Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
GHODAI ABDELRAHMAN, QING WANG, and BERNARDO PEREIRA NUNES, School of
Computing, Australian National University
Humans’ ability to transfer knowledge through teaching is one of the essential aspects for human intelligence.
A human teacher can track the knowledge of students to customize the teaching on students’ needs. With the
rise of online education platforms, there is a similar need for machines to track the knowledge of students
and tailor their learning experience. This is known as the Knowledge Tracing (KT) problem in the literature.
Effectively solving the KT problem would unlock the potential of computer-aided education applications such
as intelligent tutoring systems, curriculum learning, and learning materials’ recommendation. Moreover, from
a more general viewpoint, a student may represent any kind of intelligent agents including both human and
artificial agents. Thus, the potential of KT can be extended to any machine teaching application scenarios
which seek for customizing the learning experience for a student agent (i.e., a machine learning model). In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive and systematic review for the KT literature. We cover a broad range
of methods starting from the early attempts to the recent state-of-the-art methods using deep learning, while
highlighting the theoretical aspects of models and the characteristics of benchmark datasets. Besides these,
we shed light on key modelling differences between closely related methods and summarize them in an
easy-to-understand format. Finally, we discuss current research gaps in the KT literature and possible future
research and application directions.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Knowledge Tracing, Memory Networks, Deep Learning, Sequence Mod-
elling, Key-Value Memory, Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT), Intelligent Education, Factor Analysis ,survey
ACM Reference Format:
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes. 2022. Knowledge Tracing: A Survey . 1, 1
(January 2022), 36 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Teaching is a vital activity to facilitate transfer of knowledge. It is well-known that one key factor of
teaching is the ability of human teachers to track the learning progress of their students. This ability
allows human teachers to adjust their teaching pace, materials and methodology to maximize
the knowledge growth of each individual student. Over the past 30 years, a variety of online
education platforms such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) [109], intelligent tutoring
systems [90], and educational games [67] have emerged to complement and sometimes completely
replace conventional education systems. The COVID-19 pandemic, for example, has challenged
conventional classroom-based teaching and sped up digital transformation in education systems. To
alleviate the disruption of COVID-19, teachers and students around the world had to rapidly adjust
to an online education mode. However, while there is a pressing need for teaching using computer
technologies, technology-enhanced teaching has also posed new challenges, one of which is how
to effectively track the learning progress of a student through their online interaction with teaching

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/1-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.
arXiv:2201.06953v1  [cs.CY]  8 Jan 2022

2
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
materials – a challenge known as the Knowledge Tracing (KT) problem [5, 6, 112]. In a nutshell,
KT aims to observe, represent, and quantify a student’s knowledge state, e.g., the mastery level of
skills underlying the teaching materials.
Fig. 1. An example scenario for knowledge tracing in an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS).
To better understand the KT problem, let us consider the learning activity depicted in Figure 1.
It shows an interaction scenario between a student and an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) in
which the student is given a sequence of questions taken from a question set {𝑞1,𝑞2,𝑞3,𝑞4} and
asked to answer these questions. During the interaction, the ITS estimates the student’s knowledge
states over the skills {𝑘1,𝑘2,𝑘3,𝑘4} (e.g., math skills such as addition, subtraction and multiplication)
that are required to answer these questions. However, capturing a student’s knowledge state is a
challenging task due to several reasons:
• Each question might require more than one skill, which adds complexity to trace knowledge
states. For instance, as shown by the arrows going from skills to questions in Figure 1, question
𝑞2 requires the skills {𝑘1,𝑘3}. It is worth noting that skill is also referred to as knowledge
component in some previous studies [65].
• Dependency among skills is another important factor to consider when tackling the KT
problem. For example, although 𝑞3 requires only skill 𝑘2, skills 𝑘1 and 𝑘4 are prerequisites
for skill 𝑘2 according to the dependency graph shown in Figure 1. Thus, the mastery level of
skills required by the question 𝑞3 should also consider 𝑘1 and 𝑘4, in addition to skill 𝑘2.
• A student’s forgetting behavior [30] may result in decaying their knowledge over skills.
By modeling forgetting features, skills can be ranked by their relevance to forgetting. For
example, the bottom of Figure 1 shows that skill 𝑘1 is least affected by forgetting when the
latest question 𝑞1 is reached, whereas skill 𝑘2 is the most affected one.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
3
Historically, the notion of knowledge tracing was introduced by Anderson et al. in a technical
report [5] for cognitive modeling and intelligent tutoring in 1986, which was later published
in the Artificial Intelligence journal in 1990 [6]. Since then, many attempts have been made to
design machine learning models for solving the KT problem. Early attempts [27, 112] followed
Bayesian inference approaches, which usually relied on oversimplifying the model assumptions (e.g.,
assuming only one skill) to make the posterior computation tractable. Later, with the rise of classic
machine learning methods such as logistic regression models [117], another direction followed by
KT is to use parametric factor analysis approaches which trace a student’s knowledge states and
perform the answer prediction based on modeling a variety of factors [16, 17, 86], including: (1)
aspects about students such as prior knowledge, learning capacity, or learning rate; (2) aspects about
learning materials such as familiarity, number of previous practices, or difficulty; (3) aspects about
a learning environment itself such as the nature of the learning channel (paper- or computer-based)
and the temporal context of the practice time (within an examination period or a regular study
period). In addition to these, psychological studies about the learning behavior [75] and forgetting
behavior [52] of students have also suggested additional factors, such as the time lapse between
a student’s different interactions and the number of times on practicing learning materials, to
be considered when tracing knowledge states. It is worth noting that this direction of KT is still
active [35, 111] and is considered as an alternative to the recent state-of-the-art approaches based
on deep learning.
Motivated by breakthroughs achieved by deep learning techniques [61], deep learning KT models
have emerged rapidly. Piech et al. [89] has pioneered this direction of research and revealed the
power of deep learning techniques for knowledge tracing. They proposed a model called Deep
Knowledge Tracing (DKT) which applies Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [63] to capture
temporal dynamics in a sequence of interactions between questions and answers by a student, and
based on that, to predict the student’s answer for a new question. Empirical results showed that
DKT outperformed traditional KT models on several benchmark datasets. This attempt highlighted
the potential of using deep learning models in addressing the KT problem. In recent years, an
increasing number of studies have exploited the development of deep learning KT models from
different perspectives, including:
• Memory structures. Inspired by memory-augmented neural networks [40, 72], deep learn-
ing KT models have been extended by augmenting more powerful memory structures, typi-
cally key-value memory, for capturing knowledge states dynamically at a finer granularity
such as the mastery level of each individual skill (e.g. [1, 125]).
• Attention mechanisms. Inspired by the Transformer architecture [110] and some further
developments in natural language processing applications, attention mechanisms have been
incorporated into deep learning KT models for capturing the relationships among questions
and their relevance to a student’s knowledge states (e.g. [21, 36, 79, 80, 99]).
• Graph representation learning. Inspired by the representational power of graph learning
techniques such as Graph Neural Networks [59, 93], deep learning KT models have been
equipped with graph learning techniques to leverage the rich structural information from
graphs that can flexibly model relationships among questions and skills (e.g. [78, 108, 120]).
• Textual features. Question text may potentially contain a great wealth of information such
as skills required by questions, difficulty of questions, and relationships between questions.
Several deep learning KT models have leveraged textual features from question text for
learning question representations and tracing a student’s knowledge states (e.g. [64, 101, 122]).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

4
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
• Forgetting features. Motivated by the learning curve theory [75], a recent trend in de-
veloping deep learning KT models is to incorporate forgetting features so that a student’s
forgetting behavior can be taken into consideration for knowledge tracing (e.g. [2, 20, 77]).
These studies facilitate a seamless translation of breakthroughs in deep learning techniques into
the KT domain. So far, deep learning KT models have achieved the state-of-the-art results on the
majority of benchmark datasets for knowledge tracing (a summary of the results obtained by
different KT models is presented in Table 7).
1.1
Contributions
This paper performs a detailed survey that reviews, summarizes, classifies, and analyzes KT methods
both from the traditional machine learning perspective and the recent deep learning perspective. It
also presents KT benchmark datasets and applications. The main contributions are as follows:
• We highlight the key categories of KT methods and compare their architectures over multiple
aspects including model design, knowledge state representation, assumptions for relationships
between questions and skills, and consideration of student’s forgetting behavior.
• We present the chronic evolution for each KT category and discuss how each method is
extended on the previous work.
• We summarize the characteristics of well-known KT datasets and compare the performance
of key KT methods on each dataset by consolidating results from the relevant literature.
• We discuss application areas of KT that are not well explored currently to help derive future
research directions in new venues.
Note that a recent KT survey has been presented by Liu et al. [65]. Despite their contributions
to the field, our survey differs in depth and topics covered. The most notable differences are the
comprehensive coverage of KT models; an important discussion on the differences in representation
learning techniques related to key aspects of KT (such as knowledge state, forgetting behaviors, and
knowledge components); an in-depth coverage of the KT datasets used by the relevant literature
highlighting their similarities and issues; and, an extensive report of the results obtained by different
KT models which allows future and accurate comparisons between them.
1.2
Scope and Structure
This paper surveys the knowledge tracing literature to answer the following five research questions:
– [RQ1]: What is the historical overview for the development of traditional KT techniques?
– [RQ2]: What are the key deep learning techniques that have been applied for solving the KT
problem?
– [RQ3]: What are the datasets collected, pre-processed, and used for benchmarking KT tasks
in the literature?
– [RQ4]: What are the different application areas that can benefit from the studies on KT?
– [RQ5]: What are the future research opportunities and challenges in KT?
In the following sections, we discuss each of these five research questions in detail, as illustrated
in Figure 2. To answer RQ1, we first survey the history of traditional KT techniques by summarizing
the relevant studies and analysing their connections in Section 2. Then, we investigate different
types of deep learning techniques being proposed in the literature for solving the KT problem
with respect to RQ2, which results in a taxonomy of deep learning KT models. For each type of
deep learning techniques, we discuss their key assumptions and analyze their differences and
connections. After that, in Section 3, we conduct a comprehensive analysis on the datasets in terms
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
5
of data collection, pre-processing, characteristics, and the ground truth information, which answers
RQ3. For RQ4, we discuss several types of KT applications in Section 4, particularly in relating
to how KT techniques can enhance students’ personalized learning experience and performance.
Finally, we explore future research directions for KT which may enrich the field of study and
provide a broad understanding of opportunities and limitations of existing KT models with respect
to RQ5 in Section 5 and conclude the paper.
Paper 
Structure
Overview and Example
Scope and Structure
Contributions
Traditional Knowledge Tracing Models
Deep Learning Knowledge Tracing Models
INTRODUCTION
1
CATEGORIZATION OF 
KNOWLEDGE TRACING MODELS
2
KNOWLEDGE 
TRACING DATASETS
3
KNOWLEDGE TRACING 
APPLICATIONS
4
FUTURE RESEARCH 
DIRECTIONS
5
CONCLUSION
6
ASSISTments dataset
STATICS2011 dataset
Junyi Academy dataset
Simulated-5 (Synthetic) dataset
KDDcup dataset
EdNet dataset
Recommender Systems
Learning Provision and Quality Assurance
Interactive Learning
Learning to Teach
Considerations
Multimodal and informative Representation Learning & Datasets
Self-supervised Learning in Knowledge Tracing
Interactive Knowledge Tracing
[RQ1]
[RQ3]
[RQ4]
[RQ5]
[RQ2]
Fig. 2. Scope and structure of the survey.
2
CATEGORIZATION OF KNOWLEDGE TRACING MODELS
This section introduces a comprehensive categorization for the KT models according to the related
works found in the literature. Generally speaking, there are two broad categories: (1) Traditional
Knowledge Tracing Models; and, (2) Deep Learning Knowledge Tracing Models.
2.1
Traditional Knowledge Tracing Models
Traditionally, there are two popular lines of research for knowledge tracing: the Bayesian Knowl-
edge Tracing and the Factor Analysis Models. Figure 3 provides an overview for major traditional
knowledge tracing models that have been developed in the KT literature.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

6
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
Traditional 
Knowledge 
Tracing 
Models
Factor Analysis 
Models
Bayesian Knowledge 
Tracing
Dynamic BKT Model
Item Response Theory 
Additive Factor Model 
Performance Factor Analysis 
Knowledge Tracing Machine 
Standard BKT Model
Individualised BKT Model
Fig. 3. An overview of traditional knowledge tracing models.
2.1.1
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT) was motivated by the concepts of mastery learning [23]. Mastery
learning assumes that all students can practise on a skill such that it may lead to mastery of that
skill if two conditions are satisfied: (a) knowledge is appropriately described as a hierarchy of skills;
and, (b) learning experiences are structured to ensure that students master skills lower than those
higher in the hierarchy [24].
BKT models often use a probabilistic graphical model such as Hidden Markov Model [28] and
Bayesian Belief Network [113] to trace students’ changing knowledge states as they practise skills.
Central to these models is the Bayes’ theorem that, for two events 𝐴and 𝐵, the following holds:
𝑝(𝐴|𝐵) = 𝑝(𝐵|𝐴)𝑝(𝐴)
𝑝(𝐵)
.
(1)
In what follows we discuss the standard Bayesian approaches and their variations.
• Standard BKT Model
The first BKT model was introduced by Corbett and Anderson in 1994 [24]. The proposed
model associates a skill with a binary knowledge state: {𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑑,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑑}. This model
only considers transitions from the unlearned state to the learned state, overlooking the
forgetting theory (i.e., the probability of transition from a learned state to an unlearned state
is always zero). Additionally, note that a student may make a mistake while in a learned state
or guess correctly in an unlearned state. We refer to this model as the standard BKT model
from now on.
Parameter
Description
𝑝(𝐿0)
Probability of skill mastery by a student before learning
𝑝(𝑇)
Probability of transition from an unlearned state to a learned state
𝑝(𝑆)
Probability of slipping by a student in a learned state
𝑝(𝐺)
Probability of guessing correctly by a student in an unlearned state
Table 1. Four types of model parameters used in BKT
There are two types of variables in the standard BKT model: (1) the Binary latent variables
which represent the knowledge states of a given student (i.e., a single variable per skill
indicating learned state and unlearned state); and, (2) the Binary observed variables which
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
7
represent how students attempt questions (i.e., a variable per question indicating whether a
question is answered correctly or not).
Figure 4 shows four types of model parameters in the standard BKT model. For each skill,
there is one set of four corresponding parameters. At each time step 𝑛≥1, the model
estimates the probability 𝑝(𝐿𝑛) of skill mastery by a student by:
𝑝(𝐿𝑛) = 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟(𝐿𝑛−1) + (1 −𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟(𝐿𝑛−1)) ∗𝑝(𝑇),
(2)
where Posterior(𝐿𝑛−1) is the posterior probability of being in a learned state given the
observation to the 𝑛-th attempt by a student, calculated as:
𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟(𝐿𝑛−1) =


𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1) ∗(1 −𝑝(𝑆))
𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1) ∗(1 −𝑝(𝑆)) + (1 −𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1)) ∗𝑝(𝐺) if the 𝑛-th attempt is correct;
𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1) ∗𝑝(𝑆)
𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1) ∗𝑝(𝑆) + (1 −𝑝(𝐿𝑛−1)) ∗(1 −𝑝(𝐺)) otherwise.
Hence, the probability of a student to correctly answer a question at each time step 𝑛is the
sum of the probability of either mastering the skill but making a “slip” or not mastering the
skill but making a correct “guess”, as formulated by:
𝑝(𝐿𝑛) ∗(1 −𝑝(𝑆)) + (1 −𝑝(𝐿𝑛)) ∗𝑝(𝐺)).
(3)
Figure 4a shows the standard BKT model with one skill node 𝑘. Starting with the prior
probability 𝑝(𝐿0) of skill mastery, the latent variable for skill 𝑘is transitioned from one time
step 𝑡−1 to the next time step 𝑡based on the probability 𝑝(𝑇). The corresponding observed
variable 𝑦represents the answer node, i.e., how a student attempts questions that require
skill 𝑘, which is based on the probabilities 𝑝(𝐺) and 𝑝(𝑆).
• Individualized BKT Model
One limitation of the standard BKT model is that it has no model parameters specific to
students. All students are assumed to have the same prior knowledge and the same learning
rate for any skill. As a result, the standard BKT model may underestimate the learning
performance for above-average students, but overestimate the learning performance for
below-average students [24].
To alleviate this limitation, several attempts [24, 56, 62, 83, 123] have been made to extend the
standard BKT model by introducing student-specific parameters. Corbett and Anderson [24]
considered to add individual weights for each student, one weight corresponding to each of
the four parameter types in the standard BKT model. Pardos and Heffernan [83] focused on
individualizing the prior probability of skill mastery 𝑝(𝐿0) heuristically for each student. Lee
and Brunskill [62] also individualized the four parameter types in the standard BKT model for
students; nonetheless, the combined effects of skill-specific and student-specific parameters
were unexplored. Yudelson et al. [123] introduced an approach for individualizing BKT models
that account for student differences with respect to two types of model parameters, the prior
probability of skill mastery 𝑝(𝐿0) and the probability of transition 𝑝(𝑇). The idea was to
first define student-specific parameters and skill-specific parameters. Then, the gradients
were explicitly computed in terms of both student-specific and skill-specific parameters.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

8
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
P
P(
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
t+1
t-1
t
(a) BKT
(b) DBKT
Fig. 4. Comparing the model architectures between (a) BKT and (b) DBKT, where latent variables for skills at
the time step 𝑡are denoted as 𝑘𝑡
𝑖and their correspondingly observed variables for answers at the time step 𝑡
are denoted as 𝑦𝑡
𝑖.
Parameter
[24]
[83]
[62]
[123]
[56]
skill
student
skill
student
skill
student
skill
student
skill
student
𝑝(𝐿0)
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
𝑝(𝑇)
✓
✓
✓
-
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
𝑝(𝑆)
✓
✓
✓
-
-
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
𝑝(𝐺)
✓
✓
✓
-
-
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
Table 2. Model parameters of individualized BKT models
The underlying Hidden Markov Model remains unchanged. It turns out that adding student-
specific parameter for 𝑝(𝑇) is more beneficial for the model accuracy than adding student-
specific parameter for 𝑝(𝐿0). Later, Khajah et al. [56] proposed to extend the standard BKT
model by personalizing the guess and slip probabilities 𝑝(𝐺) and 𝑝(𝑆) based on student
ability and problem difficulty.
Compared to the standard BKT model, the individualized models can provide better correlation
between actual and expected accuracy among students, leading to more effective decisions
or improving the accuracy of predicting student performance. Table 2 summarizes the skill-
and student-specific parameters used in the individualized BKT models.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
9
• Dynamic BKT Model
In the early years, the BKT models have assumed that each question requires only one skill
and different skills are independent from each other [24, 62, 83, 123]. Thus, these models
cannot handle questions that require multiple skills, nor represent relationships between
different skills. To address this limitation, Käser et al. [54] proposed to jointly model multiple
skills and dependencies between different skills using Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN).
They aimed to capture prerequisite skill hierarchies within a single model, e.g., one skill is
conditionally dependent on another skill if the former is a prerequisite for mastering the
latter. Similar to the standard BKT model, DBN considers the same two types of variables:
binary latent variables and binary observed variables.
At each time step, a latent variable for each skill is associated with an observed variable.
A forget probability 𝑝(𝐹) is introduced, in addition to the four types of model parameters
{𝑝(𝐿0), 𝑝(𝑇), 𝑝(𝑆), 𝑝(𝐺)} in the standard BKT model. Dependencies between different skills
are learnt as weights w of a log-linear model. Let 𝑓: 𝑋× 𝑂→R𝑑denote a mapping
from a latent space 𝑋and an observed space 𝑂to d-dimensional feature vectors, and 𝑐be a
normalizing constant. The objective of the log-linear model is to find the model parameters
{𝑝(𝐿0), 𝑝(𝑇), 𝑝(𝑆), 𝑝(𝐺), 𝑝(𝐹), w} that maximize the likelihood of the joint probability of
𝑥𝑖∈𝑋and 𝑦𝑖∈𝑂as formulated below:
𝐿(w) =
∑︁
𝑖
𝑙𝑛  ∑︁
𝑥𝑖
𝑒𝑥𝑝(w⊺𝑓(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) −𝑐).
Figure 4b shows the Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBKT) with three skill nodes (denoted as
𝑘1, 𝑘2 and 𝑘3). As indicated by the directed arrows, the latent variable for skill 𝑘2 depends
on the latent variable for skill 𝑘1, and the latent variable for skill 𝑘1 depends on the latent
variable for skill 𝑘3. Further, at each time step 𝑡, latent variables for skills depend on their
latent variables in the previous time step 𝑡−1, while 𝑦𝑖is the corresponding observed answer
nodes.
2.1.2
Factor Analysis Models
Factor analysis models are theoretically supported by the Item Response Theory (IRT) [31], which
has played a large role in educational assessment and measurement. The key idea is to estimate
student performance by learning a function, usually a logistic function, based on various factors in
a population of students who solve a set of problems. It is important to note that, although an item
in the original IRT corresponds to a question involving a single skill, later works in this line have
been generalized to considering an item that may involve multiple skills. The mapping between
items and skills is often represented in the form of Q-matrix, i.e., an entry 𝑞𝑗𝑘in a Q-matrix is 1 if
an item 𝑗involves a skill 𝑘; or 0, otherwise. Q-matrix is commonly assumed as the side information.
• Item Response Theory (IRT)
The history of IRT can be traced back to Thurston’s pioneering work in the 1920s [69] and
several other works in the 1950s and 1960s [7, 13, 41, 70]. IRT is built upon the following
assumptions: (a) The probability that a student correctly answers an item can be formulated
as an item response function based on the parameters of the student and the item; (b) The
item response function monotonically increases with respect to the ability 𝜃𝑖of a student 𝑖;
(c) For a student with the ability 𝜃𝑖, items are considered conditionally independent.
The Rasch model [92] is often refereed to as the simplest IRT model, in which the item
response function is defined by a one-parameter logistic regression (1PL) model. Let L(·) be
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

10
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
a logistic function. By taking into account a difficulty parameter 𝑏𝑗that models the difficulty
of an item 𝑗, the probability 𝑝𝑖𝑗that a student 𝑖correctly answers an item 𝑗is defined as:
𝑝𝑖𝑗= L

𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗

=
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗)
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗) .
(4)
Several multiple parameter logistic regression models have also been developed for IRT, e.g.,
a four-parameter logistic (4PL) model introduced by Barton and Lord [10]:
𝑝𝑖𝑗= 𝑐𝑗+ (𝑑𝑗−𝑐𝑗)L

𝑎𝑗(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗)

= 𝑐𝑗+ (𝑑𝑗−𝑐𝑗)
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑗(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗)
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑗(𝜃𝑖−𝑏𝑗) ,
(5)
where 𝑎𝑗is a discrimination parameter to model how well an item 𝑗can differentiate students,
𝑐𝑗is a guessing parameter to model the effect of guessing, and 𝑑𝑗is a slipping parameter to
model the effect of careless errors.
IRT has been extended in many different directions. Wilson et al. [116] proposed Hierarchical
IRT (HIRT) and Temporal IRT (TIRT). HIRT exploits structure among questions by assuming
that related questions (i.e., questions sharing similar skills) have difficulty parameters drawn
from the same distribution. Different questions might vary in difficulty, but questions for
trivial skills tend to be easier while ones for difficult skills tend to be harder. TIRT models
each parameter in the logistic model (e.g., 4PL) as a time-varying stochastic process such as a
Wiener random process [105].
• Additive Factor Model (AFM)
The Additive Factor Model [17], originated from Learning Factors Analysis (LFA) [16], is a
logistic regression model under four assumptions: (1) the prior knowledge of students may
vary; (2) students learn at the same rate; (3) some skills are more likely to be known than
others; and, (4) some skills are easier to be learnt than others. In this model, a difficulty
parameter 𝛽𝑘and a learning rate parameter 𝛾𝑘are assigned for each skill 𝑘, respectively.
The key idea of AFM is that the probability of answering an item correctly by a student is
proportional to an additive combination of the ability of the student, the difficulty of skills
involved in the item, and the amount of learning gained from each attempt. Let 𝐾(𝑗) be the
set of skills involved in an item 𝑗, which can be obtained from a Q-matrix, and 𝑇𝑖𝑘be the
number of times that a student 𝑖has attempted on an item involving a skill 𝑘. AFM defines
the probability of answering an item correctly by a student 𝑖on an item 𝑗as:
𝑝𝑖𝑗= L

𝜃𝑖+
∑︁
𝑘∈𝐾(𝑗)
(𝛽𝑘+ 𝛾𝑘𝑇𝑖𝑘)

.
(6)
• Performance Factor Analysis (PFA)
Performance Factor Analysis (PFA) [86] overcomes the limitation of AFM which ignores the
evidence of learning in the successful and unsuccessful attempts on items by a student.
The key idea of PFA is to discard the parameter 𝜃𝑖used in the previous models and instead
count for success and unsuccessful attempts separately. PFA has three parameters for each
skill, including: (1) 𝛽𝑘is for the difficulty of a skill 𝑘; (2) 𝛾𝑆
𝑘is for the effect of learning a skill
𝑘after successful attempts; and, (3) 𝛾𝐹
𝑘is for the effect of learning a skill 𝑘after unsuccessful
attempts. Conceptually, 𝛾𝑆
𝑘and 𝛾𝐹
𝑘reflect the learning rate for a skill 𝑘when being applied
successfully and unsuccessfully.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
11
Let𝑇𝑆
𝑖𝑘and𝑇𝐹
𝑖𝑘be the number of successful attempts and the number of unsuccessful attempts
made by a student 𝑖on a skill 𝑘, respectively. Then PFA calculates the probability that a
student 𝑖correctly answer an item 𝑗as:
𝑝𝑖𝑗= L
 ∑︁
𝑘∈𝐾(𝑗)
(𝛽𝑘+ 𝛾𝑆
𝑘𝑇𝑆
𝑖𝑘+ 𝛾𝑇
𝑘𝑇𝐹
𝑖𝑘)

.
(7)
• Knowledge Tracing Machine (KTM)
Knowledge Tracing Machine (KTM) was recently proposed by Vie and Hisashi [111], which
generalizes Factorization Machine (FM) [104, 106] for student modeling.
KTM allows to consider an arbitrary number of factors about students, items, skills, successful
and unsuccessful attempts, or extra information about the learning environment, such as
using a mobile or a laptop. For a number 𝑁of factors, we denote all factors involved in an
event by a sparse vector 𝑥of length 𝑁such that 𝑥𝑘> 0 if a factor 𝑘∈[1, 𝑁] is involved in
the event; or 0, otherwise. Then KTM estimates the probability 𝑝𝑖𝑗of a correct answer on an
item 𝑗by a student 𝑖with an event involving 𝑥as follows:
𝑝𝑖𝑗= L
 𝑁
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑤𝑘𝑥𝑘+
∑︁
1⩽𝑘<𝑙⩽𝑁
𝑥𝑘𝑥𝑙⟨𝑣𝑘, 𝑣𝑙⟩+ 𝜇

(8)
where 𝜇is a global bias, and each factor 𝑘is modeled by both a weight 𝑤𝑘∈R and an
embedding vector 𝑣𝑘∈R𝑑for some dimension 𝑑. The first term models the logistic regression
of all factors and the second term models pairwise interactions between different factors.
When L is a logistic function, KTM include IRT, AFM and PFA as special cases [111].
Wenbin et al. [35] proposed Knowledge Tracing Machine by modeling cognitive item Difficulty
and Learning and Forgetting (KTM-DLF) that extends KTM by adding factors related to the
forgetting behavior of students. They represented the forgetting by time lapse since the last
successful attempt for the involved skills.
2.1.3
Discussion
Both Bayesian knowledge tracing and factor analysis models have strengths and weaknesses. We
discuss their connections and differences from three aspects: model parameters, model inference,
and temporal analysis.
• Model parameters: Most recent models in BKT and FAM have taken into account both
student- and skill-specific model parameters. Early BKT models were primarily centered on
the four parameters: prior learning parameter 𝑝(𝐿0), learning rate parameter 𝑝(𝑇), guess
parameter 𝑝(𝐺), and slip parameter 𝑝(𝑆) [24] and their student-specific variants. These
early BKT models usually assume that there is no forgetting parameter. Only some recent
works have incorporated the forgetting parameter [54]. For factor analysis models, most of
them have been developed with similar or more flexible model parameters than BKT models.
Particularly, recent works such as KTM [111] consider a wide range of factors, enabling a
flexible way to incorporate the side information into student modelling.
• Model inference: To keep the Bayesian inference tractable, BKT models typically assume
a first-order Markov chain when making inference based on a sequence of past question-
answering history, i.e., only considering the most recent observation. This assumption how-
ever limits their ability to model complex dynamics on student learning behaviors. Some
recent dynamic BKT models such as DBN [54] are often computationally intractable, and
thus they trade-off predication accuracy for computational efficiency. On the other hand,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

12
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
Deep 
Learning 
Knowledge 
Tracing
Attentive KT Models
Self-Attentive Knowledge Tracing 
Attentive Knowledge Tracing 
Separated Self-AttentIve Neural Knowledge 
Tracing 
Relation-Aware Self-Attention for 
Knowledge Tracing 
Forgetting-Aware KT 
Models
Deep Knowledge Tracing + forgetting 
Knowledge Proficiency Tracing 
HawkesKT
Deep Graph Memory Network 
Graph-Based KT 
Models
Graph-based Knowledge Tracing 
Graph-based Interaction Knowledge Tracing 
Structure-based Knowledge Tracing 
Memory-Augmented 
KT Models
Dynamic Key-Value Memory Network 
Sequential Key-Value Memory Network 
Text-Aware KT Models
Exercise-Aware Knowledge Tracing
Exercise-Enhanced Recurrent Neural 
Network  
Sequence Modelling 
KT Models
Fig. 5. A taxonomy of deep learning knowledge tracing models.
factor analysis models usually do not explicitly make inferences on knowledge states of a
student (e.g., decide whether a student has achieved a certain level of skill mastery by tracing
knowledge states). Instead, they target to maximize other model parameters such as the
learning rate.
• Temporal analysis: BKT models essentially deal with a sequence prediction problem based
on the history of student learning. In contrast, factor analysis models do not consider the order
of questions in which a student’s answers are observed. For example, given two questions
and their corresponding answers from a student, whether one question is answered before
the other is not important for factor analysis models. Nonetheless, by incorporating extra
temporal features of student learning behaviors, factor analysis models can be enhanced to
analyze temporal aspects of student learning.
A number of attempts have been made to leverage the best from both worlds of Bayesian
knowledge tracing and factor analysis models. For example, [47, 57, 58] extended the IRT using the
Bayesian inference to customize the estimation of question difficulty based on observations of each
student. Further work has been done through incorporating factors that reflect the characteristics of
individual students [28, 84], or the characteristics of specific items of assessment within skills [85].
2.2
Deep Learning Knowledge Tracing Models
Inspired by the success of deep learning [38, 39, 61, 95, 102], recent researches on knowledge tracing
have applied deep learning techniques. Figure 5 presents a taxonomy of deep learning knowledge
tracing models.
2.2.1
Sequence Modeling for Knowledge Tracing
A knowledge tracing task is typically modeled as a sequence prediction problem from a machine
learning perspective. Let 𝑄=

𝑞1, . . . ,𝑞|𝑄|
	 be the set of all distinct questions in a dataset. Each
𝑞𝑖∈𝑄may have a different level of difficulty, which is not explicitly provided. When a student
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
13
interacts with the questions in 𝑄, a sequence of interactions 𝑋= ⟨𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑡−1⟩undertaken by
the student can be observed, where 𝑥𝑖= (𝑞𝑖,𝑦𝑖) consisting of a question 𝑞𝑖and answer 𝑦𝑖∈{0, 1}.
𝑦𝑖= 0 means that 𝑞𝑖is incorrectly answered and 𝑦𝑖= 1 means that 𝑞𝑖is correctly answered.
Definition 2.1. Given a sequence of interactions 𝑋that contains the previous question answering
of a student, the knowledge tracing problem is to predict the probability 𝑝𝑡of correctly answering a
new question 𝑞𝑡at the time step 𝑡by the student, i.e., 𝑝𝑡= (𝑦𝑡= 1|𝑞𝑡,𝑋).
Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) [89] pioneered the use of deep learning for knowledge tracing.
It employs Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [63] and a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [46] to
predicate the probability of correctly answering a question at each time step. A sequence of hidden
states ⟨ℎ1,ℎ2, . . . ,ℎ𝑛⟩is computed which encodes the sequence information obtained from previous
interactions. At each time step 𝑡, the model calculates the hidden state ℎ𝑡and the student’s response
𝑝𝑡as follows:
ℎ𝑡= 𝑇𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑊ℎ𝑥𝑥𝑡+𝑊ℎℎℎ𝑡−1 + 𝑏ℎ)
(9)
𝑝𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊ℎ𝑦ℎ𝑡+ 𝑏𝑝)
(10)
where the 𝑇𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑢𝑖) = (𝑒𝑢𝑖−𝑒−𝑢𝑖)/(𝑒𝑢𝑖+ 𝑒−𝑢𝑖) and 𝜎(𝑢𝑖) = 1/(1 + 𝑒−𝑢𝑖) are activation functions,
𝑊ℎ𝑥, 𝑊ℎℎand 𝑊ℎ𝑦are weight matrices, and 𝑏ℎand 𝑏𝑝are bias vectors.
Despite the promising performance, DKT has several limitations. First, it assumes only one
hidden KC (i.e., a skill) in a student’s knowledge state ℎ𝑡. Second, it cannot model the relationships
among multiple KCs. Third, it assumes that all questions are equally likely related to each other,
which may not hold in many scenarios as some questions may be more relevant to each other than
the remaining of the sequence. Thus, various attempts have been made on extending DKT with the
aim of enhancing the model capacity for tackling the KT problem. Below, we review the related
work in the following areas of extension.
A number of KT models have extended DKT [89] to address its limitations. For example, Xiong et
al. [119] proposed Extended-Deep Knowledge Tracing that extends DKT by adding auxiliary student
features such as previous knowledge, question answering rates and time spent on learning and
practice; and, exercise features, such as textual information, question difficulty, skill hierarchies and
skill dependencies. A variant of DKT, called (DKT+) [121], was proposed to augment the original
DKT loss function with two additional regularization terms to address the limitations in DKT’s
ability to reconstruct an answer input and reduce inconsistency of answer prediction for questions
sharing similar KCs. Minn et al. [73] proposed an extension of DKT, named Deep Knowledge Tracing
with Dynamic Student Classification (DKT-DSC), that uses K-means to cluster student profiles
into groups based on their performance over the KCs and dynamically update the current cluster
information over time while the performance changes.
2.2.2
Memory-Augmented Knowledge Tracing Models
To trace complex KCs learned by students, several works have extended DKT by augmenting an
external memory structure, inspired by memory-augmented neural networks [40]. In particular,
following Key-Value Memory Network (KVMN) [72], a key-value memory has been employed to
represent knowledge state, which has more representational power than a hidden variable used in
DKT. Such a key-value memory consists of two matrices: key and value. The key matrix stores the
representations of KCs and the value matrix stores the student’s mastery level of each KC. Below,
we discuss two popular key-value memory networks for knowledge tracing.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

14
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
Fig. 6. A comparison of the model architecture design between (a) DKVMN and (b) SKVMN.
• Dynamic Key-Value Memory Network (DKVMN)
Dynamic Key-Value Memory Network (DKVMN) [125] has augmented DKT with two memory
matrices: key and value. To trace how the knowledge state of a student evolves over time,
unlike KVMN in which both key and value matrices are static [72], DKVMN designs the
value matrix to be dynamic while remaining the key matrix to be static.
Figure 6a shows the model architecture of DKVMN, where M𝑘∈R𝑁×𝑑𝑘is the key matrix and
M𝑣
𝑡∈R𝑁×𝑑𝑣is the value matrix at the time step 𝑡. It is assumed that there are 𝑁latent KCs
underlying all questions in a learning task. For a question 𝑞𝑡at the time step 𝑡, a correlation
weight 𝑤𝑡is computed, which represents the correlation between the question 𝑞𝑡and the
underlying latent KCs stored in the key matrix M𝑘. The model first retrieves a student’s
knowledge state with regard to the question 𝑞𝑡from the value matrix M𝑣
𝑡, calculated as:
𝑟𝑡=
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑡(𝑖)M𝑣
𝑡(𝑖).
(11)
Then, the student’s response for the question 𝑞𝑡is predicted based on the retrieved knowledge
state. After the student answers the question 𝑞𝑡, the value matrix is updated to reflect the
knowledge growth of the student after working on 𝑞𝑡.
• Sequential Key-Value Memory Network (SKVMN)
Sequential Key-Value Memory Network (SKVMN) [1] aimed to address a limitation in DKT and
DKVMN that KCs required by answering the past questions in a sequence are not necessarily
relevant to KCs required by answering the current question. Thus, SKVMN employs a
modified LSTM for sequential modeling, called Hop-LSTM, while remaining the same key-
value memory structure and loss function as in DKVMN. Different from the standard LSTM,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
15
Hop-LSTM can explicitly capture sequential dependencies among questions in a sequence
of interactions, and update the knowledge state of a student based on their responses to
relevant questions.
Figure 6b shows the model architecture of SKVMN. More precisely, two LSTM cells in Hop-
LSTM are connected only if the input question of one LSTM cell is sequentially dependent
on the input question of the other LSTM cell. This means that Hop-LSTM has the capability
of hopping across the LSTM cells when their input questions are irrelevant to the current
question 𝑞𝑡. Thus, it enables to capture long-term dependencies among questions that require
similar KCs.
2.2.3
Attentive Knowledge Tracing Models
Following the Transformer architecture [110], several works [21, 36, 79, 80, 99] have attempted
to incorporate an attention mechanism into KT models. Although the attention mechanisms
introduced by these works vary, their key ideas are similar, i.e., to learn the attention weights of
questions in a sequence of interactions in a way that can reflect the relative importance of these
questions for predicting the probability of correctly answering the next question. This mitigates
one limitation of DKT that treats all questions in a sequence of interactions equally important. In
what follows, we discuss the main attentive knowledge tracing models. Table 3 briefly summarizes
these models.
KT Model
Forgetting-Aware
Text-Aware
Attention Mechanism
SAKT [79]
×
×
Multi-head self-attention
AKT [36]
✓
×
Monotonic attention
SAINT [21]
×
×
Multi-head self-attention
SAINT+ [99]
✓
×
Multi-head self-attention
RKT [80]
✓
✓
Relational multi-head self-attention
Table 3. A comparison of attentive knowledge tracing models.
• Self-Attentive Knowledge Tracing (SAKT)
Self-Attentive Knowledge Tracing (SAKT) [79] was the first to add an attention mechanism
into the KT models. It uses the scaled dot-product attention mechanism proposed by Vaswani
et al. [110] to learn attention matrices using multiple attention heads. Specifically, each
attention matrix contains relative weights from a representative subspace, which indicate
the importance of questions in the past interactions for predicting a student’s answer to the
current question. Then, attention matrices from different representative subspaces are sent
to a feed forward network for predicating student performance.
• Attentive Knowledge Tracing (AKT)
Attentive Knowledge Tracing (AKT) was proposed by Ghosh, Heffernan, and Lan [36]. AKT
differs from SAKT in its attention mechanism called monotonic attention (i.e., a modified,
monotonic version of the scaled dot-product attention mechanism [110]) that can reduce
attention weights for questions in a sequence of interactions proportional to their time
distance in an exponential decay rate. The exponential weight decay is meant to consider the
forgetting effect in a student’s memory over time. In addition, an embedding representation
was proposed to take into account a parameter for controlling how far a question deviates
from a knowledge component it involves by following the Rasch model [92].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

16
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
• Separated Self-AttentIve Neural Knowledge Tracing (SAINT)
Separated Self-AttentIve Neural Knowledge Tracing (SAINT), proposed by Choi et al. [21],
differs from AKT and SAKT in the way that it has further applied a encoder-decoder model
along with the scaled dot-product attention mechanism as in the original architecture of
Transformer [110]. Specifically, SAINT separates a sequence of interactions by a student into
a question embedding sequence and a response embedding sequence, which are then sent to the
encoder and the decoder as input, respectively. The encoder and decoder are combinations of
multi-head attention networks with the scaled dot-product attention mechanism [110].
Recently, SAINT was extended by adding two time-related features into a response embedding
sequence: elapsed time for the time taken by a student to answer each question, and lag time
for the time interval between two consecutive learning interactions. This variant was named
as the SAINT+ model [99].
• Relation-Aware Self-Attention for Knowledge Tracing (RKT)
Relation-Aware Self-Attention for Knowledge Tracing (RKT) was proposed by Pandey and
Srivastava [80]. Similar to SAKT and SAINT, RKT employs the scaled dot-product attention
mechanism proposed by Vaswani et al. [110] to learn attention weights using multiple
attention heads. However, differs from the other attention-based KT models, RKT combines
attention weights with relation coefficients, which are obtained from exercise relation modeling
and forgetting behavior modeling. For the exercise relation modeling, it leverages the text
information of questions (e.g., a question’s textual information) to represent questions and
estimate the relation between questions in a sequence of past interactions. For the forgetting
behavior modeling, similar to AKT, RKT considers an exponential decay to count for a
student’s forgetting behavior over time.
2.2.4
Graph-Based Knowledge Tracing Models
In KT tasks, various relational structures often exist, for example, similarity of KCs, dependency
between KCs, and correspondence between questions and their KCs. To capture such relational
structures for better addressing the KT problem, a recent trend is to explore the power of graph rep-
resentation learning techniques such as Graph Neural Network (GNN). Table 4 briefly summarizes
several main graph-based knowledge tracing models and we discuss each of them separately.
KT Model
Graph
Assumption
Node
Edge
GKT [78]
KC
KC-KC relation
One KC per question
GIKT [120]
Question or KC
Question-KC relation
Many KC per question
SKT [108]
KC
KC-KC multiple relations
One KC per question
Table 4. A comparison of graph-based knowledge tracing models.
• Graph-based Knowledge Tracing (GKT)
Graph-based Knowledge Tracing (GKT), proposed by Nakagawa, Iwasawa, and Matsuo [78],
attempted to incorporate a graph where nodes represent KCs and edges represent the de-
pendency relation between KCs for a relational inductive bias. They reformulated the KT
problem as a time series node-level classification problem and solved it using standard graph
learning techniques such as message-passing GNNs [94]. Since such a graph is not explicitly
given in KT tasks, the authors proposed two approaches to construct such graphs from a
sequence of interactions by a student: (1) Statistics-based approach to construct a graph
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
17
based on statistics such as how many times one KC was answered after another KC was
answered; (2) Learning-based approach to learn a graph with the performance optimization
in an end-to-end manner.
• Graph-based Interaction Knowledge Tracing (GIKT)
Graph-based Interaction Knowledge Tracing (GIKT), proposed by Yang et al. [120], leverages
the relation between questions and KCs, represented as a graph to learn useful embedding
for answer prediction. Different from GKT which implicitly assumes that each question
corresponds to one KC, GIKT assumes that one KC may be related to many questions and
one question may correspond to more than one KC. Thus, GIKT can use a GNN to aggregate
the embeddings of questions and KCs based on their relation in the graph, and sends the
embedding of each question in a sequence of interactions to an RNN model to predict a
student’s answer for the next question.
• Structure-based Knowledge Tracing (SKT)
Structure-based Knowledge Tracing (SKT) was proposed by Tong et al. [108] which aimed to
capture multiple relations among KCs such as similarity relation and prerequisites relation.
Similar to GKT, SKT also assumes that each question corresponds to one KC. However, instead
of a single relation between KCs as captured in GKT, SKT exploits multiple relations between
KCs. Further, SKT supports information propagation to jointly model the temporal and spatial
effects when summarizing graph data. These two kinds of graph embeddings are combined
at each time step and fed to a recurrent model to predict the correct answer by a student.
2.2.5
Text-Aware Knowledge Tracing Models
Until now, the deep KT models that we have discussed mainly focused on a student’s interactions
with questions in a sequence to predict the probability of correctly answering the latest question
by the student. Yet, they did not consider much about the textual features of questions themselves.
Text-aware KT models are motivated by leveraging the textual features of questions to enhance the
performance in tackling the KT tasks.
• Exercise-Enhanced Recurrent Neural Network (EERNN)
Exercise-Enhanced Recurrent Neural Network (EERNN) was proposed by Su et al. [101], which
is a text-aware KT model to predict the probability of correctly answering a given question.
The model uses a bi-directional LSTM module to extract the representation (i.e., a vector) of
each question from the question’s text and then trace a student’s knowledge states by com-
bining it with the representations of the previously answered questions using another LSTM
module. Two variants of EERNN were developed: EERNNM, and EERNNA. The EERNNM
variant assumes that a sequence of interactions satisfies the Markov property, i.e., the an-
swer prediction for the next question only depends on the latest observed knowledge state;
thus it only considers the last hidden state. The EERNNA variant considers all the previous
knowledge states and combines them through an attention mechanism.
Later, Yin et al. [122] has further extended the work by Su et al. [101] through leveraging a
pre-training task to learn question representations. The authors followed a masked language
model (MLM) objective [71] and showed that this pre-training step could further enhance
the model’s performance compared to the original model.
• Exercise-Aware Knowledge Tracing (EKT)
Exercise-Aware Knowledge Tracing (EKT) [64] extends EERNN to incorporate the information
of multiple KCs during answer prediction, where a student’s knowledge state is represented
by a knowledge state matrix, rather than a knowledge state vector. Specifically, the model
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

18
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
uses a memory network for quantifying how much each question can affect the mastery of a
student on multiple KCs during a sequence of interactions by the student.
In addition to the above text-aware KT models, other types of KT models such as Relation-Aware Self-
Attention for Knowledge Tracing (RKT) [80] and Hierarchical Graph Knowledge Tracing (HGKT) [107]
also extract features from the textual information of questions for learning question representations
in their models.
2.2.6
Forgetting-Aware Knowledge Tracing Models
Learning psychological studies [52, 87, 97] showed that forgetting is an important aspect to consider
for an accurate estimation of a student’s knowledge state. This is because the knowledge mastery
level of a student tends to decline with an exponential rate over time since the last practice of the
relevant questions. From an experimental psychology perspective, Hermann Ebbinghaus [30, 76]
studied forces that affect memory retention, leading to formulate what is currently known as the
learning curve theory [75]. Two effects that are reflecting these forces on memory retention are the
forgetting effect and the learning effect.
Modeling the forgetting effect is one of the major challenges that the KT literature has aimed
at tackling. Traditional KT models have attempted to incorporate forgetting behavior by adding
features such as the number of past trials or the lag time from the previous interaction [55, 88, 91, 98].
In recent years, several deep learning KT models have been developed to take a student’s forgetting
behavior into consideration during tracing knowledge states.
• Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) + forgetting
Nagatani et al. [77] proposed to extend the Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) model [89] by
adding sequence-related forgetting features. These features include: (1) the number of times
a student answers questions with the same KC till the current point of time; (2) the time
lapse since the last interaction on a question with the same KC; and, (3) the time lapse since
the last interaction on a question regardless of its relating KC. The first feature reflects the
learning effect while the other two features reflect the forgetting effect. Different from the
previous traditional KT models that use forgetting features only with regard to questions
with the same KC [55, 88, 91, 98], this work considers a student’s interactions in the whole
sequence so as to model more complex forgetting behavior.
• Knowledge Proficiency Tracing (KPT)
Knowledge Proficiency Tracing (KPT) was proposed by Chen et al. [20], which is a probabilistic
matrix factorization model that leverages prior information for knowledge tracing. Specifi-
cally, two kinds of priors have been considered in this model: (1) question priors: the model
uses a Q-matrix which was marked by experts to depict the relationship between questions
and KCs for generating question representations; and, (2) student priors: the model captures
the changes in a student’s knowledge state over time by jointly applying both learning curve
and forgetting curve theories. The learning and forgetting factors are designed based on the
assumption that a student’s current knowledge state is mainly influenced by two underlying
reasons: (a) the more exercises she does, the higher level of related knowledge state she will
get; and, (b) the more the time passes, the more knowledge she will forget.
To further improve the predictive performance, an improved version of KPT, called Exercise-
correlated Knowledge Proficiency Tracing (EKPT) [48] was later developed, which incorporates
the connectivity among questions over knowledge concepts into the probabilistic modeling.
• HawkesKT
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
19
Inspired by the Hawkes process [44], Wang et al. [114] proposed HawkesKT, a model that uses
point process to adaptively model temporal cross-effects in KT. It assumes that the mastery
of a KC by a student is not only affected by previous interactions on questions of the same
KC, but also interactions on the other questions (cross-effects). Further, the model assumes
that cross effects caused by different previous interactions may also have different temporal
evolutions on the mastery of different KCs. Although cross effects all decay with time, their
decay rates differ from each other because some KCs may be easier to forget than the others.
• Deep Graph Memory Network (DGMN)
Deep Graph Memory Network (DGMN) [2] is a hybrid KT model that combines graph neural
networks with memory for forgetting aware knowledge tracing. The model aims at model-
ing the forgetting behavior over a KC space, which has the advantage to capture indirect
relationships between questions. DGMN builds a dynamic graph from a knowledge state
memory to capture relationships across KCs. Given a sequence of interactions, DGMN uses
an attention mechanism to associate questions to their relevant KCs. Then, it calculates
forgetting features over the sequence, and fuses question embedding, KC graph embedding,
and forgetting features using a gating mechanism. The gating output is used to predict the
probability of answering the next question correctly.
2.2.7
Discussion
Deep learning KT models have demonstrated its great potential in solving the KT problem. Below,
we discuss several key aspects that are crucial for being considered in their designs.
• Knowledge state: One fundamental assumption underlying each deep learning KT model
is whether a knowledge state is considered over a single KC or multiple KCs. Accordingly,
modeling a student’s knowledge states based on the mastery level of KCs by the student is
an important task in designing the deep learning KT models. Generally, from early works
such as DKT which uses a hidden state to model knowledge states over a single KC, to later
works by memory-augmented KT models (e.g., DKVMN and SKVMN) and by text-aware KT
models (e.g., EKT) which use matrices to model knowledge states over multiple KCs, a trend
in deep learning KT models is to develop a mechanism that is expressive for dynamically
capturing knowledge state representations over complex KCs.
• KC dependencies: In a KT task, each question is assumed to associate with a single KC or
multiple KCs, which is often provided as a prior knowledge such as Q-matrix. One main
challenge faced by deep learning KT models is to discover the dependencies among different
KCs, for example, one KC requires several other KCs as the prerequisite skills. To address this
challenge, two lines of research have been explored in the KT literature, including: (1) using
an attention mechanism to learn how questions are related to each other in terms of their
required KCs; and, (2) using a graph-based learning model such as graph neural networks to
learn the relationships between KCs or between questions according to their required KCs.
• Feature augmentation: To improve the model performance on KT tasks, additional features
such as temporal features relating to forgetting behavior and textual features relating to
question texts have been leveraged by a number of deep learning KT models in recent years.
On one hand, augmenting additional features can usually lead to more accurate prediction
on student learning performance; on the other hand, the augmentation of such additional
features depends on their availability in databases, thus limiting their applicability within
specific KT applications.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

20
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
KT Model
Learning Model
Knowledge Component
Knowledge State
Forgetting
Single
Multiple
BKT [24]
DBN [54]
HMM/BN
DBN
✓
-
-
✓
Binary scalar
Binary vector
×
×
IRT [41]
HIRT [116]
TIRT [116]
LFA [16]
AFM [17]
PFA [86]
KTM [111]
KTM-DLF [35]
LR
LR
LR
LR
LR
LR
FM
FM
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
✓
✓
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
✓
DKT [89]
DKT+ [121]
DKT-DSC [73]
RNN/LSTM
RNN/LSTM
RNN/LSTM
✓
✓
✓
-
-
-
Hidden state (vector)
Hidden state (vector)
Hidden state (vector)
×
✓
×
DKVMN [125]
SKVMN [1]
KVMN
LSTM+KVMN
-
-
✓
✓
Key-value memory (matrix)
Key-value memory (matrix)
×
×
SAKT [79]
AKT [36]
SAINT [21]
SAINT+ [99]
RKT [80]
FFN+MSA
FFN+MSA
FFN+ED+MSA
FFN+ED+MSA
FFN+MSA
-
-
-
-
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Attentive embedding (matrix)
Attentive embedding (vector)
Attentive embedding (matrix)
Attentive embedding (matrix)
Attentive embedding (vector)
×
✓
×
×
×
GKT [78]
GIKT [120]
SKT [108]
GNN
GNN/RNN
GNN
-
-
-
✓
✓
✓
Vector
Vector
Vector
×
×
×
EERNN [101]
EKT [64]
RNN/LSTM
AM/LSTM
✓
-
-
✓
Hidden state (vector)
Attentive embedding (matrix)
×
×
DKT+forget [77]
KPT [20, 48]
HawkesKT [114]
DGMN [2]
RNN/LSTM
FM
FM
GCN/KVMN
✓
-
-
-
-
✓
✓
✓
Hidden state (vector)
Real-valued vector
Real-valued vector
Key-value memory (matrix)
✓
✓
✓
✓
Table 5. A summary of descriptive characteristics of main knowledge tracing models, where HMM is an
abbreviation for Hidden Markov Mode [28], BN for Bayesian Network [113], DBN for Dynamic Bayesian
Network [54] , LR for Logistic Regression [117], FM for Factorization Machine [104, 106], GNN for Graph
Neural Network [94], FFN for Feed Forward Network [110], KVMN for Key-Value Memory Network [72], ED
for Encoder and Decoder model [110], MSA for Multi-head Self-Attention mechanism or variants [110]) and
AM for Attention Mechanism [8, 110].
3
KNOWLEDGE TRACING DATASETS
This section presents an overview of the benchmark datasets used in the literature to support the
evaluation of KT models. All publicly available datasets were downloaded, inspected and relevant
information reported. Table 6 lists the datasets and provides the general information such as student
interactions, the number of questions, and data availability. More details about the datasets are
presented below.
3.1
ASSISTments Datasets
The ASSISTments datasets [33, 82] contain longitudinal data collected from the free online tutoring
ASSISTment platform1. Table 7 shows that the ASSISTments datasets are the most popular datasets
used to benchmark KT models and the ones containing the most questions in total.
1https://www.assistments.org/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
21
These datasets are composed of grade school math exercises sampled from the Massachusetts
Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS)2 containing different types of questions, such as multiple
choice, text and open-ended questions. There are different versions of the ASSISTments datasets
with data collected in different periods. Details about each version is presented below.
• ASSISTments2009: This dataset was collected during the school year 2009−2010 and, when
first released, contained a total of 525, 535 interactions (i.e., student responses to questions in
the dataset), including duplicates, as discussed in [119]. The latest updated version of this
dataset contains 346, 860 interactions given by 4, 217 students to a total of 26, 688 distinct
questions and 123 KCs. We note that only two thirds of the questions (17, 751) are annotated
with KCs. Questions without assigned KCs are annotated with ‘NA’ (not available) or have
no assigned value (‘null’) whereas all other questions are annotated with up to four KCs.
Despite the popularity of this dataset, its original version is not reliable as discussed in [125]
and the updated ‘skill-builder’3 version is preferred as it fixes data modeling issues and
removes duplicated records. It is also noteworthy to mention that results obtained with
the different versions of this dataset (or with duplicated records) are often reported in the
literature but they should not be directly compared to other approaches [116].
• ASSISTments20124: This is the largest version of the ASSISTments datasets consisting of
data collected for one year (from Sept 2012 to Oct 2013). Despite the ASSISTments team
reporting that the dataset contains approximately 10 million ‘exercises’, the available dataset
consists of 179, 999 distinct questions answered by 46, 674 students resulting in 6, 123, 270
interactions. We note that the vast majority (126, 908) of the questions does not have any of
the 265 KCs associated with them. The lack of questions annotated with KCs may explain
the overall lower performance of the KT models when applied to this dataset (see Table 6).
• ASSISTments20155: This dataset contains 708, 631 student interactions with the ASSIST-
ments platform in the year 2015 produced by 19, 917 students answering 100 distinct questions.
The dataset contains only four attributes: (i) the questions’ identifiers; (ii) the identifier of
the student who answered the questions; (iii) an attribute indicating the correctness of the
answer given by each student; and, (iv) a log attribute where a temporal sequence of the
answers given by the students can be inferred.
Unlike previous versions of the ASSISTments datasets, no metadata and no KC are provided.
Another difference between this and previous datasets is related to the average number
of responses given to each question. This dataset has an average of 7, 086.31 answers per
question whereas the 2009 and 2012 versions have 12.99 and 34.01, respectively.
• ASSISTment Challenge (ASSISTChall)6: Released in 2017, the full ASSISTment Challenge
dataset contains data from 2004 −2005 and 2005 −2006 academic years. It contains 3, 162
distinct questions answered by 1, 709 students over 102 KCs resulting in 942, 816 interactions.
On average, this dataset has 298.17 answers per question, placing it second in terms of the
answer per question ratio (only lower than the ASSISTments2015 dataset). As part of a
2https://www.doe.mass.edu/mcas/testitems.html
3https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/assistment-2009-2010-data
4https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/2012-13-school-data-with-affect
5https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/2015-assistments-skill-builder-data
6https://sites.google.com/view/assistmentsdatamining
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

22
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
data mining competition, this dataset contains the most descriptive information among the
ASSISTments datasets.
3.2
STATICS2011 Dataset
This dataset is available upon request and contains students’ interactions with questions related to
the Engineering Statics course7 taught at the Carnegie Mellon University during Fall 2011 [60].
The original dataset contains 361, 092 interactions, 335 students and 1, 224 questions. In the KT
literature, this dataset is often preprocessed [125] resulting in 1, 223 distinct questions answered
by 333 students over 85 KCs. After preprocessing, the number of students’ interactions is almost
halved to 189, 297. This preprocessing was justified due to the large number of interactions without
information on whether the questions have been correctly answered. The preprocessing considers
the concatenation of the attributes ‘problem name’ and ‘step name’ and only the interactions with
a valid first attempt. On average, this dataset has 568.45 answers per question.
3.3
Junyi Academy Dataset
This dataset8 was collected between November 2010 and March 2015 from the Junyi Academy [19],
an e-learning platform in Taiwan. The original dataset contains 25, 925, 992 interactions, 247, 606
students, 722 distinct questions, and 41 KCs covering a number of topics in math. However, consid-
ering the same preprocessing step made in the previous datasets (i.e., students interactions with no
hints given to help solve the questions and only students who have attempted each question once),
the number of interactions drops to 21, 571, 469 (∼17%), 220, 441 (∼11%) students, and 716 (< 1%)
distinct questions. Finally, on average, this dataset has 97.85 answers per question.
Although this dataset has been commonly used in the KT literature, the performance reported in
some of the works cannot be directly compared. This is because these works use different subsets
or preprocessing techniques [1, 80, 108]. Further, note that an updated version of the Junyi dataset
is available in Kaggle9 with data collected from August 2018 to August 2019. This dataset contains
11, 468, 379 interactions, 25, 649 students, and 1, 701 distinct questions where no hints were given
and students have attempted each question only once.
3.4
Simulated-5 (Synthetic) Dataset
This synthetic dataset was proposed by Piech et al. [89], which simulates virtual students to answer
the same sequence of questions over a set of KCs in a controlled environment10. The dataset is
divided into two subsets, including training and testing. Each subset contains 50 distinct questions
associated with a single KC and a difficulty level. In total, each question is answered by 4, 000
virtual students resulting in 200, 000 interactions. The classic Item Response Theory [34] was used
to create the interactions and simulate students learning over time [89, 121]. This dataset provides
a standard format and does not require preprocessing steps such as removing duplicates or steps
to infer a sequence of questions answered by a student, potentially allowing direct comparison
between different KT models.
7https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/DatasetInfo?datasetId=507
8https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/DatasetInfo?datasetId=1198
9https://www.kaggle.com/junyiacademy/learning-activity-public-dataset-by-junyi-academy/tasks
10https://github.com/chrispiech/DeepKnowledgeTracing/tree/master/data/synthetic
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
23
3.5
KDDcup Dataset
This dataset was presented at the KDDcup 2010 Educational Data Mining challenge11 [100] and
contains 13–14 year old students’ responses to Algebra questions from 2005 to 2007 extracted from
the intelligent tutoring system called “The Cognitive Tutors” developed by Carnegie Learning Inc.
in the US. The dataset is split into three subsets described in what follows.
• Algebra 2005-2006: Considering both training and test data, collected between August 2005
and June 2006, this dataset contains 1, 084 distinct questions answered by 575 students result-
ing in 813, 661 interactions. Unlike other datasets, each question is divided into sub-questions
totaling 210, 136 sub-items. On average, there are 750.60 answers per question. The total
number of distinct KCs is 112 and each sub-question is associated with one or more KCs. As
in previous datasets, the total number of interactions drops to 57.8%, the number of students
roughly remains the same (574) and the number of sub-items is reduced to 130, 256 if the data
is preprocessed removing sub-items with no KCs assigned, interactions where students used
any hints and questions with two or more attempts.
• Algebra 2006-2007: This subset contains 2, 289, 726 interactions generated by 1, 840 students
answering 90, 831 distinct questions with a total of 577, 119 sub-items classified by one or
more of the 523 KCs. On average, there are 49.36 answers per question. Similarly to the
Algebra 2005-2006 dataset, the number of interactions drops to 1, 567, 072, the number of
students falls to 1, 813 and the number of questions and sub-items reduce to 89, 877 and
470, 187, respectively, after the data preprocessing step. After inspecting this subset, we found
that the timestamps provided are incorrect. This may affect the prediction of KT approaches
and may explain the low adoption of this subset in comparison to the others.
• Bridge to Algebra: This subset contains 3, 686, 871 interactions collected between November
2006 and June 2007 generated by 1, 146 students, 19, 258 distinct questions divided into 207, 790
sub-items classified by one or more of the 493 KCs. After preprocessing, the total number of
interactions is almost halved (1, 721, 987), the number of questions drops (18, 715) slightly
whereas the number of items is reduced to 123, 778 (∼40%) and the number of students
remains almost the same (1, 145).
3.6
EdNet Dataset
EdNet12 is a hierarchical dataset composed of four subsets identified by the ids: ‘KT1’, ‘KT2’,
‘KT3’ and ‘KT4’, each containing different types of student activities. ‘KT1’, for example, contains
question-response pairs similar to other datasets. The main difference is that some questions in
this dataset are organized in bundles (a set of questions that must be completed altogether). This
dataset contains over 95, 293, 926 interactions, 13, 169 questions, 784, 309 students, and 188 KCs.
Unlike the other datasets, ‘KT2’ contains the actions of the users during question-solving activities.
For example, it records the final submission and student decision-making (alternating choices)
before submitting the final answer. This subset has 56, 360, 602 interactions and 297, 444 students.
Besides the actions in ‘KT1’ and ‘KT2’, ‘KT3’ subset includes information about how students
interact with learning activities to answer a question (e.g., watch a lecture). This subset contains
more KCs (293), interactions (89, 270, 654) and students (297, 915). Finally, ‘KT4’ is the most complete
11https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/KDDCup
12https://github.com/riiid/ednet
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

24
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
Dataset
#Questions
#Students
#Interactions
#KCs
Public
available
ASSISTments2009
26, 688
4, 217
346, 860
123
Yes
ASSISTments2012
179, 999
46, 674
6, 123, 270
265
Yes
ASSISTments2015
100
19, 917
708, 631
-
Yes
ASSISTChall
3, 162
1, 709
942, 816
102
Yes
STATICS2011
1, 224
335
361, 092
85
No
Junyi Academy
722
247, 606
25, 925, 992
41
Yes
Simulated-5 (Synthetic)
50
4, 000
200, 000
5
Yes
Algebra 2005-2006
1, 084
575
813, 661
112
Yes
Algebra 2006-2007
90, 831
1, 840
2, 289, 726
523
Yes
Bridge to Algebra
19, 258
1, 146
3, 686, 871
493
Yes
EdNet-KT1
13, 169
784, 309
95, 293, 926
188
Yes
EdNet-KT2
13, 169
297, 444
56, 360, 602
188
Yes
EdNet-KT3
13, 169
297, 915
89, 270, 654
293
Yes
EdNet-KT4
13, 169
297, 915
131, 441, 538
293
Yes
Table 6. Dataset Statistics.
subset containing every action recorded by the EdNet system, including students’ purchases (e.g.,
course purchases). This subset contains 131, 441, 538 interactions in total.
Overall, the EdNet dataset series incrementally provides information into student activities and
behaviors. The dataset was collected over two years from the intelligent online tutoring platform
named Riid TUTOR13 dedicated to practicing English for international communication (TOEIC)
assessment [22] in South Korea. The variety of recorded behaviors and the large size of data points
are unique aspects of this dataset.
3.7
Considerations
Table 7 presents the results obtained by several KT models using the aforementioned datasets.
The results are reported using the AUC-ROC curve — a traditional performance measurement for
binary classification models. The probabilistic receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve plots
the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) while the area under the curve
(AUC) reports how well a KT model can distinguish between correct and incorrect answers. The
AUC-ROC ranges from 0 to 1, where 0.5 indicates an uninformative classifier (random guesses) and
1 a perfect classifier.
It is important to note that the results cannot be directly compared if experimental settings are not
standardized. As discussed in [116], the results obtained without removing duplicate interactions
(preprocessing steps) may be inaccurate and appear elevated. The existence of duplicates is also
acknowledged in the KDDcup dataset14. We reported in the previous sections the raw number of
interactions, students, KCs, etc., and whenever different, the total after removing duplicates and
discarding noise data.
13https://company.riiid.co/en/product
14https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/KDDCup/FAQ/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
25
Model
Data Split Ratio
Dataset
ASSISTments
STATICS
Junyi
Synthetic
KDDcup
EdNet
(Train-Test)
2009
2012
2015
Chall
Algebra 2005-2006
Bridge 2006-2007
BKT [24]
80%-20%
0.651 [73]
0.67 [89]
0.6571 [120]
0.623 [73]
0.6204 [120]
0.611 [73]
0.678 [108]
-
-
0.68 [89]
0.831 [108]
0.54 [89]
0.642 [73]
-
0.6027 [120]
IRT [41]
80%-20%
0.7651 [116]
0.6908 [111]
0.751 [73]
0.5869 [114]
0.702 [35]
0.743 [73]
0.6340 [114]
0.672 [73]
-
-
-
-
0.771 [35]
0.806 [73]
0.747 [35]
0.8542 [116]
-
HIRT [116]
80%-20%
0.774 [116]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.8597 [116]
-
TIRT [116]
80%-20%
0.7653 [116]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.8542 [116]
-
AFM [17]
80%-20%
0.6163 [111]
0.610 [35]
-
-
-
-
-
0.707 [35]
0.706 [35]
-
PFA [86]
80%-20%
0.6849 [111]
0.703 [73]
0.670 [73]
0.669 [35]
0.689 [73]
-
-
-
-
0.760 [73]
0.744 [35]
0.746 [35]
-
KTM [111]
80%-20%
0.8186 [111]
0.7169 [120]
0.7425 [114]
0.7535 [114]
0.6788 [120]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.6888 [120]
KTM-DLF [35]
80%-20%
0.756 [35]
-
-
-
-
-
0.837 [35]
0.812 [35]
-
DKT [89]
80%-20%
0.7429 [116]
0.86 [89]
0.8212 [121]
0.721 [73]
0.820 [79]
0.817 [36]
0.709 [78]
0.7561 [120]
0.7515 [114]
0.713 [73]
0.712 [80]
0.7286 [120]
0.7235 [77]
0.7308 [114]
0.707 [73]
0.731 [36]
0.736 [79]
0.7365 [121]
0.727 [108]
0.7263 [36]
0.734 [79]
0.7343 [121]
0.8233 [36]
0.815 [79]
0.8159 [121]
0.814 [80]
0.85 [89]
0.847 [108]
0.8255 [121]
0.823 [79]
0.75 [89]
0.784 [73]
0.751 [78]
0.8901 [116]
0.6822 [120]
0.7638 [99]
DKT+ [121]
80%-20%
0.8227 [121]
0.8024 [36]
0.822 [79]
-
0.7371 [121]
0.728 [108]
0.737 [79]
0.7313 [36]
0.7343 [121]
0.728 [79]
0.7124 [36]
0.8349 [121]
0.835 [79]
0.8301 [36]
0.889 [108]
0.8264 [121]
0.824 [79]
-
-
-
DKT-DSC [73]
80%-20%
0.735 [73]
0.721 [73]
0.716 [73]
0.430 [73]
-
-
-
0.792 [73]
-
-
DKVMN [125]
70%-30%
0.8157 [1] [125]
-
0.7268 [1] [125]
-
0.8284 [1] [125]
0.8027 [1]
0.8273 [1] [125]
-
-
-
SKVMN [1]
70%-30%
0.8363 [1]
-
0.7484 [1]
-
0.8485 [1]
0.8267 [1]
0.840 [1]
-
-
-
SAKT [79]
80%-20%
0.848 [79]
0.752 [36]
0.6860 [114]
0.735 [80]
0.6906 [114]
0.854 [79]
0.7212 [36]
0.734 [79]
0.6569 [36]
0.853 [79]
0.8029 [36]
0.834 [80]
0.832 [79]
-
-
0.7671 [21]
0.7663 [99]
AKT [36]
80%-20%
0.8346 [36]
0.7474 [114]
0.7555 [114]
0.7828 [36]
0.7702 [36]
-
-
-
-
-
-
SAINT [21]
80%-20%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.7811 [21]
0.7816 [99]
SAINT+ [99]
80%-20%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.7914 [99]
RKT [80]
80%-20%
-
0.793 [80]
-
-
-
0.860 [80]
-
-
-
-
GKT [78]
80%-20%
0.723 [78]
0.735 [108]
-
-
-
0.893 [108]
-
-
0.769 [78]
-
GIKT [120]
80%-20%
0.7896 [120]
0.7754 [120]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.7523 [120]
SKT [108]
80%-20%
-
-
0.746 [108]
-
-
0.908 [108]
-
-
-
-
DKT+forget [77]
80%-20%
0.754 [114]
0.722 [80]
0.7309 [77]
0.7462 [114]
-
-
-
0.840 [80]
-
-
-
-
HawkesKT [114]
80%-20%
0.763
0.768
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DGMN [2]
70%-30%
86.1 [2]
-
-
-
86.4 [2]
-
85.9 [2]
83.4 [2]
-
-
Table 7. AUC results reported by different KT models.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

26
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
The lack of accurate and descriptive information about each of the attributes in the datasets
also hinders experiments. An example is in the ASSISTments datasets where terminology used is
confusing15 or lacking16. This may explain the different AUC values reported to the same approach
and dataset pairs presented in Table 7.
The sequence of students’ interactions is also an important component of a KT task that is
affected by the quality of the datasets. Due to noise in the data (e.g., incorrect timestamps, null
values, etc.), the sequence of interactions may not be correctly extracted from the datasets which
may accordingly impact the performance of the proposed KT models. For example, after inspecting
the datasets, we identified timestamp errors in the Algebra 2006 −2007, which may justify its low
adoption in comparison to the other two Algebra datasets.
The fact that the benchmark datasets are often used for multiple tasks other than the KT
problem hinders the correct use and interpretation of the datasets in the KT context. The works in
[36, 73, 79, 114, 120, 121, 125], for example, report different numbers of knowledge components for
the same datasets and the work in [36] discusses how different experimental settings (association
between KC and questions) may impact the reported results. The data model and the file format
chosen to represent the datasets may also contribute to misinterpretation of the data. For example,
the data is often extracted from relational databases and stored in comma-separated values (CSV),
compressing information in a single attribute using non-standard characters, e.g., the KDDcup
dataset uses double tilde characters to assign multiple KCs to a question. Given the hierarchical
and relational nature of the data, XML and JSON are more suitable and explicit formats.
Another critical aspect is the lack of more diverse datasets. The existing public datasets are often
from a specific domain (mainly math) and a specific region (e.g., the ASSISTment datasets from the
US, and EdNet, the most recent publicly available dataset, from South Korea). Most of the datasets
do not provide demographic information, and therefore gender-based, or other similar predictions
cannot be performed.
Finally, the benchmark datasets have been updated over the years, and the version used by the
KT models is not readily identifiable, which can compromise their direct comparison. A version
control mechanism for the publicly available datasets would help keep track of every change made
to a dataset over time and allows for consistent and comparable results.
4
KNOWLEDGE TRACING APPLICATIONS
This section explores possible application areas that can benefit from KT models. We broadly divide
these application areas into the following four categories: (i) Recommender Systems; (ii) Learning
Provision and Quality Assurance; (iii) Interactive Learning; and, (iv) Learning to Teach.
4.1
Recommender Systems
An application area of KT that comes directly to mind is online education systems where the main
objective is to provide effective learning experience for their students. Tracing the knowledge state
of a student would facilitate to tailor students’ learning experience according to their capabilities
and skills. This can be achieved through recommending learning materials (e.g., lectures, labs,
and/or exercises) based on the learnt knowledge state of a student. Thus, the aim of such online
education systems is twofold: (1) to estimate the knowledge state of a student using a KT model; and,
(2) to recommend learning materials conditioned on the knowledge state using a recommendation
model [14]. Below are some examples of applications that have been recently studied. A graph-based
recommendation method has been proposed by Chanaa and Faddouli [18] to aid an educational
15https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/2012-13-school-data-with-affect
16https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/2015-assistments-skill-builder-data
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
27
instructor to segment students into groups based on their knowledge states and recommend the
most appropriate kinds of exercises for each group. More specifically, the instructor first selects a
specific knowledge component (KC), and then, the model constructs a dynamic knowledge graph
based on historical practice information that includes student knowledge vectors as nodes and
uses edges for representing their mastery level similarities around the selected KC. Such a graph is
clustered into node groups and for each group a shared embedding is constructed using GNNs to
get the final recommendations. Cai et al. [15] followed an interactive recommendation approach in
which a reinforcement learning recommender agent selects learning materials to recommend based
on a reward signal calculated from the progress in a knowledge state estimated by a KT model.
Huang et al. [49] proposed an interactive educational video recommender model that follows a
multi-objective setup of rewards. The authors designed three reward functions to reflect three main
aspects in online education systems including a reviewing reward function for recommending
videos about KCs that a student did not perform well previously, a smoothing reward function for
recommending videos with a gradual difficulty to understand, and an engagement reward function
for recommending videos about KCs a student started to master recently. The recommender agent
followed a reinforcement learning design with a state estimated by a DKT variant model, an action
for the video id to recommend, and a combined reward by using a weighted sum of the three reward
functions.
4.2
Learning Provision and Quality Assurance
Another potential application area is to provision a learning curriculum (e.g., an ordered list of topics
to study) for a specific subject based on the knowledge state of a student. One direction [25, 96] in
this application area follows a semi-automated approach in which an instructor would conduct
simulations using a KT model trained on the historical exercise records of students to identify a
suitable curriculum of learning materials for a course to maximize the knowledge gain of students.
Another direction [81] uses KT models to assess the effectiveness of a course structure in achieving
its targeted objectives by assessing the impact of each module (i.e., a collection of learning materials)
on the knowledge growth of students. Recently, deep KT models have been adopted in this direction
to provide quality assurance for the course design [66]. The authors used a DKT model [89] to trace
the progress in the knowledge state of a student after taking a specific course module, and then,
an actor-critic reinforcement learning agent [42] considers the knowledge state across different
course modules and their predefined relationships (i.e., prerequisites) and takes an action to select
the next module to work on for the student to maximize their knowledge gain in achieving course
objectives. Following this approach, the structure of a course could adapt dynamically to a student’s
needs and skills instead of having one fixed structure that does not fit all students.
4.3
Interactive Learning
Interactive education aims at making the learning process more exciting and engaging through
delivering knowledge components into a gaming shell. Cognitive studies [45] showed that students
can easily gain new knowledge components and be able to spend more time on learning if the
learning materials were delivered in an engaging manner such as gaming. This is due to the nature
of the human mind that was mainly designed for learning by real-world practices that usually come
as a form of an interactive experience (i.e., state, action, and rewards). Thus, an educational game
can provide a similar experience that could be more aligned with our natural learning capabilities
than the conventional educational ways (e.g., textbooks, lectures, etc.) that lack engaging interaction.
Long and Aleven [68] evaluated the effect of educational games in comparison to conventional
online tutoring systems through a study that involved two groups of students: one group was
learning on an educational game for math equation solving and the other group was learning
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

28
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
using a non-interactive system that presents math concepts in a conventional manner through
demonstrative examples and exercises. The study found that the group using the educational game
was more excited and engaged to continue the learning procedure in comparison to the other group.
Another study [4] focused on the effect of mobile educational games on the learning progress
for elementary school kids. The authors divided the student into two groups: one allowed to use
mobile educational games to review and practice math concepts taught at school and another group
practiced the math concepts using conventional text exercises. The study concluded that students
with access to the mobile educational games were performing better in retaining the math concepts
in comparison to the other group. These findings about the effectiveness of educational games
demonstrate the great potential of education games as an promising application area for KT models.
For an educational game to be more effective, it has to assess the knowledge progress of a
player and adjust the gaming experience accordingly. This might include adjusting the difficulty of
challenges, opening new part(s) in a game, or adjusting the competency of a computer opponent.
Kantharaju et al. [53] proposed a KT model that could detect when a player attempts a specific
skill in an educational game and quantify their knowledge state across different states, so the game
experience could be focused on challenging skills for each player. Cui et al. [26] used the BKT [112]
model to trace the knowledge state of fifth-grade elementary school students in Canada during a
science gaming assessment. The authors were not only able to effectively predict the final score of
a student based on their partial observations from the game assessment, but also identify pitfalls in
the game design and assumptions that tend not to work as expected by the designer in terms of
assessing dedicated skills.
4.4
Learning to Teach
Going beyond the conventional assumption of a human student in a KT setting opens the door
to a wide range of application areas. Virtual students, such as intelligent agents which adopt a
reinforcement learning setup or machine learning models, can be treated in a similar way as real-life
students who are in need to learn a set of skills in different machine learning tasks. For example, this
can be a deep neural network model that needs to master a skill of classifying different class labels
(e.g., cats, dogs, furniture, etc.) in an image classification task or a reinforcement learning agent
aiming at mastering different skills in an Atari game. Curriculum learning (CL) [12] aims at learning
a curriculum of tasks to enable a student agent from mastering a set of skills. A CL policy would
imply a statistical distribution on learning tasks that gradually drive the student agent towards
convergence. Another relevant paradigm is machine teaching (MT) [126] which aims at minimizing
the teaching cost represented by the size of training samples drawn from training data in a machine
learning scenario. In MT, there are two models being included: the teacher model and the student
model. The former targets to sample training data for the latter to learn an optimal parameter set 𝜃∗
the minimizes the loss function in the task. Learning to teach (L2T) [32, 118] targeted customizing
the learning process for a student agent/model through optimizing three main aspects including
training data sampling, neural architecture design, and loss function design. In L2T, a teacher agent
follows a reinforcement learning approach to optimize a teaching policy that handles one or more
of the three aspects previously mentioned. It can be observed that a shared characteristic across
these different attempts to enhance the conventional machine learning procedure is the need to
trace the knowledge state of a student model. Thus, there is a significant potential for KT models to
contribute in this application area by tracing the knowledge state of a student model during training
procedure. The output of the KT model would form the input/state of a teacher model that aims
at customizing the training procedure to speedup the student model’s convergence. Knowledge
Augmented Data Teaching (KADT) [3] aims at improving a data teaching strategy of a student ML
model by tracking its knowledge progress across multiple knowledge components in a learning task.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
29
The KADT method includes a knowledge tracking model to dynamically capture the knowledge
progression of the student model in terms of latent knowledge components. The authors develop
an attention-pooling mechanism to extract knowledge representations of the student model with
respect to class labels, which enables the development of a data-teaching strategy on significant
training samples. The authors evaluated the performance of the KADT method on four different
machine learning tasks including knowledge tracing, sentiment analysis, movie recommendation,
and image classification. Results compared to the state-of-the-art machine teaching methods have
been empirically proven that KADT consistently outperforms the others in all tasks.
5
KNOWLEDGE TRACING FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Despite the promising results achieved by current state-of-the-art KT models, limitations and gaps
of current approaches and available datasets open up several opportunities for future research. A
numbered list of such research opportunities is presented below.
Multimodal and informative representation learning & datasets. The choice of data repre-
sentation directly impacts the performance of any machine learning model [11]. KT models tend
to learn embedding representations for questions and KCs from abstract formats such as one-hot
encoding; however, some data in the description of a question such as images and mathematical
equations that can lead to more informative embedding representations, are overlooked, either by
the proposed models or by the available datasets. This opens up research directions (RD) through
the following questions:
(𝑅𝐷1) What information/satellite data can be used to improve the performance of KT models?
(𝑅𝐷2) How to represent such data for the KT tasks?
(𝑅𝐷3) How to create a dataset for the KT tasks that enables a more informative embedding repre-
sentation learning?
The Exercise-aware Knowledge Tracing (EKT) approach proposed by Liu et al. [64] is a recent
attempt to learn richer embedding representations, taking into account the textual context and
the relationships between questions. However, despite the previous efforts, the representations of
multimodal and domain-specific data such as mathematical equations and code snippets remain
mostly unexplored in the literature resulting in low-informative representation learning for KT
models. Fusing signals from multiple feature spaces may enable better representation learning in
addition to mitigating noise in data [9].
To solve (𝑅𝐷1) and (𝑅𝐷2), a new range of benchmark datasets for KT must be created containing
contextual information rather than only encoded data with ids (as previously seen in Section 3).
Datasets spanning various knowledge domains and from different cultures and educational levels are
also needed, as the performance of KT models can be affected when applied to other demographic
and educational contexts. This leads us to the next research opportunity, Self-Supervised Learning
in Knowledge Tracing.
Self-supervised learning in knowledge tracing. Although supervised learning has led to ad-
vances in different areas, it still has a major drawback: the need for large, high-quality labeled data
for training. Self-supervised learning (SSL) [74, 124], on the other hand, has proved to be effective
in several areas (e.g., natural language processing [29] and computer vision [37]) learning from
unlabeled data. SSL often adopts similarity ranking loss functions (e.g., contrastive loss [115]) in a
process called pre-training or pretext task [74] to automatically generate labels. Such pre-trained
models can thus be transferred to a downstream task to train in a supervised learning manner with
a limited amount of labeled data. Along with SSL, therefore, further contributions to the KT field
can be made, for example, by (𝑅𝐷4) creating pre-trained models (e.g., using existing pre-trained
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

30
Ghodai Abdelrahman, Qing Wang, and Bernardo Pereira Nunes
language and computer vision models) to generate informative representations for KT; and, (𝑅𝐷5)
investigating how it can mitigate limited training of students’ activities in cases of a cold-start
scenario or skewed participation data, e.g., when only a small number of students contribute to
most activities.
Interactive knowledge tracing. Most KT models adopt a passive approach of observing question
answering response history to estimate students’ knowledge states; however, interactive methods,
driven by question answering response behavior, to better understand the dynamics of students’
knowledge states are still unexplored. Interactive methods are particularly useful in cold start
scenarios where an interactive approach can reveal students’ knowledge states by directly asking
questions related to different KCs. Thus, another potential future work is to (𝑅𝐷6) develop optimized
question sampling policies to enhance the performance of KT models in, but not limited to, cold
start scenarios. Reinforcement Learning (RL) [103] approaches are a possible natural choice given
its maximal rewarding scheme.
Last but not least, considering that Knowledge Tracking involves human knowledge and learning,
transparency in the internal logic and the results obtained by KT models would benefit educational
stakeholders and processes. This leads us to investigate on eXplainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) approaches, as seen in other research fields such as [50, 51]. Potential research avenues
includes (𝑅𝐷7) the development of techniques and methods to understand and explain the pre-
diction process in KT models; and, (𝑅𝐷8) how algorithmic decisions make impacts on learning
processes, course design, instructor performance, the quality of learning materials, and student
engagement. Promising research to explain deep learning models has been carried out using
knowledge distillation [43] to understand and explain predictions in other models.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we presented a comprehensive research monograph for knowledge tracing. To cover
the related fundamental concepts, we covered early attempts for knowledge tracing in chronological
order and illustrated related background concepts. We built upon the historical Knowledge Tracing
landscape to layout a categorization for the relevant literature based on shared theoretical and
algorithmic aspects.
As deep learning is considered the current prominent toolkit for the majority of the state-of-the-
art KT approaches, we deeply reviewed its different approaches and contrasted their characteristics
on multiple dimensions such as knowledge representation learning, consideration of forgetting
behavior, and architecture design. Moreover, we presented a chronological flow for deep learning
approaches that showed how later methods extended former ones for a cohesive understanding of
limitations and research directions in these approaches.
Moreover, we introduced a detailed review of relevant KT datasets that have been used by the
literature while describing their characteristics, limitations, and contribution points. Additionally,
we provided a curated summary for all the reported performance results on the covered datasets
for key KT methods.
Finally, we discussed various application areas for knowledge tracing to show its potential in
addressing human and machine teaching domains. Furthermore, we highlighted future research
directions that could push the boundaries of the current knowledge tracing methods by harnessing
data from multiple modalities, learning with weak or no supervision, or following an interactive
reinforcement learning paradigm to overcome cold start challenges.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2022.

Knowledge Tracing: A Survey
31
