Inclusion within Continuous Belief Functions
Dorra Attiaoui
University of Tunis
LARODEC, ISG Tunis,
Tunisia

Pierre-Emmanuel Dor´e
University of Rennes 1
Rue ´Edouard Branly BP 30219
22302 Lannion, France

Arnaud Martin
IRISA
University of Rennes 1
Rue ´Edouard Branly BP 30219
22302 Lannion, France

Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
University of Carthage,
LARODEC, IHEC Carthage,
Tunisia

Abstract—Deﬁning and modeling the relation of inclusion
between continuous belief function may be considered as an
important operation in order to study their behaviors. Within
this paper we will propose and present two forms of inclusion:
The strict and the partial one. In order to develop this relation, we
will study the case of consonant belief function. To do so, we will
simulate normal distributions allowing us to model and analyze
these relations. Based on that, we will determine the parameters
inﬂuencing and characterizing the two forms of inclusion.
I. INTRODUCTION
The theory of belief functions (also called Evidential Theory
or The Dempster-Shafer Theory) is a well known framework
for reasoning under uncertainty [1]. It is widely used to model
imperfect information. We can distinguish the imprecision
(lack of accuracy), the uncertainty (lack of compliance com-
paring to the real world, due to the source of information) and
even the inconstancy where is characterized by a high level of
conﬂict.
The discrete case of belief functions, knowning a large
succes, have been applied to several research ﬁelds, medical,
military, risk management, information fusion [2], [3], [4], etc.
Otherwise, Smets in [5], deﬁned the basic notions of con-
tinuous belief functions to describe them in the extended set
of reals. Recently Attiaoui et al. [6] proposed a similarity
measure for continuous belief functions based on Smets’
formalism using the distance of Jousselme [7].
Our work in this paper will consider the notion of inclusion
and how two continuous belief functions can be included
in each other. This operation will help us later to take into
account this speciﬁc characteristic during the information
fusion and the measurement of the conﬂit. Thus, we will deﬁne
two forms: the strict inclusion and the partial one. To do so,
we will present a measure called a degree of inclusion of an
interval (the focal element of a continuous belief function) in
the second one. This work presents a new way to determine
the relation of inclusion by considering a new vision for the
continuous case within the theory of belief functions.
II. THEORY OF BELIEF FUNCTIONS: AN OVERVIEW
This section recalls the necessary background related to
the evidential theory. It has been developed by Dempster in
his work on upper and lower probabilities [1]. Based on that,
he was able to represent more precisely the observed data.
Later, in his book ”A mathematical Theory of evidence” [8],
Shafer, presented that, any information deﬁned by an expert
characterized by basic belief assignments has two functions:
a
credibility
and
a
plausibility
function
corresponding
respectively to the lower and upper probabilities of Dempster.
The theory was further developed by Smets in [9], [10]
who proposed the Transferable Belief Model (TBM). This
model presents a pignistic probability induced by a belief
function which is built by deﬁning a uniform probability from
each positive mass. Moreover, in terms of upper and lower
probabilities, it can be considered as the center of gravity of
the set of probabilities dominating the belief functions. He
also introduced new tools for information fusion and decision
making according to [11].
The objective of the evidential theory is to represent the
information which is transmitted by a source concerning an
event. A belief function must take in consideration all the
possible events on which a source can describe a belief.
Based on that, we can deﬁne the frame of discernment.
The frame of discernment is a ﬁnite set of disjoint elements
noted Ωwhere Ω= {ω1, ..., ωn}. This theory allows us to
affect a mass on a set of hypotheses not only a singleton
like in the probabilistic theory. Thus, we are able to represent
ignorance, imprecision and uncertainty.
m : 2Ω7→[0, 1].
(1)
arXiv:1501.06705v1  [cs.AI]  27 Jan 2015

X
X⊆Ω
m(X) = 1.
(2)
The principle functions in the belief functions theory are:
The credibility function (bel): this function measures the
strength of the evidence in favor of a set of propositions for
all X ∈2Ω:
bel(X) =
X
Y ⊆X,Y ̸=∅
m(Y ).
(3)
The credibility is interpreted as a degree of justiﬁed support
given to proposition X by the available evidence.
The plausibility function (pl): expresses the maximum
amount of speciﬁc support that could be given to a proposition
X ∈2Ω. pl(X) is then obtained by summing the bba′s given
to the subsets Y such that Y ∩X ̸= ∅:
pl(X) =
X
Y ∈2Ω,Y ∩X̸=∅
m(Y ).
(4)
It measures the degree of belief committed to the propositions
compatible with X.
The commonality function (q): this function measures the
set of bbas affected to the focal elements included in the
studied set, for all X ∈2Ω:
q(X) =
X
Y ⊇X
m(Y ).
(5)
A. Inclusion as a conﬂict measure for discrete belief functions
Recently Martin in [12] deﬁned a degree of inclusion as
involved in the measurement made in order to determine
the conﬂict during the combination of two discrete belief
functions.
The author presented an index of inclusion having binary
values where Inc(X1, Y2) = 1 if X1 ⊆Y2 and 0 otherwise
with X1, Y2 being respectively the focal elements of m1 and
m2. This index is then used to measure the degree of inclusion
of the two mass functions and deﬁned as:
dinc =
1
|F1||F2|
X
X1∈F1
X
Y2∈F1
Inc(X1, Y2)
(6)
σinc(m1, m2) = max(dinc(m1, m2), dinc(m2, m1))
(7)
Where dinc is the degree of inclusion of m1 in m2 and
inversely.
This inclusion is used as a conﬂict measure for two mass
functions, using it like presented:
Conf(m1, m2) = 1 −σinc(m1, m2)d(m1, m2)
(8)
where d(m1, m2), is the distance of Jousselme:
d(m1, m2) =
r
1
2(m1 −m2)T D(m1 −m2);
(9)
where D is a matrix based on the dissimilarity of Jaccard
expressed by D(A, B) = 1 if A = B = ∅otherwise,
D(A, B) = |A∩B|
|A∪B| if ∀A, B ∈2Ω
III. CONTINUOUS BELIEF FUNCTIONS
In the previous sections, we have presented different spec-
iﬁcations of discrete belief functions. Unfortunately, these
functions do not allow us to manipulate continuous data that
can be provided by sensors in different areas like: search and
rescue problems [13], classiﬁcation issues, information fusion,
etc.
Some researches were interested in representing belief func-
tions in continuous frame of discernment like Strat in [14],
and Smets in [5].
In following sections, we will present the several proposals
that allows us to describe continuous belief functions. First,
we explain how to extend these functions on the real numbers.
To do so, we will focus on Smets’ approach to represent con-
tinuous belief functions by using probability densities. Later,
we will remember the other approaches for the continuous
case of the theory of belief functions.
A. Continuous belief functions on IR
Smets based on the TBM’s background, used the same
representation than Strat, and proposed the belief functions in
the extended set of reals noted IR = IR ∪{−∞, +∞}.
However, using the belief function framework to model
information in a continuous frame is not an easy task mainly
to the complex nature of the focal elements. Comparing to
the discrete domain, on real numbers, in (Smets 2005) bba
becomes basic belief densities (bbd) deﬁned on an interval
[a, b] of IR.
1) Basic belief densities: A generalization of the classical
bba into a basic belief density (bbd) denoted mI on the interval
I. He deﬁned the bbd where all focal elements are closed
intervals or ∅.
Given a normalized bbd mI, Smets deﬁned another function f
on IR2, where:

f(a, b) = mI([a, b]),
a ≤b,
f(a, b) = 0,
a > b.
(10)
f is called a probability density function (pdf) on IR2.
B. Continuous belief functions induced by probability density
functions
Let’s consider several belief functions characterizing a
unique source of information (the source is subjective and
evidential). Smets proposed a pignistic transformation of the
belief functions (representing the knowledge of the source)
in order to obtain probabilities. The probabilities are used
to ease the decision making. Pignistic probabilities are noted

BetP having densities also noted betf. For each probability
density, we have a set of belief functions with which they are
compatible. This set is called an Isopignitic. The main issue
is to choose one belief function from this set. To do so, we
consider the principle of least commitment proposed in [15],
[16]. This principle supports the idea of choosing the belief
function that involves the least an expert. It can be considered
as a natural approach to select the less committed bba from a
subset. A particular type of belief functions describes the best
this principle which are the consonant belief functions where
focal elements are nested [17].
C. Continuous belief functions: other representations
Some other approaches have been proposed in order to
describe continuous belief functions. [18] introduced in the
notions of a source constituted by a probability space and
a multivalued mapping which is able to deﬁne the lower
probability deﬁned by a Γ function.
This function can hold at the same time two notions: on
one hand, it deﬁnes both of the lower and upper probability,
on the other hand, it considers random sets. We can say that
Γ as a multivalued mapping is measurable with respect to the
spaces that it characterizes.
Moreover, he supposes that Γ is a measurable mapping, then
it is a random set by specifying its probability distribution.
Thus the probability distribution of a random set Γ is precisely
the basic probability assignment.
We say that there is a correspondence established between
belief functions on a source S and the probability distribution
of random sets. This relation can be expressed by its density
on P(S).
Dor´e et al. in [19], proposed a similar approach founded
on an index function that can be assumed as Γ. This function
can describe the set of focal elements of a continuous belief
function. In this case, every index has its own probability
measure where there is an allocated weight to a set of focal
elements using a credal measure. Every set is described
according to its index and its probability density.
The formalism of Smets takes into consideration only to
closed intervals, in [13], the author extended classical con-
tinuous belief functions by proposing belief functions where
focal elements are not represented by intervals. He uses αcuts
to measure to area of the portions of multimodal distributions.
D. Similarity measure within continuous belief functions
Attiaoui et al. in [6] proposed a similarity measure based
on the distance of Jousselme using Smets’ formalism. This
distance uses a scalar product as a scalar product is deﬁned
on IR by:
⟨f, g⟩=
Z +∞
x=−∞
Z +∞
y=−∞
f([x, y])g([x, y])dxdy
(11)
Here, the authors presented a new method to measure the
similarity founded on the properties of belief functions on real
numbers, they were able to deﬁne a distance between two
densities in an interval I.
⟨f1, f2⟩=
Z +∞
−∞
Z +∞
yi=xi
Z +∞
−∞
Z yj=+∞
yj=xj
(12)
f1(xi, yi)f2(xj, yj)δ(xi, xj, yi, yj)dyjdxjdyidxi
The scalar product of the two basic belief densities is noted:
⟨f1, f2⟩with a function δ deﬁned as δ : IR −→[0, 1]
δ(xi, xj, yi, yj) = λ(Jmax(xi, xj), min(yi, yj)K)
λ(Jmax(yi, yj), min(xi, xj)K)
(13)
where λ represents the Lebesgue measure used for the in-
terval’s length and δ(xi, xj, yi, yj) is an extension of the
dissimilarity of Jaccard applied for the intervals in the case
of continuous belief functions.
Ja, bK =

∅,
if a > b
[a,b],
otherwise.
(14)
Therefore, the distance between two basic belief densities
is deﬁned by the following equation:
d(f1, f2) =
r
1
2(∥f1∥2 + ∥f2∥2 −2⟨f1, f2⟩)
(15)
We noticed that the standard deviation is inﬂuencing this
measure. As long as the difference between the distributions
grows, the more the distance is rising. This representation
proposed a natural approach that allows us to manipulate and
also study the behavior of continuous belief functions induced
by normal and exponential distributions.
IV. INCLUSION WITHIN CONTINUOUS BELIEF FUNCTIONS
Within this section, we will consider two forms of inclusion:
a strict and a partial inclusion. We will present their mathe-
matical expressions, and explain how do we build them. But
ﬁrst, we enumerate several properties that must be satisﬁed by
the relation of inclusion.
A. Properties of the inclusion
The inclusion deﬁned between two intervals [xi, yi] and
[xj, yj] in a set I satisﬁes the following requirements:
Property 1: Non-negativity
Inc(fi, fj) ≥0.
Namely, the inclusion of the ﬁrst interval in the second one
must never be negative.
Property 2: asymmetry
Inc(fi, fj) ̸= Inc(fj, fi), ∀fi ̸= fj.

No need for the relation of inclusion to be symmetric.
Property 3: Upper bound
Inc(fi, fj) = 1.
This property implies a total inclusion of the ﬁrst interval
in the second one other.
Property 4: Lower bound
Inc(fi, fj) = 0.
This property implies the absence of any intersection or
inclusion of the ﬁrst interval in the second one.
B. Strict inclusion
Here, we will deﬁne the strict inclusion between two
continuous belief functions represented by two basic belief
densities bbd.
First, we use these distributions to deduce a degree of inclusion
between the bbds and then we can be able to measure the value
inclusion between our continuous belief functions.
Let’s consider two continuous pdfs: f1 and f2. If one distri-
butions is included in the second one, then the strict inclusion
is expressed by the following equation:
IncStr(f1, f2) =
Z +∞
−∞
Z +∞
yi=xi
Z xi=+∞
xj=−∞
Z yj=+∞
yj=xj
(16)
δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj)f1(xi, yi)f2(xj, yj)dyjdxjdyidxi
Where [xi, yi], [xj, yj] are the considered intervals and
δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) is the degree of strict inclusion that
will allow us to measure the value related to the inclusion of
the ﬁrst interval in the second one.
We will consider that δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) is having binary
values where:
δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) =

1,
if [xi, yi] ⊆[xj, yj]
0,
otherwise.
(17)
If we are in presence of two distributions that do touch
each other, there is an intersection between them. The
δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) will have the value 1, and the strict
inclusion will be weighted by the masses of our continuous
belief functions. Otherwise δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) will be null.
C. Partial inclusion
Considering two bbds represented by two intervals [xi, yi]
and [xj, yj]: We say that [xi, yi] is partially included in [xj, yj]
or inversely, if and only if their intersection is different of ∅.
To represent the partial inclusion we deﬁne:
pdf
1
2
3
4
µ
0
0
4
4
σ
1
0.5
1
0.5
TABLE I
PROBABILITY DENSITY DISTRIBUTIONS
Fig. 1.
Modeling probalility distribution functions.
IncPar(f1, f2) =
Z +∞
−∞
Z +∞
yi=xi
Z x=+∞
xi=−∞
Z yi=+∞
yj=xj
(18)
δIncP ar(xi, yi, xj, yj)f1(xi, yi)f2(xj, yj)dyjdxjdyidxi
with δIncP ar(xi, yi, xj, yj) is the degree of partial inclu-
sion:
δIncP ar(xi, yi,xj, yj)=max(0,min(yj, yi)−max(xi, xj))
yi −xi
(19)
The degree δIncP ar(xi, yi, xj, yj) represents the length of
the intersection of the two probability density functions f1 and
f2 on the length of f1 if we are measuring IncPar(f1, f2) and
the length of f2 if we have to calculate the partial inclusion
of f2 in f1: IncPar(f2, f1)
V. ASYMMETRY WITHIN THE INCLUSION
Let us consider four probability density functions deﬁned by
their means µ, and their standard deviations σ, like presented
in table I and described in ﬁgure 1.
Once we apply the mathematical formula proposed in
equation (15), we obtain the following table II strict inclusion.
Otherwise, applying the partial inclusion expressed in equa-
tion (17), we obtain table III.
The property of asymmetry between two continuous belief
functions can be conﬁrmed when we observe the measures of
inclusion in the table II and table III .
We
witness
for
strict
and
partial
inclusion
that
IncStr(pdf2, pdf1) = IncStr(pdf3, pdf4) = 0.8586 and

IncStr
pdf1
pdf2
pdf3
pdf4
pdf1
0.5032
0.1437
0.009
0
pdf2
0.8586
0.5032
0.053
0
pdf3
0.009
0
0.5032
0.143
pdf4
0.537
0
0.8586
0.5032
TABLE II
STRICT INCLUSION AND ASYMMETRY.
IncPar
pdf1
pdf2
pdf3
pdf4
pdf1
0.8183
0.5498
0.0253
0.0013
pdf2
0.9595
0.8183
0.0041
0.0017
pdf3
0.0253
0.8247
0.8183
0.9595
pdf4
0.0041
0.0017
0.5498
0.8183
TABLE III
PARTIAL INCLUSION AND ASYMMETRY.
IncPar(pdf2, pdf1) = IncPar(pdf3, pdf4) = 0.9595 do
always have the highest values on both cases. These primary
results conﬁrm the distributions presented in Figure 1,
Meanwhile, for the case of inclusion of pdf1 in pdf4 and
pdf4 in pdf1, where the difference between the means is very
important we are dealing with very small values of inclusion.
Knowing that σ1 = σ3 and σ2 = σ4, when computing
these partial inclusions, the difference between the standard
deviations is maximal, generates a considerable value.
For the strict inclusion we have some values where there is
no intersection between the distributions and then we naturally
obtain a null value, like for IncStr(pdf1, pdf4).
According to the data in table II and table III, the primary re-
sults obtained using both of the strict and the partial inclusion,
our proposed relation responds to all the properties previously
announced (non negativity, asymmetry, upper-bound < 1).
A. Average of inclusion
Let us consider n distributions, and αf a set of bbds.We
can measure the average of inclusion of a bbd fi in αf.
To do so, we present the following equations the ﬁrst one
related to the strict inclusion and the second one to the partial.
IncS(fi, αf) =
1
n −1
n
X
j=1,i̸=j
IncStr(fi, fj)
(20)
IncP(fi, αf) =
1
n −1
n
X
j=1,i̸=j
IncPar(fi, fj)
(21)
To model the measurement of the average of inclusion, we
will apply the equations (19) and (20) to obtain respectively
table IV and table V
VI. ILLUSTRATION OF THE STRICT AND PARTIAL
INCLUSIONS
In this section we will present our experimental phase to
illustrate both of the strict and partial inclusion between two
continuous belief functions.
IncS
Value
IncS(f1, fj)
0.0509
IncS(f2, fj)
0.3038
IncS(f3, fj)
0.0506
IncS(f4, fj)
0.4653
TABLE IV
AVERAGE OF STRICT INCLUSION.
IncP
Value
IncP(f1, fj)
0.1921
IncP(f2, fj)
0.3217
IncP(f3, fj)
0.60317
IncP(f4, fj)
0.1852
TABLE V
AVERAGE OF THE PARTIAL INCLUSION.
To illustrate both of the strict and partial inclusion between
two continuous belief functions induced using a normal dis-
tribution. We decided to ﬁx the value of the ﬁrst distribution
pdf1, where, it is characterized by its mean µ1 = 0 and its
standard deviation σ1 = 1. For the second distribution pdf2,
we will vary the values of µ2 in [0, 10] and σ2 in [0, 5].
Here, our purpose is to see the behavior of the inclusion when
we modify one of the pdfs, and the parameters that infer in
the obtained results.
A. Strict inclusion between belief densities induced by normal
distributions
This strict inclusion is a natural approach, that allows
us to perceive if there exists any intersection between two
distributions, how they behave and the parameters that
interfere during this process. In this case, when a degree of
inclusion has binary values of 0 and 1, we will study this
property between two continuous belief functions.
The more the value of the second standard deviation grows,
Fig. 2.
Strict inclusion of pdf1 in pdf2.

Fig. 3.
Partial inclusion of pdf1 in pdf2
the more difference between σ1 and σ2 develops. Here, the
strict inclusion between the two distributions, which generates
a growth in the behavior of the obtained curve. We are then,
in the presence of a growth of the strict inclusion of pdf1 in
pdf2 due to the variation of the second distribution.
Otherwise, we notice in Figure 2, relative to the strict inclu-
sion, that it is not the gap between the means µ1 and µ2
that generates this growth. It is the difference between the
two standard deviations, that is in the origin of this growing
phenomenon of inclusion. As shown when σ1 > σ2 and µ2
having its maximal value with µ2 = 5, the strict inclusion
is null. This value is due to the fact that the degree of strict
inclusion δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) = 0, which can be explained
by the non-existence of any intersection between pdf1 and
pdf2.
The part of the curve where the difference between the two
standard deviations is low and at the same time the difference
between the means is high. We have a small growing strict
inclusion for example when µ2 = 3 and σ2 = 1.5, the strict
inclusion IncStr(f1, f2) = 0.1. At the meantime, even when
µ1 = µ2 = 0 σ1 = σ2 = 1, there is an intersection between
the two distributions and IncStr(f1, f2) > 0. Moreover, when
the gap between σ1 and σ2 gets higher, the curve increases,
generating a bigger strict inclusion between pdf1 and pdf2,
until rising its maximal value where IncStr(f1, f2) = 1, with
δIncStr(xi, yi, xj, yj) = 1. In this speciﬁc case, we are in
presence of a total inclusion of the ﬁrst distribution pdf1 in
the second one pdf2.
We also witness a phenomenonin which µ2 gets a high
value, the strict inclusion drops considerably. Here we can state
that the mean also has an impact on the generated inclusion.
B. Partial inclusion between belief densities induced by nor-
mal distributions
The partial inclusion is deﬁned in order to give us the
proportion of the intersection between two pdfs.
Fig. 4.
Partial inclusion of pdf2 in pdf1
1) Partial inclusion of pdf1 in pdf2: During this ex-
perimentation, we keep the same values used for the strict
inclusion and we obtain Figure 3 We notice that, when we
are dealing with similar distribution where µ1 = µ2 = 0 and
σ1 = σ2 = 1, the value of the partial inclusion is greater than
zero. It is possible to state that when we are in presence of two
distributions having the same values, there is not necessarily
any total inclusion between them. We also take note, that as
the difference between σ1 and σ2 rises, due to the of pdf2, the
ﬁgure obtained grows faster, and reaches its maximal value
IncPar(f1, f2) = 1, generating a curve more arched than the
strict inclusion.
When the difference between µ1 and µ2 increases because
of the variation of pdf2, the partial inclusion reaches a value
of IncPar(f1, f2) = 0.85, which becomes lower when the
gap between two standard deviations is the highest (σ2 =
3), we obtain the maximal value for the partial inclusion:
IncPar(f1, f2) = 1 like presented in Figure 3.
In this speciﬁc case, we witness a full and total inclusion
of pdf1 in pdf2. This is similar to what we have presented
regarding the strict inclusion. Here we have non-negative
inclusions, that respect the lower and upper bounds where the
values are [0, 1]. Besides, the property of asymmetry is also
respected because, the inclusion (what ever is strict or partial)
of a distribution in the other does not necessarily involve the
inverse case with the same value.
When IncPar = 1, we have a total inclusion of the ﬁrst
distribution pdf1 in the second one pdf2, this situation is
considered as a strict inclusion where, pdf1 is fully included
in pdf2.
2) Partial inclusion of pdf2 in pdf1: For this case, we have
chosen to measure the partial inclusion of pdf2 in pdf1, saving
the same values for both distributions. Otherwise, the equation
18 becomes:
δIncP ar(xi, yi,xj, yj)=max(0,min(yi, yj)max(xj, xi))
yj −xj
(22)

We obtain the Figure 4. In this case, we notice a different
phenomenon comparing to Figure 3. Here, we witness than
when the two distributions are totally similar, the value of
the partial inclusion equals 0.8183. This value is the maximal
one that is expressed in this, and as stated before, two similar
distributions can not be fully included in each other. We also
observe in this ﬁgure, that as long as tha values of the second
distribution µ2, and σ2 rise, the value of the partial inclusion
of pdf2 in pdf1 drops. More the two distributions are getting
different from each other, more the partial inclusion decreases.
Both parameters; the mean and the standard deviation have
considerable impacts in this measure. This is proved by the
behavior of the partial inclusion.
The difference between the Figure 3 and Figure 4 is very
obvious considering the behaviors of the two curves. This is
due to the nature of the focal elements of continuous belief
functions which are expressed by intervals. Specially with the
case of the inclusion where each time we measure the inclusion
of the intervals of a normal distribution with those of a second
normal distribution.
VII. STRICT INCLUSION VS PARTIAL INCLUSION
Comparing the results obtained in Figure 2 and Figure 3,
where we have the same values for the two distributions, we
notice that the partial inclusion reaches the maximal value
faster that the strict one. Besides, its area is bigger and larger.
Thus, we can state that the partial inclusion is dominating.
In Figure 2 and Figure 3, it seems that we have the same
phenomena between the two types of inclusion. This can be
explained by the fact that we are working with consonant
belief functions (where focal intervals are nested). We can
imagine that in presence in other nature of belief functions
(categorical, or Bayesian belief functions) we can obtain
different behaviors between the strict and the partial inclusion.
We notice the same phenomena that we have seen for
the strict, when the values of parameters characterizing the
second distribution grow, generating a big difference between
the means, and the standard deviations, the partial inclusion
decreases signiﬁcantly and comparing when we are dealing
with smaller values of µ2.
Thus, we can say that, both of the mean and the standard
deviation do have a real impact on the measurement of
the partial inclusion, having the same situation as the strict
inclusion.
In the case of two distributions getting more and more
different and especially when considering only the standard
deviation, the phenomena of inclusion gets bigger. However,
if the mean of one distribution is having non similar value than
the other we can state than the inclusion has smaller values.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have emphasized the evaluation of the
relation of inclusion between continuous belief functions in-
duced by a normal distribution. We have deﬁned two forms
of inclusions: the strict and the partial one. Before that, we
have detailed all preliminary background that will allow us to
experiment this kind of relation. We have also provided the
approach on which the evaluation of the inclusions will be
based.
We have presented a relation of inclusion having normalized
values that takes into account the nature of continuous belief
functions described using intervals as focal elements. These
two forms of inclusion respond to all the properties that must
be satisﬁed. We also have shown that both of the mean and the
standard deviation have different impacts in this phenomena
each one with its speciﬁc output.
