Witscript 3: A Hybrid AI System for Improvising Jokes in a Conversation 
Joe Toplyn 
Twenty Lane Media, LLC 
P. O. Box 51 
Rye, NY 10580 USA 

 
 
Abstract 
Previous papers presented Witscript and Witscript 2, AI sys-
tems for improvising jokes in a conversation. Witscript gen-
erates jokes that rely on wordplay, whereas the jokes gener-
ated by Witscript 2 rely on common sense. This paper extends 
that earlier work by presenting Witscript 3, which generates 
joke candidates using three joke production mechanisms and 
then selects the best candidate to output. Like Witscript and 
Witscript 2, Witscript 3 is based on humor algorithms created 
by an expert comedy writer. Human evaluators judged 
Witscript 3's responses to input sentences to be jokes 44% of 
the time. This is evidence that Witscript 3 represents another 
step toward giving a chatbot a humanlike sense of humor. 
 Introduction 
Generating all types of humor is often regarded as an 
AI-complete problem (Winters 2021). But for a conversa-
tional agent like a social robot to be truly useful, it must be 
able to generate contextually integrated jokes about what's 
happening at the moment (Ritchie 2005). What's more, to be 
high-quality, a conversational agent must generate a variety 
of jokes using a variety of joke production mechanisms 
(Amin and Burghardt 2020). Witscript 3 is a novel system 
for automatically generating a diverse range of contextually 
integrated jokes using three different joke production mech-
anisms. 
Related Work 
A few systems for the computational generation of verbally 
expressed humor can generate contextually integrated jokes, 
such as jokes improvised in a conversation. But those sys-
tems have notable limitations. Either they do not incorporate 
explicit humor algorithms (Zhang et al. 2020), or they only 
utilize one joke production mechanism (Dybala et al. 2008; 
Ritschel et al. 2019; Zhu 2019). In contrast, Witscript 3 gen-
erates conversational jokes using three joke production 
mechanisms, which are based on two explicit humor algo-
rithms. 
One of those humor algorithms, derived from the Surprise 
Theory of Laughter (Toplyn 2021), specifies that a 
monologue-type joke has these three parts: (a) the topic, (b) 
the angle, and (c) the punch line. 
Witscript 3, like Witscript (Toplyn 2021) and Witscript 2 
(Toplyn 2022), also incorporates the Basic Joke-Writing Al-
gorithm (Toplyn 2021), which consists of five steps for writ-
ing a three-part joke: 
1. Select a topic. A good joke topic is one sentence that is 
likely to capture the attention of the audience. 
2. Select two topic handles. The topic handles are the two 
words or phrases in the topic that are the most attention-
getting. 
3. Generate associations of the two topic handles. An as-
sociation is something that the audience is likely to think 
of when they think about a particular subject. 
4. Create a punch line. The punch line is the word or phrase 
that results in a laugh. It links an association of one topic 
handle to an association of the other topic handle in a sur-
prising way. 
5. Generate an angle between the topic and punch line. 
The angle is a word sequence that connects the topic to 
the punch line in a natural-sounding way. 
Now I'll describe how the Witscript 3 system employs those 
two humor algorithms to improvise jokes in a conversation. 
Description of the Witscript 3 System 
Witscript 3 is a neural-symbolic hybrid AI system. It's sym-
bolic because it incorporates the two humor algorithms de-
scribed above. And it’s neural because it executes those al-
gorithms by calling on a transformer-based, large language 
model (LLM), OpenAI's GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020). The 
most capable GPT-3 model currently available, text-
davinci-002, is used without fine-tuning. The model has 175 
billion parameters and was trained on a filtered version of 
Common Crawl, English-language Wikipedia, and other 
high-quality datasets. 
Like Witscript and Witscript 2, Witscript 3 uses the two 
humor algorithms described above to divide the task of im-
provising a joke into steps. The Witscript 2 and Witscript 3 
systems carry out those steps by making a separate call to 
the LLM for each step and using the output of each step as 

an input to the next. In their paper, Wu, Terry, and Cai 
(2022) refer to this process as "prompt chaining," and ob-
serve that the step-by-step nature of the process results in a 
system that is more debuggable, editable, controllable, and 
explainable than an LLM-based system that accomplishes 
an entire task all at once. 
More specifically, Witscript 3 employs GPT-3 to carry 
out the steps of the Basic Joke-Writing Algorithm in this 
way: 
1. Get a topic. Witscript 3 receives a sentence from a user 
and treats it as the topic of a three-part joke that consists 
of a topic, an angle, and a punch line. For example, a user 
might say to Witscript 3, "Authorities caught two pigs that 
were wandering around loose in San Antonio, Texas." 
2. Select two topic handles. The GPT-3 API is called with 
a prompt to select the two most conspicuous nouns, noun 
phrases, or named entities in the topic. That's because the 
humor of human-written jokes tends to be based on nouns 
and noun phrases (West and Horvitz 2019). From that ex-
ample topic, GPT-3 selects the topic handles "pigs" and 
"San Antonio." 
3. Generate associations of the two topic handles. The 
GPT-3 API is called with a prompt to generate a list of 
associations for each topic handle. In our example, for 
"pigs" GPT-3 generates a list including bacon, pork 
chops, ham, and sausage. For "San Antonio" it generates 
a list including The Alamo, River Walk, Texas Long-
horns, and Whataburger. 
4. Create three punch line candidates. Witscript 3 links 
associations of the topic handles in three different ways 
to create three punch line candidates: a wordplay candi-
date, a common-sense knowledge candidate, and a third 
candidate. To create its wordplay candidate, Witscript 3, 
like Witscript, uses well-known tools of natural language 
processing to combine one association from each list into 
a punch line that exhibits wordplay (Toplyn 2020). 
Witscript 3 does not call on GPT-3 to create its wordplay 
candidate because GPT-3 seems to be weak at phonetic 
tasks like generating puns and rhymes, possibly as a result 
of its use of byte-pair encoding (Branwen 2020). To cre-
ate its common-sense knowledge candidate, Witscript 
3, like Witscript 2, uses GPT-3 to combine one associa-
tion from each list using common-sense knowledge. In 
our example, when the GPT-3 API is called, GPT-3 com-
bines the associations "sausage" and "The Alamo" into 
the punch line "Alamo Sausage." Finally, to create its 
third candidate, Witscript 3 uses GPT-3 to power a 
third, proprietary, joke production mechanism involving 
the topic handles. 
5. Generate an angle between the topic and each candi-
date punch line. The GPT-3 API is called with prompts 
to generate three joke candidates, each one based on the 
topic and ending with one of the punch line candidates.  
6. Output the joke candidate that is most likely the fun-
niest. The GPT-3 API is called with a prompt to deter-
mine which of the three joke candidates seems to be the 
funniest. Then Witscript 3 outputs that joke to the user as 
its response. In our example, after the user says, "Author-
ities caught two pigs that were wandering around loose in 
San Antonio, Texas," Witscript 3 outputs the response, 
"They were taken to the Alamo Sausage Company." 
System Evaluation 
For inputs to evaluate Witscript 3, I used 13 sentences taken 
from Amazon's Topical-Chat dataset (Gopalakrishnan et al. 
2019). The dataset consists of comments exchanged by pairs 
of workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) who were 
asked to have coherent and engaging conversations based on 
topical reading material that they had been provided with. 
The dataset is available from www.kaggle.com/da-
tasets/arnavsharmaas/chatbot-dataset-
topical-chat. 
I took the following steps to select and standardize sen-
tences from the Topical-Chat dataset for use in evaluating 
Witscript 3: 
1. Take a comment from the dataset at random. 
2. Select the last (or only) complete sentence in that com-
ment if it meets all of the following criteria: (a) its length 
is 20 words or less; (b) it has no pronouns whose anteced-
ents are unclear; (c) it has at least two nouns, noun 
phrases, or named entities; and (d) it isn't basically the 
same as a sentence that has already been selected. Those 
are criteria that, in my judgment, a human would use 
when deciding whether a particular sentence in a conver-
sation could be responded to with a joke relatively easily. 
3. Repeat the first two steps until 13 sentences have been 
selected.  
4. Standardize those 13 sentences by correcting any errors 
in capitalization, spelling, and punctuation.  
Then I used each of those 13 sentences as an input to obtain 
responses from three different sources: 
1. Human—This is the AMT worker whose response to that 
sentence was recorded in the Topical-Chat dataset. I took 
the entire response up until the AMT worker changed the 
subject. Then I corrected any errors in capitalization, 
spelling, and punctuation so that the Human responses 
would be comparable to the responses output by Witscript 
3 and GPT-LOL, which contained no such errors. 
2. GPT-LOL—This is a simple joke generator I created to 
serve as a baseline. It is the text-davinci-002 version of 
GPT-3 given the prompt "You want to be funny. Respond 
to this: [The sentence]." Temperature is set to 0.7 and 
Top P to 1.0. 
3. Witscript 3—This is the system described above. 
To evaluate the responses produced by the Human, GPT-
LOL, and Witscript 3, I hired workers via AMT. I only spec-
ified that the AMT workers had to be located in the United 
States and have a Human Intelligence Task (HIT) Approval 
Rate greater than or equal to 95%. 

The 39 input and response pairs, 13 pairs for each source, 
were put in a random order and presented in that order to all 
of the AMT evaluators, who were not told how the pairs had 
been obtained. Given each input and response pair, the eval-
uators were asked to rate the response as either 1 (not a 
joke), 2 (almost a joke), 3 (a joke), or 4 (a very good joke). 
This evaluation method (Toplyn 2021) is consistent with 
that of Amin and Burghardt (2020), who use as one criterion 
for evaluating a humor generation system its humorousness, 
which they define as the ability of the system to output text 
that is identifiable as being a joke or as having humorous 
intent. 
Each of the 39 input and response pairs was evaluated by 
15 AMT workers, yielding a total of 585 ratings. Table 1 
shows the Human's response to each input sentence, along 
with the first response that was output by the two AI systems 
for that input. The mean rating given by the evaluators for 
each response is also shown. 
 
Source 
Input and responses 
Mean 
rating 
 
1. Input: Two identical twins in Japan have released a rap album and they are 100 years old. 
 
Human 
That is awesome. 
2.00 
GPT-LOL 
This is amazing! I can't believe they are still alive, let alone rapping! 
1.60 
Witscript 3 
I'm not sure if they're 'twinning' or 'losing.' 
2.33 
 
2. Input: I would love to be the UN ambassador to aliens though! 
 
Human 
Me too lol. That would be a pretty cushy job, I think. 
2.47 
GPT-LOL 
I think you would make an excellent UN ambassador to aliens! 
1.87 
Witscript 3 
I would love to be the US Permanent Representative to the United Aliens! 
2.20 
 
3. Input: Speaking of directors, did you know that "Frozen" was the first animated Disney 
film directed by a woman? 
 
Human 
Yes, "Frozen," for which she earned an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. Lee is the 
first female director. 
1.53 
GPT-LOL 
Yes, I actually did know that! I think it's amazing that Disney is finally starting to represent 
women in leadership positions! 
1.47 
Witscript 3 
And the last. 
1.60 
 
4. Input: Did you know there is a free website to listen to thousands of classic radio dramas? 
 
Human 
No, I did not. That sounds pretty cool. 
1.40 
GPT-LOL 
Yes, I did know that. It's called the Internet Archive. 
1.47 
Witscript 3 
Yes, it's called a graveyard. 
1.93 
 
5. Input: Germany has given animals legal rights in their constitution. 
 
Human 
I heard about that! I think they started that in 2002. 
1.20 
GPT-LOL 
This is a hoot! I didn't know that Germany had given animals legal rights in their constitution. I 
wonder what kinds of rights they have. 
1.60 
Witscript 3 
If animals have legal rights, does that mean I can sue my neighbor's dog for barking? 
2.80 
 
6. Input: I wonder if all those basketball players leave tea bags in their shoes to absorb the 
odor! 
 
Human 
It would be hard running the floor with those in there... Just kidding! 
2.60 
GPT-LOL 
You're hilarious! 
2.13 
Witscript 3 
Michael Jordan is the Earl Grey of slam dunks. 
2.67 
 
7. Input: Do you know Iceland is rewriting their constitution using Facebook? 
 
Human 
Great way to get more involved via social networking! 
2.13 
GPT-LOL 
Yes, I heard that Facebook is now the go-to source for constitutional law. 
1.87 
Witscript 3 
I'm not surprised. Facebook is where all the cool kids are. 
2.47 
 
8. Input: Brian May has an interesting way of playing the guitar, with an English sixpence. 
 
Human 
That's interesting. I heard Brian May has a PhD in astrophysics. 
1.53 
GPT-LOL 
Brian May has an interesting way of playing the guitar, with an English sixpence. I'm not sure if 
that's a good thing or a bad thing, but it's certainly unique! 
1.53 
Witscript 3 
I always suspected Brian May was a bit of a tightwad! 
2.33 
Table 1: Responses generated for each input, with their mean ratings on a scale from 1 (not a joke) to 4 (a very good joke). 

 
9. Input: Did you know that panda researchers wear panda costumes to work? 
 
Human 
That's weird. 
1.73 
GPT-LOL 
That's a bit of a bamboozle! 
2.93 
Witscript 3 
Do they also get a discount at the Panda Express? 
2.53 
 
10. Input: Did you know the White House has twin buildings in Ireland and France? 
 
Human 
That is interesting. 
1.80 
GPT-LOL 
Yes, I did know that! The White House is a very popular tourist destination, so it's no surprise that 
they would have twin buildings in other countries. 
1.73 
Witscript 3 
So that's where they've been hiding the other presidents! 
2.93 
 
11. Input: If you live in South Africa, you can even attach a flamethrower on your car so it 
doesn't get carjacked! 
 
Human 
That's awesome! I would totally make burgers or something with that flamethrower LOL. But I 
also probably would not go to South Africa. 
2.07 
GPT-LOL 
I don't know about you, but I feel safer already! 
2.47 
Witscript 3 
I always attach a flamethrower to my car. Just in case I need to light my cigarettes. 
2.13 
 
12. Input: An aluminum piano was once built for an airship and weighed only 365 pounds! 
 
Human 
"Only," haha. That's still massively heavy. That piano was built for the famous Hindenburg. 
2.00 
GPT-LOL 
If that's the case, I'd love to see a grand piano made out of aluminum! 
2.07 
Witscript 3 
Why did the aluminum piano cross the road? To get to the other pie piano! 
2.13 
 
13. Input: There is a radio station that turns solar activity to sound. 
 
Human 
Wow, cool. 
1.40 
GPT-LOL 
Why didn't they just name it "The Sun FM"? 
2.80 
Witscript 3 
If you listen to it for too long, you'll get sunburn. 
2.67 
Table 1 (continued).
Table 2 compares the sources based on their ratings. The 
second column shows that the Human responses are rated 
lowest. This is not surprising because the humans recorded 
in the Topical-Chat dataset were not making any special at-
tempt to be funny. Witscript 3's responses were rated, on av-
erage, substantially higher than the responses of GPT-LOL. 
Those results indicate that a hybrid of an LLM and symbolic 
humor algorithms results in a higher-quality joke generator 
than an LLM that has merely been prompted to be funny. 
The last column of Table 2 shows the percentage of re-
sponses that the evaluators rated as "a joke" or "a very good 
joke." Witscript 3's responses were judged to be jokes 44% 
of the time. This result may be evidence of the feasibility of 
an AI system that can improvise conversational jokes as ef-
fectively as a non-expert human can. 
Source 
Mean rating 
% jokes (rated 3 or 4) 
Human  
1.84 
23.6% 
GPT-LOL 
1.96 
33.8% 
Witscript 3 
2.36 
44.1% 
Table 2: Comparison of the sources based on their ratings. 
Contributions and Future Work 
This paper makes the following contributions: 
1. It presents an automatic, easily scalable system for impro-
vising a variety of contextually integrated jokes that are 
based on a variety of joke production mechanisms. 
2. It provides evidence that computational humor is best ac-
complished by taking a hybrid neural-symbolic approach. 
3. It demonstrates how an AI system can generate a joke in 
a series of editable steps, which allows a human to collab-
orate with the system in creating the joke. 
4. It introduces a simple joke generator—GPT-LOL—for 
use as a baseline in evaluating systems that generate con-
versational jokes. 
To get Witscript 3 to generate jokes more consistently, the 
following will be explored: using different prompts and con-
figuration settings for GPT-3; using LLMs other than GPT-3 
to execute the humor algorithms; and incorporating addi-
tional joke production mechanisms to widen the variety of 
the joke outputs even more. 
Work will also be devoted to developing a hybrid of an 
LLM and the humor algorithms described herein that can 
recognize jokes in addition to generating them. 
Conclusion 
The Witscript 3 system could be integrated into a chatbot as 
a humor module; the proprietary software is available for 
license. Such a humor-enabled chatbot might animate an ar-
tificial, but likeable, companion for lonely humans.
