382 
Lazy Evaluation of Symmetric Bayesian Decision Problems 
Anders L. Madsen 
Finn V. Jensen 
Department of Computer Science 
Aalborg University 
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7C, DK-9220 Aalborg, Denmark 
Abstract 
Solving symmetric Bayesian decision prob­
lems is a computationally intensive task to 
perform regardless of the algorithm used. In 
this paper we propose a method for improv­
ing the efficiency of algorithms for solving 
Bayesian decision problems. 
The method 
is based on the principle of lazy evalua­
tion - a principle recently shown to improve 
the efficiency of inference in Bayesian net­
works. The basic idea is to maintain de­
compositions of potentials and to postpone 
computations for as long as possible. The 
efficiency improvements obtained with the 
lazy evaluation based method is emphasized 
through examples. Finally, the lazy evalu­
ation based method is compared with the 
HUGIN and valuation-based systems architec­
tures for solving symmetric Bayesian decision 
problems. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Bayesian decision theory provides a solid foundation 
for assessing and thinking about actions under un­
certainty. A symmetric Bayesian decision problem is 
specified with a set of decision variables, a set of chance 
variables, a multiplicative decomposition of the joint 
probability distribution of the chance variables given 
the decision variables, and a utility function speci­
fying the preferences of the decision maker. Solving 
Bayesian decision problems is, unfortunately, a com­
putationally intensive task to perform. 
Influence diagrams [Howard and Matheson, 1984] is 
an effective modeling framework for analysis of sym­
metric Bayesian decision making under uncertainty. 
The influence diagram is a natural representation for 
capturing the semantics of decision making with a 
minimum of clutter and confusion for the decision 
maker [Shachter and Peot, 1992]. An influence dia­
gram is essentially a Bayesian network augmented with 
decision variables and utility nodes. 
Valuation-based systems (VBS) [Shenoy, 1992] is a 
framework different from influence diagrams for solv­
ing symmetric Bayesian decision problems. Influence 
diagrams are based on the semantics of conditional 
independence relations while VBS are based on a fac­
torization of the joint probability distribution of the 
chance variables and a decomposition of the utility 
function. A graphical illustration of a VBS is referred 
to as a valuation network. In valuation networks vari­
ables, potentials and the precedence constraints are 
specified explicitly. 
Solving a symmetric Bayesian decision problem 
amounts to computing an optimal strategy maxi­
mizing the expected utility for the decision maker 
and computing the maximal expected utility of 
this strategy. 
An optimal strategy specifies the 
optimal decision for each decision variable given 
the past. 
A number of different methods for 
solving symmetric Bayesian decision problems ex­
ists, see for instance [Shachter, 1986, Shenoy, 1992, 
Ndilikilikesha, 1994, Jensen et a!., 1994, Zhang, 1998]. 
Recently, the lazy propagation architecture for prob­
abilistic inference in Bayesian networks was pro­
posed [Madsen and Jensen, 1998]. 
The method we 
propose is based on applying the principles of lazy 
evaluation to solving decision problems. Bayesian net­
work inference involves elimination of chance variables 
only. Solving symmetric Bayesian decision problems, 
on the other hand, involves elimination of both chance 
and decision variables. Elimination of a chance vari­
able is performed by summation while elimination of 
a decision variable is performed by maximization. Ex­
tending the lazy propagation architecture for solving 
decision problems involves extending both the on-line 
triangulation heuristic, the elimination algorithm, and 
the potential combination algorithm. 

Lazy Evaluation of Symmetric Bayesian Decision Problems 
383 
In general, we assume the reader to be familiar with 
Bayesian networks, influence diagrams, and VBS. 
2 
PRELIMINARIES 
The set of chance variables of a symmetric Bayesian 
decision problem is partitioned into disjoint informa­
tion sets Io, I1 , ... .In relative to the decision vari­
ables. The partition induces a partial ordering -< on 
the variables of the decision problem. The set of vari­
ables observed between decision D, and DH 1 precedes 
DH 1 and succeeds D, in the ordering: Io -< D 1 -< 
I1 · · · -< Dn -<In. 
The set of legal elimination orderings is constrained 
to include only orderings where all variables in infor­
mation set h are eliminated before decision D,. This 
implies that Io is the set of chance variables initially 
observed and In is the set of chance variables never 
observed or observed after the last decision has been 
made. A total ordering on the decision variables is usu­
ally assumed. This assumption can, however, be re­
laxed. (Nielsen and Jensen, 1999] describes when de­
cision problems with only a partial ordering on the 
decision variables is well-defined. 
One of the main difficulties in solving symmetric 
Bayesian decision problems is that elimination of 
chance and decision variables do not, in general, com­
mute. Variables within the same information set can, 
however, be eliminated in any order and consecutive 
decision variables 0;. and 0;.+ 1 can be eliminated in 
any order if the information set I;. is empty. 
A decision rule for decision variable D;. is a function 
6;. : dom(no,) -) dom(D;.) where no, is the relevant 
past of 0;.. The relevant past of decision variable 0;. is 
the subset of the informational parents of 0;. relevant 
for making decision 0;. (see [Nielsen and Jensen, 1999] 
for a structural definition). 
A strategy is an ordered set of decision rules t. 
= 
( 61, . . .  , 6n) including a decision rule for each decision. 
An optimal strategy 3; returns the optimal decision for 
the decision maker to make at each decision. To solve 
a decision problem is to compute an optimal strat­
egy 3; maximizing the expected utility for the decision 
maker and to compute the maximum expected utility 
MEU{6) of 3;. 
The utility function specifying the preferences of the 
decision maker is most often assumed to decompose 
additively as when the utility function decomposes 
multiplicatively solving the decision problem reduces 
to a task similar to performing probabilistic inference 
in Bayesian networks. We return to this point later. 
The perfect recall assumption of Bayesian decision 
problems implies that at the time of any decision, 
the decision maker remembers all past decisions and 
all previously known information. This implies that 
a decision variable and all its parents are informa­
tional parents of all subsequent decision variables 
(non-forgetting arcs will not be depicted in any figure, 
but they will always be assumed present). 
For ease of exposition and limited space we focus 
on the influence diagram representation of symmet­
ric Bayesian decision problems. An influence diagram 
ID is a triple ( G, P, U) where G is a directed acyclic 
graph with chance, decision, and utility nodes. Each 
chance node corresponds to a chance variable which is 
associated with a conditional probability distribution. 
The set of conditional probability distributions is de­
noted P. Each value node is associated with a utility 
potential and the set of utility potentials is denoted 
U. Each decision node is associated with a decision 
variable. Arcs into chance nodes denote probabilistic 
dependence relations and an arc from a node X into a 
decision node D indicates that the state of X is known 
when decision D is to be made. 
In the rest of the paper the generalized marginaliza­
tion operator M introduced by (Jensen et a!., 1994] is 
used. The marginalization operator works differently 
for marginalization of chance and decision variables: 
M P = L p and M p = max p, 
X 
X 
D 
D 
where X is a chance and D is a decision variable. 
3 
THE HUGIN ARCHITECTURE 
The HUGIN architecture for solving influence diagrams 
is based on message passing in strong junction trees. 
A strong junction tree representation T of an influence 
diagram ID is constructed based on moralization, re­
moval of the information arcs, and removal of the di­
rection on the remaining arcs of ID. Let rom denote 
the resulting graph. The nodes of T are cliques of a 
strong triangulation of rom and T has the property 
that for any two adjacent cliques C;. and Ci with C;. 
closest to the strong root R ofT there exists an ordering 
of the variables of Ci respecting -< with the variables 
of C;. n Ci preceding the variables of Ci \ C;.. 
Once T is constructed, the probability and utility po­
tentials of ID are associated with cliques of T such 
that the domain of the potential is a subset of the 
clique domain. When all potentials have been associ­
ated with cliques, the probability potentials associated 
with a clique C are combined by multiplication and the 
utility potentials associated with C are combined by 

384 
Madsen and Jensen 
summation to form the initial clique probability and 
utility potentials <l>c and tJ>c, respectively. 
Messages are passed from the leaf cliques ofT to R and 
messages in different branches ofT can be passed inde­
pendently. The message passed over a separator S con­
necting cliques Ci and Ci consists of two potentials, a 
probability potential <1>5 computed by marginalization 
of <l>c; down to S and a utility potential tl>5 computed 
by marginalization of the combination of <1> c; and tj> c 1 
down to S: 
<1>5 = M <l>c, 
and tl>5 = M <l>c, tl>c,. 
C;\S 
C;\S 
When a clique C receives messages from neighboring 
separators the clique probability and utility potentials 
<l>c and tl>c are updated with the potentials received: 
<I>C: = <l>c I1 
<1>5 
and 
SEch(C) 
,,.. 
,,, 
' 
tl>5 
'I'C = 'I'C + 
L 
<I>* , 
SEch(C) 
S 
where ch( C) is the set of separators between C and all 
adjacent cliques further away from R. 
The relevant past of a decision variable is not simple to 
read off from the strong junction tree structure. How­
ever, let C be the clique containing decision variables 
0 closest to R and let Yo be the set of variables pre­
ceding 0 in C. If and only if X E Yo, then there is a 
path between X and 0 in rom such that when 0 is to 
be eliminated all variables on the path between X and 
0 have already been eliminated. This implies that all 
past variables relevant for computing the optimal deci­
sion rule b is a subset of Yo where b returns the max­
imizing alternatives of the utility potential tj>(O, Yo). 
The partial ordering imposed by the structure of the 
influence diagram IO is extended to a total ordering by 
the heuristic method used for the strong triangulation 
of rom. The strong junction tree T constructed from 
the strong triangulation imposes a partial order on the 
elimination of variables during message passing. The 
fact that T only imposes a partial order on the set of 
legal elimination orderings cannot be exploited fully 
in the HuGIN architecture as the potentials initially 
associated with cliques are combined to form initial 
clique probability and utility potentials. 
4 
VARIABLE ELIMINATION 
The maximum expected utility of a symmetric 
Bayesian decision problem is calculated by eliminat­
ing all variables of the decision problem in the reverse 
order of the partial ordering imposed by the informa­
tion constraints. A formula representing the task of 
computing MEU(Ll) by eliminating a set of variables 
Y consisting of chance variables {X 1 ,  .. . , Xn} and de­
cision variables {0 1, . . . , 0 0} from a set of probability 
potentials <I> = {P(Xi I pa(X;) 11 -:; i::; n} and a set of 
utility potentials '¥ = {U 1 , .
•
•
 , Um} is: 
Assume the first variable to eliminate according to the 
strong elimination order is Y. The set of utility poten­
tials '¥ can be divided into two subsets. Let 'Dy be the 
subset of utility potentials including Y in the domain: 
Vy = {Uj I Y E dom(Ui ), 1 ::; j ::; , m}, let Nv be the 
set of utility potentials not including Y in the domain: 
Nv = {Ui 11 ::; j ::; m} \ Vy, and let 1-lv = Y U ch(Y) 
where ch(Y) is the set of children of Y. Furthermore, 
let <l>v be the potential obtained by eliminating Y from 
the combination of all probability potentials with Y in 
the domain and let tj>y be the potential obtained by 
eliminating Y from the combination of all probability 
and utility potentials with Y in the domain: 
<l>v = M IJ P(X;Ipa(X;)), 
tl>v = M ( IJ P(X;Ipa(Xdl) L. uk. 
(2) 
Y 
X1E1l.v 
UKEVv 
With these definitions, equation 1 is rewritten as: 
MEU(Li) = t; [ (D P(Xilpa(Xdl) 
( L. ui + L. uk)] 
U;ENv 
U,EDv 
M [ ( IJ 
P(Xi lpa(Xj))) 
XEV\{Y} 
X; EV\'H.v 
M ( IJ P(XiJpa(Xj)l) ( L. ui + L. uk)] 
Y 
X;E'H.v 
U;ENv 
U,EVv 
M [( IJ 
P(Xjlpa(Xill) 
XEV\{Y} 
X;EV\'H.v 
( cv 
Ui) <l>v + tl>v)] 
M [( IJ 
P(Xilpa(Xill)<l>v 
XEV\{Y} 
X;EV\'H.v 
(3) 
(4) 

Lazy Evaluation of Symmetric Bayesian Decision Problems 
385 
Equation 4 shows that elimination of Y from <1> and 
'!' produces a probability potential <fly and a utility 
potential 
. When Y is eliminated, all potentials of 
<l>y and '!'y including Y in their domain are removed 
from <1> and '!', respectively. Instead, <fly and 
 are 
added. The union of the updated sets <1>* U '!'* is a 
value preserving reduction of <1> U '!' where Y has been 
eliminated. 
The above derivation is similar to the derivation pre­
sented in [Dechter, 1996] with the exception that we 
do not assume the decision variables to be root vari­
ables in the influence diagram. Equation 4 is essen­
tially a general specification of the fusion operation 
of [Shenoy, 1992]. The fusion operation, however, ex­
plicitly differentiates between four different cases de­
pending on the variable Y being eliminated and the set 
of potentials with Y in the domain. 
One of the main difficulties in solving symmetric 
Bayesian decision problems is that an additive decom­
position of the utility function makes combination of 
utility and probability potentials non-associative. If 
the utility function decomposes multiplicatively, then 
combination of probability and utility potentials is as­
sociative, and the need for division and summation of 
potentials is eliminated. This implies that the task 
of solving a symmetric Bayesian decision problem is 
reduced to a task similar to performing probabilistic 
inference in a Bayesian network 1. 
5 
LAZY PROPAGATION 
For ease of exposition the lazy evaluation based 
method is described in the context of influence dia­
grams and strong junction trees, but notice that the 
principles of lazy evaluation can be applied to other 
representations and computational structures such as 
VBS. In the context of strong junction trees we refer 
to the method as the lazy propagation algorithm. 
Lazy propagation is based on message passing in a 
strong junction tree representation, say T, of a deci­
sion problem represented as an influence diagram, say 
ID. Initially, the probability and utility potentials of 
ID are associated with cliques of T. The potentials 
associated with cliques are not combined, so during 
message passing each clique and separator holds two 
sets of potentials. Messages are passed from the leaves 
ofT towards the strong root R by recursively invoking 
the CollectMessage algorithm (defined below). When 
CollectMessage is invoked on a clique Ci from an adja­
cent clique Ci, clique Ci invokes CollectMessage on all 
other adjacent cliques. When these cliques have fin-
1 A multiplicative decomposition of the utility function 
is obtainable using the exponential function, for instance. 
ished their CollectMessage, Cj absorbs messages from 
each of them and C absorbs from Ci: 
Algorithm 5.1 [CollectMessage] 
Let Ci and Ci be adjacent cliques. If CollectMessage 
is invoked on Ci from Ci, then: 
1. Ci invokes CollectM essage on all adjacent cliques 
except C. 
2. The message from Ci to Ci is absorbed (algo­
rithm 5.2). 
D 
From the description of the CollectMessage algorithm 
it is clear that information is passed between adjacent 
cliques by absorption. Consider two adjacent cliques 
Ci and Ci separated by S. Absorption from Ci to Ci 
over S amounts to eliminating the variables of Ci \ S 
from the sets of probability and uti.]ity potentials <1> 
and '!' associated with Ci and the separators of ch( Ci) 
and then associating the obtained potentials with S: 
Algorithm 5.2 [Absorption] 
Let Ci and Ci be adjacent cliques and let S be the 
separator between Ci and Ci. If Absorption is invoked 
on Ci from Ci, then: 
u 
S'Ech(C;) 
2. Marginalize out all variables {Y E dom(p) I p E 
Rs, Y if. S} (algorithm 5.3). Let <1>$ and '¥$ be the 
sets of probability and utility potentials obtained. 
3. Associate <1>$ and '¥$ with S as the sets of poten­
tials passed from Ci to Ci. 
D 
Algorithm 5.2 uses the algorithm for marginalization 
of variables from two sets of potentials: 
Algorithm 5.3 [Marginalization] 
Let <1> and '!' be sets of probability and utility poten­
tials, respectively. If Marginalization of variable Y is 
invoked on <1> U '!', then: 
1. Set <l>y = { <fJ E <1> I Y E dom( <fJ)} and '!'y = N> E 
'!'I Y E dom(l)J)}. 
2. Calculate 
<llV 
M IT <tJ, 
Y 
<PE<I>v 
l)JV 
M IT <tJ .L 1)!, 
Y 
<PE<I>v 
>l>E'l'v 

386 
Madsen and Jensen 
3. Return <I>* = <I> U { <l>v} \ <l>v and '1'* = '1' U { *f} \ 
'!'y. 
0 
The maximizing alternatives of the utility potential 
"lj.>(D, Yo) from which D is eliminated during evalua­
tion of the influence diagram should be recorded as the 
optimal decision rule for D. 
Theorem 5.1 [Lazy Propagation] 
Lazy propagation computes the optimal strategy l 
maximizing the expected utility for the decision maker 
and the maximum expected utility MEU(l). 
Proof. Nothing to prove. It is just a change of repre­
sentation. 
0 
5.1 
EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS 
A number of adjustments to the basic lazy propaga­
tion algorithm can improve the efficiency of the algo­
rithm considerably. Consider absorption of informa­
tion between adjacent cliques C, and Ci. In step 1 
of algorithm 5.2 all potentials associated with clique 
Ci and separators of ch( Ci), <I> and '1' say, are as­
sumed relevant for calculating the message to pass to 
clique Ci· The subset of potentials Rs that can be 
relevant for computing the message to pass over 5 can 
be determined in time linear in the size of the domain 
graph induced by <I> U '1' using the d-separation crite­
rion [Geiger et a!., 1990]: 
Algorithm 5.4 [Find Potentials That Can Be 
Relevant] 
Let <I> and '1' be sets of probability and utility poten­
tials and let 5 be a set of variables. If Find Potentials 
That Can Be Relevant for calculating the joint of 5 is 
invoked on <I> U '1', then: 
1. Return Rs 
{ p 
E 
<I> U '1' 
3X 
E 
dom(p) and X d-connected toY E 5}. 
0 
Barren variables in Bayesian networks are defined as 
variables which are neither evidence nor target vari­
ables and have only barren descendants. We define 
barren variables in influence diagrams to have the same 
properties as barren variables in Bayesian networks 
with the additional property that a variable with a 
directed path to a utility potential cannot be barren. 
If a variable, X say, is barren when only the set of 
probability potentials are considered, we refer to X as 
a probabilistic barren variable. If a decision variable D 
is barren, then any alternative for D is optimal. The 
set of potentials Rs returned by algorithm 5.4 can be 
reduced by recursively removing all potentials includ­
ing only barren variables as head variables. 
If a variable X is probabilistic barren, then <!> 
= 
Mx ncj>E<I>x <!> is a unity-potential (referred to as vac­
uous valuations in [Shenoy, 1992]). During calculation 
of messages unity-potentials are not calculated and if 
the denominator of the division introduced in step 3 
of algorithm 5.3 is a unity-potential, then the division 
is not performed. If the denominator is not a unity­
potential, then the division should be performed on 
the domain of ncj>E<I>v <!> and not on the domain of Wy 
as the domain size of Wv is at least the size of the do­
main of ncj>E<I>v Q>. A division should not be performed 
when it is introduced, but should be postponed for as 
long as possible. 
Step 3 of algorithm 5.3 corresponds to equation 4, but 
in some cases it is more efficient to use equation 3. If, 
for example, the set Nv is known to be empty, then it 
is more efficient to use equation 3. Whether it is more 
efficient to use equation 3 or equation 4 cannot always 
be determined locally in each clique. 
Consider the calculation of "lj.>y in equation 2. This 
calculation can also be performed as: 
wv = M L ( IT P(Xilpa(Xd)) uk. 
(5) 
Y 
U,eVv 
X;E1lv 
Whether to distribute the combination of all probabil­
ity potentials depends on the structure of the utility 
potentials and whether or not the division in step 3 
of algorithm 5.3 is necessary. If all utility potentials 
have the same domain, then it is more efficient not to 
distribute. If, on the other hand, the utility potentials 
only share the variable Y, then it is more efficient to 
distribute. 
Due to the partial ordering of the variables imposed by 
the information constraints, a variable X E Ik cannot 
be instantiated by evidence when calculating the max­
imum expected utility of a decision variable Di where 
k :0:: j. This implies that the probability potential <!>x 
calculated when eliminating X is not a unity-potential 
only if X is non-descendent of Di. In general, evidence 
instantiating a variable X is exploited by reducing the 
domain of potentials including X in the domain. 
Subject to the limitations of the information con­
straints, the internal elimination order in a clique C 
is determined based on the set of potentials associated 
with C and separators of ch(C). Let V be the set of 
variables to eliminate when calculating a message. If 
a variable X E V is a probabilistic barren variable, then 
X is eliminated first unless elimination of another non­
probabilistic barren variable Y E V reduces the domain 

Lazy Evaluation of Symmetric Bayesian Decision Problems 
387 
size of a utility potential and the elimination of Y does 
not make a barren variable non-barren. 
5.2 PROPERTIES 
In this section some properties of the lazy propagation 
architecture are exemplified. 
Example 5.2 
The influence diagram ID of [Jensen et a!., 1994] and 
a corresponding junction tree T are shown in figures 1 
and 2, respectively. Figure 3 shows the flow of mes­
sages in T during CallectMessage invoked on BD1 EFD 
(sets including only unity-potentials are not shown). 
Figure 1: An influence diagram ID. 
Figure 2: A junction tree for ID shown in figure 1. 
Consider the message {ljJ(D4, I)} passed from D4Il to 
DzGD4l. This message is calculated as: 
cf>(D4, I) 
= L P(ll 04, I) = 1 o. ,[, 
L 
ljJ(D4, Il 
= L. u3 (L)P(LID4, I). 
L 
As 4>(D4, I) is a unity-potential it is not computed 
and the division introduced in step 3 of algorithm 5.3 
is not performed. In fact, no divisions are performed 
when solving ID in the lazy propagation architecture. 
Furthermore, as a benefit of the decomposition of po­
tentials and exploitation of unity-potentials consider­
ably fewer arithmetic operations are performed in the 
lazy propagation architecture than in the HUGIN ar­
chitecture. If we assume all variables to be binary, 
then 575 and 161 arithmetic operations are performed 
in the HUGIN and the lazy propagation architectures, 
respectively. This does not include the operations re­
quired to compute the initial clique probability and 
utility potentials in the HUGIN architecture. 
Figure 3: The flow of messages towards BD1 EFD. 
0 
Using the HUG!N architecture it is difficult to handle 
variables which the decision maker might or might not 
have evidence on. It is, in fact, necessary to create a 
strong junction for each scenario. The lazy propaga­
tion architecture supports certain types of changes in 
the structure of the influence diagram without requir­
ing construction of a new strong junction tree. The 
types of changes supported follows from the way in 
which variables are eliminated. Variables are elimi­
nated one at a time according to the reverse partial 
order imposed by the structure of the strong junction 
tree. If a change made to the structure of the influ­
ence diagram moves a variable X from one information 
set It to another information set Ij where j < i, then 
X has to be eliminated at a later time than specified 
in the original influence diagram. This is readily han­
dled in the lazy propagation architecture as this just 
amounts to postponing the elimination of X until in­
formation set Ij is reached during message passing in 
the junction tree. The opposite situation, however, 
cannot be handled as easily. To facilitate the possibil­
ity of changing the time of elimination of a variable X 
the strong junction tree can be constructed under the 
assumption that XEin. 
Example 5.3 (Myopic Value of Information] 
[Dittmer and Jensen, 1997] introduces a method for 
myopic value of information analysis (VOl) on a pre­
determined set of variables V in influence diagrams. 
The method is based on introducing additional con­
trol structures. The control structures can be inter­
preted as adding V to all cliques of the junction tree, 
but due to the introduction of additional control struc-

388 
Madsen and Jensen 
tures the decrease in performance is not as serious as 
this. Similarly to the above described approach, clique 
and separator potentials are only extended as needed. 
The method facilitates VOl for different information 
scenarios within the same junction tree. 
Figure 4: The original junction tree T. 
Consider the junction tree T with root 0 1 C shown in 
figure 4 (borrowed from [Dittmer and Jensen, 1997]). 
To support VOl on B control structures corresponding 
to extending all cliques and separators of T with B 
are added to T, see figure 5. The additional control 
structures facilitate VOl where the time of elimination 
of B can be chosen arbitrarily. 
Figure 5: The junction tree T' supporting VOl on B. 
Performing VOl on B in the lazy propagation architec­
ture is based on T. By postponing the elimination of 
B as explained above it is possible to choose the time 
of elimination of B arbitrarily. 
0 
Much effort has been put into developing various meth­
ods for reducing the complexity of Bayesian network 
inference. Methods for approximation, exploitation of 
independence of causal influence, and exploitation of 
context specific independence, for instance, exists for 
Bayesian networks. Very little effort, however, has 
been put into developing similar methods for influ­
ence diagrams. The next example shows that inde­
pendence of causal influence (ICI) is readily exploited 
in the lazy propagation architecture for solving influ­
ence diagrams. 
Example 5.4 [Independence of Causal Influence] 
Consider the influence diagram 10 and the corre­
sponding strong junction tree T shown in figure 6. As­
sume that 01, c2, and c3 are causally independent 
with respect to E 1 and that all variables are binary 
with states f and t. In order to compute MEU(.&) all 
variables have to be eliminated according to the partial 
order D1 -< {E1}-< Dz-< {Ez, Cz, C3}. 
Figure 6: A simple influence diagram and a corre­
sponding strong junction tree T. 
If lj.>(E1) is the messaŀe passed from E1 DzEz to 
D1 E1 CzC3, then MEU(t.) is calculated as: 
MEU(.&) =!If, L lj.>(E1) L P(Cz) 
E1 
Cz 
L P(C3)P(E1I D1, Cz, C3). 
c, 
By exploiting ICl the complexity of calculating 
MEU(.&) can be reduced to linear in the num­
ber of parents of E 1 . 
Assume that the lazy par­
ent divorcing method developed for Bayesian net­
works [Madsen and D'Ambrosio, 1'999] is used to ex­
ploit ICI. One hidden variable Y is introduced as a 
child of c2 and c3 (P(Ef I C) is the contribution from 
C E {D1, Cz, C3} to E1 when Vc-1-C' C' = f): 
MEU(.&) =max L lj.>(E1) L P(Cz) L P(C3) 
o, E, 
c2 
c, 
L 
P(Ef' I DJ) 
{E21 ,YIE,=E31 •Y} 
L 
P(Ef21Cz)P(Ef'l C3) 
{Eil ,Ei3 )Y=Ei2*£i3} 
L 
L P(Cz)P(Ef21Cz) 
{Ei2 ,E431Y=E52*Ei3} Cz 
L P(C3)P(Ef'IC3). 
c, 
When the ICl is exploited, the domain size of the 
largest potential created when computing MEU(.&) is 
3 instead of 4 variables. 
0 
6 
COMPARISON 
The HuGIN architecture for solving symmetric 
Bayesian decision problems represented as influence di­
agrams is based on constructing a strong junction tree 
representation of the influence diagram. The decision 
problem is solved by message passing in the strong 
junction tree as explained in section 3. Combining the 
probability and utility potentials associated with each 
clique to form the initial clique and utility potentials 
makes it impossible to benefit from determining the 
internal elimination order on-line and to take advan­
tage of independence relations induced by evidence. 
Furthermore, it also makes it impossible to reduce the 

Lazy Evaluation of Symmetric Bayesian Decision Problems 
389 
complexity of inference by exploiting barren and prob­
abilistic barren variables. Barren variables can, how­
ever, be determined in a preprocessing step before the 
strong junction tree is constructed. 
[Jensen et a!., 1994] argues that the contribution from 
the division operation plays a smaller role in the 
HUGIN architecture than in VBS since divisions are 
performed on separators only. We will not discuss this 
statement in detail here, but only note that a substan­
tial number of the divisions performed in the HUGIN 
architecture are unnecessary (see example 5.2). The 
lazy propagation architecture often detects the situa­
tions in which the divisions are unnecessary. We be­
lieve that it is only rarely necessary to actually per­
form most of the divisions as indicated in example 5.2. 
A number of empirical tests or an in depth analysis 
should be performed to dissolve this. The divisions 
performed in the lazy propagation architecture are 
not performed on separators, but are introduced when 
variables are eliminated. This implies that when a di­
vision in fact is performed the operation might have 
a higher computational cost than in the HuGIN archi­
tecture. It is, however, also possible that the converse 
is the case. That is, because divisions are introduced 
each time a variable is eliminated and only performed 
when it cannot be detected to be unnecessary, the op­
eration is likely to play a smaller role in the lazy prop­
agation architecture than in the HUGIN architecture. 
Recently, a method for solving symmetric Bayesian 
decision problems represented as influence dia­
grams by reducing influence diagram evaluation to 
Bayesian network inference problems has been pro­
posed [Zhang, 1998]. The reduction is performed by 
repeated use of Cooper's trick and the method induces 
simpler inference problems than the methods proposed 
by [Cooper, 1988] and [Shachter and Peot, 1992]. Re­
ducing influence diagram evaluation to Bayesian net­
work inference problems makes it possible and easy to 
exploit existing methods for improving the efficiency 
of Bayesian network inference to improve the efficiency 
of decision problem solving. We have argued that it is 
unnecessary to convert to Bayesian inference problems 
in order to exploit methods for improving the efficiency 
of decision problem solving. Exploitation of ICI in the 
lazy propagation architecture is just one example. 
The VBS architecture for solving decision problems is 
based on the fusion algorithm. The marginalization 
algorithm (algorithm 5.3) of the basic lazy propaga­
tion architecture is essentially the fusion algorithm of 
VBS. When the marginalization algorithm is extended 
with the efficiency improvements of section 5.1 the al­
gorithms become different: 
Example 6.1 [Valuation-based systems] 
Consider the valuation network shown in figure 7 (bor­
rowed from [Shenoy, 1992]). The valuation network 
specifies a joint probability distribution for C 1 and 
C 2 (the triangle in the figure), a utility function de­
composing additively into utility potentials U( C 1) and 
U(D, Cz), and the precedence constraints. 
Figure 7: A valuation network for a decision problem. 
The computations performed in the VBS corresponds 
to the following expression: 
(6) 
The corresponding expression obtained with the lazy 
evaluation based method is: 
= L.(L_P(C1,Cz)) 
c, 
c, 
c, 
( 
(maxo.Lc P(C1,Cz)U(Cz,D))) 
U(CJ) + 
2 L_P(C1,C2) 
c, 
= L.(L_P(C1,Cz)U(CJ)+ 
c, 
c, 
mgx L P(C1, Cz)U(Cz, D)). 
c, 
(7) 
The division performed in equation 6 is avoided if the 
division is postponed until it can be determined that 
it is unnecessary to perform it. The above derivation 
shows how to avoid the division. The number of arith­
metic operations performed to calculate equation 6 is 
25 while only 21 are operations performed to compute 
equation 7 (the four divisions are avoided). 
D 

390 
Madsen and Jensen 
When described in the context of valuation networks 
the lazy evaluation based method and the VBS archi­
tecture are very similar, but they are as example 6.1 
shows different. If we consider the lazy evaluation 
based method in the context of strong junction trees, 
the differences between the two methods become clear. 
The main focus of VBS is on elimination of variables 
while the main focus of lazy propagation is on mes­
sage passing. The messages are calculated by elimina­
tion of variables and the order in which variables are 
eliminated is controlled by the structure of the strong 
junction tree and the algorithms described in section 5. 
Lazy propagation exploits the structure of the strong 
junction tree to simplify tasks such as finding the set 
of potentials relevant for eliminating a particular vari­
able. The fusion operation, on the other hand, is ap­
plied directly to the entire set of potentials of the VBS 
without any preprocessing. 
7 
CONCLUS ION 
We have presented a lazy evaluation based method for 
solving symmetric Bayesian decision problems. The 
lazy evaluation based method is not developed to a 
particular computational structure as the principles of 
the method applies to various different computational 
structures. We have, however, in detail described how 
the principles of lazy evaluation can be applied to in­
fluence diagrams and strong junction trees. We have 
only briefly indicated how the principles of lazy eval­
uation can be applied to VBS. The lazy evaluation 
principle offers the opportunity to reduce the number 
of arithmetic operations performed during solution of 
symmetric Bayesian decision problems. 
The computational efficiency of solving symmetric 
Bayesian decision problems with the lazy evaluation 
based method has been emphasized through examples.
