An evaluation of machine learning techniques to
predict the outcome of children treated for
Hodgkin-Lymphoma on the AHOD0031 trial
A report from the Children’s Oncology Group
Cédric Beaulaca
Jeﬀrey S. Rosenthalb
Qinglin Peic
Debra Friedmand
Suzanne Woldene
David Hodgsonf
March 29, 2021
a Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; bDepartment of
Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; cDepartment of Biostatistics, Uni-
versity of Florida, Gainesville, USA; d Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
USA; eDepartment of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA; f Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Abstract
In this manuscript we analyze a data set containing information on children with Hodgkin
Lymphoma (HL) enrolled on a clinical trial. Treatments received and survival status were
collected together with other covariates such as demographics and clinical measurements.
Our main task is to explore the potential of machine learning (ML) algorithms in a survival
analysis context in order to improve over the Cox Proportional Hazard (CoxPH) model. We
discuss the weaknesses of the CoxPH model we would like to improve upon and then we
introduce multiple algorithms, from well-established ones to state-of-the-art models, that
solve these issues. We then compare every model according to the concordance index and
the brier score. Finally, we produce a series of recommendations, based on our experience,
for practitioners that would like to beneﬁt from the recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence.
Keywords : machine learning, case study, survival analysis, Cox proportional hazard, sur-
vival trees, neural networks, variational auto-encoders
1
arXiv:2001.05534v2  [q-bio.QM]  26 Mar 2021

1
Introduction
There is increasing eﬀort in medical research to applying ML algorithms to improve treatment
decisions and predict patient outcomes. In this article, we want to explore the potential of
ML algorithms to predict the outcome of children treated for Hodgkin Lymphoma. As we want
to minimize the side eﬀects of intensive chemotherapy or radiation therapy, a major clinical
concern is how, for a given patient, we can select a treatment that eradicates the disease while
keeping the intensity of the treatment, and the associated side eﬀects, to a minimum.
In this article we will introduce multiple ML algorithms adapted to our needs and compare
them with the Cox proportional hazard model. As it is the case with many data set within
this ﬁeld, the response variable, time until death or relapse, was right-censored for patients
without events and the data set is of relatively small size (n=1712). From a ML perspective, this
can be challenging. The response variable is right-censored for multiple observations but many
ML techniques are not designed to deal with censored observations and thus it restricts the
techniques we can include in our case study. Another challenged previously mentioned is that
medical data sets are usually smaller than those used in ML applications and thus we will have
to carefully select algorithms that could perform well in this context.
We will introduce the data set in section 2. In section 3 we will introduce the algorithms
tested. Then, in section 4 we will present our experimental set up and our results. Finally,
in section 5, we will discuss thoroughly the results, recommend further improvements and
introduce open questions.
2
Data set
We have a data set of 1,712 patients, treated on the Children’s Oncology Group trial AHOD0031,
the largest randomized trial of pediatric HL ever conducted. Each observation represents a
patient suﬀering from Hodgkin Lymphoma. For every patient, characteristics and symptoms
have been collected as well as the treatment, for a total of 21 predictors. A table containing
information on the predictors is in the appendix. The response is a time-to-event variable
registered in number of days. We consider events to be either death or relapse. For patients
without events, the response variable was right-censored at time of last seen, which is a well-
2

known data structure in survival analysis. This data set and the data collecting technique are
presented in detail by Friedman & al. (2014) who previously analyzed the same data set for
other purposes.
3
Survival Analysis models
3.1
Benchmark : Cox Proportional Hazard Model
The Cox Proportional Hazard (CoxPH) model (Cox, 1972) serves as our benchmark model. It is
widely used in medical sciences since it is robust, easy to use and produce highly interpretable
results. It is a semi-parametric model that ﬁts the hazard function, which represents the in-
stantaneous rate of occurrence for the event of interest, using a partial likelihood function (Cox,
1975).
The CoxPH model ﬁts the hazard function which contains two parts, a baseline hazard func-
tion of the time and a feature component which is a linear function of the predictors. The
proportional hazard assumption assumes the time component and the feature component of
the hazard function are proportional. In other words, the eﬀect of the features is ﬁxed through
time. In the CoxPH model, the baseline hazard, which contains the time component, is usu-
ally unspeciﬁed so we cannot use the model directly to compute the hazard or to predict the
survival function for a given set of covariates.
The main goal of this analysis is to test whether or not new ML models can outperform the
CoxPH model. As ML models have shown great potential in many data analysis applications, it is
important to test their potential to improve outcome prediction for cancer patients. We would
like our selected models to improve upon at least one of the three following problems that are
intrinsic to the CoxPH model. Problem (1): the proportional hazard assumption; we would like
models that allow for feature eﬀects to vary through time. Problem (2): the unspeciﬁed baseline
hazard function; we would like models able to predict the survival function itself. Problem (3):
the linear combination of features; we would like to use models that are able to grasp high
order of interaction between the variable or non-linear combinations of the features.
3

3.2
Conventional statistical learning models
3.2.1
Regression models
The ﬁrst model to be tested is a member of the CoxPH family. One way to capture interactions
between predictors in linear models, and thus improve towards problem (3), is to include inter-
action terms. Since typical medical data sets contains few observations and many predictors,
including all interactions usually leads to model saturation.
To deal with this issue we will use a variable selection model. Cox-Net (Simon, Friedman,
Hastie, & Tibshirani, 2011) is an extension of the now well-know lasso regression (Hastie, Tibshi-
rani, & Friedman, 2009) implemented in the glmnet package (J. Friedman, Hastie, & Tibshirani,
2010) and is the ﬁrst model we will experiment with. The Cox-Net is a lasso regression-style
model that shrinks some model coeﬃcients to zero and thus insures the model is not saturated.
The resulting model is as interpretable as the benchmark CoxPH model, but Cox-Net allows us
to include all interactions in the base model without losing too many degrees of freedom.
Another approach based on regression models is the Multi-Task Logistic Regression (MTLR).
Yu et al. (Yu, Greiner, Lin, & Baracos, 2011) proposed the MTLR model which quickly became
a benchmark in the ML community for survival analysis and was cited by many authors (Luck,
Sylvain, Cardinal, Lodi, & Bengio, 2017; Fotso, 2018; Zhao & Feng, 2019; Jinga et al., 2019). The
proposed technique directly models the survival function by combining multiple local logistic
regression models and considers the dependency of these models. By modelling the survival
distribution with a sequence of dependent logistic regression, this model captures time-varying
eﬀects of features and thus the proportional hazard assumption is not needed. The model
also grants the ability to predict survival time for individual patients. This model solves both
problem (1) and (2). For our case study, we used the MTLR R-package (Haider, 2019) recently
implemented by Haider.
3.2.2
Survival tree models
Decision trees (Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, & Stone, 1984) and random forests (Breiman, 1996,
2001) are known for their ability to detect and naturally incorporate high degrees of interactions
among the predictors which is helpful towards problem (3). This family of models is well-
established and make very few assumptions about the data set, making it a natural choice for
4

our case study.
Multiple adaptations of decision trees were suggested for survival analysis and are com-
monly referred as survival trees. The idea suggested by many authors is to modify the splitting
criteria of decision trees to accommodate for right-censored data. Based on previously pub-
lished reviews of survival trees (LeBlanc & Crowley, 1995; Bou-Hamad, Larocque, & Ben-Ameur,
2011), we have selected four techniques for the case study.
One of the oldest survival tree models that was implemented in R (R Core Team, 2013) is
the Relative Risk Survival Tree (Leblanc & Crowley, 1992). This survival tree algorithm uses
most of the architecture established by CART (Breiman et al., 1984) but also borrows ideas from
the CoxPH model. The model suggested by LeBlanc et al. assumes proportional hazards and
partitions the data to maximize the diﬀerence in relative risk between regions. This technique
was implemented in the rpart R-package (Therneau, Atkinson, & Ripley, 2017).
We also selected a few ensemble methods. To begin, Hothorn et al. (2004) proposed a new
technique to aggregate survival decision trees that can produce conditional survival function,
which solves problem (2). To predict the survival probabilities of a new observation, they use an
ensemble of survival trees (Leblanc & Crowley, 1992) to determine a set of observations similar
to the one in need of a prediction. They then use this set of observations to generate the Kaplan-
Meier estimates for the new one. Their proposed technique is available in the ipred R-package
(Peters & Hothorn, 2019). A year later, Hothorn et al. (2005; 2007) proposed a new ensemble
technique able to produce log-survival time estimates instead. We will test this technique that
is implemented in party R-package (Hothorn, Hornik, & Zeileis, 2006; Hothorn, Hornik, Strobl, &
Zeileis, 2019).
Finally, the latest development in random forests for survival analysis is Random Survival
Forests (Ishwaran, Kogalur, Blackstone, & Lauer, 2008). This implementation of a random sur-
vival forest was shown to be consistent (Ishwaran & Kogalur, 2010) and it comes with high-
dimensional variable selection tools (Ishwaran, Kogalur, Gorodeski, Minn, & Lauer, 2010). This
model was implemented in the randomForestSRC R-package (Ishwaran & Kogalur, 2019).
5

3.3
State-of-the-art models
3.3.1
Deep learning models
The ﬁrst state-of-the-art model we will experiment with is built upon the most popular archi-
tecture of models in recent years: deep neural networks. Yu et al. (2011) MTLR model inspired
many modiﬁcations (Luck et al., 2017; Fotso, 2018; Zhao & Feng, 2019; Jinga et al., 2019) in order to
include a deep-learning component to the model. The main purpose is to allow for interactions
and non-linear eﬀect of the predictors. For example, Fotso (2018; 2019) suggested an extension
of the MTLR where a deep neural networks parameterization replaces the linear parameteriza-
tion and Luck et al. (2017) proposed a neural network model that produces two outputs: one
is the risk and one is the probability of observing an event in a given time bin. Unfortunately,
the authors for most of these techniques (Luck et al., 2017; Zhao & Feng, 2019; Jinga et al., 2019)
did not provide either their code or a package which causes great reproducibility problems and
leads to a serious accessibility issue for practitioners. The DeepSurv architecture (Katzman et
al., 2018) proposed by Katzman et. al is a direct extension to the CoxPH model where the lin-
ear function of the covariance is replaced by a deep neural network. This allows the model to
grasp high-order of interactions between predictors therefore solving problem (3). By allowing
for interaction between covariates and the treatment the proposed model provides a treatment
recommendation procedure. Finally, the authors provided a Python library available on the ﬁrst
author’s GitHub (Katzman, 2017).
3.3.2
Latent-variable models
The ﬁnal model is a latent-variable model based on the Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Kingma, 2017) architecture. Louizos et al. (2017) recently suggested a latent
variable model for causal inference. The latent variables allow for a more ﬂexible observed
variable distribution and intuitively model the hidden patient status. Inspired by this model
and by the recommendation of Nazbal et al. (2018) we implemented a latent variable model
(Beaulac, Rosenthal, & Hodgson, 2018) that adapts the VAE architecture for the purposed of sur-
vival analysis. This Survival Analysis Variational Auto-Encoder (SAVAE) uses the latent space to
represent the patient true sickness status and can produce individual patient survival function
based on their respective covariates which should solve problem (1), (2) and (3).
6

4
Data analysis
4.1
Evaluation metrics
We will use two diﬀerent metrics to evaluate the various algorithms, both are well established
and they evaluate diﬀerent properties of the models. First, the concordance index (Harrell, Lee,
& Mark, 1996) is a metric of accuracy for the ordering of the predicted survival time or hazard.
Second, the brier score (Graf, Schmoor, Sauerbrei, & Schumacher, 1999) is a metric similar to
the mean squared error but adapted for right-censored observations.
4.1.1
Concordance Index
The concordance index (c-index) was proposed by Harrell et al. (1996). It is one of the most
popular performance measures for survival problems (Steck, Krishnapuram, Dehing-oberije,
Lambin, & Raykar, 2008; Chen, Kodell, Cheng, & Chen, 2012; Katzman, 2017) as it elegantly ac-
counts for the censored data. It is deﬁned as the proportion of all usable patient pairs in which
the predictions and outcomes are concordant. Pairs are said to be concordant if the predicted
event times have a concordant ordering with the observed event times.
Recently Steck et al. used the c-index directly as part of the optimization procedure (Steck
et al., 2008), their paper also elegantly presents the c-index itself using graphical models as
illustrated in ﬁgure 1. In their article it is deﬁned as the fraction of all pairs of subjects whose
predicted survival times are correctly ordered among all subjects that can actually be ordered.
We expect a random classiﬁcation algorithm to achieves a c-index of 0.5. The further from 0.5
the c-index is the more concordant pairs of predictions the model has produced. A c-index of
1 indicates perfect predicted order.
Figure 1 illustrates when we can compute the concordance for a pair of data points; this is
represented by an arrow. We can evaluate the order of events if both events are observed. If
one of the data points is censored, then concordance can be evaluated if the censoring for the
censored point happens after the event for the observed point. If the reverse happens, if both
points are censored or if both events happen exactly at the same time then we cannot evaluate
the concordance for that pair.
7

Figure 1: Steck et al.(2008) graphical representation of the c-index computation. Filled circle
represents observed points and empty circle represents censored points. This ﬁgure illustrates
the pairs of points for which an order of events can be established.
4.1.2
Brier Score
The Brier score established by Graf et al. (1999) is a performance metric inspired by the mean
squared errors (MSE). For a survival model it is reasonable to try to predict P (T > t |X = x) =
S (t |X = x) the survival probabilities a time t for a patient with predictors x. In Graf’s notation,
ˆπ(t |x) is the predicted probability of survival at time t for a patient with characteristics x. These
probabilities are used as predictions of the observed event y = 1(T > t). If the data contains
no censoring, the simplest deﬁnition of the Brier Score would be
BS(t) = 1
n
n
Õ
i=1
(1(Ti > t) −ˆπ(t |xi ))2.
(1)
Assuming we have a censoring survival distribution G (t) = P (C > t) and an associated
Kaplan-Meier estimated ˆG (t). For a given ﬁxed time t we are facing three diﬀerent scenarios :
Case 1: Ti > t and δi = 1 or δi = 0
Case 2: Ti < t and δi = 1
Case 3: Ti < t and δi = 0,
where δ1 = 1 if the event is observed and 0 if it is censored. For case 1, the event status is 1
since the patient is known to be alive at time t; the resulting contribution to the Brier score is
(1 −ˆπ(t |xi ))2. For case 2, the event occurred before t and the event status is equal to 1(Ti >
t) = 0 and thus the contribution is (0 −ˆπ(t |xi ))2. Finally, for case 3 the censoring occurred
8

before t and thus the contribution to the Brier score cannot be calculated. To compensate for
the loss of information due to censoring, the individual contributions have to be reweighed in
a similar way as in the calculation of the Kaplan-Meier estimator leading to the following Brier
Score
BSc(t) = 1
n
n
Õ
i=1

(0 −ˆπ(t |xi ))21(Ti < t, δi = 1)(1/ ˆG (Ti )) + (1 −ˆπ(t |xi ))21(Ti > t)(1/ ˆG (t))

.
(2)
4.2
Comparative results
The data set introduced in section 2 was imported in both R (R Core Team, 2013) and Python
(Van Rossum & Drake Jr, 1995). To evaluate the algorithms we randomly divided the data set into
1500 training observations and 212 testing observations. The models were ﬁt using the training
observations and the evaluation metrics were computed on the testing observations.
As mentioned in the previous sections, the CoxPH benchmark and the conventional statis-
tical learning models were all tested in the R language (R Core Team, 2013). They were relatively
easy to use with very little adjustment needed and clear and concise documentation. The com-
putational speed of these algorithms was fast enough on a single CPU so that we could perform
50 trials. The state-of-the-art techniques needed a deeper understanding of the model as they
contain many hyper-parameters that require calibration. They were also slower to run on a
single CPU.
Figure 2a illustrates Sinaplots (Sidiropoulos, Sohi, Rapin, & Bagger, 2017) with associated
Boxplots of the c-index for the CoxPH model and the 8 competitors. We used standard boxplots
on the background since they are common and easy to understand. The sinaplots superposed
on them represent the actual observed metric values and convey information about the dis-
tribution of the metrics for a given technique. As mentioned earlier c-index ranges from 0.5
to 1 where a c-index of 1 indicates perfect predicted order. According to ﬁgure 2, it seems no
model clearly outperforms another. It seems like MTLR is the best-performing model but the
diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant.
Since the Brier score is a metric inspired by the mean squared error, it ranges from 0 to 1
and the lower the Brier score is the better the technique. In ﬁgure 2b we once again observe
that none of the new techniques drastically outperforms any CoxPH. SAVAE has the lowest Brier
9

0.5
0.6
0.7
Cox
CoxNet
STree
BTree
CForest
RSF
MTLR
SAVAE
DeepSurv
Techniques
Concordance Index
(a) Boxplots and Sinaplots of the c-index (higher the better).
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Cox
CoxNet
STree
BTree
CForest
RSF
MTLR
SAVAE
DeepSurv
Techniques
Brier Score
(b) Boxplots and Sinaplots of Brier Scores evaluated at 3 years (lower the better)
Figure 2: Results from our experiments.
10

score and signiﬁcantly outperforms the CoxPH benchmark. However, as shows in Figure 2b none
of the new techniques drastically outperform CoxPH.
5
Takeaways and Recommendations
The previous section demonstrates that the new ML methods oﬀers very little improvement
compared to the benchmark CoxPH model according to our two designated performance met-
rics when patient clinical characteristics that are typically collected in clinical trials are used
as predictor variables. This is an important result as we need to evaluate the abilities of ML
techniques to solve real-life data problems, and to illuminate the changes in clinical data col-
lection that will have to occur for ML methods to be used to greatest eﬀect in assisting outcome
prediction and treatment.
Similar results on real-life data sets are observed in article presenting methodologies (Fotso,
2018; Luck et al., 2017; Jinga et al., 2019) where the proposed techniques provide non-signiﬁcant
improvements over simple models such as CoxPH. Christodoulou et al. (2019) recently per-
formed an exhaustive review of 927 articles that discuss the development of diagnostic or prog-
nostic clinical prediction models for binary outcomes based on clinical data. The authors of
the review noted the overall poor comparison methodologies and the lack of signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence between a simple logistic regression and state-of-the-art ML techniques in most of recent
years publications. These results are supported by Hand (2006) who discussed in detail the
potential strength of the simple models compared to state-of-the-art ML models. This raises
an important question our case study highlights: is it worth using more complex models for a
slight improvement?
The alternative we proposed in section 3 are all more complicated than CoxPH in various
ways. Most of the new techniques require deeper knowledge of the algorithm behaviors to
correctly ﬁx the many hyper-parameters. They can produce less interpretable results due to
model complexity, and often require more computing power. Indeed, if the CoxPH model can
be ﬁt in seconds, most of the conventional statistical learning models take minutes to ﬁt and
the state-of-the-art models take hours. Finally, many of the new techniques are not widely
accessible or standardized. As an open language, Python oﬀers very little support to users and
the libraries are not maintained, not standardized and come with dependency issues.
11

Hand (2006) demonstrates the high relative performances of extremely simple methods
compared to complex ones and mathematically justiﬁes his argument. He also discusses how
these slight improvements over simple models might be undesirable as they might be at-
tributed to overﬁtting which would cause reproducibility issues on new data sets. These slight
improvements might also be artiﬁcial as they were achieved only because the inventors of
these techniques were able to obtain through much eﬀort the best performance from their
own techniques and not the methods described by others. Overall if the improvements over
simple techniques are small, perhaps they are simply not an improvement and this argument
seems to be supported by both our case study and the recent review of Christodoulou et al.
(2019). We recommend that practitioners keep their expectations low when it comes to some
of these new models.
In contrast, signiﬁcant improvements for diagnostic tasks have been accomplished using
A.I. in recent years (Liu et al., 2017; Rodriguez-Ruiz et al., 2019; Rodríguez-Ruiz et al., 2019) and
thus we ask ourselves what caused this diﬀerence ? There is a major diﬀerence in the style of
data sets that were available. In the cited articles, images (mammographic, gigapixel pathology
image, MRI scans) are analyzed using deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Goodfellow,
Bengio, & Courville, 2016). Models such as CNN were developed because a special type of
data was available and none of the current tools were equipped to analyze it. Conventional
techniques such as logistic regression or CoxPH are not able to grasp the signal in images,
which contains a large number of highly correlated predictors that individually contain close to
no information but analyzed together contain a lot. As a matter of fact, the greatest strength of
these models is that they are able to extract a lot of information from a rich, but complicated,
data set.
In our case study, the stratum predictor was a binary predictor indicating if the patient had
a rapid early response to the ﬁrst rounds of chemotherapy. Computed-tomography (CT) scans
of the aﬀected regions were analyzed before and after the ﬁrst round of treatments and this
rich information was transformed into a simple binary variable. This practice is common: even
in ongoing trials, patients’ characteristics continue to be collected manually (often on paper
forms), which dramatically limits the capacity to capture the full range of potentially useful data
available for analysis. As new tools are established to extract information from ever growing,
both in size and complexity, data sets, clinical trialists have to rethink how they gather data
12

and transform it to make sure that no information is lost in order to utilize these new tools. It
seems like extracting and keeping as much information as possible and having a data-centric
approach where the model is designed to analyze a speciﬁc style of data were some of the
factors in the success of CNNs.
6
Conclusion
In this article, we have identiﬁed a series of statistical and ML techniques that should alleviate
some of the ﬂaws of the well-known CoxPH model. These models were tested against a real-
life data set and provided little to no improvement according the c-index and the Brier score.
Although one might anticipate that these techniques would have increased our prediction abil-
ities, instead the CoxPH performed comparably to modern models. These results are supported
by other articles with similar ﬁndings.
It would be advantageous to try to theoretically understand when the new techniques
should work and when they should not. As it currently stands, authors are not incentivized
to discuss the weakness of their techniques and it actually slows scientiﬁc progress. It is im-
perative that we try to understand when some of the newest technique perform poorly and
shed the light on why it is the case. It is also important to understand what made some of
these new techniques successful. For example, it seems that CNNs were successful since the
model was speciﬁcally built for images, a special type of data that was previously hard to handle
but contained a large amount of information.
13

Funding details
Research reported in this work was supported by the Children’s Oncology Group; by the Na-
tional Cancer Institute of the National Institute of Health under the National Clinical Trials Net-
work (NCTN) Operations Center Grant U10CA180886, the NCTN Statistics and Data Center Grant
U10CA180899; by St. Baldrick’s Foundation; the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada; and by the Ontario Graduate Scholarships.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
oﬃcial views of the Children’s Oncology Group, the National Institute of Health, or St. Baldrick’s
Foundation.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
14

Appendix
Variable
Type
Description
agedxyrs
Continuous
Age of the patient at the start of the treatment
gender
Binary
Biological gender
stage
Categorical
Cancer stage ranging from 1 to 4
b_symptoms
Binary
Presence of B symptoms
bulk_disease
Binary
Presence of Bulk disease
extralymphatic_disease
Binary
Presence of Extralymphatic disease
fever
Binary
Presence of recurrent fever
night_sweats
Binary
Presence of night sweats
weight_loss
Binary
Presence of signiﬁcant weight loss (> 10%)
nodal_aggregate
Binary
Presence of a nodal aggregate
mediastinal_mass
Binary
Presence of a mediastinal mass
esron
Continuous
Erthroctye sedimentation rate (mm/hr)
istnon
Continuous
Number of involved nodal sites
histology
Categorical
Histology (LP,LD,NS,MC, unknown)
albon
Continuous
Albumin (g/dL)
hgbon
Continuous
Hemoglobin(g/dL)
amend
Binary
stratum
Binary
Rapid early response to ﬁrst treatment
morpho_icdo
Categorical
ICD-O Morphology codes
RT
Binary
Treatment variable: Radiotherapy
DECA
Binary
Treatment variable: Intensive Chemotherapy
Table 1: Predictor variables and description
15
