Finding Lookalike Customers for E-Commerce Marketing
Yang Peng

Walmart Global Tech
Changzheng Liu

Walmart Global Tech
Wei Shen

Walmart Global Tech
ABSTRACT
Customer-centric marketing campaigns generate a large portion of
e-commerce website traffic for Walmart. As the scale of customer
data grows larger, expanding the marketing audience to reach more
customers is becoming more critical for e-commerce companies to
drive business growth and bring more value to customers. In this
paper, we present a scalable and efficient system to expand targeted
audience of marketing campaigns, which can handle hundreds of
millions of customers. We use a deep learning based embedding
model to represent customers and an approximate nearest neighbor
search method to quickly find lookalike customers of interest. The
model can deal with various business interests by constructing
interpretable and meaningful customer similarity metrics. We con-
duct extensive experiments to demonstrate the great performance
of our system and customer embedding model.
1
INTRODUCTION
In customer relationship management (CRM) systems, customer
acquiring and retention are crucial for marketing success. Expand-
ing the set of targeted customers is a very important component
in CRM systems for both customer acquiring and retention. In this
article, we consider the problem of building a large scale marketing
audience expansion system, aiming at driving e-commerce growth

campaigns.
Formally speaking, the problem to solve in this paper is: given
a set of existing customers (seed customer set) for a marketing
campaign, how to find more customers that are similar to these
seed customers, so that we can increase revenue and drive more
traffic for Walmart e-commerce.
One of the biggest challenges we face in this problem is the scale
of the data. Walmart has hundreds of millions of active customers
in the US market alone. Each customer could have hundreds or even
thousands of features. And customer data is increasing rapidly year
by year. Thus building a scalable and efficient system to handle ever-
increasing big customer data is our top priority. Besides scalability,
we need to take into account the interpretability of our method
when finding lookalike customers. Model interpretability not only
helps explain how our method works to business partners, but also
provides an intuitive way for examining system quality.
In this article, we propose a scalable and efficient audience expan-
sion system for marketing campaigns, which can handle hundreds
of millions of customers.
• Our system can generate low dimensional dense embeddings
to represent customers.
• In the customer embedding space, we use the cosine dis-
tance between the two customer embedding vectors as the
estimation of the similarity between two customers.
• The similarity metric we design can measure different busi-
ness interests (such as purchases, visits and engagements),
which are interpretable and meaningful business goals for
marketing campaigns.
• We use approximate nearest neighbor search to quickly find
lookalike customers to the seed customers in the customer
embedding space.
To improve the quality of the customer embedding model, our
model ingests multimodal features from different data sources, such
as transactions, visits, engagements and customer metadata. Multi-
modal fusion techniques have demonstrated great benefits for tasks
such as information retrieval, information extraction and classi-
fication [4, 17, 18, 20–26] by leveraging the complementary and
correlative relations between different types of data. Our embed-
ding model can also achieve better quality for audience expansion
by combining different types of data.
Our contributions are shown below:
• We propose an effective and efficient marketing audience
expansion system, which can handle hundreds of millions
of customers.
• We use a deep learning model to generate customer em-
beddings. The deep learning model can handle both dense
numerical features and sparse categorical features. And the
model encodes location embedding using transfer learning.
• Our system has great adaptability by constructing different
similarity metrics for different campaigns and business goals.
The similarity metrics are both interpretable and meaningful.
• We develop a scalable and efficient approximate nearest
neighbor search method based on FAISS to quickly find sim-
ilar customers.
• We design multimodal features from various data sources.
• Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate
the scalability, efficiency and quality of our system and em-
bedding model.
Overview Related work on lookalike modeling and audience ex-
pansion systems is discussed in Section 2. The overview of our
system is presented in Section 3. The embedding model is illus-
trated in Section 4. We demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
of our system through extensive experiments in Section 5. The
conclusions and future work of our lookalike model are discussed
in Section 6.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we will discuss the previous work on audience
expansion systems, use representation models and fast similarity
search methods. For the literature review, we mostly focus on re-
lated work in industry solutions, since we are tacking large-scale or
even web-scale datasets which are very rarely studied in academic
research.
arXiv:2301.03147v2  [cs.LG]  2 Jul 2023

Figure 1: Audience Expansion System in Walmart.
2.1
Audience Expansion
In [16], Ma et.al. discussed three types of approaches for audience
expansion for marketing campaigns: similarity-based, regression-
based and segmentation-based approaches. They proposed a graph-
based lookalike system in Yahoo! advertising platform, which takes
advantages of both simple similarity and regression-based methods.
In [14], Liu et.al. developed two methods to achieve audience ex-
pansion in LinkedIn: campaign-agnostic expansion based on user
attributes and campaign-aware expansion using nearest neighbor
search. In [8], Jiang et.al. discussed rule-based, similarity-based and
model-based methods for finding lookalike users and proposed a
deep neural network classification model for audience expansion in
MiningLamp. In [3], deWet et.al. proposed a two-stage embedding-
based audience expansion model that is deployed in production at
Pinterest. For the first stage, they trained a global user embedding
model on sitewide user activity logs. In the second stage, they used
statistical techniques to create lightweight seed list representations
in the embedding space for each advertiser.
In our system, we first use a similarity-based approach to search
lookalike customers from the whole customer universe and then
rank these new customers based on their similarity scores or a sepa-
rate classification model. We choose the similarity-based approach
for the first step because of its great scalability and low search
latency. Similarity-based approaches usually require building user
representations first. In the next section, we will discuss embedding
models for representing customers.
2.2
User Representation
Embedding models are very useful in terms of transforming high
dimensional sparse feature vectors of customers to low dimensional
dense representations of customers. Embedding models have been
widely used in industry, for example, for search engine marketing
at Walmart [9–11], search ranking at Airbnb [5], and recommenda-
tion at Pinterest [19]. Embedding models can be trained in a way to
capture similarity between customers, so that we can use approx-
imate nearest neighbor search methods to quickly find lookalike
customers of seed customers. In our case, we use a two-tower ar-
chitecture to train the customer embedding model, which is well
recognized in previous work. Our novelty in user representation is
modeling business metrics using the cosine similarity between two
embedding vectors, which has great interpretability.
2.3
Similarity Search
After user representation, we need a fast approach to search looka-
like customers from a very large customer universe with potential
size of hundreds of millions of customers. Scanning the whole
customer universe is not scalable or efficient [1, 15, 27–29]. Approx-
imate nearest neighbor search is the most popular approach used
in previous work. For example, locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
has been used in previous work [3, 14, 16]. There are several good
open-source tools [7, 13, 30–34] for approximate nearest neighbor
search, such as ScaNN [6] by Google and FAISS [12] by Facebook.
We choose FAISS for lookalike customer search for its scalability of
handling billions of vectors and support of various types of distance
measures (e.g. dot-product, cosine, Euclidean distances).
2

3
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
In this section, we explain our audience expansion system pipeline
for finding lookalike customers for e-commerce marketing in Wal-
mart. The system diagram is shown in Figure 1. Our audience
expansion system has an online stage and an offline stage. In the
offline stage, we generate customer embeddings for all the cus-
tomers in the customer universe and then build indexing on the
customer embedding space. In the online stage, the seed customers
are transformed into embeddings and then we search for lookalike
customers using the pre-built indexes from the offline stage. After
getting the lookalike customers, we will conduct filtering and rank-
ing on them. The ranking approach can be based on their similarity
scores or a different classification model.
3.1
Embedding
In this article, we will mostly focus on the embedding model and
explain how we build this model in later sections. The customer
embedding model yields unified dense representations of customers.
Our customer embedding model can be utilized in a lot of use cases.
Besides finding lookalike customers, customer embeddings can
be employed as input features in other customer models, such as
purchase propensity models and life-time value models. Ranking
method is not a focus in this paper and will be studied in our future
work.
3.2
Indexing and Search
The scalability issue in this system is how to quickly search for
lookalike customers from a pool of hundreds of millions of candidate
customers. To narrow down the customers for consideration, we
build indexes using FAISS [12]. We choose FAISS for a few reasons
as listed below. FAISS supports a wide range of different indexes and
provides both CPU and GPU implementations. FAISS also supports
different types of distance measures, such as Euclidean distances,
dot products and cosine similarity. And we can utilize compression
techniques in FAISS to process large datasets that cannot fit in
memory. How we implement indexing and search is not the main
focus of this paper. If you are interested in more details about FAISS,
please visit their Github project page.
4
EMBEDDING MODEL
In this section, we present our deep learning based embedding
model, which can capture the similarity between customers. To
design this model, we need to first define the similarity metric be-
tween two customers. While some models in previous work [3]
learned relative similarity scores between positive and negative
customer pairs, we use direct similarity metrics between two cus-
tomers, which are interpretable, meaningful and reflecting business
metrics. The similarity metrics we define can be very useful in
improving and explaining marketing campaign performance.
We use a two-tower architecture to calculate the cosine distance
between two customer embedding vectors and use the cosine dis-
tance as the estimate of similarity metric between two customers.
The customer embedding model is trained to minimize the total loss
between cosine distances and true similarity scores in the training
datasets.
4.1
Similarity Metric Definition
In Walmart, we care about a lot of different business metrics for
marketing campaigns, such as transactions, website visits, campaign
engagements. When expanding audience for marketing campaigns,
it’s a business advantage to find new customers that have similar
behavior on Walmart e-commerce website as the existing seed
customers. Finding new customers with similar business metrics
can allow marketing campaigns to maintain a similar customer
distribution after expansion, which is very beneficial for cold-start
campaigns or conversion campaigns.
There are three types of business metrics of particular interest
to our marketing campaigns: transactions, visits and engagements.
Let’s take transactions as an example to illustrate how we define
the similarity metrics. Let’s say there are a list of product categories
in Walmart catalog, 𝑐1,𝑐2, ...,𝑐𝑛. Customer A has made purchase
orders in these categories, 𝑂𝐴= (𝑎1,𝑎2, ...,𝑎𝑛). Customer B has
also made purchase orders in these categories, 𝑂𝐵= (𝑏1,𝑏2, ...,𝑏𝑛).
The similarity between A and B is defined as:
𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝐴, 𝐵) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑒_𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑂𝐴,𝑂𝐵)
(1)
We can also use other similarity distance functions, such as Jac-
card similarity and Euclidean distance. This method of calculating
similarity metrics can also be applied for visits and engagements.
Figure 2: Two-Tower Model Architecture.
4.2
Two-Tower Architecture
After defining the similarity metric between customers, the next
task is to build a machine learning model to predict the similarity
metric given customer features. Our approach is:
(1) extract raw features for customers;
(2) transform customer features into customer embeddings;
(3) calculate the cosine distances of customer embedding pairs
in the embedding space;
(4) use the cosine distances as the estimates of true similarity
scores of customer pairs.
3

Figure 3: The Embedding Model.
The process is shown in Figure 2. The loss function for optimization
is the L1 loss between cosine distance prediction and true similarity
metric.
The multimodal customer features are extracted from multiple
data sources, including transaction data, visit data, engagement
data and demographics data. The multimodal customer features
are composed of dense numerical features (such as number of or-
ders, GMV, number of visits) and sparse categorical features (such
as gender, education, occupation, location). For low dimensional
categorical features, we can use one-hot encoding to transform
them into numbers, for example gender and education level. The
location feature contains street address, city name, state name and
zip code, so it’s a very high dimensional categorical feature, which
is too inefficient to use one-hot encoding. We convert the location
feature into location embedding using transfer learning and then
concatenate it with other features together, which is explained in
the next part.
4.3
Embedding Model Structure
The embedding model is described in Figure 3. We have the trans-
action, visit, engagement, demographics and location features as
input to the embedding model. The location features are treated
as textual sentences and then transformed to location embeddings
using transfer learning of pre-trained text embedding models. Then
we concatenate the numerical features and location embeddings as
input to the final feed-forward neural network. The feed-forward
network is composed of multiple fully connected ReLU layers. The
output of the feed-forward network is a 128 dimensional embedding
as customer representation.
4.3.1
Location Embedding. We tried a few different approaches
to convert location text to location embedding. One approach is
to use a pre-trained word embedding model in PyTorch (GloVe),
which is illustrated in Figure 4. Another approach is to use the
state-of-the-art BERT model [2] for text representation learning,
which is shown in Figure 5. We also fine tune the pre-trained BERT
model in our training process.
Figure 4: Location Embedding using Word Embedding.
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
For evaluation, we setup the training, validation and testing datasets
by different time windows. For example, we can use data of last 𝑛
years as training data, data of next one month or one quarter as
validation and testing data. The evaluation metric for model quality
is mean absolute error (MAE). Due to Walmart’s privacy policy,
4

Figure 5: Location Embedding using BERT.
the results are presented as percentage proportions to the baseline
embedding model.
In this section, we compare the quality and inference time of
different model setups, from different numbers of fully connected
layers to different location embedding methods. The baseline model
is using two fully connected ReLU layers and no location embedding.
The results are shown in Table 1 and Table 2.
Table 1: Quality (MAE) of Embedding Model with Different
Setups.
No Location
Word Embedding
BERT
2 layers
100%
97%
91%
3 layers
94%
87%
86%
Table 2: Inference Time of Embedding Model with Different
Setups.
No Location
Word Embedding
BERT
2 layers
100%
110%
>500%
3 layers
105%
115%
>500%
In both Table 1 and Table 2, lower percentage indicates better
model performance. Although embedding model with BERT is the
best one in terms of model quality, its inference latency increases by
4 times compared to baseline, which is very slow. Considering we
need to process hundreds of millions of customers offline, the total
running time of our system using BERT is not ideal. Embedding
model with word embedding strikes a good balance between quality
and inference latency.
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose an effective and efficient marketing au-
dience expansion system, which can handle hundreds of millions
of customers. We use a deep learning model to generate customer
embeddings. The deep learning model can handle both dense nu-
merical features and sparse categorical features. And the model
encodes location embedding using transfer learning Our system
has great adaptability by constructing different similarity metrics
for different campaigns. The similarity metrics are interpretable
and meaningful and can reflect different business metrics. Extensive
experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the scalability,
efficiency and quality of our system and embedding model.
There are several directions for the future work in our market-
ing audience expansion system. First, we can explore the direction
of combining both similarity-based and classification-based ap-
proaches for searching lookalike customers. Second, we can study
how to filter and rank the lookalike customers using machine learn-
ing models to improve ranking quality.
