CP3-20-02
TUM-HEP-1249/20
Absence of CP violation in the strong interactions
Wen-Yuan Ai∗1, Juan S. Cruz†2, Bj¨orn Garbrecht‡2 and Carlos Tamarit§2
1Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology,
Universit´e catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve B-1348, Belgium
2Physik-Department T70, James-Franck-Straße,
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, 85748 Garching, Germany
Abstract
We derive correlation functions for massive fermions with a complex mass in the presence of a general
vacuum angle. For this purpose, we ﬁrst build the Green’s functions in the one-instanton background and
then sum over the conﬁgurations of background instantons. The quantization of topological sectors follows for
saddle points of ﬁnite Euclidean action in an inﬁnite spacetime volume and the ﬂuctuations about these. For
the resulting correlation functions, we therefore take the inﬁnite-volume limit before summing over topological
sectors. In contrast to the opposite order of limits, the chiral phases from the mass terms and from the instanton
eﬀects then are aligned so that, in absence of additional phases, these do not give rise to observables violating
charge-parity symmetry. This result is conﬁrmed when constraining the correlations at coincident points by
using the index theorem instead of instanton calculus.

1
arXiv:2001.07152v5  [hep-th]  28 Sep 2021

1
Introduction
The theoretical formulation of the strong interactions
in general allows for a Lagrangian term
1/(16π2)θ tr F eF
(1)
that is odd (i.e. it changes sign) under charge-parity
(CP) conjugation. Here, F is the gauge ﬁeld strength
tensor and eF is its Hodge dual, with electric and mag-
netic components being interchanged. One may expect
in general that this term also leads to phenomena that
violate CP.
Conceivable in particular is a permanent electric
dipole moment of the neutron [1, 2], which, together
with other potential indications of strong CP-violation,
has not been observed to date.
Since in ﬁrst place,
there is no reason to prefer θ = 0 (or an integer mul-
tiple of π), it is therefore argued that the absence of
such signals constitutes a shortcoming of the theory,
referred to as the strong CP problem, and that it re-
quires an extension of the Standard Model of particle
physics. Theoretical research in this direction is exten-
sive, and there is a number of experiments hunting for
a proposed particle, the axion, that arises in many of
these extensions [3].
From the Lagrangian, the action follows by integra-
tion over the spacetime. Since the CP-odd term (1)
turns out to be a total derivative, the corresponding
contribution to the action is determined by the bound-
ary conditions on the gauge ﬁelds.
Taking these to
be vanishing physical ﬁelds, i.e. pure gauge conﬁgura-
tions, at the boundary of spacetime, the integrals over
the CP-odd term yield θ times integer values ∆n—
to be referred to as winding number or topological
charge—corresponding to so-called homotopy classes
that categorize maps of a three-dimensional sphere
onto itself, where maps in diﬀerent classes cannot be
continuously transformed into one another [4, 5].
This topological quantization is of central relevance
when evaluating the eﬀects from the term (1). One im-
plication is, for example, that if the predictions of the
theory depend on θ, they must be periodic in this pa-
rameter. This is because in the quantized theory, the
action enters the path integral as a phase. The theory
is therefore invariant under replacements θ →θ + 2πn,
where n ∈Z. Therefore, θ is sometimes referred to
as the vacuum angle.
Further, topological quantiza-
tion implies that observables are to be calculated from
an interference of amplitudes from diﬀerent topologi-
cal sectors, i.e. from path integrals for a given ∆n or
homotopy class, in the inﬁnite spacetime.
To state a principle leading to vanishing physical
boundary conditions and therefore to topological quan-
tization, we note that the nonvanishing contributions
to the Euclidean path integral arise from saddle points
of ﬁnite action and ﬂuctuations around these. Saddle
points correspond to solutions to the Euclidean equa-
tions of motion, and for these to exist in the inﬁnite
spacetime volume, the physical boundary conditions
must vanish. As a consequence, the path integrals for
the diﬀerent topological sectors must then be evaluated
in inﬁnite spacetime volumes ﬁrst.
Otherwise, there
would be no reason to assume topological quantiza-
tion. In a second step, amplitudes from the diﬀerent
topological sectors are then to be interfered.
On the other hand, for boundary conditions imposed
on ﬁnite spacetime volumes, saddle points and solu-
tions to the equations of motion exist for nonvanish-
ing physical ﬁelds at the boundaries as well.
More-
over, the ground state conﬁguration, that should de-
termine the boundary conditions on ﬁnite spacetime
volumes, is neither a ﬁeld eigenstate nor a pure gauge
conﬁguration, i.e.
it does not correspond to vanish-
ing physical ﬁelds.
In contrast, the Euclidean path
integral in inﬁnite volumes automatically projects the
pure gauge ﬁeld eigenstates on the corresponding ac-
cessible ground states.
Nonetheless, if there were a
principle that would lead to topological quantization
for boundary conditions imposed on some ﬁnite sur-
face, one could interfere the topological sectors prior
to taking the spacetime volume to inﬁnity.
Here, we show that the material consequence of the
order of the limits is as follows: When taking the space-
time volume to inﬁnity before interfering the topolog-
ical sectors, CP-violating phenomena are absent in
the strong interactions without extending the theory
or setting the CP-odd term to zero.
On the other
hand, interfering the topological sectors before taking
the spacetime volume to inﬁnity, one concludes that
correlation functions exhibit CP-violation that cannot
be removed by ﬁeld redeﬁnitions [6].
The question of whether there is CP violation in gen-
eral in the strong interactions of massive quarks should
not be a matter of choice but be a prediction of the
theory. Appended to this letter is therefore extensive
supplementary material that addresses many aspects
of the limiting procedure as well as pertaining matters
such as the principle of cluster decomposition.
Technically, we arrive at our conclusions by com-
puting the correlation functions for massive fermions,
where we keep θ as well as the phase of the deter-
minant of the matrix of quark masses general.
As
one of the methods, we use the leading approximation
to a dilute gas of instantons so that the spacetime-
dependence of the correlations can be recovered. As
an alternative route, using arguments based on fac-
torization properties of path integrals and the Atiyah-
Singer index theorem [7], we conﬁrm that the coinci-
dent limit of the fermion correlations does not exhibit
CP violation, provided the interference of the topolog-
2

ical sectors takes place among inﬁnite spacetime vol-
umes. Hence, the main results of this work hold beyond
the perturbative expansion about instanton conﬁgura-
tions. They crucially rely on how topological quantiza-
tion emerges in spacetimes of inﬁnite volume and the
order in which the pertaining limits are carried out.
2
Topological charge, massive quarks,
and charge-parity violation
In electrodynamics, the topological term (1) is imma-
terial because its volume integral can be traded for a
surface integral over the boundaries of spacetime where
it can be shown that ﬁnite action conﬁgurations have
ﬁelds decaying fast enough such that the integral van-
ishes.
This is not true for the strong interactions,
where, due to the self-interactions, extended ﬁeld con-
ﬁgurations with ﬁnite action, so-called instantons, exist
while the surface term no longer vanishes [8]. For this
reason, it has been proposed that values of θ ̸= πm
(m ∈Z) may imply CP-violation [1, 2, 4, 5].
While the topological term is local in the ﬁrst place,
and while in singular gauges the topological ﬂux can be
constrained to inﬁnitesimal surfaces about the centres
of the instantons [9], Eq. (1) is nonetheless equivalent
to a surface term at the boundary of the spacetime
at inﬁnite distance. It is therefore an essential point
whether it aﬀects local observables in quantum ﬁeld
theory. The standard view is that this is the case be-
cause of a change in the local vacuum structure im-
posed by the boundary term. On the other hand, as
illustrated in Figure 1, one can approximate observ-
ables by including the ﬂuctuations in a subvolume of
the spacetime with all possible boundary conditions on
its surface. One may expect—and it is possible to show
this—that the theory in the subvolume is then indepen-
dent of the boundary conditions in the inﬁnite distance
so that these have no material impact.
Intricately related with the topological term are CP-
odd contributions to quark masses that can be ex-
pressed through ¯ψjmjeiαjγ5ψj where j = 1, . . . , Nf
and Nf is the number of quark ﬂavours. The quark
ﬁelds are denoted by the spinors ψj, γ5 is a matrix
in spinor space and the phases αj are CP-odd. The
phases αj can in principle be removed by redeﬁnitions
of the quark ﬁelds. However, since the so-called chiral
symmetry of the quark ﬁelds is anomalous [10, 11], the
quark phases are tied to the vacuum-angle θ. In par-
ticular, ¯θ = θ + ¯α, where ¯α = PNf
j=1 αj, is a phase that
remains invariant under ﬁeld redeﬁnitions.
In order to calculate the most important CP-
violating eﬀects from the topological term, one derives
eﬀective fermion interactions caused by the instantons
Figure 1:
For local quantum ﬁeld theory, an observer is ex-
pected to be only sensitive to ﬂuctuations in a local subvolume
Ω1 ⊂Ωin the limit of an inﬁnite volume of the spacetime Ω.
The θ-parameter inﬂuences the conditions at the boundary ∂Ω.
It can be shown that these do not aﬀect the ﬂuctuations in the
subvolume. Fluctuations corresponding to instantons and anti-
instantons are depicted as blue and orange circles, respectively.
as Lagrangian terms of the form [6, 12, 13]
−ΓNf eiξ
Nf
Y
j=1
( ¯ψjPLψj) −ΓNf e−iξ
Nf
Y
j=1
( ¯ψjPRψj) ,
(2)
where ΓNf is a coeﬃcient and the left and right chiral
projectors are PL,R = (1 ∓γ5)/2.
The interaction (2) implies that there is no chiral
symmetry with an overall U(1) phase.
In the eﬀec-
tive chiral Lagrangian for low energies, where quantum
chromodynamics (QCD) conﬁnes, there thus is the cor-
responding term
|λ|e−iξf 4
π det U + |λ|eiξf 4
π det U † ,
(3)
where fπ is the pion decay constant, U is a ﬁeld of the
form of a unitary matrix describing the mesons and λ
is a coeﬃcient within the eﬀective theory.
The aforementioned invariance of ¯θ under ﬁeld re-
deﬁnitions leaves two possibilities for the phase ξ com-
patible with the chiral anomaly (assuming that ξ is a
function of α and θ, and that the eﬀective action is
periodic in these parameters):
• ξ = θ, i.e. in general misaligned with mass terms
such that there is CP violation,
• ξ = −¯α, i.e. aligned with mass terms such that
there is no CP violation.
The restriction to the above choices can be understood
in terms of a spurious chiral symmetry under which
θ transforms or simply by demanding that the rela-
tive phases between the interactions of Eq. (2) and the
tree-level mass terms remain invariant under ﬁeld re-
deﬁnitions. Based on the topological quantization of
3

the path integral and the ensuing order of limits, we
derive here the eﬀective operator (2) and show that
the second possibility, ξ = −¯α, is the one that is real-
ized what implies that there is no CP violation in the
strong interactions.
When relating these remarks to the literature, we
note that the possibility ξ = θ is implied in most of the
papers without dismissing ξ = −¯α. The early papers,
as well as literature following these, on phenomenologi-
cal CP violation in the strong interactions make use of
the freedom of chiral ﬁeld redeﬁnitions in order to set
θ = 0 and attribute the CP-odd phases to the quark
masses [1, 2]. In the context of the present discussion,
this corresponds to setting ξ = θ = 0 while ¯α ̸= 0 in
general. The case of ξ = −¯α is apparently not pursued.
Also more recent discussions of the coeﬃcients of the
operator (3), e.g. Ref. [14], do not mull over this latter
possibility.
Reference [6] appears to contain the only direct cal-
culation leading to ξ = θ, making use of the dilute
instanton gas approximation. As we point out in the
present work, this conclusion relies on computing the
interference among topological sectors in ﬁnite space-
time volumes and taking these to inﬁnity afterwards.
Reversing this order of limits, as it is indicated when
topological quantization emerges from the requirement
of ﬁnite saddles in the action in inﬁnite spacetimes, we
show in the present work that one is led to conclude
that ξ = −¯α instead.
The interactions (3) are directly related to CP-
violating observables such as a permanent electric
dipole moment of the neutron or the decays η′ →2π
(Section S3.6). For ξ = θ, one recovers the standard
results [1, 2, 15], while for ξ = −¯α, these signals vanish.
3
Fermion correlations in a dilute in-
stanton gas
In this section we show that ξ = −¯α by computing
the quark correlation function in the approximation
of a dilute instanton gas. In order to simplify nota-
tion, we set Nf = 1 and drop the index for the quark
ﬂavour.
One should keep in mind that for a single
quark ﬂavour, the instanton eﬀects amount to an ad-
dition to the quark mass. However, the generalization
to the cases with Nf > 1 relevant for the potentially
CP-violating phenomenology follows along the lines of
the simpliﬁed analysis.
To compute the correlation function, we use the following Green’s function in the background of n instantons
(with topological charge +1) and ¯n anti-instantons (with topological charge −1) located at x0,ν, x0,¯ν respectively:
iSn,¯n(x, x′) ≈iS0inst(x, x′)+
¯n
X
¯ν=1
ϕ0L(x −x0,¯ν)ϕ†
0L(x′ −x0,¯ν)
me−iα
+
n
X
ν=1
ϕ0R(x −x0,ν)ϕ†
0R(x′ −x0,ν)
meiα
.
(4)
This approximation is valid for a dilute instanton gas and quark masses such that m is small compared to 1/ϱ,
where ϱ is the radius of the instantons (which is not ﬁxed). The spinors ϕ0L,R are the analytic continuation
of the zero modes of the Euclidean Dirac operator in the (anti-)instanton background, that determines the
equation of motion for the quark ﬁelds, in the massless limit, and
iS0inst(x, x′) = (−γµ∂µ + ime−iαγ5)
Z
d4p
(2π)4 e−ip(x−x′)
1
p2 −m2 + iϵ
(5)
is the solution in a background without instantons and is approximately valid at large distances from the
individual locations, i.e. in between the instantons and anti-instantons.
Further, we readily assume here Minkowski metric.
The approximation (4) has been used e.g. in Ref. [16]
for α = 0. The generalization to α ̸= 0 may appear
obvious but there are some complications when trans-
forming the spectrum of the Dirac operator from Eu-
clidean to Minkowski spacetime. Yet, these can be ad-
dressed in detail thus conﬁrming the form of the prop-
agator (4) (Section S2). Note that the Green’s func-
tion (4) is independent of θ because the topological
term has not yet entered the derivation. However, it
needs to be taken into account when summing conﬁgu-
rations corresponding to diﬀerent homotopy classes in
the path-integral expression for the correlation func-
tion.
Here, we use the saddle point approximation to the
path integral, where we sum over all instanton and anti-
instanton numbers n and ¯n and integrate over the loca-
tions of instantons and anti-instantons as well as over
the remaining collective coordinates such as the radii
ϱ and gauge orientations (which are independent for
4

each instanton and anti-instanton).
The question of whether ξ = −α or ξ = θ is de-
cided by the treatment of the summation over n and ¯n
in conjunction with how boundary conditions are im-
posed on the path integral. Let Ωdenote the volume of
spacetime and ﬁrst consider Minkowski space such that
Ωis inﬁnite. The case of ﬁnite Ωis discussed below.
Boundary conditions on the path integral are ﬁxed by
requiring that the physical gauge ﬁelds (as well as all
other ﬁelds) vanish on the boundary of ∂Ω, such that
the action takes ﬁnite values at its saddle points [17]
(Section S3.2). For the gauge ﬁeld, this leaves open the
possibility of pure gauge conﬁgurations.
These remarks apply to ﬁeld conﬁgurations that are
regular in Ω.
In calculations aiming for interactions
beyond the dilute instanton gas [16, 18], it can be ad-
vantageous to use the singular gauge [9] so that one
avoids working with integrands that are not manifestly
square integrable.
The price to pay for this is that
there are singularities at the centres of the instantons
or their approximate deformations. While spacetime
needs to be punctured at these singularities, there are
no apparent problems in constructing saddle point ap-
proximations to the path integral. Since the singular
contributions at the centres of the instantons are pure
gauges, the topological ﬂux through an inﬁnitesimal
ball around such a point is again quantized. Then, for
inﬁnite Ωthe ﬁelds still must vanish on ∂Ωbut there is
no topological ﬂux through ∂Ω, in contrast to the reg-
ular gauge. In eﬀect, topological quantization results
from the requirement of ﬁnite saddle point conﬁgura-
tions in inﬁnite spacetime volumes also in the singular
gauge. In contrast, when restricting spacetime to ﬁnite
Ω, there are ﬁnite saddle points for arbitrary nonsingu-
lar boundary conditions on ∂Ω. Hence, some diﬀerent
principle would again be necessary to impose topolog-
ical quantization for ﬁnite boundaries.
Both ∂Ωand SU(2) ⊂SU(3) (i.e.
the subgroup
of the group of gauge symmetries of the strong inter-
actions) are homeomorphic to the three-dimensional
sphere S3 such that the gauge conﬁgurations fall
into classes according to the third homotopy group.
These characterize the number of times ∆n a three-
dimensional hypersurface can be wrapped around S3.
In the context of strong interactions, the class of con-
ﬁgurations with boundary conditions corresponding to
a certain ∆n are sometimes referred to as a topological
sector.
This property is of relevance for the present case be-
cause in the saddle point approximation ∆n = n −¯n.
Furthermore, it is possible to deﬁne
vacuum states
|nCS⟩with a certain
integer Chern–Simons number
nCS.
Taking the matrix element characterized by
⟨mCS| and |nCS⟩corresponds to ﬁxing the topologi-
cal sector ∆n = mCS −nCS. We also note that the
states |nCS⟩are not gauge invariant as the Chern–
Simons number (deﬁned on a spatial hypersurface) can
change by all possible integer values through so-called
large gauge transformations that are not continuously
connected to the identity component. Thus, the true
vacuum state should be constructed as a superposition
of all Chern–Simons numbers of equal weight, but there
may be relative phases proportional to nCS.
These
phases are eﬀectively equivalent with the topological
term in the action when calculating expectation values
using the path integral approach. Since diﬀerent topo-
logical sectors are distinguished by the boundary con-
ditions which are taken at inﬁnity, contributions to the
path integral within a ﬁxed topological sector must be
evaluated for inﬁnite spacetime volumes Ω. Note that
this reasoning also applies to spacetime manifolds with
compact spatial hypersurfaces yet with an inﬁnite time
direction. The possibility of restricting the integration
to ﬁnite subvolumes of spacetime is discussed below.
The fermion correlator should therefore be evaluated as
⟨ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)⟩=
lim
N→∞
N∈N
lim
Ω→∞
1
Z(N, Ω)
X
mCS,nCS
|mCS−nCS|≤N
⟨mCS|ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)|nCS⟩
= lim
N→∞
N∈N
lim
Ω→∞
PN
∆n=−N
P
n ⟨nCS + ∆n|ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)|nCS⟩
PN
∆n=−N Z∆n(Ω)
= lim
N→∞
N∈N
lim
Ω→∞
N
P
∆n=−N
⟨ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)⟩∆n
PN
∆n=−N Z∆n(Ω)
.
(6)
where Z(N, Ω) and Z∆n(Ω) are the partition function summed for all sectors |∆n| ≤N and that for a single
topological sector, respectively. The dependence on N and Ωneeds to be kept before taking these parameters
to inﬁnity. The order of the two limits in the last expression determines whether one arrives at ξ = −α or ξ = θ,
as we discuss next.
5

Now we need to consider the fermion correlator in a ﬁxed topological sector.
For a single ﬂavour one has:
⟨ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)⟩∆n =
X
¯n,n≥0
n−¯n=∆n
1
¯n!n!
h
¯h(x, x′)

¯n
me−iα PL +
n
meiα PR

Ω¯n+n−1 + iS0inst(x, x′)Ω¯n+ni
× (−iκ)¯n+nei∆n(α+θ)
=
 eiαI∆n+1(2iκΩ)PL + e−iαI∆n−1(2iκΩ)PR
 iκ
m
¯h(x, x′) + I∆n(2iκΩ)iS0inst(x, x′)

× (−1)∆nei∆n(α+θ) .
(7)
In this expression, ¯h(x, x′) is a spinor correlation that remains after the integration of the instanton and anti-
instanton locations as well as the collective coordinates and κ includes the exponential suppression of the
instanton action—as these correspond to tunneling processes—as well as extra factors that appear when eval-
uating the path integral to one-loop accuracy (Section S3.1). Finally, Iα(x) is the modiﬁed Bessel function of
order α.
n =1
x
x
n =1
Figure 2:
Schematically shown are two contributions to a four-
point correlation function in some multi-instanton background.
The shaded blobs represent some subdiagram. On the left, there
is a piece induced by a six-point fermion Green’s function in the
background of an instanton (corresponding to ¯h in the two-point
case). On the right, an interaction of the same chiral structure
is induced by the fermion mass terms m1,2,3(corresponding to
iS0inst in the two-point case). When integrating over the subvol-
umes indicated by the thin grey boxes only, the left piece would
acquire a relatively misaligned phase θ + α (α being here the
sum of the quark mass phases) compared to the right piece be-
cause the phases come from the topological term and the fermion
determinants. When instead correctly computing the path inte-
gral over the full spacetime volume (represented by the thick
grey boundaries), the phase for both pieces is aligned and given
by ∆n(θ + α). For inﬁnite spacetime volumes, the interferences
between the diﬀerent sectors ∆n moreover are immaterial.
It is clear that the dilute instanton gas approxima-
tion does not apply directly to QCD. Rather, one could
think of a nonabelian gauge theory whose particle con-
tent is made up such that the running coupling remains
perturbative in the infrared and there is asymptotic
freedom in the ultraviolet. In such a model, the scale
invariance is broken radiatively such that there is no
dilatational modulus and instead a preferred instanton
size. That the symmetry properties with respect to CP
of such a theory in principle also apply to QCD should
therefore be taken as a more or less plausible assump-
tion. In Section 4, we thus also present a derivation of
the coincident fermion correlations that does not rely
on the dilute instanton gas approximation.
The volume factors Ωin Eq. (7) are resulting here
from the integration of the instanton locations over
the entire spacetime. These appear in the same form
even when taking these volumes to be ﬁnite for a given
topological sector before interfering between these [6,
16, 18]. It is then understood that Ω, which is taken
to inﬁnity after interfering the topological sectors, is
much larger than other scales that appear in the di-
lute instanton gas. This includes the mean separation
between instantons and anti-instantons as well the typ-
ical size of these. In fact, restricting Ωto small volumes
given by some physical length scale so that these only
contain few instantons would substantially alter the re-
sults of e.g. Refs. [6, 16, 18] that do not impose such
truncations on the path integral. The fact that the in-
stanton locations are to be integrated over the entire
spacetime is tied to translational invariance and mathe-
matically derives from trading the translational moduli
for collective coordinates [13, 19]. It can also be seen in
analogy with the calculation of the partition function
for a classical ideal gas, where the individual positions
of the particles are integrated over the entire conﬁgura-
tion space. Beyond the dilute gas approximation, the
spacetime integrations should be modiﬁed to account
for the overlap of instantons and anti-instantons due to
their ﬁnite size while yet, the individual locations are
still to be integrated over inﬁnite volumes [16]. For a
theory to which the dilute gas approximation applies,
omitting such corrections only amounts to a control-
lable error.
From Eq. (7), we see explicitly that in a ﬁxed topo-
logical sector and large spacetime volumes Ω, the mod-
ulus of the coeﬃcients of the left and right chiral con-
tributions tends to the same value. In particular, for
x →∞and | arg(x)| < π/2, Iα(x) ∼exp(x)/
√
2πx,
i.e.
these functions become independent of their in-
dex.
As a consequence, for Ω→∞, all topological
6

sectors contribute in precisely the same way.
More-
over, the chiral phases from the mass term contained
in S0inst (see Eq. (5)) and those induced by instanton
eﬀects are aligned, as a consequence of these phases
(that originate from the fermion determinants and the
topological term) being ﬁxed by the boundary condi-
tions on the topological sector ∆n as we illustrate in
Figure 2. When normalizing by the partition function,
the modiﬁed Bessel functions as well as the phase pro-
portional to ∆n cancel and we obtain
⟨ψ(x) ¯ψ(x′)⟩= iS0inst(x, x′) + iκ
m
¯h(x, x′)e−iαγ5 ,
(8)
such that the explicit phase can be identiﬁed with ξ =
−α. In contrast, if we were turning around the order of
limits in Eq. (6), we would sum over two independent
exponential series for n and ¯n and ﬁnd θ rather than
−α in Eq. (8) so that ξ = θ (Section S3.3).
Taking the correct order of limits, i.e.
Ω→∞
before summing over topological sectors therefore ex-
plains the absence of CP violation in the strong inter-
actions. This result can be generalized to an arbitrary
number of fermion ﬂavours (Section S3.4).
4
Chiral correlations from the index
theorem
In this section we provide an alternative derivation of
the previous results without using instantons.
The
starting point are the factorization properties of the
path integration when the full spacetime volume Ωis
divided into subvolumes Ω1 and Ω2. Following stan-
dard textbook arguments used in the context of cluster
decomposition [20], the fact that the topological charge
∆n is a surface ﬂux allows to write the partition func-
tion of the full spacetime volume Ω= Ω1 ∪Ω2 as
Z∆n(Ω) =
∞
X
∆n1=−∞
Z∆n1(Ω1)Z∆n−∆n1(Ω2).
(9)
For convenience, in this section we work in Euclidean
space, as this simpliﬁes the tracking of the complex
phases. First we can extract the θ-dependent phase,
Z∆n(Ω) ∝ei∆nθ. Any additional complex phases can
only come from the integration over fermionic ﬂuctu-
ations. To leading order in a loop expansion around
saddle points, these integrations have the form of de-
terminants of the Dirac operator in each saddle-point
background. Here we make no approximation of the
saddle points in terms of a dilute instanton gas.
Parity transformations relate pairs of eigenfunctions
of the massive Dirac operator with mutually conjugate
eigenvalues, except for those eigenfunctions that, being
zero modes of the massless operator, have eigenvalues
given by the complex fermion masses, resulting in op-
posite phases for right-handed and left-handed modes
(Section S2.2). Hence the phase of the full determi-
nant within a topological class characterized by ∆n is
determined by the diﬀerence between the number of
right and left-handed zero modes of the massless Dirac
operator, which according to the Atiyah-Singer index
theorem coincides with ∆n [7]. This gives a phase of
ei∆n¯α for the product of all fermion determinants. As
a consequence, we may write
Z∆n(Ω) = ei∆n¯θ˜g∆n(Ω)
(10)
with real ˜g∆n(Ω). Equation (9) gives then the relations
˜g∆n(Ω1 + Ω2) =
∞
X
∆n1=−∞
˜g∆n1(Ω1)˜g∆n−∆n1(Ω2). (11)
Setting Ωi = 0 above can be seen to imply that
˜g∆n(0) = δ∆n,0.
We next note that parity transfor-
mations relate ∆n with −∆n. As the ˜g∆n are real and
not sensitive to parity-violating eﬀects from the com-
plex fermion masses, one has ˜g−∆n(Ω) = ˜g∆n(Ω). The
former results motivate the Ansatz
˜g∆n(Ω) = Ω|∆n|f|∆n|(Ω2),
f|∆n|(0) ̸= 0.
(12)
Remarkably, assuming analyticity in Ω(and as shown
in Section S4), there is a unique solution which, upon
substitution in Eq. (10), gives
Z∆n(Ω) = I∆n(2βΩ) ei¯θ∆n ,
(13)
where β depends on the parameters of the theory and is
not determined at the present level of generality. This
has the same form as the result for the partition func-
tion in the dilute gas approximation (Section S3.1).
Finally we note that since all dependence on the
complex fermion masses is included in ¯θ, β can only
depend on the moduli of the complex fermion masses
mj ≡mjeiαj: β = β(mjm∗
j). In order to obtain fermion
correlators, it suﬃces to note that mj and m∗
j can
be seen as sources for integrated two-point functions.
Within a ﬁxed topological sector ∆n, the volume aver-
ages of the fermionic correlators can be obtained as
1
Ω
Z
d4x ⟨¯ψiPRψi⟩∆n = −1
Ω
∂
∂mi
Z∆n,
1
Ω
Z
d4x ⟨¯ψiPLψi⟩∆n = −1
Ω
∂
∂m∗
i
Z∆n.
(14)
Using Eq. (13) and summing over topological sectors
after taking the limit Ω→∞as before gives correlators
whose phases are aligned with the tree-level masses,
leading to no CP violation:
1
Ω
Z
d4x ⟨¯ψiPRψi⟩= −2m∗
i ∂mim∗
i β(mkm∗
k),
1
Ω
Z
d4x ⟨¯ψiPLψi⟩= −2mi ∂mim∗
i β(mkm∗
k).
(15)
7

By taking additional derivatives with respect to the
masses mj,m∗
j, the results can be extended to correla-
tion functions involving more fermion ﬁelds.
5
Finite subvolumes, periodic bound-
ary conditions and ﬁxed topological
sectors
To view this result from additional angles, we discuss
what one would obtain for ﬁxed topological sectors or
for ﬁnite spacetime volumes. Taking the order of the
limits as in Eq. (6), we have seen that the modiﬁed
Bessel functions in Eq. (7) tend to a common limit.
This can be seen as a consequence of ∆n/Ω→0. Tak-
ing Ω→∞before summing over diﬀerent topological
sectors may therefore be viewed to be equivalent with
setting ∆n = 0 from the outset. This explains why
taking limits as in Eq. (6) leads to the alignment be-
tween the various chiral phases. We note that a rel-
evant example for ﬁnite Ωand ﬁxed ∆n is given by
boundary conditions that are periodic in all four di-
mensions. This setup is mostly chosen in lattice simu-
lations, where ∆n freezes in the continuum limit.
In the approximation of the dilute instanton gas, it
can be shown that ﬁxing ∆n in an inﬁnite spacetime
volume is compliant with the principle of cluster de-
composition (Section S5.1).
In ﬁnite spacetime vol-
umes Ω, corrections to the asymptotic form of corre-
lators required by the cluster decomposition principle
then vanish, provided Ωis chosen large enough to meet
a given precision (Section S5.2). This observation has
also been made in Refs. [21, 22] through diﬀerent cal-
culational methods. We therefore conclude that it is
possible to describe the strong interactions in a ﬁxed
sector with ﬁnite ∆n, provided Ωis large enough or
inﬁnite, and that there are no CP-violating eﬀects in
this theory.
With the above observation and working in a single
topological sector with ﬁxed ∆n, we can evaluate the
path integral in a ﬁnite subvolume Ω1 ⊂Ωaccording to
Figure 1, no matter whether the full spacetime volume
is ﬁnite or inﬁnite. For such a setup, we need to sum or
integrate over boundary conditions of a certain winding
number ∆n1 (which is not necessarily integer because
instantons can be located at the boundary). The full
winding number ∆n is however ﬁxed by the bound-
ary conditions on ∂Ω. In particular, let Ω2 = Ω\ Ω1
and ∆n2 be the winding number within Ω2.
Then,
∆n = ∆n1 + ∆n2 remains ﬁxed such that the total
phase proportional to ∆n separates just like in Eq. (7)
and cancels within observables. One can then obtain
expectation values from a path integration restricted to
Ω1 in which the θ dependence is absent, and once more
the result (8) is recovered (Sections S5.1 and S5.2).
We emphasize that the fermion correlations evalu-
ated according to Eq. (6) are compatible with the en-
hanced mass of the η′-meson compared to those mesons
associated with spontaneously broken symmetries that
are not anomalous (Section S3.6).
This can be ex-
plained in more detail when observing that the chiral
susceptibility evaluated in ﬁnite subvolumes of space-
time agrees with known results from the dilute instan-
ton gas approximation and moreover when noting that
even within a ﬁxed topological sector, there is an η′-
meson with enhanced mass (Section S5.4). Then one
can also show that under reasonable assumptions the
mass of the η′ is proportional to the topological sus-
ceptibility of the pure gauge theory evaluated in ﬁnite
subvolumes, which generalizes classic results derived
for large numbers of colours in Refs. [23, 24]. Finally,
we note that arguments linking the topological suscep-
tibility with CP violation [25] rely on assuming analyt-
icity in θ of the partition function for the full volume,
which does not apply when the inﬁnite volume limit
is taken before summing over the topological sectors
(Sections S3.6 and S5.4).
6
Conclusions
In this work, we have derived fermion correlations in
instanton backgrounds, investigated the cases of ﬁnite
and inﬁnite spacetime volumes and checked the com-
pliance with cluster decomposition.
If there were a
valid principle that would allow the limit of inﬁnite
spacetime volume to be taken after the summation
over topological sectors, we would recover CP-violating
correlations proportional to the rephasing-invariant pa-
rameter ¯θ. However, based on the reasoning that the
quantization of the topological sectors comes from the
fact that the path integral receives its nonvanishing
contributions from saddle points of ﬁnite action and
ﬂuctuations about these, boundary conditions in Eu-
clidean space should be imposed at inﬁnity before the
summation over topological sectors.
The conclusion
then is that the theory of strong interactions with mas-
sive fermions does not predict CP-violating phenom-
ena, irrespective of the value of ¯θ.
