Outlier Ranking in Large-Scale Public Health Streams
Ananya Joshi*, Tina Townes, Nolan Gormley, Luke Neureiter, Roni Rosenfeld, Bryan Wilder
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Rd.
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 15213, USA
Abstract
Disease control experts inspect public health data streams
daily for outliers worth investigating, like those correspond-
ing to data quality issues or disease outbreaks. However,
they can only examine a few of the thousands of maximally-
tied outliers returned by univariate outlier detection methods
applied to large-scale public health data streams. To help
experts distinguish the most important outliers from these
thousands of tied outliers, we propose a new task for algo-
rithms to rank the outputs of any univariate method applied
to each of many streams. Our novel algorithm for this task,
which leverages hierarchical networks and extreme value
analysis, performed the best across traditional outlier de-
tection metrics in a human-expert evaluation using public
health data streams. Most importantly, experts have used our
open-source Python implementation since April 2023 and
report identifying outliers worth investigating 9.1x faster
than their prior baseline. Other organizations can readily
adapt this implementation to create rankings from the out-
puts of their tailored univariate methods across large-scale
streams.
1
Motivation
Disease control experts must analyze large volumes of time-
series population-level public health data (streams) for data
delays, errors, or changes in disease dynamics to mitigate
disease spread [31, 30, 5]. Because these streams are noisy,
nonstationary, and subject to different dynamics, experts can
most clearly detect these phenomena when they manifest as
specific types of point outliers (e.g., large spikes) in indi-
vidual data streams 1. Thus, experts have relied on tailored
univariate methods [2] applied independently per stream to
prioritize data points (outliers) corresponding to important
phenomena.
The rapid expansion of public health data since the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic [32] exposed a fundamental

1The joint relationships between streams are generally unstable due to
the statistical properties of public health data streams.
Existing Tied Maximum Outliers
No Ties After Outshines
0.98
0.95
0.89
0.76
Score Indicator
On 
Region
46005, SD
HHS 4
36029, NY
HRR 203
7/09
6/18
6/16
7/09
. . . 
Figure 1: Existing methods identify 14-20k tied maximum-
priority outliers (a subset shown here) from 3-4m points.
Outshines ranking enables experts to prioritize outliers.
flaw in this approach. When public health organizations only
curated a few thousand weekly-updated data streams, the
number of maximum-priority outliers identified this way
was relatively small, and experts could examine all outliers
manually. However, with modern volumes of public health
data containing hundreds of thousands of data streams up-
dated daily, this approach returns an overwhelming number
of tied maximum-priority outliers (e.g., 14-20k, as shown in
Fig. 1), of which many are false positives.
To address this challenge, we collaborated with the Del-
phi Group at Carnegie Mellon University. Delphi has curated
public health data for nearly a decade and maintains an API
used by various public health organizations 2. In the past
three years, Delphi’s daily data intake increased over 1000x
to 3-4 million data points across 200-300k data streams due
to the availability of public health data indicators, including
official indicators, like cases or hospitalizations, and auxil-
iary indicators, like insurance claims and cellphone-based
mobility [33, 19]. These indicators are also available at a
higher resolution (e.g., from {U.S. state x weekly} to {U.S.
county x daily}), and with historical data revisions [27],
which may contain new outliers. Existing univariate meth-
ods return false positives in this data for three reasons:
1. Because these methods operate independently per
stream, outputs should not be compared across
streams. More streams means more potential false
positives because each stream has a different outlier
2These organizations are generally in the United States (U.S.) and in-
clude national and local organizations.
1
arXiv:2401.01459v1  [cs.AI]  2 Jan 2024

threshold.
2. These methods may not account for temporal recency
and thus may not be able to appropriately rank outliers
in data streams that change rapidly (nonstationary).
3. Nonstationarity and historical data availability limit
the granularity of the output outlier scores (used for
ranking).
Motivated by this setting, we introduce a new task where
the goal is to rank the overall highest-priority outliers across
all data streams, thus limiting false positives and prioritizing
expert time: multi-stream outlier ranking. Algorithms for
this task act as a post-processing calibration step by taking
values produced by any univariate outlier detection method
applied independently to each of a large number of data
streams as input and ranking them by leveraging the histori-
cal behavior of the underlying univariate method per stream.
Our novel algorithm for this task, Outshines (Outliers in
Hierarchical Networks), uses hierarchical relationships be-
tween the streams to prioritize outliers that are extreme rela-
tive to the recent historical behavior of the univariate method
across all data streams. Because Outshines works with any
univariate outlier detection method and on different types of
indicators, it can adapt to the increasing and changing vol-
umes of large-scale public health data.
Our results from expert evaluations using real public
health data streams showed that Outshines performs the best
across traditional outlier detection metrics in our compar-
isons. As a result, Delphi has deployed Outshines, and ex-
perts have used it as part of their daily data analysis process
since April 2023. These experts report identifying outliers
worth investigating 9.1x faster with Outshines.
The Outshines implementation and evaluation mate-
rials are open-source at: https://github.com/Ananya-Joshi/
Outshines-Documentation. While we focus on public health,
this task and algorithm may also be relevant in other do-
mains with similar problem formulations (e.g., economics,
climate science, manufacturing, fraud detection, and com-
puter systems).
2
Problem Background & Formula-
tion
Each day, T, Delphi receives data points di,r(t), where in-
dicator i is in the set of curated indicators I, r is a region
in R, where R contains all the regions in Fig. 2 from dif-
ferent tiers (e.g. county, state or national), and t is a histor-
ical day 0 ≤t ≤T. This geospatial-temporal data forms
data streams, where each stream (identified by i, r) consists
of di,r(t) ∀t ∈[0, T]. The number of data streams is large
(|I| × |R|) and far exceeds the history (T) available per
stream. These streams are then optionally processed with a
National
HHS
State
HRR
County
DE
112
225
MD
Figure 2: The geospatial hierarchy for public health streams
covers 4270 regions. HRRs may serve multiple states like
HRR 112 and 225 serve both D.E. and M.D. residents.
Gaussian smoother and a Poisson regression model to re-
move weekday effects [27]. Because data providers censor
data to prevent reverse identification and may report data
with missing values, higher-tiered regions (e.g., states) may
include data from more people than expected by combining
information from county-level sub-regions and must be in-
dividually analyzed.
2.0.1
Geospatial Hierarchies
Regions in R form a hierarchy (see Fig. 2) which captures
geospatial and epidemiological relationships. Notably, hos-
pital referral regions (HRR) share a hospital system [12],
and HHS groups contain nearby states [13]. Experts use
these hierarchical relationships (e.g., parent, sibling (which
share a parent), and child streams) for outlier ranking. For
example, an expert may rank outliers by comparing them to
respective points in sibling streams.
Problem Formulation:
Our goal is to increase the rate at
which experts can identify data points that they deem worth
investigating (events) in large-scale data streams. Tailored
univariate point outlier detection methods can identify these
events, but not at large scales. So that we can use univari-
ate methods scale for large-scale (many) streams, we for-
malize the multi-stream outlier ranking task, where an al-
gorithm inputs values from univariate methods and outputs
rankable scores y(d) over all newly received data D per day.
This ranking can better prioritize expert attention. We as-
sess candidate algorithms using a range of traditional outlier
classification and ranking metrics comparing y and expert-
provided outlier scores c(d) ∀d ∈D. The implemented al-
gorithm must also meet Delphi’s deployment constraint; it
must process the complete data volume (including handling
changing, missing, and revised data) in less than one day to
stay current with daily updated data.

Output Quantile(𝜙t ,       )
Model Streams As Hierarchy
Create        via Block Maxima
…
…
Calculate 𝜙Per Stream
t-14··t-1   t+1··t+14
Block
𝜙(A)
𝜙(B)
𝜙(C)
𝜙(D)
𝜙(E)
t-2
t-1
···
···
…
A0:T ➜EWMA ➜𝜙(A0:T)
B0:T ➜EWMA ➜𝜙(B0:T)
C0:T ➜EWMA ➜𝜙(C0:T)
D0:T ➜EWMA ➜𝜙(D0:T)
E0:T ➜EWMA ➜𝜙(E0:T)
···
max      max      max      max
max      max      max      max
max      max      max      max 
A0:T B0:T C0:T
E0:T
D0:T
G0:T
F0:T
max 
max 
max 
max 
Blocks
↓
Quantile
𝜙(At) : 0.88
max
max
max max
max
max
max
max
max
    max  max max  max max 
Figure 3: Outshines models the hierarchical relationships between streams, applies a univariate method per stream to calculate
ϕs, creates Pi,t via block maxima per indicator i per day t across sibling streams, and finally, ranks ϕt by its quantile in Pi,t.
3
Related Works
To our knowledge, previous work has never considered
multi-stream outlier ranking. While there are many uni- and
multi-variate outlier detection methods [2], neither is ade-
quate for this problem. Univariate outlier detection methods
identify outlier data points in individual streams as needed,
[26, 14, 2], can operate over data streams with different
properties (e.g. scale3, noise, and outlier patterns) [6], and
are fully parallelizable over large sets of streams. They are
particularly relevant because public health data streams ex-
hibit strong temporal dependencies. However, these methods
currently return too many false positives (Fig. 1).
On the other hand, while multivariate methods can
identify outliers given interconnected factors, they are lim-
ited in several fundamental ways. Some methods rely on di-
mension reduction or sampling [16, 37], which means that
not all data is analyzed. Otherwise, they rely on the corre-
lation structures between the streams, but these are known
to change rapidly in noisy and nonstationary data (like pub-
lic health data) [15, 10]. Multivariate methods also gener-
ally require much more computational power than univariate
methods (e.g., via large matrix inversions). Unlike the public
health setting, these approaches are more relevant in settings
where data streams contain similar measurements uniformly
impacted by global events. Still, even public health-specific
approaches, like outbreak detection [35, 20, 3], are limited
by the previously described challenges.
Outlier Ranking Methods:
Outlier ranking methods are
overlooked in the existing literature. We identified that out-
lier methods create ranks from the quantiles of new data
points with respect to an empirical reference distribution, P.
This distribution, P, uses historical data from a single stream
or a small set of similar streams. As the size of P increases,
so does the resolution of quantiles possible that determine
empirical scores used for outlier ranking. For example, if
P only has 10 values, the quantiles would correspond to
deciles. The more quantiles available in P, the fewer points
3E.g., the raw COVID case count in a rural county (0-10) will be much
differently scaled than that in a city (0-1000)
may be tied at the top empirical quantile (leading to false
positives). Two existing ranking methods are:
1. Threshold Ranking
: The most common ranking ap-
proach, which we call Threshold ranking, identifies a dy-
namic outlier threshold per stream and returns a binary
[0,1] classification based on values that exceed the thresh-
old [21, 14] that corresponds to a quantile in an empirical
reference distribution P
2. Sibling Ranking
: The other approach, which we
call Sibling ranking, considers data from multiple, simi-
lar streams that share a parent, g ∈R (e.g., Rsib(g) =
{parent(r) = g|r ∈R} and data considered is di,r(t) ∀t ∈
[0, T], ∀r ∈Rsib(g)). Sibling ranking returns a real-valued,
rankable score ∈[0, 1] that corresponds to the empirical
quantile of new values compared to an empirical reference
distribution P [17]4.
Both Threshold and Sibling ranking return too many
false positives because their P 1. uses data from only one
or a few streams that cannot readily be compared at a large
scale, 2. uses the whole stream’s history instead of values
that share temporal context, and 3. only has a small and
varying number of values in P due to limited data history
per stream.
4
Outshines Method
Overview: First, Outshines (Fig. 3) models hierarchical re-
lationships in data streams for an indicator i. The resulting
hierarchical network facilitates outlier ranking by capturing
contextual relationships across all data streams. For Delphi’s
data, this network contains streams from every region in the
geospatial hierarchy, not just county-level streams.
Then, Outshines takes as input the test statistics (ϕ) out-
put from any point univariate outlier detection method ap-
plied to these hierarchical streams for all relevant data points
(ϕ(d) ∀d ∈{di,r(t) ∀r ∈R, t ∈[t −δ, t + δ]}), where the
nonstationarity and the available history of the data stream
4Sibling ranking reports mean scores for data in multiple sibling sets.

determine δ. These resulting ϕ measure the degree of agree-
ment between predicted and observed values, and extreme
ϕ indicate a potential outlier. The tailored univariate method
must ensure that the ranking of each ϕ matches that from
c per stream. However, because some streams that are ill-
suited to the tailored univariate method may consistently
return extreme ϕ, ϕ alone does not provide an informative
ranking across many data streams and must be contextual-
ized via a ranking algorithm.
Finally, Outshines outputs the rankable, scaled, real-
valued quantiles of test statistics (ϕ) from all regions in the
hierarchy at time t with respect to an empirical reference
distribution generated per day, per indicator: Pi,t. Outshines
creates Pi,t by using hierarchical relationships and extreme
value analysis on data from times close to t.
Outshines addresses the sources of false positives
present in prior ranking methods because Pi,t 1. contains
data from streams all across the hierarchy and 2. only con-
siders data values at times similar to t. For Delphi’s imple-
mentation of Outshines, where t are days and the hierarchy
is the geospatial hierarchy (Fig. 2), 3. Pi,t contains more
empirical quantiles than the other ranking algorithms and
can thus provide higher resolution rankable scores.
Algorithm 1 Outshines Ranking
Using Block Maxima to make Pi,t for indicator i and day t
Input:ϕ(di,r(t)) ∀r ∈R
Output:y(di,r(t)) ∀r ∈R
1: for Rsib ∈R: #Stream Aggregation Dim.
2:
Pi,Rsib,t = {}
3:
for h ∈[t−14, t)∪(t, t+14]: #Temporal Dim.
4:
#Block Maxima
5:
Pi,Rsib,t = Pi,Rsib,t ∪max(ϕ(di,r(h)|r ∈Rsib))
6:
end for
7: end for
8: Pi,t = ∪Rsib∈RPi,Rsib,t
9: y(di,r(t)) ←q(ϕ(di,r(t)), Pi,t)∗
log(|Pi,t|)
log(max |Pi,t|) ∀r ∈R
4.1
Generating Outshines Pi,t
Outshines can rank outliers across multiple streams be-
cause of its empirical reference distribution, Pi,t. We gen-
erate this Pi,t by adapting the block maxima technique from
extreme value analysis. Traditional block maxima tech-
niques split a data stream into equally-sized non-overlapping
data blocks (e.g., one block per week) and calculate the
maximum value in each block to form P [9] (e.g., P =
{max(di,r(t:t-7)),max(di,r(t-7:t-14))...}). Highly-ranked
outliers are points d for which ϕ(d), the test statistic, is large
even with respect to the reference distribution P; i.e., they
are more extreme than the most extreme value in a “typical”
week. The intuition for this approach is that if a univariate
method is miscalibrated for a particular data stream and reg-
ularly returns ϕ with high values, P will contain many such
examples, and outlier points must have even more extreme
ϕ to stand out. However, traditional block maxima does not
apply to streams with limited, nonstationary data [28], like ϕ
from Delphi’s data. Even recent advances that address non-
stationarity need long data histories [38, 29]. Our method
addresses both limited data history and nonstationarity in
streams of ϕ by changing both the block sizes and the ag-
gregation strategy for the block maxima technique.
Creating New Blocks (Alg 1. lines 1-7):
Each block in
block-maxima has a temporal dimension (e.g., day, week,
month) and a stream aggregation dimension (typically one
stream). Aggregating homogenous, or similar, streams per
block is a known way to calculate block maxima over more
data, but identifying an appropriate homogeneity test is dif-
ficult and could result in sets of dissimilar streams [23]. In-
stead, we identify homogenous streams as those that share a
parent r ∈Rsib(g). Each set of sibling streams, Rsib, in R
is subject to similar conditions by being in the same tier and
having the same parent5. Aggregating streams across Rsib
creates blocks of similar regions and addresses limited his-
tory.
We then use two mechanisms to address nonstationar-
ity. First, our blocks have a temporal dimension of one ob-
servation. Limiting the temporal dimension like this creates
blocks across streams instead of accross time so that tempo-
ral variations (e.g., weekday effects) do not skew Pi,t, but
there are still enough observations for block maxima (e.g.,
our blocks are 7 sibling streams x 1 day vs. the traditional
1 stream x 7 days). Second, we limit the temporal range of
blocks to data similar to the time being evaluated (a regime).
Only using data from the same regime (t ± δ) ensures Pi,t
is relevant to data at time t. For Delphi, that regime is 28
days, with 14 days of historical data and 14 days of prospec-
tive days (when data after t is available), so these blocks are
the most similar to the time considered. This 28-day range
(4 weeks) is a standard followed by many organizations par-
ticipating in the CDC’s respiratory illness forecasting tasks
[1].
We can then continue with the standard block maxima
procedure on these modified blocks so that Pi,Rsib,t con-
tains the maximum ϕ per indicator, per Rsib per t (Alg 1.
line 5). We use the maxima (the most common choice in ex-
treme value analysis) because we want values that describe
the empirical distribution at the tail, and intermediate quan-
tiles are ill-defined for small sibling groups (e.g., 95% from
a set of 3 regions).
5HRRs at state borders belong to multiple sibling sets, which models
that these regions are subject to potential outlier events from either of their
parent streams.

Aggregating Regions and Scaling (Alg 1. lines 8-9):
To
make an empirical reference distribution with many obser-
vations that capture extreme ϕ from all Rsib, these Pi,Rsib,t
for Rsib ∈R can be pooled together to create Pi,t. Thus,
Pi,t represents the distribution of recent extreme ϕ equally
weighted from each set of geospatial regions, as shown in
Alg. 1, line 8. Finally, Outshines outputs a score using the
quantile (q) of new ϕ at time t of Pi,t.
We apply Outshines to each of Delphi’s indicators sepa-
rately so that computation can occur across all indicators (in
parallel) and so that there are no assumptions about the re-
lationships between the constantly changing set of available
indicators. However, scores from Pi,t across different indi-
cators with more observations should be weighted higher be-
cause they have a higher resolution. Thus, Outshines scales
each quantile by |Pi,t| divided by the log of the maximum
possible observations, (e.g., log(|Rsib ∈R|∗regime)) to re-
turn a score (y) in [0, 1]. The log factor shrinks the scale
for both the numerator (points available) and denominator
(total possible points) so that between two indicators with
different possible total lengths (denominator) with the same
available/total points, the one with the longer stream will
have the higher multiplicative factor (and might be ranked
higher).
Ranking Algorithm Comparison:
The design of Out-
shines addresses the sources of false positives. First, Out-
shines ensures that Pi,t does not over-represent any region
or time so that the output scores are comparable. Outshines
compares every ϕ(di,r(t)) ∀r ∈R to the same Pi,t, unlike
Sibling or Threshold ranking, where the number of obser-
vations in P varies depending on missing data per stream.
Outshines also only uses data within a regime to create Pi,t.
Finally, for Delphi’s data, Outshines has more granular out-
put scores because it has more observations that characterize
P, as follows:
1. Threshold ranking contains all ϕ from a single stream
so (Pi,r := {ϕ(di,r(t))|t ∈[0, t) ∪(t, T]}).
2. Sibling
ranking
P
is
at
least
as
large
be-
cause
it
contains
all
ϕ
from
sibling
streams
(Pi,Rsib:={ϕ(di,r(t))|r ∈Rsib, t ∈[0, t) ∪(t, T]})
3. Outshines ranking P is |Pi,t|= |Rsib ∈R| × 28
On Delphi’s data, HRR and HHS tiers create intuitive and
numerous Rsib (369 Rsib with an average size of 15.85 re-
gions) and T ≤300. Thus, Outshines P is twice as large
as sibling ranking while only using a regime of 28 days, as
previously described. Increasing the regime from 28 can add
more observations and increase the granularity of Outshines’
output scores. However, this could lead to false positives as it
reduces Pi,t’s temporal similarity to t. Accordingly, before
the evaluation began, we preregistered the Github commit
of our Outshines implementation with these parameters on
OSF [18].
5
Tailored
Univariate
Method
(EWMA)
Outshines can rank ϕ produced by any univariate outlier de-
tection method that matches the expert relative ranking per
stream. We provide one such univariate method tailored to
Delphi’s experts in Summer 2023 (as shown in Fig. 3 Box
2). At that time, based on our interviews and observations,
these experts highly prioritized phenomena that manifested
as outliers representing rapid changes in streams with a high
population, few historical outliers, and few missing values
(high c). We tailored a model-free Exponentially Weighted
Moving Average (EWMA) method to identify such points in
the public health setting [4]).
Prediction Generation: We use a kernel weighting
function, K(t) whose value in position w is
Kw(t) =
(
0
if w = t
e−|w−t|
τ
otherwise
where τ=2 to prioritize the temporally closest data values. K
is discretely convolved with the stream values di,r(t) ∀t ∈
[0, T] for stream i, r and then standardized to generate
stream predictions ˆdi,r(t):
ˆdi,r(t) = (K ∗di,r)(t)/
X
K(t)
Test Statistic (ϕ) Calculation: The test statistic (ϕ)
compares observed and predicted values, as described fol-
lowing this paragraph. To cacluate ϕ, we define and scale
l(t)= ˆdi,r(t) −di,r(t)) to account for stream outlier his-
tory. Taking the absolute value ensures block maxima se-
lects points representing rapid change regardless of direc-
tion. Lastly, we multiply this value by the available stream
history and population (rpop) because these features are im-
portant to experts; an outlier in rpop= 100k should outrank a
national outlier if it is at least 2x as important6.
ϕi,r(t) = |li,r(t) −median(li,r(t))
σli,r
| · log(|di,r|) · log(rpop)
During deployment, we observed that EWMA’s ϕ for in-
flection points and points in trends longer than a week did
not match that from c. However, Delphi’s experts preferred
EWMA to a more complex but more accurate method be-
cause EWMA only requires a linear pass over each stream
in parallel.
6In smaller rpop, using absolute difference for ϕ’s does not capture sub-
tle outliers (e.g. going from 4 to 5 cases is more concerning than 34 to 35),
but can be used to detect the extreme outliers Delphi experts cared about in
July 2023.

Task
Ranking Method
Thresh.
Opt. Thresh.
Sibling
Outshines
Timing/Indicator (s)
Generate ϕ
UOD
EWMA
57.9 ± 35.17
* 6.71 ± 2.59
* 6.6 ± 2.51
319.67 ± 172.55
50.58 ± 46.40
FlaSH
458.81 ± 146.21
* 5.33 ± 2.32
* 5.2 ± 2.12
326.54 ± 160.64
45.85 ± 46.84
AR
36.13 ± 19.85
5.61 ± 3.92
4.32 ± 3.02
270.61 ± 156.14
58.97 ± 47.10
Isolation Forest
420.59 ± 270.15
65.04 ± 43.16
61.84 ± 41.92
190.58 ± 104.08
39.06 ± 29.10
DeepLog
6520 ± 4398
53.2 ± 36.13
52.79 ± 35.95
188.78 ± 102.44
38.97 ± 28.97
Telemanom
6160 ± 4449
64.65 ± 47.08
68.26 ± 52.38
293.36 ± 159.5
57.75 ± 43.44
# Ties/Indicators
UOD
EWMA
-
*15.81k ± 1.97k
* 6.05k ± 2.54k
585.33 ± 549.13
6.67 ± 0.65
FlaSH
-
* 22.02k ± 1.97k
* 8.08k± 2.13k
159.33 ± 23.37
7.67 ± 2.85
AR
-
42.11k ± 18.84k
7.02k ± 3.714k
127.67 ± 18.29
11.67 ± 10.51
Isolation Forest
-
89.87k ± 67.23k
39.80k ± 21.93k
3.87k ± 2.23k
20.67 ± 20.88
DeepLog
-
32.29k ± 26.07k
14.24k ± 3.44k
260.33 ± 63.78
18.0 ± 2.99
Telemanom
-
78.78k ± 39.10k
53.31k ± 32.42k
215.0 ± 89.44
14.0 ± 2.26
Table 1: Baseline Comparisons - Yellow highlights the deployed combination. This combination has the fewest of ties.
Figure 4: Evaluation Metrics: The red box highlights the best performing combination ranking method x tailored univariate
method for standard binary and ranking metrics. Correlations were N/A when the method returned all 0s or 1s.
6
Evaluations
To measure Outshines’ correctness, we used standard outlier
detection metrics comparing the expert-labeled data we col-
lected on real public health data streams to different combi-
nations of ranking x univariate methods (Evaluation 1). We
also monitored Outshines’ deployment over 4 months and
reported results from July to August 2023 (Evaluation 2).
6.1
Evaluation 1. Comparing Method Combi-
nations
We asked Delphi’s experts to rank outliers from real data
streams analyzed with Outshines during deployment on July
27, 2023 (snapshot dataset). This data set contained 6383
streams from the top three indicators which had outliers
worth investigating in June 20237 (and were thus likely to
contain rankable outliers during the snapshot). To compare
EWMA with model-based methods, we provided 200 days
of training data and computed rankings over the last 100
days for a total of 1.4 million data points over 300 days.
We evaluated the performance of all combinations of
ranking x univariate methods on this snapshot dataset com-
pared to the expert-labeled data we collected. The four im-
plemented ranking methods were:
• Threshold ranking [21]
• Optimized Threshold ranking8
71. Outpatient doctor visits for COVID-related symptoms, 2. % COVID-
positive antigen tests, and 3. Estimated % of new COVID hospital admis-
sions based on claims data
8The TODS implementation threshold=0.9, but we set it to 0.99 to
match the frequency outliers are expected [36]

• Sibling ranking [17]
• Outshines ranking (see Methods)
Comparing these ranking methods served as an ablation for
grouping sibling streams (Threshold to Sibling) and using
extreme values across hierarchies (Sibling to Outshines).
The univariate methods (UOD) were the Tailored Uni-
variate Method EWMA (see Methods), FlaSH [17], an out-
lier detection algorithm designed for smaller-scale public
health streams, and the TODS implementations [21] of Tele-
manom [14] (Tele) & DeepLog [8] (DL) (State of the art
deep learning methods), Isolation Forest (IF): [24], and Lin-
ear AutoRegressive Models (AR) [11]. Our proposed combi-
nation is Outshines x EWMA, and our experimental design
(e.g., analysis plan, web forms, implementations) was pre-
registered before data collection began. These experiments
were conducted on a 2.6GHz Intel Core i7 machine with
OSX in Python3.8 for TODS compatibility.
Combination Feasibility
The first section of Table 1 :
Timing/Indicator (s)9 shows that Outshines is more than
4.5x faster than Sibling ranking and generally faster than
TODS Threshold ranking. Because Outshines computes Pi,t
across a 28-day window of ϕ (parallel) instead of all histori-
cal ϕ in a stream (serial), there may be more pronounced per-
formance gains as T increases. Further, our chosen combi-
nation of Outshines x EWMA took much less time than deep
learning univariate methods, which would have required 4x
Delphi’s compute resources to generate ϕ on deployment
data (updated daily) in July 2023 (55 indicators vs. 3 in the
snapshot set) to keep daily processing times under one day.
More importantly, the second part of Table 1 : #
Ties/Indicator shows that Outshines is also the only ranking
method that produced few enough maximally tied outliers
for reviewers to investigate daily across all the univariate
method combinations. Outshines reduces Sibling ranking’s
maximally tied outliers by over 10x (typically 6-18 ties vs.
200-3k ties). If Outshines’ rankings are meaningful, these
results show that Outshines can promptly prioritize outliers
from large-scale public health streams.
6.1.1
Expert Ranking Generation and Comparison
To identify if Outshines ranks were prioritizing the outliers
experts wanted, we needed to address common limitations
in obtaining expert-labeled outlier rankings [36] by having a
large number (n = 17 vs. n=3 [34]) of experts, who regularly
use public health data streams for research or development
purposes, evaluate outliers from real data streams (and not
synthetic data [22]). These experts could only review a few
of the millions of data points in the snapshot dataset, and a
9Because EWMA and FlaSH are not in TODS, authors implemented a
similar ranking method for comparison (indicated by *).
random sample of that size would likely contain no outliers
worth ranking. Instead, because the top deployed Outshines
x EWMA rankings are empirically a subset of points of
the deployed Sibling x EWMA rankings, we could directly
compare the two methods by asking experts to rank points
that were highly differentiated by Outshines in deployment
(one example per decile, as available). We designed a sur-
vey where experts inspected two interactive web pages, each
with 5 data streams, corresponding to the selected outliers
and ranked them using the scale {5: Most important, 1: Least
important}. We had one control stream in each web page
to measure internal consistency. Using the ranky package
[25], we found that respondents demonstrated internal con-
sistency with high Spearman correlation (0.85 ± 0.27) and
low Euclidian distance (1.21 ± 0.13) in pairwise rankings
for the control stream. Reviewers also demonstrated reason-
able interrater consistency, with a high Spearman correlation
(0.71) for rankings across respondents.
In Fig. 4, we display mean metrics per stream per person
with a 95 % CI error bar for each combination of ranking
x univariate method. We calculated binary metrics (Accu-
racy, F1, and ROCAUC) using the top-k points as the pos-
itive class, where k is the number of streams with a ranked
outlier per person, and ranking metrics (Swap Correlation
(higher is better) and Hamming Distance (lower is better))
by using the respondent’s absolute ranking.
Our results show that, of all combinations, Outshines
x EWMA scores best match the experts for these standard
metrics. For example, the mean AUC of the Outshines x
EWMA combination is 0.95 vs. 0.78 from the next best
combination (Outshines x FlaSH). Similarly, Outshines x
EWMA has the highest mean correlation at 0.73 vs. the next
highest from any other ranking method (Sibling x DL) at
0.13. Outshines also performed well with other univariate
methods - Outshines x FlaSH is always the second best per-
forming combination. After Outshines, the second best per-
forming ranking method is Sibling ranking, which typically
has the third-best performance (usually Sibling x EWMA).
6.2
Evaluation 2: Outshines’ Deployed Per-
formance
Experts in Delphi have used Outshines in their daily out-
lier review process since April 2023. First, they receive the
Outshines scores y(d) for all recently updated data. Sec-
ond, they review the top 20-25 highest ranking points and
record any outliers worth investigating. Then, they investi-
gate these points by analyzing patterns in the national, par-
ent, sibling, or child streams. Afterward, they meet with the
research team weekly to discuss any findings.
A. Quantitative Results: Between July 10-August 5,
the daily deployment data volume from 55 currently updated
indicators was 3.5 million ± 280k points. Applying Out-
shines x EWMA over this data volume took 123.44±189.16

Jul 16
2023
Jul 23
Jul 30
Aug 6
0
0.5
1
1.5
Rate of Events Identified
Events/Minute
Baseline
Figure 5: Experts can identify outliers worth investigating
more quickly with Outshines.
minutes per day on production hardware (3.3GHz Intel
Core i7 machine with Pop!OS, Python3.10), and the num-
ber of ties generated over this data using Outshines rank-
ing (21 ± 5.5) were much fewer than with Sibling ranking
(14k ± 1.7k).
The most important metric for Delphi was how quickly
experts identified outliers worth investigating (events) com-
pared to a baseline from volunteers who met weekly to man-
ually review the data without an outlier detection method.
As per their meeting notes, volunteers found 0-1 outliers
worth investigating in this baseline every 30 minutes (0.033
Events/Minute). Fig. 5 shows that our combination of Out-
shines x EWMA increased the rate of expert event iden-
tification (0.43 ± 0.14 events, which is an improvement
of 9.13 ± 2.26x over the baseline), as determined by self-
reported review time and the number of outliers marked
for investigation. Further, the average number of outliers
marked daily with Outshines, 6, far exceeds baseline efforts
of 0-1 outliers during manual review.
Additionally, for one week, experts first reviewed 10 ran-
dom maximally tied points from Sibling ranking and then
the top 10 data points from Outshines ranking for a more
direct comparison between these ranking methods. In this
evaluation, experts found 4.02x as many outliers using Out-
shines than Sibling ranking and at 3.96 ± 1.27x the rate.
B. Qualitative Results: Outshines provided Delphi’s
first ever insight into outlier data points worth investigating
on a large scale. Experts preferred conducting a manual re-
view to analyzing a random sample of thousands of outliers,
like those produced by Sibling or Threshold ranking. This
means that Outshines was the only ranking method that Del-
phi could deploy in practice! Experts also felt that the feed-
back cycle with the research team was crucial in staving al-
gorithm aversion [7], which occurs when humans no longer
trust an algorithm output (and would prefer manual review).
These iterations ensured that the tailored EWMA combina-
tion matched expert needs (which Outshines scaled) and will
continue to be useful as Delphi curates new data.
7
Conclusion
Informative outlier rankings enable disease control experts
to analyze large-scale public health streams. We modeled
this problem as a new task of ranking test statistics output
from tailored univariate outlier detection methods (multi-
stream outlier ranking). Our method, Outshines, uses hi-
erarchical relationships in data streams and modified ex-
treme value analysis for this task. Our expert evaluations
and performance experiments show that Outshines outper-
forms other ranking methods on traditional metrics. Its de-
ployed performance also met experts’ needs by enabling
them to identify outliers worth investigating 9.1x faster than
the baseline. As public health data volumes grow, Outshines
provides experts with a scalable, flexible, and accurate way
to find the most important outliers quickly.
Acknowledgements:
This work was supported by a co-
operative agreement funded solely by CDC/HHS under fed-
eral award identification number U01IP001121, “Delphi In-
fluenza Forecasting Center of Excellence” and by the by the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. DGE1745016 and DGE2140739. The con-
tents do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor an
endorsement by, CDC/HHS/NSF or the U.S. Government.
