Can Computers Create Art?
Aaron Hertzmann
Adobe Research∗
May 9, 2018
Abstract
This essay discusses whether computers, using Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), could create
art. First, the history of technologies that automated aspects of art is surveyed, including
photography and animation. In each case, there were initial fears and denial of the technol-
ogy, followed by a blossoming of new creative and professional opportunities for artists.
The current hype and reality of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tools for art making is then dis-
cussed, together with predictions about how AI tools will be used. It is then speculated
about whether it could ever happen that AI systems could be credited with authorship of
artwork. It is theorized that art is something created by social agents, and so computers
cannot be credited with authorship of art in our current understanding. A few ways that
this could change are also hypothesized.
1
Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) research has made staggering advances recently, including many
publicly-visible developments in web search, image recognition, conversational agents, and
robotics. These developments have stoked fear about Artiﬁcial Intelligence’s effect on many
aspects of society. In the context of art, news media hype presents new image and video cre-
ation algorithms as if they are automating the creation of art. Perhaps they will empower
everyday users while putting artists out of work... and, while they’re at it, rob us of our human-
ity?
Beyond the hype, confusion about how technology inﬂuences art pervades serious discus-
sions. Professional artists often are concerned that computers might put them out of their jobs
[50] — a concern I’ve heard for decades. Some practitioners present their algorithms as them-
selves, potentially, artists [10, 22, 61], as do some journalists [53, 19, 54]. And, I was recently
∗This essay expresses my own opinions and not those of my employer. This is a preprint version of an
essay to appear in the journal Arts, Special Issue on The Machine as Artist (for the 21st Century) ( http:
//www.mdpi.com/journal/arts/special_issues/Machine_Artist ).
1
arXiv:1801.04486v6  [cs.AI]  8 May 2018

contacted by a prominent social psychologist who, inspired by recent results with neural net-
works, wished to conduct experiments to assess whether ordinary people might be willing to
buy artwork made by a computer, and, if so, why. It was assumed that computers were already
happily making their own artwork.
On the other hand, when I have informally asked friends or colleagues the question of
whether computers can create art, the answer is sometimes a decisive “No.” Art requires human
intent, inspiration, a desire to express something. Thus, by deﬁnition, there is no such thing as
art created by a computer... why would anyone worry? The concepts of art and inspiration are
often spoken of in mystical terms, something special and primal beyond the realm of science
and technology; as if humans can only create art because only humans have “souls.” Surely,
there should be a more scientiﬁc explanation.
In this essay, I tackle the question of “Can Computers Create Art?” This might seem like
a simple question. Sometimes people ask it as a question about technological capabilities,
like asking if a new car can go 100 miles per hour. For this sort of question, someone who
understands the technology ought to be able to give a simple yes-or-no answer. But it is not
given that any computer will ever be widely considered as an artist. To date, there is already
a rich body of computer-generated art, and, in all cases, the work is credited to the human
artist(s) behind the tools, such as the authors or users of the software — and this might never
change.
A more precise statement of this essay’s question is: “Could a piece of computer software
ever be widely credited as the author of an artwork? What would this require?” This is a
question of the psychology and philosophy of art; I do not describe the existing technology in
much detail. I also discuss the related question of “Will AI put artists out of jobs?” and, more
generally, of whether AI will be beneﬁcial to art and artists.
Before directly addressing these questions, I discuss the history and current state of automa-
tion for art. I begin with some historical perspective: previous moments in history when new
technologies automated image and ﬁlm creation, particularly the invention of photography. In
each case, we see that these new technologies caused fears of displacing artists, when, in fact,
the new technology both created new opportunities for artists while invigorating traditional
media.
I argue that new technologies beneﬁt art and artists, creating new tools and modes of ex-
pression, and new styles of expression. Sadly, art and science are often viewed as being sep-
arate, or, even, in opposition [64]. Yet, technological development stimulates so much of the
continued vitality of art, and new artistic technologies create new job opportunities. Our new
AI technologies follow this trend, and will for the forseeable future: new AI algorithms will
provide new tools for expression and transform our art and culture in positive ways, just as so
many other technologies have in the past.
Computers do not create art, people using computers create art. Despite many decades of
procedural and computer-generated art, there has never been a computer widely accepted as the
author of an artwork. To date, all “computer-generated art” is the result of human invention,
software development, tweaking, and other kinds of direct control and authorship. We credit
the human artist as author, acknowledging that the human is always the mastermind behind the
2

work, and that the computer is a simple tool.
I then discuss whether this could ever change: would we ever agree to assign authorship to a
computer? I argue that artistic creation is primarily a social act, an action that people primarily
perform as an interaction with other humans in society. This implies that computers cannot
create art, just as people do not give gifts to their coffeemakers or marry their cars. Conversely,
any human can make art, because we humans are social creatures. However, the boundaries of
art are ﬂuid, and, someday, better AI could come to be viewed as true social agents. I discuss
this and other scenarios where AI algorithms could come to be accepted as artists, along with
some of the dangers of too eagerly accepting software as artists.
This essay expresses my point of view, as someone who has developed various kinds of
technology for art, has followed the development of new technologies affecting art and culture
over the years, and, in a few small instances, exhibited my own work as artworks. I have
written it in a style that is meant to be accessible to a general audience, since these are topics
that many kinds of people care about.
2
History and Current Practice
Before making general claims about how computer tools relate to art, I begin by ﬁrst describing
several useful historical examples, including the inventions of photography, ﬁlm, and computer
animation. These examples show previous situations in which a new technology appeared
poised to displace artists, but, in reality, provided new opportunities and roles for artists. I also
discuss how procedural art and computer art employs automation. In so many of these ﬁelds,
outsiders view the computer or the technology as doing the work of creativity. Yet, in each of
these cases, the human artist or artists behind the work are the true authors of the work.
I argue that, throughout history, technology has expanded creative and professional oppor-
tunities for artists dramatically, by providing newer and more powerful tools for artists. The
advent of new technologies often causes fears of displacement among traditional artists. In
fact, these new tools ultimately enable new artistic styles and inject vitality into art forms that
might otherwise grow stale. These new tools also make art more accessible to wider sections
of society, both as creators and as consumers. These trends are particularly visible in the past
two centuries since the Industrial Revolution.
2.1
How photography became an artform
“From today, painting is dead!” — Paul Delaroche, painter, at a demonstration of the da-
guerreotype in 18391
For lessons from the past about AI and art, perhaps no invention is more signiﬁcant than
photography.2 Prior to the invention of photography, realistic images of the world could only be
produced by artists. In today’s world, we are so swamped with images that it is hard to imagine
1The historical information from this section is distilled from two texts: Scharf [60] and Rosenblum [57].
2This connection has been made previously [34, 1], but I explore it much more thoroughly here.
3

just how special and unique it must have felt to see a skillfully-executed realistic painting. The
technical skills of realism were inseparable from other creative aspects. This changed when
photography automated the task of producing images of the real world.
In 1839, the ﬁrst two commercially-practical photographic processes were invented: Louis-
Jacques-Mand´e Daguerre’s dagguereotype, and William Henry Fox Talbot’s negative-positive
process. They were mainly presented as ways to produce practical records of the world. Of the
two, the daguerreotype was more popular for several decades, because Talbot’s process was
restricted by patents. Improvements to Talbot’s method eventually made the daguerreotype
obsolete and evolved into modern ﬁlm processes.
Portraiture was a main driver for early adoption. Then, as today, people enjoyed possessing
pictures of their friends, loved-ones, and ancestors. Portrait painting was only available to
aristocrats and the very wealthy. In the 18th century, several inexpensive alternatives were
developed, such as the silhouette, a representation of an individual’s outline (Figure 1(a)),
typically hand-cut by an artisan out of black paper. The daguerreotype offered an economical
way to create a realistic portrait (Figure 1(b)). It was very slow and required locking the
subject’s head in place with a head brace for several minutes, while the subject tightly gripped
their chair, so as not to move their ﬁngers. Nonetheless, numerous daguerreotype studios arose
and became commonplace as technologies improved, and many portraitists switched to this
new technology. By 1863, a painter-photographer named Henri Le Secq said “One knows that
photography has harmed painting considerably, and has killed portraiture especially, once the
livelihood of the artist.” Photography largely replaced most older forms of portraiture, such as
the silhouette, and no one seems to particularly regret this loss. As much as I appreciate the
mystery and beauty at looking at old etchings and portraits, I’d rather use my mobile phone
camera for my own pictures than to try to paint them by hand.
Another early use for the daguerreotype was to produce souvenirs for tourists: by 1850,
daguerreotypes of Roman ruins completely replaced the etchings and lithographs that tourists
had previously purchased. As the technology improved, photography became indispensable as
a source of records for engineering projects and disappearing architectural ruins, as well as for
documentary purposes, such as Matthew Brady’s photographs of the horrors of the American
civil war.
“Is photography art?” This question was debated for many decades, coalescing into three
main positions. Many people believed that photography could not be art, because it was made
by a mechanical device rather than by human creativity. Many artists were dismissive of pho-
tography, and saw it as a threat to “real art.” For example, the poet Charles Baudelaire wrote,
in a review of the Salon of 1859: “If photography is allowed to supplement art in some of its
functions, it will soon supplant or corrupt it altogether, thanks to the stupidity of the multitude
which is its natural ally.” A second view was that photography could be useful to real artists,
such as for reference, but should not be considered as equal to drawing and painting. Finally,
a third group, relating photography to established forms like etching and lithography, felt that
photography could eventually be as signiﬁcant an art form as painting.
Photography ultimately had a profound and unexpected effect on painting. Painters’ mimetic
abilities had been improving over the centuries. Many painters of the 19th century, such as the
4

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) A traditional silhouette portrait. (b) Daguerreotype portrait of Abraham Lincoln,
1846. Photographic techniques like this completely displaced previous portraiture techniques.
Figure 2: The Unhappy Painter, by Theodor Hosemann, 1843, satirizes the painter, a victim of
progress, made obsolete by a daguerreotype.
5

Pre-Raphaelites like John Everett Millais and Neoclassicists like Ingres, painted depictions of
the world with dazzling realism, more than had ever been seen before. However, cameras
became cheaper, lighter, and easier to use, and grew widespread among both amateurs and
professionals. Realistic photographs became commonplace by the end of the 19th century. If
photorealism could be reduced to a mechanical process, then what is the artist’s role?
This question drove painters away from visual realism toward different forms of abstrac-
tion. James McNeill Whistler’s Tonalist movement created atmospheric, moody scenes; he
wrote: “The imitator is a poor kind of creature. If the man who paints only the tree, or the
ﬂower, or other surface he sees before him were an artist, the king of artists would be the pho-
tographer. It is for the artist to do something beyond this.” The Impressionists, who sought to
capture the perceptions of scenes, were likely inﬂuenced by the “imperfections” of early pho-
tographs. In contrast, Symbolists and post-Impressionist artists moved away from perceptual
realism altogether. Edvard Munch wrote “I have no fear of photography as long as it cannot be
used in heaven and in hell. ... I am going to paint people who breathe, feel, love, and suffer.”
Vincent Van Gogh, describing his artistic breakthroughs around 1888, wrote to his brother:
“You must boldly exaggerate the effects of either harmony or discord which colors produce. It
is the same thing in drawing — accurate drawing, accurate color, is perhaps not the essential
thing to aim at, because the reﬂection of reality in a mirror, if it could be caught, color and all,
would not be a picture at all, no more than a photograph.” Photography continued to inﬂuence
modern art of the 20th century; one can infer a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of ´Etienne-Jules Marey’s
multiple-exposure photography on Futurism and Cubism, e.g., in Duchamp’s Nude Descending
A Staircase.
It seems likely, in fact, that photography was one of the major catalysts of the Modern Art
movement: its inﬂuence led to decades of vitality in the world of painting, as artists were both
inspired by photographic images and pushed beyond realism.
Meanwhile, the Pictorialist movement, begun around 1885, was an attempt to ﬁrmly es-
tablish photography as an art form. Pictorialists introduced much more artistic control over
the photographs, often using highly-posed subjects as in classical painting, and manipulating
their images in the darkroom. Many of their works had a hazy, atmospheric look, similar to
Tonalism, that softened the realism of high-quality photography. They seemed to be deliber-
ately mimicking the qualities of the ﬁne art painting of the time, and today much of their work
seems rather affected. They pursued various strategies toward legitimization of their work as
art form, such as the organization of photographic societies, periodicals, and juried photog-
raphy exhibitions [67]. Their works and achievements made it harder and harder to deny the
artistic contributions of photography; culminating in the “Buffalo Show,” organized by Alfred
Stieglitz at the Albright Gallery in Buffalo, NY, the ﬁrst photography exhibition at an American
art museum, in 1910. Photography was ﬁrmly established as an art, and free to move beyond
the pretensions of Pictorialism.
This story provides several lessons that are directly relevant for AI as an artistic tool. At
ﬁrst, photography, like AI, was seen by many as non-artistic, because it was a mechanical
process. Some saw photography as a threat and argued against its legitimacy. Photography did
displace old technologies that had fulﬁlled non-artistic functions, such as portraiture’s social
6

Figure 3: The interplay of painting and early photography. (a) By the 19th century, Western
painters had achieved dazzling levels of realism. (b) Early cameras took low-quality (though
evocative) pictures. This daguerreotype took over ten minutes to expose. (c) However, camera
technology steadily improved, capturing greater and greater realism, in much faster exposures.
(d) This challenged painters to create works that were not about hyper-realistic depiction, such
as Whistler’s Tonalist Nocturne. (e) The Pictorialist photographers attempted to establish pho-
tography as an art form by mimicking the styles and abstraction of painting. Works: (a)
Ophelia, John Everett Millais, 1851 (b) Boulevard du Temple, Daguerre, 1838; (c) Portrait
of Sarah Bernhardt, F´elix Tournachon (Nadar), 1864; (d) Nocturne in Blue and Gold: Old
Battersea Bridge, James MacNeill Whistler, c. 1872-1875; (e) Morning, Clarence H. White,
1908.
7

function. Some artists enthusiastically embraced the new technology, and began to explore its
potential. As the technology improved, and became more widespread over nearly a century,
artists learned to better control and express themselves with the new technology, until there was
no more real controversy over the status of photography. The new technology made image-
making much more accessible to non-experts and hobbyists; today, everyone can experiment
with photography. Furthermore, the new technology breathed new life into the old art form,
provoking it toward greater abstraction. Wherever there is controversy in AI as an artistic tool,
I predict the same trajectory. Eventually, new AI tools will be fully recognized as artists’ tools;
AI tools may stimulate traditional media as well, e.g., the New Aesthetic [66].
2.2
The technology of live-action cinema
The story of ﬁlmmaking and technology has important lessons about how artists and technolo-
gists can work together, each pushing the other further. Most of the early photographers were,
by necessity, both artists and technologists, experimenting with new techniques driven by their
art or to inspire their art. But, in ﬁlm and animation, this interaction has been much more
central to the art form.
The history of ﬁlm is ﬁlled with artist-tinkerers, as well as teams of artists and technolo-
gists. The Lumi`ere Brothers created one of the ﬁrst ﬁlms, a simple recording of workers leaving
their factory, but also experimented with a wide range of camera technologies, color process-
ing, and artistic ways to use them. The stage magician George M´eli`es ﬁlmed fantastical stories
like A Trip to the Moon, employing a wide range of clever in-camera tricks to create delight-
fully inventive and beguiling ﬁlms. Walt Disney employed and pushed new technologies of
sound and color recording, and drove other innovations along the way, such as the multiplane
camera. Many of Orson Welles’ innovative ﬁlm techniques were made possible by new cam-
era lenses employed by his cinematographer Gregg Toland. The introduction of more portable
camera and audio equipment enabled the experiments of the French New Wave, who, in turn,
inﬂuenced young American directors like Francis Ford Coppola and George Lucas. George
Lucas’ team for Star Wars was an early developer of many new visual effects on a shoestring
budget (think of Ben Burtt hitting telephone guy-wires to create the “blaster” sound effect), as
well as an early innovation in digital ﬁlm editing and compositing [59]. Digital and computer
graphics technology, have, obviously, revolutionized ﬁlm storytelling since then, with directors
like Michel Gondry and James Cameron pushing the technology further into unforeseen direc-
tions. In each case, we see technologies rapidly adopted by directors to create new storytelling
techniques and styles, transforming the medium over and over.
2.3
3D computer animation: a collaboration
3D computer animation as an artform was pioneered by Pixar Animation Studios, and that
success is due to the close collaboration of artists and engineers [55]. It all began with Ed
Catmull, an animation enthusiast who received a PhD in computer science in 1974. In his
thesis, he invented several core techniques that every major 3D computer graphics system uses
8

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4: Technological developments in the art of ﬁlmmaking: (a) the ﬁrst captured ﬁlm, of
workers leaving the Lumiere Brothers’ factory (1895), (b) George M´eli`es’ 1902 A Trip to The
Moon ﬁlmed like a stage play but with fantastical special effects, (c) Citizen Kane, which used
numerous experimental camera and lens effects to tell the story.
today. During his time in graduate school, he quietly set a goal for himself: to make the world’s
ﬁrst computer-animated ﬁlm [5]. Consequently, he founded the Graphics Group at Lucasﬁlm
Computer Division, and hired a team of brilliant engineers to invent computer systems to be
used for ﬁlm-making. However, none of this group could animate, that is, bring a character
to life through movement. Hence, they recruited John Lasseter, an animator trained deeply in
the Disney tradition. Through tight collaboration between Lasseter and the technical staff, they
were able to invent new technologies and discover together how computer animation could
start to become its own art form [43]. This group, led by Catmull and Alvy Ray Smith, spun
out as Pixar, and, over the following years, invented numerous technical innovations aimed at
answering the needs set out by Pixar’s artists; in turn, the artists were inspired by these new
tools, and pushed them to new extremes. One of their mantras was “Art challenges technology,
technology inspires art” [5].
Pixar, by design, treats artists and engineers both as crucial to the company’s success and
minimizes any barriers between the groups. When I worked there during a sabbatical, despite
my technical role, I had many energizing conversations with different kinds of artists, attended
many lectures on art and storytelling, sketched at an open life drawing session, watched a per-
formance of an employee improv troupe, and participated in many other social and educational
events that deliberately mixed people from different parts of the company. This is the culture
that, though it still has some ﬂaws to address, achieved so many years of technical and creative
innovation, and, ultimately, commercial and artistic success.
Computer animation is another technology that scared traditional artists. In the early days
before they found Lasseter, the Lucasﬁlm Graphics Group made many attempts to interest
Disney animators in their work [55]. Smith later said: “Animators were frightened of the
computer. They felt that it was going to take their jobs away. We spent a lot of time telling
people, No, it’s just a tool-it doesn’t do the creativity!’ That misconception was everywhere”
[52]. It is a common misconception that computer animation just amounts to the computer
solving everything; a programmer presses a button and the characters just move on their own.
In reality, computer animation is extraordinarily labor-intensive, requiring the skills of talented
artists (especially animators) for almost every little detail. Character animation is an art form
of extreme skill and talent, requiring laborious effort using the same fundamental skills of
9

performance — of bringing a character to life through pure movement — as in conventional
animation [43].
Traditional cel animation jobs did not last at Disney, for various reasons. Disney Feature
Animation underwent a renaissance in the early ’90s, starting with The Little Mermaid. Then,
following some changes in management, the Disney animation began a slow, sad decline. After
releasing duds like Brother Bear and Home on the Range, management shut down all tradi-
tional 2D animation at Disney, and converted the studios entirely to 3D computer animation.
Many conventional animators were retrained in 3D animation, but Disney’s ﬁrst 3D animation,
Chicken Little was still a dud. Following Disney’s acquisition of Pixar several years later, they
revived Disney’s beloved 2D animation productions. The result, a charming and enjoyable
ﬁlm called The Princess and The Frog, performed so-so at the box ofﬁce, and, moreover, the
animators’ creative energy was focused on the newer 3D art form [5]. Today, traditional 2D
animation at Disney is dead.3 Today, computer animation is a thriving industry, and it thrives
in many more places than cel animation ever did: at many different ﬁlm studios, in visual ef-
fects for live-action ﬁlms, in video games, television studios, web startups, independent web
studios, and many more. There are now more types of opportunities for animators than ever
before. The story here is not the destruction of jobs, but the evolution and growth of an art
form through technology. This is another story that contradicts the popular notion of art and
technology operating in conﬂict, when, in fact, the opposite is usually true.
2.4
Procedural artwork
In the art world, there is a long tradition of procedural artwork. Jean Arp created artworks
governed by laws of chance in the 1910s (or so he claimed), and, beginning in the 1950s,
John Cage used random rules to compose music. The term “Generative Art” appears to have
originated in the 1960s. Sol LeWitt’s wall drawings are provided as lists of precise instructions;
people are still drawing new versions of his paintings after his death [11]. Starting in the 1970’s,
classically-trained painter Harold Cohen began exhibiting paintings generated by a program he
wrote called AARON [6]. Since the 1980s, many current artists, such as Karl Sims, Scott
Snibbe, Golan Levin, Scott Draves, and Jason Salavon, create abstract artworks by writing
computer programs that generate either static images, or create interactive artistic experiences
and installation works (Figure 5). In Sims’ and Draves’ work, the artwork “evolves” according
to audience input. The popularity of the Processing computer language for artists speaks to the
growth of procedural art.
In each of these cases, despite the presence of procedural, emergent, and/or crowdsourced
elements, the human behind it is credited as the author of the artwork, and it would seem
perverse to suggest otherwise. The human has done all of the creative decision-making around
the visual style, of designing a framework and process, of testing and evaluating alternative
algorithms, and so on.
3Traditional animation styles are still vital in countries like Japan and France that, unlike America, do not
believe that animation is just for kids. Even so, their visual styles have evolved considerably due to computer
technology.
10

(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Procedural artworks in the ﬁne art world of galleries and art museums. (a) Electric
Sheep, by Scott Draves, evolves dazzling procedural abstract animations based on thousands of
votes. “sheep” by BrothaLewis. (b) The Top Grossing Film of All Time, 1 x 1 (2000) by Jason
Salavon, shows the average color of each frame of the movie Titanic.
2.5
State of the art in computer science research
Recent developments in computational artistic image synthesis are quite spectacular. But they
should not be mistaken for AI artists.
Non-Photorealistic Rendering (NPR) is a subﬁeld of computer graphics research [58] that
I have worked in for many years. NPR research develops new algorithms and artistic tools
for creating images inspired by the look of a conventional media, such as painting or drawing.
Paul Haeberli’s groundbreaking 1990 paper [32] introduced a paint program that began with a
user-selected photograph. Whenever the user clicked on the canvas (initially blank), the system
placed a brush stroke with color and orientation based on the photograph. In this way, a user
could quickly create a simple painting without any particular technical skill (Figure 6(a)). In a
follow-up paper, Pete Litwinowcz automated the process entirely, by placing brush strokes on
a grid [45]. My own ﬁrst research paper arose from experimenting with modiﬁcations to his
algorithm: the method that I came up with creates long, curved strokes, beginning with large
strokes that were then reﬁned by small details [33] (Figure 6(b)). The algorithm was inspired
by my experience with real painting, and the way artists often start from a rough sketch and
then reﬁne it.
This type of artistic algorithm design reﬂects the majority of computer graphics research
in this area [35, 58]. The algorithms are automated, but we can explain in complete detail
why the algorithm works and the intuitions about artistic process it embodies. This mathemat-
ical modeling of artistic representation continues the investigations begun in the Renaissance
with Filippo Brunelleschi’s invention of linear perspective, a viewpoint I have written about
elsewhere [36].
At some point, I found it very difﬁcult to embody richer intuitions about artistic process
into source code. Instead, inspired by recent results in computer vision [21], I began to develop
a method for working from examples. My collaborators and I published this method in 2001,
calling it “Image Analogies” [37]. We presented the work as learning artistic style from exam-
ple. But the “learning” here was quite shallow. It amounted to rearranging the pixels of the
source artwork in a clever way, but not generalizing to radically new scenes or style (Figure
11

(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Painterly rendering algorithms that process an input photograph, using hand-coded
rules and algorithms. (a) Paul Haeberli’s interactive painting system [32]. (b) My automatic
painting system [33] processes a photograph without user input aside from selecting some
parameter settings.
7). (A related style transfer method was published concurrently by Efros and Freeman [20].)
Since then, other researchers have improved the method substantially, making it much more
robust [24].
In 2016, Leon Gatys and his colleagues published a new breakthrough in this space, Neural
Style Transfer [25]. Based on recent advances in neural networks, their method transfers certain
neural network correlation statistics from a painting to a photograph, thus producing a new
painting of the input photograph (Figure 8). The method is still “shallow” in a sense — there
is no “understanding” of the photograph or the artwork — but the method seems to be more
robust than the original Image Analogies algorithm. This paper led to a ﬂurry of excitement
and new applications, including the popular Prisma app and Facebook’s Live Video stylization,
as well as many new research papers improving upon these ideas. This work is ongoing today.
Another development which received considerable attention in 2015 was the invention of
DeepDreams by Mordvintsev et al. [48], who, developing a visualization tool for neural net-
works, discovered that a simple activation excitation procedure produced striking, hallucina-
tory imagery of a type we had never seen before. There are many other current projects, par-
ticularly those around Generative Adversarial Networks [29] and Project Magenta at Google
[46], that also show promise as new artistic tools. For example, Figure 9 shows images that we
generated by visualizing trends learned by a neural network from a large collection of artistic
images in different styles. A variety of related images are produced by Creative Adversarial
Networks [22]; it is a visual style that seems familiar but not the same as what we are famil-
12

Figure 7: Our Image Analogies algorithm [37], which stylizes a photograph in the style of a
given artwork; in this case, Van Gogh’s Starry Night over the Rhˆone.
Figure 8: The Neural Style Transfer Algorithm [25], which stylizes a photograph in the style of
a given artwork; in this case, Van Gogh’s The Starry Night. This algorithm has led to numerous
new apps and research in stylization.
13

Figure 9: Images that we generated using a neural network trained on different subsets of a
database of artistic imagery [74]. Each one is meant to typify a single stylistic category or a
medium, though the biases of the convolutional neural network architecture are also evident.
iar with (and is probably driven, in part, by the biases of the convolutional neural network
representation).
In each of these cases, the artworks are produced by a human-deﬁned procedure, and the
human is the author of the imagery.
2.6
Artiﬁcial Intelligence is not intelligent
Unfortunately, there has been a considerable amount of media hype around AI techniques. In
the news media, algorithms are often anthropomorphized, as if they have the same conscious-
ness as humans (e.g., [75]), and sometimes they are described as artists [53, 19, 54]. In fact,
we do not really know what consciousness is (despite many theories), or what it would mean
to embody it in an algorithm.
Today, the most-successful AI and machine learning algorithms are best thought of as glo-
riﬁed data-ﬁtting procedures [4]. That is, these algorithms are basically like ﬁtting a curve to a
set of datapoints, except with very sophisticated ways to ﬁt high-dimensional curves to millions
of datapoints. When we as researchers speak of “training” an algorithm, or an algorithm that
“learns,” it is easy to misinterpret this as being the same thing as human learning. But these
words mean quite different things in the two contexts. In general, “training” a model to learn a
task involves careful human effort to formulate the problem, acquire appropriate data, and test
different formulations. It is laborious and requires considerable expertise and experimentation.
When a new task needs to be solved, the human starts over.
Compared to human intelligence, these algorithms are brittle and bespoke. For example,
image recognition algorithms have undergone breathtaking breakthroughs in the past decade,
are now widely used in consumer products. Yet they often fail on inputs that suggest bizarre
misunderstandings; the existence and robustness of adversarial examples [69] and procedurally-
14

evolved images [49] demonstrates that these algorithms have not really learned anything like
human-level understanding. They are like tourists in a foreign country that can repeat and
combine phrases from the phrasebook, but not truly understand the foreign language or cul-
ture. These systems have no autonomy except within the narrow scope for which they were
trained, and typically fail-safes must be put in place as well, e.g., Google Photos no longer
classiﬁes anything as a “gorilla” because of one high-proﬁle failure [63].
There are some fascinating parallels between human learning and machine learning, and it
does seem likely that humans are, in some way, optimized by evolutionary principles [2, 41,
70, 30]. But going from these high-level analogies to actual machine intelligence is a problem
for which the solution is not even on the horizon.
3
How technology changes art
Based on this history, I now make several speciﬁc claims about how technology changes art.
Far from replacing artists, new technologies become new tools for artists, invigorating and
changing art and culture. These claims apply equally to current developments in AI as they did
to previous developments like photography and animation.
3.1
Algorithms are artists’ tools
“my watercolor teacher used to say: let the medium do it. true that — so my sketch pro-
vides the foundation and then the network does it thing; i don’t ﬁght, just constantly tweak the

In every technology that we currently employ — whether photography, ﬁlm, or software
algorithm — the technologies and algorithms we use are basic tools, just like brushes and
paint.4 The same is true for the new AI-based algorithms that are appearing. They are not
always predictable, and the results are often surprising and delightful — but the same could be
said for the way watercolor ﬂows on the page. There is no plausible sense in which current
systems reﬂect “true” artiﬁcial intelligence: there is always a human behind the artwork.
Applying the same standard to the current research in neural networks and neural style
transfer, it would seem equally perverse to assign authorship of their outputs to the software
itself. The DeepDream software was authored by a human; another human then selected an
input image, and experimented with many parameter settings, running the software over and
over until obtaining good results. Indeed, in a recent art exhibition meant to promote these
methods and their exploration [71] (Figure 10), human artists were credited for each of the
individual works.
4This view reﬂects, I think, the conventional wisdom in the computer graphics research ﬁeld, which is my
research background. This ﬁeld has always had close ties with certain artistic communities, especially computer
animation and visual effects, and, based on this experience, the ﬁeld is often resistant to attempts to automate
creative tasks. In contrast, artiﬁcial intelligence researchers use terminology much more aspirationally, historically
using words like “intelligence,” “learning,” and “expert systems” in ways that far simpler than the human versions
of these things.
15

Figure 10: Neural network art exhibition at Gray Area in San Francisco
The same process of selection of tools and inputs, adjusting settings and even modifying
code, and iterating until a desirable output is produced, occurs in all current and forseeable
computer artworks. Computer-generated artworks result from considerable time and effort
from human artists, from conception of the idea, to painstakingly guiding the execution, to
selecting from among the outputs.
There have been a few cases where AI algorithms have been presented as artists or potential
artists [10, 61, 19, 53, 54]. For the above reasons, I think this claim misunderstands the nature
of procedural art.
In short, in our present understanding, all art algorithms, including methods based on
machine learning, are tools for artists; they are not themselves artists.
3.2
New technology helps art stay vital
Rather than being afraid of the new technologies, we should be enthusiastic about the new
artworks that they will enable artists to produce. When we think of art of having external
inﬂuences, we normally think of social or political inﬂuences, but ignore the effect of new tools.
In contrast, I argue that, especially from 19th century onwards, technological developments
have played a pivotal role in advancing art, in keeping it vital and injecting fresh ideas. The
stories I gave of photography and cinema include many examples of this. However, the effect
is far more widespread.
One of the most important breakthroughs in the history of Western art was the invention of
oil paint by Flemish painters such as Jan van Eyck in the 15th century [13]. Previously, painting
had been done primarily with tempera, which lacks subtle coloration, and fresco, which was
very cumbersome to work with. Oil paint had existed in some form for centuries, but van
Eyck and others found new techniques that gave them a very practical new medium. It was
fast-drying and allowed rich colors and tones, sharp edges, and hard surfaces. The rich light
and color that we associate with the Northern Renaissance and the Italian Renaissance are due
to this technology (Figure 11).
In each decade since the 1950s, many of our culturally-important works used technology
that had only been invented within the previous ten years. For example, most technology used
in today’s feature ﬁlms did not exist ten years ago (e.g., widespread use of HD digital cameras;
16

(a)
(b)
Figure 11: The development of the oil painting technology changed painting as an art form.
(a) Fresco painting by Michaelangelo on the Sistine Chapel (ca. 1508). The fresco process
was difﬁcult and achieved limited tonal range. Today, fresco is defunct as a medium. (b) Oil
painting by Jan van Eyck for the Ghent Alterpiece (ca. 1430). Much richer colors and lighting
are possible with oil paint.
facial performance capture); the same goes for artworks using smartphones and crowdsourcing;
artworks involving white LEDs and Arduino controllers; DJs performing on stage behind their
laptops; and so on. Even the most v´erit´e-seeming romantic comedies frequently involve recent
digital video editing and digital backdrops.
Conversely, artistic styles that fail to change become stale and lose their cultural relevance;
the adoption and exploration of new technology is one of the ways that art stays vibrant. For
example, the introduction of synthesizer music into 1980s pop music created a new sound that
was exciting and modern. The sound diversiﬁed as the tools improved, until grunge became
popular and made the 80s synthpop sound seem superﬁcial and old-fashioned. Nowadays,
a recent revival of 70s and 80s instruments by bands like Daft Punk and LCD Soundsystem
seems most exciting at times when they are creating new types of music using old instruments.
In contrast, the swing music revival of the 1990s never went anywhere (from bands like Big Bad
Voodoo Daddy and Squirrel Nut Zippers) in my opinion, because the bands mimicked classic
styles with classic instruments, without inventing anything particular original themselves.
In each era, radical technological innovations are met by artists with both enthusiasm and
rejection. For example, when the Moog synthesizer became popular, it was adopted by big-
name bands like Emerson, Lake, and Palmer. Other bands felt that twisting knobs to make
music was cheating: Queen’s album covers proudly state that the band did not use synthesizers.
Robert Moog described one New York musician who said of the instrument “This is the end
of the world” [65]. It now seems silly to imagine that people might have ever categorically
objected to synthesized music, or to the scratching and sampling of hip-hop DJs, just as it now
seems silly that people once rejected waltzing, the Impressionists, and the Rite of Spring as
invalid or immoral.
17

Figure 12: Les Paul, inventor the solid-body electric guitar in 1943; Robert Moog, pioneer of
the electronic synthesizer, respectively. Their technologies transformed popular music in ways
they could not have foreseen.
In addition to stimulating professional artists, new tools make art more accessible to larger
portions of society.
Photography was once accessible only to the most determined early
adopters, but has continually become easier, faster, and more compact, to the point where
nearly everyone carries a mobile phone camera in their pocket or purse. The same goes for the
tools of cinematography (from hand-cranked to heavy cameras to Steadicams to handycams to
iPhones), and so on. Modern computers give nearly everyone access to digital equivalents of
darkrooms, mixing studios, painting studios, and so on; these were formerly highly-specialized
technologies requiring laborious effort.
3.3
New technology does not cause net unemployment
Concerns of how technology displaces jobs have been around since at least the 19th century,
when Luddite protesters destroyed mechanical weaving machines, and, in folk songs, John
Henry competed against a steam drilling machine. These fears are real and understandable.
Yet, despite centuries of technological disruption, we do not live in a world of massive unem-
ployment. This is because, as old roles are erased, many more arise in their stead. But these
fears keep recurring, because, at any given time, it is easy to imagine losing speciﬁc jobs but it
requires superhuman imagination to forecast what new opportunities will be created by trans-
formative new technologies. Nowadays, most of us do jobs that would be hard to explain to a
19th century worker.
The real workforce concerns should not be about the technology itself, but whether the eco-
nomic system shares the beneﬁts of new productivity fairly across society versus concentrating
wealth only among the very richest [68] and whether machine learning systems are misused to
magnify existing forms of inequality [51]. When displacements due to new technology occur,
their effects can be eased by social safety nets and better educational foundations (for em-
ployment ﬂexibility and retraining). Conversely, a society which fails to distribute wealth and
economic gains fairly has much bigger problems than just the impact of AI.
Fears of new technology seem to be human nature. I suspect many people view the “nor-
mal” state of things as being how they were when they came of age, and they view any sig-
niﬁcant change as scary. Yet, nearly all of our familiar modern technologies were viewed as
18

threatening by some previous generation.
The fear of human-created life has been with us for a long time. Notably, 18th-century
scientists discovered electricity. As they searched to understand it, they discovered the life-like
effect of galvanism, that the muscles of dead frogs could be stimulated by electrical currents.
Had the secret of life been discovered? This inspired Mary Shelley’s novel Frankenstein; or
The Modern Prometheus, in which an ambitious university student uses modern science to
create new life [62]. Today, the story is vivid and evocative, but, intellectually, we recognize
it as preposterous. The fear of AI is essentially the same irrational fear; SkyNet is Franken-
stein’s monster, but with neural networks as the Promethean spark instead of galvanism.5 At
present, the Terminator’s autonomous AI is only slightly more plausible than its ability to travel
backwards in time.
3.4
New AI will be new tools for artists
Some general trends around the evolution of technology and art seem quite robust. As dis-
cussed above, current AI algorithms are not autonomous creators, and will not be in the fore-
seeable future. They are still just tools, ready for artists to explore and exploit. New develop-
ments in these tools will be enthusiastically adopted by some artists, leading to exciting new
forms and styles that we cannot currently foresee. Novices will have access to new simpli-
ﬁed tools for expression. It is possible that some tasks performed by human artists will fade
out, but these will generally be mechanical tasks that do not require much creativity because
they ﬁll societal functions other than artistic expression. Some traditional arts may fade simply
due to seeming old-fashioned. This is the nature of art: nothing is fresh forever, which is not
to be blamed on technology. Artistic technology is a “imagination ampliﬁer” [8] and better
technology will allow artists to see even further than before.
Aside from general trends, it is hard to make speciﬁc predictions about the art of the future.
Les Paul, who invented the solid-body guitar in the 1940s, himself primarily performed light
pop, country, and showtunes, and could hardly have predicted how the electric guitar would
be used by, say, Led Zeppelin, just as it’s hard to imagine Daguerre predicting Instagram.
More generally, making predictions about how AI technologies might transform society is
very hard because we have so little understanding of what these technologies might actually be
[4]. Even the science ﬁction writers of the 1950s and 1960s completely failed to imagine the
transformative power of the Internet and mobile computing [42]; for them, the computers of
the future would still be room-scale monstrosities that one had to sit in front of to operate. But
they did predict moon colonies and replicants by 2018.
In short, we cannot predict what new inventions and ideas artists will come up with in the
future, but we can predict that they will be amazing, and they will be amazing because they
make use of technology in new, unpredictable ways.
5In fact, Frankenstein is presented as a cautionary tale about the quest for knowledge in general. Victor
Frankenstein tells his story as a warning when he learns that Captain Walton is himself driven by an obsessive
quest for knowledge that is entirely unrelated to Frankenstein’s.
19

4
What is an Artist?
So far, I have described how computer technologies are currently accepted as tools for artists,
not as artists themselves. Why is this? After all, computers can do other human tasks like
speak, search, print, navigate, and, to some extent, drive cars. There are several obvious reasons
why computers don’t make art, including tradition, the incentives involved, and the relatively
predictable nature of existing automation. But, still one could imagine an alternate history in
which some machines or computer programs had already been called artists. I believe there is
a more fundamental reason, which explains not just why this has not happened, but why it is
unlikely to happen anytime soon.
In this section, I theorize about what are the prerequisites for an entity being an artist,
focusing on my hypothesis that art is a social behavior. I will then apply this idea to AI in the
next section. I also explore several alternative hypotheses for what could make an AI as an
artist. Most of these alternative hypotheses identify some attribute of human artists, and then
hypothesize that that attribute is needed for an AI to be an artist.
4.1
Art is social
“What an artist is trying to do for people is bring them closer to something, because of course
art is about sharing: you wouldn’t be an artist if you didn’t want to share an experience, a
thought.” – David Hockney [38]
Why do we create and consume art? I argue that art is primarily a social behavior: art is
about communication and displays between people. For example, people often speak of art as
being about personal expression, which is an act of communication.
Any human can make art, because humans are social creatures. A painter cranking out the
same conventional landscapes for tourists year after year is still considered an artist. A childs
drawing might only be interesting to their family, but its still art.
I am directly inspired by the theory, going back to Charles Darwin, that art-making is an
adaptive product of our biological evolution. Dutton [17] sets out a persuasive argument for
this theory, which I brieﬂy summarize, though I cannot do it justice. Creating art served several
functions for our Pleistocene ancestors. Art-making served as a ﬁtness signal for mating and
sexual selection. Art can also be used as displays of wealth and status. Storytelling, music, and
dance strengthen social bonds within a group. Storytelling additionally plays a very important
role of communicating information that would otherwise be hard to share.
I observe that each of these functions of art is social: art arose as forms of communication,
displays, and sharing between people. Although art takes many different forms in different
cultures today, each of these forms serves one or more of the same basic social functions that
it did in the Pleistocene.
I generalize this theory beyond humans to hypothesize: art is an interaction between social
agents. A “social agent” is anything that has a status akin to personhood; someone worthy
of empathy and ethical consideration. Many of our other behaviors are interactions between
social agents, such as gifts, conversation, and social relationships like friendship, competition,
20

and romance.
In contrast, while we can get emotionally attached to our computers and other possessions,
we feel no real empathy for their needs, and no ethical duty toward them. Possessions can par-
ticipate only in shallow versions of these interactions. For example, we frequently talk about
our possessions with statements like “The brakes on my bicycle were complaining so I gave
it a new pair as a gift and now it’s much happier. I love my bike.” This statement indicates
emotional attachment but not true empathy with the bike’s feelings, despite the anthropomor-
phizing language. We don’t live in a social hierarchy with our possessions: we do not compete
with them for status, or try to impress them. We care about what other people have to say be-
cause we care about other people; we care about what computers have to say only insofar as it
is useful to us. We generally treat conversational agents (like Siri and Alexa) as user interfaces
to software, not like people.
Art-making does also have non-social beneﬁts to the artist. For example, art-making can
help practice skills like dexterity and problem solving. Creating art is often pleasurable or
meditative in itself. But these beneﬁts are secondary to their social beneﬁts: they are not the
reasons that evolution has produced art as a human activity. Similarly, one may also talk or
sing to oneself while alone, but talking and singing are still fundamentally social activities.
Note that the evolutionary argument here is optional; one can discuss whether art is funda-
mentally social without it. But I believe that the evolutionary view of art gives some additional
understanding.
4.2
Non-Human Authors
As we have seen, despite many technological advances, current algorithms are not accepted
as artists. There are a few other existing examples where objects are created by authors or
processes that are not human-driven. These give some support to this theory.
Natural processes.
Natural processes, including landscapes like the Grand Canyon or the
HuangShan Mountains, are not considered art, even though they may be extraordinarily beau-
tiful and change one’s perspective immensely. Beautiful structures made instinctively by ani-
mals, such as honeycombs and coral, are not considered art. This indicates that simply creating
complex and beautiful outputs is not itself sufﬁcient for art, since there is no creative social
communication in these cases.
Animals.
Some higher mammals, including chimpanzees, elephants, and dolphins, have been
trained to paint [14, 17]. Many writers are skeptical of animal-made art. Typically, the animal’s
owner or handler steers the process, letting the animal throw paint on the canvas, then stopping
the painting when they believe it is done, then selecting which works to show; the animals
seem to show no interest in the artwork afterward. Animal artwork has not had any signiﬁcant
cultural impact or popularity; it seems to have been largely the product of media stunts. (Peo-
ple for the Ethical Treatment of Animals have recently tried to claim copyright in favor of a
monkey, but failed [47], as US copyright law only allows humans to claim copyright.)
21

(a)
(b)
Figure 13:
Not art. (a) Beautiful landscapes are not considered art. (b) Pierre Brassau, the
monkey painter. He was part of a 1963 hoax that satirized modern art.
The most interesting aspect of this discussion is not whether animals can create art, but
how we decide. Discussions of whether animal-made artifacts are art are not based on a priori
rules whether animals can be artists. Instead, they are attempts to study the evidence of the
animal’s behavior around the artwork, and, from that, to infer whether the artwork is some
form of inner expression [14], or an artifact that the animal has a special appreciation for [17].
In other words, we are open to the idea of animals creating art, because they can have social
relationships with us. It’s just that we haven’t found any other creature that satisﬁes our criteria
for creating art, whatever they are.
4.3
Judging the work instead
It is tempting to judge whether a computer is an artist based solely on the merits of the work that
it produces. In this hypothesis, whether or not a computer can be an artist is a judgment of the
quality of the work that it produces, independent of the properties of the computer itself. If an
algorithm outputs a continual stream of diverse, stimulating, beautiful, and/or skillful outputs,
without many duds, we might be quite tempted to call this algorithm an artist. The better
computer-generated art becomes, the more we will hear questions about whether computers
are artists.
Skill is clearly not the real requirement for someone or something to be an artist. Any
human can make art, including unskilled amateurs and children. Conversely, computers can
already be programmed to create inﬁnite sequences of dazzling realistic or abstract imagery,
exhibiting technical proﬁciency way beyond the typical human capacity.
I suspect that, when we look at a computer’s output and ask “is this work good enough to
call the computer an artist?”, we are not actually judging the quality of the work per se. Instead,
we are really looking for evidence that the system itself is intelligent, conscious, and feeling:
traits that we associate with social agents. No matter how skillful and surprising a computer’s
output is, we will not accept it as an artist until we infer some sort of social being inside.
22

4.4
An Intent Machine
Another hypothesis is as follows: in the modern art world, the role of the artist is to supply the
“intent” and the “idea” for the work; it is not necessary for the artist to execute on the work,
other than coordinating in its production. For humans, this is clearly true in numerous exam-
ples, such as those in Section 2.4, as well as appropriation works like Duchamp’s Readymades
and Richard Prince’s questionable Instagram reproductions; artists can also employ helpers or
crowdworkers, such as in Scott Draves’ Electric Sheep and Aaron Koblin’s Sheep Market [40].
Consequently, for a computer to be an artist it simply needs to supply an intent.
It is easy to imagine designing a system that creates intent and even coordinates the labor of
producing a work. For example, one could write a simple procedural algorithm to generate very
basic intents (e.g., “portray ominous landscape”), or sample intents from a Recursive Neural
Network trained on artists’ statements scraped from the web. Or the method could randomly
select some news item, photograph, or historical event, and randomly sample some attitude
toward that thing. Starting from this intent, crowdworkers could be used to reﬁne the idea and
convert it into a new image, similar to systems like Soylent [3]. One could also automate steps
of the process, e.g., using GANs [29] to generate entirely new starting images from scratch.
Crowdworkers could also be used to rate and evaluate the outputs of the system, selecting just
the best results and discarding the rest. Final steps of the process could also automatically hire
professional designers, e.g., from sites like Upwork or 99Designs. This system could then run
continuously, generating new images over time (with payment being automatically made to the
crowdworkers involved). Workers could group images with common themes and intents, and
create separate collections around these themes. Artist’s statements could generated around
these themes. The system’s preferences could grow and adapt over time as more data are
gathered or external data streams (e.g., photography blogs) change.
Suppose someone were to build this system, calling it, say, The Intent Machine, and ex-
hibits its work in an art show or gallery. Suppose, moreover, they convinced the curator or
gallery owner to credit The Intent Machine with authorship of the works it had created, but
fully disclosed the procedure by which it worked. Would people credit it as the artist who had
authored its works, or would they say that the system-builder is the real artist here?
I believe that, in general, the consensus would be that the system-builder is the real artist
here, and that this is really an artwork about probing the nature of computer-generated art, or
the nature of the commercial artworld. Note that the procedure used to deﬁne the system is
not fundamentally different than any other procedural computer-generated art algorithm (as in
Sections 2.4 and 2.5). Even if the work itself ended up being quite good, viewers would ask
why it is good, and it is doubtful that the computer’s own contribution would be judged as
signiﬁcant beyond those of the humans involved.
Are artists just “intent machines”? If art is a social act, then the answer is no.
4.5
Creativity, Growth, Responsiveness, and so on
Finally, three related criteria that have intuitive appeal are the notions of creativity, growth, and
responsiveness. They are important for human artists, so perhaps they should be for AI artists
23

as well.
Several authors have proposed energy terms or criteria for creativity [49, 22]. These are
often attempts to express the idea that the system’s output should somehow “surpass” the hu-
man programmer and/or the training data. For example, Colton [9] proposes that we judge the
creativity of a system, in part, by whether the system’s output surprises the system’s author.
I believe that this is too weak a criterion, since many mechanical or algorithmic phenomena
may be surprising to their own discoverer or author at ﬁrst. For example, the basic algorithm
that produces Mandelbrot set images can be speciﬁed in a single sentence,6 yet produces daz-
zling animations of inﬁnite complexity.7 The Mandelbrot set is very surprising and produces
beautiful, unprecedented images, but we do not call its iteration equation creative, or an artist.
All current procedural art systems, such as the Mandelbrot set, have a recognizable style,
and, after awhile, lose their novelty. I believe that the same will be true for systems speciﬁcally
designed with “creativity” objectives [22, 49]. Unlike human artists, these systems do not grow
or evolve over time.
Perhaps an AI artist would need to exhibit some form of growth. For example, Harold
Cohen, the ﬁne-art painter who began, in 1968, to write software to generate art, described the
evolution of his views: “Ten years after [1968], I would have said ‘look, the program is doing
this on its own.’ ... Another ten years on and I would have said ‘the fact that the program is
doing this on its own is the central issue here,’ denoting my belief in the program’s potential
and growing autonomy over the whole business of art-making. ... It was producing complex
images of a high quality and I could have had it go on forever without rewriting a single line of
code. How much more autonomous than that can one get? ... [But] it’s virtually impossible to
imagine a human being in a similar position. The human artist is modiﬁed in the act of making
art. For the program to have been similarly self-modifying would have required not merely that
it be capable of assessing its own output but that it had its own modiﬁable worldview ...” [7]
In any existing system, it is easy to think of trivial ways for the system to evolve and
change over time, e.g., subtly change the color palette or the training data over the years.
Superﬁcial growth is easy; meaningful growth is hard to even deﬁne for a computer AI. If
someone could design a system that produces a sequence of art that is meaningful to people
and also signiﬁcantly evolves over time, that would be truly remarkable. Another missing piece
from current systems is an artists’ ability to respond meaningfully to their culture, experiences,
world events, responses to their work, and other aspects of their environment. It seems hard to
imagine achieving these goals without enormous technological advances — they may not be
possible without true AI or social AI in some form.
4.6
Deﬁnitions of Art
For guidance about the nature of art, we could have also looked to existing deﬁnitions of art.
However, there is no Royal Society that prescribes what is and what is not valid art. Instead,
6Color the image location (x, y) proportional to the number of steps the iteration zn+1 = z2
n + x + yi requires
to reach |z| ≥τ, starting from z1 = 0, where τ is a large constant.
7For example: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PD2XgQOyCCk
24

art is a phenomenon that results from the interplay of cultural institutions and the general
population that we can analyze, and it changes over time. Philosophers have attempted to
devise concise deﬁnitions of art that include all existing types (music, dance, painting, etc.)
and styles of art. The Institutional Deﬁnition, originated in the 1960s in response to conceptual
art, states, roughly, that art is anything in a style that is broadly accepted as art [12, 15, 44].
A more ﬁne-grained approach is to identify attributes common to many different types of art
[26, 27, 16, 17]. Each of these deﬁnitions of art is an attempt to ﬁt the data, and draw a line
between those things that we call art (like theatre) and those that we do not (like spectator
sports). Understandably, these deﬁnitions all assume that the artist is always human, without
exploring much whether non-humans can create art, and thus do not provide much guidance
for this discussion.
4.7
Attribute theories in general
Many of the theories in this section have the following recipe: identify some attributes of
human artists, and then hypothesize that AIs with these attributes will be considered artists.
Artists make high-quality work; artists supply intent; artists are creative; artists grow.
The development of Cohen’s thinking illustrates this. Cohen initially thought that a ma-
chine that makes high-quality art could be considered an artist. The more he observed his own
software, the more something seemed missing. He noted that human artists grow over time,
and his system didn’t. If he’d added some form of “growth” to his system, would it then be an
artist?
Maybe someday someone will develop a system with enough of these attributes to cross
some intangible threshold and thus be perceived as an artist. However, it seems very hard to
reason concretely about this possibility. How do we deﬁne any of these attributes precisely?
How much is enough?
Furthermore, many of these attributes are not really required of human artists. Any human
can make art, even if it is not very original or surprising; the artist need not grow noticeably
or respond to culture or feedback. We do judge the work by these attributes, but there is no
minimum requirement for humans to make art.
In contrast, the social theory makes a much more concrete statement. Art is fundamentally
a social interaction, and thus can only be made by social agents. The social theory has the
additional appeal of being based on a plausible evolutionary hypothesis for the reasons we
create art.
5
Will an AI ever be an artist?
With this background, I now turn to speculating about the future. As we have seen, authorship
of all current algorithmic art is assigned to the human author behind the algorithms. Will we
ever say that an AI itself created art? Will we ever recognize a piece of software as the author
of a work of art?
25

Human-Level AI.
If we ever develop AI with human-level intelligence and consciousness,
by deﬁnition, it would be able to create art, since it would have the same capacity for con-
sciousness, emotions, and social relationships. But, as discussed in Section 2.6, this scenario
is science ﬁction and we have no idea if this is possible or how it would be achieved. Making
meaningful predictions about a world with “true AI” is impossible [4], because we have so lit-
tle idea of how speciﬁcally this AI would actually operate. Moreover, this AI would transform
society so much as to make it unrecognizable to us. We may as well speculate about what kind
of artwork is made by aliens from outer-space — if do we ever meet them, we will have more
pressing questions than what kind of music they like.
Hence, the interesting question is whether there could be computer-authored artwork with-
out human-level intelligence or consciousness.
Social AI.
If, as I have argued, creating art is a fundamentally social act of expression and
communication, then it follows that AI can be granted authorship when we view the AI as a
social agent, and it is performing some communication or sharing through art.
What does it mean for us to view an AI as a social agent? We have to view the AI as
deserving of empathy and ethical consideration in some way. However, the AI does not need
human-level intelligence; just as we have social relationships with our pets. But we do expect
that the AI has something to say socially, something that suggests an inner consciousness and
feeling.
Short of true intelligence (the science ﬁction scenario), I think that the only way this can
happen is through “shallow AI” agents. People are sometimes “fooled” by shallow AI. The
classic example is Eliza, a simple text-based psychiatrist program developed in 1964, based
on simple pattern-matching and repetition of what the user types [73]. It was meant as a
demonstration of the superﬁciality of the AIs of the time, but, unexpectedly, many people
attributed human-like emotions to the machine. Since then, there are many anecdotes of people
being fooled by “chatbots” in online settings [18, 23], including the recent plague of Twitter
bots [39]. But, once the veil is lifted, it is clear that these chatbots don’t exhibit real intelligence.
Some software and robots have been designed to have relationships with their owners,
including talking dolls, Tamagotchi, and Paro therapeutic baby seals. A related effect is that
people behave toward their computers as if they were social agents in certain ways [56], even
when they don’t believe that they are intelligent. For example, dialogue systems like Siri and
Alexa all use female voices by default, based on many ﬁndings that male and female users both
respond better to female voices [31, 56].
Perhaps, for many users, the system doesn’t need to be truly intelligent, it just has to be
perceived as a social agent, like a Siri or Alexa that you can ask to make you an artwork
[76]. The day may come in which these agents are so integrated into our daily lives that we
forget that they are carefully-designed software. One can easily imagine the development of
AI that simulates emotion and affection toward the user; it is easy to imagine, for example, a
toy doll that paints pictures for its owner along as one of many behaviors designed to display
companionship and affection.
26

Non-social AI.
It seems possible that non-social algorithms could be successfully promoted
as artists; there have been a few tentative forays in this direction, e.g., [10, 22]. For the reasons
given above, I am skeptical that such methods will be accepted as true artists without some
plausible belief about their underlying social and/or conscious attributes.
Perhaps a curator at a well-known museum would download or otherwise acquire various
artifacts from software “artists,” and list the software systems as the authors. There would
be controversy, and discussion in newspapers and journals. Perhaps other curators and gal-
leries would follow suit. Perhaps people would ﬁnd enough value in these computer-generated
artworks, while also being convinced that no human could be rightly given credit for their
works. This sort of process has happened for things like abstract expressionism, and not for
chimpanzee art. Could it happen for computer art?
Suitcase words.
The term “artist” could come to be used as having multiple meanings, just
as words like “intelligence” and ”learning” have come to mean something different for humans
than they do for algorithms [4]. A software program that, say, automatically stylizes your
photos, could be called an “artist” in the same way that software applications like “calendar”
and “mail” programs have replaced their physical-world namesakes. Unfortunately, the use
of the same word to mean different things in different contexts causes endless confusion, as
discussed in Section 2.6.
Dangers.
A continual danger of new AI technology is that human users misunderstand the
nature of the AI [51]. When we call a shallow AI an “artist,” we risk seriously misleading or
lying to people. I believe that, if you convince people that an AI is an artist, then they will also
falsely attribute emotions, feelings, and ethical weight to that AI. If this is true, I would argue
that calling such AIs “artists” is unethical. It leads to all sorts of dangers, including overselling
the competence and abilities of the AI, to misleading people about the nature of art.
It seems likely that some companies will not have any scruples about this. For example,
Hanson Robotics has promoted (in many contexts) a social robot as a truly intelligent being,
even though it is clearly nothing more than a “chatbot with a face” [28] or, in Yann LeCun’s
words, a “Potemkin AI” [72].
A related concern is that we deprive the AI’s designer(s) of authorship credit. At present,
we credit the author of a piece of automatic software with the output of that software. This
usually acknowledges the skill and effort required to engineer and iterate with software so that
it produces good outputs. Artistic credit is important for understanding the real sources of how
something was made.
Outside of science ﬁction, I can see no positive beneﬁt to calling a computer an artist, but I
do see dangers.
27

Conclusion
I do not believe that any software system in our current understanding could be called an
“artist.” Art is a social activity. I mean this as a warning against misleading oneself and others
about the nature of art. Of course, the ambitious reader could take this as a challenge: I have
laid out some of the serious objections that you must overcome if you wish to create a software
“artist.” I don’t think it can be done anytime soon, but I also know that proving critics wrong
is one of the ways that art and science advance.
One of my main goals in this essay has been to highlight the degree to which technology
contributes to art, rather than being antagonistic. We are lucky to be alive at a time when artists
can explore ever-more-powerful tools. Every time I see an artist create something wonderful
with new technology, I get a little thrill: it feels like a new art form evolving. Danny Rosin’s
Wooden Mirror, Jason Salavon’s The Top Grossing Film of All Time, 1x1, Bob Sabiston’s Snack
and Drink, Michel Gondry’s Like A Rolling Stone, Kutiman’s ThruYOU, Amon Tobin’s Per-
mutation, Ian Bogost’s Cow Clicker, Christian Marclay’s video installations, ´I˜nigo Quilez’s
procedural renderings, and Wesley Allsbrook’s and Goro Fujita’s Virtual Reality paintings are
a few examples of artworks that have affected me this way over the years. Today, through
GitHub and Twitter, there is an extremely fast interplay between machine learning researchers
and artists; it seems like, every day, we see new tinkerers and artists Tweeting their latest cre-

Art maintains its vitality through continual innovation, and technology is one of the main
engines of that innovation. Occasionally, the avant garde has tremendous cultural impact:
electronic music and sampling was once the domain of experimental electronic and musique
concr`ete pioneers, like Wendy Carlos and Delia Darbyshire. Likewise, at one time, computer-
animated ﬁlms could only be seen at obscure short-ﬁlm festivals. Today, we are seeing many
intriguing and beguiling experiments with AI techniques, and, as artists’ tools, they will surely
transform the way we think about art in thrilling and unpredictable ways.
Acknowledgements.
Thanks to Shira Katz, Alvy Ray Smith, Craig Kaplan, Shiry Ginosar,
and Dani Oore for valuable comments on the manuscript. Thanks to everyone who shared dis-
cussion and/or encouragement online, including Aseem Agarwala, Mark Chen, Lyndie Chiou,
Michael Cohen, James Landay, Nevena Lazic, Jason Salavon, Adrien Treuille, and many oth-
ers.
