Sample-Efﬁcient Reinforcement Learning through
Transfer and Architectural Priors
Benjamin Spector∗
SE(3) Group
Cornell Tech
New York, NY 10044

Serge Belongie
SE(3) Group
Cornell Tech
New York, NY 10044

Abstract
Recent work in deep reinforcement learning has allowed algorithms to learn com-
plex tasks such as Atari 2600 games just from the reward provided by the game,
but these algorithms presently require millions of training steps in order to learn,
making them approximately ﬁve orders of magnitude slower than humans. One
reason for this is that humans build robust shared representations that are applicable
to collections of problems, making it much easier to assimilate new variants. This
paper ﬁrst introduces the idea of automatically-generated game sets to aid in trans-
fer learning research, and then demonstrates the utility of shared representations by
showing that models can substantially beneﬁt from the incorporation of relevant
architectural priors. This technique affords a remarkable 50x positive transfer on a
toy problem-set.
1
Introduction
Consider the Atari 2600 game Seaquest (1), one of the problems for which reinforcement learning is
very effective, and visualized in ﬁgure 1. (2)
Imagine a person learning to play this game. While individuals may apply different strategies, these
are steps most decent players would take:
• They would immediately recognize the existence of several sea creatures as well as a
submarine, and likely ignore the rest of the water.
• They would jiggle the controls and see what happens, and quickly determine that they could
only directly affect the yellow submarine. Additionally, this could probably be inferred from
the fact that submarines differ from all other objects on-screen in that they are man-made.
• They would perceive the existence of a bar labeled “oxygen” and would deduce that, because
the submarine they control is underwater and the bar slowly turns red with time, oxygen is a
consumable resource that the player will need to replenish, and furthermore would know
oxygen can be obtained from the atmosphere above the water.
This list of relevant human intuitions and priors, even for a game as relatively simple as Seaquest,
could probably be extended for several additional pages. In fact, in comparison to the raw pixel
values that a reinforcement learning algorithm would be given, it almost seems that humans solve a
fundamentally different problem than does machine reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning
must simply ﬁgure out how to associate large images with outputted actions to maximize a given
scalar reward. Humans appear to already know the structure of both the problem and the solution
before they even start playing, and just need to match the two together, which is a far easier task.
∗Presently a student at Horace Mann School.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.02268v1  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2018

Figure 1: A snapshot from Seaquest, in which the player controls a yellow submarine and must dodge
and destroy enemies as well as ensure that oxygen doesn’t run out.
And, though the problems are in fact the same (for the computer and the human are in reality
given identical observations and rewards), considering machine and human variants of reinforcement
learning as solving different problems yields useful perspective: humans may be better than computers
at general reinforcement learning, but the more signiﬁcant effect is that they are very good at seeing a
given problem as one they have already solved, bypassing the issue of learning.
Broadly, this means that humans make better assumptions about the problems that we care about
than do reinforcement learning algorithms, but the key is that these assumptions are not innate but
learned. So, in order to build computers that learn as quickly as people do, we ought to take a lesson
from human players, and that is the goal of this project: to illustrate how building shared feature
representations can drastically reduce training times when a new but related problem is encountered.
(3)
This paper shows that in the context of a simple set of reinforcement learning problems with known
relationships, an appropriate representation enables 50x positive transfer between variants. Because
the problems used are simple, this work is intended primarily to illustrate the usefulness of the
techniques outlined, with the potential for enormous training speedups if properly applied to more
complex problems.
2
Background
This section summarizes the key ideas on which this paper builds. Section 2.1 provides context for
reinforcement learning as used in this paper, focusing speciﬁcally on Q-learning and transfer learning.
Section 2.2 introduces value iteration networks, the key architecture used in this paper.
2.1
Reinforcement Learning
Broadly, reinforcement learning is the act of acquiring skill at a task given only positive and negative
reinforcement for previous actions in the form of reward. A reinforcement learning task is usually
a Markov decision process (MDP), which is often termed an environment. Learning is usually
subdivided into episodes, where the end of an episode marks a discontinuity in the underlying state
of the MDP. An episode consists of a sequence of steps, during which the player is provided with
an observed state and asked to return an action, upon which it is given its reward and the following
observed state.
2.1.1
Q-Learning
Q-learning is a common way to solve the MDPs that encompass most games. The essential idea
of Q-learning is that if, given a state, we can correctly assign some value to each action (assuming
a ﬁnite action space), we can simply choose the highest-valued action in order to solve the MDP.
More concretely, we deﬁne this using the Bellman equation Q(s, a) = r + γ max Q(s′, a′), which
states that the Q-value for a state is equal to the expected reward plus some discount factor times the
maximum Q value in the following state, which accounts for the fact that immediate rewards are
preferred because they have less uncertainty. Q-learning in its tabular form is known to converge to
2

a global optimum strategy, but is ineffective for the set of environments used in this paper because
each individual starting position is played only once, so that an arbitrary state is unlikely to ever be
observed more than once or twice. (4)
Deep Q Networks (DQNs) are a related extension of this idea. Because tabular Q-learning is
intractable for large state spaces, DQNs introduce a neural network as a Q-function interpolator,
allowing the algorithm to generalize to unseen states. Additionally, DQNs usually bring training
ofﬂine, meaning that they store experiences and learn on them in batches rather than learning from
observations and rewards directly as they are received. This has been found to increase sample
efﬁciency and training stability compared to other methods, but is still profoundly inefﬁcient in
comparison to humans, requiring millions of frames to learn what a human may learn in hundreds.
(2)
Double DQNs (DDQNs) represent an improvement on DQNS by reducing the Q-value overestimation
found in traditional DQNs. DDQNs solve this problem by swapping the action-selection and value-
estimation networks repeatedly while the network is being updated, preventing overestimation loops
from occurring due to the max function in the Bellman equation. (5)
2.1.2
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is the use of knowledge gained in learning a source task to improve the learning of
a different target task. There has been considerable interest in transfer learning because it is widely
seen as a step necessary to producing artiﬁcial intelligence that behaves more similarly to humans.
Humans are stateful entities, who are affected by what they learn (often needing just one example
to change their approach to a new task), and it follows that algorithms which behave like humans
should share this characteristic too. (6)
Transfer learning may improve the characteristics of learning the target task in three ways: it may
increase the starting reward on the target domain, the rate of learning (slope) for the target task, or the
maximum reward achievable. This work focuses on the second method. (7)
Within online learning, one method of transfer learning on arbitrary MDPs is the use of Proto-
value functions (PVFs), which reuse useful eigenvectors from the source domain to modify a target.
Importantly, these are reward-independent, meaning that they encode knowledge about the task itself
rather than just how to maximize its reward. (8)
Initial progress in transfer learning with DQNs copied the ﬁrst layers from a known task to an
unknown task, the idea being to have low-level features transfer between tasks. It was found that
positive transfer was often observed, but not universally. A limitation of this approach comes from
the model-free nature of DQNs, meaning that they are likely to latch on to any useful correlation
regardless of whether or not it would be generally applicable. So, any positive transfer comes from
the DQN happening upon a feature that does transfer well to a new task, but there are no guarantees
provided about this occurring, and it was additionally found that even tasks that were expected to have
positive transfer, Demon Attack and Space Invaders, due to their satisfying the similarity requirements
outlined, had negative transfer instead. (9)
Further progress in transfer learning used evolutionary algorithms combined with a novel modular
neural network, called PathNet. It was found that an appreciable positive transfer of 1.33x was
observed with optimal hyper-parameters on the Atari domain. As the problem domain used is
considerably more complex than the one explored in this paper, this is a signiﬁcant result. However,
despite the positive transfer obtained, the number of training steps required to learn the game was
not reduced due to the generally lower sample efﬁciency of PathNet in comparison with traditional
reinforcement learning techniques, meaning that human-level learning rates are still far away for this
class of MDPs. (10)
2.2
Value Iteration Networks
Value iteration networks (VINs) provide a mechanism for neural networks to learn to plan by
encapsulating an iterated version of the aforementioned Bellman equation inside an iterated process
of convolution and max-pooling along the ﬁlter layer. The networks are limited to speciﬁc types
of state-spaces, but have the desirable property that only the reward and attention models must be
3

Figure 2: A snapshot of the simpliﬁed environment.
ﬁlled in in order to construct the network, making VINs an excellent candidate for a low-dimensional
shared representation. (11)
3
Methods
In this work, a problem-set is ﬁrst deﬁned, in which the key contribution is to automatically generate
MDPs varying by a known transformation, allowing for greater ease of controlled transfer learning
research. This problem-set is then solved by a custom-designed DDQN with an embedded shared
representation to demonstrate the usefulness of these architectural priors in robust transfer.
3.1
Environment
The environment used in this paper is a type of grid-world, played on an 8x8 grid. In its simpliﬁed
version (pictured in ﬁgure 2), the state is an 8x8x5 array, with the player being fed one-hot vectors to
represent the different types of sites found on the grid (in other words, the object-space of the game).
These are (as visualized):
• Black (“Empty”)
• Blue (“Player”)
• White (“Target”): +3 reward; ends episode.
• Green (“Attractor”): +1 reward; disappears after passing over.
• Red (“Repulsor”): -1 reward; disappears after passing over.
Each step, the player selects and submits an action a ∈{UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT}, is moved
accordingly, and then receives their reward and ﬁnally the new state. An episode may also end if the
player moves off of the map, yielding a reward of -3, or if one-hundred turns have passed, yielding
zero reward.
The existence of the off-map negative reward makes the grid-world slightly more difﬁcult to learn
because most of the signal to the network at the beginning of its training comes from it wandering off
of the map, meaning that it ﬁrst must learn to not do so before it can begin to target the other rewards.
There is also a second version of this environment, the auto-generated variant (seen in ﬁgure 3). In
this environment, the player receives 8 channels rather than 5, and there may be multiple types of +1
and -1 sites. Most importantly, the ordering of the channels is no longer guaranteed other than that
black is always an empty site – every automatically-generated version of the game will have some
different assignment of colors to game object-types, and not all eight channels will necessarily be
used in every game.
Rather than deﬁning an individual MDP, the auto-generated environment describes a speciﬁc set of
MDPs, and this makes it useful for investigating transfer learning because the differences between
individual MDPs can be characterized precisely. One might see these sets of MDPs as a sort of
labeled dataset for transfer learning algorithms. Furthermore, nearly limitless related MDPs can be
efﬁciently generated on-demand, and because the simpliﬁed game is simply one such game with
4

Figure 3: A snapshot of the auto-generated environment. Note the bars on the side of the image,
which if read from left to right in the order, “Player, Target, Attractor(s), Repulsor(s)” describe the
rules of that instance of the game. So, in this snapshot, the player is red, the target blue, the attractors
white and cyan, and the repulsors green and magenta.
Figure 4: The architecture of the DDQN used for the following experiments. The auto-generated
version has an six additional parameters compared to the simpliﬁed version due to its additional input
channels, with three in each of the attention and reward layers.
three channels removed, it can be seen as compatible with the auto-generated environment. These
environments were integrated with the OpenAI Gym to allow its associated library keras-rl to be used.
(12)(13)
3.2
DDQN Architecture
The architecture of the DDQN used in these experiments is outlined in ﬁgure 4, and is trained using a
greedy-epsilon policy linearly annealed from 1 to 0.1 during training and held at 0.05 for testing.
These DDQNs are designed speciﬁcally for the environments provided, because they feature several
important characteristics for the self-transfer and auto-generation transfer experiments to come.
First, both of the initial layers are 1x1x1 convolutions. This quickly brings the game-space into a
prior-deﬁned lower-dimensional space which represents just reward and attention. These two layers
have 10 parameters together in the case of the simpliﬁed environment and 16 in the case of the auto-
generated environment. This is similar to the technique described in (14), but the lower-dimensional
shared space is described through neural network architecture rather than semideﬁnite programs and
principal component analysis, which is important because it preserves the geometry of the MDP
within the representation, simplifying the process of learning the MDP.
Second, the model is actually quite deep despite its small size due to the unrolling of the value
iteration model, and furthermore has variety within its layers, which allows greater insight into how
the different parts of the model behave when perturbed.
5

Third, the entire model is quite small, which allows these experiments to be performed quickly and
for little cost.
4
Experiments and Results
4.1
Self-Transfer
The ﬁrst set of experiments involve the idea of self-transfer. The procedure is as follows: ﬁrst, a
DDQN is trained on the simpliﬁed environment end-to-end and its performance is measured. Then,
some part of the network is re-initialized and the weights of all of the other layers are frozen. The
network is then retrained and its performance measured over time. The purpose of this is to explore
the robustness of the layer and its gradient, which in turn gives insight into candidate structures for
networks with architecturally-deﬁned shared representations. In other words, layers that are easily
retrained are likely options for the problem-speciﬁc parts of a network, whereas layers that are much
more difﬁcult to retrain should be used as general parts of the network.
The original network was trained over the course of 100,000 steps, and it was found that some parts
of the network are distinctly more difﬁcult to retrain than others.
The easiest layers of the network to retrain are unsurprisingly the reward and attention models, in that
order. The reward model can reach its original level of performance within 600 training steps, and
the attention model requires approximately 1,000.
Somewhat more difﬁcult to retrain was the action_attention layer. This is probably because it has more
parameters than either of the attention or reward models in a larger convolution, but it nonetheless
quite quickly from the beginning and achieved an average testing reward of 2.5 after approximately
2,000 steps, and a slow improvement from there on.
The q_values layer took signiﬁcantly longer to retrain. This is likely because of its number of
parameters, as it accounts for about 90% of the model’s total. However, because it only needs to
produce a linear association between the attention_value layer and the actual Q values, it achieves its
original reward within approximately 10,000 steps.
The value iteration module was found to be the most difﬁcult to re-train, which could not relearn
weights yielding a reward even close to the network’s original reward. This may be due to the iterated
nature of the module causing the model to become brittle and highly sensitive to its exact weights
and making gradient descent difﬁcult.
Complete hyper-parameter settings and training histories can be found in Appendix A.
4.2
Auto-generation transfer
The second set of experiments work with the problem of transfer learning between different auto-
generated games. Crucially, because the underlying rules of the game are identical, and only the
appearance of the game has changed, the only layers that need to be relearned for any of the thousands
of possible games are the reward and attention layers (all others being frozen), because they alone
map the game-space into the common reward and attention spaces.
Two games were selected for this experiment, seeds 42 and 256, shown in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: A visualization of the auto-generated games from seeds (a) 42 and (b) 256. Seed 42 is used
for the control, and seed 256 is trained with transfer.
6

Figure 6: The training history of the control model on seed 42.
The reader should note that the results displayed were found to generalize to arbitrary pairs of games.
Seeds 42 and 256 were chosen as a representative example simply because they were quite different
from each other, and also because they would likely pose challenges for transfer learning agents. First,
seed 256 is decidedly more difﬁcult because it has two ﬁlters mapped to the repulsor object, whereas
seed 42 has a one-to-one mapping for all object types. Second, between the seeds some ﬁlters are
reused but change meaning, and others are entirely new. Because no ﬁlter retains its original meaning,
the network must relearn each mapping in order to successfully play the new game – it could not, for
example, keep the attention block and relearn just the reward block.
Transfer between pairs of auto-generated games was found to be very effective. Comparison of
ﬁgures 6 and 7a show that the rate of training new games is drastically increased compared to the
rate of training the ﬁrst game, even with the same learning rate. Speciﬁcally, the transferred model
reached a reward of 2 approximately 50 times faster than the end-to-end (non-transferred) model,
showing that robust shared representations are indeed effective for transfer learning between games.
Figure 7: The training histories of the transferred model. Fewer data points are collected to minimize
episode interruption in the model. Graph a) shows the training history at the same learning rate as
used in the control; graph b) shows the training history at a higher learning rate.
7

5
Discussion
5.1
Self-transfer
Consider the shared representation chosen: beyond the attention and reward layers, the network never
sees the original channels provided. All that the deeper layers “know” is how to solve the MDP
given 8x8 grids of attention and reward. So, the key requirement of the shared representation is
that there must exist some mapping between games and the representation itself such that when the
representation is solved, the game is solved, too. Choosing a good representation therefore requires
minimizing the complexity of the mappings from games to the representation, so that it is as general
as possible, and the quality and depth of the shared representation itself, so that it is as effective as
possible. A good representation concentrates all of the difﬁculty of training to general layers, so that
task-speciﬁc layers can be learned quickly and easily.
So, a representation for which the general layers are much more difﬁcult to train than the game-
speciﬁc layers may be considered to be an effective representation, and a representation for which the
general layers are much easier to train than the game-speciﬁc layers is proportionally less effective.
The self-transfer experiments reveal that the design of the network is effective for the set of MDPs
the network between which is responsible for transferring because the layers that need to be relearned
are the easiest to retrain by a signiﬁcant margin, meaning that the network has ofﬂoaded most of the
difﬁcult-to-train computation to game-invariant layers.
5.2
Auto-generation transfer
The effectiveness of transfer learning may be measured by the amount of training steps required to
learn a given MDP to a certain reward without the transfer in comparison with the time required to
learn the same MDP to the same reward with the transfer. This is a good general metric, because
it simply deﬁnes the ability of the transfer learning to reduce the complexity of new problems, and
additionally is independent of the architecture of the transfer.
Under this metric, these results conclusively demonstrate that architectural priors may be highly
effective, moving these auto-generated game variants from the class of traditional reinforcement-
learning problems requiring thousands of training episodes to a near-human class requiring several
dozen.
In a sense, the fact that re-learning sixteen linear parameters of a network is much faster than learning
an 1100-parameter nonlinear network end-to-end is not only noncontroversial, but also obvious. It
should be emphasized that this, is fact, the point – transfer, if done properly, should make learning
easy.
These results are distinct from those already seen in the ﬁeld of transfer learning simply due to the
degree of the positive transfer observed. In transfer for reinforcement learning, positive transfer
results of several dozen percent are signiﬁcant, so to the best of the knowledge of the author this work
represents an order-of-magnitude greater positive transfer than ever previously demonstrated using
neural networks.
Naturally, it is not yet known how to build such complete shared representations for more complex
and diverse sets of problems, such as the benchmark Atari domain often used in prior works. However,
the performance of humans on these tasks provides an upper bound for the minimum possible number
of episodes required, showing that the creation of analogously robust priors is undoubtedly possible.
6
Conclusions
This paper introduced the idea of automatically-generated game sets to aid in transfer learning
research, and then demonstrated the utility of architectural priors by showing that reinforcement
learning agents can substantially beneﬁt from the resulting capability for positive transfer, decreasing
training times by 50x on an example problem-set.
Despite the simplicity of both the MDPs and the shared representation used, the underlying ideas
extend far beyond. Returning to the example from the introduction, a person playing Seaquest would
probably construct underlying attention and reward spaces as are used in this work. Naturally, several
8

other layers to the representation would probably also be necessary, but this highlights an intermediate
stage between model-free (DQN-like) and model-based algorithms, which might be called model-
aware algorithms, for they recognize and make use of the structure of an underlying model through
their architectural priors even though they are still intrinsically model-free. Additionally, this work
further postulates that humans may also make use of model-aware type algorithms too.
There are three straightforward paths that could be taken to extend this work:
• First, this work could be extended by further decreasing the number of steps required to play
these grid world-type games into the realm of one-shot or few-shot learning. This might
at ﬁrst seem simple to achieve by increasing the learning rates and batch sizes for transfer;
however, to go any further would likely require a more coherent and useful exploration
criteria than greedy-epsilon, as suggested in (15).
• One could also extend this technique to more complex, higher-dimensional problems such
as a restricted set of Atari games. For example, a representation consisting of semantic
reward and attention maps as utilized in this paper might also be effective at transfer between
Pong and Breakout due to the common mechanic of intercepting the path of a ball with a
paddle. One could also dynamically generate these more complex tasks in analogue to the
auto-generated game used in this paper.
• Last, one could undertake the challenge of learning the shared representation rather than
encoding it in the network architecture. Based on the results presented in this paper, this
may be a promising path to human-level learning rates on Atari-class games, but it is not yet
known how one would accomplish this.
In conclusion, there is great potential to improve even state-of-the-art reinforcement learning tech-
niques using these principles. It is therefore hoped that the methods and results presented in this work
will encourage future work on transfer learning using neural networks with shared representations.
