Coordinated Exploration in
Concurrent Reinforcement Learning
Maria Dimakopoulou
Stanford University

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University

Abstract
We consider a team of reinforcement learning agents that concurrently learn to
operate in a common environment. We identify three properties – adaptivity, com-
mitment, and diversity – which are necessary for eﬃcient coordinated exploration and
demonstrate that straightforward extensions to single-agent optimistic and posterior
sampling approaches fail to satisfy them. As an alternative, we propose seed sam-
pling, which extends posterior sampling in a manner that meets these requirements.
Simulation results investigate how per-agent regret decreases as the number of agents
grows, establishing substantial advantages of seed sampling over alternative exploration
schemes.
1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning treats the design of agents that operate in uncertain
environments and learn over time to make increasingly eﬀective decisions. In such settings,
an agent must balance between accumulating near-term rewards and probing to gather data
from which it can learn to improve longer-term performance. A substantial literature, starting
with [Kearns and Singh, 2002], has developed reinforcement learning algorithms that address
this trade-oﬀin a provably eﬃcient manner.
Until recently, most provably eﬃcient exploration algorithms (e.g., [Jaksch et al., 2010])
have been based on upper-conﬁdence-bound approaches. Over the past few years, new
approaches that build on and extend PSRL (posterior sampling for reinforcement learning)
[Strens, 2000] have proved advantageous in terms of statistical eﬃciency [Osband et al., 2013,
Osband and Van Roy, 2017a,b, 2014a,b].
PSRL operates in a simple and intuitive manner. An agent learns over episodes of
interaction with an uncertain environment, modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP).
The agent is uncertain about the transition probabilities and rewards of the MDP, and reﬁnes
estimates as data is gathered. At the start of each episode, the agent samples an MDP from
its current posterior distribution. This sample can be thought of as a random statistically
1
arXiv:1802.01282v1  [cs.AI]  5 Feb 2018

plausible model of the environment given the agent’s initial beliefs and data gathered up to
that time. The agent then makes decisions over the episode as though the environment is
accurately modeled by the sampled MDP.
In concurrent reinforcement learning [Silver et al., 2013, Pazis and Parr, 2013, Guo and
Brunskill, 2015, Pazis and Parr, 2016], multiple agents interact with the same unknown
environment, share data with one another, and learn in parallel. One might consider two
straightforward extensions of PSRL to the multi-agent setting. In one, at the start of each
episode, each agent samples an independent MDP from the current posterior, which is
conditioned on all data accumulated by all agents. Then, over the course of the episode,
each agent follows the decision policy that optimizes its sampled MDP. The problem with
this approach is that each agent does not beneﬁt over the duration of the episode from the
potentially vast quantities of data gathered by his peers. An alternative – which we will
refer to as Thompson resampling – would be to have each agent independently sample a new
MDP at the start of each time period within the episode, as done in [Kim, 2017]. The new
sample would be from a posterior distribution additionally conditioned on data gathered by
all agents up to the time. However, as discussed in [Russo et al., 2017], this naive extension
is disruptive to the agents’ ability to explore the environment thoroughly. In particular, an
agent may have to apply a coordinated sequence of actions over multiple time periods in
order to adequately probe the environment. When MDPs are resampled independently over
time periods, agents are taken oﬀcourse.
The two naive approaches we have discussed highlight potentially conﬂicting needs to
adapt to new information and to maintain the intent with which an agent started exploring
the environment. Eﬃcient coordinated exploration calls for striking the right balance. In
this paper, we present a variation of PSRL – seed sampling – that accomplish es this.
To focus on the issue of coordinated exploration, we consider a single-episode reinforce-
ment learning problem in which multiple agents operate, making decisions and progressing
asynchronously. In this context, we study the rate at which per-agent regret vanishes as the
number of agents increases. Through this lens, we demonstrate that seed sampling coordinates
exploration in an eﬃcient manner and can dramatically outperform other approaches to
concurrent reinforcement learning. In particular, the rate at which regret decays appears to
be robust across problems, while for each alternative, there are problems where regret decays
at a far slower rate.
Guo and Brunskill [2015], Pazis and Parr [2013], and Pazis and Parr [2016] have proposed
and studied UCB exploration schemes for concurrent reinforcement learning. Advantages of
PSRL over UCB in single-agent contexts by themselves motivate extension to concurrent
reinforcement learning. A possibly more important motivating factor, however, is that, as
2

our results demonstrate, UCB approaches sometimes do not coordinate exploration in an
eﬀective manner. The issue is that UCB approaches are deterministic, and as such, they do
not diversify agent behaviors to eﬀectively divide and conquer when there are multiple facets
of the environment to explore.
A broad range of applications calls for concurrent reinforcement learning. Many examples
can be found in web services, where each user can be served by an agent that shares data
with and learns from the experiences of other agents. Through coordinated exploration, the
agents can eﬃciently learn to better serve the population of users. The control of autonomous
vehicles presents another important context. Here, each agent manages a single vehicle, and
again, the agents learn from each other as data is gathered. The goal could be to optimize a
combination of metrics, such as fuel consumption, safety, and satisfaction of transportation
objectives. Exploratory actions play an important role, and structured diversity of experience
may greatly accelerate learning. The seed sampling algorithms we propose in this paper aim
to structure such exploration in a systematic and robust manner.
2
Problem Formulation
Consider a time-homogeneous, single-episode MDP, which is identiﬁed by M = (S, A, R, P, ρ, H),
where S is the ﬁnite state space, A is the ﬁnite action space, R is the reward model, P is the
transition model, ρ is the initial state distribution and H is the horizon.
Consider K agents, who explore and learn to operate in parallel in this common environ-
ment. Each kth agent begins at state sk,0 and takes an action at arrival times tk,1, tk,2, . . . , tk,H
of an independent Poisson process with rate λ = 1. At time tk,m, the agent takes action ak,m,
transitions from state sk,m−1 to state sk,m and observes reward rk,m. The agents are uncertain
about the transition structure P and/or the reward structure R, over which they share
common priors. There is clear value in sharing data across agents, since there is commonality
across what agents aim to learn. Agents share information in real time and update their
posterior, so that when selecting an action at time tk,m, the kth agent can base his decision
on observations made by all agents prior to that time.
Denote as T =

0, . . . , maxk∈{1,...,K} tk,H
	
. We will deﬁne all random variables with
respect to a ﬁltered probability space (Ω, F, (Ft)t∈T , P). As a convention, variables indexed
by t are Ft-measurable and therefore, variables indexed by k, m are Ftk,m-measurable.
The total reward accrued by the agents is PK
k=1
PH
m=1 rk,m and the expected mean regret
3

per agent is deﬁned by
BayesRegret(K) = 1
K
K
X
k=1
E
" H
X
m=1
(R∗−rk,m)
#
where R∗is the optimal reward.
We now consider some examples that illustrate this problem formulation.
Example 1 (Maximum Reward Path). Consider an undirected graph with vertices
V = {1, . . . , N} and edges E ⊆V × V. The probability of any two vertices being connected is
p. Let θ ∈ℜ|E|
+ be the vector of edge weights. We treat θ as a vector with an understanding
that edges are sorted according to a ﬁxed but arbitrary order. The state space S is the set
of vertices V and the action space from each vertex v ∈V is the set of edges incident to v.
When action (v, u) = e ∈E is taken from state v, the agent transitions deterministically
to state u and observes reward re, which is a noisy observation of the weight of edge e,
such that E[re|θ] = θe. The K agents are uncertain about the edge weights and share a
common N(µ0, Σ0) prior over ln θ. Denote as ek,m = (vk,m−1, vk,m) the mth edge of the kth
agent’s path traversed at time tk,m. For each m = 1, . . . , H the agent observes a reward rk,m,
distributed according to ln rk,m|θ ∼N(ln θek,m −σ2/2, σ2). The K agents start from the same
vertex v ∈V. The objective is, starting from vertex v, to traverse the path (v0 = v, v1, . . . , vH)
that maximizes PH
m=1 θ(vm−1,vm), i.e., to ﬁnd the maximum reward path from vertex v with
exactly H edges.
Example 2 (Bipolar Chain). Consider the directed graph of Figure 1. The chain has
an even number of vertices, N, V = {0, 1, . . . , N −1}. The endpoints of the chain are
absorbing. The set of edges is E = {(v, v + 1), ∀v = 1, . . . , N −3} ∪{(v + 1, v), ∀v =
1, . . . , N −3} ∪(1, 0) ∪(N −2, N −1). The leftmost edge eL = (1, 0) has weight θL and
the rightmost edge eR = (N −2, N −1) has weight θR, such that |θL| = |θR| = N and
θR = −θL. All other edges e ∈E\{eL, eR} have weight θe = −1. The agents do not know
whether θL = N, θR = −N or θL = −N, θR = N and they share a common prior that assigns
probability p = 0.5 to either scenario. Each one of the K agents starts from vertex vS = N/2.
Denote as ek,m the edge traversed at the mth step of the kth agent’s path and θk,m the
respective weight. Further, denote as tk,h, 1 ≤h ≤H the time at which the kth agent reaches
either endpoint with the hth traversal being the last one in the agent’s path. The kth agent’s
objective is to maximize Ph
m=1 θk,m. The optimal reward is R∗= N/2 if θL = N, θR = −N
and R∗= N/2 + 1 if θL = −N, θR = N because the leftmost endpoint vL = 0 is one vertex
further from the start vS = N/2 than the rightmost endpoint vR = N −1 and requires the
traversal of one more penalizing edge with weight −1.
4

1
0
N-1
N/2
...
-1
-1
-1
-1
-1
-1
start
...
θ(1,0)
θ(Ν-2,Ν-1)
Figure 1: Graph of “Bipolar Chain” example
Example 3 (Parallel Chains). Consider the directed graph of Figure 2. Starting from
vertex 0, each of the K agents chooses one of the C chains. Once a chain is chosen, the agent
cannot switch to another chain. All the edges of each chain c have zero weights, apart from
the edge incoming to the last vertex of the chain, which has weight θc. Let θ ∈ℜC be the
vector of these edge weights for the C chains. The K agents are uncertain about θ, over which
they share a common N(µ0, Σ0) prior. Denote as ck the chain chosen by the kth agent. When
traversing the last edge at time tk,H, the agent observes reward rk,H distributed according to
rk,H|θ ∼N(θck, σ2). For all other transitions at times tk,m, m = 1, . . . , H −1, the kth agent
observes reward rk,m = 0. The objective is to choose the chain with the maximum reward.
C,2
1,2
...
C,1
1,1
C,H
1,H
...
...
...
...
...
0
0
0
0
0
θ1
θC
0
0
Figure 2: Graph of “Parallel Chains” example
3
Algorithms
Three properties are necessary for eﬃcient coordinated exploration in concurrent reinforcement
learning:
Property 1 (Adaptivity). Adapt as data becomes available to make eﬀective use of new
information.
Property 2 (Commitment). Maintain the intent to carry out probing action sequences
that span multiple periods.
Property 3 (Diversity). Divide-and-conquer learning opportunities among agents.
As we discuss in Section 3.1, straightforward extensions of provably eﬃcient single-agent
reinforcement learning algorithms fail to meet these requirements. In Section 3.2, we introduce
5

the concept of seed sampling, which leads to algorithms that simultaneously satisfy these
three properties.
All algorithms we consider share some common structure, which we will now describe.
The K concurrent agents share a prior distribution F0 of the MDP M. Denote by Ft the
posterior distribution, given the history of observations Ht−1 available up to time t. At each
time tk,m, the agent generates an MDP Mk,m, computes the optimal policy πk,m for Mk,m,
takes a single action ak,m = πk,m(sk,m−1), transitions to state sk,m and observes reward rk,m.
The observation (sk,m−1, ak,m, sk,m, rk,m) is used to update the shared posterior distribution
of M. Therefore, at time tk′,m′ > tk,m, the k′th agent can use the knowledge gained from
this observation in order to take his m′th action. The key diﬀerence between the studied
algorithms is how each kth agent forms his MDP Mk,m at time tk,m.
3.1
Baseline Algorithms
First, we discuss the straight-forward adaptation of provably eﬃcient single-agent reinforce-
ment learning algorithms to the concurrent reinforcement learning setting. However, neither
of these baselines achieve coordinated exploration in concurrent reinforcement learning, ei-
ther because the agents, when adapting to new information, do not maintain the level of
intent required to ensure thorough exploration or because the agents do not diversify their
exploratory eﬀort in a manner that mutually beneﬁts their common learning.
3.1.1
Thompson Resampling
At time tk,m, the kth agent samples MDP Mk,m from the posterior Ftk,m. If at time tk,m of
the mth action of the kth agent and at time tk′,m′ of the m′th action of the k′th agent the
posterior is the same, Ftk,m ≡Ftk′,m′, the kth agent and the k′th agent will form a diﬀerent
MDP. Therefore, the agents will diversify their exploration eﬀorts. However, resampling an
MDP independently at each time period may break the agent’s commitment to a sequence of
actions that extend over multiple time periods. This commitment is necessary for learning in
an environment with delayed consequences, and hence the learning performance may suﬀer.
To demonstrate the importance of Property 2 (Commitment), consider the Bipolar Chain
example of Section 2. Assume that the kth agent samples an MDP at time tk,1, in which
the left-most edge is positive and the right-most edge is negative. Therefore, the kth agent
decides to move left at tk,1. When the kth agent re-samples an MDP at time tk,2, the left-most
edge may now be negative and the right-most edge may now be positive due to randomness,
even if no other agent has gathered information to warrant this change in the sampled MDP.
As a consequence, the kth agent moves right at tk,2, undoing his previous move, incurring
6

unnecessary cost and most importantly delaying the traversal of either the left-most or the
right-most edge, which would produce information valuable for all agents.
3.1.2
Concurrent UCRL
At time tk,m, the kth agent forms conﬁdence bounds for the reward structure R and the
transition structure P that deﬁne the set of statistically plausible MDPs given the posterior
Ftk,m. The kth agent chooses the MDP Mk,m that maximizes the achievable average reward
subject to these conﬁdence bounds. This algorithm is deterministic and does not suﬀer from
the ﬂaw of Thompson resampling. Note, however, that if at time tk,m of the mth action of
the kth agent and at time tk′,m′ of the m′th action of the k′th agent the posterior is the same,
Ftk,m ≡Ftk′,m′, the kth agent and the k′th agent will form the same MDP. Therefore, the
agents may not always diversify their exploration eﬀorts.
To demonstrate the importance Property 3 (Diversity), consider the Parallel Chains
example of Section 2 and assume that the parallel chains’ last edge weights, θc, are independent.
Further, assume that for any pair of chains c, c′, the prior means of θc, θc′ are the same,
µ0,c = µ0,c′, but the prior variances of θc, θc′ diﬀer, σ0,c ̸= σ0,c′. Then, UCRL will direct all K
agents to the chain with the maximum prior variance and will not diversify exploratory eﬀort
to the other C −1 chains. As the horizon H gets larger, the learning performance beneﬁts
less and less from an increased number of parallel agents and the expected mean regret per
agent does not improve due to lack of diversity.
3.2
Seed Sampling Algorithms
We now present the concept of seed sampling, which oﬀers an approach to designing eﬃcient
coordinated exploration algorithms that satisfy the three aforementioned properties. The idea
is that each concurrent agent independently samples a random seed, such that the mapping
from seed to MDP is determined by the prevailing posterior distribution. Independence
among seeds diversiﬁes exploratory eﬀort among agents (Property 3). If the mapping is
deﬁned in an appropriate manner, the fact that the agent maintains a consistent seed leads
to a suﬃcient degree of commitment (Property 2), while the fact that the posterior adapts to
new data allows the agent to react intelligently to new information (Property 1).
In the subsections that follow, we discuss ways to deﬁne the mapping from seed and
posterior distribution to sample. Note that the mappings we present represent special cases
that apply to speciﬁc problem classes. The idea of seed sampling is broader and can be
adapted to other problem classes, as we will explore further in Section 4.
Let G0 be a deterministic function mapping a seed z ∼Z to MDP M0, such that M0 ∼M.
7

At time t, the deterministic function mapping Gt is generated based on G0 and the history
of observations Ht−1 available up to this time. At the beginning of the episode, each kth
agent samples seed zk ∼Z. At time tk,m, the kth agent samples an MDP according to
Mk,m = Gtk,m(zk). The intuition behind the seed sampling algorithms is that each agent
forms its own sample of the MDP at each time period, which is distributed according to the
posterior over M based on all agents’ observations, while the randomness injected to the
agent’s samples remains ﬁxed throughout the horizon, allowing the agent to maintain the
necessary commitment to action sequences that span multiple time periods.
3.2.1
Exponential-Dirichlet Seed Sampling
The agents are uncertain about the transition structure P over which they hold a com-
mon Dirichlet prior FP
0 . The prior over the transition probabilities associated with each
state-action pair (s, a) is Dirichlet-distributed with parameters α0(s, a, s′), for s′ ∈S. The
Dirichlet parameters are incremented upon each state transition and at time t, the pos-
terior given the history of observations Ht−1 is FP
t . At time t, the transition probabil-
ities from the state-action pair (s, a) is Dirichlet-distributed with parameters αt(s, a, s′),
for s′ ∈S. At the beginning of the episode, each kth agent samples |S|2|A| sequences
of independent and identically distributed seeds zk,s,a,s′ = (zk,s,a,s′,i, i = 1, 2, . . . , ) such
that zk,s,a,s′,i ∼Exp(1).
The mapping from seed to transition structure is deﬁned as
Gt(z) :=
n
ps,a(s′) = Pαt(s,a,s′)
i=1
zs,a,s′,i
. P
˜s∈S
Pαt(s,a,˜s)
i=1
zs,a,˜s,i, ∀(s, a, s′) ∈S ×A×S
o
. Then,
each ps,a in Gt(z) is Dirichlet distributed with parameters αt(s, a) due to the fact that (a)
if Y1, . . . , Yd are independently distributed Gamma random variables with shape parame-
ters a1, . . . , ad, then X = (X1, . . . , Xd) with Xi = Yi/ Pd
j=1 Yj is d-dimensional Dirichlet
distributed with parameters a1, . . . , ad, and (b) any Gamma with shape parameter a can be
represented as the sum of a Exp(1) random variables [Gentle, 2013]. The transition structure
of the sampled MDP of the kth agent at time tk,m is given by Gtk,m(zk).
3.2.2
Standard-Gaussian Seed Sampling
The agents are uncertain about the parameters θ ∈ℜ|S||A| of the reward structure, over
which they share a common normal or lognormal prior FR
0 with parameters µ0 and Σ0. The
posterior over θ at time t, given the history of observations Ht−1 available up to this time,
is FR
t
and is normal or lognormal with parameters µt and Σt. In either case, conjugacy
properties result in simple rules for updating the posterior distribution’s parameters upon
each observation in Ht−1. Consider Example 1 and Example 3 of Section 2. At the beginning
of the episode, each kth agent samples seed zk = N(0, I). In the case of normal prior, as in
8

Example 3 (Parallel Chains), the mapping from seed to the reward structure’s parameters is
deﬁned as Gt(z) := µt + Dtz, where Dt is the positive deﬁnite matrix such that DT
t Dt = Σt.
Then, Gt(z) is a multivariate normal with mean vector µt and covariance matrix Σt [Gentle,
2009]. In the case of lognormal prior, as in Example 1 (Maximum Reward Path), the mapping
from seed to the reward structure’s parameters is Gt(z) := exp (µt + Dtz), where Dt is deﬁned
as before. Similarly, Gt(z) is a multivariate lognormal with parameters µt and Σt. The reward
structure of the sampled MDP of the kth agent at time tk,m has parameters ˆθk,m = Gtk,m(zk).
3.2.3
Martingalean-Gaussian Seed Sampling
The agents are uncertain about the parameters θ ∈ℜ|S||A| of the reward structure, over
which they share a common normal or lognormal prior FR
0
with parameters µ0 and Σ0.
Deﬁne seed z = (ˆθ0, w) with distribution Z such that ˆθ0 ∼N(µ0, Σ0) and {wj : j =
0, 1, . . . } is an IID sequence of N(µw, σ2
w). At time t, the history up to this time Ht−1
consists of observations {(sj, aj, s′
j, rj), j = 1, . . . , |Ht−1|}. The deterministic mapping Gt
from seed z = (ˆθ0, w) to reward structure parameters is a model ﬁt to the sample ˆθ0 from
the prior and the observations in Ht−1 randomly perturbed by w. In the case of normal
prior, {wj : j = 0, 1, . . . } is an IID sequence of N(0, σ2) and rj|θ ∼N
 θ(sj,aj), σ2
. The
mapping at time t from seed z = (ˆθ0, w) to the reward structure’s parameters is deﬁned as
Gt(z) := arg minρ

(ρ−ˆθ0)TΣ−1
0 (ρ−ˆθ0)+ 1
σ2
P|Ht−1|
j=1
(oT
j ρ−rj −wj)2
, where oj is the one-hot
vector |S||A| × 1, whose positive element corresponds to the state-action pair of the jth
observation in Ht−1, rj is the reward of the jth observation in Ht−1 and wj is a component
of the seed which corresponds to the perturbation of the reward of the jth observation in
Ht−1. In the case of lognormal prior, {wj : j = 0, 1, . . . } is an IID sequence of N(−σ2/2, σ2)
and ln rj|θ ∼N
 ln θ(sj,aj) −σ2/2, σ2
. The mapping at time t from seed z = (ˆθ0, w) to the
reward structure’s parameters is similar as in the normal case, but instead of ﬁtting to the
rewards rj, we ﬁt to ln rj.
Consider again Example 3 (Parallel Chains) and Example 1 (Maximum Reward Path).
At the beginning of the episode, each kth agent samples seed zk = (ˆθk,0, wk) distributed
according to Z. At time tk,m, the kth agent generates ˆθk,m = Gt(zk), which is a model ﬁt to
his sample ˆθk,0 from the prior and to the observations in the history Htk,m−1 perturbed by
wk, ˆθk,m =
 OTO + σ2Σ−1
0
−1 
OT(R + W k) + σ2Σ−1
0 ˆθk,0

where O is the
Htk,m−1
 × |S||A|
matrix whose jth row is oT
j , R is the
Htk,m−1
 × 1 vector whose jth element is rj in the
normal prior case and ln rj in the lognormal prior case and W k is the
Htk,m−1
 × 1 vector
whose jth element is wk,j ∼N(0, σ2) in the normal prior case and is wk,j ∼N(−σ2/2, σ2) in
the lognormal prior case.
9

Proposition 1. Conditioned on Ftk,m−1, rk,m and sk,m, ˆθk,m is distributed according to the
posterior of θ.
Proposition 2. For each agent k, denote as Tk = {0, . . . , tk,H} and consider a probabil-
ity measure ˜Pk deﬁned on (Ω, F, (Ft)t∈Tk), for which ˆθk,0 is deterministic, θ is distributed
N(ˆθk,0, 2Σ0). Then, ˆθk,m is a martingale with respect to ˜Pk.
Proposition 1 follows from Lemma 4 of [Lu and Van Roy, 2017] and is core to sampling
an MDP that follows the posterior distribution based on the data gathered by all agents
(Property 1). Proposition 2 follows from the deﬁnitions and motivates the name of this seed
sampling algorithm.
4
Computational Results
In this section, we present computational results that demonstrate the robustness of seed
sampling algorithms of Section 3.2 versus the baseline algorithms of Section 3.1. In sections
4.1 and 4.2, we present two simple problems that highlight the weaknesses of concurrent
UCRL and Thompson resampling and demonstrate how severely performance may suﬀer due
to violation of any among Properties 1, 2, 3. In Section 4.3, we demonstrate the relative
eﬃciency of seed sampling in a more complex problem.
4.1
Bipolar Chain
Consider the directed graph of Figure 1 and the description of Example 2 in Section 2. The
agents’ objective is to maximize the accrued reward. However, the agents do not know
whether the leftmost edge eL has weight θL = N or whether the rightmost edge has weight
θR = N. The agents share a common prior that assigns equal probability p = 0.5 to either
scenario. When any of the K agents traverses eL or eR for the ﬁrst time, all K agents learn
the true values of θL, θR. Denote as T the time when the true MDP is revealed. The horizon
is H = 3N/2. The horizon is selected in such a way, so that if an agent picks the wrong
direction and moves in every time period towards the wrong endpoint, if the true values
of θL, θR are revealed before the wrong endpoint is reached, this agent has enough time to
correct the trajectory and reach the correct endpoint. The optimal reward is R∗= N/2 if
θL = N, θR = −N and R∗= N/2 + 1 if θL = −N, θR = N because the leftmost endpoint
vL = 0 is one vertex further from the start vS = N/2 than the rightmost endpoint vR = N −1
and requires the traversal of one more penalizing edge with weight −1. We now examine how
seed sampling, concurrent UCRL and Thompson resampling behave in this setting.
10

In seed sampling, each kth agent samples a seed zk ∼Bernoulli(p), which remains ﬁxed
for the entire duration of the episode. The mapping from seed zk,m to sampled MDP Mk,m at
time tk,m < T is determined by ˆθL,k,m and ˆθR,k,m which are deﬁned as ˆθL,k,m = N ·sign(zk−0.5),
ˆθR,k,m = −ˆθL,k,m. After one of the K agents traverses eL or eR, the sampled MDP of each
kth agent who has not terminated is the true MDP, ˆθL,k,m = θL,
ˆθR,k,m = θR, satisfying
Property 1. Note that in seed sampling, among the agents who start before the true MDP is
revealed, i.e., {k : tk,0 < T}, half go left and half go right in expectation, satisfying Property
3. Thanks to the seed zk,m the sampled MDP Mk,m remains ﬁxed in every step of the kth
agent’s trajectory until the true MDP is learned. Therefore, all agents commit to reaching
either the left or the right endpoint of the chain depending on the seed they sampled, until
the correct direction is discovered by one of the agents, satisfying Property 2. When the
correct direction is revealed, the horizon H = 3N/2 allows all agents who have picked the
wrong direction but have not yet terminated to change their trajectory and eventually to
reach the correct endpoint.
In concurrent UCRL, the agents are initially optimistic that they can achieve the maximum
attainable reward, which is N/2 + 1 in the scenario that the rightmost edge (i.e., the closest
one to the start) has the positive weight, θR = N. Each kth agent at time tk,m < T chooses
an MDP that is deﬁned as ˆθL,k,m = −N, ˆθR,k,m = N. Therefore, all agents who start before
the true MDP is revealed, i.e., {k : tk,0 < T} go right, violating Property 3. Note that, in
this particular example, diversiﬁcation is not essential to exploration, since going towards a
single direction will still reveal the true MDP. When the correct direction is revealed and it
is not the rightmost endpoint, all agents who have not terminated change their trajectory
and eventually reach the correct endpoint. If the correct direction is the rightmost endpoint,
no agent has to change trajectory.
In Thompson resampling, each kth agent at time tk,m < T samples an MDP which
is deﬁned as ˆθL,k,m = N · sign (Bernoulli(p) −0.5), ˆθR,k,m = −ˆθL,k,m. Note that for two
subsequent time periods tk,m < tk,m+1 < T, the sampled MDP of the kth agent may diﬀer
due to randomness in drawing a Bernoulli(p) sample each time. Therefore, the kth agent who
decided to go towards one direction at time tk,m may change his decision and go towards the
opposite direction at time tk,m+1, violating Property 2. In this setting, violation of Property
2 is detrimental to exploration. The horizon H of each one of the K agents is consumed to
meaningless oscillations and it is very diﬃcult for any agent to reach either endpoint of the
chain. The larger the number of vertices in the chain is, the more unlikely becomes for any
agent to ever discover the true MDP.
Figure 3 shows the mean regret per agent for N = 100 number of vertices in the chain
as the number of concurrent agents increases. The ﬁgure presents averages over hundreds
11

of simulations. As the number of agents increases, in seed sampling and concurrent UCRL
more and more agents have not yet started their trajectory or moved further away from
the start towards the wrong direction the moment the true MDP is revealed. Therefore the
mean regret per agent decreases. On the other hand, in Thompson resampling, the lack of
commitment to exploring either direction prevents the true MDP to be discovered before
the horizon expires, even for a very large number of agents. As a result the mean regret per
agent does not improve.
Figure 3: Performance of the algorithms of Section 3 in the “Bipolar Chain” example with
N = 100 vertices and H = 150 horizon in terms of mean regret per agent as the number of
agents increases.
4.2
Parallel Chains
Consider the directed graph of Figure 2 and the description of Example 3 in Section 2. The
agents’ objective is to maximize the accrued reward by choosing the chain whose last edge
has the largest weight c∗= argmaxc θc. Recall that the weight of the last edge of chain c is
denoted as θc and θ = (θ1, . . . , θC) When the last edge of chain c is traversed, the reward
is a noisy observation of θc such that rc|θ ∼N(θc, σ2). However, the agents do not know
the true value θ and they share a common, well-speciﬁed prior on it. Assume that all the
θc, c = 1, . . . , C are independent and that the prior on the cth chain’s last edge weight is
N(µc, σ2
c). Further assume that ∀c ∈{1, . . . , C}, the prior mean is the same, µc = µ0, and
the prior variance increases as we move from higher to lower chains, σ2
c = σ2
0 + c.
In this setting, martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling, standard-Gaussian seed sampling
and Thompson resampling are expected to have identical performance. Thanks to sampling
12

the seeds independently, the martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling and standard-Gaussian
seed sampling agents construct MDPs in which diﬀerent chains appear to be optimal. This
is also the case for Thompson resampling agents, who sample their MDPs independently
from the prior. As a result, the martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling, standard-Gaussian
seed sampling and Thompson resampling agents are directed to diﬀerent chains and satisfy
Property 3. Note that, unlike martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling and standard-Gaussian
seed sampling, Thompson resampling does not satisfy Property 2 but in this setting this does
not impact the learning performance. A Thompson resampling agent k may draw an MDP at
time tk,0 in which chain c is optimal, but due to resampling at time tk,1 his belief may change
and another chain c′ ̸= c may appear to be optimal. However, since transitions from one
chain to another are not possible in the directed graph of Figure 2, the agent has no choice
but exploring his initial choice, which is chain c. Even if inherently Thompson resampling
lacks the commitment of martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling and standard-Gaussian seed
sampling, the structure of the problem forces the Thompson resampling agents to maintain
intent and perform equally well.
On the other hand, the concurrent UCRL agents are optimistic that they can achieve
the maximum attainable reward and they are all directed to chain C for which the upper
conﬁdence bound of the weight of the last edge is the largest. Once enough agents have
traversed the last edge of chain C and the posterior variance on θC becomes lower than the
prior variance on θC−1, the optimistic driven behavior directs the agents who have not left
the source to chain C −1. As long as there are agents who have not left the source, this way
of exploration repeats until some agents are directed to chain 1. The violation of Property 3
leads to a wasteful allocation of the agents’ exploratory eﬀort, as all agents are directed to
gather similar information. This is detrimental to learning performance, as an agent k with a
later activation time tk,0 will not have all the information to make the optimal choice of chain
that he could have made if the agents who started before him had explored all the chains.
Consider the speciﬁcation of the problem with C = 10 chains, horizon (or equivalently
number of vertices in each chain) H = 5, θc ∼N(0, 100 + c), ∀c ∈{1, . . . , C} and likelihood
of observed reward when the last edge of chain c is traversed rc|θc ∼N(θc, 1).
Figure 4a shows the mean regret per agent achieved by the algorithms as the number of
agents increases and Figure 4b shows the cumulative regret of 100, 000 concurrent agents,
with the agents ordered in ascending activation time tk,0. Both ﬁgures present averages over
hundreds of simulations.
The ﬁgures demonstrate that UCB approaches to concurrent reinforcement learning do
not eﬃciently coordinate, and as a result, performance may suﬀer severely. In order for
concurrent UCRL to achieve the same mean regret per agent that martingalean-Gaussian
13

seed sampling, standard-Gaussian seed sampling and Thompson resampling achieve with 100
agents, 100,000 agents are required.
(a) Mean regret per agent as the number of agents increases.
(b) Cumulative regret of 100,000 concurrent agents ordered in ascending activation time.
Figure 4: Performance of the algorithms of Section 3 in the “Parallel Chains” example with
C = 10 chains, H = 5 number of vertices per chain, θc ∼N(0, 100 + c), ∀c ∈{1, . . . , 10}.
4.3
Maximum Reward Path
We now present the performance of the algorithms in a more complex problem. Consider the
description of Example 1. The agents start from the same vertex and their goal is to make H
edge traversals that will return the highest reward. Initially, the agents do not know the edge
weights. The edge weights are assumed to be independent and the agents share a common
14

prior N(µe, σ2
e) over ln θe, ∀e ∈E. Every time edge e is traversed, the observed reward re
is distributed according to ln re|θe ∼N(ln θe −σ2/2, σ2) and the common posterior of all
agents is updated according to µe ←
σ2µe+σ2
e(ln re+σ2/2)
σ2e+σ2
and σ2
e ←
σ2
eσ2
σ2e+σ2. The kth agent, at
time tk,m, m = 1, . . . , H, constructs MDP Mk,m = ˆθk,m = {ˆθk,m,e, e ∈E} and from vertex
vk,m computes the maximum reward path of H −m + 1 steps.
In Thompson resampling, the kth agent’s sampled MDPs at time tk,m and time tk,m+1
may diﬀer signiﬁcantly.
Part of this diﬀerence is due to the fact that for some edges
observations were made between tk,m and tk,m+1. However, Mk,m and Mk,m+1 may also have
diﬀerent weights for edges that were not traversed between tk,m and tk,m+1 due to randomness.
Therefore, the kth agent may be enticed to redirect towards an edge which has a large weight
in Mk,m+1 but did not have a large weight in Mk,m, even if this change in beliefs is not
substantiated by true observations. As a result, Thompson resampling agents violate Property
2 and are susceptible to myopic behavior, which harms the agents’ ability to explore deep in
the graph in order to identify the maximum reward path of ﬁxed length.
In concurrent UCRL, the agents are immune to the distractions suﬀered by Thompson
resampling agents, as they construct deterministic upper conﬁdence bounds from the common
posteriors on the edge weights. However, the kth agent at time tk,m and the k′th agent at
time tk′,m′ > tk,m have identical beliefs on all the edges that have not been observed between
tk,m and tk′,m′. Therefore, the path chosen by k′th agent may be very similar or even identical
to the path chosen by kth agent. This lack of diversity (Property 3) delays the exploration of
the graph’s edges and the identiﬁcation of the maximum reward path of ﬁxed length.
In standard-Gaussian seed sampling or martingalean-Gaussian seed sampling, each agent
samples a seed independently and constructs an MDP by using this seed and the mapping
detailed in Section 3.2.2 or Section 3.2.3 respectively. The fact that each agent samples a seed
independently leads, thanks to randomness, to MDPs with very diﬀerent edge weights for the
edges that have not been traversed yet. As a result, agents pursue diverse paths. At the same
time, maintaining a constant seed ensures that each agent adjusts his beliefs in subsequent
time periods in a manner that is consistent with the observations made by all agents and not
driven by further randomness that would be distracting to the agent’s exploration.
Consider the speciﬁcation of the problem in which we sample Erd˝os-R´enyi graphs with
number of vertices N = 100 and edge probability p = 2 ln N/N. The edge weights θ are
independent and the common prior of the agents on the edge weights is ln θe ∼N(0, 4),
∀e ∈E.
When edge e is traversed, the observed reward re is distributed according to
ln re|θe ∼N(ln θe −0.005, 0.01). The horizon (i.e. length of the maximum reward path to be
found) is H = 10.
In Figure 5, we show the performance of all algorithms. The results are averaged over
15

hundreds of simulations.
Standard-Gaussian seed sampling and martingalean-Gaussian
seed sampling achieve the lowest cumulative regret, as they adhere to all the properties of
coordinated exploration. Concurrent UCRL follows with 49.9% higher cumulative regret than
the seed sampling algorithms. Concurrent UCRL does not satisfy the diversity property, and
incurs much larger cumulative regret than the seed sampling algorithms, but does better
than Thompson resampling because, unlike the latter, it satisﬁes the commitment property
which is essential in deep exploration. Thompson resampling has 191% higher cumulative
regret than the seed sampling algorithms.
Figure 5: Performance of the algorithms of Section 3 and of the Greedy algorithm in the
“Maximum Reward Path” example with N = 100 nodes, p = 2 ln N/N edge probability,
ln θe ∼N(0, 4), ∀e ∈E, H = 10 horizon in terms of cumulative regret of 10,000 concurrent
agents ordered in ascending activation time.
5
Closing Remarks
Concurrent reinforcement learning is poised to play an important role across many applications,
ranging from web services to autonomous vehicles to healthcare, where each agent is responsible
for a user, vehicle or patient. To learn eﬃciently in such settings, agents should coordinate the
exploratory eﬀort. We presented three properties that are essential to eﬃcient coordinated
exploration: real-time adaptivity to shared observations, commitment to carry through with
action sequences that reveal new information, and diversity across learning opportunities
pursued by diﬀerent agents. We demonstrated that optimism-based approaches fall short
with respect to diversity, while naive extensions of Thompson sampling lack the requisite
level of commitment. We proposed seed sampling, a novel extension of PSRL that does satisfy
16

these properties. We presented several seed sampling schemes, customized for particular
priors and likelihoods, but the seed sampling concept transcends these speciﬁc cases, oﬀering
a general approach to more broadly designing eﬀective coordination algorithms for concurrent
reinforcement learning. Much work remains to be done on this topic. For starters, it would
be useful to develop a mathematical theory that sharpens understanding of the eﬃciency
and robustness of seeding schemes. Beyond that, work is required to develop seeding schemes
that operate in conjunction with practical scalable reinforcement learning algorithms that
approximate optimal value functions and policies for problems with intractable state and
action spaces.
