A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Jonas Witt

University of Bamberg, Markusplatz 3, 96047 Bamberg,
Germany
Sebastijan Dumanˇci´c

TU Delft, Van Mourik Broekmanweg 6, 2628 XE Delft,
The Netherlands
Tias Guns

KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200a, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
Claus-Christian Carbon

University of Bamberg, Markusplatz 3, 96047 Bamberg,
Germany
Abstract
A major bottleneck in search-based program synthesis, which learns programs from
input/output examples, is the synthesis of large programs. As the size of the target pro-
gram increases so does the search depth which leads to an exponentially growing number of
candidate programs. Humans mitigate the combinatorial explosion that arises from deep
program search: they build complex programs from smaller parts. We introduce a new
strategy for program synthesis called Divide, Align & Conquer (DA&C) which exploits the
compositionality of real world domains to guide the synthesis towards useful sub programs.
Divide decomposes each example using a segmentation procedure that is synthesized as part
of the learning problem. Align matches the components in the decomposed input/output
examples in order to steer the search towards combinations which lead to the synthesis
of useful sub progams and Conquer then solves a standalone synthesis problem on each
pair of aligned input/output components. We show how replacing a deep program search
by a linear number of much smaller synthesis tasks leads us to efficiently discover useful
sub programs which are then combined into a solution program. Our agent outperforms
current Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) methods on string transformation tasks even
with minimal knowledge priors. Unlike existing methods, the predictive accuracy of our
agent monotonically increases for additional examples. It approximates an average time
complexity of O(m) in the size m of subprograms for highly structured and, hence decom-
posable domains such as strings. Finally, we demonstrate the scalability of our technique
on high-dimensional abstract visual reasoning tasks from the Abstract Reasoning Corpus
(ARC) for which ILP methods were previously infeasible. We are competitive with state-
of-the-art agents outside of ILP despite generating only 0.2% as many candidate programs
from a knowledge prior of only 11 generic geometric primitives.
1. Introduction
A key challenge in program synthesis (Gulwani & Jain, 2017), which is concerned with
learning programs from examples, is the synthesis of large programs. Program synthesis is
often framed as a search problem over a space of programs and, therefore, the larger the
program, the more difficult it is to find (Alur, Singh, Fisman, & Solar-Lezama, 2018).
Submitted for publication 10/24
arXiv:2301.03094v2  [cs.AI]  24 Dec 2024

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
(a) Abstract visual reasoning task.
(b) String transformation task.
Figure 1: Programming by Examples (PBE) tasks from the Abstraction and Reasoning
Corpus (ARC) (Chollet, 2019) (Figure 1a) and the real world string transformations data
set (Cropper & Dumanˇci´c, 2020) (Figure 1b).
Agents must search for a program that
transforms inputs into outputs. In Figure 1a: “Color the output light-blue whenever there
is a light-blue connecting pathway between the green squares in the input.” In Figure 1b:
“Extract all times from the meeting schedule and concatenate them using commas.”
Divide-and-conquer (D&C) strategies are a common solution to this problem (Alur,
ˇCern´y, & Radhakrishna, 2015). Existing D&C strategies break down the synthesis task by
dividing the set of examples into subsets (Cropper & Dumanˇci´c, 2022; Alur, Radhakrishna,
& Udupa, 2017; Cropper, 2022). Each subset of examples defines an independent synthesis
task to be conquered. The solutions to the individual synthesis tasks, defined over subsets
of examples, are later combined into a global solution i.e. the final program. Imagine for
example a synthesis task in which the input is a pair of numbers (N1, N2) and the desired
output is the larger of the two numbers. It is easy to find solutions for individual examples,
e.g. simply return either N1 or N2. In order to obtain the task solution program, these
sub programs are combined with an appropriate branching condition (’if N1 > N2 then
...’). Given that we discover sub programs independently of the branching condition, we
only ever search for expressions of length 1 even though the global solution program has a
depth of two (the ’if branch’ and its ’if condition’/ ’if consequent’). This is how standard
D&C leads to an exponential decrease in search space through a linear reduction in search
depth.
However, standard D&C makes two assumptions which limit the types of problems on
which it achieves a significant decrease in search space: (1) It assumes a solution program
can be split into individual pieces which in turn can be identified from non-overlapping
subsets of examples. (2) Solutions to subsets of examples are easier to synthesize than a
solution covering all examples. Consider the task in Figure 1a in which the color of the
output is determined by whether there exists a light-blue path between the green squares
in the input image. Dividing the task into subsets of examples (with and w/o connecting
paths) only marginally simplifies the problem: the search for a program that checks the
path’s existence remains equally difficult.
We extend D&C to the level of components
within a single example, in order to efficiently discover program pieces needed to solve an
example.
In this work, we explore an alternative divide, align, & conquer strategy (DA&C) which
divides each example into a set of independent components that are conquered separately.
2

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
(a) Program synthesized from the PROSE SDK.
(b) Program synthesized DA&C (ours).
Figure 2:
A divide, align, & conquer (DA&C) strategy yields a compact and well-
generalizing program for the task in Figure 1b.
Its atomic operation is to discover a program that solves parts of an example compared to
standard D&C which requires a solution of an example as its atomic operation. Consider
the task in Figure 1b: It takes a meeting schedule as input and extracts from it a list of
times. A traditional synthesis approach (Gulwani, 2011) generates the solution program
in Figure 2a1. The program correctly solves the task, however, it is cumbersome and does
not generalize to varying lengths of similar formatted meeting schedules. The task becomes
much easier once we acknowledge that examples have inherent compositional structure. A
DA&C strategy breaks down the inputs/outputs into substrings using commas as delimiters
and from those extracts times as prefixes. It flexibly generalizes to schedules of varying
lengths (Figure 2b).
Two major challenges in working with smaller components beyond the level of exam-
ples are, first, the question of how to segment examples into components and, second, the
problem of finding meaningful alignments between components in the inputs/outputs. An
alignment between an input and output component is meaningful whenever it leads to a
program that reconstructs the component in the output given the component in the in-
put. An example output is solved if all of its components are successfully reconstructed
from components in the input. In the example of Figure 1b, synthesis is performed on
the aligned components ’08.30 Stop at bakery’ and ’08.30’ which leads to the program Sub-
Str(component,[:6]). One could explore every possible correspondence between input/output
components but that is likely to diminish the benefit of problem decomposition as the num-
ber of synthesis steps (needed to discover that all but one correspondence is meaningless)
will be large. The problem is further complicated by the fact that not every input compo-
nent needs to be present in the output and, thus, does not need to have a correspondence
(e.g. ’Schedule’ in Figure 1b).
We propose to mitigate this problem by structurally aligning the input and output scenes,
in a process that mimics analogical reasoning. A meaningful alignment between two scenes
maximizes their shared structure. For instance, in the last training example in Figure 1b,
there are two conflicting meetings booked at the same time. Any one of them could produce
1. The program was produced using the text transformation API of the Microsoft Program Synthesis using
Examples SDK PROSE, a fleet of program synthesis APIs that are the basis of commercial tools like
FlashFill in Microsoft Excel. The code is available on GitHub (Sumit Gulwani, 2023).
3

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
the ’13.00,13.00’ substring in the output by repetition. However, only an alignment that
respects the ordering of components and aligns ’13.00 Workshop NAFTA’ with the first
’13.00’ output substring and ’13.00 Telephone conference’ with the second ’13.00’ output
substring will produce a minimal solution program that generalizes to arbritary meeting
schedules.
In order to arrive at this mapping, we leverage analogy engines such as the
structure-mapping engine (SME) (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989), a computational
model implementing structure-mapping theory (SMT) (Gentner, 1983), a formal account
of analogy making in humans.
We combine the synthesis performed on subsets of components with hierarchical search
(Wang, Cheung, & Bodik, 2017) which allows us to learn parts of a final solution pro-
gram sequentially, thereby, efficiently pruning irrelevant areas of the search space: First,
segmentation operations are independently learned of the transformation program. The
information available about the segmented output components is used to prune transforma-
tion programs that do not need to be explored during synthesis (e.g. during the synthesis
of a lowercase output component, all programs with ’capitalize’ operators can be pruned
away). Second, only after we have discovered a successful program (on a tuple of input/out-
put components), we search for similar pairs and learn an abstract classifier which tells us
when to apply it (on which components).
In addition, our approach demonstrates progress on two key topics in program synthesis:
First, we apply DA&C to high-dimensional examples without manual pre-processing them
into symbolic encodings. The segmentation of examples is discovered as part of the synthesis
in order to optimize reconstruction accuracy in the output. This strategy prepares synthesis
on raw real-world inputs. Second, synthesis tools struggle with large knowledge libraries.
DA&C performs synthesis on subsets of input/output components, where the information
on the output component is used to prune not applicable background knowledge. This is
similar to a relevance mechanism which selects predicates to be used in the current search
from a (growing) global library, e.g. the synthesis of a green output object does not need
any other color constants besides green.
To summarize, we propose a ’divide, align & conquer’ strategy (DA&C) which performs
hierarchical search on partial examples in order to infer generative programs from a minimal
number of examples. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:
1. We re-conceptualize the D&C strategy such that synthesis can exploit repeating com-
positional structure within individual examples.
We demonstrate how this allows
agents to synthesize more complex programs even on high-dimensional inputs such as
bitmaps.
2. We introduce analogical reasoning as a means to mitigate the combinatorial explosion
of correspondences between input/output components. We demonstrate how the in-
formation on an aligned output component can be used to prune parts of the program
search.
3. We implement DA&C in an algorithmic agent called BEN. Its performance is evalu-
ated on the established setting of string transformation tasks and the challenging ab-
stract visual reasoning data sets from the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC).
(Chollet, 2019).
4

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
2. Related Work And Background
Our work lies in search-based program synthesis, specifically the Programming by Examples
(PBE) systems which learn programs that are consistent with a semantic specification
implicitly defined by a set of input/output examples (Gulwani & Jain, 2017).
Recent work has focused on two areas: (1) improving the efficiency of search by guiding
it towards more promising candidates and (2) rewriting of task specifications to simplify
the search problem itself. Our work falls into the second category. It also shares common
goals with works in the first area.
Improving search efficiency.
The first area has recently focused on search optimiza-
tions that leverage the intermediate states of programs and evaluate their distance to the
target solution (Ellis, Nye, Pu, Sosa, Tenenbaum, & Solar-Lezama, 2019; Cropper & Du-
manˇci´c, 2020; Nye, Pu, Bowers, Andreas, Tenenbaum, & Solar-Lezama, 2021). Often these
approaches are neurosymbolic hybrids that statistically learn a heuristics function from past
synthesis tasks. DA&C in its current form does not make use of statistical learning across
tasks. Instead, it guides the synthesis search by pruning the search space. It uses the infor-
mation about an output component (gained from an example segmentation) to prune away
irrelevant parts of the search space. Apart form heuristic search, other approaches use re-
representation techniques to condense programs and, thus, make it is easier to search them:
compression-driven rewriting or functional abstraction (e.g. predicate invention) (Hender-
son & Muggleton, 2014; Cropper, Morel, & Muggleton, 2020; Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Cropper,
2021). The programs learned through DA&C are similarly compact but are produced by
rewriting the examples, not the program. The way that DA&C rewrites examples is by
searching for a meaningful segmentation into components. There exist search optimizations
which already make use of decomposition operators in order to guide the synthesis: Symbolic
backpropagation (Gulwani & Jain, 2017) is a top-down deductive search that uses inverse
operators to propagate constraints on the overall solution program to sub-expressions of
the intermediate program. These sub-specifications are used to filter substrings from the
input with the help of regular expressions pos(x, R1, R2, k). This approach is different from
DA&C in that it first assumes an intermediate program and then deductively finds the most
probable segmentation to support the program. In contrast, we first pick a segmentation
and then inductively search for a program.
The downside of symbolic backpropagation
is that it requires inverse operators of each language primitive to work from the example
output backwards. Gulwani and Jain (2017) address the combinatorial challenges of inverse
synthesis using forwardprop filtering of inverse candidates. However, the more expressive
the transformation language, the larger the number of conceivable inverses. For example, a
’replace’ operator which replaces a substring in the input with a constant substring in the
output will generate an intractable number of inverses. In DA&C, ’replace’ operators are
cheap cause synthesis is executed on pairs of input/output components where the constant
substring is available through the output component and its inverse is simply the input
component.
Rewriting the search problem.
Previous work in this area has demonstrated D&C
(divide & conquer) strategies on the level of examples (Alur et al., 2015). For instance,
Cropper (2022) combines D&C with modern constraint solving using answer sets. Successful
5

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
intermediate programs are used to search for a more general program that applies to multiple
chunks until all positive examples are covered.
These approaches only work on subsets
of examples (called chunks), while DA&C performs synthesis on subsets of components
within an example.
We use antiunification in the underlying domain-specific language
(DSL) to learn branching conditions that combine independent programs on components
into a global solution program. Our approach is more similar to Alur et al. (2017) who
combines intermediate programs using a conditional expression grammar in a multi-label
decision tree learning paradigm. However, their approach also only works with subsets of
examples. DA&C exploits the innate structure of input/output examples to decompose a
semantic specification into sub-specifications that are solved in multiple smaller synthesis
tasks. This trades some of the exponential complexity of a deep program search with a
linear number of additional synthesis tasks.
Analogical reasoning.
In order to mitigate the combinatorial explosion that arises from
decomposing examples into components and searching for alignments between components,
we make use of analogical reasoning (Evans, 1964; Mitchell, 1993). Research in the cogni-
tive sciences has highlighted the importance of analogies for problem-solving (Hofstadter,
2001; Mitchell, 2021). In the past, these models were applied to study psychometric tests of
intelligence (Snow, Kyllonen, & Marshalek, 1984), e.g. in number series completion, string
transformations, verbal analogies, and Raven’s matrices. For instance, Lovett and Forbus
(2017) use analogical reasoning to compute ’patterns of variance’ (descriptive statements
of how objects change) across subsequent scenes within each row of a Raven’s matrix. In
contrast, we explicitly learn actionable transformation programs which are capable of gen-
erating new outputs. We make use of the structure-mapping-engine (SME) (Falkenhainer
et al., 1989; Gentner, 1983), a computational model of analogical reasoning in humans,
to determine how an input segmentation is analogous to the segmented output and derive
from it pairwise correspondences. SME is a symbolic approach to structure-mapping which
purely relies on the syntactic representation of a problem. It is a good fit for our goal
because it works across domains and does not require training on large data sets.
Program synthesis on high-dimensional examples (e.g. bitmaps) has seen much less work
than the established domains such as bit vector and string manipulations or generation of
invariants (Alur et al., 2018). Ellis, Solar-Lezama, and Tenenbaum (2015) have synthesized
programs to represent visual concepts and perform item classification using probabilities
in a generative process. The synthesis itself was not directly performed on bitmaps but
on automatically parsed symbolic encodings. Cropper and Dumanˇci´c (2020) have learned
programs to generate bitmaps using an example-dependent loss function instead of logical
entailment in order to better guide the synthesis on large programs. We apply DA&C to the
Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) (Chollet, 2019), a much more diverse collection of
bitmap data sets, that was introduced to foster research on the efficiency with which agents
acquire new skills. The corpus is a collection of heterogeneous visual reasoning tasks. On
each task, the agent synthesizes a program that takes a bitmap as input in order to generate
a bitmap as output (example task in Figure 1a).
ARC is especially interesting to our
work as visual reasoning programs tend to be large (in current program synthesis context)
and, thus, out of reach for existing synthesis techniques.
Visual scenes also intuitively
demonstrate the idea of being composed of objects (Johnson, Vong, Lake, & Gureckis, 2021;
6

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Wagemans, Elder, Kubovy, Palmer, Peterson, Singh, & Heydt, 2012). ARC is a challenging
benchmark where the top-ranked agents only solve about 20% of tasks on a hidden test set
and perform a brute force ’generate & test’ approach using elaborately handcrafted domain-
specific languages (DSL) (Wind, 2020; de Miquel, Corominas, & Ariyasu, 2020). Instead, we
are investigating a systematic program synthesis approach that scales to high-dimensional
examples using the idea of task decomposition.
2.1 Background
In this subsection, we briefly introduce the idea of program synthesis as search and the
structure-mapping theory (SMT) (Gentner, 1983) both of which are integral parts of DA&C.
Readers already familiar with these concepts are free to skip ahead.
Program synthesis as search.
Learning a program is formulated as search through
a language space.
In addition to a semantic specification (e.g.
a set of input/output
examples), the agent is provided syntactic constraints (e.g.
grammar G) on the set of
program candidates (Alur et al., 2018). Every derivation from G is a candidate program. A
grammar G with a finite number of production rules can produce infinitely many programs
of increasing length. One of the central challenges in the field is scaling the synthesis to large
programs. The longer a solution program, the larger its search space which exponentially
grows (b|d|) in the depth of program d and the average branching factor b of the grammar.
DA&C contributes to the goal of scaling search-based program synthesis by trading a deep
program search with a linear number of smaller synthesis tasks.
Structure-mapping theory.
Analogies help us reason about an unfamiliar target do-
main (e.g. the structure of an atom: the relationship between electrons and its nucleus)
using existing knowledge of a familiar base domain (e.g. the structure of our solar system:
planets orbitting around the sun). Structure-mapping theory (SMT) systematizes the pro-
cess by which humans perform analogical reasoning. Computational models that implement
SMT consume propositional scene representations of a base and target and search for an
alignment between the two which maximizes their shared relational structure (systematic-
ity principle): for example, electrons orbit around the nucleus of an atom similar to how
planets orbit around the sun. The alignment between the base and target (called mapping)
consists of a set of matched entities and predicates, e.g. an electron is to the nucleus what a
planet is to the sun because both share the relationship of orbitting around an object with
greater mass. Mappings are evaluated systematically through three steps:
1. Generation of local match hypotheses mh: Each predicate pair in the base/target is
evaluated through a set of match constructor rules. If successful, the predicate pair
forms a local match hypothesis.
Local match hypotheses will be combined in the
following steps to find isomorphic subgraphs between the base and target. Match
constructor rules put syntactic contraints on the types of local match hypotheses that
are formed. An example of such a constructor rule is given below: In this case, any
two predicates with matching functors that are not attributes form a mh.
(mhc-rule (:filter ?b ?t :test (and (equal (exp-functor ?b) (exp-functor ?t))
(not (attribute? (exp-functor ?b))))) (construct-mh ?b ?t))
7

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
In the example above, the constructor rule leads to a match hypothesis being formed
over the predicate pairs (orbits electron nucleus) and (orbits planet sun). Let’s assume
that this step also returns a match between the predicate pair (greater mass sun
planet) and (greater mass nucleus electron).
2. Derivation of global mappings (GMAPs): A GMAP is a maximal and structurally
consistent set of local match hypotheses in the base/target. A GMAP is structurally
consistent if (1) all matched predicates also form match hypotheses between their
arguments and (2) all mhs in the GMAP yield a consistent set of one-to-one corre-
spondences between entities in the base/target.
In the example, the predicate pair ’orbits’ is structurally consistent if its arguments
’electron’/ ’planet’ and ’nucleus’/ ’sun’ also form match hypotheses.
The set of
predicates ’orbits’ and ’greater mass’ is then also structurally consistent because the
’greater mass’ predicate enforces the same one-to-one entity mapping as ’orbits’: ’elec-
tron’ is paired with ’planet’, ’nucleus’ is paired with ’sun’.
3. Ranking of GMAPs: All maximal structurally consistent GMAPs are ranked according
to their extent of matched relational structure. Nested relational structures are favored
over shallow matches which is characteristic of meaningful analogies.
A meaningful analogy in the running example is the combined set of both the ’orbits’
and ’greater mass’ predicates incl. all derived entity mappings.
We will make use of SMT in order to answer the question: How is the input of an example
structurally similar to its output? From there, we systematically search for programs that
transform a part of an input into its corresponding (SMT-derived) part in the output. The
search will first explore those pairwise correspondences that contribute most to a structurally
consistent and maximal alignment between the input/output.
3. Problem Definition
More formally, we solve a standard synthesis task represented as a tuple (Φ, G) of a specifi-
cation Φ and a grammar G. The specification is given in the form of (positive) examples Q,
where each example ql is an input/output pair ql = (Il, Rl). A program p is said to solve
the task when p ∈G such that ∀(I, R) ∈Q, p(I) = R.
In this work, we focus on problem domains with separable specifications which is a
commonly studied field of synthesis problems (Neider, Saha, & Madhusudan, 2016).
A
specification is separable if it only relates an input to its output and gives no further
constraints on the relation between outputs of different inputs, p(I) = R ∧Φ(I, R) with
program p and formula Φ (Alur et al., 2015). All synthesis tasks which make use of examples
fulfill this condition because Φ is implicitly specified over input/output pairs (I, R). We
split the problem of synthesizing a program into three subtasks (Figure 3): divide, align,
and conquer.
First, we learn to divide the input/output examples into sets of components.
The
purpose of divide is to identify components that repeat across examples.
For instance,
divide on the task in Figure 3 yields a set of orange and green shapes for each example
input/output.
8

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Figure 3: Every example is decomposed into component parts (e.g. visual objects in a
scene, words in a sentence). We use the information about components and their relations
to produce a structural alignment between the input/output scenes. Each correspondence
from this alignment is solved independently using off-the-shelf synthesis techniques. Corre-
spondences are considered in the order in which they contribute to the structural alignment
(analogy). For each unique partial program, we learn a formula which specifies its cor-
responding input space (the space of components on which it should be executed). The
combination of an input space and its transformation is called a transformation rule. A
solution program consists of a set of transformation rules that if applied to the components
in the input reconstruct all components in the output.
Second, we search for an alignment of the components in the input set of an example
with the components in its output set. The goal of the align step is to identify pairs of
input/output components that can be transformed into each other with a minimal program.
In the example, the mapping between orange squares in the input and green crosses in the
output has high probability because they share the same relational placement within the
image. The information on pairwise correspondences is used as a heuristic to guide the
search for a successful program. This is why it is no concern that orange crosses in the
input are also matched with green crosses in the output due to their surface similarity.
These matches are assigned a lower score and are never explored because by that time the
search will have already found a set of transformation programs that fully reconstructs all
output examples.
Third, we conquer each pair of aligned input/output components separately which means
synthesising a transformation program that reconstructs the output component using the
aligned component in the input. In order to combine transformation programs into a global
solution program, we learn a concept over all those input components (across examples)
which made use of the same transformation.
New test examples are evaluated by first decomposing their examples into components
and then evaluating each component against the concepts learned for the transformation
programs. If the evaluation succeeds, the transformation is applied to the input component;
its result is pasted to the output.
If align does not find a meaningful alignment for any of the components in the output,
it re-triggers divide to produce a new segmentation of the examples into updated sets of
components. If conquer is unable to synthesize a transformation for any of the output com-
9

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
Figure 4: Divide-align-conquer synthesis grammar G.
S
→
DECOMPOSE, T
T
→
τ, T | ϵ
τ
→
if CONCEPT then TRANSFORM
TRANSFORM
→
oi | primitive01(TRANSFORM, args) |
primitive02(TRANSFORM, args) | ...
ponents, it re-triggers align to find a new component pair for the missing output component.
We now introduce the problem starting from the language space of programs and then for-
malize the DA&C paradigm on top of this definition. As is standard in PBE, DA&C uses
syntactic priors to restrict the search space of programs. What distinguishes DA&C from
other PBE methods is that it requires the syntactic priors are assigned to one of the three
phases of the hierarchical search (divide, align, conquer). Specifically, DA&C expects as in-
put constraints on the segmentation of examples Gdecomp (’divide’), an encoding scheme for
segmented components Gconcept (’align’), and a grammar for the transformation programs
Gtransform (’conquer’). We later show that the total amount of syntactic priors provided
to a DA&C agent across these three inputs is not different from the syntactic priors pro-
vided to other synthesis agents within a single synthesis grammar. The process we used to
define these inputs for the experimentation domains in this paper (abstract visual reason-
ing and string transformations) was analogous to how one would define a single grammar:
We defined decomposition constraints, component attributes, and transformation primi-
tives, tested, and extended them in a process of iterative refinement. In order to assess
the effectiveness of splitting the synthesis grammar across three inputs and probing the
dependency of this architecture on custom-engineered domain specific primitives, we later
describe an experiment in which we purposefully introduce nonsense primitives into the
agent’s knowledge base. We also present an extensive ablation analysis in the experiments
section.
Space of programs.
G is a typed grammar that yields programs p : B →B which
consume and produce a domain-dependent standard type B (e.g. 2D bitmap, list of chars).
Every p ∈G is a composite program with three learnable subroutines (Figure 4):
1. A decomposition function δ : B →{B}N
i=0 which decomposes an input type B into a set
of components of the same type ∀ql : δ(Il, Rl) = ({oi}N
i=0, {oj}M
j=0). ’Divide’ expects
a configurable family of decomposition functions (e.g. in the form of a simple set
definition or a domain-specific grammar Gdecomp). It reflects basic syntactic knowledge
priors on how components comprise a domain example (e.g.
words are separated
using whitespaces, a visual scene can be comprised of multiple objects and a partially
occluded background). We will provide detailed examples in the following sections.
In the task of Figure 3, the learned decomposition function segments example images
into objects whose pixels are equally colored and directly neighboring.
10

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
The two remaining subroutines belong to the body T of the program. They make up
the if-statements defined by the synthesis grammar G in Figure 4. Each if-statement
is a transformation rule τ : B →{B}Y
j=0 that consumes exactly one component from
the input and produces a set of components in the output.
We explicitly define
solution programs using a grammar with top-level branches to make it easy to combine
transformations (Figure 4).
2. The transformation program p′(oi) = oj is the result of a synthesis performed on a
component tuple (oi, oj) using function primitives (e.g. drop first char(), color(c))
provided by a domain grammar Gtransform. The task in Figure 3 yields two transfor-
mations: One replaces objects of shape
with green objects of shape
. The other
copies the remaining objects to the output.
3. The rule condition learns the context in which to apply a transformation. This in-
formation is used to combine transformations on specific components into a solution
program on the task level. The rule condition is expressed as a formula over compo-
nent attributes (e.g. length of a substring, color of an object) taken from a domain
grammar Gconcept. It is a binary classifier that returns True iff the component belongs
to its concept: {B}i →[⊤, ⊥]. Because examples demonstrate a recurring logic, there
will be component tuples (across examples) that are solved by the same transforma-
tion program p′, their set is denoted as CORRp′. We learn a concept Cp′ over the
input components of tuples in CORRp′.
if o.shape ==
then o.replace_by( ).color(green)
if o.shape !=
then o.identity()
The unite operator ⊕combines tuples consisting of a program and its concept (p′
0, Cp′
0)
(p′
1, Cp′
1) into a single program.
τ0 ⊕τ1 = (Cp′
0 · p′
0) ⊕(Cp′
1 · p′
1) = if Cp′
0 then p′
0, if Cp′
1 then p′
1
(1)
At test time, the learned decomposition function is applied to each test example and
yields a set of components. On each input component oi, we check if it belongs to any of the
concepts Cp′ in the transformation rules and if it does, execute p′ to produce a component
in the output: τ = iff oi ∈Cp′ then p′(oi).
To summarize, a DA&C solution assigns to every component in the output oj ∈δ(Rl)
a component oi in the input oi ∈δ(Il), with corr(oi, oj) and a transformation program
τk = Cp′ · p′ transforming oi into oj : p′(oi) = oj such that if all transformation programs
τk ∈T are applied to the decomposed input δ(Il) = {oi}N
i=0, their resulting components
fully reconstruct the correct output, compose(
nS
i=0
TS
τk
τk(oi)) = Rl.
The divide, align, and conquer subroutines are interdependent. In the next section, we
introduce a specific implementation that leverages these interdependencies: We show how
to efficiently discover decomposition functions and correspondences between components
that minimize the complexity of a solution program.
11

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
4. Architectural Overview
We now detail the algorithmic approach to each of the DA&C parts following the running
example of Figure 3 already introduced in the last section.
The goal of the decomposition phase is to segment examples into sets of meaningful
components. A set of input components is meaningful whenever it leads the program search
to discover compact transformation programs T that fully reconstruct the output. This idea
is captured in the joint probability P(Q, δ, T ). We minimize its negative log-likelihood in
order to find a decomposition function δ and learn a minimal set of transformation rules T
which fulfill the specification given by inputs/outputs Q = (Il, Ol). The joint probability
is the result of a generative process which starts from the input examples and applies a
decomposition function together with a set of transformation programs to generate output
examples.
−log(P(Q, δ, T )) = −logP(δ) −
N
X
l=0
(logP(Rl|T , δ(Il)) + logP(T |δ(Il, Rl))))
(2)
The terms in Equation (2) from left to right are a prior probability on the decomposition
function, a likelihood expressed as an example dependent reconstruction accuracy, and a
prior on the set of transformation programs. The prior probability of a set of transformation
programs is dependent on the components produced by δ on a specific example (Il, Rl)
because their information is used to prune the space of programs, for example: to reconstruct
the green cross in the output (Figure 3), any program that makes use of a color terminal
other than green is pruned away. In contrary, the prior on δ is moved outside the sum,
because it is applied to all examples of a task equally.
The search is a generate & test approach outlined in Algorithm 1. For now, we only
consider the high level control flow without optimizations to illustrate its main ideas. First,
we compute an ordered list of decomposition functions ∆(line 1), ranked in the order of
estimated usefulness to the downstream synthesis. The subsequent DA&C loop proceeds
from the highest ranking decomposition function. The frontier set O keeps track of all seg-
mented components in the example outputs which have not been considered for synthesis.
We pick one (line 7) and do greedy best-first search over its ranked list of input components.
We learn a transformation program (line 12) on the highest ranked correspondence and add
it to the library T ′. Every time the library changes, we check if it contains sufficient trans-
formation programs to reconstruct the output components in all examples (line 14) and if
it does, return a global solution program that consists of a minimal set of transformation
rules. A minimal program set is one that minimizes the optimization function in Equa-
tion (2). The current output component ocurr is deleted from the frontier set O if all of its
correspondences in the input have been explored and the DA&C loop repeats.
4.1 Divide - Decomposition
We learn a bottom-up parse that extracts structured components from examples instead
of performing inductive synthesis on unstructured high-dimensional inputs at the level of
their atoms (e.g. pixels, letters). This is done in the divide stage: We synthesize a decom-
position function δ and segment the task examples into complete sets of mutually exclusive
12

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Algorithm 1 Overview Divide-Align & Conquer
Input: specification Φ = {(I, R)}L
l=0, program grammar: Gdecomp, Gconcept, Gtransform
Parameters: search depth d
Output: p ∈G s.t. ∀(I, R) ∈Φ : p(I) = R
1: ∆= ExtractAndRank(Gdecomp)
2: while |∆| > 0 do
3:
decomposition func ←Pop(∆)
4:
O ←SL
l=0 decomposition func(Rl)
▷Divide each example
5:
T ′ ←{}, C ←{}
6:
while |O| ≥1 do
7:
ol
curr ←Choose(O)
▷l is the example index which contains the current output component
8:
if ol
curr not previously explored then
9:
C[ol
curr] ←RankCorrespondences(decomposition func(Il), ol
curr)
▷Align
10:
end if
11:
oi ←Pop(C[ol
curr])
12:
τ = LearnTransformation((oi, ol
curr), Gtransform, Gconcept, d)
▷Conquer
13:
T ′ ←T ′ ∪τ
14:
if ∀oj ∈{decomposition func(Rl)L
l=0} covered by T ′ then
15:
return decomposition func, MinimalRuleSet(T ′, δ, Φ)
16:
end if
17:
if |C[ol
curr]| == 0 then
18:
O ←O \ ol
curr
19:
end if
20:
end while
21: end while
components. In the following sections, we will continue to use abstract visual reasoning as
an illustration example. We refer to our agent implementing DA&C as ’BEN’.
4.1.1 Segmentation
The decomposition of a standard type (e.g. string, image) δ(B) →{B}n yields a set of
components of the same type, called segmentation of B. In this paper, we use a symbolic
definition of decomposition functions δ over a set of constraints C that determine if two
atoms (e.g. pixels, characters) are part of the same component. Mono-colored is an example
of such a constraint which applies to all objects in the task of Figure 3. The reason we
use a symbolic implementation instead of a non-parametric statistical model (e.g. deep
autoencoders, CNNs) is because the domains we focus on only provide a single digit number
of training examples, exhibit low noise, and offer intuitive segmentation heuristics that can
be readily articulated by human task solvers (e.g. words are separated by whitespaces)
(Raza & Gulwani, 2017). ARC images also have at most 10 colors and are bounded in size
(30x30 pixels).
Our agent, BEN, works with a context-free grammar Gdecomp = (ΨN, ΨT , ΨS, R) to
encode these segmentation priors (visualized as an AND/OR graph in Figure 5a for the
13

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
(a) AND/OR graph of Gdecomp.
(b) Application of a decomposition function δ.
Figure 5: Segmentation grammar Gdecomp used for abstract visual reasoning tasks in ARC.
domain of abstract visual reasoning). ΨN is the set of non-terminals (e.g. background,
object), ΨT is the set of terminals (constraints), ΨS is the start symbol and R the set
of production rules to derive a unique set of constraints. The language of Gdecomp is the
set of decomposition functions {δ ∈Ψ∗
T |ΨS ⇒∗
Gdecomp δ} derivable from Gdecomp under the
transitive closure ⇒∗
Gdecomp. For example, the expression DJc1, c2K with constraints c1 ≜
’mono-colored’ and c2 ≜’direct neighbors’ is an abstraction over decomposition functions
that produce components containing only equally colored, directly neighboring pixels. A
decomposition function δ is applied to a bitmap by evaluating its constraints {ci}Z
i=0 on
pairs of pixels, Equation (3). Any two pixels that satisfy all constraints are merged into the
same object. The subsequent synthesis is performed on these objects instead of individual
pixels.
Z^
i=0
JciK(pixel1, pixel2) = ⊤→(pixel1, pixel2) ∈object
(3)
In the running task, the decomposition function learned by BEN segments the first
example into four orange objects and a blue background (Figure 5b).
In order to deal
with natural background/foreground separation, our domain grammar Gdecomp treats the
background object as a dense square which is partly occluded by objects in the foreground
compared to a sparse square with holes (’Law of Pr¨agnanz’ from Gestalt psychology (Wage-
mans et al., 2012)) (Figure 5a). Its color is either constant or inferred using simple heuristics
which exploit the fact that backgrounds often make up most of an image. Abstract visual
reasoning tasks frequently make use of occlusion to create the illusion of a depth ordering
amongst objects. Accepting occlusion as one fundamental principle of our world model,
leads to simpler object parses and later on also simpler solution programs.
In order to work with other domains, we update Gdecomp to reflect the compositionality
priors of the new domain. For instance, string manipulation tasks have intuitive segmen-
tation boundaries in the form of special characters (e.g. comma, whitespace, colon). The
domain of string manipulation tasks is introduced in the experiments section.
4.1.2 Optimization - generalization difficulty
We recall that the goal of the divide stage is to identify components which lead the program
search to discover a set of transformation programs T that are compact and successfully
14

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
reconstruct the task outputs. A naive approach could use the domain grammar as described
in Section 4.1.1 to linearly search through LGdecomp until it finds a segmentation which yields
a perfect reconstruction of the output given some library of transformations. However, the
number of decomposition functions in LGdecomp is too large to be traversed exhaustively.
Even the evaluation of a single δ is costly because it requires us to minimize the negative
log-likelihood of P(Q, δ, T ) by doing best-first search over a potentially large number of
pairwise correspondences.
The problem is further complicated by the fact that only slight syntactical differences
in the segmentation constraints can lead to segmentations with vastly different semantics
(usefulness in terms of the downstream synthesis). This means that the evaluation feedback
from one δ cannot easily be used to direct the search towards more promising decomposition
functions. Instead, we leverage the observation that decomposition functions that produce
meaningful segmentations and lead to perfect reconstruction on the first input/output pair
(I1, R1), are more likely to also yield meaningful segmentations on the remaining pairs ql.
The same argument applies to individual components: decomposition functions which lead
to the successful reconstruction of the first component in the first output are more likely
to also yield meaningful segmentations for the remaining components and examples. This
means, we estimate the usefulness of a decomposition function δ by evaluating its joint
probability on a single segmented component in the first output. We apply this estimation
to all decomposition functions within Gdecomp.
ˆP(Q, δ, T ) = P((I1, o1), δ, T )
and
o1 ∈R1
(4)
4.2 Align - Structural Alignment
The synthesis goal is to learn a minimal set of transformation programs T which act on
input components and reconstruct output components. We denote this partial mapping as
a set of learned correspondences corr : oi →oj in the Cartesian product δ(Il)×δ(Rl). This
step is combinatorially expensive in theory. However, compositional real world domains
provide rich constraints that we use to find likely correspondences fast.
Our approach is inspired by analogical reasoning which has been investigated as a foun-
dational mechanism humans use to map knowledge of familiar situations onto new domains.
The field’s most prevalent theory is structure-mapping theory (SMT) (Gentner, 1983), first
developed in the cognitive sciences and afterwards implemented as a computational model
in the computer sciences, called the structure mapping engine (SME) (Falkenhainer et al.,
1989). We leverage SME to search for a structural alignment between input/output ex-
amples which maximizes their shared relational structure. From there, we rank pairwise
correspondences between components in the input/output relative to their contribution
to the structural alignment and explore them iteratively until we have recovered enough
transformation programs to solve the entire output.
In the experiments, we evaluate how maximizing the joint relational structure between
examples speeds up synthesis and biases the search towards well-generalizing programs.
The structural alignment performed by SME is symbolic and, thus, requires a propositional
encoding of the decomposed scenes.
15

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
Figure 6: Example of a qualitative spatial propositional encoding of two decomposed objects
in an abstract visual reasoning task.
4.2.1 Propositional Encoding
We build on a set of basic assumptions that make the symbolic encoding of scenes domain-
independent. A propositional encoding is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) which relates
expressions about components within a scene.
Expressions are either primitive entities
(components) or predicates. Every predicate is either a relation (i.e above-of ), a function
(e.g. width) or an attribute (e.g. orange). An expression E is a vertex in a graph and forms
edges to all of its arguments (Figure 6). These are its descendants. They share E as a
common ancestor. An expression with no ancestors is called a root. A propositional scene
encoding can contain more than one root. An expression E′ is reachable from an expression
E if it is part of its transitive closure R∗(E). The depth of an expression is simply the
minimum number of edges needed to reach it, starting at a root node.
The objective of the encoding is to facilitate a fast alignment of the shared structure
in the input/output examples which in turn leads to simpler solution programs. This is
because the more similar a pair of aligned components across input/output, the shorter the
program that is needed to transform one into the other. Structure-mapping theory (SMT)
argues that humans solve the combinatorial explosion of possible mappings between a base
and target through structural alignment. This means they favor mappings between the base
and target with deep shared relational structure (systematicity principle). Evidence from
the cognitive sciences suggests that especially qualitative spatial relations are crucial to this
process (Lovett & Forbus, 2017).
The specific relations used are domain-dependent, e.g. basic positional (e.g. left-of )
and topological relations from the Region Connection Calculus (RCC8). The complexity of
a program that transforms one component into another is influenced both by the degree of
matched relational structure and the extent of feature overlap between the two components.
Therefore, we also add object features to the encoding.
Nominal domain features (e.g. a component’s color) are encoded as attributes. Any
other features, such as a component’s width or shape, are encoded as functions. For each
functional output type (e.g. scalar, matrix), there is an equivalence relation (e.g. =ARITH,
=2D) that compares specific values with constants of that type (Figure 6). Domain predi-
cates are manually provided. We use 15 features (Table 1) for the abstract visual reasoning
data sets.
16

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Object features - Abstract visual reasoning
ID
Feature
Explanation
Derived from
1
color
2
num colors
number of unique colors in the object
color
3
row origin bbox
top left corner of the object’s bounding box
4
col origin bbox
top left corner of the object’s bounding box
5
shape
2D array of pixels in bounding box
6
size
number of pixels in the object
shape
7
width
shape
8
height
shape
9
ranked color
ordinal: decreasing with the number of objects of this color
color
10
ranked color rev
ordinal: increasing with the number of objects of this color
color
11
ranked size
ordinal: decreasing with size
size
12
ranked size rev
ordinal: increasing with size
size
13
ranked shape
ordinal: decreasing with the number of objects of this shape
shape
14
ranked shape rev
ordinal: increasing with the number of objects of this shape
shape
15
filled
boolean flag: bbox is filled by the object completely
shape
Table 1: Object features used in BEN on abstract visual reasoning tasks.
4.2.2 Structure-Mapping
We provide the propositional encodings to SME and follow its three-step evaluation de-
scribed in the background to extract correspondences between input/output components.
In the running example (Figure 3), a local match hypothesis mh (Section 2.1) is formed
between the
-shaped object in the input and the green
-shaped object in the output.
During the second step, we derive maximal and structurally consistent global mappings
between the input/output (isomorphic subgraphs in their DAGs) (line 1 in Algorithm 2).
Finally, we adapt how SME scores GMAPs to take into account both matched relational
structure as well as feature similarity between matched components (line 5 in Algorithm 2).
We do this to guide the downstream synthesis towards compact transformation programs.
The updated scoring function Equation (5), therefore, evaluates local match hypotheses
based on their depth d in the DAG and a feature similarity metric sim where more impor-
tance is given to the matched relational structure ω0 > ω1. The score of a GMAP is equal
to the sum of the scores of its match hypotheses.
score(GMAP) =
|root∈GMAP|
X
f=0
|mh∈R∗(rootf)|
X
g=0
ω0 ∗d(mhg) + ω1 ∗sim(mhg)
(5)
In the running example in Figure 1a, input objects are preferably matched with their
position-invariant counterparts in the output. These pairwise correspondences receive high
evaluation scores because they map most of the qualitative relational structure in the input
to the output. Correspondences between, e.g. the orange
-shaped objects in the input
and green
-shaped objects in the output, are also generated due to feature similarities.
17

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
Algorithm 2 RankCorrespondences
Input: base representation EI, target representation ER
Parameters: match constructor rules MHC
Output: ranked correspondences CORR
1: GMAP = SME(EI, ER, MHC)
2: CORR ←{}
3: for oj ∈ER do
4:
CORR[oj] ←{}
5:
for gmap ∈GMAP do
6:
score = Score(gmap)
▷see Equation (5)
7:
CORR[oj] ←{CORR[oj] ∪(oi, score)|(oi, oj) ∈gmap}
8:
end for
9:
Sort CORR[oj] in decreasing order of score
10:
Backfill CORR[oj] with missing correspondences from {(oi, oj)|oi ∈EI}
11: end for
12: return CORR
However, their scores are much lower as they do not account for any of the relational
structure shared between the input/output.
In the following conquer stage, we perform synthesis on individual pairs of compo-
nent correspondences extracted from GMAPs. Those correspondences are explored in the
order of their associated GMAP scores (line 6 in Algorithm 2). This means that we greed-
ily perform synthesis on input/output pairs with similar relational structure and features.
However, the best-first search will never cause DA&C to miss a transformation program
because CORR contains an exhaustive list of all pairwise correspondences of an output
object with the input (line 10 in Algorithm 2). In the worst case, it will iteratively explore
the Cartesian product of component correspondences between the input/output.
Line 1 in Algorithm 2 calls SME (Structure Mapping Engine). We refrain from reprinting
detailed pseudo code in this paper and refer to (Falkenhainer et al., 1989) for the original
implementation of SME.
Complexity analysis.
(1) The construction of local match hypotheses has a worst-case
performance of O(N2) with N being the average number of expressions in E(I) and E(R).
Match constructor rules are applied to every predicate pair in the base/target. (2) The
worst-case performance of finding maximal structurally consistent GMAPs is that of finding
maximal sets of isomorphic subgraphs between the base/target which is given by O(N!).
(3) The computation of a GMAP evaluation score, Equation (5), is a graph walk over the
number of roots within each GMAP and each of their transitive closures R∗(root).
Its
performance is bounded by the total number of local match hypotheses which is O(N2) in
the worst case. The initial generation of the encodings (using unary and binary predicates)
has a worst-case performance of O(N2) which does not change the worst-case performance
of the entire algorithm. In practice, we observe that the structural alignment using SME
(Algorithm 2) performs significantly below its worst-case bound and depends heavily on
the propositional scene encoding.
Structural alignment performs best on deeply nested
relational encodings with a variety of different relations (Falkenhainer et al., 1989). We
18

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Figure 7: Domain grammar for abstract visual reasoning GARC.
τ
→
(if CONCEPT then TRANSFORM)
TRANSFORM
→
oi, border(TRANSFORM, corr, env, #hole),
inner(TRANSFORM, corr, env),
color(TRANSFORM, corr, env, oj.color),
shape(TRANSFORM, corr, env, oj.bbox),
replace(TRANSFORM, corr, env, select(REFERENCE)),
cut(TRANSFORM, corr, env, #hole),
denoise(TRANSFORM, corr, env),
move(TRASNFORM, corr, env, MD, #hole),
scale(TRANSFORM, corr, env, #hole),
rotate(TRANSFORM, corr, env, #hole),
mirror(TRANSFORM, corr, env, #hole),
complement(TRANSFORM, corr, env)
MD
→
by, to, in
REFERENCE
→
most colorful, largest, other
analyze the impact of analogical reasoning as part of the ablation studies in the experiments
section.
4.3 Conquer - Synthesis Of Transformation Programs
The structural alignment of two scenes yields a ranked list of component tuples (oi, oj)
between the input and output scenes.
From this, the search for transformation rules τ
proceeds in two steps.
(1) Rule consequent: We treat each tuple as its own synthesis
specification where the goal is to learn a transformation program p′(oi) = oj that transforms
oi into oj. (2) Rule condition: For every transformation program p′, we learn a concept
Cp′ over all input components that make use of p′ across examples. A transformation rule,
therefore, consists of a specific manipulation and the context in which it is applied.
BEN repeatedly picks the highest-ranking component tuple (as evaluated in the align
stage), solves a synthesis task after which it updates the information on (1) known transfor-
mations and (2) their respective concepts. At the end of each iteration, if the set of collected
transformations up to this point is sufficient to reconstruct all components across all out-
puts, it provides a solution program that consists of a minimal set of transformations. It
can update its solution program as more compact transformation rules are discovered until
it eventually terminates once synthesis has been performed on all correspondences in the
Cartesian product δ(Il)×δ(Rl).
We now consider a single synthesis loop (line 12 in Algorithm 1) on the highest-ranking
correspondence (component tuple).
4.3.1 Rule Consequent: Search For A Transformation
The conquer stage can use an off-the-shelf synthesis engine. BEN for example follows a
generate & test approach using top-down enumerative search that explores all programs
up to a predefined depth d. Transformation programs in the running example are derived
19

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
from the domain grammar GARC in Figure 7 which contains primitives for basic geometric
operations such as scaling, translating, rotating, and filling of objects.
Optimizations.
Here we introduce a crucial adaptation to standard enumerative search
in order to exploit the fact that synthesis is executed on component tuples: The domain
grammar GARC which houses the geometric primitives used to reason about abstract visual
scenes does not contain derivations for the arguments of its primitives. Their arguments
are either analytically specified by directly referencing the information contained within
the output component of the underlying correspondence (e.g.
see the ’oj.color’ in the
color() primitive) or they make use of ’holes’ which are dynamically filled once a program
candidate is executed. When a primitive is called with a ’hole’ as argument, it derives a
parametrization which is correct in the context of the current correspondence or returns an
error upon which the program candidate is discarded immediately. For example, the scale
primitive analytically computes the scaling factor that is needed in order to change the size
of the input component to that of the output component and replaces the ’hole’ by this
value. The use of ’holes’ significantly reduces the size of the search space because fewer
programs are enumerated. In the experiments, we show that by exploiting the information
that is available within the component tuple in this way, the speed-up in the synthesis can
well account for the overhead needed to identify and encode meaningful component tuples.
Depending on the type of arguments and their permissible range of values, ’holes’ allow
us to work with primitives such as the ’shape’ operator which would otherwise be intractable
to search through: Consider the transformation program o.shape( ).color(green) which is
the result of the synthesis performed on the
-shaped component in the input and the green
-shaped component in the output. The 2D shape argument can simply be deduced from
the matched output component and does not need to be searched. The same is true for the
color argument.
Performing synthesis on a single component tuple potentially leads to a large number of
successful transformation programs many of which do not generalize to other examples. In
order to bias the synthesis towards minimal and well-generalizing solution programs, after
each synthesis loop, we only keep track of whatever transformation program reconstructed
the most additional output components across examples. This is the reason why in line 12
in Algorithm 1 the synthesis only returns a single transformation program. The dictionary
T ′ initialized in line 5 in Algorithm 1 records and updates which components are solved by
which transformation program.
4.3.2 Rule Condition: Learn A Concept Definition
In the previous step, we synthesized transformation programs on input/output component
tuples. In order to combine these individual transformations into a program that solves
the entire task, we now learn Boolean logic formula that describe the context in which a
transformation is to be executed. Afterwards, we will use these to combine transformation
programs with ’if-then’ statements.
The problem is a standard binary concept learning task over components f(oi) →{0, 1}
where the concept to be learned represents a subset of components. For each transformation
program p′, we partition the set of input components into three groups:
20

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
1. The set of positive components P that successfully reconstruct a component in the
output using p′, ∀oi ∈P : p′(oi) ∈{δ(Rl)}L
l=0.
2. The set of negative components N that incorrectly reconstruct parts of the output if
p′ was applied to a component from this set.
3. A set of neutral objects which do not generate false outputs but also don’t reconstruct
any component in the output if p′ was applied to a component from this set (e.g.
partial reconstruction of an output component, out-of-bounds transformations).
Algorithm 3 Constrained DNF learner
Input: X: component representations {0, 1}(n,m), Y : labels of {0, 1}n
Parameters: j: max number of conjunctions
Output: DNF
1: DNF = []
2: P + = {oi|oi ∈X ∧Y [oi] == 1}
3: N−= {oi|oi ∈X ∧Y [oi] == 0}
4: for i in 1..j do
5:
conj ←solve Equation 6-9 on P + and N−
6:
Add conj to DNF
7:
Remove from P + all components covered by conj
8:
if P + is empty then
9:
return DNF
▷Perfect classifier, done
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return DNF
A key challenge is the limited number of observations available per task. There are
only as many examples as there are components in all inputs, generally between 3 to 30.
However, the fact that a task requires perfect reconstruction of all outputs introduces a
strong inductive bias: Namely, the concept must cover all positive components P but none
of the negative components Z. If the concept did include even a single negative example, at
least one of the example outputs would be reconstructed incorrectly. The learner imposes
no constraints on neutral components. In addition, we expect a good concept to only use a
small number of component features for generalization purposes.
Given that we have already generated symbolic encodings of each component during the
align phase, we learn a Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) (Valiant, 1985) over component
features. A DNF is a disjunction of conjunctions. It is best understood as a set of rules,
where each rule specifies a set of properties. If at least one rule applies, the DNF evaluates
to true. It is a function {0, 1}m →{0, 1}. In order to learn a DNF over a variety of domain
features, we first hash any non-numeric features (e.g. color, shape) and then double one-
hot encode all attributes, such that there is a Boolean for each attribute-value combination
as well as its negation (e.g. ’color == orange’ and ’color != orange’; ’shape ==
’ and
’shape !=
’ etc).
Instead of enumerating all conjunctions up to a fixed number of conjuncts, and selecting
from those, we use an implicit generation approach where we formulate the problem of
21

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
generating a single conjunction through constraint optimization. We make use of constraint
programming for item set mining (Guns, Nijssen, & De Raedt, 2013) to formulate the
following constrained optimization problem:
maximizeS
w
X
O+ −
X
S
(6)
s.t.
O+ = cover(S, P)
(7)
O−= cover(S, N)
(8)
X
O−= 0
(9)
where S (|S| = m) contains a Boolean decision variable for every Boolean attribute in the
double one-hot encoded component representation, P and N are the positive and negative
components (their representations), O+ and O−contain a Boolean decision variable for
every positive/negative component that represents whether the component is covered by
the conjunction S or not. The constraints on lines (7) and (8) compute which objects in
P and N are covered by S. The constraint on line (9) ensures no negative components are
covered and the objective function on line (6) is a lexicographic optimization which first
maximizes the number of covered P and then minimizes the number of Boolean attributes
used in the conjunction. The pseudocode of the overall DNF learner is in Algorithm 3.
While the optimization problem has to search over a worst-case exponential number
of conjunctions, there are only a few examples and the constraints provided by negative
instances greatly limit the search space. In practice, constraint solvers find solutions to
this problem very rapidly. In the running example (Figure 1a), the learned DNFs contain
a single conjunction with a single Boolean attribute set to true.
if o.shape ==
then o.replace_by( ).color(green)
if o.shape !=
then o.identity()
To summarize, a transformation rule consists of a condition and consequent. Conditions
are concepts about sets of components.
Consequents are transformation programs over
domain-specific transformation primitives. Multiple transformation rules together with a
decomposition function make up a solution program. When a solution program is executed
on a test input, the input is first decomposed into components which are then evaluated
against each of the transformation rules of the program. Whenever a rule condition evaluates
to true, it triggers the execution of the corresponding transformation program on the current
input component which completes the DA&C paradigm.
5. Experiments
Following our description of the DA&C paradigm, we claim that the use of segmentation
and analogical matching for structured domains enables agents to learn complex programs
in less time. To this end, we evaluate BEN, our implementation of DA&C using standard
top-down enumerative synthesis, across two domains: abstract visual reasoning used as a
running example throughout the paper (Section 5.2) and string transformation tasks (Sec-
tion 5.1). We select those because they cover the spectrum from an established experimen-
tation domain for program synthesis (string transformations) to a challenging new domain
22

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
benchmark that has proven difficult for current synthesis strategies. Our experiments seek
to investigate three research questions:
Q1 How does the predictive accuracy of BEN behave in comparison to state-of-the-art ILP
systems? We pay special attention to how their predictive accuracies are influenced
by the size of the example sets.
Q2 How does the use of analogical matching on structured real-world synthesis tasks
influence the runtime complexity of BEN which is expected to run with a worst case
time complexity of O(n2) with n being the number of segmented components in the
example input/output?
Q3 What is the effect of growing solution programs on solution times of BEN, especially in
the context of real-world structured domains in which solution programs are frequently
observed to linearly grow in the number of independent sub programs?
All experiments are run on a desktop with a single M1 Max CPU and 64GB of RAM.
Our code and an overview of the tasks solved by BEN are available in the supplementary
materials.
5.1 Experiment 1: String Transformations
We evaluate our approach using the established domain of string transformation tasks.
Materials.
We experiment with a publicly available data set of 130 real world string
transformation tasks from Cropper and Dumanˇci´c (2020). The initial subset of tasks was
curated by Gulwani (2011) from online Microsoft Excel forums, later expanded by Lin,
Object features - String transformation tasks
ID
Feature
Explanation
Derived from
1
content
list of characters
2
index front
index position of substring from the front
3
index back
index position of substring from the back
4
index even
boolean: even front index
index front
5
length
number of characters
content
6
number of uppers
number of capitalized characters
content
7
number of lowers
number of lowercase characters
content
8
number of digits
number of digits
content
9
number of alphas
number of alphabetical characters
content
10
number of alnums
number of alphanumeric characters
content
11
all upper
boolean: all capitalized characters
content
12
all lower
boolean: all lowercase characters
content
13
all digits
boolean: all digits
content
14
starts with upper
starts with capitalized character
content
Table 2: Object features used in BEN on string transformation tasks.
23

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
Dechter, Ellis, Tenenbaum, and Muggleton (2014) with additional handcrafted spreadsheet
manipulations and has been repeatedly used as a benchmark in program synthesis.
For this experiment, we provide BEN access to string features (Table 2) and primitives
used to manipulate character sequences (Table 3). We make sure all agents are evaluated
using a set of similar manipulation primitives.
We define the decomposition grammar
Gdecomp over subsets of non-alphanumerical characters (e.g. whitespace, comma, dot). A
decomposition function δ is one that splits a string based on the characters defined in
this subset. In addition, we also consider numeric characters as possible delimiters and
include a total decomposition that splits strings into individual characters. We chose this
decomposition grammar because it reflects much of the compositional structure of real world
strings. At the same time, it is already too expressive to be searched by naive enumeration.
During decomposition, delimiters are appended to the preceding component. We include
drop last() as a primitive operation into BEN’s knowledge base which can be used to access
components without the trailing delimiter.
BEN is evaluated against Brute (Cropper & Dumanˇci´c, 2020) and Metagol (Muggleton,
Lin, & Tamaddoni-Nezhad, 2015; Cropper & Muggleton, 2016), two state-of-the-art ILP
systems for learning recursive programs. Brute performs best-first-search guided by an
example-dependent loss function.
It was specifically designed for the synthesis of large
programs.
In addition, we also compare against a version of Brute with a traditional
entailment-based loss function. Metagol works with user-specified meta-rules which serve
as a declarative bias on the type of clauses that are considered as hypotheses, thus, limiting
the search space. We supply Metagol with the identity, inverse, precon, postcon, chain meta-
rules as recommended for learning dyadic programs by Cropper and Muggleton (2016).
BEN achieves significantly higher predictive accuracy than Brute and Metagol, even
though BEN cannot learn recursive programs and cannot perform predicate invention. Its
predictive accuracy is 17 percentage points above that of Brute and double that of Metagol
on tasks with 9 input examples Q1.
Transformation primitives - String transformation tasks
ID
Transformation
Explanation
Arguments
1
drop first(n)
drops leading n characters
n ∈{1...len(oi)}
2
drop last(n)
drops last n characters
n ∈{1...len(oi)}
3
take from front(n)
selects leading n characters
n ∈{1...len(oi)}
4
take from front(n)
selects last n characters
n ∈{1...len(oi)}
5
to uppercase()
capitalizes string
6
to lowercase()
lowercase string
7
capitalize first()
capitalizes first character
8
add space()
appends white space
9
add dot()
appends dot
10
add comma()
appends comma
11
replace(s)
replace with string s
s is given by the output string oj
Table 3: Transformation primitives used in BEN on string transformation tasks.
24

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
(a) Predictive accuracy.
(b) Mean learning time.
Figure 8: Performance on the real world string transformations data set. We report first
found solutions for all agents. All agents were executed with a time budget of 60s per task.
BEN solves over 80% of test examples given 2-3 training examples per task. In compar-
ison, Brute achieves a peak predictive accuracy of only 70%. Its peak performance is lower
because Brute has to find the entire solution program within a single synthesis search which
becomes exponentially more difficult in the size of the program. For example, in order to
extract the CPU usage ’95%’ from a command line output ’16,079 inferences, 0.003 CPU
in 0.003 seconds (5842660 Lips, 95% CPU)’, Brute learns a logic program that consists of
9 clauses and 31 literals which recursively deletes characters from the front and back of the
input string until only the CPU usage remains. BEN in comparison, learns a program that
first segments the input using a whitespace delimiter and extracts from it the second to last
substring from which it deletes the trailing whitespace.
DA&C leads to a speed-up in synthesis which more than makes up for the additional
time needed to compute a decomposition, find a meaningful structural alignment between
substrings in the input/output, and learn concepts for each transformation program. This
shows in the average learning times in Figure 8b. BEN consistently performs below the
average learning times of both Brute and Metagol. On tasks with 9 examples, Brute runs
28s on average, Metagol 37s while it only takes BEN 15s to process a task on average.
Reported learning times for BEN include the time spent searching for a segmentation,
encoding the segmented components, aligning the input/output, and learning concepts for
individual transformation programs.
BEN, compared to Brute and Metagol, shows a unique trend in predictive accuracy
over the number of input examples. Brute reaches its peak performance on tasks with a
single training example. Its performance monotonically decreases to 63% as more training
examples are added. More training examples make it more difficult to find hypotheses that
cover this growing set of examples (Figure 8a). BEN, on the other hand, does not show
a degradation in predictive accuracy on larger example sets. Its predictive accuracy on
tasks with 3 training examples is not significantly different from its predictive accuracy
on tasks with 9 training examples Q1. The reason for this is that BEN only performs
synthesis on component tuples and not sets of training examples where the complexity of
a single synthesis loop is independent of the number of total training examples in a task.
The number of examples directly impacts the second part of the conquer stage, the concept
learning. This is because in order to learn a concept, every component is assigned one of
25

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
three labels (positive, negative, neutral see Section 4.3.2) which requires the execution of
the transformation program on each input component. The impact shows in BEN’s average
learning times which follow a logarithmic increase. As the number of training examples
increases by a factor of three, mean learning times increase by 50%. Notably, established
ILP methods such as Brute and Metagol don’t show a saturation in learning times, because
their synthesis loop requires that each program candidate gets evaluated across all training
examples (Figure 8b).
If the training set consists of only a single example, BEN cannot determine how well
a transformation program generalizes to other training examples (Figure 8a). As a con-
sequence, it tends to learn overly specific transformations (e.g.
extensive use of shape
operations).
In much the same way, the concept learning in BEN requires a minimum
amount of 2-3 positive examples in order to learn an informative selector with high general-
ization power to held-out test examples (and its components). Brute and Metagol perform
significantly better on tasks with only a single example because they have better knowl-
edge priors on what constitutes a generalizable program. Missing segmentation primitives
are the primary reason why BEN does not solve more tasks. BEN cannot segment exam-
ples with arbitrary regex expressions, as for instance, the letter sequence ’aabb’ would be
needed in order to extract the first substring from the following input ’a38bz2saabb21u17a’
→’a38bz2s’.
Finally, we compare empirical solution times of BEN against its theoretical worst case
bound of O(n2) in the number n of substrings in the input and output (dashed graph in
Figure 9a). The number of substrings per example significantly influences learning times
even after controlling for the size of the solution program (F(3, 1137) = 218.8, p < .001)
with an explained variance of 36%. This is to be expected because examples with more com-
ponents will have a larger set of plausible component tuples to search through. In practice,
useful transformations are already recovered after only a few synthesis loops well below the
expected theoretical worst-case bound Q2. The search space of Brute (uniform with logical
entailment) and Metagol exponentially grows in the size of T , whereas the search space in
BEN remains constant in size and is traversed a linear m times depending on the number
m of transformation rules in a solution program. The total size of the solution program
(a) Solution times per segmented substrings.
(b) Solution times per program size.
Figure 9: Time complexity on string transformation tasks. We report first found solutions
on tasks with at least 3 input examples for all agents. Only tasks solved within the time
budget of 60s are considered.
26

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
shows no exponential impact on learning times in BEN Q3 (Figure 9b). When Brute uses
an example dependent loss function instead of logical entailment, its solutions times also
do not show an exponential trend with larger programs. The loss function it uses to guide
the synthesis search is the reconstruction accuracy in the output string which is similar to
BEN’s evaluation of reconstructed substrings (components) in the output. By working with
substrings instead of characters, however, BEN not only solves more tasks but also learns
much shorter solution programs on average (Figure 9b). Even though Metagol also learns
compact solutions programs fast, its predictive accuracy is only half of that of BEN which
makes a direct comparison difficult.
5.2 Experiment 2: Abstract Visual Reasoning
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of DA&C on program synthesis in high dimensional
domains, we apply BEN to abstract visual reasoning tasks. In this setting, we compare to
the state-of-the-art agents outside of ILP (Section 5.2.1) and evaluate different ablated
baselines of BEN (Section 5.2.2).
Materials.
We use the training part of the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC)
(Chollet, 2020) (Apache 2.0 license), which consists of 400 data sets that each contain 2-
10 examples comprising an input and an output where the outputs are generated by an
unspecified program that we wish to synthesize. The language of programs is determined
by developers and agents themselves; the benchmark does not specify a language over
programs.
5.2.1 Performance Benchmark
We compare BEN against ARGA (Abstract Reasoning with Graph Abstractions) (Xu,
Khalil, & Sanner, 2022), an agent specifically developed for ARC. It is equipped with object
centric priors which it uses to first segment examples into scenes of objects and then performs
greedy best-first search over graph representations using a DSL to manipulate the ’scene
graph’. We also compare against the winning submission of the ARC Kaggle competition
which makes use of a custom engineered DSL with handcrafted primitives and a performance
optimized implementation in C++ to perform brute-force search over bitmap manipulations
(Wind, 2020). We evaluate BEN with the object features and geometric transformation
primitives introduced in the main section of this paper (Table 1 and Figure 7).
We first report results on the entire ARC dataset and then move on to its subsets
for ’movement’, ’recoloring’, and ’augmentation’ tasks defined by (Xu et al., 2022). The
Kaggle agent solves the most tasks over all, close to 47% within a 2 minute time budget. Its
performance optimized implementation in C++ allows it to generate and test over 1.3 Mio
programs per task which it does in 35s on average. BEN solves about half as many tasks
for which it only generates an average of 0.2% as many candidate programs per task. The
use of program ’holes’ in the hierarchical DA&C search provides a succinct solution space
in which arguments are deduced from the components in the examples instead of being
searched top-down as done by the Kaggle agent. BEN takes an average of 23s to solve a
task which is competitive with the Kaggle agent despite its Python implementation. Both
BEN and the ARGA agent use a significantly reduced DSL compared to the Kaggle winner.
Whereas the Kaggle agent has access to 42 unique transformation primitives, many of which
27

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
Data set
Model
Number solved
Candidates explored
Avg. solution time
ARGA - augmentation
#1 Kaggle
24/67 (35.82%)
1932368
35.90s
ARGA
15/67 (22.39%)
7282
17.51s
BEN
19/67 (28.36%)
6818
29.60s
ARGA - movement
#1 Kaggle
19/31 (61.29%)
1906875
34.48s
ARGA
9/31 (29.03%)
12233
14.22s
BEN
13/31 (41.94%)
1743
17.83s
ARGA - recolor
#1 Kaggle
23/62 (37.10%)
1571957
30.10s
ARGA
18/62 (29.03%)
18851
25.63s
BEN
22/62 (35.48%)
2304
23.42s
All
#1 Kaggle
186/400 (46.50%)
1293492
34.65s
ARGA
45/400 (11.50%)
12412
19.75s
BEN
90/400 (22.50%)
3311
23.20s
Table 4: Results on the training part of the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC).
First found solutions within a maximum time budget of 2 minutes per task reported. The
#1 Kaggle agent and BEN were both run at a search depth of 4 on all tasks. During the
actual Kaggle competition, the #1 Kaggle agent ran as an ensemble at different search
depths to optimize scheduling. We report more challenging results at a search depth of
4. The ARGA agent does not expect a search depth as input; we use a time budget of 2
minutes.
were handcoded to solve specific tasks, BEN and ARGA purely rely on 11 generic geometric
primitives. Despite sharing the same number of primitives, BEN solves twice as many tasks
and generates three times fewer candidate programs as ARGA. BEN also consistently solves
more tasks on the ’augmentation’, ’movement’, and ’recolor’ subsets than ARGA but cannot
quite reach the performance of the Kaggle agent for the restrictive setting of a 2 min time
budget per task. Notably, BEN consistently generates far fewer candidate programs than
any of the other two agents. On the ’movement’ and ’recolor’ subsets, this even results in
a reduction of the search space by one order of magnitude compared to the graph based
representation of ARGA which also makes heavy use of segmentation priors.
Knowledge Priors.
We now take a look at specific task examples and work towards
an ablation analysis of BEN’s DA&C framework in order to investigate which part of its
performance is to due to better search versus only a refined domain-specific grammar. Most
of the tasks that BEN does not solve are due to either missing transformation primitives or
control flow logic in its current grammar GARC. The two tasks in Figure 10a are examples
of that: The first task requires a solution program that gravitates objects to the bottom
of the frame. This is a complex motion program which has to enforce that objects closest
to the bottom frame are translated first and that objects are only moved if their bottom
neighboring pixel is empty. The second task is a version of a shortest path problem where
the solution program is expected to find a trajectory which minimizes turns.
Both of
these tasks are only solved by the Kaggle agent (Wind, 2020) because it has access to
handcrafted primitives in its prior transformation library, namely a ’gravity’ operation and
a ’shortest path’ function which were custom engineered by its developer. Some of its 42
primitives only get used on one or a few tasks, whereas BEN only has access to 11 generic
28

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
geometric transformations. In other words, the performance of the current state-of-the-art
agent is in large parts due to hand-crafted, ad-hoc primitives, rather than better search.
No combination of primitives in BEN’s library (independent of the final size of a possible
solution program) can reason about the path between two objects unless that path is a
straight line. To make the comparison fairer, we conservatively reduce the agent’s primitives
to the ones that semantically match those in the domain grammar GARC of BEN (leaving
30 primitives). The matching was performed manually by studying the implementation
of the primitives in the Kaggle agent. In this case, the performance of the Kaggle agent
drops from 47% to less than 25%.
That is, BEN solves a comparable amount of tasks
with only a third of the primitives which is possible only because BEN decomposes tasks
into recurring components which leads to simpler transformations with a more compact
search space. BEN’s search space is more compact because a portion of the 30 primitives
in the Kaggle agent serve as segmentation (e.g. filter by color) and selector functions (e.g.
pick largest bitmap). In DA&C, segmentation and selector primitives are part of the divide
phase and the concept learning. They don’t influence the size of the program search space in
the main synthesis loop. In fact, selector primitives are not even searched but are entirely
inferred from components by induction. Because the synthesis loop in the Kaggle agent
is confounded with segmentation and selector primitives, it has to search through orders
of magnitudes more candidate programs to achieve comparable expressiveness to that of
the main synthesis loop in BEN augmented with a standalone segmentation and concept
learning phase. Another related reason why DA&C leads to a more compact search space
are the combinations of segmentation and selector primitives in the DSL of the Kaggle agent.
For instance, it includes a ’cutPickMax’ primitive which combines the ’cut’ and ’pickMax’
primitives into a standalone function, presumably to make it available at lower search
depths. BEN learns programs with the same semantics but offloads the ’pickMax’ to the
inductive concept learner which it can also apply to any other geometric primitive besides
’cut’ with no impact on the search space within the main synthesis loop. For the Kaggle
agent, the computational challenge of synthesizing complex programs in a high-dimenional
domain was overcome by hand-crafted sub programs which outsourced the cognitive effort
to the developer rather than the program synthesis. We instead use ARC to demonstrate
progress on the synthesis of complex programs from low-level primitives. BEN uniquely
solves 8% of the data set on which the Kaggle agent fails even with its original transformation
library of 42 primitives.
By splitting a deep program search across a linear number of much shallower synthesis
searches, BEN is able to solve tasks which were previously out of reach for state-of-the-art
agents on ARC. For example, the task in Figure 10b requires an agent to learn a program
that consists of 8 binary color swap operations. If an agent were to learn all eight operations
in a single program search, the required search depth during synthesis is also eight, too deep
for most grammars to still be exhaustively searchable. However, the color swap operations
can be quickly learned from individual object tuples. In this case, the maximum search
depth is reduced to one and the same search space is traversed eight times. BEN rapidly
finds solutions to this and similar tasks.
29

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
(a) BEN does not solve either one of these two
tasks, unlike the state-of-the-art Kaggle agent
which has handcrafted primitives, one to ’sim-
ulate gravity’ and another primitive which solves
shortest path problems.
(b) BEN executes a total of 8 synthesis loops to
retrieve the 8 binary color swap transformation
that make up the solution program, instead of
synthesizing 8 binary color swap operations in a
single deep program search.
Figure 10: Performance on example visual reasoning tasks taken from ARC.
5.2.2 Ablation Analysis
We compare to two ablated versions of BEN: one without analogical reasoning which per-
forms synthesis on random object tuples and iterates trough them until it has discovered
enough transformation programs to solve the task. The other without segmentation at all
performing synthesis on the input/output images directly.
The results in Figure 11a show that analogical reasoning helps BEN (blue bars) solve
more tasks in less time. In the restrictive case of a 15s time budget per task, BEN solves
roughly 33% more tasks than its ablated baseline without analogical reasoning. The perfor-
mance lead decreases to 7% for a 2min time budget as the random search eventually covers
a larger fraction of the total search space. Without segmentation, less than 12% of tasks
are being solved within 2min. We verified that each of the tasks solved by either of the two
baselines is also solved by BEN.
BEN has a average solution runtime of 15 seconds per task which is significantly lower
than that of the random baseline, with a mean of 20 seconds, evaluated using a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test on paired samples Z=160, p<.001 for a time budget of 30s per task (Fig-
ure 11b). The solution times include the time spent on segmentation and the time needed to
(a) Performance of BEN’s ablated baselines.
(b) Solution times per program size.
Figure 11: Performance benchmark on the abstract visual reasoning data sets from ARC.
We report first found solutions for all ablations. (Time budgets in Figure 11b are only
enforced for BEN.)
30

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
Component
Ablation
30 s
120 s
BEN
63
90
Divide
w/o multicolor objects
-24%
-33%
w/o diagonal neighbors
-5%
-22%
Conquer: synthesis search
depth ≤2
-37%
-50%
depth ≤3
+25%
-3%
+25% nonsense primitives in Gtransform
-22%
±0%
Conquer: concept learner
primary features
-34%
-27%
derived features
-24%
-10%
+50% nonsense attributes in Gconcept
±0%
±0%
Table 5: An ablation analysis of BEN’s core architecture design and domain specific knowl-
edge priors shows that the contents of its transformation grammar Gtransform and of its
component attributes Gconcept are especially robust to nonsense information.
identify meaningful object correspondences which shows that the additional computational
effort of SME (structural alignment of the input/output examples) is limited and easily
compensated for in the overall DA&C algorithm.
The solution times in BEN remain low even for crowded scenes with a large number
of decomposed objects (β = 1.25, p<.001), whereas the random baseline without analog-
ical reasoning does not scale to larger scenes (β = 3.81, p<.001) consistent with previous
observations on string transformation tasks Q2. The program size in Figure 11b refers to
the number of transformation programs in the first found solution program where each of
the transformation programs consists of multiple primitives and variables. The number of
transformation programs is a lower bound on the number of synthesis searches that BEN
needs to perform. Depending on the order in which correspondences are selected, more
synthesis searches will be necessary. On average, BEN runs 4.7 synthesis searches on a task
with an average number of correspondences of 16.4 where the first found solution program
contains an average of 2.5 transformations. This means BEN explores about twice as many
correspondences as would be minimally required to solve a task but only a fourth of all pos-
sible correspondences. This explains why program size is not a significant predictor of task
solution times Q3. Instead, interaction of analogical program synthesis and the number
of objects within a scene is a significant predictor of task solution times (F(3,176)=24.6,
p<.001). This confirms that the guidance from analogical synthesis is especially helpful for
tasks that require learning transformations over large scenes with many components.
In order to investigate the impact of the DA&C design on BEN’s performance, we sys-
tematically manipulate its search as well as its domain grammars and report the ablations in
Table 5. Most notably, adding as much as 50% additional nonsense attributes to component
encodings Gconcept or 25% additional nonsense primitives to the transformation grammar
Gtransform only has a small effect on BEN’s performance. In fact, adding more nonsense fea-
tures neither caused BEN to miss tasks nor did it increase solutions times. This is because
we learn concepts bottom-up on successful transformation programs instead of searching
them as logical formulas in a domain grammar which is what ARGA does.
Additional
transformation primitives prolong the time of a single synthesis search and, therefore, cause
BEN to timeout on 22% of tasks it had previously solved within a challenging 30 s time
budget per task. Its performance under a time budget of 120 s remains unaffected. We
31

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
present this as evidence that the domain-specific knowledge provided to BEN has not been
custom engineered and its performance is mainly due to intelligent hierarchical search in the
DA&C framework. Reducing the depth of the synthesis search generally leads to decreased
performance. On small time budgets, however, a slight reduction in search depth can have
the opposite effect when the majority of sub programs (needed for a solution program)
can be retrieved from a shallow synthesis search. As for the decomposition language, its
expressiveness (e.g., diagonal neighborhood, multicolor segmentation) directly impacts the
agent’s task performance.
1-1 Correspondences.
On some of the tasks, it is counter-intuitive how the reliance on
pairwise correspondences is improving rather than restricting search. We find that it is a
viable heuristic to guide the program search even in cases where there exist no obvious 1-1
mappings between input and output components. For instance, n-1 mappings frequently
occur in visual reasoning tasks in which information from multiple input components is
pooled (e.g. shape and color from two different components) to reconstruct a component in
the output. Another example of n-1 mappings are directed movements towards other objects
(Figure 12a). In this examples, BEN still finds the correct transformation starting from any
of the 1-1 correspondences within the n-1 mapping because its transformation grammar is
able to refer to knowledge from other input components (Figure 7). We have introduced
the ’REFERENCE’ non-terminal in Gtransform to make this explicit. The references in this
paper are hard coded (’largest object’, ’other object’ ...) but this does not need to be the
case. Similar to how DA&C uses constraint solving to learn a logic formula over input
components that make use of the same transformation program, constraint solving could be
used to learn a logic formula over ’referred components’ within transformation programs.
BEN also solves tasks which require the invention of new objects in the output such as
the example in Figure 12b. The correspondence which BEN leverages to synthesize the
pink pixel could be with any of the two pixels in the input. If the alignment produces 1-1
correspondences which don’t yield a meaningful transformation program, those will never
cause BEN to miss a task which it had otherwise solved, because the alignment is only used
as a heuristic on the order in which to search through the program space. In the worst case,
BEN explores the Cartesian product of all correspondences between the segmented input
and segmented output. We emphasize that DAC is no universal strategy to all synthesis
problems. It is ideally suited for those with compositional structure. If task examples have
no inherent compositional structure, BEN degrades to program synthesis search on the
unsegmented input/output examples.
Importance of the family of decomposition functions δ.
In order to analyze the
impact of the prior knowledge of Gdecomp on BEN’s performance, we conducted an ex-
ploratory study on the solution strategies of human task solvers (N = 4) (publication ref-
erence anonymized for blind review): Participants were presented with ARC tasks on a
web interface which asked them to reconstruct the missing output for each test case and
to highlight individual objects in each image tuple (Il, Rl) ∈Q. We used the reconstruc-
tion accuracy on test cases to control if participants understood a task. Only the image
segmentations from successful task solvers were considered in the subsequent analysis.
We find that the segmentations produced by BEN perfectly match those of human task
solvers for roughly 38% of the tasks. Whenever a segmentation deviates from those of human
32

A Divide, Align & Conquer Strategy For Program Synthesis
(a) BEN learns a program which moves both ob-
jects together, thereby compressing the shape of
the elongated object.
(b) BEN also invents new objects in the output
and can take into account information from the
input such as the x-coordinate at which an object
should be created.
Figure 12: BEN also solves ARC tasks which involve n-1 mappings or require the generation
of new components in the output.
participants, BEN is less likely to solve a task. The introductory ARC task in Figure 1a
is an example of the contrary: BEN finds an alternative segmentation in which directly
neighboring light-blue and green pixels are merged into the same object. The output is
colored light-blue whenever there exists a multicolored object in the input and its width is
larger than 3. This solution program does not fully capture the semantics of the task but is
sufficient to solve all test cases. In order to estimate the percentage of tasks that BEN fails
to solve due to insufficient segmentation, we randomly choose 50 failed tasks and directly
execute BEN on segmentations produced by human task solvers. BEN then solves 16% of
these previously unsolved tasks which suggests that missing transformation primitives and
object features are the main bottleneck instead of the current segmentation grammar.
6. Discussion And Future Work
Humans effortlessly induce large programs which generalize well to previously unseen test
cases, even in a few-shot learning setting, as in ARC or the real world string transformations
data set. Our work suggests that program synthesis can exploit the compositional nature
of structured domains to guide the search for well-generalizing programs in vast language
spaces and in high dimensional domains. That is done by decomposing the problem of
learning a single nested program into a two stage process: first, we find a segmentation of
examples into meaningful components and then perform multiple program synthesis tasks
on component tuples in the input/output. Second, separating the problem of searching for
component-specific transformations from the task of learning the contexts in which they
apply (the concept definition) leads to better generalizing programs. We implemented the
DA&C paradigm in our agent BEN using top-down enumerative search as a synthesis tech-
nique. Future work that evaluates the integration with other advanced synthesis techniques
appears promising. DA&C is a program synthesis framework which exploits the composi-
tional structure in task examples and otherwise degrades to whichever synthesis technique
it uses in its main loop.
Although BEN solves more string transformation tasks than state-of-the-art ILP base-
lines and a fair share of highly heterogeneous visual reasoning tasks, it does not yet match
33

Witt, Dumanˇci´c, Guns, & Carbon
the performance of an average human task solver. Humans seem to use additional strate-
gies that deviate from DA&C and traditional search-based synthesis in important ways. For
example, humans make efficient use of context switching, where the synthesis has access
to only those object features and transformation primitives which appear important to the
task at hand. This reduces the load of having to process many different encodings all at once
as well as limits the search space. Neurally-guided search could be a computational means
to this which would require an additional learning component or the neural implementation
of one of the DA&C subroutines.
It is well established in the cognitive sciences that higher-order functions in human
cognition, such as abstract reasoning over programs, influence the grouping of perceptual
units and the encoding of their features. In the future, we will explore how the decomposition
phase could be conditioned on the progress of the synthesis to group together what is likely
to act as a single functional unit in the solution program.
Finally, the assumption of independent object transformations is a simplification. Hu-
mans are readily able to find a suitable sequential order of object transformations for ex-
ample to make use of overpainting. The methods proposed in this paper do not rely on
independent object transformations per se and, hence, there is the need to investigate ways
of composing programs with complex dependencies between their transformations.
