International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
DOI: 10.5121/ijcsit.2019.11604                                                                                                                  29 
 
 
SELF-LEARNING AI FRAMEWORK FOR SKIN 
LESION IMAGE SEGMENTATION AND 
CLASSIFICATION  
 
Anandhanarayanan Kamalakannan1, Shiva Shankar Ganesan2 and  
Govindaraj Rajamanickam1 
 
1Department of Cyber Physical Systems, Central Electronics Engineering Research 
Institute, CSIR Madras Complex, Taramani, Chennai, India 
2PG Scholar, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Bridgeport, 126 Park Ave, 
Bridgeport, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Image segmentation and classification are the two main fundamental steps in pattern recognition. To 
perform medical image segmentation or classification with deep learning models, it requires training on 
large image dataset with annotation. The dermoscopy images (ISIC archive) considered for this work 
does not have ground truth information for lesion segmentation. Performing manual labelling on this 
dataset is time-consuming. To overcome this issue, self-learning annotation scheme was proposed in the 
two-stage deep learning algorithm. The two-stage deep learning algorithm consists of U-Net 
segmentation model with the annotation scheme and CNN classifier model. The annotation scheme uses a 
K-means clustering algorithm along with merging conditions to achieve initial labelling information for 
training the U-Net model. The classifier models namely ResNet-50 and LeNet-5 were trained and tested 
on the image dataset without segmentation for comparison and with the U-Net segmentation for 
implementing the proposed self-learning Artificial Intelligence (AI) framework. The classification results 
of the proposed AI framework achieved training accuracy of 93.8% and testing accuracy of 82.42% when 
compared with the two classifier models directly trained on the input images. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Self-learning annotation scheme, K-means Clustering, U-Net, Deep learning & Skin lesion image 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Deep learning techniques are widely used in medical imaging application for implementing 
clinical-decision support algorithms. Here, we establish a decision support algorithm based on 
two-stage deep learning framework for screening of skin lesion images. To perform effective 
feature extraction and classification on the lesion images, background skin portion needs to be 
discarded before training the algorithm. Thus, image segmentation technique plays a vital role 
in extracting Region of Interest (RoI) portion from an image. For segmentation, deep learning 
algorithms generally require big image dataset with manual annotation [1]. The medical image 
dataset mostly do not have annotation information for the entire voluminous data. To resolve 
this issue and train U-Net segmentation model, author [2] has discussed the implementation of 
ground truth mask generation using fundamental image processing method. This method 
consists of adaptive histogram equalization and morphological processing techniques for 
generating initial binary labels for the segmentation. The approximate annotation information 
for an unlabelled image dataset can be obtained using combination of different processing 
methods like segmentation, clustering, morphological operations and selective search etc. For 
skin lesion image segmentation, K-means clustering algorithm is found to be an appropriate 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
30 
 
method with fixed number of clusters [3, 4]. In this framework, a self-learning annotation 
scheme was proposed for generating initial annotation information using unsupervised K-means 
clustering algorithm. The generated labels were used to train the U-Net segmentation model. 
The trained model segments the lesion region and sends the cropped portion to Convolutional 
Neural Network (CNN) classifier. The classifier model further classifies the segmented portion 
as benign or malignant.  
In recent years, many methods were discussed for automatic skin lesion segmentation and 
classification for dermoscopic images. S. M. Jaisakthi et. al [5] proposed an automatic 
segmentation algorithm for skin lesion images using the combination of GrabCut and K-means 
clustering, in which GrabCut segments the foreground image and K-means along with flood-fill 
technique extracts the lesion region from the foreground. Youssef Filali et. al [6] trained SVM 
algorithm to classify the skin lesion images with structural and textural features extracted from 
the segmented portion. Manu Goyal .et al [7] proposed an ensemble deep learning method for 
lesion image segmentation, in which the results of two models namely DeepLabv3 and Mask-
RCNN were combined to produce accurate segmentation mask. Similarly for classification, the 
deep learning models are rigorously trained on medical image dataset like chest X-rays to 
classify images infected with signs of bacterial and viral infections.  These models are also 
trained on retinal optical coherence tomography (OCT) images to classify age-related macular 
degeneration and diabetic retinopathy [8]. The trained CNN model is also effective in 
distinguishing normal OCT images from age-related macular degeneration [9].  
In this work, we propose a self-learning AI framework consisting of two-stage deep learning 
model for performing skin lesion image segmentation and classification. The first stage 
discusses about how to segment region of interest in lesion images without ground truth 
information. The second stage explains about the benefits of image segmentation in improving 
the classification accuracy of LeNet-5 classifier model. The results of the proposed framework 
in classifying benign and malignant lesion images are tabulated and compared with the CNN 
models namely ResNet-50 and LeNet-5 trained directly on input images. The rest of the paper is 
organized as follows: Section 2 briefly explains about the proposed two-stage deep learning 
framework for skin lesion image segmentation and classification. Section 3 describes about the 
image dataset preparation and algorithm implementation. The results of the proposed algorithm 
with other CNN classifier models are reported and discussed in Section 4. The conclusion on 
the self-learning AI framework and its implementation is discussed in Section 5. 
2. SELF-LEARNING AI FRAMEWORK 
The annotation information is very much essential for training any deep learning segmentation 
algorithm. The main objective is to develop a two-stage deep-learning AI framework which can 
segment lesion region from its normal portion and classifying them under two main classes 
namely benign and malignant. The segmentation model in the AI framework learns the 
annotation information in a self-learning manner. The performance of the framework is 
evaluated and compared with single stage CNN classifier models. 
2.1. Self-learning Annotation Scheme 
Self-learning annotation scheme is based on unsupervised segmentation approach. In this 
method, to generate initial annotation data for skin lesion image segmentation, spatial K-means 
clustering algorithm was used. The K-means algorithm classifies the image pixels by grouping 
similar pixel intensities into i number of clusters. Based on the need, the optimum i-value was 
chosen. In skin images, for lesion region segmentation, we set i=5 to obtain five cluster regions 
covering entire image [4]. We need only two clusters representing the ROI and the background 
[3]. Therefore the five clusters are grouped under two regions to obtain binary segmentation 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
31 
 
mask as depicted in the flowchart Fig.1. The generated binary mask for each lesion image is 
manually checked for their approximate coverage over the lesion region. In case, the 
background region is covered by the binary mask instead of the lesion region, then it is simply 
inverted using open-source image editor like GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program). The 
final set of approximately corrected binary segmentation mask becomes initial annotation data 
and serves as target labels for training U-Net segmentation model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart of the self-learning annotation scheme 
No 
Yes 
Binary 
label=1 
Binary 
label=0 
Input Skin Lesion Image 
Apply K-means clustering with 
number of clusters, i = 5 
Check for each pixel: 
if (Cluster area < Mean 
area) 
Start 
Calculate mean area of clusters to 
merge five clusters into two regions  
Yes 
No 
Stop 
Initial annotation / binary 
mask for lesion region 
segmentation is ready 
Manually invert few generated binary masks 
using imaging tool, if the lesion region is filled 
with zero value. 
Is the lesion region 
filled with ‘0’ value 
instead of ‘1’ 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
32 
 
The self-learning annotation scheme has reduced the time and expertise needed for manual 
labeling. This scheme exploits the outcome of unsupervised methods to effectively train deep 
learning based segmentation techniques [1] and also helps to deal with medical image dataset 
which don not have ground truth information.  
 
2.2. U-Net Segmentation 
 
After generating the initial annotation data using self-learning annotation scheme from the 
lesion dataset, the U-Net model was used as the deep learning architecture to implement lesion 
region segmentation. In medical image segmentation, the U-Net model generally poses better 
performance in terms accuracy and efficiency [3, 10].  The U-Net architecture consists of three 
main sub-divisions: Down-sampling layer, Up-sampling layer and skip connection. The down-
sampling layer consists of four convolution layers for encoding the image data for analysis and 
up-sampling layer consists of four convolution layers for decoding the latent space for image 
reconstruction. Skip connections are used to transfer fine-grained information from the low-
level layers of the encoding path to the high-level layers of the decoding path to enhance the 
contextual information for image segmentation [1, 2]. 
 
To train U-Net segmentation model, the skin lesion images were resized to dimension of 256 x 
256 pixels and given as input to the segmentation model along with target binary mask 
generated by annotation scheme. The training mainly focusses on distinguishing lesion region 
from normal skin portion for image segmentation. Image segmentation is a binary class 
problem, where the lesion region needs to be separated from the normal skin portion and the 
background. Thus the U-Net training model was optimized using adam optimizer with binary 
cross-entropy as loss function. After training several epochs, the U-Net model showed better 
segmentation performance than the K-means clustering algorithm as shown in Fig.2. The 
developed model was used to segment the lesion region from the skin image.  
 
2.3. Lesion Image Classification 
 
Different CNN architectures like LeNet-5, VGG-11, VGG-16 & ResNet-50 etc. were used for 
image classification. Based on the application requirement these architectures can be trained 
with different image datasets. A. Romero Lapez [11] explains about the implementation of a 
two-class VGG-16 model to classify skin lesion images in to two main categories viz. benign 
and malignant using transfer learning paradigm. The trained VGG model achieved 81.33% test 
accuracy. In the similar way, to classify the skin lesion images, the ResNet-50 and LeNet-5 
CNN architectures were chosen as classifiers and their accuracies were analysed with training 
dataset before and after lesion region segmentation. 
 
2.4. Proposed Skin Lesion Image Analysis algorithm 
 
To provide complete solution from unsupervised segmentation to classification for the lesion 
dataset, a two-stage deep learning framework was proposed [12]. First stage is the U-Net 
segmentation model along with self-learning annotation scheme and second stage is the 
classification model as shown in the block diagram Fig.3. The segmentation algorithm provides 
best solution for lesion region segmentation on the image dataset which do not have any ground 
truth information. The self-learning annotation scheme generates initial labeling information for 
training the U-Net model. The proposed algorithm takes skin lesion colour image as input and 
passes it to trained U-Net model to obtain segmented output as binary mask. The binary mask 
performs AND operation with the skin image to crop the lesion region. The cropped lesion 
region images were used to train the LeNet-5 classifier model for further classification. During 
testing, the cropped region is passed to trained CNN model for classification. Finally the 
segmented lesions are either classified as benign or malignant. 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
33 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Input skin   
lesion image 
(b) Initial annotation 
from self-learning 
scheme 
(K-means 
Clustering) 
(c) U-Net lesion 
region 
segmentation 
(d) Cropped skin 
lesion image 
Figure 2  Lesion region segmentation results of U-Net model trained with initial 
annotation obtained from self-learning scheme 
Benign 
Images 
Malignant 
Images 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
34 
 
The two stage deep learning algorithm enables the classification model to extract more 
representative and specific features [12] from segmented region instead of the whole image, 
which improves the overall classification accuracy of the model as discussed in Section 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION 
 
3.1. Image Dataset Preparation 
 
International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) has developed an image archive [13, 14], 
which is an international repository of dermoscopic images consisting of different diagnostic 
category images namely melanoma, melanocytic nevus, basal cell carcinoma, actinic keratosis, 
benign keratosis (solar lentigo / seborrheic keratosis / lichen planus-like keratosis), 
dermatofibroma, squamous cell carcinoma and vascular lesion.  
 
Based on the category, all these images can be grouped in to two main classes namely benign 
(non-cancerous) 
and 
malignant 
(cancerous). 
Melanocytic 
nevus, 
benign 
keratosis, 
dermatofibroma and vascular lesion category images belong to benign class whereas melanoma, 
basal cell carcinoma, actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinoma lesion category images 
belong to malignant class. The training and testing images were chosen from the ISIC dataset 
which has more than 10000 lesion images. Based on the image category, 1460 lesion images 
were grouped under benign class and 1400 lesion images were identified under malignant class. 
Figure 3 Block diagram of proposed self-learning AI framework for skin lesion region 
segmentation and classification 
Input skin lesion 
colour image 
Segmentation mask 
generation using 
trained U-Net 
model
Training U-Net image 
segmentation using 
generated labels 
Segmentation Model 
Initial labeling 
from self-learning 
annotation scheme 
Classification Model 
Lesion region cropped by 
performing AND 
operation between input 
colour image and 
generated binary mask 
Training LeNet-5 
architecture over the 
cropped lesion region 
images for classification 
Trained CNN model 
classifies the lesion 
region as benign or 
malignant 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
35 
 
3.2. Implementation Details 
 
Both the U-Net segmentation and CNN classifier models were implemented using Keras library 
with TensorFlow as backend. U-Net segmentation model was trained from scratch using the 
skin lesion images chosen from the ISIC dataset. To obtain initial labels for U-Net training, self-
learning annotation scheme was coded in python language with OpenCV library support. The 
self-learning annotation scheme uses K-means clustering algorithm with grouping conditions to 
produce initial binary segmentation mask for the chosen image dataset. Around 2500 lesion 
images comprising both classes along with binary masks were used to train the U-Net model. 
The U-Net was trained for 25000 iterations to obtain optimum image segmentation result.  
 
Two different CNN classifier models namely ResNet-50 and LeNet-5 were trained and tested 
with the lesion image dataset before and after image segmentation using the U-Net model. To 
train these classifiers, 2200 images distributed equally among two classes were taken. After 
training, the classifiers were tested with the remaining 360 benign and 300 malignant lesion 
images. To implement the proposed algorithm, the entire training and testing image dataset was 
passed to trained U-Net segmentation model and obtained the segmented lesion images for 
training and testing the LeNet-5 classifier model.  
 
Both the ResNet-50 and LeNet-5 classifier models were trained and tested on the lesion image 
dataset for comparison. All the classifier models were trained for optimum number of epochs. 
The trained model weights of U-Net and CNN classifiers were saved in HDF5 format. Finally 
the proposed model segments the lesion region and classifies the region as benign or malignant. 
The training and testing accuracy of two CNN classifier models and the proposed algorithm 
were evaluated based on the performance metrics and reported in Section 4. The developed deep 
learning algorithms were trained and tested on a workstation PC with Intel Xeon E5-2620 v3 
2.40 GHz processor, 16 GB RAM, and Nvidia Quadro P4000 graphics card with 8GB memory. 
 
4. RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
 
To propose self-learning AI framework for skin lesion image dataset, the U-Net segmentation 
and LeNet-5 CNN models were used to segment lesion regions and classify them as benign or 
malignant. To perform testing of different classifiers on skin lesion images, a total of 660 
images comprising 360 benign and 300 malignant were considered as test dataset. The classifier 
results of LeNet-5, ResNet-50 and the proposed algorithm on the test dataset are presented in 
the form of confusion matrix as shown in Table-1. After testing the two classifier models, it was 
observed that the training and testing accuracy of LeNet-5 was better than the ResNet-50 as 
shown in Table-2. Based on the performance, LeNet-5 was considered as classifier model for 
the proposed self-learning algorithm.  
 
For lesion region segmentation, already a proven U-Net medical image segmentation model was 
used [1, 2, 3 & 10]. To train the U-Net model, self-learning annotation scheme was deployed to 
initiate generation of labeling information for the image dataset which don’t have ground truth. 
The segmentation results thus obtained from the trained U-Net model are found to be promising 
as shown in Fig.2. The segmented image from U-Net model gives us the quantitative 
information about the lesion region viz. area, perimeter, minor axis, major axis and colour 
information for measuring the ABCD parameter [15] of the dermatology such as Asymmetry, 
Border irregularity, Colour variation and Diameter for proper clinical diagnosis and treatment.  
After image segmentation and cropping, the cropped image data becomes more meaningful 
representation as the normal skin portion is completely removed. Due to this reason, the   
LeNet-5 classifier model showed performance improvement with segmented lesion images 
when compared with unsegmented skin images as shown in Table-2. Thus the proposed 
algorithm having U-Net image segmentation model along with LeNet-5 classifier showed better 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
36 
 
classification results. Our proposed algorithm yielded maximum training accuracy of 93.80% 
and testing accuracy of 82.42% with maximum F1 score of 0.8384 and minimum 
misclassification rate of 17.57% when compared with other CNN models viz. LeNet-5 and 
ResNet-50 trained on unsegmented input image dataset. It is observed that after image 
segmentation, the LeNet-5 CNN model with its simple architecture and limited weights able to 
achieve better classification performance in terms of overall accuracy [16]. However, deeper 
CNN architectures like ResNet-50 could not show any performance improvement after lesion 
segmentation. The self-learning AI framework integrates the capability of unsupervised 
machine learning techniques with deep learning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this paper, we proposed a self-learning AI framework for skin lesion region segmentation and 
classification in dermoscopy images.  The U-Net segmentation model along with annotation 
ResNet-50 
Actual 
Predicted 
 
Benign 
Malignant 
Benign 
240 
7 
Malignant 
120 
293 
 
LeNet-5 
Actual 
Predicted 
 
Benign 
Malignant 
Benign 
261 
22 
Malignant 
99 
278 
 
Proposed 
Algorithm 
Actual 
Predicted 
 
Benign 
Malignant 
Benign 
301 
57 
Malignant 
59 
243 
 
Model 
Training 
Accuracy (%) 
Testing 
Accuracy (%) 
F1 
Score 
Misclassification 
Rate (%) 
Classification without segmentation 
ResNet-50 
81.00 
80.75 
0.7908 
19.24 
LeNet-5 
88.40 
81.66 
0.8118 
18.33 
Classification with segmentation 
Proposed 
Algorithm 
93.80 
82.42 
0.8384 
17.57 
Table 1. Confusion Matrix of ResNet-50, LeNet-5 & the Proposed algorithm 
Table 2. Performance Metrics of Different CNN Models 

International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 11, No 6, December 2019 
 
37 
 
scheme provides a novel self-learning solution for lesion region segmentation on the image 
dataset, which do not have ground truth information. To generate initial labeling data for 
training the U-Net model, the annotation scheme uses unsupervised clustering technique. This 
technique enormously reduces the expertise and time constraints involved in manual labeling. 
The proposed algorithm takes the skin image as input and segments the lesion region with 
trained U-Net model. The LeNet-5 classifier model was trained on these segmented images to 
classify them as benign or malignant. It was noted that after U-Net segmentation, the 
performance of the LeNet-5 classifier has been improved. Thus the overall classification 
accuracy of the proposed AI framework is much better than the other two CNN classifier 
models which are directly trained on the input dataset.  The performance of the self-learning 
framework is effective in implementing end to end image processing solution for unlabelled 
skin lesion image dataset. This framework can also be extended to other medical image datasets 
like MRI images of brain tumour.
