DGCM-Net: Dense Geometrical Correspondence Matching
Network for Incremental Experience-based Robotic Grasping
Timothy Patten∗, Kiru Park∗, and Markus Vincze
Vision for Robotics Laboratory, Automation and Control Institute, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

Abstract
This article presents a method for grasping novel objects by learning from experience. Successful
attempts are remembered and then used to guide future grasps such that more reliable grasping is
achieved over time. To transfer the learned experience to unseen objects, we introduce the dense
geometric correspondence matching network (DGCM-Net). This applies metric learning to encode
objects with similar geometry nearby in feature space. Retrieving relevant experience for an unseen
object is thus a nearest neighbour search with the encoded feature maps. DGCM-Net also reconstructs
3D-3D correspondences using the view-dependent normalised object coordinate space to transform
grasp conﬁgurations from retrieved samples to unseen objects. In comparison to baseline methods,
our approach achieves an equivalent grasp success rate. However, the baselines are signiﬁcantly
improved when fusing the knowledge from experience with their grasp proposal strategy. Ofﬂine
experiments with a grasping dataset highlight the capability to transfer grasps to new instances as well
as to improve success rate over time from increasing experience. Lastly, by learning task-relevant
grasps, our approach can prioritise grasp conﬁgurations that enable the functional use of objects.
1
Introduction
Grasping is an essential capability for robots in a large variety of ﬁelds, from warehouse operations to industrial assembly
lines, applications in agriculture and many domestic service tasks. Grasping leads to the subsequent manipulation of
objects, which is the most direct way for robots to interact with the world. Especially in human environments, where
many man-made objects are designed to be handled by people, grasping with a robotic gripper or hand is necessary.
A popular approach for robot grasping is to exploit known objects [31, 57, 8, 59, 60]. However, this can only be applied
to a given set of objects and thus does not generalise to new objects, which reduces the usability for real-world operation.
It is possible to grasp unknown objects by learning classiﬁers, predictive or generative models [55, 27, 17, 35, 52, 49,
34, 63, 45] but large amounts of labelled data are required and this is time consuming when it is annotated by hand. The
effort for annotating data is eased by restricting it to 2D grasp poses (i.e., assuming top-down grasps), but this limits the
grasp conﬁgurations that are able to be applied. Training data is often generated without human annotation ofﬂine with
collections of object models [41, 40] or online with real-world robot trials. However, many hundreds or thousands of
hours are required to generate a sufﬁcient amount of data [49, 26]. Learning end-to-end strategies for grasping with
reinforcement learning [5, 36, 29, 69] also suffers from substantial training time, with some work reporting training
times in the order of months [36]. While the burden of learning time can be alleviated by leveraging physics-enabled
simulation environments, e.g., [23, 16, 22, 24], this introduces the challenge of transferring from simulation to the real
world.
An alternative approach is to transfer grasps for known objects to familiar objects. This makes the assumption that when
a new object is similar to another object for which a grasp is known, then the new object is likely to be successfully
grasped in a similar way [4]. Prior work on experience-based grasping build a database of sensory observations with
associated grasp information such as a pose or contact points. The experience is accumulated by trial and error with a
robot platform [44, 21, 14], kinesthetically taught [33, 12, 32] or inferred by directly observing human behaviour [39].
Grasping an unseen object requires a strategy to map the current observation to the samples in the database and
execute (or extrapolate from) the most similar experience. This is typically done using global shape [44, 3, 32], local
descriptors [39] or object regions [33, 21, 13, 12, 14]. In contrast to end-to-end learning approaches, experience-based
∗Equal contribution.
arXiv:2001.05279v2  [cs.RO]  17 Sep 2020

grasping has the potential to learn from very few exemplars. Only few methods have been demonstrated in an end-to-end
pipeline with a robotic platform and currently they rely on hand-crafted features for retrieving similar experiences and
for transferring grasps to new objects.
In this work we present a new method for incremental grasp learning from experience. The key to our approach is to
apply dense geometrical correspondence matching. Familiar objects are identiﬁed through global geometric encoding
and associated grasps are transferred through local correspondence matching. We introduce the dense geometrical
correspondence matching network (DGCM-Net) that uses metric learning to encode the global geometry of objects
in depth images such that similar geometries are represented nearby in feature space to allow accurate retrieval of
experience. DGCM-Net additionally reconstructs dense geometrical correspondences between pairs of depth images
using a variant of normalised object coordinate (NOC) values. These values are used to compute the rigid transformation
between the local region around the grasp of a stored experience and the corresponding region on an object in a new
scene. Precise 3D object models are not assumed, thus we deﬁne the view-dependent normalised object coordinates
(VD-NOC) to extend NOC values to single views.
DGCM-Net is applied in an incremental grasp learning pipeline, in which a robot self-supervises grasp learning from its
own experience. We show that a robot learns to repeatably grasp the same object after one or two successful experiences
and also to grasp novel objects that have comparable geometry to a known experience. As an extension, we show that
the predictions from DGCM-Net improve the performance of baseline grasping methods by combining their quality
measures with our experience-based measure. The incremental learning pipeline is also ﬂexible in that grasp success
is not the only measure to constitute experience. Speciﬁc positions or conﬁgurations of grasps can be preferred and
therefore used in future situations. In particular, semantic grasps, such as grasping the handle of a mug, are prioritised
as they are more relevant for the subsequent manipulation of the object [56, 10, 16, 1]. As a result, task-oriented grasps
are quickly learned, allowing a robot to perform meaningful actions with objects.
Studies with a dataset showcase the ability of the presented grasp prediction method to transfer between objects. The
results show strong within class transfer as well as between class generalisation. In addition, our analysis conﬁrms
the intuition that the quality of grasp prediction improves with increasing experience. Real-world experiments with a
mobile manipulator are performed to compare our grasping strategy against various other approaches. The experiments
show that we achieve a comparable grasp success rate with the baselines and improve the baseline when integrating our
predictions to achieve superior performance overall. Demonstrations of the full system show the continuous learning
capability for completely novel objects from classes never before seen. Finally, the usability of our approach for
semantic or task-oriented grasping is illustrated to grasp objects with handles.
In summary, this article makes the following contributions:
• The dense geometrical correspondence matching network to encode object geometry for nearest neighbour
retrieval and to densely reconstruct 3D-3D correspondences in order to transfer grasps from stored experiences
to unseen objects.
• An experience-based 6D grasp learning pipeline that incrementally grows a database of exemplars to guide
grasp selection for the same object or novel unseen objects.
• Ofﬂine experiments with a new annotated dataset showing the capability of DGCM-Net to generalise grasps to
unseen objects as well as to steadily improve over time with increasing accumulation of data.
• Online grasping experiments showing that the grasp success of our approach is competitive with common
baselines and improves the baselines when combining their predictions with our experience-based grasp
predictions.
• Demonstrations showing the extension of our method for semantic grasping by guiding grasp selection to the
parts of objects that are relevant to the object’s functional use.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. In Section 3, we present the dense
geometrical correspondence matching network and describe the incremental grasp learning pipeline. The results of the
ofﬂine and robotic experiments are reported in Section 4 and Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes and discusses
future work.
2
Related Work
The signiﬁcant amount of attention given to robotic grasping has resulted in a large number and high diversity of
techniques. A common strategy uses known object instances, which are provided as CAD models or are captured
by a modelling process (e.g., [50, 61]). Given a known grasp conﬁguration for an object in its local coordinate
2

system, the task of grasping is simpliﬁed to recognising and estimating the pose of the object such that the grasp pose
is transformed into the new scene. Traditional methods identify hand-crafted features to localise an object model
within a scene [31, 57, 8] but more recently advances for pose estimation have been made by the application of deep
learning [65, 48, 67, 37] and grasping pipelines achieve high success rate [59, 60]. The main limitation of this direction
of research, however, is the closed-world assumption. The approach is restricted to only the objects for which a model
is provided and thus cannot generalise to unknown objects.
To address the problem of grasping unknown objects, local geometry can serve as a strong cue. For example, ﬁtting
primitives and estimating grasps based on the geometrical structure of the primitives [54] or ﬁtting superquadratics
and synthesising grasp poses at the points of minimum curvature [42] have been shown to work in certain cases. More
often though, unknown object grasping is addressed by learning from data [4]. Along this line, methods predict the
success of a proposed grasp by training a traditional classiﬁer [27, 17] or deep neural network [55, 35, 52, 49, 34, 63].
Alternatively, grasp simulation or analytical grasp metrics are computed for objects in model databases to generate
training data [28, 41, 40, 58, 38, 46, 6]. The task is then to learn a model that can predict the value of the grasp metric
given a proposal and then select the grasp that is most likely to succeed. There is also work that avoids the sampling
and scoring procedure by directly predicting a grasp pose with a quality measure [45]. The generative method has
proven to be computationally superior and sufﬁciently fast to be integrated in a closed-loop system. While the work for
unknown object grasping has made considerable achievements, they are limited by the diversity of the training data.
Out of distribution objects may not receive accurate grasp quality predictions and may fail. Thus, it is necessary to
continuously learn and add new examples to the training set. Unfortunately, the deep neural networks that are applied
do not have the capacity to be updated online. Our approach, on the other hand, does not need to retrain for grasp
prediction. By abstracting the learning component to correspondence matching, we simply add experience to a database
and use the network to predict the closest matches for grasp transfer.
Another approach to grasping is to leverage real robot experience and learn end-to-end strategies. One direction is to
employ reinforcement learning [5, 36, 29, 69]. The advantage of an end-to-end approach is that complete grasping
policies can be learned directly from visual input, which removes the need for a dedicated perception pipeline with an
additional motion planner for execution. A disadvantage, however, is that the policies can only be applied to scenarios
that are perceptually similar, and thus generalisation to novel environments is limited. Unsupervised methods, such
as [25], better generalise to unseen scenarios and objects. They are more general to the task and less sensitive to
the training scenes. These methods learn an embedding that can be used to retrieve manipulation policies for online
execution. Despite these advances, the major drawback of both self- and unsupervised learning is that many attempts
are needed for training. Our approach, in contrast, only needs a handful of experiences to reliably repeat past successes.
Although physics simulation is now a popular alternative for training learning algorithms, the transfer from simulation
to the real world requires additional attention [23, 16, 22, 24].
Experience-based grasping is much more efﬁcient than reinforcement learning methods since far fewer examples are
needed to learn grasps. The common approach is to accumulate samples of past success or failure to guide the grasp
selection in new scenarios, under the assumption that objects with similar shape (or appearance) can be grasped in a
similar way. Some work deﬁne global shape descriptors and train a discriminative classiﬁer to identify the similarity
between object shapes to transfer grasps to familiar objects [44, 3, 32]. Other work leverage local features descriptors
to identify the relevant local regions associated with contact points to transfer grasps between objects within the same
class [39]. Another approach is to analyse object regions and to maintain a library of prototypical grasps for recurring
object parts. This is accomplished by measuring the similarity between regions on the surface of objects such as with
height maps [21] or by surface distributions or densities [33, 13, 12, 14]. A major assumption is that the observed parts
are equivalent, which means grasp transfer is the application of a transformation from the prototype to the scene. They
do not deal with the possibility of scale change or deformation. Such geometry variation would have to be stored as a
new experience. Our approach deals with this challenge by aligning shapes through dense 3D-3D correspondences
and thus also modiﬁes the shape of the grasp to ﬁt the new geometry. Another drawback of prior work is that they use
hand-crafted features to encode shape information. We instead generate descriptive features through metric learning,
which has been shown to be powerful for similar geometric matching tasks [68].
Our approach for grasping relies on ﬁrst ﬁnding the nearest observation in a database and second predicting dense
geometric correspondences to transform a successful grasp pose to a new observation. Retrieving similar samples has
been addressed using learned feature descriptors from RGB-D images [64, 2, 47]. These employ the triplet loss to train
a network to produce smaller feature distances for pairs of images with similar view points while producing larger
feature distances for pairs of images with different view points or those that contain different object classes. However,
retrieving a similar viewpoint is insufﬁcient when samples do not cover the entire object pose or when target objects
are not constrained to a ﬁxed set of a classes. This motivates our method that predicts geometric correspondences
between images to match local areas regardless of different scales or detailed shapes. A simple approach is to encode
and match local feature descriptors that represent local shapes in 3D point clouds or depth images [68, 70]. Leveraging
3

Figure 1: Overview of storing and retrieving experience with the incremental grasp learning framework.
this idea, determining pixel-wise correspondences has been demonstrated in a pipeline to predict local correspondences
or key-points while considering global contexts of objects [18, 43]. The task of this line of research is to ﬁnd the
corresponding points between an input and a known reference object, therefore, they are not applicable when the
reference image has to be selected from various objects and view points based only on global shape.
In order to make this extension, we employ the normalised object coordinate space that has been used to estimate the
6D pose of instances [48, 37] and classes [62]. Since NOC values represents coordinate values in the object’s local
frame and correspondences between the object model and the scene, predicting NOC values is sufﬁcient for computing
the transformation between local points from one observation to another. However, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne NOC values
without knowing the full 3D shape of an object or a common representation for a class. For our work, it is necessary to
predict dense correspondences between pairs of images that have similar geometry. To that end, we represent NOC
values in the reference frame of the camera view point instead of the object. This alteration to the NOC representation
is referred to as the view-dependent normalised object coordinate space. The prediction of VD-NOC values is used to
compute the transformation of local areas that are relevant to grasps in order to transform stored grasp poses to the
object in the input image.
3
Method
This section describes our methodology for incremental experience-based grasp learning. We begin with an overview of
the framework. We then describe the dense geometrical correspondence matching network for retrieving experience
samples and for generating dense 3D-3D correspondences. Lastly, we outline how grasps are transferred between local
regions using the predicted correspondences.
3.1
Incremental Grasp Learning Framework
The main components of the incremental experience-based grasp learning framework are shown in Figure 1. The input
is a depth image Di ∈RW ×H and a segmentation mask Mi ∈RW ×H that has entries 1 for pixels belonging to the
target object and 0 otherwise. The goal of the framework is to generate a pose for the gripper that will result in a
successful grasp. This is represented as a rigid transformation T ∈SE(3) of the gripper pose in the camera coordinate
frame.
The ﬁrst step is to match the target object to samples stored in an experience database E. Matching is done using the
global geometric encoding from DGCM-Net, where the feature map fi of the input image is compared to the feature
maps of the database samples. Feature maps are the output of a geometry encoder that takes as input a surface normal
image derived from the initial depth image. The set of samples with high matching score are used to propose a candidate
grasp. For each database match in E, the output of the VD-NOC encoder ce and the geometry feature encoding fe as
4

well as fi from the input are passed to the decoder of DGCM-Net to reconstruct the VD-NOC values Vi ∈RW ×H×3.
This represents a dense mapping between the pixels of the sample and the input and thus a transformation of the points
in the 3D coordinates can be computed. Each experience has an associated grasp pose, therefore, the transformation
between the images is applied to transform the experience grasp to the target object. Sensitivity to the difference in
geometry between the input and sample is reduced by conﬁning the alignment to the region around the grasp pose. The
region of interest (ROI) on the sample Re is determined from the overlap of the gripper with the 3D coordinates of the
segmented object in the depth image. The corresponding ROI on the target object Ri is derived through the matches
between the VD-NOC values. The ROIs are aligned by ﬁnding the optimal rotation and translation. The outcome is a
proposal for a full 6D grasp pose for the target object.
Incremental learning operates by executing a selected grasp proposal and updating the database online with a new
exemplar if the grasp is successful. Speciﬁcally, the depth image, surface normal image, VD-NOC values, ROI and
transformation of the grasp pose are stored. Unsuccessful grasp attempts do not provide any information for replicating
past experience, therefore, no data is stored for failed grasps. As more experience is accumulated, the likelihood of
ﬁnding a nearby match for a new input increases. The method is not restricted to only ﬁnding samples of exact object
instances, but can match to new or unseen objects if they have geometry resembling those from experience.
3.2
Dense Geometrical Correspondence Matching
3.2.1
View-dependent Normalised Object Coordinate Space
Predicting dense correspondences between two depth images (i.e., the depth image of the object to grasp and an
experience in the database) is done by predicting a variant of NOC values. The traditional NOC values represent the
correspondence between the target object and another one in the target object’s local frame. Typically this has been
applied for object pose estimation where the target object is a reference model and the other object is an observation of
the reference model in a scene.
To apply the same methodology without object models, we introduce the view-dependent normalised object coordinate
values. The depth images for a reference and an input are converted to surface normal images. The VD-NOC values for
the input Vi are computed using the 3D coordinates of each pixel I3D
i
from the input segmentation mask in the camera
coordinate frame. Normalisation is performed by setting the origin to the mean coordinate between the maximum and
minimum values of I3D
i
according to,
Vi =
I3D
i
−I
3D
i
max |I3D
i
−I
3D
i
|
, where ¯I3D
i
= max(I3D
i
) + min(I3D
i
)
2
.
(1)
Normalisation is performed separately for each dimension resulting in different normalisation factors for each axis. The
direction of the z-axis is ﬂipped to produce positive values for points that are nearer.
For grasping, the VD-NOC values are used to estimate the similarity between points on the target object in the input
image and the points on the object in the experience database. A smaller distance between values in the VD-NOC
values represents closer geometrical correspondence. These can be used to estimate the transformation of a set of points
in the grasp pose ROI in order to transfer the grasp experience to the target object.
3.2.2
DGCM-Net Architecture
An overview of the dense geometric correspondence network is shown in Figure 2. DGCM-Net consists of a geometry
encoder, VD-NOC encoder and VD-NOC decoder. The purpose of the geometry encoder is to learn a representation
that places images with similar geometry closer in feature space than images with dissimilar geometry. The purpose of
the VD-NOC encoder-decoder is to reconstruct the VD-NOC values between a pair of images.
The input to the geometry encoder is a cropped surface normal image derived from the input depth image and
segmentation mask. The cropped image is created from a 2D bounding box that is centred at the 2D projected point of
the segmentation mask’s centroid. The height and width of the image are adjusted to correspond to 30cm spatial size in
3D space. The cropped image is then resized to 128x128. The ﬁrst three blocks of the Resnet-50 [20] architecture is
employed and initialised with the pre-trained weights using the ImageNet dataset [11]. The output of the third block is
passed to three convolution layers, kernel sizes = [3, 3, 2] and ﬁlter sizes = [256, 256, 128] with strides 2 for all, and
two fully connected layers with 256 outputs. The LeakyReLU activation is applied to every layer output except the last
layer that uses the tanh as an activation to transform feature descriptors to 256 dimensions.
The input to the VD-NOC encoder is a cropped VD-NOC image. The input is passed to ﬁve convolution layers, kernel
sizes = [5, 3, 3, 3, 3] and ﬁlter sizes = [128, 256, 256, 256, 256] with strides 2 for all, and one fully connected layer with
5

Figure 2: Overview of the DGCM-Net architecture and training objectives.
256 outputs. The activation of each layer is the same for the geometry encoder. The VD-NOC decoder reconstructs the
VD-NOC values for the input image with respect to its camera frame. The input to the decoder is the concatenated
features from both geometry encodings of the images and the output of the VD-NOC encoder for the reference. Skip
connections [53] are added by concatenating one half of the output channels of each intermediate layer of the encoders
with corresponding layers in the decoder. This helps to predict ﬁne details in local areas. The decoder ends with a fully
connected layer with 2048 outputs followed by ﬁve blocks of deconvolution and convolution layers. The output of
the last convolution layer is the same size as the input image with three channels that represent the x, y and z of the
VD-NOC values.
3.2.3
Training Objective
DGCM-Net has two tasks and therefore consists of two objectives in the training process. The ﬁrst is the metric learning
of feature descriptors to perform matching and the second is for reconstructing the VD-NOC values of an input image.
For metric learning, the contrastive loss [19] is employed to minimise the Euclidean distance between features of similar
geometry (positive pair) while increasing the distance for a pair of different geometry (negative pair) as formulated by,
Lmetric = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(1 −ωi)d2
i + ωi max(10 −di, 0)2,
(2)
where ω denotes labels for pairs that are set to 0 for positive pairs and 1 for negative pairs. d denotes the Euclidean
distance between encoded feature vectors (fi, fe ∈R256) of the target and experience images from the geometry
encoder. The loss is computed for a mini-batch that consists of N pairs of training images.
For the reconstruction of VD-NOC values, the standard L1 loss is applied for each pixel p. Since background pixels are
masked out, their values are easy to predict. Hence, the loss values for pixels on the object masks Mi ∈RW ×H are
weighted by a factor of 3 to more precisely predict the values of pixels in the object masks [48]. The reconstruction loss
is thus given by,
L3D =
1
N × W × H
N
X
i=1

3
X
p∈Mi
||V p
i −V p
gt||1 +
X
p/∈Mi
||V p
i −V p
gt||1

.
(3)
The reconstruction loss is computed only if the pair of samples is positive. Finally, the objective of the training is the
weighted sum of two loss functions,
L = Lmetric + λL3D,
(4)
where λ is a weight balancing the two objectives. We set λ to 1 in our experiments.
6

Figure 3: Left: Object models from the YCB dataset used to train DGCM-Net. Middle: Examples of positive pairs with
online augmentation, Gaussian noise and partial occlusion. Right: Examples of negative pairs. The pairs are used to
train feature vectors to have smaller distance for similar geometries.
Stage
Data generation
Online augmentation
Parameters
Scale (each axis)
Distance to camera
Frac. of occluded region
Gaussian noise
Range
U(0.8, 1.5)
U(1m, 1.7m)
U(0.0, 0.25)
N(µ=0,σ=0.01)
Table 1: Overview of the parameters used to generate the training data and for the online data augmentation.
3.2.4
Training using Synthetic Images
Synthetic depth images are created to train the network. 3D models are sampled such that no two models are the same
even after a scale change2. Objects are selected from the YCB object and model set [7] and listed in Figure 3. Depth
images are rendered in OpenGL3 for each object model by uniformly sampling a pose and randomly selecting scale
factors for each axis. Five scenes are rendered with different scales for each sampled object pose. To avoid ambiguous
views of symmetric objects, view angles are limited between 0 and 45 degrees on each axis. For cylindrical objects, no
variation around the rotational axis is applied. Parameters used in the generation process are summarised in Table 1.
The result for every training sample is a depth image, VD-NOC image, annotated pose, annotated scale factors for each
dimension and a look-up table of visible vertices. Approximately 166k images are created and used for training.
Metric learning requires positive and negative pairs. Positive pairs are obtained from samples of the same object in
different poses when a pair of images share more than half of the visible vertices. Negative pairs are obtained from
different objects or different poses of the same object when images share less than half of the visible vertices. Examples
of training samples of both types are given in Figure 3 (middle and right). For positive pairs, the target VD-NOC values
(i.e., the ground truth value) is computed using the relative pose of the object, which is known for the training samples.
Thus, the VD-NOV values that are deﬁned in the camera frame of the ﬁrst element of the pair are transformed to the
camera frame of the second element. For our grasping framework, this amounts to transforming the VD-NOC values
from the object in the input image to the object in the experience database.
Further augmentation is applied to the image samples to improve robustness against occlusion and noise. Occlusion is
simulated by setting a partial area in the surface normal image and the corresponding entries in the VD-NOC values
to zero (i.e., the value for the background). This enables the network to learn features that still return good matches
between an input and samples in the database even when one is occluded. Gaussian noise is also applied to both images
to cope with the expected noise from real sensors. Figure 3 (middle and right) presents examples after applying the
augmentation. More details about the parameters used for augmentation are provided in Table 1.
We train the network for 35 epochs using the ADAM optimiser [30] while assigning 25 positive pairs and 25 negative
pairs for each batch. The learning rate is initially set to 0.0001 and divided by a factor of 10 every 5 epochs. After
training the network once, the weights are ﬁxed for all experiments without any ﬁne-tuning.
2The set of 3D models only contains one box because any other box can be constructed just by manipulating the scale in the
different dimensions.
3https://www.opengl.org
7

Figure 4: Overview of the process for generating grasp proposals from the nearest neighbour experience.
3.3
Generating Grasp Proposals
The overview in Figure 1 shows the process of retrieving and generating grasps given an input depth image. First, the
surface normal image of the input is encoded to a feature map fi by the geometry encoder. This is compared to all
feature maps {fe} ∀e ∈E to ﬁnd a set of nearest neighbours Ni ⊂E. The stored VD-NOC values Ve of a sample
e ∈Ni is loaded to compute the VD-NOC feature map ce. Given ce, fe and fi, the decoder predicts the VD-NOC
values of the input depth image Vi;e (VD-NOC values of Di in the frame of De) as shown in Figure 4. The ROI of the
experience Re is used to compute the corresponding ROI for the input Ri = {p ∈Vi : min
e |p −pe| < θc ∀pe ∈Re},
which is the subset of points whose distance to the nearest points in Re is below a threshold θc. The predicted VD-NOC
ROI points is denoted V R
i;e and are deﬁned in the camera frame of De. Each pixel of V R
i
forms a 3D-3D correspondence
from the VD-NOC values V R
i;e and V R
i;i that are deﬁned in De and Di. Thus, an initial rotation from the camera frame
of the experience to the camera frame of the input is derived by aligning the ROI VD-NOC images. The grasp pose
Te is then aligned to Di by computing the rotation that minimises the summation of distances of the correspondences
given by,
Rinit, tinit = arg min
R,t
X
Ri
||(RV R
i;e + t) −V R
i;i ||2.
(5)
The optimised solution for Equation 5 is obtained using singular value decomposition. The unit of tinit does not
correspond to the scale of the 3D space because the VD-NOC values are normalised. Therefore, the translation tinit is
separately computed using the difference between the mean coordinates between the maximum and minimum values of
the ROI points as was applied in Equation (1). The computed rotation and translation are used to transform all ROI
points of the experience Re to the scene and the alignment is reﬁned by applying the iterative closest point algorithm.
The grasp pose in the experience Te is transformed to create the grasp proposal Tg by applying the same reﬁned
transformation. Finally, the gripper position is moved a ﬁxed distance from the object surface by translating along the
approach direction with respect to the closest point in the input.
Each match in the database has an associated score in the range (0, 1] that represents that similarity of the depth image
to the input, which is used as a pseudo-measure for the quality of the grasp. This score is computed as,
S(i, e) = e−||fi−fe||2.
(6)
The ﬁnal output is a set of grasps G = {(Tg, sg)} where each grasp proposal is composed of a transformation of the
gripper into the scene Tg as well as a score value sg using Equation (6).
4
Ofﬂine Experiments
This section analyses the grasp proposal method with a hand annotated dataset. Experiments are performed to ﬁrst
investigate the quality of grasp pose prediction with respect to the size of the grasp experience database and secondly to
evaluate the ability to transfer grasps between observations of objects within the same and to different classes. The
threshold for matching ROI correspondences θc is set to 0.3 for all experiments. This value produces reasonable
separation of ROI areas and other parts of objects. Every stored experience is duplicated with in-plane rotations at
angles between -90 and +90 degrees with a step size of 45 degrees. This enables grasp transfer to objects in new poses.
Code for DGCM-Net is publicly available at https://rgit.acin.tuwien.ac.at/v4r/dgcm-net.
8

Figure 5: Objects in the dataset used for the ofﬂine experiments and to supplement past experience during the online
experiment.
4.1
Dataset
A dataset is created to evaluate the quality of grasp prediction comprising depth images of the objects shown in
Figure 5. These objects are organised into seven classes: can, mug, cup, bottle, bowl, box and clamp. Four
instances are used for each class and a number of these instances are from the YCB object dataset [7], while other
instances are objects commonly found in homes. The dataset is available at https://www.acin.tuwien.ac.at/en/
vision-for-robotics/software-tools/lfed-6d-dataset/.
Recordings are made by placing each object on a small table and capturing a depth image with an ASUS XTion Pro Live
RGB-D camera. Each object is placed in various poses and locations, and the camera is moved between two different
heights. The object is segmented in each depth image by detecting the table surface with RANSAC and selecting all
points that remain above the table plane. The dataset does not require ground truth segmentation, but instead should be
segmented by the same method that extracts the masks for the input images in order for the entries in the experience
database to best resemble the inputs.
Grasp poses for a parallel-jaw gripper are manually annotated in the depth images. Each depth image consists of
possibly multiple grasp annotations according to their direction, for example, from the top or from the side. The full
dataset used for testing consists of depth images, segmentation masks and grasp poses for 28 objects of interest.
4.2
Measuring Grasp Pose Quality
Reporting quantitative statistics requires the quality of the estimated grasp poses to be measured. It is possible to
execute physics simulation and to check for grasp success, however, to isolate the grasp prediction itself, we measure
the difference in grasp pose for an input with respect to the annotated pose. The experiments are simpliﬁed by selecting
only grasp annotations on the top of the objects when they are placed in their upright canonical pose. Even though the
grasp proposals are limited to top down, multiple poses are available, especially for objects that are symmetric or are
elongated in the x or y dimension such that translations of a top-down grasp are equivalent. Consistency of top-down
grasp poses is ensured by testing with the subset of classes can, mug, cup and bottle.
A grasp pose is regarded as correct when the translation error is less than 5cm and the rotational error around the x- and
y-axes is less than 15 degrees. A rotation error around the z-axis in the gripper frame, which is parallel to the rotational
axis of an object, is ignored since it should be a successful grasp regardless of the rotation with respect to this axis.
9

Figure 6: Results of the ofﬂine experiments. Left: Ratio of accurately estimated grasp pose with increasing number of
experiences per instance. Solid lines show results when class speciﬁc experience is used for each test class. Dotted
lines show results when experience from all classes is used. Right: Ratio of accurately estimated grasp poses using
experience from each instance in all classes.
4.3
Increasing Experience
The left plot of Figure 6 shows the ratio of correctly estimated grasp poses with increasing number of experience per
instance. Solid lines show results when only the experience for the relevant class is considered and the dotted lines
show the results when experience for all classes is considered. For each conﬁguration (class and number of experience
per instance), we perform ten iterations using randomly selected samples in the iteration. The results with class speciﬁc
experience demonstrate that the grasp poses are often correctly estimated even if only one experience is included per
instance. For the can and bottle classes, the correct estimation is approximately 90%, while the worst performing
class, cup, achieves 68%. However, as the number of experiences increases per instance in each class, the grasp pose
estimation improves.
The dotted lines show the variation in performance when including other classes for experience, which reﬂects more
practical scenarios in the real world. Except for the mug class, the performance slightly drops because the retrieval of
experiences from different classes can cause inaccurate prediction of VD-NOC values. However, the accuracy still
achieves more than 79% when two experiences are included per instance. This implies that the feature space encoded
by the geometry encoder is sufﬁcient to distinguish different geometrical shapes. The performance gap for the can
class, which has the most simple shape, is comparably larger than for the other classes. This is because the mapping
from more complex to simpler geometries produces inaccurate estimations by transferring detailed shapes into simpler
geometries. We discuss more detail regarding this relationship between classes in the following section.
Figure 7 shows qualitative results. The ﬁgure shows the three nearest experiences and the best transformed pose for
different instances from different classes. The ﬁrst and second rows are obtained when the experience database contains
samples from all classes and include the exact instance in the test image. The third and fourth rows are obtained after
excluding the instance in the test image so that different instances in the same class must be retrieved to generate grasp
proposals. The results reveal that the grasp poses are transformed to similar locations and directions even if object poses
from experience are different (see the grasp poses for the can in the third row).
4.4
Transfer Between Instances and Classes
These experiments show that experience can be transferred between instances and classes. The experiments are
conducted by using all experience from a single object instance while testing on different instances. The evaluation
metric and subset of target grasp poses are the same as in the previous experiment. The matrix on the right of Figure 6
shows that the experience of instances transfer well to other instances within the same class. Furthermore, experience
also transfers beyond the class. For example, many good grasps are found for bottle instances when provided by
experience from can instances (both types of objects have a closed surface on the top) and that instances of the cup class
10

Figure 7: Examples of the three nearest experiences and estimated grasp poses for example input images. Top two rows
show examples when the same instance is included in the experience database. Bottom two rows show examples when
the instance is not in the experience database.
provide sufﬁcient experience for grasping mug instances (both types of objects have no surface on the top). However,
the results show that it is difﬁcult to transfer the experience of a class to an instance in the same class when the geometry
and scale of the instance are different from the other instances in the class (e.g., Can4 and Cup4). Thus, better grasp
poses are obtained when the experience is obtained from geometrically similar objects regardless of explicit classes.
It is also observed that grasps for simpler geometries (e.g., from can to bottle and cup to mug) are more accurately
transferred, while the other direction from complex geometry to simpler geometry is more difﬁcult. This is because the
network tries to predict VD-NOC values of detailed shapes of objects in the experience set, such as handles of mug
instances, which potentially causes errors by predicting corresponding points even if the shapes are missing in the new
object.
5
Robot Experiments
This section presents results of real-world grasping experiments with a mobile manipulator. First, we describe the
hardware set up used for the experiments. Second, we compare our method to baseline approaches. Third, we evaluate
the full pipeline of online incremental grasp learning. Finally, we demonstrate the extension to semantic grasp learning.
5.1
Experimental Details
The robot experiments are performed with the Toyota Human Support Robot [66]. The platform consists of a 4-DOF
arm but motions are computed including the omni-directional base, which effectively offers seven degrees of freedom.
Motions for grasp execution are planned using MoveIt [9]4. The end-effector is a parallel-jaw gripper and grasp success
is measured by checking the distance between the tips of the gripper after the target object is lifted. If the distance is
non-zero, then the grasp is declared successful, otherwise, it is a failure. Depth images are captured with the onboard
ASUS XTion Pro Live RGB-D sensor positioned on the head of the robot.
4http://moveit.ros.org
11

For all grasping experiments, individual objects are placed on a small table that has a height of 45cm. The robot is
approximately positioned 30cm from the table (edge of robot base to edge of table). The head of the robot is tilted such
that the camera faces the centre of the table. The torso of the robot is raised to give an approximate distance from the
camera to an objects of 1m to suit the optimal range of the sensor. Objects are segmented from the table with the same
procedure for generating segmentation masks for the dataset.
All code is written in C++ and Python, and is running on the robot in Ubuntu 16.04. ROS [51]5 is used for process
communication. DGCM-Net is implemented in Tensorﬂow and is running on an external PC with an NVIDIA GTX
1050 Ti.
5.2
Comparison to Baselines
Experiments are conducted to measure the grasp performance of our framework. For comparison, experiments are also
performed with a number of baselines. The full set of methods is as follows:
• HAF: The approach introduced in [17], where height accumulated features are extracted from point clouds to
abstract grasp-relevant structure. The features are computed on different regions of the input and a support
vector machine is trained to predict the quality of the grasp for each feature. Both top-down and forward-facing
grasps are enabled, and the output with highest score is executed. We use the original code provided6.
• GPD: The approach introduced in [58], where grasps are sampled using the surface geometry of the input point
cloud. Grasp success for each sample is classiﬁed using a convolutional neural network (CNN). This takes as
input three images: an averaged height map of occupied points, averaged height map of the unobserved region
and averaged surface normals. Given this input, the CNN generates a score value. Finally, grasps are clustered
and the highest scoring cluster is selected. We use the original code provided7 and the full 15 channel version.
• DGCM-Net: The grasp proposals from DGCM-Net using pre-collected experience for the relevant object
classes in the experiments. Similar to GPD, the set of proposals from DGCM-Net are clustered and the highest
scoring cluster is executed. Clustering is performed by grouping all grasps within 5cm translation and 15
degrees rotation. The grasp of the cluster is the mean pose of the proposals that make up the cluster. The
cluster with the highest summed score is executed. The number of nearest neighbours to be retrieved by
DGCM-Net is set to 10.
• GPD + DGCM-Net: Grasps are proposed using GPD and the scores are modiﬁed by the predictions from
DGCM-Net. First, the grasps from the GPD method are computed and the scores are normalised to the
range [0, 1]. Then DGCM-Net is run on the same input and for each GPD candidate, we ﬁnd all DGCM-Net
proposals within 5cm translation and 15 degrees rotation. The experience score is the average of the scores
for all DGCM-Net grasps deemed to be nearby. The ﬁnal score for each GPD candidate is the average of the
normalised GPD score and the summed experience score. The grasp with the highest ﬁnal score is executed.
Many robotic grasping approaches are successful for the bin-picking task, e.g., [40]. However, these are focused on 2D
grasping and therefore expect a top-down view of the scene and only generate a grasp parallel to the camera axis. This
are unsuitable for our robot platform due to the position of the arm on the front of the body that occludes the scene
when facing the camera directly downwards. Additionally, bin-picking methods are at a disadvantage because they only
generate grasps for a single approach direction. It is left to future work to extend the evaluation to this type of scenario.
The experiments are performed for objects from the classes box, can, bottle, mug, cup, bowl and clamp. Three
instances are chosen per class and ﬁve poses are considered per instance. The ﬁve poses for each instance are kept
constant for the experiments with each grasping method. The objects selected for the experiments are shown in Figure 8.
These include one object from the YCB set for each class from the objects used in Section 4, in particular, the sugar
box, spam can, mustard bottle, red mug, orange cup, red bowl and XL clamp. The other two objects for
each class are a mixture of YCB objects and common objects found in homes.
The experience used for our method is an extension of the database from Section 4 that includes instances from the
additional classes of box, bowl and clamp. Since we are interested in observing the grasp performance for unseen
objects, the YCB objects selected as target objects are removed from the experience database.
Performance is measured by grasp success rate, which is the number of successful grasps divided by the total number of
attempts. Table 2 reports the average grasp success rate for each class and the average for all classes (bottom row). The
results show that our method performs equivalently to GPD and that both methods outperform HAF (+8%). However,
5https://www.ros.org/
6https://github.com/davidﬁschinger/haf_grasping
7https://github.com/atenpas/gpd
12

Figure 8: Test objects used for the online grasping experiments. Three instances in seven classes are used.
HAF
GPD
DGCM-Net
GPD + DGCM-Net
Box
0.87
0.80
0.67
1.00
Can
0.87
0.67
0.93
0.73
Bottle
0.87
0.93
0.93
0.93
Mug
0.80
0.80
0.87
1.00
Cup
0.80
0.80
0.73
1.00
Bowl
0.40
0.87
0.80
0.87
Clamp
0.40
0.60
0.60
0.67
Average
0.71
0.79
0.79
0.89
Table 2: Grasp success rate of our framework and baseline methods for different target object classes. The bottom row
shows the average for all classes.
combining experience with GPD achieves a much higher grasp success rate overall. In comparison to the original GPD
method, this is an increase of 10%.
For most classes, the combined approach performs either the same as the best performing individual method or better.
The only exception is the can class, which has 20% lower grasp success rate than our direct method. Our observation
during the experiments is that GPD often proposed grasps on and orthogonal to the rim of the can objects, which
resulted in failures. This exposes the ﬂaw that if the initial candidates are unfavourable, the combined approach cannot
improve. For the cans, when grasp experience on the top of the can are stored, the grasps on the rim are still similar in
position and orientation to warrant their selection.
Surprisingly, the box class is the most difﬁcult for our approach despite having easy geometry to compute a grasp as
shown by the high success rate of HAF. This can be explained by the fact that all boxes can be represented by a single
box by changing the scale in the different dimensions. Thus, the network has to decide whether to regard a new box as
a scaled version of an experience or as a transformed (i.e., rotated) box. The ambiguity causes noisy predictions of
VD-NOC values. Furthermore, since grasp proposals are transformed from previous experiences and are ideally in
a similar grasp location, a scale change may cause the prediction to exceed the range of the gripper, resulting in its
rejection due to the collision.
5.3
Incremental Learning
This set of experiments demonstrate the full incremental learning framework. The test objects chosen are the grey
clamp from our dataset, the plastic drill from the YCB object dataset and a gaming controller. Past experience
is stored in the database, however, not for the classes of the test objects. Therefore, experience for clamp class is
removed. Since good grasps may not be generated for the unseen objects, GPD is used in the beginning until DGCM-Net
makes reasonable predictions. A threshold of 0.9 is set as the minimum feature distance that must be achieved by the
output of DGCM-Net, otherwise, the best grasp from GPD is executed. Typically it only takes one or two successful
attempts for the system to switch from GPD to DGCM-Net. The objects are placed randomly on the table at the
13

Figure 9: Summary of results for the incremental learning experiment with the grey clamp.
beginning of each experiment and the system runs autonomously, with the robot grasping the object from where it
lies after a successful or failed attempt. The object is only handled by a person if it is unintentionally moved near the
edge of the table and presents a risk of falling. After successful grasps, objects are placed on the table by the robot and
receive a slight variation in pose; failed grasps typically cause considerable object movement. After any grasp attempt,
the robot base returns to the start position and the localisation inaccuracy generates further viewpoint variation.
Figures 9, 10 and 11 show the evolution of grasp success for the three objects. In these ﬁgures, the ﬁrst row shows the
surface normal image of the input and the second to fourth rows show the nearest three matches in the database. Below
this we plot the minimum feature distance of the nearest neighbour. Lastly, we show the best grasp proposal from
DGCM-Net and the actual gripper position during the grasp captured by an external camera (red border indicates failure
and green border indicates success). A video of the experiments is available at https://youtu.be/iI_P1UVXfjo.
From these experiments, we make two observations. Firstly, after the ﬁrst successful attempt from GPD is recorded, the
robot typically continues to grasp the target objects successfully. The predicted grasps for each attempt conﬁrms that
our method reliably predicts the same successful experience so long as the object and its shape is correctly identiﬁed.
The second observation is that the minimum feature distance drops below the threshold after as many as one sample is
in the database. This is most apparent for the grey clamp in which the minimum feature distance is very small for all
subsequent trials.
The grasping for the plastic drill and gaming controller are less reliable than for the grey clamp. For the
plastic drill, the system still exhibits some failures even after accumulating experience. In both cases, the nearest
feature distance does not converge to the same low value as was observed for the grey clamp. The reason is that the
plastic drill and gaming controller have less distinct shape and therefore are more difﬁcult to match. This is
especially noticeable when the objects have rotated. The objects are often confused as an instance from the box class
and the grasps for the matching box is executed. Fortunately for the gaming controller, the execution still results in
success. However, for the plastic drill, the predicted grasp is not very good and the grasp fails.
5.4
Semantic Grasping
A ﬁnal set of experiments demonstrate the extension of our method to generate semantic grasps for instances belonging
to the same functional class. For these experiments, we investigate grasps on the handles of mug and drill objects. The
experience is hand annotated for test exemplars of instances similar to the target object. It is possible for the robot to
14

Figure 10: Summary of results for the incremental learning experiment with the YCB plastic drill.
Figure 11: Summary of results for the incremental learning with the gaming controller.
self-learn semantic grasping by incorporating, for example, affordance detection to indicate whether the location of the
grasp matches the affordance of the object part [15]. This is out of scope for the present article and left for future work.
15

Figure 12: Examples of semantic grasping for the YCB red mug and the YCB orange drill in four different poses.
First row: Surface normal image. Second row: Grasp pose executed by the robot. Third row: Predicted grasp from
DGCM-Net. Fourth row: Predicted grasp from GPD. Fifth row: Predicted grasp from HAF.
Example grasp proposals generated by our method as well as GPD and HAF for a mug and a drill in various poses are
shown in Figure 12. Our method reliably generates grasp poses on the relevant object part, while both GPD and HAF
fail to do so. Although the grasps from GPD and HAF may result in success, they do not support the functional use of
the object. For the mug, it is understandable that the handle is not grasped because the quality of the depth data on that
part of the object is very poor and does not characterise a stable grasp. Our method, on the other hand, does not only
rely on the local structure to estimate the grasp. So long as there is some cue about the handle, as is present in these
selected examples, the handle grasp is generated. The drill offers more depth data on the handle but the baselines
still prefer to grasp the head. HAF is executed to ﬁnd both top and front grasps, and the best scoring grasp is shown.
Nonetheless, a top grasp or a front grasp on the head is preferred instead of the handle. A video of the grasps executed
by the robot is available at https://youtu.be/iI_P1UVXfjo.
6
Conclusion
This article presented an approach for incrementally learning grasps by leveraging past experience. In our system,
every successful grasp is stored in a database and retrieved to guide future grasps. This is accomplished with the dense
geometric correspondence network that is trained to predict the similarity between newly acquired input depth images
and stored experiences as well as to predict 3D-3D correspondences to transform grasp poses. A descriptive feature
space is constructed for the retrieval task using metric learning and correspondences are established by predicting
view-dependent normalised object coordinate values.
Ofﬂine studies with a dataset showed that our approach precisely recovers grasps from experiences with the same
object and also transfers well to unseen objects from the same or different class. Furthermore, results showed that
more experience leads to more reliable grasp proposals. Hardware experiments with a mobile manipulator showed that
our experience-based grasping method performs equally successful as the baseline and integration with the baseline
shows overall superior performance. Additional experiments demonstrated the full online capability to efﬁciently learn
grasps for unseen objects, often needing only one or two successful grasps to reliably re-grasp the same object. Finally,
an extension was demonstrated whereby speciﬁc grasps, such as those on handles, can be desired in order to achieve
semantically meaningful grasps.
16

One direction for future work is to include more instances per class when training DGCM-Net to better generalise over
varied shapes of a class instead of simply manipulating scales of an object for each class. Furthermore, it has been
observed that points on the bottom of objects are missing from the object masks since the points are regarded as table
or background. Thus, more detail about objects would be extracted by applying a segmentation method that reﬁnes
the mask using colour information. Another avenue of future work is to include failed experience during the learning
phase. Particularly for objects that are difﬁcult to grasp, it may take a large number of attempts to ﬁnally succeed.
By also considering failures, it would be possible to reject grasp candidates and thus more quickly guide grasping to
successful regions. Currently, our method was only tested with a parallel-jaw gripper. It would be interesting to extend
this work to other hardware, such as three-ﬁnger grippers or anthropomorphic hands. It would be even more interesting
to investigate how to transfer grasps between grippers so that experience learned by one platform can be exploited by
another platform with different hardware.
