The Assistive Multi-Armed Bandit
Lawrence Chan
University of California, Berkeley

Dylan Hadﬁeld-Menell
University of California, Berkeley

Siddhartha Srinivasa
University of Washington

Anca Dragan
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract—Learning preferences implicit in the choices humans
make is a well studied problem in both economics and computer
science. However, most work makes the assumption that humans
are acting (noisily) optimally with respect to their preferences.
Such approaches can fail when people are themselves learning
about what they want. In this work, we introduce the assistive
multi-armed bandit, where a robot assists a human playing a
bandit task to maximize cumulative reward. In this problem,
the human does not know the reward function but can learn
it through the rewards received from arm pulls; the robot
only observes which arms the human pulls but not the reward
associated with each pull. We offer sufﬁcient and necessary
conditions for successfully assisting the human in this framework.
Surprisingly, better human performance in isolation does not
necessarily lead to better performance when assisted by the robot:
a human policy can do better by effectively communicating its
observed rewards to the robot. We conduct proof-of-concept
experiments that support these results. We see this work as
contributing towards a theory behind algorithms for human-
robot interaction.
Index Terms—preference learning, assistive agents
I. INTRODUCTION
Preference learning [1] seeks to learn a predictive model of
human preferences from their observed behavior. These models
have been applied quite successfully in contexts like personal-
ized news feeds [2]–[4], movie recommendations [5]–[7], and
human robot interaction [8]–[12]. We can learn this predictive
model by ﬁtting a utility function to revealed preferences [13]–
[15], ﬁtting parameters in a pre-speciﬁed human model [16],
and applying contextual-bandit algorithms [3].
Central to all of these approaches is a fundamental assump-
tion: human behavior is noisily-optimal with respect to a set
of stationary preferences. Under this assumption, the problem
can then be elegantly cast and analyzed as an inverse optimal
control (IOC) [17] or inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
problem [18]. Here, the human selects an action, takes it, and
receives a reward, which captures their internal preference
(e.g. the enjoyment of having their desk organized a particular
way). The robot only observes human actions and attempts to
learn their preference under the assumption that the human
likes the actions they selected; if you go for a particular desk
conﬁguration more frequently, the robot will assume that you
like that conﬁguration more.
Unfortunately, in practice, this natural inference assumes
stationarity, which is often violated. We have all experienced
situations where our preferences change with experience
and time [19], [20]. This is particularly true in situations
where we are ourselves learning about our preferences as
H
ht
at
Round t + 1
Round t
rt ⇠✓at
Round t −1
rt−1 ⇠✓at−1
A
M
(✓1, ..., ✓N)
Fig. 1. We introduce the assistive multi-armed bandit: a formalism for the
problem of helping a learning agent optimize their reward. In each round, the
human observes reward and tells the robot which arms they would like it to
pull. The robot observes these requests, attempts to infer the reward values,
and selects an arm to pull.
we are providing them [21], [22]. For example, as we are
organizing our desk, we might be experimenting with different
conﬁgurations over time, to see what works.
Now imagine a personal robot is trying to help you organize
that same desk. If the robot believes you are optimal, it will
infer the wrong preferences. Instead, if the robot accounts
for the fact that you are learning about your preferences, it
has a better shot at understanding what you want. Even more
crucially, the robot can expose you to new conﬁgurations –
ones that might improve your posture, something you hadn’t
considered before and you were not going to explore if left to
your own devices.
In this work, we formalize how a robot can actively assist
humans who are themselves learning about their preferences.
Our thesis is that by modeling and inﬂuencing the dynamics
of human learning, the robot can enable the human-robot team
to learn more effectively and outperform a human learning
suboptimally in isolation.
To this end, we introduce the assistive multi-armed bandit:
an extension of the classical multi-armed bandit (MAB) model
of learning. In each round, the human selects an action, referred
to in the bandit setting as an arm. However, the robot intercepts
their intended action and chooses a (potentially different)
arm to pull. The human then observes the pulled arm and
corresponding reward, and the process repeats (Figure 1). We
arXiv:1901.08654v1  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2019

ﬁnd this model surprisingly rich and fascinating. It captures
the heart of collaboration: information asymmetry and the cost
of equalizing it. As the human learns about their preferences,
they are compelled to communicate them to the robot as it
decides their eventual reward. Analyzing this model allows us
to understand the theoretical limits to assisting learning agents
and the properties that make learners easier to assist.
Our contributions are the following: 1) we formalize the
assistive multi-armed bandit; 2) we give weak sufﬁcient
conditions under which a human and robot team learns
consistently, a lower bound on the cost of assuming noisy-
optimality, and a mutual-information based upper bound on
team performance; and 3) we use policy optimization [23]
to conduct an in-depth empirical validation of our theoretical
results and investigate the effect of incorrectly modeling the
human’s learning strategy. We train A against a ﬁxed learning
strategy, e.g., ϵ-greedy, and test it against a different learning
strategy, e.g., Thompson sampling. Our analysis shows a person
that is better at learning does not necessarily lead to the human-
robot team performing better - there are human learning
strategies that are ineffective in isolation but communicate
well and enable the robot to effectively assist. In fact, human
learning strategies that are inconsistent in isolation, that is,
failing a weak notion of asymptotic optimality, can allow
the human-robot team to match optimal performance in a
standard multi-armed bandit. Our results advance the theory
behind algorithmic preference learning and provide guidance
for structuring algorithms for human-robot interaction.
II. A FAMILY OF BANDITS
A. The Standard Multi-Armed Bandit
A multi-armed bandit (MAB) M is deﬁned by:
• Θ: a space of reward distributions parameters; θ ∈Θ;
• N: an integer representing the number of arms;
• p: a distribution over Θ.
At the start of the game, θ is sampled from Θ according
to the prior p. At each timestep t, an arm at ∈[1, . . . , N] is
chosen. A reward rt ∼θat is sampled from the corresponding
arm distribution. A strategy is a mapping that determines the
correct distribution to sample from given a history of reward ob-
servations and previous arm pulls: Kt(a1, r1, . . . , at−1, rt−1).
We use µk to represent the mean of arm k, with parameters
θk. We use j∗to represent the index of the best arm and µ∗
to represent its mean. Tk(t) represents the number of pulls of
arm k up to and including time t. The goal of this game is to
maximize the sum of rewards over time, or alternatively, to
minimize the expectation of the regret ¯R(t), deﬁned as:
¯R(t) =
X
t
(µ∗−µat) =
X
k
(µ∗−µk) Tk(t).
(1)
B. Stationary Inverse Optimal Control
In preference learning, e.g., inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) [24], [25] and inverse optimal control (IOC) [17], an
AI system observes (noisily-)optimal behavior and infers the
reward function or preferences of that agent. This relies on a
key assumption that the agent being observed knows the value
of actions it can take, at least in the sense that they are able to
select optimal actions. In a multi-armed bandit setting, this set
of assumptions corresponds to assuming that the human knows
the parameters of the bandit, but has some small probability
of picking a suboptimal arm. We refer to a human with this
knowledge state and policy as implementing the ϵ-optimal
policy. Inferring the reward of an ϵ-optimal, or noisily-optimal,
human can be thought of as solving a stationary IOC problem.
C. The Inverse Multi-Armed Bandit
Before formalizing the problem of assisting a human who
is learning, rather than noisily-optimal, we look at passively
inferring the reward from their actions. We call this the inverse
bandit problem. Each Inverse Bandit problem is deﬁned by:
• M: a multi-armed bandit problem
• H: a bandit strategy employed by the human, that maps
histories of past actions and rewards to distributions over
arm indices. Ht : h1 × r1 × · · · × ht−1 × rt−1 →Π(N)
The goal is to recover the reward parameter θ by observing
only the arm pulls of the human over time h1, ..., ht.
Unlike the stationary IOC case, H does not have access to
the true reward parameters. H receives the reward signal rt
sampled according to θ. As a consequence, the human arm
pulls are not i.i.d.; the distribution of human arm pulls changes
as they learn more about their preferences.
D. The Assistive Multi-Armed Bandit
In the assistive multi-armed bandit, we have a joint system
A ◦H that aims to do well in an MAB M. This strategy
consists of two parts: the human player H and robot player A.
As in an MAB, the goal is to minimize the expected regret.
The key difference between an assistive MAB and the standard
MAB is that the policy is decomposed into a human component
and a robot component. The goal is to capture scenarios where
our goal, as designers of the robot At, is to optimize a reward
signal which is only observed implicitly through the actions of
a human who is themselves learning about the reward function.
The human and robot components of the policy are arranged
in a setup similar to teleoperation. In each round:
1) The human player H selects an arm to suggest based
on the history of previous arm pulls and rewards:
Ht(a1, r1, . . . , at−1, rt−1) ∈[1, . . . , N].
2) The robot player A selects which arm to actually execute
based on the history of the human’s attempts and the
actual arms chosen: At(h1, a1, . . . , ht−1, at−1, ht) ∈
[1, . . . , N].
3) The human player H observes the current round’s arm
and corresponding reward: (at, rt ∼θAt).
Unlike the inverse MAB or (stationary) IOC, the assistive
MAB formalizes the problem of actually using learned pref-
erence knowledge to assist a human. Even if we are able to
solve the inverse MAB, this is not useful if we can’t actually
help a learner reduce regret. We expect an optimal solution to
the assistive MAB to improve on suboptimal learning, guide
exploration, and correct for noise.
2

III. THEORETICAL RESULTS
A. Hardness of Assistive MABs
We consider the relative difﬁculty of assisting a person that
knows what they want with assisting a person that is learning.
We model the ﬁrst situation as an assistive stationary IOC
problem, and the second as an assistive MAB. First, we show
that assistive stationary IOC is, as one might expect, quite easy
in theory; we show that it is possible to infer the correct arm
while making ﬁnitely many mistakes in expectation.
Proposition 1. Suppose that H’s arm pulls are i.i.d and let fi
be the probability H pulls arm i. If H is noisily optimal, that
is, fj∗> fi for all sub-optimal i, there exists a robot policy
A that has ﬁnite expected regret for every value of θ:
E[ ¯R(T)] ≤
X
i̸=j∗
µ∗−µi
(
p
fj∗−√fi)2
Proof. (Sketch) Our robot policy A simply pulls the most
commonly pulled arm.
Let ˆfi(t) = 1
t
Pt
k=1[ht = i] be the empirical frequency of
H’s pulls of arm i up to time t. Note that At = i only if
ˆfj∗(t) ≤ˆfi(t). We apply a Chernoff bound to the random
variable ˆfj∗(t) −ˆfi(t). This gives that, for each i,
Pr( ˆfi(t) ≤ˆfj(t)) ≤e−t(√fi−√
fj)2.
(2)
Summing Eq. 2 over t and suboptimal arms gives the result.
This is in contrast to the standard results about regret in
an MAB: for a ﬁxed, nontrivial MAB problem M, any MAB
policy has expected regret at least logarithmic in time on some
choice of parameter θ [26], [27]:
E[ ¯R(T)] ≥Ω(log(T)).
Several approaches based on Upper Conﬁdence Bounds (UCB)
have been shown to achieve this bound, implying that this
bound is tight [26], [28], [29]. Nonetheless, this suggests that
the problem of assisting a noisily-optimal human is signiﬁcantly
easier than solving a standard MAB.
The assistive MAB is at least as hard as a standard MAB.
For the same sequence of arm pulls and observed rewards, the
amount of information available to A about the true reward
parameters is upper bounded by the corresponding information
available in a standard MAB. From a certain perspective,
actually improving on human performance in isolation is
hopelessly difﬁcult – A does not get access to the reward
signal, and somehow must still assist a person who does.
B. Consistent Assisted Learning
We begin with the simplest success criterion from the
bandit literature: consistency. Informally, consistency is the
property that the player eventually pulls suboptimal arms with
probability 0. This can be stated formally as the average regret
going to 0 in the limit: limt→∞¯R(t)/t = 0. In an MAB,
achieving consistency is relatively straightforward: any policy
that is greedy in the limit with inﬁnite exploration (GLIE) is
consistent [30], [31]. In contrast, in an assistive MAB, it is
not obvious that the robot can implement such a policy when
the H strategy is inconsistent. The robot observes no rewards
and thus cannot estimate the best arm in hindsight.
However, it turns out a weak condition on the human allows
the robot-human joint system to guarantee consistency:
Proposition 2. If the human H implements a noisily greedy
policy, that is, a policy that pulls the arm with highest sample
mean strictly most often, then there exists a robot policy A
such that A ◦H is consistent.
Proof. (Sketch) Fix a set of decaying disjoint exploration
sequences Ek, one per arm, such that limt→∞1
t |Ek ∩
{1, ..., t}| →0 and limt→∞|Ek ∩{1, ..., t}| →∞. In other
words, each arm is pulled inﬁnitely often, but at a decaying
rate over time.
Let it be the arm most commonly pulled by H up until time
t, and A be deﬁned by
at =

k
t ∈Ek
it
otherwise .
Note that this implies that for suboptimal k, 1
t Tk(t) →0 in
probability as t →∞, as the sample means of all the arms
converge to the true means, and the rate of exploration decays to
zero. This in turn implies that A ◦H achieves consistency.
In other words, assistance is possible if the human picks the
best actions in hindsight. This robot A assists the human H in
two ways. First, it helps the human explore their preferences
– A ◦H pulls every arm inﬁnitely often. This ﬁxes possible
under-exploration in the human. Second, it stabilizes their
actions and helps ensure that H does not take too many
suboptimal actions - eventually, A ◦H converges to only
pulling the best arm. This helps mitigate the effect of noise
from the human.
1) modeling learning as ϵ-optimality leads to inconsistency:
We now investigate what occurs when mistakenly we model
learning behavior as noisy-optimality.
A simple way to make A ◦H consistent when H is noisily
optimal is for A to pull the arm most frequently pulled by H.
Proposition 3. If H plays a strategy that pulls the best arm
most often and A plays H’s most frequently pulled arm, then
A ◦H is consistent.
Proof. (Sketch) Eventually, H’s most frequent arm converges
to the best arm with probability 1 by hypothesis. At this point,
A will pull the best arm going forward and achieve a per-round
regret of 0.
Next we consider the impact of applying this strategy when
its assumptions are incorrect, i.e., H is learning. For simplicity,
we assume H is greedy and pulls the best arm given the rewards
so far. We will consider a 1 1
2-arm bandit: a bandit with two
arms, where one has a known expected value and the other is
unknown. We show that pairing this suboptimal-learner with
the ‘most-frequent-arm’ strategy leads the joint system A ◦H
to be inconsistent:
3

H is ✏-Optimal
exploit
observe
defer
−
−
...
... −
rt
1
1
0
1
1
1
H
A
H is ✏-Greedy
rt
...
...
0
1
2
−
−
−
−
...
...
3
−
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
{
{
{
explore
exploit
observe
H
A
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
defer
defer
1
defer
defer
defer
{
{
Fig. 2.
A comparison between assisting an ϵ-optimal H and an ϵ-greedy
H in a modiﬁed assistive MAB (deﬁned in Section V-E) where the robot
A has to choose between acting and letting H act. This creates a direct
exploration-exploitation tradeoff that makes it easier to qualitatively analyze
A’s behavior. At the top is whether A defers to the human or pulls an arm,
followed by what H pulls (if the robot defers), followed by the reward H
observes. When the robot models learning, the policy it learns has a qualitative
divide into three components: explore, where the robot explores for the human;
observe, when the robot lets the human pull arms; and exploit, when the robot
exploits this information and pulls its estimate of the best arm. Crucially, the
explore component is only found when learning is modeled. This illustrates
Proposition 4, which argues that assisting an ϵ-optimal H is different from
assisting a learning H.
Proposition 4. If H is a greedy learner and A is ‘most-
frequent-arm’, then there exists an assistive MAB M such
that A ◦H is inconsistent.
Proof. (Sketch) The proof consists of two steps. First, we show
a variant of a classical bandit result: if H and A output the
constant arm in the same round, they will for the rest of time.
Second, we show that this occurs with ﬁnite probability and get
a positive lower bound on the per-round regret of A ◦H.
While this is a simpliﬁed setting, this shows that the types of
mistakes and suboptimality represented by learning systems are
not well modeled by the standard suboptimality assumptions
used in research on recommendation systems, preference
learning, and human-robot interaction. The suboptimality
exhibited by learning systems is stateful and self-reinforcing.
Figure 2 shows the practical impact of modeling learning. It
compares an optimal assistance policy for stationary IOC with
an optimal policy for an assistive MAB. In general, assitive
MAB policies seem to ﬁt into three steps: explore to give H a
good estimate of rewards; observe H to identify a good arm;
and then exploit that information.
MABs are the standard theoretical model of reinforcement
learning and so this observation highlights the point that
the term inverse reinforcement learning is somewhat of a
misnomer (as opposed to inverse optimal control): IRL’s
assumptions about an agent (noisy optimality) lead to very
different inferences than actually assuming an agent is learning.
C. Regret in Assistive Multi-Armed Bandits
Having argued that we can achieve consistency for such a
broad class of human policies in an assistive MAB, we now
...
...
−
rt
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
...
...
{3} {0, 1, 2}
{2}
1
{2}
{2}
{2, 3}
{3}
{3}
H
A
Gittins index
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
Fig. 3. In Proposition 5 we show that it is possible to match the regret from
optimal learning in an standard MAB when assisting the ‘win-stay-lose-shift’
(WSLS) policy. This is because WSLS perfectly communicates the observed
rewards to A. Here we show an example trajectory from an approximately
optimal policy assisting WSLS (computed with Algorithm 1). At the top
is what H suggests, followed by what A pulls, followed by the reward H
observes. For comparison, we show the arms selected by the near-optimal
Gittins index policy for each belief state. This highlights the importance of
communicative learning policies in an assistive MAB.
return to the question of achieving low regret. In particular, we
investigate the conditions under which A◦H achieve O(log(T))
expected regret, as is possible in the standard MAB.
For any given human H, there exists a robot A such that
A ◦H does as well as H: let A copy the H’s actions without
modiﬁcation; that is, at = ht for all t. So in the case where
H achieves O(log(T)) regret by itself, A ◦H can as well.
However, a more interesting question is that of when we can
successfully assist an suboptimal H that achieves ω(log(T))
regret. While one may hypothesize that better human policies
lead to better performance when assisted, this is surprisingly
not the case, as the next section demonstrates.
1) An inconsistent policy that is easy to assist: Consider
a Beta-Bernoulli assistive MAB where rewards are binary:
rt ∈{0, 1}. A classic bandit strategy here is ‘win-stay-lose-
shift’ (WSLS) [32] which, as the name suggests, sticks with
the current arm if the most recent reward is one:
ht =

at−1
rt−1 = 1
Unif({k|k ̸= at−1})
rt−1 = 0
(3)
This a simple strategy that performs somewhat well em-
pirically – although it is easy to see that it is not consistent
in isolation, let alone capable of achieving O(log(T)) regret.
Indeed, it achieves Θ(T) regret, as it spends a ﬁxed fraction of
its time pulling suboptimal arms. However, if H can implement
this strategy, the combined system can implement an arbitrary
MAB strategy from the standard MAB setting, including those
that achieve logarithmic regret. In other words, the robot
can successfully assist the human in efﬁciently balancing
exploration and exploitation despite only having access to
the reward parameter through an inconsistent human.
Proposition 5. Let R∗be the optimal regret for a Beta-
Bernoulli multi-armed bandit. If H implements the WSLS
strategy in the corresponding assistive MAB, then there exists
a robot strategy A such that A ◦H achieves regret R∗.
Proof. (Sketch) The pair (at−1, ht) directly encodes the pre-
vious reward rt−1. This means that At can be an arbitrary
function of the history of arm pulls and rewards and so it can
implement the MAB policy that achieves regret R∗.
4

Figure 3 compares a rollout of this A ◦H(we describe the
approach in Section V-B1) with a rollout of a near-optimal
policy for a standard MAB.
2) Communication upper bounds team performance: The
WSLS policy is not unique in that it allows A ◦H to obtain
logarithmic regret. A less interesting, but similarly effective
policy, is for the human to directly encode their reward
observations into their actions; the human need not implement
a sensible bandit policy. For example, the following purely
communicative H also works for a Beta-Bernoulli bandit:
ht =
 0
rt−1 = 0
1
rt−1 = 1
(4)
We can generalize the results regarding communicative poli-
cies using the notion of mutual information, which quantiﬁes
the amount of information obtained through observing the
human arm pulls.
Let I(X; Y ) be the mutual information between X and Y ,
H(X) be the entropy of X, and H(X|Y ) be the entropy of
X given Y .
Proposition 6. Suppose that the probability the robot pulls a
suboptimal arm at time t is bounded above by some function
f(t), that is P(At ̸= j∗) ≤f(t). Then the mutual information
I(j∗; h1 × · · · × ht) between the human actions up to time t
and the optimal arm must be at least (1 −f(t)) log N −1.
Proof. We can consider the multi-armed bandit task as one of
deducing the best arm from the human’s actions. This allows
us to apply Fano’s inequality [33] to P(At ̸= j∗), and using
the fact that the entropy of a Bernoulli random variable is
bounded above by 1, we get
P(At ̸= j∗) log(N −1) ≥H(ˆj∗|j∗) −log 2
= H(ˆj∗) −I(ˆj∗; j∗) −1
≥log N −I(j∗; h1 × · · · × ht) −1.
Rearranging terms and using P(At ̸= j∗) ≤f(t), we get
I(j∗; h1 × · · · × ht) ≥log N −f(t) log(N −1) −1
≥(1 −f(t)) log N −1.
Intuitively, since the probability of error is bounded by
f(t), in (1 −f(t)) cases the human actions conveyed enough
information for A to successfully choose the best action out of
N options. This corresponds to log N bits, so there needs to
be at least (1 −f(t)) log N bits of information in H’s actions.
Corollary 7. Suppose that the probability the robot pulls a
suboptimal arm at time t is bounded above by some function
f(t), that is P(At ̸= j∗) ≤f(t). Then the mutual information
I(a1×r1×· · ·×at−1×rt−1; h1×· · ·×ht) between the human
actions up to time t and the human observations must be at
least (1 −f(t)) log N −1.
Proof. Since the best arm is independent of the human actions
given the human observations, this follows immediately from
the data processing inequality and proposition 6.
In order to achieve regret logarithmic in time, we must have
that P(Kt ̸= j∗) ≤C
t for some C > 0. Applying proposition
6 above implies that we must have
I(j∗; h1 × · · · × ht) ≥(1 −C
t ) log N −1
Note that the term I(ˆj∗; h1 × · · · × ht) depends on both the
human policy and the robot policy - no learning human policy
can achieve this bound unless the human-robot system A ◦H
samples each arm sufﬁciently often. As a consequence, simple
strategies such as inferring the best arm at each timestep and
pulling it, cannot achieve the Θ(log T) lower bound on regret.
IV. ALGORITHMS FOR ASSISTIVE MULTI-ARMED BANDITS
The optimal response to a given human strategy can be
computed by solving a partially observed Markov decision
process (POMDP) [34]. The state is the reward parameters
θ and H’s internal state. The observations are the human
arm pulls. In this framing, a variety of approaches can be
used to compute policies or plans, e.g., online Monte-Carlo
planning [35], [36] or point-based value iteration [37].
In order to run experiments with large sample sizes, our
primary design criterion was fast online performance. This lead
us to use a direct policy optimization approach. The high per-
action cost of Monte-Carlo planners makes them impractical
for this problem. Further, explicitly tracking θ and H’s internal
state is strictly harder than solving the inverse MAB.
Algorithm 1 Policy Optimization for the Assistive MAB
human policy H
initialize parameterized policy π(w; ·), policy parameters w
for i ≤nItrs do
ξs, rs ←SAMPLE-TRAJECTORIES(π(w; ·), Size, T)
ˆ
∂w ←POLICY-GRADIENT(ξs, π(w; ·))
▷[38]
w ←w + ˆ
∂w
end for
procedure SAMPLE-TRAJECTORIES(π(w, ·), Size, T)
initialize empty array ξs
for i ≤Size do
θ ∼Θ
for t ≤T do
ht ∼Ht(h1, r1, . . . , at−1, rt−1)
at ∼π(w; h1, a1, . . . , ht−1, at−1, ht)
rt ∼θat
end for
ξ ←ξ = [(h1, a1, r1), ..., (hT , aT , rT )]
ξs ←ξs+[ξ]
end for
return ξs
end procedure
Our approach applies the policy optimization algorithm of
[23] to assistive MABs. Given an assistive MAB (M, H), we
sample a batch of reward parameters θ from the prior p(Θ); gen-
erate trajectories of the form ξ = [(h1, a1, r1), ..., (ht, at, rt)]
from H and the current robot policy A(i); and use the
5

trajectories to update the robot policy to A(i+1). During this
ofﬂine training stage, since we are sampling reward parameters
rather than using the ground truth reward parameters, we can
use the generated rewards rt to improve on A(i).
We represent A’s policy as a recurrent neural network (RNN).
At each timestep, it observes a tuple (at−1, ht) where at−1 is
the most recent robot action and ht is the most recent human
action. In response, it outputs a distribution over arm indices,
from which an action is sampled. Given a batch of trajectories,
we use an approximate policy gradient method [38] to update
the weights of our RNN1. We summarize this procedure in
Algorithm 1. In our experiments, we used Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [39], due to its ease of implementation,
good performance, and relative insensitivity to hyperparameters.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we used a horizon 50 Beta-Bernoulli
bandit with four arms. Pulling the ith arm produces a reward of
one with probability θi and zero with probability 1 −θi: Θ =
[0, 1]4. We assume a uniform prior over Θ: θi ∼Beta(1, 1).
We consider 5 classes of human policy:
• ϵ-greedy, a learning H that chooses the best arm in
hindsight with probability 1 −ϵ and a random arm with
probability ϵ.2
• WSLS, the win-stay-lose-shift policy [32] sticks with the
arm pulled in the last round if it returned 1, and otherwise
switches randomly to another arm.
• TS, the Thompson-sampling policy [40] maintains a
posterior over the arm parameters, and chooses each arm
in proportion to the current probability it is optimal. This
is implemented by sampling a particle from the posterior
of each arm, then pulling the arm associated with the
highest value.
• UCL, the upper-credible limit policy [41] is an algorithm
similar to Bayes UCB [42] with softmax noise, used as a
model of human behavior in a bandit environment.3
• GI, the Gittins index policy [43] is the Bayesian optimal
solution to an inﬁnite horizon discounted objective MAB.4
In addition, we also deﬁned the following noisily-optimal
human policy to serve as a baseline:
• ϵ-optimal, a fully informed H that knows the reward
parameters θ, chooses the optimal arm with probability
1 −ϵ, and chooses a random action with probability ϵ.5
A. Inverse Multi-Armed Bandit
Our ﬁrst experiment investigates the miscalibration that
occurs when we do not model learning behavior. A robot
that doesn’t model human learning will be overconﬁdent. To
1Our code is available online at https://github.com/chanlaw/assistive-bandits
2We performed grid search to pick an ϵ based on empirical performance,
and found that ϵ = 0.1 performed best.
3We set K = 4 and softmax temperature τ = 4.
4We follow the approximations described by Chakravorty and Mahajan
in [44], and choose a discount rate (γ = 0.9) that performs best empirically
using grid search.
5We set ϵ to match that of the ϵ-greedy policy.
TABLE I
LOG-DENSITY OF TRUE REWARD PARAMS IN A HORIZON 5 INVERSE MAB
Assumed H Policy
Actual H Policy
Correct Policy
ϵ-Optimal
ϵ-greedy
0.49
-0.23
WSLS
0.95
0.13
TS
0.02
-0.23
UCL
0.03
-0.30
GI
0.94
0.20
ϵ-Optimal
–
1.55
show this, we use the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [45] to
approximate the posterior over reward parameters θ given
human actions. We compare the posterior we get when we
model learning with the posterior that assumes H is ϵ-optimal.
We compared the log-density of the true reward parameters
in the posterior conditioned on 5 H actions, under both models,
when H is actually learning. We report the results in Table I.
For every learning human policy, we ﬁnd that the log-density
of the true reward parameters is signiﬁcantly higher when we
model learning than when we do not. In the case of ϵ-greedy
and TS, we ﬁnd that the posterior that fails to model learning
assigns negative log-density to the true parameters. This means
the posterior is a worse estimate of θ than the prior.
B. Assistance is Possible
Propositions 2 and 5 prove that it is possible to assist
suboptimal learners in theory. In this section, we show that
it is possible in practice. We use Algorithm 1 to train a
recurrent policy for each human policy. In Fig. 4, we report
the performance with assistance and without.
1) Policy optimization details: To alleviate the problem of
exploding and vanishing gradients [46], we use Gated Recurrent
Units (GRU) [47] as the cells of our recurrent neural network.
The output of the GRU cell is fed into a softmax function, and
this output is interpreted as the distribution over actions. To
reduce to variance in our policy gradient estimate, we also use a
ϵ-greedy
0
2
4
6
8
10
Regret
WSLS
TS
Regret With and Without Robot Assistance
UCL
GI
ϵ-optimal
No intervention
Assist with correct H model
Assist assuming H is ϵ-optimal
True H model
Fig. 4.
Averaged regret of various human policies (lower = better) over
100,000 trajectories when unassisted, assisted with the correct human model,
and assisted assuming that the human is noisily-optimal. Assistance lowers the
regret of most learning policies, but it is important to model learning: ignoring
that the human is learning can lead to worse performance than no assistance.
Note that assisted WSLS performs almost as well as the Gittins Index policy,
an empirical veriﬁcation of Proposition 5.
6

0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Mutual information with best arm after 5 timesteps (bits)
3.25
3.50
3.75
4.00
4.25
4.50
4.75
5.00
5.25
Regret with robot assistance
Assisted Regret vs Mutual Information
ϵ-Greedy
WSLS
TS
UCL
GI
More random ←−
−→More deterministic
Fig. 5.
The assisted regret of various policies, plotted against the mutual
information between the best arm and the policy’s actions in the ﬁrst 5
timesteps. We also plot the best-ﬁt line, with 95% conﬁdence interval, for
the regression between assisted regret and mutual information. We augmented
our policies with variants of ϵ-greedy and Thompson sampling with less
randomness. Policies with high mutual information lead to lower regret when
assisted, supporting our theoretical ﬁndings.
value function baseline [48] and apply Generalized Advantage
Estimation (GAE) [49]. We used weight normalization [50] to
speed up training. We used a batch size of 250000 timesteps
or 5000 trajectories per policy iteration, and performed 100
policy iterations using PPO.
2) Results:
To quantitatively test the hypotheses that
our learned models successfully assist, we perform a two
factor ANOVA. We found a signiﬁcant interaction effect,
F(3, 999990) = 1778.8, p < .001, and a post-hoc analysis
with Tukey HSD corrections showed that we were able to
successfully assist the human in all four sub-optimal learning
policies (p < .001).
Our WSLS results agree with Proposition 5. Assisted WSLS
achieves a regret of 3.5, close to the regret of the best-
performing unassisted policy, 3.2. The gap in reward is due
to our choice to employ approximate policy optimization. We
provide an example trajectory in Fig. 3. The actions selected
are almost identical to those of the optimal policy.
This suboptimality also accounts for the small increase in
regret when assisting the Gittins index policy.
3) Modeling learning matters: Proposition 4 shows that
modeling learning matters. We compared assistance assuming
that H is ϵ-optimal with assistance with the correct (learning)
model. We report the results in Fig. 4. We found that the
regret with the wrong model is higher than no intervention in
every case but UCL. Assisted WSLS with the wrong model
has double the regret of assisted WSLS with the correct model.
Proposition 4 shows that in theory, ignoring learning leads to
inconsistency. Fig. 4 shows that this mistake leads to higher
regret empirically.
TABLE II
INCREASE IN REWARD FROM ROBOT ASSISTANCE
Assumed H Policy
Actual H
ϵ-greedy
WSLS
TS
UCL
GI
ϵ-optimal
ϵ-greedy
2.13
-0.60
-2.18
-2.20
-0.11
-3.95
WSLS
0.94
3.75
0.80
0.10
-2.21
-1.97
TS
0.33
0.66
0.60
0.44
-1.53
-0.19
UCL
1.76
-1.19
2.51
2.43
0.74
1.28
GI
-1.09
-0.28
-0.77
-0.85
-0.71
-1.50
ϵ-optimal
0.24
1.17
1.24
1.28
-3.09
1.46
C. Mutual Information Predicts Performance
Proposition 6 implies that high mutual information is
required for good team performance. To verify this, we
computed the mutual information for a variety of combined
policies after 5 timesteps. Fig. 5 plots this against the regret
of the combined system. We consider several variants of ϵ-
greedy and TS that are more or less deterministic. We consider
ϵ ∈[0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1]. To make TS more deterministic, we
use the mean of a sample of n particles to select arms. We
consider n ∈[1, 2, 3, 10, 30, ∞].
Across this data, higher mutual information is associated with
lower assisted regret, r(10) = −.82, p < .001. Furthermore,
by looking at the ϵ-greedy and TS results as a sequence, we
can observe a clear and distinct pattern. Policies that are more
deterministic tend to be easier to help. This is supported by the
results in Table I, which shows that it is easier to infer reward
parameters for WSLS and GI (i.e., the two policies with the
highest mutual information) than TS and ϵ-greedy.
D. Sensitivity to Model Misspeciﬁcation
In the previous three experiments, we assumed knowledge
of the correct learning policy. In this experiment, we consider
the implications of incorrectly modeling learning. We took the
policies we trained in Section V-B and tested them with every
human policy. We report the net change in reward in Table II.
We colored cases where the robot A successfully assists the
human H green, and cases where it fails to assist red. We
bolded the best performance in each row.
Modeling learning (even with the incorrect model) generally
leads to lower regret than assuming ϵ-optimal for every learning
H policy. However, when the robot has the wrong model of
learning, it can fail to assist the human. For example, ϵ-greedy
is only successfully assisted when it is correctly modeled. This
argues that research into the learning strategies employed by
people in practice is an important area for future research.
An intriguing result is that assuming ϵ-greedy does suc-
cessfully assist all of the suboptimal learning policies. This
suggests that, although some learning policies must be well
modeled, learning to assist some models can be transferred to
other models in some cases. On the other hand, trying to assist
GI leads to a policy that hurts performance across the board.
In future work, we plan to identify classes of learners which
can be assisted by the same robot policy.
7

ϵ-greedy
0
2
4
6
8
10
Regret
ϵ-greedy
0
2
4
6
8
10
Regret
WSLS
WSLS
TS
Turn-Taking Interaction Mode
TS
Preemptive Interaction Mode
UCL
UCL
GI
GI
ϵ-optimal
ϵ-optimal
No intervention
Assist with correct H model
Assist assuming H is ϵ-optimal
True H model
Fig. 6. Averaged regret of various human policies (lower = better) over 100,000
trajectories under different interaction modes. Assistance lowers the regret of
ϵ-greedy, WSLS, and UCL in both the preemptive and turn-taking interaction
modes. Assistance while ignoring learning is worse than no assistance in
almost every case. This offers further support for the importance of modeling
learning when assisting humans.
E. Other Paradigms of Assistance
The assistive multi-armed bandit considered so far only
captures one mode of interaction. It is straightforward to
consider extensions to different modes. We consider two such
modes. The ﬁrst is turn taking, where H and A take turns
selecting arms. This can be more difﬁcult because the robot
has to act in early rounds, when it has less information, and
because the human has to act in later rounds, when H may be
noisy and the best arm has already been identiﬁed.
The second variant we consider is preemptive interaction.
In this case, A goes ﬁrst and either pulls an arm or lets H
act. This creates an exploration-exploitation tradeoff. A only
observes H’s arm pulls by actually allowing H to pull arms
and so it must choose between observing H’s behavior and
exploiting that knowledge.
Fig. 6 shows the experiment from Section V-B applied to
each of these interaction modes. The results are largely similar
to those of teleoperation. We are able to assist the suboptimal
policies and modeling learning as ϵ-optimality increases regret
in all cases. We see that WSLS is a less attractive policy in
these settings: because H actions are always executed when
they are observed, it no longer makes sense for H to employ a
purely communicative policy. However, we do still see results
that conﬁrm Proposition 6: more deterministic policies that
reveal more information are easier to help.
1) Explore, observe, then exploit: In looking at the policies
learned for the preemptive interaction mode, we see an
interesting pattern emerge. Because the policy has to choose
between selecting arms directly and observing H, by looking
at rollouts of the learned policy we can determine when it is
observing the human. We ﬁnd that a clear pattern emerges.
A initially explores for H: it selects arms uniformly to give
H a good estimate of θ. Then, A observes H’s arm pulls to
identify the optimal arm. For the ﬁnal rounds, A exploits this
information and pulls its estimate of the optimal arm. Fig. 2
compares a representative trajectory with one that is optimized
against an ϵ-optimal H.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Summary
In this work, we studied the problem of assisting a human
who is learning about their own preferences. Our central
thesis is that by modeling and inﬂuencing the dynamics of a
human’s learning, we can create robots that can better assist
people in achieving their preferences. We formalized this as the
assistive multi-armed bandit problem, which extends the multi-
armed bandit to account for teleoperation and human learning.
We analyzed our formalism theoretically, then used policy
optimization in proof-of-concept experiments that supported
our theoretical results. Surprisingly, we found that a person
that is better at learning in isolation does not necessarily lead
to a human-robot team that performs better. We highlighted
a theoretical connection between the amount of information
communicated by the human policy and the best assisted
performance, which we validated in our experiments.
B. Limitations and Future Work.
1) Stateful environments: One signiﬁcant limitation of this
work is that we assume the environment the human is acting in
is stateless. In practice, the environmental state changes over
time, and the state can greatly inﬂuence the reward associated
with certain actions. This suggests natural extensions of the
assistive multi-armed bandit to the contextual bandit [51] and
full Markov decision process (MDP) [52] settings.
2) Realistic human policies: Another signiﬁcant limitation
of this work is the use of simple bandit policies in place of
actual human policies. In addition, we do not have access to
the true human policy in any case. Future work can remedy
this by incorporating more realistic policies, and can study to
what extent these results generalize to assisting actual humans.
C. Closing Remarks
The assistive multi-armed bandit is representative of a world
where robots are supposed to assist people, even though people
haven’t ﬁgured out what they want yet. Laying down the
theoretical foundations for these kinds of interaction paradigms
is an important and under-served aspect of HRI.
