Autonomous Strawberry Picking Robotic System
Soran Parsa∗
Lincoln Institute for Agri-food Technology
University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

Bappaditya Debnath
Kings College London
London, UK

Muhammad Arshad Khan
Lincoln Institute for Agri-food Technology
University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

Amir Ghalamzan E.∗†; ‡
Lincoln Institute for Agri-food Technology
University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK

Abstract
Challenges in strawberry picking made selective harvesting robotic technology very demand-
ing. However, the selective harvesting of strawberries is a complicated robotic task forming
a few scientiﬁc research questions. Most available solutions only deal with a speciﬁc picking
scenario, e.g., picking only a single variety of fruit in isolation. Nonetheless, most econom-
ically viable (e.g. high-yielding and/or disease-resistant) varieties of strawberry are grown
in dense clusters. The current perception technology in such use cases is ineﬃcient. In this
work, we developed a novel system capable of harvesting strawberries with several unique
features. These features allow the system to deal with very complex picking scenarios, e.g.
dense clusters. Our concept of a modular system makes our system reconﬁgurable to adapt
to diﬀerent picking scenarios. We designed, manufactured, and tested a patented picking
head with 2.5 degrees of freedom (two independent mechanisms and one dependent cutting
system) capable of removing possible occlusions and harvesting the targeted strawberry
without any contact with the fruit ﬂesh to avoid damage and bruising. In addition, we
developed a novel perception system to localise strawberries and detect their key points,
picking points, and determine their ripeness.
For this purpose, we introduced two new
datasets. Finally, we tested the system in a commercial strawberry growing ﬁeld and our
research farm with three diﬀerent strawberry varieties. The results show the eﬀectiveness
and reliability of the proposed system. The designed picking head was able to remove oc-
clusions and harvest strawberries eﬀectively. The perception system was able to detect and
determine the ripeness of strawberries with 95% accuracy. In total, the system was able to
harvest 87% of all detected strawberries with a success rate of 83% for all pluckable fruits.
We also discuss a series of open research questions in the discussion section.
keywords: Selective Harvesting; Robotic manipulation; Computer Vision; Motion planning; Precision
farming; Agricultural robotics
∗Soran and Amir equally contributed to this work
†Corresponding author
‡This work was supported by CERES Agri Tech. It is also partially supported by the Centre for Doctoral Training, United
Kingdom (CDT) in Agri-Food Robotics (AgriFoRwArdS) Grant reference: EP/S023917/1; Lincoln Agri-Robotics (LAR) funded
by Research England.
arXiv:2301.03947v1  [cs.RO]  10 Jan 2023

1
Introduction
Selective harvesting of crops using robotic technology aims to address the societal and economical challenges
of agricultural labour shortages. The industry is yet far from an eﬃcient and practical solution. Many
aspects of crop harvesting still remain unsolved (scientiﬁc and technological) problems. The dexterity and
eﬃciency of robotic end-eﬀectors are open questions. Most of the available picking heads (i.e. end-eﬀectors)
for selective harvesting are capable of performing only two actions: opening the picking head, and closing
the picking head.
Strawberry is a highly valued crop. While the annual retail value of the strawberries industry is over
$17 Billion globally, producers have to spend over $1 Billion for picking (selective harvesting) only (Web,
2020). Factors such as labour shortage, increasing labour costs, and the COVID-19 pandemic are having
a negative impact on selective harvesting costs.
Therefore, robot-based automated selective harvesting
technologies are highly in demand (Duckett et al., 2018). Over the past decade, both private and public
entities have extensively invested to develop commercially viable robotic harvesting technology. Despite the
recent investments and funding (CORDIS, 2020) and (CORDIS, 2015) for harvesting high-value crops, many
problems are still unsolved which form very interesting scientiﬁc questions. Nevertheless, there is not yet a
commercially viable robotic technology available for the selective harvesting of strawberries.
One of the challenges of a desired robotic solution is the picking head they use. While human pickers
use the sense of touch and active perception, multiple ﬁngers and two arms for picking strawberries, using a
picking head with a single degree of freedom (DOF) does not look suﬃcient. The available picking heads have
limited ability to harvest strawberries in a dense cluster where a ripe strawberry to be picked is occluded.
The problem is manifold: (1) a ripe strawberry may not be detected, (2) its segment, ripeness assessment,
and location may not be precise, (3) existing picking heads may not be able to reach a ripe strawberry
surrounded by other unripe strawberries. We present a robotic picking system capable of addressing these
issues
Moreover, the asymmetric and irregular nature of the stems coming out of the fruit makes it diﬃcult
to localise the picking point. Commercially available depth sensors are designed for large objects under
controlled lighting conditions. Insuﬃcient quality of depth-sensing technologies makes strawberry picking
point localisation on stem intractable. This is especially true under bright sunlight in farm conditions where
the depth accuracy decreases further. In addition, the depth sensors are designed to work optimally for
distances larger than 50 [cm], and their precision drops to 0 for distances below 15 [cm].
However, for
picking point localisation we require precise depth-sensing below the 15 [cm] range.
This makes the robot perception challenging as some target fruits may be occluded by non-target fruits
and leaves. Commercially available depth sensors, e.g, Realsense D435i, also make the perception challenging
as they are designed for large objects’ 3-D perception and controlled lighting conditions. For small fruits
under outdoor lighting, the depth maps are not precise. Detecting, segmenting, and localising a ripe fruit
to be picked in a complex cluster geometry, under outdoor lighting conditions make strawberry perception
a very challenging problem.
In this paper, we present a robotic system for automated selective harvesting of strawberries which aims
to address some of the challenges preventing large-scale commercial deployment of these systems. (A video of
the system can be seen in this link.) We designed, prototyped and ﬁeld-tested our robotic system beneﬁting
from a novel picking head for robotic selective harvesting. The picking head demonstrated the ability to
navigate through the cluster to reach a targeted fruit and harvest it successfully. One feature of the picking
head that makes it diﬀerent from the existing technologies, is that it is able to grasp, detach and handle the
fruit from its stems without contact with the fruit body. This is important in harvesting and handling soft
fruits e.g. strawberries, to reduce bruising and damage and increase fruit shelf time. These characteristics
are able to contribute to reducing food waste signiﬁcantly.
Our state-of-the-art perception system proved to be eﬀective in detecting and localising fruit in diﬀerent
environments and lighting conditions. Moreover, the localising of the picking point on the stem is challenging.
This is due to the nature of the 3D perception devices that work poorly on small objects, or under sunlight
conditions. To overcome this challenge we propose a novel Gaussian Process Regression method for picking
point error estimation.
We propose a modular and conﬁgurable approach to developing and integrating the robotic system for

selective fruit harvesting. The system was reconﬁgured based on two diﬀerent harvesting conditions and
tested. Unlike other approaches the robotic harvesting system is designed based on a speciﬁc requirement
and only work in a speciﬁc condition, this proposed system is modular and conﬁgurable based on the diﬀerent
varieties and growing condition. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents a
thorough literature review of the current works. In section 3 and 4 the system architecture and end-eﬀector
design are discussed respectively. Section 5 presents the perception system. Finally, the ﬁeld experiments
and results are presented in section 6 and are discussed in section 7.
2
Related Works
2.1
Harvesting systems and manipulators
Robotic harvesting systems in general are mechanisms that are designed to interact with agricultural crops.
A typical robotic harvesting system is equipped with a manipulator usually in form of a serial robotic
arm, a custom-designed end-eﬀector for grasping and/or picking the targeted crop, a perception system
for detection, and a platform to mount all these sub-components which itself could be an autonomous or
semi-autonomous powered mobile platform (Arad et al., 2020).
Oﬀ-the-shelf robotic arms and manipulators have proven to be functional and reliable and have been
employed largely to develop robotic selective harvesting systems. However, custom-designed manipulators
have been emphasised greater than using oﬀ-the-shelf ones. Among the oﬀ-the-shelf manipulators, six de-
grees of freedom (DOF) were widely used. It has been studied that additional degrees of freedom were
added to or removed from the available controllable DOFs in these oﬀ-the-shelf manipulators according to
the harvesting requirements. Xiong et.al.(Xiong et al., 2019) used a 6-DOF oﬀ-the-shelf manipulator for har-
vesting strawberries where 1-DOF was kept ﬁxed during operation to meet selective harvesting orientation
requirement.
In addition to the single-arm manipulator, multiple-arm robots were also utilised for harvesting scenarios
to tackle the complexity of selective harvesting. In particular, dual-arm manipulators were developed to
work either collaboratively or as standalone units. Sepulveda et.al.(Sep´uLveda et al., 2020) used a dual
robotic arm to cooperatively harvest eggplants with very promising and successful results in dealing with
occluded fruit conditions. Zhao et.al.(Zhao et al., 2016) also used a dual-arm robot for tomato harvesting
which also operated collaboratively. In this proposed conﬁguration, one arm detaches a tomato from its stem
while the other arm grips it. Davidson J et.al.(Davidson et al., 2017) utilised a dual-arm mechanism for
an apple harvesting robot in which a six-degree of freedom (DOF) apple picker was assisted by a two-DOF
catching mechanism. The second arm catches the picked apple and transfers it to storage. This reduces the
harvesting cycle time. A few other dual-arm conﬁgurations were also presented in (Armada et al., 2005;
Ceres et al., 1998; Xiong et al., 2020b) to speed up the harvesting cycle. The autonomous kiwi harvesting
robot(Scarfe et al., 2009) uses four robots in parallel.
The harvesting robot must reach the varying height, widths, and depths of the targeted crop with respect
to the base of the manipulator. Hence, the harvesting platform needs a moving base to increase the limited
reachable workspace of a robotic manipulator. In addition to a mobile base that can navigate across ﬁelds,
manipulators were also mounted on the vertical slide(s) (Zhao et al., 2016; Lehnert et al., 2017)(Bac et al.,
2017; Ling et al., 2019; Baeten et al., 2008), horizontal slide(s) (Davidson et al., 2017; Silwal et al., 2017;
Van Henten et al., 2002), slanting slide (Armada et al., 2005), or on a scissor lift mechanism (Arad et al.,
2020)(Feng et al., 2018) to enhance the reachability of a robotic arm. Moreover, a forklift vehicle was utilised
to enable the cutter mechanism to reach the various height and depths to harvest oranges in orchards (Lee
and Rosa, 2006).
In addition to rigid mechanisms, other mechanisms were also employed for harvesting (Chowdhary et al.,
2019). For instance, (Tiefeng et al., 2015) proposed an elephant trunk-inspired mechanism to harvest fruits.
Combined soft and rigid mechanisms have been also tested for agroforestry activities which include harvesting
as well. (Chowdhary et al., 2019).
Motion planning and motion control are also important components of a successful selective harvesting
robotic system. Mghames et al. (Mghames et al., 2020) proposed an interactive motion plan to push occluding
strawberries away in a cluster to reach a target fruit. Pushing actions are encoded by movement primitives

and hand-designed features of pushable obstacles. A set of pushing demonstrations is used to train the
motion primitives. Learning from demonstrations (Ragaglia et al., 2018), and imitation learning (Osa et al.,
2018) are used in many other contexts. However, their hand-designed features (such as the position of the
target and occluding strawberries) may limit the generalisation of such a method. Sanni et al. (Sanni et al.,
2022) proposed deep-Movement Primitives (d-MP) that do not need any hand-designed features and directly
map visual information into robot movements based on the observed demonstrations. Tafuro et al. (Tafuro
et al., 2022b) extended d-MP into deep-Probabilistic movement primitives (d-ProMP) in which the model
generates a distribution of trajectories given a single image of the scene.
To control pushing motions occluded camera views are not suﬃcient and tactile sensings are necessary.
Mandil et al. (Mandil et al., 2022) proposed a data-driven tactile predictive model which is then used
in (Nazari et al., 2022) to proactively control manipulation movements to avoid slip. This framework can be
adopted to control pushing actions.
2.2
End-eﬀectors
An end-eﬀector is a tool attached to the wrist of a robotic manipulator to harvest the fruit, either by
grasping or gripping the fruit or its peduncle (attachment), detaching it from the parent plant, and eventually
delivering it to the storage. These end-eﬀectors execute the individual actions either simultaneously (eg:
gripping and detaching) or sequentially (gripping/grasping followed by detaching) to perform a successful
harvesting operation. The end-eﬀector of a selective harvesting robot is the unit that directly and physically
interacts with crops. Across diﬀerent end-eﬀector technologies for fruit harvesting, the physical interactions
include (i) gripping/grasping the fruit by its peduncle or fruit body (attachment), (ii) detaching from the
plant by pulling, twisting, or cutting the peduncle, (iii) facilitating the fruit transport from the detachment
location to the storage, and (iv) pushing/parting of fruit in the cluster during detaching action(Xiong et al.,
2020a) that is a recently studied functionality.
Among attachment and detachment actions, some end-eﬀectors perform simultaneous gripping and de-
tachment of the strawberry peduncle using a parallel jaw mechanism (Hayashi et al., 2010; Hayashi et al.,
2014). In such a mechanism, one jaw will be shaped in the form of a cutting blade or is provided with a
provision to attach detaching blades. One such end-eﬀector design makes use of a suction cup to provide an
additional grip by sucking the fruit body to avoid any positional errors during this simultaneous gripping
and cutting actions (Hayashi et al., 2010). Another suction-based approach is used by an end-eﬀector which
uses a suction head to grip the fruit body and then rotates so that a blade is positioned on the curved
opening of the suction head to trim the peduncle(Arima et al., 2004). Instead of using any cutting blades
for trimming the peduncle, the end-eﬀector in (Yamamoto et al., 2014) uses a bending action to detach the
strawberry after gripping the fruit body with a suction head and two-jaw gripper.
In addition, a thermal-based cutting is reported to be used by another end-eﬀector that uses an electrically
heated wire on the gripping jaw to cut the peduncle (Feng et al., 2012). In this end-eﬀector, once the fruit
body is gripped by the suction cup to position the peduncle between the two jaws (cutting device), the jaws
then close and trim the peduncle using the heated wire. The end eﬀector developed by Octinion uses a soft
gripper to grip the strawberry fruit body and imposes a rotational motion while pulling the strawberry to
detach it from the peduncle (De Preter et al., 2018). The end-eﬀectors above make either a gripping contact
with the fruit body or with the peduncle during the harvesting action. But the end-eﬀector reported in
(Xiong et al., 2018) doesn’t grip the fruit body or the peduncle during the harvesting action. Instead, a
combination of three active and passive ﬁngers guides the strawberry into the end-eﬀector housing. Once
the fruit reaches the cutting location, scissor-shaped blades cut the peduncle to detach the strawberry.
After the detaching operation, the end eﬀector continues to catch/hold the fruit until it is dropped
intentionally or safely placed in the designated location by the manipulator. Some end-eﬀectors were reported
to have certain ﬁnger arrangements to perform the catching action when the harvested fruits were dropped
after the fruit detachment action.
One such catching provision was provided in the end eﬀector design
reported by Arad B et.al. (Arad et al., 2020) for the sweet pepper harvesting robot. It was a soft plastic
coated six metallic ﬁngers arrangement just below the cutting blade assembly, that receives the fruit after
the detachment. Another catching mechanism was proposed by Davidson J et.al. (Davidson et al., 2017) for
the apple harvesting robot. It used a two DOF secondary mechanism with a funnel-like catching end eﬀector
which will be moved to the dropping position to catch the apple while the primary picking manipulator

detaches and drops the apple. This pick and catch approach was determined to be superior to the conventional
pick and place approaches as it resulted in a ﬁfty per cent reduction in the harvesting cycle time (Davidson
et al., 2017).
Considering the diﬀerent options for gripping and cutting, it is always beneﬁcial to avoid applying any
force on the fruit body by the end-eﬀector contact surfaces. Since some fruits are very soft and delicate,
there are higher chances of bruising during such operations. Aliasgarian et al. (Aliasgarian et al., 2013)
showed strawberry fruits are more damaged when exposed to compression forces on their body. Hence, from
the end-eﬀector design point of view, it is recommended to target the peduncle for gripping/cutting actions
or to avoid a grip action as demonstrated in (Xiong et al., 2018).
2.3
Perception
From traditional computer vision (CV) based to modern state-of-the-art deep neural networks, various
methods exist for fruit detection and localisation of picking points. Traditional or classical CV approaches
are typically based on geometric, thresholding, colour, and morphology. Thus, similar to other areas of CV,
researchers have taken advantage of Deep Learning (DL) methods for performance improvement. Some of
the early methods for detecting ripe strawberries relied on colour thresholding in HSI colour map (Rajendra
et al., 2009).
The authors also used thresholding of diameter for detecting the strawberry stem.
The
automatic thresholding-based algorithm was shown to be more robust by Zhuang et al.
(Zhuang et al.,
2019). colour-based segmentation was used by Areﬁet al. (Areﬁet al., 2011) to segregate the background
from the fruit blob.
Areﬁet al. (Areﬁet al., 2011) used colour-based segmentation to remove the background and keep the
fruit blob. Instead of directly using colour, colour information can also be used with other features for
a more robust approach. 3D-parametric model-ﬁtting was used for the localisation of sweet peppers by
Lehner et al. (Lehnert et al., 2017). Tao et al. (Tao and Zhou, 2017) used geometric features with GA-SVM
for apple classiﬁcation. Areﬁet al. (Areﬁet al., 2011) combined the water-shed algorithm to extract the
morphology of tomatoes from colour-thresholded binary images. Zhuang et al. (Zhuang et al., 2019) were
able to improve the results obtained by colour segmentation by using iterative-retinax algorithm along with
Otsu’s thresholding. Similarly, geometry-based algorithms are among the early contributions in this domain.
Li et al. (Li et al., 2020) applied morphological operations for litchi harvesting. The connected component
algorithm was used by Duran et al. (Durand-Petiteville et al., 2017) to identify strawberry blobs. Moving on
to geometry-based approaches, Hayashi et al. (Hayashi et al., 2010) relied on extracted geometric features of
strawberries to calculate stem angle w.r.t. to the longitudinal axis. (Tao and Zhou, 2017) used a Fast Point
Feature (FPF) histogram, which is a geometric descriptor. The FPF descriptor consists of the parameterised
query of the spatial diﬀerences between a point and its adjacent area which helps in describing the geometric
properties within the K-neighbourhood of the point.
While threshold, colour, morphology, and geometry-based methods may provide good performance, they
lack generalisation and are prone to noise. This is especially true for fruits like strawberries which are not
regular in shape and lack symmetry. To improve generalisation, researchers need to engineer handcrafted
features. However, with increasing size and variation in datasets handcrafting features become infeasible
(O’Mahony et al., 2019). The alternative is to use DL methods which are reviewed next. The most obvious
DL-based approach is to use CNNs. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2018a) combined CNN-based fruit detection with
depth data to localise the fruit in 3D. CNN-based model for strawberry detection was also used by Lamb
et al. (Lamb and Chuah, 2018) where the network was optimised through image tiling, input compression,
network compression, and colour masking. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2018) relied on their CNN-based
model for tomato classiﬁcation. Instead of using colour images, Gao et al. (Gao et al., 2020) relied on a
spectral features-based CNN model for detecting the ripeness and quality of strawberries. Thermal images
have also been used as input to a CNN-based model for bruise detection on pears (Zeng et al., 2020). In
recent years DL has been demonstrated to be superior for tasks such as segmentation (He et al., 2017) and
key-points detection (Cao et al., 2019). Thus, authors in selective harvesting have begun to adopt some of
the DL techniques for fruit perception.
Lamb et al. (Lamb and Chuah, 2018) used CNN for strawberry detection by optimising the network
through input compression, image tiling, colour masking, and network compression. Liu et al. (Liu et al.,
2018a) used CNN in combination with depth data to calculate the relative 3-D location of fruit. Similarly,

Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2018) used CNN for tomato classiﬁcation. Spectral features with CNN are used for
strawberry quality or ripeness detection (Gao et al., 2020). CNN model is also used for pear bruise detection
based on thermal images (Zeng et al., 2020). CNNs have revolutionised object detection and recognition,
however for pixel-wise tasks such as semantic segmentation, Regional CNNs (RCNNs) is more appropriate.
Sa et al. (Sa et al., 2016) relied on a faster RCNN model for bounding box detection of fruit while fusing
faster RCNN, RGB, and Infrared (IR) images.
More recently, Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) has been presented as a better alternative to the original
RCNN. In selective harvesting also Mask-RCNN has been shown to provide a higher degree of accuracy while
performing a pixel-wise segmentation (Ge et al., 2019). Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2018b) relied on both YOLOv3
and mask-RCNN (M-RCNN) for bounding box detection of citrus fruit. M-RCNN with the ResNet-150 as
backbone provided better performance than YOLO-v3. Similarly, Perez et al. (P´erez-Borrero et al., 2020)
relied on M-RCNN for strawberry segmentation for harvesting. Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2019) presented another
instance of M-RCNN used for selective harvesting where features from M-RCNN were used to determine the
strawberry shapes. Afterwards, a geometrical algorithm was used to localise the strawberry picking point.
Researchers have extracted features from R-CNNs and combined them with their own algorithm to improve
the localisation of picking points (Ge et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019). Ge et al. (Ge et al., 2019) ﬁrst used
M-RCNN to determine strawberry pixels then, the extracted strawberry pixels were combined with depth
data, and thereafter density-based clustering and Hough transformation were used to develop a richer scene
segmentation. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2019) combined M-RCNN with the logical green operator to come up
with a more robust cucumber detection. Ganesh et al. (Ganesh et al., 2019) used both HSV and RGB images
to enhance the performance of M-RCNN for Orange detection. Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2019) applied M-RCNN
to segment strawberry images and then used geometrical features to localise the picking point.
On the other hand, Tafuro et al. (Tafuro et al., 2022a) argue that localisation of picking points is not
feasible by geometrical, statistical, or other such approaches even after fruit segmentation through M-RCNN.
Instead, the authors rely on key-point detection normally used for tasks like human pose estimation (Cao
et al., 2019), and face pose estimation (Zhang et al., 2014) for localisation of picking points.
We rely on the approach by Tafuro et al. for the initial detection and segmentation of strawberries.
However, 2D detection is not suﬃcient for strawberry harvesting in 3D. As discussed earlier, the depth
information is not suﬃciently accurate owing to sensor inaccuracies and sunlight. Moreover, in the real-
world more inaccuracies are introduced by camera calibration errors.
Thus, it is not feasible to simply
combine the 2D localisation with depth information. Similar, to Ge et al. (Ge et al., 2019), we develop our
own algorithm to reﬁne and work around the inaccurate depth information obtained from depth sensors.
However, our advantages over Ge et al. (Ge et al., 2019) and other methods based on M-RCNN discussed
above are two-fold: 1) We rely on M-RCNN-based key-point detection for picking points which gives us much
more robust picking point localisation as compared to handcrafted methods adopted to reﬁne Mask-RCNN
output. 2) We compensate for the lack of precise depth information by carefully ﬁne-tuning the end-eﬀector
pose by translating the information to two additional cameras at the front.
3
Concept, Design, and Features
3.1
System overview
To address the current challenges in the autonomous selective harvesting sector an autonomous system for
fruit harvesting was designed and developed. The system includes a robotic arm, a novel robotic end-eﬀector
designed and manufactured for this research, a comprehensive perception system, a mobile platform; and
an integrated control system for controlling the robotic arm and end-eﬀector. Figures 1a and 1b show the
autonomous fruit picking system and its components during ﬁeld tests in a commercial strawberry growing
glasshouse and research strawberry poly tunnels respectively. The robotic arm used in this work is an oﬀ-
the-shelf arm Franka Emika Panda with a 3 kg payload and 7 degrees of freedom. A block diagram of the
system is shown in Figure 2. In this work, a novel universal picking head (UPH) for fruit harvesting was
designed and introduced. The design of this picking head was to address the shortcoming of the available
solutions, speciﬁcally for harvesting in dense clusters. We designed, manufactured, and successfully tested
the picking head which has 2.5 degrees of freedom to allow harvesting fruits and manipulating possible
occlusions independently. In the next sections, the design of the picking head is discussed in detail.

Panda 
Robot Arm
container
Picking 
Head
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: a) The system compromises a robotic arm (Franka Emika Panda), a designed picking head, an
RGB-D sensor, and a fruit container. The system and its components including controllers are mounted on
the commercial trolley capable of moving on a rail between the strawberry rows. b) All components of the
system were reconﬁgured and mounted on a commercial mobile robot to be tested in a diﬀerent strawberry
growing ﬁeld.
Our comprehensive perception system includes an RGB-D sensor and three RGB cameras, a novel dataset,
and state-of-the-art algorithms to detect and localise the fruit and determine its suitability for picking. The
RGB-D sensor is an Intel Realsense D435i model which is integrated into the picking head design and works
based on eye-to-hand principles. This sensor provides an RGB image of the plant and also a three-dimensional
point cloud to detect fruit, localise the picking point and predict the ripeness of the fruit. The RGB cameras
located underneath the UPH allow close-range view where the RGB-D sensor loses its view. These sensors
are coupled with a novel Mask-RCNN-based algorithm to form the perception system which is discussed in
detail.
The robotic arm controller, UPH controller, RGB-D sensor, and RGB cameras are all connected to a
laptop using either USB or CAN to USB adaptors. The laptop has an Intel Core i7® CPU, with 16 GB
ram, and runs on Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS (Focal Fossa). We used ROS Noetic (Robotics Operating System)
as a middleware operating system to integrate all algorithms, sensors, robotic arm, and UPH and establish
communication between them. The system includes a second laptop with a powerful GPU unit (NVIDIA®
GeForce® RTX 2070 SUPER) to Handel the high-demand perception tasks. The second laptop is connected
to the ﬁrst laptop using an Ethernet connection and communicating through ROS. The system including
the robot, controllers, and other components can be powered by a domestic power plug or provided by a
DC power source e.g. a battery. In our ﬁeld test, we tested the system using both methods. The DC power
was sourced from the mobile robot batteries. The system also includes a container to hold the fruit punnets.
The container could be replaced manually after it is ﬁlled. A rough estimate of the cost of the entire system
(including the robotic arm, UPH, sensors, and computing system) is around £25k.
3.2
A conﬁgurable and modular system
Full integration of the system allows the robot to continuously detect and harvest ripe strawberries along
the table rows. Similar to the other agricultural robotic harvesters, all sequences are performed in a static
condition, i.e. when a strawberry is detected the mobile platform stops, the system harvests all reachable
strawberries and the mobile platform moves on. The block diagram for the system includes all sub-systems

Figure 2: System block diagram demonstrating all sub-systems and other components including; the robotic
arm, mobile platform, perception, and control system.
and components shown in ﬁgure 2 demonstrating the hardware and software architecture of the system.
One of the features of our system in comparison with previous works is the modular design of the
system.
As can be seen, all main components i.e.
robotic arm, UPH, perception, and mobile platform
are independent and could be integrated with other models with minimal development requirements. For
instance, it is possible to use a variety of oﬀ-the-shelf robotic arms depending on the costs and the harvesting
condition such as indoor/outdoor, task space, etc. More importantly, the system is conﬁgurable. In other
words, the system can be conﬁgured for diﬀerent growing conditions such as on-the-rail for glasshouses, on
a mobile robot for full autonomous harvesting, or on an XY gantry mechanism for vertical farming.
For this work, we integrated and tested our system on two mobile platforms in diﬀerent conditions. First,
the developed system including the robotic arm, UPH, and other components was mounted on Thorvald,
a four-wheeled mobile robot made by Saga Robotics as shown in Figure 1b. In this case, the mobile robot
was teleoperated remotely using a joystick.
The harvesting test was carried out at strawberry-growing
polytunnels at the Riseholme campus of the University of Lincoln. This strawberry-growing facility was
established for research purposes.
The second layout was a commercial strawberry harvesting trolley mounted on rails which was able to
move between strawberry rows. In the current stage of this work, the trolley is operated manually, i.e. a
human operator pushed the trolley on the rail. However, the automation of the mobile platform on the rail
requires a simple solution that is widely available and out of the scope of this work. This ﬁeld test was
performed at the Dyson glasshouse strawberry growing facility which is a leading commercial strawberry
grower in the UK as shown in Figure 1a.
In addition to the hardware modularity, the software and control platform of the system is modular and
conﬁgurable. The diﬀerent units and control nodes are shown in Figure 2. These units include sensor data
acquisition and processing, UPH control, robotic arm control, central control unit, a detection unit, and a
ripeness assessor. For this project, we used two laptops to separate computationally heavy fruit detection
which requires a powerful GPU, and robot control which requires high frequency. For both laptops, an image
processing node is required to provide the correct format as diﬀerent third-party packages are running on
both laptops. These units could be developed independently and integrated depending on the harvesting
condition, used hardware, and other requirements. As most available harvesting technologies were developed
for a speciﬁc growing condition or strawberry variety, they are commercially unavailable. In addition, while
they might have good performance for the condition they were designed for, they perform poorly for diﬀerent
conditions. This is important as the high number of combinations of diﬀerent varieties and diﬀerent growing
conditions makes it impossible to propose a robotic solution for all of them.

3.3
System work-ﬂow and algorithm
The ﬂowchart of the system algorithm and workﬂow is shown in Figure 3.
As can be seen, the entire
algorithm was implemented in two laptops communicating through Ethernet protocol. The whole system
consists of several control loops on diﬀerent levels, i.e. high-level, mid-level, and low-level. Initially, the
main loop triggers the robot control loop and perception loop. The robot goes to the home position (i.e.,
a suitable conﬁguration in which the robot looks at the tabletop strawberries as shown in Fig. 1) and
perception acquires the data, i.e. images, depths, point cloud, from multiple sensors. After pre-processing
the received data, the perception algorithm detects all strawberries in the ﬁeld of view and publishes their
coordinates through the berry topic. In addition, the perception classiﬁes all detected berries as ”pluckable”
or ”unpluckable” which is included in the berry topic.
Receiving an ”at least one pluckable berry detected” message, triggers the robot control loop which
converts the coordinates of berries from the camera frame to the robot base frame and commands the
robot end-eﬀector to move to the pre-grasp pose. As transformed coordinates of the picking points of the
Strawberries in the robot base frame always contain some level of error, instead of the robot moving directly
to the picking point pose, it goes to the pre-grasp pose. The pre-grasp pose is a point with the actual Y and
Z coordinate and X −d in the robot base frame where d is a predeﬁned distance of the end-eﬀector from
the berry. If more than one pluckable berries are detected the scheduling algorithm is triggered to determine
the sequence of picking in order to improve the eﬃciency of the system.
In the pre-grasp pose, the targeted berry is detected with at least two of the bottom RGB cameras.
Using the detected coordinates of the targeted berry in the bottom RGB cameras, the errors of the picking
point coordinates are estimated. Using the estimated errors, the picking point coordinates are corrected and
the robot moves to the picking pose. in this stage, the strawberry stem should be located in between the
gripping ﬁngers where the cutter is able to cut the stem eﬀectively. In addition, the remaining stem on the
berry should not be too long which damages the other fruit in the punnet, or too short where the gripper
ﬁngers contact the fruit and bruise it. To conﬁrm that the fruit is in the right place, a cutting conﬁrmation
algorithm based on the bottom RGB sensor was developed which is described in detail in Section ??.
After the conﬁrmation that the fruit is located in the right place, the cutting command is sent and
the stem is cut. In this stage, diﬀerent conditions and scenarios can lead to unsuccessfully cutting and
picking. To improve the eﬃciency of the system, and avoid redundant movement of the robot arm, a picking
conﬁrmation is performed before moving to place the fruit in the punnet. After the cutting action, the robot
moves back with a pre-deﬁned distance and performs a picking validation as outlined in Section ??.
If the picking is conﬁrmed, the robot goes to punnet pose and places the picked berry in the punnet
and the sequence is repeated. Placing poses of the fruit in the punnet are pre-deﬁned points by which it is
ensured that the fruits are placed evenly in order in the punnet to avoid bruising them.
3.4
Control and Motion planning
As the space between the strawberry plants and the robot arm is very limited and the environment contains
a high level of uncertainty, there is a high possibility of collision of the robot arm or the end-eﬀector
with diﬀerent objects. The high possibility of collision and limited task space demands a thorough and
comprehensive motion planning approach. The manipulator’s motion trajectory, velocity, and acceleration
should be rectiﬁed from the beginning through all the way to putting the fruit in the punnet, including
approaching the fruit, cutting action, holding, and placing.
In this work, to preserve a collision-free manipulation and prevent dropping/damaging fruit or equipment
we deﬁned a set of n key points through the trajectory of the end eﬀector motion denoted by Pi where
i = {0, 1, 2, ..., n}. We assumed that the trajectory of the mobile robot is aligned with the fruit tables, hence,
the robot arm’s base frame is almost the same distance as the fruit tables. In this way, the robot arm’s home
position always is almost the same distance as the fruit tables. Diﬀerent motion planning algorithms and
trajectory/velocity/acceleration proﬁles were employed for each segment of movement to ensure collision-free
and eﬃcient manipulation.
At the beginning of the picking process, the end-eﬀector frame is located at P0, i.e. Home Position.
The end-eﬀector frame denoted by Fee : {Oee; xee, yee, zee} is attached to the middle of the gripper ﬁngers.
The end-eﬀector frame coordinates are a deﬁned point that coincides with deﬁned trajectory key points

Figure 3: Flowchart of the perception and workﬂow of the system. The algorithm is implemented in two
laptops, one running the ROS nodes/topics and high-level controller and the other a GPU-enabled system
for running the strawberry detection and scheduling system.
during the robot’s movement. When the Fee locate at P0, the system is initialised and the picking process
is commenced.
We exploited the Open Motion Planning Library (OMPL) (S, ucan A. et al., 2012) which is a sampling-
based motion planning and Pilz Industrial Motion Planner to plan the manipulator’s movement.
Many
planners in OMPL (including the default one) favour the speed of ﬁnding a solution path over path quality.
A feasible path is smoothed and shortened in a post-processing stage to obtain a path that is closer to
optimal.
However, there is no guarantee that a global optimum is found or that the same solution is
found each time since the algorithms in OMPL are probabilistic. Pilz Industrial Motion Planner provides
a trajectory generator to plan standard robot motions like Pint to Point (PTP), Line (LIN), and Circle
(CIRC) with the interface of a MoveIt planner. For this work, we used the LIN motion command. LIN
motion planner connects the start point and end point with a straight line and generates a linear Cartesian
trajectory between the goal and starts poses. The planner uses the Cartesian limits to generate a trapezoidal
velocity proﬁle in Cartesian space. This planner generates more accurate movement in Cartesian space with
a focus on the end-eﬀector trajectory.
Figure 4 shows a schismatic diagram of the end eﬀector trajectory ζ(t), attached frames, and key points.
From P0 to P1, i.e. Grasp Pose, we used OMPL for motion planning as it doesn’t require high accuracy
movement nor a speciﬁc trajectory of movement. We set the speed at the highest level as long as preserves
the safety and stability of the movement. For reach-to-grasp movement, P1 to P2, Pilz Industrial Motion
Planner was employed to ensure the end eﬀector goes through a deﬁned trajectory to minimise disruption
of the objects or possible collision. It is the same case for picking and validation action, from P2 to P3.
For placing the strawberry in the punnet OMPL was used, however, the movement acceleration should be
calculated carefully to avoid dropping the harvested strawberry.

X 
F
r
y r
z r
O r
r
X 
F
e
y 
z 
e
ee
ee
ee
Figure 4: The initial (t = 0) and ﬁnal state (t = T) of end-eﬀector trajectory ζ(t) (shown with a green line):
Fe is the robot’s end-eﬀector frame, the frame Fpg is attached to pre-grasp and post-grasp points, and a
grasping conﬁguration Fp is shown with a frame attached to the picking point. Also, a frame is attached to
the container as the ﬁnal goal of the end-eﬀector is shown as Fg. All frames are expressed using the inertial
global frame Fr.
Assuming that the mass of the strawberry to be gripped in the end eﬀector is about 50 grams. This
is higher than the average mass value recorded during our ﬁeld studies (Rajendran Sugathakumary et al.,
2022). For peak forces (FC) about 22.53 N, coeﬃcient of friction of 0.3, and safety factor of 2, under dynamic
conditions, using Equation 1 the end eﬀector would be able to handle a 50 g strawberry for a manipulator
acceleration of up to about 50 m/s2.
Fc = m.(g + a).S
µ
(1)
where; ’Fc’ is the maximum gripping force (N), ’m’ is the mass to be handled (Kg), ’g’ is the acceleration
due to gravity (m/s2), ’µ’ is the coeﬃcient of friction, and ’S’ is a factor of safety.
To place the harvested fruit in the punnet six key points were deﬁned with respect to the frame attached
to the punnet Fg. These points were selected in a way that distributes the fruits in the punnet evenly and
avoids bruising or damaging them. From placing point to the home position, again OMPL with the highest
possible speed was used to increase the eﬃciency of the system
3.5
Harvesting sequence planning
selecting a berry as the target for picking among many possible pickable fruits is important to increase the
success rate and reduce possible occlusions. Picking a free fruit that occludes other pickable fruits, not only
normally has a higher success rate, but also removes the possible occlusion. There are notable studies on
sequence planning for robotic harvesting that proposed near-optimal solutions (Kurtser and Edan, 2020).
In this work we mainly implemented and tested two methods for simplicity and reducing the amount of
computation to determine the target berry as described in the followings:
1- Target Berry Selection Using Min/Max:
The min-max algorithm attempts to ﬁnd the maximum of the minimum distances among all the bounding
boxes of the detected berries. Considering that there are N berries detected in the top camera image view,
the minimum of all the distances between each berry with respect to all other detected berries are calculated

as:
dmin
i
= min(di,1, di,2 . . . di,j); ∀i ̸= j
(2)
Then the maximum of these minimum distances is taken as follows:
dtarget = max(dmin
1
, dmin
2
. . . dmin
N
, )
(3)
where dtarget represents the most isolated berry in a cluster which is scheduled to be harvested ﬁrst. This
ensures that the diﬃcult-to-reach berries are harvested later which aids in avoiding damage to other berries
while trying to reach the diﬃcult ones.
2- Coordinate based sorting:
Although the previous method gives a systematic tool to select the target berry, it was noticed that it is
more complicated to achieve a reasonable success rate. One reason is that by changing the viewpoint of
the RGB-D camera, the targeted berry might change without a change in reality. The more eﬃcient and
practical approach could be sorting berries based on their coordinate in the image frame e.g. left-to-right or
right-to-left depending on the direction of moving of the mobile platform. In this way, the mobile platform
doesn’t have to go forward and backwards to harvest all berries.
4
Universal picking head
4.1
concepts and requirement of a universal picking head
Picking fruits in diﬀerent growing conditions is a challenging problem for selective harvesting technology, as
it is diﬃcult to design and build an eﬀective robotic device (known as an end-eﬀector or picking head) that
is able to deal with complex picking operations. A human’s hand enables dexterous manipulation of fruit
with 27 degrees of freedom, and over 80 per cent of the grasping information can be encoded into just 6
Eigen grasps. In contrast, conventional robotic end-eﬀectors are customised for speciﬁc applications, such
as pick-and-place operations in industrial environments (Jarrass´e et al., 2014).
Currently, there are two types of picking heads available for robotic harvesting of high-value crops: (i)
a picking head having a parallel jaw gripper, which may not be suitable for all types of crops, and (ii) a
picking head that has a customised design for picking particular fruit in a very speciﬁc picking scenario,
which is only suitable for a speciﬁc type of crop or method of harvesting. Consequently, the eﬀectiveness of
commonly available robotic picking heads is limited, as diﬀerent robotic picking heads may be needed for
diﬀerent crop types. Some robotic picking heads are used to pick soft fruits such as strawberries. Some of
the robotic picking heads that are currently available for picking strawberries are cup-shaped picking heads,
which have opening parts that locate the peduncle of a strawberry and position the strawberry in front of
cutting scissors in order to harvest the strawberry. The cutting action causes the strawberry to detach from
the plant and fall into a punnet for collecting the strawberries. In this example, the picking head does not
directly touch the ﬂesh of the strawberry, which minimises bruising. However, as the strawberry falls from
a height into the punnet, the harvesting can inadvertently cause damage/bruising to the fruit.
Furthermore, fruit placement within the punnet is not controlled, which may result in uneven distribution
of the fruit in the punnet (which may also cause damage to fruit that are below other fruit). Similarly, the
design of the cup-shaped picking head, and the design of other types of picking heads, may not be suitable
for harvesting crops that grow in dense clusters. The present design has therefore identiﬁed the need for
an improved apparatus for the automatic detection, selection, and harvesting of crops that grow in dense
clusters.
4.2
Peduncle gripping and cutting force for end-eﬀector design
To develop an end-eﬀector solution that attempts to detach strawberries by targeting the peduncle, it
is essential to understand certain physical properties of the peduncle. This includes the estimate of the
required cutting force and the gripping force that can be applied to the peduncle. Knowing the cutting
force while using a particular cutting blade proﬁle, gives insight into a better selection of actuation systems

to provide the required cutting force. Moreover, the practice of using oﬀ-the-shelf blades takes away the
need of investing eﬀort to design optimum blade proﬁles. Rather such blades can be directly used or can
be custom-made according to the standard proﬁle. If the end-eﬀector is designed in such a way as to use
interchangeable blades, replacing the blades would be easier during worn-out situations. Hence it is wise to
use cutting blades with a standard proﬁle and in an interchangeable conﬁguration in the end-eﬀectors. For
this work, a comprehensive study on the gripping and cutting forces of strawberry peduncle was carried out
(Rajendran Sugathakumary et al., 2022).
This study intended to estimate the limit of the gripping force that can be applied to the strawberry
peduncle without crushing it. To understand this force limit, experiments were conducted by applying com-
pression force (analogous to the gripping force) to the peduncle specimens using a Universal Testing Machine
(UTM). The peduncles of ripe strawberries of both varieties were selected for preparing the specimens. 15
specimens of each variety were prepared so that the peduncle was 10 mm in length and were trimmed at
a distance of 10 mm from the top surface of the ripe strawberry fruit. This specimen measurement can
simulate the situation where an end eﬀector grips the peduncle within 10-20 mm from the top surface of
the strawberry top surface during harvesting. The specimen diameter varied from 1.40 mm to 2.22 mm for
Katrina with a mean and standard deviation of 1.75 mm and 0.24 mm. And for Zara, the diameter varied
from 1.43 mm to 2.33 mm with a mean and standard deviation of 1.76 mm and 0.25mm.
In addition, we studied the force required to cut the peduncle of a ripe strawberry using a standard blade.
And as an extension to this, the variation of this force at diﬀerent cutting orientations was also studied.
The proﬁle of the selected cutting blade was studied using a scanning electron microscope. The blade had a
double bevel cutting edge with a blade angle of 16.60 and a thickness of 0.22 mm. We studied the cutting
force variation for 00,100, 200, 300 inclinations. 15 peduncle samples from both Zara and Katrina varieties
were prepared for this study, i.e., 15 samples from each variety for each orientation of cut. These specimens
were prepared by trimming the peduncle at a length of 30 mm from the top surface of the ripe strawberry.
During the experimental trials for studying the limit of the gripping force, all tested specimens showed a
common force proﬁle under compression load. While applying compression load to the specimen, there is a
gradual increase in the resistive force to a certain point, and from then it shows a sudden drop. After then,
the specimen gets squeezed completely on further application of compression load. It has been noticed that,
after the drop in the resistive force, the specimen goes into permanent deformation, and ﬁnally leads toward
complete squeezing. So this peak force (FC) before the drop is considered the point of interest. The trend of
this force (FC) can be studied to limit the gripping force on the peduncle such that there is a lesser chance
of squeezing the peduncle during the gripping action. The squeezing or crushing of the peduncle during the
gripping action can result in the detached strawberry falling oﬀfrom the grip during the harvesting process.
Considering the peak forces, we determined that the lowest of these peak forces (FC) recorded is about
26.83 N and 22.53 N for Katrina and Zara respectively. This means that at these lowest values of compression
force (analogous to gripping force), the respective test specimen went into permanent deformation before
squeezing. Hence if we allocate a factor of safety of 2 to the lowest of these two values of forces (26.83 N
and 22.53 N), the gripping force should be limited to around 10 N.
In addition, while analyzing the force values recorded during the cutting trials, again a common force
proﬁle has been noticed for all the tested specimens. In the proﬁle, there is an increase in force value during
the cutting action but with two sudden drops after two force peaks (FP 1 and FP 2). After the second peak
force, there is a ﬂat proﬁle followed by a sharp rise in force after a point (E). This sharp increase happens
when the blade touches the peduncle supports after cutting the peduncle oﬀ. So from the force proﬁle for
each specimen, the maximum of the two peak forces (FP 1 or FP 2) is taken as the peak cutting force (FP )
required for that specimen.
From the force values recorded at diﬀerent cutting orientations, it has been noticed that the mean cutting
force shows a relatively lowest value at 300 orientation compared to other studied orientations. At 300 cutting
orientation, the maximum of the peak cutting force (FP ) recorded is about 7.20 N for Katrina, and 5.80 N
for Zara. And hence, with a factor of safety 2, the cutting force requirement can be approximated to 15
N which could be considered suﬃcient to cut the strawberry peduncle at 300 orientation. Also, this force
would be suﬃcient to handle other cutting orientations studied. We exploited these results to optimise the
design of the end-eﬀector and increase the harvesting success rate.

(a)
(b)
Figure 5: a) End-eﬀector overall view and its components. The end-eﬀector compromises an RGB-D sensor
mounted on top of it for a better wide view, three RGB sensors for close-range view, the ﬁrst pair of
ﬁngers (Separators) for occlusion removal, second pair of ﬁngers for gripping and holding strawberry stem
(grippers), and a cutting mechanism for cutting the stem (Cutter). b) End-eﬀector internal design and
components. It includes two independent actuators controlling grippers, separators, and cutter providing 2.5
degrees of freedom. The protector separates actuators from the power transmission mechanisms for better
heat reduction and dust and water isolation.
4.3
End-eﬀector design
The proposed robotic end-eﬀector for fruit harvesting, comprising: a vision system for identifying the location
of the ripe fruits on the plant; the ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers for moving any objects that at least partly occlude the
identiﬁed ripe fruit on the plant (Separators); the second pair of ﬁngers for gripping a stem of the identiﬁed
ripe fruit (Grippers); and a cutting mechanism for cutting the stem of the identiﬁed ripe fruit when the stem
is gripped between the second pair of ﬁngers (Cutter), wherein a portion of the stem that remains attached
to the fruit remains gripped by the grippers after the stem has been cut. The design and components of the
universal picking head are shown in Figures 5a and 5b.
In general, the end-eﬀector described herein beneﬁts from 2.5 degrees of freedom, which is higher than
those of available picking heads. This added degree of freedom allows the end-eﬀector to deal with complex
picking scenarios where the available picking heads fail. The end-eﬀector beneﬁts from an eﬀective combi-
nation of actuation systems and sensors to resolve the limitations of currently available picking heads. The
end-eﬀector includes three separate movements (moving objects, gripping a stem, and cutting a stem) that
are actuated using two actuators. This is useful as the ability of the end-eﬀector is increased without also
signiﬁcantly increasing the complexity or component count of the device. The actuators and protector design
for the picking head are shown in Figure 5b
The presented techniques advantageously enable ripe fruit to be harvested without bruising or damaging
the fruit. These techniques are particularly advantageous for harvesting fruit that grows in dense clusters,
such as strawberries. Strawberry is an example – and not limited – fruit that may be harvested using the
robotic end-eﬀector of the present techniques. More generally, the presented techniques may be used to
harvest diﬀerent types of fruit and vegetable crops, including those which grow individually and those which
grow in clusters.
The robotic end-eﬀector comprises a ﬁrst actuation mechanism for controlling the actuation of the ﬁrst
pair of ﬁngers. Thus, a dedicated actuation mechanism is used to control the movement and operation of the
ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers which allows one degree of freedom for manipulating the cluster and removing possible

occlusion independent from griping and holding the fruit.
Responsive for receiving the location of an object that at least partly occludes a fruit, the ﬁrst actuation
mechanism controls the ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers to push away the object, by increasing the separation distance
between the ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers. Thus, the ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers are closed together when the end-eﬀector is
being used to image a plant and identify ripe fruits, and/or when it is moving towards an identiﬁed ripe
fruit. The ﬁrst pair of ﬁngers are moved further apart when an object that at least partly occludes fruit
needs to be moved away so that the fruit can be better seen (to determine if it is suitable for harvesting)
and/or so that the second pair of ﬁngers can grip the stem of the fruit.
The cutting mechanism is located in proximity to the second pair of ﬁngers, such that when the stem
of the identiﬁed ripe fruit is cut by the cutting mechanism, the second pair of ﬁngers continues to grip a
portion of the stem that remains attached to the fruit. In other words, when a cutting operation performed
by the cutting mechanism is complete, the fruit is not immediately dropped into a container for collecting
the harvested fruit. Instead, the fruit continues to be gripped, via a portion of the stem that is still attached
to the fruit, by the second pair of ﬁngers. This is advantageous because the robotic end-eﬀector may be
controlled to gently place the harvested fruit in a container.
The second pair of ﬁngers release their grip on the portion of the stem that remains attached to the fruit
when the end-eﬀector is close to the container. The cutting mechanism may be partially or fully covered or
encased for safety reasons, i.e. to avoid any risk of a human operator being able to come into contact with
the cutting mechanism.
The second pair of ﬁngers is moved by a second actuation mechanism which also moves the cutting
mechanism. As the cutting mechanism is only operated when it is conﬁrmed that the target fruit is located
in between the second pair of ﬁngers, advantageously a single actuation mechanism is used to control both
the second pair of ﬁngers and the cutting mechanism, thereby reducing complexity and the number of
components needed to control the end-eﬀector.
The vision system comprises a depth sensor for generating a three-dimensional map of the plant. The
vision system uses the three-dimensional map to identify the location of ripe fruits on a plant and any objects
that at least partly occlude the identiﬁed ripe fruits. The depth sensor is an RGB-D (red-green-blue-depth)
camera.
Furthermore, The vision system includes three RGB image sensors for capturing images of the
fruit/cluster of fruits at the bottom of the end eﬀector in the vicinity of the second pair of ﬁngers to
enable a better view in close range. Having the RGB sensors in the vicinity of the second pair of ﬁngers is
advantageous because the sensors capture images of the fruit or cluster of fruits at the fruit level, whereas
other sensors of the vision system may view the fruit from a diﬀerent perspective/angle. This also reduces
the risk of every sensor of the vision system being occluded during the picking process, i.e. it provides some
redundancy in the vision system.
The eﬀective conﬁguration of RGB and RGB-D sensors helps to eﬃciently detect and localise the ripe
fruits. In addition, the combined sensory information can be used to estimate the size, weight, and sort
quality of the fruits to be picked. Also, they are further used to control fruit picking and occlusion removal
actions.
5
Perception for selective harvesting robotic system
Strawberries are grown in dense clusters and they come in diﬀerent conﬁgurations and wide varieties with
varying shapes. Moreover, the asymmetric and irregular nature of the stems coming out of the fruit makes
it diﬃcult to localize the picking point. Commercially available depth sensors are designed for large objects
under controlled lighting conditions.
Insuﬃcient quality of depth-sensing technologies makes strawberry
picking point localization on stem intractable. Our depth sensing, namely RealSenhas 435i, which is widely
used in robotics, has deteriorated performance under bright sunlight in farm conditions. In addition, it is
designed to work best for distances larger than 50 [cm] where the preciseness drops to 0 for distances below
15 [cm]. As picking strawberries by grasping them contributes to their bruising, we considered picking by
griping and cutting the fruit stem requiring picking point (PP) localization. However, localizing the picking
point in the depth image is challenging because of the low resolution of RealSense 435i, in particular where

the distance is below 15 [cm].
Traditional methods rely on the color-based (Areﬁet al., 2011), geometry-based, or shape-based (Li et al.,
2020) methods. Strawberries are neither very symmetrical nor their orientation is ﬁxed making an accurate
assumption, or shape-based prediction about their stem location diﬃcult. Instead, we take advantage of the
Deep Learning (DL)-based strawberry segmentation and key-point detection method proposed by Tafuro et
al (Tafuro et al., 2022a). We use the key points to understand the orientation of the strawberry and pose
the end-eﬀector. The key point also localizes the picking point to a reasonable accuracy. However, due to
the very thin cross-section of a strawberry stem, this cannot always exactly localize the stem giving rise to
inaccuracies in the depth perception of the picking point.
In addition, we address the lack of precise depth sensing and ﬁne-tuning the localization in close prox-
imity by a novel camera conﬁguration (short and medium-distance focused cameras) and a combination of
localization for short and medium distances. The system uses an Intel Realsense D435i depth-sensing cam-
era as the main sensing system. The device is placed at the back and top of the end eﬀector which allows
suﬃcient distance from the cutting action for the depth sensor to be reasonably accurate. In addition to
the Realsense camera, there are three RGB cameras placed at the front bottom of the end-eﬀector. At this
close range, it is also not feasible to calibrate the RGB cameras as a stereo system. Instead, we carefully ﬁnd
the project of 3D coordinates of the strawberry segmentation into 2D pixel coordinates of the front RGB
cameras. Then, based on the coordinates of the strawberry bounding box visible in each image we trained
an AI-Based model to make meticulously adjust the position of the end-eﬀector to the ﬁnal cutting position.
In addition to localizing the fruit and picking point, the perception should be able to determine the ripeness,
size, and shape of the fruit and determine whether it is suitable for picking or not. we present two novel
datasets of strawberries annotated with picking points, key-points (such as the shoulder points, the contact
point between the calyx and ﬂesh, and the point on the ﬂesh farthest from the calyx), and the weight and
size of the berries. We performed experiments to predict if the fruit is suitable for picking or not.
In contrast to the existing works in which classic CV methods are used to determine picking points and
suitability for picking, our approach includes SOTA MRCNN models. We collected two datasets to train our
models: Dataset-1 is collected at a new 15-acre table-top strawberry glasshouse in Carrington, Lincolnshire,
which is the latest addition to SOTA Dyson Farming’s circular farming system (Dyson, 2022); Dataset-2
has been derived from the Strawberry Digital Images (SDI) (P´erez-Borrero et al., 2020). Dataset-1 is a
novel dataset that presents strawberry dimensions, weights, suitability for picking, instance segmentation,
and key-points for grasping and picking action. The main purpose of this dataset is to facilitate autonomous
robotic strawberry picking.
For each strawberry, the dataset presents ﬁve diﬀerent key-points: the picking point (PP), the top, and
bottom points of the fruit, the left grasping point (LGP), and the right grasping point (LGP). While the PP
indicates the position on the stem where the cutting action has to be performed, the left and right grasping
points can provide a reference to the end eﬀector for the grasping action. In addition, the dataset also
contains annotation for instance segmentation for each of the strawberries. To determine the suitability of
strawberries for harvesting each strawberry is labeled as ‘pluckable’–ready to be picked– or ‘”unpluckable”’–
not to be picked–. ”unpluckable” strawberries include unripe, semi-, and over-ripe or rotten berries. The
‘pluckable’ category includes strawberries that are nearly ripe and perfectly ripe. The dataset contains a
set of 532 strawberry sets. Each set has three colors, depth, and point cloud data of the same strawberry
cluster from diﬀerent distances. The farthest image captures the entire cluster whereas the nearest image
focuses on one target strawberry in the cluster. In total, this dataset includes 1588 strawberry images. All
the images have been captured with Intel Realsense RGB-D sensor D435i.
Dataset-2 is an enhancement of the SDI dataset (P´erez-Borrero et al., 2020). SDI dataset contains a total
of 3100 images. These are dense strawberry clusters that contain an average of 5.8 strawberries per image.
We carefully annotated 10999 berries each with 5 diﬀerent key-points. Moreover, we labeled ”pluckability”
(i.e. suitability to be picked) of all the strawberries. The strawberries not annotated for key-points are
either severely occluded or are in an early ﬂowering stage where a meaningful annotation is not possible.
more details on the datasets and proposed methods were published previously and can be reached in (Tafuro
et al., 2022a).

5.1
Segmentation, Key-points and Pluckable Detection
Our proposed approach includes Detectron-2 (Wu et al., 2019) for segmentation and key-points estimation.
The Detectron-2 model is based on MRCNN (He et al., 2017) and has become the standard for instance
segmentation. It also has an added capability of key-points detection for human pose estimation. We adapted
this key-points detection method integrated within Detectron-2 to estimate the strawberry key-points. The
datasets’ key-points, segmentation masks, and strawberry categories (‘pluckable’ and ‘”unpluckable”’) are
converted to MSCOCO JSON format (Lin et al., 2015). This MSCOCO JSON is the default format for
feeding data into Detectron-2. It is also essential to recalculate the bounding box. Without the key-points,
the bounding box aligns to the extremities of the segmentation mask. However, the PP key-point lies outside
the segmentation mask of the strawberries and thus outside the bounding box. Because of the nature of
MRCNN, a key-point outside the bounding box is not detectable. Thus, the bounding boxes are expanded to
accommodate all the key-points. We performed experiments with three backbone networks for Detectron-2,
R50-FPN, X101, and X101-FPN. ResNeXt (Xie et al., 2017) (X101-FPN and X101) is a more recent network
that was introduced as an improvement to ResNet-50 (R50-FPN). Section 6.1 discusses the results in detail.
5.2
Perception Setup
We use two laptops to control the entire system and run the perception system. The ﬁrst laptop runs the
ROS nodes as shown in Figure 2 (left). The second laptop with Nvidia GPU runs the Detectron node as
shown in Figure 2 (right). The vision system consists of three cameras: An Intel Realsense d435i color and
depth-sensing camera and three colors (RGB) cameras. In robotic perception, depth-sensing cameras are
essential for the 3D localization of the target and for generating a point cloud. However, most commercially
available depth cameras including Realsense d435i are not suitable for close proximity sensing (≤15 cm).
Thus, for the depth sensing to be feasible the Realsense camera is mounted on the back and top of the
UPH 5a. However, due to the positioning of the Realsense, the berries are occluded by the picking head
in close proximity to maneuvering. So, to compensate for the lack of depth sensing and occlusion in close
proximity maneuvering three RGB cameras are additionally mounted for ﬁne-tuning the trajectory, cutting
conﬁrmation, and picking success validation. Considering that the purpose of these RGB cameras is error
reduction instead of primary strawberry detection, these cameras were mounted ﬁrmly on the front bottom
of the picking head with a 25 mm horizontal distance between them.
5.3
Perception pipeline and approach
The berry plants are on both sides of a lane of strawberry farms with a tabletop system. Hence, our robot,
similar to human pickers, picks the ripe fruits on one table on one side before picking the fruits on the other
side. This simpliﬁes motion planning as collision is checked for one side of the row of tabletop strawberries.
This was achieved using joint constraint in the robot arm planning. Let xtop
c
, xleft
c
, xmiddle
c
, and xright
c
be
the coordinates of strawberry in the top (Intel RealSense), left, middle, and right color cameras respectively.
Notice, c ∈x, y, z for xtop
c
i.e. 3D, c ∈x, y for xright
c
and xleft
c
i.e 2D. Ptop is the camera projection matrix
of the top camera for translating an image or pixel coordinates to camera link coordinates. This consists
of camera intrinsic (Ktop) and extrinsic (Rtop, ttop) parameters, where R and t stands for rotation and
translation respectively. T top is the camera calibration parameter/matrix which translates the camera link
coordinates to the robot base frame. K is the intrinsic parameters of the left, middle and right color camera.
T left, T middle, and T right are the camera calibration parameters/matrices for projection from the robot base
frame to the camera coordinate. The sequence of steps taken below for the picking action is shown in Figure
2 and described below:
• At the home position, all strawberries are detected in the top (RealSense) camera image frame
and scheduled. The depth estimation for the picking point is not reliable for something as thin as
the strawberry stem. Thus the 2D segmented strawberry pixels are used as binary masks on the
depth image to ﬁlter the depth pixels belonging to the strawberry. Further, depth pixels indicating
depths less than 20cm and more than 50 cm are ﬁltered out. The minimum distance of the gripping
point from Real-Sense is roughly 20cm. Clearly, any strawberry pixel should be more than 20cm.
Further, the initial position of the robot cannot be more than 50 cm from the berry due to the farm
structure. Then we take the average value of the remaining strawberry depth pixels which gives us

a more reliable 3D coordinate xtop
c
• The scheduled berry coordinate is transformed from the top image or pixel coordinate to the robot
base frame using the camera calibration matrix
Xbase
c
= T top
basePtopxtop
c
(4)
where P top = [Rtop, ttop]Ktop
(5)
Basically, the pixel coordinate is ﬁrst transformed to the camera link coordinate using camera
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters (Eq. 5) and then the camera link is transformed to the robot base
frame (Eq. 4).
• Using careful calibration, the targeted berry coordinate Xbase
c
in the top camera is back-projected
to the bottom left, middle and right camera using the camera intrinsic (Kleft, Kmiddle, Kright) and
camera calibration parameters (T left, T middle, T right).
xright′
c
= KrightT base
left Xbase
c
(6)
xmiddle′
c
= KmiddleT base
middleXbase
c
(7)
xleft′
c
= KleftT base
rightXbase
c
(8)
• This back projection (Eqs. 6, 7 and 8) helps in establishing a target berry association in the top
and bottom cameras at the robot home position based on image plane position error.
γleft = xleft
c
−xleft′
c
(9)
γmiddle = xmiddle
c
−xmiddle′
c
(10)
γright = xright
c
−xright′
c
(11)
γ is the error of the projected bounding box and the bounding boxes in the bottom cameras. We
consider the berry with the lowest γ the targeted berry in each camera view.
The error arises
mainly from inaccuracies in the depth perception of the RealSense camera as well as errors in
camera calibration.
• From this point on, for any arm movement, this berry association is identiﬁed in bottom cameras
for later ﬁne-tuning, grasp alignment, and cutting conﬁrmation.
• The UPH is then moved to a pre-grasp pose which is at a ﬁxed distance D from the berry. This
means the arm is moved by (Xbase
z
- D) along the depth axis while aligned to the strawberry picking
point in X and Y coordinates (Xbase
x′y′ ).
• Once the arm is in the pre-grasp pose, the UPH gripping point is adjusted based on the estimated
errors calculated. The goal here is to move the gripper to the picking point (Xbase
z
) based on initial
depth sensing. However, the X and Y alignment is continuously ﬁne-tuned, where the goal is to
locate the grasp pose of the strawberry stem in between the gripper ﬁngers.
Due to errors in depth sensing and camera calibration, the gripper cutting point does not align
perfectly with the strawberry picking point. The novelty of the proposed method is that we back-
project the 3D coordinate to 2D coordinates in the front color cameras.
By assuming the fruit
with the lowest γleft and γright as the targeted fruit, we are able to associate the same berry with
the bottom color cameras and ﬁne-tune the X, and Y alignment based on more reliable strawberry
coordinates in the bottom cameras. This enables the system to perfectly align with the strawberries
on X,Y-axis.

Figure 6: The harvesting sequences to remove a possible occlusion and pick fruit. The separator ﬁngers
penetrate in between the occluding fruits and by opening remove the occlusion and make way for gripping
ﬁngers to grasp the targeted fruit’s stem and cut it.
6
Field experiments results
In order to validate the integrity of the system and verify its accuracy, ﬁeld tests were carried out at two
diﬀerent sites. First, experiments were conducted at Berry Gardens strawberry poly-tunnels at the Riseholme
campus of the University of Lincoln 2021. The second ﬁeld test was carried out at a commercial strawberry
growing glasshouse facility owned by Dyson Farming in Carrington, England in 2022. Figure 1a and 1b
show the system harvesting at Dyson glasshouse and Berry Gardens respectively. As can be seen at Berry
Gardens the harvesting system was mounted on Thorvald mobile robot, and at Dyson glasshouse, it was
mounted on a commercial harvesting trolley.
The Berry Gardens poly-tunnels is a research strawberry farming facility with two main strawberry
varieties Driscoll Zara and Driscoll Katrina. The variety Zara has a longer calyx as compared to the Katrina
variety which makes it more complicated for robotic harvesting. The mean diameter for the Katrina variety
is 1.75 mm with a standard deviation of 0.24 mm, and for the Zara is 1.76 mm with a standard deviation
of 0.25 mm (Rajendran Sugathakumary et al., 2022).
The strawberry variety at Dyson glasshouse is a
commercial variety that is grown and available widely.
Figure 6 demonstrates harvesting sequences including removing possible occlusion using separator ﬁngers.
The separator ﬁngers penetrate in between the occluding fruits and by opening remove the occlusion and
make way for gripping ﬁngers to grasp the targeted fruit’s stem and cut it. In addition, the separator ﬁngers
can be used to remove detection occlusion as well to allow the perception system to detect all possible fruits.
6.1
Segmentation, Key-points and Pluckable Detection Results
Table 1 summarises the results for segmentation and key-points detection of strawberries for both the datasets
with Detectron-2 (Wu et al., 2019).
Although, our results demonstrate diﬀerent backbones used in our
experiments can produce consistent results across the dataset, ResNeXt based model performs better than
ResNet-50 based model. The ﬁrst two columns of Table 1 show segmentation Average Precision (AP) values
for pluckable and ”unpluckable” berries separately. The sub-columns show AP for Intersection over Union
(IoU), and thresholds of 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9. The standard practice is to consider IoU threshold 0.5 (He et al.,
2017), however, we also show up to IoU threshold 0.9. Using Dataset-2, our proposed models yield decent AP
values for both pluckable and ”unpluckable” strawberries at IoU threshold 0.5. However, as shown in Table
1, the ‘”unpluckable”’ berries in Dataset-2 signiﬁcantly outnumber the ‘pluckable’ berries. This results in
better segmentation performance of ‘”unpluckable”’ berries. The performance drops signiﬁcantly for stricter
thresholds 0.7 and 0.9. This dataset represents berries in very dense clusters and thus Dataset-2 is a very

Table 1: Segmentation and key-points detection results.The sub-columns show AP for Intersection over
Union(IoU), and thresholds of 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9.
Dataset
Backbone
Segn Pluckable
Segn ”unpluckable” Key-points Pluckable Key-points ”unpluckable”
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.9
Dataset-1
R50-FPN
93.32 90.97 83.55 59.46 53.61
42.91
91.27 89.10
81.90
51.36 46.20
37.30
X101
94.19 92.83 88.70 61.12 56.22
45.64
92.71 91.40
87.74
61.26 56.52
46.84
Dataset-2 X101-FPN 71.12 64.70 43.24 76.83 74.52
68.79
64.32 58.93
39.92
73.26 71.39
66.46
X101
72.12 66.84 47.86 78.09 76.65
70.30
59.29 54.40
42.12
74.67 71.45
65.30
Figure 7: We introduce two novel datasets targeted toward the robotic selective harvesting of strawberries.
The datasets provide instance segmentation, ”pluckability”, key-points, and weight information about the
strawberries.
challenging dataset and has the potential to further advance the research in selective harvesting. On the
other hand, Dataset-1 shows very reliable AP values for pluckable strawberries for both the backbones across
IoU thresholds. With IOU threshold of 0.5, the Detectron-2 produces 93.32 (R50-FPN) and (X101-FPN)
94.19 AP values, while with a very strict IoU threshold of 0.9 the Detectron-2 provides AP of 83.55, and 88.70
AP with R50-FPN and X101-FPN, respectively. This shows that for selective harvesting the dataset can
be reliably used. For Dataset-1, the performance of our models on ‘”unpluckable”’ berries is comparatively
less reliable as there are fewer samples of ‘”unpluckable”’ berries in this dataset. However, from a selective
harvesting perspective instance segmentation of ‘pluckable’ berries is more essential.
The results of the key-points detection expressed in terms of AP at diﬀerent IoU thresholds are similar to
segmentation. At each IoU threshold, we take the average results from 0.5, 0.3, and 0.1 OKS. OKS (Wu et al.,
2019) is the standard performance metric used by Detectron-2 (Wu et al., 2019) and MSCOCO (Lin et al.,
2015) for key-point detection. While the OKS threshold normally used is 0.5, 0.1 is a stricter threshold. The
experimental results show that similarly to segmentation, the results are consistent across the two backbones
although X101-FPN performs slightly better. Also, the key-points detection for ‘pluckable’ berries is much
better than ‘”unpluckable”’ berries for Dataset-1. The results for Dataset-2 obtained comparing X101-FPN
and X101 networks, provide a good baseline for future research. Figure 7 shows an example of creating a
fruit bounding box, key-points detection, and predicting pluckable and unpluckable fruits.

Figure 8: Predicted x, y, and z error of the fruit coordinate in the robot base frame using Gaussian Process
Regression model.
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression for picking point error estimation results
During the ﬁeld experiment, the results of picking point error estimation using the Gaussian Process Regres-
sion model were recorded which are shown in Figure 8. It presents the predicted x, y, and z error of the fruit
coordinate in the robot base frame corresponding to the euclidean distance of the fruit from the base of the
robot. After predicting the errors using the model, the targeted fruit picking point coordinate is corrected
and the new coordinate is sent to the system to re-plan the trajectory of the end-eﬀector. The results show
that the values of the errors are ﬂuctuating around a speciﬁc mean value for each axis. The Mean of errors
of x-axis is MEx = 0.062m with a standard deviation of σx = 0.012, for y-axis is MEy = 0.009m with a
standard deviation of σy = 0.014, and for z-axis is MEz = −0.019m with a standard deviation of σz = 0.016.
6.3
Harvesting analyses
We perform a series of experiments where at each attempt we consider all the berries in a series of clusters.
This typically means a target range from around 5 to 15 ripe fruits in a cluster among other yet to ripe fruit.
Diﬀerent trails in multiple harvesting sessions were carried out. The data collected from harvesting trails
are presented in Table 3. For this experiment, ﬁrst all fruit Na in the harvesting section including ripe and
unripe fruits were counted. To determine the performance of the fruit ripeness detection of the system, the
pluckable fruits Np, also were counted based on human judgment and compared with the system’s ripeness
detection Nd. The ratio of pluckable fruit to all fruits including unripe fruits (Na/Np) was 0.42. The result
of calculating ripeness detection ratio (Nd/Np) shows 95% accuracy of our ripeness detection model.
The trials show that the performance of the robot seemed to be inﬂuenced by the position of the fruit
in the cluster, which varies signiﬁcantly from one variety to another. The failure of the robot increases if
the target fruit is occluded by too many fruit and/or leaves. However, our novel design of the end-eﬀector,
equipped with separator ﬁngers, is able to unblock the most common occlusion.
The successfully harvested fruits were counted during the harvesting trails.
A harvest attempt was
considered a successful harvest where a ripe fruit was detected, griped, cut, and put in the punnet without
damage or bruise. Where a fruit dropped midway, bruised or damaged with cutting or gripping, or harvested

with a too long stem remaining on the fruit, considered an unsuccessful harvest. Therefore, the successful
harvesting rate Sr was calculated as Sr = (Ns/Np) × 100 where Ns is the total harvested fruits, and Np is
the total pluckable fruit. The results presented in Table 3 show Sr = 83% for all trials. Another important
parameter is the success rate of detected fruits which calculate as SDr = (Nd/Np) × 100 where Nd is the
total number of detected fruit by the system detection model, and Np is the total pluckable fruit. This
parameter shows the performance of the designed end-eﬀector, position error estimation model, and motion
planning control system, regardless of whether fruit is detected or not. The results show SDr = 87% for all
trials.
Table 2: Comparison of picking success rate after the ﬁrst attempt with other strawberry harvesting systems.
*Success of peduncle detection
Author
Success rate (%)
(Dimeas et al., 2015)
65
(Hayashi et al., 2010)
65*
(Feng et al., 2012)
71
(Ge et al., 2019)
74
This work (Sr)
83
This work (SDr)
87
Table 2 shows the performance of our system in comparison to existing approaches that have evaluated
their systems. Among other methods only (Ge et al., 2019) perform close in comparison to this work. It
is not surprising that (Ge et al., 2019) also relies on mask-RCNN for strawberry detection. Moreover, they
also propose their own algorithm for reﬁning the depth information obtained from the depth sensor.
To analyze the unsuccessful harvests, ﬁve more parameters were deﬁned and recorded during ﬁeld experi-
ments; total attempt At, cut command failure Fc, gripping/cutting failure Fgc, picking validation failure Fv,
and position failure Fp. The total attempt is the sum of all robot attempts to harvest all detected fruits in
a trail. Cut command failure is when the robot end-eﬀector is successfully positioned at the picking point,
but the system fails to detect the fruit and send a cutting command. The gripping/cutting failure parameter
shows unsuccessful or partially cutting oﬀthe stem, and/or unsuccessful gripping leads to harvesting failure.
Picking validation failure happens when the stem of the targeted fruit is gripped and cut successfully, but the
system fails to validate picking and doesn’t put the fruit in the punnet. The position failure parameter shows
the failures due to inaccurate localizing of the picking point where the end-eﬀector fails to grasp and/or cut
the stem of the targeted fruit.
The results show in total 201 attempts were conducted by the robot to harvest all detected pluckable
fruit which is 1.23 attempts per fruit. It can be seen that there are 66 failed attempts where 12% is the
result of detection failure, 29% due to cut command failure, 14% because of gripping/cutting failure, 9% is
the result of picking validation failure, and ﬁnally, 26% was the result of position inaccuracy.
The histogram of the time of picking one fruit successfully is presented in Figure 9. The time of harvest
of one fruit here was measured from the capture of a fruit image to put that fruit in the punnet. The average
execution time from capturing the image to placing the fruit was 28.2 s. In addition, the total time of a trial
was measured as can be seen in Table 3. This time was measured from starting the robot at the beginning
of a trail to the last harvest of that trail. The average time per successful harvest of this measurement is
slightly higher than the average picking time. This is due to failed/delayed defections, failed attempts, etc.
7
Discussion
The results of the ﬁeld experiments demonstrate the robustness and eﬀectiveness of the new robotic harvest-
ing system. The experiments in two diﬀerent growing conditions and three diﬀerent strawberry varieties show
the high-level adaptability of the system. It proves that the modular characteristics of the system alongside
its high ability to reconﬁgure the system based on the required condition, show distinguished performance.
this ability is highly important to generalise its developed technologies to other fruits or growing conditions
with minimal changes. The current alternatives have been designed and developed based on speciﬁc needs

Figure 9: The distribution of time of picking one fruit.
The time was measured from the beginning of
capturing the image of the targeted fruit using the vision sensor to the end of placing the harvested fruit in
the punnet.
and conditions, which makes it challenging to adapt them to other environments.
The vision system and ripeness detection proved to be eﬀective with just 4.9% of the ripe fruit not
detected. From the graph shown in Figure 8 it can be seen that the localisation of the vision system contains
a level of signiﬁcant errors, however, the errors ﬂuctuate around a speciﬁc value. Some of these errors could
be caused by the system’s internal calibration errors. For instance, camera calibration errors, or errors of
transformation from camera coordinate to robot coordinate can contribute to internal calibration errors.
Another source of error could be the diﬀerent lighting conditions of the experiment environment. Regardless
of the source or nature of the errors, the proposed Gaussian Process Regression for picking point error
estimation method proved to be eﬀective of mitigate the position errors. From Table 3 it can be seen that
just 8.4% of the attempts failed due to position error. It is notable that we used a limited dataset to train
the model. A more comprehensive dataset with more data points can enhance the performance of the model
in diﬀerent conditions.
The cutting conﬁrmation and picking validation methods were also tested during ﬁeld experiments. This
sub-system improves the eﬃciency of the whole system by reducing the redundant movement of the robot.
However, the results show that around 12.9% of all failed harvesting attempts were because of the cutting
conﬁrmation and picking validation failure. One reason for these failures that were observed during the ﬁeld
experiment lighting condition of the environment. As the strawberry, in general, has a shiny texture that
reﬂects direct sunlight, in some scenarios the direction of the sunlight reﬂection prevents the RGB sensors
to pick up and transmit the correct colour. In this situation, the pixels show bright colours instead of red
colour which leads to classifying the picking as unsuccessful or the cutting command as not sent.
Diﬀerent factors aﬀect the harvesting time of the robotic system. Figure 9 shows that harvesting time
varies from 21 seconds to 35 seconds with an average of 28.2 seconds. Field experiment observations indicate
that one reason for time variation is robot correction movements to adjust to the targeted fruit location

Table 3: Results of ﬁeld experiments.
Trail No.
Total
fruit
Pluckable
fruit
Pluckable
not detected
Cut comm.
Failure
Grip/Cut
failure
Picking
Valid. failure
Position
failure
Successful
harvest
Total
attempt
Total trail
time (s)
1
17
7
1
2
0
0
1
6
10
265
2
15
7
0
1
1
1
3
5
11
355
3
18
8
1
0
0
0
0
7
7
245
4
24
10
0
1
0
0
3
8
15
441
5
25
12
1
2
1
1
1
11
15
453
6
14
9
1
0
0
0
0
8
8
231
7
28
12
2
1
0
2
0
9
15
335
8
8
3
0
0
0
0
0
3
5
78
9
14
6
0
2
0
0
0
5
10
221
10
35
18
0
0
0
1
0
16
17
448
11
31
9
0
4
1
0
1
8
14
311
12
17
10
0
2
0
0
1
8
11
340
13
24
11
0
3
1
0
2
8
12
401
14
21
6
1
3
1
0
2
4
10
270
15
20
9
0
1
1
1
2
7
10
261
16
14
7
1
2
0
0
0
5
8
193
17
23
8
0
1
2
0
0
8
11
231
18
29
11
0
1
1
0
1
9
12
245
Total
377
163
8
26
9
6
17
135
201
5324 (s)
and/or bring the targeted fruit into the ﬁeld view of the bottom RGB sensor.
In some scenarios, the
robot carries out multiple adjustment movements such as moving back, left, right, down, or up to bring the
targeted fruit into the bottom sensors’ ﬁeld of view. These adjustment movements are important to capture
the targeted fruit which is later used for validation, although it might increase the harvesting time slightly.
The ﬁeld experiments demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of the novel design of the picking head. Only 4.4%
of all attempts failed because of the cutting or gripping failure. It means that the picking head design was
eﬀectively capable of a stable grip and successful cut of the strawberry stem. The picking head is successfully
capable of grasping and manipulating the harvested strawberry without contact with the fruit. In contrast,
most available technologies handle the fruit by grasping it using grippers or suction cups or directly dropping
it into the container after cutting the stem. Our design grasps and handles the fruit from its stem reducing
the possibility of bruising or damaging the fruit signiﬁcantly. In addition, an ineﬀective cutting mechanism
leads to partial cutting which damages the plant and increases plant disease possibility. We tested the design
on diﬀerent strawberry varieties which have diﬀerent stem diameters and strengths. The experiments proved
that the cutting mechanism is able to cut the diﬀerent varieties of stems eﬀectively. (A video of the system
can be seen in this link.)
8
Conclusion
We designed, prototyped and ﬁeld tested a novel picking head that can navigate through possible clusters and
pick a targeted fruit. The picking head consists of two independent mechanisms for grasping and removing
occlusion providing 2.5 DOF including the cutting mechanism.
This novel design allows the system to
manipulate occlusions independent of picking actions.
In addition, the picking head design provides a

contact-free grasping and picking of the fruit. This is highly important to reduce fruit damage or bruising
and to reduce the corresponding waste as strawberries are a very delicate fruit. We developed and proposed
a state-of-the-art perception system using RGB-D and three RGB sensors. To train our vision system, we
produced two new datasets from a real strawberry growing farm with diﬀerent features such as key points,
picking points, ripeness, etc. We designed and developed the autonomous harvesting system modular and
conﬁgurable to increase its adaptability for diﬀerent strawberry varieties and growing conditions. Finally,
to test the system we performed ﬁeld experiments on two diﬀerent commercial farms with three varieties.
The ﬁeld experiment results show the eﬃciency and reliability of the system with an 87% success rate.
Furthermore, the perception system demonstrated 95% success in detecting ripe fruits.
