2024 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA)
Analytically-Driven Resource Management for
Cloud-Native Microservices
Yanqi Zhang†, Zhuangzhuang Zhou†, Sameh Elnikety‡, Christina Delimitrou††
Cornell University†, Microsoft Research‡, MIT††

Abstract—Resource management for cloud-native microser-
vices has attracted a lot of recent attention. Previous work
has shown that machine learning (ML)-driven approaches out-
perform traditional techniques, such as autoscaling, in terms
of both SLA maintenance and resource efficiency. However,
ML-driven approaches also face challenges including lengthy
data collection processes and limited scalability. We present
Ursa, a lightweight resource management system for cloud-
native microservices that addresses these challenges. Ursa uses an
analytical model that decomposes the end-to-end SLA into per-
service SLA, and maps per-service SLA to individual resource
allocations per microservice tier. To speed up the exploration
process and avoid prolonged SLA violations, Ursa explores each
microservice individually, and swiftly stops exploration if latency
exceeds its SLA.
We evaluate Ursa on a set of representative and end-to-end
microservice topologies, including a social network, media service
and video processing pipeline, each consisting of multiple classes
and priorities of requests with different SLAs, and compare
it against two representative ML-driven systems, Sinan and
Firm. Compared to these ML-driven approaches, Ursa provides
significant advantages: It shortens the data collection process by
more than 128×, and its control plane is 43× faster than ML-
driven approaches. At the same time, Ursa does not sacrifice
resource efficiency or SLAs. During online deployment, Ursa
reduces the SLA violation rate by 9.0% up to 49.9%, and
reduces CPU allocation by up to 86.2% compared to ML-driven
approaches.
I. INTRODUCTION
Production cloud services, such as Twitter and Netflix, are
increasingly built as graphs of microservices [61], [6], [36],
[35], [33], and deployed with cloud-native frameworks like
Kubernetes [12], [4], [8], [1]. Despite the benefits of modular-
ity and elasticity, resource management for microservices that
must meet SLA constraints, e.g., end-to-end latency, is chal-
lenging, due to the diverse resource requirement of individual
microservices and their inter-service dependencies [34], [36].
Resource management for microservices has been the topic
of recent studies, and machine learning (ML) models, espe-
cially deep neural networks (DNN), have become a popular
choice to address the complexity of microservice topologies.
Previous studies have either used ML to predict important
performance metrics, such as latency and load [68], [34], [22],
[64], [49], or to directly adjust resource allocation [54], and
demonstrate that ML-driven approaches outperform traditional
techniques, such as autoscaling [18], in performance and
resource efficiency.
However, ML-driven approaches still face key challenges
limiting their adoption [25], [26], [28], [27], [31], [29], [30].
First, ML-driven approaches typically require a lengthy ex-
ploration process to collect tens of thousands of data points to
train the models, and therefore can not track changes in user
behavior or handle the frequent updates to the microservice
logic. Second, these ML models are on the critical path for
every resource management decision, limiting the speed and
scalability of resource management. Third, previous studies
are evaluated using conventional benchmarks that use remote
procedure calls (RPC) as the only method of inter-service
communication and include only lightweight text processing
in the business logic [36], [58], [70]. Modern cloud-native
applications increasingly use both RPCs and message queues
(MQ) [48], such as Kafka [3] and Redis streams [17], handle
different request classes, such as image processing and ML
workloads [57], [50], [55], and support different request pri-
orities. Different request classes or priorities exhibit different
latencies and therefore have different SLAs, making resource
management more challenging.
To address these challenges, we propose Ursa, a lightweight
resource management framework for cloud-native microser-
vices. As a first step, we conduct a case study to understand
how latency anomalies due to poor resource provisioning
propagate through different communication methods. We show
that backpressure is only significant for RPCs and is most pro-
nounced in the parent service of the culprit tier (bottlenecked
microservice). Given this, we design a method to determine the
resource utilization threshold for each microservice that pre-
vents backpressure in the application topology. By enforcing
that the system operates in a backpressure-free zone, microser-
vices in a topology can be treated as independent, reducing the
number of factors the resource manager much consider from
O(N 2), where each pairwise microservice dependency must
be accounted for, to O(N), where the latency of individual
microservices only depends on their own resource allocations.
This greatly simplifies resource management, as most prior
work resorts to complex ML models due to the need to capture
the impact that microservice dependencies have on end-to-end
performance.
Moreover, in a backpressure-free system, we develop a
performance model based on mixed integer programming
(MIP) which decomposes end-to-end latency SLA constraints
into per-service latency constraints, and maps them to resource
allocation thresholds for individual microservices. The model
also supports specifying different SLAs for different request
classes and priorities. To speed up the resource exploration,
arXiv:2401.02920v1  [cs.DC]  5 Jan 2024

Ursa explores each microservice individually, and swiftly
stops exploration when latency exceeds SLA or the resource
utilization reaches its backpressure-free threshold.
To better reflect modern microservices, we re-implemented
several DeathstarBench applications [36] using Dapr [5], a
popular microservice framework developed and used by major
cloud providers. The re-implemented benchmarks use both
RPCs and message queues (MQs), and implement different
request classes and priorities, executing more diverse business
logic than before. We compare Ursa to two representative ML-
driven systems, Sinan [68] and Firm [54] as well as traditional
autoscaling. Ursa reduces the required exploration time by
more than 128×, making it more practical to track frequent
changes to microservice logic. During online deployment,
Ursa’s control plane is 43× faster than prior work, and Ursa
reduces the SLA violation rate by 9.0% to 49.9%, and the CPU
allocation by up to 86.2% compared to ML-driven approaches.
II. RELATED WORK
Microservices. Microservices have emerged as the dominant
paradigm for interactive cloud services over the past few
years. Unlike traditional monolithic architectures that contain
the entire functionality of an application in a single binary,
microservice architectures are graphical structures composed
of tens or hundreds of single-purpose, loosely-coupled mi-
croservices, scaled independently, and in some cases imple-
mented in different programming languages. The popularity
of microservices is justified by several reasons, including flex-
ible development, rapid iteration and fine-grained elasticity.
The emergence of microservices has also prompted efforts
to benchmark and characterize them. Representative bench-
marks include DeathstarBench [36] and ticket reservation [70],
which implement several end-to-end user-facing applications.
These benchmarks use RPCs and http RESTful API as
the only inter-service communication methods, and mostly
perform lightweight text processing in the business logic.
More recently, Luo et al. [48] characterized microservices
running on AliCloud and showed that MQs are common in
practice, accounting for 23% of all communication methods,
and the performance of microservices is most sensitive to CPU
interference. Related work [69], [55], [50], [57] also shows
that cloud-native applications implement a variety of business
logic, including ML workloads, webserving, image and video
processing, etc.
Resource management. A large body of work has focused
on using ML to adjust resource allocation for microservices.
These systems use ML to predict important performance
metrics, such as latency and load or diagnose performance
issues [68], [34], [22], [64], [49] or to directly adjust re-
source allocations [54], [68]. They demonstrate that ML-
driven approaches outperform traditional approaches, such as
autoscaling [18] and queuing based mechanisms [67], in terms
of performance and resource efficiency. However, ML-driven,
especially deep learning driven approaches also suffer from
demand of large training dataset, difficulties in adapting to
changing application logic and user workload, and limited
control plane scalability. In addition to using ML, Zhou et
al. [69] reduce request failure rate in WeChat microservices
with overload control, Yang et al. [67] propose to identify
bottleneck services in multi-phase applications by monitoring
the queueing status, Suresh et al. [60] adopt deadline-based
scheduling to improve tail latency in multi-tier workloads,
and Sriraman et al. [59] present an auto-tuning framework for
microservice concurrency, and show the impact of threading
decisions on application performance and responsiveness.
Improving resource efficiency in cloud platforms in general
is an important research area, and recent work [20], [32], [37],
[39], [42], [43], [53], [62], [24], [44], [52], [28] has proposed
several directions for how cluster scheduling frameworks can
improve resource usage. Resource central [23] uses a set of
ML models to predict VM performance metrics, such as CPU
utilization and VM lifetime, Autopilot [56] uses an ensemble
of models to tune container configurations, Ambati et al. [19]
propose providing SLOs for resource harvesting VMs, and
Narayanan et al. [51] propose to efficiently solve large-scale
resource allocation problems by partitioning them to smaller
problems. However, these proposals are mainly applicable
to single VMs or containers, rather than microservices with
directed acyclic graph (DAG) topologies.
III. BACKPRESSURE EFFECT
Backpressure is one of the major challenges in microservice
resource management, and it refers to the phenomenon of
the resource allocation of one service affecting the latency
of upstream services, in addition to its own. In the presence
of backpressure, modeling microservice latency requires mod-
eling O(N 2) dependencies, in the worst case, for a topology
with N microservices, as each microservice’s latency can be
affected by the resources of its downstream services. Many mi-
croservice resource management frameworks use a centralized
performance model that requires global information about all
microservices to account for their inter-service dependencies,
at the cost of scalability [68], [34], [22]. To achieve scalable
resource management for microservices, we first conduct a
case study to understand how backpressure propagates through
different communication methods, including RPCs and MQs.
We study three types of chains connected by nested RPCs,
event-driven RPCs, and message queues (MQs), respectively.
Nested RPCs, as shown in Figure 1(a), are a synchronous
system where, upon receiving the client request (R0), the up-
stream service forwards the request to the downstream service
(S0) via RPC, blocks until the response is received (R1), and
then returns the result to the client. Event-driven RPCs [66],
as shown in Fig. 1(b), are more asynchronous in that upon
receipt of a client request, the upstream service dispatches the
request to another thread and returns immediately (S0), while
the dispatched thread contacts the downstream service via RPC
and waits for the response (R1). It is noteworthy that event-
driven RPCs are still not fully asynchronous, as they involve
a two-step process. Upon receiving a user request, the event
handling thread works asynchronously, by yielding immedi-
ately after creating a daemon thread that further processes the

R0
S0
R1
Client
Upstream
Downstream
R0
S0
R1
R0
S0
MQ
(a) Nested RPC
(b) Event-driven RPC
(c) Message queue
Fig. 1: Inter-service communication methods.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
1
2
3
4
5
Tier
Nested RPC
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Time(m)
Event-driven RPC
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Message queue
100
101
102
103
Fig. 2: Backpressure effects in a service chain.
request. However, the daemon thread talks to the downstream
service synchronously and informs the event thread when it
receives the response. This interaction involves maintaining
synchronous connections between upstream and downstream
services. Message queues, on the other hand, are completely
asynchronous. Unlike RPCs, MQs, such as Kafka [3] and
Redis streams [17], mostly use a publish-subscribe paradigm,
where publishers publish messages to topics hosted by the
MQ and subscribers consume messages by subscribing to the
topics. As shown in Figure 1(c), the upstream service does
not directly contact the downstream service, but instead sends
the client request to the MQ, and the downstream service gets
new requests by polling the MQ.
Characterizing backpressure.
We implement the RPC
service chains with gRPC [9] and the MQ with Redis
streams [17]. Each chain is configured to include 5 tiers, with
each tier implementing a CPU-intensive loop as the request
handler. We record the per-tier response time (S0−R0), which
in the cases of MQ is the service latency, and in the case
of RPC is the service latency excluding the duration waiting
for the downstream response. We measure the tier’s response
time because it is closely related to the resource allocation
of the tier itself. We stress test each service chain for 10
minutes, injecting performance anomalies into the leaf tier
(tier 5) by throttling its CPU limit between minutes 3 and
6. The resulting backpressure behavior is shown in Figure 2,
where each column on the x-axis represents a one minute
interval, each row on the y-axis corresponds to a tier (tier 1
is client-facing), and the color of each cell highlights the per-
Workload
Generator
Proxy
RPC
Tested
Service
RPC
Fig. 3: Backpressure profiling engine architecture.
tier 99th response time during that minute. For both nested
and event-driven RPCs, significant backpressure is observed,
especially for tier 4, the parent of the throttled leaf tier, and the
backpressure rapidly diminishes up the call chain and becomes
negligible above tier 3. In contrast, MQ shows no backpressure
behavior, even on tier 4.
Determining conditions for negligible backpressure. Back-
pressure complicates resource management because the la-
tency of a service also depends on the resources of its
downstream services, in addition to its own. To simplify
resource management, a natural approach is to determine safe
CPU utilization thresholds to avoid backpressure in the system,
as the performance of microservices is most sensitive to
CPU utilization [48], [36]. The approach generalizes to other
resources as well, for microservices with different resource
profiles. To this end, we use a profiling engine with the 3-
tier architecture shown in Figure 3, where the proxy acts as
the parent service and simply forwards the request to the
tested service via RPC. The engine gradually increases the
CPU limit of the tested service, and monitors the latency of
the proxy and the CPU utilization of the tested service, until
the latency of the proxy converges. The convergence of proxy
latency is determined by comparing the latency recorded under
the last two CPU limits with Welch’s t-test [65], a classical

0
1
2
3
0
500
1000
1500
Latency (ms)
post service
proxy 99th
CPU util
threshold
0
1
2
0
100
200
300
400
timeline-read service
proxy 99th
CPU util
threshold
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
60
80
CPU utilization
CPU limit
Fig. 4: Identifying backpressure-free CPU thresholds in a service mesh. We incrementally decrease the amount of resources
allocated to the tested microservice, until we observe an increase in the latency of the proxy. Given the proxy’s lack of
computation activity, this increase signals the presence of backpressure. We use this threshold as the utilization the tested
service should not exceed to avoid introducing backpressure to its parent tiers.
hypothesis testing method for identifying whether the means
of the two sets of samples are equal. The CPU utilization just
before the convergence of the proxy latency is then recorded
as the threshold for not triggering backpressure. In order to
account for complex invocation patterns, such as multiple
upstream services sending requests to a downstream service
concurrently, the workload generator synthesizes aggregate
loads from different upstream services, so that the measured
backpressure-free threshold is valid under fan-in/out patterns.
Figure 4 shows the profiling process for two microservices
in a social network application similar to [36]: the post service,
responsible for querying the contents of user post, and the
timeline-read service, responsible for querying the post IDs in
user timelines. The x-axis corresponds to the CPU limit of the
tested service. The left and right y-axis correspond to latency
and CPU utilization, respectively. The blue and green lines
show the average 99th percentile latency of the proxy and
the tested service under different CPU limits, and the error
bars represent the standard deviation. The red line indicates
the CPU utilization of the tested service. The orange line
highlights the point where the proxy latency converges, and
the corresponding CPU utilization is recorded as the threshold,
46.2% for post service and 60.0% for timeline-read service.
When significant backpressure is observed, the 99th percentile
latencies of the proxy and the tested service have already
increased by more than 5× and 10×.
Main insights. The study produces the following insights.
1) Backpressure complicates resource management because
the latency of a service depends on resources of its
downstream services, in addition to its own. Backpressure
is common in RPCs but negligible in MQs.
2) Backpressure diminishes along the invocation chain. Of
all the upstream services of the culprit, the parent service
shows the most significant increase in latency.
3) The backpressure-free resource utilization threshold of
a service can be profiled by monitoring the latency of
an upstream proxy. By operating within the thresholds,
backpressure can be avoided in the microservice system.
4) By eliminating backpressure, the number of factors re-
quired to model microservice latency becomes O(N) with
N services, because a microservice’s latency is only a
function of its own resources. Otherwise the number is
O(N 2) in the worst case, as a microservice’s latency may
depend on resources of its downstream services.
IV. PERFORMANCE MODEL
When the system has negligible backpressure, the latency
distribution of a microservice becomes mainly a function of
its own resources. We now build a performance model for
mapping microservice SLAs to resources. First, we decompose
the end-to-end latency constraint for each request type to a
set of per-microservice latency constraints. Second, we map
each per-microservice latency constraints to resources for that
service. In this section we describe the performance model we
use, based on mixed-integer programming.
Decomposing end-to-end latency. Without loss of generality,
we consider the end-to-end latency of a chain that handles
a single type of requests, which is the basic structure of
microservice DAGs and to which other topologies can be
transformed. For examples, a tree consists of multiple chains
from the root to the leaf services, and similarly, fan-in and fan-
out topologies can be decomposed to multiple chains from the
source to the sink services. If a service is accessed multiple
times by an upstream service, we consider the cumulative
latency of all accesses as the latency of that service.
Theorem 1: Consider a chain of microservices S1 to Sn,
and their response time distributions t1 to tn, where ti(xi) is

the xth
i
percentile latency of microservice Si, xi ∈[0, 100].
Similarly, we define te to be the end-to-end latency distribu-
tion, and te(xe) to be the xth
e
percentile end-to-end latency,
xe ∈[0, 100]. Then,
te(xe) ≤
n
X
i=1
ti(xi), if 100 −xe ≥
n
X
i=1
100 −xi
(1)
The theorem holds true regardless of the joint distribution
of microservice latencies (i.e., if services are independent or
correlated), and it denotes that the sum of per-microservice
latencies provides an upper bound for the end-to-end latency
at an arbitrary percentile, as long the sum of residuals of
per-microservice percentiles is no greater than the residual
of the end-to-end percentile. The proof can be found in the
supplementary material.
Theorem 1 proposes a method to guarantee the end-to-end
latency SLA by examining the latency of individual microser-
vices. For example, in a chain consisting of two microservices
S1 and S2, with the SLA defined as the end-to-end 99th
percentile latency, Theorem 1 suggests that the actual end-
to-end 99th percentile is less than the sum of xth
1
percentile
latency of S1 and xth
2
percentile latency of S2, as long as
100 −x1 + 100 −x2 ≤1, and in other words, (x1, x2) can
be (99.1, 99.9), (99.5, 99.5), (99.7, 99.3), etc. Since all such
combinations of xi are upper bounds of the actual end-to-
end latency, the end-to-end SLA must be satisfied as long as
the corresponding sum of the per microservice latencies for
one combination is less than the end-to-end SLA target. More
generally, given the end-to-end latency SLA of xth
e percentile
latency needing to be less than T in a chain of length n, the
end-to-end SLA is satisfied if
∃[x1...xn] s.t.
n
X
i=1
ti(xi) ≤T & 100 −xe ≥
n
X
i=1
100 −xi
(2)
Mapping per-microservice latency to resources.
To opti-
mize resource allocation, the per-microservice latency distribu-
tions ti need to be associated with resources, to derive a model
that maps SLAs to resources. In addition, the model should be
able to handle multiple classes or priorities of requests instead
of a single class as in Theorem 1.
In cloud-native frameworks, such as Kubernetes [12], [4],
[8], dynamic resource tuning is typically achieved by the
changing the number of replicas, or container instances, each
with a predefined resource configuration (CPU and memory).
Therefore, we use load per replica (LPR) as the metric to
relate resources to latency, where load is measured in requests
per second (RPS). Considering a service Si that handles c
classes or priorities of requests (v1 to vc), the load per replica
yi can be represented as a vector [a1
i ...ac
i], where ac
i is the load
for request class vc. If the load per replica vector yi is used
as the resource allocation threshold and the total load to Si
is [A1
i ...Ac
i], the resources consumed by Si can be calculated
using Equation 3, where ui is the resource consumption per
replica.
ri(yi) = max
1≤j≤c⌈Aj
i
aj
i
⌉· ui
(3)
On the other hand, since the latency distribution of request
vj in Si is a function of LPR yi, the xth
i
percentile latency
of vj can be denoted as tj
i(yi, xi). Then the ti(xi) items in
Equation 2 can be replaced by tj
i(yi, xi), transforming the
latency constraint to a resource allocation constraint. While
tj
i(yi, xi) can be fitted with profiling data, the resource-latency
function can be an arbitrary non-increasing function that is
not necessarily convex, which makes it hard to use convex
optimization models. Instead, we can discretize the variables
and use the function in Mixed Integer Programming (MIP),
which can be efficiently solved by modern optimization solvers
using heuristics, such as branch-and-bound algorithm [47].
Specifically, we discretize the percentile variable xi and LPR
yi, and represent the latency distributions under different LPRs
as a matrix Dj
i , where each element of Dj
i is the latency
that corresponds to a certain percentile for a given LPR. For
example, assuming that Si is profiled under m different LPRs
Yi = [y1
i ...ym
i ] and the latency distribution is discretized into
h different predefined percentiles P = [p1...ph], Dj
i will be
a m × h matrix where Dj
i [α, β] is the latency at percentile
pβ under LPR yα
i . As a result of the discretization, the LPR
variable yi can be represented by a one-hot vector δi of length
m, indicating which LPR is chosen as the resource allocation
threshold. Similarly, the percentile variable can be presented
by one-hot vector γj
i of length h, indicating which percentile
contributes to thesum of per-microservice latencies for request
class or priority vj. With the two one-hot decision variables,
the latency of request class or priority vj in microservice Si
can be expressed as δT
i Dj
i γj
i , and the resource consumption
can be expressed as δT
i Ri, in which Ri is a 1-D vector
corresponding to resource consumption under the profiled
LPRs, computed with Equation 3.
Resource optimization model.
Given that we can provide
an upper bound on the end-to-end latency using the sum of
per-microservice latencies and map per-microservice latencies
to resource allocation thresholds, we can now design an
optimization model that calculates the most efficient resource
allocation threshold for each microservice, such that they
all meet their respective per-microservice SLAs. Specifically,
the inputs to the model include the load of the application,
SLAs for different request classes and priorities, and per-
microservice latency distributions under different LPR thresh-
olds. The output of the model is the most efficient per-
microservice LPR threshold that satisfies SLAs. With the
described notations summarized in Table I, we derive the
following solvable mixed-integer programming (MIP) model
that yields optimal resource configurations given a set of end-
to-end constraints: for each request class or priority vj, the
xth
j
percentile latency should be less than Tj.

Description
δi
Resource (LPR) one-hot vector
γj
i
Latency percentile one-hot vector
Ri
Resource consumption under different LPRs
P
Discretized percentile values
Dj
i
Latency distribution matrix
Tj
End-to-end SLA target
xj
End-to-end SLA target percentile
1
1-D vector whose elements are all 1
TABLE I: Notations in the MIP formulation.
minimize
Pn
i=1 δT
i Ri,
subject to
P
i δT
i Dj
i γj
i ≤Tj, ∀j
(1)
P
i 100 −P T γj
i ≤100 −xj, ∀j (2)
1T δi = 1, ∀i
(3)
1T γj
i = 1, ∀i, j
(4)
variables
δi (0 ≤δi ≤1 & δi ∈Z)
γj
i (0 ≤γj
i ≤1 & γj
i ∈Z)
MIP1
The objective of MIP 1 is to minimize the total resource
consumption, while meeting the end-to-end SLA. Constraint 1
specifies that for each request class or priority, the sum of per-
microservice latencies must be smaller than the SLA target,
and constraint 2 specifies that the sum of per-microservice
latencies in the constraint 1 is an upper bound of the actual
end-to-end latency. The rest of the constraints enforce the deci-
sion variables to be one-hot vectors. For each microservice, the
LPR one-hot vector δi produced by MIP 1 corresponds to the
most efficient resource allocation threshold among all profiled
LPRs, which allows resource allocation of each microservice
to be decided independently, by simply checking the load of
the microservice.
Mitigating latency overestimation.
The quality of the
solution of MIP 1 is related to the tightness of the upper
bound given by Theorem 1, as a loose upper bound well above
the actual latency can lead to overprovisioning of resources.
An intuitive way to tighten the upper bound is to record the
ratio of the upper bound to the actual value and use that
ratio to refine the SLA constraint in MIP 1. For example,
if the overestimation ratio of request class or priority vj is
αj and its expectation is E(αj), constraint 1 in MIP 1 can
be refined to P
i δT
i Dj
i γj
i ≤E(αj)Tj. With a fixed resource
allocation denoted by δ∗
i , for microservice Si, ∀i, the upper
bound on the latency of request class or priority vj can
be solved using MIP 2. The objective value is the tightest
upper bound, because any percentile combination satisfying
constraint 1 in MIP 2 establishes a upper bound on latency,
and the objective is the smallest among all these upper bounds.
Thus, the overestimation ratio αj is the ratio of the objective
over the actual latency, and E(αj) is the average of αj with
different resource allocations.
minimize
P
i δ∗T
i Dj
i γj
i ,
subject to
P
i 100 −P T γj
i ≤100 −xj, ∀j
(1)
1T γj
i = 1, ∀i, j
(2)
variables
γj
i (0 ≤γj
i ≤1 & γj
i ∈Z)
MIP2
In practice, instead of using the expected overestimation
ratio to tighten the bound, one can choose other metrics, such
as the overestimation ratio at a high percentile, to tradeoff the
potential resource efficiency and the risk of SLA violation. We
leave this exploration to future work.
Discussion. In Ursa, we use this performance model to find
the most efficient resource allocation given per-microservice
latency SLA constraints, however, the model can be extended
to other cases with minor modifications. For example, the
model can handle end-to-end latency minimization under re-
source constraints, by replacing the objective of MIP 1 with the
sum of per-microservice latencies, and using the total available
resources as a constraint.
In addition, the model can handle SLAs defined in terms
of request failure rates. The failure rate of an end-to-end
request is no greater than the sum of request failure rates
of the microservices it goes through, and each microservice’s
request failure rate is related to its resources, since insufficient
resources will cause requests to time out and fail. The sum of
per-microservice failure rates can then be used as a constraint
to strengthen MIP 1. The model can also support dynamic
request paths by adding recorded paths to the model during
deployment. In the case of a microservice being accessed
multiple times in a dynamic path, the model can be simplified
by considering the total time spent in each microservice. We
plan to investigate these potential use cases in future work.
Algorithm 1: LPR threshold profiling algorithm.
Input: Initial replica R, SLA violation threshold Fsla,
backpressure-free threshold CPUbp, profiling time T;
Output: Mapping from LPR to latency distributions;
Variable: Replica r, replica tuning step step, Load L,
SLA violation frequency fsla, CPU utilization cpu,
latency distribution dlat;
Initialize r ←R, map ←{};
while r > 0 do
wait(T);
if cpu ≥CPUbp —— fsla ≥Fsla then
terminate;
else
map[ L
r ] = dlat, r = r −step;
end
end
return map
Allocation space exploration.
The task of allocation space
exploration is to collect input data for the MIP model, in-
cluding the potential resource allocation thresholds and the

Gateway
Client
Microservice
Tracing Module
Tracing
Framework
1
Resource
Controller
4
2
LPR Profiling
Exploration
Controller
Optimization Engine
3
Anomaly Detector
5
Re-explore
Re-compute
Perf Metrics
Latency Dist
Exploration Data
LPR Threshold
Micoservices
Deployment 
Anomalies
Load
Ursa Framework 
Fig. 5: System architecture of Ursa.
corresponding latency distributions for each microservice.
Exploration should include the most efficient resource allo-
cation threshold for each microservice and converge fast, by
terminating swiftly if the latency exceeds the SLA. To achieve
this goal, we explore each microservice individually with the
LPR threshold profiling algorithm shown in Algorithm 1, by
replaying the workload trace on the profiled microservice. Dur-
ing profiling, we gradually reduce the replicas of the profiled
microservice to increase the load on each replica and record
the corresponding latency distributions. Profiling is terminated
when SLA violations are observed. Additionally, profiling is
also terminated when the CPU utilization of the microservice
exceeds the service’s backpressure-free threshold to preserve
the independence assumption used by the performance model.
V. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
We now present the design and implementation of Ursa,
a resource management framework based on the proposed
performance model and allocation space exploration mech-
anism. Ursa is built on top of Kubernetes [12], a popular
container orchestration framework adopted by major cloud
providers [2], [4], [8], [1], and leverages Kubernetes’s APIs
to dynamically allocate resources by tuning the number of
replicas per microservice. Ursa requires the user to provide
the topology and the end-to-end SLAs of the microservice
application, including request paths, percentiles, and target
latencies.
Ursa aims to make allocation decisions fast and scalable.
Ursa simplifies resource management decisions to threshold-
based scaling by implementing the performance model from
Section IV. In addition, Ursa collects input data for the
performance model via the exploration process used to identify
the relation between resources and per-microservice SLAs.
The components of Ursa are shown in Figure 5, and the
functionality of each component is described below.
1. The tracing framework is implemented with Prometh-
eus [15], a time-series database for metrics monitoring. It
collects the CPU and memory usage data, as well as the
request counts and latency distributions of each service which
are used to calculated statistics required by the MIP model.
2. The exploration controller implements the allocation
space exploration mechanism. It first determines the backpres-
sure free CPU utilization thresholds for each RPC-connected
microservice individually (Section III). Then, it explores fea-
sible resource allocation thresholds of each microservice indi-
vidually using Algorithm 1. The complete exploration of all
microservices is required for a new application and must be
completed before Ursa begins to manage the application. In the
case of continuous development of individual microservices,
only the updated microservices require re-exploration.
3. The optimization engine then determines the resource
allocation threshold for each microservice using the per-
formance model in Section IV, using exploration data and
user load information collected by the tracing framework.
The optimization engine is implemented with Gurobi [10].
During the initial deployment phase, the optimization engine
is invoked with current user load information to generate the
optimal scaling thresholds of each microservice. Subsequently,
the optimization engine may need to be invoked again if the

mix of user requests changes significantly or when the business
logic of microservices is updated.
4. Using the load per replica (LPR) threshold calculated by
the optimization engine, the resource controller dynamically
adjusts the number of replicas as the load changes, ensuring
that for any class or priority of request, the average load on
each replica does not exceed the threshold. Specifically, the
resource controller determines whether the average load in
one replica exceeds the threshold using Welch’s t-test [65] to
accommodate the noise of load fluctuations. Specifically, the
resource controller compares the actual load of the microser-
vice, with the recorded load used as the scaling threshold, and
considers the threshold to be exceeded if the t-test rejects the
hypothesis that the mean of the actual load is less than the
mean of the recorded load.
5. During deployment, the anomaly detector periodically
checks for anomalies in load and latency, and triggers recal-
culation of resource allocation thresholds or re-exploration,
if necessary. Load anomalies refer to drastic changes in the
ratio of different classes or priorities of requests that may
lead to resource over-provisioning, in which case resource
allocation thresholds are recalculated to improve resource
efficiency. The anomaly detector identifies changes in request
ratios by monitoring the request ratio deviation of each
microservice, which measures the difference between the load
of the microservice and the load per replica threshold for
scheduling. The metric is denoted by maxi li
ti
P
i ti
P
i li , where li
and ti are the total load and per-replica load threshold for the
ith request class or priority. When the request ratio deviation
exceeds a user-defined threshold, the anomaly detector asks the
optimization engine to recalculate the thresholds and update
the resource controllers. If the re-calculated thresholds still
fail to mitigate the request ratio deviation, indicating that
the load pattern is not covered by previous exploration, the
anomaly detector asks the exploration controller to re-explore
the affected microservice.
On the other hand, latency anomalies refer to SLA vio-
lations, which indicate that the latency distribution recorded
during exploration needs to be updated. Similar to load anoma-
lies, users can specify an end-to-end SLA violation threshold
that triggers the re-exploration process if the SLA violation
exceeds the threshold during deployment.
VI. MICROSERVICE BENCHMARKS
Conventional microservice benchmarks [36], [58], [70] have
several limitations. First, conventional benchmarks use RPCs
as the only method for inter-service communication, whereas
MQs are becoming increasingly common in practice [48].
Second, the business logic of conventional benchmarks in-
volves only lightweight text processing, whereas a modern
microservice handles different user request classes performing
tasks, such as image processing and ML workloads [57], [50],
[55], and even different request priorities, making resource
management more challenging. To address these limitations,
we implement three benchmark applications using Dapr [5],
a popular microservice framework developed and used by
Client
Gateway
Translate
Post
Sentiment
Analysis
Timeline
Store
Post
Store
Gateway
Business Logic
Database
User
Frontend
Recommend
Image
Store
Social
Graph
Timeline
Read
Timeline
Update
Social
Store
Object
Detection
Message Queue
RPC
Fig. 6: Social network microservice topology.
Client
Gateway
Trending
Date
Scale
Video
Store
Info
Store
Frontend
Date
Store
Thumbnail
User
Rating
Rating
Store
Message Queue
RPC
Info
Gateway
Business Logic
Database
Fig. 7: Media service topology.
major cloud providers, as described below. For all the ap-
plications, we implement the business logic in Golang and
Python, and use gRPC [9] for RPCs, Redis streams [17] for
message queues and Redis [16] for data stores. We incorporate
MQ into our approach because it is an increasingly popular
communication framework for microservices.
In our benchmarks, the interactive functionalities demanding
immediate response, such as reading timelines from the social
network, are implemented with RPC. Conversely, functional-
ities that do not require immediate response, such as labeling
objects in user-uploaded images, are implemented with mes-
sage queues.
Social network.
The social network application is a re-
implementation of the DeathStarBench [36] application. In
addition to the original features including uploading text posts
and reading timelines, the re-implemented version includes
several new features, including uploading images, sentiment
analysis of texts, and object detection of images. Sentiment
analysis and object detection are implemented with machine
learning models from Hugging Face [11], and are connected
to other services via MQs.
Media service. The media service is also a re-implementation
of the corresponding DeathStarBench application. In addition
to the original features including reviewing and rating videos,
the re-implemented version additionally allows users to upload
and download actual videos, and includes video-processing
tasks, such as transcoding to different resolutions and gener-
ating thumbnails via FFmpeg [7]. The video transcoding and

Client
Gateway
Video
Store
Frame
Extraction
Message Queue
RPC
Gateway
Business Logic
Database
Metadata
Extraction
Face
Recognition
Image
Store
Fig. 8: Video processing pipeline.
thumbnail services are connected to other services via MQs.
Video processing pipeline.
Video processing pipeline con-
sists of three stages: The first stage extracts video metadata,
the second stage takes snapshots from the video at fixed
intervals, and the third stage performs face recognition on
the video snapshots. The first two stages use FFmpeg, the
third stage uses OpenCV [14], and stages are connected
with MQs. The application handles two request priorities.
High-priority requests are always processed immediately when
worker threads are available, while low-priority requests are
processed only when there is no high-priority request waiting
in the queue.
Previous work typically handles a single SLA and only man-
ages synchronous requests. For example, Sinan [68] handles a
single SLA of 500ms for the 99th percentile latency of upload-
post, read-timeline, and update-timeline in social network.
However, different request classes have diverse latencies. For
example, in social network, it takes tens of milliseconds to
upload a post, hundreds of milliseconds to update timelines,
and a few seconds to perform object detection. To reflect
these latency ranges, we assign an SLA per request class and
priority. We stress test the applications with high user loads
and use the latency before saturation as the SLA. The SLAs
of the social network, media service, and video processing
pipeline are listed in Table II, III, IV, respectively. The SLAs
are mostly defined as the 99th percentile, except for the low-
priority requests in the video processing pipeline, which is
defined as the 50th percentile latency.
Request type
99th latency (ms)
upload-post/comment
75
read-timeline
250
update-timeline
500
upload-image
200
download-image
75
sentiment-analysis
500
object-detect
10000
TABLE II: SLA requirements of the social network.
VII. EVALUATION
We aim to answer the following questions:
1) What is the overhead of Ursa’s exploration process?
(Section VII-C)
Request type
99th latency (ms)
upload-video
2000
download-video
1500
get-info
250
rate-video
400
transcode-video
40000
generate-thumbnail
2000
TABLE III: SLA requirements of the media service.
Request type
Percentile
Latency (ms)
high-priority
99th
20000
low-priority
50th
4000
TABLE IV: SLA requirements of the video processing
pipeline.
2) How accurate is Ursa’s performance model in capturing
end-to-end latency (Section VII-D)?
3) How effective is Ursa in reducing resource usage and
maintaining SLAs? (Section VII-E)
4) What is the latency required for Ursa to make resource
allocation decisions? (Section VII-F)
5) Is Ursa able to adapt to business logic changes of mi-
croservices? (Section VII-G)
A. Experimental Setup
We use the benchmarks in Section VI and use Locust [13]
to generate input load following a Poisson arrival process.
The applications are deployed on a local Kubernetes cluster
consisting of 8 machines, each with 40-88 CPUs and 126-188
GB of memory each, with a NIC bandwidth of 10 Gbps. To
reduce interference between containers colocated on the same
server, we set the CPU management policy of Kubernetes
to the static policy [45], which allows each container to
access exclusive CPUs, as long as it is configured with an
integer number of CPUs. The CPU configuration of each
microservice’s container is determined by monitoring the CPU
usage of the container at low RPS and rounding it to the
nearest integer, and similarly, the memory configuration is set
to the maximum profiled memory usage to avoid OOM errors.
During online deployment, we adjust the resource allocation
for each microservice by adjusting the number of replicas.
B. Competing Approaches
We compare Ursa to the following systems.
Sinan. Sinan [68] is a model-based ML-driven microservice
management framework. It uses a CNN and boosted trees
model, to predict the end-to-end latency of a microservice
topology given a certain resource allocation, as well as the
probability that a resource allocation will lead to an SLA
violation later into the future, taking into account the system’s
inertia in building up queues. Sinan is implemented as a
centralized scheduler that periodically queries the model with
different resource allocations, and chooses the one using the

least amount of resources, while meeting the end-to-end SLA.
The training data for the models are collected with a process
designed to explore unseen resource allocations and to keep
the ratio of violating to meeting SLAs at 1 : 1, so that the
trained models are not biased towards either predicting SLA
violation or SLA satisfaction. We train Sinan with 10,000
samples, per the paper’s recommendation.
Firm.
Firm [54] is a model-free, ML-driven framework
for microservice resource management. Unlike Sinan that
trains models to predict latency, Firm assigns a reinforcement
learning agent to each service that directly adjusts the resource
allocation for the service, given its resource usage and end-
to-end SLA status. The reward for each agent is designed to
be the weighted sum of the reduced resource usage and the
SLA violation status after applying the resource allocation
decision. The agents are trained by injecting performance
anomalies during online deployment. Similarly to Sinan, we
also use 10,000 training samples for Firm to allow accuracy
to converge.
For both Sinan and Firm, we modified the systems to handle
asynchronous events and queues, since the original systems
were designed exclusively for RPCs.
Autoscaling. Autoscaling [18] is a widely adopted resource
management method. The autoscaling controller relies on
manually configured resource utilization thresholds based on
expert knowledge to dynamically adjust resource allocation.
In our evaluation, we experiment with two configurations for
autoscaling. The first configuration uses the default setting
of AWS step scaling [18], which increases resources when
CPU utilization exceeds 60%, and reduces resources when
the CPU utilization is below 30%. This configuration is
optimistic in terms of resource usage, but comes at the expense
of SLA maintenance. The second configuration is manually
tuned to preserve the SLAs of tested applications, but uses
more resources. In the rest of the paper, we name the first
configuration Auto-a, and the second configuration Auto-b.
C. Exploration Overhead
We now compare the exploration overheads of Ursa, Sinan
and Firm. During exploration, the combination of user requests
for each application is the same across the three approaches.
Specifically, for the social network application, the ratios of
post, comment, download-image and read-timeline are ap-
proximately 1:75:15:25, adopted from [68], [46], [38]. For
the media service application, the ratios of upload-video,
get-info, download-video, and rate-video are approximately
1:100:25:25. For the video processing pipeline, we experiment
with four different ratios of high and low priority requests,
including 5:95, 25:75, 50:50, and 75:25. Across all approaches,
the sampling frequency is set to once per minute.
We run Ursa’s exploration process for each microservice
individually, as described in Algorithm 1. Since CPU and
memory are the two major resources on cloud platforms,
where CPU directly affects latency and memory is configured
to avoid OOM error, during Ursa’s exploration we configure
the initial replica of each microservice by providing it with
adequate CPUs to keep the microservice’s latency low. Each
microservice is profiled using Algorithm 1, and in each
iteration we reduce the number of replicas by 1 and collect 10
samples, until the frequency of SLA violations exceeds 10%,
or the CPU utilization exceeds the backpressure-free threshold.
For Sinan and Firm, we run their data collection algorithm and
online training process separately and collect 10k samples for
each application, matching the order of magnitude in Sinan
for DeathStarBench [68].
Table V summarizes the number of samples collected during
exploration and the required exploration time. For Ursa, the
exploration time is decided by the longest time required to
profile a single microservice, as each microservice can be
profiled individually, and the number of samples is the sum
of samples collected for all microservices. Compared to the
ML-driven approaches, Ursa reduces the required sample size
by a factor of 16.7 up to 25.6, and the exploration time by
a factor of 128.2 up to 208.4. The high online exploration
overheads of ML-driven approaches result from the nature of
deep neural networks, which require a large amount of data
to generalize, due to their large parameter space. In contrast,
Ursa’s analytical model inherently contains fewer parameters
than DNNs. The model calculates end-to-end latency as the
sum of per-microservice latencies, and foresees end-to-end
SLA violations when the latency of individual microservices
increases rapidly. Notably, despite the small required sample
size, Ursa still maintains SLA and achieves high efficiency
during deployment, as shown in Section VII-E.
App
Systems
Samples
Time(h)
Social
Ursa
440
1.2
Sinan/Firm
10000
166.7
Media
Ursa
390
0.8
Sinan/Firm
10000
166.7
Video
Ursa
600
0.8
Sinan/Firm
10000
166.7
TABLE V: Exploration overheads with Ursa compared to two
ML-driven frameworks, Sinan and Firm.
D. Model Accuracy
The performance model (Section IV) estimates the end-to-
end latency by multiplying the latency’s upper bound with the
expected overestimation rate. To evaluate the estimation accu-
racy, we record the per-microservice and end-to-end latency
distributions every 5 min for a total of 150 min during online
exploration with dynamically changing resource allocations,
and calculate the estimated latency for each type of request.
Figure 9 shows the measured and estimated latency of four
representative request types in Social Network, including post,
update-timeline, object-detection, and sentiment-analysis. The
blue line indicates the measured 99th percentile latency and
the red line indicates the estimated 99th percentile latency. For
each class of requests, the estimated latency closely follows

0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
80
P99 latency (ms)
post
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
400
500
update-timeline
0
50
100
150
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
P99 latency (ms)
object-detect
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
400
500
sentiment-analysis
Time (m)
Measured
Estimated
Fig. 9: Social network–Estimated vs. measured latency.
0
50
100
150
0
10
20
30
40
P99 latency (s)
high-priority
0
50
100
150
0
1
2
3
4
P50 latency (s)
low-priority
Time (m)
Measured
Estimated
Fig. 10: Estimated vs. measured latency for the video process-
ing pipeline.
the measured latency, with the average ratio of estimated to
measured latency ranging from 0.97 to 1.05. Additionally,
Figure 10 shows the measured and estimated latency of the
video processing pipeline which includes two request priori-
ties, with SLAs defined at the 50th and 99th percentiles, for
low and high priority requests, respectively. For both priorities,
the estimated latency is close to the measured latency, with the
average ratio of estimated to measured latency being 0.96 and
1.00 for low and high priority requests, respectively.
E. Performance Comparison
We now compare resource usage and SLA violations during
deployment between Ursa and prior work, with Ursa and ML-
driven systems using exploration data from Section VII-C. In
addition to the three previous applications, we also show the
results for the vanilla social network which implements the
same functionality as the original benchmark, by disabling the
newly added ML services, to highlight the challenges that stem
from resource need heterogeneity across microservices.
For each application, we experiment with three user loads;
constant load, dynamic load, and skewed load. Constant load
refers to Poisson arrival processes with constant RPS. Dynamic
load has time-varying RPS, including diurnal patterns where
the RPS first gradually increases and then gradually decreases,
and burst patterns, where the RPS increases sharply by 50%
to 125%. The ratio of different types of requests for constant
and dynamic loads is the same as in online exploration. In
skewed load, the ratio of request types differs from that in
the online exploration. For social network and media service,
we experiment with two other request combinations, the first
doubling the frequency of update requests, and the second
halving the frequency of update requests. For the video
processing pipeline, the ratios of high-priority to low-priority
requests include 40:60 and 60:40, which do not exist in online
exploration. For Ursa specifically, the skewed load stresses the
case where the request mix changes, and the LPR thresholds
needs recalculated using available exploration data that do not
include the current request mix. For each type of load, Ursa
calculates the optimal load-per-replica thresholds once, at the
beginning of the experiment.
Figure 11 shows the SLA violation rate, and Figure 12
shows the average CPU allocation, or the total amount of CPU
resources allocated to the microservice. Compared to ML-
driven systems, Ursa significantly reduces SLA violation rates,
achieving 0.1% to 8.5% SLA violation rates under constant
and dynamic loads, and 0.5% to 2.0% SLA violation rates
under skewed load, whereas ML-driven systems incur 9.1% to
29.2% SLA violation rates under constant and dynamic loads,
and 14.2% to 51.9% SLA violation rates under skewed load.
ML-driven systems cause higher SLA violation rates for the
new social network than for vanilla social network, because the
latency of ML microservices is less stable and more challeng-
ing for resource management, compared to lightweight text
processing. In terms of resources, Ursa reduces CPU allocation
by 2.3% to 86.2% for constant and dynamic loads. For skewed
loads, Ursa uses an average of 8.2% more CPUs, but the
ML-driven systems result in SLA violation rates significantly
higher than Ursa. As for autoscaling, Auto-a, which uses the
default setting of AWS step scaling, uses the least resources
but results in SLA violation rates of over 40%. Auto-b, the
manually tuned configuration, maintains SLAs most of the
time, with SLA violation rates only 0.9% to 6.1% higher
than Ursa. Despite the low SLA violation rates, Auto-b uses
significantly more resources than Ursa, allocating 43.9% to
148.0% more CPUs under constant and dynamic loads, and
13.6% to 57.0% more CPUs allocation under skewed loads.
Ursa may use more resources under skewed loads because it
prioritizes maintaining SLAs and makes conservative decisions
with the available exploration data. As a conceptual example,
assume a microservice handles two classes of requests, and
its total load is (4, 6), where each element of the vector is the
load of one class of requests. If the microservice’s exploration
data only includes one feasible LPR threshold (3, 2), Ursa
will provision 3 replicas for the microservice to ensure that
the load of any request class is below the threshold, while in
reality the actual per-replica load will be (1.3, 2), which is
below the (3, 2) threshold. Figure 13 shows the load and CPU
allocation for four representative microservices in the social

0
20
40
60
0.0
1.6
2.0
18.8
17.1
20.0
14.9
14.3
46.2
41.9
56.1
42.0
1.2
5.3
4.0
Vanilla Social network
Ursa
Sinan
Firm
Auto-a
Auto-b
0
20
40
60
80
1.9
4.5
2.0
21.1
26.8
42.0
22.6
24.9
51.9
57.5
63.8
66.0
4.4
10.6
8.0
Social network
0
20
40
60
80
3.3
8.5
0.5
28.5
22.4
26.0
30.8
29.2
34.6
59.3
66.3
62.0
9.3
10.6
6.0
Media service
const
dynamic
skewed
0
20
40
60
0.8
6.4
0.5
16.7
15.1
14.2
25.0
25.9
26.2
49.2
42.3
50.8
1.7
7.7
2.5
Video processing pipeline
SLA violation rate(%)
Fig. 11: SLA violation rate across load patterns for the original (Vanilla) and reimplemented Social Network application, the
Media service, and the Video Processing pipeline, with Ursa, Sinan, Firm, and the empirical Automscaling system.
network under a diurnal load when managed with Ursa, where
the left Y-axis represents the RPS of load and the right Y-axis
represents the CPU allocation. For each microservice, Ursa is
able to scale out and scale in promptly as the load increases
and decreases.
Ursa outperforms ML-driven systems with much lower
exploration overheads, because Ursa’s analytical model accu-
rately decomposes the end-to-end latency to per-microservice
latencies, which can be mapped directly to per-microservice
resource allocation. However, the ML-driven techniques need
to learn the relation between resource allocation and SLA
from scratch in a much larger parameter space, requiring more
data and leading to lower accuracy. Specifically, Sinan’s SLA
violation predictor can only achieve 80% to 85% accuracy
due to the presence of multiple request classes with different
SLAs, resulting in more SLA violations and higher resource
usage. On the other hand, in addition to the issue of large
parameter space, Firm does not always prioritize preserving
SLAs because its agent’s reward function is a weighted sum
of the SLA violation rate and the resource utilization, which
makes Firm prioritize resource savings over SLA if the savings
are significant, resulting in more violations.
Discussion. We previously compared the resource consump-
tion of the evaluated systems. Another metric of interest in
cloud native environments is throughput per dollar, i.e., the
user request throughput achievable with the same cost budget.
Since all systems are evaluated under the same workload
patterns, the improvement in Ursa’s throughput per dollar is
the inverse of its resource savings. For example, compared
to ML-driven systems, Ursa reduces CPU allocation by 2.3%
to 86.2% for constant and dynamic loads, which represents
an improvement in throughput per dollar of 1.02× to 7.24×.
Ursa’s improvement is even more pronounced when consider-
ing goodput per dollar, i.e., the user request throughput that
meets SLA under the same cost budget, since Ursa signifi-
cantly reduces SLA violations compared to other systems.
F. Control Plane Latency
The latency of resource allocation decisions is directly
related to responsiveness of resource management systems.

0
25
50
75
40
31
59
54
45
42
39
32
39
28
23
37
59
53
67
Vanilla Social network
Ursa
Sinan
Firm
Auto-a
Auto-b
0
100
200
92
76
128
127
94
111
113
97
114
72
63
109
165
146
201
Social network
0
100
200
116
73
93
129
84
78
144
96
116
57
45
49
170
137
140
Media service
const
dynamic
skewed
0
50
100
150
200
131
50
156
152
96
151
138
89
133
86
82
108
192
124
197
Video processing pipeline
CPU Cores
Fig. 12: Average CPU allocation across load patterns for the original (Vanilla) and reimplemented Social Network application,
the Media service, and the Video Processing pipeline, with Ursa, Sinan, Firm, and the empirical Automscaling system.
Resource allocation decisions are fast in Ursa because the
critical path only includes the resource controller, which
calculates the number of replicas, based on the load-per-replica
thresholds, while inference of ML requires over thousands
of floating-point operations. There are also situations where
the model needs to be updated to account for changes in
service business logic or load combinations. In such cases,
Ursa needs to recompute the optimization models, and ML-
driven approaches also need to be retrained. Table VI shows
the average control plane latency (in milliseconds) across the
different approaches, in the case of deployment and model
update. In the comparison, the control planes are always
allocated 4 CPUs. Autoscaling is undoubtedly the fastest,
as it involves only a single threshold check. In terms of
deployment, Ursa is on average 691.6× faster than Sinan with
its centralized ML model, and 43.4× faster than Firm, which
uses per-service RL agents. In terms of model updates, Sinan’s
retraining time is linear with the size of the dataset, and takes
minutes even on a dedicated GPU. Firm can adapt to load
changes gradually by updating the RL agent online, but is
still slower than Ursa by 4.4× even for a single iteration. The
RL agent may require thousands of iterations to update its
weights and fully learn new resource patterns, whereas Ursa
only needs to solve the optimization problem once to fully
adapt to the changes.
Ursa
Sinan
Firm
Autoscaling
Deploy
0.5
345.8
21.7
0.1
Update
271.7
N/A
1.2 ×103
0.1
TABLE VI: Average control plane latency in milliseconds
across Ursa, Sinan, Firm, and Autoscaling for the initial
application deployment, as well as when retraining of the
model is required, due to a change in application logic.
G. Adapting to Service Changes
A basic premise of microservices is that they enable fre-
quent logic updates without the high overhead of redeploying
the entire service mesh. We now conduct a case study to

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frontend Service
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Object Detection Service
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
200
400
600
800
Post Service
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
2
4
6
8
10
Sentiment Analysis Service
0
10
20
30
Time (m)
RPS
CPU Cores
RPS
CPUs
Fig. 13: Ursa’s CPU allocation under a diurnal load. We show the RPS and CPU allocations for individual, representative
microservices.
demonstrate Ursa’s ability to adapt to such business logic
updates. Specifically, we modify the object-detection service
in the social network application, and change the model from
DETR [21] which combines Transformer [63] and Resnet [40]
for object detection, to the more lightweight Mobilenet [41].
The exploration controller performs a partial online explo-
ration to profile only the modified object-detect service. It
collects a total of 75 samples in 1.25 hours, during which
4 SLA violations are triggered, resulting in an SLA violation
rate of 5.3%. Then the optimization engine recalculates the
LPR threshold of each service. We deploy the modified social
network application under various RPS, and Figure 14 shows
the distribution of the 99th percentile latency of the end-to-end
object-detect requests for the original and the updated Social
network service mesh. Object-detect requests go through the
frontend service, image store, post service, and the object-
detect service. The red line represents the SLA and the blue
line represents the cumulative distribution function, with SLA
violation rates of 0.62% and 0.50% for the original and
updated microservice, respectively, showing Ursa’s ability to
quickly adjust to changes in the application logic.
H. Summary
Compared to ML-driven approaches, Ursa reduces the re-
quired exploration time by more than 128×, making it practi-
cal to track frequent changes in service business logic and user
loads. Ursa also achieves better performance, maintaining low
SLA violation rates of 0.1% to 8.5% during deployment, 9.0%
to 49.9% lower than ML-driven approaches, and reducing
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Latency (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100
CDF (%)
Original
SLA
Updated
Fig. 14: 99th latency distribution of object-detect.
resource allocation by up to 86.2%. Ursa also outperforms
traditional autoscaling, both the default setting of AWS step
scaling, and a conservative, manually tuned configuration. In
addition, Ursa’s control plane is faster than ML, enabling
faster and more scalable management decisions. Finally, we
demonstrate that Ursa is able to adapt to service changes and
maintain SLAs while incurring low exploration overheads.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We present Ursa, a lightweight resource management frame-
work for microservices. Ursa uses an analytical model to
decompose the end-to-end SLA into per-microservice SLAs,
and maps them to resource allocations. During exploration,
Ursa profiles each microservice individually and swiftly stops
exploration in the case of SLA violations to shorten the
exploration process. Using benchmarks implemented with

popular microservice frameworks, we demonstrate that Ursa
outperforms ML-driven approaches and traditional autoscal-
ing in both SLA maintenance and resource efficiency, with
significantly lower exploration overheads.
