Dynamic time warping distance for message
propagation classiﬁcation in Twitter
Siwar Jendoubi1,2,4, Arnaud Martin2, Ludovic Liétard2,
Boutheina Ben Yaghlane3, Hend Ben Hadji4
1 LARODEC, ISG Tunis, Université de Tunis
2 IRISA, Université de Rennes I
3 LARODEC, IHEC Carthage, Université de Carthage
4 Centre d’Etude et de Recherche des Télécommunications

Abstract. Social messages classiﬁcation is a research domain that has
attracted the attention of many researchers in these last years. Indeed,
the social message is diﬀerent from ordinary text because it has some
special characteristics like its shortness. Then the development of new
approaches for the processing of the social message is now essential to
make its classiﬁcation more eﬃcient. In this paper, we are mainly in-
terested in the classiﬁcation of social messages based on their spreading
on online social networks (OSN). We proposed a new distance metric
based on the Dynamic Time Warping distance and we use it with the
probabilistic and the evidential k Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) classiﬁers
to classify propagation networks (PrNets) of messages. The propagation
network is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) that is used to record prop-
agation traces of the message, the traversed links and their types. We
tested the proposed metric with the chosen k-NN classiﬁers on real world
propagation traces that were collected from Twitter social network and
we got good classiﬁcation accuracies.
Keywords: Propagation network (PrNet), classiﬁcation, Dynamic Time Warp-
ing (DTW), k Nearest Neighbor (k-NN).
1
Introduction
During the past decade, many classiﬁcation methods have been appeared, like k
Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines (SVM), etc.
Those methods have been applied to several problems among them text classi-
ﬁcation and they proved their performance, [19]. However, when working with
short text like online communications, chat messages, tweets, etc, we are face to
a new challenge. In fact, in a short text there is no suﬃcient word occurrences
or shared context for a good similarity measure. Let’s take Twitter for example,
Twitter is a micro-blogging service that allows its users to share messages of
arXiv:1701.07756v1  [cs.AI]  26 Jan 2017

2
S. Jendoubi et al.
140 characters that are called tweets. As a consequence, using a traditional text
classiﬁcation technique to classify tweets, like the “Bag-Of-Words” method, fail
to achieve good classiﬁcation rates due to the message shortness. Existing works
on classiﬁcation of short text integrate meta-information from external sources
like Wikipedia, World Knowledge and MEDLINE [3,11,17]. They tend to enrich
the content of the message.
The purpose of this paper is to classify social messages without any access
to their content. Our work is motivated by two facts; ﬁrst, it is not always
possible to have access to the content of the message but we may have access
to its propagation traces, in such a case, our approaches are useful. Another
motivation is that, text processing techniques, always, need a pre-processing
step in which it is necessary to remove URLs, stop words, questions, special
characters, etc. When working with tweets, for example, after the pre-processing
step, it falls, very often, on empty messages. Those empty messages can not be
classiﬁed by a text based classiﬁcation technique. Hence comes the necessity of
new classiﬁcation approaches that consider the propagation of the message.
Our work is driven by the motivations above, and it achieves the following
contributions: 1) we adapted the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) distance [16]
to be used to measure the distance between two propagation networks (PrNet for
short)5. 2) we proposed to incorporate the proposed distance in the probabilistic
k-NN and the evidential k-NN [8] to classify propagation networks of social
messages. Then 3) we tested the classiﬁers on real world propagation traces
collected from Twitter social network.
This paper is organized as follow: Section 2 discusses some related works. Sec-
tion 3 provides relevant background. Section 4 introduces the proposed PrNet-
DTW distance. And in Section 5 presents results from our experiments.
2
Related works
2.1
Content based approaches
Methods that are used for text classiﬁcation or clustering always have some
limitation with short text, in fact, in short text there is no suﬃcient word oc-
currences. Then, traditional methods are not suitable for the classiﬁcation of
the social message that is characterized by its shortness. For example, the use
of the traditional “Bag-Of-Words” method to classify tweets may fail to achieve
good classiﬁcation rates. This limitation has attracted the attention of many re-
searchers who developed several approaches. The authors in [25] classiﬁed tweets
to “News”, “Events”, “Opinions”, “Deals” and “Private Messages” using a set of
features among them author information and features extracted from the tweet.
In [3] and [11], the authors propose approaches for short text clustering that
use not only the content of the text but also an additional set of items that
is extracted from an external source of information like Wikipedia and World
5 We call propagation network the network that conserves propagation traces of the
message, i.e. traversed links and nodes

DTW distance for message propagation classiﬁcation in Twitter
3
Knowledge. Also, [17] classify short and sparse text using a large scale external
data collected from Wikipedia and MEDLINE.
Social messages are, also, classiﬁed for sentiment analysis and opinion mining
purposes [13]. The task here, is to identify the dominant opinion about a product
or a brand using text mining techniques. The author of [14] used 3516 tweets to
identify costumer’s sentiment about some well known brands. In [10], authors
used text published on Twitter and Facebook to analyze the opinion about three
chain of pizza. The reader can refer to [15] for a recent survey.
Our work is diﬀerent from all of the above in that we propose to classify the
social message without access to its content. In fact, we predict the class of the
message by interpreting its propagation traces through the social network. We
think that the proposed approaches will be useful in the case where there is no
access to the content of the message or when text based methods are unable to
classify the message due to its shortness.
2.2
Propagation based approaches
Now we move to present two methods that were used to classify propagation
networks and that were published in [12]. The ﬁrst method uses the probability
theory and the second one incorporates the theory of belief functions. As we said
above, existing classiﬁcation approaches that are used for text classiﬁcation and
characterization, always, have some limitation with short text. To overcome this
limitation, we propose to classify the propagation traces of the message instead
of its content. For an illustrative example, when you receive a letter from your
bank, it is likely to be about your bank account.
The PrNet classiﬁers work in two main steps, the ﬁrst step, is used to learn
the model parameters and the second step, uses the learned model to classify new
coming messages (propagation network of the message). Both methods have the
same principle in the two steps. In the parameter learning step, we need a set of
propagation networks, PrNetSet that is used to estimate a probability distribu-
tion deﬁned on types of links for each level6. In the belief PrNet classiﬁer, we use
the consonant transformation algorithm, also called inverse pignistic transforma-
tion, [1,2] that allows us to transform the probability distribution (output of the
probabilistic parameter learning step) to a BBA distribution while preserving
the least commitment principle [23]. Once model’s parameters are learned, we
can use it to classify a new message (propagation network of the message). The
reader can refer to [12] for more details.
These classiﬁers need a transit step through a compact structure that as-
signs a probability distribution to each propagation level. This step leads to a
loss of information that may be signiﬁcant in the classiﬁcation step. Another
drawback is that these methods do not work with continuous types of links and
a discretization step is always needed in such a case. We think that the proposed
PrNet-DTW classiﬁers will avoid these problems.
6 We call propagation level the number of links between the source of the message and
the target node.

4
S. Jendoubi et al.
3
Background
3.1
Theory of belief functions
The Upper and Lower probabilities [7] is the ﬁrst ancestor of the evidence theory,
also called Dempster-Shafer theory or theory of belief functions. Then [20] intro-
duced the mathematical theory of evidence and deﬁned the basic mathematical
framework of the evidence theory, often called Shafer model. The main goal of
the Dempster-Shafer theory is to achieve more precise, reliable and coherent
information.
Let Ω= {s1, s2, ..., sn} be the frame of discernment. The basic belief assign-
ment (BBA), mΩ, represents the agent belief on Ω. mΩ(A) is the mass value
assigned to A ⊆Ω, it must respect: P
A⊆ΩmΩ(A) = 1. In the case where we
have mΩ(A) > 0, A is called focal set of mΩ.
Combination rules are the main tools that can be used for information fusion.
In fact, in real world applications, we do not have the same kind of information to
be combined, that’s why the same combination rule may performs well in some
applications and may gives unsatisﬁable results with other applications. Among
these combination rules, we ﬁnd the Dempster’s rule [7], the conjunctive rule of
combination (CRC) [21,22] and the disjunctive rule of combination (DRC) [22].
3.2
k Nearest Neighbors
In this paper, we choose the k nearest neighbors classiﬁcation technique because
it is distance based. It will be used to classify propagation traces of social mes-
sages together with the proposed distance. In this section we present two k-NN
based approaches which are the probabilistic k-NN and the evidential k-NN.
Probabilistic k nearest neighbors (k-NN) is a well known supervised
method that is generally used for classiﬁcation. It needs as input a set of training
examples that we know their features values and their classes, and of course the
object to be classiﬁed. Besides we have to specify a measure of distance that will
be used to quantify the matching between the new object x and every object in
the training set. First, the k-NN starts by computing the distance between x and
every object in the training set, then, it selects the k nearest neighbors, i.e. that
have the shortest distance with x. Finally, the object x is classiﬁed according
to the majority vote principle, i.e. the algorithm chooses the class that has the
maximum occurrence count in the k nearest neighbors set to be the class of x.
The k-NN technique is surveyed in [5].
Evidential k Nearest Neighbors is an extension of the probabilistic k-
NN to the theory of belief functions [8]. The probabilistic k-NN uses distances
between the object x, to be classiﬁed, and objects in the training set to sort
the training example, then it chooses the k nearest neighbors to x. However,
according to [8], the distance value between x and its nearest neighbors may be
signiﬁcant. The evidential k-NN diﬀers from the probabilistic one in the decision
rule. Let Ω= {s1, s2, ..., sn} the set of all possible classes, be our frame of
discernment and dj be the distance between x and the jth nearest neighbor. The

DTW distance for message propagation classiﬁcation in Twitter
5
idea behind the evidential k-NN consists on representing each object of the k
neighbors by a BBA distribution deﬁned by:
m ({si}) = α
(1)
m (Ω) = 1 −α
(2)
m (A) = 0 ∀A ∈2C \ {Ci}
(3)
such that 0 < α < 1. If dj is big, α have to be small. Then it will be calculated
as follow:
α = α0Φi (dj)
(4)
Φi (dj) = e−γidβ
j
(5)
where γi > 0 and β ∈{1, 2, . . .}. After estimating a BBA distribution for each
nearest neighbor, the decision about the class of x is made according to the
following steps; ﬁrst we combine all BBA distributions using a combination rule.
Second, we apply the pignistic transformation, [24], in order to obtain a pignistic
probability distribution. And ﬁnally, we choose the class that have the biggest
pignistic probability. In the next section, we will introduce the dynamic time
warping distance and its extension to compute similarity between propagation
networks.
4
Proposed dynamic time warping distance for
propagation networks similarity
The propagation network is a graph based data structure that is used to store
propagation traces of a message. The PrNet has two main characteristics that
distinguish it from an ordinary DAG7; ﬁrst, its arcs are weighted by the type
of the relationship between users, and second, its paths are time dependent. In
this paper, we choose to use distance based classiﬁers; the probabilistic and the
evidential k-NN, then, we need to measure the distance between the PrNet to
be classiﬁed and the training set. In [12], we presented two PrNet classiﬁers that
are based on mathematical distances like the Euclidean distance and the Jaccard
distance. This solution need to transform the PrNet to a set of probability or
BBA distributions, then it computes the distance between those distributions
instead of PrNets. This transformation may lead to a loss of the information. A
second solution may be to use a graph distance metric to measure the similarity
between PrNets. In the literature, we found several distances like Graph edit
distances [9], and Maximal common sub-graph based distances [6]. However, all
these distances do not consider the time dimension which is a character of the
PrNet. Then comes the need of a new distance that is adapted to weighted time
dependent DAGs like the PrNet. As a solution to this problem we propose the
Dynamic Time Warping distance for propagation networks similarity (PrNet-
DTW).
7 Directed Acyclic Graph

6
S. Jendoubi et al.
The Dynamic Time Warping similarity measure [18] was ﬁrst proposed for
speech recognition, it consider the fact that the speech is time dependent. Re-
cently, [16] propose to use it to measure the similarity between two sequences,
i.e. a sequence is an ordered list of elements. DTW distance is used to consider
the order of appearance of each element in the sequences while computing the
distance between them. Let A = (a1, a2, . . . , aS) and B = (b1, b2, . . . , bT ) be
two sequences. DTW (Ai, Bj) is the DTW distance between A and B and it is
deﬁned as [16]:
DTW (Ai, Bj) = δ (ai, bj) + min





DTW (Ai−1, Bj−1)
DTW (Ai, Bj−1)
DTW (Ai−1, Bj)
(6)
Note that δ (ai, bj) is a the distance between the two elements ai ∈A and
bj ∈B. As mentioned in [16], the implementation of this recursive function leads
to exponential temporal complexity. They propose the memoization technique
as a solution to speed up the computation. Hence, we need a | S | × | T | matrix
in which we record previous results in order to avoid their computation in next
iterations. This computation technique maintain the time and space complexity
of the DTW distance to O (| S | × | T |).
The PrNet-DTW distance is used to measure the distance between two prop-
agation networks. In the ﬁrst step, we transform each PrNet to a set of dipaths.
We deﬁne a dipath as a ﬁnite sequence vertices connected with arcs that are
directed to the same direction (line 1 and 2 in algorithm 1). We note that all
dipaths starts from the source of the message. In the second step, the PrNet-
DTW algorithm loops on the DipathSet1, at each iteration, it ﬁxes a Dipath
and compute its DTW distance with all Dipaths in DipathSet2 and it takes the
minimal value. Finally, it computes the mean of minimal distances between Di-
paths in DipathSet1 and those in DipathSet2 to be the PrNet-DTW distance.
Details are shown in algorithm 1. We choose the k-NN algorithm and eviden-
tial k-NN algorithm to classify propagation networks because they are distance
based classiﬁers and they can be used with the proposed PrNet-DTW distance.
Algorithm 1: PrNet-DTW algorithm
input : PrNet1 and PrNet2: Two propagation networks
output: Distance: The distance between PrNet1 and PrNet2.
begin
1
DipathSet1 ←PrNet1.TransformToDipathSet()
2
DipathSet2 ←PrNet2.TransformToDipathSet()
3
for i = 1 to DipathSet1.size() do
4
D ←maxV alue
5
for j = 1 to DipathSet2.size() do
6
D ←min (D, DTW (DipathSet1.get(i), DipathSet2.get(j)))
7
Distance ←Distance + D
8
Distance ←Distance/DipathSet1.Size ();

DTW distance for message propagation classiﬁcation in Twitter
7
5
Experiments and results
We used the library Twitter4j8 which is a java implementation of the Twitter API
to collect Twitter data. We crawled the Twitter network for the period between
08/09/2014 and 03/11/2014. After a data cleaning step, we got our data set that
contains tweets of three diﬀerent classes: “Android”, “Galaxy” and “Windows”.
To simplify the tweet classiﬁcation step, we consider a tweet that contains the
name of a class C, for example a tweet that contains the word “Android”, of
type that class C, i.e. the class “Android” in our example. Table 1 presents some
statistics about the data set.
Table 1: Statistics of the data set
#User #Follow #Tweet #Retweet #Mention #Prop. links #PrNet
Android
6435
9059
81840
3606
6092
7623
224
Galaxy
4343
4482
8067
2873
5965
6819
161
Windows
5775
12466
11163
2632
3441
11400
219
The remainder of this section is organized as follow: we present our experi-
ments conﬁguration, the method with which we extracted propagation and the
computation process of link weights. Then, we compare the proposed classiﬁers
with those of [12].
5.1
Experiments conﬁguration
In our experiments, we need to extract propagation traces of each type of mes-
sage. Here, we consider that a tweet of type a was propagated from a user u to
a user v if and only if u posts a tweet of type a before v and at least one of these
relations between u and v exists: 1) v follows u, 2) u mentions v in a tweet of
type a, 3) v retweets a tweet of type a written by u. After getting propagation
traces we extract propagation networks such that each PrNet has to have one
source.
We deﬁne types of links that are used to measure the similarity between
propagation networks. In Twitter social network there are three possible relations
the ﬁrst one is explicit which is the follow relation, the second and the third
relations are implicit which are the mention and the retweet. Another property
of Twitter, is that between two users u and v we can have a follow, a mention
and/or a retweet relation. We assign to each of those a weight [4] and we assign
to each link a vector of weights that has the form (wf, wm, wr). Let Su be the
set of successor of u, Pu the set of predecessor of u, Tu the set of tweets of u,
Ru (v) the set of tweets of u that were retweeted by v, Mu (v) the set of tweets
of u in which v was mentioned and Mu the set of tweets in which u mentions
another user. We compute weights [4] as follow:
8 Twitter4j is a java library for the Twitter API, it is an open-sourced software and
free of charge and it was created by Yusuke Yamamoto. More details can be found
in http://twitter4j.org/en/index.html.

8
S. Jendoubi et al.
Fig. 1: k variation
– Follow relation: wf (u, v) = |Su∩(Pu∩{u})|
|Su|
– Mention relation: wm (u, v) = |Mu(v)|
|Mu|
– Retweet relation: wr (u, v) = |Ru(v)|
|Tu|
Finally, we choose the euclidean distance to evaluate the δ (ai, bj) in the compu-
tation process of the PrNet-DTW.
5.2
Experiments evaluation
In our experiments, we want to evaluate the performance of the PrNet-DTW
distance, then, we integrate it in the k-NN and the evidential k-NN classiﬁers
and we compare the proposed classiﬁers with those proposed in [12]. As PrNet
classiﬁers works with a discrete types of links [12], a discretization step was
needed, i.e. if the weight value (wf, wm or wr) is greater than 0 we replace it by
1 in the discrete weight vector elsewere we replace it by 0. For example, if the
link is weighted by the vector (wf = 0.5, wm = 0, wr = 0.25), the output after
the discretization step will be (1, 0, 1). In the remainder of our experiments, we
divide, randomly, our data set into two subsets; the ﬁrst one contains 90% of
PrNets and it is used for training and the second one (10%) is used for testing.
The algorithm k-NN is known to be dependent to k value, and varying k
may vary the classiﬁcation accuracy. Then, to see the impact of the parameter
k, we made this experiment; we run our k-NN based algorithms with multiple
k values and we obtained results in Figure 1. We note that odd values are more
appropriate to k when we use PrNet-DTW Probabilistic k-NN. Moreover, the
PrNet-DTW belief k-NN has not the same behavior as the PN-DTW Probabilis-
tic k-NN. In fact, the curve of the evidential classiﬁer is more stable than the
curve of the probabilistic one and the variation of the value of k does not have
a great eﬀect on the classiﬁcation accuracy.
A second experiment was done to evaluate and compare the proposed clas-
siﬁcation methods. We ﬁxed the parameter k to 5 and we obtained results in
table 2. As shown in table 2, the probabilistic and the belief classiﬁers do not
give good classiﬁcation accuracy, this behavior is a consequence of the discretiza-
tion step that leads to the loss of the information given by weights values. In
contrast, the PrNet-DTW based classiﬁers show their performance, indeed, we
have got good accuracy rates: 88.69% (±3.39, for a 95% conﬁdence interval) and

DTW distance for message propagation classiﬁcation in Twitter
9
Table 2: Comparison between PrNet classiﬁers
Proba
classiﬁer
Belief
classiﬁer
PrNet-DTW
k-NN
PrNet-DTW
Belief k-NN
Accuracy
51.97% ±2.04
52.25% ±1.99
88.69% ±3.39 89.92% ±3.20
89.92% (±3.20) respectively. We see also that the PrNet-DTW belief classiﬁer
gives slightly better results.
6
Conclusion
To sum up, we presented a new distance metric that we called PrNet-DTW. Our
measure is used to quantify the distance between propagation networks. Also,
we showed the performance of our measure in the process of classiﬁcation of
propagation networks, indeed, we deﬁned two classiﬁcation approaches that uses
the PrNet-DTW measure which are the probabilistic k-NN and the evidential
k-NN.
For future works, we will search to improve the PrNet-DTW based classiﬁers
by taking into account the content of the message to be classiﬁed, in fact, we
believe that a classiﬁcation approach that uses information about the content
of the message and information about its propagation will further improve the
results.
7
Acknowledgement
These research works and innovation are carried out within the framework of the
device MOBIDOC ﬁnanced by the European Union under the PASRI program
and administrated by the ANPR. Also, we thank the "Centre d’Etude et de
Recherche des Télécommunications" (CERT) for their support.
