Detecting  Motifs  in System  Call Sequences 
 
 
William O. Wilson, Jan Feyereisl and Uwe Aickelin 
 
School of Computer Science, The  University of Nottingham, UK 

 
 
 
Abstract. The  search  for patterns or motifs  in data represents an area 
of key interest to many  researchers. In this paper  we present the Motif 
Tracking Algorithm, a novel immune  inspired  pattern identification tool 
that is able  to identify unknown motifs  which  repeat within time series 
data. The power of the algorithm is derived from its use of a small number 
of parameters  with  minimal  assumptions.  The  algorithm  searches  from 
a completely neutral perspective that is independent of the data being 
analysed and  the underlying motifs.  In  this  paper   the motif  tracking 
algorithm is applied  to the search  for patterns within sequences  of low 
level system  calls between  the Linux  kernel  and  the operating system’s 
user  space.  The  MTA  is able  to compress  data found  in  large  system 
call data sets to a limited number of motifs  which summarise that data. 
The  motifs provide  a resource  from which a profile of executed processes 
can  be built. The  potential for these profiles  and  new  implications for 
security research are highlighted. A higher  level system call language  for 
measuring similarity between patterns of such calls is also suggested. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
The investigation and analysis  of time series data is a popular  and well studied 
area  of research.  Common  goals  of time series  analysis  include  the desire  to 
identify known patterns in a time series, to predict  future  trends given historical 
information and  the ability to classify data into similar  clusters. Historically, 
statistical techniques have been applied  to this problem  domain  whilst Immune 
System  (IS)  inspired  techniques  have  remained  fairly limited  [1]. In this  paper 
we describe  the Motif  Tracking   Algorithm  (MTA),   a  deterministic  but  non- 
exhaustive  approach to identifying  repeating  patterns in time  series data. The 
MTA  abstracts principles  from  the human  immune  system, in  particular the 
immune  memory  theory of Eric Bell [2]. Implementing principles  from immune 
memory  to be used as part of a solution  mechanism  is of great interest to the 
immune  system community and  here  we are  able  to take advantage of such  a 
system. The MTA implements the Bell immune  memory theory by proliferating 
and mutating a population of solution candidates using a derivative of the clonal 
selection algorithm [3]. 
A subsequence of a time series that is seen to repeat within that time series is 
defined as a motif. The objective  of the MTA is to find those motifs. The power 
of the MTA comes from the fact that it has no prior knowledge of the time series 

 
 
 
 
to be examined  or what motifs exist. It searches  in a fast and  efficient manner 
and  the flexibility incorporated in its generic  approach allows the MTA  to be 
applied  across a diverse range of problems.  The MTA has already  been applied 
to motif detection in industrial data sets [2]. Here we test its generic properties 
by applying  it to motif identification in system call data sets. 
Considerable  research has already  been performed  on identifying known pat- 
terns in time series [4]. In contrast little research  has been performed  on looking 
for unknown  motifs in time series. A distinguishing feature of the MTA  is its 
ability  to identify  variable  length  unknown  patterns that repeat  in a time  se- 
ries. This focus on the detection of unknown  patterns makes it an ideal tool for 
investigating underlying  patterns in low level system data generated from the 
execution  of processes on a computer  system. The nature of program  execution, 
with the re-use of functions  and methods,  along with standardised programming 
structures, implies  a set  of motifs do exist within each  running  process.  Each 
process on a system is executed  by issuing sequences of system calls which are 
translated by the kernel into data understandable by the underlying  hardware. 
All processes rely on such system calls making them of high interest to the secu- 
rity community. By looking at the sequences of such system calls, we can observe 
repeating  motifs,  which will be identifiable  and  explainable  in terms  of higher 
level functions.  The  MTA  provides  an  ideal  mechanism  to compress  the data 
found in these large system call data sets to a limited number  of motifs which 
effectively summarise  that data. The motifs could then provide  a resource from 
which we can build a profile of executed  processes. These profiles could be used 
to identify sequences that indicate potentially anomalous  process behaviour. 
Related work  on  motif detection is discussed  in  Section  2 with details  of 
system calls found in Section 3. Terms and definitions used are covered in Section 
4 followed by the MTA pseudo code and the problem to be addressed  in Sections 
5 and 6. Results and future  work are found in Sections 7 and 8 before concluding 
in Section 9. 
 
 
2 Related Work 
 
The search for patterns in data is relevant to a diverse range of fields, including 
biology, business, finance and computer  security. For example, Guan [5] addresses 
DNA pattern matching using lookup table techniques that exhaustively search 
the data set  to find recurring  patterns. Investigations using  a piecewise linear 
segmentation  scheme  [6] and  discrete  Fourier  transforms  [7] provide  examples 
of mechanisms  to search  a  time series  for  a  particular motif of interest. An 
underlying  assumption in all these common approaches is that the pattern to be 
found is known in advance.  The matching task is much simpler as the algorithm 
just has to find re-occurrences  of the required  pattern. 
The search for unknown motifs is at the heart of the work conducted by Keogh 
et al. Keoghs probabilistic [8] and  Viztree  algorithms [9] are very successful in 
identifying  unknown  motifs  but  they  require  additional  parameters compared 
to the MTA  and  they  also assume  prior  knowledge  of the length  of the motif 

 
 
 
 
to be found.  Motifs  longer and  potentially  shorter  than this  predefined  length 
may  remain  undetected in full. Work  by Tanaka [10] attempts to address  this 
issue by  using  minimum  description length  to discover  the optimal  length  for 
the motif. Fu et al. [11] use self-organising maps to identify unknown patterns in 
stock market  data, by representing patterns as perceptually important points. 
This provides an effective solution but  again the patterns found are limited to a 
predetermined length. 
This prior awareness of the patterns to find, or their lengths, is not appropri- 
ate for intrusion detection systems as by their very nature intrusion techniques 
are constantly changing  to avoid detection. This represents an ideal application 
for the MTA as it makes no such pre-assumptions and aims to find all unknown 
motifs of variable  length from the data set.  Security researchers  have  been in- 
vestigating  system  calls  for  a  number  of years.  System  calls  represent  a  low 
level communication mechanism  between  processes and the systems’ underlying 
hardware, providing  a high  enough  level of abstraction for intelligent process 
behaviour  analysis  and  modelling.  The  use of system  calls for anomaly  detec- 
tion was first introduced by Forrest et al. [12]. Their  IS inspired  work looks at 
sequences  of system  calls using  a sliding window mechanism.  System  calls are 
used to generate a database of normal  behaviour,  i.e. self, which is consequently 
used to capture anomalous  behaviour,  non-self. 
Forrest’s work instigated a new stream of intrusion detection research,  with 
some researchers  taking the idea of generating a database of normal  behaviour 
and extending it further [13]. Novel approaches to solving related issues by vary- 
ing the methods  and types of signals used to generate a set of normal  behaviour 
were also proposed  [14]. Tandon  et  al. have  looked at system  call motifs  as a 
source for their  normal  behaviour  profile generation,  however  this  differs from 
our approach because it uses an exhaustive search mechanism  [15]. 
 
 
3 Intrusion  Detection and System  Calls 
 
System calls are lower level functions/methods, which act  as a communication 
channel between higher level processes (e.g. executable  commands)  and the lower 
level kernel of an operating system (OS). The system calls perform system actions 
on behalf of a user. Each system call performs a slightly different atomic task, yet 
in combination they achieve much more complex functionality. Examples of some 
of the simplest system calls are the file I/O calls, such as open(),  read(), write() 
and  close().  An  application or  a  process  can  produce  on  average  between  a 
dozen and thousands of system calls per execution,  depending  on the complexity 
of the task.  As such  system  calls are  ideal  data signals  from a security  point 
of view, they provide  a  detailed  view of a  system or process  operation while 
avoiding complex issues such as encryption or other possible higher level evasion 
mechanisms. 
The  focus of the MTA  is to look for variable  length unknown  motifs in the 
data. This  fits nicely with  system  calls as we are interested  in seeing if motifs 
exist  in  system  call  execution  sequences.  Our  inspiration  originates  from  the 

 
 
 
 
way that programs  are written, compiled and  executed.  An application usually 
consists  of various  classes, objects,  methods  or functions,  along  with  variables 
and constants. All these structures are high level constructs, that are processed 
by lower level libraries which execute appropriate system calls accordingly. These 
atomic functions,  which are deterministic as they do not depend on any variable 
input,  are likely to form the building  blocks of our motifs of interest, no matter 
what application calls them. The combination of such motifs could then provide 
a  resource  to generate a  profile  for  a  process  that distinguishes a  permitted 
execution  from a malicious one. 
The  MTA  provides  a mechanism  for compressing  and  summarising  all this 
system  call data into  a number  of repeating  motifs  that are  prevalent  in the 
data. The  MTA  would  highlight consistent patterns in the data that are  un- 
derstandable and  of value to the user, to aid in the generation of these process 
profiles. The ability of the MTA to find variable  length motifs, with no assump- 
tions about  the data or the motifs to find, ensures it is flexible enough to carry 
out such a task. 
 
 
4 Motif Detection:  Terms and Definitions 
 
Whilst  immunology  provides  the inspiration  for the theory  behind  the MTA 
(see [2] for more information), the work of Keogh et al. [8] is the inspiration for 
the time series representation used  by the MTA.  Keogh’s Symbolic  Aggregate 
approXimation (SAX) technique for representing a time series was utilised. Many 
of the following definitions used by the MTA are adapted from the work of Keogh 
[8], as summarised  below. 
Definition 1. Time  series.  A time series T = t1 ,...,tm is a time ordered  set 
of m real or integer valued variables.  In order to identify patterns in T  in a fast 
and efficient manner  we break  T  up into subsequences. 
Definition 2.  Subsequence.  “Given  a time series T  of length m, a subse- 
quence C  of T  consists of a sampling  of length n ≤ m of contiguous positions 
from T.”  [8]. Subsequences  are extracted using a sliding window technique. 
Definition 3.  Sliding  window. Given  a  time series  T  of length m,  and  a 
subsequence  C  of length n, a symbol matrix S of all possible subsequences  can 
be built by sliding a window of size n across T, one point at a time, placing each 
subsequence  into  S. After  all sliding windows are assessed S  will contain  (m - 
n + 1 ) subsequences.  Each  subsequence  generated  could represent  a potential 
match to any of the other subsequences within S. If two subsequences match, we 
have found a pattern in the time series that is repeated. This pattern is defined 
as a motif. 
Definition 4. Motif. A subsequence  from T  that is seen to repeat at least 
once throughout T  is defined as a motif. The  re-occurrence  of the subsequence 
need not be exact for it to be considered as a motif. The relationship between two 
subsequences  C1  and C2  is assessed using a match threshold r. We use the most 
common distance measure  (Euclidean distance) to examine  the match between 
two subsequences  C1  and C2 , ED(C1 , C2 ). If ED(C1 , C2 ) ≤ r the subsequences 

 
 
 
 
C1   and  C2   are  deemed  to match and  thus are  saved  as  a  motif. The  motifs 
prevalent in a time series are detected by the MTA  through the evolution  of a 
population of trackers. 
Definition 5. Tracker. A tracker represents a signature for a motif sequence 
that is seen to repeat.  It has  within  it  a sequence  of 1 to w symbols  that are 
used  to represent a  dimensionally   reduced  equivalent  of a  subsequence.  The 
subsequences generated from the time series are converted into a discrete symbol 
string using an intuitive technique described  in Section 5. The trackers are then 
used  as a tool to identify which  of these symbol  strings represent a recurring 
motif. The  trackers also include  a match count variable  to indicate the level of 
stimulation received during  the matching process. 
 
 
5 The Motif Tracking Algorithm 
 
 
The MTA pseudo code is detailed  in Program 1 and a brief summary  of this algo- 
rithm as applied  to system call analysis  is described  in the subsequent sections. 
The  MTA  parameters include  the length of a symbol s, the match threshold r, 
and the alphabet size a. 
 
Convert Time Series T to Symbolic Representation. The MTA takes 
as input  a univariate  time  series data set consisting  of system  call data which 
has been converted to a list of integers as described  in Section  6. To minimise 
amplitude  scaling issues with  subsequence  comparisons  across T  we normalise 
the time series. We then use the SAX representation [8] to discretise  the time 
series under  consideration. SAX is a powerful compression  tool that uses a dis- 
crete,  finite symbol  set  to generate a dimensionally  reduced  version  of a time 
series consisting of symbol strings. This intuitive representation has been shown 
to rival  more sophisticated reduction  methods  such as Fourier  transforms and 
wavelets  [8]. 
 
 
Program 1 . MTA Pseudo  Code 
 
Initiate  MTA   (s,  r, a) 
Convert  Time  series  T to  symbolic  representation 
Generate  Symbol  Matrix  S 
Initialise  Tracker  population  to  size  a 
While  ( Tracker  population  > 0  ) 
{ 
Generate  motif  candidate  matrix  M   from  S 
Match  trackers  to  motif  candidates 
Eliminate  unmatched  trackers 
Examine  T to  confirm  genuine  motif  status 
Eliminate  unsuccessful  trackers 
Store  motifs  found 
Proliferate  matched  trackers 
Mutate  matched  trackers 
} 
Memory  motif  streamlining 

 
 
 
 
Using SAX we slide a window of size s across the time series T  one point at 
a time.  Each  sliding window represents  a subsequence  of system  calls from T. 
The MTA calculates the average of the values from the sliding window and uses 
that average  to represent the subsequence. 
The MTA now converts this average value into a symbol string. The user pre- 
defines the size a  of the alphabet used to represent the time series T. Given T 
has been normalised  we can identify the breakpoints for the alphabet characters 
that generate a equal sized areas under the Gaussian  curve [8]. The average value 
calculated for the sliding window is then examined  against the breakpoints and 
converted into the appropriate symbol.  This  process is repeated for all sliding 
windows across T  to generate m-s+1 subsequences,  each consisting of symbol 
strings comprising  one character. 
 
Generate Symbol Matrix S . The  string  of symbols  representing  a sub- 
sequence is defined as a word. Each  word generated from the sliding window is 
entered into the symbol matrix S. The  MTA  examines  the time series T  using 
these words  and  not the original  data points to speed  up  the search  process. 
Symbol string comparisons  can be performed  efficiently to filter out  bad  motif 
candidates, ensuring  the computationally expensive Euclidean  distance calcula- 
tion is only performed  on those motif candidates that are potentially genuine. 
Having generated the symbol matrix S, the novelty of the MTA comes from 
the way in which each generation a selection of words from S, corresponding  to 
the length of the motif under consideration, are extracted in an intuitive manner 
as a reduced  set and presented to the tracker population for matching. 
 
Initialise Tracker Population to Size  a . The  trackers  are the primary 
tool  used  to identify  motif  candidates  in the time  series.  A tracker  comprises 
a sequence of 1 to w symbols.  The  symbol string contained within the tracker 
represents a sequence of symbols that are seen to repeat throughout T. Tracker 
initialisation and evolution is tightly regulated to avoid proliferation of ineffective 
motif candidates. The initial tracker population is constructed of size a to contain 
one of each of the viable alphabet symbols predefined  by the user. Each tracker 
is unique,  to avoid  unnecessary  duplication of solution  candidates and  wasted 
search time. 
Trackers  are created of a length of one symbol. The trackers are matched to 
motif candidates via the words presented from the stage matrix S. Trackers  that 
match a word are stimulated; trackers that attain a stimulation level ≥ 2 indicate 
repeated words from T  and  become candidates for proliferation. Given a motif 
and  a tracker that matches part of that motif, proliferation enables the tracker 
to extend its length by one symbol each generation until its length matches that 
of the motif. 
 
Generate Motif Candidate Matrix M   from S . The  symbol  matrix  S 
contains  a time  ordered  list  of all the words,  each containing  just one symbol, 
that are present in the time series. Neighbouring  words in S contain significant 

 
 
 
 
overlap as they were extracted via the sliding windows. Presenting all words in S 
to the tracker population would result in potentially inappropriate motifs being 
identified between neighbouring  words. To prevent this issue such ‘trivial’ match 
candidates are  removed  from the symbol  matrix S. Trivial  match elimination 
(TME)  is achieved  as a word is only transferred from S for presentation to the 
tracker population if it differs from the previous word extracted. This allows the 
MTA to focus on significant variations in the time series and prevents excessive 
time being wasted on the search across uninteresting variations. 
Excessively aggressive trivial match elimination is prevented by limiting the 
maximum  number  of consecutive  trivial match eliminations to s, the number  of 
data points encompassed by a symbol. In this way a subsequence can eliminate as 
trivial all subsequences  generated from sliding windows that start in locations 
contained  within  that subsequence  (if they  generate  the same  symbol  string) 
but  no others. The  reduced  set  of words selected  from S  is transferred to the 
motif candidate matrix M and presented to the tracker population for matching. 
 
Match Trackers to Motif Candidates. During  an iteration each tracker 
is taken in turn and compared  to the set of words in M. Matching is performed 
using a simple string comparison  between  the tracker and  the word. We define 
a match to occur if the comparison  function  returns a value  of 0, indicating a 
perfect  match between  the symbol strings. Each  matching tracker is stimulated 
by incrementing its match counter by 1. 
 
Eliminate Unmatched Trackers. Trackers  that have  a match count >1 
indicate symbols that are seen to repeat throughout T  and are viable motif can- 
didates. Eliminating all trackers with a match count < 2 ensures the MTA only 
searches for motifs from amongst these viable candidates. Knowledge of possible 
motif candidates from T  is therefore carried  forward by the tracker population. 
After elimination the match count of the surviving  trackers is reset to 0. 
 
Examine T to Confirm Genuine Motif Status. The  surviving  tracker 
population indicates which words in M represent viable motif candidates. How- 
ever motif candidates with identical words may not represent a true match when 
looking at the time series data underlying  the subsequences  comprising  those 
words.  In order  to confirm whether  two  matching  words X  and  Y, containing 
the same symbol strings, correspond  to a genuine motif we need to apply  a dis- 
tance measure  to the original time series data associated with those candidates. 
The MTA uses the Euclidean  distance to measure  the relationship between  two 
motif candidates ED(X,Y). 
If ED(X,Y) ≤ r a motif has been found. The match count of that tracker is 
stimulated to indicate a match. A memory  motif is created to store the symbol 
string associated with X and Y. The start locations of X and Y  are also saved. 
For further information on the derivation of this matching threshold please refer 
to [2]. The  MTA  then continues its search  for motifs, focusing  only  on those 
words in M  that match the surviving  tracker population in an attempt to find 

 
 
 
 
all occurrences  of the potential motifs. The  trackers therefore act  as a pruning 
mechanism,  reducing the potential search space to ensure the MTA only focuses 
on viable candidates. 
 
Eliminate Unsuccessful Trackers. The  MTA  now removes  any  unstim- 
ulated trackers from  the tracker population. These  trackers represent symbol 
strings that were seen to repeat but  upon further investigation with the under- 
lying data were not proven  to be valid motifs in T. 
 
Store Motifs Found. The  motifs  identified  during  the confirmation  stage 
are stored in the memory pool for review. Comparisons  are made to remove any 
duplication. The final memory pool represents the compressed  representation of 
the time series, containing all the re-occurring  patterns present. 
 
Proliferate Matched Trackers. Proliferation and mutation are needed to 
extend the length of the tracker so it can capture more of the complete motif. At 
the end of the first generation the surviving  trackers, each consisting of a word 
containing a single symbol, represent all the symbols that are applicable  to the 
motifs in T. The complete  motifs in T  can only consist of combination of these 
symbols. This subset  of trackers is therefore stored as the mutation template for 
use by the MTA. 
Proliferation  and  mutation  to lengthen  the trackers  will only involve  sym- 
bols from the mutation template and not the full symbol alphabet, as any other 
mutations would lead to unsuccessful motif candidates. During proliferation the 
MTA takes each surviving tracker in turn and generates a number  of clones equal 
to the size of the mutation template. The  clones adopt  the same symbol string 
as their parent. 
 
Mutate Matched Trackers. The  clones generated from each  parent are 
taken in turn and  extended by adding  a symbol  taken consecutively  from the 
mutation template. This creates a tracker population with maximal  coverage of 
all potential  motif  solutions  and  no duplication.  The  tracker  pool is fed back 
into the MTA  ready  for the next generation. A new motif candidate matrix M 
consisting of words with two symbols is now formulated to present to the evolved 
tracker population. In this way the MTA builds up the representation of a motif 
one symbol at a time each generation to eventually map to the full motif. 
Given the symbol length s we generate a word consisting of two consecutive 
symbols by taking the symbol from matrix S at position i and  that from posi- 
tion i+s. Repeating this across S, and applying  trivial match elimination as per 
Section 5, the MTA obtains  a new motif candidate matrix M in generation two, 
each entry of which contains a word of two symbols, covering a length of 2 x s. 
The MTA continues to prepare  and present new motif candidate matrix data 
to the evolving  tracker population each  generation. The  motif candidates are 
built up  one symbol  at a time and  matched to the lengthening trackers. This 
flexible approach enables  the MTA  to identify  unknown  motifs  of a  variable 

 
 
 
 
length. This process continues until all trackers are eliminated as non matching 
and  the tracker population is empty.  Any further extension to the tracker pop- 
ulation will not improve  their fit to any of the underlying  motifs in T. 
 
Memory Motif Streamlining. The  MTA  streamlines the memory  pool, 
removing  duplicates  and  those  encapsulated  within  other  motifs  to produce  a 
list of motifs that it associates with T. 
 
 
6 Detection of System  Call Patterns 
 
This paper demonstrates that an execution of a process shall produce a sequence 
of system calls containing a number  of motifs of variable  lengths and these shall 
be identifiable by the MTA. Such motifs should re-occur when the same or similar 
processes  are  run.  The  motifs in system call sequences  can  be used  in various 
security applications, for example as a data reduction  tool for behaviour  profiling 
within an Intrusion Detection  System (IDS). 
In our experiments we have two machines connected  by a local network.  The 
client  machine  (Windows  XP  machine  running  an  SSH client  PuTTY version 
0.57) connects  to the server  machine  (Debian  Linux)  which then performs  ac- 
tions based  on commands  sent by the client. Our  experiments use a VMware 
virtual machine,  running  a Debian  Linux distribution, v.3.3.5-13, with a Linux 
kernel, v.2.4.27-2, as our SSH server. The SSH daemon process (OpenSSH 3.8.1p1 
Debian-8.sarge.6) is monitored along  with all its children,  using  the standard 
strace  utility. All system calls generated by the SSH daemon  and  its child pro- 
cesses are logged and stored in separate files based on their process ID (PID). 
The  following sequence of actions  is executed  to generate our data set. The 
client connects  to the server  and  an  SSH session is established. The  following 
commands,  chosen at random,  are then issued by the client: ls, ls, ls -lsa, pwd, 
ls, ps, ps aux, ls -lsa,  chmod a+x  file, chmod a+x  directory, ls -lsa,  chmod a-x 
file. The client then disconnects  from the SSH server. 
The  PID  files generated are  concatenated to produce  one file. During  con- 
catenation the PID  file from the child  with the smallest PID  is added  to the 
parent data, this is then repeated for each remaining  child process. Concatena- 
tion results in a single data set containing system call names with their respective 
arguments. The  data is further pre-processed  by converting the individual  sys- 
tem call names  to their appropriate Linux  OS id numbers  and  removing  their 
arguments. This generates a one dimensional  data set comprising  a sequence of 
8,040 system call numbers. 
From the data set generated it can be observed that a small sequence of sys- 
tem calls relating to one particular monitored child process is repeated across a 
large proportion of the data. This process looks after the SSH terminal operation 
for the duration of the whole SSH session. Repeated read() and write()  calls and 
various  real time system call actions  are performed  over and over again.  Due to 
the basic nature of this repeating sequence,  it is not deemed  of interest to our 
analysis. Instead we focus on the last 1,000 system calls from the data set, to in- 

 
 
 
 
vestigate motifs that occur during  the last seven commands  issued by the client. 
The data set generated is available at http://cs.nott.ac.uk/∼jqf/MTA scdata.dat. 
 
 
7 Results 
 
Having  introduced the MTA  we now provide  some experimental results which 
examine  the ability  of the MTA  to identify  motifs  present in system call data. 
As defined  in  Section  6 the data set  examined  consists of 1,000 system calls 
represented  by  an  ordered  list  of 1,000 integers.  A bind  threshold  r  = 0  was 
set since system call sequences need to match identically. Symbol length s and 
alphabet size a  values were varied  to investigate the sensitivity of the MTA  to 
these parameters. The  MTA  was written in C++ and  run  on a Windows  XP 
machine  with a Pentium M 1.7 Ghz processor with 1.0 Gb of RAM. 
 
 
7.1 System Call Motifs Identified by the MTA 
 
In this scenario a = 10 to give a large alphabet diversity and s took the values 
10, 20 and  40. To  evaluate  the impact  on speed  and  accuracy  the MTA  was 
run with trivial match elimination (TME)  and with no trivial match elimination 
(NTME). We focus on significant  motifs  whose length  exceeds 40 system  calls 
to enable fair comparison  across different values of s. With s = 10 and  NTME 
eight motifs are identified. Table  1 lists these motifs with the number  of system 
calls they encompass  and the start locations where they occur in the data set. 
Motif  1 dominates  the data set,  it  consists  of 280 system  calls and  occurs 
twice in the data set from locations 386 and  717. Figure  1 presents the list of 
system calls from location 350 to 1,000 and  motif 1 is clearly  evident in this 
sequence.  From  the commands  issued  during  the SSH session (Section  6),  we 
observe the existence of motifs within the command  list itself as there are repe- 
titions of the ls and chmod commands.  From  the MTA’s analysis  of the system 
call data set, motif 1 relates to the repetition of these two observed  commands. 
The  ls  commands  contain  the same  arguments  (-lsa ) across  both  repetitions, 
whilst the chmod command  includes execute permissions for all users to a file in 
 
 
Table 1. List of motifs  found  by the MTA 
 
Motif No. Length Start Locations
1
280
386, 717
2
80
0, 227
3
70
8, 160, 235
4
50
198, 262
5
50
668, 950
6
40
39, 191, 266, 324
7
40
619, 668, 950
8
40
77, 120

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Illustration of system calls 350 to 1,000, highlighting the occurrence of Motif 1 
from system call 386 to 665 and  717 to 996 
 
 
 
the first occurrence  and  removes those same privileges from the file during  the 
second occurrence.  Motif  1 represents  two  processes occurring  in succession at 
two different time points within the overall  SSH session. Motif 1 also contains 
other sub-motifs such as motif 7. Motif 7 occurs at three different positions as 
seen from Table 1. This motif represents the chmod command  that was executed 
three times during  the session, each time with different arguments. The  motifs 
found by the MTA are a super-set  of those evident in the original command  list, 
validating the accuracy  of the MTA. The existence of motif 7 shows that appli- 
cations with varying  arguments (i.e. performing  different actions),  have atomic 
motifs that could be used for data reduction  in a security application. 
Motif 2 is the second largest motif, which has two repetitions in the data set. 
It relates to the execution  of the ps command.  This command  occurred  twice in 
succession, with different arguments, spawning a new process each time. Motif 2 
represents 80 system calls that are identical across these two spawned processes. 
Motifs 3, 4 and 8 partly overlap with motif 2 indicating a subset  of system calls 
from motif 2 that is consistent across all these motifs. However this subset occurs 
with a higher  frequency  than motif 2, representing similarities between  atomic 
parts of the ps processes not fully captured by the motif 2. This highlights parts 
of the process execution  that are more dynamic  and input  dependent and which 
need to be dealt with when considering  an IDS. 
Motif 6 again  relates to a component of the ps command.  At a lower level, 
the ps command  reads a number  of small files from the /proc/ directory  of the 
Linux  OS and  prints the read  information onto the screen.  This  information 
shows the running  processes  on the system  to the user.  From  this  a recurring 
sub-pattern of open(),  read() and close()  system calls with various arguments is 
observed. This sub-pattern is largely dependant on the input  of the ps command. 
In  this case  it is the number  of running  processes  on  the monitored system, 
which in turn is the number  of files in the aforementioned /proc/ directory. The 

 
 
 
 
motifs generated by the MTA are formed by such atomic system call sequences. 
The  randomness  in the input,  which results  in motifs  of variable  lengths  is of 
major importance when considering IDS systems. For this purpose a system call 
expression  language  is proposed  which, besides giving the MTA  an alternative 
representation to assess system call similarity, gives security researchers  a regular 
expression type language for describing system call motifs at a higher level. This 
language  is described  in more detail  in Section 8. 
In the above  analysis  we have  focused on significant motifs with sequences 
exceeding 40 system calls. The advantage of using the MTA on system call data 
and not the command  list becomes apparent when we look at the shorter motifs 
that are generated, as these indicate atomic motifs that are found across varying 
command instructions. One such motif, referred to as Z, has a length of 30 system 
calls and  occurred  five times at positions 387, 620, 669, 718 and  951. Motif Z 
relates to the re-occurrence  of a sequence that occurs during  the initialisation of 
newly spawned  processes executed  across the commands  ls -lsa, chmod a+x file, 
chmod a+x directory, ls -lsa and chmod a-x file respectively.  Each C application 
under  Linux,  when  it starts, calls and  loads  the standard C library,  libc. The 
occurrences of motif Z corresponds  to the loading of this library.  Thus the MTA 
has found a motif that is present but embedded  across differing commands.  This 
approach of using  system calls as input  to the MTA,  and  not the commands, 
would aid in the detection of exploits  that are far smaller  than the commands 
themselves. An example  of such an exploit is the SQL slammer  worm which is 
only 376 bytes  long, compared  to the text segment  of the chmod  command  of 
29,212 bytes. 
 
 
7.2 Sensitivity  to Changes in the Symbol Length s 
 
In total 961 of the 1,000 system calls are identified as being part of one or more of 
these eight motifs. From  these results it is clear the MTA is able to successfully 
identify a reduced  set of motifs from the large system call data set. By varying 
the value  of s  and  the use  of trivial match elimination we can  examine  the 
sensitivity of the MTA  and  assess its ability to retain  knowledge of these eight 
motifs. The results of this sensitivity analysis  can be seen in Table  2. 
Table  2 shows the total number  of motifs  found  and  the execution  time  of 
the MTA  for the various  values  of s. In  addition  a measure  of the quality  of 
the motifs  found  is included  by  multiplying  the identified  length  of the motif 
 
 
Table 2. Sensitivity of the MTA  to variations in the symbol  length  s 
 
Motifs  found Execution time (sec) Motif quality measure
s NTME TME NTME
TME
NTME
TME
10 
8 
6
315.8
262.0
1,490
1,230
20 
5 
4
56.9
26.5
1,140
940
40 
4 
3
12.1
1.9
960
720

 
 
 
 
by the identified frequency and summing  for all motifs found. Any omissions in 
the length or frequency of the complete motif will cause a decline in this quality 
measure. 
As the symbol length s increases, the number of motifs detected declines. This 
appears  logical as a higher s implies the search is less fine grained.  Introducing 
TME also reduces the number of motifs found. TME significantly reduces the size 
of the motif candidate matrix M  resulting in fewer candidates being examined. 
TME  is key to the dimensionality  reduction  of the original  data set leading  to 
a fast search  process, however it would appear  that its inclusion does lead to a 
loss in detection accuracy. 
Given NTME,  the MTA  is only able to identify four of the eight motifs (1, 
2, 6 and  7) if s rises from 10 to 40. The  quality measure  also indicates that, of 
the motifs  found,  there  appears  to be a loss in the detection of the full length 
or frequency  of occurrence.  The quality measure  falls from 1,490 to 960. Of the 
four motifs still detected we lose 40 system calls from motif 1 and we only detect 
two of the three repetitions of motif 7. However raising the symbol length from 
10 to 40 results  in a 96.2% reduction  in the MTA  execution  time,  taking  only 
12.1 seconds compared  to 315.8. 
 
 
7.3 Sensitivity  to Changes in the Alphabet  Size  a 
 
Adjusting the alphabet size alters the symbol  set  used  to represent the time 
series. Reducing  a  means  a greater diversity of sequences are now grouped  to- 
gether  as  similar.  TME  with a  reduced  alphabet set  should  lead  to a  larger 
number  of trivial match eliminations, leading to a faster but  potentially less ac- 
curate search.  This hypothesis is confirmed when we look at Table  3 which lists 
the motifs found for various alphabet sizes. In this scenario s = 20, r  = 0 and a 
took the values 10, 8, 6, and 4. 
Table 3 shows the alphabet size has no impact  on the detection ability of the 
MTA if there is NTME.  The five motifs detected when s = 20, a = 10 (Table  2) 
are always found and  have the same quality measurement. However the search 
time of the MTA with NTME  improves  by 30.1% as a is reduced  from 10 to 4. 
With TME  activated, changes  to a  have  a more  significant impact  on the 
motifs detected. Reducing a from 10 to 8 causes the MTA to lose track of motif 8 
but it now finds motif 2. As motif 2 is longer than motif 8 we get an improvement 
 
 
Table 3. Sensitivity of the MTA  to variations in the alphabet size a 
 
Motifs  found Execution time (sec) Motif quality measure
a NTME TME NTME
TME
NTME
TME
10 
5 
4
56.9
26.5
1,140
940
8 
5 
5
48.0
19.8
1,140
1,140
6 
5 
3
43.3
16.1
1,140
860
4 
5 
5
39.8
6.3
1,140
1,140

 
 
 
 
in the overall motif quality measure  from 940 to 1,140. Reducing  a further from 
8 to 4 causes the MTA to lose motif 6 but  gain knowledge of motif 4. Thus  we 
see that TME  causes a change  in the location in search  space where the MTA 
conducts  its search,  resulting in less consistent results. 
One could imply that this inconsistency due to trivial match elimination is 
detrimental to this particular search problem but this need not be the case. As is 
evident from Table  3 trivial match elimination significantly improves the search 
time  of the MTA  and  the results  from including  trivial  match  elimination  are 
still satisfactory. When  a=4 activating trivial match elimination results in the 
MTA still finding five motifs but  it reduces the search time by 84.2% from 39.8 
seconds to 6.3 seconds and with no loss to the quality of those five motifs found. 
 
 
7.4 Summary Discussion of Results 
 
From these results it is apparent that the MTA is able to identify motifs that are 
present in this system call data set. The MTA can compress the original data set 
of 1,000 system calls down to eight repeating motifs. A trade off between  speed 
and  accuracy  becomes  apparent as  the user  is able  to adjust the parameters 
of the algorithm to speed  up  the search  process  at the cost of a reduction  in 
detection capability, allowing a flexible search mechanism. 
The sensitivity to changes in s and a noted here is due to the nature of system 
call data. In this paper  we group  system calls together as similar  by averaging 
their system call values  over a fixed sized window. These  are then grouped  by 
boundary conditions and represented by a symbol which is then subject to trivial 
match elimination. With system calls there is no real relationship between  two 
separate  system  call values,  i.e. system  call 2 is not twice  as large  as system 
call 1. Therefore  one could argue  that a more appropriate  representation  may 
be more suitable as is discussed in Section 8. 
The results show that the MTA, developed to identify motifs in financial and 
industrial data sets, is successful in identifying motifs in system call data due to 
its  generic and  flexible approach. It provides  a useful tool  to compress  a large 
data set into small subset  of repeating patterns that are of immediate value to 
the user. 
 
 
8 Future Work 
 
The difficulty with analysing  system call sequences for the purposes  of intrusion 
detection is that the variety  of sequences generated is largely dependant on the 
diversity of the application’s input.  This potential variety  sidesteps most forms 
of pattern detection as long as the detection mechanism is not able to encode the 
variations in a manner  that is granular enough to be able to distinguish between 
normal and anomalous  patterns. To address this issue, as part of our future work 
we propose a system call expression language (SCEL), which acts as a higher level 
regular  expression  type language  consisting of constructs representing atomic 
system call motifs of meaningful  actions. 

 
 
 
 
An example of this language  can be presented using motif Z of length 30 as 
described  in Section  7. In the SCEL  motif Z  could be represented  by a higher 
level construct,  such as lib loading(libc).  Where  lib loading  represents  a partic- 
ular  set  of motifs for that action  and  (libc)  denotes the class to which  those 
motifs belong.  Similar  constructs could  be devised  for other operations which 
contain  atomic  motifs,  representative  of a higher  level functionality.  The  mo- 
tifs  2, 3, 4, and  8 in Table  1 indicate  the re-occurrence  of the open(),  read() 
and  close()  system  calls.  These  three  calls  could  now  be  represented  as  one 
file read(small) construct  to be  used  for  files below  a  certain  size threshold. 
In addition  a file read(large) construct  containing  a wild card  for the number 
of read() system calls between  the open()  and close()  calls can be generated for 
instances when reading larger files, where numerous  read() calls are executed de- 
pending  on the file’s size. When  reading  such a file an attribute of the language 
construct could denote the number  of motifs present in an observed  process. 
For example lib loading(libc)[1],  file  read(small)[*], other(*)[*] could 
denote a complete ps command  being executed.  This language tool would prove 
of value to a user as it focuses on a high level of abstraction while maintaining the 
ability to conduct  fine grained  analysis  of system calls. This new representation 
for system call similarity could now also be used as input  for the MTA to enhance 
its motif detection ability. 
 
 
9 Conclusion 
 
The search for patterns or motifs in data represents a generic problem area that 
is of great  interest  to a huge  variety  of researchers.  By extracting  motifs  that 
exist  in data we gain some understanding  as to the nature and  characteristics 
of that data, so that we can  benefit  from that knowledge.  The  motifs  provide 
an obvious mechanism  to cluster, classify and summarise  the data, placing great 
value on these patterns. 
Little research has been performed looking for unknown motifs in time series. 
The  MTA  takes up  this challenge  using  a novel immune  inspired  approach to 
evolve a population of trackers that seek out and match motifs present in a time 
series. The  MTA  uses a minimal  number  of parameters with minimal  assump- 
tions and requires no knowledge of the data examined  or the underlying  motifs, 
unlike other alternative approaches. 
In this  paper  the MTA  was applied  to motif  detection in system  call data. 
The  MTA was shown to compress the data set into a limited number  of motifs 
that provide good coverage of the original data set resulting in a minimal loss of 
information. The authors propose that these motifs highlight repeating or atomic 
functions that can be used to build profiles of “system behaviour”. These profiles 
could then assist in tasks such as anomaly  detection or behaviour  classification. 
The  authors provide  information on a system call expression  language  that 
addresses system call granularity issues for computer  security applications in the 
future.  In its current form we believe the MTA offers a valuable  contribution to 
an area of research  that at present has received surprisingly  little attention.
