arXiv:1702.00137v1  [cs.AI]  1 Feb 2017
Blue Sky Ideas in Artiﬁcial Intelligence Education
from the EAAI 2017 New and Future AI Educator Program
Eric Eaton
Univ. of Pennsylvania

Sven Koenig
U. Southern California

Claudia Schulz
Imperial College London

Francesco Maurelli
Jacobs University Bremen

John Lee
Antioch Univ.

Joshua Eckroth
Stetson Univ.

Mark Crowley
Univ. Waterloo

Richard G. Freedman
U. Massachusetts Amherst

Rogelio E. Cardona-Rivera
North Carolina State U.

Tiago Machado
New York Univ.

Tom Williams
Tufts Univ.

Abstract
The 7th Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (EAAI’17, co-chaired by Sven Koenig and Eric
Eaton) launched the EAAI New and Future AI Educator Pro-
gram to support the training of early-career university faculty,
secondary school faculty, and future educators (PhD candi-
dates or postdocs who intend a career in academia). As part
of the program, awardees were asked to address one of the
following “blue sky” questions:
1. How could/should Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) courses in-
corporate ethics into the curriculum?
2. How could we teach AI topics at an early undergraduate or
a secondary school level?
3. AI has the potential for broad impact to numerous disci-
plines. How could we make AI education more interdisci-
plinary, speciﬁcally to beneﬁt non-engineering ﬁelds?
This paper is a collection of their responses, intended to help
motivate discussion around these issues in AI education.
Bridging Across Disciplines
Claudia Schulz (Imperial College London)
The application of AI methods to problems such as le-
gal decision making, language translation, or gene analysis
often requires the cooperation of AI experts and subject spe-
cialists, e.g., lawyers, translators, or biologists. Their abil-
ity to communicate on a common ground is a crucial factor
determining the success of the project. It is thus beneﬁcial
if both parties have a basic understanding of the subject as
well as of AI methods, even before the start of a project.
Universities provide a unique opportunity to both teach
students becoming AI experts some subject knowledge (e.g.,
biology or law) and ensure that students in non-computing
subjects have a basic understanding of AI techniques. A
na¨ıve approach for achieving such interdisciplinary learning
is that AI students take some ﬁrst-year subject courses, and
subject students some introductory AI courses. Even though
Copyright c⃝2017 by the author(s). All rights reserved.
this approach is easy to implement, it may not achieve the in-
tended interdisciplinary learning beneﬁts since the courses
are not tailored towards students of a different discipline
(even ﬁrst-year courses often provide a detailed introduction
to a speciﬁc topic instead of surveying a whole ﬁeld).
We here discuss two approaches based on peer-learning,
which provide a more beneﬁcial interdisciplinary learning
environment. They share the idea that AI and subject stu-
dents learn together by teaching each other.
In the seminar-style approach, AI students give seminars
to subject students (and vice versa). These seminars may, for
example, provide an overview of AI techniques or review
applications of AI methods in subject areas. This approach
does not only beneﬁt the attending subject students, who ac-
quire knowledge tailored particularly to them, but also pro-
vides valuable experience to the AI student giving the sem-
inar in explaining AI topics to the lay audience. There is
clearly a lot of variability concerning the exact setup of these
seminars: they can be given by a single PhD student or by a
group of undergraduates, and the attendees’ background can
be a mixture of subjects or a single subject (in which case
the seminar will cover topics and examples related to this
particular subject).
In contrast to the seminar-style approach, where the
speaker teaches the audience, the project-based approach
promises mutual teaching and learning, both in terms of
knowledge and skills. In this setting, an AI student and a
subject student work together on a project trying to solve a
problem in the subject student’s area by applying AI tech-
niques. At the start, the subject student explains subject-
speciﬁc background to the AI student, whereas the AI stu-
dent teaches the subject student about possible AI tech-
niques to be used, thus creating a mutual teaching and learn-
ing environment. During the project, students will also ac-
quire the invaluable skills of working in an interdisciplinary
team. Again, there are different setups for such projects: The
problem(s) to be solved can be given by faculty or be the stu-
dents’ own ideas, and the project can be part of a course or
an extra-curricular “ideas/start-up lab”.

Student-Centric Discovery
Francesco Maurelli (Jacobs University Bremen)
Most approaches in university teaching are based on
frontal lectures, sometimes with speciﬁc lab activities and
speciﬁc homeworks. The course is divided in speciﬁc mod-
ules which are explained sequentially.
I would be interested in analysing the feasibility (and try
that with a real course) of a more student-centric approach,
inspired by the pedagogical Montessori method (Montes-
sori and George 1964). Although the main focus of the
method has always been on children, some of those elements
have been incorporated with success in secondary-school
and early-undergraduate levels.
Working with an equipped lab is fundamental for this ap-
proach. Then I would imagine that each student (or maybe
each group of students) could freely decide the direction of
the course, based on discovery and on what they are inter-
ested in. I have recently started a cooperation with Prof. Fed-
erico Gobbo at the University of Amsterdam, to analyse the
portability of some key elements of the Montessori method
into AI education of young adults (so, the target group of
this call).
From one side, I am interested to see how the Montes-
sori method applied at a later age group than usual could
help the students in their personal and professional develop-
ment. I strongly believe that independence and the ability of
thinking, reasoning, and making informed choices are key
elements of the lives of active and engaged human beings,
part of the society. A teaching approach which values in-
dependent thinking seems therefore a very interesting and
potentially fruitful approach, albeit maybe difﬁcult at times.
From the other side, looking for new engaging methods of
teaching AI and robotics might result in students approach-
ing the subject with curiosity and willingness, not just be-
cause it is in the study plan. This in turn might result in more
people engaged in AI and Robotics, and in more passion to-
wards the subject. It might be perceived not just as one of
many lectures, but a feel of “ownership” might push for a
deeper understanding of speciﬁc subjects rather than usual
frontal lectures.
Challenges in this approach would be ensuring that each
student (or each group of students) progress and explore
the subject within some boundaries. Also, evaluation is a
very delicate subject. In the original Montessori approach
there is no grading for children, but it is something usually
necessary in undergraduate courses. Establishing a fair
grading system is something necessary, though it might be
hard to compare different approaches and different paths
that each student would undertake.
