Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 47 (2013) 521-573
Submitted 01/13; published 07/13
Topic Segmentation and Labeling
in Asynchronous Conversations
Shaﬁq Joty

Qatar Computing Research Institute
Qatar Foundation
Doha, Qatar
Giuseppe Carenini

Raymond T. Ng

University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1Z4
Abstract
Topic segmentation and labeling is often considered a prerequisite for higher-level con-
versation analysis and has been shown to be useful in many Natural Language Processing

with topics, and evaluate annotator reliability for the segmentation and labeling tasks in
these asynchronous conversations. We propose a complete computational framework for
topic segmentation and labeling in asynchronous conversations.
Our approach extends
state-of-the-art methods by considering a ﬁne-grained structure of an asynchronous con-
versation, along with other conversational features by applying recent graph-based methods
for NLP. For topic segmentation, we propose two novel unsupervised models that exploit
the ﬁne-grained conversational structure, and a novel graph-theoretic supervised model that
combines lexical, conversational and topic features. For topic labeling, we propose two novel
(unsupervised) random walk models that respectively capture conversation speciﬁc clues
from two diﬀerent sources: the leading sentences and the ﬁne-grained conversational struc-
ture. Empirical evaluation shows that the segmentation and the labeling performed by our
best models beat the state-of-the-art, and are highly correlated with human annotations.
1. Introduction
With the ever increasing popularity of Internet technologies, it is very common nowadays
for people to discuss events, issues, tasks and personal experiences in social media (e.g.,

ples of asynchronous conversations where participants communicate with each other at
diﬀerent times. The huge amount of textual data generated everyday in these conversa-
tions calls for automated methods of conversational text analysis. Eﬀective processing of
these conversational texts can be of great strategic value for both organizations and indi-
viduals (Carenini, Murray, & Ng, 2011). For instance, managers can ﬁnd the information

auditing. If a decision turns out to be ill-advised, mining the relevant conversations may
help in determining responsibility and accountability. Similarly, conversations that led to
favorable decisions could be mined to identify eﬀective communication patterns and sources
within the company. In public blogging services (e.g., Twitter, Slashdot), conversations of-
c⃝2013 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
ten get very large involving hundreds of bloggers making potentially thousands of comments.
During a major event such as a political uprising in Egypt, relevant messages are posted
by the thousands or millions. It is simply not feasible to read all messages relevant to such
an event, and so mining and summarization technologies can help providing an overview of
what people are saying and what positive or negative opinions are being expressed. Mining
and summarizing of conversations also aid improved indexing and searching. On a more
personal level, an informative summary of a conversation could greatly support a new par-
ticipant to get up to speed and join an already existing conversation. It could also help
someone to quickly prepare for a follow-up discussion of a conversation she was already part
of, but which occurred too long ago for her to remember the details.
Topic segmentation and labeling is often considered a prerequisite for higher-level
conversation analysis (Bangalore, Di Fabbrizio, & Stent, 2006) and has been shown to be
useful in many Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications including automatic sum-
marization (Harabagiu & Lacatusu, 2005; Kleinbauer, Becker, & Becker, 2007; Dias, Alves,
& Lopes, 2007), text generation (Barzilay & Lee, 2004), information extraction (Allan,
2002), and conversation visualization (Liu, Zhou, Pan, Song, Qian, Cai, & Lian, 2012).
Adapting the standard deﬁnition of topic (Galley, McKeown, Fosler-Lussier, & Jing,
2003) to asynchronous conversations, we consider a topic to be something about which
the participants discuss or argue or express their opinions. Multiple topics seem to occur
naturally in social interactions, whether synchronous (e.g., meetings, chats) or asynchronous

2003), Galley et al. (2003) report an average of 7.5 topical segments per conversation. In
multi-party chat, Elsner and Charniak (2010) report an average of 2.75 discussions active

Topic segmentation refers to the task of grouping the sentences of an asynchronous
conversation into a set of coherent topical clusters (or segments)1, and topic labeling is the
task of assigning a short description to each of the topical clusters to facilitate interpreta-

from our corpora shown in Figure 1, the majority of our three annotators found three dif-
ferent topics (or clusters). Likewise, in the truncated blog conversation shown in Figure 2,
our annotators found six diﬀerent topics. The right most column in each ﬁgure speciﬁes
a particular segmentation by assigning the same topic ID (or cluster ID) to sentences be-
longing to the same topic. The topics in each ﬁgure are also diﬀerentiated using diﬀerent
colors. The topic labels assigned by the annotators are listed below each conversation (e.g.,
‘Telecon cancellation’, ‘Tag document’, ‘Responding to I18N’ in Figure 1).
While extensive research has been conducted in topic segmentation for monolog (e.g.,
news articles) and synchronous dialog (e.g., meetings), none has studied the problem of

no reliable annotation scheme, no standard corpus, and no agreed-upon metrics available.
Also, it is our key observation that, because of its asynchronous nature, and the use of
quotation (Crystal, 2001), topics in these conversations are often interleaved and do not
change in a sequential way. That is, if we look at the temporal order of the sentences in
1. In this article, we use the terms topical cluster and topical segment interchangeably.
522

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
 
From: Brian To: rdf core Subject: 20030220 telecon Date: Tue Feb 17 13:52:15 
I propose to cancel this weeks telecon and schedule another for 12 Mar 2004, if needed. 
I would like to get moving on comments on the TAG architecture document.  
Jan – are you still up for reviewing? 

From: Jeremy To: Brian Subject: Re: 20030220 telecon Date: Wed Feb 18 05:18:10 
> I propose to cancel this weeks telecon and schedule another for 12 Mar 2004, if needed.  

I think that means we will not formally respond to I18N on the charmod comments, shall I tell them that we do 

e.g. I have informed the RDF Core WG of your decisions, and no one has indicated unhappiness - however we 
have not formally discussed these issues;  and are not likely to. 
From: Jeremy To: Brian Subject: Re: 20030220 telecon Date: Thu Feb 19 05:42:21 
 
> Ah. Is this a problem. Have I understood correctly they are going through last call again anyway. 
Yes – I could change my draft informal response to indicate that if we have any other formal response it will be 
included in our LC review comments on their new documents. 
> When is the deadline? 

Two weeks from when I received the message ....i.e. during Cannes 
-I suspect that is also the real deadline, in that I imagine they want to make their final decisions at Cannes. 

From: Brian To: Jeremy Subject: Re: 20030220 telecon Date: Wed Feb 18 13:16:21 
 
> I think that means we will not formally respond to I18N on the charmod comments, shall  

Ah,  Is this a problem. Have I understood correctly they are going through last call again anyway. 
> e.g. I have informed the RDF Core WG of your decisions, and no one has indicated unhappiness  
> - however we have not formally discussed these issues; and are not likely to. 
When is the deadline? 

From: Pat To: Brian Subject: Re: 20030220 telecon Date: Wed Feb 18 16:56:26 
> I propose to cancel this weeks telecon and schedule another for 12 Mar 2004, if needed. 
Im assuming that they are all cancelled unless I hear otherwise. 
Maybe that should be our default? 
> I would like to get moving on comments on the TAG architecture document. 
I still plan to write a rather long diatribe on this if I can find the time. 
I doubt if the rest of the WG will endorse all of it but I will send it along asap, hopefully some time next week. 
Topic 1 (green): Telecon cancellation, Topic 2 (magenta): TAG document, Topic 3 (blue): Responding to I18N. 
Topic Labels 
Topic  
[1] 
[2] 
[2] 
[2] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3] 
 
[3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3] 
 
[3] 
[3] 
 
 
 
[1] 
[1] 
 
[2] 
[2] 
 
 
 
[3] 
 
 
[3] 
[3] 
[3] 

Each color indicates a
diﬀerent topic. The right most column speciﬁes the topic assignments for the sentences.
523

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
 
Fragment 
Author: Soulskill  Title: Bethesda Releases Daggerfall For Free Type: Article 
On Thursday, Bethesda announced that for the 15th anniversary of the Elder Scrolls series, they were releasing 
The Elder Scrolls II: Daggerfall for free. 
They aren't providing support for the game anymore, but they posted a detailed description of how to get the 
game running in DOSBox. 
Fans of the series can now easily relive the experience of getting completely lost in those enormous dungeons. 
Save often. 
Author: Datamonstar Title: Nice nice nice nice... Comment id: 1  Parent id: None Type: Comment 
>Fans of the series can now easily relive the experience of getting completely lost in those enormous dungeons. 
>Save often. 
... well not really, since this game is soooo old, but still its a huge HUGE gameworld. 
Really, It's big. 
Can't wait to play it. 
It makes Oblivion look like Sesame Street. 
Author: ElrondHubbard   Title: Rest well this night -- Comment id: 5  Parent id: None Type: Comment 
-- for tomorrow, you sail for the kingdom... of Daggerfall. 
Many, many enjoyable hours I spent playing this game when I could (should) have been working on my thesis. 
Chief complaint: The repetitive dungeons, stitched together seemingly near-randomly from prefabbed bits and 
pieces that were repeated endlessly. 
Still, a great game. 
Author: Anonymous    Title: Re:Rest well this night -- Comment id: 6  Parent id: 5 Type: Comment 
>Many, many enjoyable hours I spent playing this game when I could (should) have been working on my thesis 
So, how did your thesis go? 
>Chief complaint: The repetitive dungeons, stitched together seemingly near-randomly …a great game 
I also think this is a great game. 
Author: Freetardo Title: Re: Nice nice nice nice... Comment id: 2  Parent id: 1 Type: Comment 
Yes it is big, but most of it is just the same thing over and over again. 
It was quite monotonous at times, really. 
Author: gbarules2999 Title: Re: Nice nice nice nice... Comment id: 3 Parent id: 1 Type: Comment 
Randomly generated HUGE isn't nearly as good as designed small. 
Back to Morrowind, folks. 
Author: drinkypoo  Title: Re: Nice nice nice nice... Comment id: 4  Parent id: 3 Type: Comment 
>Randomly generated HUGE isn't nearly as good as designed small. 
The solution is obviously to combine both approaches. 
That way a single game will satisfy both types of players. 
Topic 1 (green): Free release of Daggerfall and reaction, Topic 2 (purple): Game contents or size, Topic 3 (orange): Bugs 
or faults, Topic 4 (magenta): Game design, Topic 5 (blue): Other gaming options, Topic 0 (red): `OFF-TOPIC'. 
Topic Labels 
Topic  
[1] 
[1] 
[2] 
[2] 
 
 
[2] 
[2] 
[2] 
[2] 
 
 
[3] 
[3] 
 
[4] 
[5] 
 
 
[4] 
[4] 
 
[1] 
[1] 
[3] 
[3] 
[1] 
 
[0] 
[1] 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
(f) 
 
 
(g) 
 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
 
 
 
(k) 
(l) 
Figure 2: Sample truncated blog conversation from our blog corpus. Each color indicates a diﬀerent
topic. The right most column (i.e., Topic) speciﬁes the topic assignments for the sentences. The
Fragment column speciﬁes the fragments in the FQG (see Section 3.1.3).
524

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
a conversation, the discussion of a topic may appear to intersect with the discussion of
others. As can be seen in Figure 1, after a discussion of topic 3 in the second and third

and synchronous dialog does not hold in asynchronous conversation. As a result, we do
not expect models which have proved successful in monolog or synchronous dialog to be as
eﬀective, when directly applied to asynchronous conversation.
Our contributions in this article aim to remedy these problems. First, we present two

reliability for the topic segmentation and labeling tasks using a new set of metrics, which
are also used to evaluate the computational models.
To our knowledge, these are the
ﬁrst such corpora that will be made publicly available.
Second, we present a complete
topic segmentation and labeling framework for asynchronous conversations. Our approach
extends state-of-the-art methods (for monologs and synchronous dialogs) by considering
a ﬁne-grained structure of the asynchronous conversation along with other conversational
features. In doing so, we apply recent graph-based methods for NLP (Mihalcea & Radev,
2011) such as min-cut and random walk on paragraph, sentence or word graphs.
For topic segmentation, we propose two novel unsupervised models that exploit, in
a principled way, the ﬁne-grained conversational structure beyond the lexical information.
We also propose a novel graph-theoretic supervised topic segmentation model that combines
lexical, conversational, and topic features. For topic labeling, we propose to generate labels
using an unsupervised extractive approach that identiﬁes the most representative phrases in
the text. Speciﬁcally, we propose two novel random walk models that respectively captures
two forms of conversation speciﬁc information: (i) the fact that the leading sentences in a
topical cluster often carry the most informative clues, and (ii) the ﬁne-grained conversational
structure. To the best of our knowledge, this is also the ﬁrst comprehensive study to address
the problem of topic segmentation and labeling in asynchronous conversation.
Our framework was tested in a series of experiments. Experimental results in the topic
segmentation task show that the unsupervised segmentation models beneﬁt when they con-
sider the ﬁner conversational structure of asynchronous conversations. A comparison of the
supervised segmentation model with the unsupervised models reveals that the supervised
method, by optimizing the relative weights of the features, outperforms the unsupervised
ones even using only a few labeled conversations. Remarkably, the segmentation decisions
of the best unsupervised and the supervised models are also highly correlated with human
annotations. As for the experiments on the topic labeling task, they show that the random
walk model performs better when it exploits the conversation speciﬁc clues from the leading
sentences and the conversational structure. The evaluation of the end-to-end system also
shows promising results in both corpora, when compared with human annotations.
In the rest of this article, after discussing related work in Section 2, we present our
segmentation and labeling models in Section 3. We then describe our corpora and evalu-
ation metrics in Section 4. The experiments and analysis are presented in Section 5. We
summarize our contributions and consider directions for future work in Section 6.
525

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
2. Related Work
Three research areas are directly related to our study: topic segmentation, topic labeling,
and extracting the conversation structure of asynchronous conversations.
2.1 Topic Segmentation
Topic segmentation has been extensively studied both for monologs and synchronous dialogs
where the task is to divide the discourse into topically coherent sequential segments (for a
detailed overview see Purver, 2011). The unsupervised models rely on the discourse cohesion
phenomenon, where the intuition is that sentences in a segment are lexically similar to each
other but not to sentences in the preceding or the following segment. These approaches
mainly diﬀer in how they measure the lexical similarity between sentences.
One such early approach is TextTiling (Hearst, 1997), which still forms the baseline
for many recent advancements. It operates in three steps: tokenization, lexical score de-
termination, and depth score computation.
In the tokenization step, it forms the ﬁxed
length pseudo-sentences, each containing n stemmed words. Then it considers blocks of k
pseudo-sentences, and for each gap between two consecutive pseudo-sentences it measures
the cosine-based lexical similarity between the adjacent blocks by representing them as vec-
tors of term frequencies. Finally, it measures the depth of the similarity valley for each gap,
and assigns the topic boundaries at the appropriate sentence gaps based on a threshold.
When similarity is computed only on the basis of raw term frequency (TF) vectors, it can
cause problems because of sparseness, and because it treats the terms independently. Choi,
Hastings, and Moore (2001) use Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to measure the similarity
and show that LSA-based similarity performs better than the raw TF-based similarity.
Unlike TextTiling, which uses a threshold to decide on topic boundaries, Choi et al. use
divisive clustering to ﬁnd the topical segments. We use similarity measures based on both
TF and LSA as features in our supervised segmentation model.
Another variation of the cohesion-based approach is LCSeg (Galley et al., 2003), which
uses lexical chains (Morris & Hirst, 1991).
LCSeg ﬁrst ﬁnds the chains based on term
repetitions, and weights those based on term frequency and chain length. The cosine simi-
larity between two adjacent blocks’ lexical chain vectors is then used as a measure of lexical
cohesion in a TextTiling-like algorithm to ﬁnd the segments. LCSeg achieves results compa-
rable to the previous approaches (e.g., Choi et al., 2001) in both monolog (i.e., newspaper)
and synchronous dialog (i.e., meeting). Galley et al. also propose a supervised model for
segmenting meeting transcripts. They use a C4.5 probabilistic classiﬁer with lexical and
conversational features and show that it outperforms the unsupervised method (LCSeg).
Hsueh, Moore, and Renals (2006) apply the models of Galley et al. (2003) to both the
manual transcripts and the ASR (automatic speech recognizer) output of meetings. They
perform segmentation at both coarse (topic) and ﬁne (subtopic) levels. At the topic level,
they get similar results as Galley et al. – the supervised model outperforming LCSeg. How-
ever, at the subtopic level, LCSeg surprisingly outperforms the supervised model indicating
that ﬁner topic shifts are better characterized by lexical similarity alone.
In our work, we initially show how LCSeg performs poorly, when applied to the temporal
ordering of the asynchronous conversation. This is because, as we mentioned earlier, topics
in asynchronous conversations are interleaved and do not change sequentially following the
526

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
temporal order of the sentences. To address this, we propose a novel extension of LCSeg that
leverages the ﬁne conversational structure of asynchronous conversations. We also propose
a novel supervised segmentation model for asynchronous conversation that achieves even
higher segmentation accuracy by combining lexical, conversational, and topic features.
Malioutov and Barzilay (2006) use a minimum cut clustering model to segment spoken
lectures (i.e., spoken monolog). They form a weighted undirected graph where the nodes
represent the sentences and the weighted edges represent the TF.IDF-based cosine similarity
between the sentences. Then the segmentation can be solved as a graph partitioning problem
with the assumption that the sentences in a segment should be similar, while sentences in
diﬀerent segments should be dissimilar. They optimize the normalized cut criterion (Shi &
Malik, 2000) to extract the segments. In general, the minimization of the normalized cut is
NP-complete. However, the sequentiality constraint of topic segmentation in monolog allows
them to ﬁnd an exact solution in polynomial time. Their approach performs better than
the approach of Choi et al. (2001) in the corpus of spoken lectures. Since the sequentiality
constraint does not hold in asynchronous conversation, we implement this model without
this constraint by approximating the solution, and compare it with our models.
Probabilistic generative models, such as variants of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003) have also proven to be successful for topic segmentation in
monolog and synchronous dialog. Blei and Moreno (2001) propose an aspect Hidden Markov
Model (AHMM) to perform topic segmentation in written and spoken (i.e., transcribed)
monologs, and show that the AHMM model outperforms the HMM for this task. Purver
et al. (2006) propose a variant of LDA for segmenting meeting transcripts, and use the top
words in the topic-word distributions as topic labels. However, their approach does not out-
perform LCSeg. Eisenstein and Barzilay (2008) propose another variant by incorporating
cue words into the (sequential) segmentation model. In a follow-up work, Eisenstein (2009)
proposes a constrained LDA model that uses multi-scale lexical cohesion to perform hierar-
chical topic segmentation. Nguyen, Boyd-Graber, and Resnik (2012) successfully incorpo-
rate speaker identity into a hierarchical nonparametric model for segmenting synchronous
conversations (e.g., meeting, debate). In our work, we demonstrate how the general LDA
model performs for topic segmentation in asynchronous conversation and propose a novel
extension of LDA that exploits the ﬁne conversational structure.
2.2 Topic Labeling
In the ﬁrst comprehensive approach to topic labeling, Mei, Shen, and Zhai (2007) propose
methods to label multinomial topic models (e.g., the topic-word distributions returned by
LDA). Crucial to their approach is how they measure the semantic similarity between a
topic-word distribution and a candidate topic label extracted from the same corpus. They
perform such task by assuming another word distribution for the label and deriving the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the two distributions. It turns out that this measure
is equivalent to the weighted point-wise mutual information (PMI) of the topic-words with
the candidate label, where the weights are actually the probabilities in the topic-word
distribution.
They use Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell & Goldstein,
1998) to select the labels which are relevant, but not redundant. When labeling multiple
topic-word distributions, to ﬁnd discriminative labels, they adjust the semantic similarity
527

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
scoring function such that a candidate label which is also similar to other topics gets lower
score. In our work, we also use MMR to promote diversity in the labels for a topic. However,
to get distinguishable labels for diﬀerent topical segments in a conversation, we rank the
words so that a high scoring word in one topic should not have high scores in other topics.
Recently, Lau, Grieser, Newman, and Baldwin (2011) propose methods to learn topic
labels from Wikipedia titles. They use the top-10 words in each topic-word distribution
to extract the candidate labels from Wikipedia. Then they extract a number of features
to represent each candidate label. The features are actually diﬀerent metrics used in the
literature to measure the association between the topic words and the candidate label (e.g.,
PMI, t-test, chi-square test). They use Amazon Mechanical Turk to get humans to rank
the top-10 candidate labels and use the average scores to learn a regression model.
Zhao, Jiang, He, Song, Achananuparp, Lim, and Li (2011a) addresses the problem of
topical keyphrase extraction from Twitter. Initially they use a modiﬁed Twitter-LDA model
(Zhao, Jiang, Weng, He, Lim, Yan, & Li, 2011b), which assumes a single topic assignment
for a tweet, to discover the topics in the corpus. Then, they use a PageRank (Page, Brin,
Motwani, & Winograd, 1999) to rank the words in each topic-word distribution. Finally,
they perform a bi-gram test to generate keyphrases from the top ranked words in each topic.
While all the above studies try to mine topics from the whole corpus, our problem
is to ﬁnd the topical segments and label those for a given conversation, where topics are
closely related and distributional variations are subtle (e.g., ‘Game contents or size’, ‘Game
design’ in Figure 2). Therefore, statistical association metrics like PMI, t-test, chi-square
test may not be reliable in our case because of data scarcity. Also at the conversation-level,
the topics are too speciﬁc to a particular discussion (e.g., ‘Telecon cancellation’, ‘TAG
document’, ‘Responding to I18N’ in Figure 1) that exploiting external knowledge bases
like Wikipedia as a source of candidate labels is not a reasonable option for us. In fact,
none of the human-authored labels in our developement set appears in Wikipedia as a title.
Therefore, we propose to generate topic labels using a keyphrase extraction method that
ﬁnds the most representative phrase(s) in the given text.
Several supervised and unsupervised methods have been proposed for keyphrase ex-
traction (for a comprehensive overview see Medelyan, 2009). The supervised models (e.g.,
Hulth, 2003; Medelyan, Frnak, & Witten, 2009) follow the same two-stage framework. First,
candidate keyphrases are extracted using n-gram sequences or a shallow parser (chunker).
Second, a classiﬁer ﬁlters the candidates. This strategy has been quite successful, but it
is domain speciﬁc and labor intensive. Every new domain may require new annotations,
which at times becomes too expensive and unrealistic. In contrast, our approach is to adopt
an unsupervised paradigm, which is more robust across new domains, but still capable of
achieving comparable performance to the supervised methods.
Mihalcea and Tarau (2004) use a graph-based (unsupervised) random walk model to
extract keyphrases from journal abstracts and achieve the state-of-the-art performance
(Mihalcea & Radev, 2011).2 However, this model is generic and not designed to exploit
properties of asynchronous conversations. We propose two novel random walk models to
incorporate conversation speciﬁc information. Speciﬁcally, our models exploit information
2. The original work was published before by Mihalcea and Tarau (2004).
528

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
from two diﬀerent sources: (i) from the leading sentences of the topical segments, and (ii)
from the ﬁne conversational structure of the conversation.
2.3 Conversational Structure Extraction
Several approaches have been proposed to capture the underlying conversational structure
of a conversation. Recent work on synchronous conversations has been focusing on disentan-
gling multi-party chats, which have a linear structure. For example, several studies propose
models to disentangle multi-party chat (Elsner & Charniak, 2010, 2011; Wang & Oard,
2009; Mayﬁeld, Adamson, & Ros´e, 2012). On the other hand, asynchronous conversations

tree-structured threads using headers. Automatic methods to uncover such more complex
structures have also been proposed (e.g., Wang, Wang, Zhai, & Han, 2011; Aumayr, Chan,
& Hayes, 2011). However, the use of quotation in asynchronous conversations can express
a conversational structure that is ﬁner grained and can be more informative than the one
revealed by reply-to relations between comments (Carenini et al., 2011). For example, in
Figures 1 and 2, the proximity between a quoted paragraph and an unquoted one can rep-
resent an informative conversational link between the two (i.e., they talk about the same
topic) that would not appear by only looking at the reply-to relations.

summarization (Carenini, Ng, & Zhou, 2008) and dialog act modeling (Joty, Carenini,
& Lin, 2011). In this work, we generalize the FQG to any asynchronous conversation and
demonstrate that topic segmentation and labeling models can also beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from
this ﬁne conversational structure of asynchronous conversation.
3. Topic Models for Asynchronous Conversations
Developing topic segmentation and labeling models for asynchronous conversations is chal-
lenging partly because of the speciﬁc characteristics of these media. As mentioned earlier,
unlike monolog (e.g., a news article) and synchronous dialog (e.g., a meeting), topics in
asynchronous conversations may not change in a sequential way, with topics being inter-
leaved.
Furthermore, as can be noticed in Figures 1 and 2, writing style varies among
participants, and many people tend to use informal, short and ungrammatical sentences,
thus making the discourse much less structured. One aspect of asynchronous conversation
that at ﬁrst glance may appear to help topic modeling is that each message comes with
a header. However, often headers do not convey much topical information and sometimes
they can even be misleading. For example, in the blog conversation (Figure 2), participants
keep talking about diﬀerent topics using the same title (i.e., ‘nice nice nice’), which does
not convey any topic information. Arguably, all these unique properties of asynchronous
conversations limit the application of state-of-the-art techniques that have been successful
in monolog and synchronous dialog. Below, we ﬁrst describe these techniques and then we
present how we have extended them to eﬀectively deal with asynchronous conversations.
529

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
3.1 Topic Segmentation Models
We are the ﬁrst to study the problem of topic segmentation in asynchronous conversa-
tion. Therefore, we ﬁrst show how the existing models, which are originally developed for
monolog and synchronous dialog, can be naively applied to asynchronous conversations.
Then, by pointing out their limitations, we propose our novel topic segmentation models
for asynchronous conversations.
3.1.1 Existing Models
LCSeg (Galley et al., 2003) and LDA (Blei et al., 2003) are the two state-of-the-art unsu-
pervised models for topic segmentation in monolog and synchronous dialog (Purver, 2011).
In the following, we brieﬂy describe these models and how they can be directly applied to
asynchronous conversations.
Lexical Cohesion-based Segmenter (LCSeg)
LCSeg is a sequential segmentation model originally developed for segmenting meeting tran-
scripts. It exploits the linguistic property called lexical cohesion, and assumes that topic
changes are likely to occur where strong word repetitions start and end. It ﬁrst computes
lexical chains (Morris & Hirst, 1991) for each non-stop word based on word repetitions.3
Then the chains are weighted according to their term frequency and the chain length. The
more populated and compact chains get higher scores. The algorithm then works with two
adjacent analysis windows, each of a ﬁxed size k, which is empirically determined. At each
sentence boundary, it computes the cosine similarity (or lexical cohesion function) between
the two windows by representing each window as a vector of chain-scores of its words.
Speciﬁcally, the lexical cohesion between windows (X and Y ) is computed with:
LexCoh(X, Y ) = cos sim(X, Y ) =
PN
i=1 wi,X.wi,Y
qPN
i=1 w2
i,X. PN
i=1 w2
i,Y
(1)
where N is the number of chains and
wi,Ω=
 rank(Ci)
if chain Ci overlaps Ω∈{X, Y }
0
otherwise
A sharp change at local minima in the resulting similarity curve signals a high probability
of a topic boundary. The curve is smoothed, and for each local minimum it computes a
segmentation probability based on its relative depth below its nearest peaks on either side.
Points with the highest segmentation probability are then selected as hypothesized topic
boundaries. This method is similar to TextTiling (Hearst, 1997) except that the similarity
is computed based on the scores of the chains instead of term frequencies.
LCSeg can be directly applied to an asynchronous conversation by arranging its com-
ments based on their arrival time (i.e., temporal order) and running the algorithm to get
the topic boundaries.
3. One can also consider other lexical semantic relations (e.g., synonym, hypernym) in lexical chaining but
the best results account for only repetition.
530

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
LDA is a generative model that relies on the fundamental idea that documents are ad-
mixtures of topics, and a topic is a multinomial distribution over words. It speciﬁes the
following distribution over words within a document:
P(xij) =
K
X
k=1
P(xij|zij = k, bk)P(zij = k|πi)
(2)
where K is the number of topics, P(xij|zij = k, bk) is the probability of word xij in document
i for topic k, and P(zij = k|πi) is the probability that kth topic was sampled for the word
token xij. We refer the multinomial distributions bk and πi as topic-word and document-
topic distributions, respectively.
Figure 3 shows the resultant graphical model in plate
notation for N documents, K topics and Mi tokens in each document i. Note that, α and β
are the standard Dirichlet priors on πi and bk, respectively. Variational EM can be used to
estimate π and b (Blei et al., 2003). One can also use Gibbs sampling to directly estimate
the posterior distribution over z, i.e., P(zij = k|xij); namely, the topic assignments for word
tokens (Steyvers & Griﬃths, 2007).
α
πi
zi,j
β
bk
xi,j
K
Mi
N
Figure 3: Graphical model for LDA in plate notation.
This framework can be directly applied to an asynchronous conversation by considering
each comment as a document. By assuming the words in a sentence occur independently
we can estimate the topic assignments for each sentence s as follows:
P(zm = k|s) =
Y
xm∈s
P(zm = k|xm)
(3)
Finally, the topic for s can be assigned by:
k∗= argmaxkP(zm = k|s)
(4)
3.1.2 Limitations of Existing Models
The main limitation of the two models discussed above is that they make the bag-of-words
(BOW) assumption ignoring facts that are speciﬁc to a multi-party, asynchronous conver-
sation.
LCSeg considers only term frequency and how closely these terms occur in the
531

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
temporal order of the sentences. If topics are interleaved and do not change sequentially in
the temporal order, as is often the case in an asynchronous conversation, then LCSeg would
fail to ﬁnd the topical segments correctly.
On the other hand, the only information relevant to LDA is term frequency. Several ex-
tensions of LDA over the BOW approach have been proposed. For example, Wallach (2006)
extends the model beyond BOW by considering n-gram sequences. Griﬃths, Steyvers, Blei,
and Tenenbaum (2005) present an extension that is sensitive to word-order and automati-
cally learns the syntactic as well as semantic factors that guide word choice. Boyd-Graber
and Blei (2008) describe another extension to consider the syntax of the sentences.
We argue that these models are still inadequate for ﬁnding topical segments correctly
in asynchronous conversations especially when topics are closely related and their distribu-
tional variations are subtle (e.g., ‘Game contents or size’ and ‘Game design’). To better
identify the topics one needs to consider the features speciﬁc to asynchronous conversations
(e.g., conversation structure, speaker, recipient). In the following, we propose our novel
unsupervised and supervised topic segmentation models that incorporate these features.
3.1.3 Proposed Unsupervised Models
One of the most important indicators for topic segmentation in asynchronous conversation
is its conversation structure. As can be seen in the examples (Figures 1 and 2), participants
often reply to a post and/or use quotations to talk about the same topic.
Notice also
that the use of quotations can express a conversational structure that is at a ﬁner level of
granularity than the one revealed by reply-to relations. In our corpora, we found an average

we need to leverage this key information to get the best out of our models. Speciﬁcally, we
need to capture the conversation structure at the quotation (i.e., text fragment) level, and
to incorporate this structure into our segmentation models in a principled way.
In the following, we ﬁrst describe how we can capture the conversation structure at the
fragment level. Then we show how the unsupervised models LCSeg and LDA can be ex-
tended to take this conversation structure into account, generating two novel unsupervised
models for topic segmentation in asynchronous conversation.
Extracting Finer-level Conversation Structure
Since consecutive turns in asynchronous conversations can be far apart in time, when par-
ticipants reply to a post or comment, a quoted version of the original message is often

Furthermore, people tend to break down the quoted message so that diﬀerent questions,
requests or claims can be dealt with separately. As a result, each message, unless it is at the
beginning, will contain a mix of quoted and novel paragraphs (or fragments) that may well
reﬂect a reply-to relationship between paragraphs that is at a ﬁner level of granularity than
the one explicitly recorded between comments. We proposed a novel approach to capture
this ﬁner level conversation structure in the form of a graph called Fragment Quotation
Graph (FQG) (Carenini et al., 2007). In the following, we demonstrate how to build
a FQG for the sample blog conversation shown in Figure 2. Figure 4(a) shows the same
blog conversation, but for the sake of illustration, instead of showing the real content, we
532

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
abbreviate it as a sequence of labels (e.g., a, b), each label corresponding to a text fragment
(see the Fragment column in Figure 2). Building a FQG is a two-step process.
Figure 4: (a) The main Article and the Comments with the fragments for the example in
Figure 2. Arrows indicate ‘reply-to’ relations. (b) The corresponding FQG.
• Node creation: Initially, by processing the whole conversation, we identify the new
and quoted fragments of diﬀerent depth levels. The depth level of a quoted fragment
is determined by the number of quotation marks (e.g., >, >>, >>>). For instance,
comment C1 contains a new fragment c and a quoted fragment b of depth level 1. C6
contains two new fragments k and l, and two quoted fragments i and j of depth level
1, and so on. Then in the second step, we compare the fragments with each other and
based on their lexical overlap we ﬁnd the distinct fragments. If necessary, we split
the fragments in this step. For example, ef in C3 is divided into e and f distinct
fragments when compared with the fragments of C4. This process gives 12 distinct
fragments which constitute the nodes of the FQG shown in Figure 4(b).
• Edge creation: We create edges to represent likely replying relationship between frag-
ments assuming that any new fragment is a potential reply to its neighboring quota-
tions of depth level 1. For example, for the fragments of C6 in Figure 4(a), we create
two edges from k (i.e., (k,i),(k,j)) and one edge from l (i.e., (l,j)) in Figure 4(b). If
a comment does not contain any quotation, then its fragments are linked to the new
fragments of the comment to which it replies, capturing the original ‘reply-to’ relation.
Note that the FQG is only an approximation of the reply relations between fragments.
In some cases, proximity may not indicate any connection and in other cases a connec-
tion can exist between fragments that are never adjacent in any comment. Furthermore,
this process could lead to less accurate conversational structure when quotation marks (or
cues) are not present. Nonetheless, we previously showed that considering the FQG can

et al., 2008). In this study, we show that topic segmentation (this Section) and labeling
533

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
(Section 3.2) models can also beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from this ﬁne conversational structure of
asynchronous conversation. Minimizing the noise in FQGs is left as future work.
LCSeg with FQG (LCSeg+FQG)
If we examine the FQG carefully, the paths (considering the fragments of the ﬁrst comment
as root nodes) can be interpreted as subconversations, and topic shifts are likely to occur
along the pathway as we walk down a path. We incorporate FQG into LCSeg in three steps.
• Path extraction: First, we extract all the paths of a FQG. For example, for the FQG
in Figure 4(b), we extract the paths < a, j, l >, < b, c, e, g >, < b, c, d >, and so on.
• LCSeg application: We then run LCSeg algorithm on each of the extracted paths
separately and collect the segmentations. For example, when applied LCSeg to <
b, c, e, g > and < b, c, d > paths separately, we may get the following segmentations-
< b, c | e, g > and < b, c | d >, where ‘|’ denotes the segment boundary.4 Notice that a
fragment can be in multiple paths (e.g., b, c) which will eventually cause its sentences
to be in multiple segments. So, in the ﬁnal step, we need a consolidation method.
• Consolidation: Our intuition is that sentences in a consolidated segment should appear
together in a segment more often when LCSeg is applied in step 2, and if they do not
appear together in any segment, they should at least be similar. To achieve this,
we construct a weighted undirected graph G(V, E), where the nodes V represent the
sentences and the edge weights w(x, y) represent the number of segments in which
sentences x and y appear together; if x and y do not appear together in any segment,
then their cosine similarity is used as edge weights. More formally,
w(x, y) =
(
n,
if x and y appear together in n segments and n > 0
cos sim(x, y),
if n = 0
We measure the cosine similarity between sentences x and y as follows:
cos sim(x, y) =
P
w∈x,y tfw,x.tfw,y
qP
xi∈x tf2xi,x.
qP
yi∈y tf2yi,y
(5)
where tfa,s denotes the term frequency of term a in sentence s. The cosine similarity
(0 ≤cos sim(x, y) ≤1) provides informative edge weights for the sentence pairs that
are not directly connected by LCSeg segmentation decisions.5 Now, the consolidation
problem can be formulated as a k-way-mincut graph partitioning problem with the
normalized cut (Ncut) criterion (Shi & Malik, 2000):
4. For convenience, we are showing the segmentations at the fragment level, but the segmentations are
actually at the sentence level.
5. In our earlier work (Joty, Carenini, Murray, & Ng, 2010), we did not consider the cosine similarity when
two sentences do not appear together in any of the segments. However, later we found out that including
the cosine similarity oﬀers more than 2% absolute gain in segmentation performance.
534

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
Ncutk(V ) = cut(A1, V −A1)
assoc(A1, V )
+ cut(A2, V −A2)
assoc(A2, V )
+ · · · + cut(Ak, V −Ak)
assoc(Ak, V )
(6)
where A1, A2 · · · Ak form a partition (i.e., disjoint sets of nodes) of the graph, and
V −Ak is the set diﬀerence between V (i.e., set of all nodes) and Ak. The cut(A, B)
measures the total edge weight from the nodes in set A to the nodes in set B, and
assoc(A, V ) measures the total edge weight from the nodes in set A to all nodes in
the graph. More formally:
cut(A, B)
=
X
u∈A,v∈B
w(u, v)
(7)
assoc(A, V )
=
X
u∈A,t∈V
w(u, t)
(8)
Note that the partitioning problem can be solved using any correlation clustering
method (e.g., Bansal, Blum, & Chawla, 2002). Previous work on graph-based topic
segmentation (Malioutov & Barzilay, 2006) has shown that the Ncut criterion is more
appropriate than just the cut criterion, which accounts only for total edge weight
connecting A and B, and therefore, favors cutting small sets of isolated nodes in the
graph. However, solving Ncut is NP-complete. Hence, we approximate the solution
following the method proposed by Shi and Malik, (2000), which is time eﬃcient and
has been successfully applied to image segmentation in computer vision.
Notice that this approach makes a diﬀerence only if the FQG of the conversation con-
tains more than one path. In fact, in our corpora we found an average number of paths of

LDA with FQG (LDA+FQG)
A key advantage of probabilistic Bayesian models, such as LDA, is that they allow us
to incorporate multiple knowledge sources in a coherent way in the form of priors (or
regularizer). To incorporate FQG into LDA, we propose to regularize LDA so that two
sentences in the same or adjacent fragments are likely to appear in the same topical cluster.
The ﬁrst step towards this aim is to regularize the topic-word distributions (i.e., b in Figure
3) with a word network such that two connected words get similar topic distributions.
For now, assume that we are given a word network as an undirected graph G(V, E), with
nodes V representing the words and the edges (u, v)∈E representing the links between words
u and v. We want to regularize the topic-word distributions of LDA such that two connected
words u and v in the word network have similar topic distributions (i.e., bk(u) ≈bk(v) for
k = 1 . . . K). The standard conjugate Dirichlet prior Dir(bk|β), however does not allow us
to do that, because here all words share a common variance parameter, and are mutually
independent except normalization constraint (Minka, 1999). Recently, Andrzejewski, Zhu,
and Craven (2009) describe a method to encode must-links and cannot-links between
535

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
words using a Dirichlet Forest prior. Our goal is just to encode the must-links. Therefore,
we reimplemented their model with its capability of encoding just the (must-)links.
Must-links between words such as (a, b), (b, c), or (x, y) in Figure 5(a) can be encoded
into LDA using a Dirichlet Tree (DT) prior. Like the traditional Dirichlet, DT prior
is also a conjugate to the multinomial, but under a diﬀerent parameterization. Instead of
representing a multinomial sample as the outcome of a K-sided die, in the tree representation
(e.g., Figure 5(b)), a sample (i.e., a leaf in the tree) is represented as the outcome of a ﬁnite
stochastic process. The probability of a leaf (i.e., a word in our case) is the product of branch
probabilities leading to that leaf. A DT prior is the distribution over leaf probabilities.
Let ωn be the edge weight leading into node n, C(n) be the children of node n, L be the
leaves of the tree, I be the internal nodes, and L(n) be the leaves in the subtree under node
n. We generate a sample bk from DT(ω) by drawing a multinomial at each internal node
i ∈I from Dir(ωC(i)) (i.e., the edge weights from node i to its children). The probability
density function of DT(bk|ω) is given by:
DT(bk|ω) ∝
 Y
l∈L
bkωl−1
l
! 


Y
i∈I

X
j∈L(i)
bk
j


∆(i)


(9)
where ∆(i) = ωi −P
j∈C(i) ωj, the diﬀerence between the in-degree and out-degree of an
internal node i. Notice when ∆(i) = 0 for all i∈I, the DT reduces to the standard Dirichlet.
Suppose we are given the word network as shown in Figure 5(a).
The network can
be decomposed into a collection of chains (e.g., (a, b, c), (p), and (x, y)). For each chain
containing multiple elements (e.g., (a, b, c), (x, y)), there is a subtree in the DT (Figure 5(b)),
with one internal node (blank in Figure) and the words of the chain as its leaves. The weight
from the internal node to each of its leaves is λβ, where λ is the regularization strength
and β is the parameter of the standard symmetric Dirichlet prior on bk. The root node
of the DT then connects to the internal nodes with |L(i)|β weight. The leaves (words) for
the single element chains (e.g, (p)) are then connected to the root of the DT directly with
weight β. Notice that when λ = 1, ∆(i) = 0, and it reduces to the standard LDA (i.e., no
regularization). By tuning λ we control the strength of the regularization.
a
b
c
p
x
y
(a)
a
λβ
b
λβ
c
λβ
3β
p
β
x
λβ
y
λβ
2β
(b)
Figure 5: (a) Sample word network, (b) A Dirichlet Tree (DT) built from such word network.
At this point what is left to be explained is how we construct the word network. To
regularize LDA with a FQG, we construct the word network where a word is linked to the
words in the same or adjacent fragments in the FQG. Speciﬁcally, if word wi∈fragx and
536

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
word wj∈fragy and wi̸=wj, we create a link (wi, wj) if x = y or (x, y)∈Efqg, where Efqg is
the set of edges in the FQG. This implicitly compels two sentences in the same or adjacent
fragments to have similar topic distributions, and appear in the same topical segment.
3.1.4 Proposed Supervised Model
Although the unsupervised models discussed in the previous section have the key advantage
of not requiring any labeled data, they can be limited in their ability to learn domain-speciﬁc
knowledge from a possible large and diverse set of features (Eisenstein & Barzilay, 2008).
Beside discourse cohesion, which captures the changes in content, there are other impor-
tant domain-speciﬁc distinctive features which signal topic change. For example, discourse
markers (or cue phrases) (e.g., okay, anyway, now, so) and prosodic cues (e.g., longer pause)
directly provide clues about topic change, and have been shown to be useful features for
topic segmentation in monolog and synchronous dialog (Passonneau & Litman, 1997; Galley
et al., 2003). We hypothesize that asynchronous conversations can also feature their own
distinctive characteristics for topic shifts. For example, features like sender and recipient
are arguably useful for segmenting asynchronous conversations, as diﬀerent participants can
be more or less active during the discussion of diﬀerent topics. Therefore, as a next step to
build an even more accurate topic segmentation model for asynchronous conversations, we
propose to combine diﬀerent sources of possibly useful information in a principled way.
The supervised framework serves as a viable option to combine a large number of fea-
tures and optimize their relative weights for decision making, but relies on labeled data
for training. The amount of labeled data required to achieve an acceptable performance is
always an important factor to consider for choosing supervised vs. unsupervised. In this
work, we propose a supervised segmentation model that outperforms all the unsupervised
models, even when it is trained on a small number of labelled conversations.
Our supervised model is built on the graph-theoretic framework which has been used
in many NLP tasks, including coreference resolution (Soon, Ng, & Lim, 2001) and chat
disentanglement (Elsner & Charniak, 2010). This method works in two steps.
• Classiﬁcation: A binary classiﬁer which is trained on a labeled dataset, marks each
pair of sentences of a given conversation as same or diﬀerent topics.
• Graph partitioning: A weighted undirected graph G = (V, E) is formed, where the
nodes V represent the sentences in the conversation and the edge-weights w(x, y)
denote the probability (given by the classiﬁer) of the two sentences x and y to appear
in the same topic. Then an optimal partition is extracted.
Sentence pair classiﬁcation
The classiﬁer’s accuracy in deciding whether a pair of sentences x and y is in the same
or diﬀerent topics is crucial for the model’s performance. Note that since each sentence
pair of a conversation deﬁnes a data point, a conversation containing n sentences gives
1+2+. . .+(n-1)=n(n−1)
2
= O(n2) training examples. Therefore, a training dataset containing
m conversations gives Pm
i=1
ni(ni−1)
2
training examples, where ni is the number of sentences
in the ith conversation. This quadratic expansion of training examples enables the classiﬁer
to achieve its best classiﬁcation accuracy with only a few labeled conversations.
537

Joty, Carenini, & Ng

total of 14, 528 data points of which 58.8% are in the same class (i.e., same is the most

corpus, we got a total of 572, 772 data points of which 86.3% are in the diﬀerent class (i.e.,
diﬀerent is the most likely in blog).6 To select the best classiﬁer, we experimented with
a variety of classiﬁers with the full feature set (Table 2). Table 1 shows the performance
of the classiﬁers averaged over a leave-one-out procedure, i.e., for a corpus containing m
conversations, train on m −1 conversations and test on the rest.
Classiﬁer
Type
Regularizer
Accuracy (Blog)

Train
Test
Train
Test
KNN
non-parametric
-
62.7%
61.4 %
54.6%
55.2%
LR
parametric
l2
90.8%
91.9%
71.7%
72.5%
LR
parametric
l1
86.8%
87.6%
69.9%
67.7%
RMLR (rbf)
non-parametric
l2
91.7%
82.0%
91.1%
62.1%
SVM (lin)
parametric
-
76.6%
78.7 %
68.3%
69.6%
SVM (rbf)
non-parametric
-
80.5%
77.9%
75.9%
67.7%
Majority class
-
-
86.3% (diﬀerent)
58.8% (same)
Table 1: Performance of the classiﬁers using the full feature set (Table 2). For each training
set, regularizer strength λ (or C in SVMs) was learned by 10-fold cross validation.
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) performs very poorly.
Logistic Regression (LR) with l2
regularizer delivers the highest accuracy on both datasets. Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
(Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) with linear and rbf kernels perform reasonably well, but not as
well as LR. The Ridged Multinomial Logistic Regression (RMLR) (Krishnapuram et al.
2005), a kernelized LR, extremely overﬁts the data. We opted for the LR with l2 regularizer
because it not only delivers the best performance in term of accuracy, but it is also very
eﬃcient. The limited memory BFGS (L-BFGS) ﬁtting algorithm used in LR is eﬃcient in
terms of both time (quadratic convergence rate; fastest among the listed models) and space
(O(mD), where m is the memory parameter of L-BFGS and D is the number of features).
Table 2 summarizes the full feature set and the mean test set accuracy (using leave-one-
out procedure) achieved with diﬀerent types of features in our LR classiﬁer.
Lexical features encode similarity between two sentences x and y based on their raw
content. Term frequency-based similarity is a widely used feature in previous work, e.g.,
TextTiling (Hearst, 1997). We compute this feature by considering two analysis windows,
each of ﬁxed size k. Let X be the window including sentence x and the preceding k −1
sentences, and Y be the window including sentence y and the following k −1 sentences. We
measure the cosine similarity between the two windows by representing them as vectors of
TF.IDF (Salton & McGill, 1986) values of the words. Another important domain speciﬁc
feature that proved to be useful in previous research (e.g., Galley et al., 2003) is cue words
(or discourse markers) that sign the presence of a topic boundary (e.g., ‘coming up’, ‘joining
us’ in news). Since our work concerns conversations (not monologs), we adopt the cue word
6. See Section 4 for a detailed description of our corpora. The class labels are produced by taking the
maximum vote of the three annotators.
538

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
Lexical
Accuracy: 86.8 Precision: 62.4 Recall: 4.6 (Blog)

TFIDF1
TF.IDF-based similarity between x and y with window size k=1.
TFIDF2
TF.IDF-based similarity between x and y with window size k=2.
Cue Words
Either x or y contains a cue word.
QA
x asks a question explicitly using ? and y answers it using any
of (yes, yeah, okay, ok, no, nope).
Greet
Either x or y has a greeting word (hi, hello, thanks, thx, tnx, thank.)
Conversation
Accuracy: 88.2 Precision: 81.6 Recall: 20.5 (Blog)

Gap
The gap between y and x in number of sentence(s).
Speaker
x and y have the same sender (yes or no).
FQG1
Distance between x and y in FQG in terms of fragment id.
(i.e., |frag id(y) −frag id(x)|).
FQG2
Distance between x and y in FQG in terms of number of edges.
FQG3
Distance between x and y in FQG in number of edges but this
time considering it as an undirected graph.
Same/Reply
whether x and y are in the same comment or one is a reply to
the other.
Name
x mentions y’s speaker or vice versa.
Topic
Accuracy: 89.3 Precision: 86.4 Recall: 17.3 (Blog)

LSA1
LSA-based similarity between x and y with window size k=1.
LSA2
LSA-based similarity between x and y with window size k=2.
LDA
LDA segmentation decision on x and y (same or diﬀerent).
LDA+FQG
LDA+FQG segmentation decision on x and y (same or diﬀerent).
LCSeg
LCSeg segmentation decision on x and y (same or diﬀerent).
LCSeg+FQG
LCSeg+FQG segmentation decision on x and y (same or diﬀerent).
LexCoh
Lexical cohesion between x and y.
Combined
Accuracy: 91.9 Precision: 78.8 Recall: 25.8 (Blog)

Table 2: Features with average performance on testsets (using leave-one-out).
539

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
list derived automatically from a meeting corpus by Galley et al. (2003). If y answers or
greets x then it is likely that they are in the same topic. Therefore, we use the Question
Answer (QA) pairs and greeting words as two other lexical features.
Conversational features capture conversational properties of an asynchronous con-
versation. Time gap and speaker are commonly used features for segmenting synchronous
conversations (e.g., Galley et al. 2003). We encode similar information in asynchronous me-
dia by counting the number of sentences between x and y (in their temporal order) as the
gap, and their senders as the speakers. The strongest baseline Speaker (see Section 5.1)
also proves its eﬀectiveness in asynchronous domains. The results in Section 5.1 also suggest
that ﬁne conversational structure in the form of FQG can be beneﬁcial when it is incor-
porated into the unsupervised segmentation models. We encode this valuable information
into our supervised segmentation model by computing three distance features on the FQG:

group comments into threads. If y’s comment is same as or reply to x’s comment, then
it is likely that the two sentences talk about the same topic. Participants sometimes men-
tion each other’s name in multi-party conversations to make disentanglement easier (Elsner
& Charniak, 2010). We also use this as a feature in our supervised segmentation model.
Topic features are complex and encode topic information from existing segmentation
models. Choi et al. (2001) used Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to measure the similarity
between two sentences and showed that the LSA-based similarity yields better results than
the direct TF.IDF-based similarity since it surmounts the problems of synonymy (e.g., car,
auto) and polysemy (e.g., money bank, river bank). To compute LSA, we ﬁrst construct
a word-document matrix W for a conversation, where Wi,j = the frequency of word i in
comment j × the IDF score of word i. We perform truncated Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) of W: W ≈UkΣkV T
k , and represent each word i as a k dimensional7 vector Λk
i . Each
sentence is then represented by the weighted sum of its word vectors. Formally, the LSA
representation for sentence s is Λs = P
i∈s tfs
i .Λk
i , where tfs
i = the term frequency of
word i in sentence s. Then just like the TF.IDF-based similarity, we compute the LSA-
based similarity between sentences x and y, but this time by representing the corresponding
windows (i.e., X and Y ) as LSA vectors.
The segmentation decisions of LDA, LDA+FQG, LCSeg and LCSeg+FQG models
described in the previous section are also encoded as topic features.8 As described in Sec-
tion 3.1.1, LCSeg computes a lexical cohesion (LexCoh) function between two consecutive
windows based on the scores of the lexical chains. Galley et al. (2003) shows a signiﬁcant
improvement when this function is used as a feature in the supervised (sequential) topic
segmentation model for meetings. However, since our problem of topic segmentation is not
sequential, we want to compute this function for any two given windows X and Y (not
necessary consecutive). To do that, we ﬁrst extract the lexical chains with their scores and
spans (i.e., beginning and end sentence numbers) for the conversation. The lexical cohesion
function is then computed with the method described in Equation 1.
7. In our study, k was empirically set to 1
4×number of comments based on a held-out development set.
8. Our earlier work (Joty, Carenini, Murray, & Ng, 2011) did not include the segmentation decisions of
LDA+FQG and LCSeg+FQG models as features.
However, including these features improves both
classiﬁcation accuracy and segmentation accuracy.
540

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
TF.IDF1
TF.IDF2
Cue
QA
Greet
Gap
Speaker
FQG1
FQG2
FQG3
Same/Reply
Name
LSA1
LSA2
LDA
LDA+FQG
LexCoh
LCSeg
LCSeg+FQG
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35

Blog
Figure 6: Relative importance of the features averaged over leave-one-out.
We describe our classiﬁer’s performance in terms of raw accuracy (correct decisions/total),
precision and recall of the same class for diﬀerent types of features averaged over a leave-
one-out procedure (Table 2). Among the feature types, topic features yield the highest
accuracy and same-class precision in both corpora (p < 0.01).9 Conversational features also
have proved to be important and achieve higher accuracy than lexical features (p < 0.01).
Lexical features have poor accuracy, only slightly higher than the majority baseline that
always picks the most likely class. However, when we combine all the features, we get the
best performance (p < 0.005). These results demonstrate the importance of topical and
conversational features beyond the lexical features used only by the existing segmentation
models. When we compare the performance on the two corpora, we notice that while in

recall is much lower. Although this is reasonable given the class distributions in the two

tively), surprisingly, when we tried to deal with this problem by applying the bagging
technique (Breiman, 1996), the performance does not improve signiﬁcantly. Note that some
of the classiﬁcation errors occurred in the sentence-pair classiﬁcation phase are recovered
in the graph partitioning step (see below). The reason is that the incorrect decisions will
be outvoted by the nearby sentences that are clustered correctly.
We further analyze the contribution of individual features. Figure 6 shows the relative
importance of the features based on the absolute values of their coeﬃcients in our LR
classiﬁer. The segmentation decision of LCSeg+FQG is the most important feature in both
domains.
The Same/Reply is also an eﬀective feature, especially in blog.
In blog, the
Speaker feature also plays an important role. The FQG2 (distance in number of edges in

Finally, in order to determine how many annotated conversations we need to achieve
the best segmentation performance, Figure 7 shows the classiﬁcation error rate (incorrect
decisions/total), tested on 5 randomly selected conversations and trained on an increasing
9. All tests of statistical signiﬁcance were performed using paired t-test.
541

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
number of randomly added conversations. Our classiﬁer appears to achieve its best perfor-
mance with a small number of labeled conversations. For blog, the error rate ﬂattens with

versations (an average of 26.3 sentences), generating a similar number of training examples
with only a few conversations (recall, for n sentences we get O(n2) training examples).
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Number of training conversations
Classiﬁcation error rate

Blog
Figure 7: Error rate vs. number of training conversations.
Graph partitioning
Given a weighted undirected graph G = (V, E), where the nodes V represent the sentences
and the edge-weights w(x, y) denote the probability (given by our classiﬁer) of the two
sentences x and y to appear in the same topic, we again formulate the segmentation task as
a k-way-mincut graph partitioning problem with the intuition that sentences in a segment
should discuss the same topic, while sentences in diﬀerent segments should discuss diﬀerent
topics. We optimize the normalized cut criterion (i.e., equation 6) to extract an optimal
partition as was done before for consolidating various segments in LCSeg+FQG.
3.2 Topic Labeling Models
Now that we have methods to automatically identify the topical segments in an asyn-
chronous conversation, the next step in the pipeline is to generate one or more informative
descriptions or topic labels for each segment to facilitate interpretations of the topics. We
are the ﬁrst to address this problem in asynchronous conversation.
Ideally, a topic label should be meaningful, semantically similar to the underlying topic,
general and discriminative (when there are multiple topics) (Mei et al., 2007). Traditionally,
the top k words in a multinomial topic model like LDA are used to describe a topic. However,
as pointed out by Mei et al., at the word-level, topic labels may become too generic and
impose cognitive diﬃculties on a user to interpret the meaning of the topic by associating
the words together. For example, in Figure 2, without reading the text, from the words
{release, free, reaction, Daggerfall}, it may be very diﬃcult for a user to understand that
the topic is about Daggerfall’s free release and people’s reaction to it. On the other hand,
if the labels are expressed at the sentence-level, they may become too speciﬁc to cover the
542

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
whole theme of the topic (Mei et al., 2007). Based on these observations, recent studies
(e.g., Mei et al., 2007; Lau et al., 2011) advocate for phrase-level topic labels, which
are also consistent with the monolog corpora built as a part of the Topic Detection and
Tracking (TDT) project10. Note that we also observe a preference for phrase-level labels
within our own asynchronous conversational corpora in which human annotators without
speciﬁc instructions spontaneously generated topic labels at the phrase-level. Considering
all this, we treat phrase-level as our target level of granularity for a topic label.
Our problem is no diﬀerent from the problem of keyphrase indexing (Medelyan,
2009) where the task is to ﬁnd a set of keyphrases either from the given text or from a
controlled vocabulary (i.e., domain-speciﬁc terminologies) to describe the topics covered
in the text. In our setting, we do not have such a controlled vocabulary. Furthermore,
exploiting generic knowledge bases like Wikipedia as a source of devising such a controlled
vocabulary (Medelyan, 2009) is not a viable option in our case since the topics are very spe-
ciﬁc to a particular discussion (e.g., Free release of Daggerfall and reaction, Game contents
or size in Figure 2). In fact, none of the human-authored labels in our developement set
appears verbatim in Wikipedia. We propose to generate topic labels using a keyphrase
extraction approach that identiﬁes the most representative phrase(s) in the given text.
We adapt a graph-based unsupervised ranking framework, which is domain independent,
and without relying on any labeled data achieves state-of-the-art performance on keyphrase
extraction (Mihalcea & Radev, 2011). Figure 8 shows our topic labeling framework. Given
a (topically) segmented conversation, our system generates k keyphrases to describe each
topic in the conversation. Below we discuss the diﬀerent components of the system.
input conversation
Preprocessor
words
Segment-level
 Ranking
Conversation-level
 Ranking
Word Ranking
Phrase 
Generation
Conversation-level 
Phrase Reranking
top M words
top M words
Segment-level 
phrases
conversation-
level phrases
Redundancy
Checking
relevant 
phrases
k output phrases
Segmented
Figure 8: Topic labeling framework for asynchronous conversation.
3.2.1 Preprocessing
In the preprocessing step, we tokenize the text and apply a syntactic ﬁlter to select the
words of a certain part-of-speech (POS). We use a state-of-the-art tagger11 to tokenize the
10. http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/TDT/
11. Available at http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/software
543

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
text and annotate the tokens with their POS tags. We experimented with ﬁve diﬀerent
syntactic ﬁlters. They select (i) nouns, (ii) nouns and adjectives, (iii) nouns, adjectives
and verbs, (iv) nouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs, and (v) all words, respectively. The
ﬁlters also exclude the stopwords. The second ﬁlter, that selects only nouns and adjectives,
achieves the best performance on our development set, which is also consistent with the
ﬁnding of Mihalcea and Tarau (2004). Therefore, this syntactic ﬁlter is used in our system.
3.2.2 Word Ranking
The words selected in the preprocessing step correspond to the nodes in the graph. A direct
application of the ranking method described by Mihalcea and Tarau (2004) would deﬁne the
edges based on the co-occurrence relation between the respective words, and then apply
the PageRank (Page et al., 1999) algorithm to rank the nodes. We argue that co-occurrence
relations may be insuﬃcient for ﬁnding topic labels in an asynchronous conversation. To
better identify the labels one needs to consider aspects that are speciﬁc to asynchronous
conversation. In particular, we propose to exploit two diﬀerent forms of conversation speciﬁc
information into our graph-based ranking model: (1) informative clues from the leading
sentences of a topical segment, and (2) the ﬁne-grained conversational structure (i.e., the
Fragment Quotation Graph (FQG)) of an asynchronous conversation. In the following,
we describe these two novel extensions in turn.
Incorporating Information from the Leading Sentences
In general, the leading sentences of a topic segment carry informative clues for the topic
labels, since this is where the speakers will most likely try to signal a topic shift and
introduce the new topic. Our key observation is that this is especially true for asynchronous
conversations, in which topics are interleaved and less structured. For example, in Figure 2,
notice that in almost every case, the leading sentences of the topical segments covers the
information conveyed by the labels. This property is further conﬁrmed in Figure 9, which
shows the percentage of non-stopwords in the human-authored labels that appear in leading
sentences of the segments in our development set. The ﬁrst sentence covers about 29% and

respectively. When we consider the ﬁrst three sentences, the coverage raises up to 39% and

To leverage this useful information in our ranking model, we propose the following
biased random walk model, where P(w|Uk), the score of a word w given a set of leading
sentences Uk in topic segment k, is expressed as a convex combination of its relevance to the
leading sentences Uk (i.e., ρ(w|Uk)) and its relatedness with other words in the segment:
P(w|Uk) = λ
ρ(w|Uk)
P
z∈Ck ρ(z|Uk) + (1 −λ)
X
y∈Ck
e(y, w)
P
z∈Ck e(y, z)P(y|Uk)
(10)
where the value of λ (0 ≤λ ≤1), which we call the bias, is a trade-oﬀbetween the two
components and should be set empirically. For higher values of λ, we give more weight to
the word’s relevance to the leading sentences compared to its relatedness with other words
544

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
38.08
44.86
48.95
50.65
52.94
28.74
34.73
38.98
42.01
44.57

Blog
Figure 9: Percentage of words in the human-authored labels appearing in leading sentences
of the topical segments.
in the segment. Here, Ck is the set of words in segment k, which represents the nodes in the
graph. The denominators in both components are for normalization. We deﬁne ρ(w|Uk) as:
ρ(w|Uk) = log(tfUk
w + 1).log(tfk
w + 1)
(11)
where tfUk
w
and tfk
w are the number of times word w appears in Uk and segment k, respec-
tively. A similar model has proven to be successful in measuring the relevance of a sentence
to a query in query-based sentence retrieval (Allan, Wade, & Bolivar, 2003).
Recall that when there are multiple topics in a conversation, a requirement for the topic
labels is that labels of diﬀerent topics should be discriminative (or distinguishable) (Mei
et al., 2007). This implicitly indicates that a high scoring word in one segment should not
have high scores in other segments of the conversation. Keeping this criterion in mind, we
deﬁne the (undirected) edge weights e(y, w) in equation 10 as follows:
e(y, w) = tfk
w,y × log
K
0.5 + tfk′
w,y
(12)
where K denotes the number of topics (or topic segments) in the conversation, and tfk
w,y
and tfk′
w,y are the number of times words w and y co-occur in a window of size s in segment
k and in segments except k in the conversation, respectively. Notice that this measure is
similar in spirit to the TF.IDF metric (Salton & McGill, 1986), but it is at the co-occurrence
level. The co-occurrence relationship between words captures syntactic dependencies and
lexical cohesion in a text, and is also used by Mihalcea and Tarau (2004).12
Equation 10 above can be written in matrix notation as:
π = [λQ + (1 −λ)R]T π = AT π,
(13)
where Q and R are square matrices such that Qi,j =
ρ(j|Uk)
P
z∈Ck ρ(z|Uk) for all i, and Ri,j =
e(i,j)
P
j∈Ck e(i,j), respectively. Notice that A is a stochastic matrix (i.e., all rows add up to 1),
therefore, it can be treated as the transition matrix of a Markov chain. If we assume each
12. Mihalcea and Tarau (2004) use an unweighted graph for key phrase extraction. However, in our experi-
ments, we get better results with a weighted graph.
545

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
word is a state in a Markov chain, then Ai,j speciﬁes the transition probability from state
i to state j in the corresponding Markov chain. Another interpretation of A can be given
by a biased random walk on the graph. Imagine performing a random walk on the graph,
where at every time step, with probability λ, a transition is made to the words that are
relevant to the leading sentences and with probability 1 −λ, a transition is made to the
related words in the segment. Every transition is weighted according to the corresponding
elements of Q and R. The vector π we are looking for is the stationary distribution of this
Markov chain and is also the (normalized) eigenvector of A for the eigenvalue 1. A Markov
chain will have a unique stationary distribution if it is ergodic (Seneta, 1981). We can
ensure the Markov chain to have this property by reserving a small probability for jumping
to any other state from the current state (Page et al., 1999).13 For larger matrices, π can
be eﬃciently computed by an iterative method called power method.
Incorporating Conversational Structure
In Section 3.1, we described how the ﬁne conversation structure in the form of a Fragment
Quotation Graph (FQG) can be eﬀectively exploited in our topic segmentation models. We
hypothesize that our topic labeling model can also beneﬁt from the FQG. In our previous

measure the importance of a sentence and demonstrated the beneﬁts of using a FQG. This
ﬁnding implies that an important node in the FQG is likely to cover an important aspect
of the topics discussed in the conversation. Our intuition is that, to be in the topic label,
a keyword should not only co-occur with other keywords, but it should also come from an
important fragment in the FQG. We believe there is a mutually reinforcing relationship
between the FQG and the Word Co-occurrence Graph (WCG) that should be reﬂected in
the rankings. Our proposal is to implement this idea as a process of co-ranking (Zhou et
al., 2007) in a heterogeneous graph, where three random walks are combined together.
Let G = (V, E) = (VF ∪VW , EF ∪EW ∪EFW ) be the heterogeneous graph of fragments
and words. As shown in Figure 10, it contains three sub-graphs. First, GF = (VF , EF ) is the
unweighted directed FQG, with VF denoting the set of fragments and EF denoting the set
of directed links between fragments. Second, GW = (VW , EW ) is the weighted undirected
WCG, where VW is the set of words in the segment and EW is the set of edge-weights as
deﬁned in equation 12. Third, GFW = (VFW , EFW ) is the weighted bipartite graph that
ties GF and GW together representing the occurrence relations between the words and the
fragments. Here, VFW = VF ∪VW , and weighted undirected edges in EFW connect each
fragment vf ∈VF to each word vw ∈VW , with the weight representing the number of times
word vw occurs in fragment vf.
The co-ranking framework combines three random walks, one on GF , one on GW and
one on GFW . Let F and W denote the transition matrices for the (intra-class) random walks
in GF and GW , respectively, and f and w denote their respective stationary distributions.
Since, GFW is a bipartite graph, the (inter-class) random walk on GFW can be described
by two transition matrices, FW|VF |×|VW | and WF|VW |×|VF |. One intra-class step changes the
probability distribution from (f, 0) to (F T f, 0) or from (0, w) to (0, W T w), while one inter-
13. For simplicity, we do not make this random jump component explicit in our equations. But, readers
should keep in mind that all the transition matrices described in this article contain this component.
546

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
GF
GW
Figure 10: Three sub-graphs used for co-ranking: the fragment quotation graph GF , the
word co-occurrence graph GW , and the bipartite graph GFW that ties the two together.
Blue nodes represent fragments, red nodes represent words.
class step changes the distribution from (f, w) to (WF T w, FW T f) (for details see Zhou,
Orshanskiy, Zha, & Giles, 2007). The coupling is regulated by a parameter δ (0 ≤δ ≤1)
that determines the extent to which the ranking of words and fragments depend on each
other. Speciﬁcally, the two update steps in the power method are:
ft+1
=
(1 −δ) (F T ft) + δ WF T (FW T WF T )wt
(14)
wt+1
=
(1 −δ) (W T wt) + δ FW T (WF T FW T )ft
(15)
We described the co-ranking framework above assuming that we have a WCG and its
corresponding FQG. However, recall that while the WCG is built for a topic segment, the
FQG described so far (Figure 4) is based on the whole conversation. In order to construct a
FQG for a topic segment in the conversation, we take only those fragments (and the edges)
from the conversation-level FQG that include only the sentences of that segment. This
operation has two consequences. One, some conversation-level fragments may be pruned.
Two, some sentences in a conversation-level fragment may be discarded. For example, the
FQG for topic (segment) ID 1 in Figure 2 includes only the fragments a, h, i, j, and l, and the
edges between them. Fragment j, which contains three sentences in the conversation-level
FQG, contains only one sentence in the FQG for topic ID 1.
3.2.3 Phrase Generation
Once we have a ranked list of words for describing a topical segment, we select the top M
keywords for constructing the keyphrases (labels) from these keywords. We take a similar
approach to Mihalcea and Tarau (2004). Speciﬁcally, we mark the M selected keywords in
the text, and collapse the sequences of adjacent keywords into keyphrases. For example,
consider the ﬁrst sentence, “.. 15th anniversary of the Elder Scrolls series ..” in Figure 2. If
‘Elder’, ‘Scrolls’ and ‘series’ are selected as keywords, since they appear adjacent in the text,
547

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
they are collapsed into one single keyphrase ‘Elder Scrolls series’. The score of a keyphrase
is then determined by taking the maximum score of its constituents (i.e., keywords).
Rather than constructing the keyphrases in the post-processing phase, as we do, an
alternative approach is to ﬁrst extract the candidate phrases using either n-gram sequences
or a chunker in the preprocessing, and then rank those candidates (e.g., Medelyan, 2009;
Hulth, 2003).
However, determining the optimal value of n in the n-gram sequence is
an issue, and including all possible n-gram sequences for ranking excessively increases the
problem size. Mei et al. (2007) also show that using a chunker leads to poor results due to
the inaccuracies in the chunker, especially when it is applied to a new domain like ours.
3.2.4 Conversation-Level Phrase Re-ranking
So far, we have extracted phrases only from the topic segment ignoring the rest of the
conversation. This method fails to ﬁnd a label if some of its constituents appear outside
the segment. For example, in our Blog corpus, the phrase server security in the human-
authored label server security and ﬁrewall does not appear in its topical segment, but
appears in the whole conversation. In fact, in our development set, about 14% and 8%

that is outside the topic segment. Thus, we propose to extract informative phrases from
the whole conversation, re-rank those with respect to the individual topics (or segments)
and combine only the relevant conversation-level phrases with the segment-level ones.
We rank the words of the whole conversation by applying the ranking models described
in Section 3.2.2 and extract phrases using the same method described in Section 3.2.3. Note
that when we apply our biased random walk model to the whole conversation, there is no
concept of leading sentences and no distinction between the topics. Therefore, to apply to
the whole conversation, we adjust our biased random walk model (Equation 10) as follows:
P(w) =
X
y∈Ck
e(y, w)
P
z∈Ck e(y, z)P(y)
(16)
where e(y, w) = tfw,y, is the number of times words w and y co-occur in a window of size s
in the conversation. On the other hand, the co-ranking framework, when applied to whole
conversation, combines two conversation-level graphs: the FQG, and the WCG.
To re-rank the phrases extracted from the whole conversation with respect to a particular
topic in the conversation, we reuse the score of the words in that topic segment (given by
the ranking models in Section 3.2.2). As before, the score of a (conversation-level) phrase
is determined by taking the maximum (segment-level) score of its constituents (words). If
a word does not occur in the topic segment, its score is assumed to be 0.
3.2.5 Redundancy Checking
Once we have the ranked list of labels (keyphrases), the last step is to produce the ﬁnal
k labels as output. When selecting multiple labels for a topic, we expect the new labels
to be diverse without redundant information to achieve broad coverage of the topic. We
use the Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998) criterion to
select the labels that are relevant, but not redundant. Speciﬁcally, we select the labels one
by one, by maximizing the following MMR criterion each time:
548

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
ˆl = argmaxl∈W−S[ρ Score(l) −(1 −ρ) max´l∈S Sim(´l, l)]
(17)
where W is the set of all labels and S is the set of labels already selected as output. We
deﬁne the similarity between two labels ´l and l as: Sim(´l, l) = no/nl, where no is the
number of overlapping (modulo stemming) words between ´l and l, and nl is the number of
words in l. The parameter ρ (0 ≤ρ ≤1) quantiﬁes the amount of redundancy allowed.
4. Corpora and Metrics
Due to the lack of publicly available corpora of asynchronous conversations annotated with
topics, we have developed the ﬁrst corpora annotated with topic information.
4.1 Data Collection

mailing list14. The BC3 corpus, previously annotated with sentence-level speech acts, sub-
jectivity, extractive and abstractive summaries, is one of a growing number of corpora being

tion and a total of 1024 sentences after excluding the quoted sentences. Each conversation

For blog, we manually selected 20 conversations of various lengths, all short enough to
still be feasible for humans to annotate, from the popular technology-related news website
Slashdot15. Slashdot was selected because it provides reply-to links between comments,
allowing accurate thread reconstruction, and since the comments are moderated by the users
of the site, they are expected to have a decent standard. A conversation in Slashdot begins
with an article (i.e., a short synopsis paragraph possibly with a link to the original story),
and is followed by a lengthy discussion section containing multiple threads of comments

reply-to), while the threads and the single comments form the sub-trees in the tree. In
our blog corpus, we have a total of 4, 411 sentences. The total number of comments per
blog conversation varies from 30 to 101 with an average of 60.3, the number of threads per
conversation varies from 3 to 16 with an average of 8.35 and the number of single comments
varies from 5 to 50 with an average of 20.25.
4.2 Topic Annotation
Topic segmentation and labeling in general is a nontrivial and subjective task even for
humans, particularly when the text is unedited and less organized (Purver, 2011). The
conversation phenomenon called ‘Schism’ makes it even more challenging for conversations.
During a schism, a new conversation takes birth from an existing one, not necessarily because
of a topic shift but because some participants refocus their attention onto each other, and
14. http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/nickcr/w3c-summary.html
15. http://slashdot.org/
549

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
away from whoever held the ﬂoor in the parent conversation (Sacks, Schegloﬀ, & Jeﬀerson,

participants discuss the topic ‘responding to I18N’. Not all our annotators agree on the fact
that the topic ‘responding to I18N’ swerves from the topic ‘TAG document’.
To properly design an eﬀective annotation manual and procedure, we performed a two-
phase pilot study before carrying out the actual annotation. Our initial annotation manual
was inspired by the AMI annotation manual used for topic segmentation of ICSI meeting
transcripts16. For the pilot study, we selected two blog conversations from Slashdot and ﬁve

from our corpora. Later in our experiments we use these conversations as our development
set for tuning diﬀerent parameters of the computational models.
In the ﬁrst phase of
the pilot study ﬁve computer science graduate students volunteered to do the annotation,
generating ﬁve diﬀerent annotations for each conversation. We then revised our annotation
manual based on their feedback and a detailed analysis of possible sources of disagreement.
In the second phase, we tested our procedure with a university postdoc doing the annotation.

already had some annotations (e.g., abstract summaries) that we could reuse for topic
annotation, whereas our blog corpus is brand new without any existing annotation.
For the actual annotation we recruited and paid three cognitive science fourth year
under-graduates, who are native speakers of English and also Slashdot bloggers. On average,

respectively. In all, we have three diﬀerent annotations for each conversation in our corpora.
For blog conversations, the task of ﬁnding topics was carried out in four steps:
1. The annotators read the conversation (i.e., article, threads of comments and single
comments) and wrote a short summary (≤3 sentences) only for the threads.
2. They provided short high-level descriptions for the topics discussed in the conversation
(e.g., ‘Game contents or size’, ‘Bugs or faults’). These descriptions serve as reference
topic labels in our work. The target number of topics and their labels were not given
in advance and they were instructed to ﬁnd as many or as few topics as needed to
convey the overall content of the conversation.
3. They assigned the most appropriate topic to each sentence. However, if a sentence
covered more than one topic, they labeled it with all the relevant topics according to
their order of relevance. They used the predeﬁned topic ‘OFF-TOPIC’ if the sentence
did not ﬁt into any topic. Wherever appropriate they also used two other predeﬁned
topics: ‘INTRO’ (e.g., ‘hi X’) and ‘END’ (e.g., ‘Best, X’).
4. The annotators authored a single high-level 250 words summary of the whole con-
versation. This step was intended to help them remember anything they may have
forgotten and to revise the annotations in the previous three steps.
16. http://mmm.idiap.ch/private/ami/annotation/TopicSegmentationGuidelinesNonScenario.pdf
550

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations

So, along with the actual conversations, we provided the annotators with such summaries to
give them a brief overview of the discussion. After reading a conversation and the associated
summaries, they performed tasks 2 and 3 as in the procedure they follow for annotating
blogs. The annotators carried out the tasks on paper. We created the hierarchical thread

using indentations and printed each participant’s information in a diﬀerent color as in Gmail.

in total), and in the blog corpus, they found 251, 119 and 192 topics respectively (562
in total). Table 3 shows some basic statistics computed on the three annotations of the

conversations contains 12.6 sentences, and a topic in blog conversations contains 27.16

blog conversations, respectively. The average entropy which corresponds to the granularity

for blog conversations. These statistics (i.e., the number of topics and the topic density)
indicate that there is a substantial amount of segmentation (and labeling) to do.
Mean
Max
Min

Blog

Blog

Blog
Number of sentences
26.3
220.55
55
430
13
105
Number of topics
2.5
10.77
7
23
1
5
Average topic length
12.6
27.16
35
61.17
3
11.67
Average topic density
1.4
5.81
3.1
10.12
1
2.75
Entropy
0.94
2.62
2.7
3.42
0
1.58
Table 3: Statistics on three human annotations per conversation.
4.3 Evaluation (and Agreement) Metrics
In this section we describe the metrics used to compare diﬀerent annotations. These metrics
measure both how much our annotators agree with each other, and how well our models
and various baselines perform. For a given conversation, diﬀerent annotations can have
diﬀerent numbers of topics, diﬀerent topic assignments of the sentences (i.e., the clustering)
and diﬀerent topic labels. Below we describe the metrics used to measure the segmentation
performance followed by the metrics used to measure the labeling performance.
4.3.1 Metrics for Topic Segmentation
As diﬀerent annotations can group sentences in diﬀerent numbers of clusters, agreement
metrics widely used in supervised classiﬁcation, such as the κ statistic and F1 score, are
not applicable. Again, our problem of topic segmentation in asynchronous conversation is
17. We got 100% agreement on the two predeﬁned topics ‘INTRO’ and ‘END’. Therefore, in all our compu-
tations we excluded the sentences marked as either ‘INTRO’ or ‘END’.
551

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
not sequential in nature. Therefore, the standard metrics widely used in sequential topic
segmentation in monolog and synchronous dialog, such as the Pk (Beeferman, Berger, &
Laﬀerty, 1999) and WindowDiff(WD) (Pevzner & Hearst, 2002), are also not applicable.
Rather, the one-to-one and local agreement metrics described by Elsner and Charniak
(2010) are more appropriate for our segmentation task.
The one-to-one metric measures global agreement between two annotations by pairing
up topical segments from the two annotations in a way (i.e., by computing the optimal
max-weight bipartite matching) that maximizes the total overlap, and then reports the
percentage of overlap. The local agreement metric lock measures agreement within a context
of k sentences. To compute the loc3 score for the m-th sentence in the two annotations, we
consider the previous 3 sentences: m-1, m-2 and m-3, and mark them as either ‘same’ or
‘diﬀerent’ depending on their topic assignment. The loc3 score between two annotations is
the mean agreement on these ‘same’ or ‘diﬀerent’ judgments, averaged over all sentences.
See Appendix A for a detailed description of these metrics with concrete examples.
We report the annotators’ agreement found in one-to-one and loc3 metrics in Table 4. For
each human annotation, we measure its agreement with the two other human annotations

metrics, though the local agreement (average of 83%) is a little higher than the global one
(average of 80%). For blog, the annotators have high agreement in loc3 (average of 80%),
but they disagree more in one-to-one (average of 54%). A low one-to-one agreement in
blog is quite acceptable since blog conversations are much longer and less focused than

blogs, people are more informal and often make implicit jokes (see Figure 2). As a result,
the segmentation task in blogs is more challenging for humans as well as for our models.
Note that in a similar annotation task for chat disentanglement, Elsner and Charniak (2010)
report an average one-to-one score of 53%. Since the one-to-one score for naive baselines (see
Section 5.1) is much lower than the human agreement, this metric diﬀerentiates human-like
performance from baseline. Therefore, computing one-to-one correlation with the human
annotations is a legitimate evaluation for our models.
Mean
Max
Min

Blog

Blog

Blog
one-to-one
80.4
54.2
100.0
84.1
31.3
25.3
loc3
83.2
80.1
100.0
94.0
43.7
63.3
Table 4: Annotator agreement in one-to-one and loc3 on the two corpora.
When we analyze the source of disagreement in the annotation, we ﬁnd that by far the
most frequent reason is the same as the one observed by Elsner and Charniak (2010) for the
chat disentanglement task; namely, some annotators are more speciﬁc (i.e., ﬁne) than others
(i.e., coarse). To determine the level of speciﬁcity in an annotation, similarly to Elsner and
Charniak, we use the information-theoretic concept of entropy. If we consider the topic
of a randomly picked sentence in a conversation as a random variable X, its entropy H(X)
measures the level of details in an annotation. For topics k each having length nk in a
conversation of length N, we compute H(X) as follows:
552

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
H(X) = −
K
X
k=1
nk
N log2
nk
N
(18)
where K is the total number of topics (or topical segments) in the conversation.
The
entropy gets higher as the number of topics increases and the topics are evenly distributed

1.58 to 3.42 in blog conversations (Table 3). These variations demonstrate the diﬀerences
in speciﬁcity for diﬀerent annotators, but do not determine their agreement on the general
structure.
To quantify this, we use the many-to-one metric proposed by Elsner and
Charniak (2010).
It maps each of the source clusters to the single target cluster with
which it gets the highest overlap, then computes the total percentage of overlap.
This
metric is asymmetrical, and not to be used for performance evaluation.18
However, it
provides some insights about the annotation speciﬁcity. For example, if one splits a cluster
of another annotator into multiple sub-clusters then, the many-to-one score from ﬁne to
coarse annotation is 100%. In our corpora, by mapping from ﬁne (high-entropy) to coarse

conversations and an average of 72% in blog conversations (Table 5). This suggests that
the ﬁner annotations have mostly the same scopic boundaries as the coarser ones.
Mean
Max
Min

Blog

Blog

Blog
many-to-one
94.9
72.3
100
98.2
61.1
51.4
Table 5: Annotator agreement in many-to-one on the two corpora.
4.3.2 Metrics for Topic Labeling
Recall that we extract keyphrases from the text as topic labels. Traditionally keyphrase ex-
traction is evaluated using precision, recall and F-measure based on exact matches between
the extracted keyphrases and the human-assigned keyphrases (e.g., Mihalcea and Tarau,
2004; Medelyan et al., 2009). However, it has been noted that this approach based on exact
matches underestimates the performance (Turney, 2000). For example, when compared with
the reference keyphrase ‘Game contents or size’, a credible candidate keyphrase ‘Game con-
tents’ gets evaluated as wrong in this metric. Therefore, recent studies (Zesch & Gurevych,
2009; Kim, Baldwin, & Kan, 2010a) suggest to use the n-gram-based metrics that account
for near-misses, similar to the ones used in text summarization, e.g., ROUGE (Lin, 2004),
and machine translation, e.g., BLEU (Papineni, Roukos, Ward, & Zhu, 2002).
Kim et al. (2010a) evaluated the utility of diﬀerent n-gram-based metrics for keyphrase
extraction and showed that the metric which we call mutual-overlap (m-o), correlates
most with human judgments.19 Therefore, one of the metrics we use for evaluating our topic
18. One can easily optimize it by assigning a diﬀerent topic to each of the source sentences.
19. Kim et al. (2010a) call this metric R-precision (R-p), which is diﬀerent from the actual deﬁnition
of R-p for keyphrase evaluation given by Zesch and Gurevych (2009). Originally, R-p is the precision
measured when the number of candidate keyphrases equals the number of gold keyphrases.
553

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
labeling models is m-o. Given a reference keyphrase pr of length (in words) nr, a candidate
keyphrase pc of length nc, and no being the number of overlapping (modulo stemming)
words between pr and pc, mutual-overlap is formally deﬁned as:
mutual−overlap(pr, pc) =
no
max(nr, nc)
(19)
This metric gives full credit to exact matches and morphological variants, and par-
tial credit to two cases of overlapping phrases: (i) when the candidate keyphrase includes
the reference keyphrase, and (ii) when the candidate keyphrase is a part of the reference
keyphrase. Notice that m-o as deﬁned above evaluates a single candidate keyphrase against
a reference keyphrase. In our setting, we have a single reference keyphrase (i.e., topic label)
for each topical cluster, but as mentioned before, we may want our models to extract the
top k keyphrases. Therefore, we modify m-o to evaluate a set of k candidate keyphrases Pc
against a reference keyphrase pr as follows, calling it weighted-mutual-overlap (w-m-o):
weighted−mutual−overlap(pr, Pc) =
k
X
i=1
no
max(nr, nic)S(pi
c)
(20)
where S(pi
c) is the normalized score (i.e., S(pi
c) satisﬁes 0 ≤S(pi
c) ≤1 and Pk
i=1 S(pi
c) = 1)
of the i-th candidate phrase pi
c ∈Pc. For k = 1, this metric is equivalent to m-o, and for
higher values of k, it takes the sum of k m-o scores, each weighted by its normalized score.
The w-m-o metric described above only considers word overlap and ignores other se-
mantic relations (e.g., synonymy, hypernymy) between words. However, annotators when
writing the topic descriptions, may use words that are not directly from the conversation,
but are semantically related. For example, given a reference keyphrase ‘meeting agenda’,
its lexical semantic variants like ‘meeting schedule’ or ‘meeting plan’ should be treated as
correct.
Therefore, we also consider a generalization of w-m-o that incorporates lexical
semantics. We deﬁne weighted-semantic-mutual-overlap (w-s-m-o) as follows:
weighted−semantic−mutual−overlap(pr, Pc) =
k
X
i=1
P
tr∈pr
P
tc∈pic σ(tr, tc)
max(nr, nic)
S(pi
c)
(21)
where σ(tr, tc) is the semantic similarity between the nouns tr and tc. The value of σ(tr, tc) is
between 0 and 1, where 1 denotes notably high similarity and 0 denotes little-to-none. Notice
that, since this metric considers semantic similarity between all possible pairs of nouns, the
value of this measure can be greater than 100% (when presented in percentage). We use
the metrics (e.g., lin similarity, wup similarity) provided in the WordNet::Similarity package
(Pedersen, Patwardhan, & Michelizzi, 2004) for computing WordNet-based similarity, and
always choose the most frequent sense for a noun. The results we get are similar across the
similarity metrics. For brevity, we just mention the lin similarity in this article.
4.3.3 Metrics for End-to-End Evaluation
Just like the human annotators, our end-to-end system takes an asynchronous conversation
as input, ﬁnds the topical segments in the conversation, and then assigns short descriptions
554

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
(topic labels) to each of the topical segments. It would be fairly easy to compute agreement
on topic labels based on mutual overlaps, if the number of topics and topical segments were
ﬁxed across the annotations of a given conversation. However, since diﬀerent annotators
(system or human) can identify a diﬀerent number of topics and diﬀerent clustering of
sentences, measuring annotator (model or human) agreement on the topic labels is not a
trivial task.
To solve this, we ﬁrst map the clusters of one annotation (say A1) to the
clusters of another (say A2) by the optimal one-to-one mapping described in the previous
section. After that, we compute the w-m-o and w-s-m-o scores on the labels of the mapped
(or paired) clusters. Formally, if l1
i is the label of cluster c1
i in A1 that is mapped to the
cluster c2
j with label l2
j in A2, we compute w-m-o(l1
i , l2
j) and w-s-m-o(l1
i , l2
j).
Table 6 reports the human agreement for w-m-o and w-s-m-o on the two corpora. Similar

the reasons remain the same; the length and the characteristics (e.g., informal, less focused)
of blog conversations make the annotators disagree more. However, note that these measures
are computed based on one-to-one mappings of the clusters and may not reﬂect the same
agreement one would get if the annotators were asked to label the same segments.
Mean
Max
Min

Blog

Blog

Blog
w-m-o
36.8
19.9
100.0
54.2
0.0
0.0
w-s-m-o
42.5
28.2
107.3
60.8
0.0
5.2
Table 6: Annotator agreement in w-m-o and w-s-m-o on the two corpora.
5. Experiments
In this section we present our experimental results. First, we show the performance of the
segmentation models. Then we show the performance of the topic labeling models based
on manual segmentation. Finally, we present the performance of the end-to-end system.
5.1 Topic Segmentation Evaluation
In this section we present the experimental setup and results for the segmentation task.
5.1.1 Experimental Setup for Segmentation
We ran six diﬀerent topic segmentation models on our corpora presented in Section 4. Our
ﬁrst model is the graph-based unsupervised segmentation model presented by Malioutov
and Barzilay (2006). Since the sequentiality constraint of topic segmentation in monolog
and synchronous dialog does not hold in asynchronous conversation, we implement this
model without this constraint. Speciﬁcally, this model (call it M&B) constructs a weighted
undirected graph G(V, E), where the nodes V represent the sentences and the edge weights
w(x, y) represent the cosine similarity (Equation 5) between sentences x and y. It then
ﬁnds the topical segments by optimizing the normalized cut criterion (Equation 6). Thus,
M&B considers the conversation globally, but models only lexical similarity.
555

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
The other ﬁve models are LDA, LDA+FQG, LCSeg, LCSeg+FQG and the Supervised
model (SUP) as described in Section 3. The tunable parameters of the diﬀerent models
were set based on their performance on our developement set. The hyperparameters α and
β in LDA were set to their default values (α=50/K, β=0.01) as suggested by Steyvers
and Griﬃths (2007).20 The regularization strength λ in LDA+FQG was set to 20. The
parameters of LCSeg were set to their default values since this setting delivers the best
performance on the development set. For a fair comparison, we set the same number of
topics per conversation in all of the models. If at least two of the three annotators agree on
the topic number, we set that number, otherwise we set the ﬂoor value of the average topic
number. The mean statistics of the six model annotations are shown in Table 7. Comparing
with the statistics of the human annotations in Table 3, we can notice that these numbers
are within the bounds of the human annotations.21
M&B
LDA
LDA+FQG
LCSeg
LCSeg+FQG
SUP

Topic number
2.41
2.10
1.90
2.41
2.41
2.41
Topic length
12.41
13.3
15.50
12.41
12.41
12.41
Topic density
1.90
1.83
1.60
1.01
1.39
1.42
Entropy
0.99
0.98
0.75
0.81
0.93
0.98
Blog
Topic number
10.65
10.65
10.65
10.65
10.65
10.65
Topic length
20.32
20.32
20.32
20.32
20.32
20.32
Topic density
7.38
9.39
8.32
1.00
5.21
5.30
Entropy
2.54
3.33
2.37
2.85
2.81
2.85
Table 7: Mean statistics of diﬀerent model’s annotation
We also evaluate the following baselines, which any useful model should outperform.
• All diﬀerent Each sentence in the conversation constitutes a separate topic.
• All same The whole conversation constitutes a single topic.
• Speaker The sentences from each participant constitute a separate topic.
• Blocks of k (= 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30): Each consecutive group of k sentences in
the temporal order of the conversation constitutes a separate topic.
5.1.2 Results for Segmentation
Table 8 presents the human agreement and the agreement of the models with the human
annotators on our corpora. For each model annotation, we measure its agreement with the
three human annotations separately using the metrics described in Section 4.3.1, and report
the mean agreements. In the table, we also show the performance of the two best baselines–
the Speaker and the Blocks of k.
20. The performance of LDA does not seem to be sensitive to the values of α and β.
21. Although the topic numbers per conversation are ﬁxed for diﬀerent models, LDA and LDA+FQG may
ﬁnd less number of topics (see Equation 3 and 4).
556

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
Baselines
Models
Human
Speaker
Blocks
of k
M&B
LDA
LDA+
FQG
LCSeg
LCSeg
+FQG
SUP

Mean 1-to-1
51.8
38.3
62.8
57.3
61.5
62.2
69.3
72.3
80.4
Max 1-to-1
94.3
77.1
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Min 1-to-1
23.4
14.6
36.3
24.3
24.0
33.1
38.0
42.4
31.3
Mean loc3
64.1
57.4
62.4
54.1
60.6
72.0
72.7
75.8
83.2
Max loc3
97.0
73.1
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Min loc3
27.4
42.6
36.3
38.1
38.4
40.7
40.6
40.4
43.7
Blog
Mean 1-to-1
33.5
32.0
30.0
25.2
28.0
36.6
46.7
48.5
54.2
Max 1-to-1
61.1
46.0
45.3
42.1
56.3
53.6
67.4
66.1
84.1
Min 1-to-1
13.0
15.6
18.2
15.3
16.1
23.7
26.6
28.4
25.3
Mean loc3
67.0
52.8
54.1
53.0
55.4
56.5
75.1
77.2
80.1
Max loc3
87.1
68.4
64.3
65.6
67.1
76.0
89.0
96.4
94.0
Min loc3
53.4
42.3
45.1
38.6
46.3
43.1
56.7
63.2
63.3
Table 8: Topic segmentation performance of the two best Baselines, Human and Models.

Most of the baselines perform rather poorly. All diﬀerent is the worst baseline of all with
mean one-to-one scores of only 0.05 and 0.10, and mean loc3 scores of only 0.47 and 0.25

but it performs poorly in blog with mean one-to-one of 0.19 and mean loc3 of 0.54. On the

This is intuitive since the average number of topics and topic length in blog conversations

for conversations containing only one topic, but its performance rapidly degrades as the
number of topics increases. It has mean one-to-one scores of 0.29 and 0.28 and mean loc3

baseline in both domains.22 In several cases it beats some of the under-performing models.

than the baselines do, but less than the annotators agree with each other. We observe a
similar trend in the local metric loc3, however on this metric, some models fail to beat the
best baselines. Notice that human agreement for some of the annotations is quite low (see
the Min scores), even lower than the mean agreement of the baselines. As explained before,
this is due to the fact that some human annotations are much more ﬁne-grained than others.
In the blog corpus, the agreement on the global metric (one-to-one) is much lower than

a similar trend in both metrics– some under-performing models fail to beat the baselines,
while others perform better than the baselines, but worse than the human annotators.
The comparison among the models reveals a general pattern. The probabilistic gen-
erative models LDA and LDA+FQG perform disappointingly on both corpora. A likely
explanation is that the independence assumption made by these models when computing
the distribution over topics for a sentence from the distributions of its words causes nearby
22. There are many anonymous authors in our blog corpus. We treated each of them as a separate author.
557

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
sentences (i.e., local context) to be excessively distributed over topics.
Another reason
could be the limited amount of data available for training. In our corpora, the average

which might not be suﬃcient for the LDA models (Murphy, 2012). If we compare the per-
formance of LDA+FQG with the performance of LDA, we get a signiﬁcant improvement
with LDA+FQG in both metrics on both corpora (p<0.01). The regularization with the
FQG prevents the local context from being excessively distributed over topics.
The unsupervised graph-based model M&B performs better than the LDA models in
most cases (i.e., except loc3 in blog) (p < 0.001). However, its performance is still far below
the performance of the top performing models like LCSeg+FQG and the supervised model.
The reason is that even though, by constructing a complete graph, this method considers the
conversation globally, it only models the lexical similarity and disregards other important
features of asynchronous conversation like the ﬁne conversation structure and the speaker.
Comparison of LCSeg with LDAs and M&B reveals that LCSeg in general is a better
model. LCSeg outperforms LDA by a wide margin in one-to-one on two datasets and in

signiﬁcant with p < 0.01. LCSeg also outperforms M&B in most cases (p < 0.01) except in

context intact. This helps it to achieve high loc3 agreement for shorter conversations like

(i.e., extracts larger chunks of sentences as a topic segment) and gets low loc3 agreement.
This is unsurprising if we look at its topic density in Table 7 on the two datasets– the density
is very low in the blog corpus compared to annotators and other well performing models.
Another reason of its superior performance over LDAs and M&B could be its term weighting
scheme. Unlike LDAs and M&B, which consider only repetition, LCSeg also considers how
tightly the repetition happens. However, there is still a large gap in performance between
LCSeg and other top performing models (LCSeg+FQG, the supervised).
As explained
earlier, topics in an asynchronous conversation may not change sequentially in the temporal
order of the sentences. If topics are interleaved then LCSeg fails to identify them correctly.
Furthermore, LCSeg does not consider other important features beyond the lexical cohesion.
When we incorporate FQG into LCSeg, we get a signiﬁcant improvement in one-to-one
on both corpora and in loc3 on blog (p<0.0001). Even though the improvement in loc3

models. Overall, LCSeg+FQG is the best unsupervised model. This supports our claim
that sentences connected by reply-to relations in the FQG usually refer to the same topic.
Finally, when we combine all the features into our graph-based supervised model (SUP
in Table 8), we get a signiﬁcant improvement over LCSeg+FQG in both metrics across both
domains (p<0.01). The agreements achieved by the supervised model are also much closer
to that of human annotators. Beside the features, this improvement might also be due to
the fact that, by constructing a complete graph, this model considers relations between all
possible sentence pairs in a conversation, which we believe is a key requirement for topic
segmentation in asynchronous conversations.
558

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
5.2 Topic Labeling Evaluation
In this section we present the experimental evaluation of the topic labeling models when
the models are provided with manual (or gold) segmentation. This allows us to judge their
performance independently of the topic segmentation task.
5.2.1 Experimental Setup for Topic Labeling

92 topics (or topical segments) respectively (269 in total), and in the blog corpus, they
found 251, 119 and 192 topics respectively (562 in total). The annotators wrote a short
high-level description for each topic.
These descriptions serve as reference topic labels
in our evaluation.23
The goal of the topic labeling models is to automatically generate
such informative descriptions for each topical segment. We compare our approach with
two baselines. The ﬁrst baseline FreqBL ranks the words according to their frequencies.
The second baseline LeadBL, expressed by equation 11, ranks the words based on their
relevance only to the leading sentences in a topical segment.
We also compare our model with two state-of-the-art keyphrase extraction methods.
The ﬁrst one is the unsupervised general TextRank model proposed by Mihalcea and Tarau
(2004) (call it M&T) that does not incorporate any conversation speciﬁc information. The
second one is the supervised model Maui proposed by Medelyan et al. (2009). Brieﬂy, Maui
ﬁrst extracts all n-grams up to a maximum length of 3 as candidate keyphrases. Then a
bagged decision tree classiﬁer ﬁlters the candidates using nine diﬀerent features. Due to the
lack of labeled training data in asynchronous conversations, we train Maui on the human-
annotated dataset released as part of the SemEval-2010 task 5 on automatic keyphrase
extraction from scientiﬁc articles (Kim, Medelyan, Kan, & Baldwin, 2010b). This dataset
contains 244 scientiﬁc papers from the ACM digital library, each comes with a set of author-
assigned and reader-assigned keyphrases. The total number of keyphrases assigned to the
244 articles by both the authors and the readers is 3705.
We experimented with two diﬀerent versions of our biased random walk model that
incorporates informative clues from the leading sentences. One, BiasRW, does not include
any conversation-level phrase (Section 3.2.4), and the other one BiasRW+, does. The
parameter Uk, the set of leading sentences, was empirically set to the ﬁrst two sentences
and the bias parameter λ was set to 0.85 based on our development set.
We experimented with four diﬀerent versions of the co-ranking framework depending
on what type of random walk is performed on the word co-occurrence graph (WCG)
and whether the model includes any conversation-level phrases. Let CorGen denote the
co-ranking model with a general random walk on WCG, and CorBias denote the co-
ranking model with a biased random walk on WCG. These two models do not include any
conversation-level phrase while CorGen+ and CorBias+ do. The coupling strength δ
and the co-occurrence window size s were empirically set to 0.4 and 2, respectively, based
on the development set. The dumping factor was set to its default value 0.85.
Note that all the models (except Maui) and the baselines follow the same preprocessing
and post-processing (i.e., phrase generation and redundancy checking) steps. The value of
23. Notice that in our setting, for each topic segment we have only one reference label to compare with.
Therefore, we do not show the human agreement on the topic labeling task in Table 9 and 10.
559

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
M in phrase generation was set to 25% of the total number of words in the cluster, and ρ
in redundancy checking was set to 0.35 based on the development set.
5.2.2 Results for Topic Labeling
We evaluate the performance of diﬀerent models using the metrics described in Section
4.3.2. Table 9 and 10, respectively, show the mean weighted-mutual-overlap (w-m-o) and
weighted-semantic-mutual-overlap (w-s-m-o) scores in percentage of diﬀerent models for
diﬀerent values of k (i.e., number of output labels) on the two corpora.
Both the baselines have proved to be strong, beating the existing models in almost every
case. This tells us that the frequency of the words in the topic segment and their occurrence
in the leading sentences carry important information for topic labeling. Generally speaking,

The supervised model Maui is the worst performer in both metrics on the two corpora.
Its performance is also consistently low across the corpora for any particular value of k.
A possible explanation is that Maui was trained on a domain (scientiﬁc articles), which is
rather diﬀerent from asynchronous conversations. Another reason may be that Maui does
not consider any conversational features.
The general random walk model M&T also delivers poor performance on our corpora,
failing to beat the baselines in both measures. This indicates that the random walk model
based on only co-occurrence relations between the words is not suﬃcient for ﬁnding topic
labels in asynchronous conversations. It needs to consider conversation speciﬁc information.
By incorporating the clues from the leading sentences, our biased random walk model
BiasRW improves the performance signiﬁcantly over the baselines in both metrics for all the
values of k on the two corpora (p<0.05). This demonstrates the usefulness of considering the
leading sentences as an information source for topic labeling in asynchronous conversation.
k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

Blog

Blog

Blog

Blog

Blog
Baselines
FreqBL
22.86
19.05
17.47
16.17
14.96
13.83
13.17
13.45
12.06
12.59
LeadBL
22.41
18.17
18.94
15.95
15.92
13.75
14.36
12.61
13.76
11.93
Models
M&T
15.87
18.23
12.68
14.31
10.33
12.15
9.63
11.38
9.07
11.03
Maui
10.48
10.03
9.86
9.56
9.03
9.23
8.71
8.90
8.50
8.53
BiasRW
24.77
20.83
19.78
17.28
17.38
15.06
16.24
14.53
15.80
14.26
BiasRW+
24.91
23.65
20.36
19.69
18.09
17.76
16.20
16.78
15.78
15.86
CorGen
17.60
20.76
15.32
17.64
15.14
15.78
14.23
15.03
14.08
14.75
CorGen+
18.32
22.44
15.86
19.65
15.46
18.01
14.89
16.90
14.45
16.13
CorBias
24.84
20.96
19.88
17.73
17.61
16.22
16.99
15.64
16.81
15.38
CorBias+
25.13
23.83
20.20
19.97
18.21
18.33
17.15
17.28
16.90
16.55
Table 9: Mean weighted-mutual-overlap (w-m-o) scores for diﬀerent values of k on two corpora.
The general co-ranking model CorGen, by incorporating the conversation structure,
outperforms the baselines in both metrics for all k on blog (p<0.05), but fails to do so in

CorGen in w-m-o for all k (Table 9), but CorGen outperforms BiasRW in w-s-m-o (Table

outperforms CorGen in both metrics for all k (p<0.05). So we can conclude that, on blog,
560

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
exploiting the conversation structure seems to be more beneﬁcial than the leading sentences,

the FQGs of blog segments are generally larger and capture more information than the

more of the human-authored words than they do in blog.
k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

Blog

Blog

Blog

Blog

Blog
Baselines
FreqBL
23.36
23.52
20.50
21.03
19.82
20.18
18.47
19.58
17.81
19.27
Lead-BL
24.99
21.19
21.69
20.61
20.40
19.49
19.57
18.98
19.17
18.71
Models
M&T
18.71
22.08
16.25
19.59
14.62
17.91
14.29
17.27
14.06
16.92
Maui
14.79
14.14
13.76
13.67
13.03
12.87
12.69
12.10
11.73
11.52
BiasRW
28.87
24.63
24.76
22.51
22.48
21.36
21.67
20.95
21.28
20.78
BiasRW+
27.96
24.51
24.71
23.05
22.56
22.88
21.19
22.08
20.82
21.73
CorGen
23.66
24.69
21.97
23.83
21.51
22.86
20.98
22.37
20.44
22.22
CorGen+
23.50
24.30
22.09
24.35
21.96
23.89
21.36
23.42
20.90
23.00
CorBias
28.44
25.66
26.39
24.15
24.47
23.18
23.70
22.76
23.56
22.67
CorBias+
27.97
25.26
26.34
24.19
24.69
23.60
23.65
23.44
23.23
23.20
Table 10: Mean weighted-semantic-mutual-overlap scores for diﬀerent values of k on two corpora.
By combining the two forms of conversation speciﬁc information into a single model,
CorBias delivers improved performance over CorGen and BiasRW in both metrics.
On

blog, CorBias gets signiﬁcant improvement over BiasRW for higher values of k (3, 4, 5) in
both metrics (p<0.05). The two sources of information are complementary and help each
other to overcome the domain-speciﬁc limitations of the respective models. Therefore, one
should exploit both information sources to build a generic domain-independent system.
When we include the conversation-level phrases (+ versions), we get a signiﬁcant im-

10.77 vs. 2.5). Thus, there is little information for the label of a topical segment out-

phrases does not hurt the performance signiﬁcantly in any case.
To further analyze the performance, Table 11 shows the mean w-m-o scores when only
the best of k output labels is considered. This allows us to judge the models’ ability to
generate the best label in the top k list. The results are much clearer here. Generally
speaking, among the models that do not include conversation-level phrases, CorBias is the
best model, while including conversation-level phrases improves the performance further.
Table 12 shows some of the examples from our test set where the system-generated (i.e.,
CorBias+) labels are very similar to the human-authored ones. There are also many cases
like the ones in Table 13, where the system-generated labels are reasonable, although they
get low w-m-o and w-s-m-o scores when compared with the human-authored labels.
561

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

Blog

Blog

Blog

Blog
Baselines
FreqBL
27.02
23.69
29.79
24.29
31.12
24.88
31.25
25.58
LeadBL
28.72
21.69
30.86
23.14
31.99
24.19
31.99
25.33
Models
M&T
21.45
21.70
23.12
23.18
25.23
23.82
25.45
24.07
Maui
14.00
14.85
15.57
17.33
17.15
19.23
18.40
20.03
BiasRW
29.34
24.92
31.42
25.18
32.58
25.89
32.97
26.64
BiasRW+
29.47
25.88
31.43
27.38
32.96
28.47
33.87
29.17
CorGen
23.45
25.05
28.44
25.72
30.10
26.40
30.33
27.10
CorGen+
24.56
25.87
28.46
26.61
31.14
27.63
32.91
28.50
CorBias
28.98
25.27
30.90
26.41
32.24
27.14
33.25
27.65
CorBias+
29.76
25.96
31.04
27.65
33.61
28.63
35.35
29.58
Table 11: Mean weighted-mutual-overlap (w-m-o) scores when the best of k labels is considered.
Human-authored
System-generated (top 5)

Details of Bristol meeting
Bristol, face2face meeting, England, October
Nashville conference
Nashville conference, Courseware developers, mid October, event
Meeting agenda
detailed agenda, main point, meetings, revision, wcag meetings
Design guidelines
general rule, design guidelines, accessible design, absolutes, forbid
Contact with Steven
Steven Pemberton, contact, charter, status, schedule w3c
Blog
faster than light (FTL) travel
FTL travel, need FTL, limited FTL, FTL drives, long FTL
Dr. Paul Laviolette
Dr. Paul Laviolette, bang theory, systems theory, extraterrestial beacons, laugh
Vietnam and Iraq warfare
Vietnam war, incapable guerrilla war, war information, war ii, vietnamese war
Pulsars
mean pulsars, pulsars slow time, long pulsars, relative pulsars, set pulsars
Linux distributions
linux distro, linux support, major linux, viable linux
Table 12: Examples of Human-authored labels and System-generated labels.
Human-authored
System-generated
Meeting time and place
October, mid October, timing, w3c timing issues, Ottawa
Archaeology
religious site, burial site, ritual site, barrows tomb
Bio of Al
Al Gilman, standards reformer, repair interest group, ER IG, ER teams
Budget Constraints
budget, notice, costs, smaller companies, travel
Food choice
roast turkey breast, default choices, small number, vegetable rataouille, lunch
Table 13: Examples of System-generated labels that are reasonable but get low scores.
562

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
This is because most of the human-authored labels in our corpora are abstractive in
nature. Annotators often write their own labels rather than simply copying keyphrases
from the text. In doing so, they rely on their expertise and general world knowledge that
may go beyond the contents of the conversation. In fact, although annotators reuse many
words from the conversation, only 9.81% of the human-authored labels in blog and 12.74%

Generating human-like labels will require a deeper understanding of the text and robust
textual inference, for which our extractive approach can provide some useful input.
5.3 Full System Evaluation
In this section we present the performance of our end-to-end system. We ﬁrst segment a
given asynchronous conversation using our best topic segmenter (the supervised model),
and then feed its output to our best topic labeler (the CorBias+ model). Table 14 presents
the human agreement and the agreement of our system with the human annotators based
on the best of k outputs. For each system annotation we measure its agreement in w-m-o
and w-s-m-o with the three human annotations using the method described in Section 4.3.3.
System
Human
k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

Mean w-m-o
19.19
23.62
26.19
27.06
28.06
36.84
Max w-m-o
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Mean w-s-m-o
24.98
32.08
34.63
36.92
38.95
42.54
Max w-s-m-o
108.43
108.43
108.43
108.43
108.43
107.31
Blog
Mean w-m-o
9.71
11.71
14.55
15.83
16.72
19.97
Max w-m-o
26.67
26.67
35.00
35.00
35.00
54.17
Mean w-s-m-o
15.46
19.77
23.35
25.57
26.23
28.22
Max w-s-m-o
47.10
47.28
47.28
48.54
48.54
60.76
Table 14: Performance of the end-to-end system and human agreement.

sations. However, there is a substantial gap between the mean and the max w-m-o scores.
Similarly, in w-s-m-o, our system achieves a maximum of 108% agreement, but the mean
varies from 25% to 39% depending on diﬀerent values of k. In blog, the w-m-o and w-s-m-o
scores are much lower. The maximum scores achieved in w-m-o and w-s-m-o metrics in blog
are only 35% and 49% (for k = 5), respectively. The mean w-m-o score varies from 10% to
17%, and the mean w-s-m-o score varies from 15% to 28% for diﬀerent values of k. This
demonstrates the diﬃculties of topic segmentation and labeling tasks in blog conversations.
Comparing with Table 11, we can notice that inaccuracies in the topic segmenter aﬀects
the overall performance.
However, our results are encouraging.
Even though for lower
values of k there is a substantial gap between our results and the human agreement, as the
value of k increases, our results get closer to the human agreement, especially in w-s-m-o.
563

Joty, Carenini, & Ng
6. Conclusion and Future Direction

which, along with the proposed metrics, will allow researchers to evaluate their work quan-
titatively. We also present a complete computational framework for topic segmentation and
labeling in asynchronous conversation.24 Our approach extends state-of-the-art methods by
considering the ﬁne-grained structure of the asynchronous conversation, along with other
conversational features. We do this by applying recent graph-based methods for NLP such
as min-cut and random walk on paragraph, sentence or word graphs.
For topic segmentation, we extend the LDA and LCSeg unsupervised models to incor-
porate the ﬁne-grained conversational structure (the Fragment Quotation Graph (FQG)),
generating two novel unsupervised models LDA+FQG and LCSeg+FQG. In addition to
that, we also present a novel graph-theoretic supervised segmentation model that combines
lexical, conversational and topic features. For topic labeling, we propose two novel random
walk models that extract the most representative keyphrases from the text, by respectively
capturing conversation speciﬁc clues from two diﬀerent sources: the leading sentences and
the ﬁne conversational structure (i.e., the FQG).
Experimental results in the topic segmentation task demonstrate that both LDA and
LCSeg beneﬁt signiﬁcantly when they are extended to consider the FQG, with LCSeg+FQG
being the best unsupervised model. The comparison of the supervised segmentation model
with the unsupervised models shows that the supervised method outperforms the unsuper-
vised ones even using only a few labeled conversations, being the best segmentation model
overall. The outputs of LCSeg+FQG and the supervised model are also highly correlated
with human annotations in both local and global metrics. The experiment on the topic
labeling task reveals that the random walk models perform better when they exploit the
conversation speciﬁc clues and the best results are achieved when all the sources of clues are
exploited. The evaluation of the complete end-to-end system also shows promising results
when compared with human performance.
This work can be extended in many ways. Given that most of the human-authored
labels are abstractive in nature, we plan to extend our labeling framework to generate
more abstract human-like labels that could better synthesize the information expressed in
a topic segment. A promising approach would be to rely on more sophisticated methods for
information extraction, combined with more semantics (e.g., phrase entailment) and data-
to-text generation techniques. Another interesting venue for future work is to perform a
more extrinsic evaluation of our methods. Instead of testing them with respect to a human
gold standard, it would be extremely interesting to see how eﬀective they are when used to
support other NLP tasks, such as summarization and conversation visualization. We are
also interested in the future to transfer our approach to other similar domains by domain
adaptation methods. We plan to work on both synchronous and asynchronous domains.
24. Our annotated corpora, annotation manual and source code will be made publicly available from
www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/lci/bc3.html
564

Topic Segmentation and Labeling in Asynchronous Conversations
Bibliographic Note
Portions of this work were previously published in two conference proceedings (Joty et al.,
2010, 2011).
This article signiﬁcantly extends our previous work in several ways, most
notably: (i) we complete the topic modeling pipeline by presenting a novel topic labeling
framework (Section 3.2), (ii) we propose a new set of metrics for the topic labeling task
(Section 5.2), (iii) we present a new annotated corpus of blog conversations, and show how
the topic segmentation and labeling models perform on this new dataset (Section 4 and 5),
and (iv) we demonstrate the performance of the end-to-end system (Section 5.3).
