A Novel Hybrid CNN-AIS Visual Pattern
Recognition Engine
Vandna Bhalla, Santanu Chaudhury, and Arihant Jain
Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi, India

http://www.iitd.ac.in}
Abstract. Machine learning methods are used today for most recog-
nition problems. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have time and
again proved successful for many image processing tasks primarily for
their architecture. In this paper we propose to apply CNN to small data
sets like for example, personal albums or other similar environs where the
size of training dataset is a limitation, within the framework of a proposed
hybrid CNN-AIS model. We use Artiﬁcial Immune System Principles to
enhance small size of training data set. A layer of Clonal Selection is
added to the local ﬁltering and max pooling of CNN Architecture. The
proposed Architecture is evaluated using the standard MNIST dataset by
limiting the data size and also with a small personal data sample belong-
ing to two diﬀerent classes. Experimental results show that the proposed
hybrid CNN-AIS based recognition engine works well when the size of
training data is limited in size.
Keywords: CNN, Clonal Selection(CS), Aritiﬁcal Immune Systems(AIS),
small datasize, Diversity
1
Introduction
Today all object recognition approaches use machine-learning methods. Larger
the dataset better is the performance. Labeled datasets like NORB[1] Caltech-
101/256[2][3] and CIFAR-10/100[4] with tens of thousands of images are in to-
days scenario considered small and LabelMe[5] and Image Net [6] with millions
of images are preferred. A simple recognition task also requires datasets of size
of the order of tens of thousands of images [14]. It is always assumed that objects
in realistic settings show a lot of variability and therefore to learn to recognize
them it is essential to have much larger training sets. The many shortcomings of
small size data sets have been widely recognized by Pinto[7]. To learn from thou-
sands of objects from millions of images, a model with a large learning capacity
with powerful processing is required.
We present an innovative, adaptive, self-learning, and self-evolving hybrid
recognition engine, which works well with small sized training data. The model
arXiv:1503.03270v1  [cs.CV]  11 Mar 2015

uses the intelligent information processing mechanism of Artiﬁcial Immune Sys-
tem (AIS) and helps Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) generate a robust
feature set taking the small set of input training images as seeds. Our model per-
forms visual pattern learning using a heterogeneous combination of supervised
CNN and Clonal Selection (CS) principles of AIS. It can be extended to perform
classiﬁcation tasks with limited training data particularly in the context of per-
sonal photo collections; where for each training sample diﬀerent points of view
are gathered in parallel using clonal selection.This is very diﬀerent from pop-
ulating datasets with artiﬁcially generated training examples[22] by randomly
distorting the original training images with randomly picked distortion param-
eters.
Speciﬁc contribution of this paper is as follows: Designed a hybrid Con-
volutional Neural Network- Artiﬁcial Immune System (CNN-AIS) Recognition
Engine Architecture designed to work with modest sized training data. This is
detailed in Section 3. The model was tested on well-known MNIST digit database
and showed remarkable success. The current best rate of 0.3% on the MINST
digit recognition task approaches human performance [8]. But we have got good
results with considerably smaller number of training samples. We have also ap-
plied this model to a small AIS based classiﬁer and successfully accomplished
classiﬁcation for two categories from a small personal photo collection dataset.
2
Related Work
The idea of building a hierarchical structure of features for object detection
has deep roots in the computer vision literature[9],[10]. The general structure
of the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) was introduced in 1989 by
LeCun[11]. His deep convolutional neural network architecture called LeNet is
what is still being used today with a lot of consistent improvement to the in-
dividual components within the architecture. An important idea of the CNN
is that the feature extraction and classiﬁer were uniﬁed in a single structure.
The parameters of both the classiﬁer and feature detector were trained globally
and supervised by back propagation. After the last stage of feature detection a
few fully connected layers were added to perform classiﬁcation. The model was
proposed for handwritten digit recognition and achieved a very high success rate
on MINST dataset[12]. But it demands substantial amount of labeled data for
training (60,000 for MINST). Also the size of input is very small(28x28) with no
background clutter, illumination change etc which is an integral part of normal
pictures/images. Infact for most realistic vision applications this is not the case.
For instance Ranzato et al [13] trained a large CNN for object detection (Caltech
101 dataset) but obtained poor results though it achieved perfect classiﬁcation
on the training set. The weak generalization power of CNN when the number of
training data is small and the number of free parameter is large is a case of over
ﬁtting or overparametrization. Other biologically inspired models like HMAX
[14] use hardwired ﬁlter and use hard Max functions to compute the responses

in the pooling layer. The problem was that it was unable to adapt to diﬀerent
problem settings.
Successful algorithms have been built on top of handcrafted gradient response
features such as SIFT and histograms of oriented gradients (HOG). These are
ﬁxed features and are unable to adjust to model the intricacies of a problem.
The success of object recognition algorithm to a large extent depends on features
detected. The features should have the most distinct characteristics among dif-
ferent classes while retaining invariant characteristics within a class. Traditional
hand designed feature extraction is laborious and moreover cannot process raw
images while the automatic extraction mechanism can fetch features directly.
The multiple processing layers of machine learning systems extract more ab-
stract, invariant features of data and have higher classiﬁcation accuracy than the
traditional shallower classiﬁers. These deep architectures have shown promising
performances in image [12] language [15] and speech[16]. In [17], [18] supervised
classiﬁers such as CNNs, MLPs, SVMs and K-nearest Neighbors are combined
in a Mixture of Experts approach where the output of parallel classiﬁers is used
to produce the ﬁnal result. CNNs though eﬃcient at learning invariant features
from images, do not always produce optimal classiﬁcation and SVMs with their
ﬁxed kernel function are unable to learn complicated invariances. Our approach
is diﬀerent as we propose a single architecture for training and testing using
CNN and AIS principles.
3
Convolutional Neural Network- Artiﬁcial Immune
System (CNN-AIS) Model
Our proposed architecture integrates Clonal Selection (CS) principles from Arti-
ﬁcial Immune System(AIS) with Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN). We will
brieﬂy introduce the Artiﬁcial Immune System (AIS) theory and the basic CNN
structure that we have used in the subsequent sections. Then the hybrid CNN-
AIS trainable recognition engine is presented followed by results and analysis of
its merits.
Artiﬁcial Immune Systems (AIS): AIS use Clonal Selection and Negative
Selection imitating the biological immune system. The main task of the immune
system is to defend the organism against pathogens. In the human body the
B-cells with diﬀerent receptor shapes try to bind to antigens. The best ﬁt cells
proliferate and produce clones which mutate at very high rates. The process
is repeated and it is likely that a better B-cell (better solution) might emerge.
This is called Clonal Selection. These clones have mutated from the original cell
at a rate inversely proportional to the match strength. Two main concepts are
particularly relevant for our framework. Generation of Diversity: The B cells
produce antibodies for speciﬁc antigens. Each B cell makes a speciﬁc antibody,
which is expressed from the genes in its gene library. The gene library does not
contain genes that deﬁne antibodies for every possible antigen. Gene fragments

in the gene library randomly combine and recombine and produce a huge diverse
range of antibodies
This helps the immune system to make the precise antibody for an antigen it
may never have encountered previously. Avidity: Refers to the accrued strength
of various diverse aﬃnities of individual binding interaction. Avidity (functional
aﬃnity) is the collective strength of multiple aﬃnities of an antigen with vari-
ous antibodies. Based on this biological process, quite a few Artiﬁcial Immune
System (AIS) have been developed in the past, [22] and [23]. Castro developed
the Clonal Selection Algorithm (CLONALG) [24] on the basis of Clonal Selec-
tion theory of the immune system. It was proved that it can perform pattern
recognition. The CLONALG algorithm can be described as follows: 1. Randomly
initialize a population of individual (M); 2. For each pattern of P, present it to the
population M and determine its aﬃnity with each element of the population M;
3. Select n of the best highest aﬃnity elements of M and generate copies/clones
of these individuals proportionally to their aﬃnity with the antigen which is
the pattern P. The higher the aﬃnity, the higher the number of clones, and
vice-versa; 4. Mutate all these copies with a rate proportional to their aﬃnity
with the input pattern: the higher the aﬃnity, the smaller the mutation rate;
5. Add these mutated individuals to the population M and reselect m of these
maturated individuals to be kept as memories of the systems; 6. Repeat steps 2
to 5 until a certain criterion is met.
Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) A Convolutional Neural Network
[22][24] is a multilayer feed forward artiﬁcial neural network with a deep su-
pervised learning architecture. The ordered architectures of MLPs progressively
learn the higher level features with the last layer giving classiﬁcation. Two op-
erations of convolutional ﬁltering and down sampling alternate to learn the fea-
tures from the raw images and constitute the feature map layers. The weights are
trained by a back propagation algorithm using gradient descent approaches for
minimizing the training error. We have used Stochastic Gradient Approach as
it avoids being stuck in poor local minima which is highly likely due to the non
linear nature of the error surface. A simpliﬁed CNN was presented in [25] which
we have used for our work instead of using the rather complicated LeNet-5[26].
The model has ﬁve layers.
CNN-AIS Model Modern architecture trains learning features across hidden
layers starting from low level details up to high level details. The architecture
of our hybrid CNN-AIS model was designed by adding an additional layer of
Artiﬁcial Immune System (AIS) based Clonal Selection (CS) in the traditional
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) structure, Fig.1. The model is explained
layer wise.
Convolutional Layer: A 2D ﬁltering between input images n, and a matrix of
kernels/weights K produces the output I where Ik = Σi,j,k M (ni * Kj) where
M is a table of input output relationships. The kernel responses from the inputs

Fig. 1. CNN-AIS Hybrid Model
connected to the same output are linearly combined. As with MLPs a scaled
hyperbolic tangent function is applied to every I.
Sub sampling Layer: Small invariances to translation and distortion is ac-
complished with the Max-Pooling operation. This is for faster convergence and
improves generalization as well.
Fully Connected Layer - I: The input to this layer is a set of feature maps
from the lower layer which are combined into a 1-dimensional feature vector and
subsequently passed through an activation function
Clonal selection Layer: This is the new additional layer that we propose in
our architecture and it is the second last layer. This layer receives its input from
the fully connected layer-I in the form of 1-D feature vector for all the images (n)
in the current running batch. Each feature vector in the Feature set undergoes
Cloning, Mutation and Crossover according to the rules of Clonal Selection to
generate additional features that satisfy the minimum threshold criteria and
resemble the particular class. The number of clones is calculated by
CNum= η x aﬃnity (Feature Vector1, Feature Vector2) ... (i), where η is the
cloning constant. Higher the aﬃnity of match the greater the clone stimulus gets,
the more the cloning number is. On the contrary, the number is less, which is
consistent with biological immune response mechanism. Mutation frequency is
deﬁned as Rate, which is calculated by
Rate = α 1/ aﬃnity (Feature Vector1, Feature Vector2)
(ii) Where α is
mutation constant. In accordance with (ii), the higher the aﬃnity of match, the

smaller the clone stimulus gets, the lower the mutation frequency is. On the
contrary, the mutation frequency is higher. Hence from n initial feature sets we
now have (n x CNum) feature sets. These newly generated feature vectors are
grouped into batches and individually fed to the output layer and the subsequent
error is backpropagated to train the kernels of the CNN. Hence from the seeds
of a few representative images of each class a bigger set is evolved using Clonal
Selection principles of Artiﬁcial Immune System. End of training phase yields
a set of representative features, which we call antibodies, from each class of
size much larger than the original dataset and a trained CNN. Though we start
with random values of feature sets(antibodies) for each class but eventually they
converge to their optimal values.
Output Layer(Fully Connected Layer-II): This layer has one output neuron
per class label and acts as linear classiﬁer operating on the 1-dimensional feature
vector set computed from the CS layer
4
Result
We performed tests on MNIST dataset. Fig.2 is a plot of comparison of error
versus training data size for both CNN and CNN +AIS hybrid. When available
data is less then CNN+AIS model performs better giving lesser error.It is evident
that CNN-AIS error rates are much lower for small data size. Hence AIS helps
in training CNN better when training data is scarce. Fig.3 shows a plot of error
versus the number of epochs for our hybrid model for standard data size. As the
number of epochs increases the error rate decreases and becomes constant after
15 epochs.
5
Application: Personal Photo Album
The CNN-AIS generates a robust and diverse pool of feature vectors and a
trained CNN for any class. We tested this model for a personal collection of
photos for two classes Picnic (A) and Conference (N). For every testing image
(the antigen), the trained CNN-AIS model computes the feature vector and
compares this with the feature set pool of that class. If the number of matches
of the test image with the various feature sets of that class and the combined
aﬃnities exceed the threshold then the testing image is placed in that class.
These emulate the antibodies in a human body recognizing an antigen. The
model is shown in Fig 4.
The trained CNN learns the features of the test image, the antigen. A two
phase testing mechanism is used for classiﬁcation. The ﬁrst phase matches the
test image feature with the 3N feature sets (antibodies) of each of the classes.
The total number of antibodies lying above the threshold for matching is counted
(C) for each class. All classes providing a minimum number of C are qualiﬁed
for phase 2 testing. The second phase calculates Avidity for each class which
is the mean strength of multiple aﬃnities of all qualiﬁed antibodies in C with
the testing image antigen. It is calculated by taking the mean of individual

Fig. 2. Error versus training data size
Fig. 3. Plot of error rate w.r.t no. of epochs

Fig. 4. Application: CNN-AIS Model Used for Personal Photo Classiﬁcation
Fig. 5. Application Analysis on Personal Photo Album
Fig. 6. Sample images from Application dataset

scores (calculated using inner product measure) of matching of test image with
each antibody above the threshold for each qualiﬁed class. This score is labeled
avidity. The class is eventually decided on the basis of the combined scores
S=(Count+Avidity). The test images are diﬀerent from training images and
may belong to diﬀerent individuals. The model can be extended to generate a
new class. If during testing no suitable match happens then the test image can
initialize a new class/ antibody set with its features set. Mutation generates the
new relevant population. The experimental results are summarized in Fig.5. The
sample dataset used for our experiments is shown in Fig.6. Despite the diversity
in the dataset and the small size of training data set, our model gives good
results.
6
Conclusion
The AIS layer shows a marked improvement in recognition when training data
is limited. The proposed model can be extended to be used as a classiﬁer for
personal photo albums as explained by the example application. The results
are very encouraging. A new class can be added to the existing set of classes
dynamically replicating the behavioral aspects of self-learning and self evolving of
human immune system. The results show the eﬃcacy of our model. The proposed
model is able to capture diversity that is inherent in personal photo collections
unlike CNN by itself.
