Monte Carlo Action Programming
Lenz Belzner
Institute for Informatics
LMU Munich
Abstract. This paper proposes Monte Carlo Action Programming, a
programming language framework for autonomous systems that act in
large probabilistic state spaces with high branching factors. It comprises
formal syntax and semantics of a nondeterministic action programming
language. The language is interpreted stochastically via Monte Carlo
Tree Search. Eﬀectiveness of the approach is shown empirically.
Keywords: Online Planning, Action Programming, MCTS
1
Introduction
We consider the problem of sequential decision making in highly complex and
changing domains. These domains are characterized by large probabilistic state
spaces and high branching factors. Additional challenges for system design are
occurrence of unexpected events and/or changing goals at runtime.
A state of the art candidate for responding to this challenge is behavior syn-
thesis with online planning [1,2,3]. Here, a planning agent evaluates possible
behavioral choices w.r.t. current situation and background knowledge at run-
time. At some point, it acts according to this evaluation and observes the actual
outcome of the action. Planning continues, incorporating the observed result.
Planning performance directly correlates with search space cardinality.
This paper introduces Monte Carlo Action Programming (MCAP) to re-
duce search space cardinality through speciﬁcation of heuristic knowledge in the
form of procedural nondeterministic programs. MCAP is based on stochastic
interpretation of nondeterministic action programs by Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) [1,4]. Combining search space constraints and stochastic interpretation
enables program evaluation in large probabilistic domains with high branching
factors. From the perspective of online planning, MCAP provides a formal non-
deterministic action programming language that allows to specify plan sketches
for autonomous systems. From the perspective of action programming, MCAP
introduces stochastic interpretation with MCTS. This enables eﬀective program
interpretation in very large, complex domains.
We will discuss MCTS and action programming in Section 2. Section 3 in-
troduces MCAP. In Section 4 we empirically compare MCTS and MCAP speci-
ﬁcations for online planning. We conclude and sketch venues for further research
in Section 5.
arXiv:1702.08441v1  [cs.AI]  25 Feb 2017

2
Related Work
We brieﬂy review Monte Carlo Tree Search in Section 2.1 and action program-
ming in Section 2.2.
2.1
Monte Carlo Tree Search
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a framework for statistical search in very
large state spaces with high branching factors based on a generative model of
the domain (i.e. a simulation). It yields good performance even without heuris-
tic assessment of intermediate states in the search space. The MCTS framework
originated from research in computer Go [4,5]. The game Go exposes the men-
tioned characteristics. Also, not many good heuristics are known for Go. Nev-
ertheless, specialized Go programs based on the MCTS algorithm are able to
play on the niveau of a human professional player [6]. MCTS is also commonly
used in autonomous planning [2,3] and has been applied successfully to a huge
number of other search tasks [1].
Fig. 1: Monte Carlo Tree Search [1].
MCTS adds nodes to the tree iteratively. Nodes represent states and store
metadata about search paths that lead through them. Gathered metadata com-
prises mean reward (i.e. node value) and the number of searches that passed
through the node. It enables assessment of exploration vs. exploitation: Should
search be directed to already explored, promising parts of the search space? Or
should it gather information about previously unexplored areas?
Figure 1 shows the basic principle of MCTS. Based on node information,
MCTS selects an action w.r.t. a given tree policy. The successor state is deter-
mined by simulating action execution. Selection is repeated as long as simulation
leads to a state that is represented by a node in the tree. Otherwise, a new node

representing the simulated outcome state is added to the tree (expansion). Then,
a default policy is executed (e.g. uniform random action execution). Gathered
reward is stored in the new node (simulation or rollout). This gives a ﬁrst es-
timation of the new node’s value. Finally, the rollout’s value is backpropagated
through the tree and the corresponding node values are updated. MCTS repeats
this procedure iteratively. Algorithm 1 shows the general MCTS approach in
pseudocode. Here, v0 is the root node of the search tree. vl denotes the last node
visited by the tree policy. ∆is the value of the rollout from vl according to the
default policy.
Algorithm 1 General MCTS approach [1]
1: procedure mcts(s0)
2:
create root node v0 with state s0
3:
while within computational budget do
4:
vl ←treepolicy(v0)
5:
∆←defaultpolicy(vl)
6:
backup(vl, ∆)
7:
return a(bestchildv0())
MCTS can be interrupted at any time and yields an estimation of quality for
all actions in the root state. The best action (w.r.t. node information) is executed
and its real outcome is observed. MCTS continues reusing the tree built so far.
Eventually, nodes representing past states are pruned from the tree.
2.2
Action Programming
Nondeterministic action programs deﬁne sketches for system behavior that are
interpreted at runtime, leaving well-deﬁned choices to be made by the system at
runtime. Interpreting an action program typically provides a measure of quality
for particular instantiations of theses sketches. Concrete traces are then executed
w.r.t. to this quality metric.
Well-established action programming languages are Golog [7,8] and Flux [9].
Each is interpreted w.r.t. a particular formal speciﬁcation of domain dynamics:
The situation calculus and the ﬂuent calculus are concerned with speciﬁcation
of action eﬀects and domain dynamics in ﬁrst order logic [10,11]. For both Golog
and Flux, Prolog interpreters have been implemented.
The MCAP framework diﬀers from these formalisms and their respective lan-
guages: (a) MCAP does not provide nor require a speciﬁc formal representation
of domain dynamics. Rather, any form of domain simulation suﬃces. (b) MCAP
does not explore the search space exhaustively. Rather, programs are interpreted
stochastically by MCTS. The search space is explored iteratively. Program in-
terpretation is directed to promising areas of the search space based on previous
interpretations. Search can be interrupted any time yielding an action recommen-

dation accounting for current situation and a given program. Recommendation
quality depends on the number of simulations used for search [1].
3
Monte Carlo Action Programming
This Section introduces Monte Carlo Action Programming (MCAP), a nondeter-
ministic procedural programming framework for autonomous systems. The main
idea of the MCAP framework is to allow to specify behavioral blueprints that
leave choices to an agent. A MCAP is a nondeterministic program. MCAP pro-
grams are interpreted probabilistically by MCTS. MCAPs constrain the MCTS
search space w.r.t. a procedural nondeterministic program.
3.1
Framework Parameters
The MCAP framework requires the following speciﬁcation.
1. A generative domain model that captures the probability distribution of
successor states w.r.t. current state and executed action (Equation 1). The
model does not have to be explicit: The framework only requires a simulation
that allows to query one particular successor state.
simulate : P(S | S × A)
(1)
(2)
2. A reward function R that encodes the quality of a state w.r.t. system goals
(Equation 3).
R : S →R
(3)
3. A discount factor γ ∈[0; 1] weights the impact of potential future decision on
the current situation. A discount factor of zero means that only immediate
consequences of action are considered. A discount factor of one means that
all future consequences inﬂuence the current decision equally, regardless of
their temporal distance.
4. A maximum search depth hmax ∈N.
3.2
Syntax
Equation 4 deﬁnes syntax of the MCAP language. ϵ is the empty program, A
denotes speciﬁed action space, ; is a sequential operator, + is nondeterministic
choice, ∥denotes interleaving concurrency. Q denotes the query space for con-
ditional evaluation (see Equation 23). ? denotes querying the current execution
context. ◦denotes a conditional loop.
P := ϵ A P;P P+P P ∥P
?(Q){P} ¬?(Q){P}
◦{Q}{P}
(4)

Normal Form We deﬁne a normal form Pnorm for MCAPs. Each program in
normal form is a choice of programs with an action preﬁx and any tail program.
Pnorm :=
X
(A;P)
(5)
Equations 6 to 13 deﬁne a term reduction system that ensures transformation
of programs to their normal form.
ϵ;p = p
(6)
p + p = p
(7)
(p1 + p2);p = (p1;p) + (p2;p)
(8)
p;(p1 + p2) = (p;p1) + (p;p2)
(9)
p1 ∥(p2 + p3) = (p1 ∥p2) + (p1 ∥p3)
(10)
(a1;p1) ∥(a2;p2) = (a1;(p1 ∥(a2;p2)))
+ (a2;((a1;p1) ∥p2))
(11)
a1 ∥(a2;p) = (a1;a2;p) + (a2;(a1 ∥p))
(12)
a1 ∥a2 = (a1;a2) + (a2;a1)
(13)
3.3
Semantics
This Section formalizes MCAP semantics in the context of MCTS interpretation.
Search Tree We introduce a formal representation of the search tree. Its
purpose is to accumulate information about computation traces w.r.t. simulation
and system action choices. Tree nodes represent states ∈S and actions ∈A.
State nodes VS and action nodes VA alternate (Equations 14 and 15). Nodes
contain aggregation of metadata D that guides further search. Aggregated data
are visitation count and node value (Equation 16).
VS ⊆S × D × 2VA
(14)
VA ⊆A × D × 2VS × P
(15)
D ⊆N × R
(16)
While it is possible to use a DAG instead of a tree [12], we will concentrate
on the tree setting in this paper for the sake of simplicity.
Framework Operations Equations 17 to 21 show the functional signatures
of MCAP framework operations. We will deﬁne each one in the rest of this
Section.
select : VS →VA
(17)
expand : S × P →VS
(18)
rollout : S × P × N →R
(19)
update : VS →VS
(20)
update : VA →VA
(21)

Selection
Equation 22 shows UCB1 action selection. It is a popular in-
stantiation of the MCTS tree policy based on regret minimization [13,14]. q(va)
denotes the current value aggregated in the metadata of action node va. #(vs) and
#(va) denote the number of searches that visited the corresponding node stored
in its metadata (see also Algorithm 2, lines 2 and 10). UCB1 favors actions that
expose high value (ﬁrst term of the sum), and adds a bias towards actions that
have not been well explored (second term of the sum). The parameter c is a
constant to control the tendency towards exploration.
select(vs) = argmaxva∈va(vs)
 
q(va) + c ·
s
2 ln #(vs)
#(va)
!
(22)
Queries Our framework requires speciﬁcation of a query representation and
a satisfaction function of queries and states to enable conditional computation.
Queries Q are evaluated w.r.t. a given state ∈S and yield a set of substitutions
for query variables (Equation 23). It returns the set of substitutions for variables
in the query for which the query holds in the state. In case the query is ground
and holds, the set containing the empty substitution {∅} is returned. If the
query does not hold, it returns the empty set ∅. We write ⊢in inﬁx notation and
s ̸⊢q ⇔s ⊢q = ∅.
⊢: Q × S →2Θ
(23)
Interpretation of MCAPs Expansion of the tree is constrained by a given
MCAP through interpreting it w.r.t a given state. The potential program function
constrains the search space w.r.t. given action program and current system state.
It maps an MCAP and a given state to the set of normalized MCAPs that result
from (a) nondeterministic choices and (b) interpretations of queries.
pot : S × P →2Pnorm
(24)
Equations 25 to 31 deﬁne MCAP interpretation by the potential program
function inductively on the structure of P.
pot (s, ϵ) = ∅
(25)
pot (s, a) = {a;ϵ}
(26)
pot (s, p;p′) =
[
p′′∈pot(s,p)
(p′′;p′)
(27)
pot
 
s,
X
i
pi
!
=
[
i
pot(s, pi)
(28)
pot(s, ?{q}{p}) =
[
θ∈s⊢q
pot (s, θ(p))
(29)
pot(s, ¬?{q}{p}) =
(
pot(s, p)
if s ̸⊢q
∅
otherwise
(30)
pot(s, ◦{q}{p}) = pot(s, ?{q}{p}; ◦{q}{p})
(31)

Expansion
Equation 32 shows the MCAP expansion mechanism. s ∈S
denotes the state for which a new node is added. p is the MCAP to be executed
in state s. Potential programs pot(s, p) in normal form deﬁne the set of action
node children for actions a that contain the corresponding tail programs p′. Thus,
a MCAP eﬀectively constrains the search space. d0 ∈D, d0 = (0, 0) deﬁnes initial
node metadata.
expand(s, p) = (s, d0, va)
where va =
[
(a,p′)∈pot(s,p)
(a, d0, ∅, p′)
(32)
Rollout
After expansion a rollout is performed. A number of simulation
steps is performed (i.e. until maximum search depth hmax is reached) and the
reward for resulting states is aggregated. An MCAP p deﬁnes the rollout’s default
policy. Actions and corresponding tail programs are selected uniformly random
from the set of potential programs in each state s encountered in the rollout.
rollout(s, p, h) =
(
R(s)
if h = hmax
R(s) + γ · rollout(s′, p′, h + 1)
otherwise
where (a, p′) ∼pot(s, p) ∧s′ ∼simulate(s′|s, a)
(33)
Value Update
After a node is expanded its value is determined by a
rollout. The newly created value is then incorporated to the search tree by value
backpropagation along the search path. In general any kind of value update
mechanism is feasible, e.g. a mean update as used by many MCTS variants.
MCAP uses dynamic programming (i.e. a Bellman update) for updating node
values [15]. An action’s value is the weighted sum of its successor states’ values
(Equation 34). A state’s value is the currently obtained reward and the value of
the currently optimal action (Equation 35).
update(va) =
X
vs∈vs(va)
#(vs)
#(va)v(vs)
(34)
update(vs) = R(s(vs)) +
max
va∈va(vs) q(va)
(35)
Algorithm 2 shows the interplay of selection, aggregation of metadata, simula-
tion, expansion, rollout and value update for Monte Carlo Action Programming.
Algorithm 3 shows the integration of MCAP with online planning. While the
system is running, a given MCAP is repeatedly evaluated and executed until ter-
mination (lines 2 – 4). Evaluation is performed by MCTS until a certain budget
is reached (lines 6 – 8). The currently best action w.r.t. MCAP interpretation
is determined (line 9). If there is no such action, the program terminated (line
10). Otherwise, the best action is executed and the outcome observed (lines 13

Algorithm 2 Monte Carlo Action Programming
Require: hmax, R, pot, simulate
1: procedure mcap(vs, h)
2:
#(vs) ←#(vs) + 1
▷increase state node count
3:
if h = hmax then
4:
return
▷reached maximum search depth
5:
if va(vs) = ∅then
6:
return
▷no action is available
7:
va ←select(vs)
▷select action node
8:
#(va) ←#(va) + 1
▷increase action node count
9:
s′ ∼simulate(va)
▷simulate action outcome
10:
if ∃vs′ ∈vs(va) : s(vs′) = s′ then
▷successor exists
11:
mcap(vs′, h + 1)
▷recursive call through the tree
12:
va ←update(va)
▷update action quality
13:
vs ←update(vs)
▷update state value
14:
else
15:
vs′ ←expand(s′, p(va))
▷create successor node
16:
r ←rollout(s′, p(va), h)
▷estimate node value
17:
d(vs′) ←(0, r)
▷set state node metadata
18:
vs(va) ←vs(va) ∪{vs′}
▷add successor node
and 14). In case the new state is already represented in the search tree, the cor-
responding state node is used as new root for further search (lines 15 and 16).
Otherwise, a new root node is created (line 18).
4
Experimental Evaluation
4.1
Example Domain
We introduce the rescue domain as illustrating example. Robots can move
around a connected graph of positions and lift or drop victims. The number
of victims a robot can carry is limited by its capacity. A position may be on ﬁre,
in which case a robot cannot move there. At every time step the ﬁre attribute
of a position may change depending on how many of the position’s neighbors
are on ﬁre. A safe position never catches ﬁre. The class diagram of the rescue
domain is shown in Figure 2. A particular state of the domain is an instantiation
of this class diagram.
Possible system actions are:
1. Move(R, P): Robot R moves to target position P if it is connected to the
robot’s current position and is not on ﬁre.
2. Extinguish(R, P): Robot R extinguishes ﬁre at a neighbor position P.
3. Lift(R, V ): Robot R lifts victim V (at same location) if it has capacity left.
4. Drop(R, V ): Robot R drops lifted victim V at the current location.
5. Noop: Does nothing.

Algorithm 3 Online MCAP
Require: initial state sinit, MCAP pinit, budget
1: vinit ←expand(sinit, pinit)
▷initial node
2: while running do
3:
online-mcap(vinit)
4: procedure online-mcap(vs)
5:
while budget do
6:
mcap(vs)
▷repeatedly update vs w.r.t. MCAP
7:
vmax
a
←argmaxva∈va(vs) q(va)
▷get optimal action
8:
if vmax
a
= null then
9:
return
▷MCAP terminated
10:
execute a(vmax
a
)
▷execute action
11:
observe s′
▷observe the outcome
12:
if vs′ ∈vs(vmax
a
) then
▷previously considered
13:
vs ←vs′
▷reuse planning result
14:
else
▷previously unconsidered
15:
vs ←expand(vs, p(vmax
a
))
Victim
Robot
capacity : Integer
Position
fire : Boolean
safe : Boolean
[*] connections
[*] victims
[0..1] position
[*] victims
[1] position
[*] robots
Fig. 2: Class diagram of the rescue domain.

4.2
Setup & Results
Eﬀectiveness of the MCAP framework was evaluated empirically for the rescue
domain. A simulation of the domain was used as generative model. Reward R(s)
was deﬁned as the number of victims located at safe positions in state s. Also,
each victim not burning provided a reward of 0.1. Maximum search depth was
set to hmax = 40 and the discount factor was set to γ = 0.9. Experiments were
conducted with randomized initial states, each consisting of twenty positions
with 30% connectivity. Three positions were safe, ten victims and ten ﬁres were
located randomly on unsafe positions. Robot capacity was set to two. This setup
yields a state space containing more than 1019 possible states. Fires ignited or
ceased probabilistically at unsafe positions. Actions succeeded or failed proba-
bilistically (p = 0.05). This yields a branching factor of 2 · 217 for each action.
In the experiments using plain MCTS all actions ∈A were evaluated at
each step. Algorithm 4 shows pseudocode for the program used to determine
the action to evaluate in the experiments with MCAP. Both MCTS and MCAP
used 1000 playouts at each step for action evaluation.
Algorithm 4 Pseudocode of the MCAP used in the experiments
1: while true do
2:
if self.position.safe ∧self.victims ̸= ∅then
3:
P
v∈self.victims self.drop(v)
4:
else if ¬(self.pos.safe) ∧self.position.victims ̸= ∅then
5:
P
v∈self.position.victims self.lift(v)
6:
else
7:
P
a∈A a
System performance was measured with the statistical model checker Mul-
tivesta [16]. Two metrics of system behavior with and without MCAP search
space constraints were assessed: Ratios of safe victims and burning victims.
Figure 3 compares the average results for behavior synthesis with plain MCTS
and with MCAP within a 0.1 conﬁdence interval. The eﬀect of MCAP search
space reduction on system performance can clearly be seen. The conﬁguration
making use of online MCAP interpretation achieves larger ratios of safe victims
and manages the reduction of burning victim ratios better than the conﬁguration
not making use of MCAP. With plain MCTS, search is distracted by low reward
regions due to avoiding burning victims. MCAP search identiﬁes high reward
regions where victims are saved within the given budget.
A similar experiment with unexpected events illustrates robustness of the
approach. Here, every twenty steps all currently carried victims fell to the ground
(i.e. were located at their carrier’s position). Also, ﬁres ignited such that overall
at least ten ﬁres were burning immediately after these events. Note that the
simulation of the domain used for plain MCTS and MCAP did not simulate these
events. The planning system managed to recover from the unexpected situations

0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Step
Ratio of Safe Victims
MCTS
MCAP
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Step
Ratio of Burning Victims
MCTS
MCAP
(b)
Fig. 3: Comparison of (a) safe victims and (b) burning ratios for MCTS and
MCAP.

autonomously (Figure 5). As for the basic experiment, the conﬁguration with
MCAP performed signiﬁcantly better that the conﬁguration using plain MCTS.
In a third experiment the reward function was changed unexpectedly for
the system. Before step 25, a reward is provided exclusively for avoiding burning
victims. From step 25 on the reward function from the previous experiments was
used, providing reward for safe victims. The planner did not simulate the change
of reward when evaluating action traces. MCAP outperformed plain MCTS by
reacting more eﬀectively to the change of reward function. Figure 4 shows the
results of this experiment.
5
Conclusion
This paper proposed Monte Carlo Action Programming, a programming lan-
guage framework for autonomous systems that act in large probabilistic state
spaces. It comprises formal syntax and semantics of a nondeterministic action
programming language. The language is interpreted stochastically via Monte
Carlo Tree Search. The eﬀectiveness of search space constraint speciﬁcation in
the MCAP framework was shown empirically. Online interpretation of MCAP
provides system performance and robustness in the face of unexpected events.
A possible venue for further research is the extension of MCAP to domains
with continuous time and hybrid systems. Here, discrete programs are inter-
preted w.r.t. continuously evolving domain values [17]. It would also be interest-
ing to evaluate to what extend manual speciﬁcation techniques as MCAP could
be combined with online representation learning (e.g. statistical relational learn-
ing [18] and deep learning [19]): How to constrain system behavior if perceptual
abstraction is unknown at design time or changes at runtime?
