IAES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (IJ-AI) 
Vol. 1, No. 3, September 2012, pp. 103-111 
ISSN: 2252-8938 
 
 
Performance Analysis of Clustering Protocol 
Using Fuzzy Logic for Wireless Sensor Network 
 
Vaibhav Godbole 
 Departement of Information Technology, Fr. Conceicao Rodrigues College of Engineering, 
Fr. Agnel Technical Education Complex, Bandra (W), Mumbai: 400050 
 
 
Article Info 
 
ABSTRACT 
Article history: 
Submission: Aug 10, 2012 
Final acceptance (after 4th 
revision): Sep 9, 2012 
 
In order to gather information more efficiently, wireless sensor networks 
(WSNs) are partitioned into clusters. Most proposed clustering algorithms do 
not consider the location of the base station. This situation causes hot spot 
problems in multi-hop WSNs. In this paper, we analyze a fuzzy clustering 
algorithm (FCA) which aims to prolong the lifetime of WSNs. This 
algorithm adjusts the cluster-head radius considering the residual energy and 
distance to the base station parameters of the sensor nodes. This helps to 
decrease the intra-cluster work of the sensor nodes which are closer to the 
base station or have lower battery level. Fuzzy logic is utilized for handling 
the uncertainties in cluster-head radius estimation. We compare this 
algorithm with the low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH) 
algorithm according to the parameters of first node dies half of the nodes 
alive and energy-efficiency metrics. Our simulation results show that the 
fuzzy clustering approach performs better than LEACH. Therefore, the FCA 
is a stable and energy-efficient clustering algorithm. 
Keyword: 
Wireless sensor network 
Fuzzy Clustering 
Fuzzy 
clustering 
algorithm 
(FCA) 
Cluster-head selection 
Fuzzy if-then rules 
Competition  radius calculation 
 
Corresponding Author: 
Vaibhav Godbole 
Departement Of Information Technology, 
Fr. Conceicao Rodrigues College Of Engineering, 
Fr. Agnel Technical Education Complex, Bandra (W), Mumbai: 400050. 

 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A wireless sensor network (WSN) [1] consists of spatially distributed autonomous sensors to 
cooperatively monitor physical or environmental conditions, such as temperature, sound, vibration, pressure, 
motion or pollutants. The development of WSNs was motivated by military applications such as battlefield 
surveillance. They are now used in many industrial and civilian application areas, including industrial process 
monitoring and control, machine health monitoring, environment and habitat monitoring, healthcare 
applications, home automation, and traffic control [2]. 
 
In addition to one or more sensors, each node in a sensor network is typically equipped with a radio 
transceiver or other wireless communications device, a small micro-controller, and an energy source, usually 
a battery. A sensor node might vary in size from that of a shoebox down to the size of a grain of dust, 
although functioning "motes" [3] of genuine microscopic dimensions have yet to be created. The cost of 
sensor nodes is similarly variable, ranging from hundreds of dollars to a few pennies, depending on the size 
of the sensor network and the complexity required of individual sensor nodes. Size and cost constraints on 
sensor nodes result in corresponding constraints on resources such as energy, memory, computational speed 
and bandwidth [4]. Figure 1 shows a typical WSN. 
 
 

      
  
 
 
2
 
Figure 1. A typical WSN architecture [4]. 
 
Several WSN applications require only an aggregate value to be reported to the observer. In this case, 
sensors in different regions of the field can collaborate to aggregate their data and provide more accurate 
reports about their local regions. Data aggregation reduces the communication overhead in the network, 
leading to significant energy savings. In order to support data aggregation through efficient network 
organization, nodes can be partitioned into a number of small groups called clusters. Each cluster has a 
coordinator, referred to as a cluster head, and a number of member nodes [5]. 
 
Most clustering algorithms utilize two techniques which are selecting cluster-heads with more residual 
energy and rotating cluster-heads periodically to balance the energy consumption of the sensor nodes over 
the network . These clustering algorithms do not take the location of the base station into consideration. This 
lack of consideration causes hot spot problems in multi-hop WSNs [6]. The cluster-heads near the base 
station die earlier, because they will be in  heavier relay traffic than the cluster-heads which are relatively far 
from the base station.. In order to solve this problem and to balance energy consumption of cluster-heads, a 
periodically rotating cluster-head mechanism was proposed by Yu and Chang [5], namely low-energy 
adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH), which is a clustering algorithm that utilizes randomized rotation to 
balance energy consumption of cluster-heads over the network.  
 
 LEACH uses a probabilistic approach to select the cluster-head schematically. Hoeever this method 
uses only local information to make decisions on the cluster-head so using only local information has its own 
limitations. Since each node probabilistically elects whether or not to become the cluster-head, there might be 
cases when two cluster-heads are selected in closed proximity of each other. In reality, considering only one 
factor such as energy is not suitable to select the cluster-head properly. This is because other conditions such 
as centrality of nodes corresponding to the entire cluster, gives an amount to the entire dissipation during 
transmission for all nodes too. The more central the node to a cluster the more is the energy efficiency for 
other nodes to transmit through that selected node. Periodical rotation is a vital property for clustering 
algorithms, it is not sufficient by itsel as incorporates delay in data packet transmission due to the movements 
of nodes being random most of the time [7]. 
 
In this paper, a fuzzy clustering approach [8] to the WSNs is analyzed to maximize its lifetime [9]. This 
approach is a distributed competitive algorithm. It selects the cluster-head via energy-based competition 
among the tentative cluster-heads which are selected using a probabilistic model. This approach mostly 
focuses on wisely assigning competition ranges to the tentative cluster-heads. In order to make wise 
decisions, it utilizes the residual energy and distance to the base station parameters of the sensor nodes. In 

 
 
 
 
Performance Analisys of Clustering Protocol Using Fuzzy Logicfor WSN (Vaibhav Godbole) 
3
addition to this, the clustering approach uses fuzzy logic to handle uncertainties in competition range 
estimation [8]. This allows the algorithm to assign greater competition ranges to the tentative cluster-heads 
which have higher residual energy levels, because they can serve a larger region [10]. 
 
 
2. 
RELATED WORK - FUZZY CLUSTERING ALGOROTHMS  
 
There are several clustering algorithms for WSNs in recent years [11]. Fuzzy logic is useful for 
making real time decisions without needing complete information about the environment [6]. On the other 
hand, conventional control mechanisms generally need accurate and complete information about the 
environment. Fuzzy logic can also be utilized for making a decision based on different environmental 
parameters by blending them according to predefined rules [12]. 
 
Some of the clustering algorithms [13] employ fuzzy logic to handle uncertainties in the WSNs. 
Basically, FCAs use fuzzy logic for blending different clustering parameters to select cluster-heads [8]. They 
assign chances to tentative cluster-heads according to the defuzzified output of fuzzy if-then rules. The 
tentative cluster-head becomes a cluster-head if it has the greatest chance in its vicinity. There are distributed 
and centralized fuzzy logic clustering approaches. 
 
In the fuzzy clustering approach proposed by Rajashree et al. [14], the cluster-heads are selected at the 
base station. In every round, each sensor node forwards its clustering information to the base station. There 
are three fuzzy descriptors which are considered by the base station during cluster-head election which are 
node concentration, residual energy in each node and node centrality which are [14]: 
 
1) Node concentration: Number of the nodes in the vicinity. 
2) Residual energy: Remaining battery energy of each sensor node. 
3) Node centrality: A parameter that indicates how central the node is to the cluster. 
There are 27 fuzzy if-then rules which are defined at the base station [15]. The base station elects 
the cluster-heads according to these fuzzy rules. After the base station selects the cluster-head, it forwards the 
election results to entire network. This algorithm is a centralized clustering algorithm, because all clustering 
decisions are made at the base station. Gupta et al. [8] reported that a centralized clustering approach will 
produce more accurate cluster-heads, because the base station has all clustering information about the 
network and base stations are more powerful than ordinary nodes [16]. However, this centralized approach 
has some disadvantages [6, 13]: 
 
1) The base station must collect all clustering information from the network. Repeating this 
process in every round brings a high overhead to sensor nodes. Thus, the battery levels of 
the sensor nodes may run low quickly. 
2) In this approach the simulation is done for electing only one cluster-head per round. 
Therefore, this simulation is not a realistic one. 
 
3. 
LEACH CLUSTERING PROTOCOL 
 
LEACH [17] is a distributed algorithm which makes local decisions to elect cluster-heads. If the 
cluster-heads are selected once and do not change throughout the network lifetime, then it is obvious that 
these static cluster-heads die earlier than the ordinary nodes. Therefore, LEACH includes randomized 
rotation of cluster-head locations to evenly distribute the energy dissipation over the network. LEACH also 
performs local data compression in cluster heads to decrease the amount of data that is forwarded to the base 
station. 
 
LEACH, cluster-head selection is done periodically to enable randomized rotation of cluster-heads. 
Every round consists of two phases, namely set-up phase and steady-state phase. In the set-up phase, cluster-
heads are selected and clusters are formed. In the steady-state phase, data transfers to the base station are 
performed through the clustered network [18]. A particular sensor node decides whether it is going to 
become a cluster-head or not by generating a random number between 0 and 1. If this number is less than the 
predefined threshold T (n), then the sensor node becomes a cluster-head. G represents the set of sensor nodes 

      
  
 
 
4
that have not been cluster-heads in the last 
 where P is the desired percentage of cluster-heads and r 
represents the current round number. If the sensor node n belongs to G using these parameters, T (n) is 
formulated as follows [19]: 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           (1) 
 
If the sensor node n does not belong to G, then the T (n) is set to 0. Thus, n cannot become a cluster-
head. At round 0, the probability of becoming a cluster-head for each node is equal to P. However, this 
situation changes in the following rounds. The cluster-heads of round 0 cannot become cluster-heads during 
the following 1 / P  rounds. This restriction prevents a particular node to become a cluster-head frequently. 
However, this restriction brings a drawback: it causes rapid decrease in the number of cluster-heads. To 
handle this drawback, as r increases, the chance of the remaining sensor nodes to be a cluster-head is also 
increased by adjusting the threshold T (n) for the remaining sensor nodes. This critical balance is a significant 
property of LEACH [19]. 
 
After cluster-heads are selected for a particular round, each cluster-head broadcasts an 
advertisement message to the remaining sensor nodes. As each non-cluster-head node receives these 
advertisement messages, they decide the cluster to which they belong. Each non-cluster-head joins to the 
cluster from which it has received the largest signal strength. In order to join to the selected cluster, it 
transmits a JoinClusterHeadMessage to that cluster [20]. Once all the cluster-heads are selected and the 
clusters are formed, data transmission continues up to the next round. The simulations in Zhang and Wei [17] 
show that LEACH reduces communication energy as much as eight times as compared to direct transmission. 
In other words, the first node death in LEACH occurs eight times later than the first node death in direct 
transmission.  
 
4. APPLICATION OF FCA TO WSN 
Fuzzy clustering algorithm is explained below (Algorithm 1). In every clustering round, each sensor 
node generates a random number between 0 and 1 [21]. If the random number for a particular node is smaller 
than the predefined threshold T which is the percentage of the desired tentative cluster-heads, then that sensor 
node becomes a tentative cluster-head. In FCA the competition radius of each tentative cluster-head changes 
dynamically. FCA uses residual energy [22] parameter with distance to the base station metric of the sensor 
node to calculate competition radius. It is logical to decrease the service area of a cluster-head while its 
residual energy is decreasing. If the competition radius does not change as the residual energy decreases, the 
sensor node runs out of battery rapidly. This approach takes this situation into consideration and decreases 
the competition radius of each tentative cluster-head as the sensor node battery level decreases. Radius 
computation is accomplished by using predefined fuzzy if-then mapping rules [23] to handle the uncertainty. 
These fuzzy if-then mapping rules are given in Table 1.  The Mamdani method used by Kim et al. [24] is 
used as fuzzy inference technique, because it is the most frequently used fuzzy inference technique. 

 
 
 
 
Performance Analisys of Clustering Protocol Using Fuzzy Logicfor WSN (Vaibhav Godbole) 
5
 
Algorithm 1. The proposed FCA for WSN. 
 
Table 1. Fuzzy if-then mapping rules for competition radius calculation in FCA. 
Rule No. 
Distance to Base 
Residual Energy 
Competotion Radius 
1 
Close 
Low 
Very Small 
2 
Close 
Medium 
Small 
3 
Close 
Medium 
Small 
4 
Medium 
Low 
Small 
5 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
6 
Medium 
Medium 
Large 
7 
Far 
Low 
Large 
8 
Far 
Medium 
Large 
9 
Far 
High 
Very Large 
 
 
In this approach for cluster-head competition radius calculation, we use two fuzzy input variables. 
The first one is the distance to the base station of a particular tentative cluster-head. The fuzzy set that 
describes the distance to base the station input variable is depicted in Figure 2. The linguistic variables for 
this fuzzy set are close, medium and far. We choose a trapezoidal membership function for close and far [25]. 
On the other hand, the membership function of medium is a triangular membership function. 
 
 The second fuzzy input variable is residual energy of the tentative cluster-head. The fuzzy set that 
describes residual energy input variable is illustrated in Figure 3. Low, medium and high are the linguistic 
variables of this fuzzy set. Low and high linguistic variables have a trapezoidal membership function while 
medium has a triangular membership function [26]. 
 
 
 

      
  
 
 
6
 
Figure 2. Fuzzy set for fuzzy input variable Distance to Base. 
 
 
Figure 3. Fuzzy set for fuzzy input variable Residual Energy. 
The only fuzzy output variable is the competition radius of the tentative cluster-head. Fuzzy set for 
competition radius fuzzy output variable is demonstrated in Figure 3. There are linguistic variables which are 
very small, small, medium, large and very large. Very small and very large have a trapezoidal membership 
function. The remaining linguistic variables are represented by using triangular membership functions. 
 
If a particular tentative cluster-head’s battery is full and it is located at the maximum distance to the 
base station, then it has the maximum competition radius [27]. On the contrary, if a particular cluster-head’s 
battery is nearing empty and is the closest node to the base station, then it has the minimum competition 
radius. The remaining intermediate possibilities fall between these two extreme cases. 
 
The maximum competition radius is a static parameter for a particular WSN. The base station 
broadcasts the value of this parameter to the entire network [28]. Thus, all the sensor nodes know the 
maximum competition radius, in advance. Each of the sensor nodes can calculate their relative competition 

 
 
 
 
Performance Analisys of Clustering Protocol Using Fuzzy Logicfor WSN (Vaibhav Godbole) 
7
radius according to the value of this parameter. The maximum distance to the base station is also a static 
parameter, because we assume that the sensor nodes are stationary. Each sensor node can determine their 
relative position to the base station considering the maximum distance to the base station in the WSN [19]. 
 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We compare proposed FCA with LEACH using WiseNet Simulator, which is an open source Java 
based tool used to simulate the sensor network topology with secured protocols. WiseNet has the following 
features [29]: 
 
• 
Graphical interface for reading the results of important parameters (eg.  power consumption, 
reliability, coverage of the network.) 
• 
Modeling types of attacks, programming of malicious sensors behavior and measuring the 
impacts on the parameters mentioned above. 
In each round of the scenario, clusters-heads are selected and clusters are formed. Next, each 
ordinary node forwards certain bits of data to its cluster-head. Each cluster-head aggregates the received data 
and forwards it to the base station with a particular routing protocol or directly transmits the aggregated data 
to the base station. LEACH cluster-heads transmit their data packets to the base station directly. The area of 
deployed wireless sensor network is same for all scenarios and is 200 m x200 m. In each round, each 
ordinary sensor node transmits 4000 bits of data to its cluster-head. The cluster-head which receives the data 
from its cluster members aggregates the received data with a certain aggregation ratio. This aggregation ratio 
is set to 10% in our simulations. 
 
In order to produce more reliable results, every scenario is simulated for 50 times, and the 
average of the results is taken. For each of the scenarios, we provide a summary result table which 
represents the values of first node dead (FND) and half node alive (HNA) [30] metrics for each of the 
algorithms simulated. After that, we provide a summary chart which illustrates the values of FND and 
HNA metrics visually. We also generate charts for the distribution of the number of live sensor nodes 
and the distribution of the number of clusters per each round. By using these simulation results, we 
comment on the performance of the simulated algorithms. 
 
5.1. Scenario 1 
In this scenario, the base station is located at the center of the WSN [3]. Each cluster-head forwards 
the aggregated data to the base station directly without using a relay node. The detailed configuration of this 
scenario is depicted in Table 2. The simulation of this scenario yielded the results shown in Table 3, which 
shows the rounds in which the FND and HNA for each simulated algorithm. 
 
Table 2. Configuration parameters of Scenario 1. 
Parameter 
Value 
Network Size 
200 m  X 200 m 
Base Station Location 
(100,100) m 
Num. Of Sensor Nodes 
75 
Initial Energy 
1 J 
Data Packet Size 
3000 B 
Aggregation Ratio 
10 % 
 
 
Table 3. Scenario 1: Values of FND and HNA metrics for each algorithm. 
Algorithm 
FND 
HNA 
LEACH 
280 
610 
FCA 
420 
810 
 

      
  
 
 
8
As seen in Table 3, the FCA performs better than LEACH. This algorithm is more efficient than 
LEACH by about 36.4%. LEACH’s performance is poor because it does not consider the residual energy 
level of the sensor nodes during clustering. It uses a pure probabilistic model for clustering, but this model 
itself is not sufficient for providing the best solution. 
 
Figure 5 depicts the distribution of the number of live sensor nodes with respect to the number of 
rounds for each algorithm. This figure clearly depicts the number of non-functional (dead) sensor nodes for 
fuzzy clustering approach begins after LEACH algorithm. 
 
   
 
                      
Figure 5. Scenario 1. Distribution of alive sensor nodes according to the number of rounds for each 
algorithm. 
 
5.2. Scenario 2 
In this scenario, the density of the deployed sensor nodes is doubled with respect to Scenario 1. We 
aim to test the behaviours of the clustering algorithms in different sensor network topologies which have 
different number of deployed sensor nodes which is similar to used by Gupta and Sampali [8]. In other 
words, we try to find out how clustering algorithms perform in relatively dense and sparse sensor network 
deployments. The detailed configuration of this scenario is illustrated in Table 4. The simulation of this 
scenario yielded the results shown in Table 5 which shows the rounds in which the FND and HNA for each 
simulated algorithm. 
 
Table 4. Configuration parameters of Scenario 2. 
Parameter 
Value 
Network Size 
200m X 200m 
Base Station Location 
(100,100) m 
No. Of Sensor Nodes 
150 
Initial Energy 
1 J 
Data Packet Size 
3000 B 
Aggregation Ratio 
10 % 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Performance Analisys of Clustering Protocol Using Fuzzy Logicfor WSN (Vaibhav Godbole) 
9
Table 5. Scenario 2: Values of FND and HNA metrics for each algorithm. 
Algorithm 
FND 
HNA 
LEACH 
400 
790 
FCA 
790 
980 
 
As seen in Table 5 the HNA performance of LEACH increased significantly in this scenario. 
LEACH sensor nodes start to die earlier than the sensor nodes FCA. FCA is more efficient than LEACH 
about 84.7 % 
 
Figure 6 shows the distribution of live sensor nodes according to the number of rounds for each 
simulated algorithm. The number of sensor nodes of FCA is significantly greater than the other algorithms 
when the number of live sensor nodes is 100. This situation implies that FCA keeps WSN stable for a longer 
time than LEACH. 
 
 
Figure 6. Scenario 2: Distribution of live sensor nodes according to the number of rounds for each algorithm. 
 
 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
As a result of these experiments, we conclude that FCA is a stable and energy-efficient clustering 
algorithm for WSNs. This algorithm is designed for the WSNs that have stationary sensor nodes. As a future 
work, the fuzzy clustering approach can be extended for handling mobile sensor nodes. 
 
Residual energy, distance to the base station and competition radius fuzzy sets can be adjusted in 
order to find optimal cluster-head radius values. In addition to this, the optimal maximum competition radius 
values for each scenario can be estimated by applying extensive tests. Some additional parameters such as 
node degree, density and local distance may also be employed to improve the performance of fuzzy 
clustering approach.
