©2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Per-
mission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this
material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists,
or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other
works.
arXiv:1901.07517v1  [cs.RO]  22 Jan 2019

Robust Recovery Controller for a Quadrupedal
Robot using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, and Marco Hutter
Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich

Abstract—The ability to recover from a fall is an essential
feature for a legged robot to navigate in challenging environments
robustly. Until today, there has been very little progress on this
topic. Current solutions mostly build upon (heuristically) prede-
ﬁned trajectories, resulting in unnatural behaviors and requiring
considerable effort in engineering system-speciﬁc components. In
this paper, we present an approach based on model-free Deep
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to control recovery maneuvers of
quadrupedal robots using a hierarchical behavior-based con-
troller. The controller consists of four neural network policies
including three behaviors and one behavior selector to coordinate
them. Each of them is trained individually in simulation and
deployed directly on a real system. We experimentally validate
our approach on the quadrupedal robot ANYmal, which is a
dog-sized quadrupedal system with 12 degrees of freedom. With
our method, ANYmal manifests dynamic and reactive recovery
behaviors to recover from an arbitrary fall conﬁguration within
less than 5 seconds. We tested the recovery maneuver more than
100 times, and the success rate was higher than 97 %.
I. INTRODUCTION
In case of a fall, animals show the remarkable ability
to recover from any posture by pushing against their sur-
roundings and swinging limbs to gain momentum. Having
similar abilities in legged robots would signiﬁcantly improve
their robustness against failure and extend their applicability
in harsh environments. We address this topic in the present
work by developing a control strategy for the robust recovery
maneuver of quadrupedal robots. By recovery maneuver, we
mean the maneuver of returning to a typical operating state
(standing or walking) from a fall as shown in the Fig. 1.
For such maneuver, the robot needs to produce motions
that make good use of the interactions with the ground and
swinging motion of the legs while avoiding self-collisions.
Optimization-based methods [17] have a hard time to solve
such a task as they usually require analytic dynamic models
and often predeﬁned contact sequences [1], which are both
hard to ﬁnd as the system can interact at multiple uncertain
contact points or patches. Moreover, all control methods that
are based on simpliﬁed template models are not valid any-
more in such fall conﬁguration. Existing methods in recovery
controllers simplify the problem by using handcrafted control
sequences [24], [25] or using simpliﬁed models [21], or even
adding mechanisms such as a tail or extra limbs [5], [7].
Consequently, they exhibit predictable behavioral patterns,
which limit their robustness in corner cases (e.g., when a
robot’s legs get stuck below its base). They also require a
considerable engineering effort.
Fig. 1: A recovery maneuver of ANYmal. (Top left) ANYmal
is initialized at a fall conﬁguration. (Top row) ANYmal swings
its legs to gain momentum, (Middle row) pushes the ground
to regain the upright and stable posture, and then (Bottom
row) stands up and walks.
A promising alternative for generating self-righting behav-
iors is model-free Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL). In this
paradigm, an agent interacts with its environment and learns
the dynamics and a control policy from the experience. By
using model-free methods, we can generate control policies
without any abstraction in modeling complex dynamics. Un-
fortunately, existing model-free algorithms typically require an
excessive number of trial-and-errors to obtain a performant
policy, and hence it often becomes impractical to train a
policy on sophisticated hardware. This is particularly true for
dynamic systems like legged robots where bad policies can be
fatal. To overcome these limitations, existing works leverage
simulations where one can generate massive data at no cost
and with high consistency. Very recent and promising research
results in the ﬁeld of legged robotics have demonstrated that
learned locomotion policies can be transferred from simulation
to reality [13], [26]. In order to realize this transfer and
overcome the so-called reality gap, it was important to use
high-ﬁdelity simulations. In [26] this was achieved by model
parameter estimation, while [13] proposed a method to learn
parts of the simulated model from real data. Beside traditional
locomotion, the latter work also demonstrated a sophisticated
self-righting policy that can be trained in a few hours in
the simulation. However, it is still challenging to train a

single policy that can manifest multiple behaviors including
self-righting, standing up, locomotion or others, because the
present Deep RL algorithms have limited capability in learn-
ing multiple skills. It often shows the degradation of the
performance in individual tasks in case of learning multiple
skills at once (e.g., Multitasker in [2]). A simple yet powerful
solution to incorporate multiple behaviors is to divide-and-
conquer. In this approach, a control problem is decomposed
into several behaviors, and then the behaviors are coordinated
either by hand [6] or learning a rule for behavior selection. The
behaviors and the selection rule can be learned separately [16],
[14] or simultaneously [8], [19]. For separate learning, a high-
level behavior selector is trained using a set of pre-learned
behaviors. This is a widely adopted approach in behavior-
based robotics [15] and has shown success in high-dimensional
continuous control problems recently. Merel et al. [16] and
Liu and Hodgins [14] demonstrated human-like behaviors
in simulation with a hierarchically structured controller that
consists of multiple low-level controllers and an agent to
organize them in a task-oriented way.
In this paper we present a hierarchically structured con-
troller consisting only of neural networks that is able to
generate complex combined maneuvers like recovering from
a fall. we build up the complex skill set from individual
behaviors including self-righting, standing up, and locomotion.
The self-righting and locomotion behaviors are introduced in
the previous work [13]. We reproduced the self-righting be-
havior with different action representation and reused existing
policy for the locomotion behavior. These behaviors are trained
using Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [22] using the
simulation framework presented in the existing work [13]. We
take inspiration from [16] and [14], and learn the complex
behavior selection subsequently. Moreover, we introduce a
novel learning-based state estimator that is learned in parallel
to the behavior selection and which even works in degenerated
conditions (i.e., when fallen on the ground and being in a
complex, unobservable contact condition).
With these elements, we are able to generate a recovery
controller of unprecedented robustness. The system was tested
on the quadrupedal robot ANYmal [10] in more than 100 trials
with a success rate higher than 97 %. Thereby, we showed
that our method can cope with all kinds of corner cases for
which previous solutions failed. As the propose controller is
not based on any heuristics, it has the potential to be applicable
for a wide variety of complex skill sets and hence bring our
robots as step closer to their natural counterparts.
II. METHOD
In this section, we ﬁrst provide an overview of our method
and then describe the details of the designs and implementation
of each component.
A. Overview
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the control framework. The
behavior selector and three behaviors form a hierarchical
behavior-based controller. Each behavior is a control policy
Fig. 2: Control architecture for the recovery controller. TSIF
refers to the Two State Implicit Filter [4].
for individual behaviors. The behavior selector selects the
most appropriate behavior for the current situation depending
on the recent observations, commands, previously chosen
behavior type and the previous action. At each time step, the
control policy for the chosen behavior sends commands to the
actuators. The height estimator is a neural network regression
module for estimating base height during the deployment on
the real system.
We decomposed the control task into three behaviors: self-
righting, standing up, and locomotion. This decomposition is
to cope with the difﬁculty of training a single policy that can
manifest all of the necessary behaviors. From our experience,
a policy trained to perform multiple tasks shows ungraceful
behaviors such as frequent slippages and highly conservative
postures. It also requires a lot more effort to come up with an
effective cost function that leads to natural motions because
the desired controller has to cover larger state space. Learning
three behaviors separately simpliﬁes the cost function design
and enables us to troubleshoot each control policy separately
on the real system.
During the deployment on the real system, the estimated
states from the Two State Implicit Filter (TSIF) [4] are used.
Additionally, we used a neural network named height estimator
to estimate the base height (z-position of the base in the
world frame) to resolve the drift issues in linear position. The
deﬁnition of the state spaces and the characteristics of TSIF
are provided in the section II-B.
Each behavior is separately trained and tested on the real
robot, whereby training is done only in simulation. Sub-
sequently, the behavior selector and a height estimator are
trained using the set of pretrained behaviors. The simulated
environments for learning consists of the data-driven actuator
model [13] and the fast contact solver presented in [12], which
efﬁciently generates high-ﬁdelity samples. Trust Region Policy
Optimization algorithm [22] with the Generalized Advantage
Estimator [23] (TRPO+GAE) is used for learning. Although
stochastic policies are used during training, the variances are
reduced to 0 during deployment to ensure a more consistent
behavior.
B. Feature Selection for the State Spaces
For each behavior, we select the most representative and
reliable set of states as given in table I. The existing state

Function
Data
Self-Righting Policy
Gravity vector (eg)
Base angular velocity in body frame (ωB
IB)
Joint positions (φj)
Joint velocities ( ˙φj)
History of joint position error & velocity
Previous joint position targets (at−1)
Standing Up Policy
Base linear velocity in body frame (vB
IB)
State space of the Self-Righting policy
Locomotion Policy
Velocity commands
Estimated base height (he)
State space of the Standing up policy
Behavior Selector
Previous action (one-hot vector)
State space of the Locomotion policy
Height Estimator
Gravity vector (eg)
Joint positions
Joint velocities
History of joint position errors & velocities
Actuator Model
Desired joint position
History of joint position errors & velocities
TABLE I: Deﬁnition of the State Spaces
estimation framework of ANYmal relies on the Two State Im-
plicit Filter (TSIF) [4] for the base pose and twist, and angular
encoders for the joint states. TSIF estimates the base twist and
the base position in the inertial frame by recursively fusing
kinematics and measurements from the Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU). It makes use of the positions of feet touching
the ground to incorporate kinematic contact constraints. When
a foot slips or all four feet lose contacts with the ground,
which are likely to happen when ANYmal falls, the estimated
base states from TSIF becomes unreliable as the position and
linear velocity drift over time (see section III-B). To maximize
reliability, the linear position and linear velocity are excluded
from the state space of the self-righting controller.
A unit vector pointing in the direction of the gravity
expressed in the base frame (eg) is used to represent the
orientation of the base because an IMU can observe only
this two dimensional subspace of the orientation (yaw angle
is unobservable). The x, y positions of the base in the inertial
frame are excluded from the state spaces because they are
always unobservable with IMU [3].
On the other hand, the z position of the base (base height)
can be accurately estimated using kinematics while walking.
We kept this state in the locomotion policy as it is critical for
fast learning and estimate the height using a new estimation
network presented in section II-F.
C. Cost terms
The cost terms are presented in the table II. We deﬁned cost
functions for each behavior by a linear combination of cost
terms. For joint position cost, we used the minimum angle
difference between two angular positions denoted by dφ(·, ·) :
R × R →[0, π].
It is important to deﬁne a bounded cost function because
otherwise an agent often ﬁnds it more rewarding to terminate
than to explore its environment. To this end, we used a logistic
kernel function K : R →[−0.25, 0) deﬁned as K(e|α) =
−1/(eαe + 2 + e−αe),
α ∈R>0 where e represents an error
Symbols
˙φjslim
maximum joint speed
Ic
index set of the contact points
Ic,f
index set of the foot contact points
Ic,in
index set of the self-collision points
ic,n
impulse of the nth contact
gi
gap function of the ith contact
pf,i
position of the ith foot
τ
vector of joint torques
|·|
cardinality of a set or l1 norm
||·||
l2 norm
ˆ·
target value
Cost Terms
Angular velocity
cω = K(|ωB
IB −ˆωB
IB|, αa)
Linear velocity
cv = K(|vB
IB −ˆvB
IB|, αl)
Height
ch = 1.0 if h < 0.35 , otherwise 0
Joint position
cjp = dφ(φj, ˆ
φj)
Orientation
co = ||[0, 0, −1]T −eg||
Torque
cτ = ||τ||2
Power
cpw = P12
i=0 max( ˙φj,iτi, 0)
Joint acceleration
ca = P12
i=0|| ¨φi||2
Joint speed
cjs = P12
i=0 max( ˙φjslim −|φi|, 0)2
Body impulse
cbi = P
n∈Ic\Ic,f ||ic,n||/(|Ic| −|Ic,f|)
Body slippage
cbs = P
n∈Ic ||vc,n||2/|Ic|
Foot slippage
cfs = P||vf,i||
∀i s.t. gi = 0, i ∈If,c
Foot clearance
cfc = P(pf,i −0.07)2||vf,i||
∀i s.t. gi > 0, i ∈If,c
Self collision
ccin = |Ic,in|
Action difference
cad = ||at−1 −at||2
TABLE II: Cost Terms
term. This kernel comes handy in tuning because it enables us
to leverage relative importance between different cost terms
and it enables us to adjust an agent’s sensitivity to e by
adjusting α.
D. Behaviors
The policies for self-righting, standing up and locomotion
are individually trained to achieve different tasks.
1) Tasks: Each behavior is learned based on a different cost
function, initial state distributions, and termination conditions.
• Self-righting behavior is to regain upright base pose
from an arbitrary conﬁguration (Fig. 3a) and re-position
joints to the sitting conﬁguration (Fig. 3b) which is
designed such that ANYmal has all feet on the ground
for a safe stand-up maneuver. The cost function is deﬁned
as koco + kjpcjp + kaca + kbicbi + kbscbs + kc,incc,in +
kadcad + kjslimcjslim + kτcτ , where k(·) is a scaling
factor. Each cost terms are explained in table. II. The
weight for the orientation cost (ko) was set to be the
highest such that ANYmal recovers up-right base pose
as soon as possible. The magnitudes of contact impulses
are penalized to avoid violent motions. The joint accel-
erations are penalized to generate smooth motions.
To sample initial states for training in simulation, we
dropped ANYmal from 0.5 m above the ground with
random joint positions. The termination condition is only

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3: (a) Sampled initial states and (b) the target conﬁgura-
tion of the self-righting task.
the time limit.
• Standing up behavior is to stand up from arbitrary
sitting conﬁgurations. The cost function is similar to the
cost of the self-righting but a height cost is additionally
introduced: kjpcjp + koco + khch + kaca + kadcad +
kjslimcjslim + kτcτ. The target joint conﬁguration is the
standing conﬁguration.
We use the same strategy for sampling initial states as
the self-righting task but with a near-upright pose and do
not specify any termination condition except for the time
limit.
• Locomotion behavior is to follow a given velocity com-
mand composed of desired forward velocity, lateral veloc-
ity, and turning rate (or yaw rate) which are sampled from
the uniform distribution, U(−1, 1) m/s, U(−0.4, 0.4) m/s,
and U(−1.2, 1.2) rad/s respectively. They are deﬁned
concerning the capabilities of an existing controller [1].
The cost function penalizes the velocity tracking errors
(cω and cv), foot motions (cfc and cfs), and constraint
violation. It is deﬁned as kωcω + kvcv + koco + kfccfc +
kfscfs + kadcad + kjslimcjslim + kτcτ.
The initial states are sampled from a multivariate Gaus-
sian distribution centered at the standing conﬁguration.
An episode terminates when the joint limit is violated or
ANYmal falls.
2) Action Representation: The output of a policy for a
behavior is a 12-dimensional real-valued vector and each
dimension is mapped to a position target of the low-impedance
Proportional-Derivative (PD) controllers running at each joint
actuator. Peng and van de Panne [18] showed that using
this type of action representations for learning motor skills
achieves better ﬁnal performance, faster learning, and higher
robustness compared to other representations such as target
joint torques and target joint velocities.
The output of a policy network is mapped to joint position
targets differently depending on the task. For locomotion, the
desired joint position φd is deﬁned as φd = kot +φn where k
is a scaling parameter, ot is the output, and φn is a nominal
joint conﬁguration (standing). It is designed such that the
distribution of the target positions has a standard deviation
of approximately 1 and mean at the nominal conﬁguration at
the beginning of training. It accelerates the learning because
the agent explores trajectories near the standing conﬁguration
more frequently. For the self-righting and the standing up, we
deﬁne φd = kot + φt, where φt is a vector of current joint
positions. It promotes exploration in joint spaces and results
in faster learning of self-righting.
3) Architecture: The policies are parameterized by a two-
layered feed-forward neural network with tanh units in the
hidden layers. The self-righting and standing-up policies have
128 units in each hidden layer and the locomotion policy has
128 and 256 units, respectively.
4) Training:
Each
policy
is
trained
separately
with
TRPO+GAE. For the natural and smooth motions, we penal-
ized joint torque, velocity, acceleration, and action difference.
We employed Curriculum Learning (CL) in a way that these
terms are near zero at the ﬁrst iteration and increase as the
training proceeds [13]; otherwise a learning agent converged
to a local minima where it stops moving.
E. Behavior Selector
The behavior selector learns to determine which behavior
to execute depending on the current situation.
1) Task: A behavior selector has to choose an appropriate
behavior such that ANYmal returns to a nominal operating
state every time it loses balance. By a nominal operating state,
we mean states where it can locomote. To this end, the cost
function is deﬁned as kωcω + kvcv + koco + khch + kpwcpw +
kadcad + kjslimcjslim + kτcτ, which is similar to that of
the locomotion task. Additionally, the use of cpw makes the
resulting behaviors power efﬁcient, while cad and cτ ensure
smooth transitions between different behaviors.
The initial states are sampled from the initial state distri-
butions of a randomly selected behaviors and the termination
condition is the same as that of self-righting.
2) State and Action Spaces: The state space of the behavior
selector consists of the union of the state spaces of behaviors
and the index of previously chosen behavior.
A behavior selector maps a state s to a categorical dis-
tribution over the behaviors. It is denoted as πθ(a|s) with
a ∈{0, 1, 2} and the output is a three dimensional real-valued
vector {p0, p1, p2}. Each dimension represents the probability
for choosing each behavior.
3) Architecture: The behavior selector is parameterized by
a two-layered feed-forward neural network with 128 tanh units
in the hidden layers. Softmax function is used at the output
such that P3
i=0 πθ(i|s) = 1 for any s. The height estimator is
of the same structure but without Softmax. Moreover it uses
the softsign unit which is computationally more efﬁcient than
tanh.
4) Training: We use a set of pre-trained behaviors, which
are regarded as a part of the environment, to train the behavior
selector using TRPO+GAE. The height estimator, which is
explained in section II-F, is trained concurrently as outlined
in the algorithm 1. The reasoning behind this strategy is to
match their state visitation frequency.
F. Height Estimation
The estimated base height becomes unreliable when ANY-
mal falls. We could observe huge errors from the base position

Algorithm 1 Training Behavior Selector
Initialize θ, ψ randomly
for i = 0, 1, ..., N do
for t = 0, 1, ..., T do
if i > Nw then
▷Nw = Warm-up period
Use the estimated height hψ(st)
Sample action at ∼πθ(a|st)
Excute the corresponding behavior
Collect state st, action at, and reward rt
Collect true height ht.
Append a st-ht pair into the replay memory
Sample K pairs from the replay memory
Update ψ by minimizing PK
j=0||hj −hψ(sj)||2
Update θ using TRPO [22]
estimates during the experiments when ANYmal lies on the
ground, which can lead to undesired behaviors. To resolve this
issue, we trained a neural network to estimate the base height.
It is denoted as hψ with a set of parameters ψ. The output is
calculated from the body orientation (IMU) and joint positions
(encoders), which are states that do not have a drift issue. The
base height can be computed using forward kinematics under
an assumption that ANYmal is on the ﬂat ground and the
geometric properties of the links are known.
The linear velocity estimate also had the same issue but the
errors were not signiﬁcant.
G. Handcrafted Behavior Selector
We introduce a traditional approach that we considered
before using the neural network behavior selector. Finite State
Machine (FSM) is a widely adopted method for controlling
hybrid systems. It is deﬁned by a set of states and transitions
between them, which are usually designed by a domain
expert. The proposed controller can be seen as an FSM if
we regard behaviors as states and the behavior selector as
a learned transition rule. As the task is straightforward, we
could handcraft it by going through trial-and-error (Fig. 4).
To maximize the success rate, it waits for TSIF to converge
for 0.5 seconds after it conducts the self-righting behavior.
X = the angle between the inertial z axis and the base z axis
Self-righting
Standing up
Locomotion
If X > 35 ° or 
base height < 0.4 m
If X < 20 ° for 0.5 s 
If base height > 0.35 m 
Fig. 4: FSM for behavior selection.
H. Simulating ANYmal
The structure of our simulator is depicted in Fig. 5. It has
actuator models and stochastic components that are designed
to account for modeling errors and to robustify the resulting
policies [13]. We used RaiSim [12] as rigid-body simulator
Fig. 5: Simulation for ANYmal.
together with learned networks that represent the actuator
dynamics.
1) Randomized Physical Properties: To make the solution
robust against modeling errors and to avoid tedious parameter
estimation for each link as done in [26], we directly use phys-
ical properties computed from the CAD model including link
lengths and inertial properties, but randomize the simulation to
overcome modeling errors. It has been shown in several works
that randomization enhances the robustness and increases the
success rate of a sim-to-real transfer [13], [26], [11]. The link
masses are randomized with additive noises up to 10 % of the
original value, and the COM of the base is randomly translated
up to 3 cm in x, y, z directions respectively every episode.
We approximated the collision geometry of ANYmal with
collision primitives such as a box, a cylinder, and a sphere.
The positions and shapes of the these collision bodies are also
randomized. The coefﬁcient of friction between the objects is
uniformly sampled between 0.8 to 2.0 every time step because
we cannot accurately simulate the material properties.
2) Actuator Model: ANYmal’s joints are Series Elastic Ac-
tuators (SEA) [20]. An SEA consists of multiple components
including a spring, gears, encoders, and an electric motor,
which results in highly complex dynamics. It is essential to
simulate actuators accurately and fast to efﬁciently train a sim-
to-real transferable policy because it substantially improves the
simulation accuracy. Developing an analytic model requires a
large number of parameters to be estimated or assumed to be
accurately provided by a manufacturer and thus often results in
an inaccurate model [9]. Instead, we use a data-driven model
introduced in [13]. The actuator model is a neural network that
outputs a joint torque conditioned on the position command
and a history of joint position errors and velocities. It is a two-
layered feed-forward neural network with 32 softsign units and
trained with real data.
3) Additive Noise to the Observation: To replicate the noisy
observation from the real robot, we added up to 0.2 m/s noise to
the linear velocity, 0.25 rad/s to the angular velocity, 0.5 rad/s to
the joint velocities, and 0.05 rad to the joint positions during
training in simulation. Additionally, in order to replicate the
behavior of TSIF, we increase the magnitude of the noise for
the linear velocity and position of the base when all four legs
lose contact.

Fig. 6: ANYmal recovering from arbitrary conﬁgurations.
Fig. 7: ANYmal reacting to a kick.
I. Implementation Details
We used the Robotics Artiﬁcial Intelligence [11] framework
together with the rigid-body simulator [12] , which are both
written in C++.
Temporal attributes of an RL task such as the control fre-
quency, the time limit, and the discount factor are regarded as
hyper-parameters. The policies for self-righting, standing up,
and locomotion run at 20 Hz, 100 Hz, and 200 Hz respectively
and the behavior selector runs at 50 Hz. The height estimator
runs synchronously with TSIF, which runs at 400 Hz. When
ANYmal switches to a different behavior, the output of the
chosen behavior is computed immediately. As a result, the
time step of the self-righting is often not preserved because it
runs at the lowest frequency.
As the policies require a history of joint measurements as
input, we implemented a history buffer that saves states for
0.05 seconds in 400 Hz. ANYmal waits in freeze mode to ﬁll
the history buffer before running the controller.
III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The experimental results are provided in this section. The
behaviors for standing-up and locomotion are not assessed
in detail in this paper. We refer the readers to [13] for a
comprehensive analysis of the locomotion behavior.
A. Robustness
We conducted two kinds of experiments to verify the
robustness of the policies. Firstly, we started the proposed
controller while ANYmal lies on the ground at an arbitrary
conﬁguration. We tested 50 different conﬁgurations and the
self-righting policy could recover up-right base pose within 5
seconds in all experiments. ANYmal can recover even when
its legs are stuck beneath its base (Fig. 6.A). It ﬂips to its side
to free the legs and then quickly regains up-right base pose.
It recovers when its base is almost upside-down (Fig. 6.B).
Secondly, we applied external disturbances while ANYmal
is walking or standing. An example is provided in Fig. 7.
It smoothly switches to self-righting behavior or standing up
behavior without any noticeable delay.
Both experiments are conducted 50 times and ANYmal fell
more than 100 times in total. The recovery maneuver failed
only three times. Consequently, The success rate was higher
than 97 %. Self-righting failed when a joint position ≥2π.
It fails because a self-righting policy hardly experiences such
a high position during the training. This is very unlikely to
happen when ANYmal falls while walking and can be easily
ﬁxed by applying modulo operation to the joint positions with
2π.
B. Comparison to Simulation
To qualitatively analyze the accuracy of the simulation, we
ran the same controller with the same initial state and velocity
command. As shown in Fig. 8, the switch in behaviors appears
in simulation (top) and reality (bottom) almost at the same
time, and the behaviors are visually identical (Fig. 8).
The estimated heights for the manuever above is provided in
Fig. 9. Unfortunately, due to a lack of motion capture system,
we could not measure the height in the experiment but have
only data from simulation. The output of the TSIF shows a
huge error when ANYmal lies on the ground (as shown by the
initial value) and ﬂuctuates during the self-righting maneuver.
On the other hand, the output of the neural network is stable
and accurately matches the simulated data (the RMS error is
less than 1 cm). When deployed without the height estimator,

Fig. 8: Comparison between simulation and experiments. ANYmal trots in 1 m/s after standing up. The snapshots are taken
every 0.5 seconds and the color bars represents the active behavior. The numbers represent the time of the switching and rounded
to the ﬁrst decimal place. (Sim) Simulated ANYmal with the initial state obtained from the experiment. (Real) Deploying the
recovery controller on the real robot. We used the same noises and randomized dynamic properties as in simulation and did
not hand-tune any number to matched the motions of the simulation and the experiment.
height (m)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
simulation
neural network
TSIF
time (s)
0
1
2
3
4
Fig. 9: Estimated base height from different sources. Self-
righting policy runs in the shaded region. (neural network
& TSIF) Output of the height estimator network and TSIF
during the experiment in Fig. 8.Real. (simulation) Computed
height from the simulation in Fig. 8.Sim.
Fig. 10: ANYmal showing undesirable behavior without the
height estimator. ANYmal jumps up and hits itself (red circle).
The behavior selector switches to locomotion policy while
ANYmal is lying on the ground.
the error in the base height sometimes results in an undesirable
behavior switch as shown in the Fig. 10.
C. FSM behavior selector
We discuss the FSM behavior selector introduced in sec-
tion II-G. The simplicity of FSM did not allow us to capture
corner cases (even with signiﬁcant tuning in simulation and
on the real system) as the one shown in Fig. 11. Besides,
the transitions between the behaviors are often unsmooth. The
FSM behavior selector is still robust enough to be used in
the ﬁeld. However, we did not examine the success rate of it
because the result can be manipulated if we experiment with
the corner cases more. The performance can be improved by
adding more states and transitions. For example, the corner
case in Fig. 11 can be resolved if we check joint positions
before standing up. However, the fundamental problem is that
Fig. 11: A corner case of our FSM. It switches to standing up
policy at a bad timing and falls.
it requires a number of design iterations and experiments on
the real robot.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a hierarchically structured controller for
the quadruped robot ANYmal that can autonomously recover
from a fall and locomote on ﬂat terrain. The control task is
decomposed into three behaviors: standing, self-righting and
walking. This strategy made it easier to design well-deﬁned
RL tasks and troubleshoot on the real robot. The policies
for behaviors are individually trained to achieve a distinct
behavior, and a behavior selector is trained to coordinate them.
Additionally, a height estimator is learned, which turned out
to be a crucial part for reliable maneuvers. All the policies are
trained in simulation and deployed on the real robot.
The proposed controller exhibits dynamic recovery ma-
neuvers involving multiple ground contacts and the resulting
motions are consistent with the simulated ones. ANYmal
can recover from multiple random fall conﬁgurations within
5 seconds and switches seamlessly between three behaviors
in response to disturbances. The robustness of our recovery
controller is evaluated by testing the controller more than 100
times on the physical system.
The current limitation of the proposed method is that it
has only been trained and tested on ﬂat ground and it will
fail in case of large inclinations or rough ground. We plan to
overcome these limitations in future work by randomizing the
environment in simulation and by estimating its properties.
