FAIRNESS SCORE AND PROCESS STANDARDIZATION:
FRAMEWORK FOR FAIRNESS CERTIFICATION IN ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS
Avinash Agarwal
Telecommunication Engineering Centre
Ministry of Communications
New Delhi, India

Harsh Agarwal
Adobe Inc.
Noida, India
Nihaarika Agarwal
Manipal Institute of Technology
Manipal, India
January 19, 2022
ABSTRACT
Decisions made by various Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) systems greatly inﬂuence our day-to-day lives.
With the increasing use of AI systems, it becomes crucial to know that they are fair, identify the un-
derlying biases in their decision-making, and create a standardized framework to ascertain their
fairness. In this paper, we propose a novel Fairness Score to measure the fairness of a data-driven AI
system and a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for issuing Fairness Certiﬁcation for such sys-
tems. Fairness Score and audit process standardization will ensure quality, reduce ambiguity, enable
comparison and improve the trustworthiness of the AI systems. It will also provide a framework
to operationalise the concept of fairness and facilitate the commercial deployment of such systems.
Furthermore, a Fairness Certiﬁcate issued by a designated third-party auditing agency following the
standardized process would boost the conviction of the organizations in the AI systems that they
intend to deploy. The Bias Index proposed in this paper also reveals comparative bias amongst the
various protected attributes within the dataset. To substantiate the proposed framework, we itera-
tively train a model on biased and unbiased data using multiple datasets and check that the Fairness
Score and the proposed process correctly identify the biases and judge the fairness.
Keywords Bias · Fairness Score · Standardization · Artiﬁcial Intelligence · Ethics · Audit · SOP
1
Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) services are used widely in various ﬁelds and aspects such as ﬁnance, education, medicine,
and law. Predictive systems use large datasets for training and several algorithms to enable accurate and fast decision-
making. These systems make decisions based on their learnings from the training data and algorithms used. The
systems are improving continuously, becoming more complex and automated. As such, manual supervision and
validation of their outcomes are reducing. Thus it is pertinent to ask some fundamental questions, such as 1) how
the system reaches the outcome? 2) how often the system’s outcomes are wrong 3) is the system being unfair to a
particular group? [Sharma et al., 2019].
Over the centuries, discrimination based on race, gender, religion, etc., has existed in society and human psychology.
The assumption that the decisions made using AI systems will be fair may not be correct. These systems learn from
datasets consisting of real-world events and observations. The biases or prejudices present in the real world seep
into the systems through various steps in model building. Hence this discrimination can be observed in the results
and decisions made by the AI systems. The discrimination and discriminatory decisions can be termed as biases and
biased decisions, respectively. Biased decisions hinder the rights and sentiments of the unprivileged group and may
cause a negative social impact. Various search engines and recommender systems had race and gender discrimination
[Leavy et al., 2020].
arXiv:2201.06952v1  [cs.CY]  10 Jan 2022

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Thus it is necessary to detect biases in AI systems and then mitigate them so that these systems are fair. However,
how do the users know whether a decision involving them is made using a fair system or a biased system? Can
the developing organization’s claim to fairness be taken at face value? Are there metrics/ methodologies to verify
the claim? Can some audit processes be standardized such that neutral certifying agencies can audit and certify AI
systems for fairness? We answer some of these questions in this paper. The aim of this study is to assess the fairness
of a given AI system and to enable third-party audit and certiﬁcation for fairness of AI systems. The scope does not
however include recommending any corrective actions to be taken if the AI system under analysis does not meet the
qualifying criteria.
Our contributions:
1. We propose a Fairness Score to measure the overall fairness of an AI system. We also propose Bias Index to
measure the bias of each protected attribute in a dataset.
2. We propose a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for issuing Fairness Certiﬁcation for data-driven Artiﬁcial
Intelligence systems that would provide a framework to operationalize the concept of fairness and facilitate
commercial deployment of such systems.
3. We explain the need for third party Fairness Certiﬁcation for such systems.
4. We deﬁne the desired characteristics of metrics to detect bias at different phases of such AI systems.
5. We propose the metrics out of a plethora of such metrics sufﬁcient to detect bias.
Methodology:
We review the various cases of bias in AI systems and the different ways to deﬁne fairness. Then, we
shortlist the metrics that properly detect bias in a training dataset and a trained model. Accordingly, we propose the
Fairness Score, Bias Index, and an SOP for detecting bias. Finally, we establish our proposals by applying them to a
model, which is trained multiple times using the following popular open datasets one by one:
1. UCI Adult dataset (four scenarios):
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset after balancing for gender
(c) Dataset after balancing for race
(d) Dataset after balancing for marital status
2. German Credit dataset (two scenarios):
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset after balancing for gender
3. Health Insurance Cross-Sell Prediction dataset (one scenario)
(a) Original dataset
Related work:
Various researchers have worked in areas related to biases in AI systems, concepts of fairness, and
metrics to measure fairness, as elaborated in subsequent sections. Most of these works are related to theoretical
or mathematical aspects. Our proposal is different as we focus on the practical implementation aspects aiming to
standardize the audit procedure to check the fairness of an AI system to enhance its trustworthiness. While most
researchers have proposed different metrics to check for biases, we consider these metrics and present an integrated
Fairness Score. Our work would be found beneﬁcial by organizations developing AI systems as well as those deploying
such systems. It would also facilitate benchmarking and independent third party audit for fairness.
2
Need for Fairness Certiﬁcation
Bias creates unwanted drifts between different groups. It gives an advantage to the people belonging to one particular
class irrespective of other vital parameters that value that decision-making process. Apart from this, it also affects
the business and its proﬁts based on the predictive results of the system. Therefore, ensuring the trustworthiness of
AI systems is not only a research subject but also a business requirement [Curionin, 2019]. Moreover, AI bias could
negatively affect every sector as AI systems become widespread [Mahoney et al., 2020].
Previous studies have highlighted cases where biases in AI-driven systems have caused unwanted impacts and results.
For example, Amazon developed an online AI-based recruitment system where the candidates were shortlisted based
on their resumes. By 2015, it came to the company’s attention that ratings were biased in favour of male applicants
2

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
for technical job titles like software developers and architects. On investigation, it was found that the data used for
training the system was having gender bias as it consisted of resumes of mostly male employees in reﬂection to the
then actual hiring trend in the company [Kodiyan, 2019]. Research on online freelance marketplace based on evidence
from TaskRabbit and Fiverr revealed that social feedback on these sites often has a signiﬁcant statistical relationship
with perceived gender and race [Hann´ak et al., 2017]. Various facial recognition systems have biases and give accurate
detection results only for people of a certain race and often incorrect results for the other demographic groups [Garvie
and Frankle, 2016]. The US healthcare system was observed to be racially biased and preferred treating white patients
over the ones with African origins [Obermeyer et al., 2019]. The Correctional Offender Management Proﬁling for
Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS) score, used in States such as California and Florida, was reported to be biased
against African origin inmates according to certain measures of fairness [Wadsworth et al., 2018]. Princeton research
showed that off-the-shelf AI software was biased in associating words like ‘woman’ and ‘girl’ with arts as compared
to science or math [Hadhazy, 2017]. Studies showed that online search queries were more likely to return ads from
services related to arrest records when names of a particular race were searched than when names of the other race
were searched [Sweeney, 2013, Lee et al., 2019]. Biases in expert systems can also lead to the false detection of
disease, wrong prescription of medical tests and more visits to the hospital for routine check-ups [Zheng et al., 2017].
These and many similar kinds of research indicate the negative impact of biases in AI systems and the need for
ensuring fairness in such systems. As these systems get embedded in day-to-day applications and essential services
such as healthcare, judicial, and many more, it becomes pertinent for users to know that the system they are using
is fair. Small service providers to large corporations and government organizations use AI/ Machine Learning (ML)
based applications to provide services. However, everyone does not have the resources or technical know-how to test
the fairness of the AI systems they are deploying. The AI application could be an off-the-shelf product or a customized
product developed speciﬁcally for that end-user. There is, therefore, a need for a standard testing procedure to test the
AI application for biases. A Fairness Certiﬁcate issued by a neutral certifying authority based on such standard testing
procedure would assure the users of the fairness of the AI/ ML system.
The standard testing procedure should protect proprietary AI system developers, privacy, and security of the training
dataset [Segal et al., 2021]. It should comply with the existing national and international regulations [Tommasi et al.,
2021]. Finally, it should not only protect the rights of individuals but also help the competition to grow and provide
the best services [Schubert and H¨utt, 2019].
3
Causes of Bias in AI Systems
Biases can enter an AI system at any point in its cycle. Empirical ﬁndings have shown that data-driven methods can
unintentionally encode existing human biases and introduce new ones [Chouldechova and Roth, 2018]. According to
[Ferrer et al., 2021], three causes of biases are:
Bias in modelling:
These biases correspond to the algorithmic biases, caused due to the algorithms deﬁned for
model functioning and decisive actions. Algorithms often reﬂect biases of the developers and hence the society at
large [Shah, 2018]. Also, they do it at a potentially massive scale and without due oversight. [Panch et al., 2019].
Bias in training:
The systems learn based on the data used to train them. The biases existing in society are often
manifested in the data used by AI algorithms and can be modelled and formally deﬁned [Ntoutsi et al., 2020]. The
data may represent the ideologies of only one group of the population or speciﬁc cases, which introduces prejudices
or biases in the decisions.
Bias in usage:
These biases arise when the models or systems are used for a purpose not deﬁned for them. The AI
systems designed for making decisions for a speciﬁc group or section provide biased results when used for any other
group. Misinterpretation of the outcomes of the system also causes wrong and indeliberate actions or biases. Biases
also creep in when the systems are used for intended purpose but one speciﬁc class has more use instances while the
AI system keeps learning from its usage.
4
How to deﬁne Fairness
While we create a certiﬁcation framework and identify fairness metrics, it is necessary to deﬁne fairness. AI fairness is
a rapidly growing topic of inquiry [Hajian et al., 2016]. Multiple deﬁnitions of fairness have been proposed [Verma and
Rubin, 2018, Zliobaite, 2017, Mehrabi et al., 2021]. Some of these deﬁnitions were proposed for formalizing fairness
from other disciplines [Hutchinson and Mitchell, 2019]. In some cases deﬁning fairness comes as a legal compulsion,
for example, lending money through The Equal Credit Opportunity Act in the United States [Arnold et al., 2019].
3

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Fairness can be broadly deﬁned as the state of being impartial towards every individual and group involved. However,
fairness can be perceived differently by different people and contexts [Mulligan et al., 2019]. Thus it is not easy to
have a single deﬁnition of fairness for all AI systems.
Various researchers have come up with their deﬁnitions for fairness in AI systems. The outcomes would differ de-
pending on the difference in the aspects of fairness focused on by different deﬁnitions of fairness [Mahoney et al.,
2020].
For applying fairness well, one should understand it within a speciﬁc context. Guiding questions to determine fairness
could be: Are there particular groups that may be advantaged or disadvantaged by the algorithm/ system in that
context? In case of uncertainty or errors in the AI system, what is the potential adverse effect to different groups?
[Diakopoulos et al., 2017]
Individual fairness implies that if two individuals differ only in protected attributes such as gender or race, they should
receive similar outcomes. There is individual discrimination if they receive different outcomes [Aggarwal et al., 2019].
A distance metric may be used to measure the similarity between the two individuals [Dwork et al., 2012].
Group fairness involves dividing the data into different categories based on the protected attributes and ensuring that
the outcomes are similar for all the groups. Group fairness averages out the data of individuals in a group, so it may
or may not represent the correct picture.
Other than individual and group fairness, fairness deﬁnitions can also be classiﬁed using the statistical approach used:
deﬁnitions based on the predicted outcome; deﬁnitions based on predicted and actual outcomes; and deﬁnitions based
on predicted probabilities and actual outcomes [Verma and Rubin, 2018].
Similarity-based deﬁnitions use non-sensitive attributes also, unlike the above fairness deﬁnitions.
Counterfactual fairness uses plotting a graph to check whether the outcome-deﬁning attributes are correlated to the
sensitive attributes [Kusner et al., 2017, Ntoutsi et al., 2020].
These deﬁnitions are independent of each other, and multiple deﬁnitions can be applied to an AI system simultaneously.
It is also important to note that for an AI system/ dataset to be fair, it does not mean that it should always have equal
representation for all the classes across the different demographics. Equality should be in sync with the ground reality.
While many formal mathematical deﬁnitions of fairness have been proposed, formalizing fairness is still a problem.
These deﬁnitions have statistical limitations, and there are adverse effects of enforcing such fairness measures on group
well-being [Corbett-Davies and Goel, 2018]. Thus, there might be systems that do not meet some of the deﬁnitions
but still are fair. It is therefore essential to understand the context of the AI system before judging it for fairness.
Obviously, fairness is a multi-disciplinary topic. [Romei and Ruggieri, 2014] provides a survey of fairness analysis in
multiple disciplines.
In the subsequent sections, we deﬁne the features of a good fairness metric and discuss some of the fairness metrics
along with their mathematical representations.
5
Desired Characteristics of Fairness Metrics
We need to measure a data-driven AI system against some fairness criteria or metrics to evaluate whether the system
is fair or not [Hertweck et al., 2021]. Unwanted biases in training data, due to either prejudice in labels or under-/
over-sampling, can be checked using statistical tests on datasets or models [Barocas and Selbst, 2016, Bellamy et al.,
2018].
While the fairness deﬁnitions and computation of fairness metrics are explicit, applying inﬂexible thresholds on such
metrics is not practical as the interpretation of the numbers is often subjective. As such, the thresholds should be
decided considering the constraints in view. Before computing these metrics, it is crucial to deﬁne the characteristics
of a good fairness metric.
A good fairness metric should be clear in terms of its mathematical and theoretical signiﬁcance and also in terms of
features, outcomes, and situations it takes into consideration during evaluation. There should be clear guidelines on the
metric review to draw valuable inferences about the biases in the system. Its constraints, drawbacks, and advantages
should be known to enable its selection according to the application of the system.
A good fairness metric is expected to be quantitatively and accurately measurable to calculate the bias present in the
AI system. Furthermore, it should assist in coming up with effective mitigation processes for the biases and setting up
fairness benchmarking guidelines for an AI system.
4

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
An excellent metric should be universally accepted for the systems used in various parts of the world. This is required
to avoid discrepancies in the fairness deﬁnitions or guidelines for a system in various geographies and to establish
uniform justice among people around the globe.
As mentioned in previous section, the context of fairness is domain dependent and there maybe inherent trade-off in
aggregating multiple metrics in different use cases [Kleinberg et al., 2016, Singh et al., 2021].
6
Standard Fairness Metrics
Here we have explained some of the standard fairness metrics which abide by the above characteristics. The various
notations used in their mathematical representations are:
Y : training label
Y ′ : predicted label
S ∈{0, 1} : binary indicator of the protected class
1 indicates the privileged group
0 indicates an unprivileged group
6.1
Demographic Parity
It is a measure of whether the probabilities of favourable outcomes for privileged and unprivileged groups of data in a
protected attribute are the same.
It is independent of the prediction/ system outcome, making it simpler and easier to implement. However, a drawback
to this metric is that it does not consider the genuine real-world differences between the privileged and unprivileged
groups. Thus, this metric will be inappropriate if the reason for the difference in probabilities of favourable outcomes
for different groups in a protected attribute is legitimate, for example, distribution of breast cancer probability based
on gender [Hinnefeld et al., 2018]. For an unbiased system, it can be mathematically represented as:
P(Y = 1|S = 0) = P(Y = 1|S = 1)
(1)
In case of bias, the two sides of the equation will not be equal. This metric can be calculated in two different ways:
6.1.1
Statistical Parity Difference
It is the difference of the probabilities of favourable outcomes for unprivileged and privileged classes in a protected
attribute and represented as:
P(Y = 1|S = 0) −P(Y = 1|S = 1)
(2)
For an unbiased system, its value should be zero.
6.1.2
Disparate Impact
It is the ratio of the probabilities of favorable outcomes for unprivileged and privileged classes in a protected attribute
[Lohia et al., 2019] and represented as:
P(Y = 1∥S = 0)
P(Y = 1∥S = 1)
(3)
For an unbiased system, its value should be one.
6.2
Equal Opportunity
It measures the equality of the true positive rates, i.e. equality of recall value for the privileged and unprivileged
groups. It simply means that every group should have equal opportunities to be successful. It is also called positive
rate parity. Mathematically, it can be written as [Hardt et al., 2016]:
P(Y ′ = 1|S = 1, Y = 1) −P(Y ′ = 1|S = 0, Y = 1)
(4)
Its disadvantage is that it requires large labelled historical data [Awwad et al., 2020].
5

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
6.3
Equal Mis-Opportunity
According to this metric, the accuracy measured as false positive rate should be the same for privileged and unprivi-
leged groups. It is also known as predictive equality [Corbett-Davies et al., 2017]. Mathematically, it can be written
as [Hinnefeld et al., 2018]:
P(Y ′ = 1|S = 1, Y = 0) −P(Y ′ = 1|S = 0, Y = 0)
(5)
6.4
Average Odds
It is the combination of equal opportunity and equal mis-opportunity metrics. It measures whether the true positive
and the false positive rates are the same for privileged and unprivileged groups. It simply means that the favourable
outcome is independent of the protected feature. Mathematically, it can be written as:
(P(Y ′ = 1|S = 0, Y = y) −P(Y ′ = 1|S = 1, Y = y))/2
(6)
where,
y ∈{0, 1}
It tries to ensure high accuracy in all demographics [Hardt et al., 2016]. It can be preferred when discrimination can
be accepted as long as it is justiﬁed by actual trustable data [Castelnovo et al., 2021].
6.5
Distance Metrics
These metrics are used to calculate the distance between two points. In terms of fairness metrics, these metrics can be
used to evaluate the similarity between two data points. These can also be used to compare two datasets, for example,
for measuring the change between an original dataset and the dataset after distortion/ bias mitigation.
Some familiar distance metrics are Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, and the more generalized Minkowski
distance.
One disadvantage of these metrics is that large valued variables might inﬂuence results. Also, they are not suitable
for image classiﬁcation or document classiﬁcation [Pandit et al., 2011]. Finally, these metrics are also not suitable to
measure similarities between groups within the same dataset.
Some researchers have suggested using distance metrics to measure bias while focusing on using these metrics to
determine individual fairness. In our experiment, we consider group fairness and hence have not used the distance
metrics to calculate bias. However, the fairness certiﬁcation framework proposed in this paper can be extended for
individual fairness also.
7
Proposed Framework for Fairness Certiﬁcation
7.1
Fairness Score and Bias Index
Different users might use different metrics to check the fairness of an AI system. Hence, it is crucial to standardise the
bias measurement on a linear scale so that a uniform scale can be used to assess fairness and enable the comparison
of different AI systems. Therefore, we introduce Bias Index for each protected attribute and Fairness Score for the
overall system as the standard benchmarks for measuring fairness.
Bias Index is deﬁned for each protected attribute in the system as follows:
BIi =
sPn
j=1(M ij −M j′)2
n
(7)
where,
i : number of the protected attribute
j : number of the fairness metric
n : total number of fairness metrics used
m : total number of protected attributes considered in the AI system
M ij : value of the jth fairness metric for the ith protected attribute
M j
′ : ideal value of the jth fairness metric
i.e. 0 for difference metrics and 1 for ratio metrics
6

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Fairness Score is deﬁned for the AI system as follows:
FS = 1 −
rPm
i=1(BIi)2
m
(8)
Substituting the equation for BI, we get,
FS = 1 −
sPm
i=1
Pn
j=1(M ij −M j′)2
mn
(9)
While Bias Index corresponds to the degree of bias for a particular protected attribute in a dataset or model, Fairness
Score corresponds to the degree of fairness in the entire model taking into account all the protected attributes together.
For a fair system, Bias Index for each protected attribute should be zero, whereas the Fairness Score should be one.
AI systems may have more than one protected attribute, and so there would be as many Bias Indexes as the number
of protected attributes, but there will be only one Fairness Score for the model. The AI system might be biased for
some of the protected attributes and fair for the other protected attributes, which the corresponding Bias Indexes would
reﬂect; the Fairness Score, on the other hand, would reﬂect the overall fairness.
7.2
Proposed Standard Operating Procedure for Fairness Certiﬁcation
Considering the desired characteristics of the fairness metrics and their applicability at different stages of model
building, we propose a Standard Operating Procedure for issuing Fairness Certiﬁcate for data-driven AI Systems as
follows:
1. Identify the protected attributes in the dataset used in the AI system.
2. Identify the privileged and unprivileged classes for each attribute in the dataset.
3. Deﬁne the tolerance band for each attribute. Ideally, it should remain ﬁxed for proper benchmarking.
4. Check the training dataset for fairness. Compute values of Statistical Parity Difference and Disparate Impact
(or any other metric considered appropriate) for each protected attribute of the training dataset. Check if the
values fall in the tolerance band.
5. Train the AI system using the training dataset.
6. Run the system on a test dataset and tally the outcomes.
7. Compute values of Equal Opportunity Difference, Equal Mis-Opportunity Difference, and Average Odds
Difference (or any other metric considered appropriate) for each protected attribute of the outcome. Check if
the values fall in the tolerance band.
8. Plot the various metrics on a graph and see if all the metrics are within the tolerance band.
9. Calculate the Bias Index for each protected attribute and the Fairness Score for the overall AI system.
10. Based on the above observations, the fairness certiﬁcation can be issued.
11. In a real-world scenario, the developers might not share the training dataset with the certifying agency. In
such cases, steps 4 and 5 have to be skipped. So, the test dataset should be close to unbiased for all the
protected attributes. Any deviation of the metrics computed on the outcomes from the mean position would
indicate bias in the system. In such cases, the certiﬁcate issued by the certifying agency should mention
that the statistical parity and disparate impact have not been checked due to non-availability of the training
dataset. Further, a legal framework could be considered where, depending on the requirements and use case,
the developers can be mandated to share their training datasets with the certifying agency for certiﬁcation.
12. As the system is operationalized and keeps learning from real-world data, it is necessary to check periodically
for any biases introduced after the initial tests. As such, periodic recertiﬁcation is recommended.
8
Experiment
We evaluated our proposed framework on seven different datasets related to the popular open datasets: UCI Adult
dataset (four scenarios), German Credit dataset (two scenarios), and Health Insurance dataset. For each dataset, we
performed the following steps:
We identiﬁed the protected attributes and also the privileged and unprivileged classes for each such attribute. Then, we
cleaned the dataset by removing special characters, dropping some skewed attributes, and transforming the categorical
7

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
attributes using one-hot encoding. We randomly divided the dataset into 85% training set and 15% test set. We
used RandomForestClassiﬁer to train the model and make predictions. We calculated the following fairness metrics
for each protected class: Statistical Parity Difference (SPD) and Disparate Impact (DI) for training dataset; Equal
Opportunity Difference (EOD), Equal Mis-Opportunity Difference (EMOD), and Average Odds Difference (AOD)
for test set predictions using the trained model.
We used visualization tools to plot these observations. We ﬁnally calculated the Bias Index for each protected attribute
and the Fairness Score for the model. We repeated these for all seven cases as mentioned above.
8.1
UCI Adult Dataset
UCI Adult dataset is also known as the Census Income dataset. The data has been extracted from the 1994 Census
dataset. It is used to predict whether an individual’s income exceeds $50k per annum or not. The dataset contains
attributes like age, gender, marital status, occupation, among others.
As part of pre-processing, we reclassiﬁed the classes in the marital-status attribute as following:
Married = {′Married −civ −spouse′, ′Married −AF −spouse′}
Unmarried = {′Widowed′, ′Never −married′, ′Divorced′,
′Separated′, ′Married −spouse −absent′}
For our experiment, we considered the following conﬁgurations:
Protected attributes : gender, race, marital −status
Privileged class : Male (gender), White (race),
Married (marital −status)
Unprivileged class : Female (gender), Other than White (race),
Unmarried (marital −status)
Favourable outcome : Income > $50k/yr
Marital status has been included as a protected ﬁeld because on analysis of the UCI Adult Dataset, a clear bias was
observed towards married individuals as compared to individuals who were not in a relationship. One possible reason
could be the belief at that time that married individuals were considered more stable and safer bet. The ﬁrst iteration
of model training and bias calculation was done on the original (biased) dataset. For the next iteration, we used
oversampling (SMOTENC) and random undersampling to mitigate bias in the race attribute. We balanced the number
of favourable outcomes for both the privileged and unprivileged classes. A fresh model was trained on this resampled
dataset, and a new set of fairness metrics was calculated for each protected attribute. We repeated the same steps two
more times, balancing gender one time and marital status the other.
Figure 1 shows Statistical Parity Difference and Disparate Impact calculated on the pre-trained dataset for all four
iterations. Figure 2 shows Equal Opportunity Difference, Equal Mis-Opportunity Difference, and Average Odds
Difference calculated on the model predictions on the test dataset. As can be seen, the original dataset has a bias
for all the protected attributes. Further, in subsequent iterations, when we calculate metrics by resampling for each
protected attribute one by one, the values start falling in the acceptable band for that attribute. We also observe that
while resampling for a protected attribute reduces the bias in that attribute, it also tends to reduce the bias for other
attributes.
8.2
German Credit Dataset
Each record in the German credit dataset represents an individual, classiﬁed as either a good credit risk or a bad credit
risk. The dataset contains attributes like Sex, Housing, Purpose, Duration among others.
For our experiment, we considered the following conﬁgurations:
Protected attributes : Sex
Privileged class : male (Sex)
Unprivileged class : female (Sex)
Favourable outcome : good (Risk)
8

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Figure 1: Statistical Parity Difference and Disparate Impact values for the pre-training datasets for the four scenarios
of the UCI Adult dataset
Figure 3 shows the fairness metrics calculated on the original dataset and the dataset after mitigating bias in the
protected attribute. The metrics indicate some gender bias in the original dataset that gets addressed in the gender-
balanced dataset.
8.3
Health Insurance Cross-Sell Prediction Dataset
Health Insurance Cross-Sell Prediction dataset is an insurance company’s dataset of customers to whom the company
provided health insurance in the last one year. The dataset is used to predict the customers interested in buying
the company’s vehicle insurance. The dataset contains attributes like DrivingLicense, VehicleAge, VehicleDamage,
AnnualPremium among others.
For our experiment, we considered the following conﬁgurations:
Protected attributes : Gender
Privileged class : Male (Gender)
Unprivileged class : Female (Gender)
Favourable outcome : 1 (Response)
Figure 4 shows the fairness metrics calculated on the original dataset. The metrics, except Disparate Impact, indicate
that the dataset is free for bias for the protected attribute.
Fairness Scores calculated for the datasets, Bias Indexes and various Fairness Metrics calculated for the protected
attributes for all the seven cases are tabulated in Table 1.
9

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Figure 2: Equal Opportunity, Equal Mis-Opportunity and Average Odds values for the predictions of the test datasets
for the four scenarios of the UCI Adult dataset
Figure 3: Fairness metrics for the Original (left) and Gender-Balanced (right) German Credit Dataset
9
Discussion
Analysis of the calculated values and their graphs related to the experiment are as follows:
1. The training datasets used for various AI systems are not perfect, so the AI systems are likely to be preju-
diced and may not be fair in all aspects. Biases may also be there due to imperfections in the algorithms in the
model. Our experiment indicates that different metrics are required to check for biases in the pre-processed
training dataset and the outcomes. For the former case, we have used Statistical Parity Difference and Dis-
10

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Figure 4: Fairness metrics for the Health Insurance Cross-Sell Prediction Dataset
parate Impact. For the latter case, we have used Equal Opportunity Difference, Equal Mis-Opportunity
Difference, and Average Odds Difference.
2. A single metric might not correctly identify bias in all cases, so using a combination of metrics is suggested.
We have used two metrics for the pre-processed training dataset and three metrics for the post-training out-
comes.
3. Different metrics may be used in other AI systems, but the Fairness Score will still be relevant and can be
used to compare various systems.
4. The training dataset might have multiple attributes that might impact the fairness of the system. It is necessary
to check for fairness for each protected attribute. In our experiment, we checked for fairness for race, gender,
and marital status in the UCI Adult Dataset and gender in the other two datasets.
5. Testing all the protected attributes combined is difﬁcult, whereas checking for each attribute separately is
practically implementable.
6. Our experiment conﬁrms bias in the protected attributes of race, gender, and marital status in the UCI Adult
Dataset and gender in the German Credit Dataset. Further, no signiﬁcant bias is observed for the protected
attribute of gender in the Health Insurance Cross-Sell Prediction dataset. These results are validated by
previous studies [Tram`er et al., 2015].
7. The graphical representation also shows the relative degree of bias for one attribute as compared to others.
The UCI Adult Dataset has a maximum bias in the case of marital status.
8. When bias for one attribute is removed, the impact on other protected attributes can also be checked from
this graphical representation. It is observed that when bias for marital status was removed, the biases for the
other two protected attributes also got reduced.
9. As having a perfect unbiased system is impossible, a tolerance band is recommended. We have considered
the band to be ±10%. The width of this band can be decided on the use case, narrow in cases where bias is
not tolerable and broader where bias is not of much signiﬁcance. The Four-Fifths Rule, Uniform Guidelines
on Employee Selection Procedures (1978) of the US Government considers the adverse impact on a group
if its selection rate is less than four-ﬁfths (or 80%) of the rate of the group with the highest selection rate,
thus indicating tolerance of 20% [CFR, 1978]. Accordingly, a Bias Index between 0 and 0.1 for a protected
attribute indicates that the system is unbiased for that attribute. Similarly, Fairness Score between 0.9 and 1.0
indicates a fair AI system.
10. Experiments on multiple datasets, some having bias and others balanced for bias, validate the proposed
Fairness Score, the Bias Index and the SOP as these correctly assess the bias or fairness of the AI models.
10
Conclusion
Just as there are established procedures for security audit and certiﬁcation of websites and portals by designated audit-
ing agencies against accepted benchmarks such as OWASP Top 10, an ecosystem for fairness audit and certiﬁcation
for AI-based Systems also needs to evolve. Standardization of the bias determining process is essential for more
acceptance of such systems. This paper proposes a Fairness Score and a Standard Operating Procedure to evaluate
the fairness of such AI systems and provide a framework for Fairness Certiﬁcation. Bias in an AI/ ML system can
be present due to the training dataset or the algorithms used. These biases are measured using pre-deﬁned metrics.
11

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
Protected Attribute
SPD
DI
EOD
EMOD
AOD
Bias Index
Fairness Value
UCI Adult dataset - Original dataset
Race
-0.1019
0.5990
0.0052
0.0443
-0.0247
0.1864
0.6457
Gender
-0.1945
0.3598
0.1257
0.0958
-0.1108
0.3114
Marital Status
-0.3831
0.1429
0.4123
0.2509
-0.3316
0.4948
UCI Adult dataset - Gender balanced
Race
-0.1463
0.5833
-0.0073
0.0700
0.0313
0.2005
0.7025
Gender
0.0000
1.0000
-0.0766
0.0647
0.0060
0.0449
Marital Status
-0.3912
0.2224
0.3901
0.2970
-0.3436
0.4725
UCI Adult dataset - Race balanced
Race
0.0000
1.0000
-0.0992
0.0263
0.0364
0.0487
0.6508
Gender
-0.2400
0.4096
0.1383
0.1329
-0.1356
0.3038
Marital Status
-0.4623
0.1732
0.4476
0.3285
-0.3880
0.5208
UCI Adult dataset - Maritial Status balanced
Race
-0.1144
0.6689
0.0270
0.0919
-0.0594
0.1646
0.8909
Gender
0.0380
0.8881
0.0541
0.0590
-0.0566
0.0687
Marital Status
0.0000
1.0000
-0.0013
0.1256
-0.0621
0.0627
German Credit dataset - Original dataset
Sex
-0.0854
0.8816
0.0679
0.1333
-0.1006
0.1037
0.8963
German Credit dataset - Sex balanced
Sex
0.0000
1.0000
-0.0890
0.1670
-0.0390
0.0864
0.9136
Health Insurance dataset - Original dataset
Gender
-0.0343
0.7519
-0.0113
0.0098
0.0008
0.1122
0.8878
Table 1: Fairness Scores for the datasets, Bias Indexes and various Fairness Metrics calculated for the protected
attributes for all the seven cases
A single metric may not be accurate for all the systems and applications, so a combination of metrics is preferred to
evaluate their fairness. This paper outlines the desired features of such metrics and shortlists the suitable metrics for
data-driven AI systems. As an AI/ ML system continuously learns while in operation, it is necessary to check for
fairness periodically to ensure its neutrality and fair decision-making ability. Our experiments on the Census Income
dataset, German Credit dataset, and Health Insurance dataset establish that the Fairness Score and the SOP proposed
in the paper can be used as a framework to evaluate the fairness of AI systems and issue a Fairness Certiﬁcate.
Further studies can be carried out to extend the framework to speciﬁc use-cases and different types of AI systems.
Some ethical questions arise as a result of the framework. Who decides the protected attributes of the dataset? Also,
the selection of privileged and unprivileged classes can be manipulated to give a favourable result. There could be a
bias or manipulation in deciding the protected attributes or the privileged/ unprivileged classes. Further, a record might
belong to privileged class in one use case and unprivileged class in another, making it difﬁcult to have strict guidelines
for privileged class selection. Answers to these concerns could be considered for further research and studies.
12

Fairness Score and Certiﬁcation Standardization in AI Systems
11
Declarations
Funding The authors did not receive support from any organization for the submitted work.
Availability of data and material Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of interest/ Competing interests On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no
conﬂict of interest.
Code availability Not applicable.
