arXiv:2001.05263v1  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2020
Approximate Weighted First-Order Model Counting:
Exploiting Fast Approximate Model Counters and Symmetry
Timothy van Bremen
KU Leuven, Belgium

Ondˇrej Kuˇzelka
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract
We study the symmetric weighted ﬁrst-order model counting
task and present ApproxWFOMC, a novel anytime method
for efﬁciently bounding the weighted ﬁrst-order model count
in the presence of an unweighted ﬁrst-order model count-
ing oracle. The algorithm has applications to inference in
a variety of ﬁrst-order probabilistic representations, such as
Markov logic networks and probabilistic logic programs. Cru-
cially for many applications, we make no assumptions on the
form of the input sentence. Instead, our algorithm makes use
of the symmetry inherent in the problem by imposing cardi-
nality constraints on the number of possible true groundings
of a sentence’s literals. Realising the ﬁrst-order model count-
ing oracle in practice using the approximate hashing-based
model counter ApproxMC3, we show how our algorithm out-
performs existing approximate and exact techniques for infer-
ence in ﬁrst-order probabilistic models. We additionally pro-
vide PAC guarantees on the generated bounds.
Introduction
Given a propositional formula φ, the model counting prob-
lem asks for the number of models (satisfying assignments)
of φ. Model counting is the prototypical #P-complete
problem. The weighted model counting (WMC) problem
generalizes this task by associating each assignment with a
real-valued weight, and asks for the weighted sum of the for-
mula’s models. In the past several years, the WMC task has
attracted great interest as an “assembly language” for prob-
abilistic inference, as inference in various formalisms such
as graphical models (Chavira and Darwiche 2008) and prob-
abilistic logic programming languages (Fierens et al. 2015)
can be reduced to WMC. Many practical implemen-
tations of (weighted) model counters have also been
introduced,
such
as
DSHARP
(Muise et al. 2012)
and
MINIC2D
(Oztok and Darwiche 2015).
In
ad-
dition
to
exact
weighted
model
counters,
another
line
of
research
has
unfolded
among
approximate
model
counters
(Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013;
Chakraborty et al. 2014), which are often capable of scaling
to much larger problem sizes than exact methods.
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
In practice, however, logical representations of real-
world domains are often ﬁrst-order, and thus are typically
grounded into propositional logic before a weighted model
counter can be used to infer probabilities. In general, a ﬁrst-
order probabilistic inference task can be reduced to an in-
stance of the weighted ﬁrst-order model counting (WFOMC)
problem, in which weights are assigned to interpretations of
a ﬁrst-order formula. In this paper, we consider the symmet-
ric WFOMC problem, where weights are associated with
each predicate, as opposed to the asymmetric case where
each possible grounding of a predicate may have a distinct
weight.
WFOMC remains a difﬁcult task. From a complexity
point of view, Beame et al. (2015) showed that the data
complexity of symmetric WFOMC for FOk (k
≥
3)
is #P1-hard, suggesting that in general sentences with
at least three distinct logical variables are not domain-
liftable.1 Nevertheless, the search for practical methods
for performing WFOMC remains an active area of re-
search. These methods can be divided into grounding
and non-grounding approaches, depending on whether
they rely on grounding out the input ﬁrst-order for-
mula to its propositional counterpart. Non-grounding al-
gorithms operate directly on the ﬁrst-order representation
in order to circumvent the grounding step. Such imple-
mentations include FORCLIFT (Van den Broeck et al. 2011)
and ALCHEMY2 (Gogate and Domingos 2011). Other ap-
proaches require ﬁrst grounding out the problem and then
passing it to a propositional weighted model counter.
One question that has received relatively little attention
is how one can efﬁciently exploit propositional model coun-
ters in practice for ﬁrst-order problems: in other words, can
we leverage off-the-shelf propositional model counters for
WFOMC, in an efﬁcient manner? In this paper, we answer
this question in the afﬁrmative, and show how such a strat-
egy can be efﬁciently implemented using hashing-based ap-
proximate model counters. As we shall show later, existing
hashing-based approximate model counting algorithms ca-
pable of dealing with weighted instances need an exponen-
1In the artiﬁcial intelligence literature, a problem is said to be
domain-liftable if inference can be performed in polynomial time
in the size of the domain (Van den Broeck 2011).

tial number of SAT queries in the size of the domain when
dealing with grounded ﬁrst-order formulas. In order to over-
come this, we ﬁrst propose a decomposition of the WFOMC
into the weighted sum of a number of (unweighted) ﬁrst-
order model counts of the input formula conjoined with car-
dinality constraints. These cardinality constraints serve to
limit the number of true instances of the formula’s atoms.
We then extend our approach to an anytime iterative algo-
rithm that uses an intuitive search procedure to ﬁnd dense
regions in the space of weighted models. We evaluate our
approach on ﬁrst-order representations of probabilistic logic
programs and Markov logic networks.
Background
In this section, we begin by explaining the principles of
hashing-based approximate model counting techniques. We
then brieﬂy review the syntax of ﬁrst-order logic, and for-
mally deﬁne the weighted ﬁrst-order model counting prob-
lem.
Hashing-based Approximate Model Counting
One promising approach to the model counting problem in-
volves exploiting universal hash functions to get approxi-
mate counts. Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi (2013) proposed
an algorithm, ApproxMC, which uses XOR-based hash
functions in order to obtain an approximate model count
with arbitrary tolerance and conﬁdence guarantees. The ba-
sic working principle of this approach involves adding a
XOR constraint on a random subset of the variables appear-
ing in the formula, which cuts the number of models approx-
imately in half. After repeating this procedure a sufﬁcient
number of times, we may compute exactly the number of
models in the constrained formula, and repeat this procedure
a number of times to get a good sample of the size of an aver-
age “cell”. Multiplying the median cell size by the number of
cells created from imposing the XOR constraints then gives
us an approximation of the overall model count.
This work later led to the development of even
more
efﬁcient
model
counters
using
the
same
underlying
principle.
In
particular,
ApproxMC2
(Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2016) was developed which
reduced the number of calls needed to a SAT oracle to
logarithmic in the number of variables of the input. Finally,
the latest revision, ApproxMC3 (Soos and Meel 2019), was
developed, which processes the constructed CNF-XOR
formulas in a more efﬁcient manner.
Crucial to all of these tools is that they give PAC guaran-
tees on the resulting model count. We follow the notation of
the papers above and denote by RF the set of models of a
propositional formula F, and by RF ↓S the projection of RF
onto a subset S of variables in the formula.
Theorem 1 (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2016). Given a
formula F, sampling set S ⊆Vars(F), a tolerance ε > 0,
and a conﬁdence 1−δ ∈(0, 1], ApproxMC3 returns a count
c such that P(|RF ↓S|/(1 + ε) ≤c ≤(1 + ε)|RF ↓S|) ≥
1 −δ. Moreover, the number of SAT oracle calls required is
k ∈O

log(|S|) log( 1
δ )
ε2

.
The
hashing-based
approach
was
extended
to
WISH
(Ermon et al. 2013)
and
WeightMC
(Chakraborty et al. 2014),
which
each
leverage related
techniques to allow for weighted model counting. In the
latter paper, the authors identify a parameter, tilt, which is
the ratio of the maximum weight of all satisfying assign-
ments to the minimum weight of all satisfying assignments,
and show that their procedure runs in time polynomial in
the tilt of the input formula when equipped with a SAT
oracle. However, the tilt of the grounding of a ﬁrst-order
formula can grow exponentially in the size of the domain,
as illustrated in the example below.
Example 1. Let Φ
=
∀x.Heads(x) ∨T ails(x) ∧
∀x.¬Heads(x) ∨¬T ails(x), and let w(Heads) = 0.5,
¯w(Heads) = 1, and w(T ails) = 0.1, ¯w(T ails) = 1. Let
D = {coin1, . . . , coinn}. Then tilt(Φ) = ( 0.5
0.1)n = 5n.
Thus, using WeightMC on a ﬁrst-order model may re-
quire an exponential number of SAT queries in the size
of the domain. Although Chakraborty et al. (2014) also de-
scribe (in Section 6 of their paper) a way to theoretically
reduce the runtime by adding constraints that split the space
of solutions into regions with small enough tilt, they mention
that this approach would require a pseudo-boolean solver ca-
pable of efﬁciently handling XOR constraints, so there is
no practical implementation of this theoretical extension of
WeightMC. In this paper we show how the number of SAT
queries can be reduced to a number polynomial in the do-
main size, while still obtaining a practical algorithm that en-
ables us to scale to problem instances that are too large for
exact approaches and for which there currently exist no other
practical methods with PAC guarantees.
First-order Logic
We deal with the function-free, ﬁnite domain fragment
of ﬁrst-order logic. An atom of arity n takes the form
P(t1, . . . , tn), where P/n comes from a vocabulary of pred-
icates, and each argument ti is either a constant from a ﬁ-
nite domain D, or a logical variable from a vocabulary of
variables. A literal is an atom or its negation. A formula is
formed by connecting one or more literals together using
conjunction or disjunction. A formula may optionally be sur-
rounded by one or more quantiﬁers of the form ∃x or ∀x,
where x is a logical variable. A logical variable in a formula
is said to be free if it does not appear in any quantiﬁer. A for-
mula with no free variables is called a sentence. A clause is
a sentence consisting of a disjunction of literals. A formula
is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is the conjunction
of one or more clauses containing only universal quantiﬁca-
tion.2 We follow the usual semantics of ﬁrst-order logic.
Weighted First-order Model Counting
We begin by reviewing the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst-order model
count of a formula. Throughout this section, we ﬁx a sen-
tence φ containing predicates P1/r1, . . . , Pk/rk.
2We
will
see
later
how
existential
quantiﬁcation
can
be
dealt
with
using
a
Skolemization
procedure
by
Van den Broeck, Meert, and Darwiche (2014).

Deﬁnition 1. The ﬁrst-order model count of φ over a do-
main of size d is deﬁned as:
FOMC(φ, d) = |modelsd(φ)|
where modelsd(φ) denotes the set of all models of φ under
the domain D = {1, . . . , d}.
In order to deﬁne the weighted ﬁrst-order model count of
the formula, we must ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of a weighting.
Deﬁnition 2. Denote the set of predicates appearing in φ
by Pφ. A weighting on φ is a pair of mappings w : Pφ →R
and ¯w : Pφ →R.
Deﬁnition 3. Let (w, ¯w) be a weighting on φ. The weighted
ﬁrst-order model count of φ over a domain of size d under
(w, ¯w) is:
WFOMC(φ, d, w, ¯w) =
X
ω∈modelsd(φ)
Y
l∈ωT
w(pred(l))
Y
l∈ωF
¯w(pred(l))
where ωT denotes the set of true predicates in the model ω,
and ωF the false predicates. The notation pred(l) maps an
atom l to its corresponding predicate name.
Cardinality Constraints
Cardinality constraints express bounds on the number of
true instances of members of a set of propositions. In this
paper, we are interested in expressing this constraint on the
number of true groundings of a ﬁrst-order predicate.
Various encodings of such a constraint are possible. When
implementing our WFOMC algorithm in practice, we will be
using ApproxMC3 to provide an FOMC oracle by ground-
ing out ﬁrst-order formulas, so we will need to express this
constraint in propositional form. For efﬁciency, we employ
an encoding by Bailleux and Boufkhad (2003). This encod-
ing splits a cardinality constraint into two parts: a totalizer,
which counts the number of true propositions as a unary-
encoded number, and a comparator, which constrains this
number to lie within the bounds speciﬁed. It adds O(n log n)
auxiliary variables and O(n2) additional clauses of length at
most 3, where n is the size of the constrained variable set.
Helpfully for our application, the encoding adds no extrane-
ous models: the truth values of the auxiliary variables are
uniquely determined by the state of the other variables (in
other words, the auxiliary variables form a dependent sup-
port, as we deﬁne in more detail later). However, even if one
were to use an alternative encoding that does add extra mod-
els the use of projection in the model counting procedure
would avoid any impact on our algorithm. This is explained
further later in the paper.
Algorithm
In this section, we ﬁrst show how the WFOMC of a sentence
can be decomposed into a series of terms by making use of
cardinality constraints. Although the utility of this decompo-
sition is limited in practice, it forms the basis for the next
section, where we show how we can further take advantage
of cardinality constraints to design an iterative algorithm,
ApproxWFOMC, that computes bounds for the WFOMC.
We will ﬁrst assume the existence of an FOMC oracle, and
then show how this can be implemented in practice using the
hashing-based approximate model counter ApproxMC3.
An Exact Decomposition of the WFOMC
We begin by giving the decomposition of a WFOMC prob-
lem into a sum of terms.
Theorem 2.
Consider a sentence φ with predicates
P1, . . . , Pk. Then the WFOMC of φ can be decomposed into
a weighted sum of ﬁrst-order model counts as:
WFOMC(φ, d, w, ¯w)
=
X
(n1,...,nk)∈K
k
Y
i=1
h
w(Pi)ni ¯w(Pi)ri−ni · FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
(n1,...,nk), d)
i
where ri = arity(Pi)d, K = {(n1, . . . , nk) ∈Nk} such
that ni ∈{0, . . . , ri}, and φCARD
(n1,...,nk) denotes the ﬁrst-order
cardinality constraint ﬁxing every model of φ to have exactly
ni true instances of Pi.
The intuition behind Theorem 2 can be reasoned as fol-
lows: consider the case of a formula φ with a single pred-
icate P, and suppose we add a cardinality constraint to φ
to ﬁx P to have precisely n true groundings. Then assum-
ing a domain of size d, we must have there are
 d
n

different
groundings each with the same weight of w(P)n ¯w(P)d−n.
The formula above generalises this to multiple predicates.
In practice, however, such a decomposition is typically too
large to compute exactly, even though the number of terms
grows polynomially in the size of the domain.
Remark 1. The number of terms (and thus, FOMC oracle
calls) in Theorem 2 for a sentence φ over a domain of size d
is:
M(φ, d) =
k
Y
i=1
(darity(Pi) + 1)
Approximating the WFOMC Using an Exact
FOMC Oracle
Overview
Our approach, ApproxWFOMC, to bounding
the value of WFOMC(φ, d, w, ¯w) is described in Algorithm
1. One begins by obtaining the coarsest bounds possible for
the WFOMC. This is done by computing the unweighted
FOMC and multiplying by the weight obtained when all
groundings of each predicate are true, or the case when all
are false depending on which is larger. It is not difﬁcult to
see that this indeed gives valid bounds on the true weighted
ﬁrst-order model count.
Example 2. Consider again the coin toss example from
Example 1, and ﬁx a domain of size d = 6. We have
FOMC(φ) = 26 = 64. Moreover, we know that the positive
weights for both predicates are lower than their respective
negative weights. Thus, we may compute the lower bound:
LB = w(Heads)d · w(T ails)d · FOMC(φ)
= 0.56 · 0.16 · 64 = 10−6.

and upper bound:
UB = ¯w(Heads)d · ¯w(T ails)d · FOMC(φ)
= 16 · 16 · 64 = 64.
We
therefore
get
the
global
bounds (LB, UB)
=
(10−6, 64) for the coarsest constraints possible {Heads →
(0, 6), T ails →(0, 6)}.
We then split the space by considering two possible cases
for each weighted predicate: one where at most half of all
groundings of the predicate are true, and one where at least
half are true. Given p weighted predicates, this means we
split the space into 2p parts.3 We can compute the FOMC
for each part using cardinality constraints, and bounds on
the maximum and minimum possible weights for these re-
gions can also be computed accordingly.Then, the upper and
lower bound for the WFOMC for each part can be stored
in a queue that is sorted according to some heuristic func-
tion on these bounds. Most importantly, the upper bounds
and the lower bounds of the two parts can be used to im-
prove the upper and lower bounds UB and LB that we have
for WFOMC(φ, d, w, ¯w). Speciﬁcally, denoting the old up-
per and lower bounds (before splitting) as u and l and the
2p new pairs of upper and lower bounds by (l1, u1), (l2, u2),
. . . , (l2p, u2p), we can update the upper bounds as UB :=
UB−u+(u1+· · ·+u2p) and LB := LB−l+(l1+· · ·+l2p).
Example 3. We now take the constraints from Example 2
and split it into 4 possible subconstraints: c1 = {Heads →
(0, 3), T ails →(0, 3)}, c2 = {Heads →(0, 3), T ails →
(4, 6)}, c3 = {Heads →(4, 6), T ails →(0, 3)} and
c4 = {Heads →(4, 6), T ails →(4, 6)}. Then impos-
ing each of these cardinality constraints in turn gives us
FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
c1
) = 20, FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
c2
) = 22,
FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
c3
) = 22, and FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
c4
) = 0.
We may now follow a similar process as that in the last exam-
ple and compute upper and lower bounds for each of these
non-overlapping regions, and push these bounds along with
their respective constraints onto a queue. We now also up-
date our global bounds (LB, UB) on the WFOMC: sup-
pose we compute the bounds (li, ui) for each constraint
ci. Then we can tighten our bounds from (10−6, 64) to
(l1+l2+l3+l4, u1+u2+u3+u4) = (2.5×10−3+3.4375×
10−4 + 2.75 × 10−6 + 0, 20 + 1.375 + 2.2 × 10−3 + 0) =
(0.0028465, 21.3772).
The ﬁrst element is then popped from the queue, and the
procedure repeats until the bounds are sufﬁciently tight.
Details
The pseudocode shown in Algorithm 1 uses sev-
eral operations that have not been described yet. We provide
the details here. The function WeightedPredicates(φ) re-
turns the set of all non-neutral predicates in φ (i.e. all predi-
cates having a positive or negative weight other than 1). The
procedure DictProduct refers to a Cartesian product of dic-
tionaries: given a dictionary D whose values are lists, it re-
turns the list of all dictionaries such that each key k is a
3Note that the number of weighted predicates is typically small
for most relational models.
value in the list D[k]. For example, given the dictionary d =
{foo →[1, 2], bar →[a, b]}, we have DictProduct(d) =
[{foo →1, bar →a}, {foo →1, bar →b}, {foo →
2, bar →a}, {foo →2, bar →b}]. The notation φCARD
a
denotes the ﬁrst-order formula imposing the cardinality con-
straints contained in the dictionary a. For example, if a =
{P1 →(0, 2), P2 →(0, 1)}, then φCARD
a
would impose
the constraint that predicates P1 and P2 have at most one
and two true groundings respectively.
The priority queue is sorted in decreasing order accord-
ing to a heuristic function on the elements: given, a tuple
(constraints, lb, ub), its heuristic is computed as |ub −lb|.
It thus splits regions with the largest gap between upper and
lower bounds ﬁrst. Alternative heuristics are possible: for
example, one could process regions with the greatest overall
model count ﬁrst, ignoring bounds on the weights. However,
in practice we ﬁnd our heuristic works well.
Approximating the WFOMC Using an
Approximate FOMC Oracle
In practice we may only have access to an approximate
FOMC oracle rather than an exact one: for example, we may
wish to ground the input sentence and use ApproxMC3 to
provide such an oracle. In this case, in order to provide ε-
δ style guarantees in ApproxWFOMC, we need to set the
correct parameters to ApproxMC3.
Theorem 3. Given a sentence φ, let (LB, UB)
=
ApproxWFOMC(φ, w, ¯w, d, τ). Suppose each FOMC ora-
cle call is made by grounding the problem and calling Ap-
proxMC3 with tolerance ε and conﬁdence δi. Then we have:
Pr
 LB
1 + ε ≤WFOMC (φ, w, ¯w, d) ≤UB (1 + ε)

≥1 −δ
where δ = P
i δi.
Proof. Let M denote the number of calls to ApproxMC3
made by ApproxWFOMC and let ci denote the output of
the i-th call to ApproxMC3. Observe that at any point
in ApproxWFOMC’s run both LB and UB are weighted
sums of the outputs of ApproxMC3: UB = PM
i=1 γi · ci
and LB = PM
i=1 γ′
i · ci (the values of the coefﬁcients γi
and γ′
i are not important for the purposes of the proof).
Next let c∗
i denote the true model count corresponding to
the approximate value ci returned by ApproxMC3 and let
UB∗= PM
i=1 γi · c∗
i and LB∗= PM
i=1 γ′
i · c∗
i be the re-
spective bounds returned by ApproxWFOMC. It follows
from the guarantees on ApproxMC3 (Theorem 1) that the
probability that ci ̸∈[ c∗
i
1+ε, (1 + ε) · c∗
i ] is no greater than
δi. Then by the union bound, we have that the probabil-
ity that at least one ci ̸∈[ c∗
i
1+ε, (1 + ε) · c∗
i ] is at most
δ = PM
i=1 δi. Hence, with probability at least 1 −δ it holds
LB ≤(1 + ε)LB∗and UB∗
1+ε ≤UB from which we then have
LB
(1+ε) ≤LB∗and UB∗≤(1 + ε)UB. Next it follows from
a simple inspection of the pseudocode of ApproxWFOMC
that LB∗≤WFOMC (φ, w, ¯w, d) ≤UB∗. Using the prob-
abilistic bounds just derived for LB and UB, we obtain that

Algorithm 1 ApproxWFOMC
Input First-order CNF φ, weights (w, ¯w), domain size
d, tolerance τ
Output (b1, b2) such that b1 ≤WFOMC(φ, d, w, ¯w) ≤
b2 and b2
b1 < 1 + τ
1: /* Initialization */:
2: queue ←new priority queue
3: LB, UB ←FOMC(φ, d)
4: for P in WeightedPredicates(φ) do
5:
ξ ←darity(P )
6:
LB ←LB · min(w(P)ξ, ¯w(P)ξ)
7:
UB ←UB · max(w(P)ξ, ¯w(P)ξ)
8:
constraints[P] ←(0, ξ)
9: Store (constraints, newLb, newUb) in queue
10: /* Main loop */:
11: while newUb
newLb ≥1 + τ and queue is non-empty do
12:
Pop (constraints, lb, ub) from queue
13:
/* Constructing reﬁned constraints (splitting) */
14:
if constraints cannot be decomposed further then
15:
continue
16:
newConstr ←{}
17:
for P in WeightedPredicates(φ) do
18:
(l, u) ←constraints[P]
19:
if l ̸= u then
20:
newConstr[P]
←{(l, ⌊l+u
2 ⌋), (⌊l+u
2 ⌋+
1, u)}
21:
else
22:
newConstr[P] ←{constraints[P]}
23:
/* Recomputing LB and UB using newConstr */
24:
LB ←LB −lb
25:
UB ←UB −ub
26:
for reﬁnedConstr in DictProduct(newConstr) do
27:
tMin, tMax ←1
28:
for P in WeightedPredicates(φ) do
29:
ξ ←darity(P )
30:
(l, u) ←refinedConstr[P]
31:
tMin
←
tMin
·
min(w(P)l ¯w(P)ξ−l, w(P)u ¯w(P)ξ−u)
32:
tMax
←
tMax
·
max(w(P)l ¯w(P)ξ−l, w(P)u ¯w(P)ξ−u)
33:
mc ←FOMC(φ ∧φCARD
reﬁnedConstr, d)
34:
LB ←LB + tMin · mc
35:
UB ←UB + tMax · mc
36:
Push (refinedConstr, tMin · mc, tMax · mc) to
queue
return (LB, UB)
LB
1+ε ≤WFOMC (φ, w, ¯w, d) ≤UB (1 + ε) with probabil-
ity at least 1 −δ.
One remaining question is how to set the values of
the δi’s. One possibility is to set δi := δ/Mmax where
Mmax is the theoretical maximum number of calls to Ap-
proxMC3, and δ is a conﬁdence parameter set by the
user. Another possibility that may be preferable in practice
is to set δi := δ/(i · ln (Mmax + 1)). Since the sum of
the ﬁrst Mmax elements of the harmonic series is at most
1/ ln(Mmax + 1), we will always have PM
i=1 δi ≤δ for
M ≤Mmax. Here we are exploiting the fact that our al-
gorithm will often use much fewer calls to ApproxMC3
than Mmax. Let M be the number of calls to ApproxMC3
made by ApproxWFOMC. Since, as asserted by Theo-
rem 1, the number of calls to a SAT oracle made by
ApproxMC3 is O
 log(|S|) log( 1
δ )
ε2

, ApproxWFOMC will
need O

M · log(|S|)·(log( 1
δ )+log M+log(ln(Mmax+1)))
ε2

calls to
a SAT oracle.
Implementation and Experiments
We
have
implemented
our
algorithm
and
tested
it
on
encodings
of
Markov
logic
networks
(MLNs)
(Richardson and Domingos 2006)
and
ProbLog
pro-
grams (Fierens et al. 2015). We implement the FOMC
oracle by using ApproxMC3 as described earlier. In this
section, we brieﬂy review each ﬁrst-order model we perform
our experiments on and show how each can be cast as a
WFOMC task, in both cases following the encodings of
Van den Broeck, Meert, and Darwiche (2014). We follow
with an analysis of our experimental results.
Encoding an MLN
Recall that an MLN comprises a set of tuples (w, φ),
where w is a real-valued weight and and φ is a ﬁrst-
order formula. For example, consider the MLN below,
“transitive-smokers-mln”:
1.22
stress(X) →smokes(X)
2.08
friends(X, Y ) ∧smokes(X) →smokes(Y )
0.69
friends(X, Y ) ∧friends(X, Z) →friends(X, Z)
The ﬁrst rule states that people who are stressed are likely
to smoke. The second states that smokers tend to make
friends with other smokers. The last rule states that the
friends relation is typically transitive.
Deﬁnition 4. The WFOMC encoding (∆, w, ¯w) of an MLN
is constructed as follows: for each tuple (wi, φi(xi)) in the
MLN, where xi denotes the free logical variables occurring
in φi, we introduce an auxiliary predicate Pi/|xi|. Then for
each formula in the MLN, ∆is formed by conjoining the sen-
tences ∀xiPi ↔φi(xi). The weighting is deﬁned by setting
w(Pi) = ewi, ¯w(Pi) = 1, and w(Q) = ¯w(Q) = 1 for all
other predicates Q.
The
encoding
of
the
ﬁrst
rule
of
transitive-smokers-mln earlier is therefore:
∀XP1(X) ↔(stress(X) →smokes(X))
with w(P1) = e2.9, ¯w(P1) = 1, and w(stress) =
w(smokes) = ¯w(stress) = ¯w(smokes) = 1.
We can take advantage of some domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge of the MLN encoding in order to further optimize our
algorithm when computing the partition function of an MLN.
We ﬁrst recall the deﬁnition of an (in)dependent support
(Ivrii et al. 2016).

2
3
4
5
6
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
104
105
Domain size
Runtime (s)
SDD
ApproxWFOMC
(a) Runtime of various WFOMC methods
for the transitive-smokers-mln
problem for various domain sizes.
2
3
4
5
6
50
100
150
200
250
Domain size
Number of ApproxMC3 calls
transitive-smokers-mln
conference-problog
(b) Number of ApproxMC3 calls made by
ApproxWFOMC with τ = 0.2.
2
3
4
5
6
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
Domain size
Ratio
transitive-smokers-mln
conference-problog
(c) Ratio of ApproxMC3 calls made by
ApproxWFOMC to FOMC oracle calls in
the decomposition in Theorem 2.
Figure 1
Deﬁnition 5. Let F denote a propositional formula, and let
X denote the set of variables appearing in F. Then I ⊆X
is said to be an independent support of F if, for any two
models σ1, σ2 ∈RF that agree on I, we have σ1 = σ2.
In other words, the truth values of I uniquely determine the
truth value of every variable in X \ I. The remaining vari-
ables X \ I are called a dependent support.
Remark 2. Let (∆, w, ¯w) denote the WFOMC encoding of
an MLN. Then, after grounding ∆over some domain D, the
ground instances of all non-auxiliary predicates form an in-
dependent support for the grounding of ∆.
Based on the observation in Lemma 2, we may pass the
ground instances of all non-auxiliary predicates as a sam-
pling set to ApproxMC3 in every call in our algorithm, and
perform projected model counting. This has the effect of
shortening the XOR constraints which must be processed
by ApproxMC3, and provides a signiﬁcant speed-up to the
model counting times.
Finally, observe that all non-auxiliary predicates have neu-
tral weight, so constraints will only be imposed on the auxil-
iary predicates.
Encoding a Probabilistic Logic Program
A probabilistic logic program combines a classical logic pro-
gram with uncertainty. In this paper, we use the ProbLog lan-
guage, and refer the reader to Fierens et al. (2015) for a com-
plete overview of the syntax and semantics. A ProbLog pro-
gram is a set of probabilistic facts of the form p::a, along
with a classical logic program φ whose rule heads do not
contain facts from F. For example, consider the program
“conference-problog” below:
0.1 :: Attends(X).
0.3 :: ToSeries(X).
Series :- Attends(X), ToSeries(X).
Deﬁnition 6. The WFOMC encoding (∆, w, ¯w) of a
tight ProbLog program γ is constructed by setting ∆as
Clark’s completion of the program, setting w(pred(α)) =
P(α), ¯w(α) = 1 −P(α) for each probabilistic fact p::a,
and setting the weight of all other predicates to neutral.
Note that the transformation above comes with some
caveats: in particular, the formula corresponding to our ex-
ample program conference-problog contains existen-
tial quantiﬁcation, but we assume that the CNF provided
to ApproxWFOMC contains only universally quantiﬁed
clauses. To overcome this, we employ the Skolemization
procedure of Van den Broeck, Meert, and Darwiche (2014).
However, this creates negative weights in the CNF, caus-
ing problems with the computation of the lower and upper
bounds in the algorithm. To avoid this issue, we may sim-
ply treat the Skolem predicate whose negative weight is −1
as a neutral predicate, thus not taking it into account in the
computation of the upper and lower bounds. Moreover, we
project away the auxiliary atoms resulting from the Skolem
and Tseitin predicates, avoiding any extraneous models they
create.
Experimental Results
We tested
ApproxWFOMC on the WFOMC
encod-
ings of the transitive-smokers-mln program and
conference-problog. We set out to answer the follow-
ing questions:
1. How does the performance of ApproxWFOMC on ﬁrst-
order probabilistic models compare to solving the same
problem using exact knowledge compilation (SDDs)?
2. How does the number of FOMC oracle calls needed by
ApproxWFOMC scale with the domain size?
3. How signiﬁcant of an improvement does the search
method proposed by ApproxWFOMC yield over the de-
composition in Theorem 2, in terms of the number of
FOMC oracle calls?
We investigate each question individually.
Q1
In Figure 1a, we show how the domain size affects
the runtime of ApproxWFOMC and compare it to the SDD

library (Choi and Darwiche 2013), called via the wrapper
PySDD. Although SDDs outperform ApproxWFOMC with
domain size 2, 3 and 4, ApproxWFOMC performs better
with larger domains, with SDD compilation running out of
memory already with a domain of size 5.
Q2
In Figure 1b, we show how the number of Ap-
proxMC3 calls made by ApproxWFOMC increases as the
domain size scales for a ﬁxed tolerance value of 0.2. We
observe that the number of calls grows quicker in the do-
main size for the transitive-smokers-mln, due to
the larger number of predicates with higher arities appear-
ing in this problem.
Notice that, despite a modest increase in the number of
ApproxMC3 calls when the domain size goes from 5 to
6, we see a signiﬁcant increase in runtime for ApproxW-
FOMC. Thus, each approximate model counter call takes
longer to return, especially as the problems become increas-
ingly constrained with tighter cardinality bounds. This leads
to the natural question of how cardinality constraints can be
more efﬁciently incorporated into model counters, which we
discuss further in the next section.
Q3
In Figure 1c, we show the efﬁciency gain of Approx-
WFOMC over using a simple decomposition of the form
in Theorem 2, by quantifying the ratio between the num-
ber of FOMC oracle calls made by ApproxWFOMC to the
number needed in the decomposition. We see that, in the
case of more challenging MLN problem, the “efﬁciency ra-
tio” improves signiﬁcantly as domain size increases. The ef-
fect is less clear for the comparatively simpler encoding of
conferences-problog.
Further Work
There are still many avenues for further research. One barrier
in particular is the performance of ApproxMC3 on highly
constrained formulas, and in particular those we observe
in our setting with highly restrictive cardinality constraints.
This raises the question of whether it is possible to inte-
grate support for these constraints into the model counter
itself. The phase transition behaviour of 1-CARD-XOR for-
mulas (the conjunction of a number of XOR clauses with
a single cardinality constraint) was recently investigated by
Pote, Joshi, and Meel (2019), paving a theoretical founda-
tion for understanding the runtime of existing solvers. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, there currently exists no
specialised solver for handling CNF formulas subject to both
cardinality and XOR constraints. If this gap was ﬁlled and in-
tegrated into ApproxMC3, we could see signiﬁcant gains in
the performance of our approach.
Conclusion
We introduced ApproxWFOMC, an anytime approximate
WFOMC algorithm with PAC guarantees, and showed how
it can be applied to inference in MLNs and probabilistic
logic programs. Initial results are promising, showing that
it is able to scale to domain sizes that are too large for exist-
ing exact methods.
Acknowledgments. TvB’s work is supported by the Re-
search Foundation – Flanders (grant G095917N). OK’s
work has been supported by the OP VVV project
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000765 “Research Center for
Informatics” and a donation from X-Order Lab. Part of this
work was done while OK was already supported by the
Czech Science Foundation project “Generative Relational
Models” (20-19104Y). Both authors thank Luc De Raedt for
helpful feedback on this paper.
