Attention over Parameters
for Dialogue Systems
Andrea Madotto, Zhaojiang Lin, Chien-Sheng Wu, Jamin Shin, Pascale Fung
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong

Abstract
Dialogue systems require a great deal of different but complementary expertise
to assist, inform, and entertain humans. For example, different domains (e.g.,
restaurant reservation, train ticket booking) of goal-oriented dialogue systems
can be viewed as different skills, and so does ordinary chatting abilities of chit-
chat dialogue systems. In this paper, we propose to learn a dialogue system that
independently parameterizes different dialogue skills, and learns to select and
combine each of them through Attention over Parameters (AoP). The experimental
results show that this approach achieves competitive performance on a combined
dataset of MultiWOZ [1], In-Car Assistant [2], and Persona-Chat [3]. Finally, we
demonstrate that each dialogue skill is effectively learned and can be combined
with other skills to produce selective responses.
1
Introduction
Unlike humans who can do both, goal-oriented dialogues [4, 5] and chit-chat conversations [6, 7]
are often learned with separate models. A more desirable approach for the users would be to have a
single chat interface that can handle both casual talk and tasks such as reservation or scheduling. This
can be formulated as a problem of learning different conversational skills across multiple domains. A
skill can be either querying a database, generating daily conversational utterances, or interacting with
users in a particular task-domain (e.g. booking a restaurant). One challenge of having multiple skills
is that existing datasets either focus only on chit-chat or on goal-oriented dialogues. This is due to the
fact that traditional goal-oriented systems are modularized [4, 8–10, 5]; thus, they cannot be jointly
trained with end-to-end architecture as in chit-chat. However, recently proposed end-to-end trainable
models [11–14] and datasets [15, 2] allow us to combine goal-oriented [1, 2] and chit-chat [3] into a
single benchmark dataset with multiple conversational skills as shown in Table 1.
A straight forward solution would be to have a single model for all the conversational skills, which
has shown to be effective to a certain extent by [16] and [17]. Putting aside the performance in
the tasks, such ﬁxed shared-parameter framework, without any task-speciﬁc designs, would lose
controllability and interpretability in the response generation. In this paper, instead, we propose
to model multiple conversational skills using the Mixture of Experts (MoE) [18] paradigm, i.e., a
model that learns and combine independent specialized experts using a gating function. For instance,
each expert could specialize in different dialogues domains (e.g., Hotel, Train, Chit-Chat etc.) and
skills (e.g., generate SQL query). A popular implementation of MoE [19, 20] uses a set of linear
transformation (i.e., experts) in between two LSTM [21] layers. However, several problems arise
with this implementation: 1) the model is computationally expensive as it has to decode multiple
times each expert and make the combination at the representation-level; 2) no prior knowledge is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:2001.01871v2  [cs.CL]  4 Mar 2020

Spk.
Conversation
Skills
Usr:
Can you help me ﬁnd a cheap 2 star hotel?
Sys:
SELECT * FROM hotel WHERE pricerange=‘cheap’
AND stars=2 AND type=‘hotel’
SQL+HOTEL
Mem:
(Result table from the SQL query, with real entities.)
Sys:
Arms is a 2 star hotel in the centre. Shall I book a room for you?
HOTEL
Usr:
Yes, thank you!
Sys:
Sure, for how many people should I book it for?
HOTEL
· · ·
Sys:
Hello! How are you today?
PERSONA
Usr:
I am good thank you! Do you like to ski? I really like it.
Sys:
No, I like to code in Haskell. Do you like to code?
PERSONA
Table 1: An example from the dataset which includes both chit-chat and task-oriented conversations.
The model has to predict all the Sys turn, which includes SQL query and generating response from a
the Memory content, which is dynamically updated with the queries results. The skills are the prior
knowledge needed for the response, where Persona refers to chit-chat.
injected in the expert selection (e.g., domains); 3) Seq2Seq model has limited ability in extracting
information from a Knowledge Base (KB) (i.e., generated by the SQL query) [2], as required in
end-to-end task-oriented dialogues systems [15]. The latter can be solved by using more advanced
multi-hop models like the Transformer [22], but the remaining two need to be addressed. Hence, in
this paper we:
• propose a novel Transformer-based architecture called Attention over Parameters (AoP). This
model parameterize the conversational skills of end-to-end dialogue systems with independent
decoder parameters (experts), and learns how to dynamically select and combine the appropriate
decoder parameter sets by leveraging prior knowledge from the data such as domains and skill
types;
• proof that AoP is algorithmically more efﬁcient compared to forwarding all the Transformer
decoders and then mix their output representation, like is normally done in MoE. Figure 1 illustrates
the high-level intuition of the difference;
• empirically show the effectiveness of using specialized parameters in a combined dataset of
MultiWOZ [1], In-Car Assistant [2], and Persona-Chat [3], which to the best of our knowledge,
is the ﬁrst evaluation of this genre i.e. end-to-end large-scale multi-domains/skills. Moreover,
we show that our model is highly interpretable and is able to combine different learned skills to
produce compositional responses.
2
Methodology
We use the standard encoder-decoder architecture and avoid any task-speciﬁc designs [12, 13], as
we aim to build a generic conversation model for both chit-chat and task-oriented dialogues. More
speciﬁcally, we use a Transformer for both encoder and decoder.
Let us deﬁne the sequence of tokens in the dialogue history as D = {d1, . . . , dm} and the dynamic
memory content as a sequence of tokens M = {m1, . . . , mz}. The latter can be the result of a
SQL query execution (e.g., table) or plain texts (e.g., persona description), depending on the task.
The dialogue history D and the memory M are concatenated to obtain the ﬁnal input denoted by
X = [D; M] = {x1, . . . , xn=m+z}. We then denote Y = {y1, . . . , yk} as the sequence of tokens
that the model is expected to produce. Without loss of generality, Y can be both plain text and
SQL-like queries. Hence, the model has to learn when to issue database queries and when to generate
human-like responses. Finally, we deﬁne a binary skill vector V = {v1, . . . , vr} that speciﬁes the
type of skills required to generate Y . This can be considered as a prior vector for learning to select
the correct expert during the training1. For example, in Table 1 the ﬁrst response is of type SQL
1the vector V will be absent during the testing
2

⋯
Figure 1: Comparisons between Single model, Mixture of Experts (MoE) [18], and Attention over
Parameters (AoP).
in the Hotel domain, thus the skill vector V will have vSQL = 1 and vHotel = 1, while all the other
skill/domains are set to zero 2. More importantly, we may set the vector V to have multiple ones to
enforce the model to compose skills to achieve a semantic compositionality of different experts.
2.1
Encoder-Decoder
To map the input sequence to the output sequence, we use a standard Transformer [22] and denote
the encoder and decoder as TRSenc and TRSdec, respectively. The input of a Transformer is the
embedded representation of the input words; thus, we deﬁne a word embedding matrix E ∈Rd×|V |
where d is the embedding size and |V | is the cardinality of the vocabulary. The input X, with its
positional embedding (Appendix A1 for more information), are encoded as the following equation:
H = TRSenc(E(X)),
(1)
where H ∈Rdmodel×n, and E. Then the decoder receives the target sequence shifted by one Y:k−1 =
{<SOS>, y1, . . . , yk} as the input. Using teacher-forcing [23], the model is trained to produce the
correct sequence Y . The output of the decoder is produced as follow:
O = TRSdec(E(Y:k−1), H),
(2)
where O ∈Rdmodel×k. Finally, a distribution over the vocabulary is generated for each token by an
afﬁne transformation W ∈Rdmodel×|V | followed by a Softmax function.
P(Y |X) = Softmax(OT W),
(3)
In addition, P(Y |X) is mixed with the encoder-decoder attention distribution to enable to copy token
from the input sequence as in [24]. The model is then trained to minimize a standard cross entropy
loss function and at inference time to generate one token at the time in an auto-regressive manner [25].
Hence, the training loss is deﬁned as:
LP (Y |X) = −
k
X
t=1
log (P(Y |X)t (yt)) .
(4)
2.2
Attention over Parameters
The main idea is to produce a single set of parameters for decoder TRSdec by the weighted sum of r
independently parameterized decoders. This process is similar to attention [26] where the memories
are the parameters and the query is the encoded representation. Let us deﬁne Θ = [θ1, . . . , θr] as the
list of parameters for r decoders, since a TRSdec is represented by its parameters θ. Since each θ
can be sized in the order of millions, we assign the corresponding key vectors to each θ, similar to
key-value memory networks [27]. Thus, we use a key matrix K ∈Rdmodel×r and a Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN), in this instance a GRU [28], to produce the query vector by processing the encoder
output H. The attention weights for each decoders’ parameters is computed as follow:
q = RNN(H)
(5)
α = Softmax(qK)
(6)
2With the assumption that at each index in V is assigned a semantic skill (e.g. SQL position i)
3

where q ∈Rdmodel and α ∈Rr is the attention vectors where each αi is the score corresponding to
θi. Hence, the new set of parameters is computed as follow:
θ∗=
r
X
i
αiθi
(7)
The combined set of parameters θ∗are then used to initialize a new TRSdec, and Equation 2 will be
applied to the input based on this. Equation 6 is similar to the gating function proposed in [19, 18], but
the resulting scoring vector α is applied directly to the parameter instead of the output representation
of each decoder, holding an algorithmically faster computation.
Theorem 1. The computation cost of Attention over Parameters (AoP) is always lower than Mixture
Of Experts (MoE) for sequence longer than 1.
Proof. Let fθ : Rd →Rn a generic function parametrized by θ. Without loss of generality, we deﬁne
θ as a afﬁne transformation W ∈Rd×n. Let X ∈Rt×d a generic input sequence of length t and d
dimensional size. Let the set F = [fθ1, · · · , fθr] be the set of r experts. Hence, the operation done
by MoE are:
MoE(X) = fθ1(X) + · · · + fθr(X) = XW1 + · · · + XWr
(8)
Thus the computational cost in term of operation is O(rtdn+rtn) since the cost of fθi(X) is O(tdn)
and it is repeated r times, and the cost of summing the representation is O(rtn). On the other hand,
the operation done by AoP are:
θ∗= θ1 + · · · + θr = W1 + · · · + Wr
(9)
AoP(X) = fθ∗(X) = XW ∗
(10)
in this case the computational cost in term of operation is O((r + t)dn) since the cost of summing
the parameters is O(rdn) and the cost of fθ∗is O(tdn). Hence, it is easy to verify that if t > 1 then:
rtdn + rtn ≥(rt)dn ≥(r + t)dn
(11)
Furthermore, the assumption of using a simple afﬁne transformation W is actually an optimal case.
Indeed, assuming that the cost of parameters sum is equal to the number of operation is optimistic, for
instance already by using attention the number of operations increases but the number of parameters
remains constant.
Importantly, if we apply α to each of the output representation Oi generated by the TRSi
dec, we
end up having a Transformer-based implementation of MoE. We call this model as Attention over
Representation (AoR). Finally, an additional loss term is used to supervise the attention vector α by
using the prior knowledge vector V . Since multiple decoder parameters can be selected at the same
time, we use a binary cross-entropy to train each αi. Thus a second loss is deﬁned as:
LV = −
r
X
i=1
vi × logσ(qK)i + (1 −vi) × log(1 −σ(qK)i)
The ﬁnal loss is the summation of LP (Y |X) and LV .
Finally, in AoP, but in general in the MoE framework, stacking multiple layers (e.g., Transformer)
leads to models with a large number of parameters, since multiple experts are repeated across layers.
An elegant workaround is the Universal Transformer [29], which loops over an unique layer and, as
shown by [29], holds similar or better performance than a multi-layer Transformer. In our experiment,
we report a version of AoP that uses this architecture, which for instance does not add any further
parameter to the model.
3
Experiments and Results
3.1
Dataset
To evaluate the performance of our model for different conversational skills, we propose to combine
three publicly available datasets: MultiWOZ [1], Stanford Multi-domain Dialogue [2] and Persona-
Chat [3].
4

Figure 2: Datasets statistics
SMD
MWOZ
Persona
#Dialogues
2425
8,438
12,875
#turns
12,732
115,424
192,690
Avg. turns
5.25
13.68
14.97
Avg. tokens
8.02
13.18
11.96
Vocab
2,842
24,071
20,343
MultiWOZ (MWOZ)
is a human-to-human
multi-domain goal-oriented dataset annotated
with dialogue acts and states. In this dataset,
there are seven domains (i.e., Taxi, Police,
Restaurant, Hospital, Hotel, Attraction, Train)
and two APIs interfaces: SQL and BOOK. The
former is used to retrieve information about a
certain domain and the latter is used to book
restaurants, hotels, trains, and taxis. We reﬁne
this dataset to include SQL/BOOK queries and their outputs using the same annotations schema
as [15].
Hence, each response can either be plain text conversation with the user or SQL/BOOK queries, and
the memory is dynamically populated with the results from the queries as the generated response is
based on such information. This transformation allows us to train end-to-end models that learns how
and when to produce SQL queries, to retrieve knowledge from a dynamic memory, and to produce
plain text response. A detailed explanation is reported in Appendix A3, together with some samples.
Stanford Multi-domain Dialogue (SMD)
is another human-to-human multi-domain goal-oriented
dataset that is already designed for end-to-end training. There are three domains in this dataset (i.e.,
Point-of-Interest, Weather, Calendar). The difference between this dataset and MWOZ is that each
dialogue is associated with a set of records relevant to the dialogues. The memory is ﬁxed in this case
so the model does not need to issue any API calls. However, retrieving the correct entities from the
memory is more challenging as the model has to compare different alternatives among records.
Persona-Chat
is a multi-turn conversational dataset, in which two speakers are paired and different
persona descriptions (4-5 sentences) are randomly assigned to each of them. For example, “I am
an old man” and “I like to play football” are one of the possible persona descriptions provided
to the system. Training models using this dataset results in a more persona consistent and ﬂuent
conversation compared to other existing datasets [3]. Currently, this dataset has become one of the
standard benchmarks for chit-chat systems, thus, we include it in our evaluation.
For all three datasets, we use the training/validation/test split provided by the authors and we keep
all the real entities in input instead of using their delexicalized version as in [1, 2]. This makes the
task more challenging, but at the same time more interesting since we force the model to produce
real entities instead of generic and frequent placeholders. Table 2 summarizes the dataset statistics
in terms of number of dialogues, turns, and unique tokens. Finally, we merge the three datasets
obtaining 154,768/19,713/19,528 for training, validation and, test respectively, and a vocabulary size
of 37,069 unique tokens.
3.2
Evaluation Metrics
Goal-Oriented
For both MWOZ and SMD, we follow the evaluation done by existing works [11,
16, 30, 31]. We use BLEU3 score [32] to measure the response ﬂuency and Entity F1-Score [33, 16]
to evaluates the ability of the model to generate relevant entities from the dynamic memory. Since
MWOZ also includes SQL and BOOK queries, we compute the exact match accuracy (i.e., ACCSQL
and ACCBOOK) and BLEU score (i.e., BLEUSQL and BLEUBOOK). Furthermore, we also report
the F1-score for each domain in both MWOZ and SMD.
Chit-Chat
We compare perplexity, BLEU score, F1-score [34], and Consistency score of the
generate sentences with the human-generated prediction. The Consistency score is computed using a
Natural Language Inference (NLI) model trained on dialogue NLI [35], a recently proposed corpus
based on Persona dataset. We ﬁne-tune a pre-trained BERT model [36] using the dialogue DNLI
corpus and achieve a test set accuracy of 88.43%, which is similar to the best-reported model in [35].
3Using the multi-bleu.perl script
5

The consistency score is deﬁned as follow:
NLI(u, pj) =
(
1
if u entails pj
0
if u is independent to pj
−1
if u contradicts pj
C(u) =
m
X
j
NLI(u, pj)
(12)
where u is a generated utterance and pj is one sentence in the persona description. In [35, 37],
the authors showed that by re-ranking the beam search hypothesis using the DNLI score (i.e., C
score), they achieved a substantial improvement in dialogue consistency. Intuitively, having a higher
consistency C score means having a more persona consistent dialogue response.
3.3
Baselines
In our experiments, we compare Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) [24], Transformer (TRS) [22],
Mixture of Expert (MoE) [19] and Attention over Representation (AoR) with our proposed Attention
over Parameters (AoP). In all the models, we used the same copy-mechanism as in [24]. In AoR instead
of mixing the parameters as in Equation 7, we mix the output representation of each transformer
decoder (i.e. Equation 2). For all AoP, AoR, and MoE, r = 13 is the number of decoders (experts):
2 skills of SQL and BOOK, 10 different domains for MWOZ+SMD, and 1 for Persona-Chat.
Furthermore, we include also the following experiments: AoP that uses the gold attention vector
V , which we refer as AoP w/ Oracle (or AoP + O); AoP trained by removing the LV from the
optimization (AoP w/o LV ); and as aforementioned, the Universal Transformer for both AoP (AoP +
U) and the standard Transformer (TRS + U) (i.e., 6 hops). All detailed model description and the full
set of hyper-parameters used in the experiments are reported in Appendix A4.
3.4
Results
Table 2 and Table 3 show the respectively evaluation results in MWOZ+SMD and Persona-Chat
datasets.
Figure 3: Results for the Persona-Chat dataset.
Model
Ppl.
F1
C
BLEU
Seq2Seq
39.42
6.33
0.11
2.79
TRS
43.12
7.00
0.07
2.56
MoE
38.63
7.33
0.19
2.92
AoR
40.18
6.66
0.12
2.69
AoP
39.14
7.00
0.21
3.06
TRS + U
43.04
7.33
0.15
2.66
AoP + U
37.40
7.00
0.29
3.22
AoP w/o LV
42.81
6.66
0.12
2.85
AoP + O
40.16
7.33
0.21
2.91
From Table 2, we can identify four patterns.
1) AoP and AoR perform consistently better
then other baselines which shows the effective-
ness of combining parameters by using the cor-
rect prior V ; 2) AoP performs consistently, but
marginally, better than AoR, with the advantage
of an algorithmic faster inference; 3) Using Or-
acle (AoP+O) gives the highest performance in
all the measures, which shows the performance
upper-bound for AoP. Hence, the performance
gap when not using oracle attention is most
likely due to the error in attention α (i.e., 2%
error rate). Moreover, Table 2 shows that by
removing LV (AoP w/o LV ) the model performance decreases, which conﬁrms that good inductive
bias is important for learning how to select and combine different parameters (experts). Additionally,
in Appendix A5, we report the per-domain F1-Score for SQL, BOOK and sentences, and Table 3 and
Table 2 with the standard deviation among the three runs.
Furthermore, from Table 3, we can notice that MoE has the lowest perplexity and F1-score, but AoP
has the highest Consistency and BLUE score. Notice that the perplexity reported in [3] is lower
since the vocabulary used in their experiments is smaller. In general, the difference in performance
among different models is marginal except for the Consistency score; thus, we can conclude that all
the models can learn this skill reasonably well. Consistently with the previous results, when LV is
removed from the optimization, the models’ performance decreases.
Finally, in both Table 2 and Table 3, we report the results obtained by using the Universal Transformer,
for both AoP and the Transformer. By adding the layer recursion, both models are able to consistently
improve all the evaluated measures, in both Persona-Chat and the Task-Oriented tasks. Especially
6

Table 2: Results for the goal-oriented responses in both MWOZ and SMD. Last raw, and italicized,
are the Oracle results, and bold-faced are best in each setting (w and w/o Universal). Results are
averaged among three run (full table in Appendix A6).
Model
F1
BLEU
SQLAcc
SQLBLEU
BOOKAcc
BOOKBLEU
Seq2Seq
38.37
9.42
49.97
81.75
39.05
79.00
TRS
36.91
9.92
61.96
89.08
46.51
78.41
MoE
38.64
9.47
53.60
85.38
37.23
78.55
AoR
40.36
10.66
69.39
90.64
52.15
81.15
AoP
42.26
11.14
71.1
90.90
56.31
84.08
TRS + U
39.39
9.29
61.80
89.70
50.16
79.05
AoP + U
44.04
11.26
74.83
91.90
56.37
84.15
AoP w/o LV
38.50
10.50
61.47
88.28
52.61
80.34
AoP+O
46.36
11.99
73.41
93.81
56.18
86.42
AoP, which achieves better performance than Oracle (i.e. single layer) in the SQL accuracy, and a
consistently better performance in the Persona-Chat evaluation.
4
Skill Composition
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our model in learning independent skills and composing them
together, we manually trigger skills by modifying α and generate 14 different responses for the same
input dialogue context. This experiment allows us to verify whether the model accurately captures the
meaning of each skill and whether it can properly learn to compose the selected parameters (skills).
Table 3 ﬁrst shows the dialogue history along with the response of AoP on the top, and then different
responses generated by modifying α (i.e., black cells correspond to 1 in the vector, while the whites
are 0). By analyzing Table 3 4 we can notice that:
• The model learns the correct semantics of each skill. For instance, the AoP response is of type SQL
and Train, and by deactivating the SQL skill and activating other domain-skills, including Train, we
can see that the responses are grammatical and they are coherent with the selected skill semantics.
For instance, by just selecting Train, the generated answer becomes “what time would you like
to leave?” which is coherent with the dialogue context since such information has not been yet
provided. Interestingly, when Persona skill is selected, the generated response is conversational
and also coherent with the dialogue, even though it is less ﬂuent.
• The model effectively learns how to compose multiple skills. For instance, when SQL or BOOK
are triggered the response produces the correct SQL-syntax (e.g. “SELECT * FROM ..” etc.). By
also adding the corresponding domain-skill, the model generates the correct query format and
attributes relative to the domain type (e.g. in SQL, Restaurant, the model queries with the relevant
attribute food for restaurants).
5
Related Work
Dialogue
Task-oriented dialogue models [38] can be categorized in two types: module-based [4, 8–
10, 5, 39] and end-to-end. In this paper, we focus on the latter which are systems that train a
single model directly on text transcripts of dialogues. These tasks are tackled by selecting a set of
predeﬁned utterances [15, 40–42] or by generating a sequence of tokens [33, 43, 16, 44]. Especially
in the latter, copy-augmented models [11, 13, 14] are very effective since extracting entities from a
knowledge base is fundamental. On the other hand, end-to-end open domain chit-chat models have
been widely studied [6, 7, 45–47]. Several works improved on the initially reported baselines with
various methodologies [48, 14, 49, 50, 34]. Finally, [16] was the ﬁrst attempt of having an end-to-end
system for both task-oriented models and chit-chat. However, the dataset used for the evaluation was
small, evaluated only in single domain, and the chit-chat ability was added manually through rules.
Mixture of Expert & Conditional Computation
The idea of having specialized parameters, or so-
called experts, has been widely studied topics in the last two decades [18, 51]. For instance, different
7

Table 3: Selecting different skills thought the attention vector α results in a skill-consistent response.
AoP response activates SQL and Train.
Sys: There are lots of trains to choose from! Where are you departing from?
Usr: I am departing from london heading to cambridge.
Sys: What time will you be travelling?
Usr: I need to arrive by 1530.
AoP: SELECT * FROM train WHERE destination=“cambridge” AND
day=“monday” AND arriveBy < “1530” and departure=“london”
SQL
BOOK
Taxi
Restaurant
Hotel
Attraction
Train
Schedule
Persona
AoP responses using different parameter combination
I would be happy to book that for you.
I have found you a few to choose from. what time would ..
I have many options for you. is there a certain time you ...
Is there a certain area you would like?
what time would you like to leave?
okay I have two trains what time would you like to cambridge?
Where do you do for work ?
BOOK FROM taxi WHERE leaveAt>“1530” AND destination=..
BOOK FROM restaurant WHERE time=“1530” AND ...
BOOK FROM hotel WHERE people=“1” AND day=“monday”
BOOK FROM train WHERE people=“1” AND id_booking=’
SELECT * FROM restaurant WHERE food=“1530” ...
SELECT * FROM hotel WHERE type=“1530”
SELECT * FROM attraction WHERE name=“departure”
architecture and methodologies have been used such as Gaussian Processes [52], Hierarchical
Experts [53], and sequential expert addition [54]. More recently, the Mixture Of Expert [19, 20]
model was proposed which added a large number of experts between two LSTMs. To the best of our
knowledge, none of these previous works applied the results of the gating function to the parameters
itself. On the other hand, there are Conditional Computational models which learn to dynamically
select their computation graph [55, 56]. Several methods have been used such as reinforcement
learning [57], a halting function [58, 29, 59], by pruning [60, 61] and routing/controller function [62].
However, this line of work focuses more on optimizing the inference performance of the model more
than specializing parts of it for computing a certain task.
Multi-task Learning
Even though our model processes only input sequence and output sequences
of text, it actually jointly learns multiple tasks (e.g. SQL and BOOK query, memory retrieval,
and response generation), thus it is also related to multi-task learning [63]. Interested readers may
refer to [64, 65] for a general overview on the topic. In Natural Language Processing, multi-task
learning has been applied in a wide range of applications such as parsing [66–68], machine translation
in multiple languages [69], and parsing image captioning and machine translation [70]. More
interestingly, DecaNLP [17] has a large set of tasks that are cast to question answering (QA), and
learned by a single model. In this work, we focus more on conversational data, but in future works,
we plan to include these QA tasks.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel way to train a single end-to-end dialogue model with multiple
composable and interpretable skills. Unlike previous work, that mostly focused on the representation-
level mixing [19], our proposed approach, Attention over Parameters, learns how to softly combine
independent sets of specialized parameters (i.e., making SQL-Query, conversing with consistent
persona, etc.) into a single set of parameters. By doing so, we not only achieve compositionality and
interpretability but also gain algorithmically faster inference speed. To train and evaluate our model,
we organize a multi-domain task-oriented datasets into end-to-end trainable formats and combine it
8

with a conversational dataset (i.e. Persona-Chat). Our model learns to consider each task and domain
as a separate skill that can be composed with each other, or used independently, and we verify the
effectiveness of the interpretability and compositionality with competitive experimental results and
thorough analysis.
Several extensions of this work are possible, for example: incremental learning and zero-shot skill
composition. The ﬁrst, would be similar to [71] where we can add skills through time and learn how
to combine it to existing ones. The second, instead, is more related to the semantic compositionality
shown in the analysis, where each skill is correctly learned and can be apply to control the generation.
An interesting direction would be to learn more general skills (e.g. Machine Translation (MT) or
emotional responses), and being able to mix it to existing skills to obtain compositional responses
without labeled data.
