Boost Phrase-level Polarity Labelling with
Review-level Sentiment Classiﬁcation∗∗∗
Yongfeng Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University

Min Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University

Yiqun Liu
Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University

Shaoping Ma
Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University

Sentiment analysis on user reviews helps to keep track of user reactions towards products, and
make advices to users about what to buy. State-of-the-art review-level sentiment classiﬁcation
techniques could give pretty good precisions of above 90%. However, current phrase-level sen-
timent analysis approaches might only give sentiment polarity labelling precisions of around
70% ∼80%, which is far from satisfaction and restricts its application in many practical tasks.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling and
attempt to bridge the gap between phrase-level and review-level sentiment analysis. We inves-
tigate the inconsistency between the numerical star ratings and the sentiment orientation of
textual user reviews. Although they have long been treated as identical, which serves as a basic
assumption in previous work, we ﬁnd that this assumption is not necessarily true.
We further propose to leverage the results of review-level sentiment classiﬁcation to boost
the performance of phrase-level polarity labelling using a novel constrained convex optimization
framework. Besides, the framework is capable of integrating various kinds of information sources
and heuristics, while giving the global optimal solution due to its convexity. Experimental results
on both English and Chinese reviews show that our framework achieves high labelling precisions
of up to 89%, which is a signiﬁcant improvement from current approaches.
1. Introduction
Sentiment analysis techniques could be classiﬁed into three levels according to the dif-
ferent granularities on which the analysis is conducted, i.e., document-level, sentence-
level and phrase-level (Liu and Zhang 2012). When analyzing user reviews, document-
level sentiment analysis is also referred to as review-level sentiment analysis. Figure 1
shows a user review on an Apple iPhone product, which is extracted from Amazon.com.
∗Part of this work was supported by Natural Science Foundation (60903107, 61073071) and National High
Technology Research and Development (863) Program (2011AA01A205) of China, and the third author is
sponsored by the National Science Foundation (IIS-0713111). The opinions, ﬁndings, suggestions or
conclusions expressed in this paper are the authors’, and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the sponsors.
∗∗This paper is an extended version of the work Do users rate or review? boost phrase-level sentiment labeling
with review-level sentiment classiﬁcation in SIGIR’14.
© 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
arXiv:1502.03322v1  [cs.CL]  11 Feb 2015

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
Star Rating: ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆
Review: I am very happy to have bought this phone from Amazon and the service rendered
from the seller is excellent. Phone quality is perfect as new though I bought a used one.
Care to their customers is something a key strategy the seller has followed. I would like to deal
again with the same group in the near future and recommend to others highly. Thank you.
Figure 1
A sample user review towards an Apple iPhone 5 product from Amazon.com, which consists of
a numerical star rating (5 stars here) and a piece of review text. The feature-opinion word pairs
(service, excellent) and (phone quality, perfect) could be extracted from the review text to
represent user attitudes (opinion words) towards speciﬁc product features (feature words).
Review-level and sentence-level sentiment analysis attempt to determine the over-
all sentiment orientation of a review or sentence. In phrase-level sentiment analysis,
however, we are particularly interested in those phrases that describe some features
or aspects of products, which, in Figure 1 for example, are the phrases service and phone
quality. The user used excellent to modify the product feature service, and perfect for phone
quality. Both pairs express user’s positive sentiment on the corresponding feature. In this
work, we use Feature word (F) to represent the words or phrases that describe speciﬁc
product features, use Opinion word (O) for the words or phrases expressing users’
sentiments towards feature words, and use Sentiment polarity (S) for the sentiment
orientation of a Feature-Opinion (FO) pair.
The construction of a sentiment lexicon is of key importance in phrase-level senti-
ment analysis (Taboada et al. 2011; Liu, Hu, and Cheng 2005; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008;
Lu et al. 2011). Each entry in the lexicon is an FO pair together with the corresponding
sentiment polarity, represented by (F,O,S) (Popescu and Etzioni 2005; Lu et al. 2011;
Taboada et al. 2011). For example, the entries (service, excellent, positive) and (phone qual-
ity, perfect, positive) could be extracted in the review of Figure 1. The underlying reason
for such approaches is the observation that the sentiment polarity of opinion words
could be contextual (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005; Lu et al. 2011), which means
that the same opinion word could lead to different sentiment orientations when used
to modify different feature words. For example, the opinion word high has a positive
sentiment when modifying the feature word quality, yet has a negative sentiment when
accompanied by noise.
However, current phrase-level sentiment lexicon construction approaches may only
give sentiment polarity labelling (determining the S for an FO pair) precisions of around
70% ∼80% (Liu and Zhang 2012; Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005; Liu, Hu, and
Cheng 2005; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008). Although the literature has shown that the overall
sentiment classiﬁcation precisions of a whole sentence or review could be reasonably
high even the sentiment lexicon is not that accurate (Cui, Mittal, and Datar 2006; Turney
2002; Liu, Hu, and Cheng 2005; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008), we argue that the problem
of constructing an accurate sentiment lexicon itself is important, because the use of a
sentiment lexicon might not be limited to aggregating the overall sentiment of sentences
or reviews. In fact, it can be used in many promising tasks, such as word of mouth
tracking of brands, tools for product design and optimization, and feature-level product
search or recommendation.
Previous work on phrase-level sentiment analysis and lexicon construction (Lu et
al. 2011; Lu, Zhai, and Sundaresan 2009; Dave, Lawrence, and Pennock 2003) assumes
that the accompanied user rating indicates the overall sentiment orientation of a review
text. However, we would like to point out according to our experiments on user rating
analysis that, the star ratings might not be a kind of reliable signal in this task, and a
2

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
substantial amount of users tend to make similar or even the same ratings continuously,
regardless of the review text that they comment on a speciﬁc product.
In this paper, however, we propose to boost the process of phrase-level sentiment
polarity labelling in a reverse way, which is to use review-level sentiment classiﬁcation
results as a heuristic for phrase-level polarity labelling. State-of-the-art review-level
sentiment classiﬁcation techniques, even the unsupervised approaches, can give pretty
good precisions of above 90% (Liu and Zhang 2012; Lin, He, and Everson 2010; Zag-
ibalov and Carroll 2008a; Qiu et al. 2009; Zagibalov and Carroll 2008b), which could be
reliable to help boost the performance of phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling. Here,
we mainly focus our attention on unsupervised review-level sentiment classiﬁcation
techniques because of the fact that they need no manually annotated training data,
which makes them domain-independent. Besides, they can achieve comparable or even
better performance compared with supervised approaches, especially in some scenarios
such as online product reviews (Liu and Zhang 2012; Lin, He, and Everson 2010).
We design a two-stage process for phrase-level polarity labelling. In the ﬁrst stage,
the overall sentiment orientations of the product reviews in the corpus are labeled using
a review-level sentiment classiﬁer. In the second stage, we extract feature-opinion pairs
from the corpus, then use the overall sentiment orientations of reviews as constraints
to learn the sentiment polarities of these pairs automatically using a novel optimization
framework. Experimental results on both English and Chinese review datasets show
that our framework improves the precision of phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling
signiﬁcantly, which means that it might be promising to leverage sentence- or review-
level sentiment analysis techniques to boost the performance of phrase-level sentiment
analysis tasks. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
•
We investigate the phenomenon of inconsistency between the numerical
star ratings and the sentiment polarities of textual user reviews though
extensive experimental studies.
•
We propose to leverage review-level sentiment analysis techniques to
boost the performance of phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling in
sentiment lexicon construction tasks.
•
We formally deﬁne the problem of phrase-level sentiment polarity
labelling as a constrained convex optimization problem and design
iterative optimization algorithms for model learning, where the global
optimal solution is guaranteed.
•
Through a comprehensive experimental study on both English and
Chinese datasets, the effectiveness of the proposed framework is veriﬁed.
The remainder of this paper will be structured as follows. Section 2 reviews some
related work, and Section 3 formally deﬁnes the problem that we investigate. In Section
4, we propose our phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling framework, followed by the
experimental results in Section 5. We conclude the work in Section 6.
2. Related work
With the rapid growth of e-commerce, social networks and online discussion forums,
the web has been rich in user-generated free-text data, where users express various
attitudes towards products or events, which have been attracting researchers into Sen-
timent Analysis (Liu and Zhang 2012; Pang and Lee 2008). Sentiment analysis plays an
important role in many applications, including opinion retrieval (Orimaye, Alhashmi,
3

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
and Siew 2013), word-of-mouth tracking (Jansen et al. 2009), and opinion oriented
document summarization (Liu, Seneff, and Zue 2010; Hu and Liu 2004), etc.
One of the core tasks in sentiment analysis is to determine the sentiment orien-
tations that users express in reviews, sentences or on speciﬁc product features, corre-
sponding to review(document)-level (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002), sentence-
level (Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie 2005; Nakagawa, Inui, and Kurohashi 2010) and
phrase-level (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005; Lu et al. 2011; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008)
sentiment analysis.
Review- and sentence-level sentiment analysis attempt to label a review or sentence
as one of some predeﬁned sentiment polarities, which are, typically, positive, negative
and sometimes neutral (Liu and Zhang 2012). This task is referred to as Sentiment
Classiﬁcation, which has drawn much attention from the research community, and both
supervised (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002; Mullen and Collier 2004; Yessenalina,
Yue, and Cardie 2010; Cui, Mittal, and Datar 2006; Bickerstaffe and Zukerman 2010;
Maas et al. 2011), unsupervised (Turney 2002; Hu and Liu 2004; Lin, He, and Everson
2010; Zagibalov and Carroll 2008a; Qiu et al. 2009; Zagibalov and Carroll 2008b) or semi-
supervised (Dasgupta and Ng 2009; Zhou, Chen, and Wang 2010; Li et al. 2011; Goldberg
and Zhu 2006) methods have been investigated.
Phrase-level sentiment analysis aims to analyze the sentiment expressed by users
in a ﬁner-grained granularity. It considers the sentiment expressed on speciﬁc product
features or aspects (Hu and Liu 2004). Perhaps one of the most important tasks in
phrase-level sentiment analysis is the construction of Sentiment Lexicon (Taboada et
al. 2011; Liu, Hu, and Cheng 2005; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008; Lu et al. 2011; Zhang
et al. 2014b), which is to extract feature-opinion word pairs and their corresponding
sentiment polarities from these opinion rich user-generated free-texts. The construction
of a high-quality sentiment lexicon would beneﬁt various tasks, for example, person-
alized recommendation (Zhang et al. 2014a, 2015; Zhang 2015) and automatic review
summarization (Hu and Liu 2004; Taboada et al. 2011).
Although some opinion words like "good" or "bad" usually express consistent sen-
timents in different cases, many others might have different sentiment polarities when
accompanied with different feature words, which means that the sentiment lexicon is
contextual (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005).
Various information and heuristics could be used in the process of polarity labelling
of the feature-opinion pairs. For example, it is often assumed that the overall sentiment
orientation of a review is aggregated from all the feature-opinion pairs in it (Ding, Liu,
and Yu 2008; Lu et al. 2011). Besides, some seed opinion words that express "ﬁxed"
sentiments are usually provided, which are used to propagate the sentiment polarities
of the other words (Hu and Liu 2004; Lu et al. 2011). Some work takes advantage of
linguistic heuristics (Liu 2010; Hu et al. 2013; Lu et al. 2011). For example, two feature-
opinion pairs concatenated with the conjunctive "and" might have the same sentiment,
while they might have opposite sentiments if connected by "but". The assumption of lin-
guistic heuristic is further extended by sentential sentiment consistency in (Kanayama
and Nasukawa 2006).
In this paper, we consider two main disadvantages of previous work. First, seldom
of them combine various heuristics in a uniﬁed framework (Taboada et al. 2011; Ding,
Liu, and Yu 2008; Liu, Hu, and Cheng 2005; Hu and Liu 2004; Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoff-
mann 2005). Second, they simply use the numerical star rating as the overall sentiment
polarity of the review text to supervise the process of phrase-level polarity labelling (Lu
et al. 2011; Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008; Lu, Zhai, and Sundaresan 2009; Dave, Lawrence,
and Pennock 2003). In this work, we propose to boost phrase-level polarity labelling
4

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
with review-level sentiment classiﬁcation, while incorporating many of the commonly
used heuristics in a uniﬁed framework.
3. Problem Formalization
In this section, we formalize the problems to be investigated, as well as the notations to
be used in this paper.
Deﬁnition (Sentiment Vector) Suppose we are considering r sentiment polarity
labels S1, S2 · · · Sr, for example, positive and negative when r = 2. A sentiment vector
x = [x1, x2, ..., xr]T (xi ≥0) represents the sentiment orientation of a review, sentence
or feature-opinion pair. The i-th element xi in x indicates the extent of sentiment on
the i-th polarity label Si. A function s : Rr →R is deﬁned on sentiment vector x such
that s(x) represents the overall sentiment of the review, sentence or feature-opinion pair.
For example, if S1 = positive and S2 = negative when r = 2, a sentiment vector
x = [1, 0]T of a review is used to indicate that the review has a sentiment orientation
on positive and no sentiment orientation on negative. If the function s(x) = x1 −x2 is
deﬁned, then the overall sentiment orientation of the review is 1. Some previous work
(Lu et al. 2011; Hu et al. 2013) enforces xi ≤1 as an additional constraint, however, this
constraint is not necessary in our framework.
Deﬁnition (Sentiment Matrix) For a set of m reviews, sentences or feature-
opinion pairs t1, t2 · · · tm, the m × r matrix X = [x1x2 · · · xm]T is used to represent
the sentiment orientations of them, where xi is the sentiment vector for ti, and
s(X) = [s(x1)s(x2) · · · s(xm)]T is their overall sentiment orientation.
Deﬁnition (Review-Level Sentiment
Classiﬁcation)
Given
a
review
corpus T
of
m user reviews t1, t2 · · · tm, a review-level sentiment classiﬁcation algorithm C
gives C(T) = Xm×r = [x1x2 · · · xm]T = [C(t1)C(t2) · · · C(tm)]T , where xi = C(ti) is the
sentiment vector for the i-th user review ti given by C.
Note that, in real applications, the review-level sentiment classiﬁcation algorithm
C could be both supervised or unsupervised. In this work, we consider unsupervised
algorithms primarily to avoid the expensive manual labelling process and make our
framework domain-independent.
Deﬁnition
(Sentiment
Lexicon)
A
sentiment
lexicon
constituting
n
FO
pairs
FO1FO2 · · · FOn is deﬁned as an n × r sentiment matrix X = [x1x2 · · · xn]T , where
xi is the sentiment vector for the pair FOi.
As has stated before, the same opinion word may express different sentiment
orientations when accompanied with different feature words, which makes a sentiment
lexicon contextual. In this work, we use General Sentiment Lexicon and Contextual
Sentiment Lexicon to indicate the two different kinds of sentiment lexicons. In the
general sentiment lexicon, the sentiment vector of an FO pair is labelled according to
its opinion word directly. For example, the opinion word excellent usually expresses a
positive opinion regardless of the feature word, as a result, the sentiment vector for
(service,excellent) will be labelled as [1, 0]T directly. If the sentiment orientation of an
opinion word is unknown, then the corresponding sentiment vector will be labelled as
5

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
[0, 0]T . This lexicon is of high precision but low coverage. In the contextual sentiment
lexicon, however, the sentiment vectors of FO pairs are labelled on considering of both
the feature words and opinion words.
Deﬁnition (Phrase-Level Sentiment Polarity Labelling) In the process of contextual
sentiment lexicon construction, once the feature-opinion pairs have been extracted
from the review corpus, an important task is to determine the sentiment polarity of each
FO pair, which is referred to as phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling. More formally,
the task is to determine the sentiment matrix Xn×r = [x1x2 · · · xn]T , which is further
transformed into the overall sentiment orientations s(X) = [s(x1)s(x2) · · · s(xn)]T .
In this work, the only input of our framework is a user review corpus T and a
general sentiment lexicon X0, and the expected output is a contextual sentiment lexicon
X, as well as their overall sentiment orientations s(X). The general sentiment lexicon X0
is achieved using some publicly available opinion word sets1. These word sets contain
simple and frequently used opinion words such as excellent, good, bad, etc., and they
are commonly viewed as basic background knowledges in natural language processing
tasks.
4. The Framework
In general, the framework is two-stage. In the ﬁrst stage, we use an unsupervised
review-level sentiment classiﬁcation algorithm C to get the sentiment matrix ˜X = C(T)
for the review corpus T; in the second stage, we extract feature-opinion pairs from
corpus T and leverage the sentiment matrix ˜X as well as the general sentiment lexicon
X0 in a uniﬁed optimization framework to obtain the contextual sentiment lexicon
X. After that, a pre-deﬁned function s(X) is used to determine the overall sentiment
orientation of each feature-opinion pair. We introduce the details of the framework in
the following part of the section.
4.1 Review-Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation
The goal of this step is to present review-level overall sentiment polarities of user
reviews by sentiment classiﬁcation algorithms, with which to supervise the phrase-level
sentiment polarity labelling process in the next stage.
We choose to use unsupervised review-level sentiment classiﬁcation algorithms
mainly because of three reasons. The ﬁrst is to avoid the manual labelling process of
review-level sentiment polarities, which makes our framework domain adaptable. The
second is to keep our framework as general as possible to ensure its independence
from speciﬁc data requirements. For example, the optimization framework in (Lu et
al. 2011) takes advantage of numerical ratings given by users in online shopping or
review service websites, to supervise the process of phrase-level sentiment polarity
labelling. However, such numerical ratings might not exist in speciﬁc environments, for

the relationship between sentiment orientations of reviews and user ratings is still
open (Moghaddam and Ester 2013; Liu and Zhang 2012). In fact, we will point out in
1 We choose the commonly used MPQA sentiment corpus for English reviews and use HowNet for
Chinese reviews. They will be formally introduced in the following part.
6

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
the experiments of user rating analysis that, the numerical ratings do not necessarily
indicate the sentiment orientation of textual reviews.
Classifying the sentiment orientations of user reviews into neutral or no opinion
is usually ignored in most work, as has been pointed out in (Liu and Zhang 2012)
and (Moghaddam and Ester 2013), for it is extremely hard and might bring about
negative effects to positive and negative sentiment classiﬁcation. As a result, we choose
two-class classiﬁcation frameworks for review-level sentiment classiﬁcation, namely, a
review is classiﬁed as either positive or negative. More formally, the dimensionality of
a sentiment vector is r = 2, with the dimensionalities S1 = positive and S2 = negative,
correspondingly.
Two possible sentiment vector candidates are used in this stage. If a review is
classiﬁed as positive by a sentiment classiﬁcation algorithm C, then its sentient vector
is assigned as x = [1, 0]T . Otherwise, the corresponding sentiment vector is set to be
x = [0, 1]T . Based on the classiﬁcation results, a sentiment matrix ˜X is constructed:
˜X = [x1x2 · · · xm]T
(1)
where xi is the sentiment vector of the i-th review in corpus T. ˜X will be used as a
constraint in the next stage.
We use the sentence orientation prediction approach in (Hu and Liu 2004) for
English reviews. In this approach, a small amount (around 30) of seed opinion words
are manually selected to construct the positive word set and negative word set. For
example, the words such as great, fantastic, nice and cool are in the positive word set, and
words like bad and dull are in the negative word set. After that, each of the two word sets
are expanded by adding the synonyms of their own words and antonyms of the words
from the other set, where the synonyms and antonyms are deﬁned in WordNet. At last,
the positive and negative word sets are used to aggregate the overall orientations of
reviews.
We use the the automatic seed word selection scheme in (Zagibalov and Carroll
2008a) for sentiment classiﬁcation of Chinese reviews. It runs on Chinese characters di-
rectly and does not require pre-segmentation. In this scheme, the positive and negative
seed words are selected in an automatic framework by taking advantage of negation
words, which are further used to aggregate the overall sentiment of a review.
Both of the two methods achieve pretty high sentiment classiﬁcation accuracies of
around 90%, especially on some speciﬁc domains of product reviews. For example, the
precision in digital camera and mobile phone reviews could be up to 92% in English
corpora and 93% in Chinese corpora, which are the state-of-the-art performance in
sentiment classiﬁcation of English and Chinese texts.
4.2 Sentiment Lexicon Construction
In this stage, we construct the contextual sentiment lexicon. We generate the feature-
opinion pairs ﬁrst, and label their polarities in a uniﬁed optimization framework.
4.2.1 Generation of Feature-Opinion Pairs.
Each of the entries in the contextual sentiment lexicon is a feature-opinion pair. The
feature word describes an aspect of a product, and the opinion word expresses the
user’s sentiment on the corresponding feature. In this stage, we ﬁrst extract feature
words from reviews, and then extract opinion words to pair with their corresponding
7

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
feature words.
Feature words extraction
We extract feature word candidates ﬁrst, and then ﬁlter out the wrong words using
a PMI-based ﬁltering approach.
We use the Stanford Parser (M. Marneffe 2006; Levy and Manning 2003; Chang et
al. 2009) to conduct Part-of-Speech tagging, morphological analysis and grammatical
analysis for both English and Chinese reviews. A sentence is converted into a
dependency tree after parsing, which contains both the part of speech tagging results
and grammatical relationships. The following example shows the dependency tree
constructed for the review sentence "Phone quality is perfect and the service is excellent."
(ROOT
(S
(S
(NP (JJ Phone) (NN quality))
(VP (VBZ is)
(ADJP (JJ perfect))))
(CC and)
(S
(NP (DT the) (NN service))
(VP (VBZ is)
(ADJP (JJ excellent))))
(. .)))
We extract the Noun Phrases (NP) and retrain those whose frequency is greater than
an experimentally set threshold. These phrases are treated as feature word candidates.
E.g., the phases phone quality and the service could be extracted.
The ﬁltering process is then performed on the candidates in a similar way to that in
(Popescu and Etzioni 2005). We ﬁrst compute the Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI)
of these feature word candidates with some predeﬁned discriminator phrases, (e.g. in
the domain of cellphone the discriminator phrases are "of phone", "phone has", "phone
comes with", etc). The PMI of two phrases p1 and p2 is deﬁned as:
PMI(p1, p2) =
Freq(p1, p2)
Freq(p1) · Freq(p2)
(2)
where Freq(p) indicates the total term frequency of a phrase p in all the user reviews,
and Freq(p1, p2) is the frequency that p1 and p2 co-occur in a subsentence. We use
subsentences instead of sentences when computing PMI because it is often the case that
a sentence covers different aspects in several subsentences, as stated in (Lu et al. 2011).
A feature word candidate is retained if its average PMI across all discriminator phrases
is greater than an experimentally set threshold.
Opinion words extraction
We attempt to extract opinion words from user reviews and assign them to appro-
priate feature words to construct feature-opinion pairs, which serve as the entries in the
sentiment lexicon. For English reviews, we extract the Adjective Phrases (ADJP) that
co-occur with a feature word in a subsentence as an opinion word candidate, to pair
with the corresponding feature word, which forms a feature-opinion pair candidate.
For example, the adjective phrase perfect could be extracted as an opinion word, as it
8

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
co-occurs with the feature word phone quality in a subsentence. The Chinese reviews
are processed in the same manner to extract opinion word candidates except that Verb
Phrases (VP) are also taken into consideration besides adjective phrases.
For each of the feature-opinion pair candidates, we compute their Co-Occure Ratio
(COR) in terms of the corresponding feature word. The co-occur ratio of a feature word
f and an opinion word o is deﬁned in the following way:
COR = Freq(f, o)
Freq(f)
(3)
The notations are the same with those in equation (2). Intuitionally, a high COR
score means that an opinion word candidate is frequently used to modify the corre-
sponding feature word, which indicates that they might be more likely to form a feature-
opinion pair.
We also use an experimentally set threshold of COR to ﬁlter the feature-opinion
pair candidates, and the retained pairs constitute the entries in the lexicon. It is possible
to employ other techniques to construct the lexicon entries, but we choose a relatively
simple approach so as to focus on the next step of sentiment polarity labelling. We adopt
the uniﬁed framework based on Finite State Matching Machine describe in (Tan et al.
2013) to locate the matched feature-opinion pairs in each review sentence.
4.2.2 Constraints on Sentiment Polarity Labelling.
In this step, we attempt to assign a unique sentiment polarity (positive or negative)
to each of the feature-opinion pairs in the sentiment lexicon, using a uniﬁed convex
optimization framework. The framework attempts to learn the optimal assignment of
sentiment polarities by searching for the minimum solution to a loss function, where
each term of the loss function is capable of representing the intuition of a speciﬁc
evidence from a speciﬁc information source. Besides, the loss function is expected to
be convex so that we can design a fast and simple optimization algorithm to ﬁnd the
unique global optimal solution to the problem.
More formally, suppose the sentiment matrix of the n feature-opinion pairs
extracted is represented by X ∈Rn×r, where r is the number of sentiment polarity
labels used, then we attempt to learn an optimal X and calculate the overall sentiment
polarity of each pair by the function s(X). The objective function of the learning process
consists of the following constrains based on different information sources.
Constraint on Review-level Sentiment Orientation
Although an online user review might be either positive or negative in terms of
overall sentiment polarity, it does not necessarily mean that users only discuss about
positive or negative features in a single piece of review. A positive opinionated review
about a product does not mean that the user has positive opinions on all aspects of
the product. Likewise, a negative opinionated review does not mean that the user
dislikes everything. As a result, the overall sentiment orientation of a review is the
comprehensive effect of all the feature-opinion pairs contained in the review text.
Suppose we have m user reviews in the review corpus T, then the sentiment matrix
˜X for the user reviews given by the review-level sentiment classiﬁcation algorithm is an
m × r matrix, where each row of the matrix is a sentiment vector for the corresponding
review.
9

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
We construct a matrix A with the dimension m × n to indicate the frequency of
each feature-opinion pair occurring in each review. Each row of the matrix represents a
review, and each column represents a feature-opinion pair. The element for review i to
pair j is deﬁned as:
aij = Ineg
ij
·
Freq(i, j)
P
k Freq(i, k)
(4)
where Freq(i, j) is the frequency of feature-opinion pair j in review i, and it would be 0
if review i does not contain pair j. Therefore, P
k Freq(i, k) represents the total number
of pairs that is contained in review i. The matrix Ineg is an indication matrix that allows
us to take the "negation rules" into consideration. Ineg
ij
= −1 if the feature-opinion pair
j is modiﬁed by a negation word in review i, e.g. "no", "not", "hardly", etc. Otherwise,
Ineg
ij
= 1.
According to our assumption that the overall sentiment of a text review is the
comprehensive effect of all the feature opinion pairs it contains, we use a sentiment
prediction function f(A, X) to estimate the sentiment orientations of the reviews, based
on the review-pairs relationship matrix A and our contextual sentiment lexicon X. We
expect to minimize the difference between our estimations and those given by the
review-level sentiment classﬁcation algorithm, which leads to the following objective
function:
R1 = ∥f(A, X) −˜X∥2
F
(5.1)
In this work, we choose a simple but frequently used sentiment prediction function,
which is to predict the overall sentiment orientation of a review as the weighted average
of all the feature-opinion pairs contained in it. This gives us the following objective
function:
R1 = ∥AX −˜X∥2
F
(5.2)
As the negation words have been represented by negative weights in A, multiplying
A and X naturally incorporates the negation rule into consideration in (5.2).
Constraint on General Sentiment Lexicon
As stated in the deﬁnition of sentiment lexicon, some opinion words like excellent,
good and bad have "ﬁxed" polarities regardless of the feature word companioned. There-
fore, we construct the general sentiment lexicon X0 by labelling the polarities of the
feature-opinion pairs in X according to publicly available sentiment corpora directly.
We ﬁrst construct a positive opinion word set and a negative opinion word set for
English and Chinese reviews, respectively. The word sets for English is constructed
from the MPQA opinion corpus2, which contains 2718 positive words and 4902 neg-
ative words, and the word sets for Chinese is constructed from HowNet3, with 3730
positive words and 3116 negative words. For the i-th feature-opinion pair (f, o), the
2 http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/corpora/
3 http://www.keenage.com/
10

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
corresponding sentiment vector xi in X0 is:
xi =





[1, 0]T , if o is in positive word set
[0, 1]T , if o is in negative word set
[0, 0]T , otherwise
(6)
and ﬁnally, X0 = [x1x2 · · · xn]T serves as the general sentiment lexicon.
We expect the sentiment polarities of the ﬁxed opinion words learnt in the contex-
tual sentiment lexicon X to be close to those in the general sentiment lexicon X0, which
leads to the following objective function:
R2 = ∥G(X −X0)∥2
F
(7)
where G is a diagonal matrix that indicates which feature-opinion pairs in X are "ﬁxed"
by the general sentiment lexicon X0. Namely, Gii = 1 if the i-th feature-opinion pair has
ﬁxed sentiment, and Gii = 0 otherwise.
Constraint on Linguistic Heuristics
An important and frequently adopted type of linguistic heuristic is the conjunctives
in user reviews (Liu 2010; Hu et al. 2013). It is intuitional that feature-opinion pairs
i and j that are frequently concatenated with "and" in the corpus might have similar
sentiments, while those that are frequently connected by words like "but" tend to have
opposite sentiments. For example, in the sentence "the phone quality is perfect and the
sound effect is clear", if "perfect" is known to be positive, then it can be inferred that
"clear" is also positive.
To formalize the intuition, we deﬁne two n × n matrices Wa and Wb for the "and"
and "but" linguistic heuristics, respectively, where W∗
ij ∈[0, 1] indicates our conﬁdence
that pair i and j have the same or opposite sentiments. A simple but frequently used
choice is to set Wa
ij = Wa
ji = 1 if pair i andj are concatenated by "and" for a minimal
number of times in all the subsentences in the corpus, otherwise, we set Wa
ij = Wa
ji = 0.
Similarly, Wb
ij = Wb
ji = 1 if pair i and pair j are linked by "but" for a minimal number
of times in the corpus, and they are set to be 0 otherwise.
To incorporate the "and" linguistic in our model, we propose to optimize the the
following objective function:
Ra
3 = 1
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
∥Xi∗−Xj∗∥2
F Wa
ij = Tr(XT DaX) −Tr(XT WaX)
(8)
where Tr(·) is the trace of a matrix, and Xi∗represents the i-th row of X, which is also
the sentiment vector for pair i. Da ∈Rn×n is a diagonal matrix where Da
ii = Pn
j=1 Wa
ij.
The underlying intuition in (8) is that the sentiment vectors of pairs i and j should be
similar to each other if they are frequently linked by "and", otherwise, a penalty would
be introduced to the loss function.
The formalization of "but" linguistic is similar, except that we expect the sentiment
vector for pair i to be close to the "opposite" of the sentiment vector for pair j. More
intuitionally, if Xi∗gains a high score in its ﬁrst dimension, which implies that pair i
tends to be positive, then Xj∗should also gain a high score in its second dimension,
which drives pair j to be negative, and vise verse. In order to model this intuition, we
11

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
introduce the following optimization term:
Rb
3 = 1
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
∥Xi∗−Xj∗E∥2
F Wb
ij = Tr(XT DbX) −Tr(XT WbXE)
(9)
where E = [ 0 1
1 0 ] is an anti-diagonal matrix that serves as a column permutation function
to reverse the columns of X. Similarly, Db is a diagonal matrix where Db
ii = Pn
j=1 Wb
ij.
Finally, the objective function regarding both "and" and "but" linguistic heuristic is:
R3 = Ra
3 + Rb
3 = Tr(XT DaX) −Tr(XT WaX) + Tr(XT DbX) −Tr(XT WbXE)
= Tr(XT DX) −Tr(XT WaX) −Tr(XT WbXE)
(10)
where D = Da + Db.
Constraint on Sentential Sentiment Consistency
The use of linguistic heuristic is extended in (Kanayama and Nasukawa 2006)
by introducing sentential sentiment consistency (called coherency in (Kanayama and
Nasukawa 2006)). The fundamental assumption of sentential sentiment consistency is
that the same opinion orientation (positive or negative) is usually expressed in a few
consecutive sentences, which is reported to be helpful in improving the accuracy of
contextual sentiment polarity labelling.
To formalize the heuristic, a sentential similarity matrix Ws ∈Rn×n is introduced,
which leverages the sentential distance between feature-opinion pairs in corpus to
estimate their sentential similarities. For example, consider two pairs i and j, if they
co-occur in the same piece of review in the corpus, then we calculate their sentential
similarity in this review, and the ﬁnal similarity between i and j is the average of all
the intra-review similarities of their co-occurrences. More formally, suppose pair i and
pair j co-occur in the same review for Nij times, and the k-th co-occurrence happens in
review tik, then Ws
ij and Ws
ji are deﬁned as:
Ws
ij = Ws
ji =







0, if Nij = 0 or Wa
ij ̸= 0 or Wb
ij ̸= 0
1
Nij
Nij
X
k=1

1 −
dist(i, j)
length(rik)

, else
(11)
where the length of a review length(rik) is the number of words (punctuations ex-
cluded) in the review, and the distance of pair i and j in the review dist(i, j) is the
number of words between the two feature words of the pair. Note that we do not
consider two pairs if they have been constrained by "and" (Wa
ij ̸= 0) or "but" (Wb
ij ̸= 0)
linguistic heuristic. Besides, a pair might co-occur for more than one times in the same
review, and we consider all the pairwise combinations in such cases.
Once the sentential similarity matrix is constructed, we incorporate sentential sen-
timent similarity constraint by taking into account the following objective function:
R4 = 1
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
∥Xi∗−Xj∗∥2
F Ws
ij = Tr(XT DsX) −Tr(XT WsX)
(12)
12

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
Algorithm 1 Contextual Sentiment Polarity Labelling
Require: A, ˜X, X0, λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, N, δ
Ensure: X
1: Construct matrix G in Equation (7)
2: Construct matrix D, Wa and Wb in Equation (10)
3: Construct matrix Ds and Ws in Equation (12)
4: Initialize X ←X0, X′ ←X0, n ←0
5: repeat
6:
n ←n + 1
7:
X′ ←X
8:
for each element Xij in X do
9:
Xij ←Xij
r
[λ1AT ˜X+λ2GX0+λ3WaX+λ3WbXE+λ4WsX]ij
[λ1AT AX+λ2GX+λ3DX+λ4DsX]ij
10:
end for
11: until ∥X −X′∥2
F < δ or n > N
12: return X
where Ds is also a diagonal matrix, and Ds
ii = Pn
j=1 Ws
ij.
The underlying intuition of this subjective function is that, a large penalty would be
introduced if the difference of the sentiment vectors of two near pairs is signiﬁcant.
4.2.3 The Uniﬁed Model for Polarity Labelling.
With the above constraints from different information and aspects, we have the follow-
ing objective function for learning the contextual sentiment lexicon X:
min
X≥0 R = λ1∥AX −˜X∥2
F + λ2∥G(X −X0)∥2
F
+ λ3
 Tr(XT DX) −Tr(XT WaX) −Tr(XT WbXE)

+ λ4
 Tr(XT DsX) −Tr(XT WsX)

(13)
where λ1, λ2, λ3 and λ4 are positive weighing parameters that control the contributions
of each information source in the learning process.
An important property of the objective function (13) is its convexity, which makes it
possible to search for the global optimal solution X∗to the contextual sentiment polarity
labelling problem. We give the updating rule for learning X∗directly here, as shown
in (14), and the proof of the updating rule as well as its convergence is given in the
appendix.
Xij ←Xij
s
[λ1AT ˜X + λ2GX0 + λ3WaX + λ3WbXE + λ4WsX]ij
[λ1AT AX + λ2GX + λ3DX + λ4DsX]ij
(14)
The algorithm for learning the contextual sentiment lexicon is shown in Algorithm
1. In this algorithm, we ﬁrst initialize the indication matrices, Laplacian matrices and
sentiment matrices through line 1 to line 4. The predeﬁned parameter N is the number
of maximum iterations to conduct. The contextual sentiment lexicon X is updated
repeatedly until convergence or reaching the number of maximum iterations, where
13

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
convergence means that the ℓ2-norm of the difference matrix between two consecutive
iterations is less than a predeﬁned residual error δ.
4.2.4 Overall Sentiment Polarity of the Pairs.
After the contextual sentiment lexicon X is constructed, we use the predeﬁned func-
tion s(X) = [s(x1)s(x2) · · · s(xn)]T to determine the sentiment polarities of the feature-
opinion pairs. In this work, we choose the function s(xi) = xi1 −xi2, where xi1 and xi2
are the values of positive and negative polarity labels in sentiment vector xi, respec-
tively. Pair i is labeled as positive if s(xi) ≥0, and negative if s(xi) < 0. For simplicity, we
leave out the polarity label of neutral like most of the existing work, as it is quite rare
that xi1 = xi2.
5. Experiments
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed framework,
and investigate the effect of different parameter settings in our framework. We will
attempt to answer the following two research questions:
1.
Are the numerical star ratings always consistent with the overall sentiment
orientations of textual user reviews?
2.
How effective is our proposed framework compared with other polarity
labelling methods?
We begin by introducing the experimental settings, and then investigate the rela-
tionship between numerical ratings and text reviews. Finally, we evaluate the proposed
framework, and make some comparisons with other techniques.
5.1 Experimental Setup
For the experimentation on English, we use the MP3 player reviews crawled from
Amazon, which is publicly available4. For the experiment on Chinese language, we
use the restaurant reviews crawled from DianPing.com5, which is a famous restaurant
rating website in China, and we also made this dataset publicly available6. Each of the
reviews of the two datasets consists of a piece of review text and an overall numerical
rating raging from 1 to 5 stars. We choose these two datasets from both English and
Chinese as these two languages are of quite different types in terms of Linguistics. We
want to examine whether our framework works in different language environments.
Some statistical information about these two datasets is shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Some statistics of the two datasets.
Language
#Users
#Items
#Reviews
MP3 Player
English
26,113
796
55,740
Restaurant
Chinese
11,857
89,462
510,551
4 http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/~wang296/Data/
5 http://www.dianping.com/
6 http://tv.thuir.org/data/
14

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
An important property of our restaurant review dataset is that, each review is
accompanied with three sub-aspect ratings except for the overall rating. They are users’
ratings made on the ﬂavour, environment and service of restaurants, respectively. A user
is required to make ratings on all these three aspects as well as the overall experience
when writing reviews on the website, which makes it possible for us to conduct much
detailed user rating analysis on this dataset. The range of the sub-aspect ratings are also
from 1 to 5.
5.2 User Rating Analysis
Previous work (Cui, Mittal, and Datar 2006; Lu et al. 2011; Wang, Lu, and Zhai 2010)
labels a review text as positive if the corresponding overall rating is 4 or 5 stars,
and negative if the overall rating is 1, 2 or 3 stars. However, the overall rating might
not always be consistent with the sentient orientation of review texts. According to
our observation, a substantial amount of users tend to make unaltered overall ratings
although the sentiment orientation expressed in his or her review text might be quite
different. Most interestingly, many users simply make 4 star ratings regardless of the
review text he wrote. We analyze this phenomenon in the following part of this section.
5.2.1 Overall and Sub-Aspect Ratings.
We begin by analyzing the difference in the rating distributions of the restaurant dataset.
The ratings on three sub-aspects allow us to investigate a user’s "true" feelings on more
speciﬁc aspects of the restaurant beyond the overall rating. For the overall rating and
each of the sub-aspect ratings, we calculate the percentages that each of the 5 star ratings
take in the total number of ratings, as shown in Figure 2. The x-axis represents 1 star
through 5 stars, and the y-axis is the percentage of each kind of star rating.
1	
  
2	
  
3	
  
4	
  
5	
  
Overall	
  
1.24%	
  
3.89%	
  
37.06%	
  
49.23%	
  
8.58%	
  
Flavor	
  
2.15%	
  
25.84%	
  
46.70%	
  
20.77%	
  
4.53%	
  
Environ.	
  
2.56%	
  
40.51%	
  
40.91%	
  
13.05%	
  
2.97%	
  
Service	
  
3.36%	
  
38.21%	
  
41.99%	
  
13.05%	
  
3.39%	
  
0%	
  
10%	
  
20%	
  
30%	
  
40%	
  
50%	
  
Percentage	
  % 
Figure 2
The percentage of each of the ﬁve star ratings (1 star through 5 stars) against the total number of
ratings, in terms of the overall rating, as well as the three kinds of sub-aspect ratings ﬂavour,
environment and service.
We see that user ratings tend to center around 4 stars on overall rating, while they
tend to center around 2∼3 stars on the sub-aspect ratings. This implies that the overall
rating might not serve as a real reﬂection of users’ feelings, and users tend to "tell the
truth" in much detailed sub-aspects. In order to examine the statistical signiﬁcance, we
calculate the average rating µ and coefﬁcient of variation cv = σ/µ for the overall rating
and three kinds of sub-aspect ratings, where σ is the standard deviation. Table 2 shows
15

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
the results. We see that users tend to give higher scores on overall rating, and the scores
on overall rating are more concentrated.
Table 2
The average ratings and the coefﬁcient of variations of the overall rating and sub-aspect ratings.
Overall
Flavour
Environment
Service
µ
3.6432
3.1547
2.8934
2.8510
cv
0.1977
0.2522
0.2697
0.2816
More intuitionally, we conduct per user analysis. For each user and each kind of
rating (overall, ﬂavour, environment and service), we calculate the percentage of 4+
stars (4 and 5 stars) that the user made. Then we sort these percentages of the users in
descending order, which is shown in Figure 3.
0%	
  
20%	
  
40%	
  
60%	
  
80%	
  
100%	
  
Percentage	
  of	
  4	
  and	
  5	
  stars	
  
Sorted	
  UserIDs	
  
Overall	
  
Flavor	
  
Service	
  
Environ.	
  
Figure 3
The percentage of 4+ stars made by each of the users. The points are sorted in descending order
so as to identify the fractile quantiles more easily.
It is clear that user rating behaviours on overall and sub-aspect ratings are different.
More than a half of the users made 50% or more 4+ ratings in terms of overall rating,
while less than 5% users did so on sub-aspect ratings.
This analysis partly shows that it might not be appropriate to use overall ratings
as groundtruth to label the sentiment orientations of review texts, as users tend to act
differently when making overall ratings and expressing their true feelings on detailed
product aspects or features.
5.2.2 Labelling Accuracy using Different Methods.
In fact, users might consider many other features except ﬂavour, environment and
service when giving the overall ratings, as a result, one may argue that the difference in
distribution of ratings on different aspects is insufﬁcient to imply that the overall rating
is inappropriate in estimating the overall sentiment orientations of review texts. As a
result, we evaluate the effect of sentiment orientation labelling of review texts using
different kinds of numerical ratings.
We randomly sampled 1000 reviews out of the 510,551 reviews from the restaurant
review dataset to be labeled manually by 3 annotators. An annotator is asked to give a
single label to a review text, which could be positive or negative. The ﬁnal sentiment of a
review is assigned by using the majority label (more than two) of the three annotators.
The inter-annotator agreement is 79.76%, which is comparable to the reports of existing
16

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
work in sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee 2008; Lu et al. 2011). Finally, the annotated
reviews consist of 673 (67.3%) positive reviews and 327 (32.7%) negative reviews. We
use four methods to estimate the overall sentiment orientation of the review texts
automatically:
1.
Overall Rating: A review text is labeled as positive if the overall star
rating is ≥4, and negative otherwise. The criterion of 4 stars is chosen to
keep in accordance with previous work (Lu et al. 2011; Lu, Zhai, and
Sundaresan 2009) for easier comparisons.
2.
Normalized Overall Rating: We use r′ = r −µi for labelling, where r is
the overall rating, and µi is the average rating of the corresponding user i.
A review is labeled as positive if r′ ≥0 and negative if r′ < 0.
3.
Sub-Aspect Rating: We use ¯r = (rf + re + rs)/3 for labelling, where rf, re
and rs are the ratings on ﬂavour, environment and service, respectively.
The criterion of 4 stars is also used here.
4.
Sentiment Classiﬁcation: We use the unsupervised review-level sentiment
classiﬁcation method described in section 4.1 for orientation labelling.
We use precision to evaluate the performance of each method, and the golden stan-
dard is our human annotations. The results are shown in Table 3, where "Pos.Review"
and "Neg.Review" represent the precisions of labelling positive and negative reviews,
respectively, and "Overall" is the overall performance of review-level orientation la-
belling.
Table 3
The precisions of review-level sentiment orientation labelling using different methods.
1-Overall
2-Normalize
3-Subaspect
4-Classify
Pos.Reviews
0.8321
0.5438
0.8009
0.9064
Neg.Reviews
0.7248
0.7859
0.7951
0.8563
Overall
0.7970
0.6230
0.7990
0.8900
We see that the orientation labelling performance by using sub-aspect ratings (3-
Subaspect) overcomes the performance of using overall ratings directly (1-Overall).
However, both of their performances are worse than that given by the sentiment classi-
ﬁcation method (4-Classify).
Intuitionally, we expect to get better performance by conducting user-based nor-
malization, as different users might have different rating scales. However, experimental
results show that user-based normalization (2-Normalize) gives the worst performance.
This is also because of the fact that many users make relatively high overall ratings
consistently, regardless of the ratings they made on the sub-aspects. Suppose that a user
made two ratings, of which one is 4 stars and the other is 5 stars. The ratings would
be normalized to be -0.5 and 0.5, which leads to a negative label and a positive label.
However, the 4-star review text and 5-star review text might both be positive in the
golden standard.
In the following part of the experiments, we use the classiﬁcation method primarily
to label the review-level sentiment orientations, whose result is further used to su-
pervise the process of contextual sentiment lexicon construction. Besides, we use the
17

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
results given by overall rating labelling and sub-aspect rating labelling for performance
comparison.
5.3 Feature-Opinion Pair Extraction
There are three experimentally set parameters in the process of feature-opinion pair
extraction, which are 1) the minimum term frequency (denoted by freq) of Noun-
Phrases to be selected as candidate feature words, 2) the minimum Pointwise Mutual
Information (denoted by pmi) of a feature word candidate to be retained during the
ﬁltering process, and 3) the minimum Co-Occure Ratio (denoted by cor) of a pair to be
selected as a ﬁnal feature-opinion pair.
Pool Lexicon: In principle, we used relatively strict parameters in order to get high
quality feature-opinion pairs, which allows us to focus on the core task of phrase-
level polarity labelling in this work. After careful parameter selection, we set freq =
10, pmi = 0.005, cor = 0.05 on the mp3 player dataset, which leaves us with 1063 pairs,
and freq = 20, pmi = 0.01, cor = 0.05 on the restaurant review dataset, which gives
us 1329 pairs. These pairs are presented to the three annotators for polarity labelling
(positive or negative), and the ﬁnal polarity of a pair is assigned according to the
majority of the labels. The average agreement among annotators in this task is 81.84%.
The pool lexicon is used for evaluating the precision of polarity labelling.
Golden Standard Lexicon: We then present the feature-opinion pair lists to human
annotators to construct the golden standard lexicon. In this stage, each annotator is
asked to select the feature-opinion pairs that describe an explicit aspect of an mp3 player
or a restaurant. A pair is retained if it is selected by at least two annotators among the
three, and the average agreement among annotators is 78.69%. The purpose of this stage
is to further ﬁlter out the low quality pairs in the pool lexicon. For example, the pair
(service is, good) could be discarded as the right feature word should be service, rather
than service is, although this pair does express a positive sentiment. The ﬁnal golden
standard lexicons for mp3 player dataset and restaurant review dataset consist of 695
and 857 feature-opinion pairs, respectively, and it is used for the evaluation of recall.
We use different lexicons to evaluation precision and recall to avoid the problem of
evaluation bias pointed out in (Lu et al. 2011).
5.4 Phrase-Level Polarity Labelling
In this section, we conduct automatic sentiment polarity labelling on the feature-opinion
pairs in the pool lexicon, and report the evaluation results of our method and the
methods for comparison.
5.4.1 Evaluation Measures.
We choose the frequently used measures precision, recall and F-measure to evaluate the
performance of polarity labelling, which are deﬁned as follows:
precision = Np_agree
Nlexicon
, recall = Ng_agree
Ngold
, F-measure = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
where Nlexicon is the number of feature-opinion pairs in the automatically constructed
sentiment lexicon, and Ngold is the number of pairs in the golden standard lexicon
(695 on the mp3 player dataset and 857 on the restaurant review dataset). Np_agree and
18

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
Ng_agree are the number of pairs consistently labeled with the pool lexicon and golden
standard lexicon, respectively.
5.4.2 Polarity Labelling Results.
We adopted the following methods for phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling in the
experiment:
•
General: Make predictions by querying the polarity of the opinion word in
general sentiment opinion word sets. Also, we use MPQA for English and
HowNet for Chinese, as in section 4.2.2. A pair is discarded if the polarity
of its opinion word could not be determined.
•
Optimize: The optimization approach proposed in (Lu et al. 2011), which
reduces the problem of sentiment polarity labelling to constrained linear
programming.
•
Overall: Use our framework except that the review-level sentiment
orientation is determined using the corresponding overall rating.
•
Subaspect: Use our framework except that sentiment orientations of
reviews are determined by averaging the corresponding sub-aspect
ratings.
•
Boost: Use our complete framework, where the sentiment classiﬁcation on
review text is conducted to boost phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling.
We set δ = 0.01 and N = 100 in algorithm 1 to ensure convergence, and use λ1 =
λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 1 in this set of experiment. Results on the two dataset using the above
ﬁve methods are shown in Table 4, in which the bolded numbers are the best perfor-
mance on the corresponding measure. We did not perform the "Subaspect" method on
mp3 player reviews as the sub-aspect ratings are absent on this dataset.
Table 4
Performance of sentiment polarity labelling using different methods on the MP3 player dataset
(English) and restaurant review dataset (Chinese).
Precision
Recall
F-measure
MP3 Player Data
General
0.9238
0.4201
0.5776
Optimize
0.8269
0.7626
0.7934
Overall
0.8288
0.7525
0.7888
Boost
∗0.8504
0.7683
0.8073
Restaurant Review
General
0.9017
0.3571
0.5115
Optimize
0.8405
0.7760
0.8069
Overall
0.8473
0.7468
0.7938
Subaspect
0.8675
0.7561
0.8079
Boost
∗0.8879
0.7818
0.8315
We see that labelling the polarities by querying the general opinion word sets gives
the best precision on both of the two datasets. However, the recall of this method is
rather low. This implies that there are many "context dependent" opinion words which
are absent from these word sets.
19

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
The "Optimize" method in (Lu et al. 2011) and our "Overall" method are similar
in that both of them leverage overall numerical ratings as the groundtruth of review-
level sentiment orientations, and they make use of similar heuristics and constraints.
Though the Optimize method achieves slightly better recall, their overall performance
are comparable. Further more, by taking advantage of the sub-aspect ratings in the "Sub-
aspect" method, both precision and recall are improved from "Optimize" and "Overall"
methods, which implies that the detailed sub-aspect ratings could be more reliable than
overall ratings.
Finally, our "Boost" method achieves the best performance in terms of recall and F-
measure, on both of the two datasets. Besides, it also achieves the best precision without
regard to the "General" method. This further veriﬁes the effect of leveraging review-
level sentiment classiﬁcation in boosting the process of phrase-level polarity labelling.
5.5 Parameter Analysis
In the previous sections, we set equal weights to the different kinds of constraints for
general experimental purpose. In this subsection, we attempt to study the effect of
different constraints in our framework by analyzing the four main parameters λ1 ∼λ4
in objective function (13).
We ﬁrst conduct "Knock Out One Term" experiment on these parameters, to see
whether all these constraints contribute to the performance of phrase-level polarity
labelling. We set one of the four parameters to 0 at a time, and evaluate the F-measure.
The results are shown in Table 5.
Table 5
Evaluation results on F-measure by knocking out one constraint, where the knocked out
constraint is represented by 0.
λ1
λ2
λ3
λ4
MP3 Player
Restaurant
Default
1
1
1
1
0.8073
0.8315
Knock
0
1
1
1
0.6783
0.6476
out
1
0
1
1
0.6332
0.6728
one
1
1
0
1
0.7461
0.7352
term
1
1
1
0
0.7756
0.7504
The experimental result shows that knocking out any of the four parameters
decreases the performance of polarity labelling. Besides, removing the constraint on
review-Level sentiment orientation (λ1) or the constraint on general sentiment lexicon
(λ2) decreases the performance to a great extent, which implies that these two informa-
tion sources are of great importance in constructing the sentiment lexicon.
We further investigate the effect of different constraints by ﬁxing three parameters
to 1 and weighing the remaining parameter. The experimental results on restaurant
dataset are shown in Figure 4, and the observations on mp3 player dataset are similar.
The experimental result shows that giving more weights to the constraints of
review-level sentiment orientation and general sentiment lexicon could further improve
the performance, which means that these two information sources might be more reli-
able. However, weighting the constraint on sentential sentiment consistency too much
would decrease the performance, this implies that noise could be introduced by this
heuristic and it is not as reliable as the linguistic heuristic of "and" and "but".
20

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
0.6	
  
0.65	
  
0.7	
  
0.75	
  
0.8	
  
0.85	
  
0.9	
  
0	
  
0.25	
  
0.5	
  
1	
  
2	
  
4	
  
8	
  
F-­‐Measure	
  
Parameter	
  values	
  	
  
λ1	
  
λ2	
  
λ3	
  
λ4	
  
Figure 4
Tune one of the parameters in the tuning range of 0 ∼8 with a tuning step of timing two, while
ﬁxing the remaining parameters to be 1.
We tuned the parameters carefully to get the optimal performance. Finally, the
optimal result on mp3 player dataset was achieved when using the parameters (4, 2,
1, 0.25), with an F-measure of 0.8237, and on restaurant review dataset (3, 2, 2, 0.5) is
used, which gives the F-measure of 0.8584.
6. Conclusions
Treating the numerical star rating as a sentiment indication of review text is a widely
used assumption in previous phrase-level sentiment analysis algorithms (Lu et al. 2011;
Lu, Zhai, and Sundaresan 2009; Dave, Lawrence, and Pennock 2003). In this paper,
however, we investigated the inconsistency between the numerical ratings and textual
sentiment orientations. Our observations on user rating analysis show that, users tend
to make biased ratings regardless of the textual reviews they comment on a speciﬁc
product. Besides, the evaluation results on labelling accuracy using different methods
further verify the existence of such a bias, and indicate the effectiveness of leveraging
review-level sentiment classiﬁcation to recover the sentiment orientation of the reviews.
The biased assumption may hurt the performance of phrase-level sentiment polar-
ity labelling to a large extent, because the numerical rating is usually incorporated as
a kind of groundtruth to supervise the model learning process in previous work. In
this paper, however, we attempt to bridge the gap between review-level and phrase-
level sentiment analysis by leveraging review-level sentiment classiﬁcation to boost the
performance of phase-level sentiment polarity labelling.
Speciﬁcally, we formalized the phrase-level sentiment polarity labelling problem
into a simple convex optimization framework, and incorporated four kinds of heuristics
to supervise the polarity labelling process. We further designed iterative optimization
algorithms for model learning, where the global optimal solution is guaranteed due to
the convexity of the objective function. More over, except for the four kinds of heuristics
investigated in this paper, the framework is also ﬂexible to integrate various other
information sources.
We conducted extensive experiments on two different language environments (En-
glish and Chinese) to investigate the performance of our framework, as well as its
transportability across different language settings. The experimental results on both
datasets show that our framework helps to improve the performance in contextual
sentiment lexicon construction tasks. Besides, the experiment on parameter analysis
shows that all of the four heuristics that we considered in this study contribute to the
21

Computational Linguistics
Volume 1, Number 1
improvement in the performance of polarity labelling, which is also in accordance with
previous studies.
In the future we would like to further investigate the effect of incorporating other
heuristics into the framework for polarity labelling. Besides, it would be interesting
to further bridge the gap between review- and phrase-level sentiment analysis by
integrating the two stages into a single uniﬁed framework through, for example, deep
learning techniques. Except for the sentiment polarity labelling task investigated in this
work, review-level analysis could also be promising to help extract feature or opinion
words in phrase-level sentiment analysis, and the joint consideration of review- and
phrase-level analysis may even lead to brand new sentiment analysis tasks.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank Prof. Xiaoyan Zhu, Yang Liu and Maosong Sun for the fruitful
discussions, as well as the anonymous reviewers for the constructive suggestions. The
authors also sincerely thank the annotators Yunzhi Tan, Cheng Luo and Boya Wu for
their careful annotations.
Appendix
In the objective function (13), let L = λ3D + λ4Ds −λ3Wa −λ4Ws, let Λ be the
Lagrange multiplier for the constraint X ≥0, and let L(X) be the Lagrange function,
then we have:
∇XL(X) = 2λ1AT AX −2λ1AT ˜X + 2λ2G(X −X0) + 2LX −2λ3WbXE −Λ
(15)
By setting ∇XL(X) = 0, we have:
Λ = 2λ1AT AX −2λ1AT ˜X + 2λ2G(X −X0) + 2LX −2λ3WbXE
(16)
According to the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) complementary condition (Boyd and
Vandenberghe 2004) on the non-negativity constraint on X, we have Λij · Xij = 0,
namely:
[λ1AT AX −λ1AT ˜X + λ2G(X −X0) + LX −λ3WbXE]ij · Xij = 0
(17)
Equation (17) can be further transformed into:
[−(λ1AT ˜X + λ2GX0 + λ3WaX + λ3WbXE + λ4WsX)
+ (λ1AT AX + λ2GX + λ3DX + λ4DsX)]ij · Xij = 0
(18)
which leads to the updating rule of X as follows:
Xij ←Xij
s
[λ1AT ˜X + λ2GX0 + λ3WaX + λ3WbXE + λ4WsX]ij
[λ1AT AX + λ2GX + λ3DX + λ4DsX]ij
(19)
The correctness and convergence of the updating rule can be proved using the
standard auxiliary function approach presented in (Lee and Seung 2001).
22

Yongfeng Zhang et al.
Boost Phrase-level with Review-level Sentiment Analysis
