Predicting Variable Types in Dynamically Typed
Programming Languages
Abhinav Jangda
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA 01002

Gaurav Anand
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA 01002

Abstract
Dynamic Programming Languages are quite popular because they increase the
programmer’s productivity. However, the absence of types in the source code makes
the program written in these languages difﬁcult to understand and virtual machines
that execute these programs cannot produced optimized code. To overcome this
challenge, we develop a technique to predict types of all identiﬁers including
variables, and function return types.
We propose the ﬁrst implementation of 2nd order Inside Outside Recursive Neural
Networks with two variants (i) Child-Sum Tree-LSTMs and (ii) N-ary RNNs that
can handle large number of tree branching. We predict the types of all the identiﬁers
given the Abstract Syntax Tree by performing just two passes over the tree, bottom-
up and top-down, keeping both the content and context representation for all the
nodes of the tree. This allows these representations to interact by combining
different paths from the parent, siblings and children which is crucial for predicting
types. Our best model achieves 44.33% across 21 classes and top-3 accuracy of
71.5% on our gathered Python data set from popular Python benchmarks.
1
Introduction
Dynamic Programming Languages like Python, JavaScript have gained the title of “most popular
languages” because of increased adoption in recent years. Python which was created to be a
replacement for Perl as a better scripting language is now being widely adopted in several communities.
With the Django and Flask Web Frameworks, Python has been widely adopted as one of the main
languages for Web Development. And frameworks like PyTorch, Tensorﬂow, NumPy, SciPy, has
made Python the de-facto choice for Machine Learning programming. Another popular dynamic
language, JavaScript, which was developed as a language for writing Web Applications is now the
major language for writing web and desktop applications. With popular frameworks like Node.js,
programmers are using JavaScript even for client-side applications. And other dynamic languages
like Ruby and Dart are ﬂourishing as well.
A major reason for the popularity of using dynamic languages is the programmers’ productivity. Un-
like statically typed languages like C++, C, Java, a dynamically typed language allows programmers
to write code quickly by not requiring to declare the types of each variable which are determined at
run-time based on the values assigned to that variable, thereby increasing programmer productivity.
However, dynamic type system suffers from two major drawbacks. First, since the variable types
are not declared in the source code, the source code becomes difﬁcult to understand and extend. For
programmers working on the large code base written in dynamic languages, it is hard to understand
the control ﬂow of the program if the types are not available at the compile time. Second, the work of
performing type-checking and generating optimized code is done by the run-time environment instead
of the compiler, resulting in extra overhead. To overcome this issue, virtual machines (VMs) like
arXiv:1901.05138v1  [cs.PL]  16 Jan 2019

Google V8, Mozilla SpiderMonkey, ﬁrst generate inefﬁcient machine code. The inefﬁcient machine
code is executed initially while the VM acquires information about the types of each variable, then
the virtual machine compiles to efﬁcient machine code with the types obtained from proﬁling. But
this approach takes time to determine the proﬁling information and hence, the code has to be executed
from the slow/inefﬁcient path.
To mitigate these issues, we present a machine learning technique to determine the types of variables
in a given program written in a dynamically typed language. Our system can be used by programmers
to determine the type of each variable, thereby improving programmer’s productivity for reading and
understanding, and by the virtual machine to generate the optimized source code with the predicted
type information, thereby giving performance improvement.
Recent advances in Natural Language Processing involving parse trees [4, 8, 5, 7] has shown
improved performance with modern neural network architectures. Le and Zuidema [4] present
Inside-Outside networks that allow information to ﬂow in both directions, top-down and bottom-up.
However, their work is limited to a maximum of two children for each node and further they use
simple recurrent units which have a problem to learn long term dependencies because of vanishing
and exploding gradients. In our case, an AST might have tens to hundreds of children, and the type
information for an AST node can come from the combination of paths involving its children, parent,
and siblings. Hence, we combine a Tree-LSTM with Inside-Outside information ﬂow [4] to capture
and allow the type information to ﬂow in an AST. We also introduce two techniques to modify the
Abstract Syntax Tree before passing it to the model: (i) Tree Re-structuring analysis and (ii) Identiﬁer
Sink Node analysis. We present ﬁrst such data set containing Python programs and types of each
identiﬁer. Our model learns to predict the types by learning the composition functions and embedding
representation of keywords and operators. With our model we obtain the top-1 accuracy of 44.4%
over this dataset and top-3 accuracy of 71.5%. The contributions of this work are:
1. A technique to predict types of all identiﬁer using Tree LSTM with Inside-Outside informa-
tion ﬂow [4] (Section 3).
2. Two modiﬁcation techniques over Abstract Syntax Tree to handle large number of chil-
dren, and improve the accuracy of model: Tree Re-structuring analysis(Section 3.1.2) and
Identiﬁer Sink Node Analysis (Section 3.3.1).
3. First data set of Python programs and corresponding type of each identiﬁer. (Section 4).
4. Our best model gives a top-1 accuracy of 44.34% and top-3 accuracy of 71.5% (Section 5)
2
Related Work
In this section, we describe the previous work to predict some program properties and then describe a
few existing analogous problems in the Natural Language Processing domain involving parse trees.
Program Properties Prediction
Alon. et al. [2] developed a technique to predict program proper-
ties for e.g. variable names, and method names in both dynamic and static programming languages.
They have developed a novel representation of Abstract Syntax Tree called AST Path, which traverses
the path from variable/leaf node to a non-terminal node representing an expression. This represen-
tation encodes the information for the identiﬁer and limits the number of nodes, reducing the AST
to a linear chain. They have used Conditional Random Fields (CRF) and word2vec for predicting
the variable and method names. Their technique predicts the full type name (including the name
of package containing that type) of variables in Java given the types of surrounding nodes and the
incomplete type name of that variable. Moreover, they only focus on the types which can be predicted
by a global type inference engine. In contrast, our model predicts the types of all identiﬁers including
variables, and function return types. Our model performs this prediction by performing just two
passes over the AST. Instead of looking at the path surrounding the variable, our technique uses the
information from its parent, children, and siblings. Their technique is not applicable to a dynamically
typed language because unlike Java, where the type information is available for most of the identiﬁers
and nodes, in Python, the type information is not available for most of the identiﬁers other than the
constants.
Tree-Based Convolution Neural Network (TB-CNN)
Convolutional Neural Network for se-
quence modeling was introduced by Yoon Kim [3] for sentiment classiﬁcation on a text sequence.
2

The idea of convolutions on Tree-based structure was developed by [5] with the idea of sliding
convolutional kernel combined with dynamic pooling [6] to process the AST to extract structural
information of a program. Mou et al. [5] have developed tree-based convolutional neural networks
for classifying programs according to the behavior, functionality, complexity, etc., and detecting code
snippets of certain patterns like unhealthy code pattern. Similar to image classiﬁcation, TB-CNN
loses the locality information and thus cannot be used for classifying the nodes in a trivial way.
Recursive Neural Network
In natural language processing sentiment classiﬁcation is a long-
standing task. Initial approaches used bag-of-words, which evolved to sequence modeling using
linear LSTM which assumes a right-branching sentence. Socher et al. [7] have introduced Recursive
Neural Network for classifying the sentiment of all nodes in the parse tree of a sentence. They
represent the sentence using word vectors and use the parse tree of the sentence to compute the
vector representation of all the internal nodes in the tree using the same composition function. Both
the composition function parameters along with vector representation of words are learned. The
internal representation of the nodes are computed in a bottom-up manner and the node representation
incorporates the information of the sub-tree rooted at that node for the purpose of classiﬁcation. In
our case some leaf nodes have to be classiﬁed based on the combination of paths that need not be
uni-directional.
Tree-LSTM
The Tree-Structured LSTM introduced in [8] had two main contributions: (i) a
generalization of LSTMs to tree-structured network topologies, and (ii) Child-Sum Trees to handle
arbitrary number of children in the tree nodes. It also replaced simple recurrent units in recursive
network with LSTM cells to overcome the problem of vanishing or exploding gradients, making it
easy to learn long-distance correlations. The Child-Sum Tree-LSTM transition equations are the
following:
˜hp =
X
k∈C(p)
hk,
(1)
ip = σ

W (i)xp + U (i)˜hp + b(i)
,
(2)
fpk = σ

W (f)xp + U (f)hk + b(f)
,
(3)
op = σ

W (o)xp + U (o)˜hp + b(o)
,
(4)
up = tanh

W (u)xp + U (u)˜hp + b(u)
,
(5)
cp = ip ⊙up +
X
k∈C(p)
fpk ⊙ck,
(6)
hp = op ⊙tanh(cp),
(7)
Here C(p) represents the children of node j and hp and cp are the hidden and cell state of pth node.
We combine this extension with the Inside-Outside algorithm.
Inside-Outside Recursive Neural Network
The architecture and algorithm introduced by Le and
Zuidema [4] allows information to ﬂow not only bottom-up, as in traditional recursive neural network,
but top-down as well. Every node in the hierarchical structure is associated with two vectors: (i)
inside representation to represent content under the node, and (ii) outside representation to represent
context (see Figure 1). The inside vectors are computed in the bottom-up (post-order traversal)
manner combining the inside representation of the children, thus capturing the content of the sub-
tree. The outside vectors are computed in the top-down (pre-order traversal) manner combining the
representation of the parent’s outside (context) and the siblings’ inside (content), thus capturing the
rest of the tree (see Figure 1). This approach is very critical when we want to classify leaf nodes and
the information may come from any combination of paths in the tree.
3
Methodology
An abstract syntax tree (AST) represents syntactic organization of the source code for a language.
Syntax Analyzer also called parser is used to convert the source code into an Abstract Syntax Tree
3

a = 1
b = 2
c = a + b
(a) Python pro-
gram with types
for a, b, and c as
int
=
c
+
a
b
=
a
1
=
b
2
{}
(b) Python AST for the program in Figure 1a. a, b,
and c represents the identiﬁers for which the types
have to be predicted.
(AST). In our technique, we target Python source code. We use Python’s built-in ast module to
convert the source code to Python’s Abstract Syntax Tree. Our model is based on the work of [4].
Figure 1a shows a simple Python program, where types of all identiﬁers is int. The addition operator
+ is overloaded in Python for int, float, string and custom types including classes. Hence,
according to the semantics of + operator, addition of two integers is always integer. Figure 1b shows
AST for Python program in Figure 1a. Our techniques takes the AST of the program as the input and
returns the types of all identiﬁer nodes in the AST.
3.1
Architecture
All the the keywords (including operators) in Python are stacked in the word embedding matrix
L ∈RDi of size (|V | + 2) × Di, where |V | is the size of vocabulary and Di is the size of vector
embeddings. The two extra words are, VAR and UNK, which are used for identiﬁers and unknown
tokens respectively.
3.1.1
Node/Class Labels
Our technique works on 21 Python built-in types including common types like: 1. int 2. string
3. float 4. None 5. module 6. tuple 7. dict 8. list 9. set For each identiﬁer we associate a label
which is the type of that identiﬁer in the program. Hence, each of the above types are the labels of the
identiﬁers. With a random model we will get an accuracy of 4.76%. To help learning for the model
we also add built-in functions of Python and their return type. These built-in functions are: 1. int
2. string 3. float 4. tuple 5. dict 6. list 7. set 8. range 9. xrange 10. len 11. reversed
3.1.2
Tree Nodes
Our architecture takes a modiﬁed AST as input. We convert the given Python AST into a tree format
where each node contains: (i) the corresponding Python AST node for e.g. while, /, * etc., (ii) all
children nodes, (iii) the inside and outside vectors. Each tree node has its own embedding index to
index a row in the embedding matrix. For keyword nodes we return an embedding index from 0 to
|V | −1. For identiﬁer nodes we return the embedding index as |V | + 1 and all other keywords are
returned with embedding index of |V |.
3.2
Models
The extension of keeping inside and outside vectors is same for both the composition function variants
that we tried. The outside vector summarizes all the information about the context of node p, and
inside vector recapitulates the sub-tree at the node p.
3.2.1
Inside Outside Child-Sum Tree-LSTM
The Child-Sum Tree-LSTM unit conditions its components on the sum of child hidden states hk, thus
it is suitable for trees with high-branching factor or whose children are unordered.
4

(a) Inside-Outside Recursive Neural Network
(IORNN). Black rectangles correspond to inner rep-
resentations, white rectangles correspond to outer
representations.
(b) Inner (ip) and outer (op) representations at the
node that covers constituent p. They are vectorial
representations of p’s content and context, respec-
tively.
Figure 1
Computing Inside Representation
The inner representations are computed bottom-up. For in-
ternal node p, the input is the embedding of the keyword xp ∈RDi, and the hidden and cell state,
hp, cp ∈RDm for inner representation use the same equations as the ones shown for Child-Sum tree
LSTM 1 to 7.
Computing Outside Representation
The outer representations are computed top-down for node
p, except the root node for which the inside representation is equal to the outside representation. The
outer representation uses the following equations:
˜hp =
X
k∈S(p)
hk,
(8)
ip = σ

U (i)˜hp + b(i)
,
(9)
fpk = σ

U (f)hk + b(f)
,
(10)
op = σ

U (o)˜hp + b(o)
,
(11)
up = tanh

U (u)˜hp + b(u)
,
(12)
cp = ip ⊙up +
X
k∈S(p)
fpk ⊙ck,
(13)
hp = op ⊙tanh(cp),
(14)
Here S(p) represents the concatenated list of parent and siblings of node p. hp and cp are the hidden
and cell state of pth node.
3.2.2
Inside Outside N-ary RNN
The N-ary RNN with simple recurrent units is suitable where the branching factor is at most Nchildren
and the children are ordered. Although this requires parameters proportional to the maximum number
of children, but it allows the model to learn more ﬁne-grained conditioning on the states of a unit’s
children when compared to the Child-Sum Tree-LSTM.
Computing Inside Representation
The inner representations are computed bottom-up. For every
node p, the input contains: (i) the embedding of the keyword xp ∈RDi, and (ii) the hidden and cell
5

state, hp, cp ∈RDm, for the inner representation use the following equations:
hi
p = tanh(W ixp +
X
k∈C(p)
U ih
k hi
k)
(15)
ci
p = tanh(W ixp +
X
k∈C(p)
U ic
k ci
k)
(16)
Computing Outside Representation
For the outer representations there is no input and they are
computed in top-down order for node p, except in the case of the root node for which the inside
representation is equal to outside representation. The outer representation is computed using the
following equations:
ho
p = tanh(W oho
p +
X
k∈S(p)
U oh
k ho
k)
(17)
co
p = tanh(W oco
p +
X
k∈S(p)
U oc
k co
k)
(18)
Here S(p) represents all siblings of node p. ho
p and co
p are the hidden and cell state of the outside
representation of pth node respectively, and ho
k and co
k are the hidden and cell state of the outside
representation of the kth sibling of node p respectively.
3.3
Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Type Prediction Model
1: function TYPEPREDICTION-TRAINING(astDataSet)
2:
internalTreeDataSet ←convertASTToTree(astDataSet)
3:
addNameSinkNodes (internalTreeDataSet)
4:
treeReStructuring (internalTreeDataSet)
5:
model ←Model ()
6:
for each epoch do
7:
for tree, labels ∈internalTreeDataSet do
8:
logits ←ForwardPass(model, tree)
9:
loss = CrossEntropyLoss(logits, labels)
10:
loss.backward()
return model
Algorithm 2 Forward Pass
1: function FORWARDPASS(model, tree)
2:
for node ∈tree.postorder () do
3:
node.inside_h, node.inside_c ←model.apply_inside_computation (node)
4:
tree.root.outside_h ←tree.root.inside_h
5:
tree.root.outside_c ←tree.root.inside_c
6:
for node, parent, siblings ∈tree.preorder () do
7:
node.outside_h, node.outside_c ←model.apply_outside_computation (node, parent,
siblings)
8: return ReLU(LinearTransform(Unknown_Vars_Outside_h)
Function TYPEPREDICTION-TRAINING in Algorithm 1 is the training procedure of our model.
It takes the data set of ASTs and returns the trained model after performing Stochastic Gradient
Descent using Adam optimizer. Line 2 ﬁrst converts the given AST data set into an internal tree
representation 3.1.2. Line 3 then performs our Identiﬁer Sink Node Analysis (Section 3.3.1) to add
sink nodes to the identiﬁer nodes that represents the same variables in the scope. Line 4 performs
our Tree Restructuring Analysis (Section 3.3.2) for restructuring the tree such that if a tree node has
more than Nchildren, then it will recursively add more nodes to limit the number of children to N.
This analysis helps in keeping the number of children for each node low and still makes sure that
all children are considered in training and prediction processes. Line 6−10 performs the training
process. Line 8 performs the forward pass on the model by calling FORWARDPASS function.
6

=
c
+
a
b
=
a
1
=
b
2
{}
a
b
(a) Sink Nodes for a and b
=
c
+
a
b
=
a
1
=
b
2
{}
if
(b) After Tree Restructuring ﬁrst two statements are
added in an if block, when Nis 2
Figure 2
Function FORWARDPASS performs bottom-up and top-down pass to compute inner and outer rep-
resentations. It ﬁrst computes the inner representation for every node in the bottom-up (post-order
traversal) manner at line 2 using inner representations of the children. And then computes outer
representation in the top-down (pre-order traversal) manner at line 6 using the outer representation of
parent and inner representations of the siblings thus giving full context. And ﬁnally it predicts the
types of all unknown leaf nodes using the outside representation which has the full context. Following
sections provide the details of each of the above passes.
3.3.1
Identiﬁer Sink Node Analysis
In a dynamically typed programming language like Python, each variable can be declared at multiple
locations (in the same scope) and can be used (or referenced) at multiple locations. Moreover, each
of the declaration and usages are not connected to each other. For instance in Figure 1a variables a
and b have been deﬁned and used in different statements. As can be seen in the AST of the program
in Figure 1b the use and declaration of variables are not connected with each other. The types
are determined when the variable is deﬁned by assigning it a value, for example, the type of a is
determined when integer 1 is assigned to it. Unfortunately, there is no type information ﬂow available
in the AST that can transfer types the statement where the variable was declared to the statement
where the is referenced. Hence, the model will not be able to transfer the type information.
To provide such a ﬂow of type information we, perform static analysis to add a new sink node which
are common for each identiﬁer. Such a node connects the declaration of the variable and all its uses.
For example, Figure 2a shows the sink nodes created for variables a and b which are connecting
the declaration of a and b with their uses. Hence, our model is not predicting the type of identiﬁer
nodes but it will now predict the types of sink nodes. Once the type of a sink node is predicted, it will
then transfer the type to other connecting identiﬁer nodes. For example, in Figure 2a when the type
information of a and b are determined then they are passed to the next statement to determine the
type of c as shown by the arrows.
3.3.2
Tree Restructuring
In our model we limit the number of children that each node can get information from (or transfer
information to). Such a limitation is required to make sure that the model can learn better from the
amount of information that is given and the timing and memory requirement during training and
prediction are within acceptable bounds. Unfortunately, large programs can easily have hundred
children for each parent. These cases usually arise when each block contains hundred of statements.
We can restructure the tree in these cases but we have to make sure that after such a restructuring
the program’s syntax and semantics are both preserved. A tree restructuring will be invalid if the
restructuring changes the types of the identiﬁers that are to be predicted. In the following text, we
denote this limit of number of children as N
We perform a tree restructuring analysis based on the insights received from our dataset that each
program’s AST has hundreds of children only in a block, for example, the statement block of the
function’s deﬁnition can have several statements. Hence, we have to perform tree restructuring only
7

when a block of statements has more than the maximum number of children as the statements. In this
case, we split the child into several child blocks, with each block having at maximum Nnumber of
children. If the new child block also has more than N, then we further split these blocks into more
blocks. We perform this recursively, by adding more child blocks until each of the node is having at
maximum Nnumber of children. Since, in Python the if statement block does not add another scope,
we use if (True) as our child block. Using if (True): as child block ensures that we do not
deﬁne variables in a new scope and the block is always executed, thereby, preserving the semantics
and syntax of the program.
Figure 2b shows the example of our Tree Restructuring analysis done on the AST in Figure 1b with
Nset to 2. Our analysis groups the ﬁrst two statements deﬁning a and b in one if (True): node.
Since, if statements does not introduce a new scope, hence, the variables deﬁned in that scope can
still be referenced in the block after this if statement. Note that, our analysis however, do not add a
new if (True): node for the third statement, we try to add minimum number of extra child blocks.
Since, our model is executed on each node and each node takes information from all its children.
The information of each inserted child block will be transferred to the parent node. The information
of each child block is determined using the information of each of the statements that were in the
original AST. Hence, our model not only limits the number of children but also makes sure that the
information is propagated. In Section 5.4 we show that using our tree restructuring analysis improves
the accuracy.
4
Data Sets
We use Python benchmarks in [1] as our data set of Python programs. It is a popular set of Python
benchmarks which are used to evaluate different implementations of Python. Hence, these benchmarks
serve as a good source of data set.
Variables in a Python program can be deﬁned as (i) local variables in the function, or (ii) global
variables. Hence, we need to get types of all local and global variables. We target 21 Python types
including all the built-in types like: int, string, float, list, tuple, function, module, and
others. Python provides locals and globals functions, which returns a dictionary of local and
global variable names with their value. We ﬁrst parse all the benchmark ﬁles including the standard
library used by the Python benchmarks and add extra code for printing values in locals dictionary,
by plugging this ast in each function’s ast before every return statement and at the end of the function’s
ast. Moreover, we also add code for printing globals dictionary at the end of each ﬁle, to print
global variables and their types. After this pass, the code is printed using codegen module. We then
execute each benchmark to print the types of local and global variables.
With this approach we retrieve a data set of 23014 number of total AST nodes, containing 1581
identiﬁers, which are distributed over 36 Python ﬁles. In this dataset we obtain 21 class types.
5
Experiments and Results
In this section we mention in detail about the experiments performed to evaluate and study our
approach. Our implementation is developed in Python 3.6 and uses PyTorch framework.
5.1
Cross-Validation and Hyperparameter Tuning
We divide our data set into two parts, training set contains 24 ASTs and test set contains 12 ASTs.
We perform 4-fold cross-validation, by carving out a validation set.
Hyperparameter Tuning
Our models were trained using Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
0.01 and L2 regularization strength of 10−5. We select two parameters: (i) the input embedding vector
size Di, and (ii) the hidden and cell state vector dimension Dm. Table 1 shows the average accuracy
of all folds with different values of the hyperparameters. IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM performs best
when Di = 10, and Dm = 15. IO N-ary RNN performs best when Di = 10, and Dm = 10. We pick
these hyperparameters for both our models, for the rest of the evaluation.
8

Di , Dm
IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM
IO N-ary RNN
5, 10
36.92%
35.7%
10, 10
34.42%
43.0%
10, 15
39.55%
40.6%
10, 20
39.25%
40.3%
Table 1: The table shows the average accuracy on 4-fold Cross-Validation set of both the models with
different values of Dimensions Di and Dm
IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM
IO N-ary RNN
Majority Predictor Baseline
Random Predictor Baseline
44.40%
42.57%
24%
4.76%
Table 2: Accuracy of both models with best performing hyperparameters on Test set
5.2
Accuracy over test data
We compared the accuracies of our models with best performing parameters with the accuracy of
a random and majority predictor. Table 2 shows the accuracy on test dataset for: (i) IO Child-Sum
TreeLSTM with Di = 10 and Dm = 15, (ii) IO N-ary RNN with Di = 10 and Dm = 10, (iii) a random
predictor to randomly predict one of the 21 classes, and (iv) a majority predictor which predicts the
maximum occurring class.
5.3
Effect of Max Children (N)
We studied the effect of Non the accuracy of both the models. For this experiment we use both
models with best performing parameters, i.e. IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM with Di = 10 and Dm =
15, and IO N-ary RNN with Di = 10 and Dm = 10. Figure 3 shows the accuracies obtained for both
models on test data as we increase the value of N.
We can see that at N= 20 both models obtain the maximum accuracy. Moreover, the accuracy
increases with increase in the value of Nuntil 20 and then decreases continuously.
Figure 3: Accuracy on test data vs Max-Children for both models with Re-structuring and best
hyperparameters
5.4
Accuracy of Tree Restructuring
We perform experiments on our best model to see the improvement in accuracy on test dataset
obtained by using Tree Restructuring Analysis. Without tree restructuring, for every node, we only
9

use Nchildren and do not take into account other children for IO N-ary RNN. For this experiment we
use both models with best performing hyperparameters and best performing N, i.e., for IO Child-Sum
Tree-LSTM Di = 10, Dm = 15, and N= 20, and IO N-ary RNN with Di = 10, Dm = 10, and N= 20.
Figure 3 shows the accuracy on test data with it.
Max-Children
N
IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM
IO N-ary RNN
With
Restructuring
Without
Restructuring
With
Restructuring
Without
Restructuring
5
42.96
41.2
41.38
40.5
10
43.55
42.12
42.00
40.7
15
44.34
42.5
42.2
41.1
20
44.33
42.6
42.57
41.4
25
44.14
42.45
42.15
41.05
30
43.94
42.1
41.45
40.7
35
43.94
41.9
41.3
39.1
Table 3: Accuracy on test data set with and without Tree Restructuring for the best performing
hyperparameters
Results shows that for both models the accuracy with tree restructuring is consistently better than the
accuracy without tree restructuring. This conﬁrms our hypothesis that tree restructuring is better even
for IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM.
5.5
Top-k accuracy
Since, our model ﬁnds the probability of type of each variable. We also perform experiments to
determine if the accurate type comes in top 5 types or not. Figure 4 shows the results of this
experiments. We can see that there has been signiﬁcant increase in accuracy from Top 1 to Top 2
and Top 3, however, after that there is not much gains in accuracy. Hence, the developers using our
technique can only look at the top 3 predicted types and there will be 71% chances that it will be the
correct. Moreover, virtual machine will need to generate optimized code for only top 3 predicted
types.
Model
Top-1
Top-2
Top-3
Top-4
Top-5
IO Child-Sum Tree-LSTM
44.33%
61.33%
71.5%
78.32%
82.42%
IO N-ary RNN
42.54%
58.8%
67.7%
73.4%
78.1%
Table 4: Top 1 to 5 accuracy for both models with best hyperparameters and Tree Restructuring
6
Discussion and Conclusions
In this work, we have developed a technique to predict the identiﬁers’ type for a given Python program
and/or Python AST. In an AST, the type information for a node can come from the combination of
paths involving its children, parent, and siblings. Hence, our problem is to classify types of some
nodes in the tree using the context of the rest of the tree and content of the sub-tree, which in this case
is the combination of paths from siblings, parent and children of the node. We have conducted and
shown the results on two proposed variants of Inside-Outside networks (i) Inside-Outside Child-Sum
LSTM and (ii) Inside-Outside N-ary RNN. We have also shown that re-structuring the tree by splitting
children and augmenting parent nodes for N-ary RNN improves the results. Out of the two variants
Child-Sum Tree-LSTM performs slightly better. Child-sum LSTM is order-insensitive while N-ary
RNN is order-sensitive but requires parameters proportional to the number of children. With our
technique we achieve top-1 accuracy of 44.34% our test data and top-3 accuracy of 71.5%.
6.1
Future Work
In future one should deﬁnitely work on expanding the data set so that variants such as N-ary Tree-
LSTM can be explored without overﬁtting as it requires four times more parameters than IO N-ary
10

RNN. Our technique only focuses on predicting Python’s built-in types. Although these are 21 types
but these does not contain the types declared by programmers including classes and structs. So far,
we set each class instance to an object. Our technique also does not take into account the source
code of modules, which are used in Python program. In future work, we will like to support adding
information from each module.
