An Active Learning Framework for Efficient Robust Policy
Search
Sai Kiran Narayanaswami∗
The University of Texas at Austin

Nandan Sudarsanam
Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science
and AI
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

Balaraman Ravindran
Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science
and AI
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

ABSTRACT
Robust Policy Search is the problem of learning policies that do
not degrade in performance when subject to unseen environment
model parameters. It is particularly relevant for transferring poli-
cies learned in a simulation environment to the real world. Several
existing approaches involve sampling large batches of trajectories
which reflect the differences in various possible environments, and
then selecting some subset of these to learn robust policies, such as
the ones that result in the worst performance. We propose an active
learning based framework, EffAcTS, to selectively choose model
parameters for this purpose so as to collect only as much data as nec-
essary to select such a subset. We apply this framework using Linear
Bandits, and experimentally validate the gains in sample efficiency
and the performance of our approach on standard continuous con-
trol tasks. We also present a Multi-Task Learning perspective to the
problem of Robust Policy Search, and draw connections from our
proposed framework to existing work on Multi-Task Learning.
KEYWORDS
deep reinforcement learning, robust learning, active learning, ro-
botics
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms
have achieved remarkable performance on continuous control tasks
[12, 22, 24, 33]. Traditionally, these algorithms are used to learn
policies to perform a given task in simulation. However, it has been
found that policies learned in simulation often do not perform well
in, or transfer to, a real-world system that the simulation models
[18, 19]. Indeed, the prospect of being able to deploy policies learned
in simulation on real-world systems such as physical robots is one
of the major drivers for research in Reinforcement Learning.
One class of approaches towards this goal that has gained trac-
tion is to learn from multiple simulated domains that approximate
the real “target” domain[10, 16, 18, 19, 34]. These usually correspond
to an ensemble of environment models with various parameters
such as the mass of a part of a robot or the coefficient of friction
between the robot’s foot and the ground. Given such an ensemble,
the problem of robust policy search is to learn policies that perform
well across this ensemble.
One prominent group of approaches in this class involves sam-
pling model parameters from the ensemble and collecting batches
∗Work performed when author was at the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and
AI, IIT Madras.
0Preprint: This is the authors’ own version of their work that is published in the 5th
Joint International Conference on Data Science and Management of Data (9th ACM
IKDD CODS and 27th COMAD) (CODS-COMAD 2022). DOI:10.1145/3493700.3493712
of trajectories simulated using these parameters [18, 32, 34], which
are then used for training a policy, typically by a model-free RL
algorithm. These approaches differ mainly in the way in which they
choose subsets of these trajectories to focus on for policy learning.
Although robust policy search is inevitably a harder learning prob-
lem than standard policy search, the amount of data collected by
these methods is still quite large, up to almost 2 orders of magnitude
more than is typically required by the usual policy optimization al-
gorithms, regardless of the method used to choose a subset of these
trajectories for learning. Therefore, although these approaches are
shown to be effective for learning robust policies, and offer other
advantages such as reduced modeling burden, the requirement for
an abundance of data makes them computationally expensive.
In this work, we demonstrate a novel way to improve their sam-
ple complexity while maintaining the performance and robustness
of the learned policy through the use of Active Learning for intelli-
gently selecting model parameters for which to sample trajectories
for learning. Active Learning is used to directly acquire some de-
sired subset of the trajectories (such as the subset resulting in the
worst performance), while collecting as little additional data as pos-
sible. In contrast, existing methods sample parameters directly from
the ensemble[18, 32, 34], and possibly discard large portions of the
collected trajectories [18]. The resulting framework, EffAcTS, offers
greatly improved scalability, thus broadening its applicability to
real-world problems. The structure of the framework and the use of
active learning for trajectory sampling results in some connections
between Robust Policy Search and Multi-Task Learning. We discuss
the relation between the two problems, as well as the differences
in their solution approaches.
Thus, the contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) We in-
troduce a novel Active Learning framework that performs more
judicious collection of trajectories for training robust policies, re-
sulting in low sample complexity; (2) We present an instantiation
of the framework using Linear Bandits, and perform experimental
validation on environment ensembles from standard continuous
control benchmarks to empirically demonstrate significant reduc-
tions in sample complexity while still being able to learn robust
policies; (3) We explore connections to Multi-Task Learning that
are revealed upon casting Robust Policy Search as a Multi-Task
Learning problem and discuss its relation to existing work in the
area.
2
RELATED WORK
[32] learn controllers with a specific functional form using trajecto-
ries sampled for parameters drawn from an ensemble, and optimize
for the average case performance. [18] propose EPOpt, which learns
arXiv:1901.00117v2  [cs.LG]  21 Nov 2021

Narayanaswami et. al.
a Neural Network (NN) policy using a model-free DRL algorithm,
but on simulated domains sampled from an ensemble of models. An
adversarial approach to training is taken that involves selectively
exposing to the model-free learner only data from those sampled
models on which the learner exhibits the least performance. EPOpt
optimizes the Conditional Value at Risk[28], which has also been
used for learning robust options[8]. Even though this is a more so-
phisticated approach than the former and is demonstrated to have
greater performance and robustness, the number of trajectories
collected is still very large. A form of adversarial training is also
employed in [17] and [14], but in these works, external (adversarial)
disturbances are applied to the agent, rather than the model itself
changing.
[34] propose an approach that optimizes the average case perfor-
mance, but additionally performs explicit system identification, and
the estimated model parameters are fed to a NN policy as additional
context information alongside the original observations. [19] also
uses system identification on data from the real world to decide the
parameters on which to train. [10] also perform system identifica-
tion, but operate in a belief space over the model parameters. Again,
the data requirements are quite large, both for policy learning as
well as system identification.
A recent work that learns from an ensemble of models is [9], but
the ensemble here consists of learned DNN models of the dynamics
for use in Model Based RL, rather than being induced by changing
physical properties of the environment. A similar ensemble gener-
ated by perturbing an already learned model is used for planning
through in [13]. This work also does not deal with model uncertain-
ties with physical meaning. Approaches related to learning from
an ensemble of models have also been studied under Dynamics
Randomization [16] and Domain Randomization [30].
Although [18] uses only an appropriate subset of models to train
on, none of the above approaches consider ways to sample trajec-
tories only as necessary. Our proposed framework employs active
learning to decide with data from only a few model parameters the
models for which the agent requires more training. Active sampling
approaches have also been explored for task selection in Multi-Task
learning by [26], a viewpoint we discuss in more detail in section 5.
3
BACKGROUND
3.1
RL on an Ensemble of Models
We work with the same setting described in [18] where the model
ensemble is represented as a family of parametrized MDPs on a fixed
state and action space. Following the same notation, this is the set
M (𝑝) =

S, A, T𝑝, R𝑝,𝛾, S0,𝑝

for each parameter 𝑝in the space of
parameters P, whose elements are respectively the state and action
spaces, transition functions, reward functions, discount factor and
the initial state distribution. Those items that are subscripted with 𝑝
depend on𝑝, i.e., different parameters induce different dynamics and
rewards. We note here that we say “parameter” even if it is a vector
rather than a real number. Further, there is a source distribution P
that indicates the likelihood of any particular 𝑝∈P in the model
ensemble.
We denote the typical trajectory from any of these MDPs by
𝜏= {𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑟𝑡}𝑇
𝑡=0, where 𝑇is the time horizon, and the discounted
return from the start state 𝑅(𝜏) = Í𝑇
𝑡=0 𝛾𝑡𝑟𝑡. These trajectories
are generated by following a policy which are parameterized by
a vector 𝜃, which we denote by 𝜋𝜃. We define the performance at
parameter 𝑝as the expected discounted return from the start state
in M (𝑝)
𝜂(𝜃, 𝑝) = E𝜏
" 𝑇
∑︁
𝑡=0
𝛾𝑡𝑟𝑡
𝑝
#
(1)
3.2
Robust policy learning via CVaR
optimization
Robust Policy Search seeks policies that perform well across all
parameters in P, and do so without knowing the parameter for the
MDP on which they are being tested. This translates to being able to
perform well on some unknown target domain, and also potentially
handle variations not accounted for in P. The intuitive objective for
this is to consider the average performance of the policy over the
source distribution 𝜂𝐷(𝜃) = E𝑝∼P [𝜂(𝜃, 𝑝)]. However, this objec-
tive could be close to the maximum even if there are sharp drops
in performance in some regions of P. A different objective used by
approaches such as [18] is the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR)
formulation from [28], which considers the performance across
only the subset of P that corresponds to the bottom 𝜖percentile
of returns from P, for a given 𝜖∈(0, 1]. This has the effect that
policies which have such sharp drops in performance (i.e bad worst
case performance) are no longer considered good solutions.
3.3
Linear Stochastic Bandits
Here, we provide a quick overview of Linear Stochastic Bandits
(LSB) since they play an important role as solutions to the Active
Learning problem in section 4.
The LSB problem is one of finding the optimal arm from a given
set of arms X similar to the standard Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
problem, but with the average reward from each arm being an
unknown linear function of the features associated with that arm.
That is, if 𝑥∈X is an arm, and we also denote its features by 𝑥, the
reward is given by 𝑟(𝑥) = 𝑥𝑇𝜃∗+ 𝜉, where 𝜉is some zero-mean
noise, and 𝜃∗gives the parameters for said linear function. Thus,
finding the optimal arm amounts to estimating 𝜃∗. Although it may
seem restrictive to assume a linear dependence on the arms, more
expressiveness can be achieved by using a feature transformer, in a
manner similar to the practice for Linear Regression. The feature
transformer is a function 𝑓: X →R𝑑that maps each arm 𝑥∈X
to a feature vector 𝑓(𝑥), and the LSB learner would be estimating
𝜃∗so that 𝑟(𝑥) = 𝑓(𝑥)𝑇𝜃∗+ 𝜉.
There have been several approaches to solving the LSB problem
under various objectives. One group of works [1, 11] are based on
the principles of the Upper Confidence Bound Algorithm for MAB
problems. The other popular class of approaches [2, 3] is based on
Thompson Sampling.
4
ACTIVE LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT
TRAJECTORY SAMPLING
Existing approaches for Robust Policy Search are based on col-
lecting trajectories at various parameters from P, and using some
subset of these trajectories to optimize the policy being learned.

An Active Learning Framework for Efficient Robust Policy Search
Use active learner to
learn about policy
performance by
collecting trajectories
as necessary
Sample parameters
according to given
objective based on
learned performance
proﬁle
Use active learner to
learn about policy
performance by
collecting trajectories
as necessary
Perform policy update
using trajectories
collected at each of
these parameters.
Figure 1: Main loop of the EffAcTS framework.
As mentioned before, the number of trajectories required can be
very large, up to 2 orders of magnitude more than required for a
standard RL problem. Although Robust Policy Search is expected
to require more data than standard RL, improvements to its sample
efficiency are still necessary in order for it to be viable in complex
real-world systems.
To motivate our developments to improve on the sample effi-
ciency, we start with the observation that there is some functional
dependence of the performance of a given policy on the model
parameter corresponding to a task under consideration. Existing
approaches all disregard this dependence when evaluating their
objective, leading to increased sample complexity. The increase in
sample complexity is more severe when using the CVaR objective
such as in [18], due to having to discard most of the trajectories
collected in order to estimate the CVaR. In fact, for a standard value
of 𝜖= 0.1, 90% of the collected trajectories need to be discarded
(more generally, a 1 −𝜖fraction). Here, we wish to devise a strat-
egy to utilize the information from the aforementioned functional
dependence effectively so as to minimize such wastage.
4.1
Active Learning and the EffAcTS
framework
Active Learning is a paradigm where the agent chooses data to learn
from based on its previous experience (see [25] for a comprehensive
survey). It has been used to speedup learning tasks, especially in
situations with limited data. An active learner not only needs to
work with as few samples as possible, it also needs to account for
the uncertainty in whatever data it has collected. These are exactly
the desiderata of the required strategy, as it must be able to fit the
performance function across P by collecting as few trajectories as
possible, which come with noisy evaluations of the performance.
Thus, quite clearly, the problem of efficiently performing such sam-
pling is connected to active learning. The case of active learning
that is of interest to us is when the agent is allowed to sample output
for arbitrary points in the input space (instead of having to choose
points from a finite dataset). The input here is some parameter 𝑝
from P, and the output is the return from one trajectory collected
at 𝑝.
We now outline our active learning framework for learning
robust policies. Each policy update involves selectively generating
Algorithm 1 The EffAcTS framework
1: for 𝑖= 0 . . . 𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠−1 do
2:
ˆ𝜂𝜃𝑖←LearnPerf(𝜃𝑖)
3:
P ←SelectParams(ˆ𝜂𝜃𝑖)
4:
𝝉←{}
5:
for each 𝑝∈P do
6:
𝜏𝑝←Trajectory collected at 𝑝using 𝜋𝜃𝑖
7:
𝝉←𝝉∪𝜏𝑝
8:
end for
9:
𝜃𝑖+1 ←BatchPolOpt(𝝉, 𝜃𝑖)
10: end for
11: return 𝜃𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠
trajectories to be sent to the batch policy optimization algorithm.
This is done in two phases as follows:
Performance Assessment: In the first phase, active learning is
used to assess the performance of the current policy. To do this,
an active learner sequentially picks some parameters and trajecto-
ries are sampled for each of them by setting the environment to
these parameters and running the current policy. After a particular
number of trials, it is in theory expected to have a reasonably good
approximation of the performance as a function of the parame-
ters, say ˆ𝜂𝜃𝑖(𝑝). Note that we have used 𝜃𝑖as a subscript since this
function is specific to the current policy with parameters 𝜃𝑖.
The active learner and this process are encapsulated in a subrou-
tine LearnPerf that takes as input some policy parameters, 𝜃and
returns the function ˆ𝜂𝜃as described above. LearnPerf could be
equipped with persistent memory (e.g. to store data from previous
iterations), and no assumptions are made about the form of the
output ˆ𝜂𝜃other than that it can be evaluated at any given 𝑝∈P.
Parameter Selection: The second phase uses this assessment to
decide which parameters from P trajectories need to be collected
for. This selection is guided by some given objective that enforces
robustness. Another subroutine, SelectParams carries out this
selection, taking as input a performance profile ˆ𝜂𝜃. Based on this
performance profile, it returns a set P of parameters at which the
policy needs to be trained.
The policy update is then performed using trajectories collected
for each parameter in P, and this is done for a given number (𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠)
of iterations. We call the resulting framework EffAcTS (Efficient
Active Trajectory Sampling), and summarize it in Algorithm 1 and
Figure 1. Any particular instantiation of EffAcTS is defined by
the choice of active learning algorithm and also the scheme used
to select which parts of P to sample from, i.e by specifying the
LearnPerf and SelectParams subroutines.
4.2
Applying EffAcTS
We analyze one such instantiation based on the CVaR objective for
parameter selection. To generate samples of the bottom 𝜖percentile
of trajectories, a batch of parameters is sampled from P, and trajec-
tories are collected only for those that are in the worst 𝜖percentile
of performance according to ˆ𝜂𝜃. The use of Bandit algorithms for
active learning is well studied in both Multi-Armed Bandit [4, 6]
as well as Linear Stochastic Bandit [27] settings. The parameter

Narayanaswami et. al.
spaces involved in Robust RL are invariably continuous. LSBs and
Gaussian Process Regression are two well-known approaches that
can perform active regression on continuous spaces. LSBs, however,
are specialized in the sense that they quickly seek out areas that
lead to high reward, a property that we make use of as described
shortly. Considering that Gaussian Processes are more computa-
tionally expensive, and also that LSBs are simpler to implement
and can be very efficient, especially when data is scarce, we turn to
LSBs as the active learner in our experiments.
Its arms are simply a large enough collection of parameters
spread across P. Pulling an arm 𝑝∈P results in a trajectory being
sampled at 𝑝. Feedback is given to the bandit in an adversarial
manner, being proportional to the negative of the return obtained on
that sampled trajectory. This causes it to seek out regions with low
performance, and in the process learn about the performance across
P. This behaviour is especially useful for identifying the worst-case
parameters that are used in optimizing the CVaR objective.
We note that although the bandit’s learning phase is inherently
serial, it is still possible to collect the trajectories for the estimated
worst 𝜖percentile of parameters in parallel.
We call this algorithm EffAcTS-C-B and its LearnPerf and Se-
lectParams subroutines described in Algorithm 2. The following
hyperparameters are introduced: 𝑁𝐵, the number of trajectories
sampled by the bandit in the course of its learning, 𝑁𝐶, the total
number of parameters chosen (this means that
l 𝑁𝐶
𝜖
m
parameter
values are drawn from the source distribution and their perfor-
mance is estimated using the bandit, but only the bottom 𝑁𝐶of
those are used to collect trajectories). The most critical component
is the LSB learner 𝐵which incorporates internally a feature trans-
former 𝑓that takes in a parameter from the source distribution’s
support and applies some transformation on it (including possibly
standardization), and also scales the negative returns given to it
appropriately.
4.3
Sample Efficiency
Due to the fact that EffAcTS-C-B strategically chooses parameters
at which to collect trajectories, we expect it to be able to maintain
robustness and performance while collecting fewer samples than
existing approaches. Consider for instance EPOpt[18], which dis-
cards a 1 −𝜖fraction of the trajectories it collects. If EPOpt collects
𝑁trajectories, and EffAcTS-C-B’s bandit learner is allowed 𝑁𝐵
“arm pulls”, with the same number of trajectories being used for
learning as EPOpt (i.e 𝑁𝐶= 𝜖𝑁), the ratio of the total amount of
data collected by the two algorithms is
 𝑁𝐵+𝜖𝑁
𝑁

. For a nominal
setting of 𝑁= 240, 𝜖= 0.1 and 𝑁𝐵= 24, this results in a dramatic
80% reduction in the amount of data collected. We later show that
efficiency gains of this order are indeed attainable in practice.
5
CONNECTIONS TO MULTI-TASK
LEARNING
The problem of robust policy search on an ensemble of models
can also be viewed as a form of transfer learning from simulated
domains to an unseen real domain (possibly without any training on
the real domain, which is referred to as direct-transfer or jumpstart
[29]). Further, the process of learning from an ensemble of models
can be viewed as a Multi-Task Learning (MTL) problem with the set
of tasks corresponding to the set of parameters that constitute the
source domain distribution. Learning a robust policy corresponds to
maintaining performance across this entire set of tasks, as is usually
the goal in MTL settings. MTL, which is closely related to transfer
learning, has been studied in the DRL context in a number of recent
works [15, 20, 21, 26]. However, these works consider only discrete
and finite task sets, whereas model parameters form a (usually
multi-dimensional) continuum. More generally, we can think of
MTL with the task set being generated by a set of parameters, and
refer to such problems as parameterized MTL problems, with Robust
Policy Search being an instance of this setting.
[26] has employed a bandit based active sampling approach sim-
ilar to what we have described here to intelligently sample tasks
(from a discrete and finite task set) to train on for each iteration.
The feedback to the bandit is also given in an adversarial manner.
However, we note several differences when it comes to a parameter-
ized MTL setting. The first is the functional dependence of the task
performance to an underlying parameter as discussed earlier. In the
discrete MTL settings usually studied (such as Atari Game playing
tasks), there is no such visible dependency that can be modeled.
This means that any algorithm that is adapted to the parameter-
ized setting need to be reworked to utilize such dependencies as
EffAcTS does. The task selection procedure in EffAcTS differs from
the one in [26] in that the performance is sampled for several tasks
in between iterations of policy training. Additionally, one single
task is not chosen in the end, rather the active learner is used to
inform the selection of a group of tasks as necessary for the given
objective.
6
EXPERIMENTS
As EPOpt[18] uses the CVaR objective, it is a very suitable baseline
against which to compare EffAcTS-C-B for demonstrating the ben-
efits of introducing the active learner. We conduct experiments to
answer the following questions, which we will reference as RQ1,
RQ2 etc. in later discussions:
(1) Do the policies learned using EffAcTS-C-B suffer any degra-
dation in performance from that of EPOpt? Is robustness
preserved across the same range of model parameters as in
EPOpt?
(2) Does the bandit active sampler identify with reasonable ac-
curacy the region corresponding to the worst 𝜖percentile
of performance, and does it achieve a reasonable fit to the
performance across the range of parameters (i.e has it ex-
plored enough to avoid errors due to the noisy evaluations
it receives)?
(3) How much can the sample efficiency be improved upon?
This mainly boils down to asking how few trajectories are
sufficient for the bandit to learn well enough.
6.1
Implementation Details and
Hyperparameters
The experiments are performed on the standard Hopper and Half-
Cheetah continuous control tasks available in OpenAI Gym [5],
simulated with the MuJoCo Physics simulator [31]. As in [18], some
subset of the following parameters of the robot can be varied: Torso

An Active Learning Framework for Efficient Robust Policy Search
Algorithm 2 Definitions of LearnPerf and SelectParams subroutines for EffAcTS-C-B
1: function LearnPerf(𝜃)
2:
for 𝑖= 1 . . . 𝑁𝐵do
3:
𝑝𝑖←Optimal arm estimate by 𝐵.
4:
𝜏𝑖←Trajectory collected at 𝑝using 𝜋𝜃
5:
𝑅𝑖←Return from 𝜏𝑖
6:
Update 𝐵with (𝑝𝑖, −𝑅𝑖)
7:
end for
8:
ˆ𝜂𝜃←Function
parameterized
by
𝐵’s
current
weights
9:
return ˆ𝜂𝜃
10: end function
1: function SelectParams(ˆ𝜂𝜃)
2:
P ←{}, ˆR ←{}
3:
for 𝑗= 1 . . .
l 𝑁𝐶
𝜖
m
do
4:
𝑝𝑗←Parameter sampled from P
5:
ˆ𝑅𝑗←ˆ𝜂𝜃(𝑝𝑗)
6:
Add ˆ𝑅𝑗to ˆR and 𝑝𝑗to P
7:
end for
8:
P𝐶←Subset of P giving rise to the bottom 𝜖per-
centile of returns in ˆR
9:
return P𝐶
10: end function
Parameter
𝜇
𝜎
Low
High
Mass
6.0
1.5
3.0
9.0
Friction
2.0
0.25
1.5
2.5
Damping
2.5
2.0
1.0
4.0
Inertias
1.0
0.25
0.5
1.5
Parameter
𝜇
𝜎
Low
High
Mass
6.0
1.5
3.0
9.0
Friction
0.5
0.1
0.3
0.7
Damping
1.5
0.5
0.5
2.5
Inertias
0.125
0.04
0.05
0.2
Table 1: Description of the source domain distribution for the Hopper (Left) and Half-Cheetah (Right) tasks. The values given
here specify the means (𝜇) and standard deviations (𝜎) for normal distributions truncated at the low and high points mentioned
here. This is equivalent to the probability density of a normal distribution with parameters (𝜇, 𝜎) being zeroed outside the
interval [Low, High], and being normalized so that it integrates to 1.
Figure 2: Performance (y-axis) as a function of torso mass (x-axis) for 𝜖= 0.1 for the Hopper (Left) and Half-Cheetah (Right)
tasks. The bands indicate the confidence intervals of the performance measured across 5 runs of the entire training procedure.
All of the configurations tested use at least 75% fewer trajectories than EPOpt, and with the exception of 𝑁𝐶= 15 and 𝑁𝐵= 15
in the Hopper task alone, perform to the same extent and are as robust as EPOpt (acccording to results reported in [18]).
Mass, Friction with the ground, Foot Joint Damping and Joint Iner-
tias. We also use the same statistics for the source distributions of
the parameters which are described in Table 1.
We emphasize that because we are using the same environments
in [18] and also the same policy parameterization, results reported
there can be used directly to compare against EffAcTS-C-B.
We use the hyperparameter settings for TRPO suggested in Ope-
nAI Baselines [7] on which our implementation is also based. These
are shown in Table 3.
One difference from EPOpt’s implementation is that we use
Generalized Advantage Estimation [23] instead of subtracting a
baseline from the value function. For value function estimation

Narayanaswami et. al.
Hyperparameters
Median %tile
Avg %tile
Std. Dev.
Max %tile
𝑁𝐶=15, 𝑁𝐵=15
14.6
15.9
7.7
32.2
𝑁𝐶=15, 𝑁𝐵=30
14.9
23.4
24.0
98.0
𝑁𝐶=30, 𝑁𝐵=15
13.7
23.0
19.4
74.7
𝑁𝐶=30, 𝑁𝐵=30
11.6
14.9
10.6
47.8
Table 2: Statistics for the percentiles described in section 6.6 for the Hopper task’s 1-D model ensemble with 𝜖= 0.1, which are
measured every fifth iteration from the 100th to the 150th iterations.
Hyperparameter
Value
Timesteps per batch
1024
Max KL
0.01
CG Iters
10
CG Damping
0.1
𝛾
0.99
𝜆
0.98
VF Iterations
5
VF Stepsize
1e-3
Table 3: Hyperparameters for TRPO
Hyperparameter
Value
𝑅
5.0
𝛿
0.1
𝜆
0.5
Table 4: Thompson Sampling Hyperparameters
using a critic, we use the same NN architecture as the policy, 2
hidden layers of 64 units each. Policies are parameterized with NNs
and have two hidden layers with 64 units each, and use tanh as the
activation function.
6.2
Bandit Algorithm
For all our experiments, we implement the bandit learner using
Thompson Sampling due to its simplicity, following the version
described in [2]. The hyperparameters introduced by this are as in
Table 4 (they have the same names as in the paper).
The first two parameters control the amount of exploration per-
formed during Thompson Sampling, while 𝜆is a regularization
parameter for the parameter estimates.
The arms of the bandit are model parameters taken uniformly
across the domain and converted to feature values. In order to allow
for some degree of expressiveness for the fit, we apply polynomial
transformations of some particular degree to the model parameters.
The features input to the bandit are 4th degree polynomial terms
generated from the model parameters. This amounts to 5 terms in
the 1-D case and 15 in the 2-D case. These arm “representations”
are then standardized before being used by the bandit. The negative
returns given as feedback to the bandit are scaled by a factor of
10−3.
6.3
(RQ1) Performance and Robustness
In this section, we perform the following experiment to evaluate
EffAcTS-C-B for the objectives of RQ1. In this experiment, only
one environment parameter (torso mass) is varied, creating a 1-D
model ensemble on which to evaluate the algorithm.
The torso mass is varied in both the Hopper and the Half-Cheetah
domains keeping the rest of the parameters fixed at their mean
values. The performance of the EffAcTS-C-B learned policy is then
tested across this range, and the results are shown in Figure 2. We
use Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [22] for batch policy
optimization and run it for 150 iterations. For this part, we use 4th
degree polynomial transformations.
We see that the policy is indeed robust as it maintains its perfor-
mance across the range of values of the torso mass, and it achieves
near or better than the best performance for both tasks as reported
in [18] in all but one case, with 𝑁𝐶= 15 and 𝑁𝐵= 15 for Hopper.
This setting samples the least number of trajectories per iteration,
30, which is just one eighth of the 240 drawn in EPOpt. Although
there is one region where it is unstable, it is still able to maintain
its performance everywhere else, thus attaining the same level of
robustnes as EPOpt. Further, the performance achieved is almost
as good as, and possibly better than EPOpt[18].
For the other settings which use more trajectories, this does not
happen, and even at 𝑁𝐶= 30 and 𝑁𝐵= 30 which samples the most
trajectories, a 75% reduction in samples collected is achieved over
EPOpt (the total number of iterations is the same). The other two
settings which perform almost as well in both tasks collect 45 each,
which amounts to an even larger reduction of 81.2%. In the case of
𝑁𝐶= 15 and 𝑁𝐵= 15 with the Half-Cheetah Task, this number is
pushed even further to 87.5% while still retaining performance and
robustness.
6.4
(RQ1) Performance on a 2-D Model
Ensemble
In this question, we further investigate the scalability of the algo-
rithm to larger model ensembles, again in the context of RQ1. In
this experiment, we vary the friction with the ground in addition
to the torso mass, thus creating a two dimensional ensemble of
parameters. Here, we run TRPO for 200 iterations, and again use
4th degree polynomial transformations. Figure 3 shows the results
obtained.
Full performance is maintained over almost all of the parameter
space in both domains, again being comparable to or better than
in [18]. Notably, with 𝑁𝐶=30, 𝑁𝐵=30, the same 75% reduction in

An Active Learning Framework for Efficient Robust Policy Search
Figure 3: Performance as a function of torso mass and
ground friction on the Hopper (left half) and Half-Cheetah
(right half) tasks for 𝜖= 0.1 for one run or EffAcTS-C-B. In
each row, Left: 𝑁𝐶=30, 𝑁𝐵=30. Right: 𝑁𝐶=30, 𝑁𝐵=50.
collected trajectories is obtained even in a higher dimensional model
ensemble. This is also despite the added challenge of an increased
number of parameters for the bandit to fit (15 as opposed to 5 in
the previous experiment).
6.5
Visualizing the Bandit Active Learner
In Figure 4, we present the outcome from one particular iteration
of training. The true performance profile is estimated by collecting
100 trajectories to calculate the mean return at each parameter
(again, these trajectories are not used for learning). Along with this
is shown the bandit’s fit, the trajectories it collects while learning
and the trajectories that are sampled based on its estimate of the
bottom 𝜖= 0.1 percentile (output used for training the policy).
We see that the bandit takes exploratory actions (points to the
left and in the middle) that don’t lead to the worst returns. However,
it quickly moves towards the region with low returns, and the final
fit is close to the true mean performance. From comparison with
the output trajectories, the trajectories in the learning phase are
quite clearly not representative of the bottom 𝜖= 0.1 percentile
according to the source distribution. Thus, we cannot reuse these
to perform learning with the CVaR objective.
We also note that a perfectly learned performance profile is not
necessary to sample from the worst trajectories. As long as the fit
is reasonably accurate in that region, the output trajectories will be
of good quality. In practice, we expect LSB algorithms to be capable
of doing this as they tend to focus on these regions.
6.6
(RQ2) Analysis of the Bandit Active Learner
Here we validate one of our key assumptions, that the active learner
learns well enough about the performance that it can produce a
decent approximation of a sample batch of the bottom 𝜖percentile
Figure 4: The bandit’s operation in the 115th iteration of
training in the Hopper task. Individual trajectories are
shown as dots or crosses, with the position indicating the
parameter value and the return obtained.
of trajectories. For this, we first evaluate the average return for a
batch of samples from P by collecting a large number of trajectories
at each parameter. We note that these trajectories are solely for the
purpose of analysis and are not used to perform any learning. Then,
the percentile of the trajectory deemed to have the greatest return
among those chosen based on the bandit learner is computed using
the returns in this batch by using a nearest-neighbor approximation.
This is done across several iterations during the training, and the
median percentiles along with other statistics are reported in Table
2 for the Hopper task.
Ideally, we would like this value to come out to around 100𝜖
(when written as proper percentiles), i.e the parameter with the
greatest performance among the worst 𝜖percentile should be at
the 𝜖𝑡ℎpercentile. In our estimates, there are some outliers that
cause the average to become large, but as the median value shows,
it is indeed reasonably close to the desired value of 10 for 𝜖= 0.1.
6.7
(RQ3) Non-stationary Bandits for Data
Reuse
In this section, we attempt to answer RQ3 by considering modifica-
tions that can be made to EffAcTS-C-B, so that it uses lesser data,
while also achieving a level of performance and robustness that is
close to the results above.
Particularly, we investigate the use of a modified version of
the Thompson Sampling algorithm above that is suited for non-
stationary scenarios. This is done in order to reuse performance
history from previous iterations to estimate the bandit’s parameters
with the aim of achieving a further reduction in sample complexity.
To implement this, past data is weighted down in the Linear Re-
gression step of Thompson Sampling, and the weight decays after
each iteration by a factor 𝛼. That is, at the 𝑖𝑡ℎiteration, the data
from the 𝑖𝑡ℎ, (𝑖−1)𝑡ℎ. . .(𝑖−𝑘)𝑡ℎiterations would have weights 1,
𝛼. . .𝛼𝑘respectively.
We compare this version with the original setup in Figure 5.
We see that the setting with the smallest number of trajectories

Narayanaswami et. al.
Figure 5: Results (performance vs. torso mass) for the
non-stationary-bandit version (labeled “With history”) of
EffAcTS-C-B, along with the original EffAcTS-C-B results
(labeled “Without history”) on the Hopper 1-D ensemble. A
value of 𝛼= 0.25 was used, with the other hyperparameters
remaining unchanged. As before, the plot shows the perfor-
mance as a function of torso mass for 𝜖= 0.1, and the bands
indicate the confidence intervals of the performance mea-
sured across 5 runs of the entire training procedure. This
time, with 92% fewer trajectories than EPOpt, the configura-
tion 𝑁𝐶= 15, 𝑁𝐵= 5 with history is able to perform compa-
rably to EPOpt, as well as EffAcTS without history and using
more trajectories.
collected with history (𝑁𝐶= 15, 𝑁𝐵= 5) is more robust than
the vanilla case with 𝑁𝐶= 15, 𝑁𝐵= 15 and performs nearly as
well (despite cutting down on 10 more trajectories). With more
data, some loss of robustness is encountered, but the performance
improves, and becomes comparable to the best original case (𝑁𝐶=
30, 𝑁𝐵= 30).
6.8
Other Remarks
We note that we do not perform “pre-training” as in EPOpt where
the entire batch of trajectories is used for policy learning for some
iterations at the beginning (corresponding to optimizing for the
average return over the ensemble). This has been reported to be
necessary, possibly due to problems with initial exploration if using
the CVaR objective from the beginning. EffAcTS-C-B on the other
hand works without any such step. However, at the very beginning,
we collect trajectories for parameters sampled directly from P
until 2048 time steps have elapsed in that iteration. This is because
algorithms like TRPO have been known to require at least that
much data per iteration.
7
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER
POSSIBILITIES
We developed the EffAcTS framework for using active learning to
make an informed selection of model parameters based on agent per-
formance, which can subsequently be used to judiciously generate
trajectories for robust RL. With an illustration of this framework
based on Linear Bandits and the CVaR objective, we have both
demonstrated its applicability for robust policy search as well as
established its effectiveness in reducing sample complexity by way
of empirical evaluations on standard continuous control domains.
We also discussed our work in the context of Multi-Task Learning
along with the similarities and differences between these settings.
Our work opens up requirements for active learning algorithms
that can work well with even lesser data than we need here. Methods
like Gaussian Process Regression are known to be efficient, but not
in high dimensional spaces. For robust policy search methods to be
effective for transfer from simulation to reality, they need to be able
to handle the complexities of the real world, which necessitates
methods that work with high dimensional model ensembles, which
in turn entail frameworks such as EffAcTS to help reduce the sample
complexity. Another possibility for robust policy search itself is to
develop objectives that can speedup learning as well as make use
of the features of EffAcTS to maintain sample efficiency.
With our interpretation of robust policy search as a parameter-
ized version of Multi-Task Learning, a natural next step would be
to adapt developments in the usual discrete MTL setting to robust
policy search. It would also be worthwhile to similarly investigate
the applicability of Meta Learning, as it would prove useful for both
dealing with large disparities between the source domains and the
real world, as well as coping with unmodeled dynamics (which are
unavoidable since it is not feasible to model the real world with
complete accuracy).
8
