Generative Deep Learning for Virtuosic Classical Music 
Generative Adversarial Networks as Renowned Composers
Daniel Szelogowski 
UW - Whitewater 
Computer Science Master’s Program 
Whitewater, WI 

 
Abstract. Current AI-generated music lacks 
fundamental principles of good compositional 
techniques. By narrowing down implementation 
issues both programmatically and musically, we 
can create a better understanding of what 
parameters are necessary for a generated 
composition nearly indistinguishable from that of 
a master composer. 
Keywords- Generative Adversarial Network; 
GAN; Neural Network; Generative Music; MIDI 
 
1. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Generative artificial intelligence systems are 
becoming increasingly popular in everyday usage 
since the invention of Generative Adversarial 
Networks (GANs) by Ian Goodfellow in 2014 [5]. 
GANs are specialized neural networks (a type of 
machine learning algorithm that mimics the way 
the human brain learns to recognize relationships 
in data) that learn to choose samples from a special 
distribution by setting up a competition [12]. This 
type of deep learning model is broken up into two 
forms: 
● A 
Generative 
model 
(based 
on 
supervised/predictive 
learning) 
which 
describes how a dataset is generated, in 
terms of a probabilistic model. By sampling 
from this model, we can generate new data 
[3] 
● A Discriminative model (based on 
unsupervised/non-output learning) which 
learns to discriminate between data 
samples from the original dataset and the 
model generated data [4] 
Using this dual-model system, the neural network 
is able to drive a competition where both players 
(the Generator and Discriminator) become better 
over time, creating better-predicted output.  
 
These types of models have grown increasingly 
popular since their creation and have rapidly 
developed within the last two years, now being 
used to generate realistic photography of people 
(especially faces) and landscapes, handwriting, 
visual arts, speech/text transcription, language 
translation, and more recently music. However, 
music is much more difficult to process for a model 
due to the number of variables a piece of music can 
have, such as the notes (including silence), 
rhythms, dynamics, voicing, phrasing, textures, 
compositional styles and genres, and so on. Much 
of current work with music-based GANs lacks 
musicality or is too error-prone to be performed 
without the necessity of an external editor 
manually correcting poorly written phrases. This 
paper seeks to discuss these issues of current 
systems and provide a possible solution along with 
insight into further developing the field to allow for 
more mature generative compositions. 
 
2. 
RELATED WORK 
While 
there 
is 
a 
growing 
number 
of 
implementations and an increase in interest for 
music generating GANs, current systems still 
result in music that is either highly distinguishable 
from its intended imitation or lacks musicality 
altogether. 
 
 

2.1 David Foster 
Foster’s initial model is a Recurrent Neural 
Network (RNN) which utilizes a Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) architecture to generate 
music through MIDI sequences [2]. RNNs feature 
nodes connected together as a directed graph, 
wherein their internal state (memory) allows them 
to process input sequences of variable length [13]. 
Using LSTM, the neural network’s weights are no 
longer hindered by speed as we go further right in 
the network, allowing the analysis of entire 
sequences of data rather than just single data points 
— this will form the basis of our own model. The 
model uses this two-stack LSTM system to form an 
attention mechanism, allowing the model to 
decode information encoded in previous layers to 
better predict a sequence’s continuation [2]. 
 
Foster’s model was trained on all six of Johann 
Sebastian Bach’s Cello Suites — while this is a 
small set of data which could have the potential to 
work well, the six suites are broken down into six 
movements of varying themes, tonalities, and 
rhythmic variation; as such, only very short 
sequences are able to be generated to sound well, 
but generally replicate existing sequences rather 
than generating completely original ones. 
 
2.2 MuseGAN 
While Foster discusses the RNN model briefly [2], 
the MuseGAN model sees much more focus; this 
model is similar to Foster’s implementation but 
allows for the input of multiple noise vectors to 
perform training and generation of polyphonic 
(multiple-voice) compositions [14]. With a  
MuseGAN, one can control the amount of noise for 
parameters such as melodic generation, rhythmic 
groove, chord/harmonic generation, and the 
generated style [2]. 
 
2.3 Google Doodle 
In 2019, the Google Doodle team worked with 
Google’s PAIR (People + AI Research) and 
Magenta (Generative Music and Art Research) 
teams to create a web application inspired by 
Johann Sebastian Bach, whose birthday the 
application celebrated [6]. The application allows 
users to write a simple melody line on a musical 
staff, to which the generative model would 
compose three harmony voices in Bach’s 
contrapuntal “Chorale” style. 
 
While the model does mimic the four-voice texture 
of a typical Bach chorale, the application itself has 
many limitations, such as the inability to modify 
the key signature or meter (or time signature) of the 
piece or write note durations longer or shorter than 
4th and 8th notes, though the user may choose to 
leave some note “spaces” empty. As well, the 
application features many musical issues: 
● The composition generated by the model 
lacks clear tonality even given a very 
melodic line, such as one taken from an 
actual chorale 
● Accidentals, or flattened/sharpened notes 
outside 
of 
the 
key 
signature, 
are 
sporadically thrown in with no melodic or 
harmonic reason 
● While the voices are meant to move 
independently, 
their 
relationship 
is 
important; the model has no clear concept 
of one line intruding upon another, or 
voice-crossing, causing what is generally 
an intentional effect to become accidental 
and disturb the harmony of the piece 
Many of these issues are due to the simplicity of 
the implementation, but also with the model itself. 
The developers trained the model on 306 Bach 
chorales (of the ~419 total) — while this may be 
effective for compositions that are tonally and 
rhythmically similar, this is a highly ineffective 
approach due to the extreme amount of tonal and 
melodic variance within the Bach chorales. 
 
2.4 Huawei 
As a demonstration of their newest smartphone in 
February of 2019 (the Mate 20 Pro), consumer 
electronics manufacturer Huawei created a model 
to be run as an Android application which would 
listen to and train on Franz Schubert’s Symphony 
No. 8, a piece famously left unfinished due to only 

having two of the standard four movements of a 
typical symphony [7].  
 
Having earned the popular title of the “Unfinished 
Symphony,” Huawei sought to use the trained 
model to generate the third and fourth movements 
of the piece before having the newly completed 
piece performed by a live orchestra. Two major 
issues stand out from this approach: 
● The model was only trained on half of a 
symphony — typically all four movements 
have varying musical styles, causing a lack 
of variation in the generated movements, as 
well 
as 
lacking 
the 
compositional 
techniques 
that 
would 
have 
been 
beneficially trained from Schubert’s other 
symphonies 
● The final output generated by the model 
was manually edited by the orchestra 
director to remove errors in musicality and 
create a better sense of phrasing 
As a result, the generated movements were 
musically similar to the first two, overly repetitive, 
and lacked independence from an external editor. 
 
2.5 OpenAI Jukebox 
Jukebox is a generative neural network with a 
language model created in late April of 2020 that 
has been used primarily in studying generative 
popular music such as classic rock and pop by 
letting the model finish parts of well-known songs, 
including voice and instruments [8]. Rather than 
utilizing two separate input layers to separate the 
vocals and instruments, however, the model 
condenses entire audio files into discrete data to 
create a raw audio model, rather than OpenAI’s 
previous project MuseNET which trained on MIDI 
data similar to Foster’s RNN model [9]. 
 
3. 
APPROACH 
In order to narrow down a solution to the 
aforementioned issues, my implementation will 
take place in a program with two components: a 
generative deep learning algorithm and a 
classification algorithm. Using a GAN along with 
a Support Vector Machine (SVM), an algorithm 
that analyzes data to perform binary classification 
(as one of two categories within a set) with as large 
of a margin as possible between the two 
classes/categories. Through regression, the SVM 
builds a strong sense of discrimination between 
two classes and has great potential to distinguish 
data as one of them or the other. 
 
Together, the two algorithms will perform the 
following tasks: 
● GAN: Read in each MIDI file and learn 
from the data 
● GAN: Attempt 
to generate a new 
composition of similar style 
● SVM: Classify the data in binary - by 
composer or not by composer 
● GAN: Strive to increase confusion for 
SVM 
The GAN will learn from evolution to generate 
pieces more similar to the composer and make it 
more difficult to differentiate between real and 
generated. Ideally, the GAN should be able to 
recreate or replicate virtuosic compositional 
techniques, and we should strive for the SVM to 
have less than 50% accuracy as the network 
becomes better at composing. 
 
4. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
My algorithm follows that of Foster’s “RNN With 
Attention” model, utilizing a two-stack LSTM 
system to allow attention dedication to musical 
pitch and another to note duration; the Python 
application itself employs the Keras deep learning 
API which is built upon Google’s Tensorflow 
library, as well as the libraries music21 for 
extracting MIDI data, Pickle to create a data store 
for the pitch and duration sequences, and Sci-kit 
Learn for the SVM algorithm. The two input 
sequences (or the previous layer’s hidden state, 
depending on the recurrence) will feed into the 
recurrent layer one step at a time, continually 
updating its hidden state. Once this state is 
finalized, it will form a vector the same length as 
the sequence length we train it on, which can then 
be fed into a Dense layer. This layer will have 

softmax output (referring to the “softargmax” 
function) to predict a distribution for the 
sequence’s next note. A full diagram of this model 
can be seen in Figure 1 (all implementations can be 
found in [15]). 
 
Figure 1: The RNN model after training on all 
24 caprices 
 
After training on each composition to a user-
defined number of epochs (or evolutions), the 
model is ready to compose. During the early 
evolutions, the model will stick to writing one note 
repeatedly with the same rhythm, eventually 
becoming more confident over time to generate 
small atonal note runs and eventually full 
sequential passages with interesting rhythmic 
durations centered firmly within a set musical key. 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the result of a model 
that has been trained thoroughly (250+ epochs) and 
can produce genuine musical phrases. 
 
Figure 2: Distribution of notes over time — 
darker squares represent a stronger certainty 
of being the next pitch 
 
Figure 3: A heatmap of the model’s attention 
on the recurrent layer’s hidden state 
corresponding to a particular note in the 
sequence over time — a “hotter” square 
denotes more attention given 

5. 
EVALUATION 
The SVM classifier is the third and final step in the 
GAN’s compositional journey. To classify the 
compositions, the MIDI files must first be 
converted into a numeric dataset. To achieve this, 
we can apply the following steps: 
1. Read in all notes and durations from the 
data file 
2. Create an array of each note’s pitch space 
value (or the number of half steps/midi 
value, an integer) with its duration (in 
fraction form) added together in the form 
Note.Duration. For any instances of a chord 
or double stop (where more than one note 
is played at once), we can multiply the 
notes of the chord together to create a 
unique identity that is less collision-prone 
than through addition or XOR 
3. Write each note in the array as a column in 
a CSV table file. Each piece will be an 
additional row added to this table 
Utilizing this will help to reduce overhead for 
performing multiple classifications, as the data for 
the composer’s pieces will already be written to a 
file and only the GAN’s composition will need to 
be converted. Afterward, the data can be compiled 
into one large N-Dimensional array containing the 
data of all of the composer’s pieces along with one 
composition by the GAN, and the SVM can run its 
predictions. Given that SVM is such a strong 
discriminator, the fairest kernel to apply is linear 
— all others will either always be correct or 
overshoot. 
 
To break down the training into multiple portions 
and discover solutions to many of the issues 
mentioned in Section 2, the model was divided up 
into four sub-models which were trained to write 
32 note sequences at a time (for a range of 400-
1200 notes allowed total, the typical range for the 
caprices) for a total of 60 compositions per model: 
● Paganini - A model trained on all 24 
caprices 
● Melodics - A model trained on caprices 20-
24 due to their similar melodic structure, 
phrasing, and rhythms 
● Moderato - A model trained on caprices 2-
4, 7, 9, 11, 14, 17, 18, 21, 23, and 24 for 
their similar “moderate” rhythmic pace 
● Presto - A model trained on caprices 1, 5, 
6, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20, and 22 for 
their similar “rapid” rhythmic pace 
After initially training only the Paganini model, I 
found that the generated compositions were either 
mostly atonal, quickly switched between slow and 
rapid tempos, repeated many notes, and generally 
failed to recover its attention after each sequence 
was written. To mitigate this, I created the 
Melodics model which yielded the best results of 
all four models, since the pieces it was trained on 
were so similar in key, tempo, phrasing, and 
rhythmically in general; after which I divided the 
entire dataset into two halves to form the Moderato 
and Presto models, both now having twice as many 
MIDI files to train on as Melodics, but half of 
Paganini. All models were trained to at least 250 
epochs; all four suffered from similar issues as 
mentioned with the Paganini model, but these were 
greatly lessened through the data subdivision. 
 
Presto and Moderato produced the most original, 
truly 
musical 
sounding 
compositions, 
with 
Paganini generally being the worst overall. 
However, regardless of their originality and 
musicality, the SVM was able to more easily 
distinguish that these were not by the composer 
than some that I believed did not sound as musical. 
For all four models as well, I divided the test into 
two portions: 
● Full Dataset 
● Individual Dataset 
The models generally performed better on their 
own individual datasets than with all 24 pieces, but 
not so steep as to promote a strong inclination that 
the models are ineffective against the entire set 
given the average difference between the two sets 
being ~2%. 
 

6. 
DISCUSSION 
After running the full SVM examination on the 
four models, I discovered that the models were able 
to generate multiple pieces which fell below the 
hypothesized 50% classification rate, with the 
lowest overall score being 18.29% and the best 
across both datasets averaging 56%. Three of the 
most (aurally) realistic musical compositions and 
two of the most SVM-confusing compositions 
generated were prepared in a quiz (which can be 
found in [16]) which contained 15-second snippets 
of each of the 5 pieces and of 5 randomly chosen 
caprices by the composer in a shuffled order, with 
a final question asking the survey taker if they are 
a music teacher, student, amateur/hobbyist, or 
listener, the division of which can be seen in Figure 
4 distributed among 25 surveyors. The results of 
this quiz are shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Audio 
recordings of these and other generated pieces can 
be found in [1]. 
 
Figure 4: Distribution of survey takers by 
musical experience 
 
Figure 5: Questions by composition origin 
versus average percent wrong 
 
Figure 6: Survey takers by musical experience 
versus average percent wrong 
 
Ideally, the success of this approach to training 
may be extended into a more mature form of GAN 
which selectively pairs input data to better 
discriminate sequences by similarity and train 
based on musical intention, rather than just by 
notation (much like the errors mentioned in 
Foster’s original model in Section 2.1). 
 
7. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper focused on narrowing down the most 
common issues with current generative music 
systems, primarily with the system of training these 
various models, and working toward a solution 
which would perform well against a large-margin 
discriminator as well as actual people and remove 
the need for a human editor for a generative 
composition to sound musically “good”. My 
experiments revolved around both narrowing and 
broadening training exercises between concisely 
similar versus relatively similar compositions, 
rather than just the entire dataset, in order to 
discover what the models struggled with the most 
and why they would hang up on a particular note, 
sequence, or lose attention entirely and write 
completely atonally. 
 
In the future, this type of model could be expended 
into a much more advanced form with a stronger 
discrimination system and utilize an infinite 
number of voices/instruments to create a more 

advanced MuseGAN — ideally a model with the 
capability to potentially train on full orchestral 
MIDIs and create more musically genuine third and 
fourth movements to Schubert’s Unfinished 
Symphony by training on his other 7, both wholly 
and on the last two movements selectively and 
infer through strong discrimination which of the 
two is more realistic for example, or creating 
Beethoven’s 10th Symphony by training on his 9 
others. As well, a model could have an additional 
system of language and vocal prediction, allowing 
for the realistic generation of solo voice and choral 
pieces, and potentially full operas through textual 
training.
