Enhanced Audit Techniques Empowered by the
Reinforcement Learning Pertaining to IFRS 16
Lease
1st Byungryul Choi
Accounting Team, Hanjin Heavy Industries and Construction Co., LTD
(Yonsei University)
Seoul, South Korea

Abstract—The purpose of accounting audit is to have clear
understanding on the ﬁnancial activities of a company, which
can be enhanced by machine learning or reinforcement learning
as numeric analysis better than manual analysis can be made.
For the purpose of assessment on the relevance, completeness and
accuracy of the information produced by entity pertaining to the
newly implemented International Financial Reporting Standard
16 Lease (IFRS 16) is one of such candidates as its characteristic
of requiring the understanding on the nature of contracts and
its complete analysis from listing up without omission, which can
be enhanced by the digitalization of contracts for the purpose of
creating the lists, still leaving the need of auditing cash ﬂows of
companies for the possible omission due to the potential error at
the stage of data collection, especially for entities with various
short or middle term business sites and related leases, such as
construction entities.
The implementation of the reinforcement learning and its
well-known code is to be made for the purpose of drawing
the possibility and utilizability of interpreters from domain
knowledge to numerical system, also can be called “gamiﬁcation
interpreter” or “numericalization interpreter” which can be
referred or compared to the extrapolation with nondimensional
numbers, such as Froude Number, in physics, which was a source
of inspiration at this study. Studies on the interpreters can be
able to empower the utilizability of artiﬁcial general intelligence
in domain and commercial area.
Index Terms—reinforcement learning, IFRS 16, Lease, audit
technique, artiﬁcial general intelligence
I. INTRODUCTION
Each implementation of International Financial Reporting
Standards 16 Lease (“IFRS 16 Lease”) into individual compa-
nies was with various challenges due to the characteristic of
the accounting standard requiring the analysis on the details
of contracts for the purpose of distinguishing containment of
(1) the existence of an identiﬁed asset, (2) the conveyance of
the right to control the use of the identiﬁed asset, (3) the time
period for the continuity of such right to control, (4) and the
application of exemptions for the short-term lease and leases
of low value assets.
The IFRS 16 Lease incurs unprecedented changes in the
ﬁnancial statements, especially for the lease-heavy companies
with the practice of asset-light, a well-known and prominent
business operation strategy for the avoidance of risks in rela-
tion with the impairments and ﬂuctuation on asset valuation
and prices, such as shipping companies and construction
companies that use many kinds of pricey machineries and
services in the course of operating processes for the mega
size projects, in return creating multiple layers of sub-contracts
which can produce a large size of economic value, as well as
a number of lease contracts that are subject to IFRS 16 newly
implemented.
The digitalization of contracts and measurement of the
right-of-asset and the liabilities according to cash outﬂow
arrangements in future is one of the fair solutions for such
companies with numerous lease contracts for the enjoyment
of the advantage of computer engineering, calculation, and
logical checkups that cannot be done if conducted manually,
likewise, the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence skills on such
IFRS 16 lease accounting may shall be in need of study in
consideration of its powerful convenience and proven per-
formance in the matters of complexity. Such expectation is
made among the industries as the artiﬁcial intelligence is under
fast development, while direct and indirect of such techniques
are not widely adopted with only small amount of reports
of application, with many anticipations and comments that
accounting will be surely under the course of such application
due to the numeric characteristics of accounting practices,
with possibility of indirect application of artiﬁcial intelligence,
while direct application of artiﬁcial intelligence is still with
some hindrances due to the need of more development for the
logical accounting measurements.
An extrapolation is the process of evaluation of values in
extended range or timeline through analysis of trend, widely
adopted and accepted in contemporary accounting practice,
especially for the purpose of fair market valuation. The extrap-
olation is not conﬁned in a range of sole domain, however, is
used for the purpose of the convergence of different domains
such as between the geometry and architecture, or between
the algebra and the economics. The equations based on nondi-
mensionalized Froude Number is adopted for the purpose of
calculation of the resistance of oceangoing vessels affected
by numerous factors of friction of shell of the vessel and
various responses of water movements and viscosity are one
arXiv:2101.05633v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2021

type of good examples of cross-domain extrapolation, since
the developments base on such extrapolated equations erected
numerous layers of industries on the ocean.
It is presumed that cross-domain extrapolation of the rein-
forcement learning is on the verge of becoming a necessity as
the studies and performances on the reinforcement learning is
on the course of development based on the computer games,
while the applications and trials of the reinforcement learning
on the industrial practices are assumed fairly limited. The
reinforcement learning has been successfully able to reach out
to the domain of games, sequential decisions, and series of
spatial and chronological arrangements, all sum in the fairly
tangible matters.
The development of reinforcement learning is prone to
focus on the matters that can have straightforward fair nu-
meric reward values, not on the matter of evaluating blurred
area which requires extensive understandings to make fair
evaluation of the reward into numerical dimension, which
is a stumbling block for the reinforcement learning can be
extensively applied into some ﬁelds that require complex
reasonings and comprehension. A fair calculation of the logics
and reasonings into numerical dimension, however, can be a
good start of the extensive application of the reinforcement
learning as it has been so for centuries in the case of the
nondimensional Froude Number effective to the real-world
calculation of resistance of vessels.
Fr =
u
√Lg
(1)
u : speed of ﬂow
L: characteristics length
g: gravitation acceleration
II. ASSESSMENT ON IFRS 16 LEASE
A. IFRS 16 requiring analysis on contracts
International
Financial
Reporting
Standards
16
Lease
(“IFRS 16 Lease”) adopted and released by the International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB), effective on January
ﬁrst 2019 worldwide, has been considered a standard that
requires developed intelligence technology skills due to its
nature pertaining to the grounds of accounting which requires
judgement on signiﬁcant issues such as incentives, de facto
lease periods, discount rates as per implicit rate of lessor
or incremental borrowing rate of lessee, payments variations,
detailed evaluation on non-lease elements, etc.
The contract digitalization might be one of the solutions
for the rightful implement of IFRS 16 as the standard links
directly to the characteristic of contracts, nevertheless, with
some unjustiﬁable costs just for the implement of accounting
aside the business practices unless the business prefers such
digitalization, which is quite undesirable if the business has
numerous short and middle term contracts and business ﬁelds
such as a construction business holding a number of construc-
tion ﬁelds. [1]
In light of IFRS 16 requiring the projection of cashﬂows and
the incremental borrowing rate (IBR) for the measurement of
the lease liabilities and right-of-asset, and the actual cash out-
ﬂows for the purpose of amortization of the lease liability, the
characteristics of lease contracts showing various ﬂexibilities
on cash schedules and circumstances in the actual business
environment shall require the cautious and watchful monitor
not only on the details of the lease contracts but also on the
behaviors of parties evolved and transactions occurred.
B. Details of the completeness of IFRS 16
It is still inevitable to have auditing on cash outﬂows for the
completeness of lease contracts even for companies with the
contract digitalization as some group of regular or repetitive
cash outﬂows to speciﬁc counterparties may imply undetected
or unrecorded contractual duties for the lease purpose with
future cash outﬂows, which incurs tremendous time and costs
if manually conducted.
With numericalization of cash outﬂows by the implemen-
tation of fair evaluation on the lease-likeness based cash
outﬂows pattern and rightful translation into numerical values,
as opted for creating language model and other deep learning
area, the auditing on cash outﬂows for the purpose of lease
completeness may be enhanced by the reinforcement learning,
as the numericalized evaluation of lease-likeness can lead to
election of sound rewards for the purpose of application of
Bellman equation, which is also possible to be considered
somewhat as the gamiﬁcation of accounting, focusing on
the characteristic of accounting, trying to archive the most
rightful ﬁnancial statements within the logical limitations and
accounting standards.
Small medium enterprises without suitable ERPs may shall
be in need of the reinforcement learning for the purpose of
acquiring enough ﬁnancial data out of accounting journals,
while large enterprises with up-to-date ERPs with strong con-
tract digitalization and cash integration suffer no difﬁculties
on producing such ﬁnancial data and subsequent accounting.
Database: First Step for Information Produced by Entity
If the collection of such lease contracts are made by purely

credibility of the information produced such manner is unreli-
able. Either the development of a new system collecting such
information or providing manual entries to form a database
system shall be considered. Either shall still be subject to the
duty of providing the documents or proof of completeness for
the purpose of collecting suitable data before identifying lease
contracts. The completeness, as by its nature, shall be based
upon seamless integration among the accounting data, or such
proof if without such seamless database structured accounting
system.
Accounting Journals: Listings of Lease contracts
Repetitive cash outﬂows, not even the trails of cash outﬂows
toward lessors and potential lessors, but also cash outﬂows
with continuity to counterparties on a regular basis are subject

Fig. 1. Entities in need of the reinforcement learning for lease completeness.
to surveillance for the purpose of auditing completeness of
lease contract listing since such regularity is a strong evidence
of existence of lease contracts. The information produced by
entity (IDE) pertaining to the list of lease contracts applied to
IFRS 16 is to be classiﬁed into four categories, (1) IFRS 16
leases to be held to lease liabilities and right-of-use asset, (2)
IFRS 16 leases to be described separately but not measured in
the balance sheet due to its nature being short-term and low
value lease, (3) leases no to be recognized but to be described
for being ﬁnished within 12 months from the implementation
of IFRS 16, and (4) leases that are not subject to the IFRS 16
deﬁnition.
If the entities contains numerous unspeciﬁed contracts, in
addition, potential errors on the entries shall be considered, as
the small-medium sized real estate market such as housings are
open to the individuals and the companies that are not tracking
or containing sufﬁcient information about such individuals
without regulated policy or system shall conduct through
analysis on entries based on similarities so that potential
omission caused by bookkeeping error can be avoided.
The review on cash outﬂows across the accounting codes
incurs the need of review on all the cash out journals, amount
payables, and related journals at least, applicable to numer-
ous journals, which shall incur high expenses if manually
conducted. The review on potential bookkeeping error across
journals without sufﬁcient information shall also require high
expense if conducted, which is the reason why there is rare
report of doing such audit on potential bookkeeping error.
The reinforcement learning on each journal and case for such
purpose shall be the best alternative that saves costs for audit
and produces better information for IFRS 16 lease accounting.
Amortization schedule and interest
As per IFRS 16, the discount rate for amortization schedule
is outlined in this manner as follows:
“At the commencement date, a lessee shall measure the lease
liability at the present value of the lease payments that are
not paid at that date. The lease payments shall be discounted
using the interest rate implicit in the lease, if that rate can be
readily determined. If that rate cannot be readily determined,
the lessee shall use the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate.”
Lessee’s incremental borrowing rate, in addition, describes
“The rate of interest that a lessee would have to pay to borrow
over a similar term, and with a similar security, the funds
necessary to obtain an asset of a similar value to the right of
use asset in a similar economic environment.”
There were several opinions “similar term” reported among
the accountants on the interpretation on the clauses above,
mainly with three categories, at lease in South Korea back
in 2019 at the stage of implement. (1) The interest rate shall
be actual and proven interest rate that the company actually
applied recently, which can be applied across assets and have
possibility of ignoring the “similar security” and “similar
economic environment” since each purchase of asset is subject
to its own industrial environment. (2) The interest rate shall be
calculated based on the weighted average period or duration
period for the purpose of fulﬁll the “similar term”, and the
interest rate shall be calculated in light of loss given default
(LGD) as it was IFRS 9. (3) More than the weighted average
period and LGD, the interest rate shall be measured in a
complex model similar to ﬁnancial bonds and be generated
in a cautious and detailed manner.
The more complexity on IBR calculation, the more the
need of machine learning increased. SMEs with hundreds of
lease contracts calculated on pure Excel or similar spreadsheet
with interpretation of (2) and (3) above, shall be subject to
the review on the accuracy of the calculation since its hyper
complexity including, but not limited to, (1) cash schedule,
(2) amortization table of liability, (3) amortization table of the
right-of-use asset for deposit, restoration costs, initial direct
costs, etc, (4) depreciation expense schedule, (5) weighted
average period calculation, (6) basis of interest rate, such as
national treasury coupon rate or bond market rate, (7) daily
or monthly amortization, (8) existence of advance payments
in various forms which is a widely accepted practice for lease
contracts, (9) payment frequency and regularity, (10) unpaid
or prepaid payments in real, as well as (11) foreign currency
effects, in consideration of potential human error if manually
conducted.
Consolidation and Understandings on Lease Contracts
Considering the requirement of understandings on character-
istics of lease contracts, and of generating various amortization
schedules on each lease liability and right-of-use asset, as
well as of adjusting the contracts applied to the consolidated
statements within a group or such afﬁliation, the understanding
of the company on the IFRS 16 lease standard also shall
be subject to the audit of completeness, as this standard is
more than numeric accounting, which is a right direction
of accounting standard for the purpose of representing the
ﬁnancial statements close to the realities of the entity.

C. Reinforcement learning for better auditing
While one of the most detailed auditing practices back in
2019 at the implement stage was censoring all cash outﬂows in
a same amount in to a same company at least twice, conducted
solely by manual checkups, with tremendous cost and time. It
may be praised for securing rock solid ground truth, but still
lacks one thing, which is omitting the possibilities of book-
keeping mistakes. Auditing of cash outﬂow journals into one
company at least twice without considering possibility of mis-
takes is comparably easier task than Auditing of cash outﬂow
journals into one company at three times with one possible
mistake, which produces multiple cases of mistake at least
with three cashﬂows, wrong company names (with a number
of candidates), and wrong payments (with various reasons such
as deduction, discount, netting, or comparably shorter residual
time slot), surely something hard to be conducted manually but
to be possible with well-designed machine learning tool such
as reinforcement learning. While manually conducted, the cost
of such auditing inclusive of such mistakes is unjustiﬁable and
impracticable, if conducted properly with machine learning,
the cost of such deeper auditing inclusive of possible mistake
is much lesser than the manual auditing which leads to a ﬁrm
justiﬁcation of conducting such machine auditing.
The auditing inclusive of possible mistake is effective if the
auditing period is focused on ﬁrst quarter of fourth quarter of
the ﬁnancial period, as the periods is the most venerable to po-
tential omission through simple mistake when such contracts
start within the fourth quarter or ends within the ﬁrst quarter,
leaving the cash outﬂow journal difﬁcult to detect some
regular payments or potential contract duties, which leads to
an implication that timely noise in accounting information
within speciﬁc period can lead to faulted recognition of lease
liabilities.
III. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
The reinforcement learning is a non-supervised machine
learning seeking the maximum numerical reward on the basis
of the Markov decision process (MDP) with the discrete
probability distribution, or such circumstances, which requires
the Agent, an important element of reinforcement learning
with Action, Environment, State, and Reward, to learn the
process to get to the maximum rewarding process through
trial-and-error.
Action is options of all possible moves or changes out of
the state, and the state is a speciﬁc situation as per given
Environment, which is a boundary and dimension for State,
Action, Agent. The Reward is a given value for each for the
pair of Action and State, which is a crucial element for the
purpose of designing suitable reinforcement learning structure.
Q-learning, the sum of two off-policy learning, the greedy
policy and epsilon greedy, is often-used method as a devel-
oped reinforcement learning compared to the older version of
reinforcement learning methods, with the proven effectiveness
on seeking the best policy and trying other potential better
options. The algorithm shall be described as below. [2]
Q(S, A) ←Q(S, A) + α · (R + γ · max
a′ Q(S′, a′) −Q(S, A))
(2)
The equitation (2) above means the memorization of re-
wards based on time diference, so that the possible sum of
reward on each policy shall be made with discounted value as
per the distance toward the future, so that iminant reward shall
be preffred more than the same amount of the reward in the far
future. The algorithm shows such step with elipson decay for
the purpose of securing chance to make random trials within
set range of possiblity.
Gridworld is well-known code as a representing case for
the reinforcement learning since it reﬂects essential elements
of the reinforcement learning. For the purpose of adopting
reinforcement learning directly and of utilizing its efﬁcient
model code for auditing lease completeness, especially for the
listing of existing lease contracts.
Gridworld is a simple task of ﬁnding the shortest way, an
useful example for reinforcement learning, whereby produces
movements from a starting point to and endpoint on 4 × 4
or 5 × 5 grid, with only one notch movement allowed at
once, to ﬁnd the shortcut to get archive the goal, in this case
reaching to the end point, evasive of hindrances if exists. The
reinforcement learning adopts the Gridworld as an perfect
model environment for Markov decision process (MDPs),
with the key elements such as the policy that determines the
probability of actions from each state, state-value function that
discounted future expected rewards, and action-value function
that returns expected reward of each action, and transition
probability that moves state, and the reward function that
speciﬁes the reward of each action from state to state, which
makes grounds for reinforcement learning controls.
Q-learning, one of off-policy control widely opted for
reinforcement learning due to its advantages of both extensive
exploration of options and still learning for convergence, shall
be elected as a control for such reinforcement auditing for the
lease contract listing completeness inclusive of investigation
of potential omission due to possible errors, deferrals to next
year, or advance payment to the previous year.
A. Environment, state and action
he connectivity between the movement on the Gridworld
and modiﬁcation of accounting journal, as if using the Grid-
world as a joystick for changes on journals. If the modiﬁcation
has a suitable valuation system that returns right reward for
the action and state, it shall be able to provide circumstances
to practice the reinforcement learning. The creation of two
pools, a nonnumeric value pool for corporate names and
a numerical value pool for payments in this case, so that
the options shall ﬁt into the 2D Gridworld structure with
each state shall be matched to each options, for example,
Gridworld position (2, 3) means selection of second candidate
from payments pool and third out of corporate names pool.

Fig. 2. The reinforcement learning model for IFRS 16 lease.
Immediate evaluation of lease-likeness on journals produces
the rewards, and possible lease candidates shall be transferred
to lease listing, leaving the journals shortened, in the grid
world viewpoint, shorter company name pools with shorter
axis X. The remaining journals shall have the matching from
the beginning, in this wise, the previous matching affects
matching afterwards, producing diffusion decision model. The
movement on the Gridworld follows the same rules in usual
Gridworld, moving one step randomly among left, right, up,
and down, which requires repetitive moves such as up-down-
up-down or right-left-right-left to make same selection twice
in the fastest way.
Fig. 3. Example steps on the grid and consequent changes on journals.
B. Regular reward and discount
The purpose of the model is to list up the all the potential
journals into the list, with speciﬁc steps, ﬁrst, the classiﬁcation
of lease journals as they are, second, as a level 1 reinforcement
learning implementation to shufﬂe nonnumeric item from each
reasonable pool for each department or subdivision to ﬁnd
possible match for lease with a set of regular rewards which
can also be referred as undiscounted rewards, third, as a
level 2 reinforcement learning implementation to conduct the
exchange of both nonnumeric item and numeric item, with dis-
counted reward according to the coefﬁcient of variation (CV)
among the numeric values so that most even values with lowest
CV can offer the greatest reward with minimized discount
again the regular reward, for the purpose of minimization of
the number of cases and prevent the curse of dimensionality
with too many possible combinations.
Fig. 4. Assessment on accounting information by the model.
C. Allowable coefﬁcient of variance of lease payments
The discounted reward according to the CV shall be es-
timated with the understanding of possible gap between the
variance so that it may ﬁt into the practice of accounting
on the business. The possible maximum value of variance
is as below, which implies that the unreasonable 50 times
gap shall be possible unless a limitation on the allowance
of CV is held. The possible allowance for gap among the
payments shall be around 5 times, with near 0.7 CV, as per

the prepayment practices and the possible payments in sums
for several contracts with one company. The CV is the standard
deviation of lease payments divided by average lease payments
on same item in the same department at this study.
Fig. 5. Allowable coefﬁcient of variation.
D. Negative reward and memory function for convergence
The normal Gridworld sets disadvantage reward on each
movements such as –1 or –0.1, however, -0.001 was set for the
movement to make a neutral as possible reward for the purpose
of reducing the any potential noise other than searching the
most possible reward, but still with a bit of disadvantage so that
it can learn to minimize the number of movements. Also artic-
ulate acceleration and bit of munipulation was made through
building the call system, making a memory to remember a
maxium reward to overcome next time, as 80,000+ iteration
on each round even with the negative reward on movements
without convergence unless such memory function is not
made. This is the characteristic of the reinforcement learng
that it is unable to learn if there are too much volatility and
too less tendency on rewards. For the purpose of concentration
on the construction of model as a whole, not on speciﬁc parts
of the model, the effects of negetive reward is not considered
at this study, even though the effect of negative reward is also
an area that requires a detailed investigation.
IV. RESULT AND IMPLICATIONS
A. Result with limitation of reinforcement learning
The convergence for the highest reward needed accelerated
epsilon decay for the purpose of aiding convergence, to reduce
to time to archive the highest reward as soon as possible,
similar to Convolution Neural Network (CNN) adopts early
stopping for the models with overﬁtting. It required quite an
endeavor to make right adjustment for the model to learn
and reach to the convergence in the course of applying
the reinforcement learning, which implies that the advanced
learnings such as Deep-Q-Network (DQN) shall produce better
results.
The convergence was made before trials of 50 times, model
A with converged reward value with a bit of variance, and
model B with stable converged reward value. For the purpose
of auditing, model B is preferred as one stable reward means
one best answer out of data.
Fig. 6. Plot of the convergence result of the model A.
Fig. 7. Plot of the convergence result of the model B.
The meaning of convergence means, at this study, that the
maximum thorough review was made in light of potential
human error at the stage of making enties about the lease
cash out journals, which can increase the credibility of an
unintegrated system without ERPs leaving accounting data to
be under human serveilliance.
B. Need of interpreter development and audit
The reinforcement learning with interpretation intact with
newly rectiﬁed with an accounting standard and its auditing,
while the series of trials and studies are made with the ex-
pectation of building the artiﬁcial general intelligence, mainly
based on the games of which actions, states, rewards can be

TABLE I
COMPANY A: 1,300+ CONTRACTS, 440,000+ JOURNALS, 80+ SEPARATE BUSINESS SITES

Excel + Data Base
Reinforcement Learning
Task of Completeness check
Separately conducted by each department
Separately conducted by each department
Centered at Accounting Dept
Lease Contract Listing
Very Difﬁcult
Half-manual
Automated
Potential Error Check
Impossible
Very Difﬁcult
Automated
IFRS 16 Identiﬁcation
Heavy Losses
Minor Losses
Near zero losses
Cash Integration
Impossible
Difﬁcult
Easy
Working Hours
200 to 240 hours
80 to 100 hours
8 to 12 hours
Double Check on Result
Impossible
Difﬁcult
Easy
TABLE II
COMPANY B: 20+ CONTRACTS WITH HIGH STABILITY

Excel + Data Base
Reinforcement Learning
Task of Completeness check
Separately conducted by each department
Separately conducted by each department
N/A
Lease Contract Listing
Stable, Easy
Stable, Easy
N/A
Potential Error Check
Impossible
Impossible
N/A
IFRS 16 Identiﬁcation
Stable, Easy
Stable, Easy
N/A
Cash Integration
Fine
Fine
N/A
Working Hours
15 to 20 hours
15 to 20 hours
N/A
Double Check on Result
Stable, Easy
Stable, Easy
N/A
described in numbers, implies the need of efforts from vice
versa, i.e. domain dimensions to numeric dimensions, so that
the artiﬁcial general intelligence may be applied to the domain
even on the course of its own development.
The development of series of interpreters that lets the
artiﬁcial general intelligence or the reinforcement learning
can be utilized in domain area shall be continued, and newly
implemented accounting standard of IFRS 16 lease, can be
one possible candidate domain for such purpose, as well as the
audit practices on other accounting standards. As the purpose
of audit is to understand the ﬁnancial activities of companies,
the reinforcement learning or other machine learning method
can be utilized for better audit practices. Such machine based
analysis can be used not only for the auditing purpose but also
for ﬁnancial advisory purpose, assisting the most reasonable
decision making for the accountants and business manage-
ment. Special groups of ﬁnancial interpreters for artiﬁcial
intelligence can also be developed into one sphere of business
as the artiﬁcial intelligence itself develops.
The distinctive advantage of reinforcement learning was the
enablement of the centralized completeness check task. Even
the company B with 20+ lease contracts with high stability
and small number of business sites were not able to conduct
centralized completeness check based on the real cash outﬂows
and shared the responsibility of completeness check on each
department using lease contracts, with lingering question still
whether that kind of completeness check shall be regarded
“complete” since its credibility depends on the competence of
departments in duty, not on the accounting information itself.
On the other hand, the Company A with 1,500+ lease
contracts with high volatility due to the nature of its busi-
ness and 80+ business sites with continual installation and
depreciation of a dozen of business sites annually were able to
make centralized completeness check on 440,000+ accounting
journals thanks to the implementation of the reinforcement
learning, even with the additional check on potential errors
that increases credibility of the lease accounting of the entity.
Every facet of lease accounting, including but not limited to
the lease contract listing, IFRS 16 lease identiﬁcation, real cash
outﬂow integration, and working efﬁciency was enhanced by
the computing skills.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The implementation of both IFRS 16 lease and the rein-
forcement learning is the solution to reduce the repetitive tasks
of checking and reviewing the lease transactions as well as to
induce the possibility of system expansion of related functions
since the formation of the lease accounting is not locked in the
spread sheet but linked in the computer programming such as
Python in the course of applying the reinforcement learning
for the IFRS 16 lease.
Some essentials of IFRS 16 Lease accounting at the stage
of implementation are subject to human judgement especially
for the classiﬁcation as per own nature of lease contracts. The
minimization of manual review shall be achieved to make the
best judgement for the IFRS 16 lease standard, and for such
purpose, the reinforcement learning is one of the best options
as the study has revealed.
Starting the completeness of IFRS 16 lease contracts, inte-
grating the actual cash outﬂows, and redoubling the credibility
through investigation on potential ﬂaws, such implementation
of the reinforcement learning shall be a good start for SMEs
without expensive ERPs, as open source programming such as
Python are easy to be acquired with near zero cost. The proof
of completeness also can be easily produced in the course of
building such programming. As the Company A shown above,

a ﬁrm with accounting skills integrated with computing skills
may produce better accounting information with low costs.
Not only the reinforcement learning, but also many com-
puting skills based on the artiﬁcial intelligence are on the
stream. The accounting practices shall be also responsive to
such changes so that industries can be mature and transparent
enough to show the ﬁnancial status as they really are, for
the purpose of constructing sound capital market with right
information.
