Transformer Based Geocoding
Yuval Solaz∗

Vitaly Shalumov∗

January 4, 2023
Abstract
In this paper, we formulate the problem of predicting a geolocation from free text as
a sequence-to-sequence problem. Using this formulation, we obtain a geocoding model
by training a T5 encoder-decoder transformer model using free text as an input and
geolocation as an output. The geocoding model was trained on geo-tagged wikidump
data with adaptive cell partitioning for the geolocation representation. All of the code
including Rest-based application, dataset and model checkpoints used in this work are
publicly available.
1
Introduction
Social media such as Twitter and Wikipedia contains considerable amount of location-related
text data. In this paper, we develop a model that learns to predict spatial probabilities from
free text. Given a query sentence, the model outputs a discrete probability distribution over
the surface earth, by assigning each geographical cell a likelihood that the input text relates
to the location inside said cell. The resulting model is capable of localizing a large variety
of sentences. Viewing the task as a hierarchical classiﬁcation problem allows the model to
express its uncertainty in the location associated with the text. The resulting model can be
used for resolving ambiguity of the location references in the text. This capability is central
to the success of ﬁnding exact location from free text. For example, Paris can refer to more
than one possible location. In a context such as: The International Olympic Committee
conﬁrmed the city chosen to host the Olympic Games in 2024. The Games will be held in
Paris, geocoding models like the one proposed in this paper can help in the resolution of
the correct location.
This work introduces the following contributions:
• Synthesizing a dataset for supervised learning, including adaptive cell partitioning.
• Formulating the geocoding problem as a sequence-to-sequence problem.
• Training an end-to-end geocoding model using said formulation.
• Publicly releasing the curated dataset, a Rest-based application and the T5 geocoding
model.
∗Equal Contribution
1
arXiv:2301.01170v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2023

2
Related works
The geolocation prediction from free text was extensively addressed in the literature. The
authors of [1] presented a multi-level geocoding model that learns to associate texts to
geographic locations. The downstream task was formulated as a multi-level classiﬁcation
problem based on multi-level S2 [2] cells as the output space from a multi-headed model.
In [3], the surface of the earth was subdivided into thousands of multi-scale geographic
cells. The authors trained a deep neural network using millions of geo-tagged images. We
adopt the adaptive partition approach introduced in this paper. The authors of [4] created
language models of locations using coordinates extracted from geo-tagged Twitter data.
The locations were modeled at varying levels of granularity, from zip code to the country
level. In [5], an end-to-end probabilistic model for geocoding text data was presented. In
addition, the authors collected a novel data set for evaluating the performance of geocoding
systems. The model-based solution, called ELECTRo-map was compared to the open source
system available at the time of publication for geocoding texts for event data. An algorithm
for estimating a distribution over geographic locations from a single image using a purely
data-driven scene matching approach was provided in [6].
The aforementioned approaches to geocoding can be viewed as sequential tasks of token
classiﬁcation (which is assumed to be solved perfectly) and geocoding. Unfortunately, this
approach suﬀers from several drawbacks.
First, it cannot handle correctly inputs that
contain several descriptions of locations (for example: ”We live in country X city Y”).
Second, it lacks the context of free text (for example: ”Country south of France”).
3
Text Geolocation with Transformer
We pose the task of text geolocation as a sequence-to-sequence problem. The model trans-
lates input text into hierarchy set of geographic cells which represent probability distribution
over the surface of the earth. The model output is a sequence encoding of hierarchical cell
representation of the surface of the earth.
3.1
Adaptive Cell Partitioning
We use Google’s open source S2 Geometry library [2] to partition the surface of the earth into
non-overlapping cells that deﬁne the target of our model. The S2 library deﬁnes hierarchical
partitioning of the surface of a sphere by projecting the surfaces of an enclosing cube on
it. The six sides of the cube are subdivided hierarchically by six quad-trees. A node in a
quad-tree deﬁnes a region on the sphere called an S2 cell. Fig. 1 illustrates the S2 cells in
several resolutions. Tab. 1 shows the resolution and number of cells for each S2 Geometry
level.
There are several reasons for choosing this subdivision scheme over a simple subdivision
of latitude/longitude coordinates. Firstly, the latitude/longitude regions get elongated near
the poles while S2 cells keep a close-to-quadratic shape, and secondly, S2 cells are mostly
uniform in size (the ratio between the largest and smallest S2 cell is 2.08). A naive approach
to deﬁne a tiling of the earth would be to use all S2 cells at a certain ﬁxed depth in the
hierarchy, resulting in a set of roughly equally sized cells. However, this would produce a
very imbalanced class distribution since the geographical distribution of wikidata items [7]
which was adopted in this paper, has strong peaks in densely populated areas see Fig. 2.
2

Figure 1: S2 Geometry hierarchical partitioning of the earth.
Table 1: S2 Geometry levels.
Level
Average area
Number of cells
00
85M km2
6
01
21M km2
24
02
5M km2
96
03
1.3M km2
384
04
330K km2
1536
05
83K km2
6K
06
20K km2
24K
07
5K km2
98K
08
1297 km2
393K
09
324 km2
1573
10
81 km2
6M
..
..
..
29
2.95 cm2
1729 ∗1015
30
0.74 cm2
7 ∗1018
We therefore perform adaptive subdivision, based on the dataset item location: starting
at the roots, we recursively descend each quad-tree and subdivide cells until no cell contains
more than a certain ﬁxed number (max cell samples parameter) of data points. By using
this approach, sparsely populated areas are covered by larger cells and densely populated
areas are covered by ﬁner cells. This adaptive tiling has several advantages over a uniform
one: (i) training classes are more balanced and (ii) it makes eﬀective use of the parameter
space because more model capacity is spent on densely populated areas. Fig. 3 demonstrates
the S2 partitioning for our dataset.
3

Figure 2: Data points distribution.
Figure 3: S2 Geometry adaptive partitioning of our dataset.
3.2
Dataset
This section describes the dataset used for training the model and for the evaluation ex-
periments. The dataset was constructed from the wikidata archive [8]. The archive was
ﬁltered as to select all records with location label (approximately 8M records). See Tab. 2
4

for samples of wikidata records.
Table 2: Wikipedia Geo Data samples.
Id
Latitude
Longitude
Text
01
53.96
-1.08
historic county of England
02
51.0
10.0
country in Central Europe
03
35.88
14.5
sovereign state in Southern Europe
04
57.30
-6.36
whisky distillery in Highland, Scotland, UK
05
47.39
0.69
city and commune in Indre-et-Loire, Centre-Val de Loire, France
06
-33.0
-71.0
sovereign state in South America
3.3
Data Labeling
Using the adaptive cells, we label each data sample with the cell id containing the sample
location. In order to keep the hierarchical nature of the cells in the label we use the following
cell id encoding: the ﬁrst digit represents the cell cube face with a digit between 0 to 5.
The next digits represent for each level the corresponding node in the quad tree with a digit
between 0 to 3. See Tab. 3 for a cell encoding example. Note that the label is a sequence
of digits with a variant length between 1 and 1+max level.
Table 3: Cell encoding.
Cell description
Cell representation
Face cell 2
2
Subcell 2 of face cell 1
12
Subcell 1 of subcell 3 of face 4
431
4
Model
4.1
Train
The model presented in this paper is based on the T5-base (220M) pre-trained sequence-
to-sequence model [9]. The model was ﬁne-tuned on the wikidata dataset with the text
records as input and the location cell encoding as the output target sequence. We chose to
utilize the standard cross-entropy loss in the ﬁne-tuning process. Evaluation of level-based
weighting in the loss function is left for future work. We trained for 2M steps over 5 epochs
with batch size of 12. We used the AdamW optimizer with learning rate 1.5e-5 and linear
decay. We train the model on 80% of the wiki-data dataset and use the other 20% for in-
domain evaluation. A diagram of our text-to-location framework with a few input/output
examples is shown in Fig. 4.
5

Figure 4: A diagram of our text-to-location framework.
Figure 5: Prediction results for the text ”Haifa”. The predicted S2 cell in blue and its
ancestor cells in white.
4.2
Evaluation
4.2.1
Inference
The inference of our resulting model is as follows: given a sentence we predict the output
sequence. Naturally it wold be 1 digit between 0 to 5 representing the predicted cube face,
followed by up to 9 digits between 0-3 representing the predicted s2cell on each level. This
sequence can easily converted to a s2 cell, which represents the probability distribution over
the earth for the input text location. We used a beam search with size of 10. See Fig. 5 for
inference example.
4.2.2
Evaluation Metric
The most straightforward classiﬁcation metric is the ”accuracy measure” where only predic-
tions with a full match between the model’s output and the true label counts as a successful
prediction. We call this metric ”Flat Accuracy” (as oppose to ”Hierarchical Accuracy”).
6

This metric fails to capture the inherent hierarchical nature of the label. Another measure
is the ”Mean distance error”. Mean distance error averages the distances between the pre-
dicted location (center of the predicted S2 cell in our case) and true location of the target
text. It too fails to capture the hierarchical nature of the label.
For this reason we prefer a hierarchical classiﬁcation metric described in Hierarchy-
Speciﬁc Variations on the Regular Classiﬁcation Metrics [10]. Those are variations of the
well-known precision, recall and f-score metrics, speciﬁcally adapted to ﬁt hierarchical clas-
siﬁcation:
hierarchical precision (hP):
hP =
P
i |Pi ∩Ti|
P
i |Pi|
,
(1)
hierarchical recall (hR):
hR =
P
i |Pi ∩Ti|
P
i |Ti|
,
(2)
and hierarchical f-measure (hF):
hF = 2 ∗hP ∗hR
hP + hR
(3)
where Pi is the set consisting of the most speciﬁc class predicted for each test example i, and
all of its ancestor classes. Ti is the set consisting of the true most speciﬁc class of test example
i, and all its ancestor classes. Each summation is computed over all of the test set examples.
5
Results
In this section, the performance of the developed geocoding model is presented and analyzed.
To demonstrate the performance of the model, let us ﬁrst present several inference examples
of the model. The examples of the predicted samples are given in Tab. 4.
Table 4: Inference examples - true and predicted labels.
Text
Predicted Label
True Label
townland in Drummaan, County Clare, Ireland
21002321
21002321
lake in Eksj¨o Municipality, Sweden
20302303
20302303
ancient monument in Denmark (2976)
20331122
20331122
school in Cheshire West and Chester, UK
210033112
210033113
mountain in Iran
1333313
133302
railway stop in Harburg, Germany
20331203
20331022
It is diﬃcult to compare two sequences due to the fact that two adjacent cells can have
very diﬀerent sequences in terms of string comparison.
This results from the fact that
two adjacent cells can originate from diﬀerent parent cells. To visualize the results, a web
demo application powered by the fune-tuned model was constructed. This demo application
can facilitate an intuitive comparison between the predicted and the true label. Inference
examples using this application are given in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and Fig. 8.
7

Figure 6: Prediction results for the text ”Paciﬁc ocean”.
Figure 7: Prediction results for the text ”South”. We can assume large amount of South
African samples biased the prediction.
Evaluation results on the wikidata test split using the metrics described in section 4.2.2
are given in Tab. 5.
Table 5: Evaluation results.
Evaluation metric
Results
Flat accuracy
0.51547
Hierarchy accuracy
0.791
8

Figure 8: Prediction results for the text ”Paris”.
6
Conclusions
In this paper we formulated the problem of geocoding as a sequence-to-sequence problem
and trained a transformer model for geocoding. To leverage the capabilities of a language
model, a pre-trained T5 model was used for ﬁne-tuning. For the sequence representation
of the geolocation label, an adaptive cell partitioning was used.
The free text and its
corresponding geolocation were obtained from wikidata. The evaluation of the model on
both hierarchical and non-hierarchical metrics demonstrated the validity of the proposed
approach for geolocation prediction.
The free text at inference time sometimes only hints at a location. It is our intuition
that by combining a huge decoder such as GPT3 [11] to produce more location-coherent
text from an obscure location reference and then feeding it to T5 could improve the model’s
performance. This evaluation is left for future work. In addition, we leave for future work
the evaluation of our approach on a benchmark such as Wikipedia Toponym Retrieval [12].
