Wise Computing 
Towards Endowing System Development with True Wisdom  
 
(Preliminary Version; January 2015) 
David Harel, Guy Katz, Rami Marelly and Assaf Marron 
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 
Abstract. Encouraged by significant advances in algorithms and tools for veri-
fication and analysis, high level modeling and programming techniques, natural 
language programming, etc., we feel it is time for a major change in the way 
complex software and systems are developed. We present a vision that will shift 
the power balance between human engineers and the development and runtime 
environments. The idea is to endow the computer with human-like wisdom – 
not general wisdom, and not AI in the standard sense of the term – but wisdom 
geared towards classical system-building, which will be manifested, throughout 
development, in creativity and proactivity, and deep insights into the system's 
own structure and behavior, its overarching goals and rationale. Ideally, the 
computer will join the development team as an equal partner – knowledgeable, 
concerned, and responsibly active. We present a running demo of our initial ef-
forts on the topic, illustrating on a small example what we feel is the feasibility 
of the ideas. 
 
1 
What is the problem?  
Major advances in languages, tools and methodologies have improved our ability to 
develop reactive systems, but the task remains very difficult, expensive and error 
prone. Deliverables can fail, bringing in their wake disastrous results that are far 
worse than merely exceeding budgets and time schedules. One of the key reasons for 
this gap is that the sheer complexity of many kinds of reactive systems keeps grow-
ing, and increasingly prevents the human mind from managing a comprehensive pic-
ture of all relevant elements and behaviors of the system and its environment. Also, of 
course, in general, the state-explosion problem prevents us from exhaustively analyz-
ing all possible behaviors of the system. 
While each new generation of languages and tools helps tackle the above issues, 
the solutions reach their limits, and resolving the great difficulties of developing reli-
able reactive systems remains a major, and critical, moving target.  
2 
Oh, wouldn't it be nice if . . .  
Our vision is to bring about a major change in the way complex software and systems 
are developed, by shifting the power balance between the human engineers and the 
development and runtime environments. Encouraged by the many recent advances in 

several fields, we propose a novel computing paradigm, whereby we turn the devel-
opment environment, as well as the final system itself, into a much smarter, proactive, 
creative and interactive stakeholder in the development process and during execution 
and maintenance. Ideally, the computer will join the development team as an equal 
partner – knowledgeable, concerned, and active. Implementing such a vision would 
require one to harness many ideas, algorithms, techniques and tools, developed by 
researchers over the years. 
As a small example, a wise environment will be able – on its own – to identify a 
missing requirement of an alarm for the loss of communication with a temperature 
sensor, explain that without such sensor data the system will keep a certain door shut 
to reduce risk of fire, and recommend that before opening the door manually, one 
should check for fire on the other side. And all this communication will be carried out 
in very high level fashion. 
As another example, consider a control system being developed for a chemical 
plant. Suppose we could ask the system “what happens if the temperature sensor mal-
functions during this-or-that procedure?”, using terminology that may or may not 
exist at the time within the system. And suppose that a wise development environ-
ment could not only answer such questions, but proceed to check system behaviors 
and properties, including such that were not explicitly specified by humans. It would 
then alert us proactively, for example, to the fact that some new functionality might 
affect a previously specified critical behavior; e.g., that an alarm device previously 
dedicated to one situation is used also for another situation, possibly confusing human 
operators.  
Moreover, suppose that years after initial development, we wanted to add function-
ality to deal with a new kind of remote safety monitoring standard. Wouldn't it be 
wonderful if the system could be told about this in an easy-to-use visual fashion, or in 
natural language and it would indicate to us (in a similar language) the affected parts 
in the system? Indeed, even the mere confirmation that such functionality does not yet 
exist would already be extremely valuable. 
We have felt for some time now that, given the great amount of relevant existing 
research, the time seems ripe to seriously address the aspirations voiced above. And 
indeed, for several months we have been working hard on the broad concept underly-
ing them, which we term wise computing. Interestingly, just as we were getting ready 
to finalize this initial paper on the topic, past ACM president Vinton Cerf published a 
CACM column (Jan. 2015) expressing the hope that people might consider working 
on (parts of) this kind of vision. 
3 
A lot has already been done  
There is a tremendous amount of past research that is key to addressing the ideas 
voiced in this paper. This includes work on new programming paradigms and lan-
guages, as well as model-driven engineering methods and tools, and domain-specific 
languages and architecture frameworks. Specific technical areas include requirements 
engineering, test generation, verification, synthesis, specification mining, code analy-
sis and refactoring, model queries, ontologies, knowledge representation and engi-

neering, learning, natural language processing, human machine interface, planning, 
multi-agent techniques, search and recommender systems for software engineering, 
and more.  
Being a vision paper, we shall not provide here a detailed review of these fields 
and of their main relevance to our ideas. In lieu of this, we are preparing a supplemen-
tary document on related work, which will be continuously updated and enriched, and 
which will be placed here:  
 
http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~harel/wisecomputing.  
 The work our group has done on an earlier and more modest dream, termed at the 
time liberating programming, is in a way a precursor to the present vision. In a 2008 
paper, we suggested that, using a scenario-based development approach, programmers 
could be brought a lot closer to the way we “program” others; i.e., the way we explain 
things to our children, employees, students, etc., in order for them to attempt to under-
stand what we had in mind and act accordingly. We have termed a generalized ver-
sion of this approach behavioral programming (BP). 
4 
So what is missing?  
Well, even with all the work done over the years, the computer being programmed is 
still that passive obedient servant, doing what it is told. Yes, the system and its devel-
opment environment have been made smarter, understanding programming on higher 
levels of abstraction, and being able to rely on examples and adapt to changes in its 
environment. Yes, a system can now deal with more natural, multi-modal, incremen-
tal specifications of inter-object scenarios, in a style that is closer to the way humans 
think about reactive behavior. And yes, we are better at analyzing, testing, verifying, 
and perhaps even synthesizing reactive systems. But the process is still one-way: it is 
still us instructing it, the computer, while all it does is make an effort to understand 
what we had in mind (assuming that we ourselves have a clear picture thereof...). 
These capabilities are still very different from how humans interact when they plan 
new systems, discuss how to deal with new tasks, or teach or coach others. Such ac-
tivities are two-way, and involve far more elaborate relationships and complex and 
subtle processes that take into account deep knowledge, both tacit and explicit, and 
many, often conflicting, desires, needs and constraints. All sides to the collaboration 
contribute their knowledge and wisdom to the effort, in line with the dynamics of the 
project’s development, and very often at their own initiative, unprompted. 
And so, we believe that a major breakthrough is called for, fundamentally changing 
the relationship between the human engineer and the development tool/environment. 
It is about time we considered treating the computer we are programming as an entity 
capable of far deeper wisdom about behavior and development than is currently 
thought. Such an entity would interact with us wisely, like a colleague. It could re-
spond to our needs with knowledge and, utilizing extensive computing power it would 
have “under the hood”, could proactively help in the variety of tasks that constitute 
the development process of the actual desired system. 

5 
Here is what we would like 
The wise development suite, or the WDS, as we shall call it, should become a creative 
and proactive stakeholder, perhaps even a leader, in the development process (see 
Fig. 1). It will possess aspects of human-like wisdom – not general wisdom, but wis-
dom geared towards system-building. This will be manifested in it initiating discourse 
and actions based on deep insights into the system's own structure and behavior, and 
its overarching goals and rationale.  
 
Fig. 1.  The WDS (wise development suite) joins the stakeholders and developers as an equal, 
knowledgeable, proactive partner throughout the lifecycle of system and software engineering. 
The WDS should use relevant knowledge (both general and domain-specific), 
which may not be captured explicitly within the system itself, and it should have the 
ability to distinguish between what is essential and what is of only secondary im-
portance. It will participate in the elicitation, formalization, validation and iterative 
enrichment of requirements, thus helping to increase confidence in the semantics and 
intention of the requirements, and establishing their consistency and inter- relation-
ships. And clearly, in the spirit of almost 30 years of model-driven development, the 
WDS will also be central to the ability to directly execute/simulate those requirements 
and/or translate them into running application code. 
We would like all of this done so that the constant “worrying” about whether 
things will work right will flow in both directions between the human and the system.  
The interaction part of the WDS will be characterized by an ability to use various 
levels of abstraction, suitable for the topic and for the human and machine partici-
pants. It will use visual representations, examples, pseudo- and conventional code, 
etc., enabling understanding by a wide range of stakeholders. 
A key capability will be the use of natural language in both directions. Indeed, de-
spite much work on controlled natural languages for requirements and program speci-
fication, we are still far from the point where we can automatically read and parse 
requirements specified in a way that is natural and accessible to humans, and from 
them create a correct formal specification.  
The WDS will be able to explore functionality and behavior both exhaustively and 
under various “what-if” conditions and use-cases, communicating on multiple levels. 
Throughout development and maintenance, the computer will thus be constantly in-
vestigating itself, in a sort of self-aware fashion. On the one hand, it will enhance 
models and documentation to help human understanding, and, on the other hand, it 

will be constantly “concerned”, like a worrisome colleague. It will detect problems in 
the system under development, including bad behaviors, conflicting behaviors, goals 
and requirements that are not met, missing specifications where human instructions 
are needed, inefficiencies in execution, and unneeded complexities in specification 
and implementation. The WDS will then initiate and propose changes and enhance-
ments, including, if needed, refactoring and restructuring to help resolve issues.  
Returning to the chemical plant example, the WDS will be able – on its own – to 
detect a missing alarm or safety check, detect that another alarm has no time limit or 
reset facility, identify a potential undesired valve opening, predict what will happen 
(and why) following changes proposed by programmers or by the WDS itself, and 
identify ways to simplify the decision of when to open the valve.  
At runtime, the system will be able to interact with users and with other systems in 
order to explain past behavior and allow the user to influence future behaviors, creat-
ing a new dimension of control. For example, a door in a chemical plant or an air-
plane will be able to explain to a human why it is presently closed, what will happen 
if it is manually opened, and discuss in detail sensor information and alternative se-
quences of manual and automated actions associated with opening and closing it.  
The system's knowledge will come from broad and multi-faceted sources. It will 
not be limited to the project at hand. Rather, it will reflect cumulative organization-
wide and industry-wide knowledge about similar systems, about the problem domain 
with its standards and practices, and about system engineering in general. Such 
knowledge will keep evolving and be constantly disseminated and expanded.  
Our goal is not full automation that creates a black-box system from natural speci-
fications. Rather, we envision the creation of an environment that serves as a proac-
tive stakeholder, who can share insightful information, criticism and suggestions with 
humans throughout the system's life span. This can benefit even systems initially 
created by full automation. 
The most immediate benefit of a wise computing suite will be, of course, a signifi-
cant reduction in the development time and cost of complex systems, and will result 
in improved system quality. Run-time wisdom, combined with ubiquitous run-time 
human interaction, will increase user and regulator confidence in systems, further 
expanding development and adoption. And over and above all of this, we believe that 
in the farther future we will experience new dimensions of innovation, as rich new 
capabilities and new ranges of safety will be initiated (nay, invented!) by wise sys-
tems, rather than only by humans.  
How will it do all this?  Well, some of our ideas on this are explained in the next 
section and some capabilities along these lines (albeit a very modest collection there-
of) are present already in our initial work, demonstrated in Section 7.  
6 
Towards getting it done  
Our dream is not about artificial intelligence in the standard sense of the term. It is 
also not about programming or verification per-se, or about automating system devel-
opment. It is about turning today's one-way engineering process of developing com-
plex systems into a wise, interactive two-way endeavor.  

The aforementioned work in our group on liberating programming, and the BP 
paradigm, enables humans to build a system in a way that is aligned with how they 
perceive its desired behavior and functionality. While these developments can serve 
as supporting building blocks in wise computing, they are far from enough. First, the 
feasibility of wise computing does not prescribe any particular approach to program-
ming (though our initial effort described in Section 7 was carried out within the BP 
framework). Second, we propose that the focus shift to what the system itself and its 
supporting environment, the WDS, know about the system and how they can use this 
knowledge.  
To accomplish this, we believe that a coordinated and interwoven 3-prong research 
effort is needed, building upon the most powerful existing means: (i) new ways for 
representing and structuring knowledge about systems, (ii) new algorithms for analyz-
ing and understanding systems, and (iii) new approaches to human-computer dis-
course about systems.  
These three, even if carried out to perfection, will not be adequate on their own. A 
major part of the work on wise computing will have to deal with putting together a 
comprehensive system development tool, with a corresponding methodology, which 
will include all three facets of the approach, and which the engineers should find ex-
tremely productive and reliable, as well as pleasant and intuitive to use. Moreover, 
such a wise computing tool would have to be relevant throughout the lifetime of even 
very large and complex systems. Hence, scale-up will become a crucial issue in all 
parts of the effort, as will a sort of legacy-retaining nature. 
6.1 
Representation and structuring 
 
Wise computing will require us to develop powerful ways, accompanied by rigor-
ous semantics, to represent behavior, structure, and other related system information 
in models and in executable specifications, adding to and complementing those pres-
ently in use in research and in mainstream development practices. Such means should 
include the ability to express multiple coexisting levels of abstraction, and interrela-
tionships between and among components and behaviors, as well as ways to define 
preferences and priorities in application-agnostic ways.  
This would entail having adequate methods to represent the integrated management 
of different types of system properties, such as behavioral and structural, discrete and 
continuous, deterministic and stochastic, object-centric and inter-object. The interrela-
tionships between behaviors would have to include creating cross-behavior awareness 
(e.g., awareness of state or properties thereof) without adversely affecting encapsula-
tion, as well as to accommodate the dependencies created in natural processes when 
humans describe behavior incrementally. A common example is the case of rules and 
exceptions, such as “whenever the system does X, it should also do Y, and not do Z 
unless condition C holds”. 
Such formalisms could extend concepts from approaches such as scenario-
based/behavioral programming, as well as from statecharts, aspect orientation, 
contract-based design, behavior-intention-priority (BIP), feature oriented software 
development, and the subsumption architecture, in order to combine natural discourse 
with robust design. The abstractions will allow natural, yet precise and verifiable, 

refinement. And it is here that research on natural language processing in the context 
of programming comes in too. 
Knowledge bases and ontologies containing general software engineering and do-
main-specific and project-specific knowledge, as well as techniques to access and 
utilize them, will have to be significantly enhanced, so that they will serve as support 
for the WDS. The required information will be built from existing ontologies, indus-
try standards and reference documents as well as information provided by project 
stakeholders, and/or fed through crowd sourcing and search-and-recommender sys-
tems.    
An important aspect of the approach is to allow both gaps and overlaps in the spec-
ifications or executables. Overlaps play a key role in accommodating multiple stake-
holders and gaps are a natural product of a system's evolution. Using its structuring 
capabilities, the WDS will be able to identify gaps, either helping to eliminate or re-
duce them, or facilitating “living with them” for as long as possible. 
6.2 
Analysis and comprehension 
Suitable ways will have to be devised to render the WDS capable of “understanding” 
what a system does or needs to do, and to explain this to the stakeholders. Such algo-
rithms will undoubtedly use (and modify or extend as needed) state-of-the-art tech-
niques in many of the fields mentioned earlier, like verification, synthesis, and learn-
ing. In particular, there will be algorithms that deal with exploring predicted behavior, 
identifying bad behaviors, conflicts and underspecification, and proposing necessary 
corrections. 
 The design will be tied to the requirements and to the general and domain-specific 
knowledge, which will enable insightful discourse regarding requirement tracking and 
impact analysis, as well as detection of missing requirements or design omissions.  
One of our goals is to be able to identify complex behavioral dependencies and 
causalities, which can be simplified for clarity or otherwise modified for better per-
formance. The WDS will then drive such changes by streamlining individual compo-
nents and by identifying and consolidating otherwise hidden emergent patterns. Ideal-
ly, the patterns will not be just syntactical, but will emerge from understanding the 
relationships between requirements, functions and structures, representing concepts 
that are meaningful to human stakeholders. The focus will be on offering design sim-
plification in view of both the individual changes and the composite system. 
An obvious problem with almost any kind of analysis is computational complexity 
and the state explosion problem. We will make an effort to enhance the ability to deal 
with this by working on multiple levels of abstraction and exploiting modularity. As 
to the latter, we will take advantage of the modularity offered by the programming 
medium involved (in our case, BP) to yield, when possible, more efficient composi-
tional verification. We already have some preliminary results (as of yet unpublished) 
in applying SMT solvers to behavioral programs, which support this.  
6.3  
Human-computer discourse 
The interaction with the WDS must be powerful, yet readily usable by a variety of 
stakeholders. There appears to be a need for a new high-level interaction language, 

utilizing, where applicable, ideas from previous work on visual formalisms and GUI-
based play-in, as well as on natural language, temporal logics, and the variety of exist-
ing collaboration languages.  
Both the computer and the user will be able to refer to system-generated and user-
generated insights and recommendations. These include goals and requirements, rea-
sons for achieving or not achieving them, various system properties, progression and 
results of event sequences.  
Interactions will be two-way, initiated by the human or the WDS, and, as discussed 
earlier, it will be possible to carry them out in natural language too. They will also be 
hierarchical, so that interaction elements will be composable into higher level ones, 
and they will be relevant in all stages of the project.  
Since the WDS is expected to deal also with the system as it evolves through itera-
tive development and maintenance, it will have to maintain a great deal of past infor-
mation, such as answers to queries and properties previously verified or documented. 
Thus, what is sometimes referred to as the human's mental model of the system under 
development will be enhanced in the wise computing world by this grand collection 
of evolving maintained artifacts, common to the human engineers and the WDS.  
7 
Demonstrating our initial work 
We end this initial paper on wise computing by illustrating the feasibility of some of 
its ideas. A pre-recorded demo of our preliminary and very modest wise computing 
system, over-voiced with explanations, can be downloaded from here:  
http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~harel/wisecomputing.   
We emphasize “preliminary” and “modest” for several reasons. First, despite prior 
work in many fields, we believe that much of the vision described above is not yet 
doable in its desired generality. For example, the demo does not yet illustrate what-if 
queries or natural language input, nor does it work on multiple levels of detail. In 
addition, it involves an extremely simple example, and the numerous issues of scale-
up are yet to be dealt with.  
Still, the work we have already done in constructing the “mini-WDS” that under-
lies the demo was far from trivial, and it exhibits new ideas beyond what we have 
seen in current system development tools. In any case, it seems to point to the feasi-
bility of wise computing.   
As explained orally in the demo itself, the tool involves three new components, 
over and above the programming language itself (BPC; i.e., behavioral programming 
in C++, allowing the waiting, requesting and blocking of events.1) and the other exist-
ing tools we use, such as a model checker and an SMT solver. We call these compo-
nents the three sisters: Athena, Regina and Livia. 
Very briefly, Athena, the wise one, works proactively, in an offline fashion, during 
development. On her own, she uses formal tools such as a model checker to analyze 
things she feels to be relevant, and produces mathematically accurate conclusions that 
are valid for all runs.  
                                                          
1   D. Harel and G. Katz, "Scaling-Up Behavioral Programming: Steps from Basic Principles to Application 
Architectures", Proc. 4th SPLASH AGERE! Workshop,  2014 

Regina, more regal than her sisters, and also working offline, actually runs the sys-
tem proactively many times, collecting statistical information as she goes. In what can 
be seen as a form of specification mining, she then attempts to reach interesting con-
clusions, and makes suggestions to the user. Her conclusions may not be valid in all 
runs, but they have the advantage of reflecting numerous executions, and thus can 
capture what will happen in typical runs.  
Finally, Livia works in a live online fashion, monitoring the system as it runs and 
helping the user or designer handle all kinds of situations in real time. She also sup-
ports integrating executed scenarios into the system as test-cases (i.e., playing them 
in), applying coverage criteria to check for test redundancy.  
The three sisters can call upon each other for help – e.g., Livia can call Athena to 
verify whether an observed property indeed always holds.  
In order to illustrate the inner workings of a future wise computing system, here is 
a high-level description of parts of Athena's current algorithm. More details, as well 
as similar descriptions of Regina and Livia, will be published separately. 
   
    Identifying threads: Athena parses the program's source files, seeking the threads.  
    Constructing state graphs: Athena runs each thread in a sandbox to construct a 
representation of its states and transitions. 
Partitioning: A thread “cares about” an event if in many of its states it affects or is 
affected by it. This definition induces a partitioning of the threads into modules, each 
including those that care about the same event. Through thread partitioning, Athena 
can recognize parts of the code that deal with the same facet of the system.  
 Pattern matching: Here Athena identifies patterns in the threads' state graphs and 
extracts relevant information. Supported patterns currently include cyclic threads, 
array components, periodic programs, sensor/actuator threads, and more.   
 Deciding what to check: Some properties are general (e.g., deadlock freedom) 
while others are program-specific. If Athena detects an array component in the pro-
gram, she might decide to check that information stored in the array eventually gets 
read. In a periodic program she can check that no task deadlines are breached.  
 Checking and recommending: Built atop the BPC framework, Athena (and also 
Regina and Livia) has interfaces to several verification tools that we have developed 
in the last few years within the BP and BPC framework: a special model checker, an 
abstraction-refinement mechanism, automatic correction tools, synchronization relax-
ation tools, and an SMT solver. Based on the property at hand, these tools can be 
invoked. Athena presents to the programmer the conclusions she reaches, and will 
attempt to suggest ways to correct problems she found (often by synthesizing or mod-
ifying program threads). 
8 
Conclusion  
 
We are excited by the wise computing vision outlined here. Clearly there is much 
previous work that is deeply relevant to it (see the supplementary document men-
tioned earlier), and which will have to be adapted and extended before it can be in-
corporated into a serious and useful wise computing development suite. Still, we hope 
that the paper and accompanying demo will inspire other research groups to become 
part of an effort to bring wise computing to fruition. We plan to carry out our own 

work on the topic using an open-source and extendible conceptual architecture and 
infrastructure.
