arXiv:2101.01669v3  [cs.SI]  14 Aug 2021
1
A Survey of Community Detection Approaches:
From Statistical Modeling to Deep Learning
Di Jin, Zhizhi Yu, Pengfei Jiao, Shirui Pan, Dongxiao He, Jia Wu,
Philip S. Yu and Weixiong Zhang
Abstract—Community detection, a fundamental task for network analysis, aims to partition a network into multiple sub-structures to
help reveal their latent functions. Community detection has been extensively studied in and broadly applied to many real-world network
problems. Classical approaches to community detection typically utilize probabilistic graphical models and adopt a variety of prior
knowledge to infer community structures. As the problems that network methods try to solve and the network data to be analyzed
become increasingly more sophisticated, new approaches have also been proposed and developed, particularly those that utilize deep
learning and convert networked data into low dimensional representation. Despite all the recent advancement, there is still a lack of
insightful understanding of the theoretical and methodological underpinning of community detection, which will be critically important for
future development of the area of network analysis. In this paper, we develop and present a uniﬁed architecture of network community-
ﬁnding methods to characterize the state-of-the-art of the ﬁeld of community detection. Speciﬁcally, we provide a comprehensive review
of the existing community detection methods and introduce a new taxonomy that divides the existing methods into two categories, namely
probabilistic graphical model and deep learning. We then discuss in detail the main idea behind each method in the two categories.
Furthermore, to promote future development of community detection, we release several benchmark datasets from several problem
domains and highlight their applications to various network analysis tasks. We conclude with discussions of the challenges of the ﬁeld
and suggestions of possible directions for future research.
Index Terms—Complex Network, Community Detection, Graph Clustering, Statistical Modeling, Deep Learning.
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
N
ETWORK science is the study of complex systems in
the form of networks using theories and techniques of
computer science, mathematics and physics. In particular,
network structures [1] (see an example in Fig 1) have been
studied extensively under the notions of subgraphs, net-
work modules, and communities. Identiﬁcation of network
structures or community detection is to divide nodes in
a network into groups where the nodes in a group are
densely connected whereas nodes in different groups are
sparsely linked. Mining network structures is also the key
to revealing and comprehending organizational principles
and operational functions of complex network systems. For
example, community detection has been applied to recom-
mendation [2], [3], anomaly detection [4], [5], and terrorist
organization identiﬁcation [6], just to name a few. Much
effort has also been devoted to the analysis of network
structural properties, e.g., the small world effect (i.e., the
average distance between nodes is short [8]) and the scale
free property (i.e., the distribution of node degrees follows
a power law distribution [9]).
Many algorithms for community detection have been
proposed, a majority of which employ exclusively the in-
formation of network topology. They include hierarchical
•
D. Jin, Z. Yu, P. Jiao and D. He are with Tianjin University, China.
•
S. Pan is with Monash University, Australia.
•
J. Wu is with Macquarie University, Australia.
•
P. S. Yu is with University of Illinois at Chicago, USA.
•
W. Zhang is with Washington University, USA.
•
Corresponding author: Pengfei Jiao.
Fig. 1: An illustrative example (Zacharys karate club net-
work [7]) showing community structure. The nodes of this
network are divided into two groups, with most connections
falling within groups and only a few between groups.
clustering [10] [11], modularity optimization [12] [13] [14],
spectral clustering [15] [16] and statistical inference [17] [18].
New methods were developed to utilize node semantics or
node attributes in addition to network topology to improve
the quality of resulting communities and meanwhile pro-
vide explanation to the results. These include heuristic opti-
mization (multi-objective) [19] [20], matrix factorization [21]
[22] and Bayesian model [23]. As more complex network
problems were tackled, complex network data from mul-
tiple sources, e.g., network topology and node semantics,
must be effectively integrated. As a result, it became difﬁcult
for these traditional approaches to perform data fusion
effectively on data of very high dimensions and diverse
xxxx-xxxx/0x/$xx.00 © 200x IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society

2
properties. The technique of deep learning was recently
adopted to handle the high dimensional network data and
learn low-dimensional representation of network structures.
Examples include methods based on the auto-encoder [24]
[25] and the generative adversarial approach [26] [27].
An important and effective idea for community detec-
tion is to learn an adequate representation of the network
structure of a given network. We call such approaches
learning-based community detection. Among these methods are
the model-based generative models. The most popular and
representative example is the stochastic block model (SBM)
[28], which detects communities by formalizing a generative
process of a network as a sequence of rigorous probability
distributions. Several extensions and improvements have
been introduced to boost the performance of SBM [29] [30].
Another model-based learning approach adopts Markov
random ﬁeld (MRF), an undirected graphical model, to
take advantage of neighborhood structures in networks [31].
A primary recent development in learning-based methods
exploits the low-dimensional representation capability of
deep learning. For instance, convolutional neural network
(CNN) [32] utilizes convolution and pooling operations to
reduce the dimensions of network data, so as to effectively
discover communities in networks. Graph convolutional
network (GCN) [33], which inherits the advantages of CNN
and directly operates on network structured data, has also
been explored to derive community representation [34].
Despite the endured effort to develop effective methods
for community detection [35], [36], there is still a lack of
understanding of the theoretical and methodological under-
pinning of community detection, particularly that based on
learning. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we will provide a
synthesized survey of the existing representative methods.
We focus particularly on two general lines of approaches,
one based on probabilistic modeling and the other on deep
learning. We start with a detailed description of each line of
the work and provide a thorough review and comparison
of the methods. We then consider several applications of
community detection in diverse ﬁelds. We ﬁnish with the
discussion of some critical challenges of the ﬁeld of network
analysis and directions for future rewarding research.
One of the major objectives of our survey is to provide
a new perspective on the existing methods to help better
understand the fundamental issues and enabling techniques
for community detection. Our survey differs from the pub-
lished ones in three aspects. First, we summarize the exist-
ing methods by focusing on learning, a central issue of com-
munity modeling and community detection, whereas the
existing reviews [37] [38] generally discuss the chronological
development of the existing methods. Second, we present a
recent trend in the development of methods for community
detection, i.e., from statistical modeling to deep learning,
while the others focus mainly on individual techniques,
e.g., evolutionary computation [39], statistical inference [40]
or deep learning [41]. Third, we present a uniﬁed system
architecture to characterize the existing methods, which
provides a novel and synthesized perspective on methods
based on statistical modeling and deep learning, which go
signiﬁcantly beyond some of the existing surveys [42] [43].
Last but not least, in the era of deep learning, as network
data become increasingly more complex and various ideas
and techniques have been proposed, a survey is urgently
needed to comprehensively unravel the inherent relation-
ships among the existing methods for community detection.
Aiming at offering a general guidance to researchers
and practitioners who are interested in network science and
network data analysis, we make our unique contributions
in this work as summarized below.
• We present the most comprehensive and extensive
overview of learning-based community detection and
divide them into two categories, probabilistic graphical
model and deep learning. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst attempt devoted to community detection
from the perspective of learning. It offers a solid founda-
tion for understanding the intuition behind community
detection, and can be used as a guideline for designing
and utilizing different methods for community detection.
• We provide a thorough theoretical analysis of learning-
based community detection methods, discuss their sim-
ilarities and differences, identify critical challenges that
remain poorly addressed and point out ﬁve directions for
future development.
• We gather abundant resources on learning-based com-
munity detection, including state-of-the-arts benchmark
datasets and applications.
The rest of this survey paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 gives the preliminaries and categorization of exist-
ing community detection approaches. Section 3 presents a
technical overview of research progress in statistical mod-
eling for community detection. Section 4 overviews the
research on deep learning-based community detection. Sec-
tion 5 discusses applications of community detection. We
suggest promising future research directions in Section 6
and conclude in Section 7.
2
PRELIMINARIES AND CATEGORIZATION
We ﬁrst introduce the terms and notations, and then present
a classiﬁcation of the methods for community detection that
we will discuss in this paper.
2.1
Deﬁnitions, Terms and Notations
Deﬁnition 1. Network. A network G = (V, E, X) consists of
n nodes V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn}, m edges E = {eij} ⊆V × V ,
and a maximal number q of attributes xi on a node vi, where
all xi’s collectively give rise to an n × q attribute matrix
X = (xi)n×q. The topological structure of G can be deﬁned
by an n × n adjacency matrix A = (aij)n×n, where aij = 1
if eij ∈E, or 0, otherwise. G is undirected if aij = aji, or
directed, otherwise [42].
Deﬁnition 2. Community. The network G contains k
communities C = {C1, C2, . . . , Ck}, where Ci is a subgraph
of G and the nodes within Ci are densely connected whereas
the nodes across Ci and Cj are sparsely connected. The
communities are non-overlapping when Ci ∩Cj = ∅∀i, j.
Deﬁnition 3. Community Detection. Given a network
G, community detection is to design a mapping F to as-
sign every node vi of G into at least one of the k com-
munities, i.e., to label vi at least one community identity
ci ∈{C1, C2, . . . , Ck}. Equivalently, the problem is to derive
a community assignment of nodes C = (c1, c2, . . . , cn).

3
Fig. 2: Classiﬁcation breakdown of methods for community detection.
2.2
A Taxonomy of Community Detection Approaches
To help better understand the existing learning-based meth-
ods and facilitate our discussion in the rest of the paper,
we introduce a taxonomy of the methods for community
detection (Fig. 2) where the methods are grouped into two
categories, probabilistic graphical model and deep learning.
Probabilistic graphical model-based methods employ
heuristics or meta-heuristics on community generation to
discover network communities. These methods typically
adopt some models of network structures to describe the
dependencies among the entities (i.e., nodes) via the edges
of the networks. Depending the type of probabilistic graph-
ical models used, community detection can be further di-
vided into three main categories: directed graphical models,
undirected graphical models and hybrid graphical models.
Speciﬁcally, directed graphical models are mainly based on
hidden variables (i.e., variables not observed in the sample),
leveraging similarity of nodes or block structures, to gener-
ate the observed edges in a network; undirected graphical
models are usually based on ﬁeld structures, using the
constraints of unary and pairwise potentials (e.g., the com-
munity label agreement between nearby nodes) to discover
community; hybrid graphical models normally transform
these two types of models into a uniﬁed factor graph to
take advantages of both models for community detection.
Deep learning-based methods aim to identify com-
munity structures utilizing a new type of community-
oriented network representation. It derives the new net-
work representation through some learning strategies that
map network data from the original input space to a
low-dimensional feature space, with the advantages of
low computational complexity and high capability for par-
allelization. Depending on the learning strategies used,
deep learning-based methods fall into four main categories:
auto-encoder-based, generative adversarial network-based,
graph convolutional network (GCN)-based, and integrat-
ing graph convolutional networks and undirected graphi-
cal models. Concretely, auto-encoder-based methods exploit
unsupervised auto-encoder, which encodes a network into
a low-dimensional representation in the latent space and
reconstructs the network, along with its community struc-
tures, from the low-dimensional representation. Generative
adversarial network-based methods adopt the idea of ad-
versarial learning. They detect communities via an adver-
sarial game between a generator and a discriminator. Graph
convolutional network-based methods extract communities
by the propagation and aggregation of features on network
topology. Hybrid graphical model-based methods integrate
graphical convolutional networks and undirected graphical
models by, for example, converting a Markov random ﬁeld
(MRF) layer into GCN, to take advantages of both models.
3
COMMUNITY DETECTION WITH PROBABILISTIC
GRAPHICAL MODEL
Probabilistic graphical models-based methods ordinarily
detect communities through network modeling, i.e., em-
ploying graphical models to explain the generation process
of networks. In this section, we will focus on three general
methods: directed graphical models, undirected graphical
models, and hybrid graphical models integrating directed
and undirected graphs.
3.1
Directed Graphical Models
We will review the recent development of directed graph-
ical models for community detection, including stochastic
block model, topic model and matrix factorization. These
methods have solid theoretical basis and reasonably good
performance, and have been broadly applied.
3.1.1
Stochastic Block Model-based Methods
Stochastic block model (SBM), an effective generative model
of network block structures, adopts statistical modeling for

4
community detection for the ﬁrst time [28]. The method
probabilistically assigns nodes in a network to different
communities (block structures) using a node membership
likelihood function, and then progressively infers the prob-
abilities of node memberships by inferencing on the likeli-
hood function to derive hidden communities in the network.
Note that there are several SBM variants for community
detection, but their core generation process is the same. The
basic generation process can be divided into two steps: the
ﬁrst is to iteratively assign a community to each node in
the network, and the second is to compute or update the
probability of two nodes connected by an edge.
Taking a social network as an example, SBM can be used
to capture a probabilistic generation process with the com-
munity distribution as a hidden variable. The communities
can be reconstructed by maximizing a likelihood function
of the node community membership. In this social network,
the nodes are partitioned into k disjoint communities with
probability ω = {ω1, . . . , ωk}. Assuming there are two
nodes vi and vj belonging to two communities Cr and Cs,
represented by cir and cjs. The probability that nodes vi
and vj connected by an edge, i.e., aij (0 or 1), obeys a
Bernoulli distribution with parameter πrs. The use of a link
probability between nodes in two communities makes the
model ﬂexible with various types of network structures [44].
The network generation distribution can be deﬁned as:
P(C|ω) =
n
Y
i=1
Multinomial(ci; 1, ω) =
n
Y
i=1
k
Y
r=1
ωcir
r ,
(1)
P(A|C, π) =
n
Y
i<j
P(aij|ci, cj) =
n
Y
i<j
k
Y
r,s
Bernoulli(aij|πrs)circjs
=
n
Y
i<j
k
Y
r,s
(πaij
rs (1 −πrs)(1−aij))circjs,
(2)
where C = (c1, c2, . . . , cn) denotes the community assign-
ment of nodes, and π = (πrs)k×k represents the community
connection probability matrix. Then, the likelihood function
can be described as:
P(A, C|ω, π) = P(A|C, π)P(C|ω)
=
n
Y
i=1
k
Y
r=1
ωcir
r
×
n
Y
i<j
k
Y
r,s
(πaij
rs (1 −πrs)(1−aij))circjs.
(3)
Based on the likelihood function, Gibbs sampling and the
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm can be used to
obtain the model parameters, e.g., ω and π. Finally, we can
derive the community partition with the interaction model
between communities. The time complexity of the basic
SBM is O(n2k2), and the process of community detection
based on SBM with a Bernoulli distribution is shown in
Appendix B [28]. The generation process of the basic SBM
may also employ a Poisson distribution [45].
Later, Zhang et al. [46] study the problem of hidden class
inference in basic SBM. They present a comparative study
between three inference approaches, i.e., heuristic spectral
methods, mean ﬁeld approximation and belief propagation,
on synthetic networks.
Mixed membership SBMs. Since the basic SBM is only
suitable under the assumption that a node belongs to only
one community, Airoldi et al. [29] propose a mixed member-
ship stochastic blocks model (MMSB) that introduces mixed
membership to the stochastic model so that one node may
belong to multiple communities. MMSB allows communi-
ties to overlap on a directed network, where ai→j indicates
whether there is a link (arrow) from nodes vi to vj. For
each node vi, ci obeys a Multinomial distribution. If vi ∈Cr
and vj ∈Cs, the community connection probability πrs
follows a Beta distribution and ai→j ∼Multinomial(ωi),
ai←j ∼Multinomial(ωj), where ω is the mixed membership
parameter of nodes. The links between communities are rep-
resented by a Bernoulli distribution. The joint distribution of
MMSB can be formulated as:
P(A, π, ω, ai→j, ai←j|α, β) =
Y
i
P(ωi|α)×
P(π|β)
Y
i,j
P(ai→j|ωi)P(ai←j|ωj)P(aij|ai→j, ai←j, π).
(4)
The time complexity of MMSB is O(n2k), and the process
of community detection based on MMSB is described in
Appendix B [29], which assumes that the parameters are
estimated by inference methods such as EM.
The original MMSB is not good at handling diverse types
of the information of nodes in community, e.g., the nodes
may represent people who are connected one another based
on different social relationships. To address this problem,
Fan et al. [47] propose a novel MMSB-based method, named
Copula mixed membership stochastic block model (cMMSB)
to introduce a Copula function into MMSB to model depen-
dencies among nodes. Moreover, Miller et al. [48] improve
the inference of MMSB by introducing a Dirichlet process
mixture to a mixture of ﬁnite mixtures (MFMs). Pal et al.
[49] propose a mixed membership degree-correct SBM and
develop an inference method of the posterior distribution
with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), to boost the
embedding performance of MMSB. The degree-corrected
SBM is widely used, which we will discuss next.
Degree-corrected SBMs. Newman et al. [30] reason that
the basic SBM divides nodes according to their degrees that
are usually nonuniform distributed. To accommodate the
possible broad degree distributions, they propose degree-
corrected SBM (DCSBM), which introduces a degree param-
eter to every node to scale the edge probabilities and make
expected degrees match observed degrees. The probability
function of network G is deﬁned as follows:
P(G|π, c) =
Y
i<j
(πcicj)aij
aij!
exp(−πcicj)
×
Y
i
( 1
2πcici)aii/2
(aii/2)!
exp(−1
2πcici),
(5)
where πcicj is the expected value of the adjacency matrix
element aij.
There are also several variants of DCSBM model. Gu-
likers et al. [51] propose an improved DCSBM which is
feasible for sparse networks. Some other distinct lines of
effort are to improve and extend DCSBM by model in-

5
TABLE 1: Summary of SBM-based community detection, where ”AD k” describes whether the approach can automatically
determine the number of communities, i.e., Yes or No.
Categories
Approaches
Sketches
Overlapping
AD k
Basic
SBM (1983) [28]
Propose a stochastic model for social network.
No
No
MMSB
MMSB (2008) [29]
Extend blockmodels for relational data to ones that capture
mixed membership latent relational structure.
Yes
No
cMMSB (2016) [47]
Combine an individual Copula function with MMSB with
improved in capturing group interactions.
Yes
No
MMDCB (2019) [49]
Propose a mixed membership degree-correct SBM and develop
an inference method of the posterior distribution with Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
Yes
No
DCSBM
DCSBM (2012) [50]
Introduce expected values to basic SBM to adapt multi-edges
and self-edges contained in social networks.
Yes
No
sparseDCSBM (2017) [51]
Propose a spectral clustering algorithm with normalized adja-
cency matrix based on DCSBM.
No
Yes
CMM (2018) [52]
Establish a convexiﬁed modularity maximization approach for
estimating the hidden communities based on DCSBM.
No
No
NCV (2018) [53]
Provide a network cross-validation approach to determine the
hidden communities based on DCSBM.
No
No
DynSBM
dMMSB (2009) [54]
Propose a state space MMSB which can track across time
dynamic evolution.
Yes
No
DynamicSBM (2010) [55]
Propose a novel Bayesian approach for network tomographic
inference buliding on MMSB and apply in dynamic network.
No
No
DSBM (2011) [56]
Capture the evolution of community by modeling the transi-
tion of community memberships for individual nodes.
No
No
DBTDP (2014) [57]
Propose a dynamic stochastic block model with temporal
Dirichlet process for hidden community.
Yes
No
SBTM (2015) [58]
Provide a local search algorithm for the inference procedure of
time evolution.
No
No
dDCSBM (2016) [59]
Propose a dynamic DCSBM to model and monitor dynamic
networks that undergo a signiﬁcant structural change.
No
Yes
DPSBM (2019) [60]
Establish a fully Bayesian generation model with the hetero-
geneity of node degree.
No
Yes
SNR-DSBM/ER (2020) [61]
Focus on estimating the location of a single change point in
a dynamic stochastic block model and take a least squares
criterion function for evaluating each point in time.
No
Yes
OSBM
OSBM (2011) [62]
Provide a global and local variational technique for discover-
ing community.
Yes
No
K-LAFTER (2018) [63]
Present a small-variance asymptotics based SBM for overlap-
ping community detection.
Yes
Yes
MNPAOCD (2020) [64]
Optimize the inference process and expect parameters in pro-
ceeding.
Yes
Yes
LSBM
LMBP (2015) [18]
Combine heterogeneous distribution with SBM to link com-
munity detection.
Yes
Yes
GNNSBM
DGLRFM (2019) [65]
Design a GNN-based overlapping SBM framework and can be
adapted readily for other types of SBMs.
Yes
Yes
ference. Chen et al. [52] present a convexiﬁed modularity
maximization approach for estimating hidden communities
under DCSBM. Chen et al. [53] provide a network cross-
validation (NCV) approach based on a block-wise node-pair
splitting to determine the hidden communities for DCSBM.
Dynamic SBMs. Different from the above methods, an-
alyzing dynamic networks based on SBM is also a relatively
active ﬁeld. Yang et al. [56] suggest a dynamic stochastic
block model named DSBM, which progressively updates
the probabilistic model to ﬁnd community in large dynamic
sparse network. Speciﬁcally, DSBM uses the distribution of
model parameter instead of the most likely values for the
model parameters in prediction, and provides an ofﬂine
inference and an online inference to estimate the param-
eters. DSBM assumes that nodes in a dynamic network
remain unchanged. Letting CT = {C(1), C(2), ..., C(T )} be
the collection of community assignments of all nodes over T
discrete time steps, and the likelihood function of the model
is as follows:
P(W (T ), C(T )|ω, π, A) =
T
Y
t=1
P(W (t)|C(t), π)
T
Y
t=2
P(C(t)|C(t−1), A)P(C(1)|ω),
(6)
where W (t) and C(t) denote the snapshot of a network and
the community assignments of nodes at a given time step t.
The time complexity of DSBM is O(nT + mT + k2T ), and
its generation process is illustrated in Appendix B [56],
Following DSBM, Tang et al. [57] introduce the Dirichlet
process to SBM, which can ﬁnd the optimal number of
communities of evolution, and in turn, alleviate the problem
of ﬁxed community number of dynamic social networks. Xu
et al. [66] propose a new approach named stochastic block
transition model (SBTM) that includes two hidden Markov
assumptions for dynamic network. Wu et al. [67] propose
a full Bayesian generation model, which incorporates the

6
heterogeneity of the degrees of nodes to model dynamic
complex networks. Bhattacharjee et al. [61] optimize SBM
with change-point estimation in dynamic social networks.
Inspired by the success of MMSB, some dynamic SBMs
based on MMSB have been proposed. Xing et al. [55] propose
a variant MMSB model for dynamic networks. Fu et al. [54]
design a state space mixed membership stochastic block
model with crossing time. Besides, there also exists DCSBM-
based approaches. Wilson et al. [59] suggest a dynamic
version of DCSBM to model and monitor dynamic networks
that undergo a signiﬁcant structural change.
Others. In addition to the above methods, there are
several other extensions to the basic SBM where commu-
nities can overlap, as summarized in Table 2. For instance,
OSBM represents the SBM that are designed to ﬁnd over-
lapping communities and LSBM represents the SBM that
are extended to ﬁnd link community. Speciﬁcally, Latouche
et al. introduce OSBM with global and local variational
technology. Jin et al. [64] provide a stochastic model to ac-
commodate the relative importance and the expected degree
of every node in each community, and improve the inference
technique that it uses.
Link communities are often more informative and in-
tuitive than node communities, because links usually have
unique identities, whereas nodes may have multiple roles.
For instance, in a social network, most individuals belong
to multiple communities such as families or friends, while
the link between two individuals often exists for a dominant
reason, which may represent family ties or friendship. Fur-
thermore, multiple links connecting to a node may belong to
distinct link communities, so that the node can be assigned
to multiple communities of links. He et al. [18] combine
heterogeneous distributions (e.g., power law distribution) of
community sizes with SBM for link community detection.
They suggest a stochastic model for link community and
extend the model by introducing a scheme of interactive
bipartition. Besides the above models, Mehta et al. [65]
introduce graph neural network into SBM, which integrate
deep learning and SBM for the ﬁrst time.
3.1.2
Topic Model-based Methods
Topic model, such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [68],
is a statistical model capable of modeling hidden topics
behind texts in natural language processing. LDA models
topics by employing latent variables, which have attracted
signiﬁcant interests and have been widely used in detecting
communities. Topic models can be grouped into two cate-
gories: one models network structures as documents and the
other models attributes of network, such as user interests, to
detect communities.
Modeling network structures as documents. We take
LDA as an example to describe the principle of the methods
in the ﬁrst category. To be speciﬁc, a method in this group
ﬁrst assumes that each node in a network may belong
to multiple communities, and thus the communities are
regarded as ”topics” while the nodes are taken as ”docu-
ments”. It then selects several initial communities, and iter-
atively updates the communities according to the topology
of the network to obtain resulting communities. Among the
existing methods, a representative model is SSN-LDA [69],
which is a LDA-based hierarchical Bayesian algorithm on
link networks where communities are modeled as latent
variables. Nodes in such a social network are regarded
as social actors and edges as social interaction. Social in-
teraction proﬁle (SIP) of each social actor, consisted of a
set of neighbors and weights, is used to characterize the
actor. Speciﬁcally, in SSN-LDA, a social network is viewed
as a corpus, where social interaction proﬁles are regarded
as documents and the occurrence of social interaction is
deemed as words. The nodes are modeled as a corpus
by SSN-LDA, which mines communities on transformed
corpus, and this problem is equivalent to topic detection
on corpus utilizing LDA. The generation process of SSN-
LDA for one social interaction proﬁle (SIPi) is clariﬁed in
Appendix C [69], and the joint distribution is written as:
P(ai, ci, ⃗θi, ⃗φ|⃗α, ⃗β) =
Ni
Y
j=1
P(aij| ⃗
φci)P(ci|⃗θi)P(⃗θi|⃗α)P(⃗φ|⃗β),
(7)
where ⃗φ is the mixture component of community ci, Ni
is the number of social interactions in a social interaction
proﬁle (SIPi), ⃗θi is the community mixture proportion for
SIPi, and ⃗α and ⃗β are the Dirichlet prior distribution hyper-
parameters that are known. The time complexity of SSN-
LDA is O(mk).
Using social network attributes. Numerous topic mod-
els utilize attributes of social network, e.g., user interests, to
discover community. Yin et al. [70] propose to integrate com-
munity detection and topic model, which gives rise to latent
community topic analysis (LCTA). Their method divides the
sampling process into user node and link samplings. The
process is to sample all network connections after sampling
a user node, and exploit the sampling results of these two
stages as the sampling result of user node. LCTA assigns
community membership attributes to each user node and
link. After the sampling process, user nodes can be assigned
to communities based on community membership. The
advantage is that the two-stage sampling process forms a
sampling area with user nodes as the core, which can simu-
late the semantic inﬂuence of user nodes on surrounding
links. The disadvantage is that LCTA does not consider
the link relationship of social network when assuming the
degree of community membership, which may disconnect
individual communities. Further, Cha et al. [71] design a
tree relationship model according to the topic information of
followers in social network, use hierarchical LDA to model
the text information in tree relationship model, and propose
HLDA for semantic social network analysis.
A method of combining topic model with Bayesian
model is proposed recently by Xu et al. [72]. They deﬁne a
joint probability distribution for all possible attributed net-
works. For a given attributed social network to be clustered,
the model assigns a probability to each possible clustering of
nodes. Therefore, the clustering problem can be transferred
to the problem of ﬁnding the clusters that have the highest
probability. The algorithm for clustering attribute communi-
ties is shown in Appendix C [72]. The Bayesian probabilistic

7
model for clustering attributed networks is as follows:
P(α, θ, φ, A, X, C|ε, λ, µ, ν)
= P(α|ε)P(θ|λ)P(φ|µ, ν)P(C|α)P(A|C, φ)P(X|C, θ),
(8)
where α denotes the probability of the nodes belonging to
different communities, θ represents the attribute probability
distribution of nodes, φ denotes the edge occurrence proba-
bility between communities, ε and λ are the Dirichlet prior
distribution hyper-parameters, and µ and ν are the Beta
prior distribution hyper-parameters.
Later, He et al. [73] introduce a generative model for
simultaneously identifying communities and deriving their
semantic description. They combine a nested EM algorithm
with belief propagation, and explore the hidden correlation
between the two parts to improve resulting communities
and description. Jin et al. [74] observe that the attributes
usually embody a hierarchical semantic structure. To handle
this, they propose a novel Bayesian model named BTLSC,
which distinguishes words from background and general
from specialized topics.
Unlike traditional topic models that assume that the
topics of social network are independent, topic embedding
methods focus on describing correlations between topics
by embedding words and topics into topic models. He et
al. [75] present a topic embedding model that combines
distributed representation learning with topic correlation
modeling. Jin et al. [76] develop a novel topic embed-
ding model named community-enhanced topic embedding
(CeTe), which combines topic documents and network
structures to detect communities. CeTe consists of three
components: a document component for describing topics,
a topological component for representing network commu-
nities, and a probabilistic transition mechanism connecting
the ﬁrst two parts. Speciﬁcally, CeTe uses a DCSBM to
describe the sub-component of network community, where
communities obey a Dirichlet distribution, and topics obey
a Uniform distribution. For each document, the commu-
nity assignment is drawn from a Multinomial distribution,
whereas the link between two documents obeys a Bernoulli
distribution. For each word, CeTe draws topic distribution
following a Multinomial distribution.
3.1.3
Matrix Factorization-based Methods
Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) [77] is another
directed graphical model for community detection. Speciﬁ-
cally, the NMF-based methods assume there are k commu-
nities in a network, and deem the adjacency matrix A =
(aij)n×n ∈R+ as a non-negative matrix to be decomposed,
where aij denotes the likelihood if there is a connection
between nodes vi and vj. We deﬁne W = (wir)n×k ∈R+
and H = (hjr)n×k ∈R+, whose elements wir and hjr
represent the likelihoods that vi generates an out-edge, i.e.,
an edge starting from vi, and vj generates an in-edge, i.e., an
edge ending at vj, belonging to the r-th community. Then,
the likelihood that nodes vi and vj are connected can be
described as:
f
aij =
k
X
r=1
wirhT
jr.
(9)
As a result, the community detection problem can be repre-
sented as eA = WHT . In general, there are two classic loss
functions to evaluate the performance of NMF. One is the
square of the Frobenius norm of the difference between A
and eA [78], and the other is the KL-divergence that measures
their difference.
Furthermore, for a undirected network with A being
symmetric, the non-negative factorization matrices W and
H should be equal. In this paper, we use B to represent
these matrices, and the loss function can be written as:
J = min
B≥0

A −BBT 

2
F .
(10)
NMF is initially used to identify non-overlapped com-
munity. Since it is easily extendable, NMF has been adopted
to solve other types of community detection problems, such
as overlapping, attributed, dynamic and semi-supervised,
as summarized in Table 3.
Basic NMF. Kuang et al. [79] propose a general ap-
proach, which inherits the advantages of NMF by enforc-
ing non-negativity on the clustering assignment matrix, for
graph clustering. Shi et al. [80] present a novel pairwise
constrained non-negative symmetric matrix factorization
(PCSNMF) method, which imposes pairwise constraints
generated from ground-truth community information, to
improve the performance of community detection. Sun et
al. [81] design a non-negative symmetric encoder-decoder
approach to derive a better latent representation to improve
community detection. Unlike other NMF-based methods
that merely pay attention to the loss of the decoder, they
combine the loss of the decoder and encoder to construct a
uniﬁed loss function, so that the community membership of
each node obtained is clearer and more explanatory.
Overlapping NMF. Overlapping community detection
is another active research topic due to the overlapping and
nesting properties of real-world networks. Wang et al. [21]
develop a NMF framework to identify non-overlapping and
overlapping community structure, and give a symmetric
NMF formula for undirected networks. Moreover, they clar-
ify the methods on asymmetric NMF and joint NMF, where
the former is capable of identifying community structures
in directed networks, while the latter is more suitable for
compound networks (e.g., an automatic movie recommen-
dation system which contains three networks: user net-
work, movie network and user-movie network). Yang et
al. [82] present a cluster afﬁliation model BIGCLAM to
detect densely overlapping, hierarchically nested, and non-
overlapping communities in a massive network. Speciﬁcally,
BIGCLAM ﬁrst builds on communities based on community
afﬁliation of nodes, i.e., each node has an afﬁliation strength
to each community via assigning node-community pair a
non-negative latent factor, and then combines the NMF
with block stochastic gradient descent, so as to estimate the
non-negative latent factors to detect communities in large
networks. The loss function of the model is deﬁned as:
J =
X
eij∈E
log(1 −exp(−bibT
j )) −
X
eij /∈E
bibT
j .
(11)
The time complexity of BIGCLAM is O(n).
Attribute NMF. Recently, it has attracted a substantial
amount of interest to the semantic information of com-

8
TABLE 2: Summary of NMF-based community detection, where ”AD k” describes whether the approach can automatically
determine the number of communities, i.e., Yes or No.
Categories
Approaches
Sketches
Objective Functions
Overlapping AD k
Basic
SymNMF (2012) [79]
Develop a symmetric NMF frame-
work
based
on
Newton-like
for
graph clustering.

A −BBT 

2
F
No
No
PCSNMF (2015) [80]
Present a symmetric NMF method
with pairwise constraints generated
from the ground-truth community
information.

A −BBT 2
F +
α[Tr(BT MBQ)+Tr(BT PB)]
No
No
NSED (2017) [81]
Pose a non-negative symmetric en-
coder and decoder approach to ob-
tain a better network representation.
∥A −WH∥2
F +

H −WT A

2
F
No
No
Overlapping
SNMF, ANMF,
JNMF (2011) [21]
Apply NMF to community detection
ﬁrstly.

A −BBT 

2
F
Yes
No
BIGCLAM (2013) [82]
Present a cluster afﬁliation model for
overlapping,
hierarchically nested
community detection in large scale
networks.
P
eij∈E log(1 −exp(−bibT
j ))
−P
eij /∈E bibT
j
Yes
Yes
Attribute
NMTF (2015) [83]
Develop a NMF clustering frame-
work combining nodes’ relations
and users’ contents to detect com-
munity structure.

Mu−u −UH1UT 

2
F
+

Mt−f −VH2N T 

2
F
+

Mu−f −UH3N T 

2
F
No
No
SCI (2016) [84]
Propose
a
semantic
community
identiﬁcation method, which can an-
notate semantic as well as detect
community.
∥B −XS∥2
F
+α Pk
r=1 ∥S (:, r)∥2
1
+β

A −BBT 

2
F
No
No
Dynamic
DBNMF (2016) [85]
Present
a
Bayesian
probabilistic
model based on NMF to identify
overlapping communities in tempo-
ral networks.
−log P (Vt|Bt)
−log P (Bt|B
′′
t−1, α)
−log P (Bt|βt) −log P (βi)
Yes
Yes
sE-NMF (2017) [86]
Develop a semi-supervised evolu-
tionary NMF framework for dy-
namic
community
detection
via
prior information.

At −˜
Bt ˜
Bt
′

2
F
No
No
Semi-supervised
USSF (2015) [87]
Present a uniﬁed semi-supervised
community
detection
algorithm
based on combination of prior and
topology information aimed NMF.
Lα(A, B) + λRβ(O, B)
No
No
munity structure utilizing NMF, i.e., delineating the cor-
responding community semantic information while iden-
tifying community structure [83], [84], [88]. In particular,
Pei et al. [83] combine social relations and content of
users to detect communities via a non-negative matrix tri-
factorization (NMTF)-based clustering with three types of
graph regularization. However, the above method merely
exploits network topology and content information to dis-
cover communities, without considering how to utilize the
mined contents, i.e., semantic information, to explain the
meaning of communities. To address this issue, wang et
al. [84] propose a semantic community identiﬁcation called
SCI, which integrates the community membership matrix
denoting network topology and community attribute matrix
representing semantic information. The loss function of the
model is deﬁned as:
min
B≥0,S≥0 J = ∥B −XS∥2
F + α
k
X
r=1
∥S (:, r)∥2
1
+ β

A −BBT 

2
F ,
(12)
where S represents attribute community matrix, α is a trade-
off hyper-parameter between the ﬁrst error and the second
sparsity term, and β is a positive parameter for setting the
proportion of the contribution of network topology. The
time complexity of SCI is O((nqk + n2k)), where q is the
dimension of node attribute.
Dynamic and semi-supervised NMF. It deserves further
attention that, during recent years, several investigators
have extended NMF in the ﬁeld of dynamic and semi-
supervised community detection, and achieved encourag-
ing results. For dynamic community detection, Wang et al.
[85] utilize a Bayesian model based on NMF to identify over-
lapping communities on temporal networks, and automat-
ically derive the number of communities in each snapshot
network based on automatic relevance determination. The
loss function is as follows:
Jt = −log P(Vt|Bt) −log P(Bt|B
′′
t−1, α)
−log P(Bt|βt) −log P(βi),
(13)
where Vt is a snapshot of a temporal network, Bt is the non-
negative matrix obtained via Vt, and B
′′
t−1 is the new Bt−1
which has been adjusted according to the node distribution
of Bt. β(·) is a parameter from a half normal distribution,
and α is a parameter to balance the clustering results of
the current and previous snapshot networks. Later, Ma et al.
[86] show that NMF can be applied to dynamic community
detection via clarifying the equivalence relationship among

9
evolutionary spectral clustering, evolutionary NMF and
optimization of evolutionary modularity density. Therefore,
they employ the above equivalence relationship to develop
a semi-supervised evolutionary NMF method, named sE-
NMF, to integrate the prior information to detect communi-
ties in dynamic temporal networks.
For semi-supervised community detection, Yang et al.
[87] put forward a uniﬁed semi-supervised algorithm by
combining prior information and topology information
aimed at two non-negative matrices generated by NMF.
Moreover, with the must-link prior information (i.e., the
prior information that a node pair composed of two nodes
must belong to the same community [94]), they add a
graph regularization item as a penalty function to the loss
function to minimize the difference between nodes in the
same community, thereby improving the performance of
community detection. The loss function is deﬁned as:
J(B|A, O) = Lα(A, B) + λRβ(O, B),
(14)
where O denotes the matrix of prior information. Lα(A, B)
is the loss function of NMF, where α ∈{LSE, KL, SYM,
MOD, ADJ, LAP, NLAP} is the parameter to measure sim-
ilarity. λRβ(O, B) is a graph regulation term, where λ is
the tradeoff parameter between the loss function and graph
regulation term, and β ∈{LSE, KL} is the speciﬁc graph
regulation term.
3.1.4
Summary for Direct Graphical Models
The direct graphical models typically transform the commu-
nity detection problem into a Bayesian inference problem
based on the observed network data and then optimize
model parameters utilizing a maximum likelihood function
or a maximum of a posteriori to obtain hidden variables
of the model to discover network community structures.
However, these methods often ignore the diversity of com-
munity patterns (e.g., community structure with homophily
or heterophily) in the real world, and the network topology
used is often noisy and sparse, limiting the performance of
community detection.
3.2
Undirected Graphical Models
To the best of our knowledge, the existing studies of undi-
rected graphical models for community detection mainly
exploit Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) [95]. MRF, a kind of
random ﬁeld, has enjoyed much success covering a variety
of applications, such as computer vision and image process-
ing. Particularly, we are interested in its applications to com-
munity detection. The MRF-based methods can be grouped
into three categories (as summarized in Table 4): the ﬁrst
is the modeling based on MRF that detects community
relation based on network topology, the second exploits the
information of semantic attributes, and the third combines
MRF with graph neural network (GNN).
Topology MRF. He et al. [31] ﬁrst apply MRF to net-
work analysis where data are organized on networks with
irregular structures, and propose a network-speciﬁc MRF
approach, namely NetMRF, for community detection. This
method effectively encodes the structural properties of an ir-
regular network in an energy function so that the minimiza-
tion of the energy function gives rise to the best community
structures. The energy function can be represented as the
sum of pairwise potential functions, written as follows:
E(C; A) =
X
vi̸=vj
Θij(ci, cj; aij)
=
X
vi̸=vj
[−(−1)δ(ci,cj)(didj
2m −aij)],
(15)
where δ is the probability of nodes vi and vj falling into
the same community partition, di is the degree of node
vi, and m is the numbers of edges. According to [95], the
smaller the function, the better the community partition.
Further, Jin et al. [90] formalize the modularity function
as a statistical model and propose a novel MRF method
for community detection. This method redeﬁnes the energy
function via the approach of modularity representation,
and leverages the max-sum belief propagation (BP) to infer
model parameters to improve the performance. The energy
function is represented as follows:
E(C; A) =
X
vi,vj∈V
−(aij −didj
2m )δ(ci, cj).
(16)
The time complexity is O(m).
Moreover, to overcome the issue of losing vital structural
information between nodes after network embedding, Jin
et al. [89] propose a general MRF method to incorporate
coupling relationship between pairs of nodes in network
embedding to better detect community. In this method, the
energy function is composed of two components: a set of
unary potentials that make the network embedding to play
a dominant role and a set of pairwise potentials that utilize
constraints on node pairs to ﬁne-tune unary potentials.
Formally, the complete energy function can be deﬁned as:
E(C; A) =
X
vi
Θi(ci) +
X
eij∈E
Θij(ci, cj),
(17)
where Θi and Θij are the unary potential function and
pairwise potential function respectively.
Topology & attribute MRF. The combination of MRF
and node semantic models (e.g., a topic model) have been
a recent research focus. However, methods that directly
integrate MRF with node semantic models cannot in gen-
eral achieve satisfactory results. It is mainly because the
parameters of the two models cannot be adjusted to support
each other, making it difﬁcult to combine the advantages
of the two methods. He et al. [91] propose a new model,
named attrMRF, to integrate LDA [68] and MRF to form an
end-to-end learning system to train the parameters jointly.
Concretely, attrMRF ﬁrst transforms LDA and MRF into a
uniﬁed factor graph, realizing the effective integration of
directed graphic model (i.e., LDA) and undirected graphic
model (i.e., MRF). Then it adopts a backpropagation (BP)
algorithm to train the parameters simultaneously, resulting
in an end-to-end learning of the two models. The global
energy function of this model is represented as:
E(Z, C; A, X, α, β) =
X
vi̸=vj
Θij(ci, cj; aij)
−
n
X
r=1
1
β1
ln fθr −
q
X
p=1
1
β1
ln fφp,
(18)

10
TABLE 3: Summary of MRF-based community detection.
Categories
Approaches
Sketches
Object Functions
Topology
NetMRF (2018) [31]
Apply MRF to community detection ﬁrstly.
P
vi̸=vj
[−(−1)δ(ci,cj)(
didj
2m −aij)]
GMRF (2019) [89]
Optimize network embedding and develop a
general MRF framework by incorporating net-
work embedding into MRF to better detect com-
munity structure.
P
vi
Θi(ci) +
P
eij∈E
Θij(ci, cj)
ModMRF (2020) [90]
Propose a MRF method formalizing modularity
as the energy function for community detection.
P
vi,vj ∈V
−(aij −
didj
2m )δ(ci, cj)
Topology & attribute
attrMRF (2019) [91]
Present a model integrating LDA into MRF to
form an end-to-end learning system for commu-
nity detection.
P
vi̸=vj
Θij(ci, cj; aij)
−
n
P
r=1
1
β1 ln fθr −
qP
p=1
1
β1 ln fφp
Combining GNN
MRFasGCN (2019) [92]
Design a new approach based on the combi-
nation of GCN and MRF for semi-supervised
community detection.
−
n′
P
i=1
kP
j=1
Yij ln Zij
GMNN (2019) [93]
Propose a new approach combining the advan-
tages of both statistical relational learning and
graph neural network for semi-supervised node
classiﬁcation.
Eqθ(yU |xV )[log pφ(yL, yU|xV )
−log qθ(yU |xV )]
where P
vi̸=vj Θij(ci, cj; aij) denotes the global energy po-
tential of MRF as deﬁned in (15), β1 is a temperature
coefﬁcient, fθr and fφp are the intermediate results gener-
ated by LDA joint probability distribution. Besides attrMRF,
there are also several approaches incorporating probabilistic
graphical models into deep learning, such as MRFasGCN
[92] and GMNN [93], which will be covered in detail later.
The undirected graphical models mainly use the char-
acteristics of MRF, i.e., unary and pairwise potentials for
irregular network structure and node attribute, to identify
community structures. Nevertheless, different energy func-
tions need to be ﬁne-tuned.
3.3
Integrating Directed and Undirected Models
Directed and undirected graphical models have also been
integrated to detect communities in complex networks. This
type of integration is typically implemented via a factor
graph model. A factor graph [96] is a tuple (V, F, ε) consist-
ing a set V of variable nodes, a set F of factor nodes, and a
set ε ⊆V × F of edges each of which connects a variable
node and a factor node. Taking MRF as an example, the joint
probability distribution of a factor graph is described as:
p(y) = 1
Z
Y
F ∈F
ψF (yN(F )),
(19)
where Z = P
y∈Y
Q
F ∈F ψF (yN(F )) denotes a normaliza-
tion factor, and N(F) = {vi ∈V : (vi, F) ∈ε} is the set of
variable nodes adjacent to factor node F.
Yang et al. [97] ﬁrst propose an instantiation model based
on factor graph, which incorporates three layers, bottom
layer (observed nodes), middle layer (hidden vector) and
top layer (latent variables for communities). It utilizes node-
feature and edge-feature functions to mine dependencies
between bottom and top layer nodes to represent corre-
sponding communities, so as to better detect communities.
Further, Jia et al. [98] apply factor graph model to ego-
center network (a kind of representation of human social
networks, which is used to represent the network between
an individual and others that the ego has a social relation-
ship with [99]), and propose an ego-centered method to
analyze social academic inﬂuence on co-author networks.
This method model the ego-centered community detection
in a uniﬁed factor graph, employing a parameter learning
algorithm to estimate the topic-level social inﬂuence, the
social relationship strength between these nodes and com-
munity structures to detect ego-community structures.
These methods merely identify the structure of commu-
nities and ignore the semantic information of community,
which is much critical for understanding the meaning of
community structure. He et al. [91] employ a factor model
to overcome the deﬁciency that directed graphical model
(i.e., LDA) and undirected graphical model (i.e., MRF) are
insufﬁcient to integrate due to parameter sharing and joint
training and to make the discovered community structure
semantically interpretable. The joint probability distribution
of MRF and LDA formulated in factor graph is written as:
P(Z, C; A, X, α, β) = 1
Z
n
Y
r=1
fθr
q
Y
p=1
fφp
Y
vi̸=vj
fγij,
(20)
where Z denotes normalization term, fθr and fφp are de-
ﬁned in (18), and fγij is the pairwise potential of nodes vi
and vj. Their major contributions lie in that they adopt the
fusion technique of MRF and LDA to deal with community
detection, which can well overcome the difﬁculties that two
model’s parameters are hard to share and train together via
factor graphs and belief propagation.
The emergence of factor graph models that integrate
directed and undirected graphical models has greatly im-
proved the performance of community detection. However,
these probabilistic graph models generally adopt variational
inference or Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
for model optimization, which inevitablely leads to high
computational complexity. Deep learning, with the ability
to effectively optimize on high-dimensional network data,
has a potential in handling community detection.
4
COMMUNITY DETECTION WITH DEEP LEARNING
In recent years, deep learning has drawn a great deal of
attention and has been demonstrated to have great power on

11
TABLE 4: Summary of auto-encoder-based community detection, where ”A” and “X” denote whether the approach utilize
network topology and node attributes respectively, and ”-” represents no constraint.
Categories
Approaches
A
X
Encoder
Decoder
Focus
Constraints
Stacked
Semi-DNR (2016) [100]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Pairwise constraint
DIR (2017) [101]
Yes
Yes
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
-
INSNCCD (2018) [102]
Yes
Yes
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Modularity maximization
AAGR (2018) [103]
Yes
Yes
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Adaptive parameter
CDDTA (2019) [104]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Regularization term
DeCom (2019) [105]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Clustering result
Modularity maximization
NEC (2020) [106]
Yes
Yes
GCN
Inner product
Embedding and clustering
Modularity maximization
Sparse
GraphEncoder (2014) [107]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Sparsity constraint
DFuzzy (2018) [108]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Clustering result
Sparsity constraint and
modularity maximization
CDMEC (2020) [109]
Yes
No
MLP
MLP
Clustering result
Sparsity constraint
Denoising
MGAE (2017) [24]
Yes
Yes
GCN
GCN
Network embedding
Interplay exploitation
GRACE (2017) [110]
Yes
Yes
MLP
MLP
Embedding and clustering
Propagation constraint
Variational
ARVGA (2018) [111]
Yes
Yes
GCN
Inner product
Network embedding
Prior constraint
VGAECD (2018) [112]
Yes
Yes
GCN
Inner product
Embedding and clustering
-
DAEGC (2019) [113]
Yes
Yes
GAT
Inner product
Embedding and Clustering
KL divergence constraint
New VGAECD (2019) [114]
Yes
Yes
GCN
Inner product
Embedding and clustering
-
Ladder VAE (2019) [115]
Yes
No
GCN
MLP
Embedding and clustering
-
NetVAE (2019) [116]
Yes
Yes
MLP
MLP
Network embedding
Prior constraint
a wide variety of problems, including community detection.
Classic deep learning explores and exploits convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and probability modeling for com-
munity detection. For example, Sperl`ı et al. [32] design a
novel approach, based on CNNs and the topological char-
acteristics of adjacency matrices, for automatic community
detection. Sun et al. [117] propose a probabilistic generative
model, i.e., vGraph, to jointly detect overlapping (and non-
overlapping) communities and learn node (and community)
representation. vGraph represents each node by a mixture
of communities and deﬁnes a community as a Multinomial
distribution over nodes. Furthermore, Cavallari et al. [118]
ﬁnd that there is a closed-loop relationship among commu-
nity detection, community embedding, and node embed-
ding. Guided by this insight, they present a novel commu-
nity embedding method, called ComE, to jointly solve the
three tasks altogether. He et al. [119] design a novel self-
translation network embedding (STNE) approach, which
maps the content sequence to node identity sequence to
improve community detection.
Although these methods have had reasonable perfor-
mance on discovering communities, they are straightfor-
ward applications of deep learning to community detection
[120], without considering the characteristics of networks,
e.g., irregularity of network topology and complex network
structures. In this section, we will discuss the following four
types of methods that are designed for complex networks,
i.e., auto-encoder-based, generative adversarial network-
based, graph convolutional network-based, and methods
integrating graph convolutional network and undirected
graphical models.
4.1
Auto-encoder-based Methods
Auto-encoders [121] are simple but important neural mod-
els that convert high-dimensional (network) data into
low-dimensional representations. Concretely, auto-encoders
learn a new representation of data in an unsupervised
manner using the encoder and decoder components. They
always have multi-hidden layers and a symmetrical archi-
tecture, and the output of one layer is the input to its succes-
sive layer. The objective of auto-encoders is to minimize the
error between original input and reconstructed data to learn
an optimal hidden representation, which can be denoted as:
Loss(θ1, θ2) =
n
X
i=1
l(xi, g(f(xi; θ1); θ2)),
(21)
where f(·; θ1) and g(·; θ2) are the encoder and decoder with
parameters θ1 and θ2, and l(·) is the loss function.
Herein, we choose several representative auto-encoder-
based models for network community detection, and sum-
marize their main characteristics in Table 4. Since most
auto-encoder-based methods derive network embeddings
as their outputs (e.g., [100], [103]), clustering, such as K-
means and spectral clustering, is subsequently applied to
extract communities. An alternative is to integrate cluster-
ing into the model (e.g., [105], [108]), to directly discover
communities. Depending on the type of auto-encoder used,
we divide the models into four types, namely stacked,
sparse, denoising and variational auto-encoders. Stacked
auto-encoder, a basic type that consists of a series of auto-
encoders, is often used as a block for other types of auto-
encoders. Particularly, when a stacked model has other
targets, such as sparsity and denoise, we classify them as
sparse or denoising auto-encoders.
Stacked auto-encoders. The semi-DNR [100] stacks a
sequence of auto-encoders to form a deep nonlinear recon-
struction of the input networks (DNR), and requires that
each layer of the encoder contains fewer neurons than the
previous layer to reduce the data dimension and extract the
most salient features in the input data. Semi-DNR makes full
use of the prior knowledge if vi and vj belong to the same
community to incorporate pairwise constraints between the

12
two nodes in the network. Speciﬁcally, it deﬁnes a prior
information matrix O = (oij)n×n, where oij = 1 if vi and
vj are known to be in the same community, or 0, otherwise.
The loss function for semi-DNR is represented as:
Loss = l(M, Z) + λ Tr(HT LH),
(22)
where L = D −O, Tr(·) is the trace of a matrix, M
the modularity matrix, Z the reconstruction data, H the
representation matrix and λ a parameter for making a trade-
off between the reconstruction error and consistency of the
new representation given the prior information. Further, a
layer-wise stacked auto-encoder in DeCom [105] is adopted
to ﬁnd seed nodes and add nodes to communities according
to the structure of the network. It is remarkable that DeCom
is suitable for handling large networks and there is no
need to pre-deﬁne the number of communities due to the
adaptive learning process. Besides, CDDTA [104] effectively
combines transfer learning and auto-encoder. AAGR [103]
and DIR [101] utilize stacked auto-encoders to incorporate
the information of topology and attributes adaptively, thus
well realizing the balance between network topology and
node attributes. NEC [106] employs graph convolutional
networks to encode and decode network data, which takes
topology and attribute information as input, but only selects
to reconstruct the adjacency matrix to ensure that the model
can still work without node attributes.
Sparse auto-encoders. Large-scale networks are in gen-
eral difﬁcult to store and process, so it is necessary to have a
sparse representation. A new line of research is to adaptively
ﬁnd the optimal representation by adding a sparse con-
straint to auto-encoder for this purpose. GraphEncoder [107]
introduces an explicit regularization term for the hidden
layer to restrict the size of hidden representation. If zi is the
i-th vector of reconstructed data, the reconstruction error
with sparsity constraints are as follows:
Loss =
n
X
i=1
∥zi −xi∥2 + βKL(ρ|bρ),
(23)
where β controls the sparsity penalty, ρ and bρ are the
sparsity parameters, where the former denotes the average
activation of a neuron across a collection of training samples,
and the latter denotes the average activation across all
training samples. The time complexity of GraphEncoder is
O(nbd), where b is the maximum number of hidden layer
nodes, and d is the average degree of the graph. DFuzzy
[108] is a parallel and scalable fuzzy clustering model with
sparse auto-encoders as building blocks. It trains an auto-
encoder using personalized PageRank, which is effective for
capturing relationships among network nodes. Besides, CD-
MEC [109] combines transfer learning with auto-encoder,
where input matrix A is used to build four similarity
matrices of complex networks. CDMEC takes one matrix
as the source domain, and the other three matrices as the
target domain to obtain multiple distinct low-dimensional
feature representations. All representations are then put
into a clustering algorithm, and the clustering results are
integrated into a new, concensus matrix Q. The consensus
matrix Q is introduced to measure the co-occurrence of
samples in the clustering result, where Qij represents the
average times that vi and vj are grouped into the same class.
Denoising auto-encoders. Denoising auto-encoders can
be applied to noisy inputs to get node representation that
is robust to noise. MAGE [24] ﬁrst employs a convolutional
network to integrate content and structure information, and
then iteratively adds random noises to content informa-
tion in the auto-encoder process. In this way, the structure
information and content information are integrated into a
uniﬁed framework, and the interplay between the two can
be analyzed. Further, Yang et al. [110] propose GRACE to
deal with dynamic networks. They model clusters under
the consideration of network dynamics, and believe that the
formation of clusters requires dynamic embedding to reach
a stable state.
Variational auto-encoders. There are also approaches
based on variational auto-encoder [122], which views the
hidden representation as a latent variable with its own prior
distribution. In variational inference, it exploits an approx-
imation q(H|X) of the true posterior p(H|X) of the latent
variable and tries to approximate the variational posterior
q(H|X) to the true prior p(H) using the KL-divergence
as a measure. For instance, the theme of ARVGA [111] is
not only to minimize the reconstruction errors of network
structure, but also to enforce the latent codes to match a
prior distribution:
Loss = Eq(H|(X,A))[log p( bA|H)] −KL[q(H|X, A)||p(H)].
(24)
During the training of VGAECD [112], the reconstruction
loss deviates from its primary objective of clustering. The
new VGAECD [114] rectiﬁes this issue by introducing a dual
variational objective. Further, Sarkar et al. [115] propose a
gamma ladder VAE based deep generative model that infers
multilayered embeddings for the nodes via multiple layers
of stochastic latent variables to improve the performance
of community detection. Jin et al. [116] propose the NetVAE
that uses one encoder and one dual decoder with two differ-
ent generative mechanisms to reconstruct network topology
and node attributes separately.
4.2
Generative Adversarial Network-based Methods
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [123], which are
inspired by the minimax two-player game, have achieved
unprecedented success in various ﬁelds. GANs typically
consist of two modules, a generator G and a discriminator
D. The generator is to capture the data distribution, i.e., to
generate samples that are as similar to the real data as pos-
sible; while the discriminator is to estimate the probability
that a sample a piece of real data rather than synthetic data
generated by the generator. Formally, the training process of
GANs can be deﬁned as:
min
G max
D V(G, D) = min
G max
D (Ex∼pdata(x)[log D(x)]
+ Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]),
(25)
where the ﬁrst expectation is the loss of discriminator for
real data and the second is the loss of discriminator for
synthetic data generated by the generator.
The inspiration of applying GANs to community detec-
tion came from the fact that GANs are usually unsuper-
vised, and (in theory) the new data generated have the

13
same distribution as real data, which provides a powerful
network data analysis capability. Jia et al. [26] propose a
novel method called CommunityGAN to adopt the idea of
afﬁliation graph model (AGM) to boost the performance by
introducing the minimax competition between the network
motif-level generator and the discriminator. It ﬁrst com-
poses some representation vectors of nodes by assigning
each node-community pair a nonnegative factor that repre-
sents the degree of membership of the node to community,
and then optimizes such representation through a speciﬁ-
cally designed GAN to detect communities. The joint value
function is formulated as:
min
θG max
θD V(G, D) =
n
X
i=1
(Em∼ptrue(.|vi)[log D(m; θD)]
+ Es∼G(s|vi;θG)[log(1 −D(G(s; θD)))]),
(26)
where θD (and θG) is the union of representation vectors
of all nodes in the discriminator D (and generator G),
m the motifs of networks and s the subset of nodes. By
employing GANs, CommunityGAN can ﬁnd overlapping
communities and learn a graph representation altogether.
Further, Zhang et al. [27] present a novel approach of seed
expansion with generative adversarial learning (SEAL). It
employs a discriminator to predict whether a community
is real or not and a generator to construct communities to
trick the discriminator by implicitly ﬁtting features of real
ones for learning heuristics for community detection. Tao et
al. [124] propose an adversarial graph auto-encoder (AGAE)
method, which incorporates ensemble clustering into a deep
graph embedding process to guide the network training
utilizing an adversarial regularizer.
There are also methods based on GANs to derive node
representation that can be applied to community detec-
tion, e.g., employing clustering algorithms such as K-means
for deriving embeddings to acquire resulting communi-
ties [125], [126], [127]. He et al. [128] further argue that
the existing GANs-based methods do not make full use
of the essential advantages of GANs, which are to learn
the underlying representation mechanism rather than the
representation itself. To this end, they propose to utilize
adversarial idea on the representation mechanism to acquire
node representation for downstream tasks. Speciﬁcally, the
training loss is deﬁned as follows:
min
E,G max
D V(G, D, E) = Ex∼pdata(x)[log D(MI(x, E(x)))]
+ Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(MI(G(z), z)))]),
(27)
where E represents the encoder that derives node represen-
tation, MI(x, E(x)) is the mutual information between the
node attributes and node representation, D is the discrim-
inator that identiﬁes the mutual information from either
positive or negative samples, and G is the generator that
generates negative samples by calculating the mutual in-
formation between fake node attributes based on Guassian
noise. Yang et al. [129] argue that most GANs compare the
results of embeddings with samples obtained from Gaussian
distribution without rectiﬁcation from real data, making
them not truly beneﬁcial for adversarial learning. Therefore,
they design a joint adversarial network embedding (JANE)
model, which jointly distinguishes the real and fake combi-
nations of embeddings, topology information and node at-
tributes, to improve node embeddings and the performance
of network analysis.
4.3
Graph Convolutional Network-based Methods
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [33], the most repre-
sentative branch of graph neural network methods [130] for
learning representation from graph data, have attracted a
great deal of attention thanks to its success on supervised
and semi-supervised classiﬁcation of nodes in a network.
Several novel GCNs-based algorithms have also been de-
veloped lately to exploit the power of GCNs for effectively
modeling and inferring high-dimensional complex network
data for community detection.
Jin et al. [131] raise the concern that embeddings derived
from GCNs are not community-oriented and community
detection is inherently unsupervised. To address this prob-
lem, they introduce an unsupervised model, named JGE-
CD, for community detection through joint GCN embed-
ding. It consists of three modules, a dual encoder that de-
rives two embeddings using the original attribute network
and its variant; a community detection module that stacks
on top of dual encoder to detect community; and a topology
reconstruction module that is employed to reconstruct net-
work topology. Formally, the probability that the i-th node
belongs to the r-th community is deﬁned as:
uir =
exp(θT
r hi)
Pk
r=1 exp(θTr hi)
,
(28)
where hi represents the embedding of node vi obtained
from GCN and θ the model parameters. Furthermore, He et
al. [132] extend JGE-CD by designing a new GCN approach
that casts MRFasGCN (to be discussed in Section 4.4 shortly)
as an encoder, and exploits a community-centric dual en-
coder to reconstruct network topology and node attributes
separately, so as to perform unsupervised community detec-
tion. In particular, the decoder for reconstructing network
topology is denoted as:
bA = sigmoid

DUWU TDT 
,
(29)
where U is the probability distribution matrix of nodes be-
longing to different communities derived from the encoder,
D the node degree matrix and W the weight matrix of
neural networks. The decoder for reconstructing attributes
is inspired by topic modeling, i.e., nodes in the same
community are more likely to have similar distributions of
attribute words. The attribute matrix can be generated by:
bX = U · R,
(30)
where the deﬁnition of U is the same as that in (29) and R
is the probability matrix of communities selecting attribute
words from the entire word set.
More recently, some researches for community detec-
tion make use of GCNs on heterogeneous networks that
contain a diversity of types of nodes and relationships.
Zheng et al. [133] design a heterogeneous-temporal GCN,
namely HTGCN, to detect community from hetergeneous
and temporal networks. Concretely, it ﬁrst obtains feature
representation of each hetergeneous network at each time

14
step by adopting a heterogeneous GCN, and then utilizes
a residual compressed aggregation mechanism to express
both the static and dynamic characteristics of community.
Beyond that, there are also certain approaches incorporat-
ing graph convolutional network with undirected graphical
models, e.g., MRFasGCN [92] and GMNN [93], which will
be discussed next.
4.4
Integrating Graph Convolutional Network and Undi-
rected Graphical Models
In the last few years, a number of studies have begun to
integrate graph convolutional network (GCN) and undi-
rected graphical models (e.g., MRF or CRF) for community
detection. The main idea of this line of research is that
GCN essentially constructs node embeddings through local
feature smoothing, which does not consider community
properties and makes the node embeddings not community-
oriented. While undirected graphical models generally offer
a good global objective to describe community, it does not
consider information on nodes and requires a substantial
amount of computation for learning the model. Therefore,
GCN and undirected graphical models are complementary
and can be combined to take advantage of their strengths.
A major work in this line is MRFasGCN [92], which
integrates GCN with MRF to solve the problem of semi-
supervised community detection in attributed networks.
The method ﬁrst extends NetMRF (as discussed in Section
3.2) to extended MRF (eMRF) by adding both unary po-
tentials and attribute information, and then reparameterizes
the MRF model to make it ﬁt to the GCN architecture. The
energy function of eMRF is deﬁned as:
E(C; A, X) =
X
vi
−p(hci
i ) + α
X
vi̸=vj
µ(ci, cj)η(vi, vj), (31)
where −p(hci
i ), whose value comes from the result of GCN,
denotes the unary potential representing the probability that
node vi belongs to community ci, µ(ci, cj)η(vi, vj) is the
pairwise potential where µ(ci, cj) represents the similarity
relationship between communities of nodes vi and vj, and
η(vi, vj) is the similarity of attributes of nodes vi and vj, and
α is the parameter for making a tradeoff between the unary
and pairwise potentials. The time complexity of MRFasGCN
is O(mqlk2), where q is the dimension of node attribute and
l is the number of hidden units of the ﬁrst layer.
After MRFasGCN, several other lines of work incorpo-
rate MRF or CRF into GCN to learn node embedding for
community detection. Qu et al. [93] propose a new approach,
called graph Markov neural network (GMNN), combines
the advantages of both statistical relational learning and
graph neural networks. A GMNN is able to learn an ef-
fective node representation and model label dependency
between different nodes, thereby completing the task of
semi-supervised node classiﬁcation. The model parameters
can be learned by employing pseudolikelihood variational
expectation-maximization [134] to optimize the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) of log-likelihood function, which is
formulated as:
log pφ(yL|xV ) ⩾
Eqθ(yU|xV )[log pφ(yL, yU|xV ) −log qθ(yU|xV )],
(32)
where log pφ(yL|xV ) is the log-likelihood function of ob-
served node labels, and qθ(yU|xV ) is any distribution over
yU. Noting that the equality holds when qθ(yU|xV ) =
pφ(yU|yL, xV ). Gao et al. [135] ﬁnd that the existing GCNs
fail to preserve the similarity relationship between different
nodes hidden in network data. To handle this issue, they
add a CRF layer to GCNs to force similar nodes to have
similar hidden features. This will enhance the quality of
node embeddings and, in turn, improve the performance
of network analysis.
4.5
Summary for deep learning
Deep learning-based methods usually realize community
detection by designing a community-oriented or universal
network representation, followed by some clustering algo-
rithms. Different types of deep-learning methods have been
adopted to derive network representations, e.g., GCN or
GAN. Learning such representations is to map network data
from a high-dimensional input space to a low-dimensional
feature space, with the superiority of low computational
complexity and effective data fusion. However, similar to
the most probabilistic graphical models, the existing deep
learning-based methods are more suitable for community
structures with homophily (where the nodes in a com-
munity are densely connected whereas nodes in different
communities are sparsely linked), which may limit the
robustness of these models.
5
APPLICATIONS OF COMMUNITY DETECTION
We start our discussion with a summary of the benchmark
datasets that have been used in the area of community
detection. We then describe real applications of community
detection in many application ﬁelds.
5.1
Open Datasets
We have put the detailed information of the datasets used
for community detection in a publicly accessible web1 to
facilitate open research on this rapidly-developing topic.
These datasets can be separated into two groups, synthetic
networks and real-world networks.
5.1.1
Synthetic networks
There are two classes of randomly generated synthetic net-
works with known community structures, i.e., the Girvan-
Newman (GN) [1] and LFR networks [136]. The GN net-
work consists of four non-overlapping communities with
the same size. Each community has 32 nodes, each of which
connects with 16 other nodes on average. Among these
16 edges, Zin edges connect to nodes of the same com-
munity, Zout edges to nodes of different communities, and
Zin + Zout = 16. The LFR network, another widely adopted
benchmark for testing the performance of algorithms for
community detection, has distributions of node degree and
community size which follow power laws with tunable
exponents. The LFR network captures several important
features of real-world systems, e.g., the scale free property.
1. http://bdilab.tju.edu.cn/

15
5.1.2
Real-world Networks
The real-world networks that we examine include four
types, i.e., social networks, citation networks, collaboration
networks, and others, listed in Table 5. To be speciﬁc, social
networks are formed by individuals and their interactions,
including eight representative datasets such as Football and
DBLP (Table 5). Citation networks consist of papers (or
patents) and their relationships (e.g., citation or inclusion),
including eight classic datasets such as Cora and arXiv.
Collaboration networks are comprised of scientists and their
collaborations (i.e., co-authoring papers), including four
typical datasets such as Computer Science and Medicine.
The nodes in these networks range from tens to millions,
and the maximum number of edges reaches hundreds to
hundreds of millions.
TABLE 5: The statistics of real-world networks.
Categories
Datasets
#Nodes
#Edges
Social
Networks
Friendship7 [37]
68
220
Football [1]
115
613
Facebook [137]
1,045
26,749
LiveJournal [138]
44,093
871,409
Twitter [27]
87,760
1,293,985
Orkut [138]
297,691
7,747,026
DBLP [139]
317,080
1,049,866
Youtube [139]
1,134,890
2,987,624
Citation
Networks
Small-hep 2
397
812
Polblogs [140]
1490
16718
Cora [141]
2708
5429
Citeseer [141]
3312
4732
Large-hep 2
11,752
134,956
Pubmed [142]
19,729
44,338
arXiv [143]
576,000
6,640,000
US patents [144]
3,700,000
16,500,000
Collaboration
Networks
Computer Science [145]
22,000
96,800
Chemistry [145]
35,400
157,400
Medicine [145]
63,300
810,300
Engineering [145]
14,900
49,300
Others
Amazon [139]
334,863
925,872
Google [146]
875,000
4,320,000
5.2
Practical Applications
We ﬁrst discuss the applications of community detection
on different domains, and then extend to other network
analysis tasks. We ﬁnish by discussing the potential of
community detection to network science.
5.2.1
Applications in Different Areas
Community detection has diverse applications across dif-
ferent domains [147], such as online social networks, neuro-
science and image understanding. Online social networks,
including Facebook, Twitter and Wechat, comprise the in-
teractions among people through the web. Discovering
community in such networks is an effective way to infer
the relationships of individuals, which has been adopted
for tasks such as spammer detection and crisis response.
Yin et al. [148] develop a uniﬁed probabilistic generative
model, namely user-community-geo-topic (UCGT), based
on a Bayesian network that infers users’ social commu-
nities by incorporating spatio-temporal data and semantic
information to improve the accuracy and interpretability
of social community detection. Wu et al. [149] design a
novel MRFwithGCN model, which introduce a MRF layer
2. https://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/kddcup/datasets.html
that captures user following information to reﬁne prediction
made by GCN for social spammer detection.
Neuroscience is a discipline studying the nervous sys-
tems and brain. With the recent development of brain map-
ping and neuroimaging techniques, the brain has begun to
be modeled as networks. A large amount of effort has been
put forward to exploit such networks to help extract the
functional subdivisions of the brain. Liu et al. [150] pro-
pose a framework of siamese community preserving graph
convolutional network (SCP-GCN). The method ﬁrst retains
the community structure considering the intra-community
and inter-community properties in learning process, and
then uses siamese architecture that models the pair-wise
similarity to guide this learning process. Jin et al. [151]
argue that the existing studies typically construct commu-
nity structures of brain networks employing resting-state
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. They
introduce the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm that
analyzes the synchronization and asynchronism of fMRI
time series to extract the correlation between brain regions.
Image understanding is to generate semantic descrip-
tions of images. Recently, works on image understanding
utilizing community have emerged. Li et al. [152] present a
novel deep collaborative embedding (DCE) model, which
learns knowledge from weakly supervised community-
contributed resources, for multiple image understanding
tasks simultaneously. Li et al. [153] propose a novel semi-
supervised RSNMF model by explicitly exploring the block-
diagonal structure of data for image representation.
5.2.2
Promotion of Network Analysis
With the great success of community detection, numer-
ous application problems, e.g., recommendation and link
prediction, have been formulated as ﬁnding community
structures in network systems. We now discuss how the
existing community detection methods are utilized to solve
some of these problems.
Recommendation is a common task that addresses the
issue of information overload for users by establishing a
proﬁle of user interests based on items in their purchas-
ing or browsing history and later recommending similar
items to users. The existing methods for recommendation
including collaborative ﬁltering [154] and neural networks
[155]. In particular, the concept of community has been
employed to improve the quality of recommendation. Eissa
et al. [156] make recommendation based on interest-based
communities that generated from topic based attributed
social networks. Satuluri et al. [2] present a general-purpose
representation layer, i.e., similarity-based clusters (SimClus-
ters), which settles a multitude of recommendation tasks at
Twitter via detecting bipartite communities from the user-
user network and leveraging them as a representation space.
Link prediction is another important task in network
mining. It deals with missing connections and predicts
possible connections in the future through the analysis of
observed network structure and external information. A
large number of approaches have been proposed to facilitate
link prediction via considering community. Xu et al. [157]
indicate that the existing metric learning for link prediction
ignores community that contain abundant structural infor-
mation. Therefore, they design community speciﬁc similar-

16
ity metrics by means of joint community detection to deal
with cold-start link prediction where edges between nodes
are unavailable. De et al. [158] propose a stacked two-level
learning framework, which ﬁrst learns a local similarity
model exploiting locality structures and node attributes, and
then combines the model with community-level features
that derive utilizing co-clustering for link prediction.
5.2.3
Promotion of Network Science
Network science is an interdisciplinary research area, which
can be used not only in computer science, but also in other
ﬁelds such as sociology and biology. Community detection,
one of the most important problem in network analysis,
can tremendously promote the development of network
science. For example, in citation network, nodes represent
papers and edges represent the citations among papers. By
grouping the papers (i.e., discovering communities where
papers have similar attributes such as belonging to the same
author or topic), we can analyze the inﬂuence of authors and
accurately grasp the latest research trends or technologies,
which is of guiding signiﬁcance for comprehending network
and further analyzing network pattern [159]. Similarly, in
sociology and biology, community detection also provides
a deeper understanding of network structure and promotes
its development both in academia and industry.
6
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
While learning-based community detection, including prob-
abilistic graphical model and deep learning, has demon-
strated superior performance across a variety of problems
and domains, there are challenges that need to be addressed.
In this section, we brieﬂy discuss these challenges and future
research directions potentially worth pursuing.
6.1
Large Networks
With the rapidly increasing scale of network data, more
large networks have become the standard across many
different scientiﬁc domains. These networks typically have
tens of thousand or billions of nodes and edges as well
as complex structural patterns. Most existing community
detection methods face excessive constraints on such large
networks due to the potentially prohibitive demand on
memory and computation. They may require a large num-
ber of training instances [160] or model parameters [161] to
make the existing methods effective. Moreover, the existing
approaches typically handle these problems by network re-
duction or approximation, which may lose some important
network information and affect the modeling accuracy. This
raises the question of how to devise a framework that far
exceeds the current benchmarks in accuracy and efﬁciency.
6.2
Community Interpretability
Although community detection has been studied for more
than a decade, the interpretability of community remains
an important and critical issue to be adequately addressed.
Most current community detection methods utilize top
ranked words or short phrases in the results to summa-
rize communities, even though the attribute information of
nodes is typically complete sentences that have more infor-
mation than individual words [73], [162]. However, these
methods may not be intuitive enough for understanding
the semantics of communities due to the small number
of words and unclear relationship between words. How
to make the best use of network information to provide
a better semantic interpretation for community is one of
future research directions.
6.3
Adaptive Community Model Selection
Adaptive model selection for community detection aims
to choose the most appropriate algorithm for discovering
community, according to the characteristics of different net-
works (e.g., heterogeneous or dynamic) or speciﬁc require-
ments of different tasks (e.g., the highest accuracy or the
lowest time complexity). Although the existing methods can
be extended from one network or task to another to some
extent (which inevitably affects the accuracy and stability
of the resulting model) [163], [164], few of them consider
how to perform model adaptation. Thus, focus has shifted
to designing a uniﬁed architecture that can automatically
adapt to speciﬁc tasks or networks while maintaining model
accuracy and stability instead of proposing diverse frame-
works for different networks or tasks. This is an emerging
research area that would be challenging but rewarding.
6.4
Networks with Complex Structures
Many real-world networks are heterogeneous, dynamic,
hierarchical, or incomplete. Heterogeneous networks [165]
are those that contain different types of nodes and edges,
or different types of descriptions on nodes and edges, such
as text and images. Dynamic networks [166] are networks
whose topology and/or attributes change over time. Dy-
namic networks appear when nodes and edges are added
or deleted, thus altering the properties of nodes or edges.
Hierarchical networks [167] are composed of several layers,
each of which has speciﬁc semantics and functions. Incom-
plete networks [168] are the ones with missing information
of their topology, nodes, or edges. While these networks
can be partly explored by the learning-based community
detection, there still exist several serious issues. First, most
existing methods assume homogeneous networks, which
may in fact difﬁcult to handle. Second, due to the variability
of dynamic networks, most existing methods, especially
the ones based on deep learning, need to be re-trained
over a series of steps when the networks evolve, which
is very time consuming and may not meet the real time
processing demand. Third, hierarchical networks typically
have different types of relationships across the network hi-
erarchies, which are important while often not well handled
by the existing methods. Moreover, almost all the existing
methods regard the networks to be analyzed to be complete
and accurately documented without noise. Unfortunately,
this is rarely the case in practice as it is challenging to
obtain complete information of the networks. Therefore,
new methods should be developed to handle these issues
to better improve the performance of community detection
on these types of complex networks.

17
6.5
Integrating Statistical Modeling and Deep Learning
Although several methods have been proposed to combine
statistical modeling with deep learning, such as MRFas-
GCN, it is still a virgin but promising research area. For
instance, the existing methods typically utilize the prior
knowledge (e.g., communities) that statistical model offers
to reﬁne the embeddings of GCN to improve resulting
communities. However, these methods may not fully con-
sider the time complexity or interpretability of the mod-
els, raising enormous challenges to community detection
in practice. In addition, the community patterns in the
real world networks are usually diverse, e.g., community
structure with heterophily (where the nodes in different
communities are closely connected while the nodes in the
same community are sparsely connected) or randomness
(where the edges between nodes are more likely to be
randomly generated), it is essential to design new robust
methods by integrating statistical modeling and deep learn-
ing [92], thereby detecting the community structure in the
network more accurately. Furthermore, it remains an open
problem to integrate statistical modeling in deep learning
methods. For example, it is difﬁcult to apply a strategy
for recommendation or medical diagnosis to make deep
learning become better representation learning, which in
turn facilitates more accurate recommendation or diagnose.
New innovative algorithms are highly desirable to integrate
statistical inference and deep learning to help deep learning
more produce interpretable network representation models
that are suitable for various network problems in broad
application ﬁelds.
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive and up-to-date
literature review on the community detection approaches.
One of our main objectives is to organize and present most
of the work conducted so far in a uniﬁed perspective. In a
ﬁrst step, we discuss in details the problem of community
detection, and provide a new taxonomy to group most
existing methods into two categories from the perspective of
learning: probabilistic graphical model and deep learning.
We then thoroughly review, compare, and summarize the
existing methods in these two categories, and discuss how
some of these methods can be interested. Moreover, since
the problem is highly application oriented, we introduce a
wide range of applications of community detection in var-
ious ﬁelds. We also highlight that more effort is needed to
address several challenging open problems for the research
of community detection. Last but not least, while we cannot
list all the literature on community detection, we expect that
our view that attempts to synthesize the state-of-the-art of
community detection will contribute to a better understand-
ing of this highly active and increasingly important area of
study in network science, serve as a source of information
for new researchers entering this ﬁeld and the researchers
working in this area, and promote future developments of
next-generation community detection approaches.
