Friend, Collaborator, Student, Manager: How Design
of an AI-Driven Game Level Editor Affects Creators
Matthew Guzdial

Georgia Institute of Technology
Nicholas Liao

Georgia Institute of Technology
Jonathan Chen

Georgia Institute of Technology
Shao-Yu Chen

Georgia Institute of Technology
Shukan Shah

Georgia Institute of Technology
Vishwa Shah

Georgia Institute of Technology
Joshua Reno

Georgia Institute of Technology
Gillian Smith

Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Mark O. Riedl

Georgia Institute of Technology
ABSTRACT
Machine learning advances have afforded an increase in
algorithms capable of creating art, music, stories, games, and
more. However, it is not yet well-understood how machine
learning algorithms might best collaborate with people to
support creative expression. To investigate how practicing
designers perceive the role of AI in the creative process, we
developed a game level design tool for Super Mario Bros.-
style games with a built-in AI level designer. In this paper
we discuss our design of the Morai Maker intelligent tool
through two mixed-methods studies with a total of over one-
hundred participants. Our findings are as follows: (1) level
designers vary in their desired interactions with, and role of,
the AI, (2) the AI prompted the level designers to alter their
design practices, and (3) the level designers perceived the AI
as having potential value in their design practice, varying
based on their desired role for the AI.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Human computer in-
teraction (HCI); User studies; Graphical user interfaces.
KEYWORDS
artificial intelligence; human computer collaboration; human-
AI interaction
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300854
ACM Reference Format:
Matthew Guzdial, Nicholas Liao, Jonathan Chen, Shao-Yu Chen,
Shukan Shah, Vishwa Shah, Joshua Reno, Gillian Smith, and Mark O.
Riedl. 2019. Friend, Collaborator, Student, Manager: How Design of
an AI-Driven Game Level Editor Affects Creators. In CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May
4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300854
1
INTRODUCTION
Advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) systems have lead to an increasing number of people
interacting with these systems on a daily basis, for example
with curated social media timelines, voice user interfaces
and agents, and self-driving cars. While the majority of these
extant AI systems cover rote or repetitive human interac-
tions, there has been increased interest in using AI to assist
creative expression [32, 56]. AI has been proposed in a col-
laborative framework in domains like storytelling, visual
art, dance, and games [14, 19, 29, 31]. As such approaches
grow in popularity and sophistication, there is a greater need
to understand how to best develop interaction paradigms
[18, 35, 52]. It is not yet clear how best to design interfaces
and AI to support creativity.
AI has long been utilized in video game design and devel-
opment [55]. This application of AI to game design is called
procedural content generation (PCG), in which algorithms
generate game content like game art, levels, and rules [23, 49].
In most cases, these algorithms are applied in one of two
ways: (1) the algorithm is run once and a human designer
then refines the output (e.g. an initial generated terrain ad-
justed by human designers) or (2) the algorithm is integrated
into a game and produces content at runtime without de-
signer oversight. Much less frequently, game design tools are
developed with AI agents as an equal design partner. Given
this, a firm understanding of the best way to structure this
arXiv:1901.06417v1  [cs.HC]  18 Jan 2019

interaction and the consequences of employing it does not
yet exist.
We designed a tool: Morai Maker, in which a level de-
signer can collaboratively work with an AI agent to build
a Super Mario Bros.-like platformer game level. The inter-
action occurs in a turn-based manner, in which the human
and AI designers take turns making changes to an initially
blank level within the same level editor interface. We ran
two mixed-methods studies with a total of over one-hundred
participants, the first as a means of guiding the development
of the tool, and the second as a means of examining the ways
in which the tool impacted the behavior of practicing game
designers. Based on the results of these studies we found
support for the following:
• The level designers varied in their desired interactions
with the AI and role of the AI in those interactions. We
summarize these roles as friend, collaborator, student,
or manager. This followed from the designer’s own
artistic style, how they attempted to employ the AI,
and their reactions to the AI’s behavior.
• The level designers demonstrated a willingness to
adapt their own design practice to the AI and to the
level editor.
• The level designers expressed a perception that the
AI could potentially bring value to their design prac-
tice. However, the form this took depended on the
individual designer’s expectations for the AI.
We discuss the design implications for user interfaces and
AI agents for game level editors in order to afford the most
effective user-AI interactions. The main contributions of this
work to the HCI community are as follows:
• We discuss the design of the intelligent level design
editor, both the front-end interface and back-end, col-
laborative deep neural network AI.
• Through our two mixed-methods studies we identify
user behaviors and user-AI interactions in our editor.
• Finally, we discuss the implications for similar inter-
faces in which users and AI collaborate on a single
creative object.
2
RELATED WORK
We review works on (1) general human-AI cooperative cre-
ation or co-creation on creative tasks and (2) relevant prior
work in the field of computer games.
AI Co-Creation
Co-creation or mixed initiative practices are those practices
in which two agents work together in some creative task [24].
Most typically these agents are humans, for example children
working together to write a story [38] or coworkers working
on a photo collage [30]. In this paper we focus on co-creation
with an AI partner in the context of game level design.
The majority of recent AI advances have arisen due to
deep learning [28], a particular machine learning approach
that allows for highly complex models [42]. There has been
a significant amount of work in applying deep learning to a
variety of tasks, including writing [6, 48], music composition
[8, 25], and visual art [7]. However these prior instances
almost all involve a use case in which a human user prompts
a trained AI agent for output. In other words, there is only
the most minimal collaboration, the AI is employed as a tool.
In those cases in which the AI is not a tool, it is still not
frequently given a partner role, for example being tasked
with question-answering in a visual chatbot [12].
Recent work has looked into building interfaces and frame-
works to allow for co-creation between a user and an AI.
Sketch-RNN [22] is an interface for sketching in which an
AI attempts to finish a user’s drawing and generate similar
drawings. Drawing Apprentice [13] is a sketching tool that
focuses on adding content based on an AI’s understanding
of a user’s sketch. This tool allows a user to give explicit
feedback to the AI, while we instead opt for implicit feed-
back. DuetDraw [32] is an intelligent tool for creating col-
ored pieces of digital art. It allows two different modes with
unique human-AI dynamics, with human or AI taking the
leading role and the other taking an assistant role. We did
not explicitly structure such roles into our models, but still
found that users naturally projected different roles onto the
same AI and took corresponding roles. Viewpoints AI [26]
is an intelligent dance partner installation in which an intel-
ligent dance partner attempts to adapt its performance to its
human partner.
Games
The concept of co-creation via procedural content generation
via machine learning (PCGML) has been previously discussed
in the literature [47, 56], but no prior approaches or systems
exist. Comparatively there exist many prior approaches to
co-creative or mixed-initiative level design agents without
machine learning [15, 53]. These approaches instead rely
upon search or grammar-based approaches [2, 3, 29, 41].
This means that there is significant developer effort required
to adapt each approach to a novel game.
Procedural content generation via Machine Learning [47]
is a relatively new field, focused on generating content through
machine learning methods. The majority of PCGML ap-
proaches represent black box methods, without any prior
approach focused on explainability or co-creativity. Our AI
could be classified as a PCGML approach, focused on co-
creativity.
Super Mario Bros. (SMB), which we employ as our particu-
lar domain of study, represents a common area of research

Figure 1: Screenshot of the final level editor.
into PCGML [11, 27, 45, 46, 50]. Beyond working with a
human user, our approach differs from prior SMB PCGML
approaches in terms of representation quality and the size of
generated content. We focus on the generation of individual
level sections instead of entire levels in order to better afford
collaborative level building [43]. We make use of a rich rep-
resentation of all possible level components and an ordering
that allows our approach to handle decorative elements.
3
INITIAL MORAI MAKER DEVELOPMENT
Morai Maker went through several iterations prior to any
participant study [21]. We named the initial prototype Morai
Maker after the popular level design game in the Mario fran-
chise Mario Maker, since it was intended as a similar applica-
tion but with “more AI". We chose Super Mario Bros. because
there has been significant PCGML work in this area [47].
Further the original game is well-recognized, which made it
more likely that future study participants would be familiar
with it.
We built the final version of our prototype interface in
Unity3D [10], a game development engine. The final version
of the UI is shown in Figure 1. The major parts of the interface
are the current level in the center of the interface, a minimap
on the bottom left of the interface, a palette of sprites in
the middle of the bottom row, and an “End Turn” button
on the bottom right. By pressing this End Turn button the
current AI level design partner is queried for an addition.
A pop-up appears while the partner processes, and then
its additions are added component-by-component to the
main screen. The camera scrolls to follow each addition,
so that the user is aware of any changes to the level. The
user then regains control and level building continues in
this turn-wise fashion. At any time users can hit the top
left “Run” button to play through the current version of the
level. A back-end logging system tracks all events, including
additions and deletions and which partner (human or AI) was
responsible for them. The current version of this interface
Unity3D project is available on GitHub.1
4
STUDY 1: PROTOTYPE INVESTIGATION
We ran an initial study to derive design lessons to apply
to future iterations of our Morai Maker tool, both in terms
of the interface and back-end AI system. We anticipated
that the choice of the AI algorithm might impact human
experience. However, it is unclear how and to what degree
different algorithms would impact user experience due to a
lack of prior work on this particular problem. Therefore, we
drew upon three previously published AI approaches to Super
Mario Bros. level generation, which we summarize in the next
section. Further, we focused on a primarily quantitative user
study as we were interested in deriving broad, summarizing
results.
AI Level Design Partners
For the initial study we created three AI agents to serve as
level design partners. Each is based on a previously published
PCGML approach, adapted to work in an iterative manner to
fit the requirements of our editor and turn-based interaction
framework. We chose to create three potential AI back-end
partners because we wished to investigate what impacts
each of these systems might have on the user experience.
We lack the space to fully describe each system, but describe
the approaches at a high level to give a sense of the means
in which their behavior varied.
• Markov Chain: This approach is a markov chain
from Snodgrass and Ontanón [44], based on Java code
supplied by the authors.
• Bayes Net: This approach is a probabilistic graphical
model, also known as a hierarchical Bayesian network
from Guzdial and Riedl [21].
• LSTM: This approach is a Long Short Term Memory
Recurrent Neural Network (LSTM) from Summerville
and Mateas [46], recreated in Tensorflow from the
paper.
We chose these three approaches because they represent
the most successful prior PCGML approaches in terms of
breadth and depth of evaluations. All three systems differed
in terms of the amount of existing level structure surveyed to
determine what next level components to add. The Markov
Chain looked only at a 2x2 grid of level content, making
hyper-local decisions, the Bayes Net looked at a chunk of
level with a width of 16 grid points, and the LSTM considered
almost the entire level. Further, the Bayes Net was the only
prior approach capable of generating decorative elements
and the only approach that represented each type of level
component as an individual type, whereas the other two
1https://github.com/mguzdial3/Morai-Maker-Engine

approaches grouped similar level components (e.g. all solid
components represented as equivalent). We chose to only
allow the agents to make additions to the level. We made
this choice as the systems were designed to autonomously
generate levels and so were not designed to handle deletions
and to minimize the potential for the agent to undo the
human’s intended design of a level.
Study Method
Each study participant went through the same process within
the same lab environment. First, they were given a short tuto-
rial on the level editor and its function. They then interacted
with two distinct AI partners back-to-back. The partners
were assigned at random from the three possible options.
During each of the two level design sessions, the user was
assigned one of two possible tasks, either to create an above
ground or below ground level. We gave the option for each
participant to look at two examples of the two level types
taken from the original Super Mario Bros.. This leads to a total
of twelve possible conditions in terms of pair of partners,
order of the pair, and order of the level design assignments.
Participants were given a maximum of fifteen minutes
for each level design task, though most participants finished
well before then. Participants were asked to press the “End
Turn” button in order to interact with their AI partner at
least once.
After both rounds of interaction participants took a brief
survey in which they were asked to rank the two AI partners
they interacted with in terms of the following experiential
measures:
(1) Which of the two agents was the most fun?
(2) Which of the two agents was the most frustrating?
(3) Which of the two agents was the most challenging?
(4) Which of the two agents most aided your design?
(5) Which of the two agents lead to the most surprising
and valuable ideas?
(6) Which of the two agents would you most want to use
again?
We chose these questions to focus on particular experien-
tial features measured in prior games experience research
[16, 21, 34]. We employed rankings over ratings because we
were particularly interested in the comparative impact on
user experience and due to previously noted benefits of rank-
ings [54]. After this ranking section, participants could chose
to leave a comment reflecting on each agent. The survey
ended by collecting demographic data including experience
with level design, Super Mario Bros., the participant’s gender
(participants input their gender through a text box), and age
(selected within the ranges of 18-22, 23-33, 34-54, and 55+).
Figure 2: Examples of six final levels from our study, each
pair of levels from a specific co-creative agent: Markov
Chain (top), Bayes Net (middle), and LSTM (bottom).
Results
In this section we discuss a data analysis of the results of our
user study. Overall 91 participants took part in this study.
However, seven participants did not interact with one or both
of their partners. Thus we do not include these results in our
analysis. The remaining 84 participants were split evenly
between the twelve possible conditions, meaning a total of
seven human participants for each condition. Of these, 67
respondents identified as male, 16 identified as female, and 1
identified as nonbinary. 64 participants placed themselves
in the 18-22 age range, which makes sense given we were
largely drawing from a student population, with 19 in the 23-
33 age range, and 1 participant in the 34-55 age range. This
population is not sufficiently diverse to draw broad, general
lessons. While this fit our needs for an initial investigation,
we broaden participant diversity in the second study.
62% of our respondents had previously designed Mario
levels before. This is likely due to prior experience playing
Mario Maker, a level design game/tool released by Nintendo.
Our participants were nearly evenly split between those who
had never designed a level before 26%, designed a level once
before 36%, or had designed multiple levels in the past 38%.
All but 7 of the participants had previously played Super
Mario Bros., and all the participants played games regularly.
Our first goal in analyzing our results was to determine if
the level design task (above or underground) mattered and
if the ordering of the pair of partners mattered. We ran a
one-way repeated measures ANOVA between ordering of

Table 1: A table comparing the ratio of first rankings for the three comparisons and the p-value of the Wilcoxon rank-sum
test, testing if the two ranking distributions differed significantly.
Most Fun
Most Frustrating
Most Challenging
Most Aided
Most Creative
Reuse
Pair of AI
ratio
p
ratio
p
ratio
p
ratio
p
ratio
p
ratio
p
Bayes-LSTM
15:13
0.6029
11:17
0.1142
9:19
0.0083
17:11
0.1142
19:9
0.0083
17:11
0.1142
Bayes-Markov
12:16
0.1469
15:13
0.6029
11:17
0.1142
14:14
1
10:18
0.0349
11:17
0.1142
LSTM-Markov
11:17
0.1142
15:13
0.6029
16:12
0.2937
12:16
0.2937
13:15
0.6029
13:15
0.6029
Table 2: A table comparing the Spearman’s correlation between the different agent ranking questions. Each cell contains the
Spearman’s rho and p values for the ranking across the 84 participants.
Fun
Frustrating
Challenging
Aided
Creative
Reuse
rho
p
rho
p
rho
p
rho
p
rho
p
rho
p
Fun
-
-0.74
<2.2e-16
-0.10
0.2194
0.79
<2.2e-16
0.76
<2.2e-16
0.88
<2.2e-16
Frustrating
-0.74
<2.2e-16
-
0.21
0.0053
-0.81
<2.2e-16
-0.64
<2.2e-16
-0.71
<2.2e-16
Challenging
-0.10
0.2194
0.21
0.0053
-
-0.21
0.0053
-0.10
0.2194
-0.07
0.3572
Aided
0.79
<2.2e-16
-0.81
<2.2e-16
-0.21
0.0053
-
0.74
<2.2e-16
0.81
<2.2e-16
Creative
0.76
<2.2e-16
-0.64
<2.2e-16
-0.10
0.2194
0.74
<2.2e-16
-
0.83
<2.2e-16
agents, the pair of agents, and the design task and the expe-
riential feature rankings. We found that no variable lead to
any significance. Thus, we can safely treat our data as having
only three conditions, dependent on the pair of partners each
participant interacted with. However, this also indicates that
none of the agents were a significant determiner of the final
rankings.
We give the overall ranking results in Table 1. We split
the results into three conditions, based on the pair of agents
those participants interacted with. This is necessary given
the pairwise ranking information. For each pair of agents,
and for each experiential feature (e.g. “Most Fun"), we give
the ratio by which each agent was ranked first for that fea-
ture and the p-value from running the Wilcoxon rank-sum
test. This p-value is bolded in the case in which we can re-
ject that these two sets of rankings arose from the same
distribution. To run the Wilcoxon rank-sum we represented
all first place rankings as 1.0 and all second place rankings
as -1.0, but we could have chosen any two distinct values.
We applied the Wilcoxon rank-sum test as our data did not
fit a normal distribution. Thus, for example for the Bayes-
LSTM condition the Bayes agent was ranked as the most fun
by 15 of the 28 participants while the remaining 13 ranked
the LSTM as the most fun. Note that we simplify the fifth
ranking question in our survey (surprising and valuable) to
most creative; surprise and value have been identified as two
of the primary requirements for something to be labelled
creative [5].
The results in Table 1 indicate that we were unable to find
any significant difference for all but three of the comparative
rankings. One might suggest that we needed to collect more
training data. However, after 72 participants we found nearly
these exact same proportionate ratios. Instead, it may be that
the participants of this study were choosing their rankings at
random. To determine this we ran a second set of evaluations
testing the degree to which rankings of one experiential
feature correlated with the other experiential features. Table
2 summarizes the results from comparing the correlations of
the experiential feature rankings. We applied Spearman’s rho
as our correlation test, due to the fact that our ranking data
does not follow a normal distribution. The first value in each
cell is the value of Spearman’s rho, while the second is the
p-value of significance, with significant values in bold. The
amount and strength of the correlations may seem surprising,
but we note that there were only two possible values (first
rank or second rank, associated with 1.0 or -1.0).
These results lend support to the notion that our partic-
ipants were not ranking according to random guesses, as
we would not expect to see any correlation. Instead, we can
break our results into groups in terms of experiential rank-
ings that implied a positive experience (fun, aided, creative,
and reuse) and those that did not (frustrating and challeng-
ing). Notably, ranking the agents in terms of which was the
most challenging appears to have been the least consistent
across participants. There is a weak positive correlation with
the ranking of most frustrating and a weak negative correla-
tion with the ranking of most aided. We anticipate this was
due to a lack of clarity in how we phrased the question, but
also note that some participants may have used a challenging

ranking to denote a lack of understanding on their part for a
potentially useful agent.
Study 1 Output Levels
We give examples of two randomly selected levels co-designed
by each of the three agents in Figure 2. While we chose these
levels at random, they demonstrate some consistent features
we found across all levels co-designed by these agents. For
example, the Markov Chain agent co-designed levels (top of
Figure 2 have a variety of unique patterns of blocks, which do
not appear in Mario or in the other agent’s co-designed levels.
The Bayes Net co-designed levels were more likely to con-
tain decoration, but otherwise appear similar to typical Super
Mario Bros. levels. Finally, the LSTM agent’s co-designed lev-
els varied widely. In the cases where participants followed
typical Super Mario Bros. level conventions, the LSTM agent
tended to co-design levels that strongly resembled original
Super Mario Bros. levels. However, when participants did not
follow these conventions (as in the two images we randomly
selected) the output tended to appear noisy or random. De-
spite referring to some of these levels as more or less Super
Mario Bros.-like we note that in all of these example images,
and in fact in all of the final levels from this study, there
existed structures that did not exist in the original Super
Mario Bros.-levels. For example in the very top level image,
the extra-long orange bars and single floating cloud the use
of an “M" shape of floating blocks in the second image.
Study 1 Results Discussion
The lack of a consistent ranking between agents according
to the experiential feature rankings suggests that no one
agent stands out as significantly superior as a creative part-
ner. Instead, they suggest that individual participants varied
in terms of their preferences. This matches our own expe-
rience with the agents. When attempting to build a very
standard Super Mario Bros. level, the LSTM agent performed
well. However, as is common with deep learning methods
it was brittle, defaulting to the most common behavior (e.g.
adding ground or block components) when confronted with
unfamiliar input. In comparison the Bayes Net agent was
more flexible, and the Markov Chain agent more flexible still,
given its hyper-local reasoning. This can be most clearly seen
in the “Most Creative" results in Table 1, in which the Bayes
Net was ranked as significantly more surprising and valuable
than the LSTM, and the Markov Chain agent ranked as sig-
nificantly more surprising and valuable than the Bayes Net.
Despite this, in comparing between the LSTM and Markov
Chain, no such significant relationship was found.
The lack of a single superior agent is further supported
by the optional comments left by some participants. For ex-
ample, despite receiving the fewest number of first place
rankings, some participants referred to the LSTM as “Pretty
smart overall... [collaborating] well with my ideas”, “seemed
more creative. I did actually use some of its ideas” or felt
that the agent “seemed to build toward an idea”. Compar-
atively the participant who gave that latter quote felt the
Markov agent “didn’t really seem to offer any ‘new’ ideas”,
despite the Markov agent consistently ranking higher on the
question about surprising/valuable ideas. Notably, despite
the requirement of ranking, our results indicate that many
participants remained unsatisfied by both agents. One piece
of evidence for this is that on average participants deleted
60% of all the agent’s additions. This is further made clear
through comments in which participants expressed displea-
sure with both agents they interacted with, such as “They
both included stuff... which seemed pretty unhelpful". One
participant who interacted first with the Bayes Net agent
stated that the agent “did not pick up on my style of design"
and of the second agent they interacted with, the LSTM agent,
they stated they were “Disappointed with the lack of creativ-
ity of level generation idea(s)". This quote appears to state
the opposite view of the participants above who specifically
mention the creativity of the LSTM agent’s ideas. The LSTM
agent did not change between participants, thus it appears
that this friction arose due to differences in the participants
as level designers. This type of friction appeared throughout
the optional quotes, indicating that different participants had
vastly different design values, with no one agent addressing
them all.
Our primary takeaways from this first study were as fol-
lows:
• Users of this prototype tool varied by such a degree
that no one static agent could meet all of their expec-
tations for an AI partner. However, users of the tool
overall expressed a clear sense of what they found
valuable.
• Participants demonstrated a consistent departure from
typical Super Mario Bros. structure.
• Participants demonstrated a lack of clear understand-
ing of their AI partners, but a willingness to invent an
explanation for how these partners behaved.
5
STUDY 2: THINKALOUD
The purpose of our first study was to derive design insights
we might use to develop our initial prototype into a more
fully realized tool. Thus, we made changes based on the
results of this first study, both to the interface and AI agent.
We discuss these changes below. After these changes we
felt we had arrived at something like an “alpha" build, to
borrow software development parlance. We ran a second
study in order to evaluate the impacts that this version of
Morai Maker had on designer’s experiences and behaviors.
This study was not meant as an evaluation of this tool, but an

investigation of the effect that the tool had on users towards
its continuing, future development. We focused this study on
practicing, published game designers with a more qualitative
methodology for this purpose. Before the study we identified
three major research questions, which directed the design of
the study and our analysis of the results. They are as follows:
• RQ1: By leveraging active learning to adapt the AI
partner to a user, can our tool better serve the needs
of level designers?
• RQ2: Can Explainable AI allow users to better under-
stand the AI, and therefore to better utilize the tool?
• RQ3: Will our overall changes to the tool lead to ben-
eficial experiences for the designers?
RQ1 arose from the first and second takeaways listed in
the Study 1 Results Discussion section, RQ2 arose from the
third takeaway, and RQ3 arose as a general response to our
changes.
Changes to Morai Maker
The results of the first study indicate a need for an approach
designed for co-creative PCGML instead of adapted from
autonomous PCGML. In particular, given that none of our
existing agents were able to sufficiently handle the variety
of human participants, we expect instead a need for an ideal
partner to more effectively generalize across all potential
human designers and to adapt to a human designer actively
during the design task. We modeled the interaction as a semi-
Markov Decision Process (SMDP) with concurrent actions
(the different possible additions) [37]. Our final agent trained
on the interactions with the 91 participants, using the “Reuse"
ranking (1 or -1) as the final reward, given that we felt this
was the most important experiential feature and correlated
strongly with the other positive features. In addition, we
include a small negative reward (-0.1) if the human deletes
an addition made by the AI partner.
From our human participant study we found that local
coherency (Markov Chain) tended to outperform global co-
herency (LSTM). Thus for a proposed co-creative architecture
we chose to make use of a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) as the agent in our SMDP. We made this choice as
CNNs focus learn small, local features that are helpful in
making more global decisions. We made use of a three layer
CNN, with the first layer having 8 4x4 filters, the second
layer having 16 3x3 filters, and the final layer having 32 3x3
filters. The final layer is a fully connected layer followed by
a reshape to place the output in the form of the action matrix
(40x15x32). Each layer made use of leaky relu activation. We
made use of a mean square loss and adam as our optimizer,
with the network built in Tensorflow [1].
We updated our agent to use an active learning frame-
work [40]. During use of the tool the agent trains on implicit
feedback from the user. If a user keeps the AI’s additions
the agent receives a reward of +0.1, and if the user removes
them -0.1. Notably these rewards are local to the addition’s
placement, meaning that a user deleting a ground tile in
a particular location will not impact the likelihood of see-
ing other ground tiles elsewhere. We also kept track of all
deletions from the user of the AI’s additions in a particular
session and prohibit the AI partner from making those same
additions again.
Overall this had the effect of an agent that, in informal
tests, was capable of picking up on user’s preferences for
local level structures. We predicted that this would allow us
to address the first two takeaways from the results of the
first study, given the ability to adapt to an individual user
and training on more levels than existed in the original Super
Mario Bros.. For further technical details please see [20].
The size and processing requirements of this new AI model
meant we could no longer run the model on the same device
as the front-end editor. Instead we made use of a client-
server framework, in which the AI agent ran on a server
during a single participant’s study, and the “End Turn” button
prompted the server for additions. Study personnel could
monitor the output of the server during the study.
Results in the first study indicated the participants did
not fully understand their AI partners, to address this we in-
cluded an explanation generation system. Explainable AI rep-
resents an emerging field of research [4], focused on translat-
ing or rationalizing the behavior of black box models. To the
best of our knowledge, this has not been previously applied
to PCGML. Codella et al. [9] demonstrated how explanations
could improve model accuracy on three tasks, but required
that every sample be hand-labeled with an explanation and
treated explanations from different authors as equivalent.
Ehsan et al. [17] made use of explainable AI for automated
game playing. Their approach relies on a secondary machine
learning interpretation of the original behavior, rather than
visualizing or explaining the original model as our approach
does.
In our explanation generation system we identify the most
decisive 4x4 slice of the level for a particular addition as a
printout from the server, we also included the AI agent’s
confidence in the addition (based on the activation) and
the filter of the first layer of the CNN that was maximally
activated as described in [33]. Essentially this meant that
for every addition an AI expert could translate why the AI
made that addition. We did not incorporate explanations
into the editor at this time, given a lack of clarity on how
best to integrate this feature. Instead we treated this as a
semi-Chinese room [39] or semi-Wizard of Oz [36] design,
with study personnel acting to translate the output expla-
nation into user-understandable language. For consistency,

we used a single member of the study personnel to trans-
late these explanations. No hypothesizing was included in
these explanations, only relating the output in terms of the
generated explanation and prior experience. Our hope was
that we might use the ways in which this individual trans-
lated the explanations as insight into an interface-integrated
explanation system.
There were only two changes made to the front-end level
editor. First, we replaced the “Options” button with a “Re-
move" button that would remove all the AI’s additions from
the last turn. We made this choice because we anticipated
the potential for brittleness and incoherent additions prior
to the agent successfully adapting to the user. The second
change was to remove the functionality of the “Run" button,
since in the case of the 7 participants who did not make use
of the AI in the first study, they spent their full time playing
their own level.
Method
The overall method of this second study remained similar
to the first. The study differed in terms of the location. Our
goal for this study was to determine the impact of this tool
on user’s design practice. For this reason, we gave the option
for study participants to take part in the study wherever
they felt the most comfortable to engage in level design. In
the cases where users took part in the study remotely, study
personnel used conference software to watch their screen
and record audio.
At the start of the study, participants were given a full
run-down of the tool, this time including informing the users
they could ask questions to the study personnel, including
explicitly “explanations about the AI". Participants then took
part in designing two levels. For each level they now inter-
acted with the same agent, which was not reset in between
levels. Thus the agent would ideally continue to adapt to
the designer during the course of the study session, and
we would expect to see better performance in the second
level design session. The participants were given a random
level design task for each level, to create an above ground
or under ground level, while the AI was not altered in either
case. The major difference in the level design portion of the
study was the use of a think-aloud protocol. At the beginning
of the study session participants were encouraged to voice
their “thoughts, reactions, and intentions" aloud. In the case
where the participant remained quiet, study personnel asked
“why” questions, referring back to the previous actions of the
participant. The exact choice of when to make use of these
questions was left up to individual study personnel. A single
study personnel ran each of these sessions. We made this
choice for consistency between when the “why" questions
were asked and the generated explanations.
Given that the original survey was designed to compare
between interactions with two different agents, we reworked
it for interacting with the same agent twice. In particular we
reworded four of the original questions to ask participants
to rank between the two experiences, in regards to the agent.
We did not include the question on reuse, as it was not rel-
evant, and we did not include the question on which agent
was most challenging to use given the apparent issues with
that question.
We added a second set of questions after the initial expe-
riential feature rankings meant to specifically address our
research questions. They were as follows:
(1) Did you prefer the agent’s behavior in the first or sec-
ond session? (a) First (b) Second.
(2) Would you prefer to use this tool with or without the
AI partner? (a) With (b) Without (c) No preference.
(3) Did you feel that the agent was collaborating with
you? (a) Yes (b) No
(4) Did you feel that the agent was adapting to you? (a)
Yes (b) No
(5) If you asked for explanations, did you find that they
improved your experience? (a) Yes (b) No
For each of these questions participants were asked to
explain their answers in text, except for the last one, which
asked for an explanation in the case of a positive response.
These questions were intended to help us pick apart elements
of user experience related to our two research questions,
RQ1 (1, 4), RQ2 (5), and RQ3 (2, 3). We added questions to
the demographic section to address the particular goals for
this study. We asked the respondents to describe their game
design experience (offering hobbyist, industry, indie, aca-
demic, etc. as suggested answers), and asked them to rate
their experience with with AI/ML on a Likert scale (No expe-
rience, I have studied or used AI/ML in the past, I regularly
use AI/ML, I am an AI/ML expert). We asked this question
due to RQ3, and our concern that experience with AI may
impact how participants asked for explanations.
Analysis Methods
During the think-aloud design portions of each study person-
nel were instructed to note interactions or utterances they
felt related to our three research questions. After all partici-
pant data had been collected we further reviewed the audio
recordings for any additional interactions or utterances. We
engaged in two discussion sessions between members of the
team concerning this final set of notes in order to derive our
final discussion points in terms of our research questions,
grouping each noted utterance or interaction in terms of
whether it positively or negatively related to each research
question.

Figure 3: Examples of six final levels from our second study,
each pair of levels comes from a single participant.
Demographic Results
We reached out to a total of 24 game designers through
various social media accounts. We sought only those with
published games, either indie, hobbyist or industry. We made
this choice because we were interested in designers with a
consistent design practice, in order to determine how this
design practice was impacted by our tool. 16 agreed to take
part in this study. During the study session of two of these in-
dividuals it was discovered that networking issues (a firewall
the participant had no control over and network latency)
lead to the tool crashing. Thus we were left with 14 final
participants.
Of the 14 participants, 8 identified as male, 4 as female,
and 2 as nonbinary. While not ideal, this does outperform the
games industry in terms of gender diversity [51]. In terms of
age, 11 chose 23-33, 2 chose 34-54, and 1 chose 18-22. This
is notably older on average than our initial study, which
follows from the difference in participant pools.
We randomly selected three of our participants and visual-
ize their final levels in Figure 3. These levels vary significantly
from the types of levels seen in Figure 2, and each demon-
strates unique design aesthetics. Most notably the middle
designer, who described her levels as “sadistic”. These levels
offer some evidence towards the tool supporting creative
expression, but does not reflect the interaction with the AI.
Quantitative Results
The only quantitative results of this study are the survey
responses and the logging information. We summarize the
Table 3: Ratio of the answers to the survey’s question in the
second study.
First
Second
Most Fun
5
9
Most Frustrating
8
6
Most Aided
5
9
Most Creative
5
9
Preference
6
8
Yes
No
Collaborating
7
7
Adapting
9
5
results in terms of the ratio of answers in Table 3. It does not
include the answer to the question concerning whether the
participant would want to use the tool with or without the
AI, but we found that nine answered “with”, two answered
“without”, and the rest “no preference”. Since the AI partner
is the main feature that differentiates this tool from other
level design editors, we anticipate that this result indicates
some positive support for RQ3. Overall these results indicate
a majority of participants had a positive interaction with
the agent, which gives some support to a positive answer to
RQ1.
As a summarizing statistic we include the change in aver-
age ranking of the second agent between the four experien-
tial features shared between the two studies. This indicates
that individuals in the second study were 14.3% more likely
to rank the second design experience as more fun than indi-
viduals in the first study, 15.5% less likely to rank the second
agent as more frustrating, 20.3% more likely to think the
second experience aided their design, and 9.5% more likely
to view the second experience as demonstrating more sur-
prising and valuable ideas from the AI. This lends further
support toward a positive answer to RQ1 since by the time
of the second session the AI agent should have had time to
adapt to the user. Half of the participants felt the AI was
collaborating with them. This seemed to be due to differing
expectations on what AI collaboration should look like across
the participants, which we discuss further below. We ended
up not finding the explanation question useful because only
three of the fourteen respondents asked for any explanations
having to do with the AI. Only 45% of AI additions were
deleted on average in this study, compared to 60% in the first.
However we caution against strong interpretations of these
results.
Qualitative Results
In this subsection we organize the results of our analysis
of the think-aloud utterances and design tool interactions
in terms of our three research questions. In our analysis

we noted two major themes across our findings. First, that
individuals differed widely in terms of their expected roles
for the AI. Second, a willingness to adapt their own behavior
to the AI. We identify participants according to the order
that they took part in the study.
Our first research question asked by leveraging active
learning to adapt the AI partner to a user, can our tool
better serve the needs of level designers?. Overall, we
found that the AI consistently demonstrated adaptation to
the participants. The study participants indicated that they
noticed this, both during the think-aloud and in their com-
ments on the final survey. Study participant 9, a male hobby-
ist game designer, added this after the collaboration survey
question: “The more I placed, the more the agent seemed
to get a sense of what I was going for, and in the end we
had a couple of decent Mario levels." Participant 1, a male
indie game designer, responded to the question about round
preference with: “... After I rejected some of the off-theme
decorative elements it attempted to add at the beginning,
I felt like it recognized what kind of blocks I was working
with in this environment." During the study, every partici-
pant had at least one interaction where they noted the AI’s
adaptation. Participant 5, a female academic game designer
reacted to one of the AI’s additions with “This is a little
better...Hey it’s starting to figure me out a little bit". Partic-
ipant 6, a non-binary, hobbyist game designer offered the
following quotes directly after observing each round of the
AI’s additions “Still don’t feel quite inspired? I’ll try a tighter
feedback loop", “Wait? that was nice", “Not great, except this
part is really great", and “Honestly, good job AI?".
Each participant experienced and remarked upon at least
one instance of the AI adapting to them. However, for some
participants, this was the exception, with most of the behav-
ior appearing “random". On a comment after the first/second
round behavior preference question, participant 14, a hobby-
ist nonbinary game designer stated “The second agent placed
objects fairly arbitrarily, in places where it didn’t really affect
gameplay, just looked weird". Participant 11, a male game
designer, who described his game design career as “all of the
above except industry" stated “it learned too much from the
first and then attempted to apply it to the second". Notably
this was one of the three participants who actually asked for
explanations about the AI agent.
Our second research question asked can Explainable AI
allow users to better understand the AI, and therefore
to better utilize the tool?. We did not find a meaningful
answer to this research question. Only three participants
asked for explanations, with two responding to the survey
saying it was useful. Participant 7, a male hobbyist game
designer added the comment “It helped me understand what
the AI was attempting to do and adapt to it for better col-
laboration." However, this could have been prompted by the
way we phrased the survey question. Instead of asking for
explanations about the AI, almost all participants instead
voiced hypotheses about why the AI did what it did. In cases
where these were phrased as questions (e.g. “Will it learn?"
from participant 5), our study personnel asked if this was
meant as a question, to which our participants responded
in the negative. This came up repeatedly, even with partici-
pants who asked for explanations. Participant 8, a male who
described himself as a “mostly" hobbyist, stated “It is adding
something to help the players", despite asking whether the
system had any explicit model of the mechanics and hearing
it did not. These hypothesized reasons often anthropomor-
phised the AI as in “I’m happy with what the AI is thinking
here" from participant 11 and “I like where it’s heads at but-
I’m gonna trim some things" from participant 13, a female
student/indie game designer.
Our third research question asked will our overall changes
to the tool lead to beneficial experiences for the de-
signers?, by which we address our belief that designers
would find value in the tool. First, participants generally
praised the front-end interface. Participant 10, a female “in-
dustry, indie, academic" game designer stated “Your level ed-
itor is amazingly functional for something written in Unity.
Also, it felt pretty good to use." Across the think-aloud and
survey comments we identified two major strategies to get
value from the tool. As either an unintentional inspiration
source or an intentional means of getting over a lack of ideas.
Participant 4, a male hobbyist designer indicated that he
preferred the behavior of the first experience to the second,
explaining “It added things that made the level harder, things
that I would not have thought of by myself, most likely". Par-
ticipant 6, after stating a preference for the tool with the
AI partner stated “I really like the tool regardless of the AI
partner, but it was nice to be surprised by the AI partner! It
prompted conversation/discussion in my head". Participant
14 during the think-aloud stated “I’m running out of ideas",
prompted the AI for additions, and exclaimed “Oh yeah I
forgot about these things!". Participant 5 stated she would
prefer to use the tool with the AI and explained “It was more
fun than facing an empty level by myself".
Not everyone found the tool to be consistently valuable,
with the majority of complaints about the tool focusing on
the AI’s behavior. Participant 10 indicated she had no prefer-
ence about whether to use the tool with or without the AI
and stated “I could see using this tool as a way to give myself
inspiration. But if I had more specific goals in mind... I would
have found it more inhibiting than useful". Seven of the par-
ticipants used the term “random" to refer to behavior they
disliked from the AI, as with participant 2, a female academic
game designer, who commented “the AI choices felt a bit too
random to suit my taste", after indicating she’d rather use the
tool without the AI. Participants also had issues with the AI

not recognizing intentional empty space. Even though the AI
could not make the same additions in the same locations, it
could add the same additions in other map locations. When
the AI repeatedly filled Participant 11’s gaps with ground
blocks he exclaimed “Quit filling in the gaps!". Some users
expected the AI to only add content that a potential player
could reach given the current level. Participant 9, reacting to
an AI addition stated “that’s an unreachable block so I’m go-
ing to delete it", this was a common reason given for deleting
the AI’s additions.
Roles and User Adapting Analysis
Users differed widely in their expectations for their AI part-
ner. In our analysis we identified four major expected AI
roles: friend, collaborator, student, and manager. These ex-
pected roles could positively or negatively impact the user
experience, and fluidly changed throughout each design ses-
sion. For friend we indicate those participants who viewed
interaction with the AI as primarily a fun activity, and even
literally described the AI as a friend. Participant 13 began her
second design session by clicking the end turn button and
stating “Let’s see what my friend comes up with". Participant
7 described the experience as “fun", but gave the answer of
no preference in the question of whether he would prefer
the tool with or without the AI.
Collaborator as a role indicated those who wanted an
equal design partner. This could be positive, for example par-
ticipant 2 stated she “found myself wanting to compliment
the AI’s choices more as I noticed its responsiveness during
the second level build". It could also be negative, when the
AI did not match a participant’s expectations for a human
collaborator. Participant 11 stated “What I expect from a
design partner is one contributing complete(ish) ideas rather
than small edits" after answering that he did not think the AI
collaborated with him. Participant 2 echoed these statements,
but with a different sense of collaboration: “It didn’t seem to
be trying to create any consistency with my initial choices
as you might expect from a human collaborator".
For the student role, we indicate that the participant seemed
to expect the AI to follow their specific design beliefs or in-
structions. Participant 8 gave “I think that the first agent
give less ‘illegal’ suggestions" as his reasoning for preferring
the first agent, suggesting a notion of right and wrong agent
behavior. On a more positive end, participant 7 stated he felt
the system was collaborating with him, explaining “It tried to
copy things I did and it wasn’t ‘frustrating’ to work with." For
this participant, copying him was the ideal for a collaborator.
Lastly, perhaps with a cynical view of a student as underling,
participant 14 reacted to AI additions by exclaiming “Yes!
Do my work for me!"
By manager, we indicate that the participant seemed to
view the AI as giving instructions to them or judging their
design. Many of the cases of participants adapting their be-
havior to the AI occurred within this interactive framework.
Participant 4 began his session by asking if it was possible for
the AI to “evaluative" him. Later, reacting to an AI addition
he stated “so I like what the AI- I’ll follow along with what it
suggested". This notion of “following along" with the AI was
common across participants who engaged with the AI in this
way. As with Participant 2, who reacted to an AI addition by
stating “I’ll stick to its idea". Participant 8, reflecting on the
AI’s previous additions while designing stated “I’ll probably
just add some blocks to satisfy its needs".
Some participants adapted their behavior to the AI pri-
marily as a means of attempting to determine how best to
interact with it. Participant 12, a male indie, paused and
reflected on the AI’s additions during one of his sessions,
stating “It does do pretty cool stuff now and then, I think I
need to get more used to what its doing". Others were more
explicit in their plan to experiment, with participant 11 stat-
ing near the beginning of his first level design session “[I’m
going to] spend some time testing it". Still others adapted
their behavior as an extension of inspiration from the AI, as
with participant 6 reflecting with “It does make me want to
do more weird things". Finally, there were those who decided
to attempt to change their own design to make even the most
“random" AI additions fit, like participant 8, who gave “i am
looking for ways that make [the AI additions] legit" as an
explanation for changing his design.
6
DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
Overall, we found that our second study demonstrated clear
answers for our research questions concerning adaptation of
the agent and the value user’s found in the tool. However, we
found no clear answer for our research question concerning
explainable AI helping users to leverage the tool. Instead, it
seemed users were much more likely to come up with their
own explanations for the AI’s performance. We anticipate
this could potentially have arisen from a lack of experience
interacting with software and tools with explanations. Al-
ternatively, given that we used a human to translate our
Explainable AI system there may have been social pressure
not to ask questions related to the AI.
For ourselves and for future designers of similar tools, we
identified a few design implications or takeaways from both
studies. First, users vary widely in terms of their expectations
for the AI, in terms of the role the AI should take in collabo-
ration and its performance in that role. One could propose
a technical solution to this problem, that the AI should just
adapt more successfully, but we expect more success to come
from more explicitly outlining what the AI can and cannot
do. Second, users expressed an interest in adapting to the
AI, either because they viewed the AI as the more dominant
designer or because they were motivated to find the best

ways to interact with it. This is a positive sign for anyone
interested in co-creation between AI and human designers,
as it indicates a willingness to bend design practice to incor-
porate AI. Finally, we found that users overall found value in
the tool as a source of inspiration, in terms of its ability to en-
courage users to rethink a design or to offer new ideas when
a designer was unsure how to proceed. We anticipate that
these interactions would transfer to other design domains.
7
POTENTIAL FOR NEGATIVE IMPACTS
With any machine learning and artificial intelligence applica-
tion there is a need to interrogate the potential to take away
the livelihood of people. We note that this tool was intended
to function only as a design aide, not as a replacement for
a designer. The AI systems described in this paper are in-
sufficient to act as solitary designers, developed in favor of
augmenting, not replacing, creative work.
Given that our AI approach adapts to the designs of a
particular user, it could potentially reinforce design biases.
For example, replicating a designer’s use of an offensive or
over-used design, such as yet another game level in which
one must save the princess. There is no place for our system
as it currently exists to challenge a designer to improve
beyond inspiring the designer to employ additional level
components. We anticipate that there is not a great risk for
negative impacts in the domain of Super Mario Bros., but
continue to reflect on this for future versions of the tool.
8
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we discuss the development of an intelligent
level editor, which includes an AI partner to collaborate with
users. We ran two mixed-methods user studies, with the first
focusing on developing the initial tool, and the second focus-
ing on interrogating its affect on practicing level designers.
We found that users varied widely in their expectations and
expected role of the AI agent, demonstrated a willingness
to adapt their behavior to the agent, and overall viewed the
tool as having potential value in their design practice.
