GILT: Generating Images from Long Text
Ori Bar El, Ori Licht, Netanel Yosephian
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Creating an image reﬂecting the content of a long text is
a complex process that requires a sense of creativity. For
example, creating a book cover or a movie poster based on
their summary or a food image based on its recipe. In this
paper we present the new task of generating images from
long text that does not describe the visual content of the
image directly. For this, we build a system for generating
high-resolution 256 × 256 images of food conditioned on
their recipes. The relation between the recipe text (with-
out its title) to the visual content of the image is vague, and
the textual structure of recipes is complex, consisting of two
sections (ingredients and instructions) both containing mul-
tiple sentences. We used the recipe1M [11] dataset to train
and evaluate our model that is based on a the StackGAN-v2
architecture [15].
1. Introduction
Generating images from text is a challenging task and
has many applications in computer vision. Recent works
have shown that Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
are effective in synthesizing high-quality, realistic images
from datasets with low variability and low-resolution [8, 3].
Further work also showed that given a text description, con-
ditional GANs (cGAN) [5] generate convincing images re-
lated directly to the text content [9].
All recent text to image synthesis cGANs used a short
visual description of the image, with low complexity and
a consistent pattern of descriptions, and the images them-
selves had low variability.
E.g.
Zhange et al. [15, 16]
used the CUB dataset [14] containing 200 bird species with
11,788 images and corresponding description and Oxford-
102 dataset [6] containing 8,189 images of ﬂowers from
102 different categories (see Figure 1). Recently the dataset
recipe1M, containing 800K pairs of recipes and their corre-
sponding images, was published as part of [11]. In com-
parison to the CUB and Oxford-102 datasets, this dataset
has a high variability due to the variety of food categories
and subcategories. Moreover, the text related to the image
is complex. It consists of 2 sections (ingredients and in-
structions), that together might contain tens of lines (e.g.
Figure 2).
Figure 1. Image samples from CUB and Oxford-102 datasets, and
their corresponding text descriptions
We propose a novel task of synthesizing images from
long text, that is related to the image but does not contain
visual description of it. Speciﬁcally, We propose a baseline
to this task by combining the state-of-the-art Stacked Gen-
erative Adversarial Network [15] and the two proposals of
recipe embeddings computed in im2recipe [11] to generate
food images conditioned on their recipes. We also present
extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments using hu-
1
arXiv:1901.02404v1  [cs.CV]  8 Jan 2019

man ranking, MS-SSIM [13] and inception scores [10], to
compare the effectiveness of the two embedding methods.
Our code is available at
https://github.com/netanelyo/Recipe2ImageGAN.
2. Related Work
Generating high-resolution images conditioned on text
descriptions is a fundamental problem in computer vision.
This problem is being studied extensively and various ap-
proaches were suggested to tackle it. Deep generative mod-
els, such as [16, 15, 12, 17], achieved tremendous progress
in this domain. In order to get high-resolution images they
used multi-stage GANs, where each stage corrects defects
and adds details w.r.t.
the previous stage.
In [12], Xu
et al. use Deep Attentional Multimodal Similarity Model
(DAMSM) for text embedding. DAMSM learns two neu-
ral networks that map sub regions of the image and words
of the sentence to a common semantic space. Thus, mea-
sures the image-text similarity at the word level to compute
a ﬁne-grained loss for image generation.
3. Learning Embeddings
Our cGAN uses the embedding of the entire recipe (ex-
cept for its title) as a condition. To generate that embedding
we leverage the methods used in [11]. They [11] proposed
two types of embedding methods, where the second adds
a semantic regularization loss component. Throughout this
paper we will refer to the ﬁrst method without semantic reg-
ularization as NOREG, and the second with semantic regu-
larization as REG. The embedding methods are composed
of the following steps (for the concrete architecture see the
original paper).
1. Preliminary embedding of the ingredients.
2. Preliminary embedding of the cooking instructions.
Figure 2. Food image and its corresponding text descriptions
(recipe) sampled from [11]
3. Joint neural embedding of the entire recipe (using the
concatenation of the former preliminary embeddings)
and the image into a common space, using cosine sim-
ilarity loss between the embeddings of recipe-image
pairs.
4. Adding a semantic regularization loss using a high-
level classiﬁcation objective (used in REG only)
We employ these methods as explained in the original
paper.
4. Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks
Originally, GANs [4] are a combination of two models
that are trained to compete with each other. In the train-
ing process both the generator G and the discriminator D
are trained. G is optimized to reproduce images similar to
the original data distribution, by generating images that are
difﬁcult for the discriminator D to differ from the true im-
ages. D is trained to distinguish between real images and
fake synthetic ones, generated by G. This training is similar
to solving a minimax of 2 players game, with the objective
function, [4]
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata[log D(x)] +
Ez∼pz[log(1 −D(G(z)))],
(1)
where x is an image sampled from the real distribution pdata
and z is the noise vector, which is sampled from a prior dis-
tribution pz (e.g Uniform or Gaussian), used by G to gener-
ate the synthetic image.
In the case of Conditional GANs [12, 15, 16, 9] both the
generator and the discriminator are compelled to consider
another variable c. We denote D(x, c) and G(z, c) to be
the generator G and the discriminator D conditioned by c,
respectively. Meaning that G is able to generate images,
and D discriminate them, conditioned on c.
The StackGAN-v2 model, introduced in StackGAN++,
by Zhang et al. [15], is an end-to-end network for mod-
eling a series of multi-scale image distributions. The ar-
chitecture of this model is consisted of several generators
and discriminators in a tree-like structure framework (for
the concrete architecture see the original paper). Given a
noise vector z ∼pz and condition c StackGAN-v2 gen-
erates images from low-resolution to high-resolution from
different branches of the tree. In our case c is one of the
recipe embeddings from section 4. Overall, we have one
model for each of the two embeddings.
5. Implementation details
We compare two types of embedding methods from [11].
The ﬁrst method is based on cosine-similarity loss only and
is of size 1024. The second method uses additionally a high-
level classiﬁcation objective to compute embedding of size

Figure 3. Comparison of the real image, the generated image using the semantic-regularization (REG), and without the regularization
(NOREG), where most humans preferred the regularized images.
Figure 4. Comparison of the real image, the generated image without using the semantic-regularization (NOREG), and with semantic-
regularization (REG), where most humans preferred the non-regularized images.
1048. For training the StackGAN-v2 [15] model we used a
batch size of 24. Trying to use a larger batch size resulted
in a mode-collapse. The text-embedding dimension param-
eter presented in StackGAN-v2 was of size 128. At ﬁrst
we used this parameter with our training and got poor re-
sults. We realized that by projecting the rich text on this
small dimension, we might omit discriminative subtleties
between different recipes. As a result we used 1024 as the
text-embedding dimension parameter for both of the em-
beddings methods. In order to accelerate the training pro-
cess we used hdf5 (hierarchical data format) to map ﬁles to
memory. All neural models were implemented using Py-
Torch framework. All other parameters are identical to [11]
and [15]. The models were trained on 3 Nvidia Titan-X
GPUs, each has 12GB of memory, for 100 epochs on each
of the embedding methods.
6. Experiments
To evaluate our models, we conduct quantitative, in the
form of Inception Score (IS) [10], and qualitative, in the
form of Human Rankings (HR), evaluations. We compare
the aforementioned evaluation methods on images gener-
ated by two different text embedding methods, which both
are computed using [11]. In addition, we show outputs from
several state-of-the-art and previous state-of-the-art text-to-
image synthesis models, which indicate that generating re-

Figure 5. Comparison of the real image, the generated image with using the semantic-regularization (REG) and without semantic-
regularization (NOREG), top-to-bottom, and the corresponding recipe. One can notice that in the generated image using semantic-
regularization (on the right side), it has a dominant green color, which is, probably, due to the parsley that in the ingredients, and
is different than the real image.
alistic food-images based on their description is a challeng-
ing task, and all the more so based on their recipe. More-
over, we examine the diversity of the generated images us-
ing MS-SSIM [13].
6.1. Datasets and evaluation metrics
Recipe1M [11] contains over 1 million recipes and 800k
food images. Due to hardware limitations, we used a train-
ing set of 52k and an evaluation set of 24k recipe-image
pairs. In the pre-processing stage, the images were down-
scaled from 256 × 256 to 128 × 128 and 64 × 64, in-order
to train on different image scales. Further more, the images
were cropped and horizontally ﬂipped randomly. This was a
best-effort to focus on the food object in the image, but from
time to time, the cropping eliminated important details from
the original image.
Evaluation metrics.
Even though evaluating genera-
tive models is often a difﬁcult task (as mentioned in [1]), to
compare between the generated images in both embedding
methods quantitatively (numerically) we use Inspection-
Score,
IS = exp(ExDKL(p(y|x) || p(y))),
(2)
Where x denotes a single generated sample, y is the
predicted label, p(y|x) and p(y) are the conditional and
marginal class distributions, respectively, and DKL is the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Intuitively, the IS mea-
sures the diversity, with respect to ImageNet [2] classes,
and clarity of the generated images. Therefore, the KL-
divergence (hence the IS), of a successful generator should
be large. We evaluate the IS on the evaluation set, which
contains 24k randomly chosen samples. In spite of the sub-
optimality of IS, stated in [1], it is the most popular method
to evaluate generative models.
Metric
Embedding
Type
REG
NOREG
Inception
Score
4.42 ± 0.17
4.55 ± 0.20
Human
Ranking
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
2.62
2.24
3.05
2.88
2.70
3.72
Table 1. Inception scores and average human rankings of our re-
sults.
Figure
6.
Example
results
of
food
images
generated
by
HDGAN [17], AttnGAN [12] and StackGAN++ [15] conditioned
on text descriptions.
Due to the aforementioned suboptimality of IS and the
fact that it does not reﬂect the correlation between the gen-
erated image and the recipe it is conditioned on, a qualita-
tive evaluation metric was used. Therefore, 30 people were
asked to rank, a total of 10 samples, in several aspects:
1. The strength of the relation between a generated image
and its corresponding recipe.
2. The strength of the relation between a generated image
and its corresponding real image.
3. In which degree the image appears to be a real food
image.
The ﬁnal human rankings are the average of the above.

Embedding Type
MS-SSIM score
REG
0.17
NOREG
0.07
Table 2. MS-SSIM[13] score of randomly chosen images from our
results.
6.2. Quantitative and qualitative results
As one can see by the examples shown in Figure 6, the
state-of-the-art and previous state-of-the-art text-to-image
synthesis models yields unsatisfying results, in spite of the
concise and visually descriptive text on which it is condi-
tioned.
We compare our model between the two mentioned text
embedding methods, i.e., embedding with semantic regu-
larization and without it. The inception scores and average
human ranks for our models are reported in Table 1. As
can be seen in the table, the embedding without semantic
regularization achieves the better IS and HR (in all aspects)
scores. Representative examples are compared in Figures 3,
4 and 5.
Human rankings. 10 corresponding pairs of generated
images were chosen, from each embedding method evalu-
ation results (i.e., images that were generated conditioned
on the same recipe). Our subjects were asked to rank the
images in the aforementioned aspects, on a scale of 1 to
5. As mentioned earlier, the model trained conditioned on
the cosine-similarity based embedding method yielded re-
sults that are close to real-like images. It is worth mention-
ing that there were real food images that were given less-
than-or-equal rank in comparison to generated images (in
the cosine-similarity embedding evaluation).
6.3. Diversity
The most successful method to evaluate image similar-
ity, as mentioned in [7], is multi-scale structural similarity
(MS-SSIM [13]). The method attempts to discount the im-
age aspects that are not important to the human eye. To
evaluate the diversity of the images generated by our model,
200 random images from the evaluation set were chosen,
and we calculated the MS-SSIM score for each pair. The
results can be seen in Table 2. One can see that the em-
bedding method without semantic regularization, achieved
better score (lower is better), i.e., generated more diversed
images. These results might be explained by the fact that -
when using semantic regularization, the classiﬁcation based
regularization aims to map the recipe embedding to one of
the 1048 classes in a discrete manner, instead of utilizing
the entire space.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end system for high-
resolution long text to image synthesis using Stacked Gen-
erative Adversarial Network (StackGAN-v2).
We com-
pare two embedding types, one based on cosine-similarity
(NOREG) and the second combines a high-level classiﬁ-
cation objective (REG). The proposed methods prove their
ability to generate photo-realistic images of food from their
text recipe (ingredients and instructions only). Herein, we
provide a baseline for this novel task. It is worth mentioning
that the quality of the images in the recipe1M dataset [11] is
low in comparison to the images in CUB [14] and Oxford-
102 datasets [6]. This is reﬂected by lots of blurred images
with bad lighting conditions, ”porridge-like images” and the
fact that the images are not square shaped (which makes it
difﬁcult to train the models). This fact might give an expla-
nation to the fact that both models succeeded in generating
”porridge-like” food images (e.g. pasta, rice, soups, salad)
but struggles to generate food images that have a distinctive
shape (e.g. hamburger, chicken, drinks). From the results, it
is evident that the method NOREG outperforms the method
REG, by generating more vivid images with more photo-
realistic details. Moreover, the inception score and diver-
sity measures of the former is better than the latter. Over-
all, we show that although REG outperforms NOREG in a
classiﬁcation task (see [11]) it is inferior for generating new
images.
