arXiv:1801.03625v2  [cs.CL]  26 Dec 2018
On Evaluating and Comparing Open Domain Dialog
Systems
Anu Venkatesh ∗, 1 Chandra Khatri ∗, 1 Ashwin Ram,1 Fenfei Guo†, 2
Raefer Gabriel,1 Ashish Nagar,1 Rohit Prasad,1 Ming Cheng,1
Behnam Hedayatnia,1 Angeliki Metallinou,1 Rahul Goel,1 Shaohua Yang,‡3Anirudh Raju1
1Amazon Alexa, 2 University of Maryland, 3Michigan State University

Abstract
Conversational agents are exploding in popularity. However, much work remains
in the area of non goal-oriented conversations, despite signiﬁcant growth in re-
search interest over recent years. To advance the state of the art in conversational
AI, Amazon launched the Alexa Prize, a 2.5-million dollar university competition
where sixteen selected university teams built conversational agents to deliver the
best social conversational experience. Alexa Prize provided the academic com-
munity with the unique opportunity to perform research with a live system used
by millions of users. The subjectivity associated with evaluating conversations
is key element underlying the challenge of building non-goal oriented dialogue
systems. In this paper, we propose a comprehensive evaluation strategy with mul-
tiple metrics designed to reduce subjectivity by selecting metrics which correlate
well with human judgement. The proposed metrics provide granular analysis of
the conversational agents, which is not captured in human ratings. We show that
these metrics can be used as a reasonable proxy for human judgment. We provide
a mechanism to unify the metrics for selecting the top performing agents, which
has also been applied throughout the Alexa Prize competition. To our knowledge,
to date it is the largest setting for evaluating agents with millions of conversations
and hundreds of thousands of ratings from users. We believe that this work is a
step towards an automatic evaluation process for conversational AIs.
1
Introduction
Conversational interfaces have recently became a focal point in both academia and industry research
for several reasons, such as: a) Rise of digital assistants like Amazon Alexa, Cortana and Siri,
b) Presence of universal chat platforms with socialbots like Facebook Messenger and Google Allo,
c) Advances in Machine learning and natural language understanding (NLU) systems, and d) Intro-
duction of NLU services such as Amazon Lex. “Chatbots” are one speciﬁc type of conversational
interface with no explicit goal other than engaging the other party in an interesting or enjoyable
conversation. While modern chatbots have progressed since ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1966), current
state-of-the-art systems are still a long way from being able to have coherent, natural conversations
with humans (Levesque, 2017). Alexa Prize was established to advance the state of the art in this
area and bring current research to a production environment with hundreds of thousands of users.
One of the main challenges faced by researchers is the lack of a good mechanism to measure the per-
formance due to lack of explicit objective for open domain conversations. The Turing Test (Turing,
1950) is a well-known test that can potentially be used for chatbot evaluation. However, we do not
believe that Turing Test is a suitable mechanism to evaluate chatbots for the following reasons:
∗Equal Contribution
†Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa
‡Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

• Incomparable elements: Given the amount of knowledge an AI has its disposal, it is not reason-
able to suggest that a human and AI should generate similar responses. A conversational agent
may interact differently from a human, but may still be a good conversationalist.
• Incentive to produce plausible but low-information content responses: If the primary metric is
just generation of plausible human readable responses, it is easy to opt out of the more challenging
areas of response generation and dialogue management. It is important to be able to source
interesting and relevant content while generating plausible responses.
• Misaligned objectives: The goal of the judge should be to evaluate the conversational experience,
not to attempt to get the AI to reveal itself.
A well-designed evaluation metric for conversational agents that addresses the above concerns
would be useful to researchers in this ﬁeld. Due to the expensive nature of human based evalua-
tion procedures, researchers have been using automatic machine translation (MT) metrics such as
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) or text summarization metrics such as ROUGE (Papineni et al., 2002)
to evaluate systems. But as shown by Liu et al. (2016), these metrics do not correlate well with
human expectations.
Serban et al. (2015) recently did a survey on available datasets for building
and evaluating conversational dialogue systems, which illustrated another problem - there is a lack
of high quality, open-ended, freely available conversational datasets. This is concerning because
these datasets are used to compare different proposed metrics by researchers in the ﬁeld. Those
which exist (e.g. Reddit, Twitter) have issues with quality, number of turns, tracking context and
multiple agent conversations. The Alexa Prize is uniquely poised in this regard as the conversation
and evaluation happen in real time through voice based interactions, with a rating provided immedi-
ately at the end of the conversation by the user who actually had the interaction with the agent. The
fact that the conversation is verbal is important because people behave differently when talking vs
writing (Redeker, 1984). In the context of Alexa Prize, the speciﬁc goal of simulating social conver-
sation and the lack of a commonly-agreed upon standard meaning for “chatbot” led to the use of the
term “socialbot” to describe the competition’s conversational agents, which is a chatbot capable of
interacting on a range of open domain conversational topics common in social conversation.
To evaluate the Alexa Prize socialbots, we developed a framework based on engagement, domain
coverage, coherence, topical diversity and conversational depth. We show that these metrics corre-
late well with human judgement by validating against more than hundreds of thousands of conversa-
tions. We believe this is the largest evaluation of conversational agents to date.
2
Related Work
Evaluation of dialogue systems is a challenging research problem, which has been heavily studied
but lacks a widely-agreed-upon metric. However, there is signiﬁcant previous work on evaluat-
ing goal-oriented dialogue systems. Some of the notable earlier works include TRAINS system
(Ferguson et al., 1996), PARADISE (Walker et al., 1997a), SASSI (Hone and Graham, 2000) and
MIMIC (Chu-Carroll, 2000). All of these systems involve some subjective measures which require
a human in the loop. However, it is easier to evaluate a task-oriented dialogue system because we can
measure systems by successful completion of tasks, which is not the case with open-ended systems.
Automated metrics such as BLEU and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), are used for machine
translation or ROUGE, which is used for text summarization have been popular metrics to evaluate
dialogue systems as they can be easily calculated for a given dataset without the need for human
intervention. However, these metrics are primarily focused on token-level overlap between surface
forms. A valid and interesting response to a statement in a conversation might have low semantic or
token level overlap with a reference response. Liu et al. (2016) show that these metrics show either
weak or no correlation with human judgements. There is work in MT and Natural Language Gener-
ation (NLG) ﬁelds which studies correlation of BLEU with human judgement and highlights some
of its shortcomings (Graham, 2015; Espinosa et al., 2010; Cahill, 2009). Shawar and Atwell (2007)
suggests a framework similar to ours based on dialogue efﬁciency, dialogue quality and user satis-
faction; however their work involves small corpora and it is unclear how their framework will scale
to large datasets. There has also been work on learning scoring models for evaluation of MT models
in WMT evaluation task (Callison-Burch et al., 2011; Bojar et al., 2016). Such models have been
used in both the MT (Gupta et al., 2015; Albrecht and Hwa, 2007) and chatbot domains (Lowe et al.,
2017; Higashinaka et al., 2014) for evaluation. While these models try to capture some aspect of co-
herence, ﬂuency or appropriateness of output, they are all dependent on context and only perform
well in a particular setting. Such models can be components of a framework which compares chat-
bots, training them can also be a challenge due to expensive data requirements (Lowe et al., 2017).
2

More recently, adversarial evaluation, ﬁrst proposed by (Bowman et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017a) is
gaining traction. Li et al. (2017b) use adversarial learning in a reinforcement learning (RL) setting
for training and evaluation of their dialogue generation model. In other directions, Graham et al.
(2017) try to use crowdsourced workers to evaluate MT systems but there is no consensus on “good
human evaluation” and reliably getting such evaluations can be prohibitively expensive. While
some of these techniques apply to dialogue interfaces, general responses based on conversational
context are much more diverse, which makes dialogue evaluation a harder problem. In this direc-
tion Walker et al. (1997b), proposed a PARADISE framework using which they decoupled the task
requirements from the dialogue behavior and supported comparisons among dialogue strategies.
3
Alexa Prize
The Alexa Prize (AlexaPrize (2017) ) is an annual university competition that was set up with the
goal of furthering conversational AI. Conversational AI is hard for a multitude of reasons including
but not limited to the need for good free-form ASR, language understanding, dialog and context
management, language generation and personalization. University teams participating in the Alexa
Prize were tasked to build agents which can hold social conversations on popular topics and news
events in domains such as Politics, Sports, Entertainment, Fashion and Technology. A user request
to initiate a chat with Alexa is routed into the Alexa Prize experience. One of the participating
socialbots is randomly launched anonymously and connected to the user to continue the conversation.
At the end of the conversation, the user is asked to rate the conversation by answering the following
question: "On a scale from 1 to 5 stars how do you feel about speaking with this socialbot again?"
and leave a free-form feedback to the university team for improving socialbot quality. This setup
allowed us to generate a large-scale human-evaluated conversational dataset with ratings.
There are two critical parts to the process of building an effective model for any purpose: relevant
data and an effective evaluation strategy. Over the duration of the competition, users initiated over a
million conversations. The Alexa Prize enabled university teams to access real user conversational
data at scale, along with the user-provided ratings and feedback. This allowed them to effectively
make improvements throughout the duration of the competition while being evaluated in real-time.
Before the ﬁnals, we observed a 14.5% improvement in ratings across all of the socialbots (average
rating increased from 2.76 to 3.16) and 20.9% improvement across the 3 ﬁnalists (average rating in-
creased from 2.77 to 3.35). One unique aspect of this conversational setup is that the user providing
the rating for the conversation is the person who engaged in the conversation itself. In most prior
work for non-goal oriented conversations, evaluations has been performed ofﬂine by separate raters.
The Alexa Prize offered a unique opportunity to generate an evaluated dataset that represented the
interactor’s point of view on the experience. This dataset is critical to being able to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the objective matrix that we propose in this paper as an alternate automated mechanism
to evaluate conversations.
4
Evaluation Metrics
Some of the proposed metrics are based on topic identiﬁcation; hence Section 4.1 provides insight
on the topic extraction module. We list a set of metrics (Section 4.2 - 4.7) that can be computed to
objectively evaluate and compare conversational agents. These metrics were also validated against
a dataset of hundreds of thousands of ratings and were found to be in-line with human evaluation.
4.1
Extracting Topical Metrics
We trained a topic classiﬁcation model using Deep Average Network (DAN) (Iyyer et al., 2015) on
an Alexa internal dataset to identify topics within a conversation to enable computation of the above
topic-based metrics. The classiﬁer identiﬁed topical domains for any given user utterance or social-
bot response into one of 26 predeﬁned topical domains (Sports, Politics, etc.) with 82.4% accuracy
(obtained through 10 fold cross-validation). This model is used to obtain various topical metrics
proposed in the following sections. In this paper, references to topics relate to topical keywords
such and "obama", "nba" etc. and domains to the 26 topical domains referenced above.
4.2
Conversational User Experience (CUX)
Conversations with a socialbot can be signiﬁcantly different from those with humans. The reasons
noted below are potential contributors to the difference:
• Expectation: The purpose for which someone may engage with a socialbot may be signiﬁcantly
different – e.g. some users expect accurate answers to questions, while others merely want a
friendly presence to listen empathetically. The baseline expectations of a conversational agent’s
capabilities also seemed to vary signiﬁcantly among users.
3

• Behavior and Sentiment: The potential lack of fear of affecting a relationship may lead to
different degree of freedom of expression with agents.
• Trust: There may be difference in opinion on how secure conversations with socialbots are, espe-
cially compared to humans. As a user builds trust in a system, they may begin to engage in ways
indicating higher trust in the socialbot through opinion requests, conversation requests indicating
a need for companionship etc.
• Visual Cues and Physicality: Absence of visual cues and physical signals such as prosody, body
langugage may impact the conversation content and direction.
It is hard to capture the above-mentioned metrics numerically. To capture the subjectivity involved
in evaluating the experience, we used Alexa user ratings. The high variability in ratings can be noted
by the fact that for a range of 1-5, the standard deviation of ratings across all competitors is 1.5. To
enable normalization and address the factors mentioned above, we also considered the ratings from
Frequent Users those users who have had a minimum of two conversations with a particular socialbot.
Using Frequent-Users ratings for CUX, we reduce variability across conversations and select into a
well-calibrated set of interactors. Table 1 provides the information on Alexa Prize conversation and
rating distribution.
Table 1: Conversation Data and Ratings Statistics
Variable
Counts and Ratings
Total number of conversations
Millions*
Total number of turns
Tens of Millions*
Average number of turns per conversation
12
Counts of ratings from all Alexa Users
Hundreds of Thousands*
Counts of ratings from Frequent Users
Hundreds of Thousands*
Average of all Alexa user ratings
3
Average of Frequent Users ratings
2.8
Average Engagement Evaluator ratings
2.4
*Rough Ranges
4.3
Engagement
To enable an open-ended, multi-turn conversation, engagement is critical. Engagement is a measure
of interestingness in a conversation (Yu et al., 2004). To account for this, we identify proxies for
engagement in our matrix of metrics for conversation evaluation. We consider number of dialogue-
turns and total conversation duration an indicator of how engaged a user is in the conversation. We
recognize that there may be cases that may have a higher number of turns due to inability of a
socialbot being able to understand the user’s intent, leading to follow-up turns with clariﬁcations
and modiﬁcations, also potentially resulting in frustration at times. However, analysis of a random
sampling of conversations leads us to believe that the impact of this effect is negligible. To handle
such cases, we recruited a set of Alexa users (Engagement Evaluators) to rate their conversations
based on engagement. We were able to recruit over 2,000 Engagement Evaluators who scored over
10,000 conversations. Table 1 provides the mean of Engagement Evaluators Ratings (EER) with
the socialbots over the course of a month. The mean EER is signiﬁcantly lower than the mean all
Alexa user ratings. We hypothesize that when users tend to scrutinize the socialbots explicitly on
engagement and interestingness, they may rate conversations lower than if they were rating overall
experience, following the standard rating protocol.
4.4
Coherence
A coherent response indicates a comprehensible and relevant response to a user’s request. A response
can be deemed weakly coherent if it is somewhat related. For example, when a user says: "What
do you think about the Mars Mission?"; the response should be about the Mars Mission, space
exploration more broadly or something related. A response related to Space Exploration but not
exactly an opinion or something related to politics, would be considered weakly coherent. For open-
domain conversations, the complexity in the response space makes this problem extremely hard.
To capture coherence, we annotated hundreds of thousands of randomly selected interactions for
incorrect, irrelevant or inappropriate responses. Using the annotations, we calculated the response
error rate (RER) for each socialbot, as deﬁned by:
4

RER = Number of incoherent responses
T otal number of utterances
4.5
Domain Coverage
A domain speciﬁc conversation agent may be more akin to goal-directed conversations, where the
output response space is bounded. An agent which is able to interact on multiple domains can be
considered more consistent with humans expectations. To account for this, we evaluated domain
coverage for Alexa Prize by identifying the distribution of domains on Alexa Prize conversations
for each socialbot. We identiﬁed the topic for each user utterance and responses across all the
conversations for each socialbot. For example, "who is your favorite musician?" is classiﬁed into
the music domain..
We calculated the entropy measure (degree of randomness) across distribution of number of conver-
sations across different domains. A conversation was classiﬁed into a particular domain based on
the domain capturing the maximum number of consecutive turns on a domain in the conversation.
Entropy across domains enables us to understand if a socialbot has a normal or biased distribution
across those domains. A high degree of entropy indicates breadth of coverage across many domains,
as opposed to a lower value which indicates a narrower focus on certain topics or domains. We
also measured the standard deviation (STD) of ratings across the ﬁve Alexa Prize domains (Sports,
Politics, Entertainment, Technology, Fashion). To identify whether a socialbot has a biased rating
distribution for certain domains or performs equally well across all of them. For evaluation, we
optimized for high entropy while minimizing the standard deviation of the entropy across multi-
ple domains. High entropy ensures that the socialbot is talking about a variety of topics while a
low standard deviation gives us conﬁdence that the metric is a conﬁdent one. To combine entropy
and standard deviation in ratings across domains for a socialbot„ we looked at Reverse Coefﬁcient of
Variation (R-COV) (Bennett, 1976) as a comprehensive metric to evaluate domain coverage. R-COV
is obtained by taking the ratio of mean domain distribution based entropy across the conversations
for each socialbot and corresponding standard deviation.
4.6
Conversational Depth
Coherence is usually measured at turn level. However, in a multi-turn conversation, context may
be carried over multiple turns. While evaluating conversational agents, it is important to detect
the context and the depth of the conversations. Human conversations generally go deeper about
a particular topic. An agent that is able to capture topical depth may sound more natural. To
evaluate the agents on conversational depth, we used the topical model to identify the domain for
each individual utterance. Conversational depth for a socialbot was calculated as the average of the
number of consecutive turns on the same topical domain.
4.7
Topical Diversity/Conversational Breadth
A good conversational agent is capable of: (i) identifying the topics and keywords from a given
utterance (ii) able to have conversations around the same topics and (iii) can share related concepts
(iv) identiﬁcation of appropriate intent. Natural conversations are highly topical and humans fre-
quently use keywords in their interactions. Agents lacking topical diversity might frustrate some
users who are not interested in the limited set of topics offered by the socialbot. Evaluating conver-
sational breadth is important to understand how broadly an agent is able to converse as opposed to
potentially having user-pleasing but potentially highly-scripted conversations about a small number
of topics. As mentioned above, breadth depends on coarse topical domains (e.g. Politics, Sports,
Music, etc.) as well as ﬁne-grained topical keywords (e.g. Obama, Federer, John Lennon, etc.).
We use topical vocabulary size as a proxy for a signal on topical diversity. We also measure the
distribution of each topic for a socialbot which we use to measure topic afﬁnity for a socialbot.
4.8
Uniﬁcation of Evaluation Metrics
Users tend to mentally evaluate the conversational systems at a more ﬁne-grained level. In ﬁve
separate user studies, we asked users to rate conversations with three socialbots on a scale of 1 to
5. We learnt that even though users evaluated multiple socialbots with same score, they had a clear
rank order among the socialbots, indicating that we need ﬁne-grained information to systematically
compare and evaluate the conversational agents. Conversational agents can be evaluated on multiple
dimensions, and agents may perform well on some, and poorly on others. The proposed matrix of
metrics should be uniﬁed in a manner appropriate to the requirements. For Alexa Prize, we planned
to generate a conversation-quality based ranking for the socialbots.
5

We explored three strategies: stack ranking (with and without weights), winners circle, and conﬁ-
dence bands. For stack ranking, we rank the bots on individual metrics and generate a score using a
summation across the metrics. A weighted stack ranking approach can be adopted if all the metrics
are not equally important. However, if error bars in metric values indicate that the differences are
not signiﬁcant, stack ranking may not provide the most appropriate solution. To account for error
bars, we tried the winners circle and conﬁdence band approaches. For each metric, we deﬁned the
"winners circle" as all the socialbots that came within error bar (95% conﬁdence) of the "winners"
(the overall top two performing bots as determined by Alexa user ratings). A socialbot within error
bar of these two top socialbots was given a score of 1 (including the top socialbots) for that criteria,
else it received a 0. An aggregate score was generated across all the evaluation metrics and 4 bands
of socialbots emerged. Table 2 provides an example in which bot 1 and bot 2 are the winners based
on user ratings. Finally, we tried the "conﬁdence bands" approach where a score of 1 to any bot
within the 95% conﬁdence band of the top two socialbots for each individual metric (instead of the
top user-rated socialbots being determined as the benchmark across all metrics).
Table 2: Sample Uniﬁcation of Evaluation Metrics for Alexa Prize
Metric
bot 1
bot 2
bot 3
bot 4
bot 5
bot 6
bot 7
...
CUX: Mean User Rating
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
...
CUX: Mean Frequent-User Rating
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
...
Coherence: RER
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
...
Engagement: EER
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
Engagement: Median Duration
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
Engagement: Median Turns
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
...
Domain Coverage: R-COV
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
...
Topical Diversity: Vocab Size
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
...
Topical Diversity: Mean Freq
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
...
Conv. Depth: Mean Depth
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
...
Total Score
10
10
5
4
4
3
2
...
CUX: Conversational User Experience, RER: Response Error Rate, EER: Engagement Evaluator Rating,
R-COV: Reverse Coefﬁcient of Variantion
4.9
Automating User Ratings
In the current study, we use the ratings obtained from Alexa users as our ground truth. To address
this concern, we did a preliminary analysis on a subset of data (about 60,000 conversations) for
automation of user ratings using utterance level and conversation level features. The following
utterance level and conversational level features were used: N-grams of user-bot turns, token overlap
between user utterance and socialbot response, duration of the conversation, number of turns and
mean response time. We trained a model using Gradient Boosted Tree (GBDT) (Elith et al., 2008)
and Hierarchical LSTM (HLSTM) (Serban et al., 2016) to estimate user ratings of conversations.
Moreover, in current study, the Coherence, Engagement and Conversational User Experience met-
rics are obtained by keeping humans in the loop. However, with the amount of data collected, it
is possible to automate this process with supervised training. Techniques adopted by Lowe et al.
(2017) and Li et al. (2017a) and their variations can be further expanded to obtain these speciﬁc
metrics apart from the general automation of the ratings mentioned above.
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Relevance of Evaluation Metrics
While aggregating evaluation metrics to come up with a uniﬁed metric, it is important to ﬁnd the
relevance of each of these metrics. For the Alexa Prize Competition, we evaluated the relevance
by identifying the correlation of each of these metrics with user ratings and Frequent-User ratings.
Table 3 provides the correlation with all Alexa user ratings, Frequent-User ratings and Engagement
Evaluator ratings with evaluation metrics. In this section we share our ﬁndings.
We found through user studies and data analysis that we need ﬁne-grained information to system-
atically compare and evaluate the conversational agents despite availability of user ratings. Fine-
grained analysis also provides an insight on the areas of strengths and weakness of socialbots. We
also compared the average ratings provided by Alexa users and those provided by Frequent Users
and Engagement Evaluators. From Table 1, it is clear that the ratings provided by Frequent-Users
6

Table 3: Correlation of Evaluation Metrics with User Ratings
Metric
Users
Frequent-Users
Engagement Evaluators
CUX
0.93
1
0.91
Coherence: RER
-0.88
-0.88
-0.82
Engagement: EER
0.93
0.91
1
Engagement: Median duration
0.81
0.82
0.77
Conversational Depth
0.73
0.73
0.80
Topical Diversity: Vocab. Size.
0.07*
0.05*
0.10*
Topical Diversity: Topic Freq.
0.37*
0.25*
0.42
Domain Coverage: R-COV
0.24*
0.23*
0.40
*P-value greater than level of signiﬁcance: 0.05
and engagement evaluators is 7% and 20% lower than those provided by general users (3.0 vs 2.80
vs 2.40) respectively.
While optimizing for user experience (as measured by the rating mechanism proxy) is important to
the Alexa Prize, the goal of this research is to create a more comprehensive conversational evaluation
metric that enables improvement in individual component areas key to the overall human perception
of successful conversation. We obtained the correlations of other metrics with user ratings and
combined these metrics to create an evaluation model.
Conversational User Experience: To capture subjectivity involved with CUX, as mentioned earlier
we used Frequent-User ratings as a measure of evaluation. CUX is highly correlated with user
ratings and EER (Table 3). As a part of future work, we plan to train a model to predict CUX based
on Frequent-User ratings seperately. As described earlier, ratings from Frequent-Users are capable
of measuring subjectivity, expectation and other CUX metrics. It can be observed from the fact
though these users come from the same pool of all Alexa users, still their average ratings are lower
than average of all Alexa user ratings.
Engagement: To evaluate user engagement, we aggregated the ratings provided by engagement
evaluators. Although the correlation between ratings obtained from all Alexa users and engagement
evaluators is high (0.90), the average ratings provided by these evaluators is 20% lower than the all
Alexa user ratings. High correlation between all Alexa user ratings and EER implies that the user
ratings can partially capture engagement. Other components for engagement that we considered are
median duration and number of turns. We see a high correlation for median duration and number
of turns for both Alexa user ratings and Frequent User ratings, indicating that longer conversations
have a higher probability of higher ratings. While duration is not a measure of the information in a
conversation it does provide insights on user satisfaction and engagement.
Coherence: For coherence, we evaluated response error rate (RER). We see a high negative corre-
lation with RER (Table 3), leading to the conclusion that users give poor ratings if responses are
incoherent.
Conversational Depth: We observed a high correlation between conversational depth for both all
user ratings and frequent users implying deeper conversations tend to result in higher ratings from
users.
Topical Diversity: We observed a positive directionality in correlation between the average fre-
quency of topics and ratings, although the p-value is not very low. However, the correlation is high
when evaluated with Engagement Evaluators (0.42), with low p-value. It can be hypothesized that
when users are explicitly asked to engage with the socialbots, they tend to look for diversity in top-
ics. If socialbots are able to respond with diversity in topics, if leads to higher user ratings. Another
aspect of Topical Diversity we considered is the size of the topical vocabulary. Although the corre-
lation between ratings and vocabulary is directionally positive, the p-value is insufﬁcient to reach a
clear conclusion.
Domain Coverage: We used Reverse Coefﬁcient of Variation (maximizing entropy minimizing
standard deviation) to obtain this metric. We observed a weakly positive correlation with user ratings
and Frequent User ratings. However, we found a high correlation (0.40 with low p-value) between
R-COV and user ratings. Similar to Topical Diversity, it can be hypothesized that when users are
explicitly asked to engage with the socialbots, they tend to cover broader domains and the socialbots
that are able to respond appropriately tend to receive higher ratings.
7

Based on the analysis and observations, it can be concluded that the proposed metrics correlates
strongly with ground truth. Hence these metrics can be used as measure for evaluating conversational
agents. Given that ratings are obtained by keeping humans in the loop, which is not generally
possible at scale, models can be trained to enable automated evaluation of conversational agents.
5.2
Uniﬁcation of Evaluation Metrics
As mentioned in Section 4.2-4.7, it is important to unify the evaluation metrics mentioned above
to be able to compare conversational performance in totality. For the Alexa Prize competition, we
obtained the scores for each socialbot based on the uniﬁed metric, as exempliﬁed in Table 4. We
found the correlation between the scores obtained by uniﬁed metric with user ratings and Frequent-
User ratings.
Table 4: Uniﬁed Metric - User Ratings Correlation
User Ratings
Frequent-User Ratings
Correlation
0.66
0.70
5.3
Automating User Ratings
We did a preliminary analysis on 60,000 conversations and ratings and we trained a model to predict
user ratings. We observed the Spearman and Pearson correlations of 0.352 and 0.351 respectively
(Table 5) with signiﬁcantly low p-value with a model trained using Gradient Boosted Decision Tree.
Although the results for GBDT are signiﬁcantly better than Random selection for 5 classes and the
model trained using Hierarchical LSTM, there is a need to extend this study the millions of Alexa
Prize conversations. Furthermore, some of the evaluation metrics (coherence, topical depth, topical
breadth, domain coverage, etc.) obtained at conversation level can also be used as features. With
signiﬁcantly higher number of conversations combined with topical features, we hypothesize that
the model would perform much better than the results obtained in preliminary analysis in Table 5.
Given subjectivity in ratings, we appropriately found inter-user agreement to be quite low for rat-
ings analysis. A user might give a conversation 5 stars because he/she thought the socialbot was
humorous, while another user might ﬁnd it unknowledgeable. Users may have their own criteria to
evaluate the socialbots. Therefore, as a part of the future work, we would like to train the model
with user level features as well. This experiment was done to obtain the potential of automating the
ratings.
Table 5: Correlation of the regression model with user ratings
Algorithm
RMSE
Spearman
Pearson
Random
2.211
0.052
0.017
HLSTM
1.392
0.232
0.235
GBDT
1.340
0.352
0.351
6
Conclusion and Future Work
Evaluating open-domain conversational agents is a challenging task and has remained largely un-
solved. In this work, we deﬁned various metrics which can be used to evaluate open-domain con-
versational agents and proposed a mechanism to obtain those metrics. We have used these metrics
to evaluate the open-domain conversational agents (socialbots) built for Alexa Prize, a university
competition targeted towards advancing the state of Conversational AI. The challenge is to build a
socialbot which can converse coherently and engagingly on popular topics and current events for
20 minutes with humans. During the competition, we have obtained millions conversations and
corresponding ratings from Alexa users. After each conversation, Alexa users are asked to give a
rating and feedback, which are currently considered as a baseline for us to evaluate our metrics. We
proposed the following metrics to evaluate the open-domain agents: Conversational User Experi-
ence, Coherence, Engagement, Domain Coverage, Topical Depth and Topical Diversity. We have
also proposed a mechanism to unify these metrics to obtain a single metric for evaluation and com-
parison. Strong correlation between the uniﬁed metric and user ratings indicate that we can use the
uniﬁed metric as a proxy to user ratings. To our knowledge, it is the largest evaluation to date of user
ratings for conversational agents, featuring millions of conversations and hundreds of thousands of
ratings from Alexa users. We also present a preliminary analysis on building models, using 60,000
conversations to automate rating prediction with promising results. As a part of future work, we
plan to extend the preliminary work by incorporating a signiﬁcantly larger dataset. This model will
8

also be helpful in improving and evaluating various dialogue strategies automatically and reliably.
We would also like to test scalability of some metrics from previous work done on smaller datasets
to see if they can be incorporated into the process.
