Bitwise Neural Networks
Minje Kim

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Paris Smaragdis

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Adobe Research, Adobe Systems Inc., San Francisco, CA 94103, USA
Abstract
Based on the assumption that there exists a neu-
ral network that efﬁciently represents a set of
Boolean functions between all binary inputs and
outputs, we propose a process for developing and
deploying neural networks whose weight param-
eters, bias terms, input, and intermediate hid-
den layer output signals, are all binary-valued,
and require only basic bit logic for the feedfor-
ward pass. The proposed Bitwise Neural Net-
work (BNN) is especially suitable for resource-
constrained environments, since it replaces ei-
ther ﬂoating or ﬁxed-point arithmetic with signif-
icantly more efﬁcient bitwise operations. Hence,
the BNN requires for less spatial complexity, less
memory bandwidth, and less power consumption
in hardware. In order to design such networks,
we propose to add a few training schemes, such
as weight compression and noisy backpropaga-
tion, which result in a bitwise network that per-
forms almost as well as its corresponding real-
valued network. We test the proposed network
on the MNIST dataset, represented using binary
features, and show that BNNs result in compet-
itive performance while offering dramatic com-
putational savings.
1. Introduction
According to the universal approximation theorem, a sin-
gle hidden layer with a ﬁnite number of units can approx-
imate a continuous function with some mild assumptions
(Cybenko, 1989; Hornik, 1991). While this theorem im-
plies a shallow network with a potentially intractable num-
ber of hidden units when it comes to modeling a compli-
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copy-
right 2015 by the author(s).
cated function, Deep Neural Networks (DNN) achieve the
goal by learning a hierarchy of features in their multiple
layers (Hinton et al., 2006; Bengio, 2009).
Although DNNs are extending the state of the art results
for various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Goodfel-
low et al., 2013), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012),
speech enhancement (Xu et al., 2014), etc, it is also the
case that the relatively bigger networks with more parame-
ters than before call for more resources (processing power,
memory, battery time, etc), which are sometimes critically
constrained in applications running on embedded devices.
Examples of those applications span from context-aware
computing, collecting and analysing a variety of sensor sig-
nals on the device (Baldauf et al., 2007), to always-on com-
puter vision applications (e.g. Google glasses), to speech-
driven personal assistant services, such as “Hey, Siri.” A
primary concern that hinders those applications from be-
ing more successful is that they assume an always-on pat-
tern recognition engine on the device, which will drain the
battery fast unless it is carefully implemented to minimize
the use of resources. Additionally, even in an environment
with the necessary resources being available, speeding up
a DNN can greatly improve the user experience when it
comes to tasks like searching big databases (Salakhutdinov
& Hinton, 2009). In either case, a more compact yet still
well-performing DNN is a welcome improvement.
Efﬁcient computational structures for deploying artiﬁcial
neural networks have long been studied in the literature.
Most of the effort is focused on training networks whose
weights can be transformed into some quantized represen-
tations with a minimal loss of performance (Fiesler et al.,
1990; Hwang & Sung, 2014). They typically use the quan-
tized weights in the feedforward step at every training iter-
ation, so that the trained weights are robust to the known
quantization noise caused by a limited precision. It was
also shown that 10 bits and 12 bits are enough to represent
gradients and storing weights for implementing the state-
of-the-art maxout networks even for training the network
(Courbariaux et al., 2014). However, in those quantized
arXiv:1601.06071v1  [cs.LG]  22 Jan 2016

Bitwise Neural Networks
networks one still needs to employ arithmetic operations,
such as multiplication and addition, on ﬁxed-point values.
Even though faster than ﬂoating point, they still require rel-
atively complex logic and can consume a lot of power.
With the proposed Bitwise Neural Networks (BNN), we
take a more extreme view that every input node, output
node, and weight, is represented by a single bit. For ex-
ample, a weight matrix between two hidden layers of 1024
units is a 1024 × 1025 matrix of binary values rather than
quantized real values (including the bias). Although learn-
ing those bitwise weights as a Boolean concept is an NP-
complete problem (Pitt & Valiant, 1988), the bitwise net-
works have been studied in the limited setting, such as µ-
perceptron networks where an input node is allowed to be
connected to one and only one hidden node and its ﬁnal
layer is a union of those hidden nodes (Golea et al., 1992).
A more practical network was proposed in (Soudry et al.,
2014) recently, where the posterior probabilities of the bi-
nary weights were sought using the Expectation Back Prop-
agation (EBP) scheme, which is similar to backpropagation
in its form, but has some advantages, such as parameter-
free learning and a straightforward discretization of the
weights. Its promising results on binary text classiﬁcation
tasks however, rely on the real-valued bias terms and aver-
aging of predictions from differently sampled parameters.
This paper presents a completely bitwise network where
all participating variables are bipolar binaries. Therefore,
in its feedforward only XNOR and bit counting operations
are used instead of multiplication, addition, and a nonlinear
activation on ﬂoating or ﬁxed-point variables. For training,
we propose a two-stage approach, whose ﬁrst part is typical
network training with a weight compression technique that
helps the real-valued model to easily be converted into a
BNN. To train the actual BNN, we use those compressed
weights to initialize the BNN parameters, and do noisy
backpropagation based on the tentative bitwise parameters.
To binarize the input signals, we can adapt any binariza-
tion techniques, e.g. ﬁxed-point representations and hash
codes. Regardless of the binarization scheme, each input
node is given only a single bit at a time, as opposed to a bit
packet representing a ﬁxed-point number. This is signiﬁ-
cantly different from the networks with quantized inputs,
where a real-valued signal is quantized into a set of bits,
and then all those bits are fed to an input node in place of
their corresponding single real value. Lastly, we apply the
sign function as our activation function instead of a sig-
moid to make sure the input to the next layer is bipolar bi-
nary as well. We compare the performance of the proposed
BNN with its corresponding ordinary real-valued networks
on hand-written digit recognition tasks, and show that the
bitwise operations can do the job with a very small perfor-
mance loss, while providing a large margin of improvement
in terms of the necessary computational resources.
2. Feedforward in Bitwise Neural Networks
It has long been known that any Boolean function, which
takes binary values as input and produces binary outputs
as well, can be represented as a bitwise network with one
hidden layer (McCulloch & Pitts, 1943), for example, by
merely memorizing all the possible mappings between in-
put and output patterns. We deﬁne the forward propagation
procedure as follows based on the assumption that we have
trained such a network with bipolar binary parameters:
al
i = bl
i +
Kl−1
X
j
wl
i,j ⊗zl−1
j
,
(1)
zl
i = sign
 al
i

,
(2)
zl ∈BKl, Wl ∈BKl×Kl−1, bl ∈BKl,
(3)
where B is the set of bipolar binaries, i.e. ±11, and ⊗stands
for the bitwise XNOR operation (see Figure 1 (a)). l, j, and
i indicate a layer, input and output units of the layer, respec-
tively. We use bold characters for a vector (or a matrix if
capicalized). Kl is the number of input units at l-th layer.
Therefore, z0 equals to an input vector, where we omit the
sample index for the notational convenience. We use the
sign activation function to generate the bipolar outputs.
We can check the prediction error E by measuring the bit-
wise agreement of target vector t and the output units of
L-th layer using XNOR as a multiplication operator,
E =
KL+1
X
i
 1 −ti ⊗zL+1
i

/2,
(4)
but this error function can be tentatively replaced by involv-
ing a softmax layer during the training phase.
The XNOR operation is a faster substitute of binary mul-
tiplication. Therefore, (1) and (2) can be seen as a special
version of the ordinary feedforward step that only works
when the inputs, weights, and bias are all bipolar binaries.
Note that these bipolar bits will in practice be implemented
using 0/1 binary values, where (2) activation is equivalent
to counting the number of 1’s and then checking if the accu-
mulation is bigger than the half of the number of input units
plus 1. With no loss of generality, in this paper we will use
the ±1 bipolar representation since it is more ﬂexible in
deﬁning hyperplanes and examining the network behavior.
Sometimes a BNN can solve the same problem as a real-
valued network without any size modiﬁcations, but in gen-
eral we should expect that a BNN could require larger net-
work structures than a real-valued one. For example, the
XOR problem in Figure 1 (b) can have an inﬁnite num-
ber of solutions with real-valued parameters once a pair
1In the bipolar binary representation, +1 stands for the
“TRUE” status, while −1 is for “FALSE.”

Bitwise Neural Networks
Input
Output
A
B
-1
-1
+1
-1
+1
-1
+1
-1
-1
+1
+1
+1
(a)
(-1,1)
(1,1)
(1,-1)
(-1,-1)
-x1+x2+1>0
x1-x2+1>0
(b)
+1
-1
+1
+1
-1
-1
+1
+1
+1
x1
x2
y
(c)
(-1,1)
(1,1)
(1,-1)
(-1,-1)
x1+x2-1>0
x1-x2+1<0
(d)
(-1,1)
(1,1)
(1,-1)
(-1,-1)
0x1+x2+0>0
(e)
Figure 1. (a) An XNOR table. (b) The XOR problem that needs
two hyperplanes.
(c) A multi-layer perceptron that solves the
XOR problem. (d) A linearly separable problem while bitwise
networks need two hyperplanes to solve it (y = x2). (e) A bit-
wise network with zero weights that solves the y = x2 problem.
of hyperplanes can successfully discriminate (1, 1) and
(−1, −1) from (1, −1) and (−1, 1). Among all the pos-
sible solutions, we can see that binary weights and bias are
enough to deﬁne the hyperplanes, x1 −x2 + 1 > 0 and
−x1 + x2 + 1 > 0 (dashes). Likewise, the separation per-
formance of the particular BNN deﬁned in (c) has the same
classiﬁcation power once the inputs are binary as well.
Figure 1 (d) shows another example where BNN requires
more hyperplanes than a real-valued network. This linearly
separable problem is solvable with only one hyperplane,
such as −0.1x1 + x2 + 0.5 > 0, but it is impossible to de-
scribe such a hyperplane with binary coefﬁcients. We can
instead come up with a solution by combining multiple bi-
nary hyperplanes that will eventually increase the perceived
complexity of the model. However, even with a larger num-
ber of nodes, the BNN is not necessarily more complex
than the smaller real-valued network. This is because a pa-
rameter or a node of BNN requires only one bit to represent
while a real-valued node generally requires more than that,
up to 64 bits. Moreover, the simple XNOR and bit count-
ing operations of BNN bypass the computational complica-
tions of a real-valued system, such as the power consump-
tion of multipliers and adders for the ﬂoating-point opera-
tions, various dynamic ranges of the ﬁxed-point representa-
tions, erroneous ﬂips of the most signiﬁcant bits, etc. Note
that if the bitwise parameters are sparse, we can further
reduce the number of hyperplanes. For example, for an in-
active element in the weight matrix W due to the sparsity,
we can simply ignore the computation for it similarly to the
operations on the sparse representations. Conceptually, we
can say that those inactive weights serve as zero weights, so
that a BNN can solve the problem in Figure 1 (d) by using
only one hyperplane as in (e). From now on, we will use
this extended version of BNN with inactive weights, yet
there are some cases where BNN needs more hyperplanes
than a real-valued network even with the sparsity.
3. Training Bitwise Neural Networks
We ﬁrst train some compressed network parameters, and
then retrain them using noisy backpropagation for BNNs.
3.1. Real-valued Networks with Weight Compression
First, we train a real-valued network that takes either bit-
wise inputs or real-valued inputs ranged between −1 and
+1. A special part of this network is that we constrain
the weights to have values between −1 and +1 as well by
wrapping them with tanh. Similarly, if we choose tanh for
the activation, we can say that the network is a relaxed ver-
sion of the corresponding bipolar BNN. With this weight
compression technique, the relaxed forward pass during
training is deﬁned as follows:
al
i = tanh(¯bl
i) +
Kl−1
X
j
tanh( ¯wl
i,j)¯zl−1
j
,
(5)
¯zl
i = tanh
 al
i

,
(6)
where all the binary values in (1) and (2) are real for the
time being: ¯
Wl ∈RKl×Kl−1, ¯bl ∈RKl, and ¯zl ∈RKl.
The bars on top of the notations are for the distinction.
Weight compression needs some changes in the backprop-
agation procedure. In a hidden layer we calculate the error,
δl
j(n) =
 Kl+1
X
i
tanh( ¯wl+1
i,j )δl+1
i
(n)

·

1 −tanh2  al
j

.
Note that the errors fron the next layer are multiplied with
the compressed versions of the weights. Hence, the gradi-
ents of the parameters in the case of batch learning are
∇¯wl
i,j =
 X
n
δl
i(n)¯zl−1
j

·

1 −tanh2  ¯wl
i,j

,
∇¯bl
i =
 X
n
δl
i(n)

·

1 −tanh2  ¯bl
i

,

Bitwise Neural Networks
with the additional term from the chain rule on the com-
pressed weights.
3.2. Training BNN with Noisy Backpropagation
Since we have trained a real-valued network with a proper
range of weights, what we do next is to train the actual
bitwise network. The training procedure is similar to the
ones with quantized weights (Fiesler et al., 1990; Hwang
& Sung, 2014), except that the values we deal with are all
bits, and the operations on them are bitwise. To this end,
we ﬁrst initialize all the real-valued parameters, ¯
W and ¯b,
with the ones learned from the previous section. Then, we
setup a sparsity parameter λ which says the proportion of
the zeros after the binarization. Then, we divide the param-
eters into three groups: +1, 0, or −1. Therefore, λ decides
the boundaries β, e.g. wl
ij = −1 if ¯wl
ij < −β. Note that
the number of zero weights | ¯wl
ij| < β equals to λKlKl−1.
The main idea of this second training phase is to feedfor-
ward using the binarized weights and the bit operations as
in (1) and (2). Then, during noisy backpropagation the
errors and gradients are calculated using those binarized
weights and signals as well:
δl
j(n) =
Kl+1
X
i
wl+1
i,j δl+1
i
(n),
∇¯wl
i,j =
X
n
δl
i(n)zl−1
j
,
∇¯bl
i =
X
n
δl
i(n).
(7)
In this way, the gradients and errors properly take the bina-
rization of the weights and the signals into account. Since
the gradients can get too small to update the binary param-
eters W and b, we instead update their corresponding real-
valued parameters,
¯wl
i,j ←¯wl
i,j −η∇¯wl
i,j,
¯bl
i,j ←¯bl
i −η∇¯bl
i,
(8)
with η as a learning rate parameter. Finally, at the end of
each update we binarize them again with β. We repeat this
procedure at every epoch.
4. Experiments
In this section we go over the details and results of the
hand-written digit recognition task on the MNIST data
set (LeCun et al., 1998) using the proposed BNN system.
Throughout the training, we adopt the softmax output layer
for these multiclass classiﬁcation cases. All the networks
have three hidden layers with 1024 units per layer.
From the ﬁrst round of training, we get a regular dropout
network with the same setting suggested in (Srivastava
et al., 2014), except the fact that we used the hyperbolic
tangent for both weight compression and activation to make
Table 1. Classiﬁcation errors for real-valued and bitwise networks
on different types of bitwise features
NETWORKS
BIPOLAR
0 OR 1
FIXED-POINT
(2BITS)
FLOATING-POINT
1.17%
1.32%
1.36%
NETWORKS (64BITS)
BNN
1.33%
1.36%
1.47%
the network suitable for initializing the following bipolar
bitwise network.
The number of iterations from 500 to
1, 000 was enough to build a baseline. The ﬁrst row of
Table 1 shows the performance of the baseline real-valued
network with 64bits ﬂoating-point. As for the input to the
real-valued networks, we rescale the pixel intensities into
the bipolar range, i.e. from −1 to +1, for the bipolar case
(the ﬁrst column). In the second column, we use the origi-
nal input between 0 and 1 as it is. For the third column, we
encode the four equally spaced regions between 0 to 1 into
two bits, and feed each bit into each input node. Hence, the
baseline network for the third input type has 1, 568 binary
input nodes rather than 784 as in the other cases.
Once we learn the real-valued parameters, now we train
the BNN, but with binarized inputs. For instance, instead
of real values between −1 and +1 in the bipolar case, we
take their sign as the bipolar binary features. As for the 0/1
binaries, we simply round the pixel intensity. Fixed-point
inputs are already binarized. Now we train the new BNN
with the noisy backpropagation technique as described in
3.2. The second row of Table 1 shows the BNN results. We
see that the bitwise networks perform well with very small
additional errors. Note that the performance of the original
real-valued dropout network with similar network topology
(logistic units without max-norm constraint) is 1.35%.
5. Conclusion
In this work we propose a bitwise version of artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks, where all the inputs, weights, biases, hid-
den units, and outputs can be represented with single bits
and operated on using simple bitwise logic. Such a net-
work is very computationally efﬁcient and can be valuable
for resource-constrained situations, particularly in cases
where ﬂoating-point / ﬁxed-point variables and operations
are prohibitively expensive. In the future we plan to in-
vestigate a bitwise version of convolutive neural networks,
where efﬁcient computing is more desirable.

Bitwise Neural Networks
