Transconductance and Coulomb blockade properties of in-
plane grown carbon nanotube field effect transistors 
 
Nan Ai1, Onejae Sul2, Milan Begliarbekov1, Qiang Song1, Kitu Kumar2, Daniel S. Choi3, Eui-
Hyeok Yang2, Stefan Strauf1 
1Department of Physics & Engineering Physics, Stevens Institute of Technology 
Castle Point on the Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA 
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology 
Castle Point on the Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA 
3Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Idaho 
875 Perimeter Dr., Moscow, ID 83844, USA 
 
(Received 07 April 2010; accepted 04 June 2010) 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Single electron transistors (SETs) made from single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are promising for 
quantum electronic devices operating with ultra-low power consumption and allow fundamental studies 
of electron transport. We report on SETs made by registered in-plane growth utilizing tailored nanoscale 
catalyst patterns and chemical vapor deposition. Metallic SWCNTs have been removed by an electrical 
burn-in technique and the common gate hysteresis was removed using PMMA and baking, leading to 
field effect transistors with large on/off ratios up to 105. Further segmentation into 200 nm short 
semiconducting SWCNT devices created quantum dots which display conductance oscillations in the 
Coulomb blockade regime. The demonstrated utilization of registered in-plane growth opens possibilities 
to create novel SET device geometries which are more complex, i.e. laterally ordered and scalable, as 
required for advanced quantum electronic devices. 

 
2
Keywords: Carbon nanotubes, in-plane growth, field-effect transistor, single electron transistor, Coulomb 
blockade, gate hysteresis 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Single electron transistors (SETs) are promising nanoelectronic devices operating with ultra-low power 
consumption and allow fundamental studies of electron transport phenomena in the quantum regime [1, 
2]. Single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are of particular interest to realize SET devices operating 
at elevated temperatures since they have extremely small diameters of about 1 nm and since they can be 
densely integrated. To create a SET from a quantum wire a pair of local tunnel barriers must be 
introduced into an individual SWCNT, such that in effect a quantum dot (QD) is formed. The first 
SWCNT-SET devices have been made by simply making source drains contacts of a few hundred nm 
separation, which provide the tunnel barriers [3]. Recently, several different techniques have been utilized 
to create SWCNT-SET devices operating at higher temperatures, such as nicking by an atomic force 
microscope tip [4, 5], buckling by placing SWCNTs over a local bottom gate [6], local chemical 
modification [7], by adding local metallic top gates between source and drain contacts [8, 9], or by 
aligning metallic CNTs acting as a top-gate over a semiconducting SWCNT [10, 11]. In all these 
approaches individual SWCNTs are typically dispersed from an aqueous solution, dry out at random 
locations over the underlying substrate, and source/drain electrodes are subsequently fabricated by 
locating the SWCNT. Better control over the nanotube location can be achieved using prepatterned 
electrodes and ac dielectrophoresis alignment [12, 13], but control down to the limit of individual 
SWCNTs is limited and the contact resistance is typically large. SWCNTs can also be directly grown in-
plane between source and drain electrodes at precisely defined locations using chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD) [14, 15]. Applications of CVD-grown SWCNT devices include densely integrated field effect 
transistors (FETs) utilizing post-growth transfer of SWNTs onto flexible substrates leading to output 
currents up to 1 A [16], and nanoelectromechanical switches operating at high-frequencies [17].  
However, only few studies report SWCNT-SET devices made by in-plane CVD growth [18, 19], which 
required either additional shadow evaporation of electrodes or a local focused ion beam (FIB) 

 
3
manipulation technique. Here we demonstrate that on-chip in-plane grown semiconducting SWCNT 
devices can be either operated as FETs with high on/off ratios approaching 105 or as SETs displaying 
pronounced conductance oscillations, without the need for post-growth transfer, shadow evaporation of 
electrodes, or local FIB manipulation.  
 
2. SAMPLE FABRICATION AND MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
The CNTs studied in this paper were grown by chemical vapor deposition at 850o C using a CH4/Ar2 
mixture with a 1:4 ratio. At these conditions CNTs grow in-plane starting from a nanoscale Ni catalyst tip 
and bridge ultimately the Au/Cr contact electrodes. Further details of the growth procedure are given in 
our previous publication [20]. Figure 1 (a) shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) picture with an 
individual SWCNT bridging the 2 µm separated electrode pair. Electrical characterization was performed 
in two-terminal geometry using a sensitive current meter with a resolution of about 1 pA and two source 
meters to control the source-drain and back-gate voltages. Samples were held on the cold-finger of a 
Helium flow cryostat with base temperature of 4.7 K. To prevent electrostatic discharge, the 200 nm thick 
Au/Cr bond pads were wire bonded to a chip carrier using an electrically grounded wire bonder tip and by 
applying only mechanical force and heat (~100° C) instead of ultrasound.  
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1 Transformation of CNT arrays into FET devices with high on-off ratios 
In-plane grown arrays of SWCNTs display either metallic or semiconducting properties corresponding to 
their chirality, which cannot be perfectly controlled in the CVD growth process. Metallic CNTs give rise 
to a non-vanishing off-state current, which masks the intrinsic high on/off ratios of the semiconducting 
SWCNTs. Since the metallic CNTs cannot be fully avoided in the CVD growth, we have adapted a 
technique to controllably break metallic CNTs without affecting the semiconducting ones [21, 22]. Since 

 
4
the metallic tubes in mixed arrays are detrimental for the device performance, an improvement FET 
performance is expected. 
Figure 2 (a) shows a plot of the source-drain current Isd versus source-drain voltage Vsd sweeps. The back 
gate was held constant at Vg= +20 V to switch the p-type semiconducting CNTs into their off-state. This 
prevents current flow through semiconducting CNTs and protects them from burning or degrading in the 
electrical breakdown procedure. Several breakdown events are visible at higher voltages. In order to 
eliminate all the metallic CNTs, we increased Vsd   until the first metallic CNT broke. The whole 
breakdown procedure was monitored by plotting the real-time current value. Once the current starts to 
fall, we stopped increasing Vsd to prevent further damage. The next breakdown attempt starts from zero 
bias voltage until another metallic CNT breaks. After each breakdown, a characteristic Isd versus Vg sweep 
was performed to examine the on/off ratio improvement. Figure 2 (b) shows the FET transconductance 
characteristic after the first and last break-in event, while steps in between are not shown.  The initial 
transconductance sweep in Figure 2 (b) top shows a rather small on/off ratio of about 2 under 100 mV 
source-drain bias. When all metallic CNTs were removed, the field effect behavior of the device is 
dramatically enhanced and FET on/off ratio improved 4 orders of magnitude to about to 104. While it is 
possible to create devices with only one SWCNT between an electrode pair by further reducing the 
electrode size, we have initially investigated larger electrodes with typically 20-30 SWCNTs across the 
contact gap. Therefore, several semiconducting SWCNTs contribute after burn-in to the total current in 
the on-state which reaches 0.1 µA under 100 mV source-drain voltage. The on-state current varies 
linearly with the source-drain voltage and highest on-state currents of about 1 µA have been achieved at 
about 1V bias voltage (not shown), corresponding to on/off ratios approaching 105. These values are 
among the highest reported for CNT FETs which are back gated on 300 nm SiO2 [23]. We have therefore 
successfully transformed mixed CNT arrays into pure arrays of semiconducting SWCNTs with high 
on/off ratios. Further improvement can only be achieved by top gating with thin high-k dielectrics [24, 
25].  

 
5
3.2 Control of conductance hysteresis in SWCNT FETs 
Despite these outstanding transport properties, the fabricated FET devices suffer from gate hysteresis 
effects [26]. The transconductance characteristics of the SWCNT-FETs are strongly affected by the sweep 
direction of the gate voltage, i.e. sweeping from negative to positive voltages or sweeping backwards. The 
hysteresis effects do not only depend on the Vg sweep direction, but they also depend on the chosen 
sweep range and sweep time. The larger the sweep range the larger the hysteresis effect (data not shown 
here). As is well known, the hysteresis is caused by charge trapping within the local CNT environment 
and is absent on elevated CNTs bridging an air gap [27]. In particular, it is not only affected by moisture 
in ambient conditions but also by the SiO2 surface-bound water attached to the silane groups proximal to 
the nanotubes [28]. Figure 3 (a) shows the hysteresis sweep of an uncapped device measured in ambient 
atmosphere recorded under a gate sweep range from -10 V to + 10 V. As can be seen, the FET on/off 
switching threshold voltage changes by more than 8V. This hysteresis makes it nearly impossible to 
operate the FET as a SET device in the Coulomb blockade regime.   
In order to eliminate hysteresis, we developed a procedure following Kim et al. [28]. Samples have been 
capped by PMMA followed by baking on a hot plate at 150 °C for several days in ambient air to remove 
surface-bound water molecules. The PMMA furthermore effectively encapsulates the CNT from the 
environment making measurements reproducible. Figure 3 (b) shows a gate sweep of the same device 
capped by PMMA and baked out while held in air. The magnitude of hysteresis was reduced to about 4 V 
and the current in the on-state was identical. Figure 3 (c) demonstrates a further reduction of that gate 
hysteresis to about 2 V if devices were held in the cryostat under vacuum. We also observed that the 
sample is less affected by the sweep range. Even though the nanotubes were covered by PMMA, 
measurements show that the vacuum environment can further reduce the hysteresis effect, indicating that 
the PMMA layer acts as a permeable membrane. After cooling the device to 80 K we observed a near-
zero hysteresis effect in the same device as shown in Figure 3 (d).  Since residual mobile charges are 

 
6
frozen out at low temperature the local CNT environment is less affected by changing the applied gate 
voltage direction. In conclusion, the hysteresis was strongly reduced utilizing the PMMA coating and 
baking technique and by cooling the device down to liquid nitrogen temperatures.  
3.3 Electrical characterization of SWCNT-FET devices operating as SETs 
Single electron transistors represent a subset of field effect transistors in which the gate voltage Vg is used 
to position individual energy levels between the Fermi levels of the source and drain contacts. Ideally, if 
the Fermi level is positioned in the energy gap, under the application of a small source-drain bias, no 
current flows through the device: a transport regime known as Coulomb blockade. In this regime, 
individual energy levels can be moved in and out of the transport window (as defined by the source-drain 
potential) giving rise to Coulomb oscillations, as shown in Figure 4d. In the Coulomb blockade regime, 
all states lying below the Fermi levels of both the source and the drain contacts are filled, giving rise to 
the single electron charging energy gap 
Σ
+
=
−
=
C
q
U
U
U
N
N
2
1
0
  (as shown in Figure 4a), where 
Σ
C  
is the total capacitance of the island, given by, 
GATE
DRAIN
SOURCE
C
C
C
C
+
+
=
Σ
  [1, 2, 30].  It should be 
further noted that a prerequisite for observing Coulomb oscillations is that the level spacing should be 
smaller than the thermal energy of the electron
T
k
E
B
<
∆
, consequently, cryogenic temperatures are 
frequently utilized to achieve the above condition.  
In accordance with previous findings, SWCNTs being either metallic or semiconducting, or even 
multiwall CNTs can operate as an SET if the device temperature is low enough, i.e. lower than the 
quantized level spacing and the charging energy [1, 29, 30,]. In effect, the Schottky barriers at the 
contacts define the quantization along the wire direction. The shorter the length of the quantum wire 
defined by the electrode spacing the larger the quantized level spacing ∆E. In order to reduce the contact 
spacing by an order of magnitude from 2000 nm to 200 nm additional electrodes have been deposited 
over an individual in-plane grown SWCNT as shown in Figure 1 (b).  

 
7
While this device still contains about 10 semiconducting SWCNTs across, the transport signatures are 
expected to be dominated by the SET behavior of the SWCNT shortened to 200 nm, since it has a much 
larger level spacing. As shown in Figure 4 (a), electron transport over the discrete QD states, which are 
spaced out by ∆E, can be controlled by changing the transport window width (EFS-EFD), which is defined 
by the difference in Fermi levels between source and drain. The larger this energy difference, which 
scales linearly with VSD, the larger the number of transport channels contributing to the observed current. 
The role of the gate voltage is to tune the QD density of states through the transport window defined by 
the source-drain voltage. As a result, conductance oscillations are observed in Figure 4 (b-d). With each 
additional electron located on the QD the electrostatic potential energy U0 increases, which affects the 
single electron transport. Therefore, the conduction oscillations vanish with increasing source-drain 
voltage as shown in Figure 4 (b). This is in agreement with the expected closing of the Coulomb 
diamonds typically observed when plotting the conductance as a function of source-drain voltage and 
gate-voltage [1, 2]. For the larger transport window of 1.5 mV highlighted in Figure 4 (c), the discrete 
electron jumps appear more as a step function since the transport window is broad enough to allow 
several transport channels to contribute simultaneously. Thus, the current does not go down in between 
each step. At the smaller transport window highlighted in Figure 4 (d) the conductance oscillations appear 
more like discrete peaks, since the window is small enough that only individual energy levels contribute 
to the total current.  
It is furthermore observed that the overall spacing of the Coulomb blockade peaks is not constant at fixed 
VSD but slightly anharmonic and that peaks appear from an underlying current background which does not 
fully vanish to zero at all back gate voltages. This effect can have several reasons: First, the particular 
device contains other 2 micron long semiconducting SWCNTs which can contribute to the total current. 
Second, there is still a residual hysteresis since this device was only annealed for 12 hrs. Thus the frozen 
charges can affect the harmonicity of the energy level spacing. And third, the 200 nm long segment is still 
long enough to allow formation of several QDs along the segment during the carrier freeze out which 

 
8
have a nonlinear interplay and level spacing. These problems can be overcome in principle by fabricating 
contact pairs with a reduced number of Ni catalyst tips such that statistically only one SWCNT remains 
after burn-in per electrode pair and by further reducing the contact spacing itself.  
4. SUMMARY 
 
We have successfully fabricated in-plane grown arrays of purely semiconducting SWCNTs by utilizing 
tailored nanoscale catalyst patterns, an optimized low-pressure CVD growth process, and an electrical 
burn-in technique. The common gate hysteresis was removed using PMMA baking and FET devices were 
demonstrated with on/off ratios up to 105, comparable to the highest values reported for back gated CNT 
FETs. For segmentation of bridged SWCNTs into QDs, we have characterized a 200 nm short SWCNT 
segment and observed conductance oscillations in the Coulomb blockade regime at 5K. As a result, we 
demonstrated SET operation of a preregistered and in-plane grown semiconducting SWCNT. In contrast 
to most previous work on CNT-SET devices, which requires either post-growth transfer of CNTs or local 
FIB manipulation techniques, the demonstrated utilization of registered in-plane growth opens 
possibilities to create laterally ordered and scalable SET device geometries, as required for advanced 
quantum electronic devices.
