Options of Interest: Temporal Abstraction with Interest Functions
Khimya Khetarpal,1,2 Martin Klissarov,1,2 Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert,2,3
Pierre-Luc Bacon,4 Doina Precup1,2,5
1McGill University, 2Mila, 3Universite de Montreal,
4Stanford University, 5Google DeepMind

Abstract
Temporal abstraction refers to the ability of an agent to use
behaviours of controllers which act for a limited, variable
amount of time. The options framework describes such be-
haviours as consisting of a subset of states in which they can
initiate, an internal policy and a stochastic termination condi-
tion. However, much of the subsequent work on option dis-
covery has ignored the initiation set, because of difﬁculty in
learning it from data. We provide a generalization of initiation
sets suitable for general function approximation, by deﬁning
an interest function associated with an option. We derive a
gradient-based learning algorithm for interest functions, lead-
ing to a new interest-option-critic architecture. We investigate
how interest functions can be leveraged to learn interpretable
and reusable temporal abstractions. We demonstrate the efﬁ-
cacy of the proposed approach through quantitative and qual-
itative results, in both discrete and continuous environments.
Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to acquire skills, and
knowing when to apply each skill plays an important role
in their ability to quickly solve new tasks. In this work, we
tackle the problem of learning such skills in reinforcement
learning (RL). AI agents which aim to achieve goals are
faced with two difﬁculties in large problems: the depth of the
lookahead needed to obtain a good solution, and the breadth
generated by having many choices. The ﬁrst problem is of-
ten solved by providing shortcuts that skip over multiple
time steps, for example, by using macro-actions (Hauskrecht
et al. 1998). The second problem is handled by restricting
the agent’s attention at each step to a reasonable number
of possible choices. Temporal abstraction methods aim to
solve the ﬁrst problem, and a lot of recent literature has
been devoted to this topic (2011; 2015; 2016; 2016; 2017;
2017). We focus speciﬁcally on the second problem: learn-
ing how to reduce the number of choices considered by an
RL agent.
In classical planning, the early work on STRIPS (Fikes,
Hart, and Nilsson 1972) used preconditions that had to be
satisﬁed before applying a certain action. Similar ideas can
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
also be found in later work on macro-operators (Korf 1983)
or the Schema model (Drescher 1991). In RL, the frame-
work of options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) uses a
similar concept, initiation sets, which limit the availability
of options (i.e. temporally extended actions) in order to deal
with the possibly high cost of choosing among many op-
tions. Moreover, initiation sets can also lead to options that
are more localized (Konidaris and Barto 2007), which can
be beneﬁcial in transfer learning. For example, in contin-
ual learning (1997), specialization is key to both scaling up
learning in large environments, as well as to “protecting”
knowledge that has already been learned from forgetting due
to new updates.
The option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017) is a gradient-based approach for learning options in
order to optimize the usual long-term return obtained by
an RL agent from the environment. However, the notion of
initiation sets originally introduced in Sutton, Precup, and
Singh (1999) was omitted from Bacon, Harb, and Precup
(2017) due to the difﬁculty of learning sets with gradient-
based methods. We propose a generalization of initiation
sets to interest functions (Sutton, Mahmood, and White
2016; White 2017). We build from the fact that a set can be
represented through its membership function. Interest func-
tions are a generalization of membership functions which
allows smooth parameterization. Without this extension, de-
termining suitable initiation sets would necessitate a non-
differentiable, search-based approach.
Key Contributions: We generalize initiation sets for op-
tions to interest functions, which are differentiable, and
hence easier to learn. We derive a gradient-based learning al-
gorithm capable of learning all components of options end-
to-end. The resulting interest-option-critic architecture gen-
erates options that are specialized to different regions of
state space. We demonstrate through experiments in both
discrete and continuous problems that our approach gener-
ates options that are useful in a single task, interpretable and
reusable in multi-task learning.
Preliminaries
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). A ﬁnite, discrete-
time MDP (Puterman 1995; Sutton and Barto 1998) is a
arXiv:2001.00271v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2020

2
4
6
8
10
12
Number of available options
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Average Rewards
Performance in initial stage (Epoch 14)
(a)
2
4
6
8
Number of available options
0.58
0.59
0.60
0.61
0.62
0.63
0.64
0.65
0.66
Average Rewards
Performance in late stage (Epoch 71)
(b)
Figure 1: Interest functions and the branching factor. During the initial stages of the learning process, allowing fewer
options helps improve learning speed, whereas in the later stages, good solutions can still be obtained with a reasonable number
of choices at each decision point.
tuple ⟨S, A, r, P, γ⟩, where S is the set of states, A is the
set of actions, r : S × A →R is the reward function,
P : S × A →Dist(S) is the environment transition proba-
bility function, and γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. At each
time step, the learning agent perceives a state St ∈S, takes
an action At ∈A drawn from a policy π : S × A →[0, 1],
and with probability P(St+1|St, At) enters next state St+1,
receiving a numerical reward Rt+1 = r(St, At) from the
environment. The value function of policy π is deﬁned as:
Vπ(s) = Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtRt+1|S0 = s] and its action-value
function is: Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtRt+1|S0 = s, A0 = a].
The Options framework. A Markovian option (Sutton,
Precup, and Singh 1999) ω ∈Ωis composed of an intra-
option policy πω, a termination condition βω : S →[0, 1],
where βω(s) is the probability of terminating the option
upon entering state s, and an initiation set Iω ⊆S. In the
call-and-return option execution model, when an agent is in
state s, it ﬁrst examines the options that are available, i.e., for
which s ∈Iω. Let Ω(s) denote this set of available options.
The agent then chooses ω ∈Ω(s) according to the policy
over options πΩ(s), follows the internal policy of ω, πω, un-
til it terminates according to βω, at which point this process
is repeated. Note that Ωis the union of all sets Ω(s), ∀s. The
option-value function of ω ∈Ω(s) is deﬁned as:
QΩ(s, ω) =
X
a
πω(a|s)QU(s, ω, a) ,
where QU : S × Ω× A →R is the value of executing
primitive action a in the context of state-option pair (s, ω):
QU(s, ω, a) = r(s, a) + γ
X
s′
P(s′|s, a)
×

(1 −βω(s′))QΩ(s′, ω) + βω(s′)
max
ω′∈Ω(s′) QΩ(s′, ω′)

Note that if an option cannot initiate in a state s, its value is
considered undeﬁned.
Interest-Option-Critic
In Sutton, Precup, and Singh (1999), the focus is on discrete
environments, and the notion of initiation set provides a di-
rect analog of preconditions from classical planning. In large
problems, options would be applicable in parts of the state
space described by certain features. For example, an option
of the form stop if the trafﬁc light is red would only need to
be considered in states where a trafﬁc light is detected. Let
1ω : S →{0, 1} be the indicator function corresponding to
set Iω: 1ω(s) = 1 iff s ∈Iω and 0 otherwise.
An interest function Iω : S ×Ω→R+ generalizes the set
indicator function, with Iω(s) > 0 iff ω can be initiated in s.
A bigger value of Iω(s) means the interest in executing ω in
s is larger. Note that, depending on how Iω is parameterized,
one could view the interest as a prior on the likelihood of
executing ω in s. However, we will not use this perspective
here, because our goal is to learn Iω. So, instead, we will
choose a parameterized form for Iω which is differentiable,
in order to leverage the power of gradients in the learning
process.
The value of Iω modulates the probability of option ω be-
ing sampled in state s by a policy over options πΩ, resulting
in an interest policy over option deﬁned as:
πIω(ω|s) ∝Iω(s)πΩ(ω|s)
(1)
Note that this specializes immediately to usual initiation sets
(where the interest is the indicator function).
We will now describe an approach to learning options
which includes interest functions. We propose a policy gra-
dient algorithm, in the style of option-critic (2017), based on
the following result:
Theorem 1. Given a set of Markov options with differen-
tiable interest functions Iω,z, where z is the parameter vec-
tor, the gradient of the expected discounted return with re-
spect to z at (s, ω) is:
X
s′,ω′
ˆµΩ(s′, ω′|s, ω)βω(s′)∂πIω,z(ω′|s′)
∂z
QΩ(s′, ω′)
where ˆµΩ(s′, ω′|s, ω) is the discounted weighting of the
state-option pairs along trajectories starting from (s, ω)
sampled from the distribution determined by πIω,z, βω is the
termination function and QΩis the value function over op-
tions corresponding to πIω,z.
The proof is in Appendix A.2.1 available on the project
page1. We can derive policy gradients for intra-option poli-
cies and termination functions as in option-critic (Bacon,
1https://sites.google.com/view/optionsoﬁnterest

Harb, and Precup 2017) (see Appendix A.2.2, A.2.3) with
the difference that the discounted weighting of state-option
pairs is now according to the new option sampling distri-
bution determined by πIω,z(s). This is natural, as the in-
troduction of the interest function should only impact the
choice of option in each state. Pseudo-code of the interest-
option-critic (IOC) algorithm using intra-option Q-learning
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Intuitively, the gradient update to z can be interpreted as
increasing the interest in an option which terminates in states
with good value. It links initiation and termination, which is
natural. It is to be noted that the proposed gradient works at
the level of the augmented chain; and not at the SMDP level.
Implementing policy gradient at the SMDP level for the pol-
icy over options would entail performing gradient updates
only upon termination, whereas using the augmented chain
allows for updates throughout. Note that this approach does
not appear in previous work to the best of our knowledge.
Illustration
In order to elucidate the way in which interest functions can
help regulate the complexity of learning how to make deci-
sions, we provide a small illustration of the idea. Consider a
point mass agent in a continuous 2-D maze, which starts in a
uniformly random position and must reach a ﬁxed goal state.
Consider a scalar threshold k ∈[0, 1], so that at any choice
point, only options whose interest is at least k can be initi-
ated by the interest policy over options πIω(ω|s). The agent
uses 16 options in total. Intuitively, an agent which has fewer
option choices at a decision point should learn faster, since
it has fewer alternatives to explore, but in the long run, this
limits the space of usable policies for the agent. Fig. 1 con-
ﬁrms this trade-off between speed of learning and ultimate
quality. Note that this trade-off holds the same way in plan-
ning as well (as discussed extensively in classical planning
works).
Experimental Results
We now study the empirical behavior of IOC in order to an-
swer the following questions: (1) are options with interest
functions useful in a single task; (2) do interest functions
facilitate learning reusable options and, (3) do interest func-
tions provide better interpretability of the skills of an agent.
A link to the source code for all experiments is provided on
the project page.
Learning in a single task
To analyze the utility of interest functions when learning in a
single task, consider a given, ﬁxed policy over options, either
speciﬁed by a just-in-time planner or via human input. This
setup allows us to understand the impact of interest functions
alone in the learning process.
Four rooms (FR) We ﬁrst consider the classic FR do-
main (1999) (Fig. 3(a)). The agent starts at a uniformly
random state and there is a goal state in the bottom right
hallway (γ = 0.9). With probability 1/3, the agent transi-
tions randomly to one of the empty adjacent cells instead
of the desired movement. The reward is +50 at the goal
Algorithm 1 IOC with tabular intra-option Q-learning
Initialize policy over options πΩ
Initialize Iω,z parameterized by z such that all options are
available everywhere to some extent
Initialize πIω,z(ω|s) as in Eq.(1)
Set s ←−s0 and ω at s according to πIω,z
repeat
Choose a according to πω,θ(a|s)
Take action a in s, observe s′, r
Sample termination from βω, ν(s′)
if ω terminates in s′ then
Sample ω′ according to πIω,z(·|s′)
else
ω′ = ω
end if
1. Evaluation step:
δ ←r −QU(s, ω, a)
δ
←
r
+
γ(1
−
βω,ν(s′))QΩ(s′, ω)
+
γβω,ν(s′) maxω′ QΩ(s′, ω′)
QU(s, ω, a) ←QU(s, ω, a) + αδ
2. Improvement step
θ ←θ + αθ
∂log πω,θ(a|s)
∂θ
QU(s, ω, a)
ν
←
ν
−
αν
∂βω,ν(s′)
∂ν
(QΩ(s′, ω)
−
VΩ(s′)) whereVΩ(s′) = P′
ω πIω,z(ω′|s′)QΩ(s′, ω′)
z ←z + αzβω,ν(s′)
∂πIω,z (ω′|s′)
∂z
QΩ(s′, ω′)
s ←s′
until s′ is a terminal state
and 0 otherwise. We used 4 options, whose intra-option
policies were parameterized with Boltzmann distributions,
and termination and interest functions represented as linear-
sigmoid functions. Options were learned using either IOC or
OC with tabular intra-option Q-learning, as described in Al-
gorithm 1. Learning proceeds for 500 episodes, with a max-
imum of 2000 time steps allowed per episode. Additional
details are provided in Appendix A.3.1.
Results: Fig. 2(a) shows the steps to goal for both OC
and IOC, averaged over 70 independent runs. The IOC agent
performs better than OC agent by roughly 100 steps. One
potential reason for the improvement in IOC is that options
become specialized to different regions of the state-space,
as can be seen in Fig. 3. We also observe that the termina-
tion functions (which were initialized to 0) naturally become
coherent with the interest functions learned, and are mostly
room speciﬁc for each option (see appendix Fig. A1). On the
other hand, options learned by OC do not show such special-
ization and terminate everywhere (see appendix Fig. A1).
These results demonstrate that the IOC agent is not only able
to correct for the given higher level policy, but also, leads to
more understandable options as a side effect.
TMaze Next, we illustrate the learning and use of interest
functions in the non-linear function approximation setting,
using simple continuous control tasks implemented in Mu-
joco (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012). A point mass agent
(blue) is located at the bottom end of a T-shaped maze (0,
−0.1) and must navigate to within 0.1 of the goal posi-

0
100
200
300
400
500
Episodes
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Steps to Goal
Four Rooms
IOC with uniform fixed πΩ
OC with uniform fixed πΩ
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iterations
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average Rewards
TMaze
IOC with uniform fixed 
OC with uniform fixed 
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Iterations
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Average Rewards
MiniWorld OneRoom
IOC with uniform fixed 
OC with uniform fixed 
(c)
Figure 2: Learning options with interest reshapes a uniform ﬁxed policy over options in a single task, in 3 different domains:
(a) tabular Four rooms, (b) continuous control in TMaze, and (c) 3D visual Miniworld task. IOC outperforms OC, indicating
the utility of interest functions.
(a) Iω1
(b) Iω2
(c) Iω3
(d) Iω4
Figure 3: Visualization of Interest Functions (Iω) at the end of 500 episodes with the goal in the east hallway. Brighter colors
represent higher values. Options learned with interest functions emerge with speciﬁc interest in different regions of the state.
tion (0.3, 0.3) at the right end of the maze (green location)
(Fig. 4(e)). The state space consists of the x, y coordinates
of the agent and the action space consists of force applied
in the x, y directions. We use a uniform ﬁxed policy over
options for both IOC and OC. We reuse the Proximal Policy
Option-Critic (PPOC) algorithm (Klissarov et al. 2017)2 and
add a 2-layer network with sigmoid outputs to compute the
interest functions. However, we do correct the implemen-
tation of the gradient of the policy over options which has
been overlooked in that work. The remaining update rules
are consistent with Algorithm 1. Complete details about the
implementation and hyper-parameter search are provided in
Appendix A.3.2.
Results: We report the average performance over 10 in-
dependent runs. The IOC agent is able to converge in almost
half the time steps needed by the OC agent. Potentially, in-
terest functions in the IOC agent provide an attention mech-
anism and thus facilitates learning options which are more
diverse (see Fig. 5 for evidence). A deeper analysis of inter-
est functions learned in this domain is deferred to subsequent
sections.
MiniWorld We also explore learning in more complex 3D
ﬁrst-person visual environment from the MiniWorld frame-
work (Chevalier-Boisvert 2018). We use the Oneroom task
2In this work we name this algorithm OC for option-critic
where the agent has to navigate to a randomly placed red
block in a closed room (Fig. 4(f)). This requires the agent
to turn around and scan the room to ﬁnd the red box, then
navigate to it.
The observation space is a 3-channel RGB image and the
action space consists of 8 discrete actions. At the start of
each episode, the red box is placed randomly. The episode
terminates if the agent reaches the box or max of 180 time
steps is reached. We used the DQN architecture of (Mnih et
al. 2015). See Appendix A.3.3 for details about implemen-
tation and hyper-parameters.
Results: The IOC agent is able to converge much faster
( 100 iterations) than the OC agent with a given uniform
policy over option (Fig. 2(c)). The performance is averaged
across 10 runs.
Based on these experiments, IOC provides improvement
in performance consistently across a range of tasks, from
the simple four-rooms domain to complex visual navigation
tasks such as MiniWorld, indicating the utility of learning
interest functions.
Option reusability
One of the primary reasons for an agent to autonomously
learn options is the ability to generalize its knowledge
quickly in new tasks. We now evaluate our approach in set-
tings where adaptation to changes in the task is vital.

0
100
200
300
400
Iterations
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average Rewards
Task Changes
TMazeTransfer
IOC
OC
PPO
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Iterations
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Average Rewards
Task Changes
MiniWorld OneRoom
IOC,
z=8E-05
IOC,
z=9E-05
OC
PPO
(b)
0
100
200
300
400
Iterations
600
400
200
0
200
400
600
800
Average Rewards
Task Changes
Half Cheetah (forward/backward)
IOC
OC
PPO
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 4: Transfer in continual learning setting: Continuous Control in TMaze: (d) The point mass agent (blue) has two
goals (green) both resulting in a reward of +1. After 150 iterations, the goal that is most visited is removed (e). (a) illustrates
that IOC converges fastest in the ﬁrst few iterations. After the task change, IOC suffers the least in terms of immediate loss in
performance and gets the best ﬁnal score. Visual navigation in Miniworld: requires the agent to go to a randomly placed red
box in a closed room. After 150 episodes the color of the box changes and the agent has to navigate to a unseen blue box (g).
IOC quickly adapts to the change (b) indicating that harnessing options learned from the old task speeds up learning in the new
task. Locomotion in HalfCheetah: The cheetah is rewarded for moving forward as fast as possible during the ﬁrst 150 iterations,
after which it is rewarded for going backwards as fast as possible.
TMaze The point mass agent starts at the bottom of the
maze, with two goal locations (Fig. 4(d)), both giving a re-
ward of +1. After 150 episodes, the goal that has been vis-
ited the most is removed and the agent has to adapt its pol-
icy to the remaining goal available (Fig. 4(e)). Both OC and
IOC learn 2 options. We use a softmax policy over options
for both IOC and OC, which is also learned at the same time.
Results: In the initial phase, the difference in perfor-
mance between IOC and the other two agents (OC and PPO)
is striking (Fig. 4(a)): IOC converges twice as fast. More-
over, when the most visited goal is removed and adaptation
to the task change is required, the IOC agent is able to ex-
plore faster and its performance declines less. This suggests
that the structure learned by IOC provides more generality.
At the end of task 2, IOC recovers its original performance,
whereas PPO fails to recover during thee allotted learning
trials.
MiniWorld Initially, the agent is tasked to search and nav-
igate to a randomly placed red box in one closed room
(Fig. 4(f)). After 150 episodes, the agent has to adapt its
skills to navigate to a randomly located blue box (Fig. 4(g))
which it has never seen before. Here, the policy over options
as well as all the option components are being learned at the
same time.
Results: The IOC agent outperforms both OC and PPO
agents when required to adapt to the new task (Fig. 4(b)).
This result indicates that the options learned with interest
functions are more easily transferable. The IOC agent is able
to adapt faster to unseen scenarios.
HalfCheetah We also study adaptation in learning a
complex locomotion task for a planar cheetah. The ini-
tial conﬁguration of this environment follows the standard
HalfCheetah-v1 from OpenAI’s Gym: the agent is rewarded
for moving forward as fast as possible. After 150 itera-
tions, we modify the reward function so that the agent is
now encouraged to move backward as fast as possible (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017).
Results: PPO outperforms both OC and IOC in the initial
task. However, as soon as the task changes, IOC reacts in
the most efﬁcient way and converges to the highest score
after 500 iterations (Fig. 4(c)). As seen consistently in all
the environments, IOC generalizes much better over tasks,
whereas PPO seems to overﬁt to the ﬁrst task and generalizes
poorly when the task changes.
In all our experiments, we notice that interest functions re-
sult in option specialization, which leads to both reusability
and adaptability (i.e. an option may get slightly tweaked),
especially in the complex tasks.
Option interpretability
To gain a better understanding of the agent’s behavior, we
visualize different aspects of the learning process in several
tasks.
TMaze We visualize the interest functions learned in
TMaze (Fig. 5). Initially, the interest functions are random-

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5: Qualitative analysis of IOC in TMaze illustrates the options and their interest over time. Row a depicts sampled
trajectories with option 0 indicated by red dots and option 1 by yellow dots. Row b & c depict the interest of each option. At
the end of task 1, the interest of option 0 emerges in the lower diagonal (row b) whereas option 1 is interested in a different
region (row c). As the task changes, the interest functions adapt (col 3).
ized. At the end of the ﬁrst task, the interest function for
option 0 specializes in the lower diagonal of the state-space
(Fig. 5(b)), whereas option 1’s interest function is com-
pletely different (Fig. 5(c)). When the task changes, the op-
tions readjust their interest. Eventually, the interest functions
for the two options automatically specialize in different re-
gions of the state space (last column of Fig. 5(c) & 5(b)).
Fig. 5(a) illustrates the agent trajectories at different time
instances, where the yellow and red dots indicate the two
different options during the trajectory. A visualization of the
emergence of interest functions during the learning process
is also available on the project page (see 1). In contrast, the
options learned by the OC agent are employed everywhere
and have not specialized as much (see Appendix Fig. A2).
HalfCheetah We analyze the skills learned in HalfChee-
tah. During the task of moving forward as fast as possible,
the IOC agent employs option 0 to move forward by drag-
ging its limbs, and option 1 to take much larger hopped steps
(Fig. 6). Fig. 6 demonstrates the emergence of these very
distinct skills and the agent’s switching between them across
time. Additionally, we analyzed each option at the end of
task 2 in which the agent was rewarded for moving back-
ward. Option 0 now specializes in moving forward while
option 1 focuses on moving backward. This is nice, as the
agent preserves some ability to now solve both tasks. OC
doesn’t learn options which are as distinct, and both options
end up going backward and overﬁtting to the new task (see
accompanying videos ( 1)).
MiniWorld We visualize the skills acquired by inspect-
ing the agent’s behavior at the end of ﬁrst task. The IOC
agent has learned two distinct options: option 0 scans the
surroundings, whereas option 1 is used to directly navigate
towards the block upon successfully locating it (Fig. 7). Dur-
ing task 2, option 1 is being harnessed primarily to move
forward, whereas option 0 is employed when jittery motion
is involved, such as turning and scanning.
Related Work
Temporal abstraction in RL has a rich history (Parr and
Russell 1998; Thrun and Schwartz 1995; Dayan and Hin-
ton 1993; Dietterich 2000; McGovern and Barto 2001;
Menache, Mannor, and Shimkin 2002; Stolle and Precup
2002). Options in particular have been shown to speed up
convergence both empirically (Precup 2000) and theoreti-
cally (Mann and Mannor 2014). Constructing such temporal
abstractions automatically from data has also been tackled
extensively, and with some success (Konidaris et al. 2011;
Mann, Mannor, and Precup 2015; Kulkarni et al. 2016;
Mankowitz, Mann, and Mannor 2016; Bacon, Harb, and Pre-
cup 2017; Machado, Bellemare, and Bowling 2017). While
some of the approaches require prior knowledge, have a
ﬁxed time horizon for partial policies (Vezhnevets et al.

Figure 6: Timeline of options used by IOC agent in HalfCheetah where each option is represented by a distinct color (black
& white). Two distinct options are learned during the task of moving forward; option 0 moves forward by dragging the limbs
whereas option 1 takes larger hopped steps; see accompanying videos.
Figure 7: 3D Navigation in MiniWorld with the top view of the environment and the agent as the red arrow. We show sequence
of frames from a sampled trajectory. Option 0 scans the environment to locate the block. Option 1 learns to directly navigate to
the block, once located. Please see accompanying videos.
2017), or use intrinsic rewards (Kulkarni et al. 2016), Ba-
con, Harb, and Precup (2017) provides an end-to-end dif-
ferentiable approach without needing any sub-goals or in-
trinsic motivation. We generalize their policy gradient ap-
proach to learn interest functions. While we use rewards in
our gradient-based algorithm, our qualitative analysis also
indicates some clustering of states in which a given option
starts, as in (Lakshminarayanan et al. 2016; Bacon 2013;
Mannor et al. 2004). Our approach is closely related in moti-
vation to Mankowitz, Mann, and Mannor (2016). However,
our method does not make assumptions about a particular
structure for the initiation and termination functions (except
smoothness).
Initiation sets were an integral part of Sutton, Precup, and
Singh (1999) and provide a way to control the complexity of
the process of exploration and planning with options. This
aspect of options has been ignored since, including in re-
cent works (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017; Harb et al. 2017;
Harutyunyan et al. 2019a; 2019b) because there was no ele-
gant way to learn initiation sets. We address this open prob-
lem by generalizing initiation sets to differentiable interest
functions. Since an interest function is a component of an
option, it can be transferred once learned.
Discussion and Future Directions
We introduced the notion of interest functions for options,
which generalize initiation sets, with the purpose of con-
trolling search complexity. We presented a policy gradient-
based method to learn options with interest functions, us-
ing general function approximation. Because the learned op-
tions are specialized, they are able to both learn faster in
a single task and adapt to changes much more efﬁciently
than options which initiate everywhere. Our qualitative re-
sults suggest that the interest function could be interpreted
as an attention mechanism (see Appendix Fig. A4). To some
extent, the interest functions learnt are able to override ter-
mination degeneracy as well (only one option being active
all the time, or options switching often) although our ap-
proach was not meant to tackle that problem directly. Ex-
ploring further the interaction of initiation and termination
functions, and imposing more coordination between the two,
is an interesting topic for future work.
In our current experiments, the agent optimizes a sin-
gle external reward function. However, the same algorithm
could be used with intrinsic rewards as well.
We did not explore in this paper the impact of interest
functions in the context of planning. However, given the in-
tuitions from classical planning, learning models for options
with interest functions could lead to better and faster plan-
ning, which should be explored in the future.
Finally, other ways of incorporating interest functions into
the policy over options would be worth considering, in order
to consider only choices over few options at a time.
