Open Challenge for Correcting Errors of Speech Recognition Systems
Marek Kubis∗, Zygmunt Vetulani∗, Mikołaj Wypych†, Tomasz Zi˛etkiewicz†,∗,
∗Adam Mickiewicz University
Umultowska 87, 61-614 Pozna´n, Poland

†Samsung Poland R&D Institute
Pl. Europejski 1, Warszawa, Poland

Abstract
The paper announces the new long-term challenge for improving the performance of automatic speech recognition systems. The goal
of the challenge is to investigate methods of correcting the recognition results on the basis of previously made errors by the speech
processing system. The dataset prepared for the task is described and evaluation criteria are presented.
1.
Introduction
The rise in popularity of voice-based virtual assistants
such as Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s Alexa, Google Assistant
and Samsung Bixby imposes high expectations on the pre-
cision of automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems.
Scheduling a meeting at the incorrect time, sending a mes-
sage to a wrong person or misinterpreting the command
for the home automation system can cause severe losses to
the user of a virtual assistant. The problem is even more
apparent in case of deep-understanding systems supposed
to work in very difﬁcult audibility condition, and where
ASR errors can appear fatal for the end users. This is the
case of systems for crisis situation management (e.g. Ve-
tulani et al., 2010) where low quality and emotional voice
input can generate a real challenge for speech recognition
systems. Furthermore, successful integration of ASR so-
lutions with the very demanding AI systems will depend
on the degree of being able to take into consideration the
non-verbal elements of utterances (prosody). Hence, de-
spite signiﬁcant improvements to the speech recognition
technology in recent years it is now even more important
to search for new methods of decreasing the risk of being
misunderstood by the system.
One of the methods that can be used to improve the
performance of a speech recognition system is to force the
system to learn from its own errors. This approach trans-
forms the speech recognition system into a self-evolving,
auto-adapting agent. The objective of this challenge is to
investigate to what extent this technique can be used to im-
prove the recognition rate of the speech processing system.
In order to make the challenge approachable by par-
ticipants from outside the speech recognition community
and to encourage contestants to use a broad range of ma-
chine learning and natural language engineering methods
that are not speciﬁc to the processing of spoken language,
we provide the dataset that consists solely of:
1. Hypotheses – textual outputs of the automatic speech
recognition system.
2. References – transcriptions of sentences being read to
the automatic speech recognition system.
Thus, the goal of the contestants is to develop a method
that improves the result of speech recognition process on
the basis of the (erroneous) output of the ASR system and
the correct human-made transcription without access to the
speech recordings.
Speech corpus
ASR
ASR response
System
training
Transcription
Recording
Reference
Error
correction
model
Figure 1: Error correction model training
ASR
ASR response
Error
correction
system
Recording
Corrected text
Error
correction
model
Figure 2: ASR error correction
arXiv:2001.03041v1  [cs.CL]  9 Jan 2020

2.
Related work
2.1.
Shared tasks
To our best knowledge this is the ﬁrst open ASR er-
ror correction task. However, there were plenty of tasks
targeting similar problems. They can be divided into two
categories: speech translation tasks and grammatical error
correction tasks. Representatives of the former category
are 2 of 3 tasks conducted at 7th International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (Paul et al., 2010). Tasks 1
and 2 provided sentences in source language in two forms:
ASR recognition results (with errors) and correct recog-
nition results (transcription without errors). Task of the
participants was to translate the source text in both forms
to the target language. Participants were provided with 3
training corpora composed of 86225 (Task 1), 19972 and
10061 (Task 2) sentence pairs. CoNLL-2013 Shared Task
on Grammatical Error Correction (Ng et al., 2013) and
BEA 2019 Shared Task: Grammatical Error Correction
(Christopher Bryant and Briscoe, 2019) are examples of
the second group of tasks. In these tasks participants are
given parallel corpora of texts written by native or non-
native English students, containing grammatical, punctu-
ation or spelling errors and their manually corrected ver-
sions. The goal of the proposed system is to correct previ-
ously unseen texts. Training corpora in these tasks consist
of 38785 and 57151 pairs of sentences respectively.
2.2.
ASR error correction systems
(Errattahi et al., 2018) provide review of some ASR
error detection and correction systems together with de-
scription of ASR evaluation metrics. (Cucu et al., 2013)
propose error correction using SMT (Statistical Machine
Translation) model. The SMT model is trained on rela-
tively small parallel corpus of 2000 ASR transcripts and
their manually corrected versions. At evaluation time the
model is used to “translate” ASR hypothesis into it’s cor-
rected form. The system achieves 10.5% relative WER1
improvement by reducing the baseline ASR system’s WER
from 11.4 to 10.2 . (Guo et al., 2019) describe ASR error
correction model based on LSTM sequence-to-sequence
neural network trained on large (40M utterances) speech
corpus generated from plain-text data with text to speech
(TTS) system. In addition to the spelling correction model
authors experiment with improving results of end-to-end
ASR system by incorporating the external language model
and with combination of the two approaches. The pro-
posed system achieves good results (19% relative WER
improvement and 29% relative WER improvement with
additional LM re-scoring, with baseline ASR WER of 6.03
) but requires large speech corpus or high-quality TTS sys-
tem to generate such corpus from plain text.
3.
Dataset description
In order to develop the dataset for the task we decided
to select 9142 sentences from Polish Wikinews (Wikime-
dia Foundation, 2019) and ask two native speakers of Pol-
ish (male and female) to read them to the speech recog-
nition system. Dataset samples consist of transcription of
1Word Error Rate, see Section 4.
Train set
Test set
Number of sentences
8142
1000
Avarage WER
3.94
4.01
Sentence Error Rate
0.74
0.75
Avarage utterance length (words)
15.40
15.10
Minimum utterance length (words)
2
3
Maximum utterance length (words)
100
48
Table 1: Datasets statistics.
the sentence being read juxtaposed with the textual output
captured from the system. Both references and hypotheses
are normalized according to the following rules:
• words are uppercased,
• all punctuation marks except hyphens are removed,
• numbers and special characters are replaced by their
spoken forms.
The dataset is divided into two sets. The training set
consists of 8142 utterances randomly sampled from the
dataset. The test set contains the rest of the samples.
The training and test set items consist of:
1. id: sample identiﬁer
2. hyp: ASR hypothesis - recognition result for the
sample voice recording
3. ref: reference - human transcription of the sample
recording,
4. source: copyright, source and author attribution in-
formation.
Exemplary dataset items are shown in the appendix. The
entire training set and test set (with the exception of ref-
erence utterances) are available for download via Gonito
online competition platform (Grali´nski et al., 2016).
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sentence length (words)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Count
Histogram of sentence length
Figure 3: Histogram of sentence length

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
WER
100
101
102
103
104
Count (log scale)
Histogram of  sentence WER
Figure 4: Histogram of Word Error Rate
4.
Evaluation
For the purpose of evaluation the contestants are asked
to submit their results using the Gonito (Grali´nski et al.,
2016) challenge available at https://gonito.net/
challenge/asr-corrections.
The submission consists of single out.tsv ﬁle contain-
ing result of running the proposed system on in.tsv ﬁle,
containing ASR system output. Both ﬁles contain one sen-
tence per line. The output ﬁle should be aligned with the
input.
The submissions are evaluated using geval tool (Gral-
i´nski, 2019), part of the Gonito platform available also as
a standalone tool. Submissions are evaluated using three
metrics:
• WER - Word Error Rate of hypothesis corrected by
the proposed system, averaged over all tests sen-
tences. WER is deﬁned as follows:
WER =
S + D + I
N = H + S + D
where: S = number of substitutions, D = number of
deletions, I = number of insertions, H - number of
hits, N - length of reference sentence. See (Morris
et al., 2004) for in-depth explanation.
• SRR - Sentence Recognition Rate - sentence level ac-
curacy of hypothesis corrected by the proposed sys-
tem. SRR is deﬁned as ratio of the number of sen-
tences with WER = 0.0 (correctly recognized sen-
tences) to the number of all sentences in the corpus.
• CharMatch - F0.5 - introduced in (Jassem et al.,
2017). F0.5-measure deﬁned in as follows:
F0.5 = (1 + 0.52) ×
P × R
0.52P + R
Where: P is precision and R is recall:
P =
P
i Ti
P
i dL(hi, si), R =
P
i Ti
P
i dL(hi, ri)
Where: ri - i-th reference utterance, hi - i-th ASR
hypothesis, si - i-th system output, dL(a, b) - Leven-
shtein distance between sequences a and b, Ti - num-
ber of correct changes performed by the system, cal-
culated as:
Ti = dL(hi, ri) + dL(hi, si) −dL(si, ri)
2
5.
