Automated Identiﬁcation of Drug-Drug Interactions
in Pediatric Congestive Heart Failure Patients
Daniel Miller
Final Report
CS 221, Stanford University

I. INTRODUCTION
Congestive Heart Failure, or CHF, is a serious medical
condition that can result in ﬂuid buildup in the body as a result
of a weak heart. When the heart can’t pump enough blood to
efﬁciently deliver nutrients and oxygen to the body, kidney
function may be impaired, resulting in ﬂuid retention. CHF
patients require a broad drug regimen to maintain the delicate
system balance, particularly between their heart and kidneys.
These drugs include ACE inhibitors and Beta Blockers to
control blood pressure, anticoagulants to prevent blood clots,
and diuretics to reduce ﬂuid overload. Many of these drugs
may interact, and potential effects of these interactions must
be weighed against their beneﬁts.
For this project, we consider a set of 44 drugs identiﬁed as
speciﬁcally relevant for treating CHF by pediatric cardiologists
at Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital. This list was generated
as part of our current work at the LPCH Heart Center.
The goal of this project is to identify and evaluate poten-
tially harmful drug-drug interactions (DDIs) within pediatric
patients with Congestive Heart Failure. This identiﬁcation will
be done autonomously, so that it may continuously update by
evaluating newly published literature.
II. GOALS AND DATA
A. Automated Literature Analysis
In the ﬁrst stage, I will use natural language processing
to extract drug interactions from medical research paper ab-
stracts. The input to this stage will be raw abstract texts related
to a DDI, like the one shown in Figure 1.
As an initial evaluation metric (labels), I have used Drug-
Bank, an established resource for drug data, which includes
drug-drug interaction and much more. DrugBank was assem-
bled over several years by a team of archivists and annotators
that included two accredited pharmacists, a physician and three
bioinformaticians with dual training in computing science and
molecular biology/chemistry [2]. One goal of my project is
to design a automated system capable of replicating, and
extending the DDI component of this work.
All abstracts used in this project come from the PubMed
Central Open Access Subset [3]. These data are all openly
available in .xml format via FTP, and currently (as of Novem-
ber 2016) include a total of 663,597 papers. These abstracts
required signiﬁcant ﬁltering to narrow down to only those
Bumetanide and furosemide in heart failure. We assessed the
handling of and response to oral bumetanide (1.0 and 2.0 mg)
and to furosemide (40 and 80 mg) in 20 patients with stable,
compensated congestive heart failure (CHF), comparing the
two drugs and, in addition, examining differences from normal
subjects. Bumetanide and furosemide were similar in time
course of absorption, but patients with CHF had considerably
prolonged absorption compared to normal subjects causing
attainment of lower peak concentrations of drug. In both
CHF and normal subjects, more bumetanide than furosemide
was absorbed. The elimination half-life of furosemide was
approximately twice that of bumetanide, and both were about
two times longer than respective values in normal subjects.
Dose-response curves were shifted downward from normal
with both drugs. In patients with CHF, overall response did
not differ between bumetanide and furosemide. The two drugs
exhibit subtle differences, the clinical importance of which
appears to be negligible from this study. Importantly, however,
both drugs showed delayed absorption causing attainment of
peak urinary excretion rates of diuretic two- to threefold lower
than in normal subjects. This effect along with the abnormal
responsivity of the tubule may contribute to the resistance
to oral doses of diuretics observed clinically even though no
quantitative malabsorption of drug occurs.
Fig. 1: An example drug-drug interaction abstract [1].
Furosemide and Bumetanide are both diuretics, used to de-
hydrate the patient.
papers concerned with drug-drug interactions, speciﬁcally for
drugs relevant to the cardiac patient population. To perform
this ﬁltering, I ﬁst considered the set of 44 cardiac drugs. Using
the DrugBank database, I identiﬁed a superset of 1781 drugs
known to have interactions with at least one of the cardiac
drugs. Any abstract that contained mention of at least one
of these 1781 drugs is deﬁned as a “Cardiac Abstract” and
included in the analysis.
This ﬁltering process left 69,713 remaining abstracts,
roughly 10% of the initial total. I used the PubMed Parser
tookit to extract the abstracts from the xml formatted dataset
[4].
arXiv:1702.04615v1  [cs.CL]  11 Feb 2017

B. Patient Analysis
The second goal of my project is to identify potential drug
interactions for a sample Congestive Heart Failure patient
population, based on the output from the previous stage. For
this project, I will be using an anonymized extract of the full
Medical Administration Record (MAR) for
60 current and
former CHF patients at the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital
(LPCH). The speciﬁc inputs to this stage are:
1) The drug interactions generated by the previous stage
2) The Medical Administration Record (MAR) for the CHF
patients (drug name and admin time).
An
example
of
a
single
patient’s
Furosemide
and
Bumetanide administration records is shown in Figure 2. As
we can see from the plot, these drug administrations overlap,
creating time windows where the patient might experience
detrimental DDI effects.
The output of this stage is a set of time-ranges where we
predict potential DDIs. For example, from the record shown
in Figure 2, we see that Patient 1 received Furosemide and
Bumatenide in July 2015, with potential effect of decrease
kidney function, and generate the following coded output:
• ((Furosemide, Bumatenide), (”2015-07-15”,
”2015-07-19”), ”Reduced Kidney Function”)
The evaluation metric for this stage is not yet clearly
deﬁned. Once the system has generated speciﬁc output hy-
potheses like the one shown above, I will request speciﬁc
clinician feedback from the LPCH cardiologists. Ideally, we
would be able to tie each effect to a known measurable
symptom. Continuing the example, reduced kidney function is
often recognized by an increase in creatinine in the kidneys.
Creatinine labs are taken frequently for the CHF patients.
This section of the project is beyond the scope of this class,
and has been deferred pending improvements in the algorithm
performance for the automated literature analysis. Future work
will include implementation of DDI identiﬁcation for current
LPCH patients, and automated warning messages to physicians
when a clearly deﬁned risk is achieved. One signiﬁcant issue
to be tackled is properly balancing the false negative vs false
positive rate to suppress false alarms, and maintain sensitivity.
III. MODEL
For the time being, we consider only part A, the automated
literature analysis. The general use case of the proposed model
may be summarized as follows:
1) The user submits a query of the following form: “Do the
drugs A and B have any potentially harmful interactions,
and if so, how may they interact?”
2) A large set of medical publication abstracts are provided,
with each related to either drug A, B, or both.
3) Our model runs on these inputs, and returns the drug-
drug interactions, if any exist.
To generate a model fulﬁlling this form, we take the
following steps.
Fig. 2: An example Medication Administration Record
(MAR).
TABLE I: Data Counts
Cardiac Abstracts
69713
Cardiac Drugs
44
Cardiac Drugs in Abstracts
36
Related Drugs
1781
Drug Interactions
63450
Types of Drug Interactions
53
Drug Interactions between 2 cardiac drugs
218
Average Drugs per Abstract
1.3
Maximum Drugs per Abstract
80
Average Words per Abstract
149.5
Average Count per Words per Abstract
1.9
Total Distinct Words in all Abstracts
53338
A. Labeling
To begin, we generate all pairwise drug combinations.
We begin by considering the 44 pediatric cardiology drugs
Dcardiac. For each cardiac drug dc ∈Dcardiac, we extract all
pairwise drug interactions (dc, d) from the DrugBank database
Ddrugbank. The union of all considered drugs d forms the set
of all drugs Dall considered in this analysis.
For each cardiac drug dc ∈Dcardiac, we create a sample
for every other drug in do ∈Dall. We assign a indicator label
if two drugs interact as follows:
label ((dc, do)) =
 1
if (dc, do) ∈Ddrugbank
0
otherwise
This label is used for the binary classiﬁcation supervised
learning problem, in which we predict whether two drugs
interact, but not the nature of their interaction. We also
consider the type of interaction, which is also provided by
the DrugBank database. By replacing the drug names in each
interaction, we obtain 53 interaction types i ∈Idrugbank of
the following form:
Ex: ”The serum concentration of ( drug ) can be increased
when it is combined with ( drug ).”
These interaction types will be used to label the supervised
multiclass classiﬁcation problem in which we will predict the
actual type of interaction between two drugs, if any exists.

B. Test/Train/Validation Split
For this particular problem, a particularly careful deﬁnition
of the validation splits is worth examination. Because each
abstract may consider one or more drugs (see Table I), we
would like to use the information each abstract for more than
one interaction (sample). Therefore, our samples will not be
independent, so a validation set randomly sampled from the
interactions could be highly correlated with the training set.
We therefore take precautions to eliminate this dependence by
splitting on interactions via the following procedure:
Algorithm 1 Train/Test/Validation Split Algorithm
1: Split all abstracts into training (80%) and testing (20%)
sets.
2: Split all interactions into training (80%) and testing (20%)
sets.
3: Split training set into training (80%) and validation/dev
(20%) sets.
4: for split in (train, test, validation) do
5:
for each pairwise interaction (d1, d2) in split do
6:
for each abstract in split do
7:
if d1 or d2 in abstract then
8:
Assign abstract to the interaction (d1, d2)
In this way, DDI’s in the training set may share abstracts,
but not with any DDI’s in the test or validation set.
C. Feature Extraction
We next extract features for each DDI from the abstracts. So
far, we have considered two methods for performing feature
extraction.
1) Word Counts: For the moment, we are simply using a
sparse vector word counter for each abstract assigned to an
interactions, and summing over all abstract counters to get a
single feature vector for each interaction. Refer to Table I for
summary information on the counts of words in the abstracts.
The current model limitation is rooted in the scaling. Many
abstracts are hundreds of words long, and make mention of
dozens of drugs. Our ﬁnal sparse word counter considers
53338 words across 63450 interaction samples. To allow some
methods to run, it was necessary to drop all but the 100 most
common words to allow for a reasonable runtime.
2) GloVe: To address the scaling issue, I have also made
use of GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation [5].
This implementation is in the very early stages, and thus far
has not demonstrated notable accuracy. In the interest of time,
we used the Wikipedia 2014 + Gigaword 5 pre-trained word
vectorizations. This contained vectorizations for 31774 of the
words across all cardiac abstracts, but did not contain pre-
trained vectors for 21560 of the words, most of which were
medically-speciﬁc. In the future, I will re-build a medically-
speciﬁc GloVe vectorization from the entire PubMed OA
subset, including both abstract and paper body test.
To move from word to sentence and full abstract vectors, I
simply used a sum over the words in the abstracts, dropping
TABLE II: Preliminary Model Results
Method
Sens.
Spec.
PPV
NPV
Raw linear SVM (dev)
1
0
0.779
N/A
Undersampled SVM (dev)
0.994
0.017
0.968
0.093
Raw CNN (train)
1
0
0.782
1 (err)
Undersampled CNN (train)
0.733
0.536
0.850
0.359
all stop words, and weighted by term frequency. This is clearly
non-ideal, as it does not take into account word order or
semantics/context, but was done in the interest of time. Even
this simple method took nearly a day of computation time on a
personal machine. Fortunately, using pre-trained word vectors
to analyze each abstract is a fully parallelizable procedure,
which will be taken advantage of going forward. I am currently
researching possible algorithms to handle a highly variable
collection of abstracts, each of variable length. One option is
to pre-process using Fixed-size Ordinally-Forgetting Encoding
(FOFE) [6].
In the future, we will consider more sophisticated features,
including pairwise indicators, n-grams, and adjacent pairs.
D. Supervised Learning: Evaluation and Model Selection
Thus far, I have implemented a variety of distinct supervised
learning algorithms. Each is trained exclusively on the training
split, and all model tuning is performed by splitting the
training set into further validation sets and cross-validation
folds. Each model’s performace is evaluated and compared
on the validation set. As more methods are considered, and
further tuning is performed, this pattern will continue. The
ﬁnal model selection will be based on performance on the
validation/dev set. This ﬁnal model will be re-tuned on the
combined train/validation sets, and only then will the ﬁnal
performance metrics be evaluated on the test set.
The ﬁrst model considered was a linear SVM using the
word count features, due to its convenient scalability, and
allowance for cheap feature extensions via kernel methods.
I implemented this model using the e1071 package in R,
since it supports sparse predictor matrices. This allowed me
to consider all 53338 word counts. Initial results followed
the typical result for SVM classiﬁers on high-dimensional
imbalanced-label datasets. Somewhat unsurprisingly, the SVM
model classiﬁed all samples to the most common class (0 –
no interaction), as this yielded a relatively high accuracy.
To counteract the imbalancing, I tried undersampling the
training set to a balanced number of each label. This led
to minor improvements as seen in Table II. I expect further
improvements to come from tuning and kernel selection, but
I am not convinced that SVM is an appropriate model for this
problem.
The second model considered was a convolutional neural
network implemented in TensorFlow with a re-purposed fork
of the Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classiﬁca-
tion toolkit written and published by Yoon Kim [7]. As CNNs
do not scale as nicely as SVMs, it was necessary to reduce
the extremely large feature set. As a preliminary selection, I
just selected out the counts of the 100 most common words.

Fig. 3: CNN training accuracy per iteration.
Fig. 4: Lasso Classiﬁer with word counts validation/dev
sensitivity-speciﬁcity curve
This model also initially experienced the same issues that
SVM had with the imbalanced labels. However, using the same
undersampling trick yielded much better results, leading to the
promising, if not immediate useful metrics seen in Table II.
One advantage of this model is the ability to continuously tune
over time. Figure 3 shows how the training accuracy of the
CNN increases as we continue to iterate the model.
I next tried to directly address the feature set size and en-
forced sparsity by introducing L1 regularization via the Lasso
method. Thus far, this method has been the most successful
by a signiﬁcant margin. The full sensitivity-speciﬁcity curve
is shown in Figure 4. The regularization parameter was tuned
via cross-validation with the reward function being area-under-
the-curve (AUC).
The ﬁnal methods both used the GloVe vectorizations rather
than the word counts. While performing better than random,
neither method approached the results of the wordcount Lasso
implementation. The ﬁrst method, shown in Figure 5 is a
simple logistic regression applied to the GloVe vectors. The
second method, shown in Figure 6 is a Lasso classiﬁer applied
to the GloVe vectors, again tuned via cross-validation for AUC.
IV. FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS
The preliminary methods and results presented in this paper
demonstrate the viability of the goals of this project. In
particular, the Lasso method on word counts points towards
Fig.
5:
Logistic
Regression
with
GloVe
validation/dev
sensitivity-speciﬁcity curve
Fig. 6: Lasso Classiﬁer with GloVe validation/dev sensitivity-
speciﬁcity curve
using feature selection in conjunction with a broad, auto-
matically generated feature space. The primary limitation of
the project thus far has been scalability. Fortunately, these
issues are focused around highly parallelizable algorithms, and
may be addressed going forward by GPU implementation.
In the same vein, more efﬁcient implementations will allow
for more sophisticated NLP algorithms to perform feature
extraction from the set of abstracts associated with each drug-
drug interaction.
In summary, our results indicate that there is a useful
information about drug-drug interactions for congestive heart
failure patients that may be extracted autonomously from the
medical literature, with no external clinical knowledge.
