Hamburg University, Department of Informatics, NATS Group 1–11
The Dialog State Tracking Challenge with Bayesian Approach
Quan Nguyen

Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg
Abstract
Generative model has been one of the most common approaches for solving the Dialog State Track-
ing Problem with the capabilities to model the dialog hypotheses in an explicit manner. The most
important task in such Bayesian networks models is constructing the most reliable user models by
learning and reﬂecting the training data into the probability distribution of user actions conditional
on networks’ states. This paper provides an overall picture of the learning process in a Bayesian
framework with an emphasize on the state-of-the-art theoretical analyses of the Expectation Maxi-
mization learning algorithm.
Keywords: DSTC, Bayesian method, Markov, Expectation Maximization, Forward-Backward Al-
gorithm
c⃝Q. Nguyen.
arXiv:1702.06199v1  [cs.AI]  20 Feb 2017

NGUYEN
1. Introduction
The problems of understanding users’ intention has long been pursued by engineers and scientists
in speech processing Thomson et al. (2010). Why is that such a hard problem? One main reason
is that for a long time there are no effective dialog models that could match speech signals to some
proper hypotheses about what the speakers are intending to do.
Figure 1 illustrates one effective model suggested by Williams et al. (2016). Basically any dialog
model needs to be capable of handling the following three tasks:
• Understanding the meaning of users’ utterance given the current state of the dialog.
• Understanding the changes of dialog’s states given the meaning of users’ utterance.
• Taking appropriate actions based on the new states of the dialog.
It can be observed that the model in ﬁgure 1 has dedicated modules to fulﬁll all those require-
ments. Since the analysis results of one task is the input for the subsequent tasks, the accuracy of
the ﬁrst two tasks is crucial for a dialog system to derive suitable actions every time the system takes
initiative.
Figure 1: End-to-End model of a dialog system Williams et al. (2016)
Assume that we have already had a functioning system and we want to ﬁnd the bottleneck of
the system. In other words, we want to know what would be the source of errors. Consider how
the speech signal is transformed throughout the system: ﬁrstly the Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion (ASR) transcribes the sound into words, then the Speech Language Understanding unit (SLU)
constructs the perceived words into small semantic units. The Dialog Manager (DM) takes in these
semantic units and tries to ﬁll in a number of slots. If the list of words the ASR churns out are highly
2

THE DSTC WITH BAYESIAN APPROACH
incorrect, the subsequent modules (SLU and DM) are often mislead into erroneous understanding
and actions.
Unfortunately, high error rate of ASR module is still common Williams et al. (2016). Conse-
quently, in order to achieve a certain level of robustness, the SLU and especially DM urge to ﬁnd
measures to overcome the non-optimal output of ASR.
To address the above issues of ambiguity and misunderstanding, one main principle is imple-
mented in the dynamics of the above three modules: maintaining multiple hypotheses on a proba-
bilistic manners. Each hypothesis has an associate weight value that indicates the level of certainty
that the system has on that hypothesis. For example, in the Figure 1 above the ASR thinks that it is
most likely that the speaker said something about leaving downtown with a probability of 60 per-
cent. Similarly, multiple instances of ﬂight reservations (the most important semantic information)
are stored in the DM in deciding which Dialog Policy should follow in the next step.
2. The Dialog State Tracking Challenge
The Dialog State Tracking Challenge (DSTC) provides a common testing framework for dialog state
trackers. The main idea behind this contest-format testing framework is that for the same training
and testing data, various trackers built upon different models compete together to ﬁnd out the best
model (i.e. highest performance score) in different scenarios and testing schemes (i.e. mis-match
distribution between train and test data, changes of user’s goals, open versus closed dictionary,
etc) Williams et al. (2016).
Figure 2: Based on the output of ASR and SLU modules, the dialog state tracker establish and
maintain multiple hypotheses of the user’s intention. The probability distribution of these
hypotheses is subsequently used for deciding agent’s actions Williams et al. (2016)
Figure 2 demonstrates the typical output of a tracker’s output. A number of different (both
contradicting and complementary) states are maintained and scored in the tracker. These scores are
effectively constructed from not just a single speaking phase but multiple phases. As the dialog
progresses, it is an expected behavior that the DM gradually update the scores of the states and the
most probable states become more and more obvious. In this setting although the output of ASR is
3

NGUYEN
not very accurate, the system is capable of combining multiple outputs and selectively eliminating
the most unlikely states. This behavior is very similar to that of Particle Filter where the current
position of the robot become more and more apparent as the robot gets more information about the
environment.
As mentioned previously, the system mainly operations in probabilistic manner with some
stochastic models corresponds to how dynamics of a module leads to the states of the subsequent
modules. There are two popular models emerge in this setting: the Discriminative model and Gen-
erative model. This paper only presents the learning algorithm in the Generative model employ
by Williams and Young (2007).
3. The Bayesian Method
In generative models, the probability inference of the observation is formulated as a stochastic se-
quence generation mechanism from some latent variables. One simple yet effective model is Hidden
Markov Model where the observation and transition states are ruled by Markov property in which,
the probability of encountering the current state or observation depends only on the immediate pre-
vious state.
Figure 3: A Markov chain with X being the hidden states and Y being the observable states. The
Markov property indicates that the likelihood of all observed states at time t can be at-
tributed to the single hidden state of time t −1. Sridharan (2014)
Figure 3 illustrates the graphical model of a simple Hidden Markov Model (HMM). The se-
quence of hidden states and observations is called Markov chain. There are two main objectives
of such model: the ﬁrst one is to ﬁnd the most likely hidden states that results in a given sequence
of observations, the second one is to construct the best transition and observation probability from
a randomly initialized setting. The accuracy of the former objective is entirely dependent on the
accuracy of the latter objective. Therefore many system put a strong emphasize on evaluating and
estimating these probabilities in the HMM.
In the context of spoken dialog system, the speech signal is the ”observation” and the underly-
ing hypotheses and states of dialog are the ”latent variables”. Since the the sequence of events is
generated based on hidden variables, the system wants to explicitly formulate the probability that it
will ”hear” something given the current understanding of the dialog.
4

THE DSTC WITH BAYESIAN APPROACH
In the next section 4, we will discuss in detail the Expectation Maximization algorithm as the
main learning methods in a generative model for DSTC.
4. Expectation Maximization Algorithm
The Expectation Maximization algorithm (EM) is one the most commonly used optimization al-
gorithm Syed and Williams (2008). The main idea of EM is to ﬁnd some appropriate probability
distribution of the latent variables and based on that distribution, the parameters are repeatedly esti-
mated with a better values than the previous ones. The objective function of EM is the log-likelihood
function of the observed data.
4.1. Jensen Inequality
Generally, Jensen Inequality states that if a function is convex, then the function of the expectation
is always smaller than or equal to the expectation of that function Borman (2004).
f(E[x]) ≤E[f(x)]
(1)
The same property can be stated for a concave function with reversed inequality (greater than
or equal instead of smaller than or equal). This strict evaluation (smaller or greater) of two terms:
expected value of a function and that function’s value at the expected value of its domain can be
proved based on the convexity of the function Syed and Williams (2008)
Figure 4: An example of convex function f. Function f is guaranteed to be convex if the expected
value of its function is larger than its value on the expected value of its domain. Borman
(2004)
Figure 4 illustrates the relative comparison between the two quantities in a parabolic convex
function. It is observable (and mathematically provable) that the equality in Jensen inequality holds
only for the case when the variable is identical with its expected value
5

NGUYEN
X = E[x]
Why is this inequality useful? Consider the logarithm function
f(x) = ln(x)
Its second-order derivative is
f′′(x) = −1
x2 < 0
This indicates that the logarithm function is concave and so is the objective log-likelihood func-
tion. This fact enables us to apply Jensen inequality on the objective function and attain a tractable
lower bound of the objective function.
4.2. Expectation Maximization Algorithm
The reason behind ﬁnding a lower bound estimation of the objective function lies in the intractability
of the objective function itself. Since the distribution of latent variables is unknown in most of the
case, directly maximizing the objective function by traversing through all possible conﬁguration of
hidden states is downright unfeasible. A better method would be ﬁnding a strict lower bound func-
tion and maximizing the lower bound function instead Borman (2004). The most crucial property
that this method need to possess is the convergence of the ﬁnal state. In other words, it is absolutely
required that the after each optimization step, the new parameters is strictly better than the previous
one.
Figure 5: Optimizing an (intractable) objective function by optimizing its lower bound. The next
parameter at time step t + 1 has to be chosen selectively to ensure the convergence of the
algorithm Borman (2004)
Figure 5 demonstrates one optimization step in EM algorithm. Notice when the algorithm moves
from the current parameter θn to the new one θn+1, the actual likelihood function L increases fol-
lowing the increasing of the lower bound function l(θ|θn). After the lower bound function has
6

THE DSTC WITH BAYESIAN APPROACH
achieved the maximal values, EM algorithm will stop although the actual likelihood still increases.
This stop condition ensure that function L is monotonic and guaranteed a (local maximal) conver-
gence.
Algorithm 1 Find MLE by EM
Require: Domain-space is well-deﬁned
Require: Random initialization procedure of parameters vector is available
T = maximum iterations
θ = randomly initialized
for t=1,...,T do
θt = argmaxEy[logPr(X, Y |θ)|Y, θt−1]
end for
return θT and Pr(Y |θT )
Algorithm 1 is a step-by-step illustration of EM algorithm. Formally, the algorithm incremen-
tally looks for the most optimal conﬁguration of parameters. The use of Jensen Inequality allows
us to transform the initial intractable optimization problem to a new tractable problem at the cost of
losing the generality in ﬁnding the global maximum. Nevertheless it has been proved empirically
that the EM algorithm achieves very good performance in the DSTC Williams et al. (2016).
4.3. Forward-Backward Algorithm
In the process of ﬁnding the optimal parameters in EM algorithm, one frequent sub-procedure is
to calculate the probability of obtaining a subset of events or the whole events given some values
of the states. This computation is a non-trivial task since it requires some manipulation over the
graphical model depicted by the HMM above. This section provide an overview on how to perform
such computation not only on the HMM itself but on general acyclic graphs. The main principle
behind this computation is Dynamic Programming which is an tractable method to calculate any
values of states given all the causal transition states before Sridharan (2014).
Algorithm 2 Forward-Backward algorithm
Require: Probability distribution of initial unobserved states is well-deﬁned
Y = set of all N observed events
X = set of all N latent variables
Run Forward algorithm
Run Backward algorithm
for k = 1,...,N do
compute all Pr(Xk|Y )
end for
Algorithm 2 is a demonstration of how the Forward-Backward algorithm is implemented in
general. As its name suggested, the algorithm requires three runs over all states, with the last run
combines the results from the previous two. The aim of the ﬁnal run is to calculate the likelihood
probability of having a sequence of hidden states from the beginning to each hidden state. To obtain
that result, the algorithm needs two information: the joint probability of these two terms and the
posterior probability of the observed events given a preﬁx of sequence of hidden states.
7

NGUYEN
Figure 6: Markov chain with Forward and Backward ﬂow of probabilities. Sridharan (2014)
An illustration of the Forward-Backward algorithm can be found in Figure 6. Since the graph
has no cycle, any arbitrary node on the graph contains all the information of its ancestors (depends
on which direction the algorithm is running, the ancestors could be the previous or subsequent
hidden states and observations). The algorithm basically consider one node at one time and never
go in reverse direction. This key observation is crucial in making the algorithm tractable.
Algorithm 3 Forward: compute joint probability of both observed and unobserved states
Require: Transition probabilities are well-deﬁned
Require: Prior distribution is well-deﬁned
Require: Probability distribution of initial unobserved states is well-deﬁned
Y = set of all N observed events
X = set of all N unobserved events
for k = 1,...,N do
Recursively compute Pr(Xk, Y ) by Dynamic Programming algorithm
end for
Algorithm 4 Backward: compute likelihood of a range of observed states given a single prior
unobserved state
Require: Transition probabilities are well-deﬁned
Require: Prior distribution is well-deﬁned
Require: Probability distribution of initial unobserved states is well-deﬁned
Y = set of all N observed events
X = set of all N unobserved events
for k = 1,...,N do
Recursively compute Pr(Yk+1:N|Xk) by Dynamic Programming algorithm
end for
Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4 illustrates the simplicity in implementation of the two procedure:
Forward run and Backward run. Indeed, it is the simplicity and efﬁciency of the algorithm being one
of the reason that make it popular in every circumstances when the probabilistic graphical model is
a acyclic graph.
8

THE DSTC WITH BAYESIAN APPROACH
5. Empirical results
The empirical performance of EM algorithm in comparison with the two other transcribed dialog
methods can be found in Figure 7 and Figure 8. In general, it can be observed that EM works better
than Automatic transcribed logs but worse than Manual transcribed logs.
Figure 7: Performance of EM is improved with increasing size of training set Syed and Williams
(2008)
The learning curve depicted in Figure 7 indicates a monotonic increasing relationship between
performance of an algorithm and number of dialog in training set. The justiﬁcation is obvious:
with more data in training set, the closer the estimated model to the optimal setting. The exact
log-likelihood value of each method can be found in Figure 8.
Figure 8: The normalized log-likelihood of three different algorithms. EM shows an improvement
over automatic transcribed dialog but still behind manually transcribed dialog Syed and
Williams (2008).
The discrepancy between manual and automatic transcribed logs can be explained by the erro-
neous of ASR module. Since ASR is not optimal, a system without Dialog Manager will perform
worse than a system with optimization step like Bayesian method. For the same reason, the manual
9

NGUYEN
transcribed method apparently eliminate all possible errors from the ASR and thus achieve the best
result among the three. The aim of research in the ﬁeld is to get the performance of generative
model closer and closer to the manual transcribed method.
6. Conclusion and Discussion
The convergence of EM algorithm has been proved in Collins (1997). Another proof can be found
in Yihua Chen (2010). However, the gradual optimization in EM is only as good as gradient descent
which makes it prone to saddle points Collins (1997). It should be noted by gradient descent, we
are referring to the optimization performed on the original likelihood function by calculating the
derivative of log-likelihood function and add the derivatives to the parameters, similar to the back-
propagation learning algorithm in neural networks.
The inherent weakness of generative model is the necessary to model the prior distribution
of latent variables p(θ). While in some circumstances modeling this prior distribution could be
beneﬁcial in the sense that it tells us how the latent variables are spanned in their domain space, we
can hardly have enough data and computational resources to accurately estimate this distribution.
Indeed it has been proven in Williams et al. (2016) that in all three DSTC the discriminative models
always outperform the generative models by a large margin. However, it should be noted that the
superior of discriminative models come in the condition of enough volume of data. In the cases
where data is not enough to build a good model, discriminative models are easily overﬁtting while
unable to tells us any meaningful information about the nature of the system.
As shown in section 5, the performance of generative models are far from the manual transcribed
dialog and the absolute truth. While a better ASR will certainly increases the performance of the
whole system, building a better model to exploit the output of ASR and SLU is still an active
research ﬁeld. We have seen above that the performance of the model increases by training on more
and more data, so incorporating the system into a big data architecture with proper scaling could be
one promising measure in the way to achieve a human-like performance of dialog models. Another
method which includes rigorous mathematical analysis is to ﬁnd tighter lower bound estimations
for the likelihood. While the Jensen inequality has proven to be able to achieve reasonable results,
having a stricter evaluation on the lower bound will certainly beneﬁts the optimization process by
increasing the optimal values of converged states and allowing longer training time for better use of
the increasing amount of data and computational powers.
10

THE DSTC WITH BAYESIAN APPROACH
