Improving Multi-hop Knowledge Base Question Answering by
Learning Intermediate Supervision Signals
Gaole He1,4†, Yunshi Lan2, Jing Jiang2, Wayne Xin Zhao3,4∗and Ji-Rong Wen1,3,4
1School of Information, Renmin University of China
2School of Information System, Singapore Management University
3Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods

ABSTRACT
Multi-hop Knowledge Base Question Answering (KBQA) aims to
find the answer entities that are multiple hops away in the Knowl-
edge Base (KB) from the entities in the question. A major challenge
is the lack of supervision signals at intermediate steps. Therefore,
multi-hop KBQA algorithms can only receive the feedback from
the final answer, which makes the learning unstable or ineffective.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel teacher-student
approach for the multi-hop KBQA task. In our approach, the stu-
dent network aims to find the correct answer to the query, while
the teacher network tries to learn intermediate supervision signals
for improving the reasoning capacity of the student network. The
major novelty lies in the design of the teacher network, where
we utilize both forward and backward reasoning to enhance the
learning of intermediate entity distributions. By considering bidi-
rectional reasoning, the teacher network can produce more reliable
intermediate supervision signals, which can alleviate the issue of
spurious reasoning. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach on
the KBQA task. The code to reproduce our analysis is available at
https://github.com/RichardHGL/WSDM2021_NSM.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Reasoning about belief and
knowledge; Search with partial observations.
KEYWORDS
Knowledge Base Question Answering; Teacher-student Network;
Intermediate Supervision Signals
ACM Reference Format:
Gaole He, Yunshi Lan, Jing Jiang, Wayne Xin Zhao and Ji-Rong Wen. 2021.
Improving Multi-hop Knowledge Base Question Answering by Learning
∗Corresponding author.
† This work is done when the first author visited SMU.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

WSDM ’21, March 8–12, 2021, Virtual Event, Israel
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8297-7/21/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3437963.3441753
Intermediate Supervision Signals. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’21), March
8–12, 2021, Virtual Event, Israel. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3437963.3441753
The Nine Lives
of Fritz the Cat
Skip
Hinnant
starred actor
Robert
Taylor
directed by
star in
hasgenre
Fritz the
Cat
Devil’s 
Doorway
Coffin
Rock
Comedy
Thriller
has genre
star in
Personal 
Property
Lucky 
Night
Wester
star in
star in
has genre
has genre
Expected forwardpath
Spurious forward path
has genre
Backward path
star in
Figure 1: A spurious case from MetaQA-3hop dataset. We use
green, red, yellow and grey circles to denote the topic enti-
ties, correct answer, intermediate entities and irrelevant en-
tities respectively.
1
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge Base Question Answering (KBQA) is a challenging
task that aims at finding answers to questions expressed in natu-
ral language from a given knowledge base (KB). Traditional solu-
tions [2, 5, 7, 36] usually develop a specialized pipeline consisting
of multiple machine-learned or hand-crafted modules (e.g., named
entity recognition, entity linking). Recently, end-to-end deep neural
networks [21, 31] become the popular paradigm for this task by au-
tomatically learning data representations and network parameters.
For the KBQA task, there have been growing interests in solv-
ing complex questions that require a multi-hop reasoning proce-
dure [20], called multi-hop KBQA. Besides the final answer, it is also
important that a multi-hop KBQA algorithm can identify a reason-
able relation path leading to the answer entities [6, 27]. In some
cases, even if the answer was correctly found, the relation path
might be spurious. We present an example of spurious multi-hop
reasoning in Fig. 1. The question is “what types are the films starred
by actors in the nine lives of fritz the cat?”. Besides the correct path
(with red arrows), two spurious paths (with blue arrows) which
include entities who are directors at the first step can also reach the
correct answer. It is mainly due to the lack of supervision signals
at the intermediate reasoning steps (which we call intermediate
supervision signals). For the multi-hop KBQA task, training data
is typically in the form of ⟨𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟⟩instead of the ideal
arXiv:2101.03737v2  [cs.CL]  7 Apr 2021

form of ⟨𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ⟩. Therefore, multi-hop reasoning
algorithms can only receive the feedback at the final answer using
such datasets.
To address this issue, several studies formulate multi-hop KBQA
as a reinforcement learning (RL) task [3, 22, 27]. They set up a
policy-based agent to sequentially extend its inference path until it
reaches a target entity. Its states are usually defined as tuple of query
and current entity, and action as traverse on KB through outgoing
edges of current entity. RL-based approaches heavily rely on the
terminal reward to bias the search. To prevent spurious paths in the
search, reward shaping [22, 27] and action dropout [22] have been
proposed to improve the model learning. However, these solutions
either require expert experience or still lack effective supervision
signals at intermediate steps.
Different from previous studies, our idea is to set up two models
with different purposes for multi-hop KBQA. The main model aims
to find the correct answer to the query, while the auxiliary model
tries to learn intermediate supervision signals for improving the rea-
soning capacity of the main model. Specifically, the auxiliary model
infers which entities at the intermediate steps are more relevant
to the question, and these entities are considered as intermediate
supervision signals. Although the idea is appealing, it is challenging
to learn an effective auxiliary model, since we do not have such
labeled data for training.
Our solution is inspired by the bidirectional search algorithms
(e.g., bidirectional BFS [17]) on graphs, in which an ideal path con-
necting the source and the destination can be more effectively
identified with bidirectional exploration. Indeed, for KBQA we also
have two different views to consider the task setting: the forward
reasoning that finds the path starting from the topic entities (i.e.,
entities in the queries) to the answer entities and the backward
reasoning that returns from answer entities to the topic entities.
Most existing methods only consider forward reasoning. However,
it is possible to jointly model the two reasoning processes, since
topic entities and answer entities are all known in the training data.
Such a bidirectional reasoning mechanism is able to incorporate ad-
ditional self-supervision signals at intermediate steps. As shown in
Fig. 1, the entity distribution obtained by forward reasoning at the
second step should be similar to that from backward reasoning at
the first step. Irrelevant entities “Devil’s Doorway” and “Coffin Rock”
are likely to be reached at the second reasoning step of forward
reasoning but unreachable at the first step of backward reasoning.
To maintain the correspondence between the two processes, we
should avoid including the director “Robert Taylor” at the first step
of forward reasoning. Such a potential correspondence is useful
to improve the learning of each individual reasoning process at
intermediate steps. That is the key point how we learn reliable
intermediate supervision signals.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel teacher-student
approach for the multi-hop KBQA task. Specifically, the student
network (i.e., the main model), which aims to find the answer, is
implemented by adapting the Neural State Machine (NSM) [14]
from visual question answering. In our approach, the student net-
work can improve itself according to intermediate entity distribu-
tions learned from the teacher network. The major novelty lies
in the design of the teacher network (i.e., the auxiliary model),
which provides intermediate supervision signals. We utilize the
correspondence between the state information from the forward
and backward reasoning processes to enhance the learning of in-
termediate entity distributions. We further design two reasoning
architectures that support the integration between forward and
backward reasoning. By considering bidirectional reasoning, the
teacher network can alleviate the issue of spurious reasoning, and
produce more reliable intermediate supervision signals.
To evaluate our approach, we conduct extensive experiments
on three benchmark datasets. Extensive experiments have demon-
strated the effectiveness of our approach on the multi-hop KBQA
task, especially for cases lacking training data. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first time that intermediate supervision signals
have been explicitly learned with a teacher-student framework.
2
RELATED WORK
Our work is closely related to the studies on KBQA, multi-hop
reasoning and teacher-student framework.
Knowledge Base Question Answering. For the KBQA task, var-
ious methods have been developed over the last decade. They
can be categorized into two groups: semantic parsing based meth-
ods and retrieval based methods. Semantic parsing based meth-
ods [2, 19, 21, 36, 37] learn a semantic parser that converts natural
language questions into intermediate logic forms, which can be
executed against a KB. Retrieval-based methods [5, 24, 30, 31, 34]
directly retrieve answers from the KB in light of the information
conveyed in the questions.
Recently, researchers pay more attention to multi-hop based
KBQA. Some work [24, 31, 38] employed classical methods (e.g.,
Variational Reasoning Network, Key-Value Memory Network and
Graph Convolution Network) to conduct multi-hop reasoning within
the KB. Moreover, Sun et al. [30] and Saxena et al. [29] leveraged
extra corpus and enriched knowledge graph embeddings to boost
the performance of multi-hop KBQA. However, these methods take
the performance of final prediction as the only objective, which are
vulnerable to the spurious examples.
Multi-hop Reasoning. In recent years, multi-hop reasoning be-
comes a hot research topic for both computer vision and natural
language processing domains. Min et al. [25] proposed to decom-
pose complex queries into several 1-hop queries and solved them by
turn. Hudson et al. [13] designed a novel recurrent Memory, Atten-
tion, and Composition (MAC) cell, which splits complex reasoning
into a series of attention-based reasoning steps. Das et al. [3, 22]
conducted multi-hop reasoning on a graph under the reinforce-
ment learning setting and treated every reasoning step as an edge
transition on the graph. Besides, there are quite a few studies that
adopt Graph Neural Network (GNN) [16, 33] to conduct explicit
reasoning on graph structure [12, 31].
Teacher-student Framework. Knowledge distillation (KD) is in-
troduced and generalized by early work [10]. They proposed a
teacher-student framework, where a complicated high-performance
model and a light-weight model are treated as teacher and student
respectively. The predictions of the teacher model are treated as
“soft labels” and the student model is trained to fit the soft labels.

While knowledge distillation was initially proposed for model com-
pression, recent work [9, 39] found that applying the soft labels as
the training target can help the student achieve better performance.
Several studies also apply the teacher-student framework in
question answering task. Yang et al. [35] designed a multi-teacher
knowledge distillation paradigm in a Web Question Answering
system. Do et al. [4] and Hu et al. [11] applied the teacher-student
framework to visual question answering task and reading compre-
hension task, respectively. In this work, we try to address spurious
reasoning caused by weak supervision in the multi-hop KBQA task
with an elaborate teacher-student framework.
3
PRELIMINARY
In this section, we introduce the background and define the task.
Knowledge Base (KB). A knowledge base typically organizes fac-
tual information as a set of triples, denoted by G = {⟨𝑒,𝑟,𝑒′⟩|𝑒,𝑒′ ∈
E,𝑟∈R}, where E and R denote the entity set and relation set,
respectively. A triple ⟨𝑒,𝑟,𝑒′⟩denotes that relation 𝑟exists between
head entity 𝑒and tail entity 𝑒′. Furthermore, we introduce entity
neighborhood to denote the set of triples involving an entity 𝑒, de-
noted by N𝑒= {⟨𝑒,𝑟,𝑒′⟩∈G} ∪{⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩∈G}, containing both
incoming and outgoing triples for 𝑒. For simplicity, we replace
a triple ⟨𝑒,𝑟,𝑒′⟩with its reverse triple ⟨𝑒′,𝑟−1,𝑒⟩, so that we can
have N𝑒= {⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩∈G}. For convenience, we further use italic
bold fonts to denote the embeddings of entities or relations. Let
𝑬∈R𝑑×|E | and 𝑹∈R𝑑×|R | denote the embedding matrices for
entities and relations in the KB, respectively, and each column vec-
tor 𝒆∈R𝑑or 𝒓∈R𝑑is a 𝑑-dimensional embedding for entity 𝑒or
relation 𝑟.
Knowledge Base Question Answering (KBQA). We focus on
factoid question answering over a knowledge base. We assume
that a KB G is given as the available resource and the answers will
be the entities in G. Formally, given a natural language question
𝑞= {𝑤1,𝑤2, ...,𝑤𝑙} and a KB G, the task of KBQA is to figure
out the answer entitie(s), denoted by the set A𝑞, to query 𝑞from
the candidate entity set E. The entities mentioned in a question
are called topic entities. Specially, we consider solving complex
questions where the answer entities are multiple hops away from
the topic entities in the KB, called multi-hop KBQA.
4
THE PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section, we present the proposed approach for the multi-hop
KBQA task under the teacher-student framework.
4.1
Overview
A major difficulty for multi-hop KBQA is that it usually lacks su-
pervision signals at intermediate reasoning steps, since only the
answer entities are given as ground-truth information. To tackle
this issue, we adopt the recently proposed teacher-student learning
framework [10, 28]. The main idea is to train a student network that
focuses on the multi-hop KBQA task itself, while another teacher
network is trained to provide (pseudo) supervision signals (i.e., in-
ferred entity distributions in our task) at intermediate reasoning
steps for improving the student network.
In our approach, the student network is implemented based on
Neural State Machine (NSM) [14], which was originally proposed
for visual question answering on scene graph extracted from image
data. We adapt it to the multi-hop KBQA task by considering KB
as a graph, and maintain a gradually learned entity distribution
over entities during the multi-hop reasoning process. To develop
the teacher network, we modify the architecture of NSM by incor-
porating a novel bidirectional reasoning mechanism, so that it can
learn more reliable entity distributions at intermediate reasoning
steps, which will be subsequently used by the student network as
the supervision signals.
In what follows, we first describe the adapted architecture of
NSM for multi-hop KBQA, and then present the teacher network
and model learning.
4.2
Neural State Machine for Multi-hop KBQA
We present an overall sketch of NSM in Fig. 2. It mainly consists
of an instruction component and a reasoning component. The in-
struction component sends instruction vectors to the reasoning
component, while the reasoning component infers the entity distri-
bution and learns the entity representations.
𝒩!
𝒑("#$)
𝒆(#)
Reasoning
Component
𝒊("#$)
𝒒
Attention
𝒒(#)
Instruction Component
starred by
𝑬("#$)
𝒊(")
Attention
𝒒("&$)
Instruction Component
𝒒
{𝒉𝒋}𝒋(𝟏
𝒍
Distribution 
update
𝑬(")
𝒑(")
directed
Reasoning
Component
𝑬("&$)
𝒑("&$)
𝑝+! 
("#$)
𝑝+" 
("#$)
𝒎(+!,.!,+)
(")
𝒎(+",.",+)
(")
Embedding 
update
𝒆+(")
𝒊(")
𝒊("&$)
Distribution 
update
Embedding 
update
…
{𝒉𝒋}𝒋(𝟏
𝒍
Figure 2: Illustration of the two reasoning steps for neural
state machine on question “which person directed the movies
starred by john krasinski?”. In different reasoning steps, the
instruction vector focuses on different parts of the question.
4.2.1
Instruction Component. We first describe how to transform a
given natural language question into a series of instruction vectors
that control the reasoning process. The input of the instruction
component consists of a query embedding and an instruction vector
from the previous reasoning step. The initial instruction vector is
set as zero vector. We utilize GloVe [26] to obtain the embeddings
of the query words. Then we adopt a standard LSTM encoder to
obtain a set of hidden states {𝒉𝑗}𝑙
𝑗=1, where 𝒉𝑗∈R𝑑and 𝑙is the
length of the query. After that, the last hidden state is considered
to be the question representation, i.e., 𝒒= 𝒉𝑙. Let 𝒊(𝑘) ∈R𝑑denote
the instruction vector at the 𝑘-th reasoning step. We adopt the

following method to learn the instruction vector 𝒊(𝑘):
𝒊(𝑘) =
𝑙∑︁
𝑗=1
𝛼(𝑘)
𝑗
𝒉𝑗,
𝛼(𝑘)
𝑗
= softmax𝑗
 𝑾𝛼(𝒒(𝑘) ⊙𝒉𝑗) + 𝒃𝛼
,
𝒒(𝑘) = 𝑾(𝑘) [𝒊(𝑘−1); 𝒒] + 𝒃(𝑘),
(1)
where 𝑾(𝑘) ∈R𝑑×2𝑑,𝑾𝛼∈R𝑑×𝑑and 𝒃(𝑘), 𝒃𝛼∈R𝑑are parame-
ters to learn. The core idea is to attend to specific parts of a query
when learning the instruction vectors at different time steps. In such
a process, we also dynamically update the query representation,
so that it can incorporate the information of previous instruction
vectors. By repeating the process above, we can obtain a list of
instruction vectors {𝒊(𝑘)}𝑛
𝑘=1 after 𝑛reasoning steps.
4.2.2
Reasoning Component. Once we obtain the instruction vec-
tor 𝒊(𝑘), we can use it as a guiding signal for the reasoning compo-
nent. The input of the reasoning component consists of the instruc-
tion vector of the current step, and the entity distribution and entity
embeddings obtained from the previous reasoning step. The output
of the reasoning component includes the entity distribution 𝒑(𝑘)
and the entity embeddings {𝒆(𝑘)}. First, we set the initial entity
embeddings by considering the relations involving 𝑒:
𝒆(0) = 𝜎

∑︁
⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩∈N𝑒
𝒓· 𝑾𝑇

,
(2)
where 𝑾𝑇∈R𝑑×𝑑are the parameters to learn. Unlike previous
studies [24, 31], we explicitly utilize the information of related
relation types for encoding entities. In the multi-hop KBQA task,
a reasoning path consisting of multiple relation types can reflect
important semantics that lead to the answer entities. Besides, such
a method is also useful to reduce the influence of noisy entities, and
easy to apply to unseen entities of known context relations. Note
that we do not use the original embedding of 𝑒when initializing
𝒆(0) because for intermediate entities along the reasoning path the
identifiers of these entities are not important; it is the relations that
these intermediate entities are involved in that matter the most.
Given a triple ⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩, a match vector 𝒎(𝑘)
⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩is learned by
matching the current instruction 𝒊(𝑘) with relation vector 𝑟:
𝒎(𝑘)
⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩= 𝜎 𝒊(𝑘) ⊙𝑾𝑅𝒓,
(3)
where 𝑾𝑅∈R𝑑×𝑑are the parameters to learn. Furthermore, we
aggregate the matching messages from neighboring triples and
assign weights to them according to how much attention they
receive at the last reasoning step:
˜𝒆(𝑘) =
∑︁
⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩∈N𝑒
𝒑(𝑘−1)
𝑒′
· 𝒎(𝑘)
⟨𝑒′,𝑟,𝑒⟩,
(4)
where 𝒑(𝑘−1)
𝑒′
is the assigned probability of entity 𝑒′ at the last
reasoning step, which we will explain below. Such a representation
is able to capture the relation semantics associated with an entity
in the KB. Then, we update entity embeddings as follows:
𝒆(𝑘) = FFN([𝒆(𝑘−1); ˜𝒆(𝑘)]),
(5)
where FFN(·) is a feed-forward layer taking as input of both previ-
ous embedding 𝒆(𝑘−1) and relation-aggregated embedding ˜𝒆(𝑘).
Through such a process, both the relation path (from topic enti-
ties to answer entities) and its matching degree with the question
can be encoded into node embeddings. The probability distribution
over intermediate entities derived at step 𝑘can be calculated as:
𝒑(𝑘) = softmax 𝑬(𝑘)𝑇𝒘,
(6)
where 𝑬(𝑘) is a matrix where each column vector is the embedding
of an entity at the 𝑘-th step, and 𝒘∈R𝑑are the parameters that
derive the entity distribution 𝒑(𝑘), and 𝑬(𝑘) is the updated entity
embedding matrix by Eq. 5.
4.2.3
Discussion. For our task, the reason that we adopt the NSM
model as the student network are twofold. First, our core idea is to
utilize intermediate entity distributions derived from the teacher
network as the supervision signals for the student network. In
contrast, most previous multi-hop KBQA methods do not explic-
itly maintain and learn such an entity distribution at intermediate
steps. Second, NSM can be considered as a special graph neural
network, which has excellent reasoning capacity over the given
knowledge graph. As shown in Section 4.2.2, the learning of entity
distributions and entity embeddings can indeed correspond to the
general “propagate-then-aggregate” update mechanism of graph
neural networks. We would like to utilize such a powerful neural
architecture to solve the current task.
The NSM [14] was proposed to conduct visual reasoning in an
abstract latent space. We make two major adaptations for multi-
hop KBQA. First, in Eq. 2, we initialize the node embeddings by
aggregating the embeddings of those relations involving the entity.
In our task, the given KB is usually very large. An entity is likely
to be linked to a large number of other entities. Our initialization
method is able to reduce the influence of noisy entities, focusing
on the important relational semantics. Besides, it is also easy to
generalize to new or unseen entities with known relations, which
is especially important to incremental training. Second, in Eq. 5,
we update entity embeddings by integrating previous embedding
𝒆(𝑘−1) and relation-aggregated embedding ˜𝒆(𝑘). For comparison,
original NSM [14] separately modeled the two parts, whereas we
combine the two factors in a unified update procedure, which is
useful to derive more effective node embeddings.
4.3
The Teacher Network
Different from the student network, the teacher network aims to
learn or infer reliable entity distributions at intermediate reasoning
steps. Note that there are no such labeled entity distributions for
training the teacher network. Instead, inspired by the bidirectional
search algorithm (e.g., bidirectional BFS [17]), we incorporate the
bidirectional reasoning mechanism for enhancing the learning of
intermediate entity distributions in the teacher network.
4.3.1
Bidirectional Reasoning for Multi-hop KBQA. Given a knowl-
edge base, the reasoning process for multi-hop KBQA can be con-
sidered to be an exploration and search problem on the graph. Most
existing multi-hop KBQA methods start from the topic entities and
then look for the possible answer entities, called forward reasoning.
On the other hand, the opposite search from answer entities to

𝑬!
(#),𝒑!
(#)
𝑬!
(%),𝒑!
(%)
𝑬!
(&),𝒑!
(&)
𝑬!
('),𝒑!
(')
𝑬(
(%),𝒑(
(%)
𝑬(
(&),𝒑(
(&)
𝑬(
('),𝒑(
(')
𝒊(
(%)
𝒊(
(&)
𝒊(
(')
𝒊(
(&)
𝒊(
(%)
𝒊!
(')
𝒊!
(&)
𝒊!
(%)
𝒊!
(%)
𝒊!
(&)
𝑬(
(#),𝒑(
(#)
(a) Illustration of 3-hop parallel reasoning.
𝒊(")
𝑬$
(%),𝒑$
(%)
𝑬$
("),𝒑$
(")
𝒊(")
𝒊(&)
𝒊(&)
𝑬$
(&),𝒑$
(&)
𝑬$
('),𝒑$
(')
𝑬(
("),𝒑(
(")
𝑬(
(&),𝒑(
(&)
𝑬(
('),𝒑(
(')
𝒊(')
(b) Illustration of 3-hop hybrid reasoning.
Figure 3: Illustration of the designed teacher architectures. We use blue, yellow and orange squares to denote the instruc-
tion component, forward reasoning component and backward reasoning component, respectively. The dotted arrows link the
corresponding intermediate entity distributions of the two reasoning processes. We use 𝑓and 𝑏as subscripts to distinguish
forward reasoning and backward reasoning, respectively.
topic entities (which we refer to as backward reasoning) has been
neglected by previous studies. Our core idea is to consider the ex-
ploration in both directions and let the two reasoning processes
synchronize with each other at intermediate steps. In this way, the
derived intermediate entity distributions can be more reliable than
those learned from a single direction. More specifically, given a
𝑛-hop reasoning path, let 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑓
and 𝒑(𝑛−𝑘)
𝑏
denote the entity distri-
butions from the forward reasoning at the 𝑘-th step and from the
backward reasoning at the (𝑛−𝑘)-th step, respectively. The key
point is that the two distributions should be similar or consistent
if the two reasoning processes have been stable and accurate, i.e.,
𝒑(𝑘)
𝑓
≈𝒑(𝑛−𝑘)
𝑏
. We will utilize such a correspondence as constraints
in the following models.
4.3.2
Reasoning Architectures. Based on the idea above, we design
two kinds of neural architectures for the teacher network, namely
parallel reasoning and hybrid reasoning.
Parallel Reasoning. The first way is to set up two separate NSMs
for both forward and backward reasoning, respectively. These two
NSM networks are relatively isolated, and do not share any param-
eters. We only consider incorporating correspondence constraints
on the intermediate entity distributions between them.
Hybrid Reasoning. In the second way, we share the same instruc-
tion component and arrange the two reasoning processes in a cycled
pipeline. Besides the correspondence constraints, the two processes
receive the same instruction vectors. Furthermore, the derived in-
formation at the final step of the forward reasoning is fed into
the backward reasoning as initial values. Formally, the following
equations hold in this case:
𝒑(0)
𝑏
= 𝒑(𝑛)
𝑓
, 𝑬(0)
𝑏
= 𝑬(𝑛)
𝑓
,
𝒊(𝑘)
𝑏
= 𝒊(𝑛+1−𝑘)
𝑓
,𝑘= 1, ...,𝑛.
(7)
We present the illustrative examples of the parallel reasoning
and hybrid reasoning in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b). Comparing the two
reasoning architectures, it can be seen that parallel reasoning has a
more loose integration, while hybrid reasoning requires a deeper
fusion between the information from both reasoning processes.
Unlike bidirectional BFS, in our task, backward reasoning might not
be able to exactly mimic the inverse process of forward reasoning,
since the two processes correspond to different semantics in multi-
hop KBQA. Considering this issue, we share the instruction vectors
and recycle the final state of the forward reasoning for initializing
backward reasoning. In this way, backward reasoning receives more
information about forward reasoning, so that it can better trace
back the reasoning path of forward reasoning.
4.4
Learning with the Teacher-Student
Framework
In this part, we present the details of model learning with our
teacher-student framework.
4.4.1
Optimizing the Teacher Network. The two reasoning archi-
tectures of the teacher network can be optimized in the same way.
We mainly consider two parts of loss, namely reasoning loss and
correspondence loss.
The reasoning loss reflects the capacity of predicting the accurate
entities, which can be decomposed into two directions:
L𝑓= 𝐷𝐾𝐿
 𝒑(𝑛)
𝑓
, 𝒑∗
𝑓
, L𝑏= 𝐷𝐾𝐿
 𝒑(𝑛)
𝑏
, 𝒑∗
𝑏
,
(8)
where 𝒑(𝑛)
𝑓
(𝒑(𝑛)
𝑏
) denotes the final entity distribution for for-
ward (backward) reasoning process, 𝒑∗
𝑓(𝒑∗
𝑏) denotes the ground-
truth entity distribution, and 𝐷𝐾𝐿(·, ·) is the Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence [18], which measures the difference between the two distribu-
tions in an asymmetric way. To obtain 𝒑∗
𝑓and 𝒑∗
𝑏, we transform the
occurrences of ground-truth entities into a frequency-normalized
distribution. Specifically, if 𝑘entities in the graph are ground-truth
entities, they are assigned a probability of 1
𝑘in the final distribution.
The correspondence loss reflects the consistency degree between
intermediate entity distributions from the two reasoning processes.
It can be computed by summing the loss at each intermediate step:
L𝑐=
𝑛−1
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝐷𝐽𝑆
 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑓
, 𝒑(𝑛−𝑘)
𝑏
,
(9)
where 𝐷𝐽𝑆(·, ·) is the Jensen-Shannon divergence [8], which mea-
sures the difference between two distributions in a symmetric way.

To combine the above loss terms, we define the entire loss func-
tion of the teacher network L𝑡as:
L𝑡= L𝑓+ 𝜆𝑏L𝑏+ 𝜆𝑐L𝑐,
(10)
where 𝜆𝑏∈(0, 1) and 𝜆𝑐∈(0, 1) are hyper-parameters to control
the weights of the factors.
4.4.2
Optimizing the Student Network. After the teacher model is
trained to convergence, we can obtain intermediate entity distribu-
tions in the two reasoning processes of the teacher network. We
take the average of the two distributions as the supervision signal:
𝒑(𝑘)
𝑡
= 1
2
 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑓
+ 𝒑(𝑛−𝑘)
𝑏
, 𝑘= 1, ...,𝑛−1
(11)
As described before, we adopt the NSM model as the student
network to conduct forward reasoning. Besides the reasoning loss,
we also incorporate the loss between the predictions of the student
network and the supervision signal of the teacher network:
L1 = 𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝒑(𝑛)
𝑠
, 𝒑∗
𝑓),
L2 =
𝑛−1
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝒑(𝑘)
𝑠
, 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑡
),
L𝑠= L1 + 𝜆L2.
(12)
where 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑡
and 𝒑(𝑘)
𝑠
denote the intermediate entity distributions
at the 𝑘-th step from the teacher network and student network,
respectively, and 𝜆is a hyperparameter to tune.
In practice, labeled data for intermediate reasoning steps is sel-
dom available. Most existing methods only rely on the final answer
to learn the entire model, which may not be well trained or form
spurious reasoning paths. Our approach adopts the teacher network
for improving the student network. The main novelty is to utilize
both forward and backward reasoning in producing more reliable
intermediate entity distributions. Note that we do not incorporate
any additional labeled data for training intermediate reasoning
steps in the teacher network. Instead, we try to learn such inter-
mediate entity distributions by enforcing the correspondence in
the bidirectional reasoning process. To our knowledge, backward
reasoning has been seldom considered in multi-hop KBQA task,
especially its correspondence with forward reasoning. Such an idea
is indeed related to recent progress in self-supervised learning [15],
in which we leverage internal supervision signal to learn the model.
5
EXPERIMENT
In this section, we perform the evaluation experiments for our
approach on the KBQA task.
5.1
Datasets
We adopt three benchmark datasets for the multi-hop KBQA task:
MetaQA [38] contains more than 400k single and multi-hop
(up to 3-hop) questions in the domain of movie, containing three
datasets, namely MetaQA-1hop, MetaQA-2hop and MetaQA-3hop.
WebQuestionsSP (webqsp) [36] contains 4737 natural language
questions that are answerable using Freebase as the knowledge base.
The questions require up to 2-hop reasoning from knowledge base.
We use the same train/dev/test splits as GraftNet [31].
Complex WebQuestions 1.1 (CWQ) [32] is generated from
WebQuestionsSP by extending the question entities or adding con-
straints to answers. There are four types of question: composition
(45%), conjunction (45%), comparative (5%), and superlative (5%).
The questions require up to 4-hops of reasoning on the KB. Follow-
Table 1: Statistics of all datasets. “#entity” denotes average
number of entities in subgraph, and “coverage” denotes the
ratio of at least one answer in subgraph.
Datasets
Train
Dev
Test
#entity
coverage
MetaQA-1hop
96,106
9,992
9,947
487.6
100%
MetaQA-2hop
118,980
14,872
14,872
469.8
100%
MetaQA-3hop
114,196
14,274
14,274
497.9
99.0%
webqsp
2,848
250
1,639
1,429.8
94.9%
CWQ
27,639
3,519
3,531
1,305.8
79.3%
ing [30, 31], we use the topic entities labeled in original datasets
and adopt PageRank-Nibble algorithm (PRN) [1] to find KB entities
close to them. With these entities, we can obtain a relatively small
subgraph that is likely to contain the answer entity. For CWQ and
webqsp datasets, we first obtain the neighborhood graph within
two hops of topic entities and then run PRN algorithm on it. We
further expand one hop for CVT entities in Freebase to obtain the
neighborhood subgraph. As shown in Table 1, 2-hop graphs are
sufficient to cover most of the answer entities. While on MetaQA
datasets, we run PRN algorithm on the entire KB. Specifically, we
use the PRN algorithm [1] with 𝜖= 1𝑒−6 and then select the 𝑚
top-scoring entities. We set 𝑚= 500 for the smaller MetaQA KB
and 𝑚= 2000 for larger Freebase. For the reserved triples, both
their head and tail entities are obtained from the top 𝑚entities
identified by PRN algorithm. We summarize the statistics of the
three datasets in Table 1.
5.2
Experimental Setting
5.2.1
Evaluation Protocol. We follow [30, 31] to cast the multi-hop
KBQA task as a ranking task for evaluation. For each test question
in a dataset, a list of answers are returned by a model according
to their predictive probabilities. We adopt two evaluation metrics

methods, we learn them using the training set, and optimize the
parameters using the validation set and compare their performance
on the test set.
5.2.2
Methods to Compare. We consider the following methods
for performance comparison:
• KV-Mem [24] maintains a memory table for retrieval, which
stores KB facts encoded into key-value pairs.
• GraftNet [31] adopts a variant of graph convolution network
to perform multi-hop reasoning on heterogeneous graph.
• PullNet [30] utilizes the shortest path as supervision to train
graph retrieval module and conduct multi-hop reasoning with Graft-
Net on the retrieved sub-graph.
• SRN [27] is a multi-hop reasoning model under the RL setting,
which solves multi-hop question answering through extending
inference paths on knowledge base.

• EmbedKGQA [29] conducts multi-hop reasoning through
matching pretrained entity embedings with question embedding
obtained from RoBERTa [23].
• NSM, NSM+𝑝and NSM+ℎare three variants of our model,
which (1) do not use the teacher network, (2) use the teacher net-
work with parallel reasoning, and (3) use the teacher network with
hybrid reasoning, respectively.
5.2.3
Implementation Details. Before training the student network,
we pre-train the teacher network on multi-hop KBQA task. To avoid

validation set every 5 epochs. We optimize all models with Adam
optimizer, where the batch size is set to 40. The learning rate is
tuned amongst {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}. The reasoning
steps is set to 4 for CWQ dataset, while 3 for other datasets. The
coefficient 𝜆(in Eq. 12) and 𝜆𝑏, 𝜆𝑐(in Eq. 10) are tuned amongst
{0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}.
5.3
Results
The results of different methods for KBQA are presented in Table 2.
It can be observed that:
(1) Among the baselines, KV-Mem performs the worst. This is
probably because it does not explicitly consider the complex reason-
ing steps. Most methods perform very well on the MetaQA-1hop
and MetaQA-2hop datasets, which require only up to 2 hops of
reasoning. On the other hand, the other datasets seem to be more
difficult, especially the webqsp and CWQ datasets. Overall, Em-
bedKGQA and PullNet are better than the other baselines. PullNet
trains an effective subgraph retrieval module based on the shortest
path between topic entities and answer entities. Such a module
is specially useful to reduce the subgraph size and produce high-
quality candidate entities.
(2) Our base model (i.e., the single student network) NSM per-
forms better than the competitive baselines in most cases. It is
developed based on a graph neural network with two novel exten-
sions for this task (Sec. 4.2). The gains of teacher-student framework
show variance on different datasets. Specifically, on the two most
difficult datasets, namely Webqsp and CWQ, the variants of NSM+𝑝
and NSM+ℎare substantially better than NSM and other baselines.
These results have shown the effectiveness of the teacher network
in our approach, which largely improves the student network. Dif-
ferent from SRN and PullNet, our approach designs a novel bidi-
rectional reasoning mechanism to learn more reliable intermediate
supervision signals. Comparing NSM+𝑝and NSM+ℎ, we find that
their results are similar. On Webqsp and CWQ datasets, the hybrid
reasoning is slightly better to improve the student network than
parallel reasoning.
5.4
Detailed Performance Analysis
Table 2 has shown that our approach overall has a better perfor-
mance. Next, we perform a series of detailed analysis experiments.
For clarity, we only incorporate the results of NSM as the reference,
since it performs generally well among all the baselines.
5.4.1
Ablation Study. Previous experiments have indicated that
the major improvement is from the contribution of the teacher
network. Here, we compare the effect of different implementations
Table 2: Performance comparison of different methods for

GraftNet and PullNet from [30], and copy the results for
SRN and EmbedKGQA from [27, 29]. Bold and underline
fonts denote the best and the second best methods.
Models
Webqsp
MetaQA-1
MetaQA-2
MetaQA-3
CWQ
KV-Mem
46.7
96.2
82.7
48.9
21.1
GraftNet
66.4
97.0
94.8
77.7
32.8
PullNet
68.1
97.0
99.9
91.4
45.9
SRN
-
97.0
95.1
75.2
-
EmbedKGQA
66.6
97.5
98.8
94.8
-
NSM
68.7
97.1
99.9
98.9
47.6
NSM+𝑝
73.9
97.3
99.9
98.9
48.3
NSM+ℎ
74.3
97.2
99.9
98.9
48.8
of the teacher network. The compared variants include: (1) NSM+𝑓
using only the forward reasoning (unidirectional); (2) NSM+𝑏us-
ing only the backward reasoning (unidirectional); (3) NSM+𝑝using
the parallel reasoning (bidirectional); (4) NSM+ℎusing the hybrid
reasoning (bidirectional); (5) NSM+𝑝,−𝑐removing the correspon-
dence loss (Eq. 9) from NSM+𝑝; and (6) NSM+ℎ,−𝑐removing the
correspondence loss (Eq. 9) from NSM+ℎ. In Table 3, we can see
that unidirectional reasoning is consistently worse than bidirec-
tional reasoning: the variants of NSM+𝑓and NSM+𝑏have a lower
performance than the other variants. Such an observation verifies
our assumption that bidirectional reasoning can improve the learn-
ing of intermediate supervision signals. Besides, by removing the
correspondence loss from the teacher network, the performance
substantially drops, which indicates that forward and backward
reasoning can mutually enhance each other.
Table 3: Ablation study of the teacher network (in percent).
Models
Webqsp
CWQ
Hits
F1
Hits
F1
NSM
68.7
62.8
47.6
42.4
NSM+𝑓
70.7
64.7
47.2
41.5
NSM+𝑏
71.1
65.4
47.1
42.7
NSM+𝑝,−𝑐
72.5
66.5
47.7
42.7
NSM+ℎ,−𝑐
73.0
66.9
47.5
42.1
NSM+𝑝
73.9
66.2
48.3
44.0
NSM+ℎ
74.3
67.4
48.8
44.0
0.01 0.05
0.1
0.5
1.0
λ
0.705
0.718
0.731
0.744
0.757

NSM+h
NSM+p
(a) Varying 𝜆on webqsp dataset.
0.01 0.05
0.1
0.5
1.0
λ
0.470
0.475
0.480
0.485
0.490

NSM+h
NSM+p
(b) Varying 𝜆on CWQ dataset.
Figure 4: Performance tuning of our approach.

The Music Lover
1.0
Melvyn Bragg
0.51
Ken Russell
0.48
directed by
writers
Play Dirty
0.05
The Boy Friend
0.10
Whore
0.15
War
0.16
Isadora
<0.01
writers
writers
Drama
0.17
Comedy
0.16
Musical
0.16
has genre
has genre
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
has genre
written by
writers
has genre
(a) The student network before improvement.
The Music Lover
Melvyn Bragg
0.99
written by
Ken Russell
<0.01
directed by
writers
writers
has genre
Play Dirty
0.74
The Boy Friend
<0.01
Whore
<0.01
War
Isadora
0.24
writers
writers
Drama
Comedy
Musical
has genre
has genre
has genre
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
(b) The teacher network with hybrid reasoning.
The Music Lover
1.0
Melvyn Bragg
0.99
written by
Ken Russell
<0.01
directed by
writers
has genre
Play Dirty
0.99
The Boy Friend
<0.01
Whore
<0.01
War
0.99
Isadora
<0.01
writers
writers
Drama
<0.01
Comedy
<0.01
Musical
<0.01
has genre
has genre
has genre
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
writers
(c) The student network after improvement.
Figure 5: A case from the MetaQA-3hop dataset. We use green, red, yellow and grey circles to denote the topic entity, correct
answer, intermediate entities and irrelevant entities respectively. The red colored edges denote the actual reasoning paths
for different methods. The color darkness indicates the relevance degree of an entity by a method. For simplicity, we only
visualize the entities with a probability equal to or above 0.01.
5.4.2
Parameter Tuning. In our approach, we have several combi-
nation coefficients to tune, including 𝜆in Eq. 12, and 𝜆𝑏and 𝜆𝑐in
Eq. 10. We first tune 𝜆amongst {0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}, which con-
trols the influence of the teacher network on the student network.
As shown in Fig. 4, hybrid reasoning seems to work well with small
𝜆(e.g., 0.05), while parallel reasoning works better with relatively
large 𝜆(e.g., 1.0). Similarly, we can tune the parameters of 𝜆𝑏and
𝜆𝑐. Overall, we find that 𝜆𝑐= 0.01 and 𝜆𝑏= 0.1 are good choices
for our approach. Another parameter to tune is the embedding
dimension 𝑑(which is set to 100), and we do not observe signif-
icant improvement when 𝑑> 100. The reasoning steps 𝑛should
be adjusted for different datasets. We observe that our approach
achieves the best performance on CWQ dataset with 𝑛= 4, while
𝑛= 3 for the other datasets with exhaustive search. Due to space
limit, we omit these tuning results.
5.4.3
Evaluating Intermediate Entities. A major assumption we
made is that our teacher network can obtain more reliable inter-
mediate entities than the student network. Here, we compare the
performance of the two networks in finding intermediate entities.
Since the MetaQA-3hop dataset is created using pre-defined tem-
plates, we can recover the ground-truth entities at intermediate
hops. We consider it a retrieval task and adopt the standard Preci-
sion, Recall and F1 as evaluation metrics. From Table 4, we can see
that the teacher network is much better than the student network
in finding intermediate entities, but has slightly worse performance
at the second hop. Note that the results of the third hop have been
omitted, since it is the last hop. Since the student network only
utilizes forward reasoning, the results of the first hop are more im-
portant than those of subsequent hops. These results also explain
why our teacher-student approach is better than the single student
model.
5.4.4
One-Shot Evaluation. In Table 2, we have found that the
improvement of our approach over the basic NSM model is very
small on the MetaQA datasets. We suspect that this is because the
amount of training data for MetaQA is more than sufficient: 100𝐾
training cases for no more than 300 templates in each dataset. To
Table 4: Performance comparison w.r.t. different hops on
MetaQA-3hop dataset (in percent).
Models
Hop 1
Hop 2
Pre
Rec
F1
Pre
Rec
F1
Student
61.0
60.6
60.4
99.9
70.2
80.8
Teacher+𝑝
80.0
59.0
66.3
95.0
68.9
78.8
Teacher+ℎ
99.9
56.0
70.9
99.7
63.0
75.4
examine this, we randomly sample a single training case for every
question template from the original training set, which forms a one-
shot training dataset. We evaluate the performance of our approach
trained with this new training dataset. The results are shown in
Table 5. As we can see, our approach still works very well, and the
improvement over the basic NSM becomes more substantial.
Table 5: Results under one-shot setting (in percent).
Models
MetaQA-1
MetaQA-2
MetaQA-3
Hits
F1
Hits
F1
Hits
F1
NSM
93.3
92.6
97.7
96.0
90.6
74.5
NSM+𝑝
94.3
93.9
98.7
96.4
97.0
79.8
NSM+ℎ
93.9
93.7
98.4
95.8
95.6
81.6
5.5
Case Study
The major novelty of our approach lies in the teacher network. Next,
we present a case study for illustrating how it helps the student
network.
Given the question “what types are the movies written by the
screenwriter of the music lovers”, the correct reasoning path is “The
Music Lovers” (movie) →written by “Melvyn Bragg” (screenwriter)
→write “Play Dirty” (movie) →has genre “War” (genre). Note that
“Isadora” is also qualified at the second step. However, its genre
is missing in the KB. Fig. 5 presents a comparison between the
learned results of the student before improvement (i.e., without the
teacher network), the teacher network and the student network
after improvement.

As shown in Fig. 5(a), the original student network has selected
a wrong path leading to an irrelevant entity. At the first hop, NSM
mainly focuses on the two entities “Ken Russell” and “Melvyn Bragg”
with probabilities of 0.48 and 0.51 respectively. Since it mistakenly
includes “Ken Russell” (director of “The Music Lovers”) at the first rea-
soning step, it finally ranks “Drama” as the top entity and chooses
an irrelevant entity as the answer. In comparison, the teacher net-
work (Fig. 5(b)) is able to combine forward and backward reasoning
to enhance the intermediate entity distributions. As we can see,
our teacher assigns a very high probability of 0.99 to the entity
“Melvyn Bragg” at the first step. When the supervision signals of
the teacher are incorporated into the student, it correctly finds the
answer entity “War” with a high probability of 0.99 (Fig. 5(c)).
This example has shown that our teacher network indeed pro-
vides very useful supervision signals at intermediate steps to im-
prove the student network.
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed an elaborate approach based on teacher-
student framework for the multi-hop KBQA task. In our approach,
the student network implemented by a generic neural state machine
focuses on the task itself, while the teacher network aims to learn
intermediate supervision signals to improve the student network.
For the teacher network, we utilized the correspondence between
state information from a forward and a backward reasoning process
to enhance the learning of intermediate entity distributions. We
further designed two reasoning architectures that support the inte-
gration between forward and backward reasoning. We conducted
evaluation experiments with three benchmark datasets. The results
show that our proposed model is superior to previous methods in
terms of effectiveness for the multi-hop KBQA task.
Currently, we adopt the NSM model as the student network. It
is flexible to extend our approach to other neural architectures or
learning strategies on graphs. In the future, we will also consider
enhancing the entity embeddings using KB embedding methods,
and obtain better intermediate supervision signals.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Kun Zhou and Junyi Li for the helpful discussions. This
work is partially supported by the National Research Foundation,
Singapore under its International Research Centres in Singapore
Funding Initiative, the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61872369 and 61832017, Beijing Academy of
Artificial Intelligence (BAAI), and Beijing Outstanding Young Sci-
entist Program under Grant No. BJJWZYJH012019100020098. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the
views of National Research Foundation, Singapore.
