ROBUST FEATURES FOR FACIAL ACTION RECOGNITION
Nadav Israel⋆
Lior Wolf⋆
Ran Barzilay†
Gal Shoval†
⋆The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
† Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel
†Geha Mental Health Center, Petah Tiqva, Israel
ABSTRACT
Automatic recognition of facial gestures is becoming increas-
ingly important as real world AI agents become a reality. In
this paper, we present an automated system that recognizes
facial gestures by capturing local changes and encoding the
motion into a histogram of frequencies. We evaluate the pro-
posed method by demonstrating its effectiveness on sponta-
neous face action benchmarks: the FEEDTUM dataset, the
Pain dataset and the HMDB51 dataset. The results show that,
compared to known methods, the new encoding methods sig-
niﬁcantly improve the recognition accuracy and the robust-
ness of analysis for a variety of applications.
Index Terms— Feature extraction, Gesture recognition,
Emotion recognition
1. INTRODUCTION
Face action recognition has been an active research domain
that has made great strides over the past decade [1]. In many
real-world applications, the goal is to recognize or infer in-
tention or other psychological states rather than facial actions
alone. For this purpose, both narrowing the number of facial
actions of interest and paying attention to the video context
may be critical to the success of an automated system. A
face action recognition system is normally composed of four
main steps: (i) face detection and tracking, (ii) face align-
ment, (iii) feature extraction, and (iv) classiﬁcation. In our
framework, we track face regions using the commonly used
ViolaJones object detection algorithm [2]. The second step in
the framework is face alignment [3], which is based on locat-
ing semantic facial landmarks such as the eyes, nose, mouth
and chin. This step is also standard and is an essential part
of face recognition, face animation, and 3D face modeling.
The third step in the framework is feature extraction, which is
the area where we make our contributions. Choosing suitable
feature extraction and feature selection algorithms play the
central roles in providing discriminative and robust informa-
tion, particularly for spontaneous facial action that are occurs
with changes in pose and illumination, and face movements.
Accordingly, the features should be extracted in a way that is
robust to these external changes. The optimal features should
minimize within class variations of expressions, while maxi-
mizing the signal between class variations. If inadequate fea-
tures are used, even the best classiﬁer would fail to achieve
accurate recognition [4]. As we experimentally demonstrate,
generic action recognition features, even successful ones, are
not suitable for the task at hand. We present a novel method
for facial features extraction which is based on capturing lo-
cal changes and encoding the facial motion into a histogram
of frequencies in order to classify the face actions. To date,
there are two common ways to recognize facial expressions.
Those include direct recognition of prototypical expressions
(as described in this paper) and recognition of expressions
through a facial action coding system (FACS) by the Ekman
method [5, 6, 7]. Our method belongs to the ﬁrst type. In
an extensive set of experiments, we demonstrate the utility
of the proposed method of multiple spontaneous facial action
datasets: FEEDTUM [8], PainDB [9] and HMDB [10]. In all
three cases, we demonstrate state of the art results.
2. RELATED WORK
In the recent past, many different approaches for facial ex-
pression classiﬁcation in videos have been evaluated.
A
signiﬁcant contribution to on research on spontaneous ex-
pressions was the introduction of UNBC-McMaster Shoul-
der Pain dataset [9], which involves subjects experiencing
shoulder pain in a clinical setting.
A. Ashraf et al. [11]
used an approach starting with extracting Active Appearance
Model [12] based features from each frame and using these
to cluster the frames, thus creating training data with size
that is manageable by a SVM. P. Lucey et al. [13] extended
this work by borrowing ideas from the related ﬁeld of visual
speech recognition and proposed to compress the signal in the
spatial rather than temporal domain using the Discrete Co-
sine Transform (DCT). K. Sikka et al. [1] suggested a method
called MS-MIL which is proposed to jointly detect and locate
pain events in video. In their framework, each video sequence
is represented as a bag of multiple segments, and Multiple
Instance Learning (MIL) is employed in order to deal with
this weakly labeled data in the form of sequence level ground
truth.
F. Wallhoff et al. [8] discussed innovative holistic
arXiv:1702.01426v2  [cs.CV]  11 Jun 2017

frame 1
frame 4
frame 5
frame 17
frame 19
frame 20
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
Frame
Gray level avg
Left eye region
(b)
Fig. 1: Face preprocessing. (a) The alignment process is performed by localizing three ﬁducial points inside the detection crop.
(b) illustrates the signal xr captured from the left eye region over 25 frames.
and self organizing approaches for efﬁcient facial expression
analysis. Their experiments are based on the publicly avail-
able FEEDTUM dataset and achieved accuracy of 61.67% by
using macro motion blocks and Sequential-Floating-Forward-
Search (SFFS) based feature selection with use of the aimed
at SVM (SVM-SFFS). More recent methods achieve consid-
erably higher accuracies [1]. Another central family, that
uses low-level representation schemes of the information in a
video is Optical-ﬂow based methods. Current state of the art
methods are based on dense trajectories [14]. The trajectories
are extracted efﬁciently with optical ﬂow and represent the
local motion information in the video. The descriptors are
then computed as HOG, HOF or MBH on a spatio-temporal
volume deﬁned by the trajectory. This method is state of the
art on the HMDB51 [10] dataset. In our work, we only care
about seven facial categories out of the 51 classes: chew,
drink, eat, laugh, smile, smoke and talk.
3. METHOD
The quality of the extracted features representing the video
content plays a key role for the latter classiﬁcation task. The
proposed system is designed to be not only accurate but also
rapid and support real-time analysis applications. The pro-
posed representation is based on capturing local changes and
encoding these local motions into a histogram of frequencies.
In this approach, a face video is modeled as a sequence of his-
tograms by the following procedure: (1) An input face image
is cropped and normalized as described in Figure 1; (2) Each
normalized frame is divided into a grid of equally sized cells;
(3) The mean graylevel intensity of each cell r at frame n is
recorded as xr[n]; (4) For the entire video, the frequency his-
togram is computed for each cell by using the wavelet trans-
form.
3.1. Preprocessing
For the purpose of face action recognition, we track the fa-
cial features robustly and efﬁciently. The appearance of facial
features changes due to pose, lighting, and facial expressions
making the task difﬁcult and complex. Automatic face regis-
tration can be achieved by face detection [2] and facial land-
marks detection [3]. Facial images were cropped and aligned
from original frames based on the two eyes and mouth loca-
tions. There are several techniques available for performing
face detection. In this paper, we have used Viola and Jones
face detection technique based on the AdaBoost algorithm. In
order to align the faces and to obtain 2D pose normalization,
the faces are transformed such that a ﬁxed distance between
the two eyes and mouth is achieved. First, we detect three
ﬁducial points inside the detected face region: the center of
each eye and the mouth location as illustrated in Figure 1.
Then, a similarity transformation (scale, rotation and transla-
tion) is used to bring these points to three pre-deﬁned anchor
points. The ﬁducial points generated by Intraface [3] are used
for detecting the face landmarks. [3] used the cascade regres-
sion with SIFT feature, and interpreted the cascade regression
procedure from a gradient descent view. We reduce the num-
ber of ﬁducial points to three by averaging the detected land-
marks of each face part: left eye, right eye and mouth.
3.2. Filter banks
In the classical applications of multi-rate ﬁlter banks, a bank
of ﬁlters is applied to a discrete input signal and then down-
sampled at a ﬁxed rate to produce a set of sub-band signals.

The signal is decomposed simultaneously using a high-pass
ﬁlter h and a low-pass ﬁlter g as illustrated in Figure 2. The
speciﬁc form of ﬁlters used is known as quadrature mirror
ﬁlters [15] This paper employs the uniform K-channel Haar
ﬁlter banks [16] for which the sampling rate is reduced by
two in all sub-bands. Figure 3 illustrates the ﬁlter bank. In
discrete ﬁlter banks, the scale and resolution vary, providing
a detailed description of the signal. Figure 3 depicts the anal-
ysis process, in which the signal is analyzed at multiple res-
olutions. This decomposition has halved the time resolution
at each cascade level. However, each output has half the fre-
quency band of the input and the frequency resolution has
been doubled. Moreover, computing a complete convolution
x ∗g with subsequent down-sampling would waste computa-
tion time. The Lifting scheme is an optimization where these
two computations are interleaved. This decomposition is rep-
resented as a binary tree with nodes representing a sub-space
or sub-scale space with a different time-frequency localiza-
tion. The tree deﬁnes the ﬁlter bank used.
Fig. 2: A block diagram showing a single level of ﬁlter bank
analysis.
Where ylow and yhigh denote as:
ylow[n] =
∞
X
k=−∞
x[k]g[2n −k],
yhigh[n] =
∞
X
k=−∞
x[k]h[2n −k]
h[n] =
"
−
√
2
2
,
√
2
2
#
,
g[n] =
"√
2
2 ,
√
2
2
#
3.3. Histogram of frequencies
The Haar ﬁlter banks are used to decompose a signal into
components of different levels of detail. Each such compo-
nent contains only a certain band of frequencies extracted
from the input signal, and the decomposition results in band-
pass ﬁltering [17, 18]. For example, a usual 2-channel ﬁl-
ter bank uses low-pass and high-pass ﬁlters in combination
with up- and down-samplers to produce the coarse and de-
tailed components. In order to obtain a multi-scale video rep-
resentation that is invariant to shifts in time, we apply the
Haar decomposition to multiple time series. Each series is
obtained as a vector of average intensities over image regions,
xr[n], where n is the frame index, and r is the regions index.
Each region is a cell obtained by ﬁxing a grid over the image.
After the ﬁlter bank is applied, we obtain, for each region
r, coefﬁcients ys
r for each cascade level s on the Haar tree
structure. In order to represent face gestures regardless of the
time at which the action occurs and keep on a compact repre-
sentation, we collect the coefﬁcients ys
r of each cascade level
into histogram zs
r = hist(ys
r). Figure 4 illustrates the coef-
ﬁcients and histograms in two cascades level. The combined
histogram of frequencies is constructed by concatenating his-
togram, zs
r, for all cascade levels, s, s = 1..K for a given
region. We deﬁne the operator that transforms the signal xr,
at region r, to a histogram of frequencies as: pr = HOF(xr).
The procedure is extremely efﬁcient. Given a face im-
age of size 100 × 100, we calculate a convolution with a
window size of 5 × 5 and decimate the result to 20 × 20
pixels. This takes 0.007 second. Then, the computation in
time takes 0.276845 seconds for a video of 256 frames. The
time complexity of the Haar ﬁlter banks satisﬁes T(N) =
2N + T(N/2), which leads to an O(N) time for the entire
operation, where N is the number of frames in a video.
4. CLASSIFIER
Bag of words [19, 20] models represent a videos as an
order-less collection of local features.
These models have
shown remarkable performance in multiple domains includ-
ing scene recognition [21, 22], object and texture catego-
rization [23, 24], and human activity recognition [25]. Let
P j =
n
pj
1, pj
2, , pj
Nj
o
denote a set of D-dimensional local
features that are extracted from a video Vj, where Nj is num-
ber of regions in a video j.
To encode these features we
use the BoW method, with a trained codebook B ∈R
d×c.
The codebook is constructed by quantizing using K-means
clustering local feature vectors randomly selected from the
videos. This encoding method is based on ﬁnding, for each
local feature, the nearest cluster center.
This coding step
maps the local feature pj
i ∈Rd to the coefﬁcient uj
i ∈Rc.
In order to obtain video-level representation, the coding co-
efﬁcients of all local features in an video are pooled together.
To increase precision, we initialize k-means 8 times and keep
the result with the lowest error. Local features are assigned to
their closest trained codebook using Euclidean distance. The
resulting histograms of word occurrences are used as video
descriptors.
A linear support vector machine (SVM) was
used as the classiﬁer for the proposed method. Speciﬁcally,
we use the implementation of LIBSVM [26]. SVM makes
binary decisions, and the multiclass classiﬁcation here is ac-
complished by using the one-versus-all rule: a classiﬁer is
learned to separate each class from the rest, and a test video is
assigned the label of the classiﬁer with the highest response.
5. RESULTS
We compare the Histogram of frequencies method to the
performance of two leading state of the art methods: dense
trajectories [14] and MIL [1]. In order to evaluate the dense
trajectories method, we used the published code [14] and em-

Fig. 3: A block diagram of the ﬁlter bank depicting a Haar tree structure with K cascade level
ployed the default parameters. For most of the datasets, dense
trajectories results are signiﬁcantly lower than the other meth-
ods. We have reported results for MIL [1] as were reported
by authors in using their own implementation. Three public
datasets was utilized for our experiments: PainDB, HMDB51
and FEEDTUM. The performance statistics for prescribed
experiments are shown in Tables 1, 2, 3, respectively.
The PainDB dataset [17] included 200 sequences from 25
subjects. Each subject was undergoing some kind of shoulder
pain and was asked to perform a series of active and passive
movements of their affected and unaffected limbs.
Active
tests were self-initiated shoulder movements and in passive
tests the physiotherapist was responsible for the movement.
These sequences were then coded on a number of levels by
experts.
Following the protocol proposed, labels were bi-
narized into pain and no pain by deﬁning training instances
with OPI ≥3 (Observer Pain Intensity)) as the positive class
(pain) and OPI = 0 as the negative class (no-pain). In the
experiments, it is common to include only those subjects
which had a minimum of one trial with an OPI rating of 0
(no pain) and one trial with an OPI rating of either 3, 4 or 5
(pain). Intermediate pain intensities of 1 and 2 were omitted,
per the protocol in [1, 9]. This yielded 147 sequences from
23 subjects for our experiments. To check for subject gen-
eralization, a leave-one-subject out strategy was employed.
Thus, there was no overlap of subjects between the training
and testing set. The classiﬁcation task focuses on pain / no
pain predictions at the video-level. For reporting the results,
we followed the strategy employed in [1, 11, 9], where they
reported total classiﬁcation rate or accuracy, which refers to
the percentage of correctly classiﬁed sequences, computed at
the Equal Error Rate (EER) point of the Receiver Operation
Curve (ROC). The comparison among all tested methods is
presented in Table 1.
The results show that the proposed
method outperforms all literature baselines.
The HMDB51 dataset [10] has 51 action classes with a total
of 6,766 videos. Each class has more than 100 videos. All
of the videos are obtained from real world scenarios such
as movies and YouTube clips.
The intra-class variation is
very high due to many factors, such as viewpoint, scale,
background, illumination etc.
In this work, we only con-
sider seven classes (chew, drink, eat, laugh, smile, smoke and
talk) that relate to facial action. We also limit the dataset
to those videos in which a face was detected in 60% of the
frames.
The total number of included videos is 484.
All
experiments were conducted in leave-one-out fashion. The
results are depicted in Table 2. The Histogram of frequencies
result achieves a signiﬁcant improvement over the baseline
method, which is among the most successful methods on the
full HMDB dataset. This supports our notion that face action
recognition requires a dedicated set of specialized techniques.
The FEEDTUM dataset [8] is a facial expression dataset
that consists of 320 videos from 19 subjects showing six
basic emotions, namely: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sad-
ness and surprise. The dataset exhibits natural expressions,
which were elicited by showing the subjects several care-
fully selected video stimulus. Here, similar to the PainDB
benchmark, we conduct leave-one-subject out experiments.
The results are shown in Table 3. Our histogram of frequen-
cies method achieves mean classiﬁcation accuracy of 81.12%
compared to the leading method on this benchmark, which is
MS-MIL at 84.50%.
Table 1: Comparison of various of methods on the PainDB
dataset. The accuracy refers to the percentage of correctly
classiﬁed sequences, computed at Equal Error Rate (EER) in
the Receiver Operation Curve (ROC).
Method
Accuracy
Dense trajectory [14]
80.70
BoW+Max+SVM [13]
81.52
MS-MIL [1]
83.70
Histogram of frequencies (ours)
85.96
Table 2: Comparison of our method to the dense trajectories
method on the HMDB51 face subset.
Method
Accuracy
Dense trajectory [14]
66.74
Histogram of frequencies (ours)
84.71
Table 3: Comparison of various methods on the FEEDTUM
dataset. The mean classiﬁcation accuracy over all expressions
is reported.
Method
Accuracy
Dense trajectory [14]
51.38
MS-MIL [1]
84.50
MilBoost [1]
81.78
Histogram of frequencies (ours)
81.12

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
Frame
Gray level avg
Left eye region
Pain
No pain
(a)
0
50
100
150
−5
0
5
·10−2
Frame
Value
Coefﬁcients - Scale 15
0
20
40
60
80
100
−2
0
2
4 ·10−2
Frame
Value
Coefﬁcients - Scale 20
(b)
−0.1
−5 · 10−2
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Bins
Prob
Histogram of frequencies - Scale 15
−4
−2
0
2
4
·10−2
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
Bins
Prob
Histogram of frequencies - Scale 20
(c)
Fig. 4: Illustration of the ﬁlter banks processing: (a) The signals xr recorded from the left eye region for a Pain video (blue)
and a No pain video (red). (b) The matching ﬁlter banks coefﬁcients ys
r. (c) The corresponding histograms zs
r = hist(ys
r)
.
6. DISCUSSION
This paper outlines a scheme for face action recognition
based on a K-level Haar wavelets decomposition. It demon-
strates an improvement in recognition accuracy over other
popular methods. From our experiments, it is evident that
spontaneous expressions in videos is a challenging problem
due owing to the variability associated with the expression
of facial gestures by different subjects at different times and
scenarios. Our results show that a meaningful face action
recognition framework can be built based on ﬁltering tools
such as the Wavelet transform, which differs considerably
from both the existing face action recognition methods and
the current action recognition methods.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Karan Sikka, Abhinav Dhall, Marian Stewart Bartlett,
Classiﬁcation and weakly supervised pain localization
using multiple segment representation.
[2] P. Viola and M. J. Jones, Robust real-time face de-
tection, International Journal of Computer Visi.on 57
(2004): 13715.
[3] Xiong, X., De la Torre, F. (2013) Supervised descent
method and its applications to face alignment. In IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR).
[4] Shan, C., Gong, S., McOwan, P.W., 2009. Facial ex-
pression recognition based on local binary patterns:
a comprehensive study. Image and Vision Computing
23,803816.
[5] Ekman, P., 1971. Universals and cultural differences
in facial expressions of emotion. In: Nebraska Sympo-
sium on Motivation. Lincoln University of Nebraska
Press, pp. 207283.
[6] Ekman, P., 2001.Telling lies: Clues to Deceit in the
Market place, Politics, and Marriage, third ed. W.W.
Norton and Company, New York.
[7] Ekman, P., Friesen, W., 1978. The facial action cod-
ing system: a technique for the measurement of facial
movements. Consulting Psychologist. Guo, G., Dyer,
C.R., 2003. Simultaneous feature selection and classi-
ﬁer training.
[8] F. Wallhoff,Efﬁcient of authentic dynamic facial ex-
pressions on the FEED database.
[9] P. Lucey, J. Cohn, K. Prkachin, P. Solomon, I.
Matthews, Painful data: the UNBCMcMaster Shoul-
der Pain expression archive database, Automatic Face
and Gesture Recognition and Workshops (FG 2011),
2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011,
pp. 5764.
[10] H. Kuehne, H. Jhuang, E. Garrote, T. Poggio, and T.
Serre. HMDB: A Large Video Database for Human
Motion Recognition. ICCV, 2011.
[11] A. Ashraf, S. Lucey, J. Cohn, T. Chen, Z.Ambadar, K.
Prkachin, P. Solomon, B. Theobald, The painful face:
pain expression recognition using active appearance
models, Proceedings of the 9th international confer-
ence on Multimodal interfaces, ACM, 2007, pp. 914.
[12] Edwards, G. J.; Taylor, C. J.; Cootes, T. F. (1998). ”In-
terpreting face images using active appearance mod-
els”. Proceedings Third IEEE International Conference
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. p. 300.
[13] P. Lucey, J. Howlett, J. Cohn, S. Lucey, S. Sridha-
ran, Z. Ambadar, Improving pain recognition through
better utilisation of temporal information, In the Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Auditory-
Visual Speech Processing, 2008.
[14] Heng Wang and Cordelia Schmid, Action Recognition
with Improved Trajectories, LEAR, INRIA, Fra7nce.
[15] D. Esteban and C. Galand ”Application on quadrature
mirror ﬁlter to split-band voice coding schema” Proc.
of IEEE International Conf. ASSP, Hartford, Connecti-
cut, pp. 191-195, May 1977.
[16] G. Strang and T. Nguyen,
Wavelets and Filter
Banks, Wellesley Cambridge University, revised edi-
tion, 1997.
[17] G. Strang and T. Nguyen,
Wavelets and Filter
Banks, Wellesley Cambridge University, revised edi-
tion, 1997.
[18] P. P. Vaidyanathan, Multirate Systems and Filter
Banks, Prentice Hall, 1993.
[19] L. Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, and A. Torralba. ”Recogniz-
ing and Learning Object Categories, CVPR 2007 short
course”.
[20] M. M. Ullah, S. N. Parizi, and I. Laptev. Improving
bag-of-features action recognition with non-local cues.
In BMVC,2010.
[21] Lazebnik, S., Schmid, C., Ponce, J.: Beyond bags
of features: Spatial pyramid matching for recogniz-
ing natural scene categories. In: 2006 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, vol. 2, pp. 21392178. IEEE (2006)
[22] van Gemert, J.C., Geusebroek, J.-M., Veenman, C.J.,
Smeulders, A.W.M.: Kernel Codebooks for Scene Cat-
egorization. In: Forsyth, D., Torr, P., Zisserman, A.
(eds.) ECCV 2008, Part III. LNCS, vol. 5304, pp.
696709. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
[23] Csurka, G., Dance, C., Fan, L., Willamowski, J., Bray,
C.: Visual categorization with bags of keypoints. In:
Workshop on Statistical Learning in Computer Vision,
ECCV, vol. 1, p. 22 (2004)
[24] Nilsback, M., Zisserman, A.: A visual vocabulary for
ﬂower classiﬁcation. In: 2006 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, vol. 2, pp. 14471454. IEEE (2006)
[25] Laptev, I., Marszalek, M., Schmid, C., Rozenfeld,
B.: Learning realistic human actions from movies.
In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2008, pp. 18. IEEE (2008)

[26] Chang, C., Lin, C.: Libsvm: a library for support vec-
tor machines, software (2001).
[27] J.Cohn and K. Schmidt, ”The timing of facial motion
in posed and spontaneous smiles,” International Jour-
nal of Wavelets, Multiresolution and Information Pro-
cessing, vol. 2, pp. 1-12, 2004.
[28] P. Lucey, J. Cohn, K. Prkachin, P. Solomon, I.
Matthews, Painful data: the UNBC McMaster. Shoul-
der Pain expression archive database, Automatic Face
and Gesture Recognition and Workshops (FG 2011),
2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011,
pp. 5764.
[29] X.Wang, L. Wang, Y. Qiao, A comparative study of en-
coding, pooling and normalization methods for action
recognition, in: K. Lee, Y. Matsushita, J. Rehg, Z. Hu
(Eds.), Computer Vision ACCV 2012, Lecture Notes
