Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 35 (2009) 717-773
Submitted 12/08; published 08/09
The Complexity of Circumscription in Description Logic
Piero A. Bonatti

Section of Computer Science, Department of Physics
University of Naples Federico II, Italy
Carsten Lutz

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Bremen, Germany
Frank Wolter

Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool, UK
Abstract
As fragments of ﬁrst-order logic, Description logics (DLs) do not provide nonmonotonic
features such as defeasible inheritance and default rules. Since many applications would
beneﬁt from the availability of such features, several families of nonmonotonic DLs have
been developed that are mostly based on default logic and autoepistemic logic. In this
paper, we consider circumscription as an interesting alternative approach to nonmonotonic
DLs that, in particular, supports defeasible inheritance in a natural way. We study DLs
extended with circumscription under diﬀerent language restrictions and under diﬀerent
constraints on the sets of minimized, ﬁxed, and varying predicates, and pinpoint the exact
computational complexity of reasoning for DLs ranging from ALC to ALCIO and ALCQO.
When the minimized and ﬁxed predicates include only concept names but no role names,
then reasoning is complete for NExpNP. It becomes complete for NPNExp when the number
of minimized and ﬁxed predicates is bounded by a constant. If roles can be minimized or
ﬁxed, then complexity ranges from NExpNP to undecidability.
1. Introduction
Early knowledge representation (KR) formalisms such as semantic networks and frames
included a wealth of features in order to provide as much expressive power as possible
(Quillian, 1968; Minsky, 1975). In particular, such formalisms usually admitted a struc-
tured representation of classes and objects similar to modern description logics (DLs), but
also mechanisms for defeasible inheritance, default rules, and other features that are nowa-
days studied in the area of nonmonotonic logics (NMLs).
When KR theory developed
further, the all-embracing approaches were largely given up in favour of more specialized
ones due to unfavourable computational properties and problems with the semantics. This
process has caused DLs and NMLs to develop into two independent subﬁelds. Consequently,
modern description logics such as SHIQ lack the expressive power to represent defeasible
inheritance and other nonmonotonic features (Horrocks, Sattler, & Tobies, 2000).
Despite (or due to) this development, there has been a continuous interest in the
(re)integration of nonmonotonic features into description logics. In recent years, the ad-
vent of several new applications of DLs have increased this interest even further. We brieﬂy
discuss two of them. First, DLs have become a popular tool for the formalization of biomed-
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
ical ontologies such as GALEN (Rector & Horrocks, 1997) and SNOMED (Cote, Rothwell,
Palotay, Beckett, & Brochu, 1993). As argued for example by Rector (2004) and Stevens
et al. (2005), it is important for such ontologies to represent exceptions of the form “in
humans, the heart is usually located on the left-hand side of the body; in humans with
situs inversus, the heart is located on the right-hand side of the body”. Modelling such
situations requires defeasible inheritance, i.e., properties transfer to all instances of a class
by default, but can be explicitly overridden in special cases (McCarthy, 1986; Horty, 1994;
Brewka, 1994; Baader & Hollunder, 1995b). The second application is the use of DLs as se-
curity policy languages (Uszok, Bradshaw, Johnson, Jeﬀers, Tate, Dalton, & Aitken, 2004;
Kagal, Finin, & Joshi, 2003; Tonti, Bradshaw, Jeﬀers, Montanari, Suri, & Uszok, 2003). In
formalizing access control policies, one must deal with the situation where a given request
is neither explicitly allowed nor explicitly denied. Then, a default decision has to be taken
such as in open and closed policies, where authorizations are respectively granted or denied
by default (Bonatti & Samarati, 2003). Moreover, policies are often formulated incremen-
tally, i.e., start with general authorizations for large classes of subjects, objects, and actions,
and then progressively reﬁne them by introducing exceptions for speciﬁc subclasses. This
approach is clearly an incarnation of defeasible inheritance.
While the above applications illustrate that integrating nonmonotonic features into DLs
is worthwhile, the actual engineering of a computationally well-behaved nonmonotonic DL
that provides suﬃcient expressive power turns out to be a non-trivial task. In particular,
combinations of DLs and nonmonotonic logics typically involve subtle interactions between
the two component logics and this easily leads to undecidability. It appears that there is no
one optimal way to circumnavigate these diﬃculties, and thus many diﬀerent combinations
of DLs and nonmonotonic logics have been proposed in the literature, each with individual
strengths and limitations (we provide a survey in Section 7). However, there is a striking
gap: almost all existing approaches are based on default logic and autoepistemic logic, while
circumscription has received very little attention in connection with DLs, and the computa-
tional properties of DLs with circumscription have been almost completely unknown. This
is all the more surprising since circumscription is known to be one of the weakest forms of
nonmonotonic reasoning—see the work by Janhunen (1999) for one of the most recent sur-
veys, and the paper by Bonatti and Eiter (1996) for an expressiveness analysis in terms of
queries. Therefore, it is a natural idea to use circumscription for deﬁning a computationally
well-behaved, yet expressive DL with nonmonotonic features.
In this paper, we study circumscription (McCarthy, 1980) as an alternative approach
to deﬁning nonmonotonic DLs. In particular, we deﬁne a family of DLs with circumscrip-
tion that enable a natural modelling of defeasible inheritance. Our general approach is to
generalize standard DL knowledge bases to circumscribed knowledge bases (cKBs) which,
additionally to a TBox for representing terminological knowledge and an ABox for repre-
senting knowledge about individuals, are equipped with a circumscription pattern. This
pattern lists predicates (i.e., concept and role names) to be minimized in the sense that, in
all admitted models of the cKB, the extension of the listed predicates has to be minimal
w.r.t. set inclusion. Following McCarthy (1986), the minimized predicates can be used as
“abnormality predicates” that identify instances which are not typical for their class. Cir-
cumscription patterns can require other predicates to be ﬁxed during minimization, or allow
them to vary freely (McCarthy, 1986). A main feature of the DLs of our family is that they
718

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
come with a built-in mechanism for defeasible inheritance: by default, the properties of a
class (“humans” in the ﬁrst example above) transfer to each subclass (“humans with situs
inversus”), but exceptions can be speciﬁed based on a priority mechanism. It is well-known
that defeasible inheritance with priority cannot be modularly encoded with pure default or
autoepistemic logic (Horty, 1994), and workarounds such as the explicit listing of exceptions
lead to serious maintainability problems. Circumscription lends itself naturally to priorities,
based on circumscription patterns that can express preferences between minimized predi-
cates in terms of a partial ordering. As argued by Baader and Hollunder (1995b), such an
approach is well-suited to ensure a smooth interplay between defeasible inheritance and DL
subsumption, and thus we prefer it over traditional prioritized circumscription.
To achieve decidability, nonmonotonic DLs usually have to adopt suitable restrictions
on the expressive power of the DL component, on non-monotonic features, or their inter-
action. In the case of default logic and autoepistemic logic, a typical restriction concerns
the diﬀerent treatment of individuals that are explicitly denoted by a constant, and those
that are not. This goes back to reasoning in ﬁrst-order default logic (Reiter, 1980) and
autoepistemic logic (Moore, 1985), which also involve tricky technical issues related to the
denotation of individuals. To make reasoning decidable in DLs based on default logic, de-
fault rules are applied only to the individuals denoted by constants that occur explicitly
in the knowledge base (Baader & Hollunder, 1995a), but not to unnamed individuals. As
a consequence, named and unnamed individuals are not treated uniformly. In approaches
based on autoepistemic logic (Donini, Lenzerini, Nardi, Nutt, & Schaerf, 1998; Donini,
Nardi, & Rosati, 1997, 2002), an alternative solution is to restrict the domain to a ﬁxed, de-
numerable set of constants. This approach overcomes the diﬀerent treatment of named and
unnamed individuals since all individuals are named. The ﬂipside is that ad-hoc encodings
are required when the domain is ﬁnite or the unique name assumption is not enforced, i.e.,
when diﬀerent constants are allowed to denote the same individual. In this respect, DLs
with circumscription pose no diﬃculty at all, and named individuals are treated in exactly
the same way as unnamed ones without any assumptions on the domain. At the same
time, we are able to base our nonmonotonic DLs on rather expressive DL components such
as ALCIO and ALCQO without losing decidability. However, we cannot do without any
restrictions either: we only allow to ﬁx and minimize concept names during circumscription
and require that all role names vary.
The main contribution of this paper is a detailed analysis of the computational properties
of reasoning with cKBs. We show that, in the expressive DLs ALCIO and ALCQO, instance
checking, satisﬁability and subsumption are decidable for concept-circumscribed KBs in
which only concept names (and no role names) are minimized and ﬁxed. More precisely, we
prove that these reasoning problems are NExpNP-complete, where the lower bound applies
already to concept-circumscribed KBs in ALC with empty preference relation and without
ﬁxed concept names and (1) empty TBox or (2) empty ABox and acyclic TBox. In addition,
we show that if a constant bound is imposed on the number of minimized and ﬁxed concept
names, then the complexity drops to NPNExp.
The situation is completely diﬀerent when role names are minimized or ﬁxed. First, the
complexity of reasoning with cKBs formulated in ALC with a single ﬁxed role name, empty
TBox, empty preference relation, and no minimized role names turns out to be outside the
analytic hierarchy, and thus very highly undecidable. This result is shown by a reduction
719

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
Name
Syntax
Semantics
inverse role
r−
(rI)⌣= {(d, e) | (e, d) ∈rI}
nominal
{a}
{aI}
negation
¬C
∆I \ CI
conjunction
C ⊓D
CI ∩DI
disjunction
C ⊔D
CI ∪DI
at-least restriction
(⩾n r C)
{d ∈∆I | #{e ∈CI | (d, e) ∈rI} ≥n}
at-most restriction
(⩽n r C)
{d ∈∆I | #{e ∈CI | (d, e) ∈rI} ≤n}
Figure 1: Syntax and semantics of ALCQIO.
of satisﬁability in monadic second-order logic (MSO) with binary predicates over arbitrary
(i.e., not necessarily tree-shaped) structures.
The reduction does not apply to cKBs in
which role names can be minimized, but not ﬁxed. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that in this case
reasoning with empty TBoxes becomes decidable (and again NExpNP-complete) for DLs
between ALC and ALCQO, and only for ALCI and its extensions it is undecidable. For all
these logics, however, adding acyclic TBoxes leads to undecidability. The reader can ﬁnd a
table summarising the complexity results in Section 7.
It is interesting to note that our results are somewhat unusual from the perspective of
NMLs. First, the arity of predicates has an impact on decidability: ﬁxing concept names
(unary predicates) does not impair decidability, whereas ﬁxing a single role name (binary
predicate) leads to a strong undecidability result. Second, the number of predicates that
are minimized or ﬁxed (bounded vs. unbounded) aﬀects the computational complexity of
reasoning. Although (as we note in passing) a similar eﬀect can be observed in propositional
logic with circumscription, this has, to the best of our knowledge, never been explicitly
noted.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we introduce syntax, semantics,
and reasoning problems for circumscribed KBs, and provide some examples.
Section 3
provides some basic results such as a polynomial simulation of ﬁxed concepts by means of
minimized concepts, a polynomial reduction of reasoning with general TBoxes to reason-
ing with acyclic TBoxes, and a polynomial reduction of the simultaneous satisﬁability of
multiple cKBs to standard satisﬁability. Then, Section 4 proves the decidability and com-
plexity results for concept-circumscribed knowledge bases. Fixed and minimized roles are
considered in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Section 7 discusses related work, and Section 8
concludes the paper by summarizing the main results and pointing out some interesting
directions for further research. To improve readability, many proof details are deferred to
the appendix. This paper is an extended version of the article by Bonatti, Lutz, and Wolter
(2006).
2. Description Logics and Circumscription
In DLs, concepts are inductively deﬁned with the help of a set of constructors, starting with
a set NC of concept names, a set NR of role names, and (possibly) a set NI of individual
720

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
names (all countably inﬁnite). We use the term predicates to refer to elements of NC ∪NR.
The concepts of the expressive DL ALCQIO are formed using the constructors shown in
Figure 1.
There, the inverse role constructor is a role constructor, whereas the remaining six
constructors are concept constructors. In Figure 1 and throughout this paper, we use #S
to denote the cardinality of a set S, a and b to denote individual names, r and s to denote
roles (i.e., role names and inverses thereof), A, B to denote concept names, and C, D to
denote (possibly complex) concepts. As usual, we use ⊤as abbreviation for an arbitrary
(but ﬁxed) propositional tautology, ⊥for ¬⊤, →and ↔for the usual Boolean abbreviations,
∃r.C (existential restriction) for (⩾1 r C), and ∀r.C (universal restriction) for (⩽0 r ¬C).
In this paper, we will not be concerned with ALCQIO itself, but with several of its
fragments.1
The basic such fragment allows only for negation, conjunction, disjunction,
and universal and existential restrictions, and is called ALC. The availability of additional
constructors is indicated by concatenation of a corresponding letter: Q stands for num-
ber restrictions, I stands for inverse roles, and O for nominals. This explains the name
ALCQIO, and also allows us to refer to fragments such as ALCIO, ALCQO, and ALCQI.
The semantics of ALCQIO-concepts is deﬁned in terms of an interpretation I =
(∆I, ·I). The domain ∆I is a non-empty set of individuals and the interpretation func-
tion ·I maps each concept name A ∈NC to a subset AI of ∆I, each role name r ∈NR to a
binary relation rI on ∆I, and each individual name a ∈NI to an individual aI ∈∆I. The
extension of ·I to inverse roles and arbitrary concepts is inductively deﬁned as shown in the
third column of Figure 1. An interpretation I is called a model of a concept C if CI ̸= ∅.
If I is a model of C, we also say that C is satisﬁed by I.
A (general) TBox is a ﬁnite set of concept implications (CIs) C ⊑D where C and D are
concepts. As usual, we use C .= D as an abbreviation for C ⊑D and D ⊑C. An ABox is
a ﬁnite set of concept assertions C(a) and role assertions r(a, b), where a, b are individual
names, r is a role name, and C is a concept. An interpretation I satisﬁes (i) a CI C ⊑D
if CI ⊆DI, (ii) an assertion C(a) if aI ∈CI, and (iii) an assertion r(a, b) if (aI, bI) ∈rI.
Then, I is a model of a TBox T if it satisﬁes all implications in T , and a model of an ABox
A if it satisﬁes all assertions in A.
An important class of TBoxes are acyclic TBoxes: call a TBox T acyclic if it is a set
of concept deﬁnitions A .= C, where A is a concept name and the following two conditions
hold:
• no concept name occurs more than once on the left hand side of a deﬁnition in T ;
• the relation ≺T , deﬁned by setting A ≺T B iﬀA .= C ∈T and B occurs in C, is
well-founded.
1. The reason that we do not consider ALCQIO in this paper is that it does not have the ﬁnite model
property; i.e., there are satisﬁable concepts that are not satisﬁable in ﬁnite models. Our proofs of the
complexity upper bounds assume the ﬁnite model property and, therefore, do not work for ALCQIO. In-
vestigating circumscription for description logics without the ﬁnite model property remains an interesting
open problem.
721

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
2.1 Circumscription, Varying Predicates, and Partial Priority Ordering
Circumscription is a logical approach suitable for modelling what normally or typically
holds, and thus admits the modeling of defeasible inheritance (McCarthy, 1986; Lifschitz,
1993). The idea is to deﬁne, in a standard ﬁrst-order language, both domain knowledge and
so-called abnormality predicates that identify instances of a class that violate the normal or
typical properties of that class. To capture the intuition that abnormality is exceptional,
inference is not based on the set of all models of the resulting theory as in classical logic,
but rather restricted to those models where the extension of the abnormality predicates is
minimal with respect to set inclusion. Intuitively, this means that reasoning is based only
on models that are “as normal as possible”. Since such models are classical models of the
given knowledge base, all classical ﬁrst-order inferences are valid in circumscription (but
additional inferences may become possible).
Since description logics are fragments of ﬁrst-order logic, circumscription can be readily
applied. Using ALC syntax, we can assert that mammals normally inhabitate land, and
that whales do not live on land:
Mammal
⊑
∃habitat.Land ⊔AbMammal
Whale
⊑
Mammal ⊓¬∃habitat.Land
The upper inclusion states that any mammal not inhabitating land is an abnormal mammal,
thus satisfying the abnormality predicate AbMammal. When applying circumscription to the
above TBox, we should thus only consider models where the extension of AbMammal is minimal.
However, there is more than one way of deﬁning such preferred models because each non-
minimized predicate can be treated in two diﬀerent ways during minimization: we may
either ﬁx its extension or let it vary freely.
Intuitively, ﬁxed predicates retain their classical semantics while varying predicates may
be aﬀected by minimization. As a concrete example, consider once more the above TBox
and assume that all non-minimized predicates are ﬁxed. Then we can derive the following
subsumptions:
Whale
⊑
AbMammal
AbMammal
.=
Mammal ⊓¬∃habitat.Land.
(†)
Here, Whale ⊑AbMammal and AbMammal ⊒Mammal⊓¬∃habitat.Land are classical consequences
of the TBox. The minimization of AbMammal adds only the inclusion AbMammal ⊑Mammal ⊓
¬∃habitat.Land.
To further analyze ﬁxed predicates, suppose that we explicitly introduce a concrete
mammal that is not a whale by adding an ABox assertion
Mammal ⊓¬Whale(flipper)
We might expect that we can derive ∃habitat.Land(flipper), but actually that is not the
case. To see this, observe that there is a classical model of the knowledge base that falsiﬁes
∃habitat.Land(flipper); the extension of the ﬁxed predicates habitat and Land are not
aﬀected by minimization, so ∃habitat.Land(flipper) must still be false after minimization.
The same argument can be applied to the negation of ∃habitat.Land(flipper), which is
thus also not derivable.
What we have just seen is that if a sentence uses only ﬁxed
722

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
predicates, then it is a consequence of a circumscribed knowledge base if, and only if, it is
a classical consequence of the knowledge base.
Now assume that we let the role habitat and the concept name Land vary freely, and ﬁx
only Mammal and Whale. In view of the concept inclusion for Mammal in our original TBox,
this setup may be interpreted as expressing that it is very unlikely for a mammal not to
live on land: we are willing to modify the extension of habitat and Land in order to avoid
abnormality. We obtain an additional consequence, namely:
Whale
.=
AbMammal.
(‡)
To see that this is indeed a consequence note that, during minimization, we can (i) make
Land non-empty and (ii) for any mammal m that is not a whale, ensure that m is not
an AbMammal by linking it via habitat to the generated instance of Land.2 Intuitively, the
equality (‡) can be seen as reﬂecting the unlikeliness of being abnormal: a mammal is only
abnormal if there is a reason, and the only reason that we have captured in our knowledge
base is being a whale.
Let us now return to the assertion Mammal ⊓¬Whale(flipper). By applying classical
reasoning to (†) and (‡), we derive Whale ⊒Mammal ⊓¬∃habitat.Land (i.e., whales are
the only mammals that do not live on land). Thus we can now derive the expected con-
clusion ∃habitat.Land(flipper). In summary, by turning habitat and Land into varying
predicates, we have obtained a more natural modelling in which the habitat attribute of
mammals can be forced to its default value.
Driving our example further, we might now consider whales abnormal to such a degree
that we do not believe they exist unless there is evidence that they do. Then we should,
additionally, let Whale vary freely. The result is that (†) and (‡) can still be derived, and
additionally we obtain the consequence
Whale .= AbMammal .= ⊥.
We can then use an ABox to add evidence that whales exist, e.g. through the assertion
Whale(mobydick). As expected, the result of this change is that
Whale .= AbMammal .= {mobydick}.
Evidence for the existence of another, anonymous whale could be generated by adding the
ABox assertion Male(mobydick) and the TBox statement
Whale ⊑∃mother.(Whale ⊓¬Male)
with mother and Male varying freely. This knowledge base classically entails that there exist
two whales, satisfying Male and ¬Male, respectively. The former is denoted by mobydick,
while the latter is not denoted by any ABox individual (which corresponds to a ﬁrst-order
constant). After minimization, Whale contains exactly those two individuals.
In general, the appropriate combination of ﬁxed and varying predicates depends on the
application. Therefore, we adhere to standard circumscription and give users the freedom
to choose which predicates are minimized, ﬁxed, and varying.
2. Indeed, this is the only reason to let Land vary: to ensure that it can be made non-empty during
minimization.
723

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
As another example, consider the sentences: “In humans, the heart is usually located
on the left-hand side of the body; in humans with situs inversus, the heart is located on the
right-hand side of the body”. They can be axiomatized as follows:
Human ⊑∃has heart.∃has position.{Left} ⊔AbHuman
Situs Inversus ⊑∃has heart.∃has position.{Right}
∃has heart.∃has position.{Left} ⊓∃has heart.∃has position.{Right} ⊑⊥.
The predicate AbHuman represents abnormal humans and should be minimized. If humans
with situs inversus are to be restricted to those individuals that are explicitly declared to
have this property, then by analogy with the previous example the roles specifying heart
position and the class of exceptional individuals Situs Inversus should be allowed to vary
while Human can be ﬁxed and retain its classical semantics. As a result and in the absence of
any further axioms, AbHuman and Situs Inversus are empty in all minimized models. The
additional axiom ∃has friend.Situs Inversus(John) turns AbHuman and Situs Inversus
into a singleton set containing an anonymous individual (though in some models, it may be
John himself). As an example for a nonclassical consequence, consider:
Human ⊓¬Situs Inversus ⊑∃has heart.∃has position.{Left} ,
that is, all humans have the default heart position with the only exception of those that are
explicitly declared to have situs inversus.
It has been extensively argued (McCarthy, 1986; Horty, 1994; Brewka, 1994; Baader &
Hollunder, 1995b) that there is an interplay between subsumption and abnormality predi-
cates that should be addressed in nonmonotonic DLs. Consider, for example, the following
TBox:
User
⊑
¬∃hasAccessTo.{ConfidentialFile} ⊔AbUser
Staff
⊑
User
Staff
⊑
∃hasAccessTo.{ConfidentialFile} ⊔AbStaff
BlacklistedStaff
⊑
Staff ⊓¬∃hasAccessTo.{ConfidentialFile}
To get models that are “as normal as possible”, as a ﬁrst attempt we could minimize the
two abnormality predicates AbUser and AbStaff in parallel. Assume that hasAccessTo is
varying, and User, Staff, and BlacklistedStaff are ﬁxed. Then, the result of parallel
minimization is that staﬀmembers may or may not have access to conﬁdential ﬁles, with
equal preference. In the ﬁrst case, they are abnormal users, and in the second case, they
are abnormal staﬀ. However, one may argue that the ﬁrst option should be preferred: since
Staff ⊑User (but not the other way round), the normality information for staﬀis more
speciﬁc than the normality information for users and should have higher priority. Such ef-
fects are well-known also from the propositional/ﬁrst-order case and indeed, circumscription
has soon after its introduction been extended with priorities to address issues of speciﬁcity
(McCarthy, 1986).
In our formalism, users can specify priorities between minimized predicates. Typically,
these priorities will reﬂect the subsumption hierarchy (as computed w.r.t. the class of all
models). Since the subsumption hierarchy is in general a partial order, the priorities between
minimized predicates may form a partial order, too. This approach is analogous to partially
724

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
ordering priorities on default rules, as proposed by Brewka (1994).
It is more general
than standard prioritized circumscription, which assumes a total ordering (McCarthy, 1986;
Lifschitz, 1985), and a special case of nested circumscription (Lifschitz, 1995).
2.2 Circumscribed Knowledge Bases
To deﬁne DLs with circumscription, we start by introducing circumscription patterns. They
describe how individual predicates are treated during minimization.
Deﬁnition 1 (Circumscription pattern, <CP) A circumscription pattern is a tuple CP
of the form (≺, M, F, V ), where ≺is a strict partial order over M, and M, F, and V
are mutually disjoint subsets of NC ∪NR, the minimized, ﬁxed, and varying predicates,
respectively. By ⪯, we denote the reﬂexive closure of ≺. Deﬁne a preference relation <CP
on interpretations by setting I <CP J iﬀthe following conditions hold:
1. ∆I = ∆J and, for all a ∈NI, aI = aJ ,
2. for all p ∈F, pI = pJ ,
3. for all p ∈M, if pI ̸⊆pJ then there exists q ∈M, q ≺p, such that qI ⊂qJ ,
4. there exists p ∈M such that pI ⊂pJ and for all q ∈M such that q ≺p, qI = qJ .
When M ∪F ⊆NC (i.e., the minimized and ﬁxed predicates are all concepts) we call
(≺, M, F, V ) a concept circumscription pattern.
△
We use the term concept circumscription if only concept circumscription patterns are ad-
mitted.
Based on circumscription patterns, we can deﬁne circumscribed DL knowledge
bases and their models.
Deﬁnition 2 (Circumscribed KB) A circumscribed knowledge base (cKB) is an expres-
sion CircCP(T , A), where T is a TBox, A an ABox, and CP = (≺, M, F, V ) a circumscrip-
tion pattern such that M, F, V partition the predicates used in T and A. An interpretation
I is a model of CircCP(T , A) if it is a model of T and A and there exists no model I′ of T
and A such that I′ <CP I.
A cKB CircCP(T , A) is called a concept-circumscribed KB if CP is a concept circum-
scription pattern.
△
Note that partially ordered circumscription becomes standard parallel circumscription if
the empty relation is used for ≺.
The main reasoning tasks for (non-circumscribed) KBs are satisﬁability of concepts
w.r.t. KBs, subsumption w.r.t. KBs, and instance checking w.r.t. KBs. These reasoning
tasks are fundamental for circumscribed KBs as well. We now provide precise deﬁnitions
of these tasks.
Throughout this and the following section, DL denotes the set of DLs
introduced in the previous section; i.e., ALC, ALCI, ALCO, ALCQ, ALCQI, ALCIO,
ALCQO, and ALCQIO.
Deﬁnition 3 (Reasoning tasks)
725

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
• A concept C is satisﬁable w.r.t. a cKB CircCP(T , A) if some model I of CircCP(T , A)
satisﬁes CI ̸= ∅. Let L ∈DL. The satisﬁability problem w.r.t. cKBs in L is deﬁned
as follows: given a concept C in L and a cKB CircCP(T , A) in L, decide whether C
is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A).
• A concept C is subsumed by a concept D w.r.t. a cKB CircCP(T , A), in symbols
CircCP(T , A) |= C ⊑D, if CI ⊆DI for all models I of CircCP(T , A). Let L ∈DL.
The subsumption problem w.r.t. cKBs in L is deﬁned as follows: given concepts C
and D in L and a cKB CircCP(T , A) in L, decide whether CircCP(T , A) |= C ⊑D.
• An individual name a is an instance of a concept C w.r.t. a cKB CircCP(T , A), in
symbols CircCP(T , A) |= C(a), if aI ∈CI for all models I of CircCP(T , A).
Let
L ∈DL.
The instance problem w.r.t. cKBs in L is deﬁned as follows: given a
concept C in L, an individual name a, and a cKB CircCP(T , A) in L, decide whether
CircCP(T , A) |= C(a).
△
These reasoning problems can be polynomially reduced to one another: ﬁrst, C is satisﬁable
w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) iﬀCircCP(T , A) ̸|= C ⊑⊥, and CircCP(T , A) |= C ⊑D iﬀC ⊓¬D
is not satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A). And second, C is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) iﬀ
CircCP(T , A) ̸|= ¬C(a), where a is an individual name not appearing in T and A; conversely,
we have CircCP(T , A) |= C(a) iﬀA⊓¬C is not satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP′(T , A∪{A(a)}), where
A is a concept name not occurring in T and A, and CP′ is obtained from CP by adding A
to M (and leaving ≺as it is). In this paper, we use satisﬁability w.r.t. cKBs as the basic
reasoning problem.
3. Basic Reductions
We present three basic reductions between reasoning problems for circumscribed knowledge
bases that are interesting in their own right and, additionally, will be useful for establishing
the main results of this paper later on. More precisely, we replay a well-known reduction of
ﬁxed predicates to minimized predicates in the context of DLs, reduce reasoning w.r.t. cKBs
with general TBoxes to reasoning w.r.t. cKBs with acyclic TBoxes, and show that, under
certain conditions, simultaneous satisﬁability w.r.t. a collection of cKBs is reducible to
satisﬁability w.r.t. a single cKB.
3.1 Fixed and minimized concepts
In circumscription, it is folklore that ﬁxed predicates can be simulated in terms of minimized
predicates, see e.g. de Kleer (1989). In the case of DLs, the same simulation is possible
for concept names.
To see this, let C0 be a concept and CircCP(T , A) a circumscribed
KB with CP = (≺, M, F, V ) and F0 = {A1, . . . , Ak} = F ∩NC.
Deﬁne a new pattern
CP′ = (≺, M′, F \ F0, V ) with
• M′ = M ∪{A1, . . . , Ak, A′
1, . . . , A′
k}, where A′
1, . . . , A′
k are concept names that do not
occur in C0, M, F, V , T , and A;
• T ′ = T ∪{A′
i
.= ¬Ai | 1 ≤i ≤k}.
726

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
It is not diﬃcult to see that C0 is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) iﬀit is satisﬁable w.r.t.
CircCP′(T ′, A). Thus, we get the following result.
Lemma 4 Let L ∈DL. Then satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs in L can be
polynomially reduced to satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs in L that have no
ﬁxed concept names.
In contrast to concept names, ﬁxed role names cannot be reduced to minimized role names
since Boolean operators on roles are not available in standard DLs such as ALCQIO. A
proof is given in Section 6, where we show that, in some cases, reasoning with minimized
role names is decidable, whereas the corresponding reasoning task for cKBs with ﬁxed role
names is undecidable.
The reduction above clearly relies on TBoxes. However, in this paper we will sometimes
work with circumscribed KBs in which the TBox is empty. The following lemma, proved in
the appendix, shows that for cKBs in ALC without ﬁxed role names and with empty TBox,
one can simulate ﬁxed concept names using minimized concept names without introducing
a TBox. The proof, which may be viewed as a much more careful version of the proof of
Lemma 4, can be adapted to yield an analogous result for the other logics in DL.
Lemma 5 In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs with empty TBox and
without ﬁxed roles can be polynomially reduced to satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed
KBs with empty TBox and without ﬁxed predicates.
3.2 Acyclic and General TBoxes
For many DLs, satisﬁability w.r.t. (non-circumscribed) KBs with general TBoxes is harder
than satisﬁability w.r.t. (non-circumscribed) KBs with acyclic TBoxes. In the case of ALC,
ALCI, ALCQ, and ALCQO, the latter problem is PSpace-complete (Baader, McGuiness,
Nardi, & Patel-Schneider, 2003; Baader, Milicic, Lutz, Sattler, & Wolter, 2005b; Y. Ding
& Wu, 2007) while the former is ExpTime-complete (Baader et al., 2003).
The only
DLs considered in this paper for which satisﬁability is ExpTime-hard already with acyclic
TBoxes are ALCIO and its extensions (Areces, Blackburn, & Marx, 2000). We show that,
for circumscribed KBs, there is no diﬀerence in computational complexity between acyclic
and general TBoxes.
Let C0 be a concept and CircCP(T , A) a cKB with CP = (≺, M, F, V ). We may assume
without loss of generality that T = {⊤.= C} for some concept C. (To see this, observe that
axioms C ⊑D are equivalent to ⊤.= ¬C ⊔D). Deﬁne
• an acyclic TBox T ′ = {A .= C, B .= ∃u.¬A, A′ .= ¬A, B′ .= ¬B}, where A, B, A′, B′, u
are new concept and role names not occurring in T , A, M, F, V , and C0.
• a circumscription pattern CP′ = (≺, M′, F, V ′), where M′ = M ∪{A′, B′} and V ′ =
V ∪{A, B, u}.
We will ad B′ conjunctively to C0 and thus be interested in models of CircCP′(T ′, A) where
(B′)I ̸= ∅. In such models, we have AI = ∆I (and thus CI = ∆I) since, otherwise, we
can turn each instance d of B′ into an instance of ¬B′ by making d an instance of B and
727

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
linking it via the role u to an instance of ¬A, thus obtaining a more preferred model w.r.t.
<CP′. This is the basis of the proof of the following lemma, given in the appendix.
Lemma 6 C0 is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) iﬀC0⊓B′ is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP′(T ′, A).
Thus, we have obtained the following result.
Proposition 7 Let L ∈DL. Satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs in L can be
polynomially reduced to satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs in L with acyclic
TBoxes and without changing the ABox.
This shows that satisﬁability w.r.t. cKBs with acyclic TBoxes is of the same complexity as
satisﬁability w.r.t. cKBs with general TBoxes. In many cases considered in this paper, the
same is even true for cKBs with empty TBoxes, c.f. Section 4. However, we also identify
cases where cKBs with non-empty TBoxes have higher complexity (see Theorems 24 and 28),
and thus a general reduction as the one underlying Proposition 7 cannot exist for the case
of empty TBoxes.
3.3 Simultaneous Satisﬁability
In applications, it is often necessary to merge TBoxes, ABoxes, and whole knowledge bases
by taking their union. We show that, under certain conditions, reasoning w.r.t. the union
of several circumscribed KBs can be reduced to reasoning w.r.t. the component cKBs. A
concept C is simultaneously satisﬁable w.r.t. cKBs CircCP1(T1, A1), . . . , CircCPk(Tk, Ak) if
there exists an interpretation I that is a model of all the cKBs and satisﬁes CI ̸= ∅.
The following lemma says that simultaneous satisﬁability can be polynomially reduced to
satisﬁability w.r.t. a single cKB if there are no two cKBs that share a role name.
The proof idea for the case k = 2 is as follows. Given CircCP1(T1, A1) and CircCP2(T2, A2),
we ﬁrst take the union of these two cKBs, replacing in CircCP2(T2, A2) each concept name
A that is also used in CircCP1(T1, A1) with a fresh concept name A′. We then introduce an
additional concept name P (for ‘problem’) and make sure that P is satisﬁed by each ABox
individual whenever there is a point in the model where the interpretation of A and A′
disagrees. We then look for a model where P is not satisﬁed in the ABox. Intuitively, the
additional concept name P satisﬁes the purpose of ‘decoupling’ A and A′, which is important
e.g. in the case where A/A′ is minimized both in CircCP1(T1, A1) and CircCP2(T2, A2). Details
are given in the appendix.
Lemma 8 For all L ∈DL, simultaneous satisﬁability w.r.t. (concept-)circumscribed KBs
CircCP1(T1, A1), . . . CircCPk(Tk, Ak), such that CircCPi(Ti, Ai) and CircCPj(Tj, Aj) share no
role names for 1 ≤i < j ≤k, can be reduced in polynomial time to satisﬁability w.r.t. single
(concept-)circumscribed KBs.
4. The Complexity of Reasoning in Concept-Circumscribed KBs
The main contributions of this paper consist in (i) showing that, in many cases, reasoning
with circumscribed knowledge bases is decidable; and (ii) performing a detailed analysis
728

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
of the computational complexity of these decidable cases. In this section, we show that
satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs is NExpNP-complete for the DL ALC and
its extensions ALCIO and ALCQO. We also show that it is NPNExp-complete if the number
of ﬁxed and minimized concept names is bounded by a constant. We ﬁrst present proofs of
the upper bounds and then establish matching lower bounds.
4.1 Upper Bounds
We start with the general case in which there is no bound on the number of ﬁxed and
minimized predicates.
4.1.1 The General Case
We prepare the upper bound proof by showing that if a concept is satisﬁable w.r.t. a
concept-circumscribed KB, then it is satisﬁable in a model of bounded size. We use |C| to
denote the length of the concept C, i.e., the number of (occurrences of) symbols needed to
write C. The size |T | of a TBox T is P
C⊑D∈T |C| + |D|, and the size |A| of an ABox A is
the sum of the sizes of all assertions in A, where the size of each role assertion is 1 and the
size of concept assertions C(a) is |C|.
Lemma 9 Let C0 be a concept, CircCP(T , A) a concept-circumscribed KB, and n := |C0| +
|T | + |A|. If C0 is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A), then the following holds:
(i) If T , A and C0 are formulated in ALCIO, then C0 is satisﬁed in a model I of
CircCP(T , A) with #∆I ≤22n.
(ii) If T , A and C0 are formulated in ALCQO and m is the maximal parameter occur-
ring in a number restriction in T , A, or C0, then C0 is satisﬁed in a model I of
CircCP(T , A) with #∆I ≤22n × (m + 1) × n.
Proof. Let CP, T , A, and C0 be as in Lemma 9. We may assume that A = ∅as every
assertion C(a) can be expressed as an implication {a} ⊑C, and every assertion r(a, b) can
be expressed as {a} ⊑∃r.{b}. Denote by cl(C, T ) the smallest set of concepts that contains
all subconcepts of C, all subconcepts of concepts appearing in T , and is closed under single
negations (i.e., if D ∈cl(C, T ) and D does not start with ¬, then ¬D ∈cl(C, T )).
Let I be a common model of C0 and CircCP(T , A), and let d0 ∈CI
0 . Deﬁne an equiva-
lence relation “∼” on ∆I by setting d ∼d′ iﬀ
{C ∈cl(C0, T ) | d ∈CI} = {C ∈cl(C0, T ) | d′ ∈CI}.
We use [d] to denote the equivalence class of d ∈∆I w.r.t. the “∼” relation. Pick from each
equivalence class [d] exactly one member and denote the resulting subset of ∆I by ∆′.
We ﬁrst prove Point (i). Thus, assume that T and C0 are formulated in ALCIO. We
deﬁne a new interpretation J as follows:
∆J
:=
∆′
AJ
:=
{d ∈∆′ | d ∈AI}
rJ
:=
{(d1, d2) ∈∆′ × ∆′ | ∃d′
1 ∈[d1], d′
2 ∈[d2] : (d′
1, d′
2) ∈rI}
aJ
:=
d ∈∆′ if aI ∈[d].
729

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
The following claim is easily proved using induction on the structure of C.
Claim: For all C ∈cl(C0, T ) and all d ∈∆I, we have d ∈CI iﬀd′ ∈CJ for the element
d′ ∈[d] of ∆J .
Thus, J is a model of T satisfying C0. To show that J is a model of CircCP(T , A), it thus
remains to show that there is no model J ′ of T with J ′ <CP J . Assume to the contrary
that there is such a J ′. We deﬁne an interpretation I′ as follows:
∆I′
:=
∆I
AI′
:=
[
d∈AJ ′
[d]
rI′
:=
[
(d1,d2)∈rJ ′
[d1] × [d2]
aI′
:=
aI.
It is a matter of routine to show the following:
Claim: For all concepts C ∈cl(C0, T ) and all d ∈∆I, we have d ∈CI′ iﬀd′ ∈CJ ′ for the
element d′ ∈[d] from ∆J .
It follows that I′ is a model of T . Observe that AI ⊙AI′ iﬀAJ ⊙AJ ′ for each concept
name A and ⊙∈{⊇, ⊆}. Therefore – and since CP is a concept circumscription pattern –
I′ <CP I follows from J ′ <CP J . We have derived a contradiction and conclude that J is
a model of CircCP(T , A). Thus we are done since the size of J is bounded by 22n.
Now for Point (ii).
Pick, for each d ∈∆′ and each concept (⩾k r C) ∈cl(C0, T )
such that d ∈(⩾k r C)I, k elements from {d′ | d′ ∈CI, (d, d′) ∈rI}.
Also pick, for
each concept (⩽k r C) ∈cl(C0, T ) such that d ∈(¬(⩽k r C))I, k + 1 elements from
{d′ | d′ ∈CI, (d, d′) ∈rI}. Denote by ∆′′ the collection of the elements picked. Take for
each d ∈∆′′ \ ∆′ an element ds ∈∆′ such that d ∼ds and deﬁne an interpretation J by
∆J
:=
∆′ ∪∆′′
AJ
:=
{d ∈∆′ ∪∆′′ | d ∈AI}
rJ
:=
{(d1, d2) ∈∆′ × (∆′ ∪∆′′) | (d1, d2) ∈rI}
∪{(d1, d2) ∈(∆′′ \ ∆′) × (∆′ ∪∆′′) | (ds
1, d2) ∈rI}
aJ
:=
d if aI ∈[d].
The following claim is easily proved.
Claim: For all C ∈cl(C0, T ), we have the following:
(i) for all d, d′ ∈∆J , if d ∼d′, then d ∈CJ iﬀd′ ∈CJ ;
(ii) for all d ∈∆I, we have d ∈CI iﬀd′ ∈CJ for some element d′ ∈[d] of ∆J .
Thus, J is a model of T satisfying C0. To show that J is a model of CircCP(T , A), it
thus remains to show that there is no model J ′ of T with J ′ <CP J . Assume to the
contrary that there is such a J ′. We deﬁne an interpretation I′. To this end, take for each
730

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
d ∈∆I \ ∆J the dp ∈∆′ such that d ∼dp. Now deﬁne I′ as follows
∆I′
:=
∆I
AI′
:=
AJ ′ ∪{d ∈∆I \ ∆J | dp ∈AJ ′}
rI′
:=
rJ ′ ∪{(d1, d2) ∈(∆I \ ∆J ) × ∆I | (dp
1, d2) ∈rJ ′}
aI′
:=
aI.
Again, it is a matter of routine to show:
Claim: For all concepts C ∈cl(C0, T ) and all d ∈∆I, we have d ∈CI′ ∩∆J iﬀd ∈CJ ′
and d ∈CI′ ∩(∆I \ ∆J ) iﬀdp ∈CJ ′ for the element dp ∈[d] from ∆′.
It follows that I′ is a model for T . Observe that AI ⊙AI′ iﬀAJ ⊙AJ ′ for each concept
name A and ⊙∈{⊇, ⊆}. Therefore – and since CP is a concept circumscription pattern
– I′ <CP I follows from J ′ <CP J . We have derived a contradiction and conclude that
J is a model of CircCP(T , A). Thus we are done since the size of J is clearly bounded
by 22n × (m + 1) × n.
J
It is interesting to note that the proof of Lemma 9 does not go through if role names are
minimized or ﬁxed. This problem cannot be overcome, as proved by the undecidability
results presented in Sections 5 and 6.
Using the bounded model property just established, we can now prove decidability
of reasoning with concept-circumscribed KBs formulated in ALCIO and ALCQO. More
precisely, Lemma 9 suggests a non-deterministic decision procedure for satisﬁability w.r.t.
concept circumscription patterns: simply guess an interpretation of bounded size and then
check whether it is a model. It turns out that this procedure shows containment of satisﬁ-
ability in the complexity class NExpNP, which contains those problems that can be solved
by a non-deterministic exponentially time-bounded Turing machine that has access to an
NP oracle. It is known that NExp ⊆NExpNP ⊆ExpSpace.
Theorem 10 In ALCIO and ALCQO, it is in NExpNP to decide whether a concept is
satisﬁable w.r.t. a concept-circumscribed KB CircCP(T , A).
Proof.
It is not hard to see that there exists an NP algorithm that takes as input a
cKB CircCP(T , A) and a ﬁnite interpretation I, and checks whether I is not a model of
CircCP(T , A): the algorithm ﬁrst veriﬁes in polynomial time whether I is a model of T and
A, answering “yes” if this is not the case. Otherwise, the algorithm guesses an interpretation
J that has the same domain as I and interprets all individual names in the same way, and
then checks whether (i) J is a model of T and A, and (ii) J <CP I. It answers “yes” if
both checks succeed, and “no” otherwise. Clearly, checking whether J <CP I can be done
in time polynomial w.r.t. the size of J and I.
This NP algorithm may now be used as an oracle in a NExp-algorithm for deciding
satisﬁability of a concept C0 w.r.t. a cKB CircCP(T , A): by Lemma 9, it suﬃces to guess
an interpretation of size 24k with k = |C0| + |T | + |A|,3 and then use the NP algorithm
to check whether I is a model of CircCP(T , A). This proves that concept satisﬁability is in
NExpNP.
J
3. The bound 24k clearly dominates the two bounds given in Parts (i) and (ii) of Lemma 9.
731

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
By the reductions given in Section 2, Theorem 10 yields co-NExpNP upper bounds for
subsumption and the instance problem.
We will show in Section 4.2 that these upper
bounds are tight.
4.1.2 Bounded Number of Minimized and Fixed Predicates
Since NExpNP is a rather large complexity class, it is a natural question whether we can
impose restrictions on concept circumscription such that reasoning becomes simpler. In the
following, we identify such a case by considering concept-circumscribed KBs in which the
number of minimized and ﬁxed concept names is bounded by some constant. In this case, the
complexity of satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs drops to NPNExp. For readers
uninitiated to oracle complexity classes, we recall that NExp ⊆NPNExp ⊆NExpNP, and
that NPNExp is believed to be much less powerful than NExpNP, see for example the work
by Eiter et al. (2004).
To prove the NPNExp upper bound, we ﬁrst introduce counting formulas as a common
generalization of TBoxes and ABoxes.
Deﬁnition 11 (Counting Formula) A counting formula φ is a Boolean combination of
concept implications, ABox assertions C(a), and cardinality assertions (C = n) where C
is a concept and n a non-negative integer. We use ∧, ∨, ¬ and →to denote the Boolean
operators of counting formulas. An interpretation I satisﬁes a cardinality assertion (C = n)
if #CI = n. The satisfaction relation I |= φ between models I and counting formulas φ is
deﬁned in the obvious way.
△
In the following, we assume that the integers occurring in cardinality assertions are coded
in binary. The NPNExp algorithm to be devised will use an algorithm for satisﬁability of
(non-circumscribed) counting formulas as an oracle. Therefore, we should ﬁrst determine
the computational complexity of the latter. It follows from results by Tobies (2000) that,
in ALC, satisﬁability of counting formulas is NExp-hard. A matching upper bound for
the DLs ALCIO and ALCQO is obtained from the facts that (i) there is a polynomial
translation of counting formulas formulated in these languages into C2, the two-variable
fragment of ﬁrst-order logic extended with counting quantiﬁers (Gr¨adel, Otto, & Rosen,
1997; Pacholski, Szwast, & Tendera, 2000), and (ii) satisﬁability in C2 is in NExp even if
the numbers in counting quantiﬁers are coded in binary (Pratt-Hartmann, 2005).
Theorem 12 (Tobies, Pratt) In ALC, ALCIO and ALCQO, satisﬁability of counting
formulas is NExp-complete even if numbers in number restrictions are coded in binary.
We now establish the improved upper bound.
Theorem 13 Let c be a constant. In ALCIO and ALCQO, it is in NPNExp to decide sat-
isﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs CircCP(T , A), where CP = (≺, M, F, V ) is such
that #M ≤c and #F ≤c.
732

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Proof.
Assume that we want to decide satisﬁability of the concept C0 w.r.t. the cKB
CircCP(T , A), where CP = (≺, M, F, V ) with #M ≤c and #F ≤c. By Lemma 4, we
may assume that F = ∅(we may have to increase the constant c appropriately).
We
may assume without loss of generality that the cardinality of M is exactly c. Thus, let
M = {A0, . . . , Ac}. By Lemma 9, C0 is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) iﬀthere exists a
model of C0 and CircCP(T , A) of size 24k, with k = |C0| + |T | + |A|. Consider, for all
S ⊆M, the concept
CS := ⊓
A∈S A ⊓
⊓
A∈{A1,...,Ac}\S ¬A.
As c is constant, the number 2c of such concepts is constant as well. Clearly, the sets CI
S,
S ⊆M, form a partition of the domain ∆I of any model I. Introduce, for each concept
name B and role name r in T ∪A, a fresh concept name B′ and a fresh role name r′,
respectively. For a concept C, denote by C′ the result of replacing in C each concept name
B and role name r with B′ and r′, respectively. The primed versions A′ and T ′ of A and
T are deﬁned analogously. Denote by N the set of individual names in T ∪A ∪{C0}.
The NExp-oracle we are going to use in our algorithm checks whether a counting formula
φ is satisﬁable or not. Now, the NPNExp-algorithm is as follows (we use C ⊏D as an
abbreviation for the counting formula (C ⊑D) ∧¬(D ⊑C)):
1. Guess
• a sequence (nS | S ⊆M) of numbers nS ≤24k coded in binary;
• for each individual name a ∈N, exactly one set Sa ⊆M;
• a subset E of N × N.
2. By calling the oracle, check whether the counting formula φ1 is satisﬁable, where φ1
is the conjunction over
• T ∪A ∪{¬(C0 = 0)};
• (CS = nS), for all S ⊆M;
• CSa(a), for each a ∈N;
• {({a} ⊑{b}) | (a, b) ∈E} ∪{¬({a} ⊑{b}) | (a, b) ∈N −E}.
3. By calling the oracle, check whether the counting formula φ2 is satisﬁable, where φ2
is the conjunction over
• T ′ ∪A′;
• (CS = nS), for all S ⊆M (note that we use the unprimed versions);
• CSa(a), for each individual name a ∈N (we use the unprimed versions);
• {({a} ⊑{b}) | (a, b) ∈E} ∪{¬({a} ⊑{b}) | (a, b) ∈N −E};
• for all A ∈M,
¬(A′ ⊑A) →
_
B∈M,B≺A
(B′ ⊏B);
733

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
• and, ﬁnally,
_
A∈M
 (A′ ⊏A) ∧
^
B∈M,B≺A
(B .= B′)

.
4. The algorithm states that C0 is satisﬁable in a model of CircCP(T , A) if, and only if,
φ1 is satisﬁable and φ2 is not satisﬁable.
Using the fact that c is ﬁxed, is is not hard to verify that this is a NPNExp-algorithm. It
remains to show correctness and completeness.
Suppose that there exists a model of CircCP(T , A) satisfying C0. Then there is such a
model I of size bounded by 24k. Let the algorithm guess
• the numbers nS = #CI
S, S ⊆M,
• the sets Sa such that aI ∈CI
Sa,
• the set E = {(a, b), (b, a) | aI = bI, a, b ∈N}.
Clearly, φ1 is satisﬁed in I. It remains to show that φ2 is unsatisﬁable. But suppose there
exists a model J satisfying φ2. By the deﬁnitions of φ1 and φ2, we may assume that
• ∆I = ∆J ;
• AI = AJ for all A ∈M;
• aI = aJ for all individual names a.
Moreover, as no unprimed role names occur in φ2 and the only unprimed concept names in
φ2 are those in M, we may assume that the interpretation of all unprimed concept and role
names in I and J coincide. Thus, J is a model of CircCP(T , A) satisfying C0. But now
deﬁne a model J ′ with domain ∆J by setting
• aJ ′ = aJ , for all individual names a;
• rJ ′ = (r′)J , for all role names r;
• AJ ′ = (A′)J , for all concept names A.
Then, by the conjunct under Item 1 of the deﬁnition of φ2, J ′ is a model for A ∪T . By
Items 5 and 6 of the deﬁnition of φ2, J ′ <CP J , and we have derived a contradiction.
Conversely, suppose the algorithm says that there exists a model of CircCP(T , A) satis-
fying C0. Then take a model I for φ1. By the conjunct under Item 1 of φ1, I is a model
for T ∪A satisfying C0. It follows from the unsatisﬁability of φ2 that I is a model for
CircCP(T , A).
J
734

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
As a corollary, we obtain co-NPNExp upper bounds for subsumption and the instance prob-
lem. A similar drop of complexity occurs in propositional logic, where satisﬁability w.r.t.
circumscribed theories is complete for NPNP and it is not diﬃcult to see that bounding the
minimized and ﬁxed predicates allows us to ﬁnd a PNP algorithm.
4.2 Lower Bounds
We prove lower complexity bounds for reasoning with concept-circumscribed KBs that
match the upper bounds given in Section 4.1.
4.2.1 The General Case
As in Section 4.1, we start with the general case in which the number of ﬁxed and minimized
predicates is not bounded. Our aim is to establish two NExpNP-lower bounds that both
match the upper bound established in Theorem 10. The ﬁrst bound is for satisﬁability w.r.t.
concept-circumscribed KBs that are formulated in ALC and have an empty TBox, but a non-
empty ABox. The second bound is also for satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs
formulated in ALC, but assumes an acyclic TBox and empty ABox. Both reductions work
already in the case of an empty preference relation, and without any ﬁxed predicates. Note
that considering satisﬁability of a concept C w.r.t. a concept-circumscribed KB CircCP(T , A)
with both T and A empty is not very interesting: it can be seen that C is satisﬁable w.r.t.
CircCP(T , A) iﬀC⊥is satisﬁable (without reference to any KB), where C⊥is the concept
obtained from C by replacing all minimized concept names with ⊥.
The proof of our ﬁrst result is by reduction of a succinct version of the problem co-
CERT3COL, which is NExpNP-complete (Eiter, Gottlob, & Mannila, 1997), to satisﬁability
w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs with empty TBox. Let us ﬁrst introduce the regular (non-
succinct) version of co-CERT3COL:
Instance of size n: an undirected graph G on the vertices {0, 1, . . . , n −1} such that every
edge is labelled with a disjunction of two literals over the Boolean variables {Vi,j | i, j < n}.
Yes-Instance of size n: an instance G of size n such that, for some truth value assignment
t to the Boolean variables, the graph t(G) obtained from G by including only those edges
whose label evaluates to true under t is not 3-colorable.
As shown by Stewart (1991), co-CERT3COL is complete for NPNP. To obtain a problem
complete for NExpNP, Eiter et al. use the complexity upgrade technique: by encoding the
input in a succinct form using Boolean circuits, the complexity is raised by one exponential
to NExpNP (Eiter et al., 1997). More precisely, the succinct version co-CERT3COLS of
co-CERT3COL is obtained by representing the input graph G with nodes {0, . . . , 2n −1}
as 4n + 3 Boolean circuits with 2n inputs (and one output) each. The Boolean circuits are
named cE, c(1)
S , c(2)
S , and c(i)
j , with i ∈{1, 2, 3, 4} and j < n. For all circuits, the 2n inputs
are the bits of the binary representation of two nodes of the graph. The purpose of the
circuits is as follows:
• circuit cE outputs 1 if there is an edge between the two input nodes, and 0 otherwise;
• if there is an edge between the input nodes, circuit c(1)
S
outputs 1 if the ﬁrst literal
in the disjunction labelling this edge is positive, and 0 otherwise; circuit c(2)
S
does the
735

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
same for the second literal; if there is no edge between the input nodes, the output is
arbitrary;
• if there is an edge between the input nodes, the circuits c(i)
j
compute the labelling
Vk1,k2∨Vk3,k4 of this edge between the input nodes by generating the numbers k1, . . . , k4:
circuit c(i)
j
outputs the j-th bit of ki; if there is no edge between the input nodes, the
output is arbitrary.
We reduce co-CERT3COLS to satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs that are for-
mulated in ALC and whose TBox and preference relation are empty. It then remains to
apply Lemma 5 to eliminate ﬁxed concept names (we note that the construction in the
proof of the lemma leaves the preference relation untouched). Let
G = (n, cE, c(1)
S , c(2)
S , {c(i)
j }i∈{1,..,4},j<n)
be the (succinct representation of the) input graph with 2n nodes. We construct an ABox
AG = {C0 ⊓Root(a0)}, a circumscription pattern CPG, and a concept CG such that G is a
yes-instance of co-CERT3COLS iﬀCG is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCPG(∅, AG).
The concept C0 used in AG is a conjunction whose presentation is split into two parts.
Intuitively, the purpose of the ﬁrst group of conjuncts is to ﬁx a truth assignment t for
the variables {Vi,j | i, j < n}, and to construct (an isomorphic image of) the graph t(G)
obtained from G by including only those edges whose label evaluates to true under t. Then,
the purpose of the second group is to make sure that t(G) is not 3-colorable.
When formulating C0, we use several binary counters for counting modulo 2n (the
number of nodes in the input graph). The main counters X and Y use concept names
X0, . . . , Xn−1 and Y0, . . . , Yn−1 as their bits, respectively. Additionally, we introduce concept
names K(i)
0 , . . . , K(i)
n−1, i ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}, that serve as four additional counters K(1), . . . , K(4).
The ﬁrst group of conjuncts of C0 can be found in Figure 2, where the following abbreviations
are used:
• ∀ri.C denotes the n-fold nesting ∀r. · · · .∀r.C;
• ∀r.(K(i) = X) is an abbreviation for ⊓
j<n
 (Xj →∀r.K(i)
j ) ⊓(¬Xj →∀r.¬K(i)
j )

and
similarly for ∀r.(K(i) = Y );
• the abbreviations Wc, c a Boolean circuit, are explained later on.
The intuition behind Figure 2 is as follows. Lines (1) to (5) build up a binary tree of depth
2n whose edges are labeled with the role name r. The 22n leaves of the tree are instances
of the concept name Leaf, and they are labeled with all possible values of the counters X
and Y . Since we will minimize Leaf via the circumscription pattern CPG, this concept name
denotes precisely the leaves of the tree. Due to the use of the counters X and Y , the leaves
are all distinct.
The leaves of the tree just established satisfy a number of purposes. To start with,
each leaf with counter values X = i and Y = j corresponds to the variable Vi,j of co-
3CERTCOLS and determines a truth value for this variable via truth/falsity of the concept
736

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
∀ri.(∃r.Xi ⊓∃r.¬Xi)
for i < n
(1)
∀rj.((Xi →∀r.Xi) ⊓(¬Xi →∀r.¬Xi))
for i < n, j < 2n
(2)
∀rn+i.(∃r.Yi ⊓∃r.¬Yi)
i < n
(3)
∀rn+j.((Yi →∀r.Yi) ⊓(¬Yi →∀r.¬Yi))
for i < j < n
(4)
∀r2n.Leaf
(5)
∀r2n.(WcE ⊓Wc(1)
S ⊓Wc(2)
S )
(6)
∀r2n.(Wc(1)
j
⊓· · · ⊓Wc(4)
j )
for j < n
(7)
∀r2n.(∃var1.LeafFix ⊓∀var1.(K(1)=X) ⊓∀var1.(K(2)=Y ))
(8)
∀r2n.(∃var2.LeafFix ⊓∀var2.(K(3)=X) ⊓∀var2.(K(4)=Y ))
(9)
P ←∃r2n.∃var1.¬Leaf
(10)
P ←∃r2n.∃var2.¬Leaf
(11)
∀r2n.(S1 →(Tr1 ↔∀var1.Tr))
(12)
∀r2n.(¬S1 →(¬Tr1 ↔∀var1.Tr))
(13)
∀r2n.(S2 →(Tr2 ↔∀var2.Tr))
(14)
∀r2n.(¬S2 →(¬Tr2 ↔∀var1.Tr))
(15)
∀r2n.(Elim ↔(¬E ⊔¬(Tr1 ⊔Tr2)))
(16)
Figure 2: The ﬁrst group of conjuncts of C0.
name Tr. Thus, the leaves jointly describe a truth assignment t for the instance G of co-
3CERTCOLS. A second purpose of the leaves is to represent the potential edges of G:
additionally to representing a variable, a leaf with X = i and Y = j corresponds to the
potential edge between the nodes i and j. To explain this more properly, we must ﬁrst
discuss the abbreviations Wc used in Lines (6) and (7) of Figure 2.
Each concept Wc, c a Boolean circuit with 2n inputs, is the result of converting c into a
concept that uses only the constructors ¬, ⊓, ⊔such that the following condition is satisﬁed:
if a d ∈∆I is an instance of Wc, the output of c upon input b0, . . . , b2n−1 is b, and the truth
value of the concept names X0, . . . , Xn−1, Y0, . . . , Yn−1 at d is described by b0, . . . , b2n−1,
then the truth value of some concept name Out at d is described by b. By introducing one
auxiliary concept name for every inner gate of c, the translation can be done such that the
size of Wc is linear in the size of c. The following concept names are used as output:
• WcE uses the concept name E as output;
• Wc(i)
S uses the concept name Si as output, for i ∈{1, 2};
• Wc(i)
j
uses the concept name K(i)
j
as output, for i ∈{1, . . . , 4} and j < n.
737

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
∀r2n.(∃col1.LeafFix ⊓∃col2.LeafFix)
(17)
∀r2n.(∀col1.(X = X) ⊓∀col1.(Y = 0))
(18)
∀r2n.(∀col2.(Y = X) ⊓∀col2.(Y = 0))
(19)
P ←∃r2n.∃col1.¬Leaf
(20)
P ←∃r2n.∃col2.¬Leaf
(21)
∀r2n.((Y = 0) →(R ⊔B ⊔G))
(22)
∀r2n.((Y = 0) →(¬(R ⊓B) ⊓¬(R ⊓G) ⊓¬(B ⊓G)))
(23)
∀r2n.((¬Elim ⊓∃col1.R ⊓∃col2.R) →Clash)
(24)
∀r2n.((¬Elim ⊓∃col1.G ⊓∃col2.G) →Clash)
(25)
∀r2n.((¬Elim ⊓∃col1.B ⊓∃col2.B) →Clash)
(26)
Figure 3: The second group of conjuncts of C0.
Lines (6) and (7) ensure that these concepts are propagated to all leaves. Our next aim is to
ensure that each leaf that represents a potential edge (i, j) is connected via the role var1 to
the leaf that represents the variable in the ﬁrst disjunct of the label of (i, j), and analogously
for the role var2 and the variable in the second disjunct of the edge label. If we replaced
the concept name LeafFix with Leaf in Lines (8) and (9), then these lines would apparently
encode these properties. However, we have to be careful as the mentioned replacement
would interact with the minimization of Leaf. To ﬁx this problem, we resort to a trick: we
use the concept name LeafFix instead of Leaf. In this way, we may or may not reach an
instance of Leaf. If we do not, we force the concept name P to be true at the root of the
tree in Lines (10) and (11). We will use CG to rule out models in which P is true. Finally,
we ﬁx LeafFix via CPG to eliminate interaction with the minimization of Leaf.
The remaining Lines (12) to (16) ensure that a leaf is an instance of Elim iﬀthe potential
edge that it represents is not present in the graph t(G) induced by the truth assignment t
described by the leaves.
The second group of conjuncts of C0 can be found in Figure 3. Here, (Y = 0) stands
for the concept (¬Y0 ⊓· · · ⊓¬Yn−1). As already mentioned, the purpose of these conjuncts
is to ensure that the graph t(G) described by the leaves does not have a 3-coloring. The
strategy for ensuring this is as follows: we use the 2n leaves with Y = 0 to store the colors
of the nodes, i.e., the leaf with X = i and Y = 0 stores the color of node i. By Lines (22)
and (23), there is a unique coloring. Then, Lines (17) to (21) ensure that each leaf (viewed
as an edge) is connected via the role col1 to the leaf that stores the color of the ﬁrst node
of the edge, and analogously for the role col2 and the second node of the edge. LeafFix and
P have the same role as before. Lines (24) to (26) guarantee that the concept name Clash
identiﬁes problems in the coloring: a leaf is in Clash if it represents an edge that exists
in G, is not dropped in t(G), and where both endpoints have the same color. The idea
is that Clash will be minimized while R, G, and B vary. When some additional concept
names are ﬁxed, this corresponds to a universal quantiﬁcation over all possible colorings.
738

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Set CG = Root ⊓¬P ⊓∃r2n.Clash, and recall that AG = {C0 ⊓Root(a0)}. The following
lemma is proved in the appendix.
Lemma 14 G is a yes-instance of co-3CERTCOLS iﬀCG is satisﬁable with respect to
CircCPG(∅, AG), where CPG = (≺, M, F, V ) with ≺= ∅, M = {Root, Leaf, Clash},
F = {LeafFix, Tr, X0, . . . , Xn−1, Y0, . . . , Yn−1, },
and V the set of all remaining predicates in AG.
Since the size of AG is polynomial in n, we get the following result by applying Lemma 5.
Theorem 15 In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs is NExpNP-hard even
if the TBox and the preference relation are empty and there are no ﬁxed predicates.
It is now rather straightforward to establish the announced second NExpNP lower bound by
a reduction of satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs in the special case formulated
in Theorem 15. Details are given in the appendix.
Corollary 16
In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs is NExpNP-hard
even if the TBox is acyclic, the ABox and preference relations are empty, and there are no
ﬁxed predicates.
Corresponding lower bounds for subsumption and the instance problems follow from the
reduction given in Section 2.
4.2.2 Bounded Number of Minimized and Fixed Predicates
We now establish a matching lower bound for Theorem 13 by showing that, in ALC, satis-
ﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs is NPNExp-hard even if only a constant number
of predicates is allowed to be minimized and ﬁxed. In contrast to the previous section,
we ignore the case of empty TBoxes and directly establish the lower bound for the case
of non-empty TBoxes and empty ABoxes. This allows us to demonstrate the usefulness of
Lemma 8 for separating diﬀerent parts of a lower bound proof: in the main reduction from
the previous section, the two parts of the reduction shown in Figure 2 and 3 are not truly
independent, which forced us to implement the technical trick that involves the concept
names LeafFix and P. When using Lemma 8, in contrast, we achieve a true separation of
concerns. In general, though, we conjecture that the lower bound proved in this section can
also be established for the case of empty TBoxes by adapting the mentioned technical trick.
We leave this as a problem to the interested reader.
Recall that a (non-deterministic) k-tape Turing machine is described by a tuple
(Q, Σ, q0, ∆, qacc, qrej),
with Q a ﬁnite set of states, Σ a ﬁnite alphabet, q0 ∈Q a starting state,
∆⊆Q × Σk × Q × Σk × {L, R}k
a transition relation, and qacc, qrej ∈Q the accepting and rejecting states. For our purposes,
an oracle Turing machine is a 2-tape Turing machine M that, additionally, is equipped
with
739

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
• a 1-tape Turing machine M′ (the oracle) whose alphabet is identical to that of M,
• a query state q?, and
• two answer states qyes and qno.
The second tape of M is called the oracle tape. When M enters q?, the oracle determines the
next state of M: if the content of the oracle tape is contained in the language accepted by
the oracle, the next state is qyes. Otherwise, it is qno. During this transition, the head is not
moved and no symbols are written. The state q? cannot occur as the left-most component
of a tuple in M’s transition relation.
Let M = (Q, Σ, q0, ∆, qacc, qrej, M′, q?, qyes, qno) be an oracle Turing machine such that
the following holds:
• M solves an NPNExp-complete problem;
• the time consumption of M is bounded by a polynomial p (where oracle calls con-
tribute with a single clock tick);
• the time consumption of M′ = (Q′, Σ, q′
0, ∆′, q′
acc, q′
rej) is bounded by 2q(n), with q a
polynomial.
We assume without loss of generality that M and M′ never attempt to move left from the
left-most position of the tape (neither right from the right-most position). Our NPNExp-
hardness proof uses a reduction of the word problem of M. Thus, let w ∈Σ∗be an input
for M of length n, and let m = p(n) and m′ = q(p(n)).
We construct three TBoxes
Tw, T ′
w, and T ′′
w , circumscription patterns CP, CP′, and CP′′, and a concept Cw such that
M accepts w iﬀCw is simultaneously satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(Tw, ∅), CircCP′(T ′
w, ∅), and
CircCP′′(T ′′
w , ∅). Then, Lemma 8 yields a reduction to (non-simultaneous) satisﬁability w.r.t.
concept-circumscribed cKBs. Intuitively, the purpose of the ﬁrst TBox Tw is to impose a
basic structure on the domain, while T ′
w describes computations of M, and T ′′
w describes
computations of M′. We use general TBoxes rather than acyclic ones since, by Lemma 6,
this can be done without loss of generality.
The TBox Tw is shown in Figure 4.
As in the previous reduction, we use concept
names X0, . . . , Xm′−1 and Y0, . . . , Ym′−1 to implement two binary counters for counting
modulo 2m′. We also use the same abbreviations as in the previous reduction. Additionally,
∀r.(X++) states that the value of the counter X0, . . . , Xm′−1 is incremented when going to
r-successors, i.e.,
⊓
k=0..m′−1
  ⊓
j=0..k−1 Xj

→
 (Xk →∀r.¬Xk) ⊓(¬Xk →∀r.Xk)

⊓
k=0..m′−1
  ⊔
j=0..k−1 ¬Xj

→
 (Xk →∀r.Xk) ⊓(¬Xk →∀r.¬Xk)

The purpose of Lines (27) to (30) is to ensure that, for each possible value (i, j) of the
counters X and Y , there is at least one instance of NExp that satisﬁes (X = i) and (Y = j).
We minimize NExp, and thus enforce that NExp has exactly 2m′ × 2m′ elements. These
elements are interconnected via the roles r (for “right”) and u (for “up”) to form a 2m′ ×2m′-
grid. Later on, we use this grid to encode computations of the oracle machine M′. Observe
740

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
⊤
⊑
∃aux.NExp
(27)
NExp
⊑
(¬(X = 2m′ −1) →∃r.NExp) ⊓(¬(Y = 2m′ −1) →∃u.NExp)
(28)
NExp
⊑
∀r.(Y =Y ) ⊓∀r.(X++)
(29)
NExp
⊑
∀u.(X=X) ⊓∀u.(Y ++)
(30)
⊤
⊑⊓
i<m ∃aux.(Result ⊓Ri)
(31)
Result
⊑⊓
i<j<m ¬(Ri ⊓Rj)
(32)
⊤
⊑
∃aux.NP
(33)
Figure 4: The TBox Tw.
that, since we are working with simultaneous satisﬁability, the minimization of NExp does
not interact with anything that we are going to put into the TBoxes T ′
w and T ′′
w .
We also minimize the concept name Result, and thus Lines (31) and (32) guarantee that
there are exactly m instances of Result, identiﬁed by the concept names R0, . . . , Rm−1. If
M makes a call to the oracle in the i-th step, then the result of this call will be stored
in the (unique) instance of Result ⊓Ri, i.e., this instance will satisfy the concept name Rej
if M′ rejected the input and falsify it otherwise. Finally, we also minimize NP, and thus
Line (33) guarantees that there is exactly one instance of NP. This instance will be used to
represent the computation of M. Summing up, the circumscription pattern for Tw is
CP := (∅, {NExp, Result, NP}, ∅, V ),
with V containing all remaining predicates used in Tw.
The purpose of T ′
w is to describe computations of M. We use the following concept
names:
• For all a ∈Σ, i, j < m, and k ∈{1, 2}, we introduce a concept name Si,j,k
a
. Intuitively,
Si,j,k
a
expresses that a is the symbol in the j-th cell of the k-th tape in the i-th step
of M’s computation. We start our numbering of tape cells and steps with 0.
• For all q ∈Q and i < m, Qi
q is a concept name expressing that M is in state q in the
i-th step of the computation.
• For all q ∈Q, i, j < m, and k ∈{1, 2}, Hi,k
j
is a concept name expressing that the
k-th head of M is on cell j in the i-th step of the computation.
• For all q ∈Q, a ∈Σ, i, j < m, k ∈{1, 2}, and M ∈{L, R}, concept names Ai
q, Ai,j,k
a
,
Ai,k
M that serve as markers. More precisely, Ai
q means that, at time point i, M has
executed a transition that switches to state q. Similarly, Ai,j,k
a
describes the symbol
written in that transition on tape k, and Ai,k
M describes the move on tape k.
The details of T ′
w are given in Figure 5. One copy of the concept inclusions in this ﬁgure
are needed for every i, j, j′ < m and every k ∈{1, 2}. We assume that w = a0 · · · an−1 and
741

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
NP
⊑
Q0
q0 ⊓H0,1
0
⊓S0,0,1
a0
⊓· · · S0,n−1,1
an−1
⊓S0,n,1
B
⊓· · · ⊓S0,m−1,1
B
(34)
NP
⊑
H0,2
0
⊓S0,0,2
B
⊓· · · ⊓S0,m−1,2
B
(35)
NP
⊑
⊓
a,b∈Σ,q∈Q\{q?}
 (Si,j,1
a
⊓Si,j′,2
b
⊓Qi
q ⊓Hi,1
j
⊓Hi,2
j′ ) →
(36)
(
⊔
(q,a,b,q′,a′,b′,M,M′)∈∆Ai
q ⊓Ai,j,1
a
⊓Ai,j′,2
b
⊓Ai,1
M ⊓Ai,2
M′)

(37)
NP
⊑⊓
q∈Q Ai
q →Qi+1
q
if i < m −1
(38)
NP
⊑⊓
a∈Σ Ai,j,k
a
→Si+1,j,k
a
if i < m −1
(39)
NP
⊑
Ai,k
L →Hi+1,k
j−1
if i < m −1 and j > 0
(40)
NP
⊑
Ai,k
R →Hi+1,k
j+1
if i < m −1 and j < m −1
(41)
NP
⊑⊓
a∈Σ
 (Si,j,k
a
⊓Hi,k
j′ ) →Si+1,j,k
a

if i < m −1 and j ̸= j′
(42)
NP
⊑
⊓
a,b∈Σ,a̸=b ¬(Si,j,k
a
⊓Si,j,k
b
) ⊓
⊓
q,q′∈Q,q̸=q′ ¬(Qi
q ⊓Qi
q′)
(43)
NP
⊑
¬(Hi,k
j
⊓Hi,k
j′ )
if j ̸= j′
(44)
NP
⊑
∃resi.(Result ⊓Ri) ⊓∀resi.(Result ⊓Ri)
(45)
NP
⊑
(Qi
q? ⊓∃resi.Rej) →Qi+1
qno
if i < m −1
(46)
NP
⊑
(Qi
q? ⊓∃resi.¬Rej) →Qi+1
qyes
if i < m −1
(47)
NP
⊑
(Qi
q? ⊓Hi,k
j ) →Hi+1,k
j
if i < m −1
(48)
NP
⊑⊓
a∈Σ
 (Qi
q? ⊓Si,j,k
a
) →Si+1,j,k
a

(49)
Figure 5: The TBox T ′
w.
use B to denote the (shared) blank symbol of M and M′. Lines (34) to (43) describe the
behaviour of a Turing machine in the usual way: transitions follow the transition table, the
computation starts in the initial conﬁguration, etc. Line (45) ensures that the instance of
NP can reach the (unique) instance of Result ⊓Ri via the role resi, for all i < m. Lines (46)
and (47) deal with transitions of M in the query state by looking up the result of the oracle
call in the corresponding instance of Result. Finally, Lines (48) and (49) ensure that the head
position and tape symbols do not change when querying the oracle. The circumscription
pattern for T ′
w is simply CP′ := (∅, ∅, ∅, V ), with V the set of all predicates used in T ′
w.
The purpose of T ′′
w is to describe computations of the oracle Turing machine M′. Note
that we have to describe more than a single computation of M′ (but at most polynomi-
ally many) since M may visit the state q? more than once. All these computations are
represented in the NExp grid, where diﬀerent computations are untangled by the use of
diﬀerent concept names for each computation. We use the counter X0, . . . , Xm′−1 to count
742

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
conﬁgurations and the counter Y0, . . . , Ym′−1 to count the tape cells of each conﬁguration.
Moreover, we use the following concept names:
• For all a ∈Σ and i < m, a concept name Si
a. If Si
a is satisﬁed by some instance of
NExp where X0, . . . , Xm′−1 has value j and Y0, . . . , Ym′−1 has value k, then the i-th
computation of M′ has, in its j-th step, symbol a on the k-th cell.
• For all q ∈Q and i < m, a concept name Qi
q. The purpose of this concept name is
two-fold: ﬁrst, it represents the current state of M′ in the i-th computation. And
second, it indicates the head position in the i-th computation.
• For all a ∈Σ, q ∈Q, M ∈{L, R} and all i < m, a concept name Ai
q,a,M as a marker.
The meaning of the marker Ai
q,a,M is that, to reach the current conﬁguration, M′ has
switched to q, written a, and moved its head in direction M. Additionally, the marker
indicates the head position in the previous conﬁguration.
• An additional concept name NH (for “nohead”) that helps us to enforce that M′ has
only a single head position.
The details of T ′′
w are shown in Figure 6, where we require one copy of each line for every
i < m. The purpose of Lines (50) and (51) is to regenerate the grid structure of NExp using
the roles r′ und u′. This is necessary since the roles r and u are used in Tw, and, to use
Lemma 8, the TBoxes cannot share any role names. Lines (52) and (53) ensure that every
instance of NExp reaches (only) the unique instance of NP via the role toNP, and (only) the
unique instance of Result⊓Ri via the role res′
i, for all i < m. Lines (54) to (64) describe the
computation of M′ in a straightforward way. More precisely, Lines (54) to (56) set up the
initial conﬁguration by reading the contents of M’s oracle tape from the instance of NP.
Lines (57) to (61) implement transitions, and Lines (62) to (64) enforce a unique label of
the tape, a unique state, and a unique head position. Finally, Line (65) ensures that, if the
i-th computation of M′ is rejecting, then Rej is true in the instance of Result ⊓Ri.
Note that M′ is a non-deterministic machine and may have more than one computation.
For storing Rej in Result ⊓Ri, we need to know that all these computations are rejecting.
To deal with this issue, Rej is minimized with all other predicates varying: if there exists
an accepting computation of M′ on the i-th input, then we can represent this computation
in NExp and make Rej false in the instance of Result ⊓Ri. Hence, Rej holds at Result ⊓Ri
iﬀthere exists no accepting computation.
Note that we cannot ﬁx the concept names
X0, . . . , Xm′−1, Y0, . . . , Ym′−1 while minimizing Rej since we would get an unbounded number
of ﬁxed concept names. This means that the elements of NExp can change their position
during minimization, and with them the roles r′ and u′. This is not harmful since Tw and
Lines (50) and (51) ensure that that the structure (NExpI, (r′)I, (u′)I) is always isomorphic
to a grid, and the rest of T ′′
w ensures that the elements of NExp always encode computations
of M′. We thus use the circumscription pattern CP′′ := (∅, {Rej}, ∅, V ′), where V ′ contains
all predicates used in T ′′
w except Rej.
The proof of the following lemma is left to the reader. In it’s formulation, the union
over all Qi
qacc imposes that at least one state in the computation is accepting.
743

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
NExp
⊑
(¬(X = 2m′ −1) →∃r′.NExp) ⊓(¬(Y = 2m′ −1) →∃u′.NExp)
(50)
NExp
⊑
∀r′.(Y =Y ) ⊓∀r′.(X++) ⊓∀u′.(X=X) ⊓∀u′.(Y ++)
(51)
NExp
⊑
∃res′
i.(Result ⊓Ri) ⊓∀res′
i.(Result ⊓Ri)
(52)
NExp
⊑
∃toNP.NP ⊓∀toNP.NP
(53)
NExp
⊑⊓
j<m⊓
a∈Σ
 (X = 0) ⊓(Y = j) ⊓∀toNP.Si,j,2
a

→Si
a

(54)
NExp
⊑
((X = 0) ⊓(Y ≥m)) →Si
B
(55)
NExp
⊑
((X = 0) ⊓(Y = 0)) →Qi
q′
0
(56)
NExp
⊑⊓
a∈Σ ⊓
q∈Q′
 (Si
a ⊓Qi
q) →
⊔
(q,a,q′,a′,M)∈∆′ ∀r′.Ai
q′,a′,M

(57)
NExp
⊑
Ai
q,a,R →(Si
a ⊓∀u′.Qi
q)
(58)
NExp
⊑
Ai
q,a,L →Si
a
(59)
NExp
⊑
∃u′.Ai
q,a,L →Qi
q
(60)
NExp
⊑
¬ ⊔
q∈Q′ Qi
q →⊓
a∈Σ(Si
a →∀r′.Si
a)
(61)
NExp
⊑
⊓
a,b∈Σ,a̸=b ¬(Si
a ⊓Si
b) ⊓
⊓
q,q′∈Q′,q̸=q′ ¬(Qi
q ⊓Qi
q′)
(62)
NExp
⊑
  ⊔
q∈Q′ Qi
q

→∀u′.NH
(63)
NExp
⊑
NH →
 ¬ ⊔
q∈Q′ Qi
q ⊓∀u′.NH

(64)
NExp
⊑
Qi
q′
rej →∀res′
i.Rej
(65)
Figure 6: The TBox T ′′
w .
Lemma 17 M accepts w iﬀCw := NP ⊓⊔
i<m Qi
qacc is simultaneously satisﬁable w.r.t.
CircCP(Tw, ∅), CircCP′(T ′
w, ∅), and CircCP′′(T ′′
w , ∅).
It remains to apply Lemmas 6, 4, and 8 to obtain the following result.
Theorem 18 In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t. concept-circumscribed cKBs is NPNExp-hard
even if the TBox is acyclic, the ABox and preference relations are empty, there are no
ﬁxed predicates, and the number of minimized predicates is bounded by a constant.
As already mentioned, we conjecture that the same result can be proved with empty TBoxes
(but non-empty ABoxes). Corresponding lower bounds for subsumption and the instance
problems follow from the reduction given in Section 2.
744

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
5. Circumscription with Fixed Roles
In the preceeding sections, we have analyzed the computational complexity of reasoning
w.r.t. concept-circumscribed KBs and, in particular, established decidability. In the current
section, we extend concept-circumscribed KBs to what we call role-ﬁxing cKBs, which diﬀer
from the former by allowing role names to be ﬁxed (but not minimized). Interestingly, the
result of this seemingly harmless modiﬁcation is that reasoning becomes highly undecidable.
We start with deﬁning the cKBs studied in this section.
Deﬁnition 19 A cKB CircCP(T , A) with CP = (≺, M, F, V ) is called role-ﬁxing if M con-
tains no role names.
△
To pinpoint the exact complexity of reasoning in role-ﬁxing cKBs, we present a reduction of
the logical consequence problem in monadic second-order logic with binary relation symbols
(over unrestricted structures, not over trees) to the instance problem w.r.t. role-ﬁxing cKBs
formulated in ALC. It follows that the latter problem is harder than any problem deﬁnable
in second-order arithmetic and thus outside the analytical hierarchy. Analogous results for
satisﬁability and subsumption follow by the reductions given in Section 2. Our reduction
applies already to the case where TBox and preference relation are empty.
For a ﬁnite set R of binary relation symbols, denote by MSO(R) the set of formulas
constructed from a countably inﬁnite set P1, P2, . . . of variables for sets, a countable inﬁnite
set x1, x2, . . . of individual variables, and the binary relation symbols in R, using Boolean
connectives, ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation, and monadic second-order quantiﬁcation. It is not
hard to see that reasoning with role-ﬁxing cKBs corresponds to reasoning in a “tiny” frag-
ment of MSO(R). More speciﬁcally, consider the standard translation of ALC-concepts C to
FO-formulas (and thus MSO(R)-formulas) C♯(x) with one free individual variable x as e.g.
given by Borgida (1996) and take a cKB CircCP(T , A) with CP = (≺, M, F, V ), ≺= V = ∅,
M = {A}, and F = {r}. Translate (T , A) to the MSO(R)-sentence
ϕ =
^
C⊑D∈T
∀x(C♯(x) →D♯(x)) ∧
^
C(a)∈A
C♯(xa) ∧
^
r(a,b)∈A
r(xa, xb),
where the xa are individual variables.
Then an ALC-concept C is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(T , A) if, and only if, the MSO(R)-
formula
ϕ ∧∃xC♯(x) ∧∀P(P ⊂A♯→¬ϕ[P/A♯])
is satisﬁable, where P ⊂A♯stands for ∀x (P(x) →A♯(x))∧∃x (A♯(x)∧¬P(x)) and ϕ[P/A♯]
denotes ϕ with A♯replaced by P. This translation is easily extended to the case where an
arbitrary number of concept names is minimized and an arbitrary number of concept and
role names is ﬁxed and varies.
When we prove that logical consequence in MSO(R) is reducible to the instance prob-
lem w.r.t. role-ﬁxing cKBs, we thus establish the surprising result that reasoning in such
sKBs does not only correspond to the above tiny fragment of MSO(R), but is as hard as all
of MSO(R). Our reduction is indirect: instead of directly reducing logical consequence in
MSO(R), we reduce the semantic consequence problem of modal logic and exploit Thoma-
son’s result that logical consequence in MSO(R) can be reduced to the latter problem, see
745

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
the works by Thomason (1975b, 1975a) and the survey articles by Wolter et al. (2007) and
Goldblatt (2003) for details.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the semantic consequence problem of modal logic (in the framework of
description logic) and present Thomason’s result, starting with some notation.
Let R be a ﬁnite set of role names. An R-frame is a structure F = (∆F, RF), where ∆F
is a non-empty domain and rF ⊆∆F × ∆F for all r ∈R. An interpretation I = (∆I, ·I) is
based on an R-frame F iﬀ∆F = ∆I and rI = rF for all r ∈R. We say that a concept C is
valid in F and write F |= C if CI = ∆I for every interpretation I based on F. The semantic
consequence of modal logic is now deﬁned as follows. Let C and D be ALC concepts with
roles from R. Then D is a semantic consequence of C, in symbols C ⊩D, if for every
R-frame F, from F |= C it follows that F |= D. Note that since validity in an R-frame F
involves quantiﬁcation over all possible interpretations of the symbols not contained in R,
the relation C ⊩D is invariant over all uniform renamings of atomic concepts in D (this
will be used later on).
For simplicity, we consider only MSO(r), monadic second-order logic with one binary
relation symbol r. It is straighforward to extend our result to arbitrary ﬁnite sets R of
relation symbols. Given a set of role names R, an ALC-concept is called an ALCR-concept
if it uses no other role names other than those in R. The following theorem follows from
the results by Thomason (1975b, 1975a).
Theorem 20 There exist an eﬀective translation σ : ψ 7→σ(ψ) of MSO(r) sentences to
ALC{r}-concepts and an ALC{r}-concept C0 such that for all MSO(r) sentences ϕ and ψ,
the following conditions are equivalent:
• ψ is a logical consequence of ϕ in MSO(r);
• C0 ⊓σ(ϕ) ⊩σ(ψ).
We can thus establish the reduction of MSO(r) to the instance problem w.r.t. role-ﬁxing
cKBs by reducing instead the semantic consequence problem. In fact, such a reduction can
be implemented in a very transparent way if we extend ALC with the universal role, whereas
the reduction to ALC itself requires a number of rather technical intermediate steps. For
this reason, we defer the ALC case to the appendix and give the proof with the universal
role.
Let u be a new role name, called the universal role. In every interpretation I, u has the
ﬁxed interpretation as uI = ∆I × ∆I. Since the interpretation of u is ﬁxed anyway, we do
not allow to use it in circumscription patterns.
Now suppose that C and D are ALC{r}-concepts. To establish the reduction, we con-
struct a role-ﬁxing cKB CircCP(∅, {C0(a)}) and concept C1 such that C ⊩D if, and only if, a
is an instance of C1 w.r.t. CircCP(∅, {C0(a)}). As noted above, we may assume that C, D do
not share any concept names (otherwise, simply replace the concept names in D with fresh
ones). Let A be a concept name that does not occur in C and D, let CP = (≺, M, {r}, V ),
where ≺= ∅, M consists of A and the set of concept names in C, and V consists of the
concept names in D. Set A = {(¬∀u.C ⊔∀u. ⊓
B∈M B)(a)}.
Lemma 21 The following conditions are equivalent:
746

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
• C ⊩D;
• a is an instance of (¬∀u.C) ⊔D w.r.t. CircCP(∅, A).
Proof. To prove that Point 1 implies Point 2, assume that Point 2 does not hold. Let I
be a model of CircCP(∅, A) such that aI ∈((∀u.C) ⊓¬D)I. Let I be based on F. To prove
that Point 1 does not hold, we show that F |= C and F ̸|= D. The latter is easy as it is
witnessed by the interpretation I. To show the former, let J be an interpretation based
on F. We show that CJ = ∆I. First note that, since I is a model of A and aI ∈(∀u.C)I,
we have BI = ∆I, for all B ∈M. We now distinguish two cases:
• BJ = ∆I, for all B ∈M. In this case, all B ∈M have the same interpretation in I
and J . Thus, since all concept names in C are in M and I and J are based on the
same frame, we obtain CJ = CI = ∆I.
• BJ ̸= ∆I, for at least one B ∈M. Then J <CP I. Assume that CJ ̸= ∆I. Then
aI ∈(¬∀u.C)J and J is a model of A. Thus, we have derived a contradiction to the
assumption that I is a model of CircCP(∅, A).
To prove that Point 2 implies Point 1, assume that Point 1 does not hold. Consider a
frame F such that F |= C, but F ̸|= D. Let I be an interpretation based on F such that
aI ∈(¬D)I. We may also assume that BI = ∆I for all B ∈M (since no such B occurs in
D). Then aI ∈((∀u.C) ⊓¬D)I and I is a model of A. It remains to show that there does
not exist an I′ <CP I such that I′ is a model of A. This is straightforward: from F |= C, we
obtain that there does not exist any I′ such that aI′ ∈(¬∀u.C)I′. Moreover, there clearly
does not exist an I′ such that BI′ ⊊BI for some B ∈M and aI′ ∈(∀u. ⊓
B∈M B)I′.
J
We have thus proved that the logical consequence problem of MSO(r) is eﬀectively reducible
to the instance problem w.r.t. role-ﬁxing cKBs formulated in ALC extended with the uni-
versal role. In our reduction, the TBox and preference relation are empty. In the appendix,
we show how the reduction above can be modiﬁed so as to prove the same result for ALC
without the universal role.
Theorem 22 The logical consequence problem of MSO(r) is eﬀectively reducible to the
instance problem w.r.t. role-ﬁxing cKBs formulated in ALC.
This even holds when the
TBox and preference relation are empty.
6. Circumscription with Minimized Roles
Unlike ﬁxed concept names, ﬁxed role names cannot be simulated using minimized role
names. This is due to the fact that Boolean operators on roles are not available in standard
DLs. Thus, Theorem 22 does not imply undecidability of reasoning in cKBs in which role
names are allowed to be minimized, but not ﬁxed. In this section, we investigate cKBs of
this type. The formal deﬁnition is as follows.
Deﬁnition 23 A cKB CircCP(T , A) with CP = (≺, M, F, V ) is called role-minimizing if F
contains no role names.
△
747

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
We show that role-minimizing cKBs behave rather diﬀerently from concept-circumscribed
KBs and from role-ﬁxing cKBs. First, it turns out that reasoning with role-minimizing
cKBs with empty TBox is NExpNP-complete for ALCQO, but undecidable for ALCI.
Thus, in contrast to the circumscribed KBs considered so far, we now observe a diﬀerence
in complexity between ALCQO and ALCI, and even between ALC and ALCI. A second
diﬀerence to the results obtained so far is that the NExpNP-lower bound, which applies
to cKBs formulated in ALC with an empty TBox, even holds for role-minimizing cKBs in
which a single role is minimized and no other predicate is ﬁxed or minimized. This result
is of interest because it shows that complexity does not drop to NPNExp if the number of
minimized predicates is constant. Finally, we show that, with non-empty TBoxes, reasoning
with role-minimizing cKBs becomes undecidable already for ALC.
6.1 Role-minimizing cKBs With Empty TBox in ALCQO
We ﬁrst prove the NExpNP-completeness result discussed above for DLs without inverse
roles. We start with the upper bound. To prove it, we ﬁrst establish a bounded model
property using a ‘selective ﬁltration’-style argument, see e.g. Blackburn et al. (2001). The
diﬀerence to the bounded model property proof given above for concept-circumscribed KBs
is that, here, we do not build a quotient model of a given model by identifying nodes using an
equivalence relation, but construct a submodel of a given model by selecting relevant nodes.
In contrast to forming quotient models, this technique works only with empty TBoxes since
a TBox can force us to select inﬁnitely many nodes. Similarly, the selection technique does
not work for DLs with the inverse role because, as we shall see below, inverse roles can be
used to simulate TBoxes.
Recall that the role depth rd(C) of a concept C is deﬁned as the nesting depth of the
constructors (⩾k r D) and (⩽k r D) in C.
Theorem 24 In ALCQO, satisﬁability w.r.t. role-minimizing cKBs with empty TBox is
in NExpNP.
Proof. Let CircCP(∅, A) be a role-minimizing cKB with CP = (≺, M, F, V ), and let C0 be a
concept that is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(∅, A). Let m0 be the maximal parameter occurring
in number restrictions of A or C0. Set
n := max({rd(C0)} ∪{rd(C) | C(a) ∈A}) and m := ((m0 + 1) × (|A| + |C0|))n+1,
We show that there exists a model J of CircCP(∅, A) satisfying C0 such that #∆J ≤m.
Let I be a model of CircCP(∅, A) such that there exists a d0 ∈CI
0 . For each d ∈∆I, ﬁx a
minimal set D(d) ⊆∆I such that,
• for every concept (⩾k r C) which occurs in A or C0 with d ∈(⩾k r C)I there exist
at least k distinct e ∈D(d) such that (d, e) ∈rI and e ∈CI and
• for every concept (⩽k r C) which occurs in A or C0 with d ̸∈(⩽k r C)I there exist
at least k + 1 distinct e ∈D(d) such that (d, e) ∈rI and e ∈CI.
Clearly, #D(d) ≤(m0 + 1) × (|C0| + |A|) for each d ∈∆I. Next, deﬁne a set D0 ⊆∆I by
setting
D0 := {d0} ∪{aI | a ∈NI occurs in A or C0}.
748

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Deﬁne sets Di ⊆∆I, 1 ≤i ≤n, inductively by
Di+1 := (
[
d∈Di
D(d))
and set ∆n := S
0≤i≤n Di. Deﬁne an interpretation I′ with domain ∆I as follows:
• aI′ = aI, for all individual names a;
• for r ∈M ∪V , (d, e) ∈rI′ if d ∈∆n \ Dn, e ∈D(d), and (d, e) ∈rI;
• for A ∈M ∪V , AI′ = AI ∩∆n;
• for A ∈F, AI′ = AI.
A straightforward inductive argument shows that I′ is a model of A such that d0 ∈CI′
0 .
Note that we did not change the interpretation of the A ∈F. Moreover, we have pI′ ⊆pI
for every p ∈M. Together with the fact that I′ is a model of A and I′ ̸<CP I, we even get
pI′ = pI for every p ∈M. It follows that I′ is a model for CircCP(∅, A) because J <CP I′
would imply J <CP I.
Note that rI′ ⊆∆n ×∆n, for every role r. Now deﬁne an interpretation J with domain
∆J = ∆n by putting
• AJ = AI′ ∩∆n, for every concept name A;
• rJ = rI′, for every role name r;
• aJ = aI, for every individual name a from A or C0.
We still have that J is a model for A satisfying C0. Moreover, any interpretation J ′ <CP J
satisfying A can be easily extended to an interpretation I′′ <CP I′ satisfying A. Hence, no
such interpretation exists and J is a model for CircCP(∅, A). From #∆n ≤m we derive
#∆J ≤m.
The proof of the NExpNP-upper bound is now exactly the same as the proof of Theorem
10; it suﬃces to replace the bound 24k for the size of interpretations by the bound m.
J
We now give a lower bound matching the upper bound of Theorem 24.
Theorem 25 In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t. role-minimizing cKBs with empty TBox is NExpNP-
hard. This holds even if there is only one minimized role name and no ﬁxed prediates
Proof. By Theorem 15, in ALC it is NExpNP-hard to decide whether a concept C0 is
satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(∅, A), where CP = (∅, M, ∅, V ) and M contains concept names only.
Clearly, it is still NExpNP-hard to decide whether there exists a common model of C0 and
CircCP(∅, A) of size at least #M. Thus, it is suﬃcient to provide a polynomial reduction
of this problem to the satisﬁability problem w.r.t. cKBs in ALC with a single minimized
role and all remaining predicates varying.
Suppose C0 and CircCP(∅, A) are given.
Let
M = {A1, . . . , Ak} and take
• two fresh role names r0, r1;
749

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
• Boolean concepts C1, . . . , Ck built using fresh concept names B1, . . . , Bk such that
every Ci, i ≤k, is satisﬁable and every Ci ⊓Cj, i ̸= j, is unsatisﬁable. One can take,
for example, Ci = B1 ⊓· · · ⊓Bi−1 ⊓¬Bi ⊓Bi+1 ⊓· · · ⊓Bk, for i ≤k.
Let CP′ = (∅, {r0}, ∅, V ∪{B1, . . . , Bk, r1}) and deﬁne A′ and C′
0 as the result of replacing,
in A and C0, every occurrence of Ai by ∃r0.Ci, for i ≤k. Finally, set A∗= A′ ∪{∃r1.Ci(a) |
i ≤k}. We show the following:
(∗) C0 is satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP(∅, A) in a model of size at least #M if, and only if, C′
0 is
satisﬁable w.r.t. CircCP′(∅, A∗).
Let I be a model of CircCP(∅, A) and C0 of size at least #M. Deﬁne an interpretation I′
with domain ∆I by extending I as follows: take mutually distinct d1, . . . , dk ∈∆I and
interpret B1, . . . , Bk, r0, r1, and a in such a way that
• CI′
i
= {di}, for i ≤k,
• rI′
0 = {(d, di) | d ∈AI
i , i ≤k},
• aI = d1,
• rI′
1 = {(d1, d1), . . . , (d1, dk)}.
It is readily checked that I′ is a model of C′
0 and CircCP′(∅, A∗).
Conversely, let I be a model of CircCP′(∅, A∗) and C′
0. Deﬁne an interpretation I′ by
extending I with AI′
i = (∃r0.Ci)I, for i ≤k. It is readily checked that I′ is a model of C0
and CircCP(∅, A).
J
6.2 Role-minimizing cKBs With Nonempty TBox
In the bounded model property proof above, it is important that the selection of nodes
stops after n iterations with the set ∆n, where n is the maximum of the role depths of the
concepts in the ABox and the concept C we want to satisfy. Such a bound for the selection
of nodes does not exist if the TBox is non-empty, and we now show that reasoning w.r.t.
role-minimizing cKBs is indeed undecidable in this case. The proof is by a reduction of the
N × N-tiling problem (Berger, 1966).
Deﬁnition 26 A tiling problem is a quadruple triple P = (T, H, V ), where T is a ﬁnite
set of tile types and H, V ⊆T × T are the horizontal and vertical matching conditions. A
solution to P is a mapping τ : N × N →T such that
• (τ(i, j), τ(i + 1, j)) ∈H for all i, j ≥0;
• (τ(i, j), τ(i, j + 1)) ∈V for all i, j ≥0.
△
750

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Let P = (T, H, V ) be an instance of the tiling problem. We deﬁne a TBox TP as follows:
⊤
⊑
∃x.⊤⊓∃y.⊤
(66)
⊤
⊑⊔
t∈T
 At ⊓⊓
t′∈T,t̸=t′ ¬At′
(67)
⊤
⊑⊓
t∈T
 At →⊔
(t,t′)∈H ∀x.At′
⊓⊓
t∈T
 At →⊔
(t,t′)∈V ∀y.At′
(68)
⊤
⊑
N ⊔(∃x.∃y.B ⊓∃y.∃x.¬B)
(69)
¬N
⊑
D
(70)
D
⊒
∃x.D ⊔∃y.D
(71)
D
⊑
∀x.D ⊓∀y.D
(72)
Let CP = (∅, M, ∅, V ) be the circumscription pattern in which V = {B, D} and M consists
of the remaining concept and role names.
Lemma 27 CircCP(TP , ∅) ̸|= D(a) iﬀP has a solution.
Proof. Assume that P has a solution τ. Deﬁne an interpretation I as follows:
∆I
:=
N × N
xI
:=
{((i, j), (i + 1, j)) | i, j ≥0}
yI
:=
{((i, j), (i, j + 1)) | i, j ≥0}
AI
t
:=
{(i, j) ∈∆I | τ(i, j) = t}
NI
:=
∆I
BI
:=
{(i, j) ∈∆I | i > 0 and j > 0}
DI
:=
∅
aI
:=
(0, 0)
It is straightforward to verify that I is a model of TP . Additionally, we clearly have aI /∈DI.
It thus remains to show that there is no model J of TP with J <CP I. Assume there is
such a J . Since all concept and role names except D and B are minimized, it follows that
1. xI = xJ and yI = yJ because J is a model of (66);
2. AI
t = AJ
t for all t ∈T because of Point 1 and J is a model of (67);
3. NI = NJ because, no matter what BJ is, by Point 1 we have
(∃x.∃y.B ⊓∃y.∃x.¬B)J = ∅.
Thus and because J is a model of (69), NI = NJ .
Thus, I and J diﬀer at most in the interpretation of the concept names D and B, which
are varying. This is a contradiction to J <CP I.
Conversely, assume that CircCP(TP , ∅) ̸|= D(a), and let I be a model of CircCP(TP , ∅) with
aI ̸∈DI. By induction on i + j, we deﬁne a mapping π that assigns to each (i, j) ∈N × N
an element π(i, j) ∈∆I such that for all i, j ≥0, we have
751

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
1. (π(i, j), π(i + 1, j)) ∈xI;
2. (π(i, j), π(i, j + 1)) ∈yI;
To start, set π(0, 0) = aI. In the ℓ-th step, we do the following:
• Select a d ∈∆I such that (π(0, ℓ−1), d) ∈yI and put π(0, ℓ) := d. Such a d exists
since I is a model of (66).
• Select a d ∈∆I such that (π(ℓ−1, 0), d) ∈xI and put π(ℓ, 0) := d. Again, such a d
exists since I is a model of (66).
• Now let i, j > 0 such that i + j = ℓ. Since I is a model of (66), there are d, d′ ∈∆I
such that (π(i −1, j), d) ∈xI and (π(i, j −1), d′) ∈yI. We show that d = d′, and
then set π(i, j) := d.
Assume to the contrary that d ̸= d′.
By (70)–(72) and since aI /∈DI, we have
π(i −1, j −1) ∈NI. Deﬁne a new interpretation J that is obtained from I by the
following modiﬁcations:
– π(i −1, j −1) is removed from NI;
– let d′ ∈BJ and d ̸∈BJ ;
– let DJ = ∆I.
Clearly, J <CP I. To obtain a contradiction against I being a model of CircCP(TP , ∅),
it thus remains to show that J is a model of TP . It suﬃces to consider (69) to (72),
the only concept inclusions referring to N, B, and D. The axioms (70) to (72) hold
because DJ = ∆I. To show (69), let e ∈∆I. We show that e ∈CJ for C the concept
on the right hand side of (69). Clearly, e ∈CJ since e ∈CI, if e is not {x, y, x−, y−}-
reachable from aI. We have e ∈NI if e is {x, y, x−, y−}-reachable from aI, because
otherwise we would have aI ∈DI by axioms (70) to (72). Thus, e ∈NJ ⊆CJ if
e ̸= π(i −1, j −1). Finally, π(i −1, j −1) ∈CJ , by deﬁnition of BJ .
Now deﬁne a mapping τ : N × N →T by setting τ(i, j) := t if π(i, j) ∈At. By (67), this
mapping is well-deﬁned. By (68), it satisﬁes the horizontal and vertical matching conditions.
Thus, P has a solution.
J
Thus, we have shown the following result.
Theorem 28 In ALC, satisﬁability w.r.t role-minimizing cKBs is undecidable.
6.3 Reasoning in Role-minimizing cKBs With Empty TBox in ALCI
We prove undecidability of reasoning in role-minimizing cKBs with empty TBox in ALCI.
The proof uses the “spy-point” technique (Areces, Blackburn, & Marx, 1999); namely, we
show that ABoxes can simulate TBox reasoning by employing inverse roles and a simulation
of nominals by circumscription. Using this idea the proof is rather similar to the proof of
Theorem 28.
752

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Let P be an instance of the tiling problem and consider the cKB CircCP(TP , ∅) deﬁned
in the proof of Lemma 27.
We simulate its TBox axioms C ⊑C′ by ABox assertions
((C →C′) ⊓∀r0.(C →C′))(a) and enforcing the role r0 to connect all relevant points to a.
This is achieved by forcing all relevant points in the domain to satisfy ∃r−
0 .{a}. Since we
do not have nominals in the language we use a concept name A instead of {a} and ensure
that it behaves like a nominal. We now present the details.
For the sake of readability, we write concept assertions C(a) in the form a : C and we
set ∀1{r}.C = C ⊓∀r.C. Let A, B′, and N′ be fresh concept names and r0 be a fresh role
name not occurring in TP . Then AP consists of the assertions
a : ∀1{r0}.(C →C′),
(73)
for C ⊑C′ ∈TP ,
a : A,
a : ∀1{r0}. ⊓
s=x,y ∀s.∃r−
0 .A,
(74)
a : ∀1{r0}.

N′ ⊔
 (A ⊓B′) ⊔∃r−
0 .(A ⊓B′)

⊓⊔
s=x,y ∃s.∃r−
0 .(A ⊓¬B′)

(75)
a : ∀1{r0}.(¬N′ →D),
a : ∃r0.D →D
(76)
Now let CP = (∅, M, ∅, {D, B, B′}), where M consists of all concept and role names distinct
from D, B, and B′.
Lemma 29 CircCP(∅, AP ) ̸|= D(a) iﬀP has a solution.
Proof. Assume P has a solution τ. Take the interpretation I from the proof of Lemma 27
expanded by
AI = {(0, 0)},
N′I = ∆I,
B′I = ∅,
rI
0 = {(aI, d) | d ∈∆I}.
We show that I is a model of CircCP(∅, AP ). Clearly, I is a model of AP . Thus it remains
to show that there is no model J of AP with J <CP I. Assume there exists J <CP I which
is a model of AP . As A is minimized and by (74), AJ = {(0, 0)}. It follows from axiom
(66) encoded in (73) that ((0, 0), (1, 0)) ∈xJ and ((0, 0), (0, 1)) ∈yJ . Now one can prove
by induction on ℓ> 0 using again the axiom (66) encoded in (73) and (74) that for all (i, j)
with i + j = ℓ, ((0, 0), (i, j)) ∈rJ
0 and ((i, j), (i + 1, j)) ∈xJ , ((i, j), (i, j + 1)) ∈yJ . It
follows that xJ = xI and yJ = yI. Also observe that N′J = ∆I because, no matter how
B′ is interpreted,
 (A ⊓B′) ⊔∃r−
0 .(A ⊓B′)

⊓⊔
s=x,y ∃s.∃r−
0 .(A ⊓¬B′)
J
= ∅.
Now one can prove similarly to the proof of Lemma 27 that J can only diﬀer from I in the
interpretation of B, B′, and D, which is a contradiction.
Conversely, suppose I is a model of CircCP(∅, AP ) with aI ̸∈DI. We ﬁrst show that
(aI, d) ∈rI
0 whenever d ̸= aI and d is {x, y}-reachable in I from aI in a ﬁnite number of
steps. Assume that this is not the case. Then there exist d, d′ ∈∆I such that
753

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
• d = aI or (aI, d) ∈rI
0 ,
• (d, d′) ∈xI or (d, d′) ∈yI,
• (a, d′) ̸∈rI
0 .
By (74), there exists d′′ ∈∆I such that aI ̸= d′′, (d′′, d′) ∈rI
0 , and d′′ ∈AI. Observe that
d ∈N′I by (76) and aI ̸∈DI. Deﬁne a new interpretation J by modifying I as follows:
• d is removed from N′I;
• let aI ∈B′J and d′′ ̸∈B′J ;
• let DJ = ∆I.
Clearly J <CP I. To obtain a contradiction it is thus suﬃcient to show that J is a model
of AP . Clearly, all assertion in AP containing neither D, B′, nor N′ are satisﬁed in J . For
the remaining assertions except (75), it follows from DJ = ∆I that they are satisﬁed in J .
Finally, for (75), observe that N′I ⊇{aI}∪{e | (aI, e) ∈rI
0 } because a ̸∈DI and assertions
(76). Thus, by deﬁnition of N′J , we only have to consider the point d removed from N′I.
But d ∈
 (A ⊓B′) ⊔∃r−
0 .(A ⊓B′)

⊓⊔
s=x,y ∃s.∃r−
0 .(A ⊓¬B′)
J
by deﬁnition of J .
Now one can use the assertions (73) to construct a solution τ of P in the same way as
in the proof of Lemma 27.
J
We have thus proved the following result.
Theorem 30 In ALCI, satisﬁability w.r.t. role-minimizing cKBs with empty TBox is un-
decidable.
7. Related Work
We have already pointed out in the introduction that circumscription is just one of several
possible approaches to nonmonotonic DLs and that, in order to achieve decidability, each
of these approaches has to adopt a suitable restriction on the expressive power of the DL
component, on the non-monotonic features, or on the interaction of the DL and its non-
monotonic features. In this section, we survey the existing approaches, discuss the adopted
restrictions, and relate them to DLs with circumscription whenever possible. However, we
point out that a full-ﬂedged formal comparison of the diﬀerent approaches is a serious re-
search endeavor of its own and outside the scope of this paper. The main approaches to
nonmonotonic DLs (excluding those relying on the integration of DLs and logic program-
ming) are summarized in Table 1, where ‘n.a.’ stands for ‘not analyzed’ and the ‘speciﬁcity’
column states whether a formalism is equipped with a priority mechanism based on the the
speciﬁcity (i.e., subsumption) of concepts.
We start with two early approaches based on circumscription. In the work by Brewka
(1987), a frame system is given a nonmonotonic semantics based on circumscription. The
focus is on showing the appropriateness of the proposed semantics, and the decidability and
complexity of reasoning is not analyzed. Cadoli et al. (1990), apply circumscription to a DL
754

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
Ref
DL
NM features
Complexity
Speciﬁcity
(Brewka, 1987)
frame lang.
Circ
n.a.
Y
(Cadoli,
Donini, &
Schaerf, 1990)
< ALE
Circ
in Σp
2
N
(Padgham & Zhang,
1993)
AL with con-
crete domains
inheritance
networks
n.a.
Y
(Straccia, 1993)
ALC
prioritized
default logic
decidable
Y
(Baader & Hollun-
der, 1995a)
ALCF
default logic
decidable
N
(Baader & Hollun-
der, 1995b)
ALC
prioritized
default logic
decidable
Y
(Lambrix,
Shah-
mehri, & Wahlloef,
1998)
ALQO+feature
agreement
prioritized
default logic
n.a.
Y
(Donini et al., 1997)
any decidable DL
MKNF with
restrictions
depends on DL
N
(Donini et al., 2002)
ALC
MKNF with
restrictions
in 3-ExpTime
N
(Giordano,
Gliozzi,
Olivetti, & Pozzato,
2008)
ALC
maximized
typicality
in co-NExpNP
N
Table 1: Some approaches to nonmonotonic DLs
in the same way as we do here. The authors consider only non-prioritized circumscription
and apply it to a fragment of the description logic ALE. Decidability of reasoning is shown
by a reduction to propositional reasoning under the Extended Closed World Assumption
(ECWA), which is in Πp
2. To the best of our knowledge, this was the ﬁrst eﬀective reasoning
method for a nonmonotonic description logic.
In another early approach by Padgham and Zhang (1993), a nonmonotonic DL is ob-
tained by an adaptation of the inheritance networks approach (Horty, 1994) where the
underlying DL is essentially AL extended with concrete data values. The main contribu-
tion is the deﬁnition of the formalism and a discussion of applications, decidability and
complexity are not analyzed.
A recent approach that is similar in spirit to circumscription has been taken by Giordano
et al. (2008). The authors extend ALC with a modal operator T representing typicality,
and maximize T’s extension to achieve nonmonotonic inferences. Decidability is proved via
a tableau algorithm that also establishes a co-NExpNP upper bound for subsumption. A
lower bound is not given.
We now turn to approaches based on default logic (Reiter, 1980). The nonmonotonic
DLs by Baader and Hollunder (1995a, 1995b), Straccia (1993), and Lambrix et al. (1998)
share a common restriction: default rules can be applied to an individual only if it has
a name, that is, if it is denoted by an individual constant that occurs explicitly in the
knowledge base. This restriction is motivated by the observation that, when defaults are also
applied to implicit (anonymous) individuals, then reasoning becomes undecidable (Baader &
755

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
Hollunder, 1995a). Since the models of DL knowledge bases usually include a large number
of anonymous individuals due to existential quantiﬁcation, this restriction introduces a
strong asymmetry in the treatment of individuals.
Another line of nonmonotonic DLs (Donini et al., 1998, 1997, 2002) is based on ﬁrst-order
autoepistemic logics whose interpretation domains are restricted to a ﬁxed and denumerable
set of constants. The use of a unique domain resolves several issues related to quantiﬁcation
in modal logics (such as whether the Barcan formula should hold, and whether diﬀerent
worlds of the same Kripke structure should be allowed to have diﬀerent domains). It also
avoids the asymmetry of the approaches based on default logic because, by deﬁnition, all
individuals have a name. The other side of the coin is that domains with ﬁnite or varying
cardinality and knowledge bases that do not satisfy the unique name assumption can only
be dealt with using rather technical encodings (such as an explicit axiomatization of the
ﬁnite domain represented by a concept name D).
In the ﬁrst paper mentioned above (Donini et al., 1998), decidability results apply only to
monotonic knowledge bases4 as the autoepistemic operator can be used in a nonmonotonic
fashion only in queries.
This restriction has been lifted in the subsequent publications.
They make use of the logic of minimal knowledge and negation as failure (MKNF), which
is equipped with two (auto)epistemic operators “K” and “A” (Donini et al., 1997, 2002).
In the former paper (Donini et al., 1997), the underlying monotonic fragment can be any
description logic with a decidable instance checking problem.
The price payed for this
generality is that decidability results apply only to so-called simple knowledge bases, where
quantifying-in (that is, quantiﬁcation across modal operators, as in ∀R.K C) is not allowed.
Nonetheless, such KBs are expressive enough to model default rules. A diﬀerent restriction is
explored by Donini et al. (2002). The underlying DL is restricted to ALC while limited forms
of quantifying-in are allowed, in so-called subjectively quantiﬁed ALCKNF knowledge bases.
Decidability results are obtained for the subclass of simple subjectively quantiﬁed knowledge
bases, whose nonmonotonic part is restricted to inclusions of the form KC ⊑D such that
⊤⊑C is can not be inferred from the knowledge base. This restriction is incompatible
with the traditional embedding of (priority-free) circumscription into autoepistemic logic,
which is based on prerequisite-free default rules that would be equivalent to inclusions of
the form K⊤⊑C.
A recent line of research on integrating DLs and logic programming rules introduces
further nonmonotonic extensions of DLs based on negation-as-failure. Some approaches
(Eiter et al., 2004) use a loosely coupled integration of logic programs and DLs, where the
interpretations of the DL component are not restricted while the logic program variables
range only over the named DL individuals. Thus, these approaches are somewhat similar
to the classical extensions of DLs based on defaults in that nonmonotonic inferences are
limited to named individuals. A more recent approach (Motik & Rosati, 2007) is based on
MKNF and shares with the MKNF-DLs discussed above pros and cons of adopting a ﬁxed
denumerable domain. If the complexity of reasoning in the underlying DL is C ̸⊆NP, then
the data complexity of entailment is bounded by CC. Finally, we mention a 3-valued variant
of this approach (Knorr, Alferes, & Hitzler, 2007) based on the well-founded semantics.
4. The autoepistemic operator can be used only in restricted contexts that suﬃce to encode so-called
procedural rules, which are monotonic.
756

The Complexity of Circumscription in DLs
ALC
ALCQO
ALCI
ALCIO
Concept circ.
#M ≤n, #F ≤n
NPNExp
(unrestricted)
NExpNP even if ≺= ∅, and either TBox=∅or ABox=∅
Minim. roles
TBox= ∅
NExpNP even if #M ≤1, #F ≤0
Undecidable
TBox̸= ∅
Undecidable
Fixed roles
Highly undecidable, even if TBox= ∅, ≺= ∅
Table 2: Summary of complexity results for satisﬁability w.r.t. cKBs
A common limitation of the nonmonotonic extensions of DLs based on MKNF is that
they provide no support for speciﬁcity and priorities. In particular, defeasible inheritance
is not mentioned in the expressiveness analysis for autoepistemic approaches (Donini et al.,
1997, 2002) and it does not appear to be a goal of any MKNF-based approach. As pointed
out in the introduction, it is well-known that, in the propositional case, nonmonotonic logics
cannot modularly encode speciﬁcity-based priorities such as those needed by inheritance
mechanisms (Horty, 1994).
8. Conclusions and Perspectives
We have shown that circumscription provides an elegant approach to deﬁning nonmonotonic
DLs, that the resulting formalisms have an appealing expressive power and are decidable
if appropriate restrictions are adopted. The main such restriction, which leads to rather
robust decidability results, is that only concept names are minimized and ﬁxed whereas all
role names vary. With empty TBoxes, decidability is retained if roles are allowed to be
minimized, but not when they are ﬁxed. The decidability and complexity results obtained
in this paper are listed in more detail in Table 2. By the results of Section 3, all bounds
with TBox ̸= ∅apply to both general and acyclic TBoxes.
We view this paper as a promising step towards establishing circumscribed DLs as a
major family of nonmonotonic DLs to be used in practical applications. To reach this goal,
some additional research topics have to be addressed, of which we mention two. First, the
algorithms presented in this paper are based on massive non-deterministic guessing and
thus do not admit an eﬃcient implementation. Ideally, one would like to have algorithms
which are well-behaved extensions of the tableau algorithms that underly state-of-the-art
DL reasoners (Baader & Sattler, 2000). A crucial issue is whether the sophisticated opti-
mization techniques implemented in such reasoners (tableaux caching, dependency-directed
backtracking etc.; cf. Baader et al., 2003, Chap. 9) can be adapted to circumscribed DLs.
Some ﬁrst steps have been made by Grimm and Hitzler (2008). Second, it seems necessary
to develop a design methodology for modelling defeasible inheritance. The examples given
in this paper indicate that the main challenge is to ﬁnd rules of thumb to determine which
predicates should be ﬁxed, varied, and minimized. It may be appealing to hide abnormality
predicates behind explicit syntax for defeasible inclusions, and trade some generality for
simplicity and usability.
Also from a theoretical perspective, our initial investigation leave open at least some
interesting questions. For example, our current techniques are limited to circumscribed DLs
757

Bonatti, Lutz, & Wolter
that have the ﬁnite model property. It would be desirable to overcome this limitation and
obtain decidability results for even more expressive DLs such as SHIQ or OWL. It is also
possible to follow the opposite approach and consider circumscribed versions of inexpressive
DLs such as those of the EL or DL-Lite family (Baader, Brandt, & Lutz, 2005a; Calvanese,
Giacomo, Lembo, Lenzerini, & Rosati, 2007), which are currently very popular in a large
number of applications. First steps have been made by Bonatti, Faella, and Sauro (2009),
who investigated circumscribed versions of EL and DL-lite.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that our complexity results for circumscription can be
used to prove complexity bounds for other, seemingly unrelated, reasoning problems in
description logic. For example, certain reasoning services for conservative extensions and
modularity in description logic and the satisﬁability problem w.r.t. concept-circumscribed
knowledge bases are mutually reducible to each other in polynomial time (Konev, Lutz,
Walther, & Wolter, 2008). As there are not many problems that are known to be NExpNP-
complete, circumscription thus provides a new class of problems that can potentially be
employed to give NExpNP lower bound proofs.
