504 
SREBRO 
UAI2001 
Maximum Likelihood Bounded Tree-Width Markov Networks 
Nathan Srebro 
Laboratory for Computer Science 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
Abstract 
We study the problem of projecting a dis­
tribution onto (or finding a maximum likeli­
hood distribution among) Markov networks 
of bounded tree-width. By casting it as the 
combinatorial optimization problem of find­
ing a maximum weight hypertree, we prove 
that it is NP-hard to solve exactly and pro­
vide an approximation algorithm with a prov­
able performance guarantee. 
1 
Introduction 
Estimating model structure from data remains a dif­
ficult problem. A typical approach involves heuristic 
search using some structure scoring metric, such as the 
Bayesian score. While this general problem is known 
to be hard [Chi96] (and the typical approach reflects 
this fact), hardness of many restricted learning sce­
narios is not well-understood, nor is the potential for 
guaranteed approximation algorithms. We focus here 
on a slightly simpler problem, in which regularization 
is attained solely by limiting the model to a restricted 
"concept" class and a maximum likelihood model is 
sought. Casting the associated estimation problem in 
purely combinatorial terms permits us to obtain both 
hardness results and provable guarantees of approxi­
mation accuracy. 
In 1968, Chow and Liu [CL68] provided a rigorous 
analysis for finding maximum likelihood Markov trees, 
casting it as a problem of finding a maximum-weight 
tree, and thus providing an efficient and exact algo­
rithm for it. We would like to generalize the work of 
Chow and Liu to the problem of learning a maximum 
likelihood Markov network of bounded complexity. In 
Section 2 we discuss how tree-width is in many ways 
the appropriate measure of complexity. Accordingly, 
we analyze the problem of learning a maximum likeli­
hood Markov network of bounded tree-width. 
In fact, we study a somewhat more general problem. 
The maximum likelihood distribution is a distribution 
minimizing the information divergence from the em­
pirical distribution. Finding a maximum likelihood 
distribution can thus be seen as a special case of the 
problem of projecting a target distribution onto a con­
cept class, i.e. finding the distribution from within the 
class that minimizes the information divergence from 
the target. Such projections have applications beyond 
finding the maximum likelihood distribution. In this 
paper, we use this framework and discuss the prob­
lem of projecting a target distribution onto the class 
of Markov networks of bounded tree-width. 
Similarly to the work of Chow and Liu, we are able 
to formalize the projection problem as a combina­
torial optimization problem on graphs. 
We show 
that projecting a distribution onto Markov networks 
of bounded tree-width is equivalent to finding a 
maximum-weight hypertree. 
This equivalence gives 
rise to global, integer programming-based approxima­
tion algorithms with provable performance guarantees. 
This contrasts with previously suggested local-search 
heuristics for the same problem [Mal91]. The equiva­
lence also allows us to study the computational hard­
ness of the learning problem. We show that learning a 
maximum likelihood Markov network of bounded tree­
width is NP-hard, even for tree-width two. 
Several other extensions to the work of Chow and Liu 
have been proposed. Meila [MP99] suggested modeling 
distributions as mixtures of tree-shaped Markov net­
works. Dasgupta [Das99] suggested poly-tree Bayesian 
networks (trees with oriented edges), proving the hard­
ness of this problem. 
Complementary to this presentation is a paper on ap­
proximation algorithms for the maximum-weight hy­
pertree problem [KS01], which details the algorithms 
mentioned here. The algorithms are motivated by the 
problems discussed here, and some results from Sec­
tion 3 are quoted in [KSOl]. 

UAI2001 
SREBRO 
505 
It should be noted that this work is concerned with 
finding distributions, and not with reconstructing the 
"true" structure. Maximum likelihood is generally not 
appropriate for model selection, as it will always find 
maximal structures, even when there is no support for 
some of the edges. In this sense, too, this work is an 
extension of Chow and Liu's approach. 
2 
Bounding the Complexity of 
Markov Networks 
A Markov network over a specified graph G is deter­
mined by the marginal distributions over cliques in G, 
and this representation essentially gives the number of 
parameters of Markov networks over G. This number 
is exponential in the clique sizes, and so we would like 
to keep the clique sizes small. 
But other than bounding the number of parameters, 
we would also like to limit ourselves to tractable com­
putations. Although the clique marginals provide a 
compact representation for any Markov network with 
small clique size, there is no generally efficient way 
of performing exact computations (e.g. of marginal 
or conditional probabilities) on such graphs. In fact, 
even calculating the minimum information divergence 
to Markov networks over the graph (i.e. the maximum 
likelihood, if the target is the empirical distribution) 
might be infeasible. Though theoretically possible, it 
would be extremely optimistic to hope that finding 
the graph that minimizes this quantity would be eas­
ier than calculating it. 
In order to work with Markov networks, and in par­
ticular to calculate marginal and conditional prob­
abilities, one usually triangulates the graph. 
On 
a triangulated graph, such calculations can be per­
formed in time linear in the representation of the clique 
marginals, i.e. exponential in the size of the cliques. 
But these are now the cliques of the augmented, tri­
angulated graph. So it is not enough for the Markov 
network to have small cliques, in order for computa­
tions to be tractable, we need the Markov network to 
have a triangulation with small cliques. 
This property is captured by the tree-width of a graph: 
Definition 1 (Tree-width). The 
tree-width 
of a 
graph is the minimum, over all triangulations of the 
graph, of the maximum clique size in the triangula­
tion, minus one: 
Tree-width (G) = 
min 
max 
I hi - 1 
G':JG 
hEClique(G) 
G' is triangulated 
In this work, we study the problem of projecting a 
distribution onto Markov networks over graphs of tree-
width at most k, for some specified k. Graphs of tree­
width one constitute the class of acyclic graphs (or 
forests), and so for k 
= 1 this becomes the problem 
of projecting onto Markov trees. As the width is in­
creased, more complex Markov networks are allowed, 
with an exponential dependence on k. 
3 
Decomposing the Information 
Divergence 
Chow and Liu [CL68] showed that, for Markov trees, 
the reduction in information divergence, relative to the 
empty graph, can be additively decomposed to edges. 
The contribution of each edge of the tree is indepen­
dent of the structure of the tree, and is the relative 
information between its nodes. We show a similar de­
composition for "wider" triangulated networks. A key 
point of this decomposition is that the contribution of 
local elements are independent of the graph structure. 
Recall that a Markov network can always be factored 
over its cliques. That is, any distribution Px that is 
a Markov network over some graph G can be written 
as: 
Px(x) = 
II 
(1) 
hE Clique( G) 
where ¢h depends only on the outcome xh inside the 
clique h. 
In the general case, the clique factors ¢h might have 
a very complex dependence on the distribution. How­
ever, when G is triangulated, the factor of a clique 
depends only on the marginal distribution inside the 
clique. Moreover, the clique factors can be calculated 
explicitly and directly from the clique marginals. 
We will concentrate on a specific explicit factorization, 
given by: 
(2) 
where the product in (1) is taken over all, not nec­
essarily maximal, cliques. That is, we refer here to 
any complete subgraph of G as a clique. Factors cor­
responding to non-maximal cliques can of course be 
subsumed into some containing maximal clique factor. 
However, this leads to clique factors that are depen­
dent on the graph structure. The factors given by (2) 
are unique in that a clique's factor does not depend on 
the graph G, except for the fact that G includes the 
clique. 1 A clique's factor depends only on the marginal 
1 More precisely: 
consider mappings P,. 
.....,. tj>,. from 
marginal distributions over subsets of variables, to factors 
over the subset. The mapping given in (2) is the only such 
mapping, such that (1) holds for every triangulated graph 
G and every Markov network P over G. 

506 
SREBRO 
UAI2001 
inside the clique, and is completely oblivious to the dis­
tribution outside the clique, or even to the structure of 
the graph outside the clique. This very strong locality 
property will be essential later. 
For a specific triangulated graph G, the projection of 
a target distribution pT onto Markov networks over G 
can be calculated explicitly. Following (2), and since 
the projected Markov network is the one in which the 
clique marginals agree with pT, the projection Fe is 
given by: 
Fc(x) = 
IT 
(3) 
where again, the product is over all, not necessarily 
maximal, cliques. 
What we would like to do is to project pT onto Markov 
networks over any graph of tree-width at most k. The 
core problem is finding the projected graph itself (i.e. 
the graph over which the projected Markov network is 
achieved). We can associate with every graph G its in­
formation divergence from pT -that is, the minimum, 
over all Markov networks over G, of the information 
divergence from pT: 
D (PTIG) = m_in D (PTIP) = D (PTIIFc) 
(4) 
pIS a 
Markov net over G 
The projected graph is the bounded tree-width graph 
minimizing the information divergence from G. 
Note that adding edges to a graph can only decrease 
the information divergence to it, since any distribu­
tion that was a Markov network on the sparser graph 
is certainly also a Markov network on the augmented 
one. So, the projected graph can always be taken to 
be triangulated- if it is not triangulated, jt can be 
triangulated by adding edges without increasing the 
tree-width, yielding an acceptable triangulated graph 
with lower or equal divergence. 
Taking this into account, it is enough to search over 
all triangulated graphs of tree-width at most k for the 
graph minimizing the information divergence from pT. 
But for triangulated graphs, the projected distribution 
Fe is given by (3), and so the information divergence 
can be calculated as: 
D (PTIIG) = D (PTIIFc) 
= Ex>PT log 
• 
[ 
pT(X) 
l 
nhE Clique( G) c!Jh(Xh) 
= EpT [logPTJ- l:Ex?PT [log¢h(Xh)J 
hE Clique( G) 
Recall the strong locality of the projected clique fac­
tors J,h, i.e. that they depend only on the marginals of 
pT. Consequentially, for each candidate clique h, the 
term EpT [logJ,h(Xh)] in the sum depends only on 
the marginal inside the clique, and not on the struc­
ture of the graph G. 
Consider a weight function over candidate cliques, 
such that w(h) = EpT [logJ,h(Xh)J. This weight 
function can be calculated from the target distribution 
pT alone, and is independent of the graph. After cal­
culating the weight function for every possible clique, 
the information divergence to any triangulated graph 
is given by: 
D(PTIIG) =EpT [logPTJ- Lw(h) 
(5) 
hE Clique( G) 
where again, the sum is over all, not necessarily max­
imal, cliques in G. In fact, the summation always in­
cludes all singleton cliques, i.e. sets of a single vertex. 
For an empty graph G, the only cliques are single­
ton cliques, and so the information divergence to an 
empty graph (i.e. fully independent model) is exactly 
captured by the singleton cliques. Thus, separating 
out the singletons, we can rewrite (5) as: 
D (PTIIG) = D (PTI\0)- L w(h) 
hE Clique(G),JhJ>l 
(6) 
Equation (6) expresses the reduction in the informa­
tion divergence versus a simple base model, as a sum 
of weights (derived from the target distribution) of all 
non-trivial cliques that appear in the graph. Minimiz­
ing the information divergence is thus equivalent to 
maximizing this sum of weights. This is represented 
in Figure 1. 
Before we return to maximizing the sum of weights, 
let us investigate the structure of these weights. 
4 
The Weights 
The weight of each candidate clique is determined by 
the target distribution and was defined in terms of the 

UAI2001 
SREBRO 
507 
0--i----
-H(PT) 
D (PTIIG) 
- H(Fc) 
Figure 1: D (PTIIG) 
LhEClique(G),Ihl>1 wh 
(EpT [log0] - H(PT)) -
projected factor: 
w(h) = ExīPT [logJ>h(Xh)J 
(7) 
Incorporating the explicit definition of the projected 
factors (3): 
= -H(PT(Xh))- 2:: w(h') 
(8) 
h'Ch 
where H(PT(Xh)) is the entropy of the marginal dis­
tribution of pT over h. 
This provides for a simple 
recursive specification of the weights. Unrolling this 
recursion, the weight of a candidate hyperedge can also 
be written as a sum: 
w(h) =- 2:: ( -1)1hl-lh'l H(PT(Xh' )) 
(9) 
h'';h 
Note that he weight w( { v}) of a singleton { v} is the 
negative entropy -H (Xv) of the single variable. Ac­
cordingly, all singleton weights are negative (or at least 
non-positive). This is not surprising, as these weights 
sum up to the negative cross-entropy EpT [tog P0] and 
are incorporated in our formulation (6) of the projec­
tion problem as part of D (PT110). They do not ac­
tually appear as weights in the maximum hypertree 
problem. 
However, as more edges are added to the graph, the 
admissible distributions are less limited and the pro­
jected distribution can become more similar to the tar­
get distribution. 
This means that weights of candi­
date cliques beyond singletons should generally have 
a positive contribution, representing the reduction in 
the information divergence, or equivalently the gain in 
negative cross-entropy. 
In fact, the weight of a vertex pair { u, v}, i.e. an edge, 
is (following (9)): w({u,v}) = -H(Xu,Xv)+H(Xu)+ 
H(Xv) =!(Xu; Xv), in agreement with Chow and Liu. 
The mutual information across an edge precisely cap­
tures the reduction in information divergence attained 
by taking into account the dependence between the 
endpoints. 
Now consider the weight of some candidate three­
clique {1, 2, 3}. If the three variables X 1, X2, X3 are 
pairwise independent, but have some three-way depen­
dence, then using (9), we can calculate w(1, 2, 3) 
= 
H(Xl)+H(X2)+H(X3)-H(X1, X2, X3). The weight 
is again non-negative. It correctly captures the ben­
efit of taking into account the dependency between 
the variables, as quantified by the reduction in the in­
formation divergence. In fact, the weight is equal to 
the information divergence between the true three-way 
marginal distribution, and the product distribution of 
the three singleton marginal distributions. 
It is tempting to adopt this clean interpretation of 
the weights, by which the weight of a candidate clique 
represents the reduction in information divergence at­
tained by taking into account the additional depen­
dency. 
Under this interpretation, the weight of a 
candidate d-clique should be the information diver­
gence between the true d-way marginal and the maxi­
mum entropy d-way distribution that agrees with the 
marginals of all d -1 sub-cliques. 
The reality is different. Consider a Markov chain over 
three variables X1 ---> X2 ---> X3. In this case all the 
information is in the pairwise dependencies, and by 
the above suggested interpretation, the weight of the 
candidate three-clique {1, 2, 3} should have been zero. 
Using (9), however, we can check that w(1, 2, 3) = 
-I (X 1; X 3) < 0. On second thought, this should not 
surprise us. Consider the total weight of a graph con­
taining the three-clique. All the dependencies in the 
Markov chain are already captured by the two pair­
wise dependencies (X 1, X2) and (X2, X3). 
Accord­
ingly, all of the reduction in the information diver­
gence is captured by w( {1, 2}) + w( {2, 3} ). However, 
since we sum all the cliques in the graph, in addi­
tion to these two pairwise weights, we will also in­
clude w({1,3}) 
= I(X1;X3). 
The pairwise weights 
thus overcount the reduction in the information diver­
gence. The weight of the candidate three-clique, which 
will always be included if all three pairwise weights are 
included, accounts for this overcounting. 
The weights of candidate cliques thus serve not only to 
reward for the new dependency made possible by the 

508 
SREBRO 
UAI 2001 
clique, but also to account for overcounting inside the 
clique. Pairwise weights need not perform any such ac­
counting, but the weight of any larger candidate clique 
can be either positive or negative. 
The possibility of negative weights is very problematic 
from an algorithmic standpoint. Negative weights may 
cause many combinatorial optimization approaches to 
fail. In fact, the algorithms presented in [KSOl] for the 
maximum weight hypertree problem do not work with 
arbitrary negative weights. Fortunately, the weights 
we define here do have some positive structure. 
Although for any particular candidate clique of more 
than two vertices, the clique weight can be negative, 
it is not possible for too many weights to be negative. 
As argued before, adding edges to a graph does reduce 
the information divergence, but it can add more then 
just one additional clique. The total weight of a trian­
gulated graph G is no less than the total weight of a 
triangulated sub-graph G' of G. Accordingly, the sum 
of the weights of cliques in G that are not cliques in 
G' must be non-negative. 
We call a weight function obeying such a constraint 
a monotone weight function. It is enough to require 
that the weight function be monotone on cliques, i.e. 
that the total summed weight of a graph containing 
a single clique { v1, v2, ... , vd} is no less than the to­
tal summed weight of the graph containing the single 
clique { v1, v2, ... , Vd-t}. A weight function that is 
monotone on cliques is also monotone on all triangu­
lated graphs. 
Note that these arguments hold only for triangulated 
graphs. Otherwise the total summed weight of the 
graph does not represent any meaningful information 
quantity as the product of the factors may not be a 
valid distribution function, let alone the projected dis­
tribution. 
5 
The Reduction 
The problem of projecting a distribution onto Markov 
networks of bounded tree-width k can thus be reduced 
to finding a triangulated graph of bounded tree-width 
(or equivalently, clique size) that maximizes the total 
summed weight of its (not only maximal) cliques with 
respect to some monotone weight function. That is, 
if we knew an algorithm that finds such a graph, we 
could use it for projecting distributions onto Markov 
networks of bounded tree-width. 
To do so, we would first calculate a weight for each set 
of at most k+l vertices (including singletons), starting 
with the small sets and proceeding to the larger ones, 
using the recurrence (8). We would then find the max­
imum weight bounded tree-width triangulated graph 
for these weights, but ignoring the singleton weights 
(the singleton weights are necessary only for the re­
cursive calculation). 
For tree-width one, i.e. triangulated graphs with no 
three-cliques, this is the problem of finding a maximum 
weight tree, and as we saw before, the weights are in 
agreement with Chow and Liu. For higher tree-width, 
this is the problem of finding a maximum weight hy­
pertree [KSOl]. 
Although the recursive definition provides for a rela­
tively quick method of calculating the weights for small 
k, it is still necessary to calculate (;;.J 
= O(n"'+-1) 
weights, taking O(nk+2) time. 
As we have not considered the representation of the 
target distribution, we cannot discuss the complexity 
of the reduction in terms of the problem 'size', as this 
of course depends on the representation. We do not 
want to go into the issues of input representations of 
the distribution, except for one special case which orig­
inally motivated us: the case in which the distribution 
is an empirical distribution of some sample. 
The "input representation" in this case is the sample 
itself, of size O(Tn log m) , where T is the sample size 
and m is the number of possible outcomes for each 
random variable. So, if k is part of the input, the 
reduction is not polynomial in the sample, as it is ex­
ponential in k while the sample is independent of it. 
If k is constant, then the reduction is polynomial. 
As the number of parameters in the resulting model, 
and therefore the complexity of calculations on the 
resulting distribution, is also exponential in k, it is 
tempting to hope that the reduction is comparable 
to, or at least polynomial in, the resulting number 
of parameters. This is essentially the output size of 
the learning problem, and practically also a bound on 
the input size, as one would generally not have less 
data then there are parameters to learn. However, 
this is not the case. The number of parameters is only 
0 ( nm"'+-1) . Therefore if n > > 
m, the reduction is 
super-polynomial even in the resulting number of pa­
rameters. 
6 
The Reverse Reduction 
In order to use the formulation (6) to analyze the com­
putational hardness, we must show how to perform 
the reverse reduction, i.e. transform an input of the 
maximum hypertree problem (a weight function) to 
an input of the projection problem (a distribution) so 
that the projected distribution implies the maximum 
hypertree. In this section, we show that for every non­
negative weight function on vertex sets of fixed size, 

UAI 2001 
SREBRO 
509 
there exists a distribution that yields weights propor­
tional to this set of weights. We thus demonstrate that 
the problem of finding a maximum hypertree, at least 
for a non-negative weight function on vertex sets of a 
fixed size, can be reduced to projecting a distribution 
onto Markov networks of bounded tree-width. 
Furthermore, a "small" sample can be constructed, 
with an empirical distribution yielding weights that 
are close enough to these weights, conserving the exact 
structure of the projected graph. This establishes that 
the problem of finding a maximum hypertree (for non­
negative weights on vertex sets of fixed size) can also 
be reduced to finding a maximum likelihood Markov 
network for empirical data. 
This reduction is weak, in the sense that the sample 
size needed to produce specific weights is polynomial in 
the value of the weights (and so exponential in the size 
of their representation). Still, this pseudo-polynomial 
reduction is enough to show NP-hardness of finding a 
maximum likelihood Markov network of bounded tree­
width, even for tree-width two. 
6.1 
A distribution yielding desired weights 
For a given weight function w : ( ,:;.1) ----> [0, 1) on can­
didate cliques of size exactly k+1, we will consider each 
vertex as a binary variable and construct a distribu­
tion Pw over these variables. The distribution will be 
such that using it as a target distribution in (7) will 
yield weights w' proportional to w. We will assume, 
without loss of generality, that Vhw(h) < 1. 
The distribution Pw will be a uniform mixture of (W1) 
distributions PV, one for each h E ( ,;;1). Each such 
PV will deviate from uniformity only by a bias of r(h) 
in the parity of the variables in h. We show below how 
to select r(h) according to w(h). Explicitly: 
If LvEh Xv is odd 
If LvEh Xv is even 
(10) 
This results in a mixed distribution Pw in which all 
marginals over at most k variables are uniform (and 
therefore have zero corresponding weight), while the 
marginal over a set h of exactly k+1 variables has a bias 
of b = t
). The corresponding weight is therefore 
/otl 
h'Ch 
vEh 
= (k+1) + 2k 
l+b log 
l+b + 2k lèb logȜ 
2/otl 
2/otl 
2..,.1 
2"*1 
= S ((1+b) log(1+b) + (1-b) log(I-b)) 
(ll) 
Using the natural logarithm and taking the Taylor ex­
pansion: 
Choosing r(h) to be approximately v'Wfh) (or more 
precisely, the inverse function of (ll)) yields weights 
proportional to w. 
6.2 
A sample yielding desired weights 
We have shown a distribution that produces weights 
proportional to any desired non-negative weight func­
tion. But since the biases in this distribution might be 
irrational (being the inverse of (ll)), there is no finite 
sample that has such a distribution as its empirical 
distribution. 
We will show a finite sample that results in weights 
that are close enough to the desired weights, such 
that the optimal structure is conserved. 
Given a 
rational weight function w, we will show a sample 
with empirical distribution Pw that produces weights 
w"(h) 
= w'(h) + e(h) such that w
' are proportional 
tow, and Lh le(h)l < q<, where Qw' is the common 
denominator of w'. This is enough, since the total 
summed w' and w11 weights of cliques in the optimal 
graph will be within q:, , less than the possible differ­
ence due to taking cliques with differing weights. 
We first show how to construct a sample that yields 
an empirical distribution similar in structure to Pw, 
with rational biases on k+1 candidate edges. For any 
mapping2 h / T < 1 we construct a sample stJ with 
empirical distribution PtJ such that all k-marginals are 
uniform, and for lhl = k+1: 
, {(1 
+ =)2-IVI 
p 
X 
-
ktl 
tJ( h)-
(I- X)2Y1V! 
q(;1) 
If LvEh Xv is odd 
If LvEh Xv is even 
Unlike the exact Pw, parities of larger sets might be 
very biased. However, these do not effect the resulting 
weights when searching for width-k Markov networks. 
We will build the sample as a pooling of ( ,;::.1) equisized 
samples s;, one for each candidate edge of size k+l. 
Each such S9 will be constructed from Q equisized 
blocks of (k + 1 )-wise uniformly independent sample 
vectors. But for p of these blocks, we will invert the 
elements of h appropriately so as to set the parity of xU 
2The common denominator Q of the biases may be dif­
ferent than the common denominator Qw' 

510 
SREBRO 
UAI2001 
to be odd for all sample vectors in the block. Note that 
this can be done without disrupting the uniformity of 
any other set of vertices of size at most k + 1. 
The 
resulting S8 will be uniform on all subsets of size up 
to k + 1, except for a bias of Pg' l on h. Pooling these 
together yields the desired empirical distribution. 
Using [AS91 J, ( k + 1 )-wise independent blocks can be 
created of size 2nk+1, yielding a total sample size of 
(kR1)Q2nk+1 = O(Qn2k+2), where Q is the common 
denominator of the rational weights. 
We now know how to construct a sample with specified 
mtional biases. However, the biases corresponding to 
rational weights are not rational. We first show how 
to achieve approximate weights with biases that are 
square roots of rationals, and then describe how these 
can be approximated with actual rationals. 
We saw in (12) that the biases of the mixture compo­
nents should be approximately the square roots of the 
desired weights. 
Using biases r'(h) = Q yields 
the following weights (where b' = (}) < 1): 
b'i 
b'2 
b'4 
w'(h) - ""- < - +""-
. L..., i(i-1) 
2 
. L..., i(i-1) 
W here: 
z=2 even 
z=4 even 
b'2 
ln 4-1 b'4 
1 
(h) 
(h) 
=-+ --
= --- w 
+e 
2 
2 
2 (::.1) 2 
L le(h) I < ( n ) ln 4-1 (max w)2 
0.19 
2 
< (c':1)3 
max w 
h 
k+l 
2 
(;lt 
., 
Recall that we would like .Z:::h je(h)j < -d-· 
Since 
the common denominator Qw' scales linearly
' 
with the 
weights, we can achieve this goal by scaling the weights 
down. But since the weights may not be square ratio­
nals, taking their square root might produce irrational 
weights. This can be overcome in a similar fashion, by 
using a rational approximation to the square root. 
6.3 
The reduction and hardness 
We saw how to reduce the maximum hypertree prob­
lem to the maximum likelihood Markov network prob­
lem, with the same k, and even if the variables are 
all binary. 
Note that our reduction is only pseudo­
polynomial, as the sample size needed is polynomial 
in the value of the weights. 
However, in [SreOO] we 
show that the maximum hypertree problem is NP­
hard, even with zero/one weights: 
Theorem 1 (proved in [SreOO]). 
The maximum hypertree problem is NP-hard, even for 
width two, zero/one weights, and weights only on pairs 
of vertices. Furthermore, it is NP-hard to approximate 
to within any constant additive offset. 
This is enough to show NP-hardness of the maximum 
likelihood Markov network problem, even for bound 
tree-width two. 
7 
Approximation Algorithms 
Although the maximum hypertree problem is NP­
hard, we present in [KS01] an integer programming 
based approximation algorithm for it. 
For any con­
stant k, we show a polynomial-time algorithm that 
finds a triangulated graph of tree-width at most k, 
which has a total summed weight within a constant 
factor of the maximum possible total summed weight. 
Unfortunately, this constant approximation factor de­
pends heavily on k-for width k, we find a graph with 
total summed weight at least 1/(8kk!(k + 1)!) of the 
optimal. Algorithms with better approximation ratios 
may be possible, perhaps even with approximation ra­
tios that do not depend on k. 
We discuss how this 
type of approximation for the combinatorial problem 
translates into a sub-optimal solution for the maxi­
mum likelihood learning problem, as well as the gen­
eral projection problem. 
Recall the decomposition of the information diver­
gence that was presented in Figure 1. When the target 
distribution is the empirical distribution, the negative 
cross entropy relative to it is exactly the log likelihood. 
Figure 1 can be viewed as representing the maximum 
log likelihood of Markov networks over 0 (fully inde­
pendent models), Markov networks over G, and the 
maximum attainable log likelihood (the negative en­
tropy of the empirical distribution). The weight of the 
graph is then the gain in maximum log likelihood ver­
sus the fully independent model. 
A constant factor 
approximation on the weight of the graph translates 
to a constant factor approximation on the gain in log 
likelihood. 
We can thus attain a constant factor (for constant 
width) approximation on the gain in log likelihood. 
But this means we only get a constant exponential 
factor approximation on the likelihood itself. U nfortu­
nately, we cannot hope for much more. Since the max­
imum hypertree problem is NP-hard to approximate 
to within any additive constant, we can conclude that 
it is NP-hard to approximate the likelihood to within 
any multiplicative constant. That is, for any constants 
k > 1 and c, it is NP-hard to find a Markov network of 
tree-width at most k, with likelihood at least c times 
the optimal likelihood among Markov networks with 
tree-width at most k. 

UAI 2001 
SREBRO 
511 
8 
Discussion 
We demonstrated how the problem of projecting a dis­
tribution onto Markov networks of bounded tree-width 
can be cast as a combinatorial optimization problem of 
finding a maximum weight hypertree. By studying the 
maximum hypertree problem, we were able to prove 
that the projection problem is NP-hard and to provide 
an approximation algorithm with a provable perfor­
mance guarantee. The approximation ratio is rather 
weak, and a large gap remains between this positive 
result and the computational hardness result. How­
ever, now that the maximum weight hypertree prob­
lem has been presented to the algorithms community, 
further progress on it will directly correspond to im­
proved algorithms for projecting a distribution onto 
Markov networks of bounded tree-width. 
In Section 5 we discussed how a constant factor ap­
proximation for maximum weight hypertree translates 
to a constant factor approximation on the reduction 
in information divergence (or, equivalently, the gain in 
likelihood). As can be seen in Figure 1, a constant 
factor approximation of the weight of the graph does 
not provide for a constant factor approximation of the 
information divergence itself. If the target distribu­
tion is far from being a narrow Markov network, or 
has low entropy (as is usually the case for an empir­
ical distribution), than approximating the reduction 
in information divergence is a more stringent, more 
useful requirement than approximating the informa­
tion divergence itself. In fact, approximating the gain 
in maximum likelihood is always more stringent then 
approximating the maximum likelihood itself. How­
ever, approximating the information divergence may 
be interesting when the target distribution is "almost" 
a narrow Markov network. In this case, approaching 
the optimal information divergence to within a small 
factor is much more stringent then approximating the 
reduction versus an independent modeL This might 
be relevant even if the target distribution is an empir­
ical distribution, e.g. if it is a large empirical sample 
from a narrow Markov network. 
It is also interesting to study the weights that carry the 
decomposition of the reduction in information diver­
gence. In particular, we might ask if the monotonic­
ity is the true property defining the structure of these 
weights. That is, is any monotone weight function 
realizable by some distribution? This question could 
potentially be answered by extending the reverse re­
duction of Section 6 from a positive weight function 
on sets of a fixed number of vertices, to any monotone 
weight function. 
In this work we concentrated on finding maximum like­
lihood models. It would be interesting to extend this 
work also to scoring functions that are appropriate for 
model selection. In fact, minimum description length 
(MDL) scores can be decomposed to clique weights 
over triangulated graphs. However, the weights are 
no longer monotone and the approximation results do 
not hold. Moreover, although the optimal MDL score 
might be achieved on a non-triangulated graph, the 
weights sum up correctly only on triangulated graphs. 
The hardness results do carry over to MDL scores, i.e. 
finding the triangulated graph of bounded tree-width 
that minimizes its MDL is NP-hard.
