arXiv:1007.0690v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jul 2010
A uniﬁed view of Automata-based algorithms for Frequent
Episode Discovery
Avinash Achar
Dept. of Electrical Engg.
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 500080 India

Srivatsan Laxman
Microsoft Research Labs
Sadashivanagar
Bangalore 560080 India

P. S. Sastry
Dept. of Electrical Engg.
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560080 India

ABSTRACT
Frequent Episode Discovery framework is a popular frame-
work in Temporal Data Mining with many applications.
Over the years many diﬀerent notions of frequencies of episodes
have been proposed along with diﬀerent algorithms for episode
discovery. In this paper we present a uniﬁed view of all such
frequency counting algorithms. We present a generic algo-
rithm such that all current algorithms are special cases of
it.
This uniﬁed view allows one to gain insights into dif-
ferent frequencies and we present quantitative relationships
among diﬀerent frequencies.
Our uniﬁed view also helps
in obtaining correctness proofs for various algorithms as we
show here. We also point out how this uniﬁed view helps us
to consider generalization of the algorithm so that they can
discover episodes with general partial orders.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Temporal data mining is concerned with ﬁnitely many use-
ful patterns in sequential (symbolic) data streams [16]. Fre-
quent episode discovery, ﬁrst introduced in [14], is a popular
framework for mining patterns from sequential data. The
framework has been successfully used in many application
domains, e.g., analysis of alarm sequences in telecommuni-
cation networks [14], root cause diagnostics from faults log
data in manufacturing [22], user-behavior prediction from
web interaction logs [11], inferring functional connectivity
from multi-neuronal spike train data [19], relating ﬁnan-
cial events and stock trends [17], protein sequence classiﬁca-
tion [2], intrusion detection [12,23], text mining [7], seismic
data analysis [15] etc. The data in this framework is a sin-
gle long stream of events, where each event is described by
a symbolic event-type from a ﬁnite alphabet and the time of
occurrence of the event. The patterns of interest are termed
episodes. Informally, an episode is a short ordered sequence
of event types, and a frequent episode is one that occurs of-
ten enough in the given data sequence. Discovering frequent
episodes is a good way to unearth temporal correlations in
the data. Given a user-deﬁned frequency threshold, the task
is to eﬃciently obtain all frequent episodes in the data se-
quence.
An important design choice in frequent episode discovery
is the deﬁnition of frequency of episodes.
Intuitively any
frequency should capture the notion of the episode occur-
ring many times in the data and, at the same time, should
have an eﬃcient algorithm for computing the same. There
are many ways to deﬁne frequency and this has given rise
to diﬀerent algorithms for frequent episode discovery [3, 6–
8, 13–15]. In the original framework of [14], frequency was
deﬁned as the number of ﬁxed-width sliding windows over
the data that contain at least one occurrence of the episode.
Another notion for frequency is based on the number of min-
imal occurrences [13, 14]. Two frequency deﬁnitions called
head frequency and total frequency are proposed in [7] in
order to overcome some limitations of the windows-based
frequency of [14]. In [8], two more frequency deﬁnitions for
episodes were proposed, based on certain specialized sets of
occurrences of episodes in the data.
Many of the algorithms, such as the WINEPI of [14] and the
occurrences-based frequency counting algorithms of [9, 10],
employ ﬁnite state automata as the basic building blocks for
recognizing occurrences of episodes in the data sequence. An
automata-based counting scheme for minimal occurrences
has also been proposed in [4].
The multiplicity of frequency deﬁnitions and the associated
algorithms for frequent episode discovery makes it diﬃcult
to compare the diﬀerent methods. In this paper, we present
a uniﬁed view of algorithms for frequent episode discovery
under all the various frequency deﬁnitions . We present a
generic automata-based algorithm for obtaining frequencies
of a set of episodes and show that all the currently available
algorithms can be obtained as special cases of this method.
This viewpoint helps in obtaining useful insights regarding
the kinds of occurrences tracked by the diﬀerent algorithms.
The framework also aids in deriving proofs of correctness
for the various counting algorithms, many of which are not
currently available in literature. Our framework also helps
in understanding the anti-monotonicity conditions satisﬁed
by diﬀerent frequencies which is needed for the candidate
generation step. Our general view can also help in general-
izing current algorithms, which can discover only serial or
parallel episodes, to the case of episodes with general partial
orders and we brieﬂy comment on this in our conclusions.
The paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2 gives an overview
of the episode framework and explains all the currently used
frequencies in literature. Sec. 3 presents our generic algo-
rithm and shows that all current counting techniques for
these various frequencies can be derived as special cases.
Sec. 4 gives proofs of correctness for the various counting
algorithms utilizing this uniﬁed framework. Sec. 5 discusses
the candidate generation step for all these frequencies. In
Sec. 6 we provide some discussion and concluding remarks.

2.
AN OVERVIEW OF FREQUENTEPISODE
DISCOVERY
In this section we brieﬂy review the framework of frequent
episode discovery [14].
The data, referred to as an event
sequence, is denoted by D = ⟨(E1, t1), (E2, t2), . . . (En, tn)⟩,
where each pair (Ei, ti) represents an event, and the number
of events in the event sequence is n. Each Ei is a symbol
(or event-type) from a ﬁnite alphabet, E, and ti is a positive
integer representing the time of occurrence of the ith event.
The sequence is ordered so that, ti ≤ti+1 for all i = 1, 2, . . ..
The following is an example event sequence with 10 events:
(A, 1), (A, 2), (B, 3), (A, 6), (A, 7), (C, 8), (B, 9), (D, 11),
(C, 12), (A, 13), (B, 14), (C, 15) (1)
An N-node episode, α, is deﬁned as a triple, (Vα, ≤α, gα),
where Vα = {v1, v2, . . . vN}, is a collection of N nodes, ≤α
is a partial order on Vα and gα : Vα →E is a map that
associates each node in α with an event type from E. Thus
an episode is a (typically small) collection of event-types
along with an associated partial order. When the order ≤α
is total, α is called a serial episode, and when the order
is empty, α is called a parallel episode. In this paper, we
restrict our attention to serial episodes1. Without loss of
generality, we can now assume that the total order on the
nodes of α is given by v1 ≤α v2 ≤α . . . ≤α vN. For example,
consider a 3-node episode Vα = {v1, v2, v3}, gα(v1) = A,
gα(v2) = B, gα(v3) = C, with v1 ≤α v2 ≤α v3. We denote
such an episode by (A →B →C). An occurrence of episode
α in an event sequence D is a map h : Vα →{1, . . . , n} such
that gα(v) = Eh(v) for all v ∈Vα, and for all v, w ∈Vα
with v <α w we have th(v) < th(w). In the example event
sequence (1), the events (A, 2), (B, 3) and (C, 8) constitute
an occurrence of (A →B →C) while (B, 3), (A, 7) and
(C, 8) do not. We use α[i] to refer to the ith event-type in
α. This way, an N-node episode α can be represented using
(α[1] →α[2] →. . . →α[N]). An episode β is said to be
a subepisode of α (denoted β ⪯α) if all the event-types in
β also appear in α, and if their order in β is same as that
in α. For example, (A →C) is a 2-node subepisode of the
episode (A →B →C) while (B →A) is not.
The frequency of an episode is some measure of how often
it occurs in the event sequence. A frequent episode is one
whose frequency exceeds a user-deﬁned threshold. The task
in frequent episode discovery is to ﬁnd all frequent episodes.
Given an occurrence h of an N-node episode α, (th(vN ) −
th(v1)) is called the span of the occurrence. In many appli-
cations, one may want to consider only those occurrences
whose span is below some user-chosen limit. (This is be-
cause, occurrences constituted by events that are widely sep-
arated in time may not represent any underlying causative
inﬂuences).
We call any such constraint on span as an
expiry-time constraint. The constraint is speciﬁed by a thresh-
old, TX, such that occurrences of episodes whose span is
greater than TX are not considered while counting the fre-
quency.
One popular approach to frequent episode discovery is to
use an Apriori-style level-wise procedure. At level k of the
procedure, a ‘candidate generation’ step combines frequent
episodes of size (k −1) to build candidates (or potential fre-
quent episodes) of size k using some kind of anti-monotonicity
1From now on, we will simply use ’episode’ to refer to a
serial episode.
property (e.g. frequency of an episode cannot exceed fre-
quency of any of its subepisodes). The second step at level k
is called ‘frequency counting’ in which, the algorithm counts
or computes the frequencies of the candidates and deter-
mines which of them are frequent.
2.1
Frequencies of episodes
There are many ways to deﬁne the frequency of an episode.
Intuitively, any deﬁnition must capture some notion of how
often the episode occurs in the data.
It must also admit
an eﬃcient algorithm to obtain the frequencies for a set of
episodes. Further, to be able to apply a level-wise proce-
dure, we need the frequency deﬁnition to satisfy some anti-
monotonicity criterion. Additionally, we would also like the
frequency deﬁnition to be conducive to statistical signiﬁ-
cance analysis.
In this section, we discuss various frequency deﬁnitions that
have been proposed in literature. (Recall that the data is
an event sequence, D = ⟨(E1, t1), . . . (En, tn)⟩).
Definition 1.
[14] A window on an event sequence, D,
is a time interval [ts, te], where ts and te are positive integers
such that ts ≤tn and te ≥t1. The window width of [ts, te]
is given by (te −ts).
Given a user-deﬁned window width
TX, the windows-based frequency of α is the number of
windows of width TX which contain at least one occurrence
of α.
For example, in the event sequence (1), there are 5 windows
with window width 5 which contain an occurrence of (A →
B →C).
Definition 2.
[14] The time-window of an occurrence,
h, of α is given by [th(v1), th(vN )]. A minimal window of α
is a time-window which contains an occurrence of α, such
that no proper sub-window of it contains an occurrence of
α. An occurrence in a minimal window is called a minimal
occurrence. The minimal occurrences-based frequency
of α in D (denoted fmi) is deﬁned as the number of minimal
windows of α in D.
In the example sequence (1) there are 3 minimal windows of
(A →B →C): [2, 8], [7, 12] and [13, 15].
Definition 3.
[7] Given a window-width k, the head
frequency of α is the number of windows of width k which
contain an occurrence of α starting at the left-end of the
window and is denoted as fh(α, k).
Definition 4.
[7] Given a window width k, the total
frequency of α, denoted as ftot(α, k), is deﬁned as follows.
ftot(α, k)
=
min
β⪯α fh(β, k)
(2)
For a window-width of 6, the head frequency fh(γ, 6) of
γ = (A →B →C) in (1) is 4. The total frequency of γ,
ftot(γ, k), in (1) is 3 because the head frequency of (B →C)
in (1) is 3.
Definition 5.
[9] Two occurrences h1 and h2 of α are
said to be non-overlapped if either th1(vN ) < th2(v1) or th2(vN ) <
th1(v1). A set of occurrences is said to be non-overlapped if
every pair of occurrences in the set is non-overlapped.
A

set H, of non-overlapped occurrences of α in D is maximal
if |H| ≥|H′|, where H′ is any other set of non-overlapped
occurrences of α in D. The non-overlapped frequency
of α in D (denoted as fno) is deﬁned as the cardinality of a
maximal non-overlapped set of occurrences of α in D.
Two occurrences are non-overlapped if no event of one oc-
currence appears in between events of the other. The notion
of a maximal non-overlapped set is needed since there can be
many sets of non-overlapped occurrences of an episode with
diﬀerent cardinality [8]. The non-overlapped frequency of γ
in (1) is 2. A maximal set of non-overlapped occurrences is
⟨(A, 2), (B, 3), (C, 8)⟩and ⟨(A, 13), (B, 14), (C, 15)⟩.
Definition 6.
[8] Two occurrences h1 and h2 of α are
said to be non-interleaved if either th2(vj) ≥th1(vj+1),
j =
1, 2, . . . N −1 or th1(vj) ≥th2(vj+1),
j = 1, 2, . . . N −1.
A set of occurrences H of α in D is non-interleaved if ev-
ery pair of occurrences in the set is non-interleaved. A set
H of non-interleaved occurrences of α in D is maximal if
|H| ≥|H′|, where H′ is any other set of non-interleaved
occurrences of α in D. The non-interleaved frequency
of α in D (denoted as fni) is deﬁned as the cardinality of a
maximal non-interleaved set of occurrences of α in D.
The occurrences ⟨(A, 2), (B, 3), (C, 8)⟩and ⟨(A, 7), (B, 9)(C, 12)⟩
are non-interleaved (though overlapped) occurrences of (A →
B →C) in D. Together with ⟨(A, 13), (B, 14), (C, 15)⟩, these
two occurrences form a set of maximal non-interleaved oc-
currences of (A →B →C) in (1) and thus fni = 3.
Definition 7.
[8] Two occurrences h1 and h2 of α are
said to be distinct if they do not share any two events. A
set of occurrences is distinct if every pair of occurrences in
it is distinct. A set H of distinct occurrences of α in D is
maximal if |H| ≥|H′|, where H′ is any other set of distinct
occurrences of α in D. The distinct occurrences-based
frequency of α in D (denoted as fd) is the cardinality of a
maximal distinct set of occurrences of α in D.
The three occurrences that constituted the maximal non-
interleaved occurrences of (A →B →C) in (1) also form a
set of maximal distinct occurrences in (1).
The ﬁrst frequency proposed in the literature was the win-
dows based count [14] and was originally applied for an-
alyzing alarms in a telecommunication network.
It uses
an automata based algorithm called WINEPI for count-
ing.
Candidate generation exploits the anti-monotonicity
property that all subepisodes are at least as frequent as
the parent episode.
A statistical signiﬁcance test for fre-
quent episodes based on the windows-based count was pro-
posed in [5]. There is also an algorithm for discovering fre-
quent episodes with a maximum-gap constraint under the
windows-based count [3].
The minimal windows based frequency and a level-wise pro-
cedure called MINEPI to track minimal windows were also
proposed in [14]. This algorithm has high space complexity
since the exact locations of all the minimal windows of the
various episodes are kept in memory. Nevertheless, it is use-
ful in rule generation. An eﬃcient automata-based scheme
for counting the number of minimal windows (along with
a proof of correctness) was proposed in [4]. The problem
of statistical signiﬁcance of minimal windows was recently
addressed in [21]. An algorithm for extracting rules under a
maximal gap constraint and based on minimal occurrences
has been proposed in [15].
In the windows-based frequency, the window width is es-
sentially an expiry-time constraint (an upper-bound on the
span of the episodes).
However, if the span of an occur-
rence is much smaller than the window width, then its fre-
quency is artiﬁcially inﬂated because the same occurrence
will be found in several successive sliding windows.
The
head frequency measure, proposed in [7], is a variant of the
windows-based count intended to overcome this problem.
Based on the notion of head frequency, [6] presents two al-
gorithms MINEPI+ and EMMA. They also point out how
head frequency can be a better choice for rule generation
compared to the windows-based or the minimal windows-
based counts.
Under the head frequency count, however,
there can be episodes whose frequency is higher than some of
their subepisodes (see [7] for details). To circumvent this, [7]
propose the idea of total frequency. Currently, there is no
statistical signiﬁcance analysis based on head frequency or
total frequency.
An eﬃcient automata-based counting algorithm under the
non-overlapped frequency measure (along with a proof of
correctness) can be found in [10]. A statistical signiﬁcance
test for the same is proposed in [9].
However, the algo-
rithm in [10] does not handle any expiry-time constraints.
An eﬃcient automata-based algorithm for counting non-
overlapped occurrences under expiry-time constraint was pro-
posed in [8, 9] though this has higher time and space com-
plexity than the algorithm in [10].
No proofs of correct-
ness or statistical signiﬁcance analysis are available for non-
overlapped occurrences under an expiry-time constraint. Al-
gorithms for frequent episode discovery under the non-interleaved
frequency can be found in [8]. No proofs of correctness are
available for these algorithms.
Another frequency measure we discuss in this paper is based
on the idea of distinct occurrences. No algorithms are avail-
able for counting frequencies under this measure. The uni-
ﬁed view of automata-based counting that we will present
in this paper can be readily used to design algorithms for
counting distinct occurrences of episodes.
3.
UNIFIED VIEW OF ALLTHEAUTOMATA
BASED ALGORITHMS
In this section, we present a generic algorithm for obtaining
frequencies of episodes under the diﬀerent frequency deﬁ-
nitions listed in Sec. 2.1.
The basic ingredient in all the
algorithms is a simple Finite State Automaton (FSA) that
is used to recognize (or track) an episode’s occurrences in
the event sequence.
The FSA for recognizing occurrences of (A →B →C) is
illustrated in Fig. 1. In general, an FSA for an N-node serial
episode α = α[1] →α[2] →. . . →α[N] has (N + 1) states.
The ﬁrst N states are represented by a pair (i, α[i + 1]),
i = 0, . . . N −1. The (N + 1)th state is (N, φ) where φ is a
null symbol. Intuitively, if the FSA is in state (j, α[j + 1]),
it means that the FSA has already seen the ﬁrst j event
types of this episode and is now waiting for α[j + 1]; if we
now encounter an event of type α[j + 1] in the data it can
accept it (that is, it can transit to its next state). The start
(ﬁrst) state of the FSA is (0, α[1]). The (N + 1)th state is
the accepting state because when an automaton reaches this

0, A
start
1, B
2, C
3, φ
A
E\{A}
B
E\{B}
C
E\{C}
E
Figure 1: Automaton for tracking occurrences of α = (A →
B →C)
state, a full occurrence of the episode is tracked.
We ﬁrst explain how these FSA can be used for obtaining
all the diﬀerent types of frequencies of episodes before pre-
senting the generic algorithm. While discussing various algo-
rithms, we represent any occurrence h by [th(v1), th(v2) . . . th(vN )],
which is the vector of times of the events that constitute
the occurrence. For the discussion of all algorithms in this
section, we consider the example of tracking occurrences of
α = (A →B →C →D) in the data stream D1 given by
D1
=
(A, 1)(B, 3)(A, 4)(A, 5)(C, 7)(B, 9)(C, 11)(A, 14)
(D, 15)(C, 16)(B, 17)(D, 18)(A, 19)(C, 20)(B, 21)
(A, 22)(D, 23)(B, 24)(C, 25)(D, 29)(C, 30)(D, 31)
There is a ‘natural’ lexicographic order on the set of all
occurrences H, of any episode, α, deﬁned below. This is a
total order on H and it will be useful in our analysis.
Definition 8. The lexicographic ordering, <⋆, on the set
of all occurrences of α is deﬁned as follows: h1 <⋆h2 if
the least i for which th1(vi) ̸= th2(vi) is such that th1(vi) <
th2(vi).
The simplest of all automata-based frequency counting al-
gorithms is the one for counting non-overlapped occurrences
[10] which uses only 1-automata per episode. (We call it al-
gorithm NO here). At the start, one automaton for each of
the candidate episodes is initialized in its start state. Each
of the automata make a state transition as soon as a rele-
vant event-type appears in the data stream. Whenever an
automaton reaches its ﬁnal state, frequency of the corre-
sponding episode is incremented, the automaton is removed
from the system and a fresh automaton for the episode is
initialized in the start state. As is easy to see, this method
will count non-overlapped occurrences of episodes. Under
the NO algorithm, we denote the occurrence tracked by the
ith automaton initialized for α as hno
i .
In our example, algorithm NO tracks the following two oc-
currences of the episode α:
(i) hno
1
= [1 3 7 15] and (ii)
hno
2
= [19 21 25 29], and the corresponding non-overlapped
frequency is 2.
In this paper we introduce the concept of earliest transit-
ing occurrence of an episode which is useful for analyzing
diﬀerent frequency counting algorithms.
Definition 9. An occurrence h of α is called earliest
transiting if Eh(vi) is the ﬁrst occurrence of α[i] after th(vi−1)
∀i = 2, 3 . . . N.
It is easy to see that all occurrences tracked by algorithm NO
are earliest transiting. Let He denote the set of all earliest
transiting occurrences of a given episode. We denote the ith
occurrence (as per the lexicographic ordering of occurrences)
in He as he
i . There are 6 earliest transiting occurrences of
α in D1.
They are he
1 = [1 3 7 15], he
2 = [4 9 11 15], he
3 =
[5 9 11 15], he
4 = [14 17 20 23], he
5 = [19 21 25 29] and he
6 =
[22 24 25 29]. The earliest transiting occurrences tracked by
the NO algorithm are hno
1
= he
1 and hno
2
= he
5.
While the algorithm NO is very simple and eﬃcient, it can
not handle any expiry-time constraint. Recall that the expiry-
time constraint speciﬁes an upper-bound, TX, on the span of
any occurrence that is counted. Suppose we want to count
with TX = 9. Both the occurrences tracked by NO have
spans greater than 9 and hence the resulting frequency count
would be zero. However, he
4 is an occurrence which satisﬁes
the expiry time constraint.
Algorithm NO can not track
he
4 because it uses only one automaton per episode and the
automaton has to make a state transition as soon as the
relevant event-type appears in the data. To overcome this
limitation, the algorithm can be modiﬁed so that a new au-
tomaton is initialized in the start state, whenever an existing
automaton moves out of its start state. All automata make
state transitions as soon as they are possible.
Each such
automaton would track an earliest transiting occurrence. In
this process, two automata may reach the same state. In our
example, after seeing (A, 5), the second and third automata
to be initialized for α, would be waiting in the same state
(ready to accept the next B in the data). Clearly, both au-
tomata will make state transitions on the same events from
now on and so we need to keep only one of them. We re-
tain the newer or most recently initialized automaton (in
this case, the third automaton) since the span of the occur-
rence tracked by it would be smaller. When an automaton
reaches its ﬁnal state, if the span of the occurrence tracked
by it is less than TX, then the corresponding frequency is
incremented and all automata of the episode except the one
waiting in the start state are retired. (This ensures we are
tracking only non-overlapped occurrences). When the oc-
currence tracked by the automaton that reaches the ﬁnal
state fails the expiry constraint, we just retire the current
automaton; any other automata for the episode will continue
to accept events. Under this modiﬁed algorithm, in D1, the
ﬁrst automaton that reaches its ﬁnal state tracks he
3 which
violates the expiry time constraint of TX = 9. So, we drop
only this automaton. The next automaton that reaches its
ﬁnal state tracks he
4.
This occurrence has span less than
TX = 9. Hence we increment the corresponding frequency
count and retire all current automata for this episode. Since
there are no other occurrences non-overlapped with he
4, the
ﬁnal frequency would be 1. We denote this algorithm for
counting the non-overlapped occurrences under an expiry-
time constraint as NO-X. The occurrences tracked by both
NO and NO-X would be earliest transiting.
Note that several earliest transiting occurrences may end si-
multaneously. For example, in D1, he
1, he
2 and he
3 all end
together at (D, 15). Both {he
2, he
5} and {he
3, he
6} form max-
imal sets of non-overlapped occurrences.
Sometimes (e.g.
when determining the distribution of spans of occurrences
for an episode) we would like to track the innermost one
among the occurrences that are ending together. In this ex-
ample, this means we want to track the set of occurrences
{he
3, he
6}. This can be done by simply omitting the expiry-
time check in the NO-X algorithm. (That is, whenever an
automaton reaches ﬁnal state, irrespective of the span of the
occurrence tracked by it, we increment frequency and retire
all other automata except for the one in start state). We

denote this as the NO-I algorithm and this is the algorithm
proposed in [9].
In NO-I, if we only retire automata that reached their ﬁ-
nal states (rather than retire all automata except the one in
the start state), we have an algorithm for counting minimal
occurrences (denoted MO). In our example, the automata
tracking he
3, he
4 and he
6 are the ones that reach their ﬁnal
states in this algorithm. The time-windows of these occur-
rences constitute the set of all minimal windows of α in D1.
Expiry time constraints can be incorporated by increment-
ing frequency only when the occurrence tracked has span less
than the expiry-time threshold. The corresponding expiry-
time algorithm is referred to as MO-X.
The windows-based counting algorithm (which we refer to
as WB) is also based on tracking earliest transiting occur-
rences. WB also uses multiple automata per episode to track
minimal occurrences of episodes like in MO. The only dif-
ference lies in the way frequency is incremented. The algo-
rithm essentially remembers, for each candidate episode, the
last minimal window in which the candidate was observed.
Then, at each time tick, eﬀectively, if this last minimal win-
dow lies within the current sliding window of width TX,
frequency is incremented by one. This is because, an occur-
rence of episode α exists in a given window w if and only w
contains a minimal window of α.
It is easy to see that head frequency with a window-width of
TX is simply the number of earliest transiting occurrences
whose span is less than TX. Thus we can have a head fre-
quency counting algorithm (referred to here as HD) that
is similar to MO-X except that when two automata reach
the same state simultaneously we do not remove the older
automaton. This way, HD will track all earliest transiting
occurrences which satisfy an expiry time-constraint of TX.
For TX = 10 and for episode α, HD tracks he
3, he
4, he
5 and
he
6 and returns a frequency count of 4. The total frequency
count for an episode α is the minimum of the head frequen-
cies of all its subepisodes (including itself).
This can be
computed as the minimum of the head frequency of α and
the total frequency of its (N −1)-suﬃx subepisodes which
would have been computed in the previous pass over the
data.
(See [7] for details).
The head frequency counting
algorithm can have high space-complexity as all the time
instants at which automata make their ﬁrst state transition
need to be remembered.
The non-interleaved frequency counting algorithm (which
we refer to as NI) diﬀers from the minimal occurrence algo-
rithm in that, an automaton makes a state transition only
if there is no other automaton of the same episode in the
destination state. Unlike the other frequency counting algo-
rithms discussed so far, such an FSA transition policy will
track occurrences which are not necessarily earliest tran-
siting. In our example, until the event (A, 4) in the data
sequence, both the minimal and non-interleaved algorithms
make identical state transitions. However, on (A, 5), NI will
not allow the automaton in state (0, A) to make a state
transition as there is already an active automaton for α in
state (1, B) which had accepted (A, 4) earlier. Eventually,
NI tracks the occurrences hni
1
= [1 3 7 15], hni
2
= [4 9 16 18],
hni
3 = [14 17 20 23] and hni
4 = [19 21 25 29].
While there are no algorithms reported for counting dis-
tinct occurrences, we can construct one using the same ideas.
Such an algorithm (to be called as DO) diﬀers from the one
for counting minimal occurrences, in allowing multiple au-
tomata for an episode to reach the same state. However, on
seeing an event (Ei, ti) which multiple automata can accept,
only one of the automata (the oldest among those in the
same state) is allowed to make a state transition; the others
continue to wait for future events with the same event-type
as Ei to make their state transitions. The set of maximal
distinct occurrences of α in D1 are hd
1 = he
1, hd
2 = [4 9 11 18],
hd
3 = [5 17 20 23], hd
4 = [14 21 25 29] and hd
5 = [19 24 30 31]
which are the ones tracked by this algorithm.
We can also consider counting all occurrences of an episode
even though it may be ineﬃcient. The algorithm for count-
ing all occurrences (referred to as the AO) allows all au-
tomata to make transitions whenever the appropriate events
appear in the data sequence. However, at each state transi-
tion, a copy of the automaton in the earlier state is added
to the set of active automata for the episode.
From the above discussion, it is clear that by manipulating
the FSA (that recognize occurrences) in diﬀerent ways we
get counting schemes for diﬀerent frequencies. The choices
to be made in diﬀerent algorithms essentially concern when
to initiate a new automaton in the start state, when to re-
tire an existing automaton, when to eﬀect a possible state
transition and when (and by how much) to increment the fre-
quency. We now present a uniﬁed scheme incorporating all
this in Algorithm 1 for obtaining frequencies of a set of serial
episodes. This algorithm has ﬁve boolean variables, namely,
TRANSIT, COPY-AUTOMATON, JOIN-AUTOMATON,
INCREMENT-FREQ and RETIRE-AUTOMATON. The count-
ing algorithms for all the diﬀerent frequencies are obtained
from this general algorithm by suitably setting the values of
these boolean variables (either by some constants or by val-
ues calculated using the current context in the algorithm).
Tables 2 – 6 specify the choices needed to obtain the algo-
rithms for diﬀerent frequencies. (A list of all algorithms is
given in table 1).
As can be seen from our general algorithm, when an event
type for which an automaton is waiting is encountered in the
data, the the automaton can accept it only if the variable
TRANSIT is true. Hence for all algorithms that track earli-
est transiting occurrences, TRANSIT will be set to true as
can be seen from table 2. For algorithms NI and DO where
we allow the state transition only if some condition is satis-
ﬁed. The condition COPY-AUTOMATON (Table 3) is for
deciding whether or not to leave another automaton in the
current state when an automaton is transiting to the next
state. Except for NO and AO, we create such a copy only
when the currently transiting automaton is moving out of
its start state. In NO we never make such a copy (because
this algorithm uses only one automaton per episode) while
in AO we need to do it for every state transition. As we have
seen earlier, in some of the algorithms, when two automata
for an episode reach the same state, the older automaton
is removed. This is controlled by JOIN-AUTOMATON, as
given by Table 4. INCREMENT-FREQUENCY (Table 5)
is the condition under which the frequency of an episode is
incremented when an automaton reaches its ﬁnal state. This
increment is always done for algorithms that have no expiry
time constraint or window width. For the others we incre-
ment the frequency only if the occurrence tracked satisﬁes
the constraint. RETIRE-AUTOMATA condition (Table 6)
is concerned with removal of all automata of an episode when
a complete occurrence has been tracked. This condition is
true only for the non-overlapped occurrences-based counting

algorithms.
Apart from the ﬁve boolean variables explained above, our
general algorithm contains one more variable, namely, INC,
which decides the amount by which frequency is incremented
when an automaton reaches the ﬁnal state. Its values for
diﬀerent frequency counts are listed in Table 7.
For all
algorithms except WB, we set INC = 1.
We now ex-
plain how frequency is incremented in WB. To count the
number of sliding windows that contain at least one oc-
currence of the episode, whenever a new minimal occur-
rence enters a sliding window, we can calculate the number
of consecutive windows in which this new minimal occur-
rence will be found in. For example, in D1, with a window-
width of TX = 16, consider the ﬁrst minimal occurrence of
(A →B →C →D), namely, the occurrence constituted by
events (A, 5), (B, 9), (C, 11) and (D, 15). The ﬁrst sliding
window in which this occurrence can be found is [−1, 15].
The occurrence stays in consecutive sliding windows, until
the sliding window [5, 21]. When this ﬁrst minimal occur-
rence enters the sliding window [−1, 15], we observe that
there is no other ‘older’ minimal occurrence in [−1, 15], and
hence, as per the else condition in Table 7, the INC is in-
cremented by (5−(−1)+1) = 7. Similarly, when the second
minimal occurrence enters the sliding window [7, 23], we in-
crement INC by (14 −7 + 1 = 8). The third minimal oc-
currence (constituted by the events (A, 22), (B, 24), (C, 25)
and (D, 29)) ﬁrst enters the sliding window [13, 29], with the
second minimal window still occurring within this window.
This third minimal occurrence remains in consecutive slid-
ing windows until [22, 38]. As per the if condition of Table
7, INC is incremented by 22 −14 = 8. We note that such
an implementation of the windows-based algorithm removes
the need for the beginsat(t) list of [14] which was used to
store all automata whose ﬁrst state transition occurred at
time-tick t.
Remark 1. Even though we included AO (for counting
all occurrences of an episode) for sake of completeness, this
is not a good frequency measure. This is mainly because it
does not seem to satisfy any anti-monotonicity condition.
For example, consider the data sequence < AABBCC >.
There are 8 occurrences of (A →B →C) but only 4 oc-
currences of each of its 2-node subepisodes. Also, its space
complexity can be high.
Remark 2. : The quantitative relationships between the
diﬀerent frequency counts for a given episode can be de-
scribed as follows:
fall ≥fh ≥ftot ≥fd ≥fni ≥fmi ≥fno
(3)
where fall denotes the frequency of an episode under AO,
while fh and ftot denote the corresponding head and total
frequencies deﬁned with a window-width exceeding the total
time-span of the event sequence.
For a large sliding win-
dow width, the head frequency fh is same as the number of
earliest transiting occurrences of an episode. In general, the
inequality fd ≥fni holds only for injective episodes (An
episode α is injective if it does not contain any repeated
event-types).
All other inequalities are true for any serial
episode. The ﬁrst inequality is obvious. The second inequal-
ity follows directly from equation 2 in deﬁnition 4. Given a
set of f maximal distinct occurrences of an episode α in a
data stream D, one can extract that many earliest transiting
Table 1: Various frequency counts
WB
Windows based
MO
Minimal Occurrences based
MO-X
Minimal Occurrence with Expiry time constraints
NO
Non-overlapped
NO-I
Non-overlapped innermost
NO-X
Non-overlapped with Expiry time constraints
NI
Non-interleaved
DO
Distinct occurrences based
AO
All occurrences based
HD
Head frequency
Table 2: Conditions for TRANSIT=TRUE
WB, MO, MO-X, HD
Always
NO, NO-X, NO-I AO
NI
If ∄earlier automaton for α
in next state j
DO
No other earlier automaton for α
waiting in same state can
transit on event (Ei, ti).
Table 3: Conditions for COPY-AUTOMATON=TRUE
WB, MO, MO-X, HD
Only if A
NI, NO-X, NO-I, DO
is in start state
NO
Never
AO
Always
Table 4: Conditions for JOIN-AUTOMATON=TRUE
WB, MO, MO-X,
Always
NO-X, NO-I
DO, AO, HD, NO, NI
Never
Table 5: Conditions for INCREMENT-FREQ=TRUE
MO, NO, NI,
Always
DO, AO, NO-I
WB, NO-X
If time diﬀerence between
MO-X, HD
ﬁrst and last state transitions
is less than TX(window-width for
WB, expiry time for others)
Table 6: Conditions for RETIRE-AUTOMATA=TRUE
NO, NO-X, NO-I
Always
WB, MO, MO-X
Never
HD, NI, DO, AO
MO-X
Table 7: Values taken by INC
INC = 1 for all counts except WB.
For Windows Based count(WB),
If(ﬁrst window which contains current minimal
occurrence also contains the previous minimal
occurrence), then
INC = Time diﬀ. between start of last window containing
the current minimal occurrence and the start of last
window which contains previous minimal occurrence.
else
INC=time diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and last window
containing the current occurrence +1.

Algorithm 1 Uniﬁed Algorithm for counting serial episodes
Input: Set CN of N-node serial episodes, event stream D =
⟨(E1, t1), . . ., (En, tn))⟩,
Output: Frequencies of episodes in CN
1: for all α ∈CN do
2:
Add automaton of α waiting in the start state.
3:
Initialize frequency of α to ZERO.
4: for l = 1 to n do
5:
for each automaton, A, ready to accept event-type Ei
do
6:
α=candidate associated with A;
7:
j = state which A is ready to transit into;
8:
if TRANSIT then
9:
if COPYAUTOMATON then
10:
Add Copy of A to collection of automata.
11:
Transit A to state j
12:
if ∃an earlier automaton of α already in state j
but not waiting for Ei then
13:
if JOIN-AUTOMATON then
14:
Retain A and retire earlier automaton
15:
if A reached ﬁnal state then
16:
Retire A.
17:
if INCREMENT-FREQ then
18:
Increment frequency of α by INC.
19:
if RETIRE-AUTOMATON then
20:
Retire all automaton of α and create a
state ’0’ automaton.
occurrences of not only α but also of all its subepisodes in
D. Hence the third inequality is also true. Also, it is easy
to verify that a set of non-interleaved occurrences of an in-
jective episode are also distinct, which validates the fourth
inequality. We will show the correctness of the remaining
two inequalities in the next section.
4.
PROOFS OF CORRECTNESS
In this section, we present proofs of correctness of the dif-
ferent frequency counting algorithms presented in Sec. 3 (all
of which are speciﬁc instances of Algorithm 1).
In our proofs, we consider the case of event sequences with
distinct occurrence-times for events. When we are not con-
sidering expiry-time constraints, the actual values of times
of occurrences of diﬀerent events are not really important;
only the time ordering of the events is important in deciding
on the occurrences of episodes. Hence, in this section we will
use h(v1) interchangeably with th(v1), the time of the ﬁrst
event in the occurrence h and so on. Modiﬁcations needed
in the case of data having multiple events with the same
time of occurrence, are discussed at the end of the section.
4.1
Minimal Window Counting algorithm
First, we analyze the minimal occurrences counting algo-
rithm (MO). Our proof methodology is diﬀerent from the
one presented in [4], where, the algorithm is viewed as com-
puting a table S[0 . . . n, 0 . . . N], where, S[i, j] is the largest
value k ≤i such that Ek . . . Ei contains an occurrence of
α[1] →. . . α[j], using dynamic programming.
The algo-
rithm, after processing Ei, stores the ith row of this ma-
trix. The dynamic programming recursion helps compute
the ith row of this matrix from its (i −1)th row. Whenever
S[i, N] > S[i −1, N], the count is incremented since a new
minimal occurrence is recognized. Viewed from an automata
perspective, the ith row of the matrix essentially stores the
ﬁrst state transition times of the currently active automata.
Our analysis of the minimal occurrence algorithm also leads
to an analysis and proof for counting non-overlapped occur-
rences (NO and NO-X) as well. Another advantage of our
proof strategy is that it may be generalized to the case of
episodes with general partial orders. (We brieﬂy discuss this
in section 6).
Lemma 1. Suppose h is an earliest transiting occurrence
of an N-node episode α. If h′ is any general occurrence such
that h <⋆h′, then h(vi) ≤h′(vi) ∀i = 1, 2, . . . N.
This lemma follows easily from the deﬁnition of the lexico-
graphic ordering, <⋆, and the deﬁnition of earliest transiting
occurrence.
Remark 3. Recall that he
i is the ith earliest transiting
(ET) occurrence of an episode. Thus, by deﬁnition, he
i (v1) <
he
j(v1) and he
i <⋆he
j whenever i < j.
Hence, from the
above lemma, we have he
i (vk) ≤he
j(vk) for all k and i < j.
In particular, we have, he
i (v1) < he
i+1(v1) and he
i (vN) ≤
he
i+1(vN), for an N-node episode.
The main idea of our proof is that to ﬁnd all minimal win-
dows of an episode, it is enough to capture a certain subset
of earliest transiting occurrences.
Lemma 2. An earliest transiting (ET) occurrence he
i , of
an N-node episode, is not a minimal occurrence if and only
if he
i(vN) = he
i+1(vN).
Proof. The ‘if’ part follows easily from Remark 3. For
the ‘only if’ part, let us denote by w = [ns, ne] = [he
i (v1), he
i(vN)]
the window of he
i . Given that w is not a minimal window,
we need to show that he
i (vN) = he
i+1(vN). Since w is not a
minimal window, one of its proper sub-windows contains an
occurrence, say, h, of this episode. That means if h starts at
ns then it must end before ne. But, since he
i is earliest tran-
siting, any occurrence starting at the same event as he
i can
not end before he
i . Thus we must have h(v1) > he
i (v1). This
means, by lemma 1, since he
i is earliest transiting, we can not
have he
i (vN) > h(vN). Since the window of h has to be con-
tained in the window of he
i, we thus have he
i (vN) = h(vN).
By deﬁnition, he
i+1 will start at the earliest possible posi-
tion after he
i .
Since there is an occurrence starting with
h(v1) we must have he
i+1(v1) ≤h(v1). Now, since he
i+1 is
earliest transiting, it can not end after h. Thus we must
have he
i+1(vN) ≤h(vN). Also, he
i+1 can not end earlier than
he
i because both are earliest transiting. Thus, we must have
he
i (vN) = he
i+1(vN). This completes proof of lemma.
Remark 4. This lemma shows that any ET occurrence
he
i such that he
i (vN) < he
i+1(vN) is a minimal occurrence.
The converse is also true. Consider a minimal window w =
[ns, ne]. Since this is a minimal window, there is an occur-
rence (and hence an ET occurrence) starting at ns. Denote
this ET occurrence by he
i . We know he
i (vN) = ne because
w is a minimal window. Then the next ET occurrence he
i+1
has to start after ns and has to end beyond ne because w is
minimal. Thus we have he
i(vN) < he
i+1(vN).
Now we are ready to prove correctness of the MO algorithm.
Consider Algorithm 1 operating in the MO(minimal occur-
rence) mode for tracking occurrences of an N-node episode

α.
Since TRANSIT is always true in the MO mode, all
automata would be tracking ET occurrences. Since COPY-
AUTOMATON is true in MO mode whenever an automa-
ton transits out of start state, we will always have an au-
tomaton in the start state. This, along with the fact that
TRANSIT is always true, implies that the ith initialized au-
tomaton would be tracking he
i , the ith ET occurrence. Let us
denote by Aα
i the ith initialized automaton. However, since
JOIN-AUTOMATON is also always true, not all automata
(initialized for this episode) would result in incrementing
the frequency; some of them would be removed when one
automaton transits into a state already occupied by some
other automaton.
In view of Lemma 2 and Remark 4, if
we show that the automaton Aα
i results in increment of fre-
quency if and only if he
i, the occurrence tracked by it, is
such that he
i (vN) < he
i+1(vN), then, the proof of correctness
of MO algorithm is complete.
Lemma 3. In the MO algorithm the ith automaton that
was initialized for α, referred to as Aα
i , contributes to the
frequency count iﬀhe
i (vN) < he
i+1(vN).
Proof.
Aα
i does not contribute to the frequency
=⇒
Aα
i is removed by a more recently initialized automaton
=⇒
∃Aα
k , k > i,
which transits into a state
already occupied by Aα
i
=⇒
∃k, j s.t. k > i, 1 < j ≤N and he
i(vj) = he
k(vj).
=⇒
∃j 1 < j ≤N s.t. he
i (vj) = he
i+1(vj).
because, by Remark 3, for k > i,
he
i (vj) ≤he
i+1(vj) ≤he
k(vj), ∀j
=⇒
he
i (vN) = he
i+1(vN)
The last step follows because both he
i and he
i+1 are ET oc-
currences and hence he
i (vj) = he
i+1(vj) implies he
i (vj′) =
he
i+1(vj′), ∀j′ > j.
Conversely, we have
Aα
i contributes to the frequency
=⇒
∀j, 1 < j ≤N, he
i (vj) < he
i+1(vj)
=⇒
he
i (vN) < he
i+1(vN).
The ﬁrst step follows because, if Aα
i contributes to the fre-
quency then no automaton initialized after it would ever
come to the same state occupied by it and since all oc-
currences tracked are earliest transiting, this must mean
he
i (vj) < he
i+1(vj), ∀j. This completes proof of the lemma.
Another interesting observation is that if he
i is minimal,
then it is non-interleaved with he
i+1. Suppose he
i is mini-
mal and he
i is not non-interleaved with he
i+1.
Since he
i is
minimal, we have he
i (vj′) < he
i+1(vj′), ∀j′.
If he
i is not
non-interleaved with he
i+1, there exists a j < N such that
he
i+1(vj) < he
i (vj+1). Thus we must have he
i(vj) < he
i+1(vj) <
he
i (vj+1) < he
i+1(vj+1). But this can not be because Ehe
i (vj+1)
is the earliest α[j + 1] after he
i (vj) and if it is also after
he
i+1(vj) then the fact that both he
i and he
i+1 are ET oc-
currences should mean he
i (vj+1) = he
i+1(vj+1) which con-
tradicts that he
i is minimal.
Hence he
i and he
i+1 are non-
interleaved.
Thus, given the sequence of minimal windows, the earliest
transiting occurrences from each of these minimal windows
gives a sequence of (same number of) non-interleaved occur-
rences. This leads to fmi ≤fni as stated earlier in (3).
4.2
Other ET occurrences-based algorithms
4.2.1
Proofs of correctness for NO-X and NO-I
The NO-X algorithm can be viewed as a slight modiﬁca-
tion to the MO algorithm.
As in the MO algorithm, we
always have an automaton in the start state and all au-
tomata make transitions as soon as possible and when an
automaton transits into a state occupied by another, the
older one is removed. However, in the NO-X algorithm, the
INCREMENT-FREQ variable is true only when we have an
occurrence satisfying TX constraint. Hence, to start with,
we look for the ﬁrst minimal occurrence which satisﬁes the
expiry time constraint and increment frequency.
At this
point, (unlike in the MO algorithm) we terminate all au-
tomata except the one in the start state since we are try-
ing to construct a non-overlapped set of occurrences. Then
we look for the next earliest minimal occurrence (which
will be non-overlapped with the ﬁrst one) satisfying expiry
time constraint and so on. Since minimal occurrences lo-
cally have the least time span, this strategy of searching
for minimal occurrences satisfying expiry time constraint
in a non-overlapped fashion is quite intuitive. Let HnX =
{hnX
1
, hnX
2
. . . hnX
f′ } denote the sequence of occurrences tracked
by the NO-X algorithm (for an N-node episode). Then the
following property of HnX is obvious.
Property 1. hnX
1
is the earliest minimal occurrence sat-
isfying expiry time constraints. hnX
i
is the ﬁrst minimal oc-
currence (satisfying expiry time constraint) that starts after
hnX
i−1(vN). There is no minimal occurrence satisfying expiry
time constraint which starts after hnX
f′ (vN).
Theorem 1. HnX is a maximal non-overlapped sequence
satisfying expiry time constraint TX.
Proof. Consider any other set of non-overlapped occur-
rences satisfying expiry constraints, H′ = {h′
1, h′
2 . . . h′
l} such
that h′
i <⋆h′
i+1. Let m = min{f ′, l}. Then we ﬁrst show
hnX
i
(vN) ≤h′
i(vN)
∀i = 1, 2, . . . m.
Suppose h′
1(vN) < hnX
1
(vN). Consider the earliest transit-
ing occurrence h′′ starting from h′
1(v1).
This ends at or
before h′
1(vN) by lemma 1. Among all ET occurrences that
end at the same event as h′′, the last one (under the lex-
icographic ordering) is a minimal occurrence by lemma 2.
Its window is contained in that of h′
1 which satisﬁes the
expiry time constraint.
Hence we have found a minimal
occurrence satisfying expiry constraint ending before hnX
1
which contradicts the ﬁrst statement of property 1. Hence
hnX
1
(vN) ≤h′
1(vN). Now applying the same argument to
the data stream starting with the ﬁrst event after hnX
1
(vN),
we get hnX
2
(vN) ≤h′
2(vN) and so on and thus can con-
clude hnX
i
(vN) ≤h′
i(vN) ∀i. This shows that no other set
of non-overlapped occurrences can have more number of oc-
currences than those in HnX. Hence, HnX is maximal.
If we choose TX equal to the time span of the data stream,
the NO-X algorithm reduces to the NO-I algorithm because
every occurrence satisﬁes expiry constraint. Hence proof of
correctness of NO-I algorithm is immediate.
4.2.2
Relation between NO-I and NO algorithms
We now explain the relation between the sets of occurrences
tracked by the NO and NO-I algorithms. As proved in [10]

the NO algorithm (which uses one automaton per episode),
tracks a maximal non-overlapped sequence of occurrences,
say, Hno = {hno
1 , hno
2 . . . hno
fno}. Since the NO-I algorithm
has no expiry time constraint, it also tracks a maximal set
of non-overlapped occurrences.
Among all the ET occur-
rences that end at hno
i (vN), let hin
i
be the last one (as per
the lexicographic ordering). Then the ith occurrence tracked
by the NO-I algorithm would be hin
i
as we show now. Since
hno
1
would be the ﬁrst ET occurrence, it is clear from our
discussion in the previous subsection that the ﬁrst occur-
rence tracked by the MO algorithm would be hin
1 .
As is
easy to see, the MO and NO-I algorithms would be iden-
tical till the ﬁrst time an automaton reaches the accepting
state. Hence hin
1
would be the ﬁrst occurrence tracked by
the NO-I algorithm. Now the NO-I algorithm would remove
all automata except for the one in the start state. Hence, it
is as if we start the algorithm with data starting with the
ﬁrst event after hno
1 (vN) = hin
1 (vN). Now, by the property
of NO algorithm, hno
2
would be the ﬁrst ET occurrence in
this data stream and hence hin
2
would be the ﬁrst minimal
window here. Hence it is the second occurrence tracked by
NO-I and so on.
The above also shows that each occurrence tracked by the
NO-I algorithm is also tracked by the MO algorithm and
hence we have fno ≤fmi as stated in (3). Hin is also a max-
imal set of non-overlapping minimal windows as discussed
in [21].
4.3
Non-interleaved and Distinct Occurrences
based Algorithms
The algorithm NI which counts non-interleaved occurrences
is diﬀerent from all the ones discussed so far because it does
not track ET occurrences. Here also we always have an au-
tomaton waiting in the start state. However, the transitions
are conditional in the sense that the ith created automa-
ton makes a transition from state (j −1) to j provided the
(i −1)th created automaton is past state j after processing
the current event. This is because we want the ith automata
to track an occurrence non-interleaved with the occurrence
tracked by (i−1)th automaton. Let Hni = {hni
1 , hni
2 , . . . hni
f′}
be the sequence of occurrences tracked by NI. From the
above discussion it is clear that it has the following property
(while counting occurrences of α).
Property 2. hni
1
is the ﬁrst or earliest occurrence (of
α).
For all i > 1 and ∀j = 1, . . . , N −1, hni
i (vj) is the
ﬁrst occurrence of α[j] at or after hni
i−1(vj+1); and hni
i (vN)
is the earliest occurrence of α[N] after hni
i (vN−1). There is
no occurrence of α beyond hni
f′ which is non-interleaved with
it.
The proof that Hni is a maximal non-interleaved sequence
is very similar in spirit to that of the NO-X algorithm. As
earlier, we can show that given an arbitrary sequence of
non-interleaved occurrences H′ = {h′
1, h′
2 . . . h′
l}, we have
hni
i (vk) ≤h′
i(vk), ∀i, k and hence get the correctness proof
of NI algorithm. It is easy to verify the correctness of the
DO algorithm also along similar lines.
It appears diﬃcult to extend both the NI and DO algorithms
to incorporate expiry time constraints. For this we should
track a set of occurrences h1, h2 . . . of α, where h1 is the
ﬁrst occurrence satisfying TX and h2 is the next earliest
occurrence satisfying TX that is non-interleaved with (or
distinct from, in case of DO) h1 and so on. Note that this h2
need not have to be the earliest occurrence non-overlapped
with h1. At present, there are no algorithms for counting
non-interleaved or distinct occurrences satisfying an expiry
time constraint.
Before ending this section, we brieﬂy outline what needs
to be done when the data stream contains multiple events
having the same time of occurrence. An important thing
to note is that two events having the same time of occur-
rence cannot be a part of a serial episode occurrence. Hence,
each automata can at most accept one event from a set of
events having the same occurrence time. With this condi-
tion, the DO, AO and HD algorithms go through as before.
One would need to process the set of events having the same
occurrence time together and allow all the permissible au-
tomata to make a one step transition ﬁrst as done using
transitions() list in [14]. After this, before processing the
set of events with the next occurrence time, we would need
to do the multiple automata check for the various candidate
episodes and delete the appropriate older automata for algo-
rithms MO, MO-X, NO-I and NO-X. For the non-interleaved
algorithm, one needs to actually back track the transitions
which resulted in two automata to coalesce.
5.
CANDIDATE GENERATION
In this section, we discuss the anti-monotonicity properties
of the various frequency counts, which in-turn are exploited
by their respective candidate generation steps in the Apriori-
style level-wise procedure for frequent episode discovery.
It is well known that the windows-based [14], non-overlapped
[9] and total [7] frequency measures satisfy the anti-monotonicity
property that all subepisodes of a frequent episode are fre-
quent. One can verify that the same holds for the distinct
occurrences based frequency too. It has been pointed out
in [7] that the head frequency does not satisfy this anti-
monotonicity property. For an episode α, in general, only
the subepisodes involving α[1] are as frequent as α under
the head count. In a level-wise apriori-based episode discov-
ery, the candidate generation for the head frequency count
would exploit the condition that if an N-node episode is fre-
quent, then all (N −1)-node subepisodes that include α[1]
have to be frequent. The head frequency deﬁnition has some
limitations in the sense that the frequency of the (N −1)-
node suﬃx subepisode2 can be arbitrarily low. Consider the
event stream with 100 As followed by a B and C. Suppose
all occurrences of A →B →C satisfy the expiry constraint
TX. Even though there are 100 occurrences of A →B →C,
there is only one occurrence of B →C.
This can be a
problem when one desires that the frequent episodes cap-
ture repetitive causative inﬂuences.
Like the head frequency, the minimal occurrences (windows)
and the non-interleaved occurrences also do not satisfy the
anti-monotonicity property that all subepisodes are at least
as frequent as the corresponding episode.
However, the
(N −1)-node preﬁx and suﬃx subepisodes are at least as
frequent as the episode as we show below. For an example,
consider a data stream where successive events are given by
ABACBDCD.
Even though there are two minimal win-
2Given an N-node episode α[1] →α[2] →· · · →α[N], its
K-node preﬁx subepisode is α[1] →α[2] →· · · →α[k] and
its (N −K)-node suﬃx subepisode is α[K+1] →α[K+2] →
· · · →α[N] for K = 1, 2, · · · , (N −1).

dows (and two non-interleaved occurrences) of A →B →
C →D, there is only one minimal window (and one non-
interleaved occurrence) of each of the non-preﬁx and non-
suﬃx subepisodes A →B →D and A →C →D. How-
ever, the situation here is not as bad as that for head fre-
quency because all such subepisodes will have at least as
many distinct occurrences as the number of minimal or non-
interleaved occurrences of the episode, at least in case of in-
jective episodes. (Note that this example is that of an injec-
tive episode). This is because, in case of injective episodes,
the number of distinct occurrence is always greater than
the non-interleaved count, which in-turn is greater than the
minimal windows count. Hence, given that there are f non-
interleaved or minimal occurrences of an injective episode
α, there are at least f distinct occurrences of α too. Since
the distinct occurrences based frequency satisﬁes the origi-
nal anti-monotonicity property, all subepisodes of α too will
have at least f distinct occurrences.
We now formally prove the anti-monotonicity property for
minimal and non-interleaved occurrences based frequencies.
Theorem 2. If a N-node serial episode α has a frequency
f in the minimal or the non-interleaved sense, then its (N −
1)-preﬁx subepisode (αp) and suﬃx subepisode (αs) have a
frequency of at least f.
Proof. Consider a minimal window of the episode α,
w = [ns, ne].
Consider the earliest occurrence hp of the
preﬁx subepisode starting from ns and let w′ be its window.
Any proper sub-window of w′ starting at ns and containing
an occurrence of αp contradicts lemma 1.
A proper sub-
window of w′ containing an occurrence of αp starting after
ns would contradict the minimality of w itself. Hence w′ is
a minimal window of αp starting at ns. We hence conclude
that αp has a frequency of at least f. A similar proof works
for the suﬃx subepisode by considering the window of the
last occurrence hs of the suﬃx subepisode ending at ne.
Let Hni = {h1, h2, . . . hf} be a maximal non-interleaved
sequence.
From each occurrence hk, we choose the sub-
occurrence h′
k = [hk(v1), hk(v2), . . . hk(vN−1], of αp. It is
easy to see that this new sequence of occurrences h′
1, h′
2, . . . h′
f
forms a non-interleaved sequence. Hence the frequency of
αp is at least f. A similar argument works for the suﬃx
episode.
Hence, for every episode α, we extract its (N −1) suﬃx, go
down the candidate list and search for a block of episodes
whose N −1 preﬁx matches this suﬃx.
We form candi-
dates as many as the number of episodes in this matching
block. This kind of candidate generation has already been
reported in the literature in [20], [18] and [19] in the context
of sequences under inter-event time constraints.
6.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The framework of frequent episodes in event streams is a
very useful data mining technique for unearthing tempo-
ral dependencies from data streams in many applications.
The framework is about a decade old and many diﬀerent
frequency measures and associated algorithms have been
proposed over the last ten years.
In this paper we have
presented a generic automata-based algorithm for obtain-
ing frequencies of a set of candidate episodes. This method
uniﬁes all the known algorithms in the sense that we can
particularize our algorithm (by setting values for a set of
variables) for counting frequent episodes under any of the
frequency measures proposed in literature.
As we showed here, this uniﬁed view gives useful insights
into the kind of occurrences counted under diﬀerent fre-
quency deﬁnitions and thus also allows us to prove relations
between frequencies of an episode under diﬀerent frequency
deﬁnitions. Our view also allows us to get correctness proofs
for all algorithms. We introduced the notion of earliest tran-
siting occurrences and, using this concept, are able to get
simple proofs of correctness for most algorithms. This has
also allowed us to understand the kind of anti-monotonicity
properties satisﬁed by diﬀerent frequency measures.
While the main contribution of this paper is this uniﬁed view
of all frequency counting algorithms, some of the speciﬁc re-
sults presented here are also new. The relationships between
diﬀerent frequencies of an episode (cf.
eqn 3), is proved
here for the ﬁrst time. The distinct-occurrences based fre-
quency and an automata-based algorithm for it are novel.
The speciﬁc proof of correctness presented here for minimal
occurrences is also novel. Also, the correctness proofs for
non-overlapped occurrences based frequency counting un-
der expiry time constraint has been provided here for the
ﬁrst time.
In this paper we have considered only the case of serial
episodes. This is because, at present, there are no algorithms
for discovering general partial orders under the various fre-
quency deﬁnitions.
However, all counting algorithms ex-
plained here for serial episodes can be extended to episodes
with a general partial order structure. We can come up with
a similar ﬁnite state automata(FSA) which track the earliest
transiting occurrences of an episode with a general partial
order structure [1]. For example, consider a partial order
episode (A B) →C which represents A and B occurring in
any order followed by a C. In order to track an occurrence
of such a pattern, the initial state has to wait for either of
A and B. On seeing an A it goes to state-1 where it waits
only for a B; on the other hand, on seeing a B ﬁrst it moves
to state-2 where it waits only for an A. Then on seeing a
B in state-1 or seeing a A in state-2 it moves into state-3
where it waits for a C and so on. Thus, in each state in
such a FSA, in general, we wait for any of a set of event
types (instead of a single event for serial episodes) and a
given state will now branch out into diﬀerent states on dif-
ferent event types. With such a FSA technique it is possible
to generalize the method presented here so that we have
algorithms for counting frequencies of general partial order
episodes under diﬀerent frequencies. The proofs presented
here for serial episodes can also be extended for general par-
tial order episodes. While it seems possible, as explained
above, to generalize the counting schemes to handle general
partial order episodes, it is not obvious what would be an
appropriate candidate generation scheme for general partial
order episodes under diﬀerent frequency deﬁnitions. This is
an important direction for future work.
In this paper, we have considered only expiry time constraint
which prescribes an upper bound on the span of the occur-
rence. It would be interesting to see under what other time
constraints (e.g., gap constraints), design of counting algo-
rithms under this generic framework is possible. Also, some
unexplored choice of the boolean conditions in the proposed
generic algorithm may give rise to algorithms for new use-

ful frequency measures.
This is also a useful direction of
research to explore.
7.
