Are We There Yet? Learning to Localize in Embodied Instruction Following
Shane Storks1*, Qiaozi Gao2, Govind Thattai2, Gokhan Tur2
1 University of Michigan
2 Amazon Alexa AI

Abstract
Embodied instruction following is a challenging problem re-
quiring an agent to infer a sequence of primitive actions to
achieve a goal environment state from complex language and
visual inputs. Action Learning From Realistic Environments
and Directives (ALFRED) is a recently proposed benchmark
for this problem consisting of step-by-step natural language
instructions to achieve subgoals which compose to an ulti-
mate high-level goal. Key challenges for this task include
localizing target locations and navigating to them through
visual inputs, and grounding language instructions to visual
appearance of objects. To address these challenges, in this
study, we augment the agent’s ﬁeld of view during navigation
subgoals with multiple viewing angles, and train the agent
to predict its relative spatial relation to the target location at
each timestep. We also improve language grounding by in-
troducing a pre-trained object detection module to the model
pipeline. Empirical studies show that our approach exceeds
the baseline model performance.
Introduction
As in-home robots become a reality, there are still funda-
mental problems along the intersection of vision, language,
and robotics to be solved. A particularly challenging prob-
lem is embodied instruction following, where an agent must
complete a task by following a human teacher’s language in-
structions. The language instructions may require the agent
to navigate through a space, and manipulate objects in the
space. Thus, navigation skills and language grounding are
essential capabilities for such agents, and this research area
has received signiﬁcant attention in recent years.
While much progress has been made toward this in
graph-structured, discrete navigation environments (Ander-
son et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020; Majumdar et al. 2020), the
problem remains challenging in continuous navigation en-
vironments. Action Learning From Realistic Environments
and Directives (ALFRED) is a recently introduced bench-
mark dataset for embodied task learning, providing human-
written natural language instructions for an agent to perform
tasks in a virtual environment with continuous navigation
*Work performed during an internship with Amazon Alexa AI.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Instructions: ”Walk to the counter. Pick up the knife. …”
1. RotateLeft
2. MoveAhead
3. MoveAhead
4. RotateLeft
5. MoveAhead
6. MoveAhead
7. MoveAhead
8. MoveAhead
9. MoveAhead
10. STOP
timesteps
3
1
6
Figure 1: To improve an embodied agent’s navigation ca-
pability, we use enhanced inputs from the environment to
track the direction of the goal location from the agent’s per-
spective at every timestep (colored dotted lines). This signal
guides the agent during navigation.
(Shridhar et al. 2020). We focus our work on this challeng-
ing benchmark.
To address key weaknesses of existing approaches for
ALFRED, we implement several enhancements in this work.
First, we train the model on a step-by-step granularity of
language instructions. Next, we augment the inputs for nav-
igation by adding panoramic visual observations at each
timestep of navigation, and object segmentation masks of all
objects in the environment. We use these inputs to train an
object detection module that can be used at inference time.
Lastly, we propose a novel, transformer-based localization
module which we train to predict the agent’s orientation an-
gle with respect to the goal location. This module is then
used at inference time to guide the agent during navigation,
as shown in Figure 1. From these modiﬁcations, we show
some improvements over a strong baseline approach.
Related Work
Language, vision, and robotics.
Within the intersection
of language, vision, and robotics, there are several threads
of work toward embodied instruction following, navigation,
and localization within a virtual environment. As such prob-
lems rely on the availability of virtual environments and
large-scale data, many of these threads have spawned from
the release of benchmarks and challenge datasets. Chang
arXiv:2101.03431v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2021

et al. (2017), Kolve et al. (2017), Yan et al. (2018), Savva
et al. (2019), and Xia et al. (2019) propose various virtual
environments for embodied AI research, each with their own
considerations and features. Das et al. (2018) framed the tra-
ditional task of QA in a virtual environment, posing ques-
tions that required an agent to explore an environment to ﬁnd
the answer. Qi et al. (2020) proposes a remote object ground-
ing challenge, where an embodied agent must ﬁnd a partic-
ular object in a virtual environment. Xia et al. (2020) frames
robotic motion planning in a virtual environment with mov-
able objects as a reinforcement learning problem. Anderson
et al. (2018) proposes the vision-and-language navigation
(VLN) task, where an agent must use human-written lan-
guage instructions to reach a goal location in a photorealis-
tic virtual environment, and Thomason et al. (2019) expands
this task to a dialog-based formulation.
Vision-and language navigation.
A particularly substan-
tial body of work toward navigation in embodied instruction
following exists in the VLN thread. Fried et al. (2018) in-
troduced a pragmatic reasoning module to the problem that
learned to re-tell candidate navigation routes in natural lan-
guage, and use this output to re-rank the routes. Jain et al.
(2019) introduced a new graph-based metric for navigation
ﬁdelity, and used this as a new training objective to improve
the ﬁdelity of agents to navigation instructions. Ma et al.
(2019a) introduced another auxiliary training objective for
the agent to estimate its progress toward the goal location,
and Ma et al. (2019b) expanded upon this to give the agent
the ability to backtrack during navigation. Hu et al. (2019)
improve language grounding in navigation agents by using
a pre-trained object detection system to augment visual in-
puts with localized representations of objects in the scene.
Zhu et al. (2020) combined several previously proposed and
novel self-supervised auxiliary training objectives for VLN
to achieve state-of-the-art performance on the task. Majum-
dar et al. (2020) pre-trained a transformer on a large-scale
language grounding task to further improve performance.
ALFRED Benchmark and Baseline
In this work, we focus on the ALFRED benchmark. AL-
FRED is a recent embodied task learning benchmark where
an agent must complete household tasks to achieve a spe-
ciﬁc goal state in a virtual environment powered by AI2
Thor (Kolve et al. 2017). First, we introduce the problem
and the existing baseline approach formally.
Problem Formulation
An instance of ALFRED consists of a high-level goal G
which consists of a sequence of N subgoals gi ∈G. Each
subgoal may be a navigation subgoal or a manipulation sub-
goal, e.g., to pick up, put down, heat, or cool an object. Nav-
igation subgoals consist of primitive navigation actions, e.g.,
to turn, move forward, or change the vertical heading angle,
while manipulation subgoals consist mostly of primitive ma-
nipulation actions, e.g., to pick up, slice, or toggle an object.
A typical ALFRED instance consists of alternating naviga-
tion and manipulation subgoals, and all primitive actions are
performed sequentially.
These subgoals, when completed in order, achieve a goal
state S∗in the virtual environment. The internal represen-
tation of goals and subgoals are not provided for inference.
Instead, the agent needs to reason from the associated hu-
man annotated natural language instructions. From language
instructions LG and Li, i ∈{1, 2, · · · , N} describing the
goal and subgoals respectively, as well as visual observa-
tions vt at each timestep t, the agent must predict an ac-
tion at and (if applicable) a binary mask mt over vt which
highlights an object to interact with. After an episode length
of T timesteps, an inferred sequence of predicted actions
a1, a2, · · · , aT and masks m1, m2, · · · , mT is considered
successful if and only if the ﬁnal state ST is equal to S∗.
Evaluation
ALFRED employs three primary modes of
evaluation, which we call action-by-action, subgoal-by-
subgoal, and goal-by-goal. Action-by-action evaluation is
used while training the model to select the best model in-
stance during hyperparameter search. It aims to score only
the action sequence predicted by the agent by comparing it
to the ground truth action sequence. To facilitate this eval-
uation, at each timestep, we simply supply the model with
the ground truth action sequence up until the timestep, and
compare the model’s output action with the ground truth ac-
tion. This can give us some ideas on how well the model can
choose the next primitive action based on language instruc-
tions and the ground truth episode history.
To evaluate the composition of both an agent’s action and
object interaction mask prediction in achieving particular
subgoals, we use subgoal-by-subgoal evaluation. Here, we
run the agent and underlying model through the ground truth
episode up until a particular subgoal, then allow the agent to
attempt to complete the subgoal. The episode will continue
until the agent successfully completes the subgoal, predicts
stop, or reaches a time limit. The agent will be considered
successful if all subgoal conditions are satisﬁed, e.g., if the
instructions direct the agent to pick up an object, that the
object is now held by the agent.
To measure how well the agent’s sequential predictions
for all subgoals achieve the overall goal in each ALFRED
task, we use goal-by-goal evaluation, the primary mode used
for ranking on the ALFRED leaderboard.1 It places the agent
into the virtual environment under the initial conditions, and
then requires the agent to execute all steps to achieve all
subgoals toward a goal. The episode ends when the agent
predicts a stop action, reaches some limit of timesteps, or
encounters some maximum number of API errors when in-
teracting with the AI2 Thor environment. The agent is then
evaluated based on whether the goal state is true in the envi-
ronment. An agent is considered successful if all goal con-
ditions are satisﬁed, but we can also score the agent based
on the proportion of goal conditions it achieved. For exam-
ple, if a goal is given as “Rinse off a mug and place it in the
coffee maker,”2 the goal conditions may be that there exists
a mug in the coffee maker, and that mug is clean.
1https://leaderboard.allenai.org/alfred/submissions/public
2Example from Shridhar et al. (2020).

LSTM
Linear
DeConv
LG + Lg1 + … + LgN
at
at-1
+
…
…
+
+
predicted action and mask
language instructions for 
goal G and all subgoals g1 - gN
previous predicted action
visual observation vt
Figure 2: At each timestep, the SEQ2SEQ model takes sev-
eral encoded inputs: the visual observation vt, all language
instructions LG + L1 + · · · + LN (reweighted by an atten-
tion mechanism at every timestep), and the previous pre-
dicted action at−1. These encoded inputs are passed into an
LSTM, which generates a history-dependent representation.
The original inputs and this representation can be passed to
a linear layer to predict a primitive action to take and (if a
manipulation action is predicted) to a deconvolutional layer
to predict a binary mask over the target object.
Baseline Approach
The baseline SEQ2SEQ approach is shown in Figure 2. First,
we generate encoded representations of all language instruc-
tions for the example, the current visual observation image,
and the previously predicted action. Language is encoded in
a bidirectional LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997),
images are encoded in a frozen pre-trained ResNet (He et al.
2016) model, and an embedding is learned for actions. At
each timestep, these inputs are passed to a decoder LSTM.
The LSTM’s hidden state along with these task inputs are
used to predict a primitive action to take (through a linear
layer), and a binary mask to be used if a manipulation action
is predicted (through a deconvolutional layer). More detailed
information on the implementation of the baseline model is
provided by Shridhar et al. (2020).
Key Limitations
We identify several key opportunities for
improvement of the baseline approach. First, the required
sequence of actions is typically quite long before the goal
state is achieved, requiring the completion of several sub-
goals, which each consist of several primitive actions. Such
long-distance dependency is very challenging for current
neural networks.
Second, the agent’s performance in navigation is a bot-
tleneck to the overall performance. Nearly every other
subgoal in ALFRED task instances requires the agent to nav-
igate to a new location; if the agent failed to arrive at the
correct location, it will not ﬁnd the objects it must manip-
ulate afterward. Using the pre-trained weights of the base-
line agent,3 we found that navigation subgoals achieved a
subgoal-by-subgoal success rate of 61.9%, relatively low
compared to many manipulation subgoal types, such as to
cool or toggle an object, which both achieved over 90%.
As navigation occurs before every manipulation subgoal and
thus is a prerequisite to all other subgoal types, if we can
improve the navigation performance, then we expect to im-
prove the overall performance of the model.
We suspect that the navigation performance is so low for
two reasons. First, because the baseline model is trained by
imitation learning, there are no opportunities to explore dur-
ing training. During navigation, a task that relies heavily on
exploration, this becomes a challenge. The agent is trained
only on expert demonstrations where the agent knows ex-
actly where to go, even if the initial location is far away or
out of view of the destination. However, if the agent encoun-
ters these conditions at inference time, it is unclear whether
it could have learned any exploratory behavior to be able to
ﬁnd the destination.
Another possible factor is that the agent is not given any
explicit training toward language grounding during naviga-
tion subgoals. While the agent is trained to generate bi-
nary masks over the target objects of manipulation actions
during manipulation subgoals, there is no such supervision
available during navigation. Human navigation relies on ﬁrst
identifying landmarks, then ﬁnding routes between them
(Siegel and White 1975). Navigation instructions in AL-
FRED often point out landmarks along the way, for example,
“Turn around and walk towards the bed, then hang a left and
walk up to the wall, turn left again and walk over to the right
side of the wooden desk.” Therefore, it is advantageous for
the agent to identify them, especially if the landmark refers
to the destination.
Proposed Improvements
Considering the key limitations of the baseline model, we
propose three main improvements. First, in order to lighten
the load on the LSTM used to decode the sequence of ac-
tions, we train the model to execute only one subgoal at a
time rather than the entire sequence of subgoals. Second, to
enable better visual understanding and language grounding,
we augmented the task inputs with additional visual obser-
vations for panoramic view angles at each timestep, and ap-
plied an object detection module to all of the agent’s visual
observations. Lastly, to guide navigation, we use these aug-
mented inputs to predict an additional input to the model at
every timestep: the angle between the agent’s view and the
goal location. This input is predicted using a new localizer
module before being passed into the LSTM.
3https://github.com/askforalfred/alfred

[CLS]
spatial 
token
spatial 
token
[SEP]
Walk
to
[SEP]
.
spatial 
token
current + next subgoal
“bread”
“knife”
“sink”
BERT
dt
YOLO bounding box coords. (in panoramic space) + class labels
…
…
…
…
…
Figure 3: For a navigation subgoal gk, the multimodal BERT-based localizer takes text and spatial tokens as input. The text
input consists of language instructions Lk and Lk+1 for the current and next subgoal, while the spatial input is comprised of the
coordinates (projected into panoramic space) and BERT-embedded object class labels of panoramic bounding boxes at timestep
t. The pre-trained BERT model generates a spatial representation of the model’s percepts and language instructions, and we
input this representation for the special [CLS] token into a linear layer to predict dt, the angle from the agent’s orientation to
the goal location.
Granular Training
The LSTM-based SEQ2SEQ baseline for ALFRED is
trained to predict a sequence of primitive actions from a
long sequence of text (consisting of language descriptions of
the overall goal and all subgoals), visual observations of the
agent, and previously executed actions. However, most sub-
goals are disentangled from one another with minimal cross-
referencing. As such, we reduced the strain on the LSTM-
based model by breaking the execution down into one sub-
goal at a time: for each instance of inference, the model will
receive the language instructions for one subgoal, and out-
put the actions and interaction masks required to complete
the subgoal. As the language instructions are delimited by
subgoal at both training and test time, we can simply iterate
through them to facilitate this.
Augmented Navigation
We augment the input data for ALFRED in two ways. First,
for navigation subgoals, we add panoramic image observa-
tions to the visual input at each timestep. Second, we train an
object detection model to identify objects in all visual input
images.
Panoramic Visual Observations
As the baseline agent
is trained by imitation learning, it does not learn any ex-
ploratory behavior. During navigation, this becomes prob-
lematic. The agent can only see directly in front of itself, so
if the referred landmarks or destination are not in view, it
may cause difﬁculties linking language to visual perception.
To mitigate this, for all navigation subgoals in the train-
ing data, we use AI2 Thor (Kolve et al. 2017) to generate
the agent’s visual observations at eight rotation angles for
each timestep. These observations can be used to approxi-
mate a panoramic view for the agent at each timestep dur-
ing navigation, which has proven beneﬁcial in the related
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) task (Anderson et al.
2018; Fried et al. 2018). In training, this allows the agent to
effectively “look around” before taking a step. During infer-
ence, the additional observations can be generated by forc-
ing the agent to take eight consecutive rotation actions at
each timestep.
Object Detection Model Training
While the baseline
agent is trained to explicitly identify objects from language
instructions during object manipulation subgoals, there is no
such training during navigation subgoals. This inhibits the
agent’s ability to ground navigation instructions to its sur-
roundings.
To enable better language grounding, especially during
navigation, we introduced YOLO V4 (Bochkovskiy, Wang,
and Liao 2020), an object detection model, to the pipeline.
The model was trained on robot view images, with bound-
ing boxes supplied by the AI2 Thor. Once trained, this object
detection model enables the agent to identify 203 categories
of objects in view during inference.

(𝑝, 𝑐!, 𝑐")
𝜃
horizontal angle 𝜃
vertical angle 𝜙
parameterized bounding box
𝜙
Figure 4: Spatial representation of the bounding box for a knife. At each timestep, the agent collects visual inputs for eight
panoramic view angles, and applies the trained object detection model to them. Each resulting bounding box can be parameter-
ized by the ordinal view angle index p of its image and the centroid coordinates (cx.cy) of the bounding box within the image.
We project the parametric representation for each bounding box into panoramic space by using it to calculate the horizontal
angle θ and vertical angle φ.
Localizer Module
Lastly, we combine these new inputs to introduce a new
module to the pipeline: the localizer. At each timestep dur-
ing navigation subgoals, this module predicts a spatial vec-
tor dt representing the angle between the agent’s orienta-
tion and direction to the goal location. dt is then appended
to the SEQ2SEQ model’s inputs at each timestep to guide
navigation toward the goal location. During non-navigation
subgoals, a zero vector is passed instead.
Inputs
The agent must predict the angle toward the goal
location using task inputs that are available at inference time.
These include only the language instructions and any visual
observations resulting from taken actions.
In order to characterize the goal location of a navigation
subgoal and subsequently predict its direction, it is critical
to consider the target objects of both the navigation sub-
goal and the following object manipulation subgoal. Con-
sider two consecutive instructions: “Walk to the counter”
and “Pick up the knife”. The instruction for the navigation
subgoal refers to a large object, the counter, as the destina-
tion. If we only look at this instruction, anywhere around the
counter could be a correct location. However, from the next
instruction, we know that the agent should stop at a location
that it can reach for the knife.
As such, given the language instructions Lk and Lk+1 for
consecutive navigation and object manipulation subgoals gk
and gk+1, along with the panoramic visual observations and
bounding boxes for all visible objects as described earlier,
we aim to predict the direction from the agent’s view to the
goal location. As ALFRED provides the ground truth se-
quence of agent movements and the ﬁnal goal location, it is
straightforward to calculate the ground truth for dt. To suc-
cessfully perform this task, the localizer must learn how the
position and size of bounding boxes correspond to the direc-
tion and distance of objects around the agent, and how these
properties may be affected by object type4 and context.5
4For example, at the same distance, the expected sizes of a knife
Implementation
The full architecture of the localizer is
shown in Figure 3. It is implemented using a multimodal
variant of BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) which encodes the
panoramic bounding boxes available at each timestep along
with the current and next subgoal language instructions to
produce a spatial representation of the agent’s observations
at each timestep. We perform a regression on the model out-
put to estimate the current angle to the goal location. This
model incorporates techniques proposed by Li et al. (2020),
who input image region features into BERT alongside lan-
guage features for impressive results on various multimodal
tasks, and Miyazawa et al. (2020), who encode spatial infor-
mation as input to a similar multimodal BERT model.
Bounding box coordinates in panoramic space.
As
shown in Figure 4, the augmented navigation inputs give us
labeled bounding boxes for images from eight panoramic
view angles. In order to uniquely represent the position of
each bounding box with respect to the agent, we project it
into three-dimensional, panoramic space through two polar
coordinates. In this space, we represent a bounding box by
its horizontal angle θ and vertical angle φ. θ will be calcu-
lated relative to the agent’s body orientation, while φ will
be relative to the center of the agent’s vertical range of head
motion.
To calculate these angles, we ﬁrst parameterize each
bounding box by three values: the ordinal index p of the
panoramic view angle for the image the bounding box be-
longs in, and the centroid coordinates (cx, cy) of the bound-
ing box within its image normalized by the image width and
height. Note that two consecutive panoramic views have an
angle of 45 degrees between them. Given these parameters
and the horizontal ﬁeld of view Fx, we can calculate the hor-
izontal angle θ of a particular bounding box (in degrees) by
and of a dining table in the agent’s ﬁeld of view are different.
5For example, if two objects of the same type are visible at
once, only the context given by the language instructions can dis-
ambiguate the correct destination, e.g., “The knife on the left.”

Model
Action-by-Action
F1 (%)
Navigation Subgoal
Success Rate (%)
Goal Condition
Success Rate (%)
Val. Seen
Val. Unseen
Val. Seen
Val. Unseen
Val. Seen
Val. Unseen
baseline
84.5
75.6
31.0
27.5
1.6
0.0
step-by-step
91.6
85.3
30.0
26.5
1.3
0.0
oracle
93.9
86.9
67.8
35.4
2.8
0.0
localizer
93.8
88.7
25.4
28.8
1.4
0.0
Table 1: Results for the compared models. Best non-oracle result in bold, and best overall result underlined.
θ = arctan

2(cx −0.5) tan Fx
2

+ 45p
(1)
Additionally given the vertical ﬁeld of view Fy and the
agent’s current vertical heading angle δ, we can calculate
the vertical φ of a particular bounding box (in degrees) by
φ = arctan

2(0.5 −cy) tan Fy
2

+ δ
(2)
Input and output details.
Once we have calculated θ and
φ, we encode the spatial representation as a 5-dimensional
vector of sin θ, cos θ, sin φ, and the width w and height h of
the bounding box, respectively. By incorporating sines and
cosines, we account for the circular nature of angles and re-
strict the range of the values. This encoding is repeated to
be comparable size to a BERT embedding, then added to
the BERT embedding for the bounding box class label, e.g.,
knife, to create a spatial token ready for input to BERT. As
shown in Figure 3, the full input to the localizer is a con-
catenation of the special [CLS] token, the spatial tokens,
the [SEP] token, the BERT embedding for the current and
next subgoal language instructions Lk and Lk+1, and an-
other [SEP] token.
After being processed by BERT into a spatial represen-
tation for the agent’s inputs, we use a linear layer to predict
dt, the sine and cosine of the angle toward the goal location.
Speciﬁcally, we use the generated representation for the spe-
cial [CLS] token. Again, sine and cosine are used to account
for the circular nature of angles.
Empirical Results
Due to prohibitive training time, we conduct experiments on
examples from one task type stack and place, where each in-
stance consists of both navigation actions and manipulation
actions on multiple objects. We compare the performance of
the following approaches:
• SEQ2SEQ baseline (baseline)
• SEQ2SEQ baseline + granular training (step-by-step)
• SEQ2SEQ baseline + granular training + oracle spatial
tracking (oracle)
• SEQ2SEQ baseline + granular training + localizer spatial
tracking (localizer)
For the remainder of this section, we introduce the oracle
approach, then present the results.
Oracle spatial tracking.
To gauge the effectiveness of
this spatial tracking approach and compare our model to
a perfect model, we introduce an oracle spatial tracking
model. At each timestep during navigation subgoals, rather
than predict the angle toward the goal location dt, we feed
the ground truth value of this into the model directly. This
gives us an upper bound on the performance of this spatial
tracking approach.
Metrics.
At inference time, we evaluate the model with
metrics in the three increasingly strict modes of evaluation
for our models derived from Shridhar et al. (2020): action-
by-action, subgoal-by-subgoal, and goal-by-goal. To judge
the agent’s prediction of primitive actions, we use the action-
by-action F-measure of the predicted sequences of primitive
actions for entire goal trajectories compared to the ground
truth. To judge navigation performance, we also calculate
the navigation subgoal success rate, i.e., the percentage of
navigation subgoals the agent successfully completes. As we
trained our models on a relatively small subset of the data, no
models achieve a viable goal completion success rate in this
evaluation. Consequently, to judge the ability of the agent to
achieve the overall goal of ALFRED tasks, we only report
the goal condition success rate, the percentage of all goal
conditions achieved by the model.
All metrics are calculated for ALFRED’s two validation
sets: validation seen and unseen. The seen dataset uses vir-
tual rooms from AI2 Thor which were seen in training, while
the unseen uses rooms that were not seen in training.
Results interpretation.
The evaluation results for the
compared models are listed in Table 1. We see that intro-
ducing granular training in the step-by-step model gives us
a signiﬁcant improvement in the prediction of individual
actions, but achieves comparable results for other metrics.
While the oracle spatial tracking approach offers drastic im-
provements in navigation subgoal and goal performance, the
non-oracle BERT-based localizer approach does not come
close to this upper bound. Nonetheless, it provides an overall
net improvement in action-by-action F-measure of 9.3% and

13.1% over the baseline for seen and unseen rooms, respec-
tively, and provides a slight improvement in navigation sub-
goal success rate over the baseline. This may indicate that
in the task of predicting the spatial direction of targets, the
transformer-based model still has much room for improve-
ment.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we investigated several methods to improve
the ALFRED baseline SEQ2SEQ model, including subgoal-
by-subgoal granular training, augmenting navigation inputs
with panoramic visual observation images and a full cov-
erage of object segmentation masks, and combining these
new inputs to propose a novel BERT-based spatial tracking
module.
While granular training considerably improves precision
of predicted actions, we show through an oracle approach
that if the agent is given the angle toward the goal location
as input at every timestep, we can achieve astounding per-
formance improvements in navigation and goal completion.
This suggests that improving navigation performance can in-
deed be a key to solving this problem. Our fair, learning-
based spatial tracking approach makes some progress to-
ward this grand goal of closing the gap to oracle perfor-
mance, but we expect there is much more work to be done.
Beyond this, future work may include extending BERT or
similar transformer-based models to handle the entire task
end-to-end, including action and object interaction mask
prediction.
