(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
Modeling of Human Criminal Behavior using 
Probabilistic Networks 
 
 
Ramesh Kumar  Gopala Pillai 
Research Scholar 
R.V. Center for Cognitive Technologies 
Bangalore, India 
- 
 
 
        Dr. Ramakanth Kumar .P 
Professor 
R.V. Center for Cognitive Technologies   
Bangalore, India  
-
 
 
Abstract— Currently, criminal’s profile (CP) is obtained from 
investigator’s or forensic psychologist’s interpretation, linking 
crime scene characteristics and an offender’s behavior to his or her 
characteristics and psychological profile. This paper seeks an 
efficient and systematic discovery of non-obvious and valuable 
patterns between variables from a large database of solved cases via 
a probabilistic network (PN) modeling approach. The PN structure 
can be used to extract behavioral patterns and to gain insight into 
what factors influence these behaviors. Thus, when a new case is 
being investigated and the profile variables are unknown because 
the offender has yet to be identified, the observed crime scene 
variables are used to infer the unknown variables based on their 
connections in the structure and the corresponding numerical 
(probabilistic) weights. The objective is to produce a more 
systematic and empirical approach to profiling, and to use the 
resulting PN model as a decision tool. 
 
Keywords-component; Modeling, criminal profiling, criminal 
behavior, probabilistic network, Bayes Rule 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modeling human criminal behavior is challenging due to 
many variables involved and the high degree of uncertainty 
surrounding 
a 
criminal 
act 
and 
the 
corresponding 
investigation. Probabilistic graphs are suitable modeling 
techniques because they are inherently distributed and 
stochastic. In this paper, the system variables comprising the 
PN are offender behaviors and crime scene evidence, which 
are initialized by experts through their professional experience 
or expert knowledge.  
 
The mathematical relationships naturally embedded in a set of 
crimes [3, 4, 8] are learned through training from a database 
containing solved criminal cases. The PN model is to be 
applied when only the crime scene evidence is known to 
obtain a useable offender profile to aid law enforcement in the 
investigations. A criminal profile is predicted with a certain 
quantitative confidence. 
 
The PN approach presented here seeks to build on the ideas of 
behavior correlations in order to obtain a usable criminal 
profile when only crime scene evidence is known from the 
investigation.  
This paper proposes a systematic approach for deriving a 
multidisciplinary behavioral model of criminal behavior. The 
proposed offender behavioral model is a mathematical 
representation of a system comprised of an offender’s actions 
and decisions at a crime scene and the offender’s personal 
characteristics.  
 
The influence of the offender traits and characteristics on the 
resulting crime scene behaviors is captured by a probabilistic 
graph or PN that maps cause-and-effect relationships between 
events, and lends itself to inductive logic for reasoning under 
uncertainty [1]. The use of PNs for CP may allow 
investigators to take into consideration various aspects of the 
crime and discover behavioral patterns that might otherwise 
remain hidden in the data. The various aspects of a crime 
include a victimology assessment (victim’s characteristics, 
e.g., background characteristics, age, gender, and education), 
crime scene analysis (evidence from the crime scene, e.g., 
time and place where the crime occurred), and a medical 
report (autopsy report, e.g., type of non-deadly and deadly 
lesions and signs of self defense). 
 
The PN approach to criminal profiling is demonstrated by 
learning from a series of crime scene and offender behaviors. 
The learning techniques employed in this modeling research 
are evaluated on a set of validation cases not used for training 
by defining a prediction accuracy based on the most likely 
value of the output variables (offender profile) and its 
corresponding confidence level. 
 
II. 
APPROACH 
To start with, a graphical model of offender behavior is 
learned from a database of solved cases. The resulting CP 
model obtained through training is then tested by comparing 
its predictions to the actual offenders’ profiles.  
 
Let the database sample space = D,  
 
Let D consist of ‘d’ solved cases {C1, ...,Cd},  
 
where Ci is an instantiation of X, which is randomly 
partitioned into two independent datasets such as a training set 
216
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
T and a validation set V, such that D = T U V. The variables in 
X are partitioned as follows: the inputs are the crime scene 
(CS) variables XI (evidence) for XI = (XI
1 , ...,XI
k ), and the 
outputs are the offender (OFF) variables comprising the 
criminal profile XO, for XO = (XO
1 , ...,XO
m), where (XI ,XO) ε 
X. 
 
The PN model is learned from T, as explained later, and it is 
tested by performing inference to predict the offender 
variables (OFF) in the validation cases V. An offender profile 
is estimated based on crime scene evidence, with a prediction 
being the most likely value of a particular offender variable. 
During the testing phase, the predicted value of XO
i , denoted 
by xP
i,a where a=1 or 2 for a binary variable, is compared to the 
observed state xO
i,b obtained from the validation set V, where 
b=1 or 2. An example of an offender variable is “gender”, with 
states “male” and “female”. The overall performance of the 
PN model is evaluated by comparing the true (observed) states 
xO
i,b to the predicted output variable values xP
i,a in the 
validation cases. This process tests the generalization 
properties of the model by evaluating its efficiency over V. 
 
III. 
VARIABLES CONSIDERED 
The relevant categories of variables that have emerged from 
the criminal profiling research as selected by investigators, 
criminologists, and forensic psychologists are described as 
follows: 
• Crime Scene Analysis (CSA): CSA variables are systematic 
observations made at the crime scene by the investigator. 
Examples of CSA variable pertain to where the body was 
found 
(e.g., 
neighborhood, 
location, 
environment 
characteristics), how the victim was found (e.g., the body was 
well-hidden, partially hidden, or intentionally placed for 
discovery), and the correlation between where the crime took 
place and where the body was found (e.g., the body was 
transported after the murder). 
• Victimology Analysis (VA): VA variables consist of the 
background characteristics of the victim independent of the 
crime. For example, VA variables include the age, sex, race, 
education level, and occupation of the victim. 
• Forensic Analysis (FA): FA variables rely on the medical 
examiner’s report that deals with the autopsy. Examples of this 
are time of death, cause of death, type of non-lethal wounding, 
wound localization, and type of weapon that administered the 
wounds. 
 
The set of CP variables used in this paper were defined in 
previous research [4, 5, 7, 8]. The selection criteria for 
variable selection [6] are:  
(i) Behaviors are clearly observable and not easily 
misinterpreted 
(ii) Behaviors are reflected in the crime scene, e.g., type of 
wounding, and  
(iii) Behaviors indicate how the offender acted toward and 
interacted with the victim  
e.g., victim was bound/gagged, or tortured. Some crime scene 
(CS) variables describing the observable crime scene and 
offender (OFF) variables describing the actual offender were 
selected based on the above criteria. Examples of the CS 
variables are multiple wounding to one area, drugging the 
victim, and sexual assault. Examples of the offender variables 
include prior offenses, relationship to the victim, prior arrests, 
etc. The variables all have binary values representing whether 
the event was present or absent. 
 
IV. 
TRAINING THE MODEL 
The basic schematic of the training software, including the 
validation process, is shown in Figure 1, where Ph is the 
proposed PN and Popt is the trained (or optimized) PN. The 
software is intended to aid law enforcement in the 
investigation of violent crimes. Because the cases are unsolved 
and only the crime scene inputs are known, the criminal 
profiling software consists of a trained PN model that has been 
previously trained and validated with D. Also, the model has 
the potential to be updated by means of an incremental 
training algorithm when additional cases are solved by the 
police. Thus, Ptrained consistently reflects the model of an 
evolving criminal profile over time. 
 
 
V. 
DATA BASE OF SOLVED CASES 
A set of single offender/single victim homicides was collected 
by psychologists from solved homicide files of the British 
police [4, 6]. In order to examine the aggressive behavioral 
patterns of a particularly violent offense, the criteria for case 
selection is: single offender/single victim homicide cases; a 
mixture of domestic (where the victim and offender were 
known to each other (e.g., family member, spouse, co-worker) 
and stranger (the offender is unknown to the victim, thus they 
had no previous links to each other) cases; offenders are adults 
at least 17 years of age, as defined by the court system. 
Excluded from the sample were cases when the cause of death 
was not aggressive or extremely intentional. Homicides by 
reckless driving are not included due to the lack of 
interpersonal interaction between the offender and victim.  
 
VI. 
SAMPLING 
A simulation set is built to produce an artificial CP database to 
study the PN learning and inference capabilities. This included 
a more extensive list of crime scene, offender characteristics 
217
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
and multiple-valued variables. A PN is used to simulate a set 
of cases where the crime scene and offender variables can be 
chosen by the user. An initial structure thus relating the 
variables and the corresponding initial probabilistic parameters 
θ0 are declared based on the prior knowledge, through 
experience, or by sampled statistics. Cases are simulated by 
feed forward sampling, where variables are sampled one at a 
time in order from top-level variables (variables without 
parents), to the mid-level variables (variables with both 
parents and children), ending with the bottom-level variables 
(children variables with parents only). For each variable, the 
discrete conditional prior probabilities in vector form are given 
as: 
 [P(xi,1| πi ), (xi,2| πi ),….., (xi,ri| πi )] 
where ri is the maximum state for Xi and πi disappears if Xi is a 
top-level variable. A value vi is drawn from a uniform 
continuous distribution between ‘0’ and ‘1’ and the 
conditional prior probability vector as a vector of ranges 
becomes 
[P(xi,1| πi ),P(xi,1| πi )+ P(xi,2| πi ),…..,  
 
 (x
1
ir
i=∑
i,j| πi )]  which refers to 
  
    
 
Xi=         
 
 
 
 
                                                                                 (1) 
 
 
 
To simulate a set of cases for the system represented by the 
three-nodal model illustrated in Figure 2, the variables are 
ordered as (X1, X2, X3), where X1 is the parent of X2 and X3, 
and X1 = (x1,1, x1,2), X2 = (x2,1, x2,2) and X3 = (x3,1, x3,2). 
Starting with X1, it has three possible states with the prior 
probabilities P(x1,1) = 0.2, P(x1,2) = 0.5, and P(x1,3) = 0.3, 
which becomes a vector [0.2, 0.7, 1] referring to: 
 
 
 
 
X1 = 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               (2) 
 
If v1 = 0.11 which makes X1 = x1,1, and the Conditional 
Probability Table (CPT) for X2 is listed in Table 1. 
 
 
 Then the conditional prior probability vector of ranges for a 
newly generated v2 becomes 
 
 
X2 =  
 
               (3) 
X3 is sampled following the same procedure as X1 and X2. 
This is repeated until the desired number of cases as specified 
by the user is reached. The Matlab function utilized for the 
sampling exercise is sample b_net in the Bayes Net Toolbox 
[2]. 
VII. PN PREDICTIONS AND ACCURACY  
When a PN model of offender behavior on the crime scene is 
learned from solved cases, it is implemented on a set of solved 
validation cases in order to test the trained model’s 
performance. Performance is tested through probabilistic 
inference. Inference is the process of updating the probability 
distribution of a set of possible outcomes based upon the 
relationships represented by the PN model and the 
observations of one or more variables. With the updated 
probabilities, a prediction can be made from the most likely 
value of each inferred variable. Thus, in order to test the 
trained model, only the crime scene evidence is inserted into 
the model, with the predicted offender profile being compared 
to the actual offender characteristics. Because this is a 
probabilistic model, a certain confidence accompanies the 
offender variable predictions.  
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS  
This paper presents an approach for deriving a network model 
of criminal profiling that draws on knowledge-based systems 
and on fields of criminology and offender profiling. 
Implementing probabilistic networks makes it possible to 
represent multidimensional interdependencies between all 
relevant variables that have been identified in previous 
research as playing a role in determining or reflecting the 
behavior of offenders at the crime scene. Hence, a valid 
xi,1 if  0< v < P(xi,1|πi ) 
xi,2 if  P(xi,,1|πi )≤ v < ∑P(x
1
ir
i=
i,j|πi ) 
xi,ri if ∑P(x
1
ir
i=
i,j|πi)≤v<1 
x1,1 if  0 ≤ v1 < 0.2 
 
x1,2 if  0.2 ≤ v1 < 0.9 
 
x1,3 if  0.9 ≤ v1 < 1 
x2,1 if  0 ≤ v2 < 0.2 
 
x2,2 if  0.2 ≤ v2 < 1 
218
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
network model can be used to predict unknown variables 
composing an offender profile based on the variables observed 
from the crime scene.
