Context Capture in Software Development
Bruno Antunes⋆, Francisco Correia and Paulo Gomes
Knowledge and Intelligent Systems Laboratory
Cognitive and Media Systems Group
Centre for Informatics and Systems of the University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal

http://www.cisuc.uc.pt/
Abstract. The context of a software developer is something hard to
deﬁne and capture, as it represents a complex network of elements across
diﬀerent dimensions that are not limited to the work developed on an
IDE. We propose the deﬁnition of a software developer context model
that takes into account all the dimensions that characterize the work
environment of the developer. We are especially focused on what the
software developer context encompasses at the project level and how it
can be captured. The experimental work done so far show that useful
context information can be extracted from project management tools.
The extraction, analysis and availability of this context information can
be used to enrich the work environment of developers with additional
knowledge to support their work.
Key words: Context, Software Development, Knowledge Management.
1
Introduction
The term context has an intuitive meaning for humans, but due to this intu-
itive connotation it remains vague and generalist. Furthermore, the interest in
the many roles of context comes from diﬀerent ﬁelds such as literature, philos-
ophy, linguistics and computer science, with each ﬁeld proposing its own view
of context [1]. The term context typically refers to the set of circumstances and
facts that surround the center of interest, providing additional information and
increasing understanding.
The context-aware computing concept was ﬁrst introduced by Schilit and
Theimer [2], where they refer to context as “location of use, the collection of
nearby people and objects, as well as the changes to those objects over time”.
In a similar way, Brown et al. [3] deﬁne context as location, identities of the
people around the user, the time of day, season, temperature, etc. In a more
generic deﬁnition, Dey and Abowd [4] deﬁne context as “any information that
can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person,
⋆Supported by FCT grant SFRH/BD/43336/2008.
arXiv:1101.4101v1  [cs.SE]  21 Jan 2011

2
B. Antunes, F. Correia and P. Gomes
place, or object that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user and
an application, including the user and applications themselves”.
In software development, the context of a developer can be viewed as a rich
and complex network of elements across diﬀerent dimensions that are not limited
to the work developed on an IDE (Integrated Development Environment). Due to
the diﬃculty on approaching such challenge, there is not a unique notion of what
it really covers and how it can be truly exploited. With the increasing dimension
of software systems, software development projects have grown in complexity
and size, as well as in the number of functionalities and technologies involved.
During their work, software developers need to cope with a large amount of
contextual information that is typically not captured and processed in order to
enrich their work environment.
Our aim is the deﬁnition of a software developer context model that takes
into account all the dimensions that characterize the work environment of the
developer. We propose that these dimensions can be represented as a layered
model with four main layers: personal, project, organization and domain. Also,
we believe that a context model needs to be analyzed from diﬀerent perspectives:
capture, modeling, representation and application. This way, each layer of the
proposed context model will be founded in a deﬁnition of what context capture,
modeling, representation and application should be for that layer.
This work is especially focused on the project layer of the software developer
context model. We give a deﬁnition of what the context model encompasses at
the project layer and present some experimental work on the context capture
perspective.
The remaining of the paper starts with an overview of the software developer
context model we envision. In section 3 we describe the current work on context
capture, some preliminary experimentation and the prototype developed. An
overview of related work is given in section 4. Finally, section 5 concludes the
paper and point out some directions for future work.
2
Context Model
The software developer context model we propose takes into account all the
dimensions that comprise the software developer work environment. This way,
we have identiﬁed four main dimensions: personal, project, organization and
domain. As shown in ﬁgure 1, these dimensions form a layered model and will
be described from four diﬀerent perspectives: context capture, context modeling,
context representation and context application.
The personal layer represents the context of the work a developer has at
hands at any point in time, which can be deﬁned as a set of tasks. In order to
accomplish these tasks, the developer has to deal with various kinds of resources
at the same time, such as source code ﬁles, speciﬁcation documents, bug reports,
etc. These resources are typically dispersed through diﬀerent places and systems,
although being connected by a set of explicit and implicit relations that exist

Context Capture in Software Development
3
DOMAIN
LAYER
ORGANIZATION
LAYER
PROJECT
LAYER
PERSONAL
LAYER
CONTEXT CAPTURE
CONTEXT MODELING
CONTEXT REPRESENTATION
CONTEXT APPLICATION
Fig. 1. The software developer context model layers and perspectives.
between them. At this level the context model represents the resources that are
important for the tasks the developer is working on.
The project layer focuses on the context of the project, or projects, in which
the developer is somehow involved. A software development project is an aggre-
gation of a team, a set of resources and a combination of explicit and implicit
knowledge that keeps the project running. The team is responsible for accom-
plishing tasks, which end up consuming and producing resources. The relations
that exist between people and resources are the glue that makes everything work.
The project layer represents the people and resources, as well as their relations,
of the software development projects where the developer is included.
The organization layer takes into account the organization context to which
the developer belongs. Similarly to a project, an organization is made up of
people, resources and their relations, but in a much more complex network.
While in a project the people and resources are necessarily connected due to the
requisites of their work, in a software development organization these projects
easily become separate islands. The knowledge and competences developed in
each project may be of interest in other projects and valuable synergies can be
created when this information is available. The organization layer represents the
organizational context that surrounds a developer.
The domain layer takes into account the knowledge domain, or domains, in
which the developer works. This layer goes beyond the project and organization
levels and includes a set of knowledge sources that stand out of these spheres.
Nowdays, a typical developer uses the Internet to search information and to keep
informed of the advances in the technologies s/he works with. These actions are
based on services and communities, such as source code repositories, development
foruns, news websites, blogs, etc. These knowledge sources cannot be detached

4
B. Antunes, F. Correia and P. Gomes
from the developer context and are integrated in the domain layer of our context
model. For instance, due to the dynamic nature of the software development ﬁeld,
the developer must be able to gather knowledge from sources that go beyond
the limits of the organization, either to follow the technological evolution or to
search for help whenever needed.
The four context dimensions described before can be described through four
diﬀerent perspectives: context capture, which represents the sources of context
information and the way this information is gathered, in order to build the con-
text model; context modeling, which represents the diﬀerent dimensions, entities
and aspects of the context information (conceptual model); context representa-
tion, which represents the technologies and data structures used to represent the
context model (implementation); and context application, which represents how
the context model is used and the objectives behind its use.
3
Context Capture
Our current work is focused on the project layer of our developer context model,
and we will discuss our work at this level from the diﬀerent perspectives we have
presented before.
Concerning context capture, the main sources of contextual information that
feed up the developer context model at the project level are project management
tools. These tools store a big amount of explicit and implicit information about
the resources produced during a software development project, how the people
involved relate with these resources and how the resources relate to each other.
We are focusing on two types of tools: Version Control Systems (VCS) and Issue
Tracking Systems (ITS). As shown in ﬁgure 2, the former deals with resources
and their changes, the second deals with tasks. These systems store valuable
information about how developers, tasks and resources relate and how these
relations evolve over time. We are especially interested in revision logs and tasks.
Brieﬂy described, a revision log tell us that a set of changes were applied by a
developer to a set of resources in the repository. A task commonly represents a
problem report and the respective ﬁx.
The network of developers, resources, tasks and their relations will be used to
build our context model at the project level. This way, the context model of the
developer, from a project point of view, will be modeled as a set of implicit and
explicit relations, as shown in ﬁgure 3. The lines with a ﬁlled pattern represent
the explicit relations and those with a dotted pattern represent the implicit ones.
The developers are explicitly related with revisions, as they are the ones who
commit the revisions, and with tasks, as each task is assigned to a developer.
The relation between tasks and resources is not explicit, but we believe it can
be identiﬁed by analyzing the information that describe tasks and revisions. The
proximity between developers can be inferred by analyzing the resources were
they share work. Also, the resources can be implicitly related by analyzing how
often they are changed together.

Context Capture in Software Development
5
RESOURCE
REVISION
TASK
VERSION
CONTROL
SYSTEM
ISSUE
TRACKING
SYSTEM
