Queue-Learning: A Reinforcement Learning Approach for
Providing Quality of Service
Majid Raeis, Ali Tizghadam, Alberto Leon-Garcia
University of Toronto, Canada

Abstract
End-to-end delay is a critical attribute of quality of service
(QoS) in application domains such as cloud computing and
computer networks. This metric is particularly important in
tandem service systems, where the end-to-end service is pro-
vided through a chain of services. Service-rate control is a
common mechanism for providing QoS guarantees in service
systems. In this paper, we introduce a reinforcement learning-
based (RL-based) service-rate controller that provides prob-
abilistic upper-bounds on the end-to-end delay of the sys-
tem, while preventing the overuse of service resources. In or-
der to have a general framework, we use queueing theory to
model the service systems. However, we adopt an RL-based
approach to avoid the limitations of queueing-theoretic meth-
ods. In particular, we use Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) to learn the service rates (action) as a function of
the queue lengths (state) in tandem service systems. In con-
trast to existing RL-based methods that quantify their perfor-
mance by the achieved overall reward, which could be hard
to interpret or even misleading, our proposed controller pro-
vides explicit probabilistic guarantees on the end-to-end de-
lay of the system. The evaluations are presented for a tandem
queueing system with non-exponential inter-arrival and ser-
vice times, the results of which validate our controller’s capa-
bility in meeting QoS constraints.
Introduction
End-to-end delay of a service system is an important per-
formance metric that has a major impact on the customers’
satisfaction and the service providers’ revenues. Therefore,
providing guarantees on the end-to-end delay of a service
system is of great interest to both customers and service
providers. Ensuring quality of service (QoS) guarantees is
often a challenging task, particularly when the service sys-
tem is composed of ﬁner-grained service components. This
can be seen in many different service contexts such as cloud
computing and computer networks. Speciﬁcally, with the
emergence of Network Function Virtualization (NFV) in
cloud environments, end-to-end service networks can be cre-
ated by chaining virtual network functions (VNF) together.
The goal of a cloud service provider is to efﬁciently man-
age the resources, while satisfying the QoS requirements
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
of the service chains. This can be achieved through differ-
ent control mechanisms such as vertical (horizontal) scal-
ing of the resources, which corresponds to adding/removing
CPU or memory resources of the existing VNF instances
(adding/removing VNF instances) in response to the work-
load changes (Toosi et al. 2019).
In order to study the problem of QoS assurance in
a broader context, we take a general approach and use
queueing-theoretic models for representing the service sys-
tems. Therefore, the presented results can be applied to a
wide range of problems, such as QoS assurance for VNF
chains. In this paper, we focus on dynamic service-rate con-
trol of the tandem systems as an effective approach for
providing end-to-end delay guarantees. This is closely re-
lated to the concept of vertical auto-scaling of VNF service
chains. There is a rich body of literature on the service-
rate control of the service systems, the majority of which is
based on queueing theoretic approaches (Kumar, Lewis, and
Topaloglu 2013; Lee and Kulkarni 2014; Weber and Stid-
ham 1987). However, most of this literature is limited to
simple scenarios or unrealistic assumptions, such as expo-
nential inter-arrival and service times. This is due to the fact
that the queueing theoretic techniques become intractable as
we consider larger networks under more realistic assump-
tions.
Considering the shortcomings of the queueing theoretic
methods and the fact that the service-rate control problem
involves sequential decision makings, we adopt a reinforce-
ment learning approach, which is a natural candidate for
dealing with these types of problems. In particular, we use
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al.
2016) algorithm to handle the continuous action space (ser-
vice rates) and the large state space (queue lengths) of the
problem. The contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows
• We introduce an RL-based framework that takes a QoS
constraint as input, and provides a dynamic service-rate
control algorithm that satisﬁes the constraint without
overuse of the service resources (Fig. 1). This makes our
method distinct from the existing service-rate control al-
gorithms that quantify their performance by the achieved
overall reward, which is highly dependent on the reward
deﬁnition and might have no practical interpretations.
arXiv:2101.04627v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2021

#&, %&
&& = (
!"
Service-rate 
Control Algo.
!"
QoS Constraint
" ##$# > #%& < &%&
…
…
…
…
Figure 1: Queue learning: RL-based framework for provid-
ing QoS guarantees
• The proposed controller provides explicit guarantees on
the end-to-end delay of the system. This is in contrast to
existing methods that only consider some implicit notion
of the system’s latency such as the queue lengths.
• Our RL-based controller provides probabilistic upper-
bounds on the end-to-end delay of the system. This is an
important contribution of this paper since ensuring prob-
abilistic upper-bounds on a particular performance met-
ric, such as the end-to-end delay of the system, is a much
more challenging task compared to the common practice
control methods that only consider average performance
metrics such as the mean delay.
Related Work
Service system control problem has been studied using var-
ious techniques. The majority of these studies are based on
queueing theoretic methods, which are often limited to sim-
ple and unrealistic scenarios due to mathematical intractabil-
ity of the problem. The common approach used in this class
of studies is to minimize a cost function that consists of
different terms such as the customer holding cost and the
server operating cost (Kumar, Lewis, and Topaloglu 2013;
Lee and Kulkarni 2014). These methods do not directly con-
sider the delay of the system in their problem formulation
and therefore, cannot provide any delay guarantees. Using
a constraint programming approach, Terekhov et al. (2007)
study the control problem of ﬁnding the smallest-cost com-
bination of workers in a facility, while satisfying an upper-
bound on the expected customer waiting time. Although
this work provides a guarantee on the delay of the system,
the authors only consider the average waiting time of the
system. Another approach that has recently emerged as a
popular control method for complex service systems is re-
inforcement learning (Liu, Xie, and Modiano 2019; Raeis,
Tizghadam, and Leon-Garcia 2020). The authors in these
works study queueing control problems such as server allo-
cation, routing (Liu, Xie, and Modiano 2019) and admission
control (Raeis, Tizghadam, and Leon-Garcia 2020).
Similar control problems have been studied in different ar-
eas such as cloud computing and computer networks. VNF
auto-scaling is one such example, which aims to provide
QoS guarantees for service function chains (Toosi et al.
2019; Duan et al. 2017; Rahman et al. 2018). However, the
proposed algorithms in this area are often based on heuristic
methods and do not provide much insight into the behaviour
of the system or the control mechanism.
…
#!
$! "!
#"
$" ""
##
$# "#
Figure 2: System model: a tandem network of multi-server
queueing systems, where the service rates µn, 1 ≤n ≤N,
can be dynamically adjusted by the controller to satisfy the
QoS constraint.
Problem Model and Formulation
In this paper, we consider multi-server queueing systems,
with First Come First Serve (FCFS) service discipline, as
the building blocks of the tandem service networks that we
study (Fig.2). In a tandem topology, a customer must go
through all the stages to receive the end-to-end service. We
do not assume speciﬁc distributions for the service times
or the inter-arrival times and therefore, these processes can
have arbitrary stationary distributions. We study QoS assur-
ance problem for a tandem network of N queueing systems,
where system n, 1 ≤n ≤N, is a multi-server queueing sys-
tem with cn homogeneous servers having service rates µn.
Moreover, we consider a service rate controller that chooses
a set of service rates for the constituent queueing systems
every T seconds. Therefore, the controller takes an action
at the beginning of each time slot1 and the service rates are
ﬁxed during the time slot. We denote by qn the queue length
of the nth queueing system at the begining of each time
slot. The service rate controller takes actions based on the
queue length information of all the constituent systems, i.e.,
(q1, q2, · · · , qN). Moreover, we denote the end-to-end delay
of the system at an arbitrary time slot by d.
As mentioned earlier, the reason for considering the ser-
vice rate controller is to provide QoS guarantees on the end-
to-end delay of the system. More speciﬁcally, our goal in
designing the controller is to provide a probabilistic upper-
bound on the end-to-end delay of the customers, i.e., P(d >
dub) ≤ϵub, where dub denotes the delay upper-bound and
ϵub is the violation probability of the constraint. Since there
is an intrinsic trade-off between the system’s service capac-
ity and its end-to-end delay, satisfying the QoS constraint
might be achieved at the cost of inefﬁcient use of the service
resources. Therefore, the amount of service resources that
are used by the controller is an important factor that needs
to be considered in our algorithm design.
Service Rate Control as a Reinforcement
Learning Problem
In this section, we start with a brief review of some basic
concepts and algorithms in reinforcement learning. Then, we
formulate our problem in the RL framework.
Background on Reinforcement Learning
The basic elements of a reinforcement learning problem are
the agent and the environment, which have iterative inter-
1Throughout the paper, we use the terms time slot and time step
interchangeably.

actions with each other. The environment is modeled by
a Markov Decision Process (MDP), which is speciﬁed by
< S, A, P, R >, with state space S, action space A, state
transition probability matrix P and reward function R. At
each time step t, the agent observes a state st ∈S, takes
action at ∈A, transits to state st+1 ∈S and receives a
reward of rt = R(st, at, st+1). The agent’s actions are de-
ﬁned by its policy π, where π(a|s) is the probability of tak-
ing action a in state s. The total discounted reward from
time step t onwards is called the return, which is calcu-
lated as rγ
t = P∞
k=t γk−trk, where 0 < γ < 1. The goal
of the agent is to ﬁnd a policy that maximizes the aver-
age return from the start state, i.e., maxπ J(π) = E[rγ
1|π].
Let us deﬁne the (improper) discounted state distribution as
ρπ(s′) =
R
S
P∞
t=1 γt−1p(s)p(s →s′, t, π)ds, where p1(s)
and p(s →s′, t, π) denote the density at the starting state
and the density at state s′ after transitioning for t steps from
state s, respectively. Now, we can summarize the perfor-
mance objective as J(π) = Es∼ρπ,a∼π[r(s, a)].
Stochastic Policy Gradient
Policy gradient is the most
popular class of continuous action reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms. In these algorithms, the policy function is
parametrized by θ and is denoted by πθ(a|s). The parame-
ters θ are adjusted in the direction of ∇θJ(πθ) to optimize
the performance function. Based on the policy gradient the-
orem (Sutton et al. 2000), we have
∇θJ(πθ) = Es∼ρπ,a∼πθ[∇θ log πθ(a|s)Qπ(s, a)],
(1)
where Qπ(s, a) denotes the action-value function deﬁned as
Qπ(s, a) = E[rγ
1|S1 = s, A1 = a; π]. To calculate the gra-
dient in Eq. (1), policy gradient methods often use a sample
based estimate of the expectation. However, an important
challenge facing these methods is the estimation of the un-
known action-value function Qπ(s, a).
Stochastic Actor-Critic
This family of policy gradient
algorithms use an actor-critic architecture to address the
above mentioned issue (Sutton et al. 2000; Peters, Vijayaku-
mar, and Schaal 2005). In these algorithms, an actor adjusts
the parameters θ of the policy, while a critic estimates an
action-value function Qw(s, a) with parameters w, which is
used instead of the unknown true action-value function in
Eq. (1).
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG)
In contrast to the
policy gradient methods, DPG (Silver et al. 2014) uses a
deterministic policy µθ : S →A. Since the randomness
only comes from the states, the performance objective can
be written as J(µθ) = Es∼ρµ[r(s, µθ(s))]. Moreover, using
the deterministic policy gradient theorem, the gradient of the
performance objective can be obtained as
∇θJ(µθ) = Es∼ρµ
∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)

.
(2)
The same notions of actor and critic can be used here. Com-
paring Eqs. (1) and (2), we can observe that the expectation
in the deterministic case is taken only with respective to the
state space, which makes DPG more sample efﬁcient than
the stochastic policy gradient, especially for problems with
large action spaces.
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
This al-
gorithm generalizes DPG to large state spaces by using neu-
ral network functions, which approximate the action-value
function (Lillicrap et al. 2016). While most optimization al-
gorithms require i.i.d samples, the experience samples are
generated sequentially in an environment. To address this
issue, DDPG uses a replay buffer. Speciﬁcally, the experi-
ences are stored in the replay buffer after each interaction,
while a minibatch that is uniformly sampled from the buffer
is used for updating the actor and critic networks. Moreover,
to deal with the instability issue that is caused in the update
process of the Q-function, DDPG uses the concept of target
networks, which is modiﬁed for the actor-critic architecture.
The target networks Q′ and µ′, with parameters w′ and θ′,
are updated as w′ ←τw+(1−τ)w′ and θ′ ←τθ+(1−τ)θ′,
where τ ≪1. As a result, the stability of the learning pro-
cess is greatly improved by forcing the targets to change
slowly.
Problem Formulation
Now, let us formulate the service-rate control task as a re-
inforcement learning problem. Our environment is a tandem
queueing network as in Fig. 2 and the agent is the controller
that adjusts the service rates of the network’s queueing sys-
tems. The goal is to design a controller that guarantees a
probabilistic upper-bound on the end-to-end delay of the
system, i.e., P(d > dub) < ϵub, while minimizing the av-
erage sum of service rates per time slot. In order to achieve
this goal, our controller interacts with the environment at the
beginning of each time slot. Therefore, the service rates are
ﬁxed during each time slot.
Now, let us deﬁne the components of our reinforcement
learning problem as follows:
• State: The state of the system is denoted by s
=
(q1, q2, · · · , qN), where qn is the queue length of the nth
queueing system at the beginning of each time step.
• Action: The action is deﬁned as choosing a set of ser-
vice rates for the constituent queueing systems, i.e.,
a
=
(µ1, µ2, · · · , µN). Here we consider determinis-
tic policies and therefore, action will be a deterministic
function of the state, i.e. a = µθ(s).
• Reward: Designing the reward function is the most chal-
lenging part of the problem. The immediate reward at
each time step should reﬂect the performance of the sys-
tem, in terms of the end-to-end delay, under the taken ac-
tion in that particular time slot. We pick the duration of
the time slots, T, such that T > dub. Let At denote the
set of arrivals at time step t, i.e. [t, t+T], except those that
arrived in [t+T −dub, t+T] but did not depart until t+T.
The reason for this exclusion is that we cannot ﬁnd out if
the end-to-end delay of an arrival in Ac
t (complement of
set At) will exceed dub or not, by the end of that time slot.
However, one should note that this portion of excluded ar-
rivals will be negligible if T/dub ≫1 or ϵub ≪1. Nev-
ertheless, we calculate the immediate reward at time step
t, which is represented by rt, only based on the arrivals
in At. We assign sub-rewards to each arrival in At as fol-

lows:
r′
i =
n β1
di < dub
β2
di > dub ,
i ∈At,
(3)
where r′
i and di denote the assigned sub-reward and the
end-to-end delay of the ith arrival in At. Furthermore, we
should take the cost of the chosen service rates into ac-
count. In other words, there is an intrinsic trade-off be-
tween the provided delay upper-bound and the average
sum-rate of the queueing systems (resources). Let µsum
t
denote the sum of the service rates at time step t, i.e.,
µsum
t
= PN
n=1 cnµn,t, where µn,t denotes the service rate
of the nth queueing system at time step t. Now, we deﬁne
the immediate reward at time step t, which is represented
by rt, as follows
rt = r(st, µθ(st)) =
P
i∈At r′
i
E[na]
−µsum
t
,
(4)
where E[na] is the average number of arrivals in a given
time step, which can be estimated from the previous ar-
rivals. Now, the average reward per time step can be cal-
culated using the deﬁned reward function in Eq. (4) as
follows
J(µθ) =
Z
S
pµ(s)E[r(s, µθ(s))]ds,
(5)
where pµ(s) denotes the steady state distribution of the
states, while following policy µ. Let us deﬁne Bt as the
set of arrivals in At for which di < dub. Now, by splitting
At into Bt and Bc
t, we have
E[r(st, µθ(st))|st = s]
=
E
 P
i∈Bt β1 + P
i∈Bc
t β2
s

E[na]
−E[µsum
t
|s]
= β1
E
h
|Bt|
s
i
E[na]
+ β2
E
h
|Bc
t|
s
i
E[na]
−E[µsum
t
|s]
≃β1P(d < dub|s) + β2P(d > dub|s) −E[µsum
t
|s],
where the approximation in the last line can be obtained
using the law of large numbers (LLN). Therefore, using
Eq. (5) we have
J(µθ) = β1P(d < dub) + β2P(d > dub) −E

N
X
n=1
cnµn

(6)
Now, let us choose the parameters of the reward function
as follows
β1 = ϵubλ,
β2 = −(1 −ϵub)λ.
(7)
Substituting the parameters and rewriting Eq. (6), we have
J(µθ) = λ (P(d < dub) −(1 −ϵub))
|
{z
}
QoS Constraint
−E

N
X
n=1
cnµn

|
{z
}
Average sum-rate
,
(8)
where λ speciﬁes the trade-off between the QoS con-
straint and the average sum rate.
Hyper-Parameter Selection
Discussion on Trade-off Coefﬁcient (λ)
As we discussed in the previous section, λ can be used to
adjust the trade-off between the QoS constraint and the av-
erage sum rates. Here, we discuss the effect of this param-
eter on the learned policy by transforming our goal into an
optimization problem.
Let us redeﬁne our problem as learning a control pol-
icy that satisﬁes the QoS constraint with minimum service
resources. Therefore, we can express the service-rate con-
troller design problem as follows
max
θ
−E
 N
X
i=1
ciµi

(9)
s.t.
P(d < dub) ≥1 −ϵub.
We deﬁne the Lagrangian function associated with prob-
lem (9) as
L(θ, λ) = −E
 N
X
i=1
ciµi

+ λ (P(d < dub|A) −(1 −ϵub)) ,
(10)
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the
QoS constraint in Eq. (9). As can be seen, the Lagrangian
function is similar to the average reward obtained in
Eq. (8). Moreover, the Lagrangian dual function is deﬁned as
g(λ) = maxθ L(θ, λ) and the dual problem can be written
as
min
λ g(λ),
s.t. λ ≥0.
(11)
Therefore, λ can be interpreted as the Lagrange multiplier
of the dual problem. Moreover, maximizing the average re-
ward J(µθ) with respect to θ will be the same as computing
the Lagrangian dual function associated with problem (9).
Hence, λ can be seen as a hyper-parameter for our RL prob-
lem, where choosing the proper λ can result in achieving the
goal formulated in (9). It should be noted that based on the
KKT (Karush–Kuhn–Tucker) conditions, the optimal point
λ∗must satisfy λ∗(P(d < dub) −(1 −ϵub)) = 0. We will
use these insights in the next section for better selection of
the hyper-parameter λ.
Discussion on Time Slot Length (T)
The length of the time slot is another design parameter that
can affect the performance of the controller and the learned
policy. In general, decreasing the time slot length provides
ﬁner-grained control over the system and can result in bet-
ter optimized policies. However, choosing very small time
slot lengths can cause two major practical problems. First,
any controller has a limited speed due to its processing time
and therefore, might not be able to interact with the environ-
ment in arbitrary short time-scales. The second and more im-
portant problem is that queueing systems do not respond to
the actions instantaneously, which makes the policy learning
problem even more complex. This can be especially prob-
lematic when the system is saturated (Mao et al. 2019). As a
result, the time slot length should be large enough such that

the immediate reward deﬁned in Eq. (4) provides a good
assessment of the taken action. On the other hand, choos-
ing very large time slot lengths can result in various issues
too. As discussed earlier, larger time slot means less frequent
control over the system and as a result, potentially less op-
timal control policies. Furthermore, if the time slot length
becomes large enough such that the queueing system stabi-
lizes after taking each action, the rewards become less de-
pendent on the states and only assess the taken action (cho-
sen service rates). Therefore, the learned actions become al-
most independent of the states, which questions the whole
point of using adaptive service rate control. Another impor-
tant factor to consider is the data efﬁciency of our algorithm.
As we increase the time slot length, the controller will have
less interactions with the environment and therefore, it will
take a longer time for the controller to start learning useful
policies.
Based on the above discussion, we should choose a time
slot length that is large enough to capture the effect of the
taken actions, but not too large that jeopardizes the dynamic
nature of the policy. A related concept that can help us in
determining a reasonable time slot length is the time con-
stant or the relaxation time of the system. The relaxation
time can be used as a measure of the transient behaviour of
the queue, which is deﬁned as the mean time required for
any deviation of the queue length from its mean (¯q) to re-
turn 1/e of its way back to ¯q (Morse 1955). For a simple
M/M/1 queue, the relaxation time can be approximated by
2λ/(µ −λ)2 (Morse 1955). As can be seen, the relaxation
time is a function of both the arrival rate (λ) and the service
rate (µ), which tremendously increases as ρ = λ/µ →1,
i.e. when the controller chooses a service rate close to the
arrival rate. In addition to the fact that calculating the relax-
ation time for a complex network becomes mathematically
intractable, the dependence of it on the service rates makes it
dependent on the chosen actions and the policy. Therefore,
we cannot use the relaxation time concept directly in our
problem. However, we use a similar notion that is the core of
our problem formulation, i.e., the probabilistic upper-bound
on the end-to-end delay. Although we do not know the opti-
mal policy beforehand, we know that it must guarantee the
QoS constraint, i.e., P(d > dub) < ϵub. Given that ϵub is
often a small probability, dub can be used as an estimate of
the time it takes the set of customers at a given time to be
replaced with a new group of customers. Therefore, we will
use dub as a guideline for choosing the time slot length. We
will discuss this issue further in the next section.
Evaluation and Results
In this section, we present our evaluations of the proposed
controller under different circumstances. We ﬁrst describe
the experimental setup in terms of the service network topol-
ogy and the technical assumptions used in the experiments.
We then explain the implementation and parameter selection
procedures. Finally, we discuss the experiments and results.
Experimental Setup and Datasets
As discussed in the previous sections, the reason why we
adopt a queueing-theoretic approach for modeling our sys-
tem is to provide general insights on the service-rate control
problem in different applications. As a result, we consider
general queueing models for the experimental evaluations.
It should be noted that these models can be close approx-
imations of the real-world service systems, since we make
no assumptions on the inter-arrival or service time distribu-
tions in our design process. Moreover, our method can be
used for pretraining purposes in real-world applications in
which interacting with the environment and obtaining real
experiences are highly expensive.
We should again emphasize that most of the existing
works on the control of queueing systems focus on conges-
tion metrics such as the average queue length or the aver-
age delay, ignoring the tail of the distributions. Moreover,
the primary goal in those studies is the optimization of a
cost function, which is highly dependent on the design pa-
rameters. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing
work that is capable of providing probabilistic QoS guaran-
tees for the network’s end-to-end delay. Therefore, we focus
on the performance of our proposed method and discuss the
effect of different design parameters on the controller’s per-
formance.
Queueing Environment
In order to perform our experi-
ments, we set-up our own queueing environment in Python.
In this environment, multi-server queueing systems can be
chained together to form a tandem service network. More-
over, the inter-arrival and service times can be generated
using different distributions. Although we are interested in
long-term performance metrics and there is no notion of ter-
minal state in queueing systems, we chose an episodic en-
vironment design for some technical reasons. More specif-
ically, we terminate each episode if the end-to-end de-
lay of the network exceeds Delay Max or the number
of steps reaches Max Step. The reason why we consider
Delay Max is to achieve more efﬁcient learning by avoid-
ing saturated situations. This is particularly important in the
beginning episodes, where random exploration can easily
put the system in saturated states, in which the controller
is not able to ﬁx the situation since it has not been trained
enough. In order to make sure that the controller experiences
different states for enough number of times and does not get
stuck in some particular states, we terminate each episode
after Max Step steps and reset the environment. The con-
troller can interact with the environment every T seconds,
and receives the next state and the corresponding reward,
which is deﬁned based on Eq. (4).
Implementation Parameters and Challenges
The algorithm and environment are both implemented in
Python, where we have used PyTorch for DDPG implemen-
tation. Our experiments were conducted on a server with one
Intel Xeon E5-2640v4 CPU, 128GB memory and a Tesla
P100 12GB GPU. The actor and critic networks consist of
two hidden layers, each having 64 neurons. We use RELU
activation function for the hidden layers, Tanh activation
for the actor’s output layer and linear activation function
for the critic’s output layer. The learning rates in the ac-
tor and critic networks are 10−4 and 10−3, respectively. We

!!
!#
!"
…
VNF1
VNF2
VNF3
Figure 3: VNF chain modeled as a tandem queueing network
choose a batch size of 128 and set γ and τ to 0.99 and 10−2,
respectively. For the exploration noise, we add Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck process to our actor policy (Lillicrap et al. 2016),
with its parameters set to µ = 0, θ = 0.15 and σ decaying
from 0.5 to 0.005.
An implementation challenge that requires more discus-
sion is the range of state values (queue lengths) and the
actions (service rates) that should be used in the training.
Speciﬁcally, we truncate qis by qmax, and limit µi between
µmax
i
and µmin
i
. The reason for considering qmax is that
when queue lengths become too large, which happens when
the system is congested, the exact values of the queue length
become less important to the controller. Therefore, we trun-
cate the state components by qmax = 1024 to make the state
space smaller and the learning process more efﬁcient, with-
out having much effect on the problem’s generality. It should
be mentioned that we only truncate the states (observations)
and not the actual queue lengths of the environment. On the
other hand, the service rates should be chosen such that the
system stays stable and do not get congested. Therefore, we
choose µmin
i
such that ρi < 1, where ρi = λi/µi is the traf-
ﬁc intensity of the ith queue. µmax
i
represents the maximum
service rate of the ith system, which can be chosen based on
the service system’s available resources.
Results and Discussion
Consider a service chain consisting of three VNFs, each
modeled as a multi-server queueing system as in Fig. 3
([c1, c2, c3] = [3, 5, 2]). For this experiment, we choose
Gamma distributed inter-arrival and service times. Through-
out this section, time is normalized such that the average
number of arrivals per unit of time (i.e., arrival rate) equals
λa = 0.95. Moreover, the Squared Coefﬁcient of Variation
(SCV) for the inter-arrival and the service times are equal to
0.7 and 0.8, respectively. We should emphasize that our de-
sign does not rely on any particular inter-arrival or service
time distribution. The reason for choosing Gamma distri-
bution is to both show our method’s performance for non-
exponential cases, which is often avoided for mathematical
tractability, and also because this is an appropriate model
for task completion times (Law and Kelton 2014). Our goal
is to adjust the service rates (µ = 1/Ave ServiceTime)
dynamically to guarantee a probabilistic delay upper-bound
of dub = 10 with violation probability ϵub = 0.1, i.e.,
P(d > dub) ≤ϵub, while minimizing the average sum ser-
vice rate per decision time step. In this section, we ﬁrst dis-
cuss how the reward function’s hyper-parameter λ should be
chosen. Then, we present our results on the convergence of
our algorithm and the effect of the time slot length on the
8
10
12
14
16
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(d > dub)
*
(a)
8
10
12
14
16
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
Sum-Rate
(b)
Figure 4: Performance of the controller for different values
of λ: a) QoS violation probability b) Average sum service
rate (E[PN
n=1 cnµn])
training phase. Finally, we will compare the performance of
the learned algorithms for different time slot lengths.
Tuning λ in Reward Function
As discussed earlier, we
can use hyper-parameter λ to adjust the trade-off between
the QoS constraint and the consumed resources (sum-rate).
Fig. 4 shows the achieved violation probability P(d > dub)
and the average sum service-rate (E[PN
n=1 cnµn]), for λ ∈
{8, 10, 12, 14, 16} and time slot length T = 30, after train-
ing. As can be observed, increasing λ results in the decrease
of constraint violation probability and the increase of aver-
age sum-rate. Speciﬁcally, small values of λ correspond to
the case that the constraint has been removed from the re-
ward function in Eq.(8), which results in large violation of
the QoS. On the other hand, a large λ corresponds to the
case that the sum-rate is removed from the reward function
and therefore, the goal of the controller is simpliﬁed to min-
imization of the probability of QoS violation, which can re-
sult in tremendous overuse of the resources.
In this experiment, the best performance is achieved for
λ∗≃14, since it results in the minimum sum-rate, while
satisfying the constraint (P(d > 10) ≤0.1). This can be
also veriﬁed by our earlier discussion on the optimal λ∗,
where the KKT (Karush–Kuhn–Tucker) condition requires
that λ∗(P(d < dub) −(1 −ϵub)) = 0. Therefore, in order
to adjust λ, we train the controller for a range of λ values
and pick the one or which P(d > dub) is the closest to ϵub.
Training
Fig. 5 shows the convergence of the violation
probability (P(d > dub)), the average sum-rate, and the av-
erage reward per time step for three controllers with differ-
ent time slot lengths of T = 15, 30 and 100, as a function of
the number of training episodes. For each time slot length,
λ∗has been obtained using the same procedure discussed
above, and the controllers have been trained with 4 different
initial seeds. The dark curves and the pale regions in each
ﬁgure show the average and the standard error bands, re-
spectively. Since the time slot lengths are different, we ad-
just the number of steps per episode accordingly to ensure
that each episode has the same interval length of 2000 (time
is normalized). As a result, the controllers with smaller time
slot lengths will have more interactions with the environ-
ment during each episode and therefore, are updated more
often. As can be observed from Figs. 5 (a) and (d), increas-
ing the time slot lengths results in larger variations in the

1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(d > dub)
ub = 0.1
T=15
T=30
(a)
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
6
8
10
Sum-Rate
T=15
T=30
(b)
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
12
10
8
6
Average reward
T=15
T=30
(c)
2000
4000
6000
8000
Episodes
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(d > dub)
ub = 0.1
T=100
(d)
2000
4000
6000
8000
Episodes
6
8
10
Sum-Rate
T=100
(e)
2000
4000
6000
8000
Episodes
12
10
8
6
Average reward
T=100
(f)
Figure 5: Impact of the time slot length on the convergence of QoS violation probability (P(d > dub)), average sum service-rate
(E
 PN
i=1 ciµi

), and average reward per time step
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time
1e3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(d > dub)
T=15
T=30
T=100
Figure 6: Short-term violation of QoS constraint (Compari-
son of the trained controllers with different time slot lengths)
beginning training episodes. Moreover, the controllers with
larger time slot lengths have slower convergence (the con-
troller with T = 100 is shown separately because of its
slower convergence). It should be noted that all of the con-
trollers roughly see the same number of departures in an
episode, since the episodes are adjusted to have the same
interval duration. Therefore, increasing the time slot length
makes the algorithm less data efﬁcient. Although controllers
with larger time slot lengths have the advantage of receiving
more meaningful rewards, since the effect of the taken ac-
tion has been assessed for a longer period of time, the results
suggest that time slot lengths in the order of dub = 10 result
in better performances. We can justify this using our previ-
ous discussion on the system’s time constant. As mentioned
earlier, dub plays the same role as the time constant of the
system, when ϵub ≪1. Figs.5 (b) and (e) show that the con-
troller with smaller time slot length is able to consume less
resources (sum-rate), while satisfying the QoS constraint.
Similarly, we can observe from Figs.5 (c) and (f) that the
controller with smaller time slot length can achieve a better
average reward after training.
Test
Now, let us compare the performance of the trained
controllers on the test data, which is generated using our en-
vironment with the same parameters discussed earlier in this
section. Fig. 6 plots the short-term ﬂuctuations of the QoS
violation probabilities for controllers with different time slot
lengths. These violation probabilities have been calculated
for short time intervals of length 1000 and can be used as
short-term performance measures. Each controller has been
tested with 5 different sample arrivals. Similar to the previ-
ous ﬁgures, the pale regions show the standard error bands
around the means. As can be observed, the controller with
the smaller time slot length (T = 15) is more stable and does
a better job of providing QoS, by controlling the violation
probability at the ﬁxed level of 10% with small variations.
On the other hand, increasing the time slot length results in
larger short-term ﬂuctuations of the QoS, because of having
less control over the system.
Conclusions
This paper studies a reinforcement learning-based service
rate control algorithm for providing QoS in tandem queue-
ing networks. The proposed method is capable of guarantee-
ing probabilistic upper-bounds on the end-to-end delay of
the system, only using the queue length information of the
network and without any knowledge of the system model.
Since a general queueing model has been used in this study,
our method can provide insights into various application,
such as VNF chain auto-scaling in the cloud computing con-
text. For the future work, it would be interesting to extend
this method to more complex network topologies, where a
centralized controller might not be a practical solution.
