Debate Dynamics for Human-comprehensible Fact-checking on Knowledge
Graphs∗
Marcel Hildebrandt†, Jorge Andres Quintero Serna†, Yunpu Ma,
Martin Ringsquandl, Mitchell Joblin, Volker Tresp
Siemens Corporate Technology, Munich, Germany

Abstract
We propose a novel method for fact-checking on knowledge
graphs based on debate dynamics. The underlying idea is
to frame the task of triple classiﬁcation as a debate game
between two reinforcement learning agents which extract ar-
guments – paths in the knowledge graph – with the goal to
justify the fact being true (thesis) or the fact being false (an-
tithesis), respectively. Based on these arguments, a binary
classiﬁer, referred to as the judge, decides whether the fact
is true or false. The two agents can be considered as sparse
feature extractors that present interpretable evidence for either
the thesis or the antithesis. In contrast to black-box methods,
the arguments enable the user to gain an understanding for
the decision of the judge. Moreover, our method allows for
interactive reasoning on knowledge graphs where the users
can raise additional arguments or evaluate the debate taking
common sense reasoning and external information into ac-
count. Such interactive systems can increase the acceptance of
various AI applications based on knowledge graphs and can
further lead to higher efﬁciency, robustness, and fairness.
1
Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KG) are multi-relational,
graph-
structured databases which store facts about the real world.
Thereby, entities correspond to vertices and binary relations
to edge types that specify how the entities are related to each
other. KGs are useful resources for various artiﬁcial intel-
ligence (AI) tasks in different ﬁelds such as named entity
disambiguation in NLP (Han and Zhao 2010) or visual re-
lation detection in computer vision (Baier, Ma, and Tresp
2017). Examples of large sized KGs include Freebase (Bol-
lacker et al. 2008), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum
2007), and WordNet (Miller 1995). In particular, the Google
Knowledge Graph (Singhal 2012) is a well-known example
of a commercial KG with more than 18 billion facts, used by
the search engine to enhance results. One major issue, how-
ever, is that most real-world KGs are incomplete (i.e., true
facts are missing) or contain false facts. Machine learning
algorithms designed to solve this problem try to infer missing
∗This is a short workshop paper. The conference paper can be
downloaded from https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.00461.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
triples or detect false facts based on observed connectivity
patterns.
Most machine learning approaches for reasoning on KGs
embed both entities and predicates into low dimensional vec-
tor spaces. Then a score for the plausibility of a triple can
be computed based on these embeddings. Common to most
of these methods is their black-box nature because what con-
tributed to this score is hidden from the user. This lack of
transparency constitutes a potential limitation when it comes
to deploying KGs in real world settings. Explainability as
a development focus for new machine learning models has
gained attention in the last few years (see (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016), (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015), or (Mon-
tavon et al. 2017)) as the success of machine learning and AI
continues, while the ability to understand and interpret the
increasingly complex and powerful methods staggers behind.
Laws that require explainable algorithms and models have
been considered and implemented (Goodman and Flaxman
2017). Additionally, in contrast to one-way black-box con-
ﬁgurations, comprehensible machine learning methods allow
to build systems where both machines and users interact and
inﬂuence each other.
In this work we describe a novel method for triple clas-
siﬁcation based on reinforcement learning. Inspired by the
concept outlined in (Irving, Christiano, and Amodei 2018)
to increase AI safety via debates, we model the task of triple
classiﬁcation as a debate between two agents each presenting
arguments for the thesis (the triple is true) and the antithesis
(the triple is false), respectively. Based on these arguments,
a binary classiﬁer, referred to as the judge, decides whether
the fact is true or false. In that sense the two agents act as
feature extractors that present evidence for and against the
validity of the fact. In contrast to most methods based on
representation learning, the arguments can be displayed to the
user such that he can audit the classiﬁcation of the judge and
potentially overrule the decision. Further, our method can be
used to create tools for knowledge graph curation or question
answering where the users can interact with the system by
inputting additional arguments or make a decision based on
the agents’ arguments. Moreover, mining evidence for both
the thesis and the antithesis can be considered as adversarial
feature generation, making the classiﬁer more robust towards
contradictory evidence or corrupted data. To the best of our
knowledge, our method constitutes the ﬁrst model based on
arXiv:2001.03436v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2020

Michael
Jordan
Washington
Wizzards
Chicago Bulls
National
Basketball
Association
(NBA)
Chicago
White Sox
Major
League
Baseball
(MLB)
male
Basketball
player
USA
Space
Jam
Children’s
Movie
Query: (Michael Jordan, has_profession, basketball player)
Agent 1: (Michael Jordan, plays_for, Chicago Bulls)
∧(Chicago Bulls, team_of, NBA)
Agent 2: (Michael Jordan, plays_role_in,Space Jam)
∧(Space Jam, has_genre, Children’s Movie)
Agent 1: (Michael Jordan, plays_for, Washington Wizzards)
∧(Washington Wizzards, team_of, NBA)
Agent 2: (Michael Jordan, plays_for, Chicago White Sox)
∧(Chicago White Sox, team_of, MLB)
Judge: Query is true.
plays_
for
plays_
for
team_
of
team_
of
plays_
for
team_
of
has_
gender
plays_
role_in
has_
nationality
has_
genre
produced_
in
has_
profession
Figure 1: The agents debate whether Michael Jordan is a professional basketball player. While agent 1 extracts arguments from
the KG promoting that the fact is true (green), agent 2 argues that it is false (red). Based on the arguments the judge decides that
Michael Jordan is a professional basketball player.
debate dynamics for triple classiﬁcation in KGs.
2
Background and Related Work
In this section we provide a brief introduction to KGs in a
formal setting and review the most relevant related work. Let
E denote the set of entities and consider the set of binary
relations R. A knowledge graph KG ⊂E × R × E is a
collection of facts stored as triples of the form (s, p, o) – sub-
ject, predicate, and object. To indicate whether a triple is
true or false, we consider the binary characteristic function
φ : E × R × E →{1, 0}. For all (s, p, o) ∈KG we assume
φ(s, p, o) = 1 (i.e., a KG is a collection of true facts). How-
ever, in case a triple is not contained in KG, it does not imply
that the corresponding fact is false but rather unknown (open
world assumption). Triple classiﬁcation (or fact-checking) is
concerned with predicting the truth value φ(s, p, o).
Representation learning is an effective and popular tech-
nique underlying many KG reasoning methods. The basic
idea is to project both entities and relations into a low dimen-
sional vector space. Then the likelihood of triples is modelled
in terms of a functional on the embedding spaces. Popular
methods based on representation learning include the transla-
tional embedding method TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), fac-
torization approaches such ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016),
or deep neural network methods including ConvE (Dettmers
et al. 2018). While these methods efﬁciently encode the
local neighborhood of entities, they cannot reason through
more complex inference paths in KGs. Therefore, path-based
reasoning methods have been studied. For instance, the Path-
Ranking Algorithm (PRA) proposed in (Lao, Mitchell, and
Cohen 2011) uses a combination of weighted random walks
through the graph for inference. (Xiong, Hoang, and Wang
2017) proposed the reinforcement learning based path search-
ing approach called DeepPath, where an agents picks rela-
tional paths between entity pairs. Recently, and more related
to our work, (Das et al. 2018) proposed the multi-hop rea-
soning method MINERVA. The basic idea is to display the
query subject and predicate to the agent and let the agent
perform a policy guided walk to the correct object entity. The
paths that MINERVA produces also lead to some degree of
explainability. However, we ﬁnd that only actively mining
arguments for the thesis and the antithesis, thus exposing the
user to both sides of a debate, allows to make a well-informed
decision.
Our method is inspired on the concept outlined in (Irving,
Christiano, and Amodei 2018) where the authors propose
the use of debate dynamics for the AI alignment task. Their
concept is based on training agents to play a zero sum debate
game where they raise arguments which are evaluated by a
judge. More concretely, given a question or a proposed action,
two or multiple agents take turns making short statements
until a human can decide which of the agents gave the more
convincing information. While a major part of their work
consists of theoretical considerations, they also conduct an
initial experiment on MNIST with an automated judge: First,
an image is shown to two agents and each of them selects a
digit. Then, the two agents sequentially select pixels of the
image with the goal to convince a sparse classiﬁer that the
pixels stem from an image that displays the digits to which
they are committed. Thereby, the classiﬁer cannot observe
the complete image but only the pixels revealed by the agents.
The authors state that their eventual goal is to produce natural
language debates, where humans judge dialogues between the
agents. In that regard, our method can be seen as a ﬁrst step
in that direction since paths in a knowledge graph correspond
to factual statements that can be easily translated to natural
language.
3
Our Method
We formulate the task of fact prediction in terms of a debate
between two opposing agents. Thereby, a query triple corre-
sponds to the statement around which the debate is centered.
The agents mine paths on the KG that serve as evidence for
the thesis or the antithesis. More concretely, they traverse the
graph sequentially and select the next hop based on a policy
that takes previous transitions and the query triple into ac-
count. The transitions are added to the current path extending
the argument. All paths are processed by a binary classiﬁer
called the judge that tries to distinguish between true and
false triples. An exemplary debate is shown in Figure 1. The
main steps of a debate can be summarized as follows:
1. A query triple around which the debate is centered is pre-

Figure 2: Sketch of the architecture of our method: The two agents extract arguments from the KG. Along with the query relation
and the query object, these arguments are processed by the judge who classiﬁes whether the query is true or false.
sented to both agents
2. The two agents take turns extracting paths from the KG
that serve as arguments for the thesis and the antithesis.
3. The judge processes the arguments along with the query
triple and estimates the truth value of the query triple.
While the parameters of the judge are ﬁtted in a supervised
fashion, both agents are trained to navigate through the graph
using reinforcement learning. More concretely, their envi-
ronments are modelled via the ﬁxed horizon, deterministic
Markov decision processes outlined below.
States
The fully observable state space S for each agent
is given by E2 × R × E. Intuitively, we want the state to
encode the query triple q = (sq, pq, oq) and the location of
exploration e(i)
t
(i.e., the current location) of agent i ∈{1, 2}
at time t. Thus, a state S(i)
t
∈S for time t ∈N is represented
by S(i)
t
=

e(i)
t , q

.
Actions
The set of possible actions for agent i from
a state S(i)
t
=

e(i)
t , q

is denoted by AS(i)
t .
It con-
sists of all outgoing edges from the entity e(i)
t
and the
corresponding target entities.
More formally, AS(i)
t
=
n
(r, e) ∈R × E : S(i)
t
=

e(i)
t , q

∧

e(i)
t , r, e

∈KG
o
.
Moreover, we denote with A(i)
t
∈AS(i)
t
the action that agent
i performed at time t. We include self-loops for each node
such that the agent can stay at the current node.
Environments
The environments evolve deterministically
by updating the state according to the agents’ actions (i.e., by
changing the agents’ locations). The query fact remains the
same. Formally, the transition function of agent i at time t is
given by δ(i)
t (S(i)
t , A(i)
t ) :=

e(i)
t+1, q

with S(i)
t
=

e(i)
t , q

and A(i)
t
=

r, e(i)
t+1

.
Policies
We denote the history of agent i up to time t with
the tuple H(i)
t
=

H(i)
t−1, A(i)
t−1

for t ≥1 and H(i)
0
= (q).
The agents encode their histories via recurrent neural net-
works. The output is mapped to a distribution over all ad-
missible actions (i.e., transitions). This induces agent spe-
ciﬁc policies π(i)
θ
: H(i)
t
7→(p1, p2, . . . , pm) ∈Rm
≥0, where
m = |AS(i)
t | and θ denotes the set of all trainable parame-
ters. Then, the next action of agent i is sampled according to
A(i)
t
∼Categorical (p1, p2, . . . , pm).
Debate Dynamics
In a ﬁrst step, the query triple q with
truth value φ(q) ∈{0, 1} is presented to both agents. Agent
1 argues that the fact is true, while agent 2 argues that it is
false. Similar to most formal debates, we consider a ﬁxed
number of rounds N ∈N. In every round n = 1, 2, . . . , N
the agents start graph traversals with ﬁxed length T ∈N from
the subject entity of the query sq. More concretely, agent 1
starts generating a sequence τ (1)
n
of length T −1 consisting
of entities and relations followed by a mandatory end of argu-
ment action. Then agent 2 proceeds by producing a similar
sequence τ (2)
n
starting from sq ending with the stop action.
After N rounds the debate terminates and concatenating all
paths leads to the overall sequence of arguments τ. The judge
processes τ and predicts the truth value of the triple. This
induces a binary classiﬁer f(τ) ∈(0, 1). The parameters of
the judge are trained in a supervised fashion to approximate
the underlying truth value of the triple φ(q). An overview of
the architecture of our method is depicted in Figure 2.
Since agent 1 argues that the thesis is true, the rewards R(1)
n
after every round n ≤N are given by the classiﬁcation score
R(1)
n
= f

τ (1)
n

. Similarly, the rewards of agent 2 are given
by R(2)
n
= −f

τ (2)
n

. Intuitively, this means that the agents
receive high rewards whenever they extract an argument that
is considered by judge as strong evidence for their position.
To ﬁnd the best set of parameters the agents maximize the
expected cumulative rewards where standard methods such
as REINFORCE (Williams 1992) can be employed.

Query:
Richard Feynman
nationality
−−−−−−−→USA?
Nelson Mandela
hasP rofession
−−−−−−−−−−→Actor?
Agent 1:
Richard Feynman
livedInLocation
−−−−−−−−−−→Queens
Nelson Mandela
hasF riend
−−−−−−−→Naomi Campbell
∧Queens
locatedIn
−−−−−−→USA
Naomi Campbell
hasDated
−−−−−−→Leonardo DiCaprio
Agent 2:
Richard Feynman
hasEthnicity
−−−−−−−−−→Russian people
Nelson Mandela
hasP rofession
−−−−−−−−−−→Lawyer
∧Russian people
geographicDistribution
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→Republic of Tajikistan
∧Lawyer
_specializationOf
−−−−−−−−−−−−→Barrister
Table 1: Two examples of debates generated by our method: While agent 1 argues that the query triple is true and agent 2 argues
that it is false. The underscore indicates inverse relations.
4
Discussion
In this section we present the results of a preliminary ex-
periment and discuss applications and directions of future
works. We implemented our method as outlined in Section 3
where the policies of the agents consists of LSTM cells with
a dense neural network stacked on top. The judge processes
each argument individually by a feed forward neural network,
sums the output for each argument up and processes the re-
sulting sum by a linear, binary classiﬁer. Both agents and the
judge have separate lookup tables that contain embeddings
for the relations and entities. We run this ﬁrst experiment on
the benchmark dataset FB15k-237 (Toutanova et al. 2015)
which contains around 15,000 different entities mainly fo-
cused around culture, sports, and politics. Following (Socher
et al. 2013) we select the following relations for training and
testing purposes: ’gender’, ’profession’, ’nationality’, ’eth-
nicity’, and ’religion’. Thereby we found that 82.4% of the
query triples in the balanced test set (i.e., equally many true
and false facts) were classiﬁed correctly by the judge. While
these results are promising for a ﬁrst experiment, we leave
the majority of the empirical work including experimenting
with different architectures to future research.
By manually examining the quality of the extracted paths
we found mostly reasonable arguments (e.g. when arguing
that a person has a certain nationality, the agents frequently
bring up that the fact the person is born in a city in this coun-
try). However, there were also some arguments that do not
make intuitive sense. We conjecture that this is partially due
to the fact that the embeddings of entities encode their neigh-
borhoods. While the judge has access to this information
through the training process, it remains hidden to the user.
For example, when arguing for the fact that Nelson Mandela
was an actor (see Table 1) the argument of agent 1 requires the
user to know that both Naomi Campbell as well as Leonardo
DiCaprio are actors (which is encoded in FB15k-237). Then
this argument serves as evidence that Nelson Mandela was
also an actor since people tend to have friends that share their
profession (social homophily). However, without this context
information it is not intuitively clear why this is a reasonable
argument. To asses whether the arguments are informative
for users in an objective setting we plan to conduct a sur-
vey where respondents take the role of the judge making a
classiﬁcation decision based on the agents’ arguments.
Many KGs, including DBpedia, Freebase, and Wikidata,
are (among other techniques) semiautomatically built and
maintained with the assistance of manual efforts to ensure
that the knowledge keeps expanding and is kept up-to-date
and accurate (Ge et al. 2016). While manually validating
triples is laborious, most machine learning methods for this
task are based on a numerical conﬁdence score which is hard
to interpret. Our method can be employed for interactive
KG curation and fact checking. More concretely, if there are
doubts concerning the truthfulness of a triple, the user can
examine the arguments to make an informed decision or input
arguments that the agents might have missed. Suppose, for
example, the triple (BarackObama, nationality, USA) is
classiﬁed as false and the user observes that one agent brought
up the argument that Barack Obama was born in Kenya – a
fact most likely mined from an unreliable source from the
web. The user can then enter the correct fact that Obama is
born in Hawaii which results in the correct classiﬁcation. On
a related note, (Nickel et al. 2015) raise the point that when
applying statistical methods to incomplete KGs the results are
likely to be affected by biases in the data generating process
and should be interpreted accordingly. Otherwise, blindly
following recommendations from KG reasoning methods can
even strengthen these biases. While the judge in our method
also exploits skews in the underlying data, the arguments of
the agents can help to identify these biases and potentially ex-
clude problematic arguments from the classiﬁcation decision.
Moreover, our method can be integrated into QA systems. In-
stead of simply providing an answer to a question, the system
could then also display evidence for and against this answer
allowing the user to trace back the decision. This added
transparency can potentially increasing user acceptance.
5
Conclusion
We have described a novel approach for triple classiﬁcation
in KGs based on a debate game between two opposing rein-
forcement learning agents that argue whether a fact is true or
false. The two agents search the KG for arguments that shift
the judge, a binary classiﬁer, towards their position. Since the
judge bases its decision on the extracted arguments, the user
can examine the arguments and trace back the classiﬁcation
decision. This also allows for building tools where the user
interacts with the system leading to higher acceptance of KG
reasoning tools. While the ﬁrst experiments that we conduct
in the scope of this work are promising, signiﬁcant further
research, including experiments with different architectures
for the agents and the judge, is required. Another directions
for future work is a systematic, qualitative analysis of the
arguments.
