Trolls Identiﬁcation within an Uncertain Framework
Imen Ouled Dlala, Dorra Attiaoui, Arnaud Martin, and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
Abstract—The web plays an important role in people’s social
lives since the emergence of Web 2.0. It facilitates the interaction
between users, gives them the possibility to freely interact, share
and collaborate through social networks, online communities forums,
blogs, wikis and other online collaborative media. However, an other
side of the web is negatively taken such as posting inﬂammatory
messages. Thus, when dealing with the online communities forums,
the managers seek to always enhance the performance of such
platforms. In fact, to keep the serenity and prohibit the disturbance of
the normal atmosphere, managers always try to novice users against
these malicious persons by posting such message (DO NOT FEED
TROLLS). But, this kind of warning is not enough to reduce this
phenomenon. In this context we propose a new approach for detecting
malicious people also called ’Trolls’ in order to allow community
managers to take their ability to post online. To be more realistic,
our proposal is deﬁned within an uncertain framework. Based on
the assumption consisting on the trolls’ integration in the successful
discussion threads, we try to detect the presence of such malicious
users. Indeed, this method is based on a conﬂict measure of the belief
function theory applied between the different messages of the thread.
In order to show the feasibility and the result of our approach, we
test it in different simulated data.
Keywords—Q&AC, trolls, belief function theory, conﬂict measure.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE way we look for, and acquire information has shifted
greatly into to instant, easy and low cost process. In fact,
thanks to the Internet one can make a research in any given
topic, get a huge amount of information by a simple click.
Although, for some problems it is difﬁcult to get satisfactory
answers by searching directly on a traditional search engine.
Instead, we prefer to ﬁnd someone who has expertise or
experience. In order to have the best answer, one of the
tools that has widened the scope of information exchange is
Question Answering Communities (Q&AC). These systems
allow everyone to contribute as much as they can on a given
community. Unfortunately, not all messages can be considered
as reliable: some users claim themselves as experts, and
other people post messages without any utility for the one
who is seeking for answers. Thus, the managers of these
communities seek to always enhance the performance of such
platforms. Although, the increase of the useless messages can
be attributed to the presence of trolls. The term of trolling has
been deﬁned in several works within different communities,
including [2], [6] and [17]. These Malicious people intend to
insidiously mislead the subject of the discussion in order to
provoke controversy and disrupt the discussion. They aim to
make normal users fall into their traps by deviating them from
the main topic of the discussion. In fact, the only way to deal
with a troll is to ignore him, or detect his presence in order
to notify him or take away his ability to post online. Thus,
Manuscript received.
some other works tried to detect not just their characteristics
but also their presence in order to avoid them. To address
this problem Cambria et al. [14] proposed a technique based
on semantic computing to automatically detect and check
web trolls. This work aims to prevent the malicious people
from emotionally hurting other users or communities within
the same social network. In another work Ortega et al. [15]
proposed a method to classify users in a social network
regarding to their trustworthiness. The goal of their method
is to detect trolls from the other users by preventing such
malicious users to gain high reputation in the network. Patxi
et al. [16] dealt with Trolling users on twitter social network.
These studies were explored in different social networks within
certain framework.
When dealing with real-world applications, the massive
amounts of data are inseparably connected with imperfection.
In fact, this kind of data can be imprecise and/or uncertain
or even missing. Different theories have emerged to deal with
this kind of data such as fuzzy set theory [21], possibility
theory [22] and belief function theory [1]. Thus, to be closer
to reality and to obtain more relevant results, we propose a
new method dealing with uncertain data. This method aims to
detect trolls in Q&AC using the framework of belief function.
The paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we introduce
the Q&AC and brieﬂy review related works. In section 3,
we present the necessary background regarding the different
concepts of the belief functions theory. We deﬁne the different
steps of our proposal based on a conﬂict measure in section
4. Finally, we present the feasibility of the proposed method
on an illustrated example.
II. Q&AC: QUICK OVERVIEW
In this section we introduce some concepts related the
Q&AC. First we will start by presenting the main actors in
these forums, then a little overview on sources identiﬁcation
and ﬁnally the levels of uncertainty we can face in Q&AC.
A. Users within Q&AC
Users are considered as the main actors within Question
Answering Communities. We can deﬁne different types such
as experts, trolls and learners.
• Reliable user / Expert: a person who is very knowledge-
able about or skilful in a particular area.
• Troll: a person who seeks to disturb the serenity of the
concerned community. His purpose is to create controver-
sial debates by multiplying irrelevant messages that we
keep unanswered.
• Learner: a normal user of the Question Answering
Community, trying to gain information and expertise.
arXiv:1501.05272v1  [cs.AI]  21 Jan 2015

B. Sources Identiﬁcation within Q&AC
Several researches have been exploring this ﬁeld, trying to
evaluate sources of information in Q&AC. Such as Bouguessa
et al. [7] who proposed a model to identify authoritative
users based on the number of best answers provided by them.
A best answer is selected either by the asker or by other
users via a voting procedure. In [12], the author focused
on the selection of questions a user would choose for an-
swering. Based on these studies, experts prefer answering
questions where they have a higher chance of making a
valuable contribution. Recently in [13], the authors proposed a
framework for evaluating both the reliability and the expertise
of an information provider. Considering some cognitive and
behavioral criteria of the users, they were able to establish
a trust system. Using a response matrix summarizing the
interactions between peers of persons, each one is capable
of estimating and providing an opinion. Using the subjective
logic to aggregate these evaluations, they provided later a
global reliability and expertise value for each user within
Q&AC.
C. Uncertainty within Q&AC
When dealing with information provided by humans, we
are facing several levels of uncertainty. Gjergji et al. proposed
three levels for Q&AC [11], the ﬁrst one is related to the
extraction and integration of uncertainty, the second deals
with information sources uncertainty and ﬁnally the inherent
knowledge related to the information itself. In our case, we
are more interested in the evaluation of the sources and the
part of uncertainty related to them. The main issue in these
communities is that we are facing users that we do not always
have an apriori knowledge about them. We ignore every thing
about the sources’ credibility, reliability, relevance, objectivity
and expertise. In this context, we will exploit all the mathe-
matical background and large panel of sepciﬁcities provided
by the theory of belief functions to help us considering this
problem in an uncertain point of view.
III. THEORY OF BELIEF FUNCTIONS
This section recalls the necessary background related to the
belief function theory It has been developed by Dempster in
his work on upper and lower probabilities [1]. Based on that,
he was able to represent more precisely the observed data.
A belief function must take into consideration all the
possible events on which a source can describe a belief. Based
on that, we can deﬁne the frame of discernment.
A. Frame of discernment
It is a ﬁnite set of disjoint elements noted Ωwhere Ω=
{ω1, ..., ωn}. This theory allows us to affect a mass on a set of
hypotheses not only a singleton like in the probabilistic theory.
Thus, we are able to represent ignorance, imprecision...
B. Basic belief assignment (bba)
A bba is deﬁned on the set of all subsets of Ω, named power
set and noted 2Ω. It affects a real value from [0, 1] to every
subset of 2Ωreﬂecting sources amount of belief on this subset.
A bba m veriﬁes:
X
X⊆Ω
m(X) = 1.
(1)
We consider any positive elementary mass m(X) > 0 as a
focal element such that X belongs to 2Ω.
C. Combination rules
Many combination rules have been proposed taking in
consideration the nature of the sources.
1) Dempster’s combination rule: The ﬁrst one was pro-
posed by Dempster in 1967 [1] which is a conjunctive normal-
ized combination rule also called the orthogonal sum. Given
two mass functions m1 and m2, for all X ∈2Ω, X ̸= ∅, the
Dempster’s rule is deﬁned by:
mD(X) = m1 ∩m2(X) =
1
1 −k
X
Y1∩Y2=X
m1(Y1)m2(Y2)
(2)
where k = P
Y1∩Y2=∅m1(Y1)m2(Y2) is the inconsistency
of the fusion (or of the combination) can also be called the
conﬂict or global conﬂict. (1 −k) is the normalization factor
of the combination in a closed world.
2) The conjunctive combination rule: In order to consider
the issues of the open world, the conjunctive combination rule
was introduced by Smets [9]. Considering two mass functions
m1 and m2, for all X ∈2Ωmconj is deﬁned by:
mconj(X) =
X
Y1∩Y2=X
m1(Y1)m2(Y2)
(3)
3) The disjunctive combination rule: First introduced by
Dubois and Prade 1986 [18], the induced results of two bbas
m1 and m2 is deﬁned as follows:
∀X ⊆Ωmdisj(X) =
X
Y1∪Y2=X
m1(Y1)m2(Y2)
(4)
The disjunctive combination rule can be used when one of
the sources is reliable or when we have no knowledge about
their reliability.
IV. INCLUSION AS A CONFLICT MEASURE FOR BELIEF
FUNCTIONS
Recently Martin in [3] used a degree of inclusion as
involved in the measurement made in order to determine the
conﬂict during the combination of two belief functions. He
presented an index of inclusion having binary values where:
Inc(X1, Y2) =

1, ifX1 ⊆Y2
0, otherwise
(5)
With X1, Y2 being respectively the focal elements of m1
and m2. This index is then used to measure the degree of
inclusion of the two mass functions and deﬁned as:

dinc =
1
|F1||F2|
X
X1∈F1
X
Y2∈F2
Inc(X1, Y2)
(6)
Where |F1| and |F2| are the number of focal elements of m1
and m2. He deﬁne the degree of inclusion of m1 and m2:
σinc(m1, m2) as follows:
σinc(m1, m2) = max(dinc(m1, m2), dinc(m2, m1))
(7)
Where dinc is the degree of inclusion of m1 in m2 and
inversely. This inclusion is used as a conﬂict measure for two
mass functions, using it like presented:
Conf(m1, m2) = (1 −σinc(m1, m2)d(m1, m2))
(8)
where d(m1, m2), is the distance of Jousselme [10]:
d(m1, m2) =
r
1
2(m1 −m2)T D(m1 −m2)
(9)
where D is a metric based on the measure of Jaccard:
D(A, B) =
(
1, ifA = B = ∅
|A∩B|
|A∪B|, ∀A, B ∈2Ω
(10)
V. TROLLS IDENTIFICATION BASED IN A CONFLICT
MEASURE
Based on the assumption that consists of the trolls’ integra-
tion in the successful discussion threads, we propose a new
method for detecting malicious people in online communities
forums. This approach is deﬁned within the framework of
belief functions. Indeed, it is based on a conﬂict measure
of this theory applied between the different messages of the
thread. We can summarize our proposed method in three major
steps that will be discussed in depth in the following.
A. Users’ messages
Hardarker proposed primary characteristics of a troll [2]
(Aggression, Deception, Disruption, Success). In 2014, Buck-
els et al. [6] speciﬁed the behavioral characteristics of a troll.
They described them as persons having sadism, psychopathy
and machiavilism. To them, trolling is a ”deceptive, destructive
or disruptive manner in social media”.
In the context of this work, to distinguish between the troll
and the other users, we tried to manually extracted the charac-
teristics of their responses from the answers and comments in
different forums. Based on these characteristics, the content of
the messages can be: Off-topic, senseless or controversy. Using
these characteristics, we have deﬁned the frame of discernment
that can characterize a message in a forum:
Ωmsg = {Off −topic, Senseless, 1, . . . , N}
(11)
• Senseless: how much the response is empty of meaning?
• Off-topic: How irrelative the answer can be?
• [1..N] : number of topics where, [1..N]\i with i being
the relevant topic, and [1..N]\i are the controversy topics
posted by a troll.
During this step, we assume that a method of analysis
expresses a piece of evidence concerning the nature of each
message. This method aims to analyze the messages relative
to the posted question or topic.
B. Users’ conﬂict
Detecting irrelevant messages does not only means that this
user is a troll. Thus, it is not only the content of the messages
that can characterize the trolls. We can ﬁnd a victim user that
responds to a message posted by a troll. Besides, the subject
of the discussion can change gradually. In fact, to distinguish
between trolls and other users in a community, we need to
quantify how a given user is in conﬂict with the rest of all the
other users. Thus, we will base our approach on measuring the
conﬂict between the messages of each person posting answers.
The list of notations is shown in table I. Using the inclusion
TABLE I
LIST OF NOTATIONS
Notations
Description
U
Users
N
Number of users
NP
Number of all the previous messages
NPj
Number of the previous messages of a user Uj
Ni
Number of all messages posted by a user Ui
Nj
Number of all messages posted by a user Uj
mk
kth message of a user Ui
ms
sth message of a user Uj
Rank(m)
Rank of the message m
Tab1
Contains in each time the conﬂict of a message
relative to each user
Tab2
Contains in each time the number of the previous
messages of a message
Tab3
Contains the total conﬂict of each user
Conft
Contains the sum of conﬂict of each user
as a conﬂict measure for belief functions, for each user Ui we
will measure:
• Confmsg/U : measures the conﬂict between the kth mes-
sage posted by Ui and the messages that were posted
before it by each other users Uj.
Confmsg/U (mk(Ui), m(Uj)) =
1
NPj
NPj
X
s=1
Conf(mk(Ui), ms(Uj)), (i ̸= j)
(12)
• Confmsg: measures the conﬂict between the kth message
posted by Ui and the all messages that were posted before
it by all the other users U based on a weighted mean.
This measure takes into account the number of messages
posted by every user in order to determine the level of
conﬂict especially between a troll and an expert.
Confmsg(mk(Ui), m(U)) =
N
X
j=1
NPj
NP Confmsg/U (mk(Ui), m(Uj))
(13)
• Confuser: measures the global conﬂict of the user Ui
Confuser = 1
Ni
Ni
X
k=1
Confmsg(mk(Ui), m(U))
(14)
The value of the total conﬂict of a user can be risen when
this user launches into an interminable debate with a troll. In
this case, this victim user becomes in his turn a troll. Thus, the
managers have to control the behavior of the users in many
discussion threads.

C. Users’ clustering
The last step consists on the classiﬁcation of the users
according to their conﬂict results into two groups. Therefore,
to make decision we base our approach on an unsupervised
classiﬁcation method using the k means algorithm.
It was introduced by McQueen [19] and implemented in
its current forms by Forgy [20]. The Kmeans algorithm aims
to construct from the objects of the training set K partitions
(clusters) concentrated and isolated from each other. In our
case, we will devise the users into two partitions: K= 2. Since
the value of the troll ’s conﬂict is bigger than the conﬂict of
the other users:
- Trolls belong to the group having the biggest value of
center.
- The other users belong to the group having the least value
of center.
VI. EXPERIMENTATION
To illustrate the comportment of our proposed method, we
have tested it in different simulated data. In this section, we
will present two different examples.
A. Example 1
As we presented our method, it has three main steps. Indeed,
we will present the results of each step:
1) Users’ messages: Our assumption consists on the in-
tegration of the trolls in the successful discussion threads.
From this point of view, we simulate the data of analyze of
messages as depicted in Figure 1. In fact, in this example
we will try to detect a troll in a group of 4 users. In
this scenario, the discussion thread contains 16 messages
posted by different users and among whom three messages
are published by a troll. In this example, our frame of
discernment is composed by 4 elements: Relevant=X1, off-
topic=X2, senseless=X3, controversy-topic=X4. As shown in
Figure 2 each row presents: the owner of the message, the
order of the message in the discussion thread and the mass
function of this message (as mention in section III. B each
bba must be equal to 1).
In this example, the ﬁrst message of the troll (U4) is con-
troversy: m(X4) = 0.9210. His second message is empty of
meaning: m(X3) = 0.9716. His third message is controversy:
m(X4) = 0.8387.
2) Users conﬂict: Based on the method of the inclusion and
applying our algorithm, we will present the total conﬂict of
each user of our example in Table II: U4 has the biggest value
of conﬂict. The total conﬂicts of users U1 and U2 is small
relative to the total conﬂict of U4 despite the fact that they
responded to the ﬁrst message of the troll by posting each
one a controversy message. this result can be explained by
the answers provided by these two users who have published
relevant messages. U3 has a small value of conﬂict, he
published three relevant messages where in his ﬁrst message
m(X1) = 0.9732, in his second message m(X1) = 0.7782,
and his third message m(X1) = 0.9632.
Fig. 1.
Simulation Results
TABLE II
TOTAL CONFLICT OF EACH USER
U1
U2
U3
U4
Confuser
0.0610
0.0639
0.0489
0.2030
3) Users clustering: Applying the K-means algorithm to
the different values of total conﬂict of all users we obtained
two clusters.
- Trolls= {U4}
- Other users= {U1, U2, U3}
Our proposal provides us a correct classiﬁcation of the users.
This result shows the feasibility of our proposed method.
B. Example 2
For this simulation we will assume that we are dealing
with 8 users, among them two trolls. The discussion thread
contains 31 messages. The result of the total conﬂict of each
user expressed in equation 14 is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
The ﬁrst troll U4 published 2 controversy messages and the
second troll U8 published 3 messages: The two ﬁrst ones are
off-topic, and the last one is controversy.

- U1 posted 3 relevant messages and 2 controversy messages
to respond to the ﬁrst troll.
- U2 posted 7 relevant messages and 2 controversy messages
to respond to the ﬁrst troll.
- U3 posted 4 relevant messages and one off-topic message to
respond to the second troll.
- U5 posted one relevant message.
- U6 published 3 relevant messages.
- U7 published 2 relevant messages.
The total conﬂict of the troll U4 is bigger relatively to
the other troll U8 because he published his posts after a big
number of reliable messages provided by the other users. So,
this situation created a higher value of a conﬂict. Applying
the Kmeans algorithm our method provides us a correct
classiﬁcation:
- Trolls= {U4, U8}
- Other users= {U1, U2, U3, U5, U6, U7}
The users U1, U2 and U3 are not classiﬁed among the
trolls in spite of their posts that can be categorized as trolls’
messages. This result is explained by the fact that they have
other relevant messages.
Fig. 2.
The steps of detecting trolls
VII. CONCLUSION
We proposed in this paper a new method for detecting
’Trolls’ in Q&AC. Relying on this approach managers, can
control the behavior of the users in many discussion threads
in order to notify them to stop trolling. Our work is deﬁned
within an uncertain framework. It is based on a conﬂict
measure in the belief function theory applied between the
messages of the different users of the thread. First of all,
this method aims to analyze the messages relative to the
posted question or topic. But detecting irrelevant message is
not enough to judge if this user is a troll or not. Thus, not
only the content of the messages that can characterize the
trolls but also their behaviors. Next, using the results of this
analysis we measured the conﬂict between the different users.
Finally, after calculating the conﬂict of each user we applied
the kmeans method in order to distinguish trolls from the
other users. Indeed, we have classiﬁed the users according
to their conﬂict results into two clusters. This method was
tested in different simulated data to check its feasibility. Since
our proposed method for detecting malicious users dealt only
with one discussion thread, we aim to extend this approach to
detect trolls inside the community.
