Heartbeat Anomaly Detection
using Adversarial Oversampling
Jefferson L. P. Lima
Centro de Inform´atica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
50.740-560, Recife, PE, Brazil

David Macˆedo
Centro de Inform´atica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
50.740-560, Recife, PE, Brazil

Cleber Zanchettin
Centro de Inform´atica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
50.740-560, Recife, PE, Brazil

Abstract—Cardiovascular diseases are one of the most common
causes of death in the world. Prevention, knowledge of previous
cases in the family, and early detection is the best strategy
to reduce this fact. Different machine learning approaches to
automatic diagnostic are being proposed to this task. As in most
health problems, the imbalance between examples and classes is
predominant in this problem and affects the performance of the
automated solution. In this paper, we address the classiﬁcation
of heartbeats images in different cardiovascular diseases. We
propose a two-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network for
classiﬁcation after using a InfoGAN architecture for generating
synthetic images to unbalanced classes. We call this proposal
Adversarial Oversampling and compare it with the classical over-
sampling methods as SMOTE, ADASYN, and RandomOversam-
pling. The results show that the proposed approach improves the
classiﬁer performance for the minority classes without harming
the performance in the balanced classes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cardiovascular diseases are demanding attention since they
are among the leading causes of death in the world. Cardiac
arrhythmia consists of disturbances that alter heart rate, consti-
tuting a severe public health problem. The electrocardiogram
(ECG) is the process of recording the heart electrical activity
over some time using electrodes. ECG can be handy to
assist the cardiac arrhythmia diagnostic as it is a non-invasive
method of detecting abnormal cadences of the heartbeats.
Cardiologists often perform human arrhythmia detection
using ECG because of the high error rates of the comput-
erized approaches. In order to perform arrhythmias detection
using ECG, a machine learning algorithm must recognize the
distinct arrhythmias wave types and its distinct forms. Detect
arrhythmias is a difﬁcult task due to the variability in wave
morphology between patients as well as the presence of noise.
The considerable intra-class variation makes the challenger
even harder.
Most of the current approaches to deal with arrhythmia clas-
siﬁcation make use of feature extraction procedures. However,
these approaches require a prior and speciﬁc knowledge about
the characteristics that are essential to represent a speciﬁc
type of heartbeat. A possible strategy is taking abnormal
beats as crucial points and analyzing the recurrence of the
anomalies along the segment of the ECG. To overcome the
previously mentioned limitations, considering the difﬁculty
and the importance of taking spatial information in ECG
analysis, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been
used to tackle this problem in several studies [1] [2] [3] [4].
However, one problem commonly encountered in datasets
involving health is the high degree of imbalance. Often, we
come across a smaller amount of samples involving the pos-
itive class (representing the disease). Many learning systems
are not used to deal with unbalanced data.
The use of this type of datasets to train models such
as a neural network usually causes high accuracy for data
belonging to the majority class, but an unacceptable accuracy
for minority class data. It typically happens because the
model ends up specializing only in the classes with the most
signiﬁcant quantity of samples as the classes with few samples
are presented fewer times for the adjustments of the weights.
Many techniques try to increase the amount of minority
class samples. The simplest way is to repeat samples randomly.
Other techniques try to use some criterion to select the
samples, such as a level of difﬁculty that they have according
to the classiﬁcation model. Some more elaborate techniques to
generate extra samples trying to follow the original distribution
of the data, however, much class noise is inserted in the dataset
since samples may follow an incorrect assumption of that
distribution.
To solve this problem, in this paper, we propose a generative
adversarial model architecture using InfoGAN to try to learn
the data distributions and generate synthetic samples of ECG
beats. The idea is to balance the dataset with sintentic data
generated by an InfoGAN. We call this method adversarial
oversampling. Moreover, we compared our proposed method
with three other traditional oversampling methods: Rando-
mOversampler, SMOTE, and ADASYN.
The MIT-BIH arrhythmia database was used to perform
experiments in order to verify if a CNN training using the
proposed method outperforms the ones trained using standard
oversampling approaches.
In section II, we described related work. Section III presents
the proposed method. Additionally, the experiments and results
are reported in Section IV and Section V, respectively. Section
VI presents ﬁnal remarks and future works.
arXiv:1901.09972v1  [cs.LG]  28 Jan 2019

Fig. 1. Pipeline of the proposed model: Pre-processing (converts signals into 2D images of single beats); InfoGAN (generates synthetic samples to balance
the dataset); CNN (classiﬁes the database balanced).
II. BACKGROUND
This section describes the subjects that served as a basis
for developing this work. First, we present the standard over-
sampling methods used in this paper. After that, we describe
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) in generic terms.
A. Oversampling Methods
The present work makes use of synthetic samples generated
by InfoGAN to perform a dataset balancing. To investigate
the effectiveness of this approach, we compare to three other
classical methods for data balancing: RandomOversampler,
SMOTE, and ADASYN. These methods are widespread in
the literature and are widely used to deal with unbalanced
datasets [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]. All methods are available in
the Imblearn library [11].
1) Random OverSampler: It consists of the most straight-
forward approach to performing Oversampling. The method
suggests choosing samples from the minority class randomly
and with replacement.
2) SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique:
To oversample with SMOTE [12], is took a sample from the
dataset, and consider its k nearest neighbors (in feature space).
To create a synthetic data point, take the vector between one
of those k neighbors, and the current data point. Basically,
synthesizes new instances between existing (real) minority
instances. SMOTE draws lines between existing minority
samples and then generate new, synthetic minority instances
somewhere on these lines.
3) ADASYN: Adaptive Synthetic Sampling Approach for
Imbalanced Learning: The basic idea behind ADASYN [13] is
to consider the level of difﬁculty in learning different samples
from minority class examples and use to weighted distribu-
tion for each class. The method generates synthetic data for
minority class examples that are harder to learn compared
to those minority examples that are easier to learn. That is,
forcing the learning algorithm to focus on regions of difﬁcult
learning. The main idea of the ADASYN algorithm is to use
a density distribution as a criterion for automatically deciding
the needed number of synthetic samples to be generated for
each example of the minority class. So, for each example of
the minority class xi, gi synthetic examples are generated.
B. Generative Adversarial Networks
GANs [14] have shown remarkable success as a framework
for training models to produce realistic-looking data. GANs
are composed of two networks which compete in other to im-
prove their performance. Given a training set X, the Generator,
G(x), takes as input a noise vector and tries to produce sample
data similar to real data presented in the training set.
A Discriminator network, D(x), is a binary classiﬁer that
tries to distinguish between the real data exhibited in the
training set X and the fake data generated by the Generator.
So, given a set of training data, GANs can learn to estimate
the underlying probability distribution of the training data.
Based on traditional GAN models, Xi Chen et al. [15]
(2016) designed the infoGAN, which applies concepts from
Information Theory to transform some of the noise terms into
latent codes that have systematic and predictable effects on the
outcome. InfoGAN performs its task by splitting the Generator
input code into two parts: the traditional noise vector and a
new latent code vector. The codes are then made meaningful
by maximizing the Mutual Information between the code and
the generator output. It allows convergence to happen much
faster than in traditional GANs.
Recently, the use of synthetic samples generated by GANs
has been gaining strength with the results obtained in some
works. Anthreas Antoniou et al. (2018) [16] presented the Data
Augmentation Generative Adversarial Networks (DAGAN).
It has been empirically shown that the samples generated
by DAGAN generally yielded gains of accuracy, reaching
improvements of up to 13% in experiments. M. Frid-Adar et
al. (2018) [17] used synthetic samples generated by a Deep
Convolutional GAN (DCGAN) to perform Data Augmentation
in order to improve liver lesion classiﬁcation. It achieved an

Fig. 2. Samples of heartbeat after the pre-processing step with their respective classes.
improvement of 7% using synthetic augmentation over the
classic augmentation methods. F. Bolelli et al. (2018) [18]
used GANs in Skin Lesion Segmentation problem. The GANs
was used to augment data in the image segmentation ﬁeld, and
a Convolutional Deconvolutional Neural Network (CDNN) to
generate lesion segmentation mask from dermoscopic images.
Among the surveys, we have no ﬁnd any approach to
address the use of GAN to deal with unbalanced datasets
involving health problems, therefore, more like the Oversam-
pling we have is the use of GAN to Data Augmentation for a
whole dataset.
III. HEARTBEAT ANOMALY DETECTION
USING ADVERSARIAL OVERSAMPLING
In this section, we describe the complete pipeline of the
model proposed in this work. The Figure 1 shows in a
summarized way the ﬂow of the solution. Three phases com-
prise the method: Pre-processing, Adversarial Oversampling
(InfoGAN), and CNN classiﬁcation.
1) Pre-processing: The complete long ECG records are
preprocessed to extract all individual beats and produce
heartbeat centered binary images;
2) Adversarial Oversampling: The InfoGAN is used to
generate synthetic adversarial images for the minority
heartbeat classes;
3) Trainning and Classiﬁcation: The new balanced dataset
is used to training a 2D CNN to image classiﬁcation.
A. Pre-processing
After the acquisition of the signal, a pre-processing was
performed to collect a range of 25 time-slices of the signal.
Those images have the peak of the heartbeat in its central
region. Therefore, each peak centralized image is classiﬁed
individually. Then, we produced binary images with 112×112
resolution corresponding to the peaks. With this, the database
that was previously composed by a long 1-dimensional ECG
series is now composed of several 2-dimensional labeled
images. The Figure 2 shows the data after all pre-processing.
B. Adversarial Oversampling
After a search of the existing GAN models, rapid experi-
ments were carried out to evaluate the speed of convergence,
robustness to mode collapse and visual quality of the synthetic
generated images. We evaluated in details the traditional GAN,
the Wasserstein GAN [19], and InfoGAN. Finally, we chose
the InfoGAN as the adversary model.
As we need to generate new images, the Generator (G) and
Discriminator (D) are both composed by convolutional layers.
The Generator also has upsampling and batch normalization
layers. At the end of the model, we employed a Tanh activation
function to have activation between −1 and 1.
Therefore, the G takes a standard normal random noise of
size 64×1, which turns on a synthetic image at the end of the
model. The D takes both fake and real images (not at same
time) with size 112×112. The D is composed of 2-dimensional
convolutional layers, dropout to minimize overﬁtting, batch
normalization, Leaky ReLU [20] as activation function, and
Sigmoid function as the output of the model. The auxiliary
Q Net is composed of Fully Connected layers and a Softmax
function as output to give us the current label of the synthetic
image.
The Figure 3(a) shows at left the architecture of the Info-
GAN Generator, and a detailed architecture of the Discrimi-
nator (D) and Auxiliary Q Net at right.
To train the InfoGAN, we use batches of noise generated
images as fake class and batches of real images as the true
class. So, the traditional steps to train a conventional GAN is
performed. We pass a batch of samples with some fake data,
and a batch of samples with real data to the Discriminator to
learn how to differentiate fake data from the real data. The
InfoGAN training is shown in the Figure 3(b).
After training some epochs of the Discriminator and the
Q Net, we freeze D weights and train only the Generator
model at the combined model. Consequently, the Generator
model iteratively learns how to generate synthetic images
that follow the real distribution of the training images. The
general InfoGAN objective function is given by the lower-
bound approximation to the Mutual Information as follows:
min(G, Q)max(D)VinfoGAN(D, G, Q) = V (D, G) −λLI(G, Q)
We adopted the following methodology to generate syn-
thetic samples: Given training data samples from the minority
classes VEB and APC, we train the InfoGAN for both samples.
The training/generation of images was iterative. The max
number of epochs was 100 thousand, and at every 500 epochs,
we save a snapshot of the generator network model and some
synthetic images. When the training was ﬁnished, we looked
at all samples and chose snapshots that generated images with
a realistic appearance. Hence, we are not considering the loss,
but looking only to the quality of generated images.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3. (a) InfoGAN Architecture. (b) InfoGAN Training. (c) CNN Architecture.
C. Training and Classiﬁcation
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was chosen as the
classiﬁcation model. The Figure 3(c) presents the high-level
architecture of the proposed CNN. The network takes as input
a 2D dimensional array, which represents a sampled heartbeat
image with 112×112 dimensions. Two convolutional layers
compose the model. The kernels initialization follow the He
Initialization approach [21]. We used Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) [22] as the activation function.
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(1)
To prevent overﬁtting, we employ some layers with the
dropout training strategy [23] and also batch normalization
[24] to accelerate training. As subsampling method, we use
simple AveragePooling layers. At the end of the network, we
used a Softmax layer to provide the output as probabilities of
each heartbeat class. We use the Adam optimizer [17] with the
default parameters and interrupted the training when the loss
on the validation set stopped to decrease. Given the data set X,
for a single sample of Xi from X, the network training consists
in optimize the following cross-entropy objective function:
L(Xi, c) = −
M
X
c=1
y(o,c)p(o,c)
(2)
In the previously equation, M is the number of classes or
rhythms that a signal can assume, y is a binary indicator (0 or
1) if class label c is the correct classiﬁcation for observation
(heartbeat) o, and p is the predicted probability observation o
is of class c.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section describes the experiments that investigate if
Adversarial Oversampling could be used to balance the train-
ing data set. That is, whether synthetic data generated by a
GAN could improve the overall classiﬁcation accuracy. We
compare the performance of this Adversarial Oversampling
with the RandomOversampler, SMOTE, and ADASYN.
In this experiments, we use the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia
Database, which is a classical arrhythmia database. This
dataset contains 48 half-hour excerpts of two-channel ambula-
tory ECG 360hz recordings obtained from 47 subjects studied
by the BIH Arrhythmia Laboratory between 1975 and 1979.
[25]. From the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia dataset, we collect a
number of samples from seven different classes as shown in
Table II.
The CNN training consisted of 20 epochs and an early-stop
if the loss in the validation set did not decrease considering
the previous epoch. The experiments were repeated ten times,
where 20% the data was used as the test set, 10% as the
validation set, and 70% to training.
Considering the methodology used to generate InfoGAN
synthetic samples, we split the original dataset between the
training set and test set, and only the train set was used
to InfoGAN training. Considering only the training set, we
generate how many samples were necessary to reach a total
of 1000 samples as the other classes have around this amount.
In this way, the new training set became relatively balanced.
After generating the synthetic samples, we perform the
Adversarial Oversampling iteratively added the samples to the
network training and observed the F1 score for each class.
Then we used the same training and test environment and

TABLE I
F1 SCORE FOR EACH OVERSAMPLING METHOD
Class
Original
Adversarial Oversampling
ADASYN
SMOTE
Random Oversampler
APC
0.68 ± 0.03
0.80 ± 0.03
0.73 ± 0.02
0.71 ± 0.02
0.72 ± 0.03
Normal
0.98 ± 0.01
0.98 ± 0.01
0.97 ± 0.02
0.95 ± 0.02
0.94 ± 0.01
LBBB
0.96 ± 0.02
0.96 ± 0.02
0.95 ± 0.01
0.96 ± 0.01
0.93 ± 0.01
PAB
0.92 ± 0.01
0.92 ± 0.01
0.92 ± 0.01
0.91 ± 0.01
0.91 ± 0.02
PVC
0.93 ± 0.01
0.93 ± 0.02
0.91 ± 0.02
0.91 ± 0.01
0.89 ± 0.02
RBB
0.93 ± 0.02
0.94 ± 0.01
0.93 ± 0.01
0.92 ± 0.01
0.92 ± 0.01
VEB
0.43 ± 0.02
0.81 ± 0.02
0.61 ± 0.03
0.55 ± 0.02
0.49 ± 0.02
Total
0.83 ± 0.02
0.91 ± 0.02
0.86 ± 0.02
0.84 ± 0.01
0.83 ± 0.02
compare the Adversarial Oversampling with the traditional
oversampling methods. The classiﬁer for each oversampling
methods was the proposed CNN method.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, the results of the proposed Adversarial
Oversampling approach are compared to the ones provided
by traditional oversampling methods. As shown in the second
column in Table I, the CNN produced low performance in the
original (unbalanced) dataset inﬂuenced by the F1 score for
the minority classes VEB and APC.
Consequently, this experiment aims to minimize this prob-
lem by generating high-quality synthetic samples to minority
classes to get a more balanced train set. Although it had a
slightly smaller amount, the PAB class was not chosen to be
oversampled since it did not inﬂuence the performance of the
overall classiﬁcation.
The Figure 4 shows three adversarial samples for the
classes APC and VEB. On the left side, we have two images
representing the original samples of the mentioned clasess.
To observe whether Adversarial Oversampling could be
used to perform the dataset balancing, the F1 score for each
class was observed as synthetic samples were inserted. The
TABLE II
MIT-BIH ARRHYTHMIA DATASSET DESCRIPTION
Heartbeat Type
# Samples
Atrial Premature Contraction
APC
243
Normal
Normal
1079
Left Bundle Branch Block
LBBB
1051
Paced Beat
PAB
895
Premature Ventricular Contraction
PVC
1012
Right Bundle Branch
RBB
1006
Ventricular Escape Beat
VEB
106
objective was to observe if the APC and VEB minority classes
would perform better in the classiﬁcation, without decreasing
the performance of the other classes.
The Figure 5a and the Figure 5b show the CNN performance
for each class when 150 and 100 samples are added until
reaching the total number of 1000. Both graphs contain a mean
F1 score of 10 executions.
After observing the variation in CNN performance as syn-
thetic samples are inserted into the training set, we tested the
CNN using the best amount of synthetic samples for each
of both classes. As shown in Figure 5a and Figure 5b, the
best performance of CNN was observed using 600 synthetic
samples of the APC class and 600 synthetic samples of the
VEB class. The Table I shows the F1-score for each class using
Adversarial Oversampling compared to the RandomOverSam-
pler, ADASYN, SMOTE oversampling methods.
As we can see, the results favor the hypothesis that the
Adversarial Oversampling could be used to perform the dataset
balancing taking into account the performance observed in
Table I, which was higher than obtained by oversampling
using RandomOversampler, SMOTE and ADASYN for the
two minority classes, APC and VEB.
One possible explanation for this may be the fact that
InfoGAN generates new samples, not just repeats them as
Fig. 4. Adversarial samples from VEB and APC classes.

(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Mean of F1-score for each class when (a) VEB and (b) APC synthetic samples are used.
in the case of RandomOversampler. Besides, it can generate
samples that follow the original distribution of the classes,
reducing the occurrence of class noise, which is a common
risk in traditional Oversampling methods.
VI. CONCLUSION
When using deep learning for signal analysis, such as ECG,
through convolutional neural networks, convolutions with one
dimension consider the signal as a time series. However,
according to the obtained results, we can observe that the
bi-dimensional approach used in our method obtained an
excellent performance. Only the minority classes did not have
a satisfactory classiﬁcation.
Concerning the performance of the InfoGAN to generate
synthetic samples, we show that these samples have a variation
within the class and maintain the original characteristics
of the signal, which is fundamental. So, we can see that
and Adversarial Oversampling can be used to perform an
dataset balancing, generating new synthetics samples of the
minority classes on the dataset and that the generated and
selected samples were able to decrease the effects of the
unbalance data signiﬁcantly. The proposed approach improved
the performance of CNN in the classiﬁcation of VEB and
APC types. Besides, for the used dataset the Adversarial
Oversampling proposed overcomes traditional methods such
as RandomOversampler, SMOTE, and ADASYN.
As future works we suggest the elaboration of a more
automatic form of generating and selection samples, possibly
observing only the loss, without the necessity of human
interference to select good synthetic samples to use. Also,
we suggest evaluating the performance of new approaches
such as Unrolled GAN [26]. The base code for this work is
available publicly online (https://github.com/JeffersonLPLima/
adversarial oversampling).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank CAPES and CNPq (Brazilian re-
search agencies) for the ﬁnancial support. In addition the E.life
Brazil for making the infrastructure available for conducting
the experiments.
