VERTEBRA-FOCUSED LANDMARK DETECTION FOR SCOLIOSIS ASSESSMENT
Jingru Yi, Pengxiang Wu, Qiaoying Huang, Hui Qu, Dimitris N. Metaxas
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
ABSTRACT
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a lifetime disease that
arises in children.
Accurate estimation of Cobb angles of
the scoliosis is essential for clinicians to make diagnosis and
treatment decisions. The Cobb angles are measured accord-
ing to the vertebrae landmarks.
Existing regression-based
methods for the vertebra landmark detection typically suffer
from large dense mapping parameters and inaccurate land-
mark localization. The segmentation-based methods tend to
predict connected or corrupted vertebra masks. In this pa-
per, we propose a novel vertebra-focused landmark detection
method. Our model ﬁrst localizes the vertebra centers, based
on which it then traces the four corner landmarks of the verte-
bra through the learned corner offset. In this way, our method
is able to keep the order of the landmarks. The comparison
results demonstrate the merits of our method in both Cobb
angle measurement and landmark detection on low-contrast
and ambiguous X-ray images. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/yijingru/Vertebra-Landmark-Detection.
Index Terms— Scoliosis, keypoint, landmark detection
1. INTRODUCTION
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a lateral deviation
and axial rotation of the spine [1] that arises in children at
or around puberty [2]. Early detection and bracing treatment
of scoliosis would decrease the need for surgery [3]. Cobb
angle [1] is used as a gold standard by clinicians for scolio-
sis assessment and diagnosis. It is commonly measured based
on the anterior-posterior (AP) radiography (X-ray) by select-
ing the most tilted vertebra at the top and bottom of the spine
[4, 3]. Measurement of the Cobb angles is challenging due
to the ambiguity and variability in the scoliosis AP X-ray im-
ages (Fig. 1). Generally, the clinicians manually measure the
landmarks (the yellow points in Fig. 1) and choose the partic-
ular tilted vertebrae for the Cobb angle assessment. However,
the measurement tends to be affected by the selection of the
vertebrae and the bias of different observers.
Given that manual scoliosis assessment of Cobb angles
in clinical practice is time-consuming and unreliable, there
is a surge of interest in developing automatic methods for
accurate spinal curvature estimation in spinal AP X-ray im-
ages. Traditional unsupervised methods such as ﬁltering [4]
PT
MT
TL
PT
MT
TL
TL
MT
PT
MT
PT
TL
Fig. 1. Illustration of the anterior-posterior (AP) X-ray im-
ages. The ground-truth landmarks (68 points in total, 4 points
per vertebra) are shown in yellow points. The coronal Cobb
angles of proximal thoracic (PT), main thoracic (MT) and the
thoracolumbar (TL) curves [9, 10] are measured according to
the selected vertebrae. The red lines pass through the center
lines of the selected vertebrae.
and active contour [3] are parameter sensitive and typically
involve complicated processing stages. To deal with the large
anatomical variability and the low tissue contrast in X-ray
images, supervised learning-based methods are developed.
S2VR [5] uses structured Support Vector Regression (SVR)
to regress the landmarks and the Cobb angles directly based
on the extracted hand-crafted features. BoostNet [6] learns
more robust spinal features by convolutional layers. These
regression-based methods are able to exploit the global infor-
mation of the image. However, the dense mapping between
the regressed points and the latent features requires signiﬁcant
parameter and computational costs. Consequently, the input
image (∼2500×1000) has to be downsampled to a very small
resolution (e.g., 256×128) to enable training and inference.
Such an operation limits the performance of these methods
due to the loss of ﬁne details from the original high-resolution
images. To handle this issue, another direction proposes to
use convolutional layers to segment each vertebra for sco-
liosis assessment [7, 8].
These methods are mainly based
on U-net, and tend to be sensitive to the image qualities and
difﬁcult to separate the attached vertebrae.
Recently, keypoint-based methods have achieved remark-
able performance in human pose joint localization [12] and
object detection [13, 14, 15].
Unlike the regression-based
arXiv:2001.03187v1  [eess.IV]  9 Jan 2020

Heatmap
Center Offset
Corner Offset
(a) Vertebra-Focused Landmark Detection Network
(b) Landmark Decoding
Heatmap
Corner Offset
Landmarks
Skip connections
1024×512
512×256×64
256×128×64
128×64×128
32×16×512
64×32×256
64×32×256
128×64×128
256×128×64
E1
E3
E2
E4
E5
D4 D3
D2
conv3×3
conv1×1
bilinear upsample
conv7×7
Skip connection module
256x128x1
256x128x2
256x128x8
Fig. 2. (a)The framework of the vertebra-focused landmark detection network. The backbone of the network (i.e., conv1-5)
is from ResNet34 [11]. The sizes of the feature maps are presented as height×width×channels. E and D represent encoder
and decoder, respectively. The gray-scale input image is resized to 1024×512. The skip connections combine the shallow and
deep layers through the skip connection module. (b) Landmark decoding process. The vertebrae centers are extracted from the
heatmap and the center offset. From the center of each vertebra, the four corner landmarks are traced using the corner offset.
methods, the keypoint-based methods localize the points
without dense mapping. Therefore, it simpliﬁes the network
and is able to consume the higher-resolution input image. In
this paper, we propose a vertebra-focused landmark detection
method based on keypoint detection. We make the network
learn to differentiate different vertebrae by localizing the
vertebra centers directly. After capturing the vertebrae, we
regress the four corner landmarks of each vertebra using
convolutional layers. In this way, we keep the order of the
landmarks. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our method compared to the regression and segmentation
based methods.
2. METHOD
As is shown in Fig. 1, the Cobb angles are determined by the
locations of landmarks. The X-ray image we used contains 17
vertebrae from the thoracic and the lumbar spine. Each ver-
tebra has 4 corner landmarks (top-left, top-right, bottom-left
and bottom-right), and each image totally has 68 landmarks.
The relative orders of landmarks are important for accurately
localizing the tilted vertebrae. Considering this, we do not
localize the 68 points directly from the output feature map
since the model cannot guarantee that the detected points will
stay at the right positions, especially when there are false pos-
itives, which would lead to incorrect landmark ordering. To
address this issue, one strategy is to separate the landmarks
into different groups, thus giving an output feature map with
channel number 17×4 = 68. However, since each channel of
output feature map has only one positive point, this strategy
suffers from the class imbalance issue between the positive
and negative points, which will hurt the model performance.
In this paper, we propose to ﬁrst localize the 17 verte-
brae by detecting their center points. One advantage of this
approach is that the center points will not overlap. Therefore,
the center points can be used to identify each vertebra without
suffering from the touching problem in segmentation-based
methods. After the vertebrae are localized, we then capture
the 4 corner landmarks of each vertebra from its center point.
In this way, we are able to keep the order of landmarks.
Our vertebra-focused landmark detection network is illus-
trated in Fig. 2. The inputs of the network are gray-scale im-
ages with size ﬁxed to 1024×512. First, we use ResNet34
[11] conv1-5 to extract the high-level semantic features of the
input image. Then we use the skip connections to combine
the deep features with the shallow ones to exploit both high-
level semantic information and low-level ﬁne details, similar
to [16, 17]. At layer D2, we construct the heatmap, center
offset and corner offset maps using convolutional layers for
landmark localization.
2.1. Heatmap of Center Points
The keypoint heatmap is generally used in pose joint localiza-
tion and object detection. For each point k, its ground-truth is
an unnormalized 2D Gaussian disk (see Fig. 2b) which can be
formulated as exp(−x2+y2
2σ2 ). The radius σ is determined by
the size of the vertebrae [13]. We use the variant of the focal
loss to optimize the parameters, the same as [13, 18]:
Lhm = −1
N
X
i
(
(1 −pi)α log pi
yi = 1
(1 −yi)β(pi)α log(1 −pi)
otherwise ,
(1)
where i indexes to each position of the feature map. N is the
total number of positions on the feature map, pi and yi refer
to the prediction and ground-truth values, respectively. We set
the parameters α = 2 and β = 4 [13] in this paper.

2.2. Center Offset
As can be seen from Fig. 2a, the output feature map of the
network is downsized compared to the input images. This not
only saves computational cost but also alleviates the imbal-
ance problem between the positive and negative points due to
the reduced output resolution. Consequently, a position (x, y)
on the input image is mapped to the location (⌊x
n⌋, ⌊y
n⌋) of the
downsized feature map, where n is the downsampling factor.
After extracting the center points from the downsized feature
map, we use the center offset to map the points back to the
original input image. The center offset is deﬁned as:
(x
n −⌊x
n⌋, y
n −⌊y
n⌋).
(2)
The center offsets at the center points are trained with L1 loss.
2.3. Corner Offset
When the center points of each vertebra are localized, we
trace the 4 corner landmarks from the vertebra using corner
offsets. The corner offsets are deﬁned as vectors that start
from the center and point to the vertebra corners (see Fig. 2b).
The corner offset map has 4 × 2 channels. We use L1 loss to
train the corner offsets at the center points.
3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
3.1. Dataset
We use training data (580 images) of the public AASCE MIC-
CAI 2019 challenge as our dataset. All the images are the
anterior-posterior X-ray images. Speciﬁcally, we use 60%
of the dataset for training (348 images), 20% for validation
(116 images), and 20% for testing (116 images). Each im-
age contains 17 vertebrae from the thoracic and lumbar spine.
Each vertebra is located by 4 corner landmarks. The ground-
truth landmarks (68 points per image) are provided by lo-
cal clinicians. The Cobb angle is calculated using the algo-
rithm provided by AASCE. The input images vary in sizes
(∼2500×1000).
3.2. Implementation
We implement our method in PyTorch with NVIDIA K40
GPUs. The backbone network ResNet34 [19] is pre-trained
on ImageNet. Other weights of the network are initialized
from a standard Gaussian distribution. We ﬁx the input reso-
lution of the images to 1024×512, which gives an output res-
olution of 256×128. To reduce overﬁtting, we adopt the stan-
dard data augmentation, including random expanding, crop-
ping, contrast and brightness distortion. The network is opti-
mized with Adam [19] with an initial learning rate 2.5×10−4.
We train the network for 100 epochs and stop when the vali-
dation loss does not decrease signiﬁcantly.
3.3. Evaluation Metrics
Following the AASCE Challenge, we use the symmetric
mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE) to evaluate the
accuracy of the measured Cobb angles:
SMAPE = 1
N
N
X
j=1
P3
i=1(|aji −bji|)
P3
i=1(aji + bji)
,
(3)
where i indexes the three Cobb angles in the area of proxi-
mal thoracic (PT), main thoracic (MT) and the thoracolumbar
(TL), j denotes the j-th image, and N is the total number of
testing images. The a and b refer to the estimated and the
ground-truth Cobb angles, respectively. We also report the
SMAPE for PT, MT and TL area individually which we rep-
resent as SMAPEP T , SMAPEMT and SMAPET L.
We evaluate the accuracy of the landmarks by comparing
the detected landmark locations to the ground-truth landmark
locations. The averaged detection error is:
Errordec = 1
M
M
X
i=1
||di −gi||2,
(4)
where di = (dx,i, dy,i) and gi = (gx,i, gy,i) are the detected
and ground-truth landmark locations, respectively; M is the
total number of landmarks of the whole testing images.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We compare our method with the regression-based method
[10] and the segmentation-based method [7]. The qualitative
results and the quantitative results are shown in Fig. 3 and Ta-
ble 1. Note that the regression-based method has a smaller
input resolution because the parameters in the FC layers are
too large and the GPU memory is limited. The landmarks
of the segmentation-based method are decoded from the cor-
ner points of the minimum bounding rectangle of the vertebra
segmentation mask. We use the same data augmentations and
training skills for all these baseline methods.
As is shown in Fig. 3, the regression-based method per-
forms well in capturing the orders of landmarks. This is ow-
ing to the separated channels of the FC layer. However, it
fails to capture the landmark locations accurately. One reason
would be that the small input resolution loses the morphology
details of the vertebrae. In addition, the dataset we used is not
large enough for the model to learn well as there are lots of
parameters in the FC layers. Different from the regression-
based method, the segmentation-based method captures the
landmark locations better with the aid of segmentation masks.
We show the overlayed vertebrae masks in Fig. 3. However,
as can be seen from cases 1 and 6, the segmentation-based
method fails to separate the connected regions. Moreover,
for cases 2-4, the segmentation-based method tends to pro-
duce corrupted masks due to the ambiguity of the input im-
ages. Consequently, the false predictions disrupt the orders

Input
GT
Reg.
Seg.
Input
GT
Vertebra-focused (Ours)
Reg.
Seg.
Vertebra-focused (Ours)
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Fig. 3. Qualitative results of the landmark detection. GT refers to the ground-truth landmarks. For our method, we show both
the prediction of the corner offsets and the landmarks. The big arrows indicate that the detected landmarks are from the four
corner landmarks of the vertebra. The results of the segmentation-based method are overlaid with its predicted masks. The
different color refers to different vertebra.
Table 1. Evaluation results of Cobb measurement and landmark detection. The frame per second (FPS) is measured on K40.
Method
Input Resolution
SMAPE
SMAPEP T
SMAPEMT
SMAPET L
Errordec
FPS
Regression-based [10]
512 × 256
23.43
16.38
30.27
35.61
77.94
11.40
Segmentation-based [7]
1024 × 512
16.48
9.71
25.97
33.01
74.07
2.38
Ours
1024 × 512
10.81
6.26
18.04
23.42
50.11
5.65
of detected landmarks and incur errors in landmark detection
and Cobb angle calculation. This is also explained in Table 1
that the segmentation-based method performs worse in the TL
area of the spine as the vertebra typically gets more ambigu-
ous in this part. In particular, in the TL area, the landmark
error of the segmentation-based method is very close to that
of the regression-based method.
Compared to the baseline methods, our vertebra-focused
method achieves the best performance in both Cobb an-
gle measurement (SMAPE) and the landmark detection
(Errordec), as shown in Table 1. We illustrate both the cor-
ner offsets and the detected landmarks in Fig. 3. The corner
offsets are colored arrows starting from the decoded center
point of the vertebra. From cases 2,4,6, we can see that the
vertebra-focused method is robust in localizing the verte-
brae that have low-contrast in the original images. The reason
would be that the model has the ability to identify the vertebra
according to their global morphology features through center
localization. We show a failure example in case 5, which
suggests that the vertebra-focused network would skip the
vertebra that has lower morphology property than the other
vertebrae. However, such a failure does not affect the detec-
tion of the remaining vertebrae, indicating that the proposed
method has better object reasoning ability.
5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a vertebra-focused landmark de-
tection method that traces the corner landmarks of a verte-
bra from its center point.
The strategy of predicting cen-
ter heatmaps enables our model to identify different verte-
brae and allows it to detect landmarks robustly from the low-
contrast images and ambiguous boundaries. In contrast to the
regression- and segmentation-based methods, our vertebra-
focused method performs the best in landmark detection and
Cobb measurement.

6. REFERENCES
[1] PJM Scholten and AG Veldhuizen, “Analysis of cobb
angle measurements in scoliosis,” Clinical Biomechan-
ics, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 7–13, 1987.
[2] Stuart L Weinstein, Lori A Dolan, Jack CY Cheng, Aina
Danielsson, and Jose A Morcuende, “Adolescent idio-
pathic scoliosis,” The Lancet, vol. 371, no. 9623, pp.
1527–1537, 2008.
[3] H Anitha and GK Prabhu,
“Automatic quantiﬁcation
of spinal curvature in scoliotic radiograph using image
processing,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 36, no. 3,
pp. 1943–1951, 2012.
[4] H Anitha, AK Karunakar, and KVN Dinesh, “Automatic
extraction of vertebral endplates from scoliotic radio-
graphs using customized ﬁlter,” Biomedical Engineer-
ing Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 158–165, 2014.
[5] Haoliang Sun, Xiantong Zhen, Chris Bailey, Parham Ra-
soulinejad, Yilong Yin, and Shuo Li, “Direct estimation
of spinal cobb angles by structured multi-output regres-
sion,” in International Conference on Information Pro-
cessing in Medical Imaging. Springer, 2017, pp. 529–
540.
[6] Hongbo Wu, Chris Bailey, Parham Rasoulinejad, and
Shuo Li,
“Automatic landmark estimation for ado-
lescent idiopathic scoliosis assessment using boostnet,”
in International Conference on Medical Image Com-
puting and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI).
Springer, 2017, pp. 127–135.
[7] Ming-Huwi Horng, Chan-Pang Kuok, Min-Jun Fu,
Chii-Jen Lin, and Yung-Nien Sun, “Cobb angle mea-
surement of spine from x-ray images using convolu-
tional neural network,” Computational and mathemati-
cal methods in medicine, 2019.
[8] Jen-Tang Lu, Stefano Pedemonte, Bernardo Bizzo,
Sean Doyle, Katherine P Andriole, Mark H Michalski,
R Gilberto Gonzalez, and Stuart R Pomerantz, “Deep-
spine: Automated lumbar vertebral segmentation, disc-
level designation, and spinal stenosis grading using deep
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.10215, 2018.
[9] M.F. O’Brien and Spinal Deformity Study Group, Ra-
diographic Measurement Manual, Medtronic Sofamor
Danek USA, 2008.
[10] Liansheng
Wang,
Qiuhao
Xu,
Stephanie
Leung,
Jonathan Chung, Bo Chen, and Shuo Li,
“Accurate
automated cobb angles estimation using multi-view ex-
trapolation net,” Medical Image Analysis, vol. 58, pp.
101542, 2019.
[11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[12] Alejandro Newell, Kaiyu Yang, and Jia Deng, “Stacked
hourglass networks for human pose estimation,”
in
European conference on computer vision (ECCV).
Springer, 2016, pp. 483–499.
[13] Hei Law and Jia Deng, “Cornernet: Detecting objects as
paired keypoints,” in Proceedings of the European Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 734–
750.
[14] Jingru Yi, Pengxiang Wu, Qiaoying Huang, Hui Qu,
Bo Liu, Daniel J Hoeppner, and Dimitris N Metaxas,
“Multi-scale cell instance segmentation with keypoint
graph based bounding boxes,”
in International Con-
ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). Springer, 2019, pp.
369–377.
[15] Jingru Yi, Hui Tang, Pengxiang Wu, Bo Liu, Daniel J
Hoeppner, Dimitris N Metaxas, Lianyi Han, and Wei
Fan, “Object-guided instance segmentation for biolog-
ical images,” Thirty Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, 2020.
[16] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox,
“U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation,”
in International Conference on Med-
ical image computing and computer-assisted interven-
tion (MICCAI). Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[17] Jingru Yi, Pengxiang Wu, Menglin Jiang, Qiaoying
Huang, Daniel J. Hoeppner, and Dimitris N. Metaxas,
“Attentive neural cell instance segmentation,” Medical
Image Analysis, vol. 55, pp. 228 – 240, 2019.
[18] Xingyi Zhou, Jiacheng Zhuo, and Philipp Krahenbuhl,
“Bottom-up object detection by grouping extreme and
center points,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2019, pp. 850–859.
[19] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization,” The International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
