1
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
for Low-Level Wireless Communication
Colin de Vrieze, Shane Barratt, Daniel Tsai and Anant Sahai UC Berkeley
Abstract—Traditional radio systems are strictly co-designed on
the lower levels of the OSI stack for compatibility and efﬁciency.
Although this has enabled the success of radio communications,
it has also introduced lengthy standardization processes and
imposed static allocation of the radio spectrum. Various initiatives
have been undertaken by the research community to tackle the
problem of artiﬁcial spectrum scarcity by both making frequency
allocation more dynamic and building ﬂexible radios to replace
the static ones. There is reason to believe that just as computer
vision and control have been overhauled by the introduction of
machine learning, wireless communication can also be improved
by utilizing similar techniques to increase the ﬂexibility of wireless
networks. In this work, we pose the problem of discovering
low-level wireless communication schemes ex-nihilo between two
agents in a fully decentralized fashion as a reinforcement learning
problem. Our proposed approach uses policy gradients to learn
an optimal bi-directional communication scheme and shows
surprisingly sophisticated and intelligent learning behavior. We
present the results of extensive experiments and an analysis of
the ﬁdelity of our approach.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, automatically learned features have replaced
hand-designed ﬁlters in computer vision problems, yielding
much higher accuracy on benchmark tasks such as image
classiﬁcation and object detection. These results are achieved
by training a deep neural network end-to-end from raw pixels
to output probabilities with a large amount of training data. In
the process of optimizing the network to minimize prediction
error, the model learns meaningful low-level spatial features in
the form of activations in the hidden layers of the network [1].
There is no theoretical bound on performance, as more layers
can always be added to increase the expressiveness of the
model, and recent research using very deep networks has
exceeded human level performance on tasks such as image
classiﬁcation [2].
Data-driven reinforcement learning approaches have also
proven to be an effective tool for approximately solving control
problems such as object manipulation and robotic locomotion.
Classically, these problems were solved by constructing the
dynamics model of a system and optimizing the trajectory by
using local linear models such as iLQR [3] or ﬁnite-difference
methods. More modern approaches solve trajectory optimiza-
tion by modelling the problem as an actor that inputs actions
into the system and receives a new state and a reward signal
as a response. The actor is then responsible for maximizing
this reward signal. A derivative of this technique is multi-
agent cooperative learning, which has recently been gaining
in popularity as a method for solving simple logic games
involving multiple actors [4].
DSP tool
ML equivalent
FIR ﬁlter
←→
Convolutional layer
IIR ﬁlter
←→
Recurrent cell
LMS equalizer
←→
Gradient descent algorithm
Source coding
←→
Autoencoders
Table I: Parallels between classic digital signal processing
(DSP) and modern machine learning (ML) tools. A FIR ﬁlter
convolves a signal with a kernel, just as a convolutional
layer in a neural network does. An IIR Filter is a ﬁlter with
feedback, just as a recurrent cell performs computation with
feedback. The least mean squares (LMS) equalizer updates
the parameters of an equalization ﬁlter using gradient descent,
just as gradient descent is used to optimize the parameters of
neural networks. Finally, source coding (compression) seeks to
ﬁnd a ”smaller” representation of data, just as an autoencoder
attempts to compress input data through a bottleneck and then
decode it.
Wireless communication is a domain that is traditionally
characterized by manually designed signal processing blocks,
similar to the hand-crafted features used in traditional com-
puter vision. Low-level functions such as modulation and error
correcting codes have been carefully designed to optimize the
performance of the radios under various channel conditions.
In addition, traditional radio systems are strictly co-designed
on the lower levels of the OSI stack for compatibility and
efﬁciency. Although this has enabled radio communications
to succeed despite hardware constraints, it has also introduced
lengthy standardization processes and imposed static allocation
of the radio spectrum. Various initiatives have been undertaken
by the research community to tackle the problem of artiﬁcial
spectrum scarcity by making frequency allocation more dy-
namic and building collaborative networks to replace the static
ones. The most prominent of these initiatives is the DARPA
Spectrum Collaboration Challenge (SC2), which is “the ﬁrst-
of-its-kind collaborative machine-learning competition to over-
come scarcity in the radio frequency (RF) spectrum”.1
In this work, we investigate the use of modern reinforcement
learning techniques to alleviate the rigidity of traditional radio
network design. We intend to replace ordinary radio blocks
such as modulation and demodulation with high-capacity mod-
els that are agnostic to their speciﬁc function, and are instead
learned in a data-driven manner. The parallels between classic
digital signal processing blocks and machine learning tools
1spectrumcollaborationchallenge.com
arXiv:1801.04541v1  [eess.SP]  14 Jan 2018

2
(see Table I) justify the assumption that high-capacity models
should be able to learn low-level radio functions. In contrast
to other domains, data for training can be easily generated for
large-scale simulations. Finally, we will show that it is possible
for two actors to learn modulation schemes for communication
while sharing only a ﬁxed bit string and having no domain-
speciﬁc knowledge about the task.
The rest of the work is organized as follows: Section II and
Section III discuss related work and give some background
information on wireless communication and reinforcement
learning. Section IV presents some preliminary analysis of data
driven approaches to classic radio tasks. Section V introduces
the problem of a fully decentralized multi-agent setting for
learning modulation. Section VI and VII present our solution
and results, respectively. Finally, some concluding remarks are
given in Section VIII.
II.
RELATED WORK
The research presented in this work spans many ﬁelds, so
the related works will be grouped by research topic. First, we
review early approaches to parameter optimization in radio-
related tasks, then we explore machine learning algorithms
in the communication domain and ﬁnish by describing recent
work on distributed deep reinforcement learning.
The concept of using parameter optimization in radio-
related tasks was ﬁrst introduced in 1960 [5]. Widrow applied
gradient descent to the problem of equalization in the form
of the least mean squares equalizer, which optimizes the ﬁlter
parameters of a ﬁxed length FIR ﬁlter to counteract the effects
of a multipath channel (see Section III-A). His work also
links back to the optimization of single perceptrons. In 1957,
Lloyd came up with his algorithm for k-means unsupervised
learning while solving the problem of demodulating pulse-
code modulation. His work was published in 1982 [6] and now
serves as the standard solution to solving k-means. Through
their interdisciplinary work, Widrow and Lloyd were pioneers
in both digital wireless communication and machine learning.
Since Widrow’s early work, research into the use of neu-
ral architectures and machine learning techniques to address
problems in communications has taken off in many directions.
Ibnkahla’s comprehensive review of the intersection of com-
munications and machine learning [7] is a testament to the
impressive efforts made in this area of research. His survey lists
various learning-based approaches to adaptive equalization,
nonlinear channel modeling, coding, error correcting codes,
spread spectrum applications, network planning, modulation
detection and many more. Due to the vastness of this ﬁeld,
we refer the reader to the review. Research in making radio
agents adaptive to achieve cooperative goals began in 1999,
when Mitola introduced the concept of the cognitive radio [8].
His proposal was for cognitive radios to use model-based rea-
soning to achieve competency in radio related tasks using both
supervised and unsupervised learning. A review of cognitive
radio work in years after that is in [9].
Beyond the applications to game-playing and control tasks,
some researchers have begun to investigate the use of re-
inforcement learning in various communication-based coop-
erative multi-agent tasks. Foerster et al. [4] applied vari-
ants of deep Q-networks (DQN) without experience replay
to prisoner’s games with multiple agents. The considered
problems require the agents to communicate over a very
simple noiseless channel of small bandwidth and develop a
collaborative strategy. Mordatch and Abbeel [10] show how
a grounded, compositional language can emerge when agents
have to communicate their intentions to each other in order
to maximize their reward. Finally, Abadi and Andersen [11]
study the problem of learning encryption between agents with
the help of an adversary.
Though these works are not concerned with the low level
details of wirelessly transmitting digital signals, they do in-
corporate communication between the agents as an essential
part to solve the presented problems. In all of them, the
communication protocol is not given upfront but has to be ﬁg-
ured out during training. However, their works rely on several
assumptions which set them apart from a fully decentralized
setting: Foerster et al. implement decentralized execution but
centralized training by using a single set of parameters for
all agents. Mordatch and Abbeel’s work also trains a single
policy, but assumes a fully differentiable environment and
communication protocol. Lastly, Abadi and Andersen relax
the problem by allowing agents to exchange rewards and
parameters. In contrast, our approach aims to fully decentralize
the learning process to minimize the gap to a real system. It
gives hope that fully distributed deep reinforcement learning
is possible.
III.
BACKGROUND
A. Low Level Digital Wireless Communication
Figure 1 shows a simpliﬁed model of a generic communica-
tion link. The goal in every setting is to transmit information
from some source (input) across a channel to some sink
(output) with the help of a carrier. The channel is an abstract
description of a means to transmit the information between
the transmitter (upper blocks) and the receiver (lower blocks).
It typically corrupts the signal in some way, e.g. by adding
delays, noise or echos, which stem from the physical nature
of the carrier.
Output
Channel
encoder
Modu-
lator
Source
decoder
Channel
decoder
Demodu-
lator
Channel
Source
encoder
Input
Fig. 1: Simple model of a communication link between a
transmitter (top) and a receiver (bottom). In the transmitter,
source coding removes redundancies from the source signal
while channel coding systematically adds redundancy for error
correction. Modulation is used to impose the information on
the carrier, which conveys it through the channel. On the
receiver side, all processes are reversed to reconstruct the
original signal.

3
Input
Channel
Carrier
Output
Microphone
Hard drive
Magnetic remanence
Speaker
Camera
Copper cable
Voltage signal
Screen
Radio
Wireless link
Electromagnetic wave
Radio
Table II: Examples of typical communication systems. We
focus on the setting with two radios and a wireless link.
In this work, we ignore the problem of source and channel
coding and focus on the modulation and demodulation of the
the carrier. Wireless communication utilizes electromagnetic
waves as a carrier to convey information across a wireless
link between radios. Those waves are described by sinusoidal
functions in time and space. Ignoring the details of propaga-
tion, the wave induces a voltage signal s(t) in an antenna at a
given point in space. We can interpret the signal s(t) as a sum
of two parts: The in-phase component I(t) and the quadrature
component Q(t) plus the sinusoidal functions cos(2πft) and
sin(2πft), respectively. Because sin and cos are orthogonal
over multiples of a period T = 1/f, the receiver of the
electromagnetic wave can extract the two functions I(t) and
Q(t) from the signal s(t) independently. Thus, we can interpret
the components as two independent degrees of freedom to use
for the transmission of information.
s(t) = I(t)cos(2πft) −Q(t)sin(2πft)
= Re{[I(t) + iQ(t)]ei2πft}
(1)
For the purpose of dealing with the in-phase and quadrature
component, Equation 1 shows how to think of the signal s(t)
as the real part of a complex number x(t) = I(t) + iQ(t)
multiplied by a carrier signal c(t) = ei2πft. We say the signal
x(t) modulates the carrier c(t). In digital modulation, we allow
only certain values for x(t). The plot of all valid values for
x(t) in the complex plane is called a constellation diagram and
each individual value results in a constellation point. Given
the maximum number of valid points for a certain modulation
scheme, we can assign a bit sequence with a set length to
each of the points individually. For transmitting information,
the transmitter modulates the electromagnetic wave by setting
the value of x(t) to a constellation point for a certain duration
Ts of one symbol. A series of bits can be transmitted by
consecutively sending symbols, each of which conveys a given
number of bits. The transmitter and receiver have to agree
upfront on the modulation scheme as well as the mapping
between constellation points and bit sequences to successfully
transmit a message. Figure 2 shows common modulation
schemes for up to four bits per symbol.
The radio hardware as well as the signal propagation through
the wireless channel are not perfect but instead attenuate and
corrupt the signal. Various effects can be simpliﬁed to an ad-
ditive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) process with zero mean
and variance σ2 = N0/2 on both in-phase and quadrature
component. On the receiver side, the noise leads to bit errors
if a symbol is accidentally mapped to the wrong constellation
point due to the noise. In the normalized constellation diagram
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
00
01
10
11
Quadrature
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
Quadrature
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0000
0001
0010
0011
0100
0101
0110
0111
1000
1001
1010
1011
1100
1101
1110
1111
In-Phase
Quadrature
-1 -0.5 0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
In-Phase
Fig. 2: Left column: Common modulation schemes: QPSK (2
bits per symbol), 8-PSK (3 bits per symbol) and 16-QAM (4
bits per symbol). Right column: Impact of AWGN with noise
power density N0 = 0.04 on the received signal.
(see Figure 2), the constellation points of, e.g. QPSK, are
further apart than those of 16-QAM. Hence, for the same
noise power density2 N0, misclassiﬁcations of symbols are
less likely for QPSK than for 16-QAM modulation. However,
16-QAM conveys twice the amount of bits per symbol and con-
sequentially doubles the bit rate. Thus, there obviously exists
a trade-off between the bit rate and resilience against bit errors
among the different modulation schemes. Higher noise usually
necessitates the use of a lower order modulation and hence
lower bit rate. To improve the resilience of the transmission, it
furthermore makes sense to map bit sequences with minimal
Hamming distance3 to adjacent constellation points. In that
way, the number of bit errors is minimized if a certain symbol
gets confused with its neighbor. A mapping scheme which
guarantees that every pair of directly neighboring constellation
points has a Hamming distance of dmin = 1 is called Gray
coding.
2“Noise power density” refers to the power spectral density of the noise and
is the given noise power per unit of bandwidth. To calculate the total noise
power one has to integrate over the bandwidth of the signal.
3The Hamming distance d of two bit sequences is deﬁned as the number
of dissimilar bits between them. For example: d(0011, 1010) = 2.

4
To
quantify
the
performance
of
different
modulation
schemes under noise one usually examines the mean bit error
rate (BER) across different noise situations given by the Eb/N0
ratio. Eb is the mean energy per bit and N0 is the noise
power density. Eb/N0 is a normalized signal-to-noise (SNR)
ratio, also known as the “SNR-per-bit”. Figure 3 shows a
performance comparison of traditional modulations schemes
across different noise levels.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
QPSK
8-PSK
16-QAM
Fig. 3: Performance comparison of QPSK, 8-PSK and 16-
QAM in terms of BER for different noise levels.
In wireless communication, the signal does not only prop-
agate directly from transmitter to receiver through the line-
of-sight path, but it also gets reﬂected from objects in the
environment (see Figure 4). Thus, at every time step, the
receiver receives a superposition of the signal and delayed and
attenuated copies plus additive noise, which leads to inter-
symbol interference. The effect of multipath propagation is
equivalent to a convolution of the input signal with the chan-
nel impulse response h(t), which characterizes the wireless
environment. Thus, the output signal of the channel can be
modeled as ˆx(t) = x(t) ∗h(t) + n(t).
Channel
 
h(t)
n(t)
x(t)
+ 
x(t)
^
RX
TX 
n(t)
Fig. 4: Left: Multipath propagation of the wireless signal leads
to a superposition of the signal and delayed and attenuated
copies of itself at the receiver. Right: ˆx(t) can be modeled by
a convolution of x(t) with h(t) and the addition of a complex
Gaussian random variable n(t) ∼CN(0, N0).
If uncompensated, the inter-symbol interference would lead
to detection errors, so it has to be dealt with before de-
modulation, which is called equalization. Figure 5 shows
one of the ﬁrst approaches to equalization: The least mean
squared (LMS) equalizer developed by Widrow and Hoff in
1960 [5]. Interestingly, both the LMS equalizer and neural
architectures use gradient descent to update their parameters.
Links to both of these applications can be found in Widrow’s
seminal work. This fact once again raises the question of how
well modern machine learning approaches perform in digital
radio tasks since both share a common ancestor.
x[m]
^x[m]
Filter
x [m]
-
++ 
Adaptive
algorithm
e[m]
Fig. 5: Principle of the LMS equalizer for discrete-time
samples x[m] of the continuous signal x(t). Initialized with
weights w = w1, ..., wN, the ﬁlter outputs the convoluted
signal x′[m] = ˆx[m] ∗w[m] given the corrupted signal ˆx[m].
During training, the correct signal x[m] is known, thus the
equalizer can calculate the error between the reconstructed
signal and the correct signal: e[m] = x′[m] −x[m]. The
adaptive algorithm then updates the weights of the ﬁlter with
learning rate α in the direction of steepest descent of the energy
of the error signal: wt+1 ←wt −α d(|e|)2
dw .
B. Reinforcement Learning and Policy Gradients
One of the most difﬁcult problems in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence today is that of sequential decision making in
stochastic systems. These problems are characterized by an
environment whose state evolves as a probabilistic function of
the actions taken by the actor. Reinforcement learning algo-
rithms direct an agent to choose optimal actions. In this work,
we pose the problem of learning low-level wireless communi-
cation schemes in a decentralized fashion as a reinforcement
learning problem and propose the policy gradient algorithm as
a solution. This section introduces Markov decision processes,
policy search, the score function gradient estimator and a
vanilla policy gradient algorithm as they are all central to our
approach.
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a formalism for
reasoning about decision making under uncertainty. There is
an environment that takes on a set of states and an actor
that takes actions at discrete time steps. Based on the state
and the action taken, every time step, the actor receives a
scalar reward. MDPs satisfy the Markov property, that all
information relevant to the dynamics of the system deﬁne the
state and only the current state and action affect the transition
to the next state. An MDP can be formally deﬁned as tuple
(S, D, A, P(s′|s, a), P(R|s, a)):
•
S: A set of possible states of the world.
•
D: A probability distribution over the set of initial states.
•
A: The set of possible actions.
•
P(s′|s, a): The state transition distribution. For each
state s ∈S and action a ∈A, it gives the probability
that the system transitions to state s′ ∈S.
•
P(R|s, a): The scalar reward distribution. For each state
s ∈S reached by action a ∈A, it deﬁnes a probability
distribution across scalar rewards.

5
An episodic realization of an MDP proceeds as follows.
First, an initial state s0 ∈S is sampled from D. Then, the
decision-making agent takes an action a0 ∈A. A new state
s1 ∈S is sampled from P(s′|s0, a0). A reward R1 is sampled
from P(R|s0, a0). This process repeats until a terminal state
sN is reached. The reward of the full episode is R = R1 +
R2 + · · · + RN.
The goal of the agent is to choose actions a0, a1, · · · to
maximize the expected reward, E[R]. There is a diverse set
of problem setups, based on what information - if any - is
available to the agent and the structure of the state and action
spaces. For example, some approaches assume the agent has a
probabilistic model of the state-transition distribution (model-
based), and some do not (model-free). Since we do not have
an explicit model of the system, our approach is model-free.
Successful approaches to the aforementioned problem either
try to compute the value of each state (value-function methods)
or directly try to optimize a decision-making strategy (policy-
search methods). Because of the Markov property of MDPs,
it sufﬁces to choose each action as a function of the current
state st [12]. In this work, we take this approach and work
directly in the space of policies.
A stochastic policy π(a|s; θ) deﬁnes a probability distribu-
tion over actions given states, where θ are the parameters of the
distribution. We seek to ﬁnd parameters θ which achieve the
highest expected reward under a given MDP scenario, which
can be framed as the following optimization problem:
max
θ
E[R|πθ]
(2)
This optimization problem is explicitly solvable in the case
where one knows the dynamics model and reward function, for
example in the linear-quadratic case using the iLQR algorithm
[3]. However, in this work, we are considering the model-free
case. If no model is known, the agent must act in the environ-
ment and use its experience to update its parameters and repeat
this process over and over. This form of learning is known as
policy gradient method, in which over each experience the
agent computes an approximation of the gradient ∇θE[R|πθ]
and updates its parameters.
To compute this gradient estimate, an estimator called the
Score Function Gradient Estimator (SFGE) is used. It is
derived as follows:
∇θEx[f(x)] = ∇θ
Z
dx p(x|θ)f(x)
=
Z
dx ∇θp(x|θ)f(x)
=
Z
dx p(x|θ)∇θp(x|θ)
p(x|θ) f(x)
=
Z
dx p(x|θ)∇θ log p(x|θ)f(x)
= Ex[f(x)∇θ log p(x|θ)]
(3)
The last equation gives us the unbiased estimator: Just
sample xi ∼p(x|θ) and compute ˆgi = f(xi)∇θ log p(xi|θ).
Now if we assume f to be our reward function and s to be
the whole trajectory τ = ((s0, a0, r0), (s1, a1, r2), · · · ), our
gradient estimator becomes:
∇θEτ[R] = Eτ
h
R∇θ
X
log π(at|st; θ)
i
= E
"T −1
X
t=0
∇θ log π(at|st; θ)
T −1
X
t′=t
rt′
#
(4)
So a “vanilla” policy gradient algorithm follows:
Result: Policy parameters θ
Initialize policy parameters θ;
for i = 1, 2, · · · do
Collect a set of trajectories by executing the current
policy;
At each timestep in the trajectory compute PT −1
t′=t rt′;
Update the policy using the average of the policy
gradient estimates ˆgi for each trajectory;
end
Algorithm 1: The vanilla policy gradient algorithm.
Since this section was brief, we point the reader to the
following resources for more background. For a more in-depth
look into MDPs, see [13]. For a more in-depth look into
reinforcement learning algorithms, see [12]. For a more in-
depth look into policy gradients, see [14].
Reinforcement learning is a diverse ﬁeld with a rich history.
In the past, limited computation power and simple tabular
algorithms restricted reinforcement learning to simple, low-
dimensional tasks. Now, it has been combined with value
functions, state models and policies approximated by high
capacity models (e.g. neural networks), now known as deep
reinforcement learning. Deep reinforcement learning has led
to many recent successes, e.g. in helicopter ﬂight [13], beating
human experts in the game Go [15] and continuous con-
trol [16].
IV.
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
In this section, we explore how general machine learning
algorithms perform on the standard wireless communication
problem of modulation and demodulation. The question we
seek to address is how well a generic gradient descent approach
without any domain speciﬁc knowledge works on these tasks
for which there exist well known solutions. By training a single
learning agent together with a ﬁxed conventional counterpart,
we hope to get an estimate of the learnability of modulation
and demodulation before exploring the more generalized and
complex collaborative setting.
A. Single Agent Receiver
The ﬁrst question we would like to answer is how well
an agent can recognize and demodulate an unknown signal
based on a known bit sequence (preamble) which is transmitted
before the actual payload data. In contrast to prior work,
which oftentimes considers parameter tuning across known
modulation schemes or runs classiﬁcation in a supervised
learning setting, we assume no prior knowledge about common
modulation schemes (QPSK, 8-PSK, 16-QAM, ...).

6
1) Problem Statement: The problem is formulated as fol-
lows: Given a transmitter with an arbitrary but ﬁxed modula-
tion scheme with up to 20 constellation points which transmits
a known preamble and a large unknown batch of payload data
across an AWGN channel - which bit-error rate can we achieve
across the transmission of the payload under various noise
conditions? Since we do not assume any knowledge about
usual modulation schemes, the problems boils down to an
unsupervised clustering problem. The algorithm has to ﬁnd
the number of clusters in the received samples, assign each
cluster a mapping from samples to bit strings given the known
preamble and then demodulate the payload with the learned
demodulator.
2) Approach: We use Lloyd’s algorithm [6] to solve a
variant of k-means clustering called the jump method, which
is based on an information-theoretic approach to clustering
presented in [17]. The algorithm runs k-means for every
number of k = 1...N on the received sequence and every
complex sample is interpreted as point in a 2D space. In
our analysis, we limit N to N = 20. After running k-means
for a ﬁxed number of iterations, the algorithm calculates the
minimum average distortion dk of the clustering.
Deﬁnition 1. Minimum average distortion: Let X be a two-
dimensional random variable representing the real and imagi-
nary part of the received samples. Let the means c1 · · · cN be
given and let cx be the closest mean to a given sample of X
under L2 norm. Then the minimum average distortion d[k] is
deﬁned as minimum variance across all possible clusterings:
d[k] = 1
2minc1...ckE[(X −cx)T (X −cx)]
(5)
In the setting with a ﬁnite training sequence, the expectation
gets replaced by the sample mean across all training samples.
Once all values of the distortion function have been col-
lected, the algorithm computes the jump function J(k)k=1...N,
which is the discrete derivative of the inverse of the distortion
function:
J(k) = d(k)−1 −d(k −1)−1
(6)
The algorithm then uses the value of k which maximizes
J(k) as k in k-means clustering to return k cluster means.
Once we have found a clustering, we can label each cluster
with its most common bit string across all the points within
the cluster, thus creating a mapping from complex values back
to bit strings.
The logic behind this algorithm becomes apparent if we
think about how the distortion develops if we increase k.
Assuming the k-means algorithm converges, the distortion
will always decrease with higher k because more clusters can
explain the variance in the dataset better than fewer ones. How-
ever, once we increase k beyond the actual number, splitting
the clusters will only marginally decrease the distortion. Thus,
we are looking for the “jump” in the transformed distortion
function d(k)−1, which points us to the number of clusters
beyond which diving the dataset further does not explain much
more variance. More information and mathematical support
for this algorithm in the form of asymptotic reasoning can be
found in [17].
In general, the initialization for the k-means algorithm
plays an important role. We use a variant of the k-means++
scheme [18] but instead of sampling initial means in a prob-
abilistic manner we simply choose the points that maximize
the distance to any of the previously chosen initial means.
3) Evaluation: In our analysis, we examine how well our
clustering approach works on data modulated with common
modulation schemes. We ﬁrst send a preamble to create a
clustering and a mapping of cluster means back to bits. Then, a
large chunk of data is transmitted to evaluate the bit-error rate
with the learned demodulator. Besides the BER, we also record
the number of clusters which the algorithm identiﬁed and plot
both measures over different noise intensities. Table III shows
the hyperparameters used during training.
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of iterations for k-means algorithm
50
Number of symbols for testing
107
Number of constellation points
16
Table III: Hyperparameters of the unsupervised clustering
algorithm test.
We focus our evaluation on the case where the transmitter
sends data modulated with 16-QAM. Among the modulation
schemes of order four or smaller, 16-QAM is the most complex
and hence interesting to analyze and we found that the results
for BPSK, QPSK and 8-PSK deliver similar results. Using a
standard modulation scheme allows us to compare the perfor-
mance of our algorithm to that of a conventional decoder as
baseline, which assumes full knowledge about the modulation
and thus serves as a statistical upper bound.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
Baseline
Clustering
#Clusters
4
8
12
16
20
4
8
12
16
20
Number of Clusters
Fig. 6: Performance comparison of demodulation with unsu-
pervised clustering (red) assuming a known preamble of 1000
symbols versus a conventional decoder (baseline) for 16-QAM.
The yellow line shows the algorithm’s estimate of the number
of constellation points in the data.

7
Eb/N0 = 2dB
Eb/N0 = 8dB
Eb/N0 = 14dB
Fig. 7: Visualization of the noise power. The yellow points
are the originally sent constellation points. The blue points
represent the input to the clustering algorithm.
Figure 6 shows the performance in terms of BER and
number of identiﬁed clusters for a transmission of 16-QAM-
modulated data. For high Eb/N0 ratios (i.e. low noise) of
>10dB, the learned decoder matches the BER performance
of the baseline. Although the algorithm performs very poorly
on identifying the correct number of clusters in high noise
situations, the resulting BER is still very close to the ideal
solution and does not break down. Since the bit mappings of
the constellation points are spatially correlated, our algorithm
gets approximately the same number of bits right even when
mapping multiple clusters to a single point. Thus, it does not
matter that the algorithm underestimates the number of clusters
and confuses constellation points, because the resulting error is
close to its statistical expectation. Figure 7 gives some intuition
for different noise situations in terms of the Eb/N0 ratio.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
4
8
12
16
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
4
8
12
16
20
Eb/N0 [dB]
Number of clusters
#Training samples:
100
1000
10000
Fig. 8: Number of identiﬁed clusters over different noise levels,
parametrized by the length of the training preamble.
Figure 8 shows the development of the number of identiﬁed
clusters over time for different preamble lengths. A high
number of training samples leads the algorithm to underesti-
mate the number of clusters because the constellations points
in the middle of 16-QAM are indistinguishable while the
noisy quadratic shape of the constellation diagram is best
explained by four clusters. When training with fewer samples
the algorithm slightly overestimates the number of clusters
because the number of samples per cluster is low. However,
in comparison to the other runs it converges the fastest.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
#Training samples:
100
1000
10000
Fig. 9: Bit-error rate over different noise levels, parametrized
by the length of the preamble used during training. The blue
curve shows the performance of a standard coherent 16-QAM
demodulator (baseline).
Figure 9 shows the bit-error rate for schemes trained with
different preamble lengths. The algorithm trained on a long
preamble does very poorly in presence of high noise because
of the underestimation of the number of clusters. However,
once the Eb/N0 ratio increases past 4dB, the algorithm quickly
converges to the performance of the baseline. The algorithm
trained on very few examples, despite giving the best estimate
of the number of clusters, never reaches baseline performance
because the small number of samples leads to an imprecise
guess of the cluster means.
As a result, we can conclude that simple non-parametric
and unsupervised clustering does very well on demodulating
received signals based on a known preamble in comparison
to standard coherent demodulators4. When we later move to
the multi-agent setting, there is obviously no need for neural
architectures or sophisticated learning algorithms for the sole
purpose of demodulation when there is a shared preamble.
B. Single Agent Transmitter
We now turn around the setting and ask how well an agent
can learn the functionality of a modulator and communicate
with a given receiver. The receiver is static and will try to
demodulate the signal based on a common modulation scheme,
however we assume no knowledge about common modulation
schemes in the transmitter. The goal of the transmitter is to
minimize the expected bit error rate of the receiver.
1) Problem Statement: The transmitter is given a random
but ﬁxed binary preamble b and consecutively maps ﬁxed-
length bit strings bi of the preamble to complex symbols o(bi).
The symbols get send over an AWGN channel to the receiver,
who receives ˆo(bi) = o(bi) + n with n ∼CN(0, N0). The
receiver then demodulates the noisy signals using its ﬁxed
modulation scheme and recovers ˆb. Finally, the transmitter
receives a reward based on the difference between the preamble
it sent and the bit sequence that the receiver decoded.
4While we also tried using spectral clustering [19] based on various
adjacency graphs, we found that this method was generally less capable.

8
TX
RX
Channel
rew
ε 
b
b^
b
o(b)
o(b)
^
Agent 1
Agent 2
 (0,N0)
Fig. 10: The learning transmitter tries to communicate with a
static receiver. The learning process is centralized because the
reward is calculated based on the output of the receiver.
2) Approach: The transmitter is parametrized by a neural
network that takes as input a single bit string of given length
and outputs a single complex symbol. It uses the bipolar
representation of −1 and 1 to represent bits. The network has
one fully connected hidden layer that uses the ReLU activation
function and its hidden units are fully connected to a single
neuron which calculates µ = [Re{µ}, Im{µ}]. To encourage
exploration, the output of the transmitter is drawn from a
complex normal distribution parameterized by the output µ and
a trainable standard deviation σ = [Re{σ}, Im{σ}], which can
be seen as just another variable weight of the neural network.
Figure 11 visualizes the architecture of the transmitter.
x
0
0
1
μ 
σ
)
|
(
x
o
p
Input
Hidden
Output
Fig. 11: Architecture of the transmitter. A ﬁxed number of bits
is used as input into a fully connected neural network which
outputs a real and imaginary mean µ = [Re{µ}, Im{µ}].
The complex output symbols are then sampled i.i.d. from a
multivariate Gaussian distribution parametrized by the real and
imaginary means and a separate variable σ = [Re{σ}, Im{σ}]
representing the standard deviations of the distribution.
The agent receives a loss signal from the environment
which is equal to the L1-norm between the sent preamble b
and the preamble ˆb recovered by the receiver, plus a factor
corresponding to the energy of the complex symbols outputted
by the transmitter:
Li = ∥bi −ˆbi∥1 + λp∥o(bi)∥2
2.
(7)
This allows the network to optimize for minimizing the bit
error rate while also trading off for the energy of the signal.
The negative loss is then used as the advantage estimator for
computing the SFGE of the expected reward. This gradient is
used in conjunction with the Adam optimizer [20] to train the
network using the vanilla policy gradient algorithm described
in Section III-B. In contrast to how the policy gradient algo-
rithm was described before, here our episode length is 1. Each
input, transmission, output and associated reward is taken to
be a single episode of training. This is necessary because there
is no temporal structure to the actions taken. The state in this
case is the past history of transmissions and rewards but it is
not modeled explicitly by the network. The gradient estimator
then, is simply
∇θE[R] ≈−
N
X
i=1
Li∇θ log p(o(xi)|xi)
(8)
3) Results: We found that the network was capable of learn-
ing approximations of QPSK, 8-PSK and 16-QAM for two,
three and four bit transmissions respectively with reasonable
preambles lengths of a few hundred symbols within a few
hundred iterations. Figure 12 shows a typical learning curve
for this set-up given a ﬁxed 16-QAM receiver. The learning
progress is quantiﬁed by the bit-error rate of the preamble
transmission and shows a rapid decrease of the BER within
the ﬁrst 200 iterations, because the network explores positions
for the constellation points which minimize the error rate. After
that, the transmitter has learned to put the constellation points
in the right position as dictated by the receiver. Subsequently,
it starts to exploit the learned constellation by reducing the
standard deviation of the sampling process, which leads to a
slow but steady decrease in BER. These results conﬁrm that
the loss signal is expressive enough for the network to learn
an intelligible communication scheme.
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Training iterations
Bit-error rate (BER)
Fig. 12: Bit-error rate over number of training iterations of
the system with a learning transmitter and a ﬁxed 16-QAM
receiver. Hyperparameters: Initial log(σ) = −2. For the other
parameters refer to Table VI.
V.
MAIN PROBLEM FORMULATION
After studying how agents can learn to receive and transmit
given a static counterpart, it an obvious question to ask whether
it is possible to combine both aspects and train a receiver
and a transmitter simultaneously. As previously mentioned,

9
we intend to solve the problem in which two agents are only
allowed to communicate strictly through an unknown noisy
channel using their respective learned digital communication
scheme. Unlike previous work in this area, which signiﬁcantly
relaxed the problem by allowing for shared weights, shared
gradients or a fully differentiable communication process, it
is no longer clear how the reward signal should be computed
and how it will be communicated between agents.
VI.
MAIN PROBLEM SETUP
We propose the following approach as a solution for the
problem described above. Two actors, Agent 1 and Agent 2,
share a ﬁxed bit string b that acts as the preamble. Each agent
contains both a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitters are
an instance of the neural network from Section IV-B that takes
a bit string as input and outputs a complex number which rep-
resents the actor’s transmission for that bit string. The receiver
runs k-nearest neighbors (kNN) on each complex number by
comparing it with the rest of the modulated preamble and
generates a guess for each transmission. The noise function
of the channel is parametrized by n ∼CN(0, N0).
o2(b,b)
TX
 (0,N0)
rew
o1(b)
o1(b)
^
Agent 1
Agent 2
TX
b
RX
^
o2(b,b)
^
b^
b
b
RX
ε 
^
Channel
Fig. 13: Full system with decentralized reward. Agent 1 and 2
share a ﬁxed preamble b, echo it back and forth over the noisy
channel and use the difference between the sent and received
preamble to compute the reward rew.
During each iteration, each actor takes turns in completing
an entire update operation for their transmitter. The update
operation is described as follows:
1) Agent 1 modulates the preamble to produce the signal
o1(b) and sends it over the channel.
2) Agent 2 receives the noisy modulated signal ˆo1(b) =
o1(b) + n and produces a guess of the preamble ˆb using
its receiver.
3) Agent 2 modulates both the preamble b and its guess of
the received preamble ˆb to produce the signal o2(b,ˆb) and
sends it over the channel.
4) Agent 1 receives the noisy modulated signal ˆo2(b,ˆb) and
computes a guess of ˆb, which is ˆˆb, with its receiver using
the modulation of b as reference.
5) Agent 1 then computes a loss function given b and ˆˆb and
updates its parameters using policy gradients.
6) Agent 1 and Agent 2 switch roles and the loop starts over
at step 1.
The receiver has two distinct behaviors depending on the
type of signal it receives. If it receives only the modulated
preamble, then it will demodulate each symbol with the help
of the other known modulated symbols of the preamble. If
instead it receives the modulated preamble along with another
modulated signal, it will demodulate the latter signal by ﬁnding
the nearest neighbors in the former.
The secondary behavior of the receiver is to combat the
noise that Agent 2’s transmitter adds to ˆb. The modulation
of the preamble gives Agent 1’s receiver a noisy idea of the
modulation scheme used by Agent 2’s transmitter, so that the
receiver can produce an educated demodulation of ˆo2(ˆb).
The loss function is deﬁned to be a weighted combination of
the bit error rate and average symbol energy as in Equation 7.
The loss is then used in computing the policy gradient as
described in Algorithm 2.
Result: Transmitter parameters θ1 and θ2
Initialize policy parameters θ1 and θ2;
while stopping condition not met do
Agent 1 sends b to Agent 2 and receives an echoed
version ˆˆb;
Agent 1 calculates the reward for each symbol, the
negative loss Ri = −Li;
Agent 1 calculates
∇θ1E[R] ≈−PN
i=1 Li∇θ1 log p1(o(xi)|xi);
Agent 1 performs a gradient update on its parameters;
Agent 1 and 2 switch roles;
end
Algorithm 2: Decentralized learning of modulation schemes.
The quality of the gradient updates for each agent is depen-
dent on the quality of the other agent’s transmitter. Because
of this interdependency, the training is a complex optimization
problem in which the signal is constantly changing due to
both internal and external updates. Thus exploration plays an
important role in the learning process and we investigate the
visualization and interpretation of these dynamics in the next
section.
VII.
RESULTS
In this section, we describe the results of a thorough analysis
of our approach. First, we comment on the training behavior,
which reveals some very interesting strategies to learn a
robust modulation scheme. Next, we qualitatively describe
the inﬂuence of each of the hyperparameters on the learning
progress and on the ﬁnal scheme. Finally, we give quantitative
results on the performance of the learned modulation schemes.
All quantitative results have been collected and are depicted
in terms of their mean and standard deviation across ten runs
with different random seeds.
A. Training Behavior
For brevity, we restrict our analysis the most complex case
within the set of modulation schemes of order four or lower
and thus focus on schemes with 16 constellations points.

10
We provide both agents with a preamble of set length M
where M is a hyperparameter. As described above, the agents
take turns in transmitting and receiving preambles and echos
through the AWGN channel and we record the loss of each
agent’s transmitter at every time step. Figure 14 shows the
development of the modulation scheme of a given transmitter
with the set of hyperparameters listed in Table VI. These
plots were produced by having the transmitter modulate a
sequence of bit strings with the modulation scheme it has
learned up until a certain number of iterations and recording
the complex outputs. Each red point represents the modulation
of a single bit string, and the overall plot visualizes the means
and standard deviations of the network at that iteration5.
it=0
it=300
it=350
it=425
it=550
it=1300
Fig. 14: Sampled output of the transmitter during training
without symbol energy limit. See Appendix A Table VI for
hyperparameters.
From the graphs it is clear that the training is broken up into
distinct phases, ultimately converging to an optimal solution
which represents a rotated version of 16-QAM. Initially, all
of the constellation points are near the origin and have high
variance. The random initialization of the network’s weights
and biases breaks any initial symmetry. After a few hundred
iterations, the network splits the points into two clusters of
eight constellation points each. Next, the network splits the
points into four clusters of four constellation points each
on a line that goes through the origin. After around 400
iterations, it begins to split the points into eight clusters of
two constellation points, each in a direction perpendicular to
the original cluster direction. After splitting each of the clusters
one more time, each constellation point has its individual
position in the constellation diagram. Finally, the network
reduces the standard deviation on the transmitted points and
converges on an optimal scheme which is very similar to a
rotated version of 16-QAM.
5Note that the randomness in the plots does not stem from the AWGN
channel, since the plots are constructed from the outputs of the transmitter.
Instead, the point clouds demonstrate the stochasticity of the neural network’s
outputs.
One other noteworthy observation is that, upon splitting, the
agent reliably chooses every subset of constellations points in a
way that minimizes the Hamming distance between the points
in the subset, resulting in a steadily decreasing BER throughout
training. In transmitting four bits, the network learns groups
of four constellation points that are internally Gray coded but
there is no global Gray coding across the whole constellation.
This is likely due to the fact that locally Gray coded solutions
represent local minima and a global Gray code is a non
trivial combinatorial problem. Because we did not implement
any techniques for escaping these minima such as simulated
annealing, it is reasonable for the network to generally fall into
locally Gray coded solutions.
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Training iterations
Mean energy per symbol
Fig. 15: Development of the mean energy per symbol ¯
Es over
the course of the training with unrestricted energy.
If the energy per symbol is not restricted but only penalized
with a soft loss, the network will initially increase the average
energy beyond the ﬁnal constellation to allow for greater
exploration in the mapping. This gives the network enough
room to split the clusters under any noise situation without
increasing the bit error rate. After it achieves a reasonably low
bit rate by splitting the clusters and moving the constellation
points, it will begin to reduce the symbol energy and ﬁnd
a pareto-optimal point in the BER versus energy trade-off.
Figure 15 shows how the mean energy per symbol develops
over training time.
In contrast, Figure 16 shows result for the case that the
energy of the output signals is restricted. If the maximum mean
symbol energy across all constellation points is hard-clamped
to the unit circle, the network cannot simply increase the output
energy to counter the noise anymore. Conventional radio
system would usually decrease the order of the modulation
scheme in the presence of higher noise e.g. from 16-QAM to
QPSK. However, because we ﬁxed the length of each input to
four bits, the network has no other choice but to arrange all
possible 16 constellation points in some way.
In Figure 16, we see that increasing the noise power density
steadily reduces the number of indistinguishable clusters from
16 individual points over eight clusters with two constellation
points each down to only four clusters with four constellation
points each when the noise is especially harsh. What is
interesting about this is that the network chooses to “sacriﬁce”

11
N0 = 0.01
it=275
it=900
it=1500
N0 = 0.04
N0 = 0.16
Fig. 16: Sampled output of the transmitter with restricted
energy (unit circle) at different iterations (columns) and noise
power densities N0 (rows). See appendix A Table VII for the
other hyperparameters.
the same bit across all clusters, and to minimize hamming
distance for the rest of the bits between the clusters. Thus, the
network inherently learns the concept of decreasing the order
of the modulation scheme in the presence of noise. This result
is especially surprising because the system cannot exploit the
lower order scheme to reduce the BER because it is forced
to send four bits in each symbol. Section VII-C will present
some insight on why the networks behaves in the presented
fashion nonetheless.
Figure 17 shows how the bit-error rate of the preamble
decreases during training for the case of the full system with
and without restricted energy in comparison to the single
agent transmitter from Section IV-B. The bit-error rate of the
preamble represents the loss during training minus the energy
penalty. The three depicted runs are based on dissimilar Eb/N0
values during training and necessitate different hyperparam-
eters to converge, thus the absolute BER values should not
be compared to each other (We present dependable results
about the performance of the resulting modulation schemes in
Section VII-C). However, a qualitative comparison reveals that
the single transmitter system converges much faster with less
variance because it does not have to come up with a resilient
modulation scheme itself but only ﬁnd the one that the receiver
dictates. For the full system, we can see that the variance of the
bit error rate is large for the same period of time that the mean
energy per symbol (Figure 15) stays relatively high. This is due
to the transmitters learning fairly diverse mappings early while
exploring the constellation space. Around a certain BER value,
which happens to be approximately 10−2 in this case, the
transmitters stick to their discovered schemes and subsequently
only decrease the standard deviation of their sampling to lower
the BER further. The restricted agent explores faster but longer
because of a smaller initial log(σ) which was necessary for
convergence.
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Training iterations
Bit-error rate (BER)
Single
Full
Full (restricted)
Fig. 17: Bit-error rate over the ﬁrst 1000 iterations. Hyper-
parameters: Initial log(σ) = −2 for the single transmitter and
the full system with restricted energy. For the other parameters
refer to Table VI.
B. Inﬂuence of Hyperparameters and Initialization
This subsection qualitatively describes the inﬂuence of the
hyperparameters and the initialization on the learning behavior
and convergence of the algorithm. We ran around 4000 hyper-
parameter sweeps in a random search fashion to ﬁnd a good
set for the evaluation process and to study the inﬂuence of
each of the parameters on the learning performance. Table IV
shows the parameter search space.
Hyperparameter
Range
Preamble length M:
128, 256, 512
Initial log(σ):
−1.5...1
Noise power density N0:
0.01...0.7
Power loss factor λp:
0.001...0.1
Step size:
0.0001...0.01
k in kNN:
3 (hand-picked)
Num hidden units:
40 (hand-picked)
Training iterations:
2000 (hand-picked)
Table IV: Value ranges for the hyperparameter sweeps.
1) Preamble length: The number of symbols in the preamble
determines the sample size for one gradient approximation,
since the network parameters are updated after each transmis-
sion. While longer preambles offer a more precise reward and
thus less noisy update steps, preambles longer than 29 symbols
signiﬁcantly increase training time and become impractical for
testing.

12
2) Initial log standard deviation: The initial log standard
deviation of the transmitter plays an important role in the
learning process because it controls the level of exploration of
the agent in the exploration versus exploitation trade-off. Initial
values of the log standard deviation which are too large prevent
the agent from learning in a reasonable number of iterations
while values that are too small stymie the exploration process
and cause the network to prematurely converge on an unstable
constellation.
3) Step size: The convergence of the algorithm and the ﬁnal
shape of the constellation is very sensitive to variations in the
step size of the gradient update. Small step sizes lead to an
excessively long training duration but large step sizes cause
an instantaneous splitting of all clusters and low stability. In
our experiments we were able to tune a ﬁxed learning rate
for the Adam algorithm in a way so that the ﬁnal constellation
automatically converges. However, to guarantee stability across
many different conditions it would be wise to implement some
kind of learning rate decay.
4) Noise power density: The noise power density in the
AWGN channel adds uncertainty to the learning progress, but
very low noise levels that do not effect the learning are not
realistic. In fact, if the symbol energy is not clipped but only
penalized by a soft power loss factor, the agent will simply
increase its mean symbol energy to compensate for the noise.
In this case, the noise power density is less important to
consider (see Section VII-C).
The noise power density might be an unintuitive measure to
the reader, so we provide a conversion chart between values
of N0 and the resulting Eb/N0 ratio for standard 16-QAM in
Table V. As a reference, Eb/N0 = 0dB implies that the noise
power density in the channel is equal to the mean energy per
bit. Every addition of 3dB leads to a doubling of the Eb/N0
ratio. Note that we cannot directly link the noise power density
to Eb/N0 values for our learned modulation schemes because
the network can vary its mean output energy depending on the
current noise level. For a visualization of different noise levels
also refer to Figure 7.
N0
Eb/N0
0.01
11.43dB
0.04
5.41dB
0.09
1.88dB
0.16
-0.61dB
Table V: Relationship between values of the noise power
density N0 used for evaluation and the resulting Eb/N0 values
for standard 16-QAM.
5) Power constraint: λp in Equation 7 determines the con-
tribution of the mean output power to the training loss. If the
energy per symbol was unconstrained, the constellations points
would simply ﬂy off without limit in order to increase the
Eb/N0 ratio. However, an excessively high λp factor inhibits
the splitting of the clusters and thus the learning process as a
whole. A loss factor for the output power is a soft constraint,
because the network can still increase the symbol energy at
will if it helps decreasing the BER term. An alternative to the
power loss factor is a hard constraint, which forces the output
energy of the transmitter to be smaller than or equal to 1.
In our approach, we achieve this by normalizing all symbol
amplitudes by the value of the largest mean symbol energy of
the network if the largest mean energy is greater that 1. We
will refer to this as the “restricted energy” case6.
6) Number of hidden units: The number of hidden units
determines the expressiveness of the neural network which
forms the transmitter. However, a more expressive architecture
does not necessarily perform better. We found that increasing
the number of hidden units past approximately 40 or using
even multiple hidden layers does not improve the performance
but only slows down the learning.
7) k in the kNN receiver: In the receiver, k determines
the number of neighboring points which are considered to
determine the bit sequence assigned to a constellation point.
As described in Section IV-A, it is possible to demodulate a
signal with a clustering algorithm very well even for short
preamble lengths. However, a powerful demodulator will lead
the transmitter to stick with the ﬁrst best random constellation
instead of exploring the space to ﬁnd a noise-resistant scheme.
Hence, we limit k to 3 in order to motivate the transmitter to
ﬁnd a scheme which works even for weak demodulators and
is thus more robust.
8) Training iterations: The number of training iterations
determines how often we send the preamble back and forth
before we stop the training process and evaluate the resulting
modulation scheme. We found that a good set of hyperpa-
rameters leads to convergence within the ﬁrst 1000 to 2000
iterations or less. Hence, we ﬁxed the number of iterations to
2000 since there is no value in evaluating a modulation scheme
which has not yet converged. On the other hand, for evaluation
we only use the learned constellation points as represented by
their means, which converge even faster.
9) Initial weights and biases: Figure 18 shows the sampled
output of the same transmitter as in Figure 14, but with another
seed for the random generator which provides the initial
weights and biases for the network. Although the network
converges to an equivalent constellation, the training process
runs through very different stages. This effect can also be
observed in the high variance of the bit-error rate during some
stages of the training (see Figure 17).
We found that initializing the weights and biases of the
network with normally distributed values of variance σ = 0.2
and the means with normally distributed values of σ = 0.5
but no bias worked well for most runs. Random initialization
proved to be important to break initial symmetries in the
network and converge to a meaningful modulation scheme.
6Note that this does not force the energy of each sampled symbols to be
strictly smaller than 1, since we only normalize by the mean. The logic behind
this is that the ﬁnal transmitter will no longer use a stochastic policy after
learning but only the resulting means of the learning process. Normalizing on
a sample basis would stymie the learning progress.

13
it=0
it=400
it=525
it=675
it=850
it=1325
Fig. 18: Sampled output of the same transmitter as in Figure 14
but with a different seed for the random weight generator.
C. Quantitative Analysis
After describing the training process qualitatively, The fol-
lowing plots show numerical results from the performance
analysis of the learned modulation schemes. To generate these
plots, we train the system with the provided hyperparameters
and then extract the learned modulation scheme represented by
the mean output for each possible input bit sequence. We then
transmit 10 million symbols modulated with that scheme for
different Eb/N0 levels across the channel to the receiver. Since
we want to analyze the learned modulation scheme and not the
performance of the receiver, we transmit a long preamble of
10,000 symbols to perfectly recreate the constellation points
at the receiver by averaging out the noise. Finally, we use the
reconstructed mapping to demodulate the noisy samples and
measure the bit-error rate of the transmission.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
N0:
0.01
0.04
0.16
Fig. 19: Performance of modulation schemes learned under
different noise power densities for the unrestricted energy case.
For the other hyperparameters refer to Table VI. The blue line
represents the performance of standard 16-QAM.
Figure 19 shows the performance of modulation schemes
learned under different noise situations during training with
a preamble length of 512 in terms of their BER. We see
that although the learned modulation schemes are more error-
prone than standard 16-QAM, the learning process is very
stable, since varying the noise power density has only a small
impact on the result. The high resilience against noise during
training is achieved because the network has the option to
trade-off symbol energy versus BER in the unrestricted case.
In fact, the scheme learned under the very high noise power
density of 0.16 performs slightly better than the other ones.
This observation can be explained by the fact that the network
is forced to learn a very robust transmission scheme, and that
the high noise power restricts much of the feasible mapping
space as it increases the likelihood for transmission errors.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
Preamble length:
128
256
512
Fig. 20: Performance of modulation schemes learned with
different preamble lengths under a noise power density of
N0 = 0.16 during training. For the other hyperparameters
refer to Table VI. The blue line represents the performance
of standard 16-QAM.
Figure 20 shows results for a sweep over preamble lengths
for a set noise power density. Since the sweeps over a lower
N0 were yet again very stable, we were interested to see
at which point the learning breaks down and thus chose a
very high value of N0 = 0.16. We see that performance
improves for increasing preamble length, which is expected
because the longer preamble provides more samples for the
score function gradient estimator, improving the robustness of
the network. From the graph we can see that the network with
preamble length of 128 is extremely variable in performance,
as visualized by the high standard deviation for high Eb/N0
ratios. Although there is a signiﬁcant increase in performance
when increasing the preamble length from 128 to 256 symbols,
we observe marginal improvement when jumping from 256 to
512 symbols. We predict that further increases to the preamble
length would bring performance even close to the 16-QAM
baseline, but the trade-off in the number of symbols that need
to be transmitted during the learning process would render our
approach infeasible for realistic scenarios.

14
Finally, we present results on the performance of modulation
schemes learned with restricted symbol energy under different
noise levels. In Figure 16 we have seen that increasing the
noise power density beyond N0
= 0.01 during training
prevents the network from splitting the clusters all the way
to single constellation points. This behavior leads to high
bit error rates for these schemes because the constellation
points mapped to the same cluster become indistinguishable.
Figure 21 shows that for schemes learned with N0 ≥0.04 the
BER is high, because the receiver will statistically get 50%
of the bits that differ between constellation points within the
same cluster wrong.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
Bit-error rate (BER)
N0:
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.16
Fig. 21: Performance of modulation schemes learned under
different noise power densities for the energy restricted case.
For the other parameters refer to Table VI. The blue line
represents the performance of standard 16-QAM. The vertical
lines refer the noise level during training to the Eb/N0 curve
of 16-QAM.
The plot also shows that given a ﬁxed input of four
bits per symbol, splitting the constellation into 16 separate
points, as represented by the red curve, is always better
than keeping them in clusters. The difference between the
red curve representing 16 clusters and the purple and yellow
curve representing 8 and 4 clusters is staggeringly high for
high Eb/N0 values. However, referring the noise level during
training back to the performance curve of 16-QAM (vertical
lines) reveals that the maximum possible decrease in BER
for splitting the clusters is not actually that high for those
noise situations. The difference to the feasible red curve is
even lower. Thus, we interpret that the network simply has
no incentive to split the clusters any further, because that
would only marginally decrease the BER for the given noise
situation. Even a tenfold increase in learning rate did not
change said behavior. While this feature was unanticipated,
it is desirable to have the agents automatically switch to a
lower order modulation scheme under high noise. However,
this assumes that the agents can also exploit those beneﬁts by
encoding less bits per symbol, which our architecture currently
cannot.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The importance of ﬂexible radio design has been conﬁrmed
by the initiation of the DARPA Spectrum Collaboration Chal-
lenge, which is devoted entirely to the task of building col-
laborative radio agents via machine learning. In this work, we
began by noting the similarities between signal processing in
radio domain and machine learning techniques. We tested that
observation through a series of preliminary analysis of data-
driven approaches to the modulation and the demodulation of
digital signals. Using the preliminary results, we formulated
the problem of two agents learning modulation schemes in
an entirely decentralized fashion and solved it using modern
deep reinforcement learning techniques. Finally, we thoroughly
analyzed the performance of the algorithm through extensive
experiments and discussion.
We conclude that it is possible to learn physical modulation
ex-nihilo and decentralized, and that the learning process is
very resilient against noise. While it is not surprising that the
network tends to learn the standard modulation schemes, these
results in conjunction with the highly orchestrated behavior
observed during the training process are remarkable. The
reward function, which is deﬁned entirely in terms of the bit
error rate and the symbol energy, contains no information to
induce such structured behavior from the network - there is
no reward shaping, no direct measurement of the noise and
the neural network itself is rather shallow. At the beginning of
training, the reward signal holds almost no useful information
because its quality is tied to the performance of the transmitter
of the other agent. Nonetheless, the agents learn to balance the
exploration versus exploitation trade-off, increase the symbol
energy to counteract noise, cluster subsets of constellations
points according to their hamming distance, employ local
Gray-coding, converge without learning rate decay, implement
standard modulation schemes and even try to adapt the mod-
ulation scheme to the noise level.
For future work, it would be interesting to increase the
capabilities of the agents to deal with more complex settings.
A possible next step is to give the agents an option to decide
themselves how many bits to encode in each transmitted
symbol. Furthermore, the next big step would be to generalize
the channel to a non-reciprocal linear time-invariant (LTI)
multipath model, which is considerably harder as it is no
longer memoryless. Since in this work the BER signal has
proven to be rich enough to enable the learning of all kinds
of modulation techniques, it is a valid question to ask whether
it could also enable the learning of equalization or pre-coding
in a decentralized fashion.

15
APPENDIX A
TABLES OF HYPERPARAMETERS
Hyperparameter
Value
Preamble length M:
512
Initial log(σ):
−1.0
Noise power density N0:
0.01
Power loss factor λp:
0.09
k in kNN:
3
Step size:
0.00245
Hidden units:
40
Training iterations:
2000
Table VI: Hyperparameters if applicable and not stated other-
wise.
Hyperparameter
Value
Preamble length M:
512
Initial log(σ):
−2.0
Noise power density N0:
0.01
Power loss factor λp:
0.05
k in kNN:
3
Step size:
0.002
Hidden units:
40
Training iterations:
2000
Table VII: Hyperparameters if applicable and not stated oth-
erwise.
