1
Explainable AI Framework for COVID-19
Prediction in Different Provinces of India
Mredulraj S. Pandianchery, Gopalakrishnan E.A, Sowmya V, Vinayakumar Ravi, Soman K.P
Abstract—In 2020, covid-19 virus had reached more than 200
countries. Till December 20th 2021, 221 nations in the world
had collectively reported 275M conﬁrmed cases of covid-19 &
total death toll of 5.37M. Many countries which include United
States, India, Brazil, United Kingdom, Russia etc were badly
affected by covid-19 pandemic due to the large population. The
total conﬁrmed cases reported in this country are 51.7M, 34.7M,
22.2M, 11.3M, 10.2M respectively till December 20, 2021. This
pandemic can be controlled with the help of precautionary steps
by government & civilians of the country. The early prediction
of covid-19 cases helps to track the transmission dynamics &
alert the government to take the necessary precautions. Recurrent
Deep learning algorithms is a data driven model which plays a
key role to capture the patterns present in time series data. In
many literatures, the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based
model are proposed for the efﬁcient prediction of COVID-19 cases
for different provinces. The study in the literature doesn’t involve
the interpretation of the model behaviour & robustness. In this
study, The LSTM model is proposed for the efﬁcient prediction
of active cases in each provinces of India. The active cases dataset
for each province in India is taken from John Hopkin’s publicly
available dataset for the duration from 10th June, 2020 to 4th
August, 2021. The proposed LSTM model is trained on one state
i.e., Maharashtra and tested for rest of the provinces in India.
The concept of “Explainable AI” is involved in this study for the
better interpretation & understanding of the model behaviour.
The proposed model is used to forecast the active cases in India
from 16th December, 2021 to 5th March, 2022. It is notated that
there will be a emergence of third wave on January, 2022 in
India.
Index Terms—Covid-19 (novel corona), Time series analysis,
prediction, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Explainable AI.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N December 2019, there was an outbreak with unknown
cause in the Wuhan city, Hubei province of China. The
infection was named as 2019-nCoV on 12th January, 2020 &
the genome sequences were send to World Health Organization
(WHO). On 11th March 2020, WHO had declared covid-19
outbreak as global pandemic [1].
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) provides improved methodolo-
gies to mitigate the effect of COVID-19 pandemic [12]. The
deep learning tools provided by AI are one of the main high-
lights of improved methodology. Deep learning approaches
Mredulraj S. Pandianchery, Gopalakrishnan E.A, Sowmya V and Soman
K.P are with Center for Computational Engineering and Networking (CEN),
Amrita School of Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore,

Vinayakumar Ravi is with Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Prince Moham-

succeeded to discover the pattern present in large datasets
& had brought breakthrough in visual recognition, speech
and video processing [2]. Deep learning approaches plays a
prominent role in detecting COVID-19 infections among the
infected people & the early prediction of COVID-19 cases.
Deep Learning architectures are used for the detection of
COVID-19 infection by the classiﬁcation of chest radiogra-
phy images [3]. They are also used for different real time
applications such as face mask detection & social distance
identiﬁcation in public places which are the most important
control measures for the mitigation of COVID-19 [4], [5].
Before the implementation of these containment measures in
public places, the government forecast the transmission trend
of covid-19 among the population. The early prediction of
covid-19 plays a key role to control the transmission dynamics
of virus among the population. It helps the government to
take the necessary precautions & alert the people by the
implementation of different restriction in public places.
The early prediction of covid-19 cases can be done by the
means of mathematical models & deep learning algorithms.
The recurrent deep learning algorithms captures the pattern
present in time series data. The forecasting of time series
data plays a key role in different domain such as epidemics
& ﬁnance [6]-[8]. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based
models such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) & Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) are capable to learn the dynamics in
time series data more efﬁciently as compared to the traditional
methods. From the beginning of pandemic, there was lots
of study carried related to the transmission trend in different
provinces of India [19]. Bahri et. al. proposed LSTM model
for the prediction of covid-19 deceased cases in USA, Italy
and India. The LSTM model had done the estimation for 7
days ahead with the error rate of 1.37%, 2.69% and 1.99%
respectively [13]. Liu et. al. had proposed the LSTM model for
the prediction of cumulative conﬁrmed cases for four different
regions in China which include Zhejiang, Guangdong, Beijing,
and Shanghai. The proposed LSTM model with LSTM layer
of 10 hidden units & relu as an activation function for the
prediction of cumulative conﬁrmed case of next day [14].
Arora et. al. had done the comparison between different deep
learning architectures such as Stacked LSTM, Bi-LSTM and
Convolutional-LSTM for the daily & weekly basis prediction
of positive COVID-19 cases of each province in India. The
study involves training data from 14th March to 8th May,
2020 and testing data from 9th May, 2020 to 14th May
2020. The Bi-LSTM had performed well in daily and weekly
prediction among the other deep learning algorithms [18].
ArunKumar et. al. had done the comparison of LSTM &
arXiv:2201.06997v2  [cs.CY]  30 Jul 2022

2
GRU model with 2 hidden layers & 300 neuron each in the
layer for the prediction & forecasting of cumulative conﬁrmed
cases, cumulative recovered cases & cumulative fatalities from
March, 2020 to October, 2020 in 10 different countries USA,
Brazil, India, South Africa, Peru, UK, Brazil, Russia, Mexico,
Chile & Iran separately. The deep learning architectures are
trained & tested on same parent province [24].
From the literature. It is evident that there are various
researches for the efﬁcient prediction of COVID-19 cases. In
the literature review, the proposed model is used for the early
prediction for different provinces individually i.e., training
and testing the model on same parent provinces. The study
doesn’t involve whether the proposed model is robust, reli-
able or interpretable for different stakeholders which include
Data Scientist, Product Owners, Regulatory entities, Medical
Doctors & Executive Board Member etc. It is very critical
to understand the model behaviour in different tasks such as
explanation of predictions in-order to support the decision-
making process and debugging the unexpected behaviour of
the model. Due to the availability of large databases, well
developed methodologies and good computational power, deep
learning algorithms perform well on complex tasks. Due to
non-linear structure in deep learning models, the decision
taken by the neurons are considered to be black box. There
is lack of transparency in understanding the model behavior.
The requirements of transparency and trust are more crucial in
critical applications. Explainable AI is a term which helps to
make the results from AI systems more understandable to the
stakeholders. Explainable AI contributes to ”Responsible AI”
considering the accountability, responsibility and transparency
[9], [16]. Explainable AI helps to detect the biases existing
in the model or data and the weakness existing in the AI
system. The detection of improper classiﬁcation or wrong
prediction helps to improve the AI models [10], [11], [15].
The explainable AI approach plays a key role in the medical
domain. The explainable AI approach has been used for heart
rate variability in ECG signal. The study involves of different
deep learning architecture such as LSTM, GRU, CNN and
RSCNN trained on one tachycardia disease and tested on
different tachycardia diseases. As all tachycardia disease has
fast beat rhythm as common characteristic, it will allow to
check the robustness & reliability in the model [17].
Motivated by the importance of ”Explainable AI”, this
article is unique from few perspective:
1) India is a country with 36 provinces which includes 28
states & 8 union territories. This study had proposed a
LSTM model for active cases per day prediction trained
on single state with favourable dynamics & tested for
rest of the provinces. This approach helps to understand
the robustness present in behaviour of the model.
2) The study also involves the visualization & interpretation
of the biased behaviour detected in model prediction.
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
A. COVID-19 Outbreak
In India, the ﬁrst case of covid-19 was reported on 27th
January, 2020 in Thrissur district of Kerala [25]. During covid-
19 outbreak, WHO has acknowledged that the entire world
had gazed their attention towards the strategies to be taken by
Indian government in-order to control the covid-19 outbreak
[26]. The nationwide lockdown was implemented on 24th
March, 2020 in India as a precautionary step to control the
pandemic [25]. In the absence of vaccine, non pharmacological
intervention i.e. social distancing was the only way to control
the pandemic. The sudden surge of covid-19 positive cases in
hospital has brought the crises in the healthcare operations
during the 1st wave of pandemic. The covid-19 outbreak
has brought the challenge in the requirements of hospital
beds, ventilators, testing services & front-line workers. It was
a great challenge for the country to improve the primary
health care system, as 65-68% of the population lives in
the rural areas [27]. The forecasting of covid-19 cases was
necessary to capture the transmission dynamics in the different
provinces of India. It helps the government to predict the
requirements of healthcare facilities & to make the decision for
the implementation of precautionary measures which include
lockdown & quarantine [28]-[30].
B. Time Series Analysis
Time Series Analysis is deﬁned as an analysis of orderly
sequenced value of the variable which is sampled at the
speciﬁc interval of time. It captures the evolution of the
variable with respect to time & helps to forecast the future data
points [31]. The analysis of time series detect the regularities
present in the data which include seasonality & cyclicity.
The different techniques are used for time series forecasting
which include regression method, auto regression method,
mathematical modelling & machining learning methods [32]-
[34]. The extreme events in dynamical systems are responsible
for the sudden transitions in the time series data. This kind
of dynamics in the data can be captured with deep learning
methods [35]. This study focuses in the implementation of
deep learning based model for the prediction of active cases
per day in different province of India.
C. Deep Learning Methods
Conventional machine learning methods has limitation in its
ability to convert the raw data into suitable representation. In
the development of machine learning models, domain expertise
is needed for the feature extraction from raw data. The rep-
resentation based learning helps the machine to automatically
discover the patterns present in the raw data. Deep learning
methods is a representation based learning method which
extracts the intricate structure present in the data with multiple
levels of abstraction. Deep learning methods had achieved
state of art accuracies in different ﬁelds which include visual
recognition, speech recognition & natural language processing
etc. For time series data, the hand crafted features are more
expensive. The recurrent neural networks in deep learning
methods helps to capture the past information present in the
sequence & predicts the information in future time steps [2],
[36].
1) Recurrent Neural Network (RNN): Recurrent Neural
Network captures the pattern present in the data which varies
with respect to time. RNN is a structured deep learning model

3
with feedback loop which allows to do the forecasting. In
feed forward neural network, there is a unidirectional ﬂow
from input layer to the output layer. In RNN, the output
from the layer is added with input and fed back into the
same layer. RNN takes the sequential input and gives the
sequential output from the model. So, RNN plays a key role
in sequential modelling with a different variety of applications
[21]. The drawback in RNN is that it suffers from the problem
of vansishing gradient & exploding gradient.
2) Long Short Term Memory (LSTM): Long Short Term
Memory provides gating mechanism which helps to overcome
the inefﬁciency of long term dependencies. LSTM is consist of
three important gates which include Input Gate, Forget Gate
and Output Gate. The Input Gate in LSTM helps to retain
the information in current cell state. The Forget Gate plays a
key role in determining which information has to be removed
from the previous LSTM cell. The output from LSTM cell is
determined by the Output Gate with the combination of cell
value, current input and output from the previous iteration
[22]. The gating mechanism helps in retaining the relevant
information for the next cell and helps to sustain the long
term dependency.
3) Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU): Gated Recurrent Unit
solves the vanishing gradient & exploding gradient problem
in RNN during back-propagation. GRU is consist of two gates
which are Update Gate & Reset Gate. Update Gate determines
how much information from the past sequence is relevant for
future. Update Gate functions as similar to the Output Gate
in LSTM. Reset Gate determines how much information from
the past sequence has to be removed. Reset Gate functions as
similar to the combination of Input & Forget Gate in LSTM
[37], [38]. GRU does not contain current cell state which is
present in LSTM. The information present in current cell state
is directly fed in to the hidden state of GRU.
D. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
Now a days, there are lots of development in industrial &
research domain with the help of deep learning. Deep learning
had succeeded in solving the critical problems. But the wrong
interpretation from the deep learning models is very crucial
in different critical domains. So, it is necessary to understand
the model behaviour in deep learning approach. The questions
always arises in the research with respect to the failure of the
model and also how to leverage the performance of the model.
The term “Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence” helps to do the
interpretation and understanding from the analysis of the deep
learning models. It helps to interpret the decision made in the
black box of the neurons. It helps the ML community to have a
good interpretability and explainability of ML algorithms [23].
Explainable AI helps to detect the biased decision taken by the
deep learning model and also interpret the model behaviour
which improve the performance in various ﬁeld of AI.
III. RESEARCH METHODS
The development of prediction model & experiments are
carried out in Python platform. Different recurrent deep learn-
ing architecture are compared for the efﬁcient prediction of
covid-19 cases.
A. Dataset Description
The dataset for 28 states and 8 union territories of India
has been extracted from John Hopkin’s publicly available
dataset [20]. The dataset for each province in India is consist
of active cases per day, case fatality, cumulative conﬁrmed
cases, cumulative death cases, incident rate and cumulative
recovered cases. The dataset extracted is for the duration
from 10th June, 2020 to 4th August, 2021. Active cases per
day is calculated based on cumulative conﬁrmed, deceased
and recovered cases. The study involves data which includes
1st wave & 2nd wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. Many
states in India were affected badly during covid-19 pandemic.
Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka & Tamil Nadu had reported
20%, 11%, 9% & 8% of cumulative conﬁrmed cases in India
respectively. Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu & Delhi had
reported 31%, 9%, 8% & 6% of cumulative deceased cases in
India respectively. Maharashtra is one among the province in
India which was badly affected during the pandemic & also
reported maximum active cases per day up to 7,01,614 cases
during 2nd wave of pandemic.
B. Model Development
In this study, deep learning architecture is trained on one
province which had reported large number of active cases per
day with good dynamics & this pretrained model is tested
for rest of the provinces. This approach helps to understand
the robustness in the model and it will also help to improve
the results obtained based on the better understanding of the
model behaviour. The study also focuses on the comparison
between two approaches as follows
1) Proposed Approach-1 : To train the model on state with
favourable dynamics & test for rest of the provinces.
2) Proposed Approach-2 : To train & test the model on
same parent province.
As per the data exploration, Maharashtra is one of the states
which was badly affected during the 1st and 2nd wave of pan-
demic in India. Due to the high population density, the covid-
19 pandemic had shown the worst effect in Maharashtra. So,
the different deep learning architecture is trained on Maharash-
tra which have favourable dynamics in the data. The different
deep learning architecture which include SimpleRNN, LSTM,
GRU, Stacked RNN, Stacked LSTM & Stacked GRU are used
for the prediction of active cases per day in Maharashtra. For
the further study, the dataset is normalized between 0 & 1 by
MinMax scaler. The normalization is done for data as per the
following formula
Xi =
Xi −Xmin
Xmax −Xmin
(1)
where Xmax represents the maximum value of the data &
Xmin is minimum value of the data. The train dataset is
consist of data from 10th June, 2020 to 27th December, 2020
& the test data from 28th December, 2020 to 4th August,
2021. The deep learning model is trained with 210 days
and had tested for 203 days on the dataset of Maharashtra.
For Lakshadweep, the 1st case of covid-19 was reported on
18th January, 2021. In proposed approach-2, 300 days are

4
Fig. 1. Research Framework.
considered in train dataset & remaining data of Lakshadeep
is used to test the model. The deep learning models are
trained for 100 epochs with validation split of 10%. In deep
learning model, hard sigmoid function is used as recurrent
activation function & tanh function is used as block input and
output activation function. In prediction, loss is measured in
MSE (Mean Squared Error) & optimizer is rmsprop (Root
Mean Square Propagation). The metrics for LSTM model
is measured in Mean Absolute Error (MAE). MAE can be
expressed as
MAE =
P∞
i=1 |pi −ai|
n
(2)
where pi represents the predicted value, ai is actual value &
n is total number of observations. The research framework
for training & testing the model for the efﬁcient prediction of
active cases per day is shown in Fig. 1. The pretrained model
is also tested on the data of active cases per day for India &
forecasted for 100 days ahead.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Selection of Model
The comparison is done for different deep learning architec-
ture which include SimpleRNN, LSTM, GRU, Stacked RNN,
Stacked LSTM & Stacked GRU based on MAE obtained after
testing the model. The deep learning model with different
input size & number of hidden units are used for the one
day prediction ahead.
Based on comparison with other deep learning architecture
in Table I, LSTM model with input size as 1x8 & number
of hidden unit as 150 has given the better result on test
TABLE I
COMPARISON BASED ON MAE (MAHARASHTRA).
Sr.
Deep
No. of
No. of
Input
Output
MAE
No.
Learning
hidden
layers
window
window
Model
units
size
size
1
Simple
150
1
1x7
1
8866.23
RNN
2
LSTM
150
1
1x8
1
6092.11
3
GRU
100
1
1x8
1
6494.57
4
Stacked
200,
2
1x5
1
8542.66
RNN
50
5
Stacked
150,
2
1x8
1
7982.91
LSTM
50
6
Stacked
50,
2
1x8
1
7402.05
GRU
50
data of Maharashtra. The proposed LSTM model had done
the prediction for one day ahead. The statistical heuristics
behind the selection of the best model is shown in Fig. 2. The
comparison is done between these models based on different
input step size & number of hidden units. The proposed LSTM
model which is trained on Maharashtra is used to test for
rest of the provinces. The comparison has been done between
proposed approach-1 (LSTM model trained on Maharashtra
& tested on rest of the province) & proposed approach-2
(LSTM model trained and tested on same parent province)
based on MAE is shown in Fig. 3. Based on the comparison
between MAE of proposed approach-1 & proposed approach-
2, proposed approach-1 had captured the dynamics efﬁciently
as in proposed approach-2 for majority of the provinces in
India.

5
Fig. 2. Statistical Heuristics.
Fig. 3. Comparison between Proposed Approach-1 & 2.
B. Visualization & Interpretation of Proposed LSTM Model
From the comparison, it has been notated that proposed
approach-1 had performed better as compared to proposed
approach-2 for some provinces which include Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Delhi with difference in MAE
greater than 1000. The MAE calculated for the prediction
of active cases per day for these ten states in proposed
approach-1&2 is shown in Table II. In both the approaches,
the LSTM model had incorporated one LSTM layer with
150 hidden units, “tanh” as input/output activation function
& “hard sigmoid” as recurrent activation function. So, the
study had focussed in the visualization of the output from the
LSTM layer. The output from the LSTM layer is elementwise
multiplication of output from tanh function (input/output acti-
vation function) & hard sigmoid function (recurrent activation

6
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN PROPOSED APPROACH-1&2 FOR 10 PROVINCES
BASED ON MAE.
Sr.
State
MAE
MAE
No.
(Proposed
(Proposed
Approach-1)
Approach-2)
1
Chhattisgarh
1496.25
2988.53
2
Gujarat
1342.59
6090.86
3
Haryana
1062.18
2081.32
4
Karnataka
5397.95
12373.41
5
Kerala
4759.85
11581.44
6
Tamil Nadu
2504.48
7366.15
7
Telangana
755.34
1868.48
8
Uttar Pradesh
2962.28
6243.55
9
Uttarakhand
849.57
2539.34
10
Delhi
1135.53
2702.94
Fig. 4. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data of Kerala in Proposed
Approach-1.
Fig. 5.
Heatmap for Output from LSTM layer in Proposed Approach-1
(Kerala).
function). At the input of the model, the input step size is 1 x
8 which is mapped to the vector dimension of 1 x 150 at the
output of the LSTM layer. For the prediction of 203 days in
test data, there will be 203 x 150 dimensional matrix at the
output of the LSTM layer.
Fig. 6. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data of Kerala in Proposed
Approach-2.
Fig. 7.
Heatmap for Output from LSTM layer in Proposed Approach-2
(Kerala).
The comparison between actual & predicted data for Kerala
in proposed approach-1 & 2 is shown in Fig. 4 & 6 respec-
tively. The heat map for 203 x 150 dimensional matrix at the
output of the LSTM layer for proposed approach-1 & 2 are
shown in Fig. 5 & 7 respectively. There is slight variation
in the color intensity of heatmap for proposed approach-1
& 2. The output from the LSTM layer is used to get the
prediction at the output of the dense layer in the proposed
LSTM model. In proposed approach-2, the large value of
absolute error between actual & predicted data has been
notated between 75th and 203rd day of prediction while the
model is tested. So, the output value of LSTM layer from
75th to 203rd day of prediction is considered for further study
of proposed approach-1&2. It is difﬁcult to differentiate the
heatmaps of proposed approach-1&2 visually. To differentiate
the heatmaps, the maximum & minimum output value from
LSTM layer for each hidden unit is extracted. These two
extreme output values have been compared with the actual
data to check whether the LSTM layer output had captured the
pattern present in the actual data. From the Fig. 8, it is evident

7
Fig. 8. Absolute Minimum Output & Maximum Output value from LSTM layer (Kerala).
Fig. 9. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data in Proposed Approach-1&2 (Chhattisgarh).
Fig. 10. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data in Proposed Approach-1&2 (Gujarat)..
that proposed approach-1 had captured the pattern in data in
a better way as compared to the approach-2 for Kerala. The
pattern present after the peak value in the actual test data has
been captured well in maximum activation output as compared
to minimum activation output. The pattern present before the
peak value in the actual test data has been captured well in
minimum output. The LSTM model in proposed approach-
2 had not captured the trend up to the peak value present in

8
Fig. 11. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data in Proposed Approach-1&2 (Karnataka)..
Fig. 12. Comparison between Actual & Predicted data in Proposed Approach-1&2 (Tamil Nadu)..
Fig. 13. Absolute Minimum Output & Maximum Output value from LSTM layer (Chhattisgarh).
actual test data which lead to the large value of MAE between
actual & predicted data from 75th to 203rd day.
In proposed approach-2 for Chhattisgarh, the large value
of absolute error between actual & predicted data has been
notated between 50th and 150th day of prediction as shown
in Fig. 9. The minimum & maximum output value from the
LSTM layer is shown with actual trend of data in Fig. 13
for Chhattisgarh. So, the output value of LSTM layer from

9
Fig. 14. Absolute Minimum Output & Maximum Output value from LSTM layer (Gujarat).
Fig. 15. Absolute Minimum Output & Maximum Output value from LSTM layer (Karnataka).
Fig. 16. Absolute Minimum Output & Maximum Output value from LSTM layer (Tamil Nadu).
50th to 150th day of prediction is considered for further
study of proposed approach-1&2. The maximum & minimum
output value had captured the trend in the actual test data in
proposed approach-1&2. While in proposed approach-2, there
is a lack of scalability in the two extreme value of output from
LSTM layer as compared to the proposed approach-1 which is
also reﬂected in the predicted value. For states which include
Gujarat, Karnataka & Tamil Nadu. the maximum difference
in actual & predicted data is notated between 75th to 175th
day of prediction in proposed approach-2 as shown in Fig
10, 11 & 12 respectively. From the visualization of maximum
& minimum output of LSTM layer for Gujarat in Fig. 14, it
is evident that there is right drift in the pattern captured in
proposed approach-2 as compared to approach-1. The right
drift in the trend of predicted value is notated for proposed
approach-2 in Fig 10. For Karnataka, the trend in actual data

10
Fig. 17. Forecasting of active cases per day in India.
is captured in both proposed approach-1 & 2. There is a slight
deviation at the peak value of maximum & minimum output
from LSTM layer in proposed approach-2 as shown in Fig.
15. For Tamil Nadu, there is a deviation in the predicted data
after the peak value for proposed approach-2 as shown in Fig.
12. The same deviation of trend has been notated in maximum
and minimum activation output in proposed approach-2 with
respect to proposed approach-1 and actual trend of test data.
The pretrained LSTM model had captured the trend of active
cases per day in test data for 36 provinces in India. The
visualization of maximum & minimum output from LSTM
layer for proposed approach-1 had shown the robustness in
the model to capture the different dynamics.
C. Forecasting of active cases per day for India
The proposed pretrained LSTM model is used for the fore-
casting of active cases per day in India. The data of active cases
per day for India is collected from https://prsindia.org/covid-
19/cases. The data for active cases in India from 9th February,
2021 to 15th December, 2021 is used to test the LSTM model.
The MAE calculated between actual & predicted data for
active cases in India is 19547.95. The forecasting of active
cases per day is done from 16th December, 2021 to 5th March,
2022 as shown in Fig. 17. As per the forecasting, there will be
a rise in the active cases of covid-19 in January & February
2022. The active cases in India will spike more than 3,00,000
cases. The different variants of SARS-CoV-2 i.e. Beta, Delta &
Omicron is a major threat to entire countries in the world [39],
[40]. As per the forecasting, there will be a emergence of third
wave of pandemic in India from January, 2022. The severity
of third wave will be less as compared to second wave of
pandemic because of the massive vaccination drive in India.
In India, three vaccines which include Covishield, Covaxin
& Sputnik has administered more than 1.37 billion doses
(Source: https://www.mohfw.gov.in). More than 0.82 billion
& 0.54 billion population is inoculated with 1st & 2nd dose
respectively. Apart from vaccination, it is necessary to follow
the precautionary steps in daily life which include social
distancing, use of face mask & hand-sanitizer to overcome
this pandemic [41].
D. Discussion of Findings
1) The prediction of active cases per day helps the govern-
ment to be aware about the upcoming wave of covid-
19 pandemic. It is necessary to develop the model
which can predict the different transmission trend of
covid-19 for 36 provinces in India because of distinct
geographical location & population density
2) As per the data exploration, Maharashtra is one of the
state which was badly affected during 1st & 2nd wave
of pandemic due to the high population density.
3) Based on train & test on the dataset of Maharashtra,
the vanilla LSTM had performed better as compared to
SimpleRNN, GRU, Stacked version of RNN, LSTM &
GRU.
4) The pretrained LSTM model from proposed approach-
1 had done the better prediction on test data of all
provinces in India. Based on the visualization of max-
imum & minimum output from LSTM layer, the pre-
trained model is robust enough to capture the transmis-
sion dynamics of covid-19 in different province of India.
5) The forecasting of active cases in India is done by
pretrained LSTM model from 16th December, 2020 to
5th March, 2022. The forecast result shows that there
will be a spike in active cases by the end of December,
2021.
V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY
A. Theoretical Contributions
This article is consist of several implications. First, the
article had proposed the LSTM model which is trained on

11
single state with favourable dynamics i.e. Maharashtra & had
done the prediction for rest of the provinces. Second, the
performance of proposed LSTM model is compared with
different model architecture which include SimpleRNN, GRU,
Stacked RNN, Stacked LSTM & Stacked GRU based on
different input window size & number of hidden units. Third,
under the importance of Explainable AI, the visualization is
done for the maximum & minimum output value of LSTM
layer & compared with actual trend in the data. Fourth, this
article had proved the robustness in the proposed model &
also determined the better results in prediction by proposed
approach-1. Fifth, the proposed pretrained model had fore-
casted the active cases in India for 100 days ahead.
B. Limitations of the Study & Future Directions
This article had proposed LSTM model & new approach
for the efﬁcient prediction of active cases per day for different
province in India. By the approach of training the model on
province with favourable dynamics & testing on rest of the
provinces had helped to enhance the results of prediction. The
proposed model had shown the alarm with respect to the spike
in active cases of covid-19 in India. It alerts the government
to take an appropriate decision & efﬁcient implementation of
precautionary measures. There are many external factors which
include mutations of covid-19 virus, human immigration,
festival season, political & religious event, triggers the trans-
mission of covid-19 among the population. The transmission
dynamics of covid-19 changes with the occurrence of such
events. So it is necessary to retrain the model as per the
change in dynamics. The proposed LSTM model has not
incorporated the availability of testing facilities, hospital beds
& ventilators [42], [43]. The health infrastructure plays a key
role to control the pandemic. The forecast model incorporated
with medical facilities will help to do the efﬁcient prediction
of active cases & requirements in health infrastructure. The
another limitation in this article is that the proposed model is
not linked with contact tracing of covid-19 infected people.
This factors incorporated in the model will helps to efﬁciently
capture the transmission dynamics of covid-19.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, the proposed pretrained LSTM model is used
for the prediction of active cases in different province of
India. The different deep learning architecture which include
SimpleRNN, LSTM, GRU, Stacked RNN, Stacked LSTM &
Stacked GRU are trained & tested on data of Maharashtra. The
detailed comparison has been done between these architecture
based on different input window size & number of hidden
units. The LSTM model has outperformed the other deep
learning architectures on the dataset of Maharashtra. The
proposed LSTM model trained on data of Maharashtra had
captured the transmission dynamic for rest of the province
in India. Under the umbrella of Explainable AI (XAI), this
kind of approach tests the robustness present in the model to
capture the different dynamics. The proposed approach-1 has
given the better results as compared to proposed approach-2.
For Lakshadweep, the ﬁrst case was reported on 18th January,
2021. It was notated that number of training days has to be in-
creased in proposed approach-2 as there is negligible dynamics
in data. This kind of problem can be overcomed by proposed
approach-1. The study had also focused on the visualization of
maximum & minimum output value from LSTM layer for few
states which include Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka
& Tamil Nadu. From the visualization, it is evident that the
proposed approach-1 had succeeded to generalize the model
inorder to capture the different dynamics of transmission. The
pretrained LSTM model is used to forecast the active cases
in India from 16th December, 2021 to 5th March, 2022. The
forecasted data had shown that there will be a emergence of
third wave by January, 2022 in India. The forecasting of active
cases helps the Indian government to implement the necessary
restrictions & carry out the covid-19 testing in airports, bus &
railway stations.
