From Natural Language Instructions to Complex Processes:
Issues in Chaining Trigger Action Rules
Nobuhiro Ito1 and Yuya Suzuki1 and Akiko Aizawa2,1
1The University of Tokyo
2National Institute of Informatics

Abstract
Automation services for complex business processes usually
require a high level of information technology literacy. There
is a strong demand for a smartly assisted process automa-
tion (IPA: intelligent process automation) service that enables
even general users to easily use advanced automation. A nat-
ural language interface for such automation is expected as an
elemental technology for the IPA realization. The workﬂow
targeted by IPA is generally composed of a combination of
multiple tasks. However, semantic parsing, one of the natural
language processing methods, for such complex workﬂows
has not yet been fully studied. The reasons are that (1) the
formal expression and grammar of the workﬂow required for
semantic analysis have not been sufﬁciently examined and (2)
the dataset of the workﬂow formal expression with its cor-
responding natural language description required for learn-
ing workﬂow semantics did not exist. This paper deﬁnes a
new grammar for complex workﬂows with chaining machine-
executable meaning representations for semantic parsing. The
representations are at a high abstraction level. Additionally,
an approach to creating datasets is proposed based on this
grammar.
Introduction
Automation services for business process like robotic pro-
cess automation (RPA) have recently attracted increasing
attention. These automation services typically require ad-
vanced information technology literacy when creating au-
tomation programs. Thus, it is difﬁcult for non-skilled users
to make use of the services. A smart interface that can cre-
ate and execute an automated program speciﬁed in a natural
language (NL) description would be useful. This smart in-
terface is one of the intelligent process automation (IPA)
realizations. We focus on a natural language processing
method that plays an important role in this interface: seman-
tic parsing. Semantic parsing consists of three components:
(a) a natural language description, (b) a machine-executable
meaning representation (MEMR), and (c) a parser that con-
verts (a) to (b). MEMR can be a formal expression that fol-
lows a speciﬁc grammar. Workﬂows targeted by automation
systems represented by RPA are generally complex work-
ﬂows composed of a combination of multiple tasks. In stud-
ies on semantic parsing, (1) the formal expression and the
formal grammar for expressing such workﬂows have both
not been sufﬁciently examined. As a result, (2) there was no
dataset that had a pairing of a complex workﬂow with its
corresponding NL description.
Formal Expression and Grammar
With respect to the expression and the grammar, we focus
on two problems: an expression unit, and a formal grammar
for complex workﬂows.
Expression Unit
Several types of expressions exist de-
pending on the abstraction level of the expression. Many
studies have been conducted on parsing NL description to
code, such as transition-based neural semantic parsing like
TranX (Yin and Neubig 2017; Yin and Neubig 2018). The
ﬁeld of code generation typically uses expressions with low
abstraction: code itself. Therefore, the expression becomes
bloated when attempting to express a complex workﬂow
that is composed of hundreds of lines of code. Consider
an expression with high abstraction that is much closer to
human language, as exempliﬁed by calling macros, APIs,
and modules, 1 such as “Insert Rows Into a Google Spread-
sheet”; this is a straightforward approach to avoiding the
bloating problem. An expression with high abstraction is
typically used in a trigger action program (TAP) format that
performs a certain action when a certain trigger occurs. A
notable TAP dataset is the IFTTT dataset (Ur et al. 2016;
Mi et al. 2017). However, the workﬂow targeted by the
IFTTT dataset itself is too simple to use for complex work-
ﬂows.
Formal Grammar
Although it is necessary to express a
series of processes as a whole in one shot, collecting such
datasets is inherently difﬁcult. We focus on the form of the
TAP chain in formulating a formal grammar. TAP can be
considered a type of MEMR. The advantage of TAP is that it
expresses the essence of being event-driven in a straightfor-
ward manner, so it has high versatility. Moreover, there are
datasets and existing studies on TAP. Complex workﬂows
are composed of process chains like “If this triggered, then
do this action and do this action separately, and ﬁnally do
1This expression can be considered as a “no-code/low-code”
expression that has recently been refocused in RPA.
arXiv:2001.02462v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2020

this action.” On the other hand, a single TAP only ends with
“If this triggered, then do this action,” ((a) in Figure 1) but
we can assume that performing this action causes another
trigger ((b) in Figure 1). Thus, we can express a complex
workﬂow by repeating TAP chaining ((c) in Figure 1). We
call this a “TAP chain” and incorporate it into the grammar
formulation2. This facilitates conversion to complex work-
Figure 1: TAP Chain
ﬂows through relatively simple MEMRs.3 Especially, this
enables us to apply the already-mentioned transition-based
neural semantic parsing to a workﬂow intricately combined
with such MEMRs. Transition-based neural semantic pars-
ing does not generate code directly, but generates a sequence
of grammars (in the form of context-free grammars)4. To the
best of our knowledge, no such study has been conducted
thus far because of the lack of an adequate grammar for such
workﬂows and parsing.
Complex Workﬂow Dataset
In our creation of complex workﬂow dataset, we use the
IFTTT dataset that contains TAP programs with their cor-
responding NL descriptions. From the IFTTT dataset, we
manually extract the relationships where one TAP triggers
another TAP, and generate the TAP chain rules. After that,
a TAP chain rule is randomly applied to generate a complex
workﬂow. Since it is applied randomly, the usefulness of the
generated workﬂow is manually annotated. NL description
corresponding to the created workﬂow is generated by fus-
ing NL description of each TAP that constitutes the work-
ﬂow. Two approaches are considered: rule-based generation,
2It seems important to consider the concept of type or category
of a MEMR. The type may include semantic content indicating the
close connectivity of each task.
3In this paper, we use the TAP chain-based formal expression
for workﬂow for the reason already described, but other formal ex-
pressions for workﬂow can be also considered. We reserve this is-
sue for future work.
4TranX mainly targets a low abstraction level. The main focus
of TranX for applying the parsing is to ensure that the parsing re-
sults are legal in the context of the Python abstract grammar.
and sentence fusion generation (one approach in abstractive
summarizations). The generated NL descriptions are manu-
ally annotated especially with respect to test data.
The main contribution of this study is the deﬁnition of
a new grammar for semantic parsing to complex work-
ﬂows. In addition, an approach to creating the dataset is pro-
posed based on this grammar. In the following, we concisely
explain the related work, then propose workﬂow patterns
grammar (WPG) and dataset creation, then concisely refer
to the model, and ﬁnally conclude this short paper.
Related Work
Semantic Parsing
The process of converting NL into MEMR is known as
semantic parsing. A typical example of semantic parsing
is SQL generation for database queries. A semantic parser
translates the sentence “How many people live in Seat-
tle?” to “SELECT Population FROM CityData where
City==Seattle”. Then the SQL query is executed to obtain
the correct answer, “620,778” (Gardner et al. 2018). An-
other typical example of semantic parsing is code generation
where a single function declaration or class declaration is
viewed as an MEMR (Gardner et al. 2018). Rather than gen-
erating code directly, transition-based neural semantic pars-
ing like TranX generates a sequence of ASDL grammars that
are sequentially expanded and applied to generate MEMRs
(Yin and Neubig 2017; Yin and Neubig 2018). However,
these parsing models mainly target a low abstraction level
of formal expression.
TAP/IFTTT
A typical web service of TAP is the IFTTT (Ur et al. 2016;
Mi et al. 2017). As an example, the NL description
“youtube upload to blogger new post” is converted into
an MEMR with a high abstraction level TRIGGER
“YouTube.New public video uploaded by you”
and
ACTION “Blogger.Create a post.” A study of sim-
ple
grammar-based
semantic
parsing
without
neural
model has been conducted (Quirk, Mooney, and Galley
2015). Additionally, a method using neural semantic
parsing has been proposed (Beltagy and Quirk 2016;
Liu
et
al.
2016;
Dong
and
Lapata
2016;
Dong, Quirk, and Lapata 2018). Furthermore, a dialogue
model (Chaurasia and Mooney 2017) and a reinforcement
learning dialogue model (Yao et al. 2018) have also been
proposed. However, a target workﬂow of IFTTT itself is too
simple to be able to directly automate complex real-world
workﬂows.
Workﬂow Patterns Grammar
In this paper, we deﬁne a new grammar for semantic parsing
to complex workﬂows (Table 1). This enables us to apply
the transition-based neural semantic parsing to a workﬂow
intricately combined with MEMRs. The speciﬁc notation
follows Yin and Neubig (2018), which mainly refer to the
Python ASDL grammar: The notation “?” represents the op-
tional type, which can have one value or a null value, and the

notation “*” indicates the sequential type, which can have
two or more values.
stmt
=
Workﬂow(wpg pattern)
· · ·(1)
wpg
=
Sequence(func? trigger, func action)
|
Parallel Split(func? trigger, func* action)
· · ·(2)
func
=
Call(type channel, wpg? next)
· · ·(3)
type
=
Type A | Type B | Type C ...
· · ·(4)
Table 1: Workﬂow Pattern Grammar
Workﬂow Initialization
The ﬁrst line (1) in the table indicates the start point of the
workﬂow generation. The stmt type evokes a constructor
with the wpg type argument called “pattern.” This expansion
delivers the start point of the workﬂow.
Workﬂow Patterns
In workﬂows like the ones in ofﬁce workplaces, there are
patterns that repeatedly occur. Russell, van van der Aalst,
and ter Hofstede (2016) introduced ﬁve basic patterns to
capture the elementary aspects of the ﬂow: sequence, par-
allel split, synchronization, exclusive choice, and simple
merge. In this study, we consider two patterns, sequence and
parallel split, to maintain the tree structure and simplicity of
the MEMRs. These constructors are shown in line (2) of Ta-
ble 1. The ﬁrst pattern expands wpg to a sequence pattern:
that is, it evokes the sequence pattern constructor. The sec-
ond pattern expands wpg to a parallel split pattern: that is, it
evokes the parallel split pattern constructor.
WPG expression in this paper also considers the ﬂow of
processed data. For example, the “Send Text to Me” function
has no return value and therefore no function to connect to
the next. Since the “Archive Text in Spread Sheet” function
must receive text data, it cannot follow a “Send Text to Me”
function having no return. If the processed output data from
functions are different, it is straightforward to handle them
in different branches. Also, transition-based neural semantic
parsing learns the sequence of grammar expansions corre-
sponding to NL descriptions. In this learning, the parallel
split is expected to work as a signal token to decide whether
subsequent ﬂow should branch, based on its previous trigger
or action and NL descriptions.
TAP Chaining
As already mentioned, a complex workﬂow is generated
from a simple MEMR by considering a TAP chain, as pre-
sented in line (2) in Table 1. The sequence pattern’s argu-
ments are the func? type argument called “trigger” and the
func type argument called “action.” Because this pattern is
simple, such that when the “trigger” is evoked, the “action”
is activated, we consider this pattern to have two arguments.
The notation “?” represents the optional type, which can
have one value or a null value. When two sequence patterns
are connected (for example, Sequence(Function A, Function
B) and Sequence(Function B, Function C) are connected se-
quentially), the action in the ﬁrst sequence pattern is the
same as the trigger in the second sequence pattern. Thus,
the function is duplicated. We expand the second sequence
pattern as Sequence(null, Function C).
The parallel split pattern’s arguments are the func? type
argument called “trigger” and the func* type argument
called “action.” This pattern splits the preceding function’s
result into two or more functions.
TAP Call
func is the type that evokes the Call constructor, as presented
in line (3) in Table 1. The constructor controls the next task
and the next workﬂow to be executed after the task is com-
pleted. The concrete task is derived through expansion from
the type argument called “channel”. On the other hand, if the
task is followed by another task, the constructor should get a
value at the type argument called “next”. type is expanded to
a concrete macro method class that has concrete functions
belonging to the class. This expansion is presented in line
(4) in Table 1.
Workﬂow Represented in Abstract Syntax Tree
(AST)
Consider a speciﬁc example of a workﬂow represented
in AST (WAST). For example, consider a workﬂow, as
depicted in Figure 25. When WPG is applied to this
Figure 2: Workﬂow Example
workﬂow, the WAST is that in Figure 3. The WPG
Figure 3: Complex Workﬂow in WAST Form
grammars applied sequentially are depicted in Table 2.
The formal expression for parsing is Sequence ( An-
5In this paper, to make the discussion easier we use a work-
ﬂow that is more complex than TAP but still relatively simple. The
proposed framework is applicable to versions of workﬂow that are
more complex than this simple example.

t
Frontier Field
Action
t1
stmt root
Workﬂow(wpg pattern)
t2
wpg pattern
Sequence(func? trigger, func action)
t3
func? trigger
Call(type channel, wpg? next)
t4
type channel
SelectMacr[Android]
t5
Android
SelectMacr[Any Missed Phone]
t6
wpg? next
StopExpnsn(close the frontier ﬁeld)
t7
func action
Call(type channel, wpg? next wpg)
t8
type channel
SelectMacr[Watson API]
t9
Android
SelectMacr[Voice to Text]
t10
wpg? next
Parallel Split(func? trigger, func* action)
t11
func? trigger
StopExpnsn(close the frontier ﬁeld)
t12
func* action
Call(type channel, wpg? next wpg)
t13
type channel
SelectMacr[SMS]
t14
SMS
SelectMacr[Send Text to Me]
t15
wpg? next
StopExpnsn(close the frontier ﬁeld)
t16
func* action
Call(type channel, wpg? next wpg)
t17
type channel
SelectMacr[Google Drive]
t18
Google Drive
SelectMacr[Archive Text Spread Sheet]
t19
wpg? next
StopExpnsn(close the frontier ﬁeld)
t20
func* action
StopExpnsn(close the frontier ﬁeld)
Table 2: WPG Expansion Example
droid. Any Missed Phone, Parallel Split ( Watson API.
Voice to Text, SMS. Send Text to Me, Google Drive.
Archive Text in Spread Sheet)).
Dataset Creation
We propose an approach of creating a training dataset and
a test dataset for learning transition-based neural semantic
parsing for a complex workﬂow with TAP chain. We basi-
cally suppose that the dataset is to be annotated manually.
We use an existing TAP dataset which includes correspond-
ing NL descriptions for TAPs. This dataset is beneﬁcial be-
cause TAPs and NL descriptions are actually created and
used by real users, and the NL descriptions enable the anno-
tator to reuse them to create NL descriptions for the work-
ﬂows as a whole.
WAST Generation
In the IFTTT data, if a trigger function is called, then an
action function is invoked. There can exist a case wherein
when an action function in one TAP occurs, a trigger func-
tion in another TAP is ﬁred simultaneously. We manually
conducted such action-evoke-trigger annotations and deter-
mined the TAP chaining rules. This chain rule assumes the
vertical expansion of TAP in a workﬂow (Figure 4). On the
Figure 4: TAPs for Vertical Expansion
other hand, the horizontal expansion of TAP is simple; that
is, it is sufﬁcient to execute multiple actions that have the
same trigger (Figure 5). This makes it possible to create
complex workﬂows from TAP chains.
A complex workﬂow is generated by randomly chaining
TAPs. However, it is unclear whether this automatically gen-
Figure 5: TAPs for Horizontal Expansion
erated workﬂow is really beneﬁcial. Therefore, the automat-
ically generated workﬂow is annotated in whether: (A) con-
venient and frequently used, (B) possible to use, or (C) in-
convenient and not used. Each TAP that is an element of
workﬂow generation is limited to the TAPs actually created
and used by real users. In other words, for each TAP it is
assumed that the combination of trigger and action is useful
for some user.
Generation of NL instructions
Furthermore, the graphical form of the automatically gener-
ated workﬂow like Figure 2 is shown to an annotator, who is
asked to annotate the instruction/description that should be
given when they ask a machine to perform the workﬂow6.
Consequently, a pairing of an NL description and a work-
ﬂow represented as WAST can be generated.
Model
With respect to the model, we follow Yin and Neubig
(2018). Transition-based neural semantic parsing has an in-
put of the NL utterance x consisting of n words {wi}n
i=1.
The parser outputs at, one of the three transitions: “Apply-
Constr[c] ” expresses the instruction to apply a WPG hav-
ing constructor c, “SelectMacr” means to generate a terminal
token (function), and “StopExpnsn” means stop generating
optional or sequential arguments.
The probability of generating WAST z from NL instruc-
tions x is:
q(z|x) = Πtq(at|a<t, x).
(1)
The model is trained to maximize the log-likelihood of the
transition sequence. Then, the best WAST is inferred from
NL description using beam search.
Discussion
In this paper, we assume a simple design where each
thread progresses independently and focus only on a WAST
form with a tree structure. In other words, ﬂows that have
branched once never rejoin. However, complex workﬂows
usually include a simple merge workﬂow pattern, where
branched ﬂows will merge at some point in the following
process. WPG needs to be extended to graph a structure.
This paper referred to general workﬂow patterns. With
the spread of RPA, data on business processes have been
6In the annotation process, we ﬁrst automatically generate in-
structions/descriptions by rule-based summarization. Then, anno-
tators review and modify the instruction/description. It is possible
to use sentence fusion models (Lebanoff et al. 2019) to generate
these.

accumulated. It is possible that there are common patterns
across the companies. Therefore, it is useful to extract such
common workﬂow patterns from real usage data of the RPA
products and reduce them to WPG.
Conclusion
In this study, we deﬁned a new grammar for chaining high
abstraction level MEMRs for semantic parsing into com-
plex workﬂows. We also proposed an approach to gener-
ate a dataset based on this grammar. Consequently, it is ex-
pected that an NL interface will be constructed for the com-
plex workﬂow assumed by IPA. In the future, we intend to
perform semantic parsing on the dataset created by this ap-
proach.
