Beating the World’s Best at Super Smash Bros. Melee with Deep Reinforcement
Learning
Vlad Firoiu
MIT

William F. Whitney
NYU

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Abstract
There has been a recent explosion in the capabili-
ties of game-playing artiﬁcial intelligence. Many
classes of RL tasks, from Atari games to motor
control to board games, are now solvable by fairly
generic algorithms, based on deep learning, that
learn to play from experience with minimal knowl-
edge of the speciﬁc domain of interest.
In this
work, we will investigate the performance of these
methods on Super Smash Bros. Melee (SSBM), a
popular console ﬁghting game. The SSBM envi-
ronment has complex dynamics and partial observ-
ability, making it challenging for human and ma-
chine alike. The multi-player aspect poses an ad-
ditional challenge, as the vast majority of recent
advances in RL have focused on single-agent en-
vironments. Nonetheless, we will show that it is
possible to train agents that are competitive against
and even surpass human professionals, a new result
for the multi-player video game setting.
1
Introduction
The past few years have seen a renaissance of sorts for neu-
ral network models in AI and machine learning. Driven in
part by hardware advances in the GPUs that accelerate their
training, the ﬁrst breakthroughs came in 2012 when convolu-
tional architectures were able to achieve record performance
on image classiﬁcation [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] [Cirean et
al., 2012]. Today the technique is known as Deep Learning
due to its use of many layers that build up increasingly ab-
stract representations from raw inputs.
In this paper we focus not on vision but on game-playing.
As far back as the early 90’s, neural networks were used
to reach expert-level play on Backgammon [Tesauro, 1995].
More recently, there have been breakthroughs on learning to
play various video games [Mnih et al., 2013]. Even the an-
cient board game Go, which for long has thwarted attempts by
AI researchers to build human-level programs, fell to a com-
bination of neural networks and Monte-Carlo Tree Search
[Silver et al., 2016].
2
The SSBM Environment
We focus on Super Smash Bros. Melee (SSBM), a fast-paced
multi-player ﬁghting game released in 2001 for the Nintendo
Gamecube. SSBM has steadily grown in popularity over its
15-year history, and today sports an active tournament and
professional scene. The metagame is constantly evolving as
new mechanics are discovered and reﬁned and top players
push each other to ever greater levels of skill.
From an RL standpoint, the SSBM environment poses sev-
eral challenges - large and only partially observable state,
complex transition dynamics, and delayed rewards. There
is also a great deal of diversity in the environment, with 26
unique characters and a multitude of different stages. The
partial observability comes from the limits of human reaction
time along with several frames of built-in input delay, which
forces players to anticipate their opponent’s actions ahead of
time. Furthermore, being a multi-player game adds an en-
tirely new dimension of complexity - success is no longer a
single, absolute measure given by the environment, but in-
stead must be deﬁned relative to a variable, unpredictable ad-
versary.
Figure 1: The Battleﬁeld Stage
2.1
State, Action, Reward
Many previous applications of deep RL to video games have
used raw pixels as observations. Partly for pragmatic rea-
sons, we instead use features read from the game’s memory
on each frame, consisting of each player’s position, veloc-
ity, and action state, along with several other values. This al-
arXiv:1702.06230v3  [cs.LG]  8 May 2017

lows us to focus purely on the RL challenge of playing SSBM
rather than the perception. In any case, the game features are
readily inferred from the pixels; as deep networks are known
to perform quite well on vision tasks, we have good reason
to believe that pixel-based models would perform similarly.
Pixel-based networks would also be better able to deal with
projectiles, which we do not currently know how to read from
the game memory.
The game runs natively at 60 frames per second, which we
lower to 30 by skipping every other frame. No actions are
sent on the skipped frames, which is equivalent to the con-
troller not changing state. To better match human play, we
would lower this further by skipping more frames, but that
would make it impossible to perform certain important ac-
tions which humans perform regularly (for example, some
characters require releasing the the jump button at most 2
frames after pressing it in order to perform a “short hop” in-
stead of the full jump).
The GameCube controller has two analog sticks, ﬁve but-
tons, two triggers, and a directional pad, all of which are rel-
evant in SSBM. To make things easier, we eliminate most of
the inputs, leaving only 9 discrete positions on the main ana-
log stick and 5 buttons (at most one of which may be pressed
at a time), for a total of 54 discrete actions. This sufﬁces for
the majority of the relevant actions in SSBM, although proﬁ-
cient humans routinely make use of controller inputs outside
this limited set (such as precise angles and partial tilts of the
control stick).
The goal of SSBM is to knock out (KO) the opponent by
sending them out of bounds, and we give scores of ±1 for
these events. How far opponents are sent ﬂying when hit de-
pends on their damage, which is displayed on screen. We
add the damage dealt (and subtract the damage taken) from
the score, with a small weighting factor. Although not the
ultimate objective, this reward signal is very important to hu-
mans, so we felt it was appropriate to include it. Without it,
learning from the very sparse KO signal alone would be very
difﬁcult.
Players re-spawn in the middle of the stage after being
KOed. In tournaments, games are won after four KOs. To
simplify navigating through the SSBM menus we instead
set the game mode to inﬁnite time and arbitrarily mark off
episodes every few seconds.
3
Methods
We used two main classes of model-free RL algorithms: Q-
learning and policy gradients. While standard, we follow with
a brief review of these techniques. Henceforth, we will use s
to denote states, a to denote actions, and r to denote rewards,
all three of which may be optionally indexed by a time step.
Capital letters denote random variables.
3.1
Q-learning
In Q-learning, one attempts to learn a function mapping state-
action pairs to expected future rewards:
Qπ(st, at) = E[Rt + λRt+1 + λ2Rt+2 + · · ·]
(1)
We assume that all future actions (upon which the Ri are
implicitly dependent) are taken according to the policy π. In
practice, we estimate the RHS from a single sampled trajec-
tory, and also truncate the sum in order to reduce the variance
of the estimate (at the cost of introducing bias). Our objective
function becomes:
L = (Q(st, at) −[rt + λrt+1 + · · · + λnQ(st+n, at+n)])2
(2)
With Q approximated by neural network, we use (batched)
stochastic gradient descent on L to learn the parameters. Note
that the second (subtracted) Q in the objective is considered
a constant with regards to gradients; we wish to adjust Q to
become a better predictor of future rewards, not to adjust the
future rewards to match the past prediction.
Once we learn Qπ for some policy π, we can construct
a new (better) policy π′ which always takes the best action
under the learned Qπ, and repeat. This is known as policy
iteration, and is guaranteed to quickly converge to the opti-
mal policy for small environments. Of course, more inter-
esting environments like SSBM have large (and continuous)
state spaces, and so it is prohibitive to exhaustively explore
the entire space. In such cases it is common to generate expe-
riences using an ϵ-greedy strategy, in which a random action
is taken with probability ϵ. To further explore promising ac-
tions, we also take actions from a Boltzmann distribution over
their predicted Q-values. That is, in state s we take action a
with probability proportional to exp(τQ(s, a)), where τ is an
(inverse) temperature parameter that must be chosen to match
the scale of the Q-values.
In the RL literature, our approach might be referred to as
n-step SARSA. DeepMind’s original work using deep Q-
networks (abbreviated DQN) on Atari games employed a
slightly different algorithm based on the Bellman equation
[Mnih et al., 2013]:
Qˆπ(st, at) = E[Rt + λ max
a
Qˆπ(St+1, a)]
(3)
In principle this would allow one to directly learn Q for the
optimal policy ˆπ, independent of the policy used to generate
the experiences. However, we found this to be much less sta-
ble than SARSA, with the Q-values rapidly diverging from
reality, likely due to the iteration of the maximum operator
during training. There exist techniques such as the double-
DQN [van Hasselt et al., 2015] to alleviate this effect, which
warrant further exploration.
A note about implementation: our Q-network does not ac-
tually take the action as an input, but instead outputs a vector
of Q-values for all the actions.
3.2
Policy Gradient Methods
Policy gradient methods work slightly differently from Q-
learning. Their main feature is an explicit representation of
the policy π, which maps states to (distributions over) actions,
and which is directly updated based on experience. The RE-
INFORCE [Williams, 1992] learning rule is the prototypical
example:
∆θ = α(R −b)∇θ log πθ(s, a)
(4)

Here R is the sampled future reward (possibly truncated, as
above), b is a baseline reward, and α is the learning rate. In-
tuitively, this increases the probability of taking actions that
performed better than the baseline, and vice-versa. It can be
shown that, in expectation, ∆θ maximizes the expected dis-
counted rewards, averaged over all states.
The Actor-Critic algorithm is an extension of REIN-
FORCE that replaces the baseline b with a parameterized
function of the state, known as the critic. This critic Vπ(s)
attempts to predict the expected future reward from a state
s assuming that the policy π is followed, very similar to the
above Q function:
Vπ(st) = E[Rt + λRt+1 + λ2Rt+2 + · · ·]
(5)
Ideally, this removes all state-dependent variance from the
reward signal, leaving only the action-dependent component
or advantage, A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −V (s), to inform policy
updates. In our experience the value networks perform quite
well, explaining about 90% of the variance in rewards.
One issue that Actor-Critics face is premature convergence
to a suboptimal deterministic policy. This is bad because,
once the policy is deterministic, different actions are no
longer explored, so we never receive evidence that other ac-
tions might be better, and so the policy never changes. A sim-
ple workaround is to add some ϵ noise to the policy, like in
Q-learning. However, because we do not have Q-values, we
can’t explicitly explore similarly-valued actions with similar
probabilities. Instead, we add an entropy term to the learn-
ing rule (4) that nudges the policy towards randomness, and
we tune the scale h of this entropy term so that the actor
neither plunges into deterministism (0 entropy) nor remains
stuck at uniform randomness (maximum entropy). Since en-
tropy is simply expected (negative) log-probability, our re-
sulting Actor-Critic policy gradient is:
∆θ = α(A(s, a) −h)∇θ log πθ(s, a)
In this form, we see that the entropy scale h is constant
negative distortion on the reward signal. Therefore, like the
REINFORCE baseline b, h does not affect the overall validity
of the policy gradient as a maximizer (in expectation) of total
discounted reward.
Overall our approach most closely resembles DeepMind’s
Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic [Mnih et al., 2016],
although we do not perform asynchronous gradient updates
(merely asynchronous experience generation). Similar to the
Q network, the actor network outputs a vector containing the
probabilities of each action.
3.3
Training
Despite being 15 years old, SSBM is not trivial to emulate 1.
Empirically, we found that, while a modern CPU can reach
framerates of about 5x real time, those typically found on
servers can only manage 1-2x. This is quite slow compared
to the performance-engineered Atari Learning Environment,
which can run Atari games over one hundred times faster
than real time. This means that generating experiences (state-
action-reward sequences) is a major bottleneck. We remedy
1We used the dolphin emulator. http://dolphin-emu.org
this by running many different emulators in parallel, typically
50 or more per experiment. 2
The many parallel agents periodically send their experi-
ences to a trainer, which maintains a circular queue of the
most recent experiences. With the help of a GPU, the trainer
continually performs (minibatched) stochastic gradient de-
scent on its set of experiences while periodically saving snap-
shots of the neural network weights for the agents to load.
This asynchronous setup technically breaks the assumption
of the REINFORCE learning rule that the data is generated
from the current policy network (in reality the network has
since been updated by a few gradient steps), but in practice
this does not appear to be a problem, likely because the gra-
dient steps are sufﬁciently small to not change the policy sig-
niﬁcantly in the time that an experience sits in the queue. The
upside is that no time is wasted waiting on the part of either
the agents or the trainer.
Hyper-Parameters
All of our policies used an epsilon value of 0.02. Our discount
factor λ was set such that rewards 2 seconds into the future
were worth half as much as rewards in the present. We tried
different values of n in the discounted reward summation and
settled on n = 10.
All of our neural networks (Q, actor, and critic) used archi-
tectures with two fully-connected hidden layers of size 128.
While far from thorough, our attempts with different archi-
tectures did not yield improvements - some, such the 3 x 128
policy network, actually did worse. On the other hand, the
number and sizes of the critic layers did not have much of an
effect.
Our weight variables were initialized to have random
columns of norm 1, and the biases as zero-mean normals with
standard deviation 0.1. Our nonlinearity was a smoothed ver-
sion of the traditional leaky ReLU which we call “leaky soft-
plus” (with α = 0.01):
fα(x) = log(exp(αx) + exp(x))
Learning rate and second-order methods
Whenever gradient descent is employed, one must worry
about choosing the right learning rate. It must not be too
large, or the local linearity assumption breaks down and the
loss fails to decrease (or even diverges). But if too small,
then learning is unnecessarily slow. Ideally, the learning rate
would be as large as possible, while still ensuring conver-
gence. Often, some hand-tuning sufﬁces; in our case, a learn-
ing rate of 1e-4 gave reasonable results.
A more principled approach is to use higher-order deriva-
tives to adjust the learning rate or even the gradient direction.
If the error surface is relatively ﬂat, then we can take a larger
step; if it is very curved, then we should take a small step.
This incidentally solves another issue with ﬁrst-order meth-
ods: that scaling the loss function (or the rewards) translates
into an equivalent scaling of the gradients, which can mean
a dramatic change in the learning dynamics, even though the
optimization problem is effectively unchanged.
2Computing resources were provided by the Mass. Green High-
Performance Computing Center.

In RL, however, we are optimizing more than just a loss
function - we are optimizing a policy through policy iteration.
This means that we should care about the change in the pol-
icy as well as the change in the loss (and when using REIN-
FORCE there isn’t really a “loss”, only a direction in which
to improve the policy). This approach, known as Trust Re-
gion Policy Optimization [Schulman et al., 2015], constrains
each gradient step so that the change in policy is bounded.
This change is measured by the KL divergence between the
old policy and the new policy, averaged over the states in our
batch:
D(π, π′) = 1
|S|
X
s∈S
DKL(π(s), π′(s))
If the old policy is parameterized by θ0 which we are
changing in the ∆θ direction, then a second-order approxi-
mation of the change in policy is given by:
D(πθ0, πθ0+∆θ) ≈1
2∆θT H(θ0)∆θ
Here H(θ) is the Hessian of D(πθ0, πθ). Note that there is
no ﬁrst-order term, since θ = θ0 is a global minimum of the
policy distance. The direction in which the KL divergence is
taken also doesn’t matter, as it is locally symmetric.
If the policy gradient direction is g, our goal then is to max-
imize ∆θT g (the progress made in improving the policy) sub-
ject to the constraint
1
2∆θT H∆θ ≤c
Here c is a our chosen bound on the change in policy. The
method of Lagrange multipliers shows that the optimal direc-
tion for ∆θ is given by the solution to Hx = g (which we
then rescale to satisfy the constraint). Unfortunately, H is
in practice too big to invert or even store in memory, as it is
quadratic in the number of parameters, which is already quite
large for neural networks. We thus resort to the Conjugate
Gradient method [Shewchuk, 1994], which only requires the
ability to take matrix-vector products with H. This we can do
as follows:
Hx =

∇θ
 xT ∇θD(πθ0, πθ)

θ=θ0
Note that we are only taking gradients of scalars, which can
be done efﬁciently with automatic differentiation. Each step
of conjugate gradient descent improves our progress in the
direction of the policy gradient g within the constrained pol-
icy region, at the cost of extra computation time. In practice,
we found that a policy bound of 10−6 and 10-20 conjugate
gradient iterations worked best.
4
Results
Unless otherwise stated, all agents, human or AI, played as
Captain Falcon on the stage Battleﬁeld 3. We chose Cap-
tain Falcon because he is one of the most popular characters,
and because he doesn’t have any projectile attacks (which
our state representation lacks). Using only one character and
stage greatly simpliﬁes the environment and makes it possible
to directly compare learning curves and raw scores.
3Considered the best stage for competitive play.
4.1
In-game AI
We began by testing the RL algorithms against the in-game
AI. After appropriate parameter tuning, both Q learners and
actor-critics proved capable of defeating this AI at its highest
difﬁculty setting, and reached similar average reward levels
within a day.
Figure 2:
Learning curves for Actor-Critic (purple) and
“DQN” (yellow) against the in-game AI. Y-axis is average
reward, X-axis is hours.
For each algorithm, we found little variance between ex-
periments with different initializations.
However, the two
algorithms found qualitatively different policies from each
other. Actor-Critics pursued a standard strategy of attack-
ing and counter-attacking, similar to the way humans play.
Q-learners on the other hand would consistently ﬁnd the un-
intuitive strategy of tricking the in-game AI into killing itself.
This multi-step tactic is fairly impressive; it involves moving
to the edge of the stage and allowing the enemy to attempt
a 2-attack string, the ﬁrst of which hits (resulting in a small
negative reward) while the second misses and causes the en-
emy to suicide (resulting in a large positive reward).
OpenAI Baseline
OpenAI has released Gym and Universe, which provide a
uniform RL interface to a collection of various environments
(such as Atari) [Brockman et al., 2016]. They also provide a
“starter agent” implementing the A3C algorithm as a baseline
for solving the Gym/Universe RL tasks 4. While our main
work does not use this interface, as it lacks support for multi-
agent environments, we have implemented SSBM as a Gym
environment 5 (with the in-game AI as the opponent) for easy
access. This allowed us to run (a slightly modiﬁed version
of 6) OpenAI’s starter agent on the same task from above: C.
Falcon vs max level C. Falcon on Battleﬁeld. However, after
running for several days on a 16-core machine, the average
reward never surpassed -1e-3, a level which both our DQN
and Actor-Critic were able to reach in only a few hours. This
suggests that SSBM, even when using the underlying game
4http://github.com/openai/universe-starter-agent
5http://github.com/vladﬁ1/gym-dolphin
6http://github.com/vladﬁ1/universe-starter-agent

state instead pixels, is somewhat more difﬁcult than the Atari
environments for which the starter agent was built.
4.2
Self-play
The agents trained against the in-game AI, while successful,
would not pose a challenge to even low-level competitive hu-
man players. This is due to the quality of their opponent - the
in-game AI pursues a very speciﬁc (and, for the Q-learner,
exploitable) strategy which was does not reﬂect how expe-
rienced players actually play. Without having ever played
against a human-level opponent, it is not surprising that the
trained agents are themselves below human-level.
By switching the player structs in the state representation,
we can have a network play as either player 1 or 2, allowing
it to train against old versions of itself in a similar fashion to
AlphaGo [Silver et al., 2016]. After a week of self-training an
Actor-Critic, our network exhibited very strong play, similar
to an expert (if repetitive) human. The author, himself a mid-
level player, was hard-pressed to defeat this AI through con-
ventional tactics. After another week of training, we brought
a copy of the network to two major tournaments, where it per-
formed favorably against all professional players who were
willing to face it.
Opponent
Rank
Kills
Deaths
S2J
16
4
2
Zhu
31
4
1
Gravy
41
8
5
Crush
49
3
2
Maﬁa
50
4
3
Slox
51
6
4
Redd
59
12
8
Darkrain
61
12
5
Smuckers
64
8
5
Kage
70
4
1
Table 1: Some results against ranked SSBM players. Rank-
ings from http://wiki.teamliquid.net/smash/
SSBM_Rank. S2J is considered by some to be the best Cap-
tain Falcon player in the world.
Even this very well-trained network exhibited some strange
weaknesses, however. One particularly clever player found
that the simple strategy of crouching at the edge of the stage
caused the network to behave very oddly, refusing to attack
and eventually KOing itself by falling off the other side of the
stage. One hypothesis to explain this weakness is the lack of
diversity in training - since the network only played against
old copies of itself, it never encountered such a degenerate
strategy.
Another limitation is that this network was only trained to
play as and against a speciﬁc character and on a particular
stage, and predictably performs much worse if these variables
are changed. Our attempts to train networks to play as multi-
ple characters at once - that is, to simultaneously train on ex-
periences generated from multiple characters’ points of view
- did not have much success. Anecdotally, we observed that
these networks would not appropriately change their strat-
egy based on their character, choosing to use moves from the
rather small intersection of the “good” moves of each char-
acter. This is somewhat similar to autoencoders that learn to
generate blurry images that represent the “average” input of
their dataset.
4.3
Agent Diversity
The simple solution to playing multiple characters is to use
a different network for each character. We did this for the
six most popular competitive characters (Fox, Falco, Sheik,
Marth, Peach, and Captain Falcon), and had the networks
train against each other for several days. The results were
fairly good, with the networks becoming challenging for the
author to play against. In addition, these did not exhibit the
strange behavior of the earlier Falcon-bot. We suspect that
this is due to the added uncertainty in the environment from
training against different opponents.
This set of six networks then became opponents against
which to train future networks, providing a concrete bench-
mark for measuring performance.
Empirically, none of
these future attempts were able to ﬁnd degenerate counter-
strategies to the benchmark networks, so we tentatively de-
clare that weakness resolved.
4.4
Character Transfer
When training a network to play as a new character, we found
it more efﬁcient to initialize from an already-trained network
than from scratch. We can measure this in the amount of time
taken to reach 0 average reward against the benchmark set of
agents.
Scratch
Sheik
Marth
Fox
Falco
Peach
Falcon
Sheik
36
0
4
7
7
3
9
Marth
40
5
0
11
10
7
10
Fox
31
8
6
0
2
6
7
Falco
35
9
6
2
0
7
5
Peach
26
2
4
5
5
0
6
C. Falcon
53
9
11
13
12
10
0
Table 2: Transfer times (in hours) for Actor-Critics.
We
consider a network “trained” once it reaches 0 mean reward
against the benchmark agents.
Figure 3: Hierarchical clustering of the characters by transfer
time. Fox and Falco, considered to be “clone” characters,
cluster tightly together.

By this measure, transfer provides a signiﬁcant speedup to
training. This is especially true for similar pairs of characters,
such as Fox and Falco. On the whole these results are unsur-
prising, as many basic tactics (staying on the stage, attacking
in the opponent’s direction, dodging or shielding when the
opponent attacks) are universal to all characters.
The data also reveal the overall ease of playing each char-
acter - Peach, Fox, and Falco all trained fairly quickly, while
Captain Falcon was signiﬁcantly slower than the rest. This to
some extent matches the consensus of the SSBM community,
which ranks the characters (in decreasing order of strength)
as: Fox, Falco, Marth, Sheik, Peach, C. Falcon. The main
difference is that Peach performs better than would be naively
expected from the community rankings. This is likely due to
her very quick and powerful attacks, which are easier for RL
agents to learn to use compared to the movement speed of-
fered by other characters like Marth and C. Falcon.
5
Discussion
5.1
Actor-Critic vs Q-Learning
We found that Q-learners did not perform well when learn-
ing from self-play, or in general when playing against other
networks that are themselves training. It could be argued that
learning the Q-function is intrinsically harder than learning
a policy. This technically true in the sense that from Qπ one
can directly get a policy that performs as least as well as π (by
playing greedily), but from π it is not easy to get Qπ (that’s
the entire challenge of Q-learning).
However, we found that Q-learners perform reasonably
well against ﬁxed opponents, such as the in-game AI and the
set of benchmark networks. This leads us to believe that the
issue is the non-stationary nature of playing against agents
that are also training. In this scenario the Q function has to
keep up with the not only the policy iteration but also the
changes in the opponent.
5.2
Exploration vs Exploitation
Our main method for quantitatively measuring the tendency
of an agent to explore different actions is through the average
entropy of its policy. For Q-networks, this is directly con-
trolled by the temperature parameter. For Actor-Critics, the
entropy scale factor nudges the direction of the policy gradi-
ent towards randomness during training.
Looking at only the mean entropy over many states can be
misleading, however. Typically the minimum entropy quickly
dips below 0.5, while the average remains above 3. In many
cases we found these seemingly high-entropy agents to actu-
ally play very repetitively. This suggests that on most frames,
which action is taken is largely irrelevant to the agent’s per-
formance. Indeed, once an attack is initiated in SSBM, it gen-
erally cannot be aborted during its duration, which can last on
the order of seconds.
A more principled approach to exploration would attempt
to quantify the agent’s uncertainty, and prefer to explore ac-
tions about which the agent is unsure. Even measuring how
much an state/action has been explored can be quite difﬁcult
- once this is known, bandit algorithms such as UCB may be
applied [Bellemare et al., 2016].
5.3
Action Delay
The main criticism of our agents is that they play with un-
realistic reaction speed: 2 frames (33ms), compared to over
200ms for humans. To be fair, Captain Falcon is, of the pop-
ular characters, perhaps the worst equipped to take advantage
of this reaction speed, with attacks that take many frames to
become active (on the order of 15 frames, or 250ms). Many
other characters have attacks that become active in half the
time, or even immediately (on the very next frame) - this was
an additional reason for using C. Falcon initially.
The issue of reaction time highlights a big difference be-
tween these neural net-based agents and humans. The neu-
ral net is effectively cloned, fed a state, asked for an action,
and then destroyed on each frame. While the cloning and
destruction don’t really take place, this perspective puts the
network in stark contrast to people, who have a memory and
respond continually to their sensory experiences and internal
thoughts.
The closest a neural network can get to this is via recur-
rence, where the network outputs not only an action but also
a memory state, and is fed not only the current game state but
also the previous memory. Unfortunately these network are
known to be difﬁcult to train [Pascanu et al., 2013], and we
were not able to train a competent recurrent agent. This av-
enue certainly warrants further investigation - recurrent net-
works would be able to deal with any amount of delay and
could even in principle handle projectiles, by learning to re-
member when they were ﬁred and simulating their trajectory
in memory.
Instead, to deal with an action delay of k frames, we use a
network that takes in the previous k+1 frames as input, along
with the actions taken on those frames. This was sufﬁcient to
train fairly strong agents with delay 2 or 4, but performance
dropped off sharply around 6-10 frames. We suspect that the
cause for this drop in performance is not simply the handicap
given by the delay, but the further separation of actions from
rewards, making it harder to tell which actions were really
responsible for the already sparse rewards.
To the best of our knowledge, action delay (and human-
like play in general) is not an issue that has been addressed
by the (deep) RL community, and remains an interesting and
challenging open problem.
6
Conclusions
The goal of this work is threefold. We introduce a new en-
vironment to the reinforcement learning community, Super
Smash Bros Melee, a competitive multi-player game which
offers a variety of stages and characters. We analyze the dif-
ﬁculties posed by adapting traditional reinforcement learning
algorithms, which are typically designed around a stationary
Markov decision process, to multi-player games where the
adversary may itself learn. Finally, we demonstrate an agent
based on deep learning which sets the state of the art in this
environment, surpassing the abilities of ten highly-ranked hu-
man players.
