1
Integration of Vehicular Clouds and Autonomous
Driving: Survey and Future Perspectives
Yassine Maalej, Student Member, IEEE, and Elyes Balti, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—For decades, researchers on Vehicular Ad-hoc Net-
works (VANETs) and autonomous vehicles presented various
solutions for vehicular safety and autonomy, respectively. Yet, the
developed work in these two areas has been mostly conducted in
their own separate worlds, and barely affect one- another despite
the obvious relationships. In the coming years, the Internet of
Vehicles (IoV), encompassing sensing, communications, connec-
tivity, processing, networking, and computation is expected to
bridge many technologies to offer value-added information for
the navigation of self-driving vehicles, to reduce vehicle on board
computation, and to deliver desired functionalities. Potentials
for bridging the gap between these two worlds and creating
synergies of these two technologies have recently started to
attract signiﬁcant attention of many companies and government
agencies. In this article, we ﬁrst present a comprehensive survey
and an overview of the emerging key challenges related to the
two worlds of Vehicular Clouds (VCs) including communications,
networking, trafﬁc modelling, medium access, VC Computing
(VCC), VC collation strategies, security issues, and autonomous
driving (AD) including 3D environment learning approaches and
AD enabling deep-learning, computer vision and Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AI) techniques. We then discuss the recent related work
and potential trends on merging these two worlds in order to
enrich vehicle cognition of its surroundings, and enable safer and
more informed and coordinated AD systems. Compared to other
survey papers, this work offers more detailed summaries of the
most relevant VCs and ADs systems in the literature, along with
some key challenges and insights on how different technologies
ﬁt together to deliver safety, autonomy and infotainment services.
Index Terms—VANETs, IOV, Vehicular Clouds, AI, AD,
Safety Applications, Computer Vision, LIDAR, Cooperative Au-
tonomous Driving.
PART 1: Research Signiﬁcance and Market Opportunity
of Connected Vehicles and Self-Driving Cars
The race among vehicle manufacturers and IT companies to
develop, test and market a reliable fully autonomous vehicular
technology is motivated by the big expected annual revenue
stream of smart autonomous and connected vehicles. In this
part, we introduce the major technological solutions in the
IoV with their industrial market opportunities and research
challenges and signiﬁcance
I. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH SIGNIFICANCE
F
or more than three decades, researchers have increas-
ingly infused more cyber capabilities to vehicles. Starting
from basic communications to cell towers, passing through
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I)
short range communications (a.k.a. VANETs), and reaching
the recent era of VCs. On the other hand, many researchers
have taken signiﬁcant steps in vehicular automation with a
long-term vision of reaching a full driving autonomy. Despite
their obvious relevance to one another, the bridging and
synergies between these two worlds have not been properly
investigated. But this has recently started to attract massive
interest from many companies and government agencies. For
instance, the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
US Department of Transportation (USDOT) have expressed
tremendous need and importance to relate these two worlds
together in several of their call for research proposals in 2017
[1]. They clearly emphasized the importance of integration
and fusion of data from various input modes in order to
create a deeper understanding of surroundings for safer and
more coordinated AD applications. More precisely, enriched
3D scene reconstruction by different input technologies and
deep learning techniques are of paramount importance to
allow autonomous vehicle systems to perform effectively and
safely. These directions are strongly supported by the few
accidents and fatalities [2] and trafﬁc light violations [3]
made by autonomous vehicle prototypes from top industries
in the market (e.g., Tesla, Uber). These incidents that could
have easily been mitigated if strong connectivity, comput-
ing and distributed coordination resources among vehicles
and to the road infrastructure did exist. Luckily, VANET
applications for both safety and non-safety messaging have
been approved by many government agencies (e.g., USDOT)
and are “ready for deployment.” Forecasters estimate more
than 250 million wireless-enabled vehicles by 2020 [1]. In
addition, vehicle manufacturers, such as Cadillac, have already
introduced commercial products (e.g., 2017 Cadillac CTS).
Many modern vehicles will soon be equipped with sophis-
ticated computing and storage capacities in their on-board
unit (OBU). In addition, vehicles are getting more and more
communication technology options, such as Dedicated Short
Range Communications (DSRC), WiFi, 3G or Long-Term
Evolution (LTE), which allow them to efﬁciently communicate
and exchange information about their positions and intended
steering commands. Furthermore, these wireless communica-
tion technologies can be used for awareness and safety through
V2V beacons, as well as to enrich vehicular knowledge about
their status and timings through V2I connections to static
infrastructure entities such as trafﬁc signals, street signs, etc.
In addition to the available computing capabilities, such as
micro datacenters in modern RSUs as an example, modern
vehicles are equipped with computing resources in their OBUs.
All of these distributed resources together offer a great op-
portunity to form VCs. Advanced VC technologies efﬁciently
combined with recent advances in AD can revolutionize the
latter. A VC does not only provide much more enriched and in-
arXiv:2201.02893v2  [eess.SP]  15 Jan 2022

2
formed 3D understanding of the vehicle surroundings through
communications among the vehicles and the infrastructure. But
also migrates current AD decision-making paradigms from
single isolated operations per vehicle to a more cooperative
and coordinated operation through VCC. However, it is a
difﬁcult task to create a real-time 3D map that is enriched from
the mapping of data derived from distinct sensing inputs as
well as premapped data that usually provides static references
on streets from the cloud. Reaching this stage requires not only
merging and ﬁnding the synergies of VC and AD systems,
but also getting separate data from the various technologies
constituting each of them. For instance, the DSRC technology
enables safety and non-safety applications for VANETs, which
constitute a key component in VCs and ADs. Safety appli-
cations are time critical applications that are based on V2V
communications that enrich the knowledge of AD systems,
while non-safety applications rely mostly on V2I communi-
cations to enable the connectivity of vehicles to VCs. The
Wireless Access for Vehicular Environment (WAVE) standard
partitions the bandwidth into seven channels of 10 MHz each,
one control channel (CCH) to serve safety applications, and
six Service Channels (SCHs) to serve non-safety applications.
DSRC speciﬁes a channel switching scheme to allow vehicles
to alternate between these two types of applications. Moreover,
the channel switching scheme has a lot of limitations and needs
to be improved and adjusted depending on the network density
and the requirements of the applications.
Thus, there is a need for constructing robust single and
multi hop communications for VCs in order to perform the
desired coordinated role for multiple non-safety or commercial
applications. This creates many challenges to optimize their
coalition formation, manage the cloud resources efﬁciently and
distributively, and make the technology more cost effective.
On the other hand, many deep learning and artiﬁcial in-
telligence systems and algorithms have been developed and
tailored to enhance autonomous vehicles’ 3D surrounding
reconstruction and image ﬂow recognition from both camera
feeds and LIDAR point clouds. End-to-End recognition and
driving decisions frameworks have also been recently studied.
However, many challenges still exist in terms of the accuracy
of the resulting learned environment and decisions taken by
autonomous vehicles, especially in very low visibility (e.g.,
foggy weather, camera facing the sun) and out-of-sight scenar-
ios (e.g., vehicles hidden by buildings/trucks at intersections),
in which camera and LIDAR technologies can easily fail.
This article starts by providing a comprehensive survey,
over-viewing the current research in the literature about both
VC and AD technologies, and illustrating their on-going
challenges and limitations. In addition, we shed some light on
the recent work towards merging these two worlds to develop
a synergistic framework for a more informed, advanced and
coordinated AD systems. The outline of the contributions of
this paper relative to the recent literature can be summarized
as follows:
• Present how different communications technologies and
protocols ﬁt together to form Vehicular networks and
clouds.
• Provide an overview of some of the VANET and VC
challenges presented in the recent literature and provide
a summary of the related research work. Moreover, we
present the relation between these technologies and other
emerging technologies, such as big data analytic and
cloud computing.
• Unlike previous surveys, this survey provides not only
the characteristics of the existing Media Access Con-
trol (MAC) protocols, but also how to optimize them
to improve the performance of safety and non-safety
applications in VCs.
• Due to the rapidly-changing topology and high node
mobility in VANETs, we discuss different routing al-
gorithms and their performance evaluation based on the
transmission strategy, delay sensitivity and homogeneity
or heterogeneity between networks.
• We classify various VCC architectures and expose their
advantages and limitations.
• We review various perceptions only, LIDAR only, and
mixed approaches for objects recognition, tracking and
scene ﬂow estimation surrounding the self-driving vehi-
cle.
• Review current research attempts ranging from pedestrian
tracking, free space and road segmentation to more com-
plex systems offering autonomous navigation based on
the different up-to-date modalities of sensors.
• We present and compare recent Simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) based methods for vehicle local-
ization based on surrounding on the move data recorded
from different sensors.
• We present various open research and technical chal-
lenges of mapping and fusion techniques based on the
sensing technology, alignment type (post or pre) and the
data provenance from the VC or the vehicle sensors.
• We introduce recent works aiming to align the informa-
tion obtained from camera feeds, LIDAR point clouds,
and DSRC Basic Safety Messages (BSMs) in order to
construct a more enriched and informed 3D understand-
ing of autonomous vehicle surroundings.
• We shed light on prospective research directions to de-
velop both more robust multimodal data merging and
deep learning schemes for AD, and advanced computing
and optimization frameworks for safer and more coordi-
nated AD systems.
II. MARKET OPPORTUNITY OF CONNECTED
VEHICLES AND AD
Connected and autonomous vehicles offer a promising mar-
ket opportunity for on board communications equipment man-
ufacturers, autonomous steering, Internet Service Providers
(ISPs), LIDAR and RADAR scanners, AI vehicle computing
platforms, etc.

3
Fig. 1: Projected Market Share of Autonomous Vehicles
Technology Through 2030 [4].
Appealed by the estimated $87 billion market opportunity
by 2030 [4], traditional vehicle manufacturers are thriving to
put the pedal to the medal while they contest with technology
companies to put driver assistive features of fully automated
self-driving technology in vehicles. The software systems,
computation hardware, and optical cameras are projected to
form the most signiﬁcant economic impact in the self-driving
vehicles market, as presented in Fig. 1. The National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA) has issued a notice
of proposed rule-making (NPRM) to mandate vehicle manu-
facturers to mount DSRC radios for V2V communications in
new vehicles sold in the USA market starting in 2020 [5].
Consequently, this is expected to produce a rapid expansion
of ubiquitous V2V and V2I connectivity, as the number of
projections shown in Fig. 2 makes the leap to self-driving
vehicles even smaller. Regardless of the on board communica-
tions, connectivity to the cloud has a substantial and profound
impact on businesses and the society. It enables a variety of
key vehicular applications such as software updates, real-time
trafﬁc with parking information, charging stations location and
availability, and vehicular apps that evolve the deployment
of autonomous vehicles. Speciﬁcally by 2020, projections
estimate that the connected vehicle market is expected to
create a total revenue of $141 Billion [7]. In addition to the
aforementioned driving related features, connected vehicles
would gain from cloud services including advanced infotain-
ment systems, commercial applications, and deep analysis and
diagnostic systems. Based on different connectivity solutions,
the annual global sales are expected to gain a tremendous
growth especially for the embedded and integrated solutions,
as shown in Fig. 3. The embedded connectivity solutions en-
able connectivity, intelligent computation and built in services
and applications running inside the vehicle. While tethered
solutions rely on the separation of the applications, remain
inside the vehicle, and the connectivity is delivered externally
(e.g., using a phone). The integrated solution (usually called
bring-you-own-device) enables connecting a device that has
the computation, applications and connectivity to the vehicle’s
dashboard.
Fig. 2: Projected Numbers of Vehicles Equipped With V2X
Connectivity Through 2025 [6].
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Annual Units Sales(Millions)
Embedded
Tethered
Integrated
Fig. 3: Forecast Worldwide Sales of Vehicle Connectivity
Solutions.
US consumer trust and interest in simple, partial, and fully
automated driving systems have increased as detailed in Fig.
4 presented by the study in [?]. Among all the levels of
vehicle automation technologies, younger consumers in the US
have shown strong interest in systems with emphasis on basic
automation, adaptive safety, limited autonomous driving and
full autonomy. These survey ﬁndings presented more details
about the trust and the interest of US customers between 2014
and 2016, which deﬁnitely point to a fast-pace growth demand
towards the AD systems.
However, this expected progression of spreading the con-
nected VC related services and the AD systems is very related
to the provision of high Quality of Service (QoS) connectivity
for vehicles, and regulatory actions.

4
Fig. 4: US Consumer Interest of Various Levels of Vehicle
Automation [?].
III. REMAINDER OF THE PAPER
The overall structure of this article is organized into three
major parts. Part 2 provides a comprehensive survey of the key
challenges encountered in VANETs and VCs. In Section IV,
we introduce the various communications technologies used in
vehicular networking. Heterogeneous VANETs are classiﬁed
in Section VI. In Section VII, we evaluate the numerous
MAC protocols in VANETs. Different types and strategies
for trafﬁc modelings and networking of safety and non-safety
applications are introduced in Section IX. In addition, we
present recent optimization schemes for MAC protocols and
discuss the effect of the Synchronization Interval (SI) in the
reliability of the vehicular applications. In Section X, we
compare the different ideas of VC formation based on var-
ious data center types and the heterogeneous communication
technologies in ad-hoc cloud networks. We also show how
differentiating the cloud performance can improve the QoS of
the non-safety applications. Most common security threats in
vehicular communications and VCs are described in Section
IX. Part 3 presents a thorough overview of the literature
and the on-going open problems in AD and its enabling 3D
scene reconstruction using camera and LIDAR technologies.
In Section XII.A, we present mediated perception approaches
for object recognition from cameras only. In Section XII.B,
we present the prediction of driving decisions through direct
perception approaches. While in Section XII.C we illustrate
the behavior reﬂex approach usage to directly map sensed
input to the driving action that has been previously taken.
The various LIDAR based perception approaches for objects
detection and recognition from a point cloud are developed
in Section XII.D. The mixed techniques based on mediated
and LIDAR perceptions are iterated in Section XII.E. Sections
XIII.A, XIII.B and XIII.C are dedicated to vehicle localization
based on visual odometry, LIDAR and Combined Visual-
LIDAR odometry, respectively. Afterwards, Part 4 sheds light
on the recent advances in merging these two worlds for
advanced and coordinated AD systems. In Section XIV, recent
techniques to post-align pre-learned scenes for camera feeds,
LIDAR scans, VANET BSMs, and infrastructure messages are
illustrated. Future research directions on pre-fusion of the data
obtained from this multimodal input (i.e., camera, LIDAR
and VANETs) are highlighted in Section XV. In addition,
potential research tools that utilize the resulting enriched and
informed environment recognition to achieve AD cooperation
and coordination for AD are presented in Section XVI. Finally,
examples of integrating VCs and AD systems are presented in
Section XVII. In Part 5, we present the major open challenges
facing the effective widespread utilization of VCs as well as
the fully autonomous vehicles, as detailed in Section XVIII.
Finally, we conclude the paper by summarizing the important
take-away messages of this article in Section XIX.
PART 2: KEY CHALLENGES IN VANETS AND VCS
The major studied building blocks of vehicular networks can
be classiﬁed into four major sections; namely: communications
technologies,
cellular
and
DSRC
architectures,
network
architectures and VANET MAC protocols. The vehicular
networks are intended to manage the connectivity of vehicles
from and to VCs and to support access independently of
the clouds’ architectures and challenges. This section focus
on the overall challenges in VCs and provides a thorough
summary of the most relevant architectures developed in the
literature.
IV. VEHICULAR COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES
Modern
vehicles
are
mostly
equipped
with
various
communications technologies such as WiFi, DSRC, 3G, and
LTE. This is considered a valuable advancement, but ensuring
that
vehicles
use
the
most
appropriate
communication
technologies is a very challenging problem. This is the case
for each of these technologies and the trade-off between
their pros and cons. The maximum range of WiFi-direct
can extend to 200 meters with a highest data rate of 11
Mbps. Whereas LTE is a paid mobile communications
technology that has a wider connectivity coverage than
DSRC and WiFi, but provides a lower data rate that ranges
from 5 to 12 Mbps. Even though DSRC has a maximum
data rate of up to 27 Mbps, its maximum range is 1000 meters.
A. Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC)
The DSRC [8] standard was coined by the Federal Commu-
nications Commission (FCC) [9] to operate over a dedicated
75 MHz spectrum band around 5.9 GHz in the USA [10] and
partitions the bandwidth into seven channels. The DSRC has
been adopted to enable two classes of applications (Safety and
Non-Safety) for VANETs. One control channel CCH number
178 which are used to serve safety applications. Six SCHs
(172,174,176,180,182,184) to serve non-safety applications as
detailed in Fig. 6.

5
Paper
Organization
Part 3:
Autonomous
Vehicles
XII.A Mediated
Perception
Approaches
XII.A Mediated
Perception
Approaches
XII.B Direct
Perception
Approaches
XII.C Behaviour
Reﬂex
Approaches
XII.D Lidar
Perception
Approaches
XII.E Mixed
Mediated and
LIDAR
Perception
XIII.
Localization and
Mapping
Approaches
Part 4:
Towards VCs
meeting AV
XIV. Post
Alignment and
fusion
XV. Pre-fusion
between VC
and AD data
XVI.
Cooperation and
Coordinated AD
XVII. Examples
of Integration
Systems
Part 2: Key
Challenges of
VANETs and
VCs
I.
Communication
Technologies
II. Cellular and
DSRC
Architectures
III. Vehicular
Network
Architectures
IV. Vanet MAC
Protocols
V.
Vehicular Cloud
Architecture
VI.
Vehicular Cloud
Challenges
Fig. 5: Overall Organization of the Paper.
B. Wireless Access for Vehicular Environments (WAVE)
The CCH and the SCHs have four different access cate-
gories (ACs) and different priorities for each one of them to
access the medium. In many urban areas, vehicles can use
the free WiFi connectivity and might also use paid cellular
base stations (e.g., 3G, LTE or 5G) connectivity to access
the Internet depending on the application requirements, QoS,
and cost. Vehicles having only DSRC connectivity may also
use their neighboring vehicles as a gateway to the outside
world. It is kind of tricky how to handle all these types of
connections in a sophisticated and cost efﬁcient manner. In this
section, we mainly focus on the DSRC emerging technology
and WAVE standard of VANETs, then we describe different
MAC protocols that have been proposed in many research
attempts. With respect to the OSI reference Model in Fig. 7,
the WAVE model is divided into four categories:
• IEEE 1609.1 [12]: standard used as a guide to manage
the resources in VANET entities (e.g., RSUs, and OBUs).
• IEEE 1609.2: standard deﬁned as the WAVE security ser-
vices for applications and management of messages that
are responsible for ensuring the anonymity, authenticity
and conﬁdentiality of the vehicular safety and non-safety
packets.
• IEEE 1609.3: standard developed as a guide for WAVE
network conﬁguration management and WAVE Short

6
Fig. 6: DSRC Channel Arrangements [11].
Message (WSM) transmission and reception.
• IEEE 1609.4 [13]: standard responsible for WAVE Multi-
Channel Operations that provides the DSRC frequency
band with coordination and management of multiple
connections by adopting the IEEE 802.11p standard for
MAC and Physical Layer (PHY) speciﬁcations.
Fig. 7: OSI Model vs. WAVE Model Communications Stack
[11].
C. DSRC Channels Switching Assignment
DSRC speciﬁes a channel switching scheme that allows
vehicles to alternate between the transmission of safety and
non-safety packets. The DSRC standard recommends that, dur-
ing a SI which is 100ms long, vehicles should visit the CCH
to exchange their status messages with neighboring vehicles.
The SI is composed of Control Channel Interval (CCHI) and
Service Channel Interval (SCHI), both intervals are used to
access the CCH and the SCHs for sending safety and non-
safety application packets, respectively. Many research studies
have been conducted to optimize the CCHI and the SCHI to
Fig. 8: WAVE Channel Access Mechanisms [11].
guarantee a fair split of the SI between the safety and non-
safety applications and to prioritize applications based on their
QoS requirements. A higher time share of the CCH from the SI
leads to more reliable safety applications. In [14], the authors
Fig. 9: Reference Model of MAC Architecture in IEEE
1069.4 for Multi-Channel Operations [11].
developed two algorithms to optimize the length of the CCHI
so that non-safety applications have a fair share of the SI. In
[11], the authors developed an advanced awareness scheme
of channel inactivity to dynamically achieve optimal interval
switching based on the average effective interval utilization.
V. CELLULAR TECHNOLOGY AND DSRC-CELLULAR
HYBRID ARCHITECTURES
Due to the aforementioned limitations of DSRC, many
research attempts have raised interest to investigate the support
of cellular technologies (e.g., 3G, LTE, 5G) for vehicle to any
(V2X) communications and usage of both DSRC and cellular

7
communications, as shown in Fig. 10. Cellular technology is
gaining momentum in the research community over DSRC
because of the following enablers:
• The capacity of dense networks to support high band-
width demand of vehicles and cellular users at the same
time. In such scenario, the performance evaluation of the
downlink with unicast and broadcast vehicular messages
is studied in [15] for LTE based systems.
• Reduced frequency of horizontal handoff of vehicles
between BSs is guaranteed through the large cellular
coverage.
• Unlike DSRC poor Non-Line-Of-Sight receptions, cellu-
lar LTE systems provide potentially better coverage as
demonstrated in [16].
• Cellular is widespread and mature technology that accel-
erates the deployment of V2X communications and does
not require new infrastructure facilities like DSRC.
On the contrary, current research studies that investigate
sending vehicular safety messages using LTE [17], and cross-
trafﬁc assistance of vehicular safety messages using UMTS
and LTE [16], do not account for traditional cellular network
trafﬁc. Even though the downlink and uplink transmission
rates between the BS, as the access network connecting to the
Internet, and vehicles in LTE (up to 300 and 75 Mb/s, respec-
tively) are higher than in DSRC, LTE cannot provide the same
awareness update rate and latency for Cooperative Awareness
Messages (CAM) like ”offered” using DSRC [16]. To put it
differently, the centralized nature of cellular networks imposes
that messages should be sent from vehicles to BSs that unicast
or broadcast messages to other vehicles. In other words,
instead of directly sending safety messages using DSRC, in
cellular networks safety messages have to pass by the BS.
Therefore, the use of the cellular technology results in lower
awareness update rate and higher latency for disseminating
delay critical safety-related applications. Additionally, several
challenges limit transmission of the messages received by the
BS:
• Unicasts the received safety messages to the relevant
vehicles subject to the the initial sender’s safety. The
Work in [18] shows that in case of unicast of messages
from the BS, the uplink has lower trafﬁc load than the
downlink and it becomes a bottleneck. One affordable
solution that is available in 3GPP and higher standards
is the use of multimedia broadcast and multicast services
(MBMS), and the evolved MBMS (eMBMS) for safety
message dissemination over cellular communications.
• Broadcasts the received safety messages to all the ve-
hicles in its cell coverage area. Ultimately every vehicle
receives all the safety messages sent by the BS, regardless
of whether or not it belongs to the same zone of relevance
to the sending vehicle. An alternative solution that might
have a high latency is to create multicast groups [19] with
eMBMS that are concerned with the safety messages that
the BS transmits.
Detailed comparisons between the DSRC-cellular and pure
cellular architectures are summarized in Table. I
VI. VEHICULAR NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
In this section, we survey the most recent research progress
on vehicular network architectures, as detailed in [30]. This
can be classiﬁed into three major categories based on the parts
intervening in the network:
• Stationary cellular and/or RSU based networks used
as access points to provide services to vehicles, such
architecture is detailed in [31].
• Pure VANET formed by parked [32] or moving vehicles
[33].
• Hybrid network architecture that combines cellular and
RSU with mobile vehicles as ad-hoc networks, as de-
scribed in [34].
Vehicular networks based on ﬁxed infrastructure are even-
tually unfeasible because of the high cost associated with
infrastructure deployment. Most of the research attempts focus
on VANETs and hybrid networks. VANETs are created by
applying the principles of mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs)
for spontaneously creating a wireless network of moving
vehicles to increase safety through DSRC communications or
collaboration to better utilize the communications capabilities
of vehicles in the same area. VANETs support a wide range of
applications that vary from simple one hop [35] information
dissemination of CAMs [36] to multi-hop [30] dissemination
of messages over vast distances [37]. VANETs can be divided
into three types depending on their building blocks; namely,
connected vehicles that rely only on V2V communications,
coalition of RSUs and OBUs with V2V and V2I commu-
nication, and interconnected infrastructure equipment (e.g.,
Trafﬁc light, pavement markers, cameras, etc.). In contrast to
MANETs, modeling the moving nodes in VANETs is less
complex especially that most of vehicles are restricted in
their range of motion by paved highways/roads with trafﬁc
lights. The key issue of network selection is when vehicles
are connected to many types of infrastructure nodes like RSUs
with DSRC communications access and/or cellular nodes with
3G/LTE access and/or WiFi. Thus, it renders the decision
making regarding the best type of connectivity very critical
given vehicular application requirements, cost, availability
expectations, etc. These infrastructure nodes have to be utilized
efﬁciently in the best manner that reduces handover latency
from one network to another and to avoid bottleneck network
congestion. In [38], authors studied the use of IPv6 based on its
efﬁcient Internet trafﬁc ﬂow management over heterogeneous
technologies. Their model is based on using the RSUs to
act as IPv6 routers and to handle the convergence of DSRC
and cellular technologies while vehicles get in or out of their
coverage.
VII. VANET MAC PROTOCOLS
A major challenge in VANETs is the frequent changes in
the network topology. VANET MAC protocols have to reduce
the medium access delay for safety applications and to handle
all the vehicles joining or leaving the network. In this paper,
we classify several MAC protocols that have been proposed
for VANETs into ﬁve major categories; namely, contention-
based protocols, contention-free protocols, hybrid protocols,

8
Fig. 10: DSRC-Cellular Hybrid Scenario for V2X Communications [20].
TABLE I: PURE CELLULAR AND HYBRID DSRC-CELLULAR ARCHITECTURES FOR V2X COMMUNICATIONS
Architecture
Channel
Seperation
Channel
Assignment
Reference
Application
Vehicular
Communication
Bandwidth
Aggregation
Pure Cellular
Architecture
Hierarchical
Fixed
[21]
Any application
Cellular
No Aggregation
Dynamic
[22]
Any application
Cellular
No aggregation
DSRC-Cellular
Hybrid Architecture
Flat
Performance
Centric
[23]
Internet
Access
V2I
No V2V
Yes
Generic/DSRC
Aggregation
[24]
Internet
Access
V2I
No V2V
No
LTE/DSRC
Aggregation
Data-centric
[25], [26]
Routing
V2V
No V2I
No
UMTS/DSRC
Aggregation
Hierarchical
Dynamic
[27], [28]
Video Sharing
V2V and V2I
Yes
LTE/DSRC
Aggregation
Fixed
[29]
Safety Message
Broadcast
V2V and V2I
No
LTE/DSRC
Aggregation
dedicated short-range communications-based protocols, and
directional antenna-based protocols. In VANETs, Time Divi-
sion Multiple Access (TDMA), Frequency Division Multiple
Access (FDMA), or Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA)
are very difﬁcult to implement because of the need to dynam-
ically allocate slots, channels, or codes without centralized
control. We highlight the MAC protocols using TDMA by
implementing time-slotted access channels while taking into
consideration the major requirement of clock synchronization
between vehicles. TDMA allocates the disposed bandwidth to
all the vehicles by creating different time frames and dividing
each frame into several time slots so that vehicles send their
data during one or more time slots. Vehicles can access every
frame and they receive during the time slots allocates to neigh-
boring vehicles. The rapidly changing topology in VANETs is
induced by the fast moving vehicles, which imposes that an
efﬁcient MAC protocol must be implemented to adapt to these
changes in the network either through the use of specialized
RSUs, or using cluster head vehicles, or in a distributed
manner. In contrast to TDMA time slotted accesses, MAC
protocols developed as part of the IEEE 802.11p standard
offer a signiﬁcant increase in the network throughput while
reducing the transmission delay by using CCH and SCHs with
reservation-based access and dynamic assignment of channels
to resolve the hidden terminal problem [57]. Ko et al. [58]
developed a directional antenna-based MAC protocol that can
be applied to vehicular environments so that it allows a vehicle
to block the communication to avoid the hidden node problem.

9
TABLE II: WAVE MAC PROTOCOLS CLASSIFICATION
Channel Access
Channel Separation
Channel Assignment
Channel Coordination
Hybrids
Contention-free methods
Distributed
***
Centralized RSU
ACFM [39]
CBRC [40]
Contention-(free
and
based)
methods
Distributed
CS-TDMA [41]
SOFT-MAC [42]
DMMAC
HER-MAC
Centralized Cluster-head
CBMMAC
CBMCS
Centralized RSU
RMAC
Contention-Based
IEEE 802.11p [43]
Distributed
CSMA with DEA [44]
DCAS [45]
Centralized RSU
p-persistant CSMA with CEA [44]
Contention-free
TDMA
Distributed
VeMAC [46]
VeSOMAC [47]
STDMA [48]
CFR MAC
ASTA
Centralized Cluster-head
CAH-MAC [49]
CBMAC [50]
ADHOC MAC [51]
A-ADHOC [52]
TC-MAC [53]
CBT [54]
Centralized RSU
UTSP [55]
FDMA
Distributed
dFDMA [56]
VIII. NETWORK SELECTION SCHEMES AND ROUTING
PROTOCOLS IN VANETS
The dynamic nature of nodes in VANETs offers additional
challenges of ﬁnding and maintaining routes for vehicular
application packets. In addition, the high mobility induces
difﬁculties while routing in homogeneous or heterogeneous
networks. The routing challenges in VANETs include:
• Routing in Homogeneous Networks: most of the tra-
ditional VANET routing protocols have one common
assumption that all packets are transmitted via a short
distance wireless technology (e.g., WAVE standards). As
a result, those routing algorithms’ performance is often
analyzed and compared relative to a horizontal handoff.
The work in [59] presents the scenario of a data trans-
mission session transferred from one Point of Attachment
(POA) to another with the same access technology and in
the same network. In [60] and [61], the authors studied
a use case of horizontal handover to transfer an Internet
video streaming session of a vehicle while moving from
one coverage area of an RSU to another.
• Routing in Heterogeneous Networks: The main reason
why IoV networks are more complicated than VANETs is
that they often include different radio access technologies,
thereby leading to a heterogeneous network. Vertical
handoff is a classical problem in heterogeneous networks,
including the IoV, with different access technologies that
have different characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, frequency
band, modulation and coding scheme). It offers the
possibility to switch from one access technology to an-
other based on performance, availability or cost reasons,
while maintaining active connections. The authors in
[62] present the scenario of a data transmission session
transferred from one POA to another with a different
access technology and in a different network. In [63],
Lee et al. proposed a vertical handoff (VHO) algorithm
for more seamless integration of 3/4G wireless data
networks, VANETs and IEEE 802.11 WLANs.
A. Network Selection Schemes
One way to increase the vehicular networks performance in
terms of throughput and delay is to minimize the cost related to
handovers. Network selection schemes are effective processes
to make handover decisions depending on handover triggers.
They are considered as measures to derive the handover
decisions and can be classiﬁed into user-centric, network-
centric or hybrid, as illustrated in details in Table III. In
cases where there is a necessity for network improvement
or handover needs to be applied, user and network related
information are provided to the network selection scheme
in order to make the network selection’s decision be more
ﬂexible.
B. Routing Protocols in VANETs
Finding and maintaining routes in VANETs is a very
challenging task especially in networks with very chang-
ing topology due to the dynamicity of the vehicular nodes.
Similar to IoV, several classical protocols applicable to
MANETs are developed, such as: Ad-hoc On Demand Dis-
tance Vector (AODV) [69], Destination-Sequenced Distance-
Vector (DSDV) [70] and Dynamic Source Routing (DSR)
[71]. Additionally, many research attempts have considered the
properties of vehicles and developed geographic protocols like
Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR) [72] and Greedy
Perimeter Coordinator Routing (GPCR) [73]. A detailed taxon-
omy of existing routing protocols is given in Table IV. These
protocols are classiﬁed in this section based on:

10
TABLE III: HANDOVER TRIGGERS AND SELECTION SCHEMES
Handover Trigger
Type
Metrics
