Adaptive Anomaly Detection for IoT Data in Hierarchical Edge Computing
Mao V. Ngo,a,b Hakima Chaouchi,c Tie Luo,d Tony Q.S. Queka
aSingapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
bInstitute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
cCNRS, SAMOVAR, Telecom Sud Paris, Institut Mines-Telecom, Paris-Saclay University, France
dDepartment of Computer Science, Missouri University of Science and Technology, USA

Abstract
Advances in deep neural networks (DNN) greatly bolster
real-time detection of anomalous IoT data. However, IoT de-
vices can barely afford complex DNN models due to limited
computational power and energy supply. While one can of-
ﬂoad anomaly detection tasks to the cloud, it incurs long de-
lay and requires large bandwidth when thousands of IoT de-
vices stream data to the cloud concurrently. In this paper, we
propose an adaptive anomaly detection approach for hierar-
chical edge computing (HEC) systems to solve this problem.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst construct three anomaly detection DNN
models of increasing complexity, and associate them with the
three layers of HEC from bottom to top, i.e., IoT devices,
edge servers, and cloud. Then, we design an adaptive scheme
to select one of the models based on the contextual informa-
tion extracted from input data, to perform anomaly detection.
The selection is formulated as a contextual bandit problem
and is characterized by a single-step Markov decision pro-
cess, with an objective of achieving high detection accuracy
and low detection delay simultaneously. We evaluate our pro-
posed approach using a real IoT dataset, and demonstrate that
it reduces detection delay by 84% while maintaining almost
the same accuracy as compared to ofﬂoading detection tasks
to the cloud. In addition, our evaluation also shows that it out-
performs other baseline schemes.
1
Introduction
With the increasing demand of detecting anomalous sen-
sory data generated by a massive number of IoT devices,
machine learning—especially deep learning—offers an ef-
fective approach and has been successfully applied to many
anomaly detection tasks in IoT environments (Mohammadi
et al. 2018; Luo and Nagarajan 2018; Malhotra et al. 2016).
A variety of IoT applications, such as collision avoidance for
autonomous vehicles and ﬁre alarm system in factories, are
time-critical and requires fast anomaly detection. In these
cases, the traditional approach of streaming all the IoT sen-
sory data to the cloud can be problematic as it tends to incur
high communication delay, congest backbone network, and
pose a risk on data privacy.
Anomaly detection with edge or fog computing (La et al.
2019; Chen and others 2017) can provide a better alternative
by performing distributed anomaly detection in the proxim-
ity of the sources of sensory data. However, pushing com-
putation from cloud to the edge faces resource challenges
This work was supported in part by the CNRS Grant
SAMOVAR DAD4IoT 2019.
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
especially when the model is complex (such as deep learn-
ing models) and the edge device only has limited computa-
tion power, storage, and energy supply, which is the case for
typical IoT devices.
A possible solution is to transform a large complex model
into one that ﬁts the IoT device’s capability; for example,
model compression (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016) achieves
this by pruning redundant and unimportant (near-zero) pa-
rameters as well as by quantizing weights into bins. How-
ever, such an approach needs to handle the anomaly detec-
tion models on a case-by-case basis via ﬁne-tuning, and is
only applicable to a few speciﬁc types of deep neural net-
works (DNNs) with large sparsity.
There are also other proposed approaches (Teerapit-
tayanon, McDanel, and Kung 2017; Kang et al. 2017), but
overall, we identify three main issues in most of existing
works: (1) “one size ﬁts all” - prior work attempts to use one
anomaly detection model to handle all input data, while it is
generally overlooked that different data samples often have
different levels of hardness in detecting anomaly events; (2)
improving accuracy or F1-score was often the focus but de-
tection delay and memory footprint were not given adequate
consideration; (3) lack of appropriate local analysis and thus
data are often transmitted back and forth between sources
and the cloud, incurring unnecessary delay.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive approach that lever-
ages the hierarchical edge computing (HEC) system by
adaptively matching data of differentiated hardness level for
detection with models of different complexity. Speciﬁcally,
we construct three anomaly detection DNN models of in-
creasing complexity based on the state of the art, and as-
sociate them with the three layers of HEC from bottom to
top, i.e., IoT devices, edge servers, and cloud. Then, we
propose an adaptive scheme that judiciously selects one of
the models based on the contextual information extracted
from the particular input data to perform anomaly detection.
The scheme follows a single-step Markov decision process
by formulating the model selection problem as a contextual
bandit problem. By selecting appropriate models, we avoid
unnecessary data transmission to edge servers and the cloud,
and minimize detection delay as well.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We identify three main issues in existing IoT anomaly de-
tection approaches, namely using one universal model to
ﬁt all scenarios, one-sided focus on accuracy, and lack of
local analysis that results in unnecessary trafﬁc.
• We propose an anomaly detection approach that consists
arXiv:2001.03314v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2020

of two components: (i) constructing three DNN models
based on state of the art with increasing complexity, and
associating them with three corresponding layers of HEC
systems; (ii) designing an adaptive scheme to select ap-
propriate models based on the contextual information of
input data, by casting the problem as a contextual bandit
problem which is also represented as a single-step Markov
decision process.
• We evaluate our approach using a real-world IoT dataset
and show that it outperforms other benchmark schemes; in
particular, it makes the best tradeoff by achieving high de-
tection accuracy and low detection delay simultaneously.
2
Related work
Deep learning is becoming increasingly popular in anomaly
detection for IoT applications (Mohammadi et al. 2018; Luo
and Nagarajan 2018; Singh 2017; Malhotra et al. 2016). For
example, (Luo and Nagarajan 2018) proposed an autoen-
coder (AE) neural network model for distributed anomaly
detection in IoT systems. They built an AE neural network
to capture the patterns of normal data, and detect outliers
based on reconstruction errors. Their AE model can be de-
ployed at IoT devices to perform distributed anomaly detec-
tion, but the model is lightweight and may not be able to
detect some complex anomalous events. A more complex
model was proposed by (Malhotra et al. 2016) which used
an LSTM-based encoder-decoder model to predict events in
a few future time-steps based on a few historical time-steps.
However, that model does not suit resource-constrained IoT
devices due to its high computational cost.
On another line of research, (Teerapittayanon, McDanel,
and Kung 2016) proposed a BranchyNet architecture for an
image classiﬁcation task that can early “exit” from a multi-
layer DNN during inference based on the conﬁdence of in-
ference output. Later on, the same authors (Teerapittayanon,
McDanel, and Kung 2017) deployed different sections of
BranchyNet in a HEC system, in order to reuse extracted
features from lower layers to do inference at a higher layer.
This requires less communication bandwidth and allows for
faster and localized inference due to the shallow model at the
edge. However, this approach has to make inference sequen-
tially from the very bottom to the top of HEC, which can
lead to unnecessary delay and inference requests to lower
layers when detection is hard. In addition, it requires all the
distributed models to use the same architecture, while our
approach has the ﬂexibility of using different models at dif-
ferent layers of HEC.
Our work was inspired by (Taylor et al. 2018) and (Wu et
al. 2018) from the computer vision domain for image clas-
siﬁcation applications. (Taylor et al. 2018) used multiple k-
Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcation models to train a se-
lection model to choose a proper inference model (among
several models within an embedded device) for a given in-
put image and desired accuracy. (Wu et al. 2018) proposed a
Blockdrop scheme that learns to dynamically drop or keep a
residual block of a trained deep residual networks (ResNets)
during inference, in order to minimize the number of resid-
ual blocks and preserve recognition accuracy. In this paper,
we introduce a similar idea into the IoT domain and apply
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time steps
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Power consumption (KW)
Ground truth
Reconstructed train_iot
Error
Figure 1: Reconstruction error of AE-IoT model.
it to anomaly detection tasks. Furthermore, instead of us-
ing multiple sequentially KNN classiﬁers like (Taylor et al.
2018) which is hard to scale, we design a policy network
that can directly outputs a suitable model (rather than se-
quentially checking each KNN classiﬁer until the required
accuracy is met) based on the contextual information of in-
put IoT data.
3
Adaptive Anomaly Detection
We consider a K-layer HEC system: IoT devices at layer-1,
edge servers at layer-2 to layer-(K −1), and the cloud at
layer-K. In Section 3.1, we construct K anomaly detection
models with increasing complexity and associate them with
the layers from 1 to K. In Section 3.2, we design an adaptive
model selection scheme that automatically chooses a suit-
able model to detect anomaly based on input data, in order
to achieve high accuracy and low detection delay simultane-
ously, and in the meantime consumes less uplink bandwidth.
3.1
Multiple Anomaly Detector Models in
Hierarchical Edge Computing
As is common in the literature (La et al. 2019; Mohammadi
et al. 2018), we consider K = 3 for HEC, corresponding
to IoT devices, edge servers, and the cloud. For these three
layers from bottom to top, we construct three anomaly de-
tection models of increasing complexity. For IoT devices,
we adapt the autoencoder (AE) model with a single hidden
layer from (Luo and Nagarajan 2018), which has proved the
feasibility of running this model on IoT devices. In (Luo and
Nagarajan 2018), the compression ratio between the dimen-
sion of the encoded layer and that of the input layer is 70%;
while in our case, we use a much lower ratio of 30% in order
to ﬁt more diverse low-cost IoT devices. Simulation shows
that our model under this ratio can still reconstruct normal
data very well (see Fig. 1).
For edge servers (e.g., IoT gateways or micro-servers),
we have a wider choice from more complex state-of-the-art
anomaly detection models such as deeper AE, LSTM (Singh
2017; Malhotra et al. 2016), and generative adversarial net-
works (GAN). In this study, we consistently use AE-based
model with more hidden layers to enhance the capability of
learning better features to represent data. We add one more
encoder layer and one more decoder layer to the previous
AE model to obtain a model which we call AE-Edge. For
the cloud, we further add one more encoder layer and de-
coder layer to have a deep AE model, which we refer to as
AE-Cloud.

Table 1: Three anomaly detection models for IoT devices,
edge severs, and the cloud.
Model
Architecture
# of Parameters FLOP
AE-IoT
Input(672), Hidden(201), Output(672) 271,017
1.35 Million
AE-Edge
Input(672), Hidden(336 |201 |336),
949,468
2.93 Million
Output(672)
AE-Cloud Input(672), Hidden(470 |336 |201|
1,085,077
5.41 Million
|336 |470), Output(672)
The detailed setup of the above models is given in Table 1.
Each number in the “Architecture” column is the number of
units of a corresponding layer. The column “# of Parame-
ters” (weights and biases) reﬂects the approximate memory
footprint of each model. The “FLOP” column gives the to-
tal number of ﬂoating point operations, which reﬂects the
required computation of each model during the inference
phase.
We train our models with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) to minimize the mean absolute error between the
reconstructed outputs and the expected outputs (which are
equal to the inputs). To avoid overﬁtting, we use ℓ2-norm
regularization for weights, and add a dropout rate of 0.3 af-
ter each hidden layer. In accordance with the different com-
plexities of these models, we train them over 4000, 6000 and
8000 training epochs for AE-IoT, AE-Edge, and AE-Cloud,
respectively.
The training process shows that the above AE models can
well capture the normal data pattern, indicated by low re-
construction error for normal data and high error for abnor-
mal data (the reconstruction error is ei = |xi −ˆxi| where
xi is input data and ˆxi is the corresponding reconstructed
output). Therefore, the reconstruction error is a good indica-
tor for detecting anomaly. Assuming that reconstruction er-
rors generally follow Gaussian distribution N(µ, Σ), where
µ and Σ are the mean and covariance matrix of reconstruc-
tion errors of normal data samples (the training set), we use
logarithmic probability densities (logPD) of the reconstruc-
tion errors as anomaly scores, as is similar to (Singh 2017;
Malhotra et al. 2015). The normal data will have a high
logPD while anomalous data will have a low logPD. We then
use the minimum value of the logPD on the normal dataset
(i.e., the training set) as the threshold for detecting outliers
during testing.
3.2
Adaptive Model Selection Scheme
As AE-IoT, AE-Edge, and AE-Cloud will be deployed in a
HEC corresponding to the three layers, we propose an adap-
tive model selection scheme in this section to select the most
suitable model based on the contextual information of input
data (testing sample), so that each data sample will be di-
rectly fed to its best-suited model. Note that this is in con-
trast to traditional approaches where input data will either
(i) always go to one same model regardless of the hard-
ness of detection (Chen and others 2017), or (ii) be succes-
sively ofﬂoaded to higher layers until meeting a required or
desired accuracy or conﬁdence (Teerapittayanon, McDanel,
and Kung 2017).
Detector 
Layer 1
(IoT devices)
Detector
Layer k 
(Edge layer-k)
Detector
Layer K
(Cloud)
Reward
Policy
network
State: 
Extracted
features
…
Figure 2: Adaptive model selection based on a policy net-
work and modeled as a contextual bandit problem.
Our proposed adaptive model selection scheme is a rein-
forcement learning algorithm that adapts its model selection
strategy to maximize the expected reward of the model to
be selected. We frame the learning problem as a contextual
bandit problem (Sutton et al. 2000; Williams 1992) (which
is also known as associative reinforcement learning (RL),
one-step RL, associative bandits, and learning with bandit
feedback) and use a policy gradient method to solve it.
See Fig. 2. Formally, given the contextual information zx
of an input data x, where zx is composed of extracted fea-
tures of the input data x, and K trained models deployed at
the K layers of a HEC system, we build a policy network
that takes zx as the input state and outputs a policy of select-
ing which model (or equivalently which layer of HEC) to do
anomaly detection, in the form of a categorical distribution
πθ(a|zx) =
K
Y
k=1
sak
k ,
where a = (a1, a2, · · · , aK), ak ∈{0, 1}, is the actions
encoded as a one-hot vector which deﬁnes which model (or
HEC layer) to perform the task, s = (s1, s2, · · · , sK) =
fθ(zx), sk
∈[0, 1], is a likelihood vector representing
the likelihood of selecting each model k, and PK
k=1 ak =
1, PK
k=1 sk = 1. We set ak = 1 if k = arg maxk(sk)
and ak = 0 otherwise, and we denote the selected action
as |a| = k.
The policy network fθ(.) is designed as a single hid-
den layer neural network with parameters θ. To make the
policy network small enough to run fast on IoT devices,
we use the extracted features zx instead of the raw in-
put data x, to represent the contextual information of in-
put data (i.e., a state vector). The policy network is trained
to ﬁnd an optimal policy π that maps an input state zx
to an action (which model or layer) to maximize the ex-
pected reward of the selected actions. We train the policy
network using a policy gradient method (Williams 1992;
Sutton et al. 2000) to minimize the negative expected re-
ward:
min L(θ) = −
E
a∼πθ
[R(a, zx)],
where R(a, zx) is a reward function of action a given state
zx.
To reduce the variance of reward value and increase
the convergence rate, we utilize reinforcement comparison

(Williams 1992) with a baseline R(˜a, zx) that is indepen-
dent of output actions. We choose the baseline R(˜a, zx) to
be the best observed reward (Sutton et al. 2000), which is
empirically shown to boost the convergence rate. In addition,
we add a ℓ2-norm regularization term to prevent overﬁtting.
So the loss function L(θ) is rewritten as follows:
L(θ) = −
E
a∼πθ
[(R(a, zx) −R(˜a, zx)] + γ
2 ||θ||2,
(1)
where γ is a regularization parameter. To minimize (1),
we utilize the policy gradient with REINFORCE algorithm
(Williams 1992) to compute the gradient of L(θ) as follows:
∇θL
= −
E
a∼πθ
[(R(a, zx) −R(˜a, zx))∇θ log(πθ(a|zx))] + γθ
= −
E
a∼πθ
"
(R(a, zx) −R(˜a, zx))∇θ
K
X
k=1
ak log(sk)
#
+ γθ
In order to encourage selecting an appropriate model that
jointly increases accuracy and reduces the cost of ofﬂoad-
ing tasks further away from the edge, we propose a reward
function as follows:
R(a, zx) = accuracy(x) −C(a, x),
where accuracy(x) is the accuracy of detecting anomaly in
an input x, and C(a, x) is the cost function of ofﬂoading the
detection task to a layer k = |a| for data x, which will be
deﬁned later.
To balance between exploration and exploitation during
training, we apply a simple ϵ-greedy approach for action
selection. With probability ϵ, an action is randomly se-
lected for exploration of more actions, while with probabil-
ity (1 −ϵ), an action is greedily selected based on output of
the current policy network. In implementation, we gradually
decrease the value of ϵ after a certain number of episodes,
so as to exploit more of the current policy network after it is
sufﬁciently trained.
We deﬁne the cost function C(a, x) as a function of
total delay, which consists of the communication delay
tcommun(x, a) of transmitting data x from an IoT device to
a server at layer k = |a| of HEC, and the computation delay
tcomp(a) of executing the detection task at layer k = |a|:
C(a, x) = fcost(tcommun(x, a) + tcomp(a))
The computation delay is given by
tcomp(a) =
FLOP of model k = |a|
FLOPS of machine k = |a|,
(2)
where the total FLOP (ﬂoating point operations) of a model
k can be measured during training for just once, as shown
in the last column of Table 1. The FLOPS (FLOP per sec-
ond) of a machine k can be measured by a benchmark tool
linpack1.
The function fcost(t) maps the total delay t to an equiva-
lent accuracy in scale [0, 1]. For example, fcost(50 ms) = 0.1
means the ofﬂoading cost 50 ms of delay is equivalent to a
1http://www.netlib.org/benchmark/hpl/
reduction 0.1 in accuracy. We use the following function as
the mapping function where a higher delay will result in a
greater reduction in accuracy:
fcost(t) =
α · t
1 + α · t,
(3)
where α is a tunable parameter.
4
Performance Evaluation
4.1
Dataset
We evaluate our proposed approach using a public dataset
of power consumption2 of a Dutch research facility, which
has been used in (Keogh, Lin, and Fu 2005; Malhotra et al.
2016; Singh 2017). It consists of 35040 samples recorded
every 15 minutes, the data has a repetition of weekly cycle of
672 time steps with ﬁve consecutive peaks for ﬁve weekdays
and two lows for weekends. The abnormal week could have
less than ﬁve consecutive peak days which might be because
of a holiday in a weekday, or high power consumption in
a weekend. Examples of normal and abnormal weeks are
shown in Fig. 3. Hence, each input data is a sequence of one
week of data with 672 time steps. We manually label a day
as abnormal if it is a weekday with low power consumption,
or it is a weekend with high power consumption; other days
are labeled as normal. For the anomaly detection task, we
split the dataset into train and test sets with ratio 70:30, or
equivalently 37 weeks:15 weeks. The train set only contains
normal weeks and the test set contains the remaining normal
weeks and all the 8 anomalous weeks, each having at least
one abnormal day.
13
Jan
1997
14
15
16
17
18
19
Time Stamp
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Power Consumption (KW)
week 2.0
(a) Normal week
05
May
1997
06
07
08
09
10
11
Time Stamp
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Power Consumption (KW)
week 18.0
(b) Abnormal week
Figure 3: Example weeks of power consumption.
To train the model selection policy network, we choose a
train set that contains all the 8 abnormal weeks and 7 normal
weeks, and a test set that is the whole dataset to verify the
quality of the policy network. The data is standardized to
zero mean and unit variance for all of the above trainings
(i.e., anomaly detection models and the policy network).
2http://www.cs.ucr.edu/∼eamonn/discords/

Table 2: Hardware speciﬁcations of the deployed IoT device,
edge server, and cloud server in our experiment. The net-
work latency is between the IoT device and a corresponding
higher-layer server.
Layer
Speciﬁcations
FLOPS Latency
IoT device
Broadcom BCM2837 1.2 GHz, 4 cores
194M
0ms
Edge server
Intel i7-4790 3.60 GHz, 4 cores, 8 threads
197G
50ms
Cloud server Intel i7-6850K 3.60 GHz, 6 cores, 12 threads
289G
100ms
4.2
Experiment Setup
We use Tensorﬂow to implement three anomaly detec-
tion models with network architecture described in Section
3.1.The input is a sequence of 672 time steps—a week of
measured power consumption. We use tanh as the non-
linear activation function for all the hidden layers. We train
and test the three models separately with 5-fold cross-
validation.
We then deploy the three trained anomaly detection mod-
els at a IoT device, an edge server, and a cloud server with
speciﬁcations shown in Table 2. Network latency shown in
Table 2 is conﬁgured by using Linux trafﬁc control tool,
tc, to emulate WAN connections of HEC (Chen and others
2017). The peak FLOPS of the IoT device and servers shown
in Table 2 are measured by a benchmark tool, linpack.
Then, the computation time of the three models are calcu-
lated by (2). The total delay which includes both computa-
tion and communications will be evaluated by simulation.
The cost of executing each model on the IoT device, edge,
or cloud is calculated by (3), which depends on α. We will
evaluate with different parameters α ∈[0.0001, 0.0045] to
see the trade-off between the ofﬂoading cost and the accu-
racy gain of a complex model.
In order to reduce complexity for the policy network, the
state representation of raw input data is an extracted feature
vector which includes min, max, mean, and standard devia-
tion of each day’s sensor data. So the dimension of the con-
textual state is just 4x7=28. We build a single hidden neural
network with 100 hidden units and an output layer with 3
units which indicate the likelihood of choosing one of three
detection models.We train the policy network as described
in Section 3.2 with 6000 episodes and the initial ϵ = 0.5 is
gradually decreased to zero after 3000 episodes.
We evaluate the performance of our adaptive model selec-
tion scheme with four other baseline schemes: (1) AE-IoT
which always detects on IoT devices, (2) AE-Edge which
always ofﬂoads detection to an edge server, (3) AE-Cloud
which always ofﬂoads to the cloud, and (4) Successive which
ﬁrst executes on IoT devices and then successively ofﬂoads
to a higher layer until obtaining a conﬁdent output or reach-
ing the cloud. For the Successive scheme, a detected anoma-
lous day is considered conﬁdent if the day contains at least
one data point that has the logPD of error larger than the
threshold by a certain factor. We experiment with thresh-
old factors of 2 and 4, and name the corresponding schemes
Successive-2 and Successive-4, respectively.
4.3
Experiment Results
Anomaly detection models: The complexity of models in-
creases from IoT to cloud, as indicated by the number of pa-
rameters and total FLOP of the models shown in Table 1. F1-
score and accuracy of AE-IoT, AE-Edge, and AE-Cloud on
the test set are obtained as (0.465, 78.09%), (0.741, 93.33%),
and (0.870, 97.14%), respectively. We can see that the F1-
score and accuracy of AE-Cloud are 87% and 19% higher
than those of the AE-IoT model. Due to the space constraint,
we show an example of reconstruction performance of the
AE-Edge model on the ﬁrst 2000 time steps of the test set in
Fig. 4.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Time step
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Power consumption(KW)
Input
Output Edge
Error
True label
(a) Absolute reconstruction errors.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Time step
−400
−200
0
LogPD
logPD
True label
Threshold
(b) Logarithmic probability densities (logPD) of errors.
Figure 4: AE-Edge performance on the ﬁrst 2000 time steps
of the test set for anomaly detection on edge servers.
Adaptive model selection scheme: The F1-score, accu-
racy, total reward, and average detection delay over the en-
tire dataset under the ﬁve baseline schemes and our proposed
scheme (α = 0.0025) are shown in Table 3. The AE-IoT
scheme achieves the smallest detection delay but the low-
est accuracy and F1-score among all the evaluated schemes.
On another extreme, the AE-Cloud scheme provides the
best accuracy but incurs the largest detection delay. The two
Successive schemes leverage distributed anomaly detection
models of HEC and thus reduce the average detection de-
lay signiﬁcantly as compared to AE-Edge and AE-Cloud.
However, their accuracy and F1-score are still below those
of AE-Edge. In contrast, our proposed scheme adaptively
chooses a suitable model to execute the anomaly detection
task to jointly maximize accuracy and minimize detection
delay. Thus, not only does it has a smaller average detec-
tion delay, but its F1-score and accuracy also consistently
outperform those of AE-IoT, AE-Edge, and the two Succes-
sive schemes. Even though the F1-score and accuracy of our
proposed scheme are marginally (4% and 0.28%) lower than
those of the AE-Cloud scheme, it reduces the average detec-
tion delay by a substantial 84%.
In summary, our proposed adaptive anomaly detection

0.0001 0.0005
0.001
0.0015
0.002
0.0025
0.003
0.0035
0.004
0.0045
α
94
96
98
Accuracy (%)
Proposal
AE-IoT
AE-Edge
AE-Cloud
Successive-2
Successive-4
20
40
60
80
100
Delay (ms)
Figure 5: Evaluation of how α affects our proposed scheme
(through the cost function). Accuracy is plotted as solid lines
while delay is plotted as dash lines.
scheme strikes the best tradeoff between accuracy and de-
tection delay, and obtains the highest total reward. This is
achieved by leveraging the HEC architecture and our policy
network that automatically selecting the best layer to execute
the detection task.
Table 3: Comparison of Accuracy, Delay, and total Reward
of all the anomaly detection schemes.
Scheme
F1
Accuracy(%)
Reward
Delay(ms)
AE-IoT
0.465
93.68
47.18
6.89
AE-Edge
0.741
98.08
41.64
50.00
AE-Cloud
0.870
99.18
35.71
100.00
Successive-2
0.476
93.96
N/A
15.55
Successive-4
0.714
97.80
N/A
25.17
Our Method
0.833
98.90
49.52
16.28
Cost function to trade-off between accuracy and de-
lay: We train different policy networks using different cost
functions with the tunable parameter α ∈[0.0001, 0.0045].
We plot the accuracy (solid line) and delay (dash line) of the
proposed scheme and the baseline schemes (which are inde-
pendent of α) in Fig. 5. We can see that as α increases, both
accuracy and delay of the proposed scheme generally de-
creases. When α ≤0.0015, the proposed scheme achieves
the highest accuracy as the AE-Cloud scheme, while reduc-
ing the average delay signiﬁcantly by 40%-60%. Based on
the overall performance, we choose α = 0.0025 for the best
tradeoff between accuracy and delay.
5
Conclusions
In this paper, we identify three issues in existing IoT
anomaly detection approaches, namely using one universal
model to ﬁt all data, lobesided focus on accuracy, and lack of
local analysis. We then propose an adaptive anomaly detec-
tion scheme for IoT data in HEC. It constructs three anomaly
detection models with increasing complexity, and associate
them with three layers of HEC from bottom to top (i.e., IoT
devices, edge servers, and cloud). Next, it uses an adaptive
scheme that consists of a policy network as the solution to
a single-step MDP or equivalently a contextual bandit prob-
lem, to select the best suited model based on the contextual
information of input data. The experiment results based on a
real-world IoT dataset show that our proposed scheme out-
performs other baseline schemes and achieves the best over-
all performance on accuracy and detection delay.
