Evaluation of Interactive
Machine Learning Systems
Nadia Boukhelifa, Anastasia Bezerianos, and Evelyne Lutton
Abstract The evaluation of interactive machine learning systems remains a difﬁcult
task. These systems learn from and adapt to the human, but at the same time, the
human receives feedback and adapts to the system. Getting a clear understanding of
these subtle mechanisms of co-operation and co-adaptation is challenging. In this
chapter, we report on our experience in designing and evaluating various interac-
tive machine learning applications from different domains. We argue for coupling
two types of validation: algorithm-centered analysis, to study the computational be-
haviour of the system; and human-centered evaluation, to observe the utility and
effectiveness of the application for end-users. We use a visual analytics application
for guided search, built using an interactive evolutionary approach, as an exemplar
of our work. We argue that human-centered design and evaluation complement al-
gorithmic analysis, and can play an important role in addressing the “black-box”
effect of machine learning. Finally, we discuss research opportunities that require
human-computer interaction methodologies, in order to support both the visible and
hidden roles that humans play in interactive machine learning.
1 Introduction
In interactive Machine Learning (iML), a human operator and a machine collaborate
to achieve a task, whether this is to classify or cluster a set of data points [1, 10], to
ﬁnd interesting data projections [5, 6, 13], or to design creative art works [35, 43].
The underlying assumption is that the human-machine co-operation yields better
results than a fully automated or manual system. An interactive machine learning
N. Boukhelifa, E. Lutton

A. Bezerianos

1
arXiv:1801.07964v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2018

2
N. Boukhelifa et al.
system comprises an automated service, a user interface, and a learning component.
A human interacts with the automated component via the user interface, and pro-
vides iterative feedback to a learning algorithm. This feedback may be explicit, or
inferred from human behaviour and interactions. Likewise, the system may provide
implicit or explicit feedback to communicate its status and the knowledge it has
learnt.
The interactive approach to machine learning is appealing for many reasons in-
cluding:
• to integrate valuable experts knowledge that may be hard to encode directly into
mathematical or computational models.
• to help resolve existing uncertainties as a result of, for example, bias and error
that may arise from automatic machine learning.
• to build trust by making humans involved in the modelling or learning processes.
• to cater for individual human differences and subjective assessments such as in
art and creative applications.
Recent work in interactive machine learning has focused on developing working
prototypes, but less on methods to evaluate iML systems and their various com-
ponents. The question of how to effectively evaluate such systems is challenging.
Indeed, human-in-the-loop approaches to machine learning bring forth not only nu-
merous intelligibility and usability issues, but also open questions with respect to the
evaluation of the various facets of the iML system, both as separate components and
as a holistic entity [40]. Holzinger [27] argued that conducting methodically correct
experiments and evaluations is difﬁcult, time-consuming, and hard to replicate due
to the subjective nature of the “human agents” involved. Cortellessa and Cesta [18]
found that the quantitative evaluation of mixed-initiative systems tend to focus ei-
ther on problem-solving performance of the human and what they call the artiﬁcial
solver, or the quality of interaction looking at user requirements and judgment of the
system. This statement also applies to iML systems, where current evaluations tend
to be either algorithm-centered to study the computational behaviour of the system,
or human-centered focusing on the utility and effectiveness of the application for
end-users [6, 8, 7].
The aim of this chapter is to review existing evaluation methods for iML systems,
and to reﬂect upon our own experience in designing and evaluating such applications
over a number of years [3, 37, 31, 33, 35, 46, 47]. The chapter is organised as fol-
lows: First we provide a review of recent work on the evaluation of iML systems
focusing on types of human and system feedback, and the evaluation methods and
metrics deployed in these studies. We then illustrate our evaluation method through
a case study on an interactive machine learning system for guided visual search,
covering both algorithm-centered and human-centered evaluations. Finally, we dis-
cuss research opportunities requiring human-computer interaction methodologies
in order to support both the visible and hidden roles that humans play in machine
learning.

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
3
2 Related Work
In this section, we review recent work that evaluates interactive machine learning
systems. We consider both qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Our aim is not
to provide an exhaustive survey, but rather to illustrate the broad range of existing
methods and evaluation metrics.
Paper
Classiﬁcation
Clustering
Density estimation
Dimensionality Reduction
Implicit User Feedback
Explicit User Feedback
System Feedback
Case Study
User Study
Observational Study
Survey
Objective Metrics
Subjective Metrics
Co-integration [2]
DDLite [20]
Interest Driven Navigation [25]
ISSE [11]
RCLens [34]
ReGroup [1]
View Space Explorer [5]
Visual Classiﬁer [26]
OLI [48]
ForceSPIRE [21]
ForceSPIRE [38]
RugbyVAST [32]
3D Model Repository Explorator [22]
User Interaction Model [19]
SelPh [30]
EvoGraphDice [6]
EvoGraphDice [37]
Dis-Function [10]
UTOPIAN [17]
Table 1 Summary of reviewed interactive machine learning systems, characterised by the types of
human feedback (implicit, explicit, or both, i.e. mixed), system feedback, the evaluation methods
(case study, user study, observational study, survey), and evaluation metrics (objective or subjective
). These systems are ordered in terms of the machine learning tasks they each support: classiﬁca-
tion, clustering, density estimation or dimensionality reduction.
2.1 Method
We systematically reviewed papers published between 2012-2017 from the follow-
ing venues: IEEE VIS, ACM CHI, EG EuroVis, HILDA workshop, and CHI HCML

4
N. Boukhelifa et al.
workshop. We downloaded then ﬁltered the proceedings to include papers having
the following keywords: “learn AND algorithm AND interact AND (user OR hu-
man OR expert) AND (evaluation OR study OR experiment)”. We then drilled down
to ﬁnd papers that describe an actual iML system (as deﬁned in the introduction)
with an evaluation section. In this chapter, we focus on studies from the ﬁelds of vi-
sualization and human-computer interaction. Our hypothesis was that papers from
these domains are likely to go beyond algorithm-centered evaluations. In total, we
reviewed 19 recent papers (Table 1), from various application domains including
multidimensional data exploration [5, 6, 19, 25, 48], data integration [2], knowledge
base construction [20], text document retrieval [26], photo enhancement [30], audio
source separation [11], social network access control [1], and category exploration
and reﬁnement [34]. We examined these evaluations in terms of the machine learn-
ing tasks they support, the types of user feedback, the nature of system feedback,
and their evaluation methods and metrics.
2.2 Human Feedback
Broadly speaking, human feedback to machine learning algorithms can be either
explicit or implicit. The difference between these two mechanisms stems from the
ﬁeld of Information Retrieval (IR). In the case of implicit feedback, humans do
not assess relevance for the beneﬁt of the IR system, but rather to fulﬁll their own
task. Besides, they are not necessarily aware that their assessment is being used for
relevance feedback [29]. In contrast, for explicit feedback, humans indicate their as-
sessment via a suitable interface, and are aware that their feedback is interpreted for
relevance judgment. Whereas implicit feedback is inferred from human interactions
with the system, explicit feedback is directly provided by humans.
The systems we reviewed either use implicit (7 papers), explicit (8 papers), or
mixed (4 papers) human feedback. In the case of mixed feedback, the system tries
to infer information from user interactions to complement the explicit feedback.
Implicit Human Feedback
Endert et al. [21, 38] developed semantic interaction for visual analytics where the
analytical reasoning of the user is inferred from their interactions, which in turn
helps steer a dimension reduction model. Their system ForceSpire learns from hu-
man input, e.g. moving objects, to improve an underlying model and to produce an
improved layout for text documents. Similarly, UTOPIAN [17] supports what the
authors describe as a “semantically meaningful set of user interactions” to improve
topic modelling. These interactions include keyword reﬁnement, and topic splitting
and merging. Implicit feedback may also be gathered from user interactions with
raw data. For example, Azuan et al. [2] developed a tool where manual data correc-
tions, such as adding or removing tuples from a data table, are leveraged to improve
data integration and cleaning.

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
5
Interactive machine learning systems may infer other types of information such
as attribute salience or class membership. Wenskovitch and North implemented
Observation-Level Interaction technique (OLI) [48], where the importance of data
attributes is infered from user manipulations of nodes and clusters, and is used to
improve a layout algorithm. The ReGroup tool [1] learns from user interactions and
faceted search on online social networks to create custom on-demand groups of
actors in the network.
In the previous examples, the system learns from individual users. In contrast,
Dabek and Caban [19] developed an iML system that learns from crowd interac-
tions with data to generate a user model capable of assisting analysts during data
exploration.
Explicit Human Feedback
Often explicit human feedback is provided through annotations and labels. This
feedback can be either binary or graduated. The View Space Explorer [5] for in-
stance, allows users to choose and annotate relevant or irrelevant example scatter
plots. Gao et al. [22] proposed an interactive approach to 3D model repository ex-
ploration where a human assigns “like” or “dislike” labels to parts of a model or its
entirety. RCLens [34] supports user guided exploration of rare categories through
labels provided by a human. In a text document retrieval application [26], humans
decide to accept, reject or label search query results. Similarly, but for a video search
system [32], users can either accept or reject sketched query results.
A richer and more nuanced approach to human feedback is proposed by Brown
et al. in their Dis-function system [10], where selections of scatterplot points can
be dragged and dropped to reﬂect human understanding of the structure of a text
document collection. In this case, the closer the data points in the projected 2D
space, the more similar they are. Ehrenberg et al. [20] proposed the “data program-
ming” paradigm, where humans encode their domain expertise using simple rules,
as opposed to the traditional method of hand-labelling training data. This allows
to generate a large amount of noisy training labels, which the machine learning al-
gorithm then tries to de-noise and model. Bryan et al. [11] implemented an audio
source separation system where humans annotate data and errors, or directly paint
on a time-frequency or spectrogram display. In each of these cases, human feedback
and choices are taken into consideration to update a machine learning model.
Mixed Human Feedback
To guide user exploration of large search spaces, EvoGraphDice [37, 6] combines
explicit human feedback regarding the pertinence of evolved 2D data projections,
and an implicit method based on past human interactions with a scatterplot matrix.
For the explicit feedback, the user ranks scatterplots from one to ﬁve using a slider.
The system also infers view relevance by looking at the visual motifs [49] in the
ranked scatterplots. For example, if the user tends to rank linear point distributions
highly, then this motif will be favored to produce the next generation of scatterplots.
Importantly, the weights of these feedback channels are set to equal by default,

6
N. Boukhelifa et al.
but the user can choose to change the importance of each at any time during the
exploration.
Healey and Dennis [25] developed interest-driven navigation in visualization,
based on both implicit and explicit human feedback. The implicit feedback is gath-
ered from human interactions with the visualization system, and from eye track-
ing to infer preferences based on where the human is looking. Their argument is
that data gathered through implicit feedback is noisy. To overcome this, they built
a preference statement interface, where humans provide a subject, a classiﬁcation,
and a certainty. This preference interface allows the human to deﬁne rules to identify
known elements of interest.
Another example is the SelPH system [30], which learns implicitly from a photo
editing history, and explicitly from the direct interaction of a human with an op-
timisation slider. Together, these two feedback channels help to exclude what the
authors call the “uninteresting” or “meaningless” design spaces.
2.3 System Feedback
System feedback goes beyond showing the results of the co-operation between the
human and the machine. It seeks to inform humans about the state of the machine
learning algorithm, and the provenance of system suggestions, especially in the case
of implicit user feedback.
System feedback can be visual: Boukhelifa et al. [37] used color intensity and a
designated ﬂag to visualise the system’s interpretation of the mixed user feedback
regarding the pertinence of 2D projections. Heimerl et al. [26] implemented a visual
method and text labels to show the classiﬁer’s state, and the relevance of the selected
documents to a search query. Legg et al. [32] visualised the similarity metrics they
used to compute a visual search.
System feedback can be uncertain: Koyama at al. [30] indicated the system’s
conﬁdence in the estimation of humans’ preferences with respect to color enhance-
ment. Behrisch et al. [5] provided a feature histogram and an incremental decision
tree. These meta visualizations also communicate the classiﬁer’s uncertainty. Lin et
al. [34] showed visualization of rare categories using their “category view”, and a
glyph-based visualization to show classiﬁcation features as well as conﬁdence.
System feedback can be progressive: Dabek and Caban [19] discussed the im-
portance of choosing when to propose something to the human. Their approach
consisted in providing feedback when the human is in need of guidance. They estab-
lished a number of rules to detect when this occurs. UTOPIA [17] visualises inter-
mediate output even before algorithmic convergence. Ehrenberg et al. [20] showed
“on-the-spot” performance feedback using plots and tables. They claimed that this
allows the user to iterate more quickly on system design, and helps navigate the key
decision points in their data programming workﬂow.
For the majority of the iML systems we reviewed, system feedback was pro-
vided. It appears that this feedback is an important feature, perhaps because it helps

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
7
humans better interpret the results, and allows them to correct any mistakes or ar-
eas of uncertainty in the inferred user model. The challenge, however, is to ﬁnd the
right level of feedback without having to fully expose the inner workings of the
underlying models and their parameters.
2.4 Evaluation Methods and Metrics
In total, for the systems we reviewed, there were nine papers with case studies and
usage scenarios [5, 17, 20, 21, 22, 25, 32, 34, 48], ten user studies [1, 2, 6, 10,
11, 19, 22, 26, 30, 32] and two observational studies [37, 38], in addition to sur-
veys, questionnaires and interviews (seven papers). Although a number of papers
included some form of a controlled user study, it was however acknowledged that
this type of evaluation is generally difﬁcult to conduct due to the various potential
confounding factors such as previous knowledge [32]. Indeed, evaluating accuracy
of an iML system is not always possible as ground truth does not always exist [1].
Objective Performance Evaluations
One way to evaluate how well the human-machine co-operation performs to achieve
a task is to compare the iML system with its non-interactive counterpart, i.e. no hu-
man feedback, or to an established baseline system. Legg at al. [32] conducted a
small-scale empirical evaluation with three participants using three metrics inspired
from content-based information retrieval: time, precision and recall. The idea was
to manually identify ﬁve video clips as the ground truth, then to compare an iML
video search system with a baseline system (a standard video tool with fast-forward)
for a video search task. They found that participants performed better in the iML
condition for this task. In a user study with twelve participants, Amerish et al. [1]
compared traditional manual search to add people to groups on online social net-
works (using an alphabetical list or searching by name), to an interactive machine
learning approach called ReGroup. They looked at the overall time it took partic-
ipants to create groups, ﬁnal group sizes, and speed of selecting group members.
Their results show that the traditional method works well for small groups, whereas
the iML method works best for larger and more varied groups.
Another way to objectively evaluate the success of the human-machine co-
operation is to look at insights. In the context of exploratory data visualization,
Endert et al. [21] and Boukhelifa et al. [37] found that with the help of user feed-
back, their respective iML systems were able to conﬁrm known knowledge and led
to new insights.
Other evaluations in this category compared the iML application with and with-
out system feedback. Dabek et al. [19] proposed a grammar-based approach to
model user interactions with data, which is then used to assist other users during
data analysis. They conducted a crowdsourced formal evaluation with 300 partic-
ipants to assess how well their grammar-based model captures user interactions.
The task was to explore a census dataset and answer twelve open-ended questions

8
N. Boukhelifa et al.
that required looking for combinations of variables and axis ranges using a paral-
lel coordinates visualization. When comparing their tool with and without system
feedback, they found that system suggestions signiﬁcantly improved user perfor-
mance for all their data analysis tasks, although questions remain with regards to
the optimal number of suggestions to display to the user.
A number of studies looked at algorithmic performance when user feedback was
implicit versus explicit. Azuan et al. [2] who used a “pay-as-you-go” approach to
solicit user feedback during data integration and cleaning, compared the two human
feedback methods for a data integration task. They found that user performance un-
der the implicit condition was better than for the explicit feedback in terms of num-
ber of errors. However, the authors noted some difﬁculties in separating usability
issues related to the explicit feedback interface from the performance results.
Finally, some authors focused on algorithm-centered evaluations, where two or
more machine learning methods are compared. For instance, in the context of topic
modelling, Choo et al. [17] compared latent Dirichlet allocation and non-negative
matrix factorisation algorithms, from the practical viewpoints of consistency of mul-
tiple runs and empirical convergence. Another example is by Bryan et al. [11] who
chose objective separation quality metrics deﬁned by industry standards, as objec-
tive measures of algorithmic performance for audio source separation.
Subjective Performance Evaluations
The subjective evaluations described in Table 1 were carried out using surveys,
questionnaires, interviews, and informal user feedback. They included evaluation
metrics related to these aspects of user experience: happiness, easiness, quickness,
favorite, best helped, satisfaction, task load, trust, conﬁdence in user and system
feedback, and distractedness. Moreover, the observational studies [37, 38] that we
reviewed provided rich subjective user feedback on iML system performance. En-
dert et al. [38] looked at semantic interaction usage, in order to assess whether the
latter aids the sensemaking process. They state that one sign of success of iML sys-
tems is when humans forget that they are feeding information to an algorithm, and
rather focus on “synthesising information relevant to their task”.
Other evaluations looked at human behavioural variations with regards to differ-
ent iML interfaces. Amerish et al. [1] compared two interfaces for adding people to
online social networks, with and without the interactive component of iML. They
looked at behavioural discrepancies in terms of how people used the different inter-
faces and how they felt. They found that participants were frustrated when model
learning was not accurate. Koyama et al. [30] compared their adaptive photo en-
hancement system with the same tool stripped of advanced capabilities, namely the
visual system feedback, the optimisation slider functions, and the ordering of search
results in terms of similarity. Because photo enhancement quality can be subjective,
performance of the iML system was rated by the study participants. In this case, they
were satisﬁed with the iML system and preferred it over more traditional workﬂows.
In summary, There are many aspects of interactive machine learning systems
that are being evaluated. Sometimes authors focus on the quality of the user inter-

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
9
action with the iML system (human-centered evaluations), or the robustness of the
algorithms that are deployed (algorithm-centered evaluations), and only in a few
cases detailed attention is drawn to the quality of human-machine co-operation and
learning. These studies use a variety of evaluation methods, as well as objective and
subjective metrics. Perhaps our main observation from this literature review, is that
for the majority of the reviewed papers, only a single aspect of the iML system is
evaluated. We need more evaluation studies that examine the different aspects of
iML sytems, not only as separate components but also from an integrative point of
view.
In the next section, we introduce an interactive machine learning system for
guided exploratory visualization, and describe our multi-faceted evaluation ap-
proach to study the effectiveness and usefulness of this tool for end users.
3 Case Study: Interactive Machine Learning For Guided Visual
Exploration
Exploratory visualization is a dynamic process of discovery that is relatively un-
predictable due to the absence of a-priori knowledge of what the user is searching
for [24]. The focus in this case is on the organisation, testing, developing concepts,
ﬁnding patterns and deﬁnition of assumptions [24]. When the search space is large,
as is often the case for multi-dimensional datasets, the task of exploring and ﬁnding
interesting patterns in data becomes tedious. Automatic dimension reduction tech-
niques, such as principle component analysis and multidimensional scaling, reduce
the search space, but often are difﬁcult to understand [42], or require the speciﬁca-
tion of objective criteria to ﬁlter views before exploration. Other techniques guide
the exploration towards the most interesting areas of the search space based on in-
formation learned during the exploration, which appears to be more adapted to the
free nature of exploration [6, 10].
In our previous work on guided exploratory visualization [6, 7, 37, 12, 13], we
tried to address the problem of how to efﬁciently explore multidimensional datasets
characterised by a large number of projections. We proposed a framework for Evo-
lutionary Visual Exploration (EVE, Figure 1) that combines visual analytics with
stochastic optimisation by means of an Interactive Evolutionary Algorithm (IEA).
Our goal was to guide users to interesting projections, where the notion of “interest-
ingness” is deﬁned implicitly by automatic indicators such as the amount of visual
pattern in the two-dimensional views visited by the user, and explicitly via subjective
human assessment.
In this section, we report on our experience in building and evaluating an interac-
tive machine learning system called EvoGraphDice (Figure 3) using the EVE frame-
work. We note that existing evaluations of interactive evolutionary systems tend to
be algorithm-centered. Through this case study, we argue for a multi-faceted eval-
uation approach that takes into account all components of an iML system. Similar
recommendations can be found for evaluating interactive visualization systems. For

10
N. Boukhelifa et al.
Fig. 1 The Evolutionary Visual Exploration Framework (EVE). Raw data dimensions (from the
data space) are fed into an evolutionary loop in order to progressively evolve new interesting views
to the user. The criteria for deciding on the pertinence of the new views is speciﬁed through a com-
bination of automatically calculated metrics (from the computational space) and user interactions
(at the user space).
example, Carpendale [14] advocates for adopting a variety of evaluative methodolo-
gies that together may start to approach the kind of answers sought.
3.1 Background on Interactive Evolutionary Computation IEC
There are many machine learning approaches, including artiﬁcial neural networks,
support vector machines and Bayesian networks. Moreover, many machine learn-
ing problems can be modelled as optimisation problems where the aim is to ﬁnd
a trade-off between an adequate representation of the training set and a generali-
sation capability on unknown samples. In contrast to traditional local optimisation
methods, Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) have been widely used as a successful
stochastic optimisation tool in the ﬁeld of machine learning in the recent years [44].
In this sense, machine learning and the ﬁeld of Evolutionary Computation (EC), that
encompasses EAs, are tightly coupled.
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are stochastic optimisation heuristics that copy,
in a very abstract manner, the principles of natural evolution that let a population
of individuals be adapted to its environment [23]. They have the major advantage
over other optimisation techniques of making only few assumptions on the function
to be optimised. An EA considers populations of potential solutions exactly like a
natural population of individuals that live, ﬁght, and reproduce, but the natural envi-
ronment pressure is replaced by an “optimisation” pressure. In this way, individuals
that reproduce are the best ones with respect to the problem to be solved. Reproduc-
tion (see Figure 2) consists of generating new solutions via variation schemes (the
genetic operators), that, by analogy with nature, are called mutation if they involve
one individual, or crossover if they involve two parent solutions. A ﬁtness function,
computed for each individual, is used to drive the selection process, and is thus opti-

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
11
mised by the EA. Evolutionary optimisation techniques are particularly efﬁcient to
address complex problems (irregular, discontinuous) where classical deterministic
methods fail [4, 39], but they can also deal with varying environments [50], or non
computable quantities [45].
Interactive Evolutionary Computation (IEC) describes evolutionary computa-
tional models where humans, via suitable user interfaces, play an active role, im-
plicitly or explicitly, in evaluating the outputs evolved by the evolutionary compu-
tation (Figure 2). IEC lends itself very well to art applications such as for melody
or graphic art generation where creativity is essential, due to the subjective nature
of the ﬁtness evaluation function. For scientiﬁc and engineering applications, IEC is
interesting when the exact form of a more generalised ﬁtness function is not known
or is difﬁcult to compute, say for producing a visual pattern that would interest a
human observer. Here, the human visual system, together with their emotional and
psychological responses are far superior than any automatic pattern detection or
learning algorithm.
Fig. 2 The evolutionary loop: user interactions can occur at any stage including the selection and
evaluation of individuals and the genetic operators.
Whereas current IEC research has focused on improving the robustness of the
underlying algorithms, much work is still needed to tackle human-factors in systems
where adaptation between users and systems is likely to occur [36].
3.2 The Visible and Hidden Roles of Humans in IEC
The role of humans in IEC can be characterised by the evolutionary component at
which they operate, namely: initialisation, evolution, selection, genetic operators,
constraints, local optimisation, genome structure variation, and parameters tuning.
This may or may not be desirable from a usability perspective, especially for non-
technical users. The general approach when humans are involved, especially for

12
N. Boukhelifa et al.
parameter tuning, is mostly by trial-and-error and by reducing the number of param-
eters. Such tasks are often visible, in that they are facilitated by the user interface.
However, there exists a hidden role of humans in IEC that has often been neglected.
Algorithm and system designers play a central role in deciding the details of the
ﬁtness function to be optimised and in setting the default values of system parame-
ters, and thus contributing to the “black-box” effect of IEC systems. Such tasks are
inﬂuenced by the designer’s previous experience and end-user task requirements.
Besides this hidden role in the design stage, there is a major impact of the
“human-in-the-loop” on the IEC. This problem is known as the “user bottleneck”,
i.e. human fatigue due to the fact that the human and the machine do not live and
react at the same rate. Various solutions have been considered in order to avoid
systematic and repetitive or tedious interactions, and the authors themselves have
considered several of them, such as: (i) reducing the size of the population and the
number of generations; (ii) choosing speciﬁc models to constrain the exploration in
a-priori “interesting” areas of the search space; and (iii) performing an automatic
learning (based on a limited number of characteristic quantities) in order to assist
the user and only present interesting individuals of the population, with respect to
previous votes or feedback from the user. These solutions require considerable com-
putational effort. A different approach and new ideas to tackle the same issue could
come from Human Computer Interaction (HCI) and usability research, as discussed
later on in this chapter.
3.3 EvoGraphDice Prototype
EvoGraphDice [6, 7, 37, 13] was designed to aid the exploration of multidimen-
sional datasets characterised by a large space of 2D projections (Figure 3). Starting
from dimensions whose values are automatically calculated by a Principle Compo-
nent Analysis (PCA), an IEA progressively builds non-trivial viewpoints in the form
of linear and non-linear dimension combinations, to help users discover new inter-
esting views and relationships in their data. The criteria for evolving new dimensions
is not known a-priori and is partially speciﬁed by the user via an interactive inter-
face. Pertinence of views is modelled using a ﬁtness function that plays the role of
a predictor: (i) users select views with meaningful or interesting visual patterns and
provide a satisfaction score; (ii) the system calibrates the ﬁtness function optimised
by the evolutionary algorithm to incorporate user’s input, and then calculates new
views. A learning algorithm was implemented to provide pertinent projections to
the user based on their past interactions.

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
13
Fig. 3 EvoGraphDice prototype showing an exploration session of a synthetic dataset. Widgets:
(a) an overview scatterplot matrix showing the original data set of 5 dimensions (x0..x4) and the
new dimensions (1..5) as suggested by the evolutionary algorithm. (b) main plot view. (c) tool bar
for main plot view. (d) a tool bar with (top to bottom) favorite toggle button, evolve button , a
slider to evaluate cells and a restart (PCA) button. (e) the selection history tool. (f) the favorite
cells window. (g) the selection query window. (h) IEA main control window. (i) window to limit
the search space. (j) dimension editor operators.
3.4 Multi-Faceted Evaluation of EvoGraphDice
We evaluated EvoGraphDice quantitatively and qualitatively following a mixed-
approach, where on the one hand we analysed the computational behaviour of the
system (algorithm-centered approach), and on the other hand we observed the utility
and effectiveness of the system for the end-user (human-centered approach).
3.4.1 Quantitative Evaluation
For this study [6], we synthesised a 5D dataset with an embedded curvilinear rela-
tionship between two dimensions and noise for the rest of the dimensions. The task
was to ﬁnd a data projection that shows a derived visual pattern. We logged user
interactions with the tool and the state of the system at each algorithm iteration. For

14
N. Boukhelifa et al.
log data analysis, we used both statistical and exploratory visualization techniques.
Algorithm-Centered Evaluation
This evaluation focused on two aspects of our iML system: the robustness of the
underlying algorithm, and the quality of machine learning. To study robustness, we
conducted two types of analyses: (a) convergence analysis to assess the algorithms
ability to steer the exploration toward a focused area of the search space, and (b)
diversity analysis to assess the richness and variability of solutions provided by the
algorithm. These two analyses are relevant because they relate to two important
mechanisms in evolutionary algorithms, exploitation and exploration [4], where on
the one hand users want to visit new regions of the search space, and on the other
hand they also want to explore solutions close to one region of the search space.
In terms of objective metrics, we used the number of generations and task outcome
to measure algorithmic performance, and mean visual pattern differences (using
scagnostics [49]) to assess diversity. To evaluate the quality of learning, we used the
rate of concordance between user evaluation scores, and the “predicted” values as
calculated by the algorithm.
Our analysis showed that on average the interactive evolutionary algorithm fol-
lowed the order of user ranking of scatterplots fairly consistently, even though users
seemed to take different search and evaluation strategies. For example, some par-
ticipants tended to lump evaluation scores to fewer levels, others used the ﬁve pro-
vided score levels, whereas the rest alternated between the two strategies at dif-
ferent stages of the exploration. Moreover, these results indicated a possible link
between user evaluation strategy, and outcome of exploration and speed of conver-
gence, where users taking a more consistent approach converged more quickly. The
diversity analysis showed that, in terms of visual pattern, the IEA provided more di-
verse solutions at the beginning of the exploration session before slowly converging
to a more focused search space.
Human-Centered Evaluation
The user-centered evaluation of EvoGraphDice focused on two different aspects re-
lated to human interactions with the iML system. First we performed a user strategy
analysis to understand the different approaches users took to solve a data explo-
ration task. The evaluation metrics we used here were the type of searched visual
pattern, and stability of the exploration strategy. Second, we looked at user focus to
highlight hot spots in the user interface and assess user evaluation strategies. In this
case, our evaluation metrics were related to the user view visitation and evaluation
patterns.
In terms of results, the user strategies analysis showed that EvoGraphDice allows
for different types of exploration strategies that appear to be relevant for the study
task. In the case of a two-curve separation task, these strategies centered around
three dominant types of scagnostics: skinny, convex and sparse. We also found that
the stability of the exploration strategy may be an important factor for determining
the outcome of the exploration task and the speed of convergence, since successful

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
15
exploration sessions had a more consistent strategy when compared to the unsuc-
cessful ones, and they converged more quickly on average.
From the user visitation and evaluation analyses, we found that users were more
likely to visit scatterplots showing dimensions relevant to their task. Moreover, these
plots were on average ranked highly by the user. Since for this game task, the main
dimensions relevant to the task appeared on the top left side of the proposed cells,
users intuitively started navigating that way. What we saw in these results was prob-
ably a mixture of task-relevance and intuitive-navigation, as the relevant original
dimensions are placed in a prominent position in the matrix.
3.4.2 Qualitative Evaluation
To assess the usability and utility of EVE, we conducted another user study [37]
where we tried to answer these three questions: is our tool understandable and can it
be learnt; are experts able to conﬁrm known insights in their data; and are they able
to discover new insight and generate new hypotheses. We designed three tasks: (a)
a game-task (similar to the task in the quantitative evaluation above) with varying
levels of difﬁculty to assess participants abilities to operate the tool; (b) we asked
participants to show in the tool what they already know about their data; and (c) to
explore their data in light of a hypothesis or research question that they prepared.
This sequence of tasks assured that experts became familiar with the tool, and un-
derstood how to concretely leverage it by looking for known facts, before looking
for new insights. This evaluation approach sits between an observational study and
an insight-based evaluation, such as the one proposed by Saraiya et al. [41].
The study led to interesting ﬁndings such as the ability of our tool to support
experts in better formulating their research questions and building new hypotheses.
For insight evaluation studies such as ours, reproducing the actual ﬁndings across
subjects is not possible as each participant provided their own dataset and research
questions. However, reproducing testing methodologies and coding for the analysis
is. Although we run multiple ﬁeld studies with domain experts from different do-
mains, with sessions that were internally very different, the high-level tasks, their
order and the insight-based coding were common. Training expert users on simple
speciﬁc tasks that are not necessarily “theirs” also seemed to help experts become
conﬁdent with the system, but of course comes at a time cost.
4 Discussion
We conducted qualitative and quantitative user studies to evaluate EVE which
helped us validate our framework of guided visual exploration. While the obser-
vational study showed that using EVE, domain experts were able to formulate in-
teresting hypothesis and reach new insights when exploring freely, the quantitative

16
N. Boukhelifa et al.
evaluation indicated that users, guided by the interactive evolutionary algorithm, are
able to converge quickly to an interesting view of their data when a clear task is
speciﬁed. Importantly, the quantitative study allowed us to accurately describe the
relationship between user behaviour and algorithms response.
Besides interactive machine learning, guided visualization systems such as EVE
fall under the wider arena of knowledge-assisted visualization and mixed-initiative
systems [28]. In such cases, where the system is learning, it is crucial that users un-
derstand what the system is proposing or why changes are happening. Thus, when
evaluating iML systems with users, we need to speciﬁcally test if the automatic state
changes and their provenance are understood. It would be interesting, for example,
to also consider evolving or progressive revealing of the provenance of system sug-
gestions. This way, as the user becomes more expert, more aspects of the underlying
mechanics are revealed. When creativity and serendipity are important aspects, as it
is the case in artistic domains and data exploration, new evaluation methodologies
are required.
Research from the ﬁeld of mixed initiative systems describes a set of design
principles that try to address systematic problems with the use of automatic services
within direct manipulation interfaces. These principles include considering uncer-
tainty about a user’s goal, transparency, and considering the status of users’ attention
[28]. We can be inspired by the extensive experience and past work from HCI, to
also consider how user behaviour can in turn adapt to ﬁt our systems [36].
During the design, development and evaluation of EVE, we worked with do-
main experts at different levels. For the observational study, we worked with data
experts from various disciplines, which allowed us to asses the usefulness, usabil-
ity and effectiveness of our system in different contexts. In particular, we largely
beneﬁted from having one domain expert as part of the design and evaluation team.
This expert explored multidimensional datasets as part of her daily work, using both
algorithmic and visual tools. Involving end-users in the design team is a long-time
tradition in the ﬁeld of HCI as part of the user-centered design methodology. This
is a recommendation we should consider more, both as a design and as a system
validation approach. While HCI researchers acknowledge the challenges of forming
partnerships with domain experts, their past experience (e.g. [16]) can inform us on
how to proceed with the evaluation of iML systems.
5 Research Prospects
We report on observations and lessons learnt from working with application users
both for the design and the evaluation of our interactive machine learning system, as
well as the results of experimental analyses. We discuss these below as research op-
portunities aiming to facilitate and support the different roles humans play in iML,
i.e. in the design, interaction and evaluation of these systems.

Evaluation of Int. ML Systems
17
Human-Centered Design: during the design, development and evaluation of
many of our tools, we worked with domain experts at different levels. For Evo-
GraphDice, for instance, we largely beneﬁted from having a domain expert as part
of the design and evaluation team. However, this was carried out in an informal way.
Involving end-users in the design team is a long-time tradition in the ﬁeld of HCI
as part of the user-centered design methodology. Participatory design, for instance,
could be conducted with iML end-users to incorporate their expertise in the design
of, for example, learning algorithms and user models. This is a recommendation we
should consider in a more systematic way, both as a design and as a system valida-
tion approach.
Interaction and Visualization: often the solutions proposed by the iML systems
are puzzling to end-users. This is because the inner workings of machine learning
algorithms, and the user exploration and feedback strategies that led to system sug-
gestions are often not available to the user. This “black-box” effect is challenging to
address as there is a ﬁne balance to ﬁnd between the richness of a transparent inter-
face and the simplicity of a more obscure one. Finding the tipping point requires an
understanding of evolving user expertise in manipulating the system, and the task
requirements. Whereas HCI and user-centered design can help elicit these require-
ments and tailor tools to user needs over time, visualization techniques can make
the provenance of views and the system status more accessible.
At the interaction level, HCI can contribute techniques to capture rich user feed-
back without straining the user, that are either implicit (e.g. using eye-tracking); or
explicit such as using simple gestures or interactions mediated by tangible objects to
indicate user subjective assessment of a given solution. Here, our recommendation
is to investigate rich and varied interaction techniques to facilitate user feedback,
and to develop robust user models that try to learn from the provided input.
Multifaceted Evaluation: the evaluation of iML systems remains a difﬁcult task
as often the system adapts to user preferences but also the user interprets and adapts
to system feedback. Getting a clear understanding of the subtle mechanisms of this
co-adaptation [36], especially in the presence of different types and sources of un-
certainty [9], is challenging and requires to consider evaluation criteria other than
speed of algorithm convergence and the usability of the interface.
In the context of exploration, both for scientiﬁc and artistic applications, creativ-
ity is sought and can be characterised by lateral thinking, surprising ﬁndings, and
the way users learn how to operate the interactive system and construct their own
way to use it. For IEC, our observation is that augmented creativity can be achieved
with the right balance between randomness and user-guided search. What is im-
portant to consider for evaluating iML systems in the context of creativity, are the
exploration components. Our recommendation with this respect is two-fold: ﬁrst, to
work towards creating tools that support creativity (something that the HCI commu-
nity is already looking into [15]); and second, to investigate objective and subjective
metrics to study creativity within iML (e.g. to identify impacting factors such as the
optimisation constraints, user engagement and the presence or absence of direct ma-

18
N. Boukhelifa et al.
nipulation). Some of these measures may only be identiﬁable through longitudinal
observations of this co-adaptation process.
6 Conclusion
User-driven machine learning processes such as the ones described in this chap-
ter, rely on systems that adapt their behaviour based on user feedback, while users
themselves adapt their goals and strategies based on the solutions proposed by the
system. In this chapter, we focused on the evaluation of interactive machine learn-
ing systems, drawing from related work, and our own experience in developing and
evaluating such systems. We showed through a focused literature review that de-
spite the multifaceted nature of iML systems, current evaluations tend to focus on
single isolated components such as the robustness of the algorithm, or the utility
of the interface. Through a visual analytics case study, we showed how coupling
algorithm-centered and user-centered evaluations can bring forth insights on the un-
derlying co-operation and co-adaptation mechanisms between the algorithm and the
human. Interactive machine learning presents interesting challenges and prospects
to conduct future research not only in terms of designing robust algorithms and
interaction techniques, but also in terms of coherent evaluation methodologies.
