Neural Networks for Keyword Spotting on IoT
Devices
Rakesh Dhakshinamurthy
Dublin City University

Abstract. We explore Neural Networks (NNs) for keyword spotting
(KWS) on IoT devices like smart speakers and wearables. Since we target
to execute our NN on a constrained memory and computation footprint,
we propose a CNN design that. (i) uses a limited number of multiplies.
(ii) uses a limited number of model parameters.
1
Introduction
Nowadays the speech-related NNs are becoming exponentially popular since it
is an essential feature in a broad-spectrum of IoT devices. In IoT devices like
wearables and smart speakers, true hands-free speech recognition is achieved
by continuously listening to spot speciﬁc keywords. After spotting the speciﬁed
keywords, the local or online voice understanding model is woken up, and the
user’s voice is streamed to the model. This keyword spotting (KWS) Models
run on all the devices that are equipped with digital voice assistants like Alexa.
Even in the advanced voice-based systems and smart speaker prototypes, such
KWS models are integrated. For example, Sensory wake word engine was used in
the recent study [8]. Here, a face recognition algorithm was trained using Deep
Neural Network and deployed on their modern Alexa smart speaker prototype.
This model, without disturbing the smart speaker routine can detect and identify
a human face, then start the Alexa voice service only when an authorized face is
present in the live video frames. Similarly, another recent study [9] also used the
Sensory wake word engine to spot the Alexa wake word. Here, a DL and Open
CV based object detection model was deployed in their smart speaker. After
waking up the device by calling out the Alexa command, whenever the user calls
out Alexa, ask Friday what she sees, the smart speaker camera turns on, then
executes the deployed model and calls out the names of detected objects as a
response to the user command. The study [7] presents a microphone array and
voice algorithm-based smart hearing aid. We recommend the authors to add a
KWS spotting mechanism to the software deployed in their prototype to improve
the operating time of their device.
Since the above tiny devices and others have limited memory footprint and
low computational power, the current KWS systems need tuning to comfortably
execute on constrained setups and without disturbing the routine of the devices.
To eﬃciently deploy large models on such devices, we recommend advanced
arXiv:2101.00693v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2021

Fig. 1. a. Shows the components of a KWS system (left to right) (i) Feature Extraction
(ii) Deep Neural Network (iii) Posterior Handling. b. Shows the architecture of a typical
CNN with a convolutional and max-pooling layer.
model optimization methods such as RC-NN [6] and Edge2Train [5]. In the
recent wearable-based study named Avoid touching your face [10], the authors
have optimized their hand-to-face motion-detecting CNNs using RCE-NN to
enable the resource-friendly execution of the use-case model on a wide range
of smartwatches. Similarly, we recommend optimizing the adaptive strategy
model [4] to make it comfortably execute within the limited resource of mobile
IoT devices and carry out the model intended task of improving the wireless
communication quality of the target devices. Also, the parts of this optimization
pipeline are applicable to unsupervised methods [11].
In this paper, we take motivation from [1] to design CNNs for KWS use case.
We propose a CNN based approach since CNNs have shown better performance
than DNNs and also has a smaller model size. In our proposed design, we
ﬁrst limit the overall computation of our KWS model. i.e., we limit the model
parameters and multiplies. Here, we ﬁrst implement a CNN architecture that
does not perform pooling but rather performs ﬁlter striding in the frequency
domain. Second, we limit the total parameters during the design of the KWS
model.
2
Keyword Spotting on IoT Devices
A block diagram of the KWS system [2] used in this work is shown in Fig. 1. The
ﬁrst feature extraction component computes 40-dimensional log-mel ﬁlterbank
features every 25ms with a 10ms frame shift. Next, in each frame, we stack
25 frames to the left and 10 frames to the right and provide this as an input
to DNN which is the second component. This DNN architecture has 3 hidden

Fig. 2. Traditional CNN Architecture used for the KWS task. Par. is the number of
parameters and Mul. is the number of multipliers used by each part of the CNN.
layers with 128 hidden units plus a softmax layer, where each hidden layer uses
a ReLU nonlinearity. The softmax is the output layer containing one target
output for each of the words that need to be detected from the audio signal
stream. This model’s weights are trained to optimize a cross-entropy criterion
using the distributed asynchronous gradient descent. The ﬁnal component is the
posterior handling module. Here for each frame, posterior scores from the DNN
are combined into a single score.
3
Keyword Spotting CNN Design
Here we present a CNN design that is our proposed alternative to the DNN
described in the previous Section.
3.1
Typical CNN Architecture
A typical convolutional architecture shown in Fig. 1 has been heavily used on
many challenges [3]. When the log-mel input (tf = 3240) is fed into the model,
the ﬁrst layer has a ﬁlter size with a speciﬁed frequency (freq r = 9). The common
method is to choose a ﬁlter size in time spanning two-thirds of the overall input
size. Multiplication is performed by striding this ﬁlter by s = 1 and v = 1
across both frequency and time domains. Next, non-overlapping max-pooling
is performed with a pooling region of q = 3. The second ﬁlter has a ﬁlter of
r = 4 in frequency, and no max-pooling is performed. Since we target limited
resource devices, we need to keep the number of parameters as low as possible.
We show the architecture of a traditional CNN in Fig. 2. Here, as shown, the
model has 2 convolutional, one linear low-rank, and one DNN layer. Currently,
this architecture has a huge number of multiplies in the convolutional layers due
to the 3-D inputs spanning across all the three frequency, time, and feature maps.
Hence, not feasible for power-constrained small-footprint devices where multiplies
are limited. In the below sections, we present alternative CNN architectures to
address the tasks of limiting parameters or multiplies.

Fig. 3. Optimized CNN Architecture that performs the same KWS task but has a
lesser number of Parameters and Multipliers than original CNN.
3.2
Limiting Multiplies
To obtain a resource-friendly CNN we need to limit the number of multiplies.
One solution to limit multiplies is to have a single convolutional layer, and also
have the time ﬁlter span all of the time. The output of this convolutional layer
should be passed to a linear low-rank layer followed by two DNN layers. Fig. 3
shows an architecture with only one convolutional layer. Here, the number of
multiplies is cut by a factor of 10, compared to the CNN from Fig. 2.
3.3
Limiting Model Parameters
Increasing model parameters leads to performance improvements at the cost of
model size. In this section, we explore CNN architectures by limiting the model
size to 250K but we do not limit the multiplies like in the previous section. We
can improve performance by increasing the input features. Keeping parameters
ﬁxed by doing so requires exploring sampling of input audio signal in time
and frequency. When designing models for acoustic use cases, the called words
that we want to classify occur over within a very short time-duration, making
pooling reduce the model detection accuracy. But the keywords like Alexa occur
over a longer time-span (50-100ms). Thus, we propose to improve the resource
friendliness of models by sub-sampling the signal in time using striding or pooling.
In the future, we shall explore the conventional sub-sampling in time with longer
acoustic units.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a CNN design that is best suited for the KWS use case.
When comparing CNNs with DNNs, when we limit the number of multiplies and
model parameters of CNNs, we hypothesize to achieve performance improvements
in both clean and noisy environments. In the future, we shall evaluate our proposed
design and open-source the trained model.
