arXiv:1005.1860v2  [cs.AI]  20 May 2010
Feature Selection Using Regularization in Approximate Linear
Programs for Markov Decision Processes
Marek Petrik*

Gavin Taylor†

Ron Parr†

Shlomo Zilberstein*

* Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003 USA
† Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA
Abstract
Approximate
dynamic
programming
has
been used successfully in a large variety of do-
mains, but it relies on a small set of provided
approximation features to calculate solutions
reliably. Large and rich sets of features can
cause existing algorithms to overﬁt because
of a limited number of samples. We address
this shortcoming using L1 regularization in
approximate linear programming.
Because
the proposed method can automatically se-
lect the appropriate richness of features, its
performance does not degrade with an in-
creasing number of features.
These results
rely on new and stronger sampling bounds
for regularized approximate linear programs.
We also propose a computationally eﬃcient
homotopy method.
The empirical evalua-
tion of the approach shows that the proposed
method performs well on simple MDPs and
standard benchmark problems.
1. Introduction
Solving large Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) is
a very useful, but computationally challenging prob-
lem addressed widely by reinforcement learning.
It
is widely accepted that large MDPs can only be
solved approximately.
This approximation is com-
monly done by relying on linear value function approx-
imation, in which the value function is chosen from a
small-dimensional vector space of features. While this
framework oﬀers computational beneﬁts and protec-
tion from the overﬁtting in the training data, selecting
Appearing in Proceedings of the 27 th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Haifa, Israel, 2010. Copyright
2010 by the author(s)/owner(s).
an eﬀective, small set of features is diﬃcult and re-
quires a deep understanding of the domain. Feature
selection, therefore, seeks to automate this process in
a way that may preserve the computational simplicity
of linear approximation (Parr et al., 2007; Mahadevan,
2008). We show in this paper that L1-regularized ap-
proximate linear programs (RALP) can be used with
very rich feature spaces.
RALP relies, like other value function approximation
methods, on samples of the state space.
The value
function error on states that are not sampled is known
as the sampling error. This paper shows that regular-
ization in RALP can guarantee small sampling error.
The bounds on the sampling error require somewhat
limiting assumptions on the structure of the MDPs, as
any guarantees must, but this framework can be used
to derive tighter bounds for speciﬁc problems in the
future. The relatively simple bounds can be used to
determine automatically the regularization coeﬃcient
to balance the expressivity of the features with the
sampling error.
We derive the approach with the L1 norm, but it could
be used with other regularizations with small modiﬁ-
cations. The L1 norm is advantageous for two main
reasons. First, the L1 norm encourages the sparse so-
lutions, which can reduce the computational require-
ments. Second, the L1 norm preserves the linearity
of RALPs; the L2 norm would require quadratic opti-
mization.
Regularization using the L1 norm has been widely
used
in
regression
problems
by
methods
such
as LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996) and Dantzig selec-
tor (Candes & Tao, 2007). The value-function approx-
imation setting is, however, quite diﬀerent and the re-
gression methods are not directly applicable. Regular-
ization has been previously used in value function ap-
proximation (Taylor & Parr, 2009; Farahmand et al.,

Feature Selection Using Regularization
2008; Kolter & Ng, 2009). In comparison with LARS-
TD (Kolter & Ng, 2009), an L1 regularized value func-
tion approximation method, we explicitly show the in-
ﬂuence of regularization on the sampling error, pro-
vide a well-founded method for selecting the regu-
larization parameter, and solve the full control prob-
lem. In comparison with existing sampling bounds for
ALP (de Farias & Van Roy, 2001), we do not assume
that the optimal policy is available, make more general
assumptions, and derive bounds that are independent
of the number of features.
Our approach is based on approximate linear program-
ming (ALP), which oﬀers stronger theoretical guaran-
tees than some other value function approximation al-
gorithms. We describe ALP in Section 3 and RALP
and its basic properties in Section 4.
RALP, unlike
ordinary ALPs, is guaranteed to compute bounded so-
lutions.
We also brieﬂy describe a homotopy algo-
rithm for solving RALP, which exhibits anytime be-
havior by gradually increasing the norm of feature
weights. To develop methods that automatically se-
lect features with generalization guarantees, we pro-
pose general sampling bounds in Section 5.
These
sampling bounds, coupled with the homotopy method,
can automatically choose the complexity of the fea-
tures to minimize over-ﬁtting. Our experimental re-
sults in Section 6 show that the proposed approach
with large feature sets is competitive with LSPI when
performed even with small feature spaces hand se-
lected for standard benchmark problems.
Section 7
concludes with future work and a more detailed rela-
tionship with other methods.
2. Framework and Notation
In this section, we formally deﬁne Markov decision
processes and linear value function approximation.
A Markov Decision Process is a tuple (S, A, P, r, γ),
where S is the possibly inﬁnite set of states, and A
is the ﬁnite set of actions. P : S × S × A 7→[0, 1] is
the transition function, where P(s′, s, a) represents the
probability of transiting to state s′ from state s, given
action a. The function r : S × A 7→R is the reward
function, and γ is the discount factor. Pa and ra are
used to denote the probabilistic transition matrix and
reward vector for action a.
We are concerned with ﬁnding a value function v
that maps each state s ∈S to the expected total γ-
discounted reward for the process. Value functions can
be useful in creating or analyzing a policy π : S ×A →
[0, 1] such that for all s ∈S, P
a∈A π(s, a) = 1. The
transition and reward functions for a given policy are
denoted by Pπ and rπ. The value function update for
a policy π is denoted by Lπ, and the Bellman operator
is denoted by L. That is:
Lπv = γPπv + rπ
Lv = max
π∈Π Lπv.
The optimal value function v∗satisﬁes Lv∗= v∗.
We focus on linear value function approximation for
discounted inﬁnite-horizon problems, in which the
value function is represented as a linear combination
of nonlinear basis functions (vectors). For each state
s, we deﬁne a vector φ(s) of features. The rows of the
basis matrix Φ correspond to φ(s), and the approxima-
tion space is generated by the columns of the matrix.
That is, the basis matrix Φ, and the value function v
are represented as:
Φ =
 —
φ(s1)T
—
...
!
v = Φw.
This form of linear representation allows for the cal-
culation of an approximate value function in a lower-
dimensional space, which provides signiﬁcant compu-
tational beneﬁts over using a complete basis; if the
number of features is small, this framework can also
guard against overﬁtting noise in the samples.
Deﬁnition 1. A value function, v, is representable if
v ∈M ⊆R|S|, where M = colspan (Φ). The set of
ǫ-transitive-feasible value functions is deﬁned for ǫ ≥0
as follows: K(ǫ) = {v ∈R|S|
v ≥Lv −ǫ1. Here 1
is a vector of all ones. A value function is transitive-
feasible when v ≥Lv and the set of transitive-feasible
functions is deﬁned as K = K(0).
Notice that the optimal value function v∗is transitive-
feasible, and that M is a linear space.
3. Approximate Linear Programming
The approximate linear programming (ALP) frame-
work is an approach for calculating a value function
approximation for large MDP with a set of features Φ
that deﬁne a linear space M (Schweitzer & Seidmann,
1985; de Farias & Van Roy, 2003). The ALP takes the
following form:
min
v∈M
X
s∈S
ρ(s)v(s)
s.t.
r(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
P(s′, s, a)v(s′) ≤v(s)
where ρ is a distribution over the initial states and
the constraints are for all (s, a) ∈(S, A); that is
P
s∈S ρ(s) = 1.
To ensure feasibility, one of the
features is assumed to be constant.
Therefore, in

Feature Selection Using Regularization
the remainder of the paper, we make the following
standard assumption (Schweitzer & Seidmann, 1985),
which can be satisﬁed by setting the ﬁrst column of
M to 1.
Assumption 2. For all k ∈R, we have that k·1 ∈M,
where 1 is a vector of all ones.
For simplicity and generality of notation, we use L to
denote the ALP constraint matrix, so Lv ≤v is equal
to the set of constraints {Lav ≤v : ∀a ∈A}. Then,
we can rewrite the ALP as follows:
min
v
ρTv
s.t.
Lv ≤v
v ∈M
(1)
Notice that the constraints in the ALP correspond
to the deﬁnition of transitive-feasible functions in
Deﬁnition 1.
A succinct notation of the ALP con-
straints can then use the set of transitive-feasible func-
tions as v ∈M ∩K.
The constraint v ∈M implies that v = Φw and there-
fore the number of variables in (1) corresponds to the
number of features.
Typically, this is a small num-
ber. However, the number of required constraints in
ALP is |S| × |A|, which is oftentimes impractically
large or inﬁnite. The standard solution is to sample a
small set of constraints according to a given distribu-
tion (de Farias & Van Roy, 2003). It is then possible
to bound the probability of violating a randomly cho-
sen constraint. There are, however, a few diﬃculties
with this approach. First, leaving constraints out can
lead to an unbounded linear program. Second, in prac-
tice the distribution over the constraints can be very
diﬀerent from the distribution assumed by the theory.
Finally, the bound provides no guarantees on the so-
lution quality.
ALP
has
often
under-performed
ADP
methods
in practice;
this issue has been recently studied
and partially remedied (Petrik & Zilberstein, 2009;
Desai et al., 2009). Because these methods are inde-
pendent of the proposed modiﬁcations, we only focus
on standard approximate linear programs.
We show next that RALP with sampled constraints
not only guarantees that the solution is bounded and
provides worst-case error bounds on the value function,
but also is independent of the number of features. As
a result, the ALP formulation does not require a small
number of features to be selected in advance.
4. Regularized Approximate Linear
Programming
In this section, we introduce L1-regularized ALP
(RALP) as an approach to automate feature selection
and alleviate the need for all constraints in standard
ALP. Adding L1 regularization to ALP permits the
user to supply an arbitrarily rich set of features with-
out the risk of overﬁtting.
The RALP for basis Φ and L1 constraint ψ is deﬁned
as follows:
min
w
ρTΦw
s.t.
LΦw ≤Φw
∥w∥1,e ≤ψ,
(2)
where ∥w∥1,e = P
i e(i)w(i). Note that RALP is a
generalization of ALP; when ψ approaches inﬁnity, the
RALP solution approaches the ALP solution. The ob-
jective value of (2) as a function of ψ is denoted as
θ(ψ).
We generally use e = 1−1, which is a vector of all ones
except the ﬁrst position, which is 0; because the ﬁrst
feature is the constant feature, we do not include it
in the regularization. The main reasons for excluding
the constant feature are that the policy is independent
of the constant shifts, and the homotopy method we
propose requires that the linear program is easy to
solve when ψ = 0.
Alternatively, we can formulate RALP in (2) as a mi-
nor modiﬁcation of ALP in equation (1). This is by
modifying M to satisfy the L1 norm as:
M(ψ) = {Φw ∥w∥1,e ≤ψ}.
Notice that RALP introduces an additional parameter
ψ over ALP. As with L1 regularization for regression,
this raises some concerns about a method for choosing
the regularization parameter. Practical methods, such
as cross-validation may be used to address this issue.
We also propose an automated method for choosing ψ
in Section 5 based on the problem and sampling pa-
rameters.
5. Sampling Bounds
The purpose of this section is to show that RALP of-
fers two main beneﬁts over ALP. First, even when the
constraints are sampled and incomplete, it is guar-
anteed to provide a feasible solution. Since feasibil-
ity does not imply that the solution is close to op-
timal, we then show that under speciﬁc assumptions
— such as smooth reward and transition functions —
RALP guarantees that the error due to the missing
constraints is small.

Feature Selection Using Regularization
To bound the error from sampling, we must formally
deﬁne the samples and how they are used to construct
ALPs. We consider the following two types of samples
˜Σ and ¯Σ deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 3. One-step simple samples are deﬁned as
follows: ˜Σ ⊆{(s, a, (s1 . . . sn), r(s, a)) s ∈S, a ∈A},
where s1 . . . sn are selected i.i.d.
from the distribu-
tion P(s, a, ·). One-step samples with expectation are
deﬁned as follows: ¯Σ ⊆{(s, a, P(s, a, ·), r(s, a))
s ∈
S, a ∈A}.
Often the samples only include state transitions, as ˜Σ
deﬁnes. The more informative samples ¯Σ include the
probability distribution of the states that follow the
given state and action, as follows:
¯L(v)(¯s) = r(¯s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
P(¯s, a, s′)v(s′),
(3)
where
(¯s, a, P(¯s, a, ·), r(¯s, a))
∈
¯Σ.
The
less-
informative ˜Σ can be used as follows:
˜L(v)(˜s) = r(˜s, a) + γ 1
n
n
X
i=1
v(si),
(4)
where (˜s, a, (s1 . . . sn), r(˜s, a)) ∈˜Σ. The corresponding
transitive-feasible sets ¯K and ˜K are deﬁned similarly.
The ALPs can be constructed based on samples as
Figure 1 shows. Full ALP corresponds to the RALP
formulation in (2), when M is constricted with L1
regularization. In comparison, sampled ALP is missing
some of the constraints while estimated ALP is both
missing some constraints, and the included constraints
may be estimated imprecisely.
The following two assumptions quantify the behavior
of the ALP with respect to missing and imprecise con-
straints respectively. The ﬁrst assumption limits the
error due to missing transitions in the sampled Bell-
man operator ¯L.
Assumption 4 (Constraint Sampling Behavior). The
representable value functions satisfy that:
K ∩M(ψ) ⊆¯K ∩M(ψ) ⊆K(ǫp) ∩M(ψ),
and that for all representable value functions v ∈
M(ψ) we have that |(ρ −¯ρ)Tv| ≤ǫc(ψ).
The constant ǫp bounds the potential violation of the
ALP constraints on states that are not provided as a
part of the sample. In addition, all value functions that
are transitive-feasible for the full Bellman operator are
transitive-feasible in the sampled version; the sampling
only removes constraints on the set. The constant ǫc
essentially represents the maximal error in estimating
the objective value of ALP for any representable value
function.
The next assumption quantiﬁes the error on the es-
timation of the transitions of the estimated Bellman
operator ˜L.
Assumption 5 (Constraint Estimation Behavior).
The representable value functions satisfy that:
¯K(−ǫs) ∩M(ψ) ⊆˜K ∩M(ψ) ⊆¯K(ǫs) ∩M(ψ),
where ¯Σ and ˜Σ (and therefore ¯K and ˜K) are deﬁned
for identical sets of states.
These assumptions are quite generic in order to apply
in a wide range of scenarios. The main idea behind
the assumptions is to bound by how much a feasible
solution in the sampled or estimated ALP can violate
the true ALP constraints. These assumptions may be
easily satisﬁed, for example, by making the following
Lipschitz continuity assumptions.
Assumption 6. Let k : S →Rn be a map of the
state-space to a normed vector space.
Then for all
x, y, z ∈S and all features (columns) φi ∈Φ, we deﬁne
Kr, KP , and Kφ such that
|r(x) −r(y)| ≤Kr∥k(x) −k(y)∥
|p(z|x, a) −p(z|y, a)| ≤KP ∥k(x) −k(y)∥
|φi(x) −φi(y)| ≤Kφ∥k(x) −k(y)∥
Proposition 7. Assume Assumption 6 and that for
any s ∈S there exists a state ¯s ∈¯Σ such that ∥¯s−s∥≤
c.
Then Assumption 4 and Assumption 5 hold with
ǫp(ψ) = cKr + cψ(Kφ + γKP )
Because of the technical nature of the proof, it is de-
ferred to the appendix.
The importance of this bound is that the violation on
constraints that were not sampled grows linearly with
the increasing coeﬃcient ψ. As we show below, this
fact can be used to determine the optimal value of ψ.
For the sake of brevity, we do not discuss the estima-
tion error bounds ǫs in more detail, which can be eas-
ily derived from existing results (Petrik & Zilberstein,
2009).
We are now ready to state the following general bounds
on the approximation error of a RALP.
Theorem 8 (Oﬄine Error Bound). Assume Assump-
tions 2, 4, and 5. Let ˆv, ¯v, ˜v be the optimal solutions
of (5), (6), and (7), respectively (see Figure 1). Let
ǫ =
2
1−γ minv∈M(ψ) ∥v −v∗∥∞Then, the following in-

Feature Selection Using Regularization
Full ALP
ρ = 1
|S|
X
s∈S
φ(s)
min
v
ρTv
s.t.
v ∈K
v ∈M(ψ)
(5)
Sampled ALP
¯ρ =
1
|¯Σ|
X
(s,...)∈¯Σ
φ(s)
min
v
¯ρTv
s.t.
v ∈¯K
v ∈M(ψ)
(6)
Estimated ALP
¯ρ =
1
|˜Σ|
X
(s,...)∈˜Σ
φ(s)
min
v
¯ρTv
s.t.
v ∈˜K
v ∈M(ψ)
(7)
Figure 1. Constructing ALP From Samples
equalities hold:
∥ˆv −v∗∥1,ρ ≤ǫ
∥¯v −v∗∥1,ρ ≤ǫ + 2ǫc(ψ) + 2ǫp(ψ)
1 −γ
∥˜v −v∗∥1,ρ ≤ǫ + 2ǫc(ψ) + 3ǫs(ψ) + 2ǫp(ψ)
1 −γ
Because of the technical nature of the proof, it is de-
ferred to the appendix.
Notice that because the weight ρ is often chosen arbi-
trarily, the bounds may be simply derived for ∥· ∥1,¯ρ.
In that case, ǫc = 0. Unlike most of the existing ALP
bounds, we focus on bounding the error of the value
function, instead of bounding the number of violated
constraints.
Consider the implications of these bounds combined
with the Lipschitz assumptions of Proposition 7. It is
clear that reducing ψ tightens Theorem 8, but causes
the set M(ψ) to shrink and become more restrictive;
this suggests a tradeoﬀto be considered when set-
ting the regularization parameter.
The bound also
illustrates the importance of covering the space with
samples; as the distance between the samples c ap-
proaches zero, the bound tightens. In short, the Lip-
schitz assumptions limit how quickly the constraints
can change between sampled states.
As sampled
states get closer or the reward, feature, and probabil-
ity functions become smoother, constraints between
samples become more and more restricted; however,
smoother basis functions may mean a less expressive
space. Similar tradeoﬀs are likely to appear however
Assumption 4 and Assumption 5 are fulﬁlled.
The oﬄine error bounds in Theorem 8 can be used to
guarantee the performance of a RALP for a ﬁxed num-
ber of samples and the regularization coeﬃcient ψ. It
does not, however, prescribe how to choose the regu-
larization coeﬃcient for a given set of samples. To do
that, we have to derive bounds for an actual value func-
tion v. When the samples are known, these bounds are
typically tighter than the oﬄine error bound.
0
5
10
0
2
4
6
ψ
Error Bound
 
 
Global minimum
ˆv −v∗
˜v −ˆv
˜v −v∗
Figure 2. Sketch of error bounds as a function of the reg-
ularization coeﬃcient. Here, ˆv is the value function of the
full ALP, ˜v is the value function of the estimated ALP, and
v∗is the optimal value function.
Theorem
9
(Online
Error
Bound).
Assume
Assumption 2 and let v ∈
˜K ∩M(ψ) be an arbi-
trary feasible solution of the estimated ALP (7).
Then:
∥v∗−v∥1,ρ ≤¯ρTv −ρTv∗+ ǫc(ψ) + 2ǫs(ψ) + ǫp(ψ)
1 −γ
.
Because of the technical nature of the proof, it is de-
ferred to the appendix.
Here we brieﬂy introduce a homotopy method that not
only speeds the computation of the RALP solution,
but also can be used to ﬁnd the optimal value of ψ.
Because the homotopy method only relies on standard
linear programming analysis and is somewhat techni-
cal, the detailed description is provided in Appendix B
in the appendix.
The main idea of the homotopy method is to ﬁrst cal-
culate θ(0) and then trace the optimal solution for in-
creasing values of ψ.
The optimal solution w(ψ) of
the RALP (2) is a piecewise linear function of ψ. At
any point in time, the algorithm keeps track of a set
of active – or non-zero – variables w and a set of ac-
tive constraints, which are satisﬁed with equality. In
the linear segments, the number of active constraints
and variables are identical, and the non-linearity arises
when variables and constraints become active or inac-

Feature Selection Using Regularization
tive. Therefore, the linear segments are traced until
a variable becomes inactive or a constraint becomes
active. Then, the dual solution is traced until a con-
straint becomes inactive or a variable becomes active.
Since the homotopy algorithm solves for the optimal
value of the RALP (2) for all values of the regulariza-
tion coeﬃcient ψ, it is possible to increase the coeﬃ-
cient ψ until the error increase between sampled con-
straints balances out the decrease in the error due to
the restricted feature space as deﬁned in Theorem 8.
That is, we can calculate the objective value of the
linear program (2) for any value of ψ.
It is easy to ﬁnd ψ that minimizes the bounds in this
section. As the following corollary shows, to ﬁnd the
global minimum of the bounds, it is suﬃcient to use
the homotopy method to trace θ(ψ) while its derivative
is less than the increase in the error due to the sam-
pling (∥ˆv −˜v∥1,ρ). Let v(ψ) be an optimal solution of
(7) as a function of the regularization coeﬃcient ψ.
Corollary 10. Assume that ǫc(ψ), ǫp(ψ), and ǫs(ψ)
are convex functions of ψ.
Then, the error bound
∥v(ψ) −v∗∥1,ρ ≤f(ψ) for any v(ψ) is:
f(ψ) = θ(ψ) −ρTv∗+ ǫc(ψ) + 2ǫs(ψ) + ǫp(ψ)
1 −γ
.
The function f(ψ) is convex and its sub-diﬀerential1
∇ψf is independent of v∗. Therefore, a global mini-
mum ψ∗of f is attained when 0 ∈∇ψf(ψ∗) or when
ψ∗= 0.
The corollary follows directly from Theorem 9 and the
convexity of the optimal objective value of (2) as a
function ψ. Figure 2 illustrates the functions in the
corollary. Notice that Proposition 7 is suﬃcient to sat-
isfy the conditions of this corollary. In particular, the
functions ǫs(ψ), ǫp(ψ), ǫc(ψ) are linear in ψ.
6. Experimental Results
In this section, we present results indicating that
RALP eﬀectively selects from rich feature spaces to
outperform ALP and other common algorithms, such
as LSPI, on several example problems, including the
balanced pendulum and the bicycle problems. We also
demonstrate the speed and eﬀectiveness of the homo-
topy method in choosing a value of ψ.
Beneﬁts of Regularization
First, we demonstrate
and analyze the properties of RALP on a simple chain
problem with 200 states, in which the transitions move
to the right by one step with a centered Gaussian noise
1Function f may be non-diﬀerentiable
with standard deviation 3.
The reward for reach-
ing the right-most state was +1 and the reward in
the 20th state was -3. This problem is small to en-
able calculation of the optimal value function and to
control sampling. We uniformly selected every fourth
state on the chain and estimated the sampling bound
ǫp(ψ) = 0.05ψ. The approximation basis in this prob-
lem is represented by piecewise linear features, of the
form φ(si) = [i −c]+, for c from 1 to 200; these fea-
tures were chosen due to their strong guarantees for
the sampling bounds. The experimental results were
obtained using the proposed homotopy algorithm.
Figure 3 demonstrates the solution quality of RALP
on the chain problem as a function of the regulariza-
tion coeﬃcient ψ. The ﬁgure shows that although the
objective of RALP keeps decreasing as ψ increases,
the sampling error overtakes that reduction. It is clear
that a proper selection of ψ improves the quality of the
resulting approximation. To demonstrate the beneﬁts
of regularization as it relates to overﬁtting, we com-
pare the performance of ALP and RALP as a func-
tion of the number of available features in Figure 5.
While ALP performance improves initially, it degrades
severely with more features. The value ψ in RALP is
selected automatically using Corollary 10 and the sam-
pling bound of ǫp(ψ) = 0.05ψ. Figure 4 demonstrates
that RALP may also overﬁt, or perform poorly when
the regularization coeﬃcient ψ is not selected properly.
To ﬁnd the proper value of ψ,
as described in
Corollary 10, the problem needs to be solved using
the homotopy method. We show that the homotopy
method performs signiﬁcantly faster than a commer-
cially available linear program solver Mosek. Figure 6
compares the computational time of homotopy method
and Mosek, when solving the problem for multiple val-
ues of ψ in increments of 0.5 on the standard mountain
car problem (Barto & Sutton, 1998) with 901 piece-
wise linear features and 6000 samples. Even for any
single value ψ, the homotopy method solves the linear
program about 3 times faster than Mosek. The next
two experiments, however, do not use the homotopy
method. In practice, RALP often works much better
than what is suggested by our bounds, which can be
loose for sparsely sampled large state spaces. In the
following experiments, we determined ψ empirically by
solving the RALP for several diﬀerent values of ψ and
selecting the one that produced the best policy. This
was practical because we could solve the large RALPs
in just a few minutes using constraint generation.
Inverted Pendulum
We now oﬀer experimental re-
sults demonstrating RALP’s ability to create eﬀec-
tive value functions in balancing an inverted pen-

Feature Selection Using Regularization
0
1
2
3
0
5
10
Regularization Coefficient ψ
L1 Error
 
 
True Error
RALP Objective
Figure 3. Comparison of the ob-
jective value of RALP with the
true error.
0
50
100
150
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
Features
True L1 Error
 
 
RALP: ψ = 0.1
RALP: ψ = 3
RALP: Adaptive ψ
Figure 4. Comparison of the per-
formance RALP with two values
of ψ and the one chosen adap-
tively (Corollary 10).
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Features
True L1 Error
 
 
ALP
RALP
Figure 5. Average of 45 runs of
ALP and RALP as a function
of the number of features.
Co-
eﬃcient ψ was selected using
Corollary 10.
0
2
4
6
10
−2
10
0
10
2
Regularization: ψ
Time (s)
 
 
Mosek(R) Solver
Homotopy
Figure 6. Comparison of perfor-
mance of homotopy method ver-
sus Mosek as a function of ψ in
the mountain car domain.
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
Steps Balanced
Figure 7. RALP performance on
pendulum as a function on the
number of episodes.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
Episodes
% Reached Goal
Figure 8. RALP performance on
bicycle as a function on the num-
ber of episodes.
dulum, a standard benchmark problem in reinforce-
ment learning (Wang et al., 1996; Lagoudakis & Parr,
2003). Samples of the form (s, a, r, s′) were drawn from
every action on states drawn from random trajectories
with the pendulum starting in an upright state, re-
ferred to as episodes.
Features were kernels on 650
states randomly selected from the training data, con-
sisting of Gaussian kernels of standard deviation 0.5,
1, and 1.5, and a 6th degree polynomial kernel.
ψ
was 1.4, and an average of 25 features had non-zero
weights.
The constraints in the RALP were based on a single
sample for each state and action pair. The policy was
evaluated based on the number of steps it could bal-
ance the pendulum, with an upper limit of 3000. This
served to evaluate the policy resulting from the ap-
proximate value function. We plot the average num-
ber of steps the pendulum was balanced as a func-
tion of the number of training episodes in Figure 7,
as an average of 100 runs. It is clear the controller
produced by RALP was eﬀective for small amounts of
data, balancing the pendulum for the maximum num-
ber of steps nearly all of the time, even with only 50
training episodes.
Similarly, it was able to leverage
the larger number of available features to construct an
eﬀective controller with fewer trajectories than LSPI,
which needed 450 training episodes before achieving
an average of 2500 balanced steps (Lagoudakis & Parr,
2003).
Bicycle Balancing and Riding
We also present
experimental results for the bicycle problem, in which
the goal is to learn to balance and ride a bicy-
cle to a target position (Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998;
Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003).
This is a challenging
benchmark domain in reinforcement learning. Train-
ing data consisted of samples for every action on states
drawn from trajectories resulting from random actions
up to 35 states long, similar to the inverted pendulum
domain. The feature set consisted of monomials up
to degree 4 on the individual dimensions and products
of monomials up to degree 3, for a total of 159 fea-
tures. ψ was 0.03, and an average of 34 features had
nonzero weights. We plot the number of runs out of
100 in which the bicycle reached the goal region as a
function of number of training episodes in Figure 8.
Again, a high percentage of runs were successful, even
with only 500 training episodes. In comparison, LSPI
required 1500 training episodes to pass 80% success. It
is worth pointing out that due to sampling every ac-
tion at each state, RALP is using more samples than
LSPI, but far fewer trajectories.

Feature Selection Using Regularization
7. Conclusion and Related Work
In this paper, we introduced L1-regularized Approxi-
mate Linear Programming and demonstrated its prop-
erties for combined feature selection and value func-
tion approximation in reinforcement learning. RALP
simultaneously addresses the feature selection, value
function approximation, and policy determination
problems; our experimental results demonstrate that
it addresses these issues eﬀectively for several sample
problems, while our bounds explain the eﬀects of sam-
pling on the resulting approximation.
There are many additional issues that need to be ad-
dressed. The ﬁrst is the construction of better bounds
to guide the sampling. Our bounds explain the behav-
ior of RALP approximation as it relates to the trade-oﬀ
between the richness of the features with the number
of available samples, but these bounds may at times
be quite loose. Future work must identify conditions
that can provide stronger guarantees.
Additionally,
a data-driven approach which can calculate a tighter
bound online would be valuable. Finally, our analy-
sis did not address the conditions that would guaran-
tee sparse RALP solutions and, therefore, allow more
computationally eﬃcient solvers.
