arXiv:1602.08903v1  [cs.LO]  29 Feb 2016
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued
models
MAURICIO OSORIO
Universidad de las Américas - Puebla
Depto. de Actuaría, Física y Matemáticas
Sta. Catarina Mártir, Cholula, Puebla, 72820 México

JUAN CARLOS NIEVES
Department of Computing Science
Umeå University
SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden

submitted February 28 2014; revised August 28 2015 and February 3 2016; accepted February 21 2016
Abstract
Characterizations of semi-stable and stage extensions in terms of 2-valued logical models are pre-
sented. To this end, the so-called GL-supported and GL-stage models are deﬁned. These two classes
of logical models are logic programming counterparts of the notion of range which is an established
concept in argumentation semantics.
KEYWORDS: Logic programming semantics, Argumentation Semantics, Non-monotonic Reasoning.
1 Introduction
Argumentation has been regarded as a non-monotonic reasoning approach since it was sug-
gested as an inference reasoning approach (Prakken and Vreeswijk 2002). Dung showed
that argumentation inference can be regarded as a logic programming inference with nega-
tion as failure (Dung 1995). In his seminal paper (Dung 1995), Dung introduced four ar-
gumentation semantics: grounded, stable, preferred and complete semantics. Currently, it
is known that these four argumentation semantics introduced by Dung can be regarded
as logic programming inferences by using different mappings, from argumentation frame-
works (AFs) into logic programs, and different logic programming semantics (see Section
4).
Following Dung’s argumentation style, several new argumentation semantics have been
proposed. Among them, ideal, semi-stable, stage and CF2 have been deeply explored
(Baroni et al. 2011). Semi-stable and stage semantics were introduced from different points
of view; however, they have been deﬁned in terms of the so-called ranges of complete ex-
tensions and conﬂict-free sets, respectively. It seems that by using the concept of range, one
can deﬁne different classes of argumentation semantics as is the case with the semi-stable

2
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
and stage semantics. Given that the concept of range seems a fundamental component of
deﬁnitions of argumentation semantics such as semi-stable and stage semantics, the fol-
lowing question arises:
[Q1] How the concept of range can be captured from the logic programming point of view?
This question takes relevance in the understanding of argumentation as logic program-
ming.
In this paper, we argue that for capturing the idea of range from the logic program-
ming point view, logic programming reductions which have been used for deﬁning logic
programming semantics such as stable model (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) and p-stable
(Osorio et al. 2006) semantics are important. To show this, we introduce a general schema
SC1 which takes as input a logic program P and a set of atoms M, then considering a
function R which maps P into another logic program, SC1 returns a subset of atoms of
the signature of P 1. In order to infer ranges from the argumentation point of view us-
ing SC1, the logic program P has to capture an argumentation framework. Let us ob-
serve that there are different mappings from AFs into logic programs which have been
used for characterizing Dung’s argumentation semantics as logic programming inferences
(Carballido et al. 2009; Dung 1995; Caminada et al. 2013; Strass 2013). In this sense, the
following question arises:
[Q2] Can the mappings used for characterizing Dung’s argumentation semantics characterize
range-based argumentation semantics using SC1?
In order to give an answer to Q2, we consider the mappings ΠAF and Π−
AF which
have been used for characterizing Dung’s argumentation semantics in terms of logic pro-
gramming semantics. ΠAF has been shown to be a ﬂexible mapping to characterize the
grounded, stable, preferred, complete and ideal semantics by using logic programming se-
mantics such as, the well-founded, stable, p-stable, Clark’s completion and well-founded+
semantics, respectively (Carballido et al. 2009; Nieves et al. 2008; Nieves and Osorio 2014).
Π−
AF has been used to characterize the grounded, stable, preferred, complete, semi-stable
and CF2 (Dung 1995; Nieves et al. 2011; Strass 2013).
Considering ΠAF and Π−
AF for deﬁning two different instantiations of SC1, we will
deﬁne the so-called GL-supported and GL-stage models. We will show that GL-supported
and GL-stage models characterize the semi-stable and stage extensions, respectively. In
these instantiations of SC1, we will instantiate the function R with the well-known Gelfond-
Lifschitz reduction which is the core of the construction of the stable model semantics
(Gelfond 2008). Moreover, we will point out that R can be instantiated with the RED re-
duction, which is the core of the p-stable semantics (Osorio et al. 2006), getting the same
effect in the constructions of the GL-supported and GL-stage models.
To the best of our knowledge, SC1 is the ﬁrst schema designed to capture the range
concept from a logic programming point of view. It is worth mentioning that a range-based
semantics as semi-stable semantics has been already characterized as logic programming
inference (Caminada et al. 2013; Strass 2013); however, these characterizations do not of-
fer a schema for capturing the concept of range from a logic programming point of view
1 The formal deﬁnition of SC1 is presented in Section 3.1

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
3
in order to characterize (or construct) other range-based argumentation semantics such as
stage semantics.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, a basic background about
logic programming and argumentation is introduced. In Section 3, by considering a couple
of instantiations of SC1, we introduce the so-called GL-supported and GL-stage models;
moreover, we show how these models characterize both semi-stable and stage extensions.
In Section 4, a discussion of related work is presented. In the last section, our conclusions
are presented.
2 Background
In this section, we introduce the syntax of normal logic programs and the p-stable and
stable model semantics. After this, some basic concepts of argumentation theory are pre-
sented. At the end of the section, the mappings ΠAF and Π−
AF are introduced.
2.1 Logic Programs: Syntax
A signature L is a ﬁnite set of elements that we call atoms. A literal is an atom a (called
a positive literal), or the negation of an atom not a (called a negative literal). Given a set of
atoms {a1, . . . , an}, we write not {a1, . . . , an} to denote the set of literals {not a1, . . . , not an}.
A normal clause C is written as:
a0 ←a1, . . . , aj, not aj+1, . . . , not an
where ai is an atom, 0 ≤i ≤n. When n = 0 the normal clause is called a fact and is
an abbreviation of a0 ←⊤, where ⊤is the ever true atom. A normal logic program is a
ﬁnite set of normal clauses. Sometimes, we denote a clause C by a ←B+, not B−, where
B+ contains all the positive body literals and B−contains all the negative body literals.
When B−= ∅, the clause C is called a deﬁnite clause. A deﬁnite program is a ﬁnite set
of deﬁnite clauses. LP denotes the set of atoms that occurs in P. Given a signature L,
ProgL denotes the set of all the programs deﬁned over L. Given a normal logic program
P, Facts(P) = {a|a ←⊤∈P}.
In some cases we treat a logic program as a logical theory. In these cases, each negative
literal not a is replaced by ¬a where ¬ is regarded as the classical negation in classical
logic. Logical consequence in classical logic is denoted by ⊢. Given a set of proposition
symbols S and a logical theory (a set of well-formed formulae) Γ, Γ ⊢S if ∀s ∈S Γ ⊢s.
Given a normal logic program P, a set of atoms is a classical model of P if the induced
interpretation evaluates P to true. If M ⊆LP , we write P ⊩M when: P ⊢M and M is
a classical 2-valued model of the logical theory obtained from P (i.e. atoms in M are set
to true, and atoms not in M to false). We say that a model M of a program P is minimal if
a model M ′ of P different from M such that M ′ ⊂M does not exist.
2.2 Stable model and p-stable semantics
Stable model semantics is one of the most inﬂuential logic programming semantics in the
non-monotonic reasoning community (Baral 2003) and is deﬁned as follows:

4
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
Deﬁnition 1
(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) Let P be a normal logic program. For any set S ⊆LP , let
P S be the deﬁnite logic program obtained from P by deleting
(i) each clause that has a formula not l in its body with l ∈S, and then
(ii) all formulæ of the form not l in the bodies of the remaining rules.
Then, S is a stable model of P if S is a minimal model of P S. Stable(P) denotes the set of
stable models of P
From hereon, whenever we say Gelfond-Lifschitz (GL) reduction, we mean the reduction
P S. As we can observe GL reduction is the core of the stable model semantics.
There is an extension of the stable model semantics which is called p-stable semantics
(Osorio et al. 2006). P-stable semantics was formulated in terms of Paraconsistent logics.
Like stable model semantics, p-stable semantics is deﬁned in terms of a single reduction,
RED, which is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 2
(Osorio et al. 2006) Let P be a normal program and M be a set of atoms. We deﬁne
RED(P, M) := {l ←B+, not (B−∩M)|l ←B+, not B−∈P}.
As we can see, GL reduction and RED reduction have different behaviors. On the one
hand, the output of GL reduction always is a deﬁnite program; on the other hand, the output
of RED reduction can contain normal clauses.
By considering RED reduction, the p-stable semantics for normal logic programs is
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 3
(Osorio et al. 2006) Let P be a normal program and M be a set of atoms. We say that M
is a p-stable model of P if RED(P, M) ⊩M. P-stable(P) denotes the set of p-stable
models of P.
The stable model and p-stable semantics are two particular 2-valued semantics for nor-
mal program. In general terms, a logic programming semantics SEM is a function from
the class of all programs into the powerset of the set of (2-valued) models.
Before moving on, let us introduce the following notation. Let P be a logic program,
2SEM(P) denotes the 2-valued models of P. Given two logic programming seman-
tics SEM1 and SEM2, SEM1 is stronger than SEM2 if for every logic program P,
SEM1(P) ⊆SEM2(P). Let us observe that the relation stronger than between logic
programming semantics is basically deﬁning an order between logic programming seman-
tics.
2.3 Argumentation theory
In this section, we introduce the deﬁnition of some argumentation semantics. To this end,
we start by deﬁning the basic structure of an argumentation framework (AF).

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
5
Deﬁnition 4
(Dung 1995) An argumentation framework is a pair AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩, where AR is a
ﬁnite set of arguments, and attacks is a binary relation on AR, i.e. attacks ⊆AR × AR.
We say that a attacks b (or b is attacked by a) if (a, b) ∈attacks holds. Similarly, we
say that a set S of arguments attacks b (or b is attacked by S) if b is attacked by an argument
in S. We say that c defends a if (b, a) and (c, b) belongs to attacks.
Let us observe that an AF is a simple structure which captures the conﬂicts of a given set
of arguments. In order to select coherent points of view from a set of conﬂicts of arguments,
Dung introduced the so-called argumentation semantics. These argumentation semantics
are based on the concept of an admissible set.
Deﬁnition 5
(Dung 1995)
• A set S of arguments is said to be conﬂict-free if there are no arguments a, b in S
such that a attacks b.
• An argument a ∈AR is acceptable with respect to a set S of arguments if for each
argument b ∈AR: If b attacks a then b is attacked by S.
• A conﬂict-free set of arguments S is admissible if each argument in S is acceptable
w.r.t. S.
Let us introduce some notation. Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an AF and S ⊆AR.
S+ = {b|a ∈S and (a, b) ∈attacks}.
Deﬁnition 6
(Caminada 2006; Dung 1995) Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework.
An admissible set of arguments S ⊆AR is:
• stable if S attacks each argument which does not belong to S.
• preferred if S is a maximal (w.r.t. set inclusion) admissible set of AF .
• complete if each argument, which is acceptable with respect to S, belongs to S.
• semi-stable if S is a complete extension such that S ∪S+ is maximal w.r.t. set inclu-
sion.
In addition to argumentation semantics based on admissible sets, there are other ap-
proaches for deﬁning argumentation semantics (Baroni et al. 2011). One of these approaches
is the approach based on conﬂict-free sets (Verheij 1996). Considering conﬂict-free sets,
Verheij introduced the so-called stage semantics:
Deﬁnition 7
Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework. E is a stage extension if E is
a conﬂict-free set and E ∪E+ is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion.
Let us observe that both semi-stable and stage semantics are based on the so-called
range which is deﬁned as follows: If E is a set of arguments, then E ∪E+ is called
its range. According to the literature, the notion of range was ﬁrst introduced by Verheij
(Verheij 1996).

6
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
2.4 Mappings from argumentation frameworks to normal programs
In this section, two mappings from an AF into a logic program will be presented. These
mappings are based on the ideas of conﬂictfreeness and reinstatement which are the basic
concepts behind the deﬁnitions of conﬂict-free sets and admissible sets. In these mappings,
the predicate def(x) is used, with the intended meaning of def(x) being “x is a defeated
argument”.
A pair of mapping functions w.r.t. an argument is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 8
Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework and a ∈AR. We deﬁne a pair
of mappings functions:
Π−(a) =
[
b:(b,a)∈attacks
{def(a) ←not def(b)}
Π+(a) =
[
b:(b,a)∈attacks
{def(a) ←
^
c:(c,b)∈attacks
def(c)}
Let us observe that Π−(a) suggests that an argument a is defeated when anyone of the
arguments which attack a is not defeated. In other words, an argument that has an attacker
that is not defeated has to be defeated; hence, Π−(a) stands for conﬂictfreeness. Π+(a)
suggests that an argument a is defeated when all the arguments that defends a are defeated.
In other word, any argument that is not defeated has to be defended; therefore Π+(a) stands
for admissibility.
One can see that if a given argument a has no attacks, then Π−(a) = {} and Π+(a) =
{}. This situation happens because an argument that has no attacks is an acceptable argu-
ment which means that it belongs to all extensions sets of an AF.
By considering Π−(a) and Π+(a), two mappings from an AF into a logic program are
introduced.
Deﬁnition 9
Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework. We deﬁne their associated
normal programs as follows:
Π−
AF :=
[
a∈AR
{Π−(a)}
ΠAF := Π−
AF ∪
[
a∈AR
{Π+(a)}
Observing Deﬁnition 9, it is obvious that Π−
AF is a subset of ΠAF . However, each map-
ping is capturing different concepts: Π−
AF is a declarative speciﬁcation of the idea of con-
ﬂictfreeness and ΠAF is a declarative speciﬁcation of both ideas: conﬂictfreeness and re-
instatement. Indeed, one can see that the 2-valued logical models of Π−
AF characterize
the conﬂict-free sets of an AF and the 2-valued logical models of ΠAF characterize the
admissible sets of an AF.

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
7
3 Semi-stable and Stage extensions as 2-valued models
This section introduces the main results of this paper. In particular, we will show that the
following schema SC1 suggests an interpretation of range from the logic programming
point of view:
SC1(P, M) = Facts(R(P, M)) ∪{LP \ M}
in which P is a logic program, R is a function which maps a logic program into another
logic program considering a set of atoms M ⊆LP .
In order to show our results, we will introduce two instantiations of the schema SC1.
These instantiations will lead to the so-called GL-supported models and GL-stage models.
We will show that the GL-supported models of ΠAF characterize the semi-stable exten-
sions of a given AF (Theorem 1); moreover, the GL-stage models of Π−
AF characterize the
stage extensions of a given AF (Theorem 2).
3.1 Semi-Stable Semantics
We start presenting our results w.r.t. semi-stable semantics. To this end, let us start deﬁning
the concept of a supported model.
Deﬁnition 10 (Supported model)
Let P be a logic program and M be a 2-valued model of P. M is a supported model of
P if for each a ∈M, there is a0 ←B+, not B−∈P such that a = a0, B+ ⊆M and
B−∩M = ∅.
As we saw in Deﬁnition 6, semi-stable extensions are deﬁned in terms of complete
extensions. It has been shown that the supported models of ΠAF characterize the complete
extensions of a given AF (Osorio et al. 2013). By having in mind this result, we introduce
an instantiation of the schema SC1 in order to deﬁne the concept of GL-supported-model.
Deﬁnition 11 (GL-supported-model)
Let AF = ⟨AR, Attacks⟩be an argumentation framework and M be a supported model of
ΠAF . M is a GL-supported-model of ΠAF if Facts((ΠAF )M)∪{LΠAF \M} is maximal
w.r.t. set inclusion. GLModels(ΠAF) denotes the GL-supported models of ΠAF .
In other words, a supported model M of ΠAF is a GL-supported-model if for every
supported model N of ΠAF such that N is different of M, SC(ΠAF , M) ̸⊂SC(ΠAF , N)
where SC(ΠAF , X) = Facts((ΠAF )X) ∪{LΠAF \ X}.
Let us observe that the function R of the schema SC1 was replaced by the GL-reduction
in the construction of a GL-supported model. One of the main constructions of the def-
inition of a GL-supported model is Facts((ΠAF )M). This part of the construction of a
GL-supported model is basically characterizing the set E+ where E is a complete exten-
sion. We can see that the GL reduction is quite important for this construction. As we saw
in Deﬁnition 1, GL reduction is the core of the deﬁnition of stable models.
We want to point out that the deﬁnition of GL-supported models can also be based on the
RED reduction which is the reduction used for deﬁning p-stable models (see Deﬁnition 3).
This similarity between RED and GL reductions argues that both RED and GL reductions

8
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
can play an important role for capturing the idea of range of an argumentation framework
from a logic programming point of view. As we will see in the following theorem, GL-
supported models characterize semi-stable extensions; hence, both RED and GL reductions
play an important role for capturing semi-stable extension as 2-valued logical models.
In order to simplify the presentation of some results, let us introduce the following no-
tation. Let EM = {x|def(x) ∈LΠAF \ M} and E+
M = {x|def(x) ∈Facts((ΠAF )M)}
where M ⊆LΠAF . As we can see, EM and E+
M are basically sets of arguments which are
induced by a set of atoms M.
Theorem 1
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework and M ⊆LΠAF . M is a GL-
supported model of ΠAF iff EM is a semi-stable extension of AF.
Proof
Let us start introducing the following result from (Osorio et al. 2013):
R1: Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework. M is a supported model
of ΠAF iff EM is a complete extension of ΠAF .
The proof goes as follows:
=> Let M be a GL-supported model of ΠAF and M ∗= Facts((ΠAF )M). Then by
deﬁnition of a GL-supported model, M ∗∪LΠAF \ M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion.
Moreover, M is a supported model. Therefore, by R1, EM is a complete extension.
Hence, it is not hard to see that EM ∪E+
M is a range with respect to the complete
extension EM. Since M ∗∪LΠAF \ M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion, EM ∪E+
M is also
maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Hence, EM is a semi-stable extension.
<= Let us suppose that E is a semi-stable extension of AF. By deﬁnition E ∪E+ is max-
imal w.r.t. set inclusion and E is a complete extension. By R1, there exists a supported
model M of ΠAF such that EM = E; moreover, any supported model N of ΠAF has the
property that EN ∪E+
N is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Then LΠAF \N∪Facts((ΠAF )N)
is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Then N is a GL-supported model of ΠAF .
An interesting property of GL-supported models is that they can be characterized by
both the set of p-stable models of ΠAF and the set of 2-valued models of ΠAF .
Proposition 1
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework.
1. M is a GL-supported model of ΠAF iff EM ∪E+
M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion
where M is a 2-valued model of ΠAF .
2. M is a GL-supported model of ΠAF iff EM ∪E+
M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion
where M is a p-stable model ΠAF .

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
9
Proof
We start introducing the following observations from the state of the art:
1. Let M ⊆LΠAF . M is a 2-valued model of ΠAF iff EM is an admissible extension of AF
(Nieves and Osorio 2014).
2. According to Proposition 4 by (Caminada et al. 2012) the following statements are equiv-
alent:
(a) E is a complete extension such that E ∪E+ is maximal (w.r.t. set inclusion).
(b) E is an admissible set such that E ∪E+ is maximal (w.r.t. set inclusion).
3. Let M ⊆LΠAF . M is a p-stable model of ΠAF iff EM is a preferred extension of AF
(Carballido et al. 2009).
Now let us prove each of the points of the proposition:
1. M is a GL-supported model of ΠAF iff Facts((ΠAF )M) ∪{LΠAF \ M} is maximal
w.r.t. set inclusion and M is a supported model. By Theorem 1, EM ∪E+
M is maximal
w.r.t. set inclusion and M is a supported model iff EM ∪E+
M is maximal and EM is a
complete extension of AF. By Observation 2, EM ∪E+
M is maximal and EM is a complete
extension of AF iff EM ∪E+
M is maximal and EM is an admissible extension of AF.
Hence, the result follows by Observation 1 which argues that any 2-valued model of ΠAF
characterizes an admissible set of AF.
2. Let us start by observing that semi-stable extensions can be characterized by preferred
extensions with maximal range which means: E is a semi-stable extension iff E ∪E+
is maximal (w.r.t. set inclusion) and E is a preferred extension (see Proposition 13 from
(Baroni et al. 2011)). Hence, the result follows by Observation 3 and Theorem 1.
A direct consequence of Proposition 1 and Theorem 1 is the following corollary which
introduces a pair of characterizations of semi-stable extensions as 2-valued models and
p-stable models of ΠAF .
Corollary 1
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework.
1. Let M be a p-stable model of ΠAF . EM is a semi-stable extension of AF iff EM ∪
E+
M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion.
2. Let M be a 2-valued model of ΠAF . EM is a semi-stable extension of AF iff EM ∪
E+
M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion.
Observing Corollary 1, we can see that there is an interval of logic programming se-
mantics which characterizes semi-stable extensions. This interval of logic programming
semantics is deﬁned by the order-relation between logic programming semantics: stronger
than. This result is formalized by the following corollary.

10
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
Corollary 2
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework and SEM be a logic program-
ming semantics such that SEM is stronger than 2SEM and P-stable is stronger than
SEM. If M ∈SEM(ΠAF ), then EM is a semi-stable extension of AF iff EM ∪E+
M is
maximal w.r.t. set inclusion.
Given the relation of semi-stable extensions with the stable and preferred extensions, we
can observe some relations between GL-supported models w.r.t. the stable model semantics
(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) and p-stable semantics.
Proposition 2
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework.
1. If M is a stable model of ΠAF then M is a GL-supported model of ΠAF .
2. If M is a GL-supported model of ΠAF then M is a p-stable model of ΠAF .
Proof
1. It follows from Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 by (Caminada et al. 2012).
2. It follows from Theorem 1 and Theorem 3 by (Caminada et al. 2012).
Proposition 3
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework such that Stable(ΠAF) ̸= ∅.
Then, Stable(ΠAF) = GLModels(ΠAF).
Proof
We know that E is a stable extension of AF iff E = EM where M is a stable model of
ΠAF (Theorem 5 by (Carballido et al. 2009)). Hence, the result follows from Theorem 1
and Theorem 5 by (Caminada et al. 2012).
3.2 Stage Semantics
We have seen that the idea of range w.r.t. complete extensions can be captured by instanti-
ating the schema SC1 considering supported-models, the GL-reduction and ΠAF .
In Section 2.4, the mappings Π−
AF and ΠAF were introduced. We have observed that
Π−
AF is basically a declarative speciﬁcation of conﬂict-free sets. Given that stage semantics
is based on conﬂict-free sets, we will consider Π−
AF for instantiating SC1 and deﬁning the
so-called GL-stage models:
Deﬁnition 12
Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework and M be a 2-valued model of
Π−
AF . M is a GL-stage model of Π−
AF if Facts((Π−
AF )M)∪{LΠ−
AF \M} is maximal w.r.t.
set inclusion.
In other words, a 2-valued model M of Π−
AF is a GL-stage-model if for every 2-valued
model N of Π−
AF such that N is different of M, SC′(Π−
AF , M) ̸⊂SC′(Π−
AF , N) where
SC′(Π−
AF , X) = Facts((Π−
AF )X) ∪{LΠ−
AF \ X}.

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
11
In this characterization of SC1, once again we are replacing the function R of SC1 by
the GL-reduction; however, one can use RED reduction for deﬁning GL-stage models.
One can observe that GL-stage models characterize stage extensions. In order to formal-
ize this result, the following notation is introduced: Let E′
M = {x|def(x) ∈LΠ−
AF \ M}
and E
′+
M = {x|def(x) ∈Facts((Π−
AF )M)} where M ⊆LΠ−
AF . Like EM and E+
M, E′
M
and E
′+
M return sets of arguments given a set of atoms M from Π−
AF .
Theorem 2
Let AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework. M is a GL-stage model of
Π−
AF iff E′
M is a stage extension of AF.
Proof
Let us start with one observation:
O1: Let AF = ⟨AR, attacks⟩be an argumentation framework. E′
M is a conﬂict-free set
of AF iff M is a 2-valued model of Π−
AF .
=> Let M be a GL-stage model of Π−
AF and M ∗= Facts((Π−
AF )M). Then by deﬁnition
of a GL-stage model, M ∗∪LΠ−
AF \ M is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion and M is a 2-
valued model. Hence, by O1, E′
M is a conﬂict-free set. One can see that E′
M ∪E
′+
M
is a range with respect to the conﬂict-free set E′
M. Since M ∗∪LΠ−
AF \ M is maximal
w.r.t. set inclusion, E′
M ∪E
′+
M is also maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Hence, EM is a stage
extension.
<= Let us suppose that E is a stage extension of AF. By deﬁnition E ∪E+ is maximal
w.r.t. set inclusion and E is a conﬂict-free set. By O1, there exists a 2-valued model M
of Π−
AF such that E′
M = E; moreover, any 2-valued model N of Π−
AF has the property
that E′
N ∪E
′+
N is maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Then LΠ−
AF \ N ∪Facts((Π−
AF )N) is
maximal w.r.t. set inclusion. Then N is a GL-stage model of Π−
AF .
Let us observe that Facts((Π−
AF )M) ∪{LΠ−
AF \ M}, which is the key construction of
GL-stable models, is basically characterizing ranges w.r.t. conﬂict-free sets.
Dvorák and Woltran have shown that the decision problems of the credulous and scep-
tical inferences are of complexity ΣP
2 -hard and Πp
2-hard, respectively, for both semi-stable
and stage semantics (Dvorák and Woltran 2010). Hence it is straightforward to observe that
the decision problems of the credulous and sceptical inferences are of complexity ΣP
2 -hard
and Πp
2-hard, respectively, for both GL-supported models and GL-stage models. Let us re-
member that GL-supported models and GL-stage models are deﬁned under the resulting
class of programs of the mappings ΠAF and Π−
AF , respectively.
4 Related work
Dung showed that argumentation can be viewed as logic programming with negation as
failure and vice versa. This strong relationship between argumentation and logic program-
ming has given way to intensive research in order to explore the relationship between argu-
mentation and logic programming (Caminada et al. 2013; Carballido et al. 2009; Dung 1995;

12
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
Nieves et al. 2005; Nieves et al. 2008; Osorio et al. 2013; Nieves et al. 2011; Strass 2013;
Wu et al. 2009). A basic requirement for exploring the relationship between argumenta-
tion and logic programming is to identify proper mappings which allow us to transform
an argumentation framework into a logic program and vice versa. The ﬂexibility of these
mappings will frame the understanding of argumentation as logic programming (and vice
versa). Therefore, deﬁning simple and ﬂexible mappings which regard argumentation as
logic programming (and vice versa) will impact the use of logic programming in argumen-
tation (and vice versa). Currently, we can ﬁnd different mappings for regarding argumenta-
tion as logic programming (and vice versa) (Caminada et al. 2013; Carballido et al. 2009;
Dung 1995; Gabbay and d’Avila Garcez 2009). All of them offer different interpretations
of argumentation as logic programming (and vice versa). Depending on these interpre-
tations, one can identify direct relationships between argumentation inferences and logic
programming inferences.
In this paper, we have limited our attention to the interpretation of argumentation as
logic programming. In this sense, there are some characterizations of semi-stable infer-
ence as logic programming inference (Caminada et al. 2013; Strass 2013). Caminada et
al., (Caminada et al. 2013), showed that the semi-stable semantics can be characterized
by the L-stable semantics and the mapping PAF which is deﬁned as follows: Given an
argumentation framework AF := ⟨AR, attacks⟩:
PAF =
[
x∈AR
{x ←
^
(y,x)∈attacks
not y}
Unlike GL-supported models which are 2-valued models, the models of the L-stable
semantics are 3-valued. Moreover, unlike ΠAF which is a declarative speciﬁcation of ad-
missible sets, PAF is a declarative speciﬁcation of conﬂict-free sets.
Strass (Strass 2013) has also showed that the semi-stable semantics can by characterized
by both the so-called L-supported models and L-Stable models. Unlike Caminada’s char-
acterization and our characterizations, Strass considered the mapping Π−
AF . As we have
observed in Section 2.4, the clauses of Π−
AF are a subset of ΠAF which is the mapping that
we considered in both Theorem 1 and Corollary 2. It is worth mentioning that the mapping
introduced by Dung (Dung 1995) can be transformed into Π−
AF .
We cannot argue that one characterization is better than the other; however, we can ob-
serve that all these characterizations, including the ones introduced in this paper, offer
different interpretations of semi-stable inference. Moreover, given that semi-stable infer-
ence has been characterized in terms of both L-stable semantics and L-supported modes, it
seems that these logic programming semantics are related to GL-supported semantics.
In the literature, there are different characterizations of argumentation semantics in terms
of logic programming semantics. A summary of these characterization is presented in Table
1.
Table 1 argues for a strong relationship between argumentation inference and logic pro-
gramming inference. Moreover, we can observe that the argumentation semantics which
have been characterized by logic programming semantics have been studied from different
points of view, e.g., Labellings (Baroni et al. 2011). This evidence argues that any well-
deﬁned argumentation semantics must be characterized by a logic programming seman-

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
13
Table 1. Characterization of argumentation semantics as logic programming inferences.
Argumentation se-
mantics
Logic
program-
ming
semantics
using PAF
Logic
program-
ming
semantics
using ΠAF
Logic
program-
ming
semantics
using Π−
AF
Grounded
Seman-
tics
Well-founded
semantics
(Caminada et al. 2013),
the
Kripke-
Kleene
model
(Strass 2013)
Well-founded
semantics
(Carballido et al. 2009)
Well-founded
semantics
(Dung 1995),
the
Kripke-
Kleene
model
(Strass 2013)
Stable Semantics
Stable
model
semantics
(Caminada et al. 2013;
Nieves et al. 2005),
Supported
models
(Strass 2013)
Stable
model
semantics
(Carballido et al. 2009)
Stable
mod-
els
semantics
(Dung 1995), Sup-
ported
models
(Strass 2013)
Preferred
Seman-
tics
Regular
semantics
(Caminada et al. 2013),
M-supported mod-
els, M-stable mod-
els (Strass 2013)
P-stable Semantics
(Carballido et al. 2009)
M-supported mod-
els, M-stable mod-
els (Strass 2013)
Complete
Seman-
tics
3-valued
sta-
ble
semantics
(Wu et al. 2009;
Strass 2013),
3-valued
sup-
ported
models
(Strass 2013)
Supported Models
(Osorio et al. 2013)
3-valued
stable
semantics, 3-valued
supported
models
(Strass 2013)
Semi-stable
Se-
mantics
L-Stable
(Caminada et al. 2013;
Strass 2013),
L-
Supported
models
(Strass 2013)
GL-supported
models
(Theorem
1)
L-supported
mod-
els, L-stable mod-
els (Strass 2013)
Ideal Semantics
W FS+
(Nieves and Osorio 2014)
CF2 Semantics
MM ∗
(Nieves et al. 2011)
Stage Semantics
GL-stage
models
(Theorem 2)

14
M. Osorio, J. C. Nieves
tics. However, further research is required in order to identify the necessary conditions
which could support a basic deﬁnition of a Well-deﬁned Non-monotonic Inference of any
argumentation semantics. These conditions can be identiﬁed in terms of non-monotonic
reasoning properties which have been explored in both ﬁelds argumentation and logic pro-
gramming, e.g., the property of relevance (Caminada 2006; Nieves et al. 2011).
The exploration of argumentation as logic programming inference is not limited to
the characterization of argumentation semantics in terms logic programming semantics.
Since Dung’s presented his seminal paper (Dung 1995), he showed that logic program-
ming can support the construction of argumentation-based systems. Currently there are
quite different logic-based argumentation engines which support the inference of argu-
mentation semantics (Charwat et al. 2015; Egly et al. 2010; Toni and Sergot 2011). It is
well-known that the computational complexity of the decision problems of argumenta-
tion semantics ranges from NP-complete to Π(p)
2 -complete. In this setting, Answer Set
Programming has consolidated as a strong approach for building argumentation-based sys-
tems (Charwat et al. 2015; Egly et al. 2010; Toni and Sergot 2011; Nieves et al. 2005).
5 Conclusions
Currently, most of the well accepted argumentation semantics have been characterized as
logic programming inference (Table 1). This evidence argues that whenever a new se-
mantics appears, it is totally reasonable to search for a characterization of it as a logic
programming inference.
According to Theorem 1, semi-stable semantics can share the same mapping (i.e. ΠAF )
with grounded, stable, preferred, complete and ideal semantics for being characterized as
logic programming inference. This result argues that all these argumentation semantics can
share the same interpretation of an argumentation framework as a logic program. Certainly,
the logic programming semantics which are considered for characterizing these argumen-
tation semantics share also a common interpretation of the argumentation inference which
is restricted to the class of programs deﬁned by ΠAF . We have also showed that stage
semantics can be also characterized by a logic programming semantics (Theorem 2). This
result argues that stage semantics has also logic programming foundations. Considering
Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we can give a positive answer to Q2.
An interesting observation, from the results of this paper, is that the concept of range
which is fundamental for deﬁning semi-stable and stage semantics can be captured from
the logic programming point of view by considering SC1 which can be based on well-
acceptable reductions from logic programming. It is worth mentioning that reductions as
GL and RED suggest some general rules for managing negation as failure. This evidence
suggests that SC1 deﬁnes an approach for answering Q1.
We argue that SC1 suggests a generic approach for exploring the concept of range in
two directions: to explore ranges as logic programming models and to explore new argu-
mentation semantics based on both logic programming models and ranges.

Range-based argumentation semantics as 2-valued models
15
