Decoded fMRI neurofeedback can 
induce bidirectional behavioral changes 
within single participants 
 
Aurelio Cortese​1,2,3,4,7​, Kaoru Amano​3,7​, Ai Koizumi​1,3,4,5,7​, Hakwan Lau​4,6 
 & Mitsuo Kawato​1,2
 
 
1.
Dep. of Decoded Neurofeedback, ATR Cognitive Mechanisms Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan 
2.
Faculty of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan 
3.
Center for Information and Neural Networks (CiNet), NICT, Osaka, Japan 
4.
Dep. of Psychology, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA 
5.
Dep. of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, USA 
6.
Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA 
7.
These authors contributed equally to this work 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 
Studies
using
real­time
functional magnetic resonance imaging (rt­fMRI) have recently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incorporated the decoding approach, allowing for fMRI to be used as a tool for manipulation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
fine­grained neural activity. Because of the tremendous potential for clinical applications, certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions regarding decoded neurofeedback (DecNef) must be addressed. Neurofeedback
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects can last for months, but the short­ to mid­term dynamics are not known. Specifically, can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same subjects learn to induce neural patterns in two opposite directions in different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions? This leads to a further question, whether learning to reverse a neural pattern may be
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
less effective after training to induce it in a previous session. Here we employed a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within­subjects' design, with subjects undergoing DecNef training sequentially in opposite
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directions (up or down regulation of confidence judgements in a perceptual task), with the order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
counterbalanced across subjects. Behavioral results indicated that the manipulation was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strongly influenced by the order and direction of neurofeedback. We therefore applied nonlinear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematical modeling to parametrize four main consequences of DecNef: main effect of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change in behavior, strength of down­regulation effect relative to up­regulation, maintenance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning over sessions, and anterograde learning interference. Modeling results revealed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef
successfully
induced
bidirectional
behavioral
changes
in
different
sessions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, up­regulation was more sizable, and the effect was largely preserved even after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an interval of one­week. Lastly, the second week effect was diminished as compared to the first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
week effect, indicating strong anterograde learning interference. These results suggest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reinforcement learning characteristics of DecNef, and provide important constraints on its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application to basic neuroscience, occupational and sports trainings, and therapies. 
 
 
2 

Introduction 
 
Real­time functional magnetic resonance imaging (rt­fMRI) neurofeedback has enjoyed a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerable rise in interests in recent years, due to its great potential in investigating scientific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions via direct manipulation of specific brain activity patterns, as well as potential clinical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications ​(Sulzer et al. 2013; deCharms 2008)​. Whereas most previous studies have mainly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focused on participants learning to self­regulate a univariate blood­oxygen­dependent­level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(BOLD) signal in specific brain areas ​(Weiskopf et al. 2003; deCharms et al. 2004; Birbaumer et
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al. 2013; Sulzer et al. 2013)​, only recently has multi­voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) or decoding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis ​(Kamitani & Tong 2005) been applied to rt­fMRI neurofeedback, opening a new range
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
of possibilities ​(Shibata et al. 2011; deBettencourt et al. 2015)​. 
 
Previously, up­and­down regulation of univariate ​BOLD signal ​within a single subject ​in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interleaved block designs of rt­fMRI neurofeedback has been shown to be possible under
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several conditions ​(Weiskopf et al. 2004; deCharms 2008)​. These conditions include regulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of BOLD signals within specific ROIs and differences in activation between two ROIs;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
furthermore, in most rt­fMRI neurofeedback studies, participants were given specific explicit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategies of neural induction as well as neural loci through verbal instructions. For example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scheinost ​et al. showed that up­and­down regulation of orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is beneficial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for OCD therapy, although they did not examine each effect separately for activation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deactivation ​(Scheinost et al. 2013)​. Similarly, in a different study, subjects learned to voluntarily
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
up­ and down­regulate the activity level of the anterior insula ​(Veit et al. 2012)​. The aim was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analyzing
the
functional
interactions
between
different
brain
areas
during
rt­fMRI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback, but neither study examined the effect of up or down­regulation separately on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functional connectivity or behaviors. In contrast, Shibata and colleagues changed cingulate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cortex multi­voxel patterns by decoded neurofeedback (DecNef) in two opposite directions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two different groups of participants and observed increase and decrease of facial preference in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each group, respectively ​(Shibata et al. 2016)​. However, these differential behavioral results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
caused
by
differential
multi­voxel manipulations were observed for different groups of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants, but not within single participants. 
 
3 

From
a
broader
perspective,
considering
traditional
ROI­based
rt­fMRI
neurofeedback,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connectivity neurofeedback (FCNef) ​(Megumi et al. 2015)​, and DecNef, to the best of our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge, no study has successfully ​demonstrated opposing behavioral outcomes for different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback manipulations within single subjects. ​This open question is important for both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practical as well as basic neurobiological reasons. Neurofeedback is a powerful research tool
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
for human systems neuroscience because it can address causal relationships between altered
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
brain dynamics and resulting behaviors. As in optogenetics studies in rodents, to rigorously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prove the causal relationships between brain activity and behaviors, it is desirable to be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
induce and suppress the same pattern of brain activities, and confirm that they indeed lead to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposite behavioral effects within the same subject. Therefore, studying the extent and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dynamics of DecNef’s effects, as well as their mechanisms, is of central importance for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of the technique for clinical and rehabilitative applications.  
 
We aimed to address the following three questions in this research. First, if some behavioral
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
change is induced by a neurofeedback manipulation, is it possible to develop another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback manipulation to cancel out the first behavioral change? Second, how long is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
behavioral change maintained after neurofeedback manipulation? Third, how much interference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occurs when two different neurofeedback manipulations are conducted in single participants?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first question is important, as it is desirable to have the ability to cancel out presumed
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative side effects in the event these occur. The second question is related to efficiency of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback as a therapeutic method. Megumi ​et al. ​(Megumi et al. 2015) showed that 4 days
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of FCNef changed resting­state functional connectivity, and these lasted more than two months.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amano ​et al. (Amano et al. 2016) showed that 3 days of DecNef induced associative learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
between color and orientation lasts for 3 to 5 months. However, there is no quantitative study
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examining mid­term effects; for example, to what extent are neurofeedback effects maintained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one week after manipulation? The third point is ethically important in considering cross­over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designs as candidate paradigms for randomized control trials to show statistical effectiveness of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback therapy. If two different neurofeedback manipulations interfere severely within
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
single patients, a cross­over design is not a feasible option. 
 
DecNef and FCNef can be assumed as a neural operant conditioning or reinforcement learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
process, since it is essentially a reward­based manipulation of brain states and participants
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have no conscious understanding of the objectives of neurofeedback ​(Bray et al. 2007; Shibata
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

et al. 2011; Megumi et al. 2015)​. Furthermore, unlike most of rt­fMRI neurofeedback studies,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef and FCNef do not utilize verbal instructions about conscious strategy to participants,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and thus likely depend on more automatic and implicit processes compared with other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional neurofeedback paradigms. Generally speaking for fMRI neurofeedback, basal ganglia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are thought to be amongst the key areas playing a pivotal role in the procedural nature of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback ​(Birbaumer et al. 2013; Koralek et al. 2012)​. Since DecNef relates to learning,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an interesting argument can be explored: interference of learning is expected when we attempt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
a two­way behavioral manipulation. Disruption of learning has been studied extensively in motor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and visuomotor learning, with various elegant studies showing that previous learning can hinder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or interfere with the subsequent practice of a second task ​(Brashers­Krug et al. 1996; Krakauer
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et al. 1999; Osu et al. 2004)​. Interference can be retrograde or anterograde, depending on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
direction in time of the learning/memory effects. In a classic A​1​BA​2 paradigm, subjects are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
instructed to sequentially learn Task A, Task B, and then Task A again. Retrograde effects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflect how learning of Task B affects the memory of task A, while anterograde effects reflect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how the memory of task A affects the learning of task B ​(Sing & Smith 2010)​. Anterograde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interference has received less attention in the literature ​(Sing & Smith 2010)​. Interference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects have also been shown to be present in perceptual learning ​(Seitz et al. 2005; Yotsumoto
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et al. 2009)​. Therefore, anterograde interference of learning resulting from the bidirectional use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of DecNef manipulations within subjects may prove two aspects: (1) behavioral changes are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
result of a true learning process and, (2) behavioral effects should be long lasting. 
 
Here we used DecNef to manipulate a specific cognitive property ­ perceptual confidence ­
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
bidirectionally, i.e., up (increase confidence), and down (decrease confidence). We first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constructed a classifier for high versus low confidence by utilizing MVPA. In a second stage,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
with a within­subjects design, participants learned to implicitly induce multi­voxel activation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns reflecting high and low confidence levels over two weeks. In both weeks, induction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions took place across two consecutive days, and behavioral changes were measured with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a Pre­ and Post­Test, immediately before and after induction session. Participants were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
randomly assigned to one of two groups, defining the order of induction (Up­ then Down­DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or vice versa). The second DecNef session was carried one week after the first, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
measure whether effects would survive a one week interval. To best capture the differential
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects of DecNef on confidence judgements, we utilized nonlinear equation modeling.  
 
5 

 
 
Materials and methods 
Subjects and Experiment Design 
All experiments and data analyses were conducted at the Advanced Telecommunications
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Institute International (ATR). The study was approved by the Institutional Review
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Board of ATR. All subjects gave written informed consent. A companion paper (Cortese ​et al.​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
submitted) was submitted elsewhere and discussed implications of the results for neural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms of meta­cognitive function, especially perceptual confidence. The experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data used is exactly the same, but the research objectives of the two manuscripts are not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overlapping. 
 
The cognitive aspect that served as the basis for the computational analysis of DecNef effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was perceptual confidence. As a working definition of confidence, we can intend it as the degree
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
of certainty in one’s own perceptual decisions. Perceptual confidence can take graded levels
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between a low (uncertain), and high (certain) states. For experimental design purposes, data
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
samples were subdivided between the two confidence boundaries, thus creating two categories:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Low and High Confidence. 
 
The entire experiment was subdivided into 6 fMRI sessions (Fig. 1A). In the first session,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants did a retinotopy scan to functionally define visual areas, followed by an MVPA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
session, on separate days. After successful MVPA, where decoding of confidence attained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more than 55% cross­validated accuracy in any of the frontoparietal ROIs of interest (see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
below), participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups, with respect to the order of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the confidence inductions in DecNef: Down­Up group (aiming at Low­ then High confidence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D­U throughout the manuscript) or Up­Down group (aiming at High­ then Low confidence, U­D
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the manuscript). The behavioral performance in these tasks, before vs after DecNef,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is our primary dependent variable of interest. Eighteen subjects (23.7±2.5 years old; 4 females
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and 14 males) with normal or corrected­to­normal vision participated in the first part of the study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(retinotopy mapping and MVPA). Ten subjects with the highest confidence decoding accuracy in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

frontoparietal ROIs were selected to perform the full DecNef experiments (24.2±3.2 years old, 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
females and 7 males). The screening was opted for based on previous DecNef experiments (to
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure successful neurofeedback induction, decoding accuracy needs to be higher than ~60%).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore,
DecNef being a causal tool, if the independent variable is manipulated by the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimenter (in this case, decoding accuracy higher than a certain threshold), if it is truly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
representing the encoding of confidence, a change in the dependent variable in Pre­ and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post­tests will be seen.   
Stimuli, Behavioral and DecNef Designs 
The behavioral task was a two­alternative forced choice of motion discrimination with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
confidence rating using random dot motion (RDM) (Fig. 1B). Subjects were instructed to indicate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the direction of motion (left or right) after a short delay following stimulus presentation, and rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the level of confidence on their decision (4­point scale). Performance in judging the motion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
direction was not significantly different from the target level of 75% correct (76.8%±1.6%). A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binary confidence decoder for High vs Low confidence was created by pooling together samples
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the lower half and higher half of confidence choices distribution, individually. Specifically,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we re­assigned the intermediate levels (2, 3) to both the low and high confidence classes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to collapse the 4 confidence levels into 2 levels, and equate the number of trials in each
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
class. First, one intermediate class was merged with the high or low confidence group,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depending on the total number of trials. To equate the number of trials, randomly sampled trials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the left­out intermediate confidence class were added to the confidence group now having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a lower total number of trials. The balancing was based on the confidence rating response
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution, and on the final number of trials. To construct the binary classifiers, we used sparse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
logistic
regression
(SLR),
which
automatically
selects
relevant voxels for classification
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Yamashita et al. 2008)​. We constructed four decoders in frontoparietal areas, corresponding to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the following anatomical ROIs: inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and three subregions generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarded as being part of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, namely the inferior frontal sulcus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IFS), middle frontal sulcus (MFS), and the middle frontal gyrus (MFG). These areas have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously linked to confidence judgements in perceptual decisions ​(Kiani & Shadlen 2009;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleming et al. 2010; Rounis et al. 2010)​. 
 
Once individual confidence classifiers were constructed, each participant completed a two­day
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
DecNef training in each session (Down/Up), and each session was separated by at least one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

week (see Fig. 1A). Each subject went through both DecNef training for High and Low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
confidence, and the order of confidence inductions was counterbalanced across subjects (i.e.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Up then Down vs Down then Up). The neurofeedback task itself is illustrated in Fig. 1C:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants were asked to “manipulate, modulate or change their brain activity in order to make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the feedback disc presented at the end of each trial as large as possible”. The experimenters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided no further instructions nor strategies. Without knowing the actual meaning of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback, subjects learned to implicitly induce brain activation patterns corresponding to high or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low confidence. Participants received monetary reward proportional to their induction success
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ability to implicitly induce the selected activation pattern).  
 
After each scanning day, subjects were asked to describe their strategies in making the disc
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
size larger. Answers varied from “I was counting”, to “I was focusing on the disc itself”, to “I was
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
thinking about food”. All answers can be found in appendix A. When subjects were asked about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which group they thought they were assigned to at the end of the experiments (N=5, 2 months
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
later, and N=4, 5 months later ­ 1 subject could not be joined), their answers were at chance
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(57% correct, ​Chi­square test, 
​= 0.225, ​P​ = 0.64​).
 χ 2
 
 
The details of the DecNef methodology have been published previously ​(Shibata et al. 2011)​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On each day of a given DecNef session, subjects participated in up to 11 fMRI runs. The mean
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(±s.e.m) number of runs per day was 10±0.1 across days and subjects. Each fMRI run
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consisted of 16 trials (1 trial=20 sec) preceded by a 30­sec fixation period (1 run=350 sec). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fMRI data for the initial 10 sec were discarded to avoid unsaturated T1 effects.  
 
Each trial started with a visual cue (three concentric disks, white, gray and green) signaling the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
induction period. Induction lasted 6 sec, and was followed by a 6 sec rest period, before the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback disk (a white ring) was presented on the gray screen for up to 2 sec. Finally, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
trial ended with a 6 sec ITI.  
 
During the fixation period, subjects were asked to simply fixate on the central point and rest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This period was inserted between the induction and the feedback periods to account for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hemodynamic delay, assumed to last 6 sec. The following feedback period corresponded to a 2
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
sec presentation of a white disc. The size of the disc represented how much the BOLD signal
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns obtained from the induction period corresponded to activation patterns of the target
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

confidence state (high or low). The white disc was always enclosed in a larger white concentric
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
circle (5 deg radius), which indicated the disc’s maximum possible size.  
 
The size of the disc presented during the feedback period was computed at the end of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fixation period according to the following steps. First, measured functional images during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
induction period underwent 3D motion correction using Turbo BrainVoyager (Brain Innovation)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for each of the four frontoparietal ROIs used (IPL, IFS, MFS, and MFG). Second, time­courses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of BOLD signal intensities were extracted from each of the voxels identified in the MVPA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
session, and were shifted by 6 sec to account for the hemodynamic delay. Third, a linear trend
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
was removed from the time­course, and the BOLD signal time­course was z­score normalized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for each voxel using BOLD signal intensities measured for 20 sec starting from 10 sec after the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
onset of each fMRI run. Fourth, the data sample to calculate the size of the disc was created by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
averaging the BOLD signal intensities of each voxel for 6 sec in the induction period. Finally, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likelihood of each confidence state was calculated from the data sample using the confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decoder computed in the MVPA session. The size of the disc was proportional to the averaged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likelihood from the four different frontoparietal ROIs (ranging from 0 to 100%) of the target
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
confidence assigned to each subject on a given DecNef block. Importantly, subjects were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unaware of the relationship between their activation patterns induction and the size of the disk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
itself. The target confidence was the same throughout a DecNef block. In addition to a fixed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
compensation for participation in the experiment, a bonus of up to 3000 JPY was paid to the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjects based on the mean size of the disc on each day. 
 
All stimuli were created and presented with Matlab (Mathworks) using the Psychophysics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Toolbox extensions Psychtoolbox 3 ​(Brainard 1997)​. The behavioral task was the same for both
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MVPA, and Pre­ Post­Tests. In behavioral studies, subjects performed the task on a standard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
computer and gave responses from a standard keyboard. In the fMRI sessions, subjects gave
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their responses via a 4­buttons pad.  
 
Visual stimuli were presented on an LCD display (1024 × 768 resolution, 60Hz refresh rate)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
during titration and the Pre­ and Post­Test stages, and via an LCD projector (800 × 600
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resolution, 60Hz refresh rate) during fMRI measurements in a dim room. Stimuli were shown on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
a black background and consisted of RDM. We used the Movshon­Newsome (MN) RDM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithm ​(Shadlen & Newsome 2001)​. The stimulus was created in a square region of 20
20
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
×
 
9 

deg, but only the region within a circular annulus was visible (outer radius: 10 deg, inner radius:
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.85 deg). Dot density was 0.5 deg​−2 (contrast 100%), with a speed of 9 deg/sec and size of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
0.12 deg. Signal dots all moved in the same direction (left or right, non­cardinal directions of 20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deg and 200 deg) whereas noise dots were randomly replotted. Dots leaving the square region
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were replaced with a dot along one of the edges opposite to the direction of motion, and dots
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leaving the annulus were faded out to minimize edge effects. 
Mathematical modeling and model comparison 
We constructed a mathematical model to objectively examine the effects of Up and Down
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef, a decay of learning (of DecNef effect) due to one­weak elapse, and an anterograde
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interference of learning from the first to second weeks. The model was fit to 4 measurement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
values of perceptual confidence at the 4 time points for each participant and possesses 4 model
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
parameters.
are the experimentally measured confidence values, while
are the estimated
  Xi
j
 
 
 
 
 
 
  X
︿i
j  
 
 
 
confidence values, for each subject (with
) (i.e., behavioral outcome of DecNef effects)
 
 
 
 
 
  i = 1 : 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
at each time point (with
); The main 4­parameter nonlinear model to describe DecNef
 
 
 
 
  j = 1 : 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects is formally outlined as follows.   
 
 
B
X
︿i
1 =  
(1) 
 
 group D­U
or i
, 
f
= 1 : 5
 
 
B
X
︿i
2 =  
+ ε ∙Δ
(2) 
 
B 
ε
X
︿i
3 =  
+   ∙Δ ∙α
(3) 
 + 
 
B 
X
︿i
4 =  
+   ε ∙Δ ∙α
γ ∙Δ
(4) 
 
 group U­D
or i
0, 
f
= 6 : 1
 
 
B
X
︿i
2 =  
+ Δ
(5) 
 
B 
Δ
X
︿i
3 =  
+  
∙α
(6) 
 + 
 
B 
X
︿i
4 =  
+   Δ ∙α
ε ∙γ ∙Δ
(7) 
 
rror 
Σ Σ X  
X 
F(α, ε, ɣ, Δ) 
E
=  
i
j(
i
j − 
︿i
j)
2
=  
 
 
 
(8) 
10 

 
Where
is the initial baseline (0 ­ the realigned confidence level); Δ, the change in confidence
  B 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
by Up­DecNef in the first week; ɛ, the ratio of Down­DecNef effect normalized by Up­DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effect; ɣ, the anterograde learning interference resulting in reduced second week DecNef effect;
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and ɑ, the learning persistence ([1­ (decay of learning)] in the week­long interval) during one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
week. Submodels are defined by setting different parameters to zero or one, one at a time or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
concomitantly following a complexity logic. This gives rise to a hierarchical group of models,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
from simpler to most complex (capturing single or increasingly more aspects of DecNef effects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on confidence). The first model is the simplest and only estimates Δ, with the other parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setting as ɛ = 0, ɣ = 1, ɑ = 1. The second model, by complexity order, assumes Up and
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Down­DecNef effects, estimates Δ and ɛ, while ɣ = 1, ɑ = 1. The third model estimates Δ, ɛ and
 
 
   
 
 
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
ɣ, with ɑ = 1. Further DecNef­based models estimate Δ, ɛ and ɑ, with ɣ = 1; or estimate Δ, ɛ and
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
     
 
 
 
   
 
ɑ, with ɣ = 0; or estimate Δ, ɛ and ɣ, with ɑ = 0; or finally, estimate Δ, ɣ, and ɑ, with ɛ = 0.  
 
We considered alternative models that do not take into account DecNef direction assumptions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or a posteriori conceptions. These are a 1­parameter constant confidence model (confidence
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
does not change, is constant throughout the experiment), with two versions:
or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X ,
k =  
i
1  
 
Other free models are a ​within­week ​constant confidence, and ​within­week
 
mean(X ,
,
).
k =  
i
2 X
i
3 X
i
4  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
constant confidence with two or four additional linear parameters.  
 
For model comparison, we used the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) ​(Akaike 1974)​. 
Raw AIC is computed according to the following equation: 
 
IC 
nlog(σ ) 
2k 
A
=  
︿2 +  
 
(9) 
 
where
,
is the sample size and
the number of parameters in the
  σ
︿2 =
n
Residual Sum of Squares   n  
 
 
 
 
  k  
 
 
 
 
 
 
model. In our set of global models, n=30, and k varied from 1 to 4. In the modeling reported for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
small sample sizes (i.e., n/k <~ 40), the second­order or corrected Akaike Information Criterion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(AICc) should be used instead. Although ​the AICc formula assumes a fixed­effects linear model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
with normal errors and constant residual variances, while our models are nonlinear, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standard AICc formulation is recommended unless a more exact small­sample correction to AIC
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
is known ​(Burnham & Anderson 2002)​: 
11 

 
ICc 
AIC 
 
A
=  
+   (n−k−1)
2∙k∙(k+1)
(10) 
 
For comparing models, two useful metrics are Δ​AICc and Akaike weights (​w​i​). Δ​i​
AICc is a measure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
of the distance of each model relative to the best model (the model with the most negative, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lowest, AIC value), and is calculated as: 
 
 
AICc  
min(AICc) 
Δi
AICc =  
i − 
(11) 
 
As indicated in Burnham and Anderson ​(Burnham & Anderson 2002)​,
suggests
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Δi
AICc <    
 
substantial evidence for the ​i​th model, while
indicates that the model is very unlikely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Δi
AICc >  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(implausible).  
Akaike weights (​w​i​) provide a second measure of the strength of evidence for each model, is
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
directly related to 
 and is computed as:
Δi
AICc
 
 
w  i =   exp(−Δ
/2)
i
AICc
xp(−Δ
/2)
∑
R
i=1 e
i
AICc
 
(12) 
 
AIC analysis results are reported in Table 1, with values reported being AICc, Δ​AICc​, and Akaike
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weights (​w​i​).  
 
In cases such as ours, where high degrees of model selection uncertainty exists (the best AIC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model is not strongly weighted), a formal solution is to compute parameter estimates through
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model­averaging. For this approach, two procedures may be used, depending on the results.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first approach makes use of only a limited subset of models that are closest to the current
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
best model (Δ​AICc ​< 2), while the second approach will consider all models (in fact, this accounts
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to consider all models with
). We applied the first approach, selecting only models with
 
 
 
 
 
= 0 
wi /  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high likelihood. Parameters are estimated according to the equation: 
 
 β
︿
=  
∑
R
i=1 wi
β
∑
R
i=1 wi i
︿
 
(13) 
 
12 

Where 
 is the estimate for the predictor in a given model ​i​, and 
 is the Akaike weight of that
βi
︿
wi
 
model.  
Unconditional error, necessary to compute the unconditional confidence interval for a 
model­averaged estimate, can be calculated according to the following equation: 
 
e(β) 
 
s
︿
︿
=   ∑
R
i=1
wi√var(β ) 
(β  
β)
︿
i
︿
+  
︿
i − 
︿2
(14) 
 
Where 
is the variance of the parameter estimate in model ​i​, and 
 and 
 are as defined
ar(β )
v
︿
︿
i
β
︿
i
β
︿
 
above. The confidence interval is then simply given by the end points: 
 
se(β)
β
︿
± z1−α/2
︿︿
(15) 
 
For a 90% confidence interval, 
= 1.65.
z1−α/2
 
Note that the unconditional variance comprises two terms, the first one local (internal variance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of model ​i​), while the second one global, in that it represents the variance between the common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
estimated parameter and the true value in model ​i​. Since these models are very stable and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
robust, changing the initial condition set does not lead to different solutions, thus providing proof
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that solutions reached are globally best. Therefore, in order to assess the variance, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recreated surrogate data sets by selecting
samples out of a population of
samples, with all
 
 
 
 
 
  k  
 
 
   
 
 n  
 
 
 
possible combinations. This is equivalent to the binomial coefficient, thus creating N!/K!(N­K)!
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subgroups. For each group, parameters were independently estimated, and we thus calculated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the population variance. 
 
In the second part of the modeling approach, we consider all data points, and model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
population’s individual fits with nonlinear equations with ​global and ​local parameters. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equations determining the model are thus the same as above : 
 
 
B
X
︿i
1 =  
i 
(16) 
 
 group D­U
or i
, 
f
= 1 : 5
 
 
B
X
︿i
2 =  
i + ε ∙Δi
(17) 
13 

 
B  
ε
X
︿i
3 =  
i +   ∙Δi ∙α
(18) 
 + 
 
B  
X
︿i
4 =  
i +   ε ∙Δi ∙α
γ ∙Δi
(19) 
 
 group U­D
or i
0, 
f
= 6 : 1
 
 
B
X
︿i
2 =  
i + Δi
 
(20) 
 
B  
Δ
X
︿i
3 =  
i +  
i ∙α
(21) 
 + 
 
B  
X
︿i
4 =  
i +   Δi ∙α
ε ∙γ ∙Δi
(22) 
 
rror 
Σ Σ X  
X
F(α, ε, ɣ, Δ , B ) 
E
=  
i
j(
i
j − 
︿i
j)
2
=  
 
 
 
i  
i
 
(23) 
 
Compared with the global­parameter model (Eq. 1­8), in this individualized model
(the initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  B
 
 
confidence point) is now optimized individually, as well as
, the change in confidence induced
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 Δ  
 
 
 
 
 
by DecNef . For this model, n=40, and k=23. 
 
Analysis, statistics and model­solving routines 
All analysis were performed with Matlab (Mathworks) versions 2011b and 2014a with custom
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made scripts. Additional statistical analysis such as ANOVA were performed with SPSS 22 (IBM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
statistics). We employed Matlab optimization routines to solve our systems of nonlinear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equations with a nonlinear programming solver, under least­square minimization. The Matlab
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solver was ​fmincon​, with the following optimization options. A sequential quadratic problem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SQP) method was used; specifically, the ‘SQP’ algorithm. This algorithm is a medium­scale
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
method, which internally creates full matrices and uses dense linear algebra, thus allowing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional constraint types and better performance for the nonlinear problems outlined in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previous section. As compared with the default ​fmincon ‘interior­point’ algorithm, the ‘SQP’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithm also has the advantage of taking every iterative step in the region constrained by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bounds, which are not strict (a step can exist exactly on a boundary). Furthermore, the ‘SQP’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
algorithm can attempt to take steps that fail, in which case it will take a smaller step in the next
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
iteration, allowing greater flexibility. We set bounded constraints to allow only certain values in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the parameter space to be taken by the estimates, reflecting the biological dimension they were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explaining. As such, boundaries were set as: Δ
[0 Inf], ɛ
[­1 0], ɣ
[0 1], and ɑ
[0 1].
 
 
 
 
 
 
   ∈ 
 
   ∈ 
 
   ∈ 
 
 
   ∈ 
 
 
14 

The function tolerance was set at
, the maximum number of iterations at
and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
1
−20  
 
 
 
 
 
  0   
1
6
 
 
maximum number of function evaluations at 
.
0   
1
5  
 
Statistical results involving multiple comparisons are reported in both the corrected and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncorrected forms. The rationale behind this decision is that these comparisons can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpreted as multiple comparisons of one hypothesis across different mediums, or simply as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different hypothesis, in which case no multiple comparisons should be considered. For multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparisons, we used the Holm­Bonferroni procedure, where the ​P​­values of interest are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ranked from the smallest to the largest, and the significance level α is sequentially adjusted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
based on the formula
for the ith smallest ​P​­values. Thus, for the analyses with 8 ROIs, the
 
 
 
 
α
(n−i+1)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
significance levels corresponding to an α of 0.05 were, in increasing order, α​1​=0.0063,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
α​2​=0.0071, α​3​=0.0083, α​4​=0.0100, α​5​=0.0125, α​6​=0.0167, α​7​=0.025, α​8​=0.05. In the text, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enhanced clarity, we present the results as corrected ​P​­values. 
 
MRI parameters  
The subjects were scanned in a 3T MR scanner (Siemens, Trio) with a head coil in the ATR
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Brain Activation Imaging Center. Functional MR images for retinotopy, the MVPA session, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef stages were acquired using gradient EPI sequences for measurement of BOLD signals.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In all fMRI experiments, 33 contiguous slices (TR = 2 sec, TE = 26 ms, flip angle = 80 deg,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
voxel size = 3×3×3.5 mm​3​, 0 mm slice gap) oriented parallel to the AC­PC plane were acquired,
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covering the entire brain. For an inflated format of the cortex used for retinotopic mapping and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an automated parcellation method (Freesurfer), T1­weighted MR images (MP­RAGE; 256
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
slices, TR = 2 s, TE = 26 ms, flip angle = 80 deg, voxel size = 1×1×1 mm​3​, 0 mm slice gap) were
 
       
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
also acquired during the fMRI scans for the MVPA. 
 
 
Results  
DecNef can be essentially assumed
as a neural operant conditioning and/or reinforcement
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
learning paradigm, with which a multi­voxel pattern corresponding to a specific piece of brain
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
15 

information
can be induced without explicit knowledge of participants. Throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manuscript we refer to Up­DecNef for High­Confidence DecNef and Down­DecNef for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Low­Confidence DecNef. Since there were two groups (for DecNef order counterbalancing), we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will often refer to these as D­U (first session is Low­Confidence DecNef while the second is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High­Confidence) and U­D (the reverse, first High­Confidence DecNef, then Low­Confidence)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the results section. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Experiment timeline and design. (a) The entire experiment consisted of four sessions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divided into 6 fMRI scanning days. The first two days were equal for all groups: a retinotopy
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
session to functionally define visual areas, followed by an MVPA session, during which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants of both groups performed in a 2­forced choice discrimination task with confidence
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
rating. Participants were randomly assigned to either group D­U or group U­D. For the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsequent neurofeedback sessions (day 3­4 and 5­6), group U­D did first High Confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 

followed by Low Confidence DecNef, while group D­U did the reverse sequence. Each DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
session was preceded and followed by a Pre­ and Post­test
(on the same days), a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
psychophysical assessment using the same behavioral task employed in the MVPA session, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
order to capture modulations in confidence and perceptual accuracy. (b) In the MVPA session,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and in Pre­ and Post­Tests, each trial started with a fixation cross, followed by a noise RDM.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
The stimulus was then presented, consisting of a coherent RDM with either rightward or leftward
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motion. After a 4 sec delay, subjects were required to give the direction of motion (left or right)
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and their confidence in their decision during a fixed time window. A trial ended with a 6 sec ITI.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
3 TRs, starting at stimulus presentation onset, were averaged and used for the actual MVPA. (c)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A neurofeedback trial commenced with a visual cue indicating the induction period, during which
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjects were asked to “manipulate, change their brain activity in order to maximize the size of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the feedback disc and the reward”. Induction was followed by a rest period, then the feedback
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
disc was presented for 2 sec and a trial ended with a 6 sec ITI. Either during the induction
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
period, or at the beginning of the fixation period (pseudo­random onsets: 2, 4, 6, or 8 sec from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
trial start) a 2 sec noise RDM was also presented. Pseudo­random onsets were designed in
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to ensure minimal interference and maximal effect of the RDM on the induction process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group D­U: Down­ then Up­DecNef, group U­D: Up­ then Down­DecNef. 
 
 
 
Behavioral data from the Pre­ and Post­Tests show that confidence was differentially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manipulated by DecNef (Fig. 2). Importantly, the resulting changes in confidence cannot be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attributed to a simple week order effect (ANOVA with repeated measures, non­significant effects
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of neurofeedback, ​F​1,9 = 0.370, ​P = 0.558, and time, ​F​1,9 = 2.834, ​P = 0.127, and non­significant
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
interaction, ​F​1,9​ = 0.844, ​P​ = 0.382). 
As displayed in Fig. 2A, the confidence change is larger for Up­DecNef than Down­DecNef, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importantly, the confidence level attained at the end of the first week was almost entirely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserved until the beginning of the second week, in the second session. Lastly, the second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
week effect seems present but reduced as compared to the first week effect. Thus, order of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef (Up then Down, or Down then Up) had a large influence on how confidence was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
manipulated. A mixed­effects repeated measures ANOVA, with within­subjects factor time, and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between­subjects factors neurofeedback, and order, clarifies this finding, as it resulted in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
17 

significant interaction between the three factors (​F​1,16 = 4.769, ​P = 0.044). Furthermore, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
factor time (​F​1,16 = 4.623, ​P = 0.047) and the interaction between time and neurofeedback (​F​1,16
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
= 18.050, ​P​ = 0.001) both had significant effect on the dependent variable, confidence. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Confidence ratings in psychophysical Pre­ and Post­Tests. (a) Each group induced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both High and Low Confidence, in two separate sessions: group D­U with the order Low­ then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High­Confidence (Down then Up), and group U­D High­ then Low Confidence. Results are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
color­coded: purple for single group results of group D­U and green for group U­D. Average
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across groups, representing mere order effect, is depicted in gray, at the bottom, while the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grand average per condition (High and Low Confidence), is in black, on the right side. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
apparent that the confidence changes in the first week strongly influence the confidence level in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the second week. The Pre­ level in the second week remains indeed very close to the previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post­ level attained in the first week. Furthermore, neurofeedback in the first week seems to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

have a stronger impact than in the second week, and this holds when comparing both High with
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Low Confidence DecNef. For each bar, N=5. Error bars represent s.e.m. (b­c) Subjects’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual confidence data with the four measurement timings, organized in groups (D­U and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U­D), both raw (b) and 0­aligned (c) confidence. Timings 1 and 2 correspond to Pre­ and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
Post­Test in the first week, respectively; while timings 3 and 4 to Pre­ and Post­Test in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
second week DecNef. The dotted line represents the week­long interval between the two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions (DecNef in week 1 and DecNef in week 2). Each colored line represents day­averaged
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data from one subject (total, N=10). 
 
 
The results at the group level (Fig. 2A) were mirrored at the individual level (Fig. 2B, C). Fig. 2B
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows that the initial value varied across subjects, but also that on average the initial point was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same for both groups and that changes had a clear common trend across subjects. Thus, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
Fig. 2C, data were realigned to the same starting point, centered on zero. In more detail, Fig. 2C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggests that 7/10 cases in the Down­DecNef and 9/10 cases in the Up­DecNef showed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changes in confidence in the expected directions. The Phi coefficient (a measure of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation between two vectors of binary variables) computed between real and expected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directional changes was strongly significant (
= 0.612, ​P = 0.0041). That is, confidence
 
 
 
 
  ϕ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased in Up­DecNef weeks, and decreased in Down­DecNef weeks. 
 
A concept that has been extensively studied in motor learning and, to a lesser extent, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
perceptual learning, is learning interference. In a classic motor learning interference paradigm,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Krakauer ​et al. ​(Krakauer et al. 1999) showed that learning of another kinematic or dynamic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model with conflicting sensorimotor mappings interfered with the consolidation of previously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learned models of the same type. Similarly, in this study, we propose that DecNef training also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
induced an anterograde interference effect, where learning of task B was partly prevented by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the previous learning of task A. This effect will be more rigorously examined later. 
 
To effectively analyze the changes in confidence, the two DecNef sessions for the two groups,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D­U1, D­U2, and U­D1, U­D2, respectively, are presented as deltas (Fig. 3A). As expected,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average changes were positive for Up and negative for Down­DecNef: U­D1 data was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly different from zero (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = 4.253, ​P = 0.0067, uncorrected; ​P = 0.026,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
     
 
corrected for multiple comparisons), as well as D­U2 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = 2.188, ​P = 0.0469,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
19 

uncorrected, ​P = 0.14, corrected). Both D­U1 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = ­0.978, ​P = 0.192,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncorrected, ​P = 0.192, corrected) and U­D2 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = ­1.626, ​P = 0.0896,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncorrected, ​P = 0.179, corrected) were not statistically different from zero. The contrast
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between D­U1 and U­D1 yielded a statistically significant difference (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = ­3.822,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
P = 0.0094, uncorrected, ​P = 0.0468, corrected). This result is of great importance, because in
   
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
the two instances only the neurofeedback sign was different, while all other behavioral schemes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were the same, and yet different results were obtained. Thus, DecNef purely induced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bidirectional confidence changes, and these confidence changes were not caused by general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects of monetary rewards or repeated exposure to random dot stimuli, which are common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimental components of both up and down DecNef. Furthermore, mean differences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between U­D1 and U­D2 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = 4.228, ​P = 0.0067, uncorrected, ​P = 0.0402,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
corrected), D­U2 and U­D1 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = ­3.661, ​P = 0.0108, uncorrected, ​P = 0.0431,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
     
 
corrected)
yielded
statistically
significant results before and after multiple comparisons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correction. It should be noted that, although they did not survive a multiple comparisons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correction, even the differences between D­U1 and D­U2 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = ­2.512, ​P = 0.033,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
uncorrected, ​P = 0.0989, corrected), and D­U2 and U­D2 (one­tail t­test, t​(4) = 2.296, ​P = 0.0416,
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
uncorrected, ​P = 0.0833, corrected) were initially significant. Since one could argue that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions between each comparisons are different, because they entail different DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directions and therefore assumptions, it is noteworthy to see that most of the confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences were significantly distinct.  
 
Fig. 3B plots the ratios of the above differences U­D2/D­U1, D­U2/U­D1 and the average of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two. Because these values are positive and less than 1, the second week effect was smaller
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than the first week effect, an outcome that is likely due to anterograde learning interference. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first two values being relatively similar, the interference effect did not seem to be dependent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upon Up­Down or Down­Up sequence. 
 
Therefore, considering that differences in the first and second week of DecNef are quantifiable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and can be ascribed to a specific hypothesis, pure Up and Down effects can be computed by
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applying a simple correction. Reduced Up and Down­DecNef effects in the second week can be
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
corrected for the first week effect by dividing them by the average ratio (Fig. 3C). Both Up and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Down effects were statistically significantly different from zero (one­tail t­test, Up­DecNef t​(9) =
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
4.390, ​P = 0.0009, Down­DecNef t​(9) = ­1.876, ​P = 0.0467), and they were different from each
 
   
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 

other (one­tail t­test, t​(9) = 4.315, ​P = 0.001), suggesting a specific DecNef effect to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurofeedback signs. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Summary statistics for confidence changes. (a) Δ confidence is given by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difference [Post­Test ­ Pre­Test] of confidence average. D­U1 is the confidence difference in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group D­U, DecNef session 1, D­U2 the confidence distance in group D­U, DecNef session 2,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U­D1 group U­D, DecNef session 1, and U­D2 group U­D, DecNef session 2. Asterisks to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
left of the slashes represent uncorrected significant differences, while asterisks to the right,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significant differences after correction for multiple comparisons ( ​✱​P ​< 0.05, ​✱✱​P ​< 0.01, ​✱✱✱
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
     
 
 
P ​< 0.005). (b) Ratios of Δ confidence measured as confidence change in the second week
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divided by the confidence change in the first week, for both Up­ and Down­DecNef. The right
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
column indicates the average of the two ratios, used in the analysis displayed in the next panel.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Corrected net DecNef effect: the correction is computed by dividing the second week effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the averaged ratios of Δ confidence. This term accounts for the anterograde learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 

interference, decreasing the DecNef effect in the second week. Both Up­ and Down­DecNef are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thus significantly different from zero. 
 
 
 
From a mathematical standpoint, in order to best capture the different components of DecNef
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects while accounting for both Up­ and Down neurofeedback, we fitted a system of nonlinear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
parametric
equations
with
four
global
parameters
(explained
in
greater
detail
in
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematical modeling part of the Materials and methods section). The four global parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were selected in light of the summary statistics results displayed in Fig. 3. Global parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hence were the initial (first week) absolute change in confidence by Up­DecNef effect (Δ), the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ratio of the weaker Down­DecNef effect compared with that of stronger Up­DecNef effect (ε),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anterograde learning interference (ɣ), and the memory loss effects between DecNef sessions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ɑ). Importantly, we fitted various alternative models, where some of the parameters had fixed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values (such as = 1 or = 0) to account for full effects, or the lack of effects, in order to compare
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and infer which aspects of DecNef were likely to play a significant role in determining the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulting confidence changes. Simpler models, that did not assume directionality in confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changes, or other interpretations, included a constant­confidence model, constant­within­week
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
model, and first­grade polynomial models. In order to compare various models, we used the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corrected (second­order) Akaike Information Criterion (AICc), which allocates more importance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the principle of parsimony, and gives higher penalty to more complex models (i.e., with larger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number of parameters). Indeed, since the dataset is finite, and the ratio k/n (number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters / number of samples) > 1/40, AICc is strongly recommended to avoid model
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selection bias ​(Burnham & Anderson 2002)​).  
 
When using AIC (and, by extension, AICc), the best model has the most negative (or lowest)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
score. Absolute values of AICs are not really informative ​per se​, and to effectively compare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models we use the distance from the best model (Δ​AICc​), and the likelihood of each model being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the best model, computed as Akaike weights. Normally, a Δ​i​
AICc < 2 means the ​i​th model cannot
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
be ruled out and has a conspicuous likelihood of being the best model with a different dataset.  
Accordingly, we computed AICc scores, Δ​AICc​, and w​i (reported in table 1). As shown in the table,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
there are three models that can be considered essentially as good as the best model, since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distance between two of them and the most negative AICc is < 2. Furthermore, three more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
22 

models had Δ​AICc < 6, indicating these had a very low likelihood, but nevertheless marginal
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
validity. All other models had distances greater than 10 from the best model, and importantly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
among them simpler models such as constant­confidence, within­week constant confidence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and first­grade polynomial models all performed very poorly in fitting the data. These models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with Δ​AICc > 10 are sufficiently poorer than the best AIC model as to be considered implausible
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Burnham & Anderson 2002)​. 
 
Since model selection uncertainty exists, with very similar AICc values (Δ​AICc < 2 compared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
the most negative AICc), a formal solution is to apply model­averaging, where each parameter
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
present in the selected models is estimated according to a weighted average based on their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding Akaike weights. For model averaging, we used all models for which Δ​AICc < 2,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
keeping the estimated parameters in the same initial scale and focusing the averaging process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the subset of highly likely models. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4A reports individual data, as well as fits of the three best models (​Δ​AICc < 2, ​full model with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
4 global parameters ­ ɑ, ε, ɣ, Δ; submodel with ɣ=0, submodel with ɑ=1), and the simplest
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model, where confidence does not change and is akin to a 1­k model, with the only parameter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
being the confidence group average. As can be deduced from the figure, each model provides a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
good fit, and therefore a high likelihood of being the best one at describing the empirical data.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conversely, a simpler model, where confidence is assumed to be constant, provides a very poor
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
23 

fit to the data, showing that DecNef was indeed successful in inducing confidence changes, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the no­change model is implausible. 
 
Model­averaged estimates of the 4 parameters suggest that all of them are different from zero
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Fig. 4B), and thus impact the effects of DecNef.  
 
The delta parameter was 0.37; thus Up­DecNef on the first week increased confidence by 0.37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(~20% change in confidence). Alpha was 0.83, hence on average only 17% of the first week
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effect was lost during the one week interval due to memory decay. Epsilon was ­0.35, thus the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Down­DecNef effect was opposite in its sign and 35% of the magnitude of that of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Up­DecNef. Gamma was 0.19, and thus, due to anterograde learning interference, the second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
week effect was only 19% of that of the first week. Our nonlinear modeling robustly indicates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that there exist both Up­ and Down­DecNef effects, anterograde learning interference, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preservation of memory between sessions one­week apart.  
 
 
24 

 
Figure 4. Confidence changes modeled with global parameters and nonlinear functions. (a)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Individual and group­modeled data are presented, 0­aligned, with the same color­codes and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation rules as in fig. 3. Thick lines represent different model fits, darker colors being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
better fits. The light gray line is the simplest model, assuming constant confidence (1 parameter
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model). The three other fits are, respectively, the best model, for which the computed AICc was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most negative, and models having a Δ​AICc < 2 from the best model. Actual data from each
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant is shown as a thin colored line. (b) Global parameters estimates resulting from model
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
averaging. For each model, based on the Δ​AICc​, Akaike weights were computed (the likelihood of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ​i​th model being the best model). Each parameter was then evaluated as the weighted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average of single models estimates. Error bars represent the 90% confidence intervals,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computed from the unconditional standard error.  
 
 
 
25 

In the second part of the modeling analysis, we considered all data points, and model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
population’s individual fits with nonlinear equations with ​global and ​local parameters. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach is warranted by the results from the global model­averaging, where all four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters have high likelihood of being different from zero. This aspect, albeit not entirely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
backed by the confidence intervals (CI for
includes 0), is nevertheless supported by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  γ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal variance of the models: these variances are very low, indicating high stability within a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
model’s parameter space. Furthermore, if the models are robust and explain the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phenomenons in DecNef, parameter estimates should converge to similar solutions. 
  
In the second model, global parameters were the weaker Down­DecNef effect (ε), anterograde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning interference (ɣ), and the memory loss effects between DecNef sessions (ɑ), and local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters were the individual initial absolute change in confidence for Up­DecNef effect (Δ​i​),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the individual initial point of confidence (b​i​). Fig. 5A shows the 23 parameter model fit to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
raw data, and provides further support for Fig. 4 conclusions. Parameter estimate values (Fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
5B) are in good agreement in both modeling instances (Fig. 4B and 5B), underscoring the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presence and generality of the effects they represent, as well as supporting the robustness of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the model analyses. 
 
 
26 

 
 
Figure 5. Global and local parameters modeling: the model is based on the parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtained from the previous model­averaging step using global models. This full model accounts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for all four major effects of DecNef, as exemplified in the parameter estimates plot in the panel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
below: Δ​i​, individual differences in Up­DecNef confidence change; ɛ, reduced Down­DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effect; ɣ, anterograde learning interference resulting in reduced second week DecNef effect; ɑ,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning persistence (memory loss in the week­long interval). (a) Thick lines are individual fits,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while dots are the actual measured data. Color­codes and presentation rules are the same as in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 3 and 5. (b) Model estimates. Error bars are standard deviation for Δ​i​, and CI for ɛ, ɣ, and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
ɑ. D­U: Down­Up DecNef order (Low­ then High Confidence DecNef), U­D: Up­Down DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order. 
 
 
27 

To conclude, by utilising the gamma parameter, representing anterograde learning interference,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computed in the global modeling approach through model averaging, we show that DecNef was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effective in both directions (Fig. 6). That is, simply discounting the weaker second week effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by correcting (dividing) the individual pre­ post­ confidence change from the second week by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gamma parameter indeed leads to a significance level that is statistically relevant for both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase and decrease of confidence.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Pure effects of Up­ and Down­DecNef trainings. The second week confidence 
difference between Pre­ and Post­tests were individually corrected by dividing the difference by 
the gamma parameter computed in the global model approach by model averaging (
).
.19
γ = 0
 
One­tail t­test for Up­DecNef (t​(9)​ = 3.64, ​P​ = 0.0027), Down­DecNef (t​(9)​ = ­1.92, ​P​ = 0.0433), as 
well as direct comparison of the two pure effects (t​(9)​ = 3.47, ​P​ = 0.0034), were all significant, 
evidencing the bidirectional effectiveness of DecNef. 
 
 
 
Discussion 
We hypothesized that DecNef could be successfully used to induce changes in a behavioral trait
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
(confidence) for two opposing directions and within the same subjects. Furthermore, if DecNef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
were based on a learning process in the behavioral dimension probed, we expected an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anterograde learning interference. To directly examine these hypotheses, we constructed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual decoders based on confidence judgements in a visual perceptual task, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants then induced such multi­voxel activation patterns in two DecNef sessions, i.e., one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

for High Confidence and one for Low Confidence induction. Importantly, each session was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
separated at least one week apart, in order to best capture possible learning­maintenance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects.  
 
Our modeling results support the assumptions that confidence changes due to DecNef followed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a specific pattern, where (1) DecNef was successful in both opposing directions, but that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Up­DecNef effect was more pronounced than Down­DecNef, (2) the acquired confidence level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at the end of the first week was subjected to only small degradation effect, (3) there existed a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
strong anterograde interference onto the next DecNef session by the first week DecNef. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consequence was a stronger effect of neurofeedback in the first week as compared to the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
second week.  
 
The anterograde interference in learning that emerges when training participants to induce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activation patterns that correspond to different (opposite) behavioral variables sequentially is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important. This effect is remarkable, because it implies that any manipulation through DecNef is
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
likely relying on long term changes akin to sensory motor learning or perceptual learning, thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing an additional support to previous empirical finding in rt­fMRI ​(Shibata et al. 2011;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Megumi et al. 2015)​. Specifically, these behavioral changes may be deeply ingrained due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instrumental conditioning that is subtending such learning processes.  
 
In motor and visuomotor learning, a conspicuous literature has explored the effect of opposing
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tasks on the dynamics and modalities of the learning processes ​(Brashers­Krug et al. 1996;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Krakauer et al. 1999; Tong et al. 2002; Osu et al. 2004)​. Both retrograde and anterograde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms have been suggested to mediate interference in visuomotor learning ​(Tong et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002; Miall et al. 2004; Krakauer et al. 2005)​. The vast majority of previous studies have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addressed interference in learning within short delays (typically, between a few minutes and up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
to 24h­48h), but, nevertheless, several studies have reported interference effects even after 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
week ​(Caithness et al. 2004; Krakauer et al. 2005)​, thus corroborating our results. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anterograde interference is thought to have substantially larger effects as compared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
retrograde interference ​(Sing & Smith 2010)​. It is therefore not surprising that the interference
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in this study resulted in a second week effect of only ~20% of the size of the first week, a
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
significant decrease. 
 
29 

To conclude, ​we established the causal nature of DecNef, as bidirectional brain manipulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
led to bidirectional behavioral change, in that DecNef was effective in both increasing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decreasing confidence. By finding a strong anterograde interference in the behavioral results,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DecNef can be seen as a natural learning, likely close to sensory motor learning and perceptual
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning. From a translational viewpoint, DecNef is effective since only two days training were
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sufficient to maintain 80% of the learned level after one week elapsed. Once acquired,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cancelling out DecNef effects was difficult (only 20%), possibly requiring more days of induction.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Up and down modulations are asymmetrical, suggesting some differential basic neural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms for confidence encoding.
