White Paper
Towards a meaningful deployment of 
embodied actors
Systems Challenges for
Trustworthy Embodied Systems

2
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems –  
Towards a meaningful deployment of embodied actors
Autor
Dr. Harald Rueß
fortiss GmbH 
Guerickestr. 25 
80805 München 

Systems Challenges for  
Trustworthy Embodied Systems1 
Towards a meaningful deployment of embodied actors 
 
 
 
Autor: 
Dr. Harald Rueß 
 
fortiss - Research Institute of the Free State of Bavaria 
Guerickestr. 25 
80805 Munich 
 
Version 2.0 
15th of March, 2022 
 
 
This research is supported by the BMWi-funded project Embodied Intelligence - The Next Big 
Thing, and the CASSAI project as funded by the Bavarian Ministry of Economics in the context of 
the fortiss AI Center. 
 
     
 
   
 
 
1 Disclaimer: This research is supported by project Embodied Intelligence—The Next Big Thing as funded by the German Ministry of 
Economics, and the CASSAI project as funded by the Bavarian Ministry of Economics in the context of the fortiss AI Center. This report 
heavily draws on the results of the Agenda CPS and ongoing discussions, and constructive feedback on earlier versions by Prof. Dr. Dr. 
h.c. Manfred Broy, is strongly influenced by ongoing work by SRI colleagues on the rigorous design of increasingly autonomous 
machines, in particular Dr. John Rushby and Dr. Natarajan Shankar, and also exchanges during a research stint in November 2019. It is 
also based on regular exchanges with fortiss colleagues, in particular, Dian Balta, Dr. Markus Duchon, Dr. Johannes Kroß, Prof. Dr. 
Daniel Mendez, Prof. Dr. Rute Sofia, and Dr. Henrik Putzer. It has also benefited from a recent BIG workshop on challenges for embodied 
systems with participating colleagues from Siemens and fortiss. The views in the section on robust AI were developed in 2017 in 
preparation of the  fortiss-IBM joint research center, and the section on human-centered engineering is heavily based on the 
corresponding fortiss whitepaper by Dr. Yuanting Liu and Dr. Habil. Hao Shen on this topic. The views on uncertainty quantification 
were mainly formed through interactions within the CASSAI projects with the fortissians Carmen Carlan, Amit Sahu, Tewodros Beyene, 
and Julian Bernhard. It is a safe assumption, however, that most probably none of the contributors mentioned above could agree with 
all the described hypotheses on systems challenges for embodied systems as outlined here. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 2 
 
Abstract 
A new generation of increasingly autonomous and self-learning systems, which we call 
embodied systems, is about to emerge. When deploying these systems into our very societal 
fabric, we face various engineering challenges, as it is crucial to coordinate the behavior of 
embodied systems in a beneficial manner, ensure their compatibility with our human-centered 
social values, and design verifiably safe and reliable human–machine interaction. We argue that 
traditional systems engineering is coming to a climacteric from embedded to embodied systems, 
and with assuring the trustworthiness of dynamic federations of situationally aware, intent-
driven, explorative, ever-evolving, largely unpredictable, and increasingly autonomous embodied 
systems in uncertain, complex, and unpredictable real-world contexts.  With this goal in mind we 
identify urgent systems engineering challenges for designing embodied systems in which we can 
put our trust, including robust and human-centered artificial intelligence, cognitive architectures, 
uncertainty quantification, trustworthy self-integration, and continual analysis and assurance. 
 
 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 3 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract .................................................................................................................................................. 2 
Table of Contents ................................................................................................................................ 3 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 3 
 
1. 
Embodied Systems ....................................................................................................................... 8 
Software Actors ............................................................................................................................. 9 
Robotic Companions ................................................................................................................. 10 
Service Federations .................................................................................................................... 12 
 
2. Characteristics ............................................................................................................................ 16 
Cognitive Systems ...................................................................................................................... 17 
Intent-Driven Systems ............................................................................................................... 19 
Federated Systems .................................................................................................................... 20 
Autonomous Systems ................................................................................................................ 21 
Self-Learning Systems ............................................................................................................... 22 
 
3. Trustworthiness ......................................................................................................................... 24 
 
4. Challenges ...................................................................................................................................29 
Robust Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning .................................................................. 30 
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning................................................34 
Cognitive Architectures .............................................................................................................36 
Uncertainty Quantification........................................................................................................39 
Self-Integration ...........................................................................................................................43 
Analysis ........................................................................................................................................ 46 
Testing .......................................................................................................................................... 47 
Symbolic Analysis....................................................................................................................... 48 
Runtime Verification and Recovery ........................................................................................ 49 
Assurance ..................................................................................................................................... 52 
 
5. Conclusions ................................................................................................................................. 61 
 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 4 
 
Introduction 
A new generation of increasingly autonomous machinery is about to be developed and 
embodied into all aspects of everyday life. This machinery is used beyond mere automation and 
assistance to humans. As manufacturing robots make way for autonomous machine workers, 
business and administrational services are performed by autonomous virtual organizations, and 
processes and value chains in the real and virtualized worlds are executed by coalitions of 
autonomous machine actors. In this way, computational machines act as self-sufficient entities 
in our very economic and societal fabric. 
Next-generation autonomous machines may also acquire and improve necessary skills and 
behavior in real-world contexts by means of action, reaction, and interaction in and with physical 
and social environments.2 But how exactly do the required cognitive skills and behavior that 
could possibly be termed intelligent3 unfold in time? 
Various answers to this fundamental quest on the emergence of intelligence, including 
Descartes’ brain–body duality, have been developed throughout the history of philosophy. These 
considerations have also been motivating the field of embodied intelligence (EI), which is the 
computational approach to the design and understanding of intelligent behavior in embodied 
and situated actors through the consideration of the strict coupling between the actor and its 
environment (situatedness), mediated by the constraints of the actor’s own body, perceptual and 
motor system, and brain (embodiment).4 
On the basis of this paradigm, computational machines may develop and improve at least some 
physical dexterities and cognitive skills by means of interactions between the physical self and 
environment.5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 In this way, EI robots that can move, see, speak, and interact with 
 
2 Striedinger. Hauser, Kaspar, der “rätselhafte Findling” 1828–1833, Lebensläufe aus Franken, Herausgegeben im Auftrag der 
Gesellschaft für Fränkische Geschichte von Anton Chroust, III. Erster Band, 1927. 
3 Deary. Intelligence: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2020. 
4 Cangelosi, Bongard, Fischer, Nolfi. Embodied Intelligence. Handbook of Computational Intelligence. Springer, 2015. 
5 Growing evidence shows that at least some sensorimotor behavior and cognitive skills are realized in the body and that social 
interactions can bootstrap learning (for example, Ballard et al., Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 1997; McGeer. Passive dynamic walking. International Journal of Robotics Research, 1990; O’Regan, Noe. A sensorimotor 
account of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2001) 
6 Pfeifer, Scheier. Understanding Intelligence, MIT Press, 2001. 
7 Breazeal. Designing Sociable Robots. MIT Press, 2002. 
8 Beer. A dynamical systems perspective on agent-environment interaction. Artificial Intelligence 72, 1994. 
9 Brooks. Elephants don’t play chess, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6(1), 1990. 
10 Cangelosi. Grounding language in action and perception: From cognitive agents to humanoid robots. Physics of Life Reviews 7(2), 
2010. 
11 Chiel, Beer. The brain has a body: Adaptive behavior emerges from interactions of nervous system, body and environment. Trends 
in Neurosciences 20, 1997. 
12 Keijzer. Representation and Behavior. MIT Press, 2001. 
13 Nolfi, Floreano. Evolutionary Robotics: The Biology, Intelligence, and Technology of Self-Organizing Machines. MIT Press, 2000. 
14 Pfeifer, Bongard. How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: A New View of Intelligence. MIT Press, 2006. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 5 
 
other robots effectively have been built.15 16 Current approaches to EI also rely on training actors 
in virtualized playgrounds for accelerated learning and for enabling nondestructive learning from 
failure.17 18 19 20 Despite all this progress on EI, however, it still remains open to speculation if and 
how “higher-level” thinking, symbol grounding, natural language understanding, consciousness, 
and emotions may emerge in machines through embodiment.21 22 23 
A central but largely untouched challenge of EI is concerned with embodying computational 
actors into real-world environments with all their intricacies, including uncertainty, complexity, 
and unpredictability. This is not an easy task as actors may demonstrate unexpected and even 
emergent behavior when deployed in new operating environments, such as when being moved 
from a model-based virtual playground into a real-world physical context.24 
Another key point of moving actors from innocent training playgrounds into a physical or social 
context is that actions have real consequences. Tay,25 a pretrained chatbot that quickly turned 
nasty, when placed in the context of a (so-called) social network, may serve as a cautionary tale 
of what can go wrong all too easily and quickly. While this problem was solved by simply taking 
Tay offline, it is easy to imagine other cases of self-learning actors neglecting human moral 
expectations with a long-lasting and perhaps even more severe impact. The sad tale of Tay also 
reminds us of the importance of meaningful control of EI. 
 
We clearly face serious social, economic, and legal challenges when deploying EI in the real 
world,26 as it is crucial to coordinate the behavior of EI actors in a beneficial manner, ensure their 
compatibility with our human-centered social norms and values, and design verifiably safe and 
reliable human–machine interaction. 
 
Notice that interpretations of the terms “beneficial” and “social norms and values” are heavily 
context- and application-specific. A simple robot companion, for example, might be called 
 
15 Workshop on Embodied AI at CVPR’21 (https://embodied-ai.org) 
16 Pfeifer, Iida. Embodied Artificial Intelligence. Springer, 2004. 
17 Such as visual exploration, visual navigation, and embodied question-answering. In particular, the question “Is there still milk in the 
fridge?” may require the embodied actor to unlock new insights that are momentous in answering and initiate corresponding tasks 
such as moving to the kitchen and opening the fridge. 
18 For example, workshop on Embodied AI. http://https://embodied-ai.org/. CVPR, 2020. 
19 For example, ongoing Embodied AI programs, such as at Intel Labs or Facebook AI Research. 
20 These simulation environments currently include SUNCG, Matterport3D, iGibson, Replica, Habitat, and DART. 
21 Smith, Gasser. The development of embodied cognition: Six lessons from babies. Artificial Life, 11(1–2), 2005. 
22 Rushby, Sanchez. Technology and Consciousness. SRI Technical Report, 2018. 
23 For example, integrated information theory (IIT) asserts that it is the intrinsic causal powers of the brain that really matter. Those 
powers cannot be simulated but must be part and parcel of the physics of the underlying mechanism. 
24 Remark: The very notion of a “digital twin” suggests an unequivocalness of the model with respect to the real world no model can 
actually deliver; as Plato already realized, such a model is nothing more than a “shadow on the wall.” 
25 https://www.theverge.com/2016/3/24/11297050/tay-microsoft-chatbot-racist 
26 Vazdanan et al. Responsibility Research for Trustworthy Autonomous Systems. 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 6 
 
beneficial if it acts according to the intents of its human companion. This idea does not 
necessarily imply, however, that the robot companion acts according to the intents of others, 
which may even be contradictory, let alone that it acts according to relevant human-centered 
social values. 
In our quest to develop and deploy EI in a meaningful way, we need to find adequate solutions to 
central engineering challenges: 
 
How can we ensure that an EI actor behaves beneficially? That is, it functions as intended and 
behaves in accordance with higher-level societal goals and standards. 
 
How can we ensure that learning-enabled EI actors are robust across their whole life cycle? 
That is, the behavior of EI-enabled actors is dependable, safe, and predictable (up to 
quantified tolerances) in uncertain, complex, and unpredictable environments. 
 
How can we ensure that meaningful (human) control over an EI actor is enabled during 
operation? 
 
Traditionally, the field of systems engineering tackles these kinds of questions for assuring 
purposeful and acceptable technical systems. 
 
However, the engineering of software-intensive systems has so far mainly been concerned with 
relatively small-scale, centralized, deterministic, nonevolvable, automated, and task-specific 
embedded and cyber-physical systems (CPSs), which operate in well-defined and largely 
predictable operating environments. The state-of-the-practice in safety engineering,27 for 
instance, is restricted to deterministic systems operating in well-defined operating contexts, and 
it usually relies on ultimate fallback mechanisms to a human operator (as is the case, for 
example, for current airplane autopilots). Current safety engineering practice, therefore, does not 
support certification and corresponding operating readiness of the envisioned new generation of 
EI acting in real-world environments. 
 
In Section 2, we introduce the notion of embodied systems. This class of systems is based on the 
central EI concepts of situatedness and embodiment. As such, the design of embodied systems 
may benefit from any progress on EI, but their success does not hinge on reaching EI’s ultimate 
quest for human-like machine intelligence.  
 
27 For instance, industrial safety engineering standards, such as DO 178C in aerospace and ISO 26262 in the automotive industry. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 7 
 
We illustrate the defining features and disruptive potential of embodied systems by means of 
three different scenarios, namely, software assistants, robot companions, and federations of 
services. In Section 3, we analyze the main characteristics of embodied systems, and in Section 
4, we discuss how to possibly increase trust in embodied systems. In Section 5, we deduce 
system challenges for designing trustworthy embodied systems from the main characteristics of 
embodied systems. We conclude with some final remarks in Section 6. 
 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 8 
 
1. 
Embodied Systems 
In contrast to traditional EI, which is largely driven by its fundamental quest for emerging 
intelligent behavior in computational machines, we are embracing a seemingly utilitarian stance 
in that the embodiment of actors in a real-world context, physical or social, serves  
 
the development of flexible, inventive, and optimized actions 
 
for beneficial, goal-oriented, and robust behavior 
 
in uncertain, complex, and unpredictable real-world environments. 
The central challenge is to enable the beneficial, dependable, safe, and predictable—at least up 
to acceptable tolerances—operation of embodied actors when woven into our very economic 
and social fabric. 
 
Actors are supposed to purposefully cooperate with other actors, both human and robot. As 
such, embodied systems support humans in various real-world tasks and in an increasingly 
autonomous, self-guided manner. Embodied systems, however, should not be restricted to an 
assistance role. Instead, their self-learning capabilities should well support the coevolution of 
humans and machine as necessary for bootstrapping overall capabilities.28 
 
Embodied systems29 may be viewed as increasingly autonomous and self-learning CPSs.30 More 
specifically, embodied systems are decentralized, dynamic, self-learning, and self-organizing 
federations of actors that collaborate to accomplish complex tasks and missions in partially 
unpredictable real-world operating contexts. Therefore, these systems are: 
 
Situational in that they are aware of the operating context and itself. 
 
Embodied in that real-world actions, reactions, and interactions are instrumental for the 
flexible development of inventive actions for goal-oriented and robust behavior in uncertain, 
complex, and unpredictable real-world environments. 
 
Open to interacting and collaborating with others in a mutually synergistic manner while still 
operating as self-sufficient individually purposeful systems. 
 
28 Bardini. Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the Origins of Personal Computing. Stanford University Press, 2000. 
29 Notice that we use the terms embodied system and embodied actors almost interchangeably; if the embodied system is regarded 
as a self-sufficient component, however, we tend to call it an actor. Moreover, populations of actors are usually referred to as 
embodied systems. 
30 Broy, Geisberger (Eds.). Agenda CPS. acatech, 2013 (https://www.fortiss.org/en/results/scientific-publications/details/agenda-cps-
integrierte-forschungsagenda-cyber-physical-systems). 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 9 
 
 
Adaptive in that they may adjust and improve behavior through experience and targeted 
exploration. 
Some scenarios might help illustrate the main concepts, benefits, and challenges of embodied 
systems. 
 
Software Actors 
Consider a mission- and communication-oriented software-based actor31 that autonomously 
gathers information, for example, from seminar organizers, composes announcements of next 
week’s seminars, and mails them each week to a list that it keeps updated, all without human 
supervision. Similarly, consider a software companion for automated assignment of tasks to 
employees in a large organization that automates the workload of hundreds of human 
counterparts. Automated software assistants typically are “embodied” in and interact with a 
largely virtual world of information sources, with a dedicated interface to a human operator. 
These kinds of autonomous software assistants do exist, with their main architectural principles 
rooted in cognitive architectures such as global workspace theory32 or multiactor 
communication frameworks (KQML33 or OAA34). They have often been shown to outperform 
human counterparts on many real-life exploration and complex planning, scheduling, and 
dispatching tasks such as customer service, risk evaluation, product inspection, and data mining. 
Their actions are based on a situational awareness of the operating environment together with 
built-in intents and goals for managing the unpredictable. 
 
Traditional autonomous software assistants, however, lack the main attributes of embodied 
systems as they are purpose-built for solving specific tasks only, and they have a limited ability to 
adapt to changing environments through interactions with their environment, including human 
operators. 
We can easily imagine a new generation of integrated and more versatile software-based actors, 
which are embodied in the sense that they are learning our intents through collaborative 
interactions and are able to automatically detect and adapt to changing conditions (for example, 
a specific source of information is temporarily unavailable), thereby also optimizing future 
 
31 The actor paradigm in AI is based upon the notion of reactive (internally motivated entities embedded in changing) uncertain 
worlds that they perceive and in which they act. 
32 Franklin, Patterson. The LIDA Architecture: Adding New Modes of Learning to an Intelligent, Autonomous, Software Agent. IDPT, 
2006. 
33 Finin, Labrou, Mayfield. KQML as an Agent Communication Language. Software Agents, MIT Press, 1997. 
34 Martin, Cheyer, Moran. The open agent architecture: A framework for building distributed software systems. Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 13(1–2), 1999. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 10 
 
problem-solving strategies. Such a personal software assistant should be able to largely 
automate managerial tasks, such as doing taxes, planning trips, ordering food, or controlling 
household appliances, according to an overall situational assessment and intents. 
 
Robotic Companions35 
Figure 1. depicts an embodied system with the sole purpose of landing an airplane. In a slightly 
more complex scenario, we envision such a robot to act as a copilot in a single-pilot cockpit. In 
this way, on long flights with two pilots, one can sleep while the other flies with assistance from 
the robotic companion. Such a robot needs to be more like a human copilot than a conventional 
flight management system or a functionally automated autopilot. In particular, the robot 
companion needs to perform heterogeneous and complementary tasks, including radio 
communications, interpreting weather data and making route adjustments, pilot monitoring 
tasks, shared tasks (flaps, gear), ground taxi, and communication with the cabin crew (emergency 
evacuation).  
The robot companion also needs to integrate these tasks to accomplish a safe flight; it needs to 
base its decisions and actions on an overall situational assessment. In case things go wrong, the 
robot companion needs to find effective explanations based on fault diagnosis and engage in an 
effective resolution process with the (human) pilot on the basis of a model of the pilot’s beliefs. 
 
 
Figure 1. Robotic copilot.36 
 
 
35 This scenario is heavily based on the one presented by J. Rushby on increasingly autonomous systems. 
36 Source: https://www.aerotime.aero/23374-robot-co-pilot-flies-lands-boeing-737 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 11 
 
In extreme situations, the automated robot copilot might even take over control, such as if there 
is smoke in the cockpit. The robotic copilot might also be better suited to maintain pitch and 
thrust in extreme situations as the human pilot.37 In these rare cases, the “robot” must now also 
cope with inconsistencies (for example, in sensor readings) based on flight laws, training 
procedures, models of the physical environment, and unforeseen situations without the 
possibility of a structured handover to the human pilot. In extreme cases where flight laws 
suddenly change, due, for example, to severe damage to the body of the airplane, the 
mechanized copilot can even relearn to fly the aircraft under these new circumstances on the 
spot and in real time. 
 
Altogether, the robotic copilot in Figure 1. augments the sensing, acting, and mental capabilities 
of the pilot (Figure 2). For its embodied “self,” it may be operated in different cockpit settings. 
However, if the robotic copilot is only supposed to augment the decision-making and acting 
capabilities of a pilot, then an embodied “self” is superfluous. In these cases, deploying an 
autonomous and self-learning software companion into the cockpit control system is sufficient. 
 
 
Figure 2. Areas of human augmentation. 
 
The robotic copilot is a particular instance of a larger class of embodied companions. Personal 
companions for supporting and taking over tedious household chores and for assisting with tax 
declarations, including communication with tax authorities, and suggesting new possibilities 
based on our intents are an old dream. 
 
37 For instance, http://understandingaf447.com/extras/18-4_minutes__23_seconds_EN.pdf 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 12 
 
Embodied companions are also designated to assist truck drivers, ship captains, caregivers, 
investors, managers, workers, lawyers, and, in fact, everybody. Potential benefits of these kinds of 
embodied companions include increased safety, reliability, efficiency, affordability, and previously 
unattainable capabilities. 
 
 
Figure 3. Federated retail. 
 
Service Federations 
When using current shopping websites, the consumer selects an order from a large but 
ultimately fixed set of product options and configurations, and the ordered goods are, by and 
large, already produced and stored in a system of warehouses to guarantee speedy delivery. As 
such, the traditional shopping experience has just moved from a physical store to a retail 
website, but the whole process builds on established stakeholder roles of consumers, producers, 
logisticians, and chains of retailers. 
We might think, however, of more flexible setups that start with a software-defined custom 
design instead of a custom order. An often-cited example is custom-designed sneakers that 
might even be 3D knitted, say, in a store.38 Other obvious examples are software-defined custom 
cars or mission-specific drones. The journey thus starts with a custom design, which is usually 
constructed by instantiating available design patterns and composing them into the desired 
design and a corresponding production plan. 
 
38 See Speed Factory (https://www.digitale-
technologien.de/DT/Redaktion/DE/Standardartikel/AutonomikFuerIndustrieProjekte/autonomik_fuer_industrie_projekt-
speedfactory.html) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 13 
 
This new design and the production plan can be made available to others to build upon, 
analogous to an app store. Let us assume, however, that the design now needs to be realized, 
that is, the production plan needs to be executed. Instead of identifying a suitable production site 
upfront, a bidding process is started among several production sites and logistics providers to 
dynamically set up a suitable distributed production chain for realizing the custom design. 
In Figure 3, this process of connecting the digital production plan with real-world production 
entities, such as 3D printers, robots, and flexible production lines together with storage and 
transport capabilities, for moving partly finished products is referred to as deployment.39 Some of 
these entities, such as the shipping service, may operate autonomously and are possibly 
organized as their own virtual companies. 
Such a deployment might be chosen according to different criteria, including the traditional triad 
of costs, quality, and time-to-delivery. For example, the ordering customer is provided with the 
option of a reduced price if they accept a, say, two-day shipping delay. Additionally, flexible 
deployment might take other all-important attributes such as resilience to faults or even partial 
collapse of selected production or logistics capabilities, sustainability (for example, climate 
neutrality), and other ethical considerations (for example, no child labor). These attributes might 
now even be part of the ordering process itself, thereby enabling everybody to act on behalf of 
their own personal beliefs and social values and directly influence the world through seemingly 
mundane everyday acts such as ordering goods. 
Altogether, the customer is not (only) a customer anymore because they can order the 
manufacturing of the goods they want or need. Moreover, integrated production and logistics 
chains are broken up into highly specialized services, which are orchestrated flexibly and in a 
highly distributed fashion. Production and logistics services might be realized through in-
creasingly autonomously acting actors, who might do their own bidding for providing services 
with the purpose of forming dynamic coalitions. From this point of view, there does not seem to 
be a direct need for a traditional retailer40 as an intermediary between customers and producers 
anymore. 
By and large, we might be able to realize a proof-of-concept prototype of the embodied retail 
system as depicted in Figure with the currently available technology. In fact, the attentive reader 
might already have noticed that the embodied retailer is structured according to the main 
principles of model-driven design, namely, platform-independent model, platform-dependent 
modeland a deployment relation between those two models. 
 
39 In general, such a deployment is an n:m relation between services in the virtual world and their physical embodiments. 
40 Maybe as an embodied system? 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 14 
 
However, the extra flexibility of the embodied retail system comes with a cost, and we do not yet 
have a foundational understanding of the necessary operators for composing the required 
designs and service nor do we have anything that comes close to the required large-scale 
deployment schemes. Serious questions have also been raised regarding resilience—that is, 
tolerance, isolation, and recovery from faults, breakdowns, and cyberattacks.41 
 
From the business and societal perspective, the main open questions involve the feasibility of 
corresponding value chains, incentivization and regulation, (product) liability issues, intellectual 
property, payment systems, and tax laws. Indeed, systems, such as the outlined federation for 
retail, do not only have the potential to disrupt established economic cycles but also shake up 
established social, economic, and governmental structures and infrastructures. 
 
The embodied retail scenario has been designed to also demonstrate the possible elimination of 
middlemen between consumer and service providers, thereby enabling completely new value 
chains in the upcoming era of postplatform ecosystems. These kinds of dynamic federations of 
embodied service systems may well make currently well-established retail platforms and 
middlemen, such as Amazon, Uber, or AirBnB, superfluous. They also rely on flexible 
infrastructural services for payment systems, insurance, and arbitration boards, among others. 
We can easily abstract from the main building principles of embodied retail to other societal-
scale lifeworlds to create similar scenarios; in particular, critical supply infrastructures (for 
example, energy/water), mobility (for example, integrated transportation), medical (for example, 
personalized medicine), law (for example, judicial Q&A advisors, attorneys-at-law, and software 
judges in line with Leibniz’s rational actors), and government (for example, seamless and 
proactive government services). 
 
Numerous other examples of embodied federated systems can be found across many 
application domains, such as collaborative IoT systems for supply–demand interaction (for 
example, machine–machine, human–machine) in industrial applications, prosumer interaction 
and collaboration under permanently changing conditions in the energy domain, ad hoc 
collaboration between smart infrastructure and autonomous vehicles, self-engineering and 
reconfiguration of automation components in building automation, or self-managed production 
logistics and warehouse logistics with a heterogeneous fleet of AGVs, which are able to self-
adapt to heterogeneous production floors and tasks. 
 
41 Fault detection, isolation, recovery (FDIR) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 15 
 
Moreover, next-generation communication networks are expected to sense, compute, learn, 
reason, act on business intent, and manage the ongoing explosion of data from an ever-
increasing number of connected intelligent devices and a multiplicity of new use cases, along 
with ever-changing network topologies.42 Zero-touch network operations for coping with the 
growing system’s complexity, size, and reduced decision-making lead time result in an increased 
level of network autonomy and self-adapting automation, where unforeseen situations, intents, 
and requirements can usually be addressed without human intervention. 
 
 
 
42 Ericsson. Artificial intelligence in next-generation connected systems. Whitepaper, 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 16 
 
2. 
Characteristics 
Embodied systems comprise federations of collaborating actors. They operate in largely 
unpredictable environments, physical or not, and they recognize this environment through 
sensors. Moreover, they are informed about the intentions of other actors in their respective and 
immediate operating environments; take nontrivial decisions based on reasoning; influence their 
environment, including other actors, via actuators; interact and cooperate with the elements of 
their operating environment; influence elements in their environment to better meet their own 
goals43; show a certain behavior based on skills; and learn new and improved behavior during 
operation and through interactions.44 Altogether, an embodied system is characterized as being: 
 
Cognitive. as actions are based on situational awareness, model building, and planning. 
 
Intent-driven. as actions are based on capturing actors’ intents, tasks, and goals. 
 
Federated. as actions of decentralized actors are coordinated in a collaborative manner 
between stakeholders and on an intentional level to accomplish joint tasks or missions. 
 
Autonomous. as actions are increasingly determined by an actor’s, or federations of actors’, 
own knowledge, beliefs, intents, preferences, and choices. 
 
Self-learning. as actions are adapted and improved through experience, exploration, and 
reasoning, both inductive and deductive, of a situated actor. 
Embodied systems may, therefore, be viewed as autonomous and self-learning CPSs with intent-
driven, goal-oriented, and collaborative behavior. 
Embodied systems, therefore, go well beyond current functional automated systems, such as 
autopilots for landing an airplane, parking a car, or manufacturing robots, which are all designed 
to handle limited tasks in precisely specified operational contexts. Task execution in functional 
automated systems is planned offline or during design time and they usually do not learn during 
operation. Moreover, collaboration is restricted to the exchange of information about the system 
context, and they rely on a fallback mechanism to a human operator when encountering 
unforeseen and difficult situations. Most current systems, including production or household 
robots, are functional automated systems, and we are on the edge of deploying intent- and 
mission-oriented systems. Simple collaborative systems have started to be established. Self-
learning during operation, however, is currently impossible for mission-critical and safety-related 
applications. 
 
43 For example, Mechanism Design (see also: Roughgarden. Algorithmic Game Theory. CACM, 2010).  
44 Putzer, Wozniak. Trustworthy Autonomous/Cognitive Systems. fortiss, 2021. (see also: 
https://www.fortiss.org/fileadmin/user_upload/05_Veroeffentlichungen/Informationsmaterialien/fortiss_whitepaper_trustworthy_AC
S_web.pdf) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 17 
 
Cognitive Systems 
 
Cognition may be defined as the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and 
understanding through experience and the senses.45 Clearly, it is only in conjunction with 
cognitive faculties that systems and machines develop their full potential and address a 
constantly growing number of new challenges in daily use. 
In a system with cognitive faculties, individual or interconnected objects, therefore, cannot only 
perceive the physical environment but are also able to learn from the wealth of experience 
gained, derive new insights, understand contexts, and make important decisions in a supportive 
or autonomous manner. 
 
The essential cognitive faculties are:46 47 
 
Perception. Fusion and interpretation of a multitude of sensors, stimuli, and observed 
behavior; removal of vagueness and ambiguity in input data; and synthesis of relevant 
information such as the detection, localization, and classification of relevant surrounding 
objects. 48 
 
Interpretation. Construction and update of faithful representations (“digital twins”) of the 
exogenous operating environment and the endogenous “self” based on perceived inputs and 
other knowledge sources. 
 
Imagination. Model-based capability of situational awareness, inductive and deductive 
reasoning, planning, and projection into the future (and the past) based on both exogenous 
and endogenous world models, derived knowledge, and perceived input. 
 
Action. Selecting and prioritizing appropriate goals for a given configuration of the 
environmental models, and current beliefs and intents to achieve the selected goals by 
balancing optimized performance with the need for resilience. 
 
Learning. Ability to adapt and optimize situational behavior; to adapt internal models, goal 
management, and planning processes dynamically; and to acquire new knowledge through 
inductive and deductive reasoning. 
 
 
45 https://www.lexico.com/ 
 
46 The selection of these cognitive capabilities is inspired by “axioms,” which are considered necessary for machine intelligence (see 
also: Aleksander. Machine Consciousness, Progress in Brain Research. Elsevier, 2005). The big questions, however, center on 
cognitive capabilities sufficient for machine consciousness. 
47 See also: Metzler, Shea. Taxonomy of cognitive functions. Engineering Design, 2011. 
48 Guidance, Navigation, and Control (GNC) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 18 
 
Situational-aware reasoning, planning, and learning, therefore, are the main ingredients of the 
sense–plan–act cycle (Figure 4), which is the central architectural concept of cognitive actors in 
the field of artificial intelligence (AI).49 In other words, AI is concerned principally with designing 
the internals of stream-transforming cognitive actors for mapping from a stream of raw 
perceptual data to a stream of actions, whereas EI primarily focuses on the perception of and 
actions on a physical world. 
 
 
Figure 4. Sense–plan–act cycle. 
Designs for cognitive actors vary considerably depending on the nature of the operating 
environment, nature of the perceptual and motor connections between actors and environment, 
and requirements of the task. For instance, cognitive faculties are categorized as System 1 (fast) 
capabilities for performing intuitive, automated tasks that we can do instinctively and as System 2 
(slow) capabilities for performing tasks that require conscious decision-making and may be 
described verbally.50 
There has always been a tendency in AI to use a heterogeneous set of techniques for realizing 
these two categories of cognitive capabilities, as machine implementations of System 1 
functionality are often based on logic and probability theory (“symbolic”), and the 
implementation of System 2 functionality primarily uses connectionist (“subsymbolic”) 
 
49 Russell, Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson, 2021. 
50 According to the global workspace theory of consciousness. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 19 
 
approaches, which are inspired by the networked neural structure of the brain. Building on these 
two pillars of AI, cognitive architectures, such as Soar51, integrate logic with connectionist 
techniques to realize autonomous robotic (both virtual and physical) systems that have some 
basic cognitive abilities of humans but also in search of a unified theory of cognition52. With a 
similar motivation in mind, neurosymbolic programming proposes integrated frameworks that 
have the pure neural, logical, and probabilistic methods as special cases.53 Symbolic reasoning 
capabilities, however, may also be encoded with connectionist networks. 
 
Intent-driven Systems 
Everything an actor needs to know about its goals and expected actions must be defined by 
means of intents of both human and machine actors. The aim of intent-driven systems is to 
capture relevant intents and to act in accordance with these intents in an optimized and resilient 
manner.54 Intent-driven networks, for example, can predict faults to proactively optimize 
performance and carry out repairs.55 
Intents of actors are ideally expressed explicitly and declaratively—that is, as utility-level goals56 
that describe the properties (what?) of a satisfactory outcome rather than prescribe a specific 
solution (how?). This gives the system the flexibility to explore various solution options and find 
an optimized one. It also allows the system to optimize by choosing its own goals that maximize 
utility. One of the benefits of expressing intents as utility-level goals is that doing so supports the 
system in coping with conflicting objectives of multiple intents. This is vital because an embodied 
actor often must take multiple intents into account before making a decision. 
Unlike traditional software-intensive systems, where requirements are analyzed offline to detect 
and resolve conflicts prior to implementation, intents are added to an embodied system and 
modified during operation. Adaptation to changed intent as well as conflict detection and 
resolution are, therefore, essential capabilities of embodied systems. 
 
One of the main challenges for specifying goals and intents of embodied systems operating in 
the real world, however, is that there is very little chance that we can specify our objectives 
completely and correctly in such a way that the pursuit of those objectives by more capable 
 
51 Laird. The SOAR Cognitive Architecture. MIT Press, 2012. 
52 Newell. Unified Theories of Cognition. Cambridge, 1990. 
53 Raedt, Manhaeve, Dumancic. Neuro-symbolic = Neural + logic + probabilistic. IJCAI, 2019. 
54 Silvander, Wnuk, Svahnberg. Systematic literature review on intent-driven systems. IET Software, 14(4), 2020. 
55 Huawei. Huawei launches the intent-driven network solution to maximum business value, 2018. (see: 
http://www.huawei.com/en/press-events/news/2018/2/Huawei-Launches-the-Intent-Driven-Network-Solution) 
56 Including those that may have been considered “common sense” in human-operated systems. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 20 
 
machines has beneficial outcomes.57 In particular, we can expect a sufficiently capable machine 
that is pursuing a fixed objective to take preemptive steps to ensure that the stated objective is 
achieved, including acquiring physical and computational resources and defending against any 
possible attempt to interfere with goal achievement. 58 
This ability to recognize plans, goals, and intents of other actors enables basic cognitive 
capabilities to reason about what other actors are doing, why they are doing it, and what they 
will do next. Consider, for example, a robotic butler that does all the boring, repetitive tasks that 
we wish we did not have to do. Ultimately, we want household assistants that can anticipate our 
intentions and plans, and provably act in accordance with them. Building these kinds of proactive 
assistant systems requires a plan, action, and intent recognition for accurately capturing and 
tracking the operator’s requirements.59 
Plan, goal, and intent recognition also enable different actors to negotiate with each other on 
behalf of their peers’ intent as the basis for a potential mutually beneficial collaboration. For 
example, one actor may have the intent to deliver high-quality service, while another may want 
to minimize resource spending. Current AI technology resolves such conflicts either explicitly 
from weights that introduce relative importance or implicitly from properties of preferential 
outcomes as defined in utility-level goals. 
 
Federated Systems 
A federated system consists of an ensemble of interacting actors, both machines and humans, 
that collaborate to jointly perform a common task or achieve a common goal through the 
mutual provision of actions that individual systems alone cannot achieve.60 61 
In doing so, these ensembles exchange relevant information, negotiate their goals, plans, and 
intentions, and they adapt their own actions to the negotiated plan. This aspect of negotiation—
that is, the ability to confer with another as to arrive at the settlement of some matter62—is a 
central activity, and the realization of “confer” and “arrive at settlement” are among the 
challenges for designing collaborative, federated systems The community of distributed AI in 
particular has developed a range of models of collaborative plans in the face of resource 
constraints and uncertainty. 
 
57 “So tell me what you want, what you really, really want…” (Spice Girls, Wannabe) 
58 Russell. Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control. Springer, 2021. 
59 Sukthankar et al (Eds.). Plan, Activity, and Intent Recognition: Theory and Practice. Newnes, 2014. 
60 Böhm et al. Model-based Engineering of Collaborative Embedded Systems. Springer Nature, 2021. 
61 Grosz. Collaborative Systems, AAAI-94 Presidential Address. AI Magazine, 1996. 
62 Mish (Ed.). Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. 1988. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 21 
 
Collaborative federated systems are often safety-critical, operate in dynamic contexts, and must 
be capable of reacting to unforeseen situations without human inter- vention. On the one hand, 
they must be able to handle uncertainties due to the imprecision of sensors and the behavior of 
data-driven components for perceiving and interpreting the context to enable decisions to be 
made during operation. On the other hand, uncertainties can emerge from the collaboration in a 
collaborative group related to the exchange of information (e.g., context knowledge) between 
collaborative systems. Uncertainty that can occur during operation should be considered 
systematically during engineering to enable collaborating systems to cope with uncertainties 
autonomously. 
Effective collaboration strongly relies on the assumption that most, if not all, actors operate as 
expected. Therefore, a level of trust and distrust between actors needs to be established as part 
of the collaboration.63 Measures need to be taken to tolerate a certain number of non-
collaborating and ineffective actors, but also actors with malicious intentions. In particular, the 
security design of current decentralized systems with their heterogeneous components, 
including components-off-the-shelf and software of unknown pedigree, start with a zero-trust 
model, which is then mitigated with the right mix of security measures to create challenging 
barriers for attackers, including pervasive authentication and corresponding checks of all 
interactions. 
 
Autonomous Systems 
Current industrial practice is mainly concerned with developing remotely operated vehicles 
(“teleoperated driving”) and self-operated systems for restricted time periods and for restricted 
objectives such as remotely piloted air systems in case of a lost data link, pilotless underwater 
vehicles, and driverless metros in controlled urban environments. Yet, we are only at the very 
beginning of a new generation of autonomous systems, which are characterized by increasingly 
autonomous behavior in increasingly complex environments, fulfilling missions of increasing 
complexity, the ability to collaborate with other machines and humans, and the capability to 
learn from experience and adapt their behavior appropriately. 
As it is designed to perform the equivalent operational tasks of understanding through 
experiencing and sensing, an autonomous system, therefore, may be viewed as a technical 
implementation of cognition. These systems perform and integrate heterogeneous sets of tasks 
on the basis of an overall situational assessment. 
 
 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 22 
 
In contrast to mere automation, increasingly autonomous systems employ a never-give-up 
strategy even in the face of real difficulties, such as inconsistencies, unforeseen situations, and 
authority limits (see “Robotic Companions”). Potential benefits include increased safety, reliability, 
efficiency, affordability, and previously unattainable mission capability. Clearly, with more 
autonomy come more and different forms of responsibility. 
In the absence of an adequately high level of autonomy that can be relied upon, substantial 
involvement by human supervisors and operators is required. Increasingly autonomous systems 
support humans in daily routine tasks, have humans in the loop for continuous control of the 
evolution of subsystems, and ask humans for high-level decision-making. This kind of mixed 
human–machine system creates significant new challenges in the areas of human–machine 
collaboration and mixed-initiative control. 
 
The overarching goal is in achieving a sufficient mutual understanding of the state and intent of 
both humans and technical systems to optimally blend their competencies in jointly acting 
toward overarching objectives while respecting privacy. The challenge here is to model human 
behavior interactions and provide the appropriate uncertainty characteristics related to the 
largely unpredictable behavior of humans under unforeseen circumstances. Moreover, as 
individual spheres of control may overlap arbitrarily, these processes need to be orchestrated 
such that they jointly serve, say, not only a single human but can possibly best multitask in 
serving arbitrarily large groups at the same time despite uncorrelated requests and 
uncoordinated missions. 
 
Self-Learning Systems 
One of the distinctive features of embodied systems is their ability to continuously improve their 
knowledge and capabilities through experience, both positive and negative, and targeted 
exploration in the real world. This ability of self-learning through exploration is, of course, a far 
cry from supervised machine learning (ML) schemes for synthesizing, say, neural network 
representations for approximating functions from given input–output samples. The “learned” 
behavior may often not be transferred to other operating contexts. An end-to-end autonomous 
controller, for example, might work well for driving around in the outskirts of Phoenix for which 
it was trained. However, we most probably expect it to fail miserably when placed on the streets 
of Algiers or when it is navigating around the Gateway of India.  
This is because the neural network controller has not actually learned to drive in the way that we 
humans are supposed to when visiting a driving school. The controller was just trained to mimic 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 23 
 
a context-specific set of driving scenarios, and there is no reason to expect it to generalize its 
behavior to radically new contexts. 
In contrast, autopoietic systems autonomously extend their perception and attention, situational 
representation and interpretation of the perceived world, actions, and collaboration patterns, and 
are able to communicate such learned capabilities with other systems64: “An autopoietic 
machine is a machine organized (…) as a network of processes of production (transformation 
and destruction) of components which: (i) through their interactions and transformations 
continuously regenerate and realize the network of processes (relations) that produced them; 
and (ii) constitute it (the machine) as a concrete unity in space in which they (the components) 
exist by specifying the topological domain of its realization as such a network.” The unsupervised 
learning ability through interacting with its operating context (including the “self”) is the major 
characteristic of autopoietic systems. This behavior is close to human behavior and possibly also 
the ultimate dream of AI. 
 
Achieving higher levels of autonomy in open—that is, uncertain, unstructured, and dynamic—
environments and terrain increasingly involves data-driven ML techniques with many open-
systems science and engineering challenges. The prevalent approach in autonomous driving, for 
example, aims to reduce the uncertainty of the operating context by compiling and continuously 
extending large sets of driving scenarios that sufficiently (up to tolerable quantities?) cover all 
possible situations as the basis for continuous self-learning ecosystems on a global scale. 
New and more efficient control regimes for reliable and safe exploration of unknown terrain are 
clearly needed, as embodied systems must necessarily act with complete, uncertain, and even 
inconsistent models of the world. Possible approaches that are currently being pursued include 
the learning and use of causal models, employment of an ensemble of models, and multifaced 
understanding.65  
 
 
64 Maturana, Varela. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living. Kluwer, 1980. 
65 Minsky: “You don’t really understand something if you only understand it one way.” 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 24 
 
3. 
Trustworthiness 
Embodied systems are a new generation of increasingly autonomous systems operating in real-
world societal contexts. Thus, the actions of embodied systems do matter. 
The autonomous behavior of embodied systems also implies a real danger of losing control 
because self-learning systems may exhibit emergent behavior, evolve much faster than we as 
humans may even comprehend, and are able to self-organize in increasingly powerful dynamic 
federations. These essential features of embodied systems make it even harder to ensure that 
meaningful (human) control over an embodied system is enabled in the field. 
If embodied systems—and the human beings behind them—are not demonstrably worthy of 
trust, unwanted consequences may ensue, and their uptake might be hindered, preventing the 
realization of the potentially vast social and economic benefits that they can bring. 
Trustworthiness, therefore, is a prerequisite for people and societies to develop, deploy, and use 
embodied systems in a meaningful manner. 
Trust may be viewed either as a belief, attitude, intention, or behavior, and as such, it is a 
complex notion in itself. It is most generally understood as a subjective evaluation of a trustor on 
a trustee about something in particular—for example, the completion of a task.66 A classical 
definition from organization theory defines trust as the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to 
the actions of another party on the basis of the expectation that the other will perform a 
particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that 
party.67 An expert group commissioned by the EC recently identified three main ingredients for 
trustworthy AI-based systems.68 Specifically, they recommend trustworthy systems to be at least: 
 
Lawful. that is, complying with applicable laws and regulations, 
 
Ethical. that is, ensuring adherence to applicable ethical principles and values, 
 
Robust. that is, predictable and sustained functionality in the face of uncertainty, faults, and 
malicious attacks. 
Respecting the vast amount of largely unwritten norms for accepted social behavior is also 
instrumental for building up trust. 
Explicit lawful and ethical actors have been proposed based on implementing legal theories, 
human-like competence, and ethical theories predicated on virtue ethics, deontology, and 
consequentialism.69 For example, when ethical principles are in conflict, attempts are made to 
 
66 Hardin. Trust and Trustworthiness. Russell Sage Foundation, 2002. 
67 Mayer, Davis, Schoorman. An integrative model of organizational trust. Academy of Management Review, 1995. 
68 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/expert-group-ai 
69 Scheutz. The case for explicit ethical agents. AI Magazine, 2017. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 25 
 
work out reasonable resolutions. For contexts where informing others of one’s intention and 
reasoning is crucial, these actors communicate and even defend their reasoning. 
Explicit lawful and ethical actors, however, are inevitably tied to a specific societal context. 
Therefore, societal-scale CPS that is parameterized by social contexts has been proposed. This 
approach is based on (1) understanding the nature, scope, and evolution of policies in the 
operation of societal-scale CPS in different societies, (2) investigating methods for the explicit 
formal representation of societal context, and (3) developing architectures that guarantee the 
enforcement of policy requirements.70 
 
Table 1. Principles by the EC for responsible and trustworthy artificial intelligence.71 
Human agency and oversight 
Including fundamental rights, human agency, and human 
oversight. 
Technical robustness and 
safety  
Including resilience to attack and security, fallback plan, and 
general safety, accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility. 
Privacy and data governance 
Including respect for privacy, quality and integrity of data, and 
access to data. 
Transparency 
Including traceability, explainability, and communication. 
Diversity, nondiscrimination, 
and fairness 
Including the avoidance of unfair bias, accessibility and 
universal design, and stakeholder participation. 
Societal and environmental 
wellbeing 
Including sustainability and environmental friendliness, social 
impact, society, and democracy. 
Accountability 
Including auditability, minimization, and reporting of negative 
impact, tradeoffs, and redress. 
 
We briefly describe different accounts in the EU and US for trustworthy AI-based systems. Table 1 
summarizes the lawful, ethical, and robustness attributes for responsible and trustworthy AI as 
developed on behalf of the European Commission. Figure 5 displays these practices, which are 
recommended to be implemented and continuously evaluated throughout the system’s life 
cycle. These are strong recommendations on the use of AI techniques, which seem to be well 
beyond the current practice for data- and information-driven societal processes.  Notably, most 
 
70 NSF PIRE 16-571: Science of Design for Societal-Scale Cyber–Physical Systems 
71 https://www.aepd.es/sites/default/files/2019-12/ai-ethics-guidelines.pdf 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 26 
 
of these recommendations are not specific to AI-ish techniques and may, therefore, be part of 
any kind of machine ethics. If and how continuous evaluation of these attributes (see Figure 5) 
can be realized in a practical manner are also unclear, as current auditing frameworks are 
inefficient, slow, and error-prone for self-learning and ever-evolving systems, and we currently 
do not have adequate technical means for automated compliance audits. Moreover, tradeoffs 
usually need to be made in real-life engineering to address seemingly contradictory attributes 
such as privacy and transparency.  
 
 
Figure 5. Attributes of trustworthy artificial intelligence.72 
 
 
 
 
72 Source: EU High-Level Expert Group on AI (https://www.aepd.es/sites/default/files/2019-12/ai-ethics-guidelines.pdf) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 27 
 
In a similar vein, the principles in Table 2 by the ACM for transparency and accountability 73 are 
designed to increase trust in all kinds of algorithmic systems. 
Table 2. ACM principles for transparency and accountability.74 
Awareness 
Owners, designers, builders, users, and other stakeholders of analytic 
systems should be aware of the possible biases involved in their design, 
implementation, and use and the potential harm that biases can cause to 
individuals and society. 
Access and 
redress 
Regulators should encourage the adoption of mechanisms that enable 
questioning and redress for individuals and groups that are adversely 
affected by algorithmically informed decisions. 
Accountability 
Institutions should be held responsible for decisions made by the algorithms 
that they use, even if explaining in detail how the algorithms produce their 
results is not feasible. 
Explanation 
Systems and institutions that use algorithmic decision-making are 
encouraged to produce explanations regarding both the procedures 
followed by the algorithm and the specific decisions that are made. This is 
particularly important in public policy contexts. 
Data provenance 
A description of the way the training data was collected should be 
maintained by the builders of the algorithms, accompanied by an 
exploration of the potential biases induced by the human or algorithmic 
data-gathering process. Public scrutiny of the data provides maximum 
opportunity for corrections. However, concerns over privacy, protecting 
trade secrets, or revelation of analytics that might allow malicious actors to 
game the system can justify restricting access to qualified and authorized 
individuals. 
Auditability 
Models, algorithms, data, and decisions should be recorded so that they can 
be audited in cases where harm is suspected. 
Validation and 
testing 
Institutions should use rigorous methods to validate their models and 
document those methods and their results. In particular, they should 
routinely perform tests to assess and determine whether the model 
generates discriminatory harm. Institutions are encouraged to make the 
results of such tests public. 
 
 
 
 
73 ACM Code of Ethics (http://ethics.acm.org) 
74 ACM Code of Ethics (http://ethics.acm.org) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 28 
 
We may observe a strong overlap of the trustworthiness requirements in the EU and US because 
of the relative similarity of the underlying systems of social values. However, the ACM principles 
for transparency and accountability tend to be phrased more in technical terms; consequently, 
they seem to be more amenable to automated compliance. The ACM principles for transparency 
and accountability were clearly formulated with current AI/ML techniques in mind. As such, they 
do not adequately address the characteristics of the upcoming generation of increasingly 
autonomous and self-learning systems. Particularly, clearly identifiable “institutions” anymore for 
operating an embodied system may no longer exist, and embodied systems might eventually 
need to be held responsible for their very own actions.  
 
Moreover, the demand for data provenance as formulated above may not be applicable to 
continuous, unsupervised learning. Depending on the intended role of embodied systems in 
societal contexts, ranging from mere assistants to fully autonomous actors, the ACM principles 
for transparency and accountability, therefore, need to be revised, developed further, and agreed 
upon to fit the characteristics of a new generation of increasingly autonomous and self-learning 
systems. We also need to develop techniques for ensuring algorithmic transparency and 
accountability for dynamic federations of increasingly autonomous, learning-enabled, and 
embodied systems. 
 
 
Figure 6. Mapping from main characteristics of embodied systems to 
corresponding system challenges. AI, artificial intelligence. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 29 
 
 
 
4. 
Challenges 
Traditional system engineering comes to a juncture from assuring the quality of service, 
dependability, and safety attributes for relatively small-scale, centralized, deterministic, and 
predictable, nonevolvable, automated embedded systems operating in well-defined and 
predictable environments to assure the trustworthiness of larger-scale, federated, unpredictable, 
self-learning, and increasingly autonomous embodied systems operating in uncertain and largely 
unknown environments. These differences between embedded and embodied systems are 
summarized in Figure 7. 
 
 
Embedded systems 
Embodied systems 
Architecture 
Centralized 
Federated 
Behavior 
Deterministic 
Largely 
unpredictable 
Context 
Well defined 
Uncertain 
Maintenance 
Updates 
Self-learning 
Requirement 
Dependability 
Trustworthiness 
Human control 
Yes 
Increasingly no 
Figure 7. From embedded to embodied systems. 
 
Thereby, we can build up trust by engineering embodied systems that are lawful, ethical, and 
robust. Compared with traditional embedded systems engineering, we face the following 
additional challenges, particularly in embodied systems: 
 
Learn continuously and adapt and optimize their behavior based on experience and targeted 
exploration. 
 
Need to safely operate in partially unknown or uncertain environments, and they need to be 
robust in the presence of inaccuracies, uncertainty, and errors in their world models (“known 
unknown”) and also in the presence of nonmodeled phenomena (“unknown unknown”). 
 
Increasingly lack fallback to a responsible human being. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 30 
 
 
Offer a variety of new attack surfaces due to data-driven programming.75 
 
Exhibit largely unpredictable and emergent behavior due to data-driven programming. 
 
Cannot be certified because current certification regimes require the system’s behavior and 
its intended operating context to be fully specified and verified prior to commissioning. 
For the continuous evolvability and self-organizing capabilities of embodied systems, the 
traditional design–build–commission–decommission life cycle of embedded systems is 
inadequate and clearly needs to be replaced with a design–operation continuum based on the 
combined functionality for design, simulation/verification, deployment, operation, and 
maintenance. 
Given the expected lifetime of embodied systems, they must be designed to cope with changing 
underlying technologies and hardware, regulatory settings, societal contexts, system 
requirements, and yet provide the same high level of dependability and quality of service 
throughout their evolution. It is even perceivable that certain design and engineering steps, 
including situational risk management, are eventually performed by the embodied systems 
themselves. 
On the basis of the characteristics of embodied systems as outlined in Section 2, we are now 
deriving all-important systems challenges for developing, deploying, and operating trustworthy 
embodied systems. A high-level summary of this derivation is provided in Figure 6. However, this 
figure depicts the most obvious and possibly the most important relations between 
characteristics and derived challenges for engineering trustworthy embodied systems. 
 
Robust Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning 
ML techniques are ubiquitous and have many successful applications. The main attraction of ML 
is that functional requirements are stated in terms of data only, and a corresponding program for 
approximating such a function is synthesized in an automated fashion. Moreover, engineering 
steps from data wrangling to architectural selection and optimization of the function 
approximation are increasingly being automated.76 However, these advantages also come with 
some downsides. 
 
Current learning techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANNs), for example, are only 
as good as the available data (and their resource-intensive preprocessing and labeling 
requirements). 
 
75 vulgo: machine learning. 
76 Xin, Zhao, Chu. AutoML: A survey of the state-of-the-art. Knowledge-Based Systems, 212, 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 31 
 
 
Uncertainty exists with regard to the input–output behavior of the learned function 
approximators usually because they are not robust in the sense that small changes to the 
input might result in unexpected behavior; for example, one-pixel attacks of trained classifiers 
are successful for many ANNs. 
 
The learned function is usually restricted to the context as encoded in the learning data with 
limited transferability.77 
 
The input–output behavior of the learned function is implicit and not transparent in that the 
reasons for proposed decisions are opaque. For example, a neural network for classifying 
tumors as benign or not might show human-like performance, but further explanation is 
usually given to the human diagnostician. 
 
Current supervised learning algorithms based on stochastic gradient descent, for example, 
are rather data-intensive and inefficient. Small children, in particular, have the ability to form 
concepts such as “cow” on the basis of only a few encounters. 
 
As we gain more experience with developing and deploying ML-based systems for real-world 
challenges, we realize some shortcomings.78 
 
Adequate data often are not or not readily available, and crucial data for specifying the 
intended behavior might become available during development and operation only. 
Traditional process models with clearly defined phases of requirements engineering, 
however, do not adequately support the extra flexibility needed by a data-driven AI 
development approach. 
 
Building data-driven ML systems requires a comprehensive wealth of experience, even 
though this kind of expert knowledge (“Which learning algorithm?,” “Which architecture?,” 
“Which hyperparameters?”) is increasingly being captured in automated metalearning 
processes.79 
 
An ML system is often more than just ML; building and running it is a serious software and 
systems engineering undertaking. However, generally accepted or even standardized 
processes, methods, and tools for the development and operation of predictable and 
transparent ML are largely missing. 
 
77 “The soccer bot lines up to take a shot at the goal. But instead of getting ready to block it, the goalkeeper drops to the ground and 
wiggles its legs. Confused, the striker does a weird little sideways dance, stamping its feet and waving one arm, and then falls over. 1-
0 to the goalie… AI trained using reinforcement learning can be tricked by … an adversarial policy.” (quoted from Heaven. 
Reinforcement learning AI are vulnerable to a new kind of attack. MIT Technology Review, Artificial Intelligence, 2020) 
78 Standards for engineering trustworthy autonomous systems are currently emerging, in particular, VDE-AR-E 2842-61 of the 
standardization organization DKE (cmp. https://www.dke.de/de/normen-standards/dokument?id=7141809&type=dke|dokument ) 
79 For example, AutoML. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 32 
 
 
Current ML applications usually do not adequately address trustworthiness attributes, as 
outlined in Section 3. 
Moreover, most ML applications nowadays are based on supervised learning, which does not 
support the required self-learning capabilities of embodied systems. However, reinforcement 
learning, which is based on optimizing objective functions, is a good starting point, where inverse 
reinforcement learning might be used for intent recognition. However, current approaches to 
reinforcement learning require a large number of trials. Failed attempts in the real world might 
result in undesired behavior, accidents, or other catastrophic events. 
Techniques for safe and predictable self-learning and exploration of uncertain and unpredictable 
real worlds are still in their infancy. Promising approaches for tackling the added complexities of 
autonomous actors in real-world settings include hybrid combinations80 of classical and 
learning-based algorithms and the incorporation of prior knowledge.81 
How can one learner who does not know what there is to learn, manage to learn anymore? 
Current ML approaches usually start with what needs to be learned for learning. We, as humans, 
however, can discover both the tasks to be learned and the solution to those tasks through 
exploration or nongoal-directed action. 
 
ML has mainly concentrated on nonincremental learning tasks, where the entire training set is 
fixed at the start of learning and then is either presented in its entirety or randomly sampled. 
Embodied actors, however, need to learn incrementally and continuously through exploration. 
ML is also increasingly being augmented with domain-specific knowledge, and rules to increase 
the efficiency and effectiveness of ML, rules, and decision trees might also be compiled from 
learned behavior, which themselves can be used to improve further learning and make decisions 
transparent, say, to a human operator. In this way, domain knowledge, such as physical laws, is 
currently integrated into ML using techniques such as regularization, data augmentation, or 
postprocessing. 
A recent survey on knowledge-augmented ML82 reviews the role of knowledge in ML and 
discusses its relation to the concept of invariance. Neurosymbolic integration (with logic, 
probability theory, and neural structures as projections) has been proposed as the basis for a new 
generation of dependable, predictable, transparent, and efficient data-driven programming 
 
80 Chaplol et al. Learning to explore using active neural slam. ICLR, 2020. 
81 Ye, Yang. From seeing to moving: As survey on learning for visual indoor navigation. arXiv:2002.11310, 2020. 
82 
https://www.fortiss.org/fileadmin/user_upload/05_Veroeffentlichungen/Whitepaper/fortiss_whitepaper_knowledge_as_invariance_
web.pdf 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 33 
 
techniques for realizing increasingly autonomous human assistants and/or for mission- and 
safety-relevant applications. 
Despite technological advances that have led to the proliferation of data-driven ML systems, the 
question of the level of trust that we can put in these systems remains. What is needed, 
therefore, is a new generation of robust ML algorithms that,83 
 
can operate in uncertain and largely unpredictable environments, 
 
can make timely and confident decisions, 
 
produce results that are understandable and explainable to a human operator, 
 
are resilient to erroneous inputs and targeted attacks, 
 
can process ever-increasing amounts of data, 
 
come from decentralized and heterogeneous data sources, 
 
can extract useful insights from small amounts of data and sparse rewards, 
 
do not make significant compromises in confidentiality and privacy in federated multiactor 
settings. 
Traditionally, ML modeling techniques have relied on unsiloing data from multiple sources into a 
single data lake. Centralized data sources, however, pose serious privacy, data misuse, and 
security challenges for federated systems. Moreover, aggregating diverse data from multiple 
sources need to meet regulatory principles such as the General Data Protection Rights (GDPR), 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), or CCPA (we will reconsider 
these issues in the subsection below on Assurance). To overcome these challenges, several 
pillars of privacy-preserving ML have been developed for unsiloing ML models with specific 
techniques that reduce privacy risk and ensure that data remain reasonably secure, namely, 
federated ML, secure multiparty computation, differential privacy, and homomorphic encryption. 
Altogether, the prevailing methods for ML do not map to the ways that humans learn, as humans 
learn by seeing, moving, interacting, and speaking with others. Humans learn from sequential 
experiences, not from shuffled and randomized experiences. We need to come up with a new 
generation of ML techniques that possibly mimic the ways humans learn to enable efficient self-
learning for trustworthy embodied systems through targeted exploration and experience. 
 
 
 
 
83 Stoica et al. A Berkeley View of Systems Challenges for AI. 2017 (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1712.05855.pdf). 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 34 
 
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning 
 
Embodied systems are machines that support humans in daily routine tasks, have humans in the 
loop for the continuous supervision of the evolution of subsystems, and ask humans to 
undertake high-level decision-making. The central challenge, as addressed in the field of 
human-centered engineering, is to enable symbiotic relationships, in which embodied systems 
and humans augment each other reciprocatively,84 and as the basis for coevolutionary 
improvement of both machines and humans.85 
 
Humans and machines need to avoid “mode confusions” based on a mutual understanding of 
state and intent of both humans and machines to optimally blend their competencies in jointly 
acting toward overarching objectives while respecting privacy. Moreover, in the absence of an 
adequately high level of autonomy that can be relied upon, substantial involvement by human 
supervisors and operators is required. This need creates significant new challenges in the areas of 
human–machine interaction and mixed-initiative control. 
 
Embodied systems are learning enabled. However, as discussed above, current ML techniques 
offer new attack surfaces, are largely nontransparent (implicit models), tend to be energy and 
data-hungry, and lack basic transferability capabilities that are required to navigate unknown or 
uncertain terrain.86 Therefore, if and how these technologies can be used beneficially in real-
world applications that require human–machine interaction or in mission- and safety-critical 
applications is unclear.87 
 
Moreover, the apparent success of ML in producing seemingly intelligent decisions poses the risk 
of misunderstanding during the communication between humans and machines. A comparison 
of the behavior of ML systems and humans in decision-making shows obvious significant 
differences. ML essentially provides efficient algorithmic solutions for optimizing a well-defined 
target function, enabling the learning of task- and data-specific patterns from a large number of 
samples or observations. 
 
 
84 Cmp. IBM high-level AI framework. 
85 Engelbart. The Bootstrap Paradigm (https://dougengelbart.org/content/view/248/). 
86 For example, the keynote of AAAI President, http://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~tgd/talks/dietterich-aaai-presidents-address-
final.pdf. 
87 See https://www.fortiss.org/fileadmin/user_upload/05_Veroeffentlichungen/Whitepaper/fortiss_whitepaper_HCML_web.pdf. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 35 
 
In contrast, a human would rather make decisions based on ground truth rules, such as causality, 
and can transfer known solutions to new situations and domains. Although both types of 
decision-making can be called forms of generalization, the human way of decision-making is a 
harder form of generalization, sometimes termed horizontal, strong, or out-of-distribution 
generalization. Human decision-making takes advantage of heterogeneous information sources, 
such as interventions, domain shifts, and temporal structures, which ML typically discards or even 
fails to model during learning processes. 
 
These shortcomings of ML lead to serious challenges in designing trustworthy systems based on 
ML for human users, such as: 
 
Low explainability. The decision-making mechanism of ML algorithms, such as ANNs, cannot 
be made fully transparent to humans and is difficult for humans to interpret. 
 
Miscalibration of trust. ML seems to be both highly effective to humans and also largely 
predictable, thereby luring humans into accepting these technical systems as human-like 
partners (anthropomorphization) that are trusted more than actually justified.88 
 
Low level of human control and involvement. Most ML algorithms rely on either a 
hypothetical model of the distribution of data or concrete interpretation (labeling) of data. 
Such constructions have become one major hurdle to enabling ML systems with high levels 
of human control, such as human-like reasoning and generalization. Specifically, finding the 
right level of human control on which the system can effectively communicate with humans 
to obtain such input is difficult. 
The challenge here is to model human behavioral interactions with the technical system and 
provide the appropriate uncertainty characteristics related to the largely unpredictable behavior 
of humans under unforeseen circumstances. Moreover, as individual spheres of control may 
overlap arbitrarily, these processes need to be orchestrated such that they not only jointly serve a 
single human but can also possibly best multitask in serving arbitrarily large groups at the same 
time despite uncorrelated requests and uncoordinated missions. 
This is particularly challenging for complex mission tasks that call for collaboration and 
teamwork among humans and machines. In these cases, AI-enabled systems may need to 
identify the real intent of human operators and their goals, interact with them in a goal-oriented 
manner based on models of human behavior, and, in extreme cases, tolerate and adequately 
mitigate seemingly irrational behavior. 
 
88 This phenomenon was previously demonstrated by Feigenbaum’s ELIZA program. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 36 
 
Building trust based on explainability (“how?,” “why?,” “what if?”) is essential for human operators 
to accept ML-based solutions and those systems that incorporate decisions made by them. 
 
Explainability, therefore, is particularly useful for 
 
increasing the confidence of human operators, 
 
building trust by supporting an increased understanding of the transferability of results to 
other problems of interest, 
 
avoiding misconception and ensuring that humans understand outcomes of learning-
enabled components as a solid basis for intervening human actions, and 
 
increasing human confidence in the decisions and predictions made by a learning-enabled 
component. 
However, significant challenges remain in developing adequate methods for explainability. One 
of them is the tradeoff between attaining the simplicity of algorithmic transparency and 
impacting the high-performing nature of complex but opaque ML models. Yet another challenge 
is to identify the right information for the user, where different levels of knowledge will come 
into play. Beyond selecting the level of knowledge retained by the user, generating a concise 
explanation also becomes a challenge. Most existing methods for explainability, however, focus 
on explaining the processes behind an ML-based decision, which is often useless in a particular 
application domain. In addressing these issues, current research is integrating ML algorithms with 
domain-specific (for example, laws of physics) and, possibly learned, knowledge. 
 
Cognitive Architectures 
 
The field of cognitive architectures creates programs that can reason about problems across 
different domains, develop insights, adapt to new situations, and even reflect on themselves. 
These programs realize cognitive functions, including perception, memory, attention, social 
interaction, planning, motivation, actuation, reasoning, communication, learning, emotion, 
modeling self/other, building/creation, and arithmetic capabilities. 
Prominent cognitive architectures include Soar, ACT-R, LIDA, CLARION, and EPIC.89 However, 
with no clear definition and the general theory of cognition, several hundreds more architecture 
 
89 Nancy, Balamurugan, Vijakkumar. A comparative analysis of cognitive architecture. JARTET, 2016. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 37 
 
based on different sets of premises and assumptions are available, also coming from various 
backgrounds (computer science, psychology, philosophy, and neuroscience).90 
What constitutes a cognitive architecture is not even clear at all. Newell’s criteria for a cognitive 
architecture, for instance, include flexible behavior, real-time behavior, rationality, large 
knowledge base, learning, development, linguistic abilities, self-awareness, and brain 
realization.91 Sun’s desiderata are broader and include, among others, cognitive realism, 
adaptation, modularity, routineness, and synergistic interaction.92 Many of these criteria for 
cognitive systems are clearly of general interest also for the class of embodied systems, as 
defined above. 
The obvious question, therefore, is if and how principles of cognitive architectures are aiding in 
the design of embodied systems.93 For example, machinery that is expected to behave 
“correctly” in a complex world is recognized to possibly be akin to a model-based reflective 
predictive controller of a machine with a mission.94 95 
Some cognitive architectures use one uniform representation and corresponding learning 
method that yields “grand unification and functional elegance”96 but loses expressiveness. Others 
utilize general knowledge representations and many inference strategies97 that result in higher 
expressiveness, but they cause difficulties with integrations of different components of the 
cognitive architecture. A substantial number of cognitive architectures are hybrid (for example, 
Soar, ACT-R, LIDA, CLARION, EPIC) in that they combine symbolic and subsymbolic reasoning, 
thereby providing architectural concepts for integrating connectionist98 with logic-based AI 
technologies. 
Probabilistic programming provides yet another framework in which basic components of 
cognitive architectures are represented in a unified and elegant fashion.99 This probabilistic 
model cognition is destined to support aleatoric uncertainty, that is, the “known unknown.” 
Probabilistic programming also suggests a programming model for embodied systems based on 
well-known concepts of program construction in computer science for specifying, developing, 
analyzing, synthesizing, and composing programs. 
 
90 Kotseruba et al. A review of 40 years of cognitive architecture research. arXiv:1610.08602, 2016. 
91 Anderson, Lebiere. The Newell test for a theory of cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26(5), 2003. 
92 Sun. Desiderata for cognitive architectures. Philosophical Psychology, 17(3), 2004.  
93 Irrespective of their relative ability to explain the development of higher-level intelligent behavior and consciousness. 
94 Sanz, Lopez, Rodriguez, Hernandez. Principles for consciousness in integrated cognitive control. Neural Networks Society, 20(9), 
2007. 
95 Sanz. Thinking with the body: Towards hierarchical scalable cognition. Handbook of Cognitive Science, An Embodied Approach. 
Elsevier, 2008. 
96 Rosenbloom. Extending Mental Imagery in Sigma, Springer, 2012. 
97 Goertzel, Pennachin, Geisweiller. Engineering General Intelligence. Atlantis Press, 2014. 
98 Connectionist architectures are supposed to exhibit intelligent behavior without storing, retrieving, or otherwise operating on 
structured symbolic expressions. 
99Potapov. A Step from Probabilistic Programming to Cognitive Architectures. arXiv, 2016. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 38 
 
Numerous demonstrations of cognitive architectures for performing real-world tasks are 
available, including navigation, obstacle avoidance, object manipulation, fetch-and-carry tasks 
for trash collecting,100 and soda-collecting101 mobile robots. Applications from industrial domains 
include robotic crane operation,102 bridge construction,103 autonomous cleaning and deburring 
workstation,104 an automated stamp distribution center,105 and an analytics engine, as inspired by 
the HTM cognitive architecture.106 Cognitive architectures have also proven to be useful for 
human performance modeling, human–robot interaction, natural language processing, 
categorization and clustering, and computer vision. 
Cognitive architectures might be able to support active perception107 for coupling perception 
with the action of an embodied actor. For example, an actor may be spawned anywhere in the 
environment and may not immediately “see” the pixels that contain the answer to its visual goal 
(for example, the car/goal may not be visible). Thus, the actor must move to succeed, controlling 
the pixels that it will perceive. The actor must learn to map its visual input to the correct action 
on the basis of its perception of the world, the underlying physical constraints, and its 
understanding of the question. The observations that the actor collects are a consequence of the 
actions that the actor takes in the environment, and the actor is controlling the data distribution 
that is coming in. The actor controls the pixels it gets to see. One of the challenges of active 
perception is to be generally robust to variation. 
Finally, cognitive architectures and theories from psychology, such as cue theory, might serve as 
the basis and inspiration for designing novel control regimes for embodied actors capable of 
safely exploring and navigating the “unknown unknown.” In this way, careful terrain exploration 
has been approached by minimizing surprises, for example, based on active inference108 and the 
free energy principle109 110 or, alternatively, by maximizing predictive information.111 
 
100 Firby et al. An Architecture for Vision and Action. IJCAI, 1995. 
101 Brooks. A robot that walks: Emergent behaviors from a carefully evolved neural network. Neural Computation, 1(2), 1989. 
102 Lytle, Saidi. NIST research in autonomous construction. Autonomous Robots, 22(3), 2007.  
103 Bostelman, Bunch. Delivery of an advanced double-hull ship welding. ICSC, Symposia on Intelligent Industrial Automation and Soft 
Computing, 1999. 
104 Murphy, Norcross, Proctor. CAD directed robotic deburring. Robotics and Manufacturing Research, Education, and Applications, 
1988. 
105 Albus. The NIST real-time control system (RCS): An approach to intelligent systems research. Journal of Experimental & 
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 9(2–3), 1997 
106 https://numenta.com/grok 
107 Aloimonos (Ed.). Active Perception. Psychology Press, 1993. 
108 Active inference: maintaining a model and its predictions through action to change the sensory inputs to minimize prediction error 
indirectly (if the sound is not getting louder, then one should move closer to the train to hear the train getting louder). 
109 Friston’s free energy principle (FEP) is a leading formal theory of self-organizing system dynamics. It basically asserts that living 
systems must minimize the entropy of their sensory exchanges with the world; for example, Friston. The free-energy principle: A 
unified brain theory?, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 2010). 
110 Smith. A Unified Framework for Intelligence based on the Free Energy Principle. 2019. 
111 Ay, Bertschinger, Der, Güttler, Olbrich. Predictive information and explorative behavior of autonomous robots, European Physical 
Journal B, 63(3), 2008. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 39 
 
Uncertainty Quantification 
A multitude of sources is available for uncertainty in the design and operation of embodied 
systems, given the controller uncertainty due to nondeterminism, probabilistic control 
algorithms, and the uncertainty about the following: their operational context (for example, how 
many and which objects and actors are in the environment), corresponding hazards and risks, 
the behavior of learning-enabled components, safety envelopes, the internal models, and, last 
but not least, the intentions, behaviors, and strategies and actions of other embodied actors, 
both human112 and machines. 
Learning in the sense of replacing specific observations using general models is a process of 
inductive inference. Such models are never provably correct but only hypothetical and, 
therefore, uncertain; the same holds true for the predictions produced by a model. For example, 
the input–output behavior of ANNs heavily relies on the selection of “complete” and “correct” 
sets of training and support data for faithfully specifying relevant operating contexts (input) and 
their intended internal representation (output). Another source of uncertainty for ANNs is the use 
of stochastic search heuristics, which may lead to incorrect recall even for inputs from the 
training data, and the largely unpredictable capability of generalizing from given data points. 
Uncertainty on the faithfulness of the training data that represent operating contexts and 
uncertainty on the correctness and generalizability of training also combine in a, well, uncertain 
manner. 
One usually distinguishes between aleatoric and epistemic sources of uncertainty. Aleatoric113 
uncertainty refers to the variability in the outcome of an experiment due to inherently random 
effects, and epistemic114 uncertainty refers to uncertainty caused by a lack of knowledge.115 For 
example, incomplete knowledge of an embodied actor’s operating context is an epistemic 
source of uncertainty. As epistemic uncertainty refers to the ignorance of an actor and hence to 
its epistemic state, it can, in principle, be reduced with additional information. 
 
112 Compare with the Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning challenges above. 
113 Also known as statistical, experimental, or “known unknown.” 
114 Also known as systematic, structural, or “unknown unknown.” 
115 Hüllermeier, Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: An introduction to concepts and methods. 
Machine Learning, 110(3), 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 40 
 
The central challenge is uncertainty quantification,116 that is, to systematically reduce uncertainty 
to an acceptable level and serves as the basis for trustworthy and (up to tolerable quantities) 
predictable embodied systems. Uncertainty quantification involves: 
 
Identifying all relevant sources of uncertainty. 
 
Adequately quantifying and estimating uncertainty. 
 
Understanding how uncertainty accumulates, forward and inverse, along the chains of 
computations. 
 
Reducing overall uncertainty below acceptable levels.117 
 
Managing incremental change of uncertainty. 
Table 3 lists corresponding challenges for the rigorous design of embodied systems and for 
managing uncertainties throughout its life cycle. The analysis and assurance challenges are also 
addressed in the corresponding subsections on Analysis and Assurance. 
 
Different uncertainty-reducing techniques are available for robust AI systems depending on the 
aleatoric or epistemic nature.118 The basic principle of uncertainty reduction also plays a key role 
in active learning119 and in learning algorithms.120 For example, indirect cues121 may cause the 
system to hypothesize the existence of a relevant object, which needs to be confirmed using 
additional actions. Additionally, uncertainty quantification approaches in engineering have been 
designed to demonstrate that, with high probability, a real-valued response function of a given 
physical system does not exceed a given safety threshold.122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is the science of quantitative characterization and reduction of uncertainties in both computational 
and real-world applications. It tries to determine how likely certain outcomes are if some aspects of the system are not exactly 
known. 
117 For example, less than one hazardous behavior for 109 operational times. 
118 Dietterich. Steps toward robust artificial intelligence. AI Magazine, 38(3), 2017. 
119 Aggarwal, Kong, Gu, Han, Philip. Active learning: A survey. Data Classification: Algorithms and Applications. CRC Press, 2014. 
120 Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations. Tech. Rep. TR CBM–TR–117, Rutgers University, 1980. 
121 Björkman. Internal cue theory: Calibration and resolution of confidence in general knowledge. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 58(3), 1994. 
122 Owhadi, Scovel, Sullivan, McKerns, Ortiz. Optimal uncertainty quantification. Siam Review, 55(2), 2013. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 41 
 
Table 3. Engineering challenges for uncertainty quantification. 
Specification 
challenge 
• 
Provide means for constructing (and maintaining) safety envelopes either 
deductively from safety analysis or inductively from safe nominal behavior. 
• 
Provide means for minimizing uncertainties related to safety envelopes with a 
given level of effort. 
• 
Provide means for deriving safety requirements for learning-enabled 
components, which are sufficient for establishing artificial intelligence (AI) 
system safety. 
• 
Provide means for reducing specification uncertainty by means of deriving 
data requirements for learning-enabled components. 
Prediction 
challenge 
• 
Identify all relevant sources of uncertainty for an AI system. 
• 
Provide adequate means for measuring uncertainty. 
• 
Calculate forward propagation of uncertainty, where the various sources of 
uncertainty are propagated through the model to predict overall uncertainty 
in the system response. 
• 
Identify and solve relevant inverse123 uncertainty quantification problems for 
safe AI (using, for example, a Bayesian approach). 
• 
Predict (up to tolerable quantities) the unsafe behavior of AI systems 
operating in uncertain environments. 
Assurance 
challenge 
• 
Provide adequate measures of uncertainty to assure AI system safety. 
• 
Construct and maintain evidence-based arguments to support the certainty 
and rebut the uncertainty of safety claims. 
• 
Identify useful safety case patterns for safe AI systems together with 
compositional operators on safety cases for managing uncertainty. 
Design 
challenge 
• 
Develop safety case patterns for different architectural designs of AI 
systems.124 
• 
Construct safe and quasipredictable AI systems compositionally together 
with their safety cases. 
Analysis 
challenge 
• 
Provide adequate means for measuring and reducing uncertainty on the 
input–output behavior of learning-enabled components. 
• 
Define and measure the respective contributions of static and dynamic 
analysis techniques for learning-enabled systems to reduce safety-related 
uncertainty to tolerable levels. 
Maintenance 
challenge 
• 
Identify incremental change operators for maintaining uncertainty and safety 
assurance of self-learning AI systems. 
• 
Safely adapt and optimize the situational behavior of an AI system (together 
with its safety cases based on the principle of minimizing uncertainty). 
 
 
123 That is, calculating from a set of observations the causal factors that produced them. 
124 In analogy to, say, Mils separation kernel protection profile. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 42 
 
Uncertainty quantification also plays a pivotal role in reducing uncertainties for learning-enabled 
components such as ANNs.125 126 Establishing resilience127 and other invariance128 properties, for 
example, is an important means to reduce the behavioral uncertainty of ANNs. Moreover, 
measuring and estimating the uncertainty of the input–output behavior of learning-enabled 
components is essential for, say, switching between performant and safe channels in a simplex 
architecture, and uncertainty information is useful input for planning safe actions. 
 
Proposals for measuring behavioral uncertainty of learning-enabled components include the 
following: 
 
The distance between neuron activations observed during training and the activation pattern 
for the current input are used to estimate the input–output uncertainty.129 
 
Ensemble learning techniques are used to estimate input–output uncertainty by training a 
certain number of ML components from different initializations and sometimes on differing 
versions of the dataset; the variance of the ensemble’s predictions is then interpreted as to its 
epistemic uncertainty. 
 
Certain instances of ensemble learning techniques, such as Bayesian neural networks, 
measure both epistemic uncertainties on model parameters and the aleatoric uncertainty of 
the input–output behavior with respect to model parameters.130 
What we should focus on, however, is not so much about reducing behavioral uncertainty of 
individual components but of the embodied system itself. Such uncertainty on the system-level 
behavior is obtained, for example, by forward propagation131 of component uncertainties along 
chains of computation. 
 
Uncertainties can also be explicitly managed through assurance cases.132 These structured 
arguments are comprehensive, defensible, and valid justification that the system fulfills crucial 
properties, at least up to a tolerable level of uncertainty, with the goal of increasing confidence 
and building up trust in the behavior of an embodied system. The purpose is, broadly, to 
 
125 Czarnecki, Salay. Towards a framework for managing perception uncertainty for safe automated driving. Computer Safety, 
Reliability and Security, 2018. 
126 Abdar et al. A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges. Information Fusion, 
76, 2020. 
127 Cheng, Nührenberg, Rueß. Maximum resilience of artificial neural networks. International Symposium on Automated Technology 
for Verification and Analysis, 2017. 
128 With respect to certain classes of input transformations such as stretching. 
129 Cheng, Nührenberg, Yasuoka. Runtime monitoring neuron activation patterns. Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & 
Exhibition, 2019. 
130 Jospin, Buntine, Boussaid, Laga, Bennamoun. Hands-on bayesian neural networks-a tutorial for deep learning users. 
arXiv:2007.06823, 2020. 
131 For example, based on Bayesian inference. 
132 We will be revisiting assurance cases in the subsection describing the Assurance challenge. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 43 
 
demonstrate that the crucial risks associated with specific system concerns133 have been 
identified, are well understood, and have been appropriately mitigated, and that there are 
mechanisms in place to monitor the effectiveness of defined mitigations. Of particular interest is 
to see how the influence of a learning-enabled component is captured and reasoned within the 
control structure of an embodied system. Recent extensions of assurance cases for reasoning 
about confidence and uncertainty seem to be a good starting point for a more thorough 
investigation into uncertainty quantification for embodied systems. 134 135 
Altogether, interest in various aspects of uncertainty quantification for embodied systems has 
been increasing. What is still missing, however, is a comprehensive set of methods and tools for 
the rigorous design of embodied systems based on the principle of uncertainty quantification. 
 
Self-Integration 
Let’s reconsider the federated retail example in Figure 3. How and why do all the embodied 
actors, ranging from design, production, and logistics, form a collaborative federation in a 
productive manner, thereby supporting the intent of the buyer? Moreover, how does this 
federation tolerate real-world mishaps, such as a ship getting stuck in a channel? 
Intent-driven formation of purposeful federations of embodied systems requires the individual 
systems to be open to collaborating with others while still operating as self-sufficient individually 
purposeful systems. The formation of these federations is based on self-integration, which seeks 
out other systems to support to meet their local and global intents and goals, which cannot be 
accomplished on their own. 
The Semantic Interoperability Logical Framework (SILF)136, for example, facilitates dependable 
machine-to-machine information exchange based on an extensive ontology to describe the 
content of messages and an intent-aware mediation mechanism to translate messages as 
needed. These adapters may be synthesized automatically from ontological descriptions, 
whereas the purpose of the integration is represented in a task ontology.137 SILF focuses on the 
composition138 of systems but not compositionality139 to enable novel capabilities. 
 
133 Including safety and security, but also applies to all the other attributes of trustworthiness. 
134 Duan et al. Reasoning about confidence and uncertainty in assurance cases: A survey. Software Engineering in Health Care, 17, 
2014. 
135 Bloomfield, Littlewood, Wright. Confidence: Its role in dependability cases for risk assessment. Annual IEEE/IFIP International 
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2007. 
136 NATO Science and Technology Organization, Neuilly-sur-Seine. Framework for Semantic Interoperability. TR-IST-094.5, 2014. 
137 Ford et al. Purpose-aware interoperability: The ONISTT ontologies and analyzer. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2007. 
138 Requiring the preservation of local properties. 
139 Compositionality requires the analysis of emergent properties of compositions, some of which are vital, as in safety and security. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 44 
 
More recently, self-integration based on contract theory and negotiation has been used to 
purposefully self-integrate, for example, drones and wearable (IoT) devices. A trust negotiation 
protocol for IoT devices has been developed to create an assume–guarantee contract that also 
includes a set of assessment procedures.140 The contract yields additional assurance for dynamic 
integration from a shared historical record of adaptation assessment. This additional assurance 
might also be managed using the concept of assurance cases. 
Other examples for self-integrating systems include mobility scenarios in which cars and, say, 
traffic lights are purposefully interacting and adjusting their behavior to improve the flow of 
traffic, and intensive care unit scenarios in which, say, heart-lung machines and X-ray cameras 
recognize each other and negotiate their safe interaction.141 Some of these integrated systems 
could, of course, be readily constructed as bespoke one-trick-pony systems by suitably skilled 
teams. Automated self-integration, however, promises to be more flexible, more efficient, and 
less error prone. The above scenarios also demonstrate that, beyond automation of the 
integration, the challenge is to provide assurance for the safety of the integrated systems. 
Forming intent-driven federations of increasingly autonomous embodied systems is a 
challenging endeavor. Indeed, the composition of more traditional systems can often introduce 
new vulnerabilities,142 as in, say, exposed crypto keys and privacy violations. We, therefore, need 
to come up with suitable architectural principles and composition operators for constructing 
resilient and safe embodied systems from a (possibly dynamically changing) set of hetero-
geneous and even untrusted constituent systems. In this way, embodied systems may tolerate 
certain failures, unexpected events, and even malicious attacks. Modeling attacks and other 
hardware and software defects is an issue because, almost by definition, cyberattacks are very 
hard to predict.143 Yet, providing some degree of and continuously improving resilience is a must 
for societal acceptance of embodied systems. For the most advanced kinds of systems, what 
may be needed is an agreement on a shared system of ethics. 
 
Embodied systems are acting in the real world with their wickerwork of societal norms, rules, and 
laws. Smart contracts are a central concept toward intent-driven dynamic federations of 
embodied systems. In this way, self-integration and self-orchestration might be approached as 
follows. 
 
140 Riley et al. Toward a negotiation framework for self-integration. IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing & Self-
Organizing Systems Companion, 2020. 
141 Rushby. Trustworthy self-integrating systems. International Conference on Distributed Computing and Internet Technology, 2016. 
142 Neumann. How might we increase trustworthiness? Communications of the ACM, 2019. 
143 Dutertre et al. Intrusion-tolerant enclaves. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2002. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 45 
 
 
Software-based (“smart”) contracts define the service interfaces and service-level agreements 
for embodied actors. 
 
Federations of embodied actors are formed through the conclusion of contracts, for 
instance, through bidding in auctions and/or using a mediator. 
 
Smart contracts are executed until the purpose of the contract has been met. 
For example, a “ship” embodied actor offers smart contracts for “shipping A from B to C in 
exchange for D.” If there is a “customer” who needs to ship “a in A” from “b in B” to “c in C” and is 
willing to provide “d in D” in exchange, then the “ship” and the “customer” might want to 
conclude a corresponding contract. If “c noting C,” for example, that is the “ship” did not intend 
to call at harbor “c,” then the “ship” might be willing to change their route for a small extra fee. 
Alternatively, mitigations of common mishaps might already be defined in the initial set of 
contracts. This is, of course, just how the current contract-based economy is designed to work. 
The offering and conclusion of contracts may be realized, for instance, by means of distributed 
execution of logic programs. Global invariants need to be maintained on a set of contracts. For 
example, the federation in Figure 3 needs to ensure that their mutual service-level agreements 
enable timely and orderly delivery of the customer’s order. Other invariants need to be ensured, 
such as regulatory rules, desiderata, such as climate neutrality, or resiliency to some breach of 
contract. 
 
Not all contracts are being served to completion. What happens, for example, if the “ship” is not 
able to fulfill the contract because it got stuck in some shipping channel? The federation of 
actors in Figure 3 may need to reorganize to still be able to satisfy the customer order on time. 
Such a reorganization of the federation is based on successful renegotiation and cancellation of 
contracts. This process of resilient execution of smart contracts generalizes the fault detection, 
isolation, and recovery (FDIR) cycle of fault-tolerant systems. Again, if contracts are negotiated 
by means of distributed logic programs, then resilient execution and renegotiation of contracts 
might, for example, be realized through backtracking and mechanisms for distributed 
incremental maintenance. 
 
A contract-based reconfiguration of a federation might also involve a change of the 
embodiment of certain services. For example, if the ship refuses or is unable to call port “c,” then 
the delivery federation might decide to replace this ship with other means of transportation. 
Using the slang of model-driven design, such a replacement involves changing the deployment 
of a platform-independent model (federation of virtualized services) to a platform-dependent 
model (embodiment of virtualized services in the physical world). 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 46 
 
Most importantly, actors and/or federations of actors need to be incentivized to honor contracts. 
They need to be held responsible144 for breach of contract possibly by some empowered higher 
instance, who identifies, collects evidence, and penalizes breach of contract. 
Clearly, the suggested contract-based composition and execution operator for embodied 
systems mimics a contract-based societal organization. The obvious question is, if and how 
these “smart contracts” may be integrated into existing judicial systems or variants thereof. 
These considerations point to a multitude of serious systems programming challenges. For 
instance, how do we specify smart contracts? What is the right framework for negotiating 
contracts? How can we verify smart contracts? How can we provide evidence of the conclusion 
or breach of contract? How can we incentivize/penalize embodied actors to ensure beneficial 
behavior? Whether such federations should be deployed in social contexts without an 
orchestrating higher instance is also open to discussion. 
 
Analysis 
 
Analysis is the process of assuring that a system meets a set of given requirements. The 
verification challenge involves identifying what kind of properties are expected of embodied 
systems and how to establish them. Analysis of embodied systems is challenging for their 
openness, adaptivity, situatedness, and for their largely unpredictable behavior in uncertain 
operating contexts. In addition to functional correctness, performance, dependability, and safety 
requirements as in classical embedded systems, the analysis of embodied systems focuses on 
establishing properties on their lawful, ethical, and robust, that is, trustworthy behavior. The 
verification of learning-enabled components of embodied systems poses yet another challenge. 
Consider, for example, the embodied retail system in Section 1, and assume that, in reaction to 
the customer’s request, a dynamic federation of production and logistics services have been set 
up to cooperatively serve this request. Analysis might establish that this federation actually is able 
to fulfill the request within the agreed time frame, that the delivered product is consistent with 
functional, quality, and safety agreements. The federation might also be shown to be robust to 
common faults, such as breakdowns of logistics chains and even malicious attacks. Moreover, 
the analysis may be used to demonstrate that the federation complies with applicable laws (for 
example, tax laws) and that certain social values, such as climate neutrality, are adhered to. 
 
144 Vazdanan et al. Responsibility research for trustworthy autonomous systems. Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 47 
 
State-of-the-practice techniques for safety analysis require deterministic behavior in well-
defined operating contexts and usually rely on fallback mechanisms to a human operator. 
Clearly, these prerequisites are not fulfilled for embodied systems and consequently, current 
safety analysis methodology, as encoded in industrial standards, such as DO 178C in aerospace 
or ISO 26262 in the automotive domain, are not applicable—at least not directly so. 
Three main analysis techniques exist, namely, testing, symbolic verification, and runtime 
verification. We briefly describe some associated challenges when applied to analyzing 
embodied systems with learning-enabled components. 
Testing. This is the most widely used and arguably also the most successful technique for 
analyzing software-intensive systems. Nondeterministic systems, however, are usually 
considered untestable because of the overwhelming number of cases to be considered. System 
tests are also performed with the assumption of fixed and well-described operating contexts. 
Embodied systems, however, need to be analyzed with respect to uncertain operating contexts, 
which may not even be known at design time. Finally, the analysis for learning-enabled 
components requires establishing properties for all possible evolutions of such a component. For 
all these reasons, testing methodologies as developed for embedded systems are not directly 
applicable to embodied systems. Novel approaches to testing embodied systems are urgently 
needed. 
 
For example, scenario-based testing dynamically classifies relevant scenarios by means of 
automated clustering and generates a sufficient set of test cases from the classes thus 
obtained.145 More generally, probabilistic programs might be synthesized for capturing relevant 
scenarios,146 because probabilistic programs assign distributions to features of scenarios, and 
they impose hard and soft constraints over scenarios. 
 
Testing is usually decomposed into testing individual components of a system followed by 
testing the integrated system. But then, how can we test systems with learning-enabled 
components? For ANNs, traditional structural coverage criteria from software testing can usually 
not be applied directly to ANN. For example, neuron coverage is trivially fulfilled for an ANN using 
a single test case. Moreover, branch coverage, when applied to ANNs, may lead to an 
exponential (in the number of neurons) number of branches to be investigated and is, therefore, 
not practical, as typical ANNs comprise millions of neurons. As usual, in testing, the balance 
 
145 Hauer. On Scenario-Based Testing of Automated and Autonomous Driving Systems. Doctoral dissertation, Technische Universität 
München, 2021. 
146 Fremont et al. Scenic: Language-Based Scene Generation. Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2018-8, 2018. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 48 
 
between the ability to find bugs and the computational cost of test case generation is essential 
for the effectiveness of a test method.147 
Therefore, ANN-specific nonstructural test coverage criteria for the robustness, interpretability, 
completeness, and correctness of an ANN have been developed.148 A scenario coverage metric, 
for example, partitions the possible input space according to N attributes (for example, snow and 
rainy), and proposes, on the basis of existing work on combinatorial testing, efficient k-projection 
(for k = 0, …, N−1) coverage metrics as approximations of the exponential number of input 
partitions. 
The generation of falsifying/adversarial test cases generally uses search heuristics based on 
gradient descent or evolutionary algorithms.149 150 151 152 These approaches may be able to find 
falsifying examples efficiently, but they usually do not provide an explicit level of confidence 
about the nonexistence of adversarial examples in case the algorithm fails to find one. 
Various traditional techniques for test case generation, such as fuzzing, symbolic execution, 
concolic testing, mutation testing, and metamorphic testing, have been extended to ANNs. 
Despite their effectiveness in discovering various defects of ANNs together with their data-
centered requirement specifications, however, how testing-based approaches can be efficiently 
integrated into the construction of convincing safety argumentations for learning-enabled 
components, let alone embodied systems, is not exactly clear. 
Altogether, testing methods seem to be effective at discovering defects of learning-enabled 
components such as ANNs. However, how to measure the effectiveness of test coverage metrics 
in building up sufficient confidence or, dually, raising doubts is unclear. Moreover, most testing-
based approaches assume a fixed ANN. Yet, ANNs are learning-enabled and trained continuously 
on new data/scenarios. The challenge is to come up with methodologies for efficiently—
depending on the application context also in real time—retesting safety requirements for 
continuously evolving ANNs. 
Symbolic Analysis. These analysis techniques generalize testing, in that, sets of test cases are 
evaluated on a system at once. These test sets are usually encoded as logical constraints for 
describing possibly infinite test sets. Symbolic analysis requires neither a complete system 
implementation nor a fully specified operational context, because unknown behavior may be 
 
147 Sun et al. Testing deep neural networks. arXiv:1803.04792v4, 2019. 
148 Cheng, Nührenberg, Rueß, Yasuaoka. Towards dependability metrics for neural networks. 16th ACM/IEEE International Conference 
on Formal Methods and Models for System Design, 2018. 
149 Goodfellow, Shlens, Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv:1412.6572, 2014. 
150 Papernot et al. The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings. IEEE European Symposium on Security & Privacy, 2016. 
151 Carlini, Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. IEEE European Symposium on Security & Privacy, 2017. 
 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 49 
 
represented logically by means of uninterpreted functions. Logical constraints on these 
uninterpreted functions are used to express known (or learned) facts about these behaviors. In 
contrast to testing, a symbolic analysis may be applied to demonstrate that certain requirements 
hold for embodied systems that operate in uncertain and only partially known operating 
contexts. Another use of symbolic analysis is to support the generation of safe trajectories during 
runtime.153 
Recently, many different symbolic analysis techniques have been adapted to learning-enabled 
components such as ANNs.154 Verification problems for ANNs have been reduced to constraint 
solving problems such as satisfiability in propositional logic,155 156 satisfiability modulo theories,157 
158 159 160161 and mixed-integer linear programming.162 These approaches, however, typically do 
not scale up to the size of real-world ANNs with millions of neurons. Approximation techniques 
are applied to improve efficiency but usually at the expense of precision. Recent approaches 
based on global optimization have the potential to deal with larger networks.163 Compositional 
verification techniques for scaling up symbolic analysis are largely missing. Symbolic analysis 
technologies work on abstract models, which is why they might miss certain defects due to 
implementation issues (for example, rational numbers vs. IEEE floating points). Moreover, how to 
efficiently apply these techniques to continuously evolving learning-enabled components is also 
unclear. 
Runtime Verification and Recovery. In runtime verification, a monitor observes the concrete 
execution of the system in question and checks for violations of stipulated properties. When the 
monitor detects a violation of a property, it notifies a command module, which then isolates the 
cause of the violation, followed by an attempt to recover from the violation. In this way, runtime 
verification is a central element of FDIR-based164 fault-tolerant systems. For the multitude of 
sources for uncertainty in AI systems, stringent real-time requirements, and ever-changing 
 
153 Althoff, Dolan. Online verification of automated road vehicles using reachability analysis. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2014. 
154 Huang et al. A survey of safety and trustworthiness of deep neural networks: Verification, testing, adversarial attack and defence, 
and interpretability. Computer Science Review, 37, 2020. 
155 Cheng, Nührenberg, Rueß. Verification of binarized neural networks. Working Conference on Verified Software: Theories, Tools, 
and Experiments, 2018. 
156 Narodytska et al. Verifying properties of binarized deep neural networks. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 2018. 
157Huang, Kwiatkowska. Safety verification of deep neural networks. International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, 2017 
158 Pulina. An abstraction-refinement approach to verification of artificial neural networks. International Conference on Computer 
Aided Verification, 2010. 
159 Katz et al. Reluplex: An efficient SMT solver for verifying deep neural networks. International Conference on Computer Aided 
Verification, 2017. 
160 Tuncali, Ito, Kapinski, Deshmukh. Reasoning about safety of learning-enabled components in autonomous cyber-physical 
systems. Proceedings of the 55th Annual Design Automation Conference, 2018. 
 
162 Cheng, Nührenberg, Rueß. Maximal resilience of artificial neural networks. International Symposium on Automated Technology for 
Verification and Analysis, 2017. 
163 Ruan, Wu, Sun, Huang. Reachability analysis of deep neural networks with provable guarantess. IJCAI, 2018. 
164 Fault Detection, Isolation, and Recovery 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 50 
 
learning-enabled components, runtime verification is an essential element for analyzing 
embodied systems. 
Architectural design principles for monitoring distributed systems are needed to ensure that 
monitoring does not perturb the system (at least, not too much).165 In particular, a tutorial 
discusses challenges involved in instrumenting real-time systems so that the timing constraints 
of the system are respected.166 A recent tutorial describes state-of-the-practice technology for 
generating runtime monitors that capture the safe operational environment of systems with 
AI/ML components.167 
Altogether, runtime verification is an essential and attractive technique of any verification 
strategy for embodied systems. Unlike static verification techniques, such as testing or symbolic 
analysis, adaptation to learning-based components is not needed. In this way, runtime 
monitoring is an enabling verification technology for continuous assurance based on the MAPE-
K168 loop from autonomic computing. The main challenge in deploying runtime monitoring, as is 
the case for any other CPS, is to embed monitors in an efficient (for example, energy-efficient) 
way without perturbing the behavior of the embodied system too much. 
Runtime monitoring may also be used to measure uncertainties in the input–output behavior of 
learning-enabled components. For example, if the input is out of the distribution of the training 
set, then one may conclude that the output may not actually be a “correct” one. Such 
information about the uncertainty of a perception result is useful input for deliberatively planning 
meaningful and safe actions. Uncertainty information about the perception unit is also used in 
Simplex architectures for switching to a safe(r) perception channel whenever the ANN output is 
doubtful. Clearly, the distance (in some given metric) of the input to the set of training input may 
serve as a measure of uncertainty of the input–output behavior of the learning-enabled 
component. However, such a measure returns zero uncertainty even for “incorrect” behavior on 
training inputs. Alternatively, a proposed approach is to monitor the neuronal activation pattern 
in ANN-based components and to compare it with neuronal activation patterns as learned during 
the ANN training phase.169 Applicable background knowledge and physical laws may also be 
used in monitoring the plausibility of the input-output behavior of an ANN. 
 
165 Goodloe, Pike. Monitoring distributed real-time systems: A survey and future directions. NASA, 2010. 
166 Bonakdarpour. Runtime-monitoring of time-sensitive systems. International Conference on Runtime Verification, 2011. 
167 https://uva-mcps-lab.github.io/RV21/paper10.1.html 
168 Measure, Analyze, Plan, Execute; the K stands for Knowledge 
169 Cheng, Nührenberg, Yasuoka. Runtime monitoring neuron activation patterns. IEEE Design, Automation & Test in Europe 
Conference & Exhibition, 2019. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 51 
 
In summary, due to the multitude of sources of uncertainty of embodied systems with learning-
enabled components and the partially unknown environments in which they operate, even if all 
the challenges for specification and verification are solved, it is likely that one will not be able to 
prove unconditional safe and correct operation. Situations will always exist in which we do not 
have a provable guarantee of correctness. Therefore, techniques for achieving fault tolerance 
and error resilience at runtime must play a crucial role.  
 
However, a systematic understanding does not yet exist as to what kind of analysis can be 
achieved at design time, how the design process can contribute to the safe and correct 
operation of the embodied system at runtime, and how the design time and runtime analysis 
techniques can interoperate effectively. 
 
The distributed and dynamic nature of federations of embodied actors and their goals is 
particularly challenging for runtime verification. A runtime monitoring framework for embedded 
systems must support reasoning under uncertainty170 171 and also partially observable systems 
with nondeterministic and probabilistic dynamics.172 
 
VerifAI is a runtime monitoring framework for autonomous systems with learning-enabled 
components.173 It includes formal modeling of the autonomous system and its environment (in 
terms of probabilistic programs), automatic falsification of system-level specifications and other 
simulation-based verification and testing methods, automated diagnosis of errors, and automatic 
specification-driven parameter and component synthesis.  
 
The safety of systems with learning-enabled components in simplex architectures174 often relies 
on a runtime monitor-based switch between a performant and a safe channel. Runtime 
monitoring of typical security hyperproperties,175 176 privacy policies,177 and contextual integrity178 
 
170 Zheng, Julien. Verification and validation in cyber physical systems: Research challenges and a way forward. IEEE Software 
Engineering for Smart Cyber-Physical Systems, 2015. 
171 Ma et al. Predictive monitoring with logic-calibrated uncertainty for cyber-physical systems. ACM Transactions on Embedded 
Computing Systems, 2021. 
172 Viswanadha et al. Parallel and multi-objective falsification with scenic and VerifAI. International Conference on Runtime 
Verification, 2021. 
173 Torfah, Junges, Fremont, Seshia. Formal analysis of AI-based autonomy: From modeling to runtime assurance. International 
Conference on Runtime Verification, 2021. 
174 Desai, Ghosh, Seshia, Shankar, Tiwari. SOTER: A runtime assurance framework for programming safe robotics systems. 49th 
Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2019. 
175 Finkbeiner, Hahn, Stenger, Tentrup. Monitoring hyperproperties. Formal Methods in System Design, 54(3), 2019. 
176 Bonakdarpour, Sanchez, Schneider. Monitoring hyperproperties by combining static analysis and runtime verification. International 
Symposium on Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, 2018. 
177 Chowdhury, Jia, Garg, Datta. Temporal mode-checking for runtime monitoring of privacy policies. International Conference on 
Computer Aided Verification, 2014. 
178 Barth, Datta, Mitchell, Nissenbaum. Privacy and contextual integrity: Framework and applications. IEEE Symposium on Security & 
Privacy, 2006. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 52 
 
have also been considered. Given a set of properties and an embodied system, the challenge is 
to generate and maintain sound and possibly complete runtime monitors, which are woven into 
the embodied system, to keep interferences with the core behavior at a minimum. 
 
Assurance 
A trustworthy embodied system operating in our very economic and social fabric is required to 
obey applicable regulations and laws, to act according to human-centered social values, and to 
be robust and safe (see Section 3). But how can we be assured that an embodied system is 
indeed worthy of the trust we may put in it? Clearly, an analysis (see Subsection Analysis) of 
embodied systems is a central component of any mechanism for inspiring confidence in the 
lawful, ethical, and robust behavior of any technical system, and for building up trust. 
Additionally, as an actor in a real-life context, an embodied system is required to provide explicit 
evidence that it is acting as required. 
 
Requirements. Embodied systems have the possibility of autonomously acting in regulated 
sectors such as healthcare, finance, insurance, accounting, or retail. As such, they need to 
comply with applicable regulations and national laws, for example, the General Data Protection 
Regulation, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, 
the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, or the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act. 
 
These kinds of regulations and laws are indeed not lacking. For example, German law now 
obliges organizations to demonstrably ensure that basic labor and human rights standards are 
respected throughout global supply chains.179 The length of these regulations and laws, the 
opacity of the legal language, the complexity of these acts, and their contradictions,180 however, 
make determining and demonstrating compliance difficult.181 
 
Regulations have been formalized using a variety of policy languages.182 183 184 Formalisms and 
 
179 https://www.bmz.de/de/entwicklungspolitik/lieferkettengesetz 
180 Lam, Mitchell, Sundaram. A formalization of HIPAA for a medical messaging system. International Conference on Trust, Privacy 
and Security in Digital Business, 2009. 
181 Ness. A year is a terrible thing to waste: early experience with HIPAA. Annals of Epidemiology, 2(15), 2005. 
182 Anton, Earp, Reese. Analyzing website privacy requirements using a privacy goal taxonomy. Proceedings IEEE Joint International 
Conference on Requirements Engineering, 2002. 
183Anton, Eart, Vail, Jain, Gheen, Frink. HIPAA’s effect on web site privacy policies. IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy, 2007. 
184 Anton, He, Baumer. Inside JetBlue’s privacy policy violations. IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy, 2004. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 53 
 
systems for expressing and checking privacy policy include P3P,185 EPAL,186 XACML,187 DKAL,188 
and the logic of privacy and utility, which formalizes the concept of contextual integrity. 189 
In addition to compliance with applicable laws and norms, embodied systems are required to be 
demonstrably robust, safe, and secure.  
 
More precisely, embodied systems are expected to be 
 
resilient to common and possibly also new kinds of breakdowns and malicious attacks, 
 
such that the risk of unintended harm to humans, machinery, and the environment is 
demonstrably below acceptable levels, and 
 
such that identified confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements are satisfied. 
Other requirements include transparency (for example, traceable use of data and information 
sources, published decision policies), demonstrable fairness of decisions (for example, all 
applicants are demonstrably being served equally), inverse privacy,190 or contextual integrity.191 192 
The latter requirement is based on the hypothesis that privacy is a right to appropriate flow of 
information. In case of noncompliance with any of these requirements, culprits need to be 
identified and called to account. 
 
The challenge is to come up with satisfactory formalizations of adequate subsets of applicable 
laws and norms as a prerequisite for demonstrable compliance with these requirements. 
Previous attempts in this direction were often based on some variant of temporal logic and/or 
logic programming. 
 
We now describe possible approaches and corresponding challenges for assuring compliance 
with these kinds of requirements. The challenge for a federation of embodied actors is to assure, 
and possibly demonstrably so, that it is indeed worthy of our trust (Section: Trustworthiness). 
For example, the largely autonomously acting federation of embodied retail actors (Section: 
Service Federations) is required to answer questions such as the following: 
Is it able to deliver the requested product in time and according to order specs? Is it resilient to 
 
185 Cranor. P3P: Making privacy policies more useful. IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy, 2003. 
186 Ashley, Hada, Karjoth, Powers, Schunter. Enterprise privacy authorization language (EPAL). IBM Research, 30, 2003. 
187 Ramli, Nielson, Nielson. The logic of XACML. Science of Computer Programming, 83, 2014. 
188 Gurevich, Neeman. DKAL 2—A simplified and improved authorization language. Technical Report MSR-TR-2009–11, 2009. 
189 Barth, Datta, Mitchell, Nissenbaum. Privacy and contextual integrity: Framework and applications. IEEE Symposium on Security & 
privacy, 2006. 
190 Gurevich, Hudis, Wing. Viewpoint: Inverse privacy. Communications of the ACM, 59(7), 2016. 
191 Nissenbaum. Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life. Stanford University Press, 2010. 
192 Datta, Blocki, Christin, DeYoung, Garg, Jia, Sinha. Understanding and protecting privacy: Formal semantics and principled audit 
mechanisms. International Conference on Information Systems Security, 2011. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 54 
 
common planning breakdowns, failures, and malicious attacks? Are contingency plans and 
never-give-up strategies put in place in case of, say, operational, judicial, and financial 
quagmires? Are the actors of the federation acting safely? Does the federation obey applicable 
tax laws? Can the federation demonstrate that the delivered product is not based on child labor? 
Does the federation demonstrably act in a climate-neutral or even climate-positive manner? This 
list of questions is necessarily incomplete as there is indeed no lack of requirements when acting 
in real-world social contexts. 
 
Analysis-based Assurance. Static analysis techniques, such as testing, ensure the system’s 
compliance with requirements, but only at selected points of time in their evolution. Even if one 
succeeds in testing the compliance of an embodied system with its requirements, these results 
are usually outdated in further evolutions of the self-learning embodied system operating in a 
dynamic context, thereby requiring retesting. In a similar vein, traditional formal verification 
techniques may be applied to demonstrate, a priori during design time, conformance 
requirements of an embodied system operating in largely unknown environments and all its 
possible evolutions. Hereby, proof objects serve as evidence,193 and reflection principles are used 
to generate specific evidence for each possible evolution.194 But it seems unrealistic that still 
largely manual formal verification is applied to the analysis of nontrivial evolving embodied 
systems.  
By and large, we, therefore, need to go beyond current static analysis techniques, such as testing 
and formal verification, to realistically assure compliance of ever-evolving embodied systems 
with their complex real-world requirements. 
 
Process-based assurance. Assurance has traditionally been approached in software and systems 
engineering through design processes that follow rigorous development standards and by 
demonstrating compliance through analysis. Well-proven and successful assurance standards, 
such as DO 178C in aerospace or ISO 26262 in the automotive domain, are predicated on the 
assumptions that system behavior is deterministic, a clearly defined operating environment 
exists, a fallback to a human-in-the-loop operator is always available, and the system does not 
learn and evolve once it is deployed.  
These basic assumptions of traditional safety engineering do not hold anymore for embodied 
systems. Safety engineering, therefore, comes to a grand climacteric, moving from deterministic, 
 
193 Necula. Proof-carrying code. Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming 
Languages, 1997. 
194 Rueß. Meta-Programming in the Calculus of Construction. Doctoral dissertation, Ph.D. thesis, Universit at Ulm, 1995. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 55 
 
nonevolving embedded systems and CPSs operating in well-defined contexts to embodied 
systems. Process-based design for many embodied systems seems to be difficult, if not 
impossible; as these systems continuously integrate into dynamic coalitions, they are 
increasingly autonomous, and they are evolving based on previous experience. But changes in 
process-based assurance are notoriously slow and expensive.195 Therefore, assurance for 
embodied systems increasingly needs to rely on assurance artifacts collected at runtime instead 
of process-based design-time assurance. 
 
Continuous Assurance. The general recommendation is to audit the trustworthiness of an 
embodied system continuously throughout its life cycle (Table 1) to assure compliance with 
applicable laws, social norms, and technical robustness and safety requirements. This is easier 
said than done, as embodied systems 
 
are dynamic federations based on changing priorities and intent, 
 
are composed of ever-evolving embodied systems with self-learning capabilities, and 
 
operate in largely unknown contexts based on experience and targeted exploration. 
Moreover, applicable laws and regulations may change over time and are also location-
dependent. 
 
The challenge, therefore, is continuous assurance, an assurance system that is provided 
provisionally at design time and continually monitored, updated, and evaluated at runtime as the 
system and its environment evolves. But continuous assurance for regulations, such as GDPR, 
has become a costly burden.196 197 The culprit is the heavy reliance on manual checklist-based 
auditing in today’s compliance process, which is expensive, slow, and error prone. It is also 
restricted to the compliance of static snapshots in the evolution of a system. Therefore, runtime 
analysis and assurance are important for continuously assuring compliance of ever-evolving 
embodied systems. 
 
Runtime assurance is a dynamic analysis technique based on a log for recording system events, 
which are relevant for establishing conformance with given requirements. These requirements 
 
195 Changes of only one line of code in safety-critical code in the aerospace industry have reportedly cost seven-figure sums (in US 
dollars) in some cases. 
196 According to Forbes, GDPR cost US Fortune 500 companies $7.8 billion as of 2018. (Forbes. The GDPR racket: Who’s making 
money from this $9bn business shakedown. 2020. https://www.forbes.com/sites/oliversmith/2018/05/02/the-gdpr-racket-whos-
making-money-from-this-9bn-business-shakedown/#54c0702034a2) 
197 A recent report shows that 74% of small or midsized organizations spent more than $100,000 to prepare for continuous 
compliance with GDPR and CCPA. (DataGrail. The age of privacy: The cost of continuous compliance. 2020. 
https://datagrail.io/downloads/GDPR-CCPA-cost-report.pdf) 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 56 
 
are usually expressed in a variant of temporal logic, which is expressive enough for encoding 
regulation rules.198 Runtime verification techniques are used to establish that the logged event 
trace indeed conforms to the given requirement. For example, an embodied actor logs events of 
its data handling operation, and runtime verification is used to establish compliance with a given 
privacy policy or detect violations thereof. The root cause of such a violation may be computed 
from a log as the basis for calling the responsible embodied actors to account for the 
conformance violations they caused. 
 
A subject that is open to discussion is if the identified embodied culprits can and should be 
treated as legal entities that can be held responsible for their actions in a traditional brick-and-
mortar judicial system. Workable judicial governance of one sort or the other is needed for 
promoting, by and large, compliant behavior as the basic mechanism for self-improving system 
behavior. 
 
Depending on the regulatory framework, compliance with these requirements by every actor 
might lead to functionally inferior behavior or may even be a barrier to innovation. For example, 
regulatory frameworks may well be contradictory; considerations of the relative importance of 
compliance with a wide range of different requirements, possibly from different sources, are 
ongoing; and, finally, without minor transgressions of, say, traffic rules (such as crossing solid 
lines), traffic flow would often be less fluid. 
At a high-level, runtime assurance can be approached by compliance checks on recorded logs 
when demanded, say, by an audit authority, 199 by online checking of relevant events against the 
prevailing policy, 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 or by combinations thereof.208 In federations of 
 
198 DeYoung, Garg, Dia, Kaynar, Datta. Experiences in the logical specification of the HIPAA and GLBA privacy laws. Proceedings of the 
9th Annual ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, 2010. 
199 Garg, Jia, Datta. Policy auditing over incomplete logs: Theory, implementation and applications. Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2011. 
200 Basin, Klaedtke, Müller. Monitoring security policies with metric first-order temporal logic. Proceedings of the 15th ACM 
Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, 2010. 
201 Basin, Klaedtke, Marinovic, Zalinescu. Monitoring compliance policies over incomplete and disagreeing logs. International 
Conference on Runtime Verification, 2012. 
202 Basin, Klaedtke, Marinovic, Zalinescu. Monitoring of temporal first-order properties with aggregations. International Conference on 
Runtime Verification, 2013. 
203 Chomicki. Efficient checking of temporal integrity constraints using bounded history encoding. ACM Transactions on Database 
Systems, 20(2), 1995. 
204 Chomicki, Niwinski. On the feasibility of checking temporal integrity constraints. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 51(3), 
1993. 
205 Krukow, Nielsen, Sassone. A logical framework for history-based access control and reputation systems, Journal of Computer 
Security, 16(1), 2008. 
206 Bauer, Gore, Tiu. A first-order policy language for history-based transaction monitoring. International Colloquium on Theoretical 
Aspects of Computing, 2009. 
207 Ozeer. φ comp: An architecture for monitoring and enforcing security compliance in sensitive health data environment. 18th 
International Conference on Software Architecture Companion, 2021. 
208 Chowdhury, Jia, Garg, Datta. Temporal mode-checking for runtime monitoring of privacy policies. International Conference on 
Computer Aided Verification, 2014. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 57 
 
embodied actors, system logs not only need to contain all relevant events in the right order but 
also need to be tamper-proof and to comply with applicable privacy policies. Distributed ledger 
technology, such as various incarnations of blockchain, has lately been tried, for instance, for 
tamper-proof logging. Monitoring information flow policies such as noninterference or 
observational determinism, which relate multiple computation traces with each other, is also 
challenging.209 210 
 
Assurance Cases. A fundamentally different approach to assurance is based on constructing and 
maintaining safety and assurance cases,211 which are compelling, comprehensive, defensible, and 
valid justifications of the compliance of a system. It is based on a structured argument of 
assurance considerations across the system life cycle that can assist in convincing various 
stakeholders that the system is acceptably safe. The purpose is, broadly, to demonstrate that the 
safety-related risks associated with specific system concerns212 have been identified, are well 
understood, and have been appropriately mitigated, and that mechanisms are in place to 
monitor the effectiveness of safety-related mitigations. In this sense, an assurance case is a 
structured argument for linking safety-related claims through a chain of arguments to a body of 
the appropriate evidence. 
 
One of the main benefits of structured arguments in assurance cases is that the causal 
dependencies between assurance claims and the substantiating evidence as obtained, for 
instance, by analysis are captured explicitly. Assurance cases also determine the level of scrutiny 
needed for developing and operating systems that are acceptably safe. This kind of information 
from safety cases might also be used by an embodied actor in the future to safely explore and 
navigate in largely unknown operating contexts. 
However, assurance cases currently are at most semiformal, and their construction and 
maintenance require significant manual efforts. Adequate notions of assurance case patterns and 
modular composition operators for assurance cases are opening up new possibilities for aligning 
compliance arguments with system evolvements during runtime (such as the dynamic formation 
of federations). 
 
209 Finkbeiner, Hahn, Stenger, Tentrup. Monitoring hyperproperties. International Conference on Runtime Verification, 2017. 
210 Bonakdarpour, Finkbeiner. The complexity of monitoring hyperproperties. IEEE 31st Computer Security Foundations Symposium, 
2018. 
211 UK Ministry of Defence, 2007. 
212 Including safety and security, but also applies to all other attributes of trustworthiness. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 58 
 
A major challenge is to measure configdence in assurance cases.213 214 215 216 217 Eliminative 
induction increases confidence in assurance cases by removing sources of doubt and using 
Baconian218 probability to represent confidence.219 One systematic approach is the construction 
and dialectical consideration of counterclaims and countercases, where counterclaims are 
natural in confirmation measures as studied in Bayesian confirmation theory, and countercases 
are assurance cases for negated claims. 
 
Assurance cases are successfully applied to traditional safety-critical systems with clearly defined 
operating contexts, safety requirements, and fallback strategies to human operators. Given the 
increasing complexities and sources of uncertainty, however, the current assurance approach 
with prescribed and fixed verification and validation process activities, criteria, and metrics does 
not work well for assuring AI-based or even embodied systems. With the multitude of sources of 
uncertainty, assurance arguments for increasingly autonomous embodied systems need to (1) 
stress rigor in the assessment of the evidence and reasoning employed and (2) automate the 
search for defeaters, the construction of cases and countercases, and the management and 
representation of dialectical examination.220 A topic of particular interest is to capture how the 
influence of a learning-enabled component is depicted and reasoned within the control 
structure of an embodied actor. Rigorous assurance cases can be adapted faster and more 
efficiently to the ever-evolving assurance needs of embodied systems. 
Rigorous assurance cases open new possibilities for dependable and safe exploration in largely 
unknown operating contexts, which have been obtained from relevant information of a safety 
case and its certainty assessment. For example, if only weak evidence is available for the fact that 
the traffic light in front of the ego vehicle is green, then the ego cart might want to increase its 
assurance by strengthening this case through additional sensor activity, for example. Therefore, 
rigorous assurance cases can be instrumental in online behavioral self-adaptation and in 
determining safe behavior when operating in uncertain contexts. 
 
 
213 Grigorova, Maibaum. Taking a page from the law books: Considering evidence weight in evaluating assurance case confidence. 
IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering Workshops. 2013. 
214 Duan, Rayadurgam, Heimdahl, Sokolsky, Lee. Representing confidence in assurance case evidence. International Conference on 
Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 2014. 
215 Bloomfield, Littlewood, Wright. Confidence: Its role in dependability cases for risk assessment. IEEE 37th Annual IEEE/IFIP 
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2007. 
216 Rushby. Formalism in safety cases. Making Systems Safer, Springer, 2010. 
217 Rushby. Logic and epistemology in safety cases, International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 2013. 
218 https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20160013333/downloads/20160013333.pdf 
219 Goodenough, Weinstock. Toward a theory of assurance case confidence. CMU Technical Report, 2004. 
220 Bloomfield, Rushby. Assurance 2.0: A manifesto. arXiv:2004.10474, 2020. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 59 
 
Evidence-based assurance is based on explicitly generating verifiable evidence for any 
transaction of and between embodied actors. The underlying mindset is “verify, then trust.” 
Consider a responsible visa-granting actor that returns evidence (think of it as a number) 
corresponding to the permission for the requester to enter the foreign country for a specific time 
frame. The border control verifies the identity of the presenter upon entry and verifies that the 
presented visa is valid. This basic mechanism is applicable to all kinds of transactions that involve 
the exchange of physical evidence in the form of identity cards, driver’s licenses, money, checks, 
visas, airline tickets, traffic tickets, birth certificates, vaccination certificates, and stock certificates, 
as well as electronic evidence, including PIN numbers, passwords, keys, certificates, digital coins, 
and nonces. 
It is easy to extrapolate from the above scenario the other uses of digital evidence in electronic 
commerce, business and administrative processes, and digital government, where actors execute 
smart contracts (as outlined in the Self-Integration subsection) to perform specific tasks that 
require the exchange of authorization and authentication information. In this way, evidence is 
produced, say, to assert the conclusion of contracts. The generated evidence can then be 
independently and automatically checked as the prerequisite for directing corresponding 
payments. 
Previously, we defined a framework for evidential transactions called Cyberlogic, which is based 
on public key infrastructure.221 222 The basic components are simple. First, evidence is encoded 
by means of numbers using digital certificates and nonces. Second, predicates are signed by 
private keys so that decryption of such a certificate with the corresponding public key serves as 
proof or evidence for the assertion contained in the certificate. Third, protocols are distributed 
logic programs that gather evidence using ordinary predicates, digital certificates, and proof 
construction based on the Curry–Howard isomorphism. These simple building blocks are 
sufficient to encode all-important capabilities for delegation, retraction of permission, and time-
stamped evidence. For example, some vaccination certificates might be handed out at a certain 
point in time. Now, new medical evidence on the ephemeral efficacy of vaccination results in the 
need to retract corresponding capabilities. 
 
Evidential transaction in a Cyberlogic-like setting has recently been used to demonstrate that 
accountability for federated ML is paramount to fully overcoming legislative and jurisdictional 
constraints.223 In particular, it ensures that all entities’ data are adequately included in the model 
 
221 Rueß, Shankar. Introducing cyberlogic. Proceedings of the 3rd Annual High Confidence Software and Systems Conference, 2003. 
222 Nigam, Reis, Rahmouni, Rueß. Proof search and certificates for evidential transactions. Automated Deduction–CADE 28, 2021. 
223 Balta, Sellami, Kuhn, Schöpp, Buchinger, Baracaldo, Altakrouri. Accountable federated machine learning in government: 
Engineering and management insights. International Conference on Electronic Participation, 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 60 
 
and evidence on fairness and reproducibility is curated toward trustworthiness or realizing 
accountability for federated ML. Cyberlogic also forms the foundations for secure and trusted-
by-design smart contracts.224 Even though Cyberlogic has proven to be instrumental in many 
cases, whether proof-carrying capabilities can be scaled up for complex real-world systems is 
still unclear. Possible directions for addressing these scalability issues are interactive proof 
systems and the use of advanced cryptographic mechanisms. 
 
We have described challenges and possible approaches for the assurance of embodied systems 
acting in social contexts. A detail that should have become clear is that embodied systems, as 
increasingly autonomous actors in the real world, need to deal, like the rest of us, with the 
complexity and rigmaroles associated with real-world norms and laws. As technical systems, 
however, they rely on rigorous and faithful digital representations thereof. Moreover, auditing, as 
a means of assuring compliance, needs to be aligned with the evolvement of actors. Auditing 
also needs to be largely automated. Correspondingly, we have outlined promising base 
technologies based on assurance cases and evidential transactions. 
 
We suggest that rigorous and automated assurance is key to a meaningful embodiment of ever-
evolving and increasingly autonomous systems into social contexts. We also hope that these 
advancements may also eventually prove to be instrumental for more rational and evidence-
based development and maintenance of judicial and regulatory frameworks as the basis for 
deforesting the convoluted jungle of applicable regulations and for creating space for more 
innovative behavior. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 Dargaye, Kirchner, Tucci-Piergovanni. Towards secure and trusted-by-design smart contracts. Francophone Days of Application 
Languages, 24, 2018. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 61 
 
5. 
Conclusions 
We have argued that a new generation of increasingly autonomous and self-learning systems is 
about to be developed and embodied into all aspects of everyday life. The main driver for their 
deployment is their ubiquitous disruptive potential. Autonomy and unsupervised learning 
capabilities, therefore, are widely believed to be the key technological base for initiating and 
driving the next economic and societal phase shift.225 
Embodied systems are not distant AI-ish science fiction, as purpose-built embodied systems 
might be “handcrafted” with currently available technology, but only at a very high cost and 
sometimes with unknown risks, because we do not yet have mature science and technology to 
support the engineering of embodied systems in which we may place our trust. 
Becoming (too) dependent and losing meaningful control over increasingly autonomous and 
self-learning systems are real risks. When deploying these systems into real-life contexts, we face 
various engineering challenges, because coordinating the behavior of embodied actors in a 
beneficial manner is crucial to ensure their compatibility with our human-centered social values 
and to design verifiably safe and reliable human–machine interaction.226 
Traditional systems engineering, however, is coming to a climacteric from embedded to 
embodied systems, and with assuring the trustworthiness of a new generation of dynamic 
federations of situationally aware, intent-driven, explorative, ever-evolving, largely unpredictable, 
and increasingly autonomous embodied systems in uncertain, complex, and unpredictable real-
world contexts. 
Model-driven engineering has so far been the pillar for building dependable and safe embedded 
control systems, such as those used for flying airplanes safely. Currently, we are working on 
data-driven engineering techniques for functional automated systems with learning-enabled 
components. Next, we need to develop engineering capabilities for trustworthy embodied 
systems, which are based on a suitable mixture, adaptations, and further developments of the 
model- and data-driven engineering methodologies. 
Such an engineering framework needs to be as rigorous as possible, because embodied systems 
will eventually be equipped with substantial self-engineering capabilities, including data- and 
experience-driven functional updates, zero-touch repair and maintenance capabilities, and the 
 
225 Davidow, Malone. The Autonomous Revolution: Reclaiming the Future we’ve Sold to Machines. Berrett–Koehler Publishers, 2020. 
226 Vazdanan et al. Responsibility Research for Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, 2021. 

 
 
Systems Challenges for Trustworthy Embodied Systems 
 62 
 
possibility of by-need-augmentation of sensing, cognitive, and acting capabilities. We also 
envision embodied systems that perform their own risk analysis and define their own mitigation 
strategies based on their own understanding of socially acceptable behavior. 
We have described the main characteristics of embodied systems and derived from these 
characteristics a shortlist of central systems challenges, including robust and human-centered AI, 
architectures for autonomous systems, safe exploration of the unknown (unknown), trustworthy 
self-integration, and continual verification and assurance for federated self-learning systems. We 
restricted ourselves to technical systems challenges, thereby omitting important but largely 
unsolved economic, jurisdictional, and societal questions on embodying autonomous, technical 
systems into our everyday life. 
We consider the identified list of technical systems challenges to comprise only the most 
pressing ones. We expect to identify additional ones as we gain a deeper understanding of the 
real consequences of embodying autonomous actors into economic and societal contexts. 
Moreover, the relative importance of each of the identified systems challenges is highly 
dependent on the envisioned application context and its associated requirements. Solving these 
challenges will require synergistic innovations in software systems engineering, architectures for 
autonomous systems, and core AI/ML algorithms. 
A crucial next step is to gain more experience and increase our theoretical understanding of 
autonomous and self-learning embodied systems in which we can put our trust. A series of 
increasingly challenging embodied systems might support us in leveraging and bootstrapping 
engineering knowledge for embodied systems in an accelerated fashion. At the same time, 
sound sociopolitical and legal conditions and frameworks must be created to embody 
autonomously acting machines in essential real-world processes and structures, because failing 
to deploy embodied systems in a meaningful manner into our very economic and social fabric 
can all too easily and quickly become dystopian. 

1
Publisher
fortiss
www.fortiss.org
© 2022
Authors
Harald Rueß
Layout
Sonja Taut, 
Kathrin Hörmann
ISSN Print	
	
ISSN Online
2699-1217	
	
2700-2977
Imprint
Picture Credits
Titel: adobe stock © Tex vector

2
Although this white paper was prepared with the 
utmost care and diligence, inaccuracies cannot be 
excluded. No guarantee is provided, and no legal 
responsibility or liability is assumed for any damages 
resulting from erroneous information.
fortiss is the Free State of Bavaria research institute 
for software-intensive systems based in Munich. The 
institute’s scientists work on research, development 
and transfer projects together with universities and 
technology companies in Bavaria and other parts 
of Germany, as well as across Europe. The research 
activities focus on state-of-the-art methods, tech­
niques and tools used in software development and 
systems & service engineering and their application 
with cognitive cyber-physical systems such as the 
Internet of Things (IoT). 
 
fortiss is legally structured as a non-profit limited 
liability company (GmbH). The shareholders are the 
Free State of Bavaria (majority shareholder) and the 
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der ange-
wandten Forschung e.V.

3
fortiss GmbH
Guerickestraße 25
80805 München
Deutschland
www.fortiss.org
Tel.: +49 89 3603522 0
