Choosing the Right Word: Using Bidirectional LSTM
Tagger for Writing Support Systems
Victor Makarenkov, Lior Rokach, Bracha Shapira
Department of Software and Information Systems Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
Abstract
Scientiﬁc writing is diﬃcult. It is even harder for those for whom English is
a second language (ESL learners). Scholars around the world spend a signiﬁ-
cant amount of time and resources proofreading their work before submitting
it for review or publication.
In this paper we present a novel machine learning based application for
proper word choice task. Proper word choice is a generalization the lexical
substitution (LS) and grammatical error correction (GEC) tasks. We demon-
strate and evaluate the usefulness of applying bidirectional Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) tagger, for this task. While state-of-the-art grammatical
error correction uses error-speciﬁc classiﬁers and machine translation meth-
ods, we demonstrate an unsupervised method that is based solely on a high
quality text corpus and does not require manually annotated data. We use a
bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) with LSTM for learning the
proper word choice based on a word’s sentential context. We demonstrate and
evaluate our application on both a domain-speciﬁc (scientiﬁc), writing task
and a general-purpose writing task. We show that our domain-speciﬁc and
general-purpose models outperform state-of-the-art general context learning.
As an additional contribution of this research, we also share our code, pre-
trained models, and a new ESL learner test set with the research community.
Keywords:
LSTM, Writing Support, Language Modeling
1. Introduction
Writing good scientiﬁc papers is a diﬃcult process, and this task is even
more challenging for non-native English speakers. In this paper we propose a
Preprint submitted to arxiv.org
January 10, 2019
arXiv:1901.02490v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2019

new task of proper word choice. We apply a bidirectional LSTM tagger [1] to
implement a writing support method for those for whom English is a second
language (referred to as ESL learners in this paper). Our application uses
long term linguistic patterns and regularities which are captured by RNNs
with an LSTM cell [2], when extracted from a large scientiﬁc corpus. This
application could be used to help ESL learners with tasks such as choosing the
right word, avoiding homophone confusion, and using correct and up-to-date
jargon and terminology. Our application is not simply another spell-checker;
rather it is an implementation of a method specially aimed at assisting ESL
learners and is focused on suggesting corrections for the types of errors made
by these writers.
There are hundreds of millions of non-native English speakers worldwide,
yet most prestigious academic conferences are held in the English language.
A paper’s acceptance or rejection often hinges on the quality of writing,
which is why scholars invest so much time and resources in writing, editing,
spell-checking, proofreading, and revising their work before submitting it for
review.
In order to meet the needs of ESL learners, we address two important
word replacement tasks, each of which are generalized: the grammatical
error correction (GEC) and lexical substitution (LS) tasks.
In the GEC
task, the need to replace one word with another derives from the inherent
deﬁnition of the error correction task, in which a written sentence does not
comply with English grammar rules; consequently, a word replacement can
inadvertently change the entire meaning of the sentence. In contrast, in the
LS task, the substitute for a word in a sentential context, must preserve the
original meaning [3] of the sentence, while the sentence itself must adhere
to English grammar rules. Both reasons for word replacement (because of a
grammatical error or a poor word choice) occur frequently in the articles of
ESL learners.
The main contributions of this work are threefold: 1) We deﬁne a new
task of proper word choice and develop a solution for it.
This task is a
generalizartion of GEC and LS. 2) We present an RNN based model, that
addresses many various types of GEC and the LS in a single model (rather
than an ensemble). 3) While most exsiting solutions based on supervised
learning, our model relies solely on an unsupervised data, without any hu-
man annotation, that results in a comprehensive, unsupervised, and powerful
system for ESL writing assistance. In order to better demonstrate our appli-
cation’s usefulness, we created an ESL learner test-set. We share our code,
2

Table 1: Examples of common grammatical errors and error types in the CoNLL-2014
shared task. The errors are marked with an asterisk (*) and the correction follows the
forward slash (/). Examples are provided from [7].
Error type
Example
Verb tense
Medical technology during this time *is/was
not advanced enough to cure him.
Verb modal
Although the problem *would/may not be serious,
people *would/might still be afraid.
Verb form
A study in 2010 *shown/showed that patients
recover faster when surrounded by family members.
Subject-verb agreement
The beneﬁts of disclosing genetic risk information
*outweighs/outweigh the cost.
Article or determiner
It is obvious to see that *internet/the internet saves
people time and also connects people globally.
Noun number
A carrier may consider not having any
*child/children after getting married.
Preposition
This essay will *discuss about/discuss whether the
carrier should tell his relatives or not.
Wrong collocation
Early examination is *healthy/advisable and will
cast away unwanted doubts.
Word form
The sense of *guilty/guilt can be more than expected.
pre-trained models, and the ESL learner test-set for the research community.
2. Background and Related Work
The proposed task of proper word choice is closely related to other error
correction tasks, including: semantic collocation correction [4], lexical sub-
stitution [5], paraphrase generation [6], grammatical error correction [7] and
sentence completion1 [8]. In this section we present background and related
work associated with the GEC and LS tasks which are generalized in our
task. This section also addresses the related topics of bidirectional LSTM
tagger and language modeling.
1Microsoft Sentence Completion Challenge
3

2.1. Grammatical Error Correction
In recent years, several GEC competitions have taken place, including the
HOO-2011 [9], HOO-2012 [10], CoNLL-2013 [11], and the CoNLL-2014 [7]
competitions. The CoNLL-2014 shared task on GEC, the most recent and
prominent of these competitions, proposed 28 error types, the most common
of which are presented in Table 1. In this competition, the participants were
required to develop end-to-end GEC systems, for speciﬁc, non-exhaustive,
grammatical error detection and correction. The participating teams devel-
oped a wide range of approaches, including statistical classiﬁers [12], language
models, and statistical machine translation [13], and rule-based modules [14].
The systems submitted were trained on an NUCLE [15] annotated corpus of
articles written by ESL learners. More recent GEC research has used ma-
chine translation and classiﬁers [16, 17], and the state-of-the-art GEC method
was developed by Rozovskaya and Roth [18] who combined machine transla-
tion methods and machine learning classiﬁers in the current best performing
method using the CoNLL-2014 test set.
2.2. Lexical Substitution
The LS task [3] has attracted increased attention following its inclusion
in SemEval-2007 [5]. In this type of word replacement, given a word in a
sentence, the task is to substitute the correct word, such that the original
meaning of a sentence remains the same. For example [3]:
• ”After the { match / game }, replace any remaining ﬂuid deﬁcit to
prevent problems of chronic dehydration throughout the tournament.”
• ”The results clearly { indicate / show / illustrate } that our method
outperforms the current state-of-the-art.”
The word can be one of the following four part-of-speech (POS) classes:
noun, verb, adjective, or adverb. The systems presented at Sem-Eval 2007
relied heavily on multiple external resources and inventories such as WordNet
[19]. The LS task involves the subtasks of candidate prediction and candi-
date ranking, and most recent research has only focused only on candidate
ranking. However, Melamud et al. [20] used bidirectional LSTM for context
learning, and this represents the current state-of-the-art approach in LS.
4

Figure 1: An example of bidirectional LSTM tagger architecture.
2.3. Bidirectional LSTM tagger
Figure 1 presents the approach of bidirectional LSTM tagger when ap-
plied to a text classiﬁcation task. Each word is transformed into its dense
embedding representation and is then being fed into two LSTM networks: 1)
left-to-right LSTM network, and 2) right-to-left LSTM network. The out-
puts of the two networks (the LSTM hidden states) are further concatenated
and the classiﬁcation is performed. When applying this approach to text,
a model learns from target word’s preﬁx (left-to-right) and suﬃx (right-to-
left) contexts and performs the ﬁnal classiﬁcation based on the jointly learned
representation of this context. Similar bidirectional LSTM models were suc-
cessfully used in various NLP tasks, e.g., Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging [21],
context learning [20] and sentiment analysis [22]. We formally describe the
application of bidirectional LSTM tagger to the proper word choice task in
section 3.3.
2.4. Deep Language Modeling
A language model (LM) is deﬁned as a function that assigns a probability
distribution over words in a given vocabulary [23]. While n-gram based LMs
have been studied for decades, powerful deep learning and RNN-based LMs
5

Figure 2:
Overview of the proposed bidirectional LSTM application for word choice
method.
For example, in a given sentence, for the target word, specify, the method
suggests a list of three replacement candidates, sorted by the probability of observing
a candidate in this sentential context.
(RNNLM) have only begun to attract a signiﬁcant amount of attention in
recent years [24, 25, 26, 27], along with other text classiﬁcation tasks, such as
sentiment analysis [28, 22, 29, 30] or fake-news detection [31, 32, 33]. Training
an LM with an RNN as its sequence model paradigm enables models to be
created that reﬂect a target word’s long and varied history.
3. Bidirectional LSTM tagger for proper word choice
We now turn to formally specify the proper word choice task, elaborate
on the application of bidirectional LSTM tagger to the task, and formally
deﬁne it as well.
3.1. Formal task speciﬁcation
We formally deﬁne the task as following:
Given a sentence s =< w1, w2, ..., target, ..., wn > where the target is explic-
itly speciﬁed, the task is to provide a sorted list of the k most appropriate
words to replace the target in s based on the sentential context of the target
in s.
3.2. Application overview
Our main goal is to predict the most appropriate target word, given
the original word written by an ESL writer and its sentential context. The
application consists of the following steps which are presented in Figure 2:
1. Obtain a probability distribution from the bidirectional LSTM model,
which was trained to predict a target word based on its sentential con-
text.
6

2. From this distribution, ﬁlter the words that own such a sense that has
the same POS as the original target word that was written by the
ESL writer. The sense list and respective POS tags are extracted from
WordNet [19].
The bidirectional LSTM tagger approach lies at the heart of our applica-
tion. In essence, our model combines an RNN approach to language modeling
and variable-length context learning around the target word. The model’s
architecture is presented in Figure 3. The model consists of two separate
recurrent neural networks with LSTM memory cells. To train this model
we feed the sentence (from left to right) into the ﬁrst LSTM, and then we
feed the same sentence (right to left) into the second LSTM. The outputs
of the two networks are concatenated and represent the sentential context
embedding as illustrated in Figure 3. The concatenation of the networks’
outputs does not occur as expected from the standard bidirectional LSTM
tagger, in which the outputs at time t are combined for each LSTM with its
relative bidirectional zipped counterpart. Instead, the outputs of two LSTM
networks are combined with an oﬀset of two as displayed in Figure 3. Finally,
the combined output undergoes softmax normalization, in order to obtain a
probability distribution on the words in the vocabulary. We use the cross-
entropy as the loss function in the process of learning our model’s parameters.
In this learning process we also learn the LSTM networks’ parameters, the
sentential context embeddings, and the target words’ embeddings.
Consider the following sentence which was written by an ESL learner:
The results clearly *indicate/show that our method outperforms the current
state-of-the-art methods. The word, indicate, was originally written, but was
later replaced with the word show for a better word choice. In order for our
method to produce such a suggestion, the word, show, had to be learned by
a model to appear in this sentential context.
3.3. Formal application speciﬁcation
Using the notation of context2vec [20], let lLS be the LSTM which reads
the words from left to right, and let rLS be the LSTM which reads the
words from right to left. Let w1:n be a sentence of n words. The context
representation for the target word wi is deﬁned as the concatenation of the
outputs of lLS and rLS:
biLS(w1:n, i) = lLS(l1,i−1) ⊕rLS(rn:i+1)
(1)
7

Figure 3: An application of bidirectional LSTM tagger to the proper word choice task. For
example, for learning to suggest the word, results, we concatenate the left-LSTM network’s
output before the word, the, and right-LSTM before same word from the right side, clearly.
where l and r represent distinct left-to-right and right-to-left word em-
beddings of the words in the sentence. The concatenated representation is
then linearly transformed to the vector of the vocabulary size2:
LIN(x) = W ∗x + b
(2)
where W is a matrix of model parameters, and b is a vector representing the
bias. Next, we squash the k-dimensional vector z = LIN(x) with a softmax
function, to obtain a probability distribution:
σ(z)i =
ezi
P
j=1..k
ezj
for
i = 1..k
(3)
Next, the loss is calculated using the cross-entropy function. The distri-
bution obtained is then used as an estimated distribution Q, and the true
distribution P assigns 1 to the target word and 0 to all of the other words:
2equal to 30,000 in this work
8

H(P, Q) = −
X
x
p(x) log q(x)
(4)
The LSTM equations that are computed at each step t, for each LSTM
network are a implemented using coupled input and forget gates [34]:
it = σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + Yict−1 + bi)
(5)
ft = σ(Wfxt + Ufht−1 + Yfct−1 + bf)
(6)
ot = σ(Woxt + Uoht−1 + Yoct−1 + bo)
(7)
gt = tanh(Wgxt + Ught−1 + bg)
(8)
ct = ft · ct−1 + it · gt
(9)
ht = ot · tanh(ct)
(10)
where W∗, U∗and Y∗are the LSTM model parameters, and b∗are the biases.
it, ft, and ot are the input gate, forget gate, and output gate, respectively.
ht is the output that is passed to the next layer of the network, and ct is the
state that is passed to the next step at time t + 1.
We follow Aharoni et al. [35] in a way of demonstrating the step-by-step
training.
The graph in Figure 4 presents the training at each step for a
given target word. For the left-to-right LSTM, the one-hot encoded context
word is transformed to a learned ad hoc embedding. Then, the embedding
is used, in turn, as an input to the LSTM memory cell, which also combines
its previous state. Next, the hidden state of LSTM is concatenated with its
respective counterpart from right-to-left LSTM which was learned separately
in an analogous manner. The concatenated representation of the context is
transformed to a distribution of vocabulary size and used to compute the loss
cross-entropy function against the actually observed word in the training text.
3.4. The Role of WordNet In POS Filtering
A crucial part of our application is ﬁltering only those words, for which the
POS in the sentential context is identical to the POS of the originally written
word. We experimented with two diﬀerent POS extraction procedures: 1) the
NLTK [36] POS tagger which was trained on the Penn Treebank [37] corpus,
and 2) the WordNet [19] electronic dictionary of the English language.
In the case of NLTK, we put a candidate word in place of the originally
written word and applied the POS tagging procedure to determine the can-
didate word’s POS tag.
9

Figure 4: A detailed example of the training process. In each step, a target word (re-
sults in this example) is learned based on a prediction given the two words immediately
surrounding the target word, which in turn, are preceded with sentential context.
In the case of WordNet, we extracted all possible senses of a candidate
word and the originally written word and checked whether both words share
the same POS in one of their senses.
We found that our application achieved slightly better performance when
using WordNet as the POS source for the candidate words, as we discuss in
detail in Section 5. Intuitively, using WordNet rather than a statistical POS
tagger impairs the purity of the statistical method, because a hand-crafted
word resource is used in the suggestion method. However, since this strat-
egy resulted in a slightly higher mean reciprocal rank (MRR) value without
aﬀecting the results and ﬁnal conclusion, we used it in our experiments.
4. Evaluation Settings
We evaluate our application in three diﬀerent experimental settings. First,
we demonstrate how a piece of scientiﬁc writing (176 sentences) can be im-
proved using our application with a model learned from a high quality sci-
entiﬁc text corpus. Second, to further demonstrate the performance of our
application, we apply it to general-purpose writing using a subset of the
10

CoNLL-2014 shared task [7] dataset as the test set (2421 sentences). Third,
we perform a human evaluation, using professional English editors’ judgments
to evaluate our method’s performance.
Like the evaluation conducted in the CoNLL-2014 [7] competition and
query auto completion (QAC) [38, 39] evaluation practice, we use a strict
evaluation policy in the two ﬁrst evaluation settings; that is, we compare the
application’s performance against the single correct word replacement sug-
gested by a professional English editor, in order to provide an underestimate
of the possible MRR. The word choice method generates a list of the top
k replacement suggestions, based on the original word’s POS and sentential
context. We report the MRR measure obtained during our experiments. We
set k = 100 in our experiments.
Several other tasks allow multiple replacements. For example, consider
the LS task evaluation [5] method.
Evaluating our application against a
dataset with multiple possible word suggestions dramatically improves the
results. For the third evaluation setting, we show an even better result, which
is achieved by actual MRR obtained from the human evaluation.
In addition, in a special evaluation setting, we evaluate our application
on this article and present the results in Appendix A.
4.1. Scientiﬁc Writing
Motivated by the challenge of writing high quality academic articles for
top tier scientiﬁc conferences and journals, we focused on the following set-
ting.
High quality scientiﬁc corpus. In order to train an eﬀective word sugges-
tion model3, we used a high quality corpus of scientiﬁc articles. This corpus
consists of 29,848 articles ranked A and A∗from 60 top ranked ACM and
IEEE conferences that were selected on the basis of the CORE Rankings Por-
tal4. To accelerate the training process we used the 30,000 most frequently
appearing words in the corpus as the vocabulary and only used sentences
that contained 40 words or less. The resulting corpus consists of roughly
40 million tokens in 2.78 million sentences. The initial corpus size was 41
million tokens in 2.8 millions sentences, so the reduction was actually quite
negligible.
3This pre-trained model is available at:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/
0B5iAITPoL9L2ald0VzNxZWtxdGM/view?usp=sharing
4The Computing Research and Education Association of Australasia, CORE
11

Figure 5: A snapshot of some of the corrections suggested for scientiﬁc articles written by
ESL learners. Three diﬀerent sentences after they were edited by a professional English
editor. In the course of this research we collected these examples and constructed the new
ESL learner test set.
Scientiﬁc text test set. To create a scientiﬁc text test set, we manually
collected 176 sentences from 10 scientiﬁc articles written by researchers for
whom English is a second language (ESL learners), including research stu-
dents and faculty members from three diﬀerent universities: Queen Mary
University of London, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev and Tel Aviv
University. The mother tongue of the writers was either Russian or Hebrew,
which contributes to the diversity of the test set used in our experiment; the
test set of the CoNLL-2014 shared task was derived from articles written at
the National University of Singapore. Each of the 10 articles was written
in the course of the scholar’s ongoing research work, either as Ph.D. thesis
chapters or articles for scientiﬁc publication (for a conference or journal).
Editing of the papers was performed by four professional English editors,
prior to the initiation of the experiments described in this work, so the ed-
itors did not know that their corrections would be used in this way. We
selected corrections in which a single word was replaced by another single
word. We focused on proper word choice, and therefore excluded corrections
of verb-tense, subject-verb agreement, word form, noun-number and article-
or-determiner. We included grammatical errors and lexical substitutions that
correspond to improper word choice. Examples of some of the corrections
suggested are presented in Figure 5. Grammatical errors (according to the
ConLL-2014 error dichotomy) include wrong collocation, and preposition and
verb modal types of errors. Lexical substitution refers to substitutions that
were preferred by the English editors. In cases in which more than one cor-
rection was made in a sentence, the sentence was adjusted so that it only
12

requires the replacement of one word in the test stage. The scientiﬁc-text
test is available for use and may be downloaded by the research community.5
4.2. General Purpose Writing
General purpose English corpora. For a representative and balanced En-
glish corpora we use the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA).6
COCA is equally divided into ﬁve parts: spoken, ﬁction, popular magazines,
newspapers, and academic texts, from the years 1990-2015, and has a total
of 520 million words. The spoken part was excluded from our experiment.
After limiting the vocabulary size to 30000 words and the sentence length
to 40 words, a reduced corpus with 57 million words in 4.8 million sentences
remained.
General purpose text test set. For a general purpose test set we use
a subset of the CoNLL-2014 GEC shared task dataset [7], that consists of
2421 sentences. Table 4 speciﬁes the subset of errors that were chosen for
the evaluation. The error distribution with the results is also presented in
Table 4.
As with the scientiﬁc writing, we only use those errors where a single word
is replaced by another single word. However, as opposed to the scientiﬁc test
set, we left all other grammatical errors in these sentences (in addition to
the word choice errors), since we aimed to handle this in a manner similar to
that which was done in the most recent study addressing the GEC problem
[18].
4.3. Human Annotators’ Evaluation
Scientiﬁc writing and general purpose evaluation scenarios underestimate
the MRR, providing its lower bound. To further investigate our method’s
performance and approach to the actual MRR, we performed a human eval-
uation. In this evaluation scenario, we employed two professional English
writers. Both of them are native English speakers, and obtained an under-
graduate degree, one in the US and the other in the UK. Each annotator
was given the list of 176 ESL writer’s sentences with a target word and a
correction for each sentence. A list of possible corrections for each sentence,
generated by our method, was also given to each annotator. Each anno-
tator was asked to select from among the possible corrections provided by
5https://github.com/vicmak/Exploiting-BiLSTM-for-Proper-Word-Choice
6http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
13

our method, those corrections that would be an equal quality substitution
for the original correction correction of the sentence made when the article
was being edited prior to its submission to a conference or journal. Because
the two annotators did not agree completely on the corrections, we collected
all of the corrections that were selected by the annotators and created two
comparison sets used to evaluate our method’s performance:
1. Combined set. We combined all of the corrections selected by the
two annotators, thereby obtaining a wider list of possible corrections.
2. Intersection set. We chose only the corrections that both annota-
tors agreed on, thereby, receiving a more restricted, and likely more
conservative correction list.
We further evaluated our method with these two test sets.
4.4. Implementation details
Due to the very large training sets and the extensive amount of time
it took to train the models, we had to implement batch training.
Batch
training on RNNs when there are sentences of varying lengths in one batch is
a very challenging engineering task. Therefore, we designed a special training
mechanism that would take into account the two LSTM networks (right-to-
left and left-to-right) and would not sum the errors obtained from padded
sentences that are less then 40 tokens long. Thus, we implemented all RNN
based models using the DyNet [40] toolkit7.
DyNet supports a dynamic
computation graph, making this implementation possible.
Standard and
more common deep learning libraries, e.g., TensorFlow [41], do not support
dynamic computation graphs, and enforce specifying the exact dimensions of
input sentences. These implementations are provided with a list of sentences
and ESL learner’s original word explicitly speciﬁed in each sentence.
We used the NLTK [36] API for POS tagging in our two experimental
strategies: 1) to access the WordNet database for words’ senses and 2) to ob-
tain statistical POS tagging. We used the KENLM [42] toolkit8 to implement
the n-gram LM with Kneser-Ney smoothing for the n-gram LM evaluation.
7The implementation is available for download at:
https://github.com/vicmak/
Exploiting-BiLSTM-for-Proper-Word-Choice
8Available for download at: https://github.com/kpu/kenlm
14

4.5. Hyper-parameters
We experimented with various hyper-parameter values and experienced
a considerable trade-oﬀbetween training time and quality. We were also
limited by hardware resources, as we performed the training on an NVIDIA
GRID K2 GPU with 4 GB of memory. The results reported here were ob-
tained using the following hyper-parameters for the model architecture and
training.
• Word embedding dimension = 200
• Number of LSTM hidden units = 200
• Sentential context embedding dimension = 400
• Training batch size = 100 sentences
• Maximal sentence length = 40 words for all RNN based methods (BiL-
STM and RNNLM in Table 3)
• Vocabulary size = 30,000 (the size of initial one-hot vectors, represent-
ing the words as the starting point for word embedding learning)
• N-gram LM with Kneser-Ney smoothing was trained to learn a distri-
bution for ﬁve n-gram’s sizes, starting from unigram to ﬁve-gram.
In the training of RNN based models, we padded the sentences which
were in lowercase letters with special <start> and <stop> tokens at the
beginning and at the end of each sentence, to ensure consistent starting and
ending point for each RNN’s LSTM state.
Because the training batch size aﬀects both training time and classiﬁ-
cation performance [43], we experimented with both pure stochastic and
mini-batch training procedures. The training on the scientiﬁc corpus took
24 hours to perform, with minibatch training and a batch size of 100 sen-
tences. The time it took to train the general-purpose corpus (COCA) was 40
hours, also with minibatching and a batch size of 100 sentences. Stochastic
training on the scientiﬁc corpus took took approximately 100 hours to train,
with one sentence at a time with only one pass (epoch) over the data. The
resulting performance was signiﬁcantly poorer than that obtained in the case
of minibatch training.
15

5. Results
Table 2: Examples of the suggestions for the scientiﬁc writing test set. The errors are
marked with an asterisk (*) and the correction follows the the forward slash (/). The top
three correction suggestions are listed for each sentence.
Corrected sentence
Top 3
The results clearly *indicate/show that our method
signiﬁcantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art.
1) show
2) demonstrate
3) suggest
Other predictors incorporate the statistical data of query term,
frequencies within the collection obtained *from/during the
indexing stage.
1) at
2) from
3) during
This technique mimics the number of operations
*needed/required to transfer one text string to another.
1) required
2) needed
3) used
While the problem of product recommendations for consumers in
e-commerce, has been *widely/extensively analyzed modelling
consumer’s willingness, to pay for the recommended product has
hardly been addressed
1) widely
2) extensively
3) previously
In order to *enforce/ensure that out of budget features are not
selected, the framework maintains a so called potential features set
1) ensure
2) guarantee
3) ﬁnd
5.1. Scientiﬁc Writing
5.1.1. Baselines
In order to demonstrate the strength of our bidirectional LSTM network
model, we evaluated several baselines using the 176-sentences scientiﬁc test
set:
1. A left-to-right RNNLM, trained on the high quality scientiﬁc corpus.
2. A right-to-left RNNLM, trained on the high quality scientiﬁc corpus.
3. A ﬁve-gram LM with Kneser-Ney smoothing, trained on the high qual-
ity scientiﬁc corpus. We derived a left-to-right ﬁve-gram LM. There
are sentences in which the correction takes place within the ﬁrst ﬁve
words of a sentence. To accommodate for this, we use a whole sentence
perplexity to rank the candidates. Thus, we take into account not only
the history, but also the future, of the target word which is corrected.
16

Table 3: Lower bound (underestimate) MRR for the scientiﬁc test set. The proposed
bidirectional LSTM model trained on a domain speciﬁc corpus substantially outperforms
multiple baselines which also employ only unlabeled data for constructing a statistical
classiﬁer.
Model
MRR
BiLSTM - Domain speciﬁc, batch train, WordNet POS
0.41
BiLSTM - Domain speciﬁc, batch train, NLTK POS
0.40
BiLSTM - Domain speciﬁc, stochastic train, WordNet POS
0.22
BiLSTM - General purpose (COCA), batch train
0.33
N-Gram with Kneser Ney smoothing - Domain speciﬁc
0.34
Left-to-right RNNLM - Domain speciﬁc
0.16
Right-to-left RNNLM - Domain speciﬁc
0.02
context2vec t2c-t2t - General purpose
0.11
context2vec t2c - General purpose
0.06
4. Our bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) model trained on the general pur-
pose COCA corpus. This baseline is used primarily to compare our
model with a pre-trained general-purpose context2vec model.
5. Our bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) model trained on the high quality
scientiﬁc corpus, using NLTK POS tagger.
6. Our bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) model trained stochastically on the
high quality scientiﬁc corpus, using WordNet for POS tags. We use this
benchmark to show the necessity of batch training.
7. A context2vec t2c-t2t model, pre-trained on the UkWac [44] general
purpose corpus.
8. A context2vec t2t model, pre-trained on the UkWac general purpose
corpus.
These baselines allow us to assess the impact of three diﬀerent dimensions,
on the performance of a proper word choice:
1. The model itself.
2. The POS ﬁltering source.
3. The corpus of model training.
5.1.2. Improving the baselines
Using the scientiﬁc test set, a high-quality academic corpus, and WordNet
POS source, BiLSTM model achieves the highest result: an MRR of 0.41. In
17

other words, the gold standard correction is routinely among the replacement
candidates suggested by our method, falling, on average, between the second
and the third suggested candidates.
Table 2 presents a few examples of
corrected sentences from the scientiﬁc-text test set, along with the suggestion
provided by our method. We compared our results to the baseline models.
The result of MRR=0.41 only slightly outperforms the result obtained when
using a standard, statistical POS tagger, which achieved an MRR of 0.40.
Surprisingly, a very respectable result was achieved by the well-known and
strong benchmark of n-gram LM with Kneser-Ney smoothing. On average,
its suggestions fell at the third place. Our BiLSTM model, which was trained
stochastically, feeding one sentence at a time into the model during training,
performed signiﬁcantly worse, despite the fact that it used the same high
quality scientiﬁc corpus. Moreover, BiLSTM model that was batch-trained
on COCA corpus, performed even better than the model which was domain
speciﬁc but stochastically trained.
Our BiLSTM model dramatically outperformed the uni-directional stan-
dard RNNLM models which achieved lower results in terms of word sugges-
tion capabilities.
Finally, we compared our model, trained on COCA general purpose cor-
pus, to a context2vec model, which was pre-trained9 on the two billion words
ukWaC [44] corpus. We experimented with two diﬀerent context similar-
ity measures that are available in context2vec: 1) target-to-context (t2c) ,
and 2) combined similarity measure of target-to-context and target-to-target
(t2t).
This combined measure is denoted as t2c −t2t.
Both t2c and t2t
similarity measures are measured as a cosine distance between the word’s
embedding vector and the embedding vector of the context and word, re-
spectively. In the t2c −t2t similarity measure, the original target word is
provided to the model, as it is provided to our suggestion method, and the
combined similarity is measured as a product of the t2c and t2t measures.
The general purpose COCA model outperforms the context2vec’s model when
the t2c −t2t similarity measure or a simpler t2c similarity measure is used.
In addition, context2vec’s model incorporates signiﬁcantly more parameters
than our model does. Speciﬁcally, the target words’ embeddings and the
sentential contexts’ embeddings used by context2vec in this setting use a di-
9Downloaded
from:
http://u.cs.biu.ac.il/~nlp/resources/downloads/
context2vec/
18

mensionality of 600 units. Moreover, it uses 600 LSTM hidden and output
units. context2vec’s model includes an additional network - a multi layer
perceptron (MLP), with non-linear activation functions, in order to capture
complex context regularities. Therefore, this context2vec’s model is signif-
icantly more complex and harder to train, again providing slightly worse
results, when trained on another huge general purpose corpus.
The results for the scientiﬁc test set are summarized in Table 3.
5.2. General-Purpose Writing
Table 4: Lower bound (underestimate) MRR for the general-purpose test set. The MRR
values for useful suggestions are indicated in bold.
Error type
Number of
sentences in the
test set
MRR
Verb tense
205
0.31
Verb modal
56
0.41
Verb form
180
0.13
Subject-verb
agreement
242
0.33
Noun number
399
0.15
Pronoun form
61
0.36
Preposition
447
0.41
Wrong
collocation
547
0.20
Word form
158
0.06
Parallelism
17
0.15
Linking words
109
0.24
All errors
2421
0.25
Table 4 contains the results for the subset of ConLL-2014 shared task
test set on grammatical error correction. The best results, in which the gold
standard correction was suggested by our method was between second and
ﬁfth place are marked in bold. The preposition, pronoun form, and verb
modal error types are handled especially well by our method, and the word
replacement candidates suggested by our method often include the gold stan-
dard in second or third place. Remarkably, the method also performs quite
19

Table 5: MRR results for human evaluated correct test sets. The combined correct list set,
as expected, leads to the highest MRR value achieved by our method. The intersection
set still leads to a high value. Both MRR values are higher than the lower bound MRR
achieved by the BiLSTM model, compared to only one corrected option.
Correct list set
MRR
Combined set
0.61
Intersection set
0.49
well on the subject-verb agreement error type. Of the suggestions provided
by our method the gold standard correction comes in third place.
5.3. Human evaluation
Thus far we computed the lower bound MRR, with a strict evaluation
policy, where only one possible correction was used for the MRR computa-
tion. In the human evaluation scenario we use multiple possible corrections,
that were obtained from two human annotators as described in Section 4. As
we expected, using a list of all possible corrections leads to better results as
shown in Table 5.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
We presented a simple and clear application of bidirectional LSTM tagger
to the proper word choice task. Our implementation is aimed at responding
to the challenges faced by ESL scholars within academia, and their need
to write in a highly professional and correct language in order to publish
their studies.
The system we have shown is simple, straightforward and
applicable since it does not rely on manually annotated data. To emphasize
the simplicity even further, our application does not require a training of a
speciﬁc classiﬁer for each type of grammatical error or lexical substitution,
as opposed the the state-of-the-art GEC systems [18].
Our application addresses the types of errors typical to ESL learners.
Speciﬁcally, we focus on the problem of word replacement, which may be
due to wrong collocation correction or more intelligent lexical substitution.
In response to this problem, we propose a word choice suggestion method
based on the application of bidirectional LSTM tagger. We demonstrated its
performance in three evaluation settings. We performed the evaluation on a
big subset of well known CoNLL-204 shared task (general purpose writing),
20

and manually collected sentences (scientiﬁc writing) for further demonstra-
tion. We also contributed a new ESL learner test set to the NLP community
that was collected from actual proofreading tasks and reﬂects a realistic sce-
nario.
In this paper we did not attempt to address the detection of incorrect
word usage, and therefore the results are not directly comparable to the
existing GEC method, which handles detection and correction and uses the F-
measure as its evaluation metric for the complete test set. In future research
we intend to develop a word detection method for detection poor words, in
order to create a more comprehensive approach that can be compared with
the state-of-the-art model presented by Rozovskaya and Roth [18]. We also
intend to explore other similarity and substitutability measures proposed by
Melamud et al. [45]
One limitation of the method presented, that we will explore in future work,
is its ineﬀectiveness in handling multiple interacting errors in one sentence.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our gratitude to Stas Shteibook and Evgenyi
Vainer for their invaluable technical support in setting up the GPU machine
and compiling the DyNet toolkit in the Windows environment.
We also
thank Roee Aharoni for numerous comments and helpful advice during the
experiments that are described in this work. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the two editors, who contributed to this research: Robin
Levy-Stevenson and Jade Makarenkov.
Appendix A.
Just before the submission of the current paper for review, we decided to
evaluate our method on its edited version. We collected 15 sentences that
contain the replacement of a word by another word and evaluated our method
with these sentences. We achieved an MRR of 0.27 using the domain-speciﬁc
(scientiﬁc) model and an MRR of 0.17 using the general-purpose (COCA)
model. The top three suggestions for these sentences are presented in Table
A.6.
21

Table A.6: A sample of word replacements in the current paper, with the top three
suggestions from domain-speciﬁc and general-purpose models. The replacement of the
word marked with an asterisk (*) in a sentence was made by a professional English editor
follows the forward ﬂash (/).
Sentence
Domain speciﬁc
suggestions
General purpose
suggestions
Scientiﬁc writing is *hard/diﬃcult.
1) diﬀerent
2) important
3) useful
1) replete
2) tantamount
3) laughable
A language model (LM) is deﬁned as a
function that *puts/assigns a probability
distribution to words in a given vocabulary.
1) assigns
2) maps
3) associates
1) is
2) produces
3) involves
From this distribution, ﬁlter the words
which/that are tagged with the same part of
speech if replaced with the original word in
the sentence.
1) that
2) words
3) phrases
1) they
2) and
3) you
Consider the *next/following sentence
which was written by an ESL learner.
1) following
2) ﬁrst
3) next
1) same
2) last
3) ﬁnal
