Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in
Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
Giang Nguyen 1 Shuan Chen 2 Thao Do 1 Tae Joon Jun 3 Ho-Jin Choi 1 Daeyoung Kim 1
Abstract
Interpreting the behaviors of Deep Neural Net-
works (usually considered as a black box) is crit-
ical especially when they are now being widely
adopted over diverse aspects of human life. Tak-
ing the advancements from Explainable Artiﬁcial
Intelligent, this paper proposes a novel technique
called Auto DeepVis to dissect catastrophic for-
getting in continual learning. A new method to
deal with catastrophic forgetting named critical
freezing is also introduced upon investigating the
dilemma by Auto DeepVis. Experiments on a
captioning model meticulously present how catas-
trophic forgetting happens, particularly show-
ing which components are forgetting or chang-
ing. The effectiveness of our technique is then
assessed; and more precisely, critical freezing
claims the best performance on both previous and
coming tasks over baselines, proving the capabil-
ity of the investigation. Our techniques could not
only be supplementary to existing solutions for
completely eradicating catastrophic forgetting for
life-long learning but also explainable.
1. Introduction
Regarding human evolution, life-long learning has been con-
sidered as one of the most crucial abilities, helping us de-
velop more complicated skills throughout our lifetime. The
idea of this learning strategy is hence deployed extensively
in deep learning community. Life-long learning (or contin-
ual learning) enables machine learning models to perceive
new knowledge while simultaneously exposing backward-
forward transfer, non-forgetting, or few-show learning (Ling
& Bohn, 2019). While the aforementioned properties are the
ultimate goals for life-long learning systems, catastrophic
forgetting or semantic drift naturally occurs in deep neural
networks (DNNs) because they are mostly updated upon
gradient descent algorithm (Goodfellow et al., 2013).
Many attempts have been succeeded to address the forget-
ting problem in generative models (Zhai et al., 2019), object
detection (Shmelkov et al., 2017), semantic segmentation
(Tasar et al., 2019), or captioning (Nguyen et al., 2019b).
However, algorithms tend to rely on external factors (e.g.,
input data, network structure) while ignoring why catas-
trophic forgetting happens internally. If we have the picture
of the forgetting process and understand how this problem
affects models, it would be one step towards learning with-
out forgetting.
Contemporary interpretability methods give us advantages
to understand the decision-making process of deep neu-
ral networks, ranging from visualizing saliency maps (Si-
monyan et al., 2013; Dabkowski & Gal, 2017) to transform-
ing models into human-friendly structures (Che et al., 2016).
Interpreting the activation of a neuron or a layer in networks
helps us categorize the speciﬁc role of each block, layer, or
even a node. It has been proven that the earlier layers ex-
tract the basic features, such as edges or colors; while deeper
layers are responsible for detecting distinctive characteris-
tics. Prediction Difference Analysis (PDA) (Zintgraf et al.,
2017), even more speciﬁcally, highlights pixels that support
or counteract a certain class, indicating which features are
positive or negative to a prediction.
Although catastrophic forgetting is tough and undesirable,
research to understand this problem is rare amongst AI
community. The interest in understanding or measuring
catastrophic forgetting does not correlate with the number
of research to deal with this problem. (Kemker et al., 2018)
develop new metrics to help compare continual learning
techniques fairly and directly. (Nguyen et al., 2019a) study
which properties cause the hardness for the learning pro-
cess. By modeling the chosen properties using task space,
they can estimate how much a model forgets in a sequen-
tial learning scenario, shedding light on factors affecting
the error rate on a task sequence. However, they can not
explain what is being forgotten or which components are
forgetting inside the model, but showing what properties
of tasks trigger catastrophic forgetting. In comparison, our
work focuses on study which components of a network are
most likely to change corresponding to a given sequence of
tasks.
This research introduces a novel approach to dissect catas-
trophic forgetting by visualizing hidden layers in class-
incremental learning (considered as the hardest learning
arXiv:2001.01578v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2020

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
scenario in continual learning). In this learning paradigm,
rehearsal strategies using previous data are prohibited and
samples of the incoming tasks are unseen so far. We pro-
pose a tool named Auto DeepVis which leverages the
prediction difference analysis from (Zintgraf et al., 2017).
This tool automates the dissection of catastrophic forget-
ting, exactly pointing out which components in a model are
causing the forgetting. By using Intersection over Union
(IoU), the degree of forgetting is measured after each class
is added, thus giving us an intuition how forgetting happens
on a given part of the network.
In the ﬁrst step, our tool observes the evidence and against
for a prediction. If the evidence for a given image changes,
we argue that the model is forgetting what it needs to look.
IoUs between the previous and current evidence are taken
into account to determine the degree of forgetting. We
automate this procedure on representative samples of trained
classes, followed by a generalization step to ﬁgure out the
main culprits of forgetting. The algorithm is outlined in
Algorithm 1.
In our thorough analysis of the model, it is necessary to
pick the appropriate components in a block to visualize the
changes. For instance, in ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016), there
are 5 convolutional blocks, thus interpreting the activation
of all ﬁlters in the whole 5 blocks will take a large amount of
time. We propose to choose the ﬁlter having the highest IoU
value with the ground truth segmentation. This choice is
sufﬁcient because although some ﬁlters may be blocked by
activation function, ranking the importance of the remaining
ﬁlters over a convolutional block is impossible. As a result,
the biggest-IoU ﬁlter can be the representative for a given
block.
A work from (Kemker et al., 2018) conducts experiments on
state-of-the-art continual learning techniques that address
catastrophic forgetting. It is demonstrated that although the
algorithms work, but only on weak constrains and unfair
baselines, thus the forgetting problem is not yet fully solved.
They insist on the infeasibility of using toy datasets, such as
MNIST (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) or CIFAR (Zenke et al.,
2017) in continual learning. Consequently, we choose Split
MS-COCO (Nguyen et al., 2019b) to measure the forgetting
on deep neural networks. From the results of the dissection,
we simply freeze the most plastic components in the network
to protect the accumulated information. In addition to visu-
alization on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), we also
brieﬂy study how the decoder which consists of Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) changes in continual learning.
We summarize the contributions of this work as follows:
First, we propose a novel and pioneering method to ana-
lyze catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. Auto
DeepVis automatically points out the forgetting compo-
nents in a network while learning a task sequence. Second,
we introduce a new approach to mitigate catastrophic for-
getting based on ﬁndings. Our techniques could play a com-
plementary role in the step towards eradicating catastrophic
forgetting.
2. Related Work
Feature Visualization
To understand how a model for-
gets the features learned before, we need to visualize how
the model processes the input image. To do this, the layer-
wise visualization of the model is performed. The old model
(or original model) is the model we have obtained so far,
denoting acquired knowledge on past tasks. On the other
hand, the new model (or current model) is the network fac-
ing the new incoming tasks and should avoid catastrophic
forgetting.
There are several works trying to visualize convolutional
neural networks by various kinds of means. (Zeiler & Fer-
gus, 2014) make use of multi-layered deconvolutional net-
works (deconvnet), using switches to record the local max
value of the original input images. Deconvnet allows us to
recognize which features are expected by a speciﬁc part of a
network or what properties of image excite a chosen neuron
the most. Instead of feeding an input image to diagnose,
(Yosinski et al., 2015) attempt to generate a synthetic im-
age which maximizes the activation of a given neuron by
gradient descent algorithm.
Another broadly used approach called saliency maps by
(Simonyan et al., 2013), presenting a gradient-based tech-
nique to measure how the classiﬁcation score is sensitively
changed due to the small changes from pixels. This work
shows a generalized version of deconvolution layers. A
similar approach has been proposed by (Robnik-ˇSikonja &
Kononenko, 2008), which completely removes input pixels
instead of calculating the gradient of those pixels. A vari-
ant of the above-mentioned work called PDA is proposed
by (Zintgraf et al., 2017). They utilize conditional sam-
pling that sweeps away patches of connected pixels instead
of removing one single pixel at a time, which eventually
shows better visualization results. However, this tool only
generates the computer vision, leaving the conclusion for
users. This manual process can not ensure the quality of
the observation when we can have hundreds or even thou-
sands of feature maps in a convolutional block. In this work,
PDA is adopted to build an automatic tool for visualizing
catastrophic forgetting.
Catastrophic Forgetting
Catastrophic forgetting has
been introduced for the ﬁrst time by (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989) in connectionist networks. Very recently, (Toneva
et al., 2018) reframe the deﬁnition of forgetting as when the
prediction of a model on a sample is shifted during the learn-
ing process, from correctly to incorrectly. Going deeply into

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
the model, we can argue that the values of neurons have
changed drastically, thus possibly resulting in a different
answer for the same input image.
Elastic Weight Consolidation - EWC (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017) uses Fisher information matrix to help model mimic
the synaptic consolidation mechanism of the human brain.
Important parameters for the performance of the old task
are protected while others are updated to minimize the loss
on the new dataset. By comparison, the signiﬁcance of
each synapse (or weight) in the neural network is computed
locally in (Zenke et al., 2017). When the distribution in-
terference appears, synaptic states keep and estimate the
importance of synapses by an online estimation and crucial
synapses are prevented from changing. Learning without
Forgetting - LwF (Li & Hoiem, 2017) generates pseudo
labels on incoming data to help capture the previous dis-
tribution. In training, knowledge distillation (Hinton et al.,
2015) turns the pseudo labels into soft targets and a warm-
up step is applied. Based on Bayesian neural networks,
(Lee et al., 2017) match the moment of posteriors on both
two tasks to guide the new network to a common low-error
region. Knowledge distillation from the old model and an
expert feature extractor is conducted in (Hou et al., 2018),
complemented by a retrospection on a trivial fraction of old
data. (Rusu et al., 2016) dynamically expand the network by
specialized sub-networks to absorb new knowledge while
the old modules are frozen.
Catastrophic forgetting can be generally addressed by regu-
larization, data replay or altering network architecture. In
this research, we show that only by simply freezing the frag-
ile blocks of a network, we can signiﬁcantly improve the
generalization performance.
IoU
0.363
IoU
0.865
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) IoU value between the segmentation of a train and
the positive features. (b) The IoU of two representative maps. Red
is evidence and blue is against.
3. Methodology
Although (Nguyen et al., 2019a) show an interest in under-
standing catastrophic forgetting, they focus on how task
properties inﬂuence the hardness of sequential learning.
Hence, they are explaining based on the input data. In
comparison, our work attempts to explain how the forget-
ting happens over time based on the computer vision of
models. (Zintgraf et al., 2017) present response from a
network to a given image in which we can clarify which
features support or counteract the prediction. We leverage
this tool for visualizing the computer vision, but extend
to an automatic version - Auto DeepVis to efﬁciently
dissect the forgetting dilemma. The ultimate goal of this
tool is to ﬁgure out the most plastic layers or blocks in a
network. Plasticity means low degree of stiffness or easy to
change. Moreover, continual learning techniques have been
proposed to alleviate catastrophic forgetting, but none of
them are devised based on the ﬁndings from Explainable AI.
Critical freezing is built on the top of Auto DeepVis’ in-
vestigation to provide an interpretable yet effective approach
to acquire the life-long learning ability for deep learning
models. In the learning process, the stable state of the old
model is employed to initialize the new network. This way
really mimics the working mechanism of the human brain.
3.1. Auto DeepVis
To dissect the model, we visualize the hidden layers to un-
derstand the forgetting effect inside a model after being
trained on different tasks. (Zintgraf et al., 2017) claim that
different features of the objects being dissected could be cap-
tured and visualized by particular feature maps in different
layers. By looking into every response maps in one convolu-
tional block, we realize diverse features, such as eyes, face
shape, car wheels, or background are isolatedly recognized
by different channels. Unfortunately, ﬁnding each feature
map manually by human eyes might be inefﬁcient. To solve
this issue, we only compare the computer vision with the
ground truth segmentation rather than small details. In gen-
eral, we do not look for the answer that what features are
being forgotten, but which layers are now forgetting.
Assume the semantic segmentation label of MS-COCO
dataset (Lin et al., 2014) is what human sees, we compare
this segmentation with the computer vision of the model,
particularly concentrating on positive evidence for a predic-
tion. The IoU value between the segmentation and evidence
is calculated as shown in Fig. 1 (a). The red dots in the
map describe the positive evidence while the blue points
represent the against. The scheme of Auto DeepVis is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
Having the m-th feature map (FM) in the l-th layer of a
model M and the ground truth segmentation GT, the IoU is

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
AutoDeepVis
Ground truth 
segmentation
Cat
IoUs
Figure 2. Overall scheme of Auto DeepVis
computed as:
IoUM,GT (l, m) = FM(m, l) ∩GT
FM(m, l) ∪GT
(1)
To select the feature map having the largest overlap with the
ground truth in each convolutional block, the representative
feature map (RM) with the best IoU is denoted as RMM,GT
:
RMM,GT (l) = argmaxm(IoUM,GT (l, m))
(2)
To understand how the computer vision change over the
training process, we compared the RM in the new model
with the RM of original network RMMO,GT Fig. 1 (b). The
forgetting effect of each trained model is measured by the
IoU between the original model MO and new model MN:
IoUMN,MO(l, m) = FM(m) ∩RMMO,GT
FM(m) ∪RMMO,GT
(3)
Similar to the method of ﬁnding out the best map ﬁtting with
ground truth, the feature map representing the best memory
of the original feature map is denoted as RMMN,MO in
Equation 4. In the same block of both the old and new
model, the role of a ﬁlter can be adjusted. For instance, the
50th ﬁlter in the 2nd block of the old model detects the eyes,
but the same ﬁlter in the same block of the new model will
consider the face. The way we propose to pick RMMN,MO
sounds heuristically sufﬁcient.
RMMN,MO(l) = argmaxm(IoUMN,MO(l, m))
(4)
The pipeline of our method is depicted in Algorithm 1. The
sample set S is particularized in Section 4, and K is the
number of the convolutional blocks in the network. By
inputting image by image from S, we get the visualization
of ﬁlters over the whole network by PDA. Next, we iterate
Algorithm 1 Auto DeepVis
Input: Sample set S, segmentation ground truth GT, old
model MO, new model MN, number of blocks K
Output: Forgetting layers F
i = 0
Ł = Ø
repeat
I = S[i]
IoUs = Ø
RM = Ø
FM = PDA(I)
for j = 1 to K do
RMMO,GT ←FM with highest IoUMO,GT
RMMO,MN ←FM with highest IoUMO,MN
Append(IoUs, max(IoUMO,MN ))
Append(RM, RMMO,MN )
end for
b ←block with highest drop in IoUs
Append(Ł, b)
i = i + 1
until i = size(S)
F ←Most frequent block in Ł
through the blocks to obtain the fragile block against a given
image, then the indexOf gets the most forgetting block.
Finally, we generalize on S to return the most forgetting
component F.
3.2. Critical Freezing
Using the investigation from Auto DeepVis, we freeze
or apply a tiny learning rate on the most plastic layer in a
deep learning model. Take Resnet-50 including 5 convolu-
tional blocks as an example, if we ﬁnd the 3rd convolutional
layer fragile, this layers should be slightly updated or com-
pletely frozen in the training process of the next task. The
objective function is the standard cross-entropy loss for

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
a cat is sitting on a bed with a blanket
Training image
Cocker spaniel
Computer vision
Classifier
Decoder
Encoder
Figure 3. Two-head network for dissecting catastrophic forgetting.
image captioning, in which V is the size of the vocabulary.
L = LCE = −
V
X
i=1
Y i
k log ˆY i
k
(5)
The proposed technique can accompany various existing
solutions. For instance, when using knowledge distillation
for continual semantic segmentation in (Michieli & Zanut-
tigh, 2019), progressively adding classes alters the evolution
of the model, misleading the network to a local optimum.
By knowing which regions are needed to be intact, the per-
formance on the old task could be largely improved. Our
tool could also beneﬁts other continual learning approaches,
ranging from regularization to dynamic architecture.
4. Experiments
When using PDA (Zintgraf et al., 2017), the optimal window
size for the best visualization is k = 5. We use a tweaked
dataset called Split MS-COCO from (Nguyen et al., 2019b)
to reproduce catastrophic forgetting. The dataset contains
over 47k images for training and over 23k images for vali-
dation and testing. For incremental learning setup, at one
time step, a new class will arrive. Notably, data balancing is
not applied yet; as a result, this technique could be left for
future work to increase the overall performance.
Experiments are performed on a multi-modal task (caption-
ing) combining both CNN and RNN in the architecture,
obeying the sequential scenario from (Nguyen et al., 2019b).
We initially train 19 classes to acquire the original model,
then adding 5 classes incrementally. Obviously, if the in-
vestigation from our tool makes the chosen task work, the
ﬁndings could be also deployed on object detection, classi-
ﬁcation or segmentation. The captioning model is divided
into an encoder followed by a decoder. Therefore, the orig-
inal structure should be transformed into a two-head net-
work so that we can get the prediction of the CNN and the
sentence generated from the decoder simultaneously. We
add one more output layer as a classiﬁer after the encoder,
and our proposed architecture is presented in Fig. 3. The
encoder is the ResNet-50, and the decoder includes an em-
bedding layer, a single-layer LSTM, and a fully-connected
layer producing a word at a time step.
Input
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Linear layer
Figure 4. Feature maps from convolutional blocks of ResNet-50.
As our tool works on a single image, running multiple times
on different and diverse input images is needed, helping us
generalize the forgetting. We choose a sample set S (bicycle,
car, motorcycle, airplane, bus, train, bird, cat, dog, horse,
sheep, and cow) from 19 trained classes.
To evaluate critical freezing, there are baselines, such as
ﬁne-tuning or heuristically freezing. In ﬁne-tuning, The
old model initializes the new model and training is done to
minimize the loss on the new task. As the network contains
two parts, encoder and decoder, we freeze them separately.
The traditional scores for image captioning are considered
in evaluating the superiority of critical freezing over the
baselines.

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
Table 1. Performance when 5 classes arrive sequentially on past tasks and newly added tasks.
Past −tasks
New −tasks
BLEU1
BLEU4
METEOR
ROUGE L
CIDEr
BLEU1
BLEU4
METEOR
ROUGE L
CIDEr
Original
68.1
24.9
23.4
50.8
77.8
-
-
-
-
-
Fine −tuning
46.0
6.5
11.7
34.5
11.3
58.1
15.5
17.7
44.2
35.0
Encoder −Freezing
51.3
11.1
15.3
38.8
27.1
60.5
17.2
19.3
45.4
43.7
Decoder −Freezing
53.3
13.6
15.6
40.3
35.3
60.2
17.3
17.8
44.7
36.5
Critical −Freezing
54.3
12.5
16.1
40.4
33.0
61.1
17.8
19.6
46.3
45.6
4.1. Auto DeepVis to Dissect CNNs
To dissect which parts in the encoder are forgetting the most,
we ﬁrst apply Auto DeepVis to elaborate the IoU of
each layer comparing with the ground truth and the original
computer vision seen by layers of the original model M19
(trained on 19 classes). After adding a new class, we obtain
M20, and Mn is the model when n classes are witnessed. In
Fig. 4, the visualized results show that the ﬁrst and second
block of ResNet-50 can overall capture the outline of objects.
Computer vision turns to represent more detailed features
from the objects and other background features to determine
the class of the input image.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Linear layer
M19
M20
M24
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Linear layer
M19
M20
M24
Figure 5. IoUM,GT of M19, M20 and M24 comparing with GT.
Subsequently, the IoUs of different blocks in each model,
comparing with ground truth, are calculated by equation
1 and 2. The results reveal that although different models
show different levels of performance of classiﬁcation, the
IoUMn,GT (n > 19) values are roughly similar at all the
layers, which implies that no matter the how good the per-
formance is, the level of matching between feature maps of
each model and the human vision is preserved (Fig. 5).
To quantitatively measure how the forgetting occurs in the
encoder, we compute IoUs by equation 3 and 4. As shown in
Fig 6, it is clear that the IoU between M20 and M19 is much
higher than the ﬁgure for M24 and M19 in every block. For
M20, the IoUM20,M19 is always 1.00 at the ﬁrst block of the
network, showing that a very trivial forgetting happens here.
The IoUM20,M19 starts to drop along the blocks because
the later feature maps are constructed by the previous maps.
The forgetting effect persists and does not show which block
is forgetting the most.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Linear layer
M20
M24
Figure 6. IoUMT,MO of model M20 and M24 comparing with
M19.
Table 2. Qualitative analysis on the encoder. The prediction is
preserved via critical freezing.
Category
Bus
Train
Bird
Cat
Dog
Image
M19
Police van
Passenger 
car
American 
egret
Ibizan hound
American 
Staffordshire 
terrier 
M20
Police van
Passenger 
car
Crane
Wallaby
Kelpie
M24
Quill
Quill
Thimble
Quill
Tray 
M24
Critical 
Freezing 
Police van
Passenger 
car
Crane
Ibizan hound
American 
Staffordshire 
terrier
For M24, the ﬁrst block of the model still gets a high IoU
comparing with M19 and the values decrease from the sec-
ond block. Unlike the stably decreasing trend seen in M20,
the decreasing rate of IoUM24,M19 ﬂuctuates through the
blocks and a severe drop at block 3 is observed in all the test-

Dissecting Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning by Deep Visualization
Table 3. Performance of M24 on the past tasks when freezing de-
coder’s components.
BLEU1
BLEU4
METEOR
ROUGE L
CIDEr
LSTM
46.1
7.0
11.1
34.1
12.8
Embedding
45.0
6.7
11.1
34.0
12.8
Linear
39.3
2.1
8.3
31.3
4.2
ing input, suggesting that the forgetting effect might happen
the most in this block. After the 3rd block, almost instances
show a continuous IoU decline at block 4. Iterating this
procedure on all images of the set S reinforces that the most
dramatically forgetting is happening at block 3 and block 4
in ResNet-50.
Freezing the mentioned blocks means the feature extraction
stays unchanged. We conduct a qualitative analysis to ob-
serve the response of the encoder while critical freezing is
adopted in Table. 2. The prediction keeps virtually the same
with the output of the original model. The only misclassif-
cation in the Table. 2 is from American eagle and Crane;
however, they are still from the bird family. While two naive
approaches of freezing in (Nguyen et al., 2019b) are also
implemented (partially freezing), we devise critical freezing
based on ﬁndings, which only freezes the most plastic layers.
As shown in Table. 1, precisely freezing helps learning on
both the new and old tasks more effectively.
4.2. Decoder Dissection
In addition to dissecting CNN, we also want to inspect and
visualize the changes of the decoder. However, to the best
of our knowledge, there is still no work done in revealing
how RNNs visually see or sense the input. Therefore, in
this work, we simply freeze each component of the decoder
in learning the new task and observe the effect of freezing.
We also keep the encoder frozen from M19 to see how
the synthetic caption depends on an individual layer of the
decoder. Table 3 suggests the signiﬁcance of the LSTM
network in the sentence generation process while the linear
layer can be trainable over a task series.
5. Conclusion
As the presence of catastrophic forgetting hinders the life-
long learning, understanding how this phenomenon happens
in computer vision is extremely signiﬁcant. We introduce
Auto DeepVis to grasp catastrophic forgetting. From
knowing where the forgetting issue is coming from, a tech-
nique has been proposed focusing on plastic components
of a model to moderate the information loss. The results
indicate the superiority of critical freezing over the base-
lines. We also try knowledge distillation on plastic layers
but it does not help much because the discrepancy of teacher
and student is accumulated over time, leading to a difﬁculty
for teaching. To the best of our knowledge, no work has
been done for mitigating catastrophic forgetting based on
Explainable AI. This work shows a satisfying result from
the investigation. Auto DeepVis gives good observation
on the forgetting layer, and freezing critical layers helps
the model mitigate catastrophic forgetting and could play
as a supplement to other techniques to completely address
catastrophic forgetting.
There are future works following our paper. First and fore-
most, a deeper, cleaner, and effort-free version of our tool
should be taken into consideration to give a better insight
into catastrophic forgetting. At this time, we only consider
the ﬁlter having the highest IoU. Although this assumption
is appropriate, it is still crude, thus looking into other ﬁl-
ters in one convolutional block might be necessary as well.
Scaling this work for other tasks can better validate the feasi-
bility of the proposed continual learning algorithm. Last but
not least, RNN is now being overlooked and not understood
fully via interpretability methods. RNN dissection requires
efforts but would open the door to understanding the nature
of this network.
