Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
Youwei Liang∗1 Kevin Stone∗2 Ali Shameli 2 Chris Cummins 2 Mostafa Elhoushi 2 Jiadong Guo 2
Benoit Steiner 2 Xiaomeng Yang 2 Pengtao Xie 1 Hugh Leather 2 Yuandong Tian 2
Abstract
Finding the optimal pass sequence of compilation
can lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in program size
and/or improvement in program efﬁciency. Prior
works on compilation pass ordering have two ma-
jor drawbacks. They either require an excessive
budget (in terms of compilation steps) at compile
time or fail to generalize to unseen programs. In
this paper, for code-size reduction tasks, we pro-
pose a novel pipeline to ﬁnd program-dependent
pass sequences within 45 compilation calls. It
ﬁrst identiﬁes a coreset of 50 pass sequences
via greedy optimization of a submodular func-
tion, and then learns a policy with Graph Neural
Network (GNN) to pick the optimal sequence by
predicting the normalized values of the pass se-
quences in the coreset. Despite its simplicity, our
pipeline outperforms the default -Oz ﬂag by an
average of 4.7% over a large collection (4683) of
unseen code repositories from diverse domains
across 14 datasets. In comparison, previous ap-
proaches like reinforcement learning on the raw
pass sequence space may take days to train due
to sparse reward, and may not generalize well in
held-out ones from different domains. Our re-
sults demonstrate that existing human-designed
compiler ﬂags can be improved with a simple yet
effective technique that transforms the raw action
space into a small one with denser rewards.
1. Introduction
For more efﬁcient execution with fewer resources (e.g.,
memory, CPU, and storage), applying the right ordering for
compiler optimization passes to a given program, i.e., pass
ordering, is an important yet challenging problem. Manual
efforts require expert knowledge and are time-consuming,
error-prone, and often yield sub-par results, due to the huge
*Equal second author contribution,
listed alphabetically.
1University of California, San Diego 2Meta AI. Correspondence

Coreset Optimization
Programs
Reward
Matrix
Action sequences
Optimize
Coreset
...
...
...
Normalized Value Prediction
Inference
Program
Value
Softmax
...
Coreset
GNN-GEAN
Program
Observation
Figure 1. A depiction of our main contributions. (Top) Coreset
Optimization: A process for discovering a small set of pass se-
quences (coreset) that generalizes. (Bottom) Normalized Value
Prediction A process where our model learns to predict the nor-
malized value of pass sequences from the coreset. (Bottom inset)
Our model, Graph Edge Attention Network (GEAN), for encoding
program observations.
size of the search space. For example, the LLVM compiler
has 124 different compilation ﬂags. If the pass sequences
have a length of 45, then the possible number of sequences
(12445 ∼1094) is already more than the atoms in the uni-
verse (∼1080 (Planck Collaboration et al., 2016)).
In recent years, machine learning (ML)-guided pass order-
ing has emerged as an interesting ﬁeld to replace this labori-
ous process (Wang & O’Boyle, 2018). Along this line, many
works show promising results using various optimization
and/or ML techniques (e.g., reinforcement learning (Haj-Ali
et al., 2020a), language modelling (Cummins et al., 2017),
evolutionary algorithms (Kulkarni & Cavazos, 2012), etc).
However, there are several limitations. Some previous works
(e.g., MLGO (Troﬁn et al., 2021), MLGoPerf (Ashouri et al.,
2022)) run adaptive search algorithms to optimize a set of
programs for many hours. While this achieves strong per-
formance gain, the procedure can be slow and does not
distill knowledge from past experience and requires search-
ing from scratch for unseen programs. Recent works like
Autophase (Haj-Ali et al., 2020b) learn a pass policy via re-
arXiv:2301.05104v2  [cs.PL]  27 Jan 2023

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
inforcement learning, and applies it to unseen programs
without further search procedure, and GO (Zhou et al.,
2020) ﬁne-tunes the models for unseen programs. These ap-
proaches work for unseen programs from the same/similar
domain, but can still be quite slow in the training stage, and
do not show good generalization to programs from very
different domains.
In this work, we propose a novel pass ordering optimization
pipeline to reduce the code size of a program. As a ﬁrst
contribution, we formulate the search for a universal core
set of pass sequences (termed coreset) as an optimization
problem of a submodular reward function and use a greedy
algorithm to approximately solve it. The resulting coreset
consists of 50 pass sequences with a total number of passes
of 625. Importantly, it leads to very strong performance
across programs from diverse domains, ranging from the
Linux Kernel to BLAS. Speciﬁcally, for one unseen pro-
gram in the evaluation set, there exists one of the 50 pass
sequences that leads to an average code size reduction of
5.8% compared to the default -Oz setting, across 10 diverse
codebases (e.g. Cbench (Fursin, 2014), MiBench (Guthaus
et al., 2001), NPB (Bailey et al., 1995), CHStone (Hara
et al., 2008), and Anghabench (Da Silva et al., 2021)) of
over one million programs in total. Considering the huge
search space of compiler ﬂags, this is a very surprising
ﬁnding.
While it is time-consuming to ﬁnd an optimal pass sequence
with an exhaustive enumeration of the core subset of pass
sequences, as a second contribution, we ﬁnd that the (near)
optimal pass sequence can be directly predicted with high
accuracy via our Graph Edge Attention Network (GEAN), a
graph neural network (GNN) architecture adapted to encode
the augmented ProGraML (Cummins et al., 2021) graphs
of programs. Therefore, we can run a few pass sequences
selected by the model on an unseen program to obtain a
good code size reduction. This enables us to ﬁnd a good
ﬂag conﬁguration that leads to 4.7% improvement on aver-
age, with just 45 compilation passes, a reasonable trade-off
between the cost spent on trying compilation passes and the
resulting performance gain.
We compare our approach with extensive baselines, includ-
ing reinforcement learning (RL) -based methods such as
PPO, Q-learning, and behavior cloning. We ﬁnd that RL-
based approaches operating on the original compiler pass
space often suffer from unstable training (due to inaccurate
value estimation) and sparse reward space and fail to gener-
alize to unseen programs at inference. In comparison, our
approach transforms the vast action space into a smaller one
with much more densely distributed rewards. In this trans-
formed space, approaches as simple as behavior cloning can
be effective and generalizable to unseen programs.
2. Related Work
Graph structured data are present in numerous applications
and it has been shown that taking advantage of this data
can help us train very effective machine learning models.
(Brauckmann et al., 2020) use abstract syntax trees and con-
trol ﬂow graphs for learning compiler optimization goals.
They show that using such graphs allows them to outper-
form state-of-the-art in the task of heterogeneous OpenCL
mapping. (Guo et al., 2020) uses a transformer based model
with a graph guided masked attention that incorporates the
data ﬂow graph into the training. They achieve state of the
art performance in four tasks including code search, clone
detection, code translation, and code reﬁnement.
As a contender to graph neural networks, (Mialon et al.,
2021) uses transformers to process graphs. They show that
if we effectively encode positional and local sub-structures
of graphs and feed them to the transformer, then the trans-
former can outperform the classical GNN models. They
test their model on classiﬁcation and regression tasks and
achieve state of the art performance.
In (Srinivas et al.,
2020), they used an unsupervised model to learn embed-
dings of high dimensional pixel data using contrastive learn-
ing. They then use this embedding for downstream rein-
forcement learning tasks.
3. Methodology
3.1. Action space
The CompilerGym framework (Cummins et al., 2022) pro-
vides a convenient interface for the compiler pass ordering
problem. The default environment allows choosing one of
124 discrete actions at each step corresponding to running
a speciﬁc compiler pass. In this work we will use the term
pass interchangeably with action. We ﬁx episode lengths to
45 steps to match the setup in (Haj-Ali et al., 2020b). Given
that our trajectories have a length of 45 steps, this means
we have 12445 ∼1.6 × 1094 possible pass sequences to
explore. To ﬁnd an optimal pass sequence for a program,
we can apply some existing reinforcement learning meth-
ods including Q learning like DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and
policy gradient like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
Pass Sequences However for this problem it turns out that
certain pass sequences are good at optimizing many differ-
ent programs (where “good” is deﬁned as better than the
compiler default -Oz). We found that constraining the ac-
tion space to a learned set of pass sequences enables state
of the art performance and also signiﬁcantly reduces the
challenge of exploration. This allows us to cast the problem
as one of supervised learning over this set of pass sequences.
We use the following algorithm to ﬁnd a good set of pass
sequences.

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
Figure 2. An exemplar reward matrix for 67 programs and 50 pass
sequences. Most of the pass sequences do not lead to strong re-
wards, except for a few. On the other hand, certain pass sequences
(i.e., columns) can lead to high rewards for multiple programs
simultaneously and thus are good candidates for the coreset.
Suppose we have N programs and M promising pass se-
quences. Let R = [rij] ∈RN×M be the reward matrix, in
which rij > 0 is the ratio of the codesize of i-th program if
applied with j-th pass sequence, compared to -O0. rij > 1
means that the j-th pass sequence does better than -O0 in
codesize reduction for i-th program, and rij < 1 means
it performs worse. The reward matrix is normalized per
row, by the maximum reward for each program, so that the
optimal pass sequence has reward of 1 for each program.
Then we aim to pick a subset S of K pass sequences, called
the coreset, from all M pass sequences, so that the overall
saving J(S) is maximized:
max
|S|≤K J(S) =
N
X
i=1
max
j∈S rij
(1)
Finding M candidate pass sequences. Note that there can
be exponential number of pass sequences, and we cannot
construct the entire reward matrix, instead we seed a list
of candidate action trajectories. For this, we run a random
policy on a subset of M (17500) selected training programs.
For each selected program, we run E (200) episodes and
pick the best pass sequence as one of the M candidates.
If part of the best pass sequence leads to the same state,
they are truncated so that the sequence becomes shorter.
If multiple pass sequences yield the same reward we only
retain the ﬁrst after ordering them length-lexicographically.
On average these last two steps reduce the length of the
candidate pass sequences by 80%.
We then construct the reward rij by applying the j-th best
pass sequence to program i, and comparing it with -O0.
Finding the best coreset S with greedy algorithm. As
a function deﬁned in subsets, J(S) can be proven to be a
nonnegative and monotone submodular function (See Ap-
pendix). While maximizing a submodular function is NP-
hard (Ward & ˇZivn`y, 2016), the following greedy algorithm
is proven to be an efﬁcient approximate algorithm that leads
to fairly good solutions (Nemhauser et al., 1978). Start-
ing from S0 = ∅, at each iteration t, it picks a new pass
sequence jt as follows:
jt := arg max
j /∈St−1 J(St−1 ∪{j})
(2)
And St ←St−1 ∪{jt} until we pick K pass sequences. We
set K = 50 in this paper.
Given the discovered coreset S, we deﬁne a generalized ac-
tion as a pass sequence in S. Applying a generalized action
to a program means that we roll out the corresponding pass
sequence on the program and return the best program state
(i.e., having the highest cumulative reward) (it is feasible
because we can cache the program state for each step).
3.2. Normalized Value Prediction
After discovering the “good” pass sequences (i.e., the core-
set), we can turn the problem of the sequential decision-
making on compiler passes into a problem of supervised
learning. The target is to train a model to predict the best
pass sequence conditioned on the program, where the label
of the program is the index of the pass sequence that results
in the largest code size reduction. However, one important
observation we have is that there are typically multiple pass
sequences in the coreset that all result in the largest code
size reduction (see Figure 3 for the examples). Therefore,
instead of using the single-class classiﬁcation method with
a cross entropy loss, we leverage the fact we have access to
the values for all pass sequences. We predict the softmax
normalized value of each pass sequence with a cross entropy
loss detailed below. This approach is similar to behavior
cloning (Pomerleau, 1988) but with soft targets over the
coreset.
For a program p, we roll out all pass sequences in the
coreset on it, obtaining a reward rp
j for the j-th sequence
(i.e., the highest cumulative reward observed during the
rollout of the pass sequence), which forms a value vector
rp = [rp
1, . . . , rp
K]. Then, the normalized values of the pass
sequences are deﬁned by
vp = Softmax(rp/T)
(3)
where T is a temperature parameter.
For an initial observation op of a program, our model out-
puts a probability distribution, a = f(op), over the pass
sequences. The target of the training is to make a close to
the normalized values of the pass sequences. To this end, we
use the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to supervise the

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
model, which can be reduced to the following cross entropy
loss up to a constant term.
L(ap, vp) = −
K
X
j=1
ap
j log vp
j
(4)
3.3. Program Representations
Since we use the CompilerGym (Cummins et al., 2022)
environments for program optimization, we exploit the pro-
gram representations from CompilerGym, where program
source code is converted to LLVM Intermediate Represen-
tation (IR) (Lattner & Adve, 2004) and several representa-
tions are constructed from the IR, including the ProGraML
graph (Cummins et al., 2021), the Autophase feature (Haj-
Ali et al., 2020b), and the Inst2vec feature (Ben-Nun et al.,
2018). We choose to use the LLVM environment from
CompilerGym because the LLVM ecosystem is a popular
compiler infrastructure that powers Swift, Rust, Clang, and
more.
Autophase We use the Autophase features Haj-Ali et al.
(2020b) to build some baseline models for comparison,
which will be detailed in Section 4.2. The Autophase feature
is a 56-dimension integer feature vector summarizing the
LLVM IR representation, and it contains integer counts of
various program properties such as the number of instruc-
tions and maximum loop depth. we use an MLP to encode
it and output a program representation.
ProGraML As a part of our main method, we leverage
ProGraML (Cummins et al., 2021) graphs for training GNN
models. ProGraML is a graph-based representation that en-
codes semantic information of the program which includes
control ﬂow, data ﬂow, and function call ﬂow. This repre-
sentation has the advantage that it is not a ﬁxed size - it
does oversimplify large programs - and yet it is still a more
compact format than the original IR format. We list three
bullet points of the ProGraML graph below.
• Node features Each node in a ProGraML graph have
4 features described in Table 1. The “text” feature
is a textual representation and the main feature that
captures the semantics of a node. For example, it tells
us what an “instruction” node does (e.g., it can be
alloca, store, add, etc).
• Edges features Each edge in a ProGraML graph have
2 features described in Table 1.
• Type graph There is an issue with the ProGraML
graph. Speciﬁcally, a node of type variable/constant
node can end up with a long textual representation
(for the “text” feature) if it is a composite data struc-
ture. For example, a struct (as in C/C++) contain-
ing dozens of data members needs to include all the
members in its “text” feature. In other words, the
current ProGraML representation does not automati-
cally break down composite data types into their ba-
sic components. Since there is an unbounded num-
ber of possible structs, this prevents 100% vocabulary
coverage on any IR with structs (or other composite
types). To address this issue, we propose to expand
the node representing a composite data type into a
type graph. Speciﬁcally, a pointer node is expanded
into this type graph: [variable] <- [pointer] <-
[pointed-type], where [...] denotes a node and
<- denotes an edge connection. A struct node is ex-
panded into a type graph where all its members are
represented by individual nodes (which may be fur-
ther expanded into their components) and connected
to a struct node. An array is expanded into this
type graph:[variable] <- [array] <- [element-
type]. The newly added nodes are categorized as
type nodes and the edges connecting the type nodes
are type edges. The type nodes and type edges con-
stitute the type sub-graphs in the ProGraML graphs. In
this manner, we break down the composite data struc-
tures into the type graphs that consist of only primitive
data types such as float and i32.
3.4. Network Architecture
Since the Autophase feature can be encoded by a simple
MLP, we discuss only the network architectures for encod-
ing the ProGraML graphs in this section.
We use a graph neural network (GNN) as the backbone
to encode the ProGraML graphs and output a graph-level
representation. The GNN encodes the graph via multiple
layers of message passing and outputs a graph-level repre-
sentation by a global average pooling over the node features.
The goal of graph encoding is to use the structure and re-
lational dependencies of the graph to learn an embedding
that allows us to learn a better policy. To this end, we ex-
perimented with several different GNN architectures such
as Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling,
2017), Gated Graph Convolutions Network (GGC) (Li et al.,
2015), Graph Attention Network (GAT) (Brody et al., 2022),
Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) (Xu et al., 2019). To
better capture the rich semantics of node/edge features in
the ProGraML graphs, we propose Graph Edge Attention
Network (GEAN), a variant of the graph attention net-
work (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017). These GNNs leverage both
the node and edge features, so we start by presenting how
to embed the node and edge features.
Node embedding For the “text” features of the nodes, we
build a vocabulary that maps from text to integer. The
vocabulary covers all the text ﬁelds of the nodes in the
graphs in the training set. The ﬁnal vocabulary consists of

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
Feature
Description
Node
type
One of {instruction, variable, constant, type}
text
Semantics of the node
function
Integer position in function
block
Integer position in IR basic block
Edge
ﬂow
Edge type. One of {call, control, data, type}
position
Integer edge position in ﬂow branching
Table 1. Features in the ProGraML graph representation which we
augment with type information (changes highlighted). We ablate
the augmentations in Section 4.5.
117 unique textual representations, and we add an additional
item “unknown” to the vocabulary which denotes any text
features that may be encountered at inference time and we
have not seen before. The i-th textual representation is
embedded using a learnable vector vi ∈Rd, where d is
the embedding dimension. The “type” feature is not used
because it can be inferred from the “text” feature.
Edge embedding The edge embedding is the sum of three
types of embedding as the following.
• Type embedding We have 4 types of edge ﬂows, so
we use 4 learnable vectors to represent them.
• Position embedding The “position” feature of an edge
is a non-negative integer which does not have an upper
bound. We truncate any edge positions larger than 32
to 32 and use a set of 32 learnable vectors to represent
the edge positions.
• Block embedding We use the block indices of the
two nodes connected by the edge to construct a new
edge feature. The motivation is that whether the edge
goes beyond an IR basic block can inﬂuence program
optimization. Suppose the block indices of the source
node and the target node of an edge are respectively bi
and bj. We get the relative position of the two nodes
with respect to IR basic blocks in the following way:
pblock = sign(bi −bj). If the edge connects two nodes
in the same IR basic block, then pblock is 0. And
pblock = ±1 indicates the edge goes from a block
to the next/previous block. There are 3 possible values
for pblock, so it is embedded using 3 learnable vectors.
The ﬁnal embedding of an edge is the sum of its type, posi-
tion, and block embedding vectors.
Graph mixup We note that the ProGraML graphs of two
programs can be composed into a single graph without af-
fecting the semantics of the two programs. And their value
vectors can be added up to correctly represent the value vec-
tor of the composite graph. In this manner, we can enrich
the input space to the GNNs and mitigate model overﬁtting
for the normalized value prediction method.
Graph Edge Attention Network We introduce the GEAN
in this paragraph and defer its mathematical details to the
Appendix. There are two main differences between the GAT
and GEAN. 1) GEAN adopts a dynamic edge representa-
tion. Speciﬁcally, GAT uses the node-edge-node feature to
calculate the attention for neighborhood aggregation, while
GEAN uses the node-edge-node feature to calculate not
only the attention but also a new edge representation. Then,
the updated edge representation is sent to the next layer for
computation. Note that GAT uses the same edge embedding
in each layer. We conduct an ablation study showing that
the edge representation in GEAN improves the generaliza-
tion of the model. 2) GAT treats the graph as an undirected
graph while GEAN encodes the node-edge-node feature to
output an updated node-edge-node feature, where the two
updated node features represent the feature to be aggregated
in the source node and the target node, respectively. This
ensures that the directional information is preserved in the
neighborhood aggregation.
3.5. Dataset Preparation
Overﬁtting issues could happen if training is performed
on a small subset of programs, or the set of programs is
not diverse enough. To mitigate this we ﬁnd it helpful to
create an aggregate dataset that uses many different public
datasets as curated by CompilerGym. CompilerGym gives
us access to 14 different datasets constructed using two
different methods.
• Curated These are small collections of hand-picked
programs. They are curated to be distinct from one
another without overlap and are not useful for training.
Typically programs are larger as they may comprise
multiple source ﬁles combined into a single program.
These are commonly used for evaluating compiler op-
timization improvements.
• Uncurated These are comprised of individual com-
piler IRs from building open source repositories such
as Linux and Tensorﬂow. We also include synthetically
generated programs, targeted for compiler testing (not
optimization).
For our aggregate dataset we decided to holdout the entirety
of the four curated datasets for use as an out-of-domain test
set. This is important because they represent the types of
programs we expect to see in the wild. We also split the
uncurated datasets into train, validaton, and test programs.
3.6. Evaluation
For all our metrics and rewards we leverage the IR instruc-
tion count as value we are trying to minimize. We also
report metrics on each CompilerGym dataset as well as

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
Type
Dataset
Train
Val
Test
Uncurated
anghabench-v1
70,7000
1,000
2,000
blas-v0
133
28
29
github-v0
7,000
1,000
1,000
linux-v0
4,906
1,000
1,000
opencv-v0
149
32
32
poj104-v1
7,000
1,000
1,000
tensorﬂow-v0
415
89
90
clgen-v0
697
149
150
csmith-v0
222
48
48
llvm-stress-v0
697
149
150
Curated
cbench-v1
0
0
11
chstone-v0
0
0
12
mibench-v1
0
0
40
npb-v0
0
0
121
Total
-
728,219
4,495
4,683
Table 2. CompilerGym dataset types and training splits. The hand
curated datasets are used solely to evaluate generalization to real
world program domains at test time.
the mean over datasets to get a single number to compare
overall results.
• The mean percent improved over -Oz (MeanOverOz)
deﬁned as following:
¯IOz = MeanOverOz :=
1
|P|
X
p
IOz
p
−Iπθ
p
IOz
p
,
(5)
where p is a speciﬁc program from the set of programs
P in the dataset. IOz
p
is the number of IR instructions
in the program after running the default compiler pass
-Oz. Iπθ
p
is the number of IR instructions in the pro-
gram after applying the policy under consideration.
We can think of this as a simple average of the percent
improvement over -Oz.
• We
also
look
compare
the
geometric
mean
(GMeanOverOz) of ﬁnal sizes across all pro-
grams relative to -Oz to give a weighted comparison
that is insensitive to outliers.
¯IOz
G
= GMeanOverOz :=
 Y
p
IOz
p
Iπθ
p
!
1
|P|
(6)
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
For the methods in Table 3, we search over a set of hyper-
parameters, including the temperature T in Eq. 3, number
of layers, the embedding dimension of the node/edge fea-
tures, and the output dimension in the hidden layers in the
MLPs. We select the best model of each method based on
the validation metric (validation MeanOverOz in 45 steps)
and report the best model’s metrics on the test set.
4.2. Baseline Methods
Oracle We consider a brute-force search over the coreset
in order to ﬁnd the best pass sequence for a given program.
This gives us an upper-bound of the downstream policy
network. In our case the coreset has a total of 50 sequences
(625 total passes).
Top-45 We also consider how well we would do if the oracle
is only allowed to use the most popular pass sequences
but limited to 45 passes. We use 45 passes because this
is maximum allowed for our all other baselines and our
proposed method.
RL-PPO We reproduce the Autophase (Haj-Ali et al.,
2020b) pipeline by using the state-of-the-art RL algorithm
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to learn a policy model. We
have two program representations for training the RL mod-
els, including the Autophase feature and the ProGraML
graphs (note that Haj-Ali et al. (2020b) only used the
Autophase feature).
The Autophase/ProGraML feature
is sent to a GNN/MLP for feature encoding, which out-
puts a program-level embedding. Following Haj-Ali et al.
(2020b), we add an additional action history feature to the
RL pipeline, which is a histogram of previously applied
passes. The vector of the histogram of action history is
divided by 45 (i.e., the number of the total passes in our
budget) for normalization. A 2-layer MLP is used to encode
the action history to obtain a feature vector, which is con-
catenated with the program embedding extracted from the
ProGraML graph or the Autophase feature. The concate-
nated feature is sent to a 2-layer MLP to output the action
probability for the policy network. The value network (i.e.,
the critic) in our PPO pipeline mimics the policy network
(i.e., the actor) in feature encoding and outputs a scalar to es-
timate the state values. The state values are the expectation
of the discounted cumulative rewards where the reward in
each step is the improvement over -O0: (I(t)
p
−Iπθ
p )/I(t)
p ,
where I(t)
p
denotes the current IR instruction count of the
program p at time step t. This reward is reasonable since
it makes the value approximation Markovian. At inference,
an action is sampled from the output of the learned policy
network at each time step until the total number of steps
reaches 45.
Q-value-rank We consider each pass sequence in the core-
set as a generalized action and train a Q network to predict
the value of each generalized action. Recall that the value
vector rp is the highest cumulative reward observed during
the rollout of each pass sequence in the coreset on program
p. The Q-value-rank model is trained to approximate the
value vector using a mean squared loss.

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
Figure 3. GEAN-Q-value-rank: ground truth of rewards and model predictions over the 50 generalized actions for three benchmarks.
BC We consider learning a standard behavior cloning model
to predict the best pass sequences from the coreset, where
the best pass sequence is deﬁned as the following. As in the
previous bullet point, the value vector is denoted by rp. If
there is only one i such that rp
i = maxj∈n rp
j , then the clas-
siﬁcation label is i. If there are multiple such i’s (multiple
pass sequences) that achieve the largest reward maxj∈n rp
j ,
then we order the corresponding pass sequences by length-
lexicographic ordering. The classiﬁcation label is selected
to be the ﬁrst one after the ordering. This ensures that our
deﬁnition for the best pass sequence (among the coreset) for
a program is unique and consistent. We use a standard cross
entropy loss to train the single-class classiﬁcation model.
NVP This is the normalized value prediction method de-
scribed in Section 3.2.
The last three methods (i.e., Q-value-rank, BC, and NVP)
share the same inference protocol. Note that they all output
a vector a of length 50 whose entries correspond to the pass
sequences in the coreset. At inference, we roll out the pass
sequences with the highest values in a one by one until our
budget of 45 passes is reached. Since the pass sequence has
an average length of 12.5, typically 3 or 4 pass sequences are
applied (anything beyond 45 passes will be truncated). For
BC and NVP, we also tried sampling pass sequences using
the model output a, but that resulted in worse performance.
Therefore, we stick to selection by maximum values.
4.3. Main Results
In Table 3 we present the main results of our experiments
comparing our proposed method -NVP to various base-
lines. The test programs were completely held-out during
both data-driven learning phases (pass sequence search and
model training).
The results show that our model achieves strong perfor-
mance over the prior method (Autophase-RL-PPO) pro-
posed in (Haj-Ali et al., 2020b). Additionally, we can see
that both the GEAN model and the normalized value pre-
diction over the discovered coreset are needed to achieve
the best performance within 45 passes. See Figure 6 in the
Method
#passes
¯IOz
¯IOz
G
Compiler (-Oz)
-
0%
1.000
Autophase-RL-PPO
45
-16.3%
0.960
GCN-RL-PPO
45
-12.2%
0.987
GGC-RL-PPO
45
-8.5%
1.000
GIN-RL-PPO
45
-11.3%
0.991
GAT-RL-PPO
45
-10.3%
0.999
GEAN-RL-PPO
45
-10.0%
0.997
GEAN-Q-value-rank
45
-0.3%
1.043
Autophase-BC
45
2.6%
1.043
GEAN-BC
45
2.1%
1.038
Autophase-NVP (Ours)
45
3.8%
1.054
GCN-NVP (Ours)
45
4.4%
1.058
GGC-NVP (Ours)
45
4.1%
1.056
GIN-NVP (Ours)
45
4.2%
1.056
GAT-NVP (Ours)
45
4.1%
1.055
GEAN-NVP (Ours)
45
4.7%
1.062
Top-45
45
-7.5%
0.992
Oracle
625
5.8%
1.075
Table 3. Evaluation results on held-out test set averaged over all
datasets. ¯IOz denotes per-program MeanOverOz, and ¯IOz
G
de-
notes GMeanOverOz over all programs. All methods except
Compiler and Oracle baselines use 45 compiler optimization
passes.
Appendix for a visualization of the improvement in program
size over the 45 passes on programs from the holdout set.
The Oracle shows strong performance but requires a large
number of interactions with the compiler. But, this shows
that the pass sequence search generalizes to new unseen
programs. This is somewhat unsurprising given that the
compiler’s built-in hand-tuned pass list (-Oz) works reason-
ably well for most programs.
The performance of Top-45 by itself is weak showing that
in order to achieve good results in a reasonable number
of passes (45) we need to leverage a general policy and

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
search to select the most likely candidate pass sequences to
evaluate.
4.4. Why Did the RL-PPO Baseline Fail?
We provide an empirical analysis of why the RL-PPO ap-
proaches obtain much lower performance compared to our
NVP approaches. We hypothesize two possible reasons for
the failures of RL-PPO. 1) Inaccurate state-value estima-
tion results in a high variance in training. In the PPO
algorithm, we have a policy network (the actor) to output
a probability distribution over the actions. And we have
a value network (the critic) for estimating the state val-
ues, where the approximation is based on regressing the
cumulative reward of trajectories sampled from the current
policy (Schulman et al., 2017). The update of the policy
network is based on the state value outputted by the value
network. Inaccurate state value estimation results in a high
variance in training the policy network. Due to the stochas-
tic nature of the value estimation that stems from the Monte
Carlo sampling in cumulative reward regression, it is difﬁ-
cult to analyze how accurately the value network approx-
imates the ground truth state values (which are unknown
even for the programs in the training set). We alleviate
this issue by analyzing the Q-value-rank approach (as
introduced in Section 4.2), which can be seen as a sim-
pliﬁed version of the value approximation in PPO. The
Q-value-rank approach is simpler because the values
to estimate are deterministic (i.e., the value vector rp is
ﬁxed for a program p). Moreover, since we consider the
50 pass sequences in our coreset as 50 generalized actions,
the Q-value-rank approach can be seen as the value
approximation in a PPO pipeline where a trajectory consists
of only a single step over the 50 generalized actions. In
this sense, the Q-value-rank approach is a simpliﬁed
version of the regular value estimation in PPO. Figure 3
shows that the value estimation is inaccurate for programs
in the held-out test set even for Q-value-rank approach.
Therefore, it is even more challenging to estimate the state
values in PPO. The inaccuracy leads to a high variance in
training the policy network. 2) The reward is very sparse.
As shown in Figure 2, the rewards are very sparse. There-
fore, the good states (i.e., the program states with a higher
chance to be optimized in code size reduction) are rarely
seen by the value/policy network during rollouts. Then, the
value network does not have a good value estimation for
those good states, and the policy network does not converge
to output a good policy for them. We conjecture these two
issues are the main reason for why the RL-PPO methods
obtain the worst performance as shown in Table 3.
4.5. Ablation Studies
Ablation for GEAN-NVP We perform 3 ablation exper-
iments for GEAN-NVP, where we remove graph mixup,
Figure 4. The effect of temperature on GEAN-NVP.
Method
Test MeanOverOz
GEAN-NVP
4.7% (0.0%)
- graph mixup
4.4% (-0.3%)
- edge embedding
4.4% (-0.3%)
- type graph
-5.3% (-10.0 %)
Table 4. Ablation on GEAN-NVP components.
mask the edge embedding, and remove the type graph,
respectively.
The results in Table 4 show that the test
MeanOverOz metric drops after removing any of the three
components. Speciﬁcally, the performance drops signiﬁ-
cantly after removing the type graph, which validates its
importance.
The effect of the temperature The temperature parameter
T in Eq. 3 controls how sharp the target distribution is. The
distribution tends to be sharper as the temperature decreases.
To analyze the inﬂuence of the temperature on the general-
ization of the model, We vary the temperature T in training
the GEAN-NVP model and report the results in Figure 4.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we develop a pipeline for program size re-
duction under limited compilation passes. We ﬁnd that it is
a great challenge to approximate the state values (i.e., the
maximum code size reduction) for a diverse set of programs,
so existing state-of-the-art methods such as proximal policy
optimization (PPO) fail to obtain good performances. To
tackle this problem, we propose a search algorithm that dis-
covers a good set of pass sequences (i.e., the coreset), which
generalizes well to unseen programs. Moreover, we propose
to train a GNN to approximate the normalized state values
of programs over the coreset, for which we propose a variant
of the graph attention network, termed GEAN. Our pipeline
of coreset discovery and normalized value prediction via
GEAN perform signiﬁcantly better than the PPO baselines.

Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction
