1
Sub-Optimal Multi-Phase Path Planning:
A Method for Solving Rubik’s Revenge
Jared Weed Department of Mathematical Sciences
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Worcester, Massachusetts 01609-2280

Abstract—Rubik’s Revenge, a 4 × 4 × 4 variant of the Rubik’s
puzzles, remains to date as an unsolved puzzle. That is to say, we
do not have a method or successful categorization to optimally
solve every one of its approximately 7.401×1045 possible conﬁgu-
rations. Rubik’s Cube, Rubik’s Revenge’s predecessor (3×3×3),
with its approximately 4.33 × 1019 possible conﬁgurations, has
only recently been completely solved by Rokicki et. al, further
ﬁnding that any conﬁguration requires no more than 20 moves.
[8] With the sheer dimension of Rubik’s Revenge and its total
conﬁguration space, a brute-force method of ﬁnding all optimal
solutions would be in vain. Similar to the methods used by
Rokicki et. al on Rubik’s Cube, in this paper we develop a
method for solving arbitrary conﬁgurations of Rubik’s Revenge
in phases, using a combination of a powerful algorithm known
as IDA* and a useful deﬁnition of distance in the cube space.
While time-series results were not successfully gathered, it will
be shown that this method far outweighs current human-solving
methods and can be used to determine loose upper bounds for
the cube space. Discussion will suggest that this method can also
be applied to other puzzles with the proper transformations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Rubik’s puzzles have been an interest to children and
adults alike for many decades since the original Rubik’s Cube
invention in 1974 by Erno Rubik. Today, many variations of
Rubik’s Cube exist and each provide their own challenges
when solving. Interestingly, such a large following for these
puzzles have developed over the years, that entire competitions
revolve around the speed at which the puzzles can be solved,
using hundreds of memorized algorithms designed for speed
and recognition. The most popular of which have been the
Rubik’s Pocket, Rubik’s Cube, Rubik’s Revenge, and Rubik’s
Professor. The World Cube Association, since 2003, has
conducted competitions and kept record of results.
Fig. 1. Current World Records in 2015
While many enjoy solving these puzzles by hand using a
set of well-established algorithms, mathematicians ﬁnd interest
in understanding the properties the puzzles have on a more
fundamental level. Since each puzzle is fully observable, we
can derive useful results based on the theory alone. As an
example, the algorithms used in speed-solving by humans are
terribly suboptimal, in that the necessary amount of moves
to correctly solve the scrambled conﬁguration is much less
than the required moves by the algorithms. This is by virtue
of each algorithm being generalized and not speciﬁc to one
particular conﬁguration. This however begs the question: What
if we were gods? What if we had the ability to know how to
solve any conﬁguration of a puzzle in the least amount of
moves possible, through the use of some clever algorithm?
This hypothetical notion is deﬁned as God’s Algorithm, one
that unfortunately we as humans do not know.
Throughout this paper, we will be adopting World Cube
Association’s (WCA) Single-Turn notation to annotate how
twists are executed on Rubik’s Revenge. A quarter turn in the
clockwise direction of the outer left, right, front, back, up,
or down faces is aptly noted as L, R, F, B, U, D respectively.
Similarly, a quarter turn in the clockwise direction of the inner
faces are noted as l, r, f, b, u, d. A turn that is instead in the
counter-clockwise direction is represented with an additional
tick (such as the move R′ - a counter-clockwise turn of the
outer right face). Lastly, a half turn (as opposed to quarter
turn) is represented with an additional 2 (such as the move u2
- a half-turn of the inner up face).
Fig. 2. Three Independent Moves Using WCA Notation
II. RELATED WORK
Much of the method employed here stems from previous
work developed on Rubik’s Cube. The development that
started it all occurred in 1981 when Morwen Thistlethwaite
proposed in a paper that the Rubik’s Cube can be solved using
four independent phases. [9] The idea was that the cube, given
any scramble, could be maneuvered into a conﬁguration using
quarter turns of all the faces, that could then be maneuvered
arXiv:1601.05744v1  [math.HO]  20 Jan 2016

2
into a conﬁguration using half turns of some of the faces, and
so on until the cube was solved. The choice of maneuvers
was not arbitrary: He noted that as each phase was solved,
the groups of available twists of the cube were nested in
one another. For the ﬁrst phase, the moves L, R, F, B, U, D
are permitted, and using these moves, the cube should be
maneuvered into a conﬁguration such that it can be solved
using the moves L, R, F, B, U2, D2. The following ﬁgure
gives a documentation of Thistletwaite’s process. Note here
Fig. 3. Thistlethwaite’s Four-Phase Process
that each subgroup denoted by Gi are the moves available
to the given phase, as mentioned earlier. It is obvious that
these subgroups are indeed nested such that Gi ⊃Gi+1. The
number of conﬁgurations immediately following the subgroups
are the total conﬁgurations that are possibly generated by that
subgroup. Clearly, G1 generates the entire cube space, which is
known to have approximately 4.33×1019 valid conﬁgurations.
Following this is the number of coset elements. While this
terminology will be explored later in the paper, we may naively
deﬁne this as the number of unique classes of elements existing
in Gi not currently solvable in Gi+1. Lastly, a diagram is
provided showing the state of a particular scramble as it is
maneuvered through the phases of this algorithm.
In 1985, Richard Korf proposed a new method of tree
searching called Depth-ﬁrst Iterative-deepening, which could
be used with a heuristic method such as A* (which he
aptly coined IDA*). [3] Using this method, in 1992 Herbert
Kociemba expanded on the theory of Thistlethwaite’s four-
phase process for Rubik’s Cube and simpliﬁed it to only two-
phases. [2] This was possible by combining the ﬁrst two phases
of Thistlethwaite’s process into one phase, and also the last
two-phases into one phase. From the previous ﬁgure, it would
then be clear that the number of ”coset elements” drastically
increases in this new method. Note, however, that using IDA*
on this bi-part search space allowed for considerably real-time
results, and found that solutions typically of 45 to 52 moves in
Thistlethwaite’s process were reduced to solutions on average
of 26 moves in this method.
Several years later, Korf showed that optimal solutions
could be found for Rubik’s Cube with the help of pattern
databases, while also employing his previously developed
IDA* algorithm. [4] The pattern databases, in this case, are
related to the coset elements mentioned previously, in that each
of these elements can have their distances computed and stored
into a large table, each with a unique identiﬁer. [1] Then, for
any scrambled cube, it is identiﬁed by certain properties and
its distance quickly found by a lookup in the table. This use
of lookup tables drastically improved computation time when
searching the cube space in conjunction with using iterative-
deepening. Korf was able to show that a pattern database along
with an efﬁcient search algorithm provided him with optimum
solutions as long as 18 moves.
Fig. 4. The ”Superﬂip”: First Known Twenty-Move Conﬁguration
Lastly, over the course of the years 2009 to 2013, a
culmination of efforts from Korf, Kociemba, Rokicki, and
others, found the optimal solution to every valid conﬁguration
of Rubik’s Cube and determined that the maximum number
of moves necessary to solve one is 20. [7][8] While it is clear
that the computation necessary to do so required a timespan of
several years, the method by which these solutions were found
came largely from the development of methods by Korf using
IDA* and the pattern databases (which Kociemba incidentally
adopted for his two-phase solver in recent years).
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
It is clear that Rubik’s Cube has, by deﬁnition, been solved
and categorized for every valid conﬁguration. However, we
note that this success came only just a couple of years ago.
Rubik’s Revenge, its successor in size, has yet to be solved,
and this is primarily due to the sheer difference in size of
the conﬁguration space when comparing it to that of Rubik’s
Cube. With minimal effort, it can be shown that the approach
used by Rokicki et. al to solve Rubik’s Cube cannot be applied
directly to the 7.401 × 1045 conﬁgurations, as a single search
tree would require a depth upwards of 34 and a breadth
of nearly 24. Such an expanse would require a near-inﬁnite
amount of time in the current computing power available.
Instead, in this paper we investigate the following question:
Can a series of sub-problems be planned optimally for the
Rubik’s Revenge to sub-optimally solve any valid conﬁgu-
ration? This means that we will not be searching for God’s
Algorithm exactly, but rather cheat the deﬁnition and ﬁnd
generalized versions of the algorithm for each sub-problem.
We note that this approach is similar to that of previous works
of Thistlethwaite and Kociemba, but will necessarily require
the approach of Korf and Rokicki when applying IDA* to
ﬁnd solutions at greater depths. In the following section, we
will deﬁne several components to this method. Firstly, we will
develop some basic theory about the puzzle which will aid us

3
greatly in sub-dividing the problem. Next, a deﬁnition of a
multi-phase method will be given, followed by a deﬁnition of
the metric used to have a notion of ”distance from solved” for
each phase. Finally, pseudo-code for the two-part algorithm of
IDA* will be provided, showing how the method approaches
deriving a solution for any conﬁguration.
IV. METHODOLOGY
Theory
As mentioned in the sections above, there are approximately
7.401×1045 possible valid conﬁgurations of Rubik’s Revenge.
[5] There are eight corner pieces, which are unrestricted in
their orbit, resulting in 8! possible permutations of the corners.
Furthermore, each corner piece has one of three possible
rotations, with one such piece having its rotation deﬁned by the
other seven (the parity of the corners must always be even),
resulting in another factor of 37. Thus in total, the corner
pieces have 8! · 37 unique conﬁgurations. Additionally, there
are twnety-four edge pieces, which are also unrestricted in
their orbit, resulting in 24! possible permutations of the edges.
The edge pieces, however, cannot be ﬂipped singly since the
internal structure of Rubik’s Revenge is asymmetrical for each
edge pair.
Fig. 5. The corners, edges, and centers of Rubik’s Revenge, respectively
For the twenty-four center pieces, which also have 24!
possible permutations. It is important to note that the center
pieces on a solved Rubik’s Revenge are indistinguishable;
that is, there is no designation where each of the four center
pieces per face belong. Thus we can reduce the total possible
permutations by a factor of 4! for each face, resulting in a total
reduction factor of (4!)6. Lastly, we note that the orientation of
the cube is not ﬁxed in space. Unlike Rubik’s Cube, which has
ﬁxed centers to designate the color scheme, Rubik’s Revenge
has no such ﬁxed center, thus we can additionally reduce the
permutations by a factor of 24 to account for symmetry.
When putting the above calculations together, we ﬁnd that
the total number of possible conﬁgurations is
8! · 37 · 24! · 24!
(4!)6 · 24
= 8! · 37 · 24!
24
≈7.401 × 1045
as shown previously.
Given that there are 12 independent slices for Rubik’s
Revenge, each of which can be twisted a total of 3 different
ways, we have a total of 36 unique twists that can be executed
on the cube. However, if we consider a sequence of twists
exacted on the cube, we ﬁnd that there are only 24 unique
twists when performed in succession. This is not immediately
obvious, however it can be easily understood. Consider the
sequence of two moves F F2, which is a quarter-turn of the
outer front face, followed by a half-turn of the outer front
face. It comes as no surprise that this two-twist sequence can
be identiﬁed by the single twist F ′. Similarly, we can consider
Fig. 6. The result of two twists being equivalent to one.
a different type of two-twist sequence, such as R2 L2, which
is a half-turn of the outer right face, followed by a half-turn
of the outer left face. The resulting conﬁguration is exactly
identical to the resulting conﬁguration if we swapped the order
of the sequence, namely L2 R2. In this case, the sequence
is commutative, because the two slices being performed on
are independent of one another. Therefore, for any arbitrarily
chosen twist of an arbitrarily chosen slice, we can ensure
the sequence is non-commutative or non-simpliﬁable (at least
initially) by disallowing subsequent twists that occur on a
parallel slice. Thus this results in the ﬁgure of 24 from before.
Using these facts, we can show by a fairly straightforward
pigeonhole argument that there exists a conﬁguration of the
cube that requires at least 34 moves to solve. Since 36 twists
are available for the ﬁrst move in a sequence, and 24 for all
subsequent twists, we are curious to solve the inequality
36 · 24n−1 ≥7.401 × 1045
where n is the number of twists. A quick calculation shows
that n is necessarily larger than 34.
Solving in Phases
By the information above, it is obvious that a brute-force
method involving one search tree is completely intractable.
We note that the tree will be at least 34 nodes deep, and have
an approximate branching factor of 24. This indicates that the
method will require the problem be solved in phases. We do
this by dividing the cube group into nested subgroups G0 ⊃
G1 ⊃. . . ⊃Gn, where G0 represents the cube group, and Gn
represents the identity element (the solved conﬁguration). Each
subgroup is then deﬁned by the twist generators, which can
generate a subset of the total possible conﬁgurations. Since the
subgroups are nested, this implies that as we move from Gi
to Gi+1 we restrict the twist generators available to that class.
As an example, recall Thistlethwaite’s four-phase scheme from
above, and note that the subgroups are
G0 = {L, R, F, B, U, D}
G1 = {L, R, F, B, U2, D2}
G2 = {L, R, F2, B2, U2, D2}
G3 = {L2, R2, F2, B2, U2, D2}
G4 = {I}
from this, we can see that his four-phase scheme indeed has
nested subgroups and that G0 represents the twist generators
of all possible Rubik’s Cube conﬁgurations.

4
Next, we consider an arbitrary conﬁguration that can be
generated by the group Gi. Looking ahead to the following
group Gi+1, we determine the unique characteristics about
this conﬁguration that cannot be solved using the generators
of Gi+1. Interestingly enough, the elements contained in the
right coset space Gi+1\Gi are all the possible unique classes
of conﬁgurations that deﬁne these characteristics between the
groups Gi and Gi+1. This is not intuitive, and difﬁcult to
visualize given the groups we are operating in. The following
is an example of right coset spaces:
Let G be the group of positive integers modulo 8, i.e,
G = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7} = Z+
8
and let H = {0, 4}, which is indeed a subgroup of G. Given
that the operator on the integers is addition, the following
elements are contained in the right coset group H\G :
H + 0 = {0, 4}
H + 1 = {1, 5}
H + 2 = {2, 6}
H + 3 = {3, 7}
Using the example above, we can think of the elements in
the right coset space Gi + 1\Gi as classes of elements that
identify particular characteristics of the cube conﬁguration. For
instance, the ﬁrst right coset group of Thistlethwaite’s scheme
has 1024 elements, which correspond to the 1024 possible
conﬁgurations the twelve edges can be in. Note that multiple
conﬁgurations can have the same conﬁguration of the twelve
edges, and thus get grouped into the same class element. This
is the essence of the right coset space.
There is then an identity element in each of these right
coset spaces, which is a class of conﬁgurations that are indeed
solvable in the group Gi+1. We can thus reduce the problem
to planning a sequence of moves from the class element cor-
responding to the conﬁguration in Gi to the identity element
in Gi+1\Gi, which brings the cube to a conﬁguration solvable
in Gi+1. The planning necessary within each right coset space
will them be developed for each phase.
Metric Deﬁnition
Prior to constructing an algorithm, we must ﬁrst derive a
deﬁnition of distance in the cube space, to understand how
”far away” a certain conﬁguration is from being solved in
a phase. This is necessary since a planning method such as
A* (as part of the IDA* algorithm) implements an additional
heuristic to better plan towards a solution. We thus develop
a notion of twist distance. For any piece of the cube, ﬁnd
the minimum number of twists necessary to correctly position
and orient it into a given phase conﬁguration. That is, if the
conﬁguration is currently operating in Gi, ﬁnd the number of
twists for that piece such that it is in a conﬁguration from the
identity element of Gi+1\Gi. We then deﬁne twist distance
as the sum over all pieces characteristic of that phase.
As a heuristic, this current deﬁnition of twist distance is
not admissible. To be admissible, we must divide the sum
by 16. If we consider an arbitrary twist of a slice, we either
disturb 12 pieces (for an inner slice) or 16 pieces (for an
outer slice). Since a distance heuristic is admissible if it
underestimates the true distance for any conﬁguration, we must
divide by the greatest disturbance. We can improve this metric
by instead calculating the twist distance for three separate sets:
the corners, the edges, and the centers. since the maximum
disturbance of each of these sets is 4, 8, and 8 respectively,
each corresponding twist distance must be divided by this
factor. We can then take the maximum of these three values
as our measured distance, which will be used in the following
algorithm.
Algorithm
We then introduce iterative-deepening A* (IDA*) as our
algorithm of choice, following similar construction used by
Kociemba and Korf on Rubik’s Cube. We want to ﬁnd an
optimal solution for each phase, however depth-ﬁrst search
doesn’t guarantee an optimal solution (or one at all) for an
arbitrary depth, and breadth-ﬁrst search, with a branching
factor of 24, would require a vast amount of memory. Iterative-
deepening combines the luxury of both types of search while
also guaranteeing an optimal solution without the need for
memory. This is done by simply iterating the depth for each
phase, in a pseudo-breadth-ﬁrst search fashion, attempting
to ﬁnd a solution at depth d. If one cannot be found, then
simply search again for a solution at instead depth d + 1. We
then combine this search with the A* planner (and the above
heuristic) to determine the branching of successive twists:
If a solution must exist at depth d and we have already
conducted n twists, then we can disallow a twist if the resulting
conﬁguration has a twist distance that is greater than d −n.
This action performs a much-needed pruning of the search
space if it’s clear a solution will not be found within the
restricted depth.
Combining all of the information above results in the fol-
lowing two algorithms. The ﬁrst algorithm, RevengeSolver,
corresponds to the more general-level planning, wherein we
iterate through each phase to ﬁnd the optimal solution. For a
given valid cube conﬁguration C, we begin with an unﬁlled
solution plan. Then for each phase, we slowly increase the
depth at which the phase operates (i.e., does a depth = 3
solution exist? If not, try to ﬁnd a depth = 4 solution, etc.). If
a path is returned from PhaseSearch (the second algorithm),
then the phase has produced a solution. In this case, we
transform the current conﬁguration of the cube using the
sequence of twists in path and append the path to the current
solution sequence. At this point, the current conﬁguration
is now solvable in the next phase, so move into the next
phase until no more exist. Once this has completed, we must
have found our solution, so we return solution which is the
sequence of twists necessary to solve the conﬁguration.
The second algorithm, PhaseSearch, does the actual phase
planning, given a conﬁguration C, the current phase, and
the depth of twists remaining to be explored. Note that this
algorithm is recursive, so we ﬁrst introduce a recursion check:
if depth = 0 (meaning we have no more allowable twists to

5
Algorithm 1: RevengeSolver(C)
Data: C, a valid cube conﬁguration
begin
solution ←−Null
for phase = 0 . . . N do
for depth = 0 . . . ∞do
path ←−PhaseSearch(phase, C, depth)
if Success then
Transform(C, path)
solution ←−solution + path
break
return solution
explore), we calculate the twist distance C in the current phase
from the identity element of that phase. If this distance is 0,
then we have necessarily arrived at the solution for this phase.
If, however, depth is not 0, then we again calculate the twist
distance of C in the current phase from the identity element of
that phase. If this distance is less than depth (i.e., a solution is
still feasible), we can apply all the available twists from that
phase to the conﬁguration, and recurse through PhaseSearch,
this time reducing depth by 1.
Algorithm 2: PhaseSearch(phase, C, depth)
Data: C, a valid cube conﬁguration
phase, current operational phase
depth, depth left to travel
begin
if depth = 0 then
if Distance(C, phase) = 0 then
return Success
else
if Distance(C, phase) ≤depth then
for twist ∈Successor(phase) do
Cnew ←−Transform(C, twist)
PhaseSearch(phase, Cnew, depth −1)
V. THEORETICAL RESULTS
Theoretically speaking, the number of phases implemented
in the method is inversely correlated to plan time. This is
caused by several latent features present in the algorithm.
Firstly, by introducing more phases, we inadvertently reduce
the cardinality of the right coset spaces (although the number
of right coset spaces is exactly the number of phases). This
implies that the search space within each right coset space
is smaller, requiring fundamentally less computation time and
search. However, since we are searching through more phases,
this necessarily increases the average total moves necessary to
solve the cube. While we can suspect that the average number
of moves within each phase decreases, the number of phases
places a larger role in the monotonicity of the upper bound.
Conversely, by reducing the number of phases, we greatly
increase the size of the right coset spaces. Intuitively, this is
because a reduction in phases necessarily requires that more
cases are examined that must be solved before moving into the
next phase. Thus a much greater time is expended searching
the space for a solution. However, the beneﬁt to reducing the
number of phases is that, as mentioned about the monotonicity
of the upper bound, less moves on average will be required to
solve the cube. In fact, as the number of phases is reduced to 1,
we converge on God’s Algorithm. It should be noted however,
that even a reduction by 1 phase exponentially increases the
amount of computation time needed.
Lastly, of importance is the fact that by virtue of the IDA*
algorithm, each phase is guaranteed to be solved optimally.
This means that if a conﬁguration that meets the necessary
conditions of a particular phase was found to have an N-
move solution, we can guarantee that no solution of N −1
or less existed for that conﬁguration. There are, however,
caveats to this fact. Firstly, we cannot guarantee that only
one optimum solution exists for any conﬁguration within a
particular phase. In fact, it is quite likely that several optimal
solutions exist. This comes with an interesting effect on the
method itself. Different optimal solutions may yield different
ﬁnal conﬁgurations when maneuvered into the next phase.
This means that the solution to successive phases are affected
by their predecessors. Having two optimal solutions for one
particular phase does not necessarily imply that their respective
solutions in the following phase are of the same length.
VI. EXAMPLE PROBLEM
While Bruce Norskog had found after tedious computation
that an upper bound can be achieved on the Rubik’s Revenge
with only 79 single-twist moves, other cubing enthusiasts
such as Charles Tsai worked on developing phase-like solu-
tions, borrowing from the theory that Thistlethwaite previously
proposed. [6] One such solution structure is an eight-step
algorithm, which is in fact a two-step four-phase solver.
[10] The ﬁrst four phases work as you’d expect: successive
subgroups continue to restrict the allowable twists of all twelve
slices:
G0 = {R, L, F, B, U, D, r, l, f, b, u, d}
G1 = {R, L, F, B, U, D, r, l, f2, b2, u2, d2}
G2 = {R2, L2, F, B, U, D, r2, l2, f2, b2, u2, d2}
G3 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U, D, r2, l2, f2, b2}
Once the fourth phase is successful, the intriguing aspect
of this Tsai’s algorithm is that the Revenge is now in a
conﬁguration known as a reduction. A Revenge in reduction
means that, if inner slice twists are completely restricted, then
the Revenge is isomorphic to the 3x3 Rubik’s Cube. If that
is the case, then Thistlethwaite’s four-phase algorithm can be
applied, and this is indeed the second-step of the algorithm
and the last four phases:

6
G4 = {R, L, F, B, U, D}
G5 = {R2, L2, F, B, U, D}
G6 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U, D}
G7 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U2, D2}
After completing the eight phases corresponding to the
above subgroups, any Rubik’s Revenge can be solved. A visual
example is as follows. Let us ﬁrst apply a 35-move WCA
random scramble to a fully solved Rubik’s Revenge.
F d2 u B ′F ′ u U L2 r2 f ′
R D U l2 u′ r2 R′ B′ f ′ l2
b L b u′ f l b d U2 B D′ d2
This yields the following initially scrambled conﬁguration:
Fig. 7. An initially scrambled Revenge
Phase 1
In Phase 1, no twists are restricted when approaching G1.
To ensure the cube can be solved using the restrictions of G1
the center pieces for both the right and left faces must contain
only the two colors designated for those faces. This is because
in G1, there is no way to change the eight pieces set in the
left and right centers. Phase 1 is solved as
B2 u F2 D r′ f
From the initially scrambled conﬁguration shown before, this
results in the following conﬁguration.
Fig. 8. After Phase 1: G1 = {R, L, F, B, U, D, r, l, f2, b2, u2, d2}
Phase 2
Note that from the above ﬁgure, the left and right centers
contain only red and orange pieces. In Phase 2, we now restrict
nearly all the inner slices to half twists, with the exception of
the u and d slices. To bring this conﬁguration to one that
can be solved using the restrictions of G2, we must ensure
that all edge pairs (currently unpaired) have the same parity.
Furthermore, since G2 restricts all inner slices to half twists,
the center pieces for all opposing faces must contain only the
two colors designated for those faces. Phase 2 is solved as
R2 D2 r B2 L F ′ U ′ l
Which results in the next conﬁguration
Fig. 9. After Phase 2: G2 = {R2, L2, F, B, U, D, r2, l2, f2, b2, u2, d2}
Phase 3
In similar fashion as Phase 2, Phase 3 will now solve the
centers for all opposing faces into an equivalent scheme made
for the right and left centers. Furthermore, the conﬁguration
of each center face is such that they contain columns, which
allows for the centers to be solved using only half-turn twists
of the inner slices. To have the cube in a conﬁguration that
can be solved in G3 we must also ensure that four arbitrary
edges have been paired together and placed in the ”middle”
of the cube. Geometrically, these are the four edge positions
not located on the top or bottom. The choice of these four
pairings is unbounded so thus the shortest sequence of moves
that does so is chosen. Phase 3 is solved as
R2 B U ′ r2 b2 d2 D′ F r2 B
Resulting in the following conﬁguration, which you may
note has four paired edges.
Phase 4
Phase 4 brings the conﬁguration to reduction. Again, this
means that it will then be in a conﬁguration solvable using only
the outer slices. This is done by pairing up the remaining eight
edges and by solving each center so that the correct color is
on each face. Furthermore, since G4 will disallow any inner
slice twists, we must also ensure that the parity of the corners
and the edges match. Without this condition, the conﬁguration
will not match the parity of a Rubik’s cube and thus not be
isomorphic. This occurs since the centers are indistinguishable.
The following moves solve Phase 4:

7
Fig. 10. After Phase 3: G3 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U, D, r2, l2, f2, b2}
F2 l2 U2 R2 B2 U2 r2 U f2
It is clear at this point that all edges are paired and centers
solved, resulting in a reduction.
Fig. 11. After Phase 4: G4 = {R, L, F, B, U, D}
Phase 5
Since we are now in reduction, we no longer consider twists
of the inner slices. For this phase, we must ﬁrst correct the
parity of the edges, and we can do this without restriction of
twists for the outer faces. If we consider G5, we are restricted
to half turns on the right and left faces. This means that the
orientation of edges cannot be changed when considering its
ﬁnal position. Thus each edge must have a correct orientation
before being solvable in G5. Phase 5 is solved using the
following moves:
L B L F ′ R
Unfortunately, this phase is not readily visualized, but note
that each edge has ”good” orientation.
Phase 6
In similar fashion to correcting parity of the edges in Phase
5, in Phase 6 we must ensure that we have the correct parity
of the corners. Looking at G6, we are further restricting the
F and B faces to half turns as well, meaning that the corners
cannot be reoriented when considering their ﬁnal positions.
Also, given this restriction, the four edges with a ﬁnal position
in the ”middle” layer (this is the same as in Phase 3) must be
placed in that layer. Phase 6 has the following solution:
Fig. 12. After Phase 5: G5 = {R2, L2, F, B, U, D}
U F D L2 B′ F ′ U B
Note that the ”middle” consists of the colors Orange, Red,
Blue, and Green, and thus the four edges corresponding to
those colors are positioned in that layer.
Fig. 13. After Phase 6: G6 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U, D}
Phase 7
In Phase 7, we place the remaining edges in their correct
layers, without regard to the ﬁnal position.Furthermore, since
G7 is a restriction of all faces to half-twists only, the permuta-
tion of the corners and edges must match: If the corners have
even permutation, then so must the edges; if the corners have
odd permutation, then the edges must also. We must satisfy
this condition before a conﬁguration can be solved in G7 since
half turns restrict us to even permutation twists only. With the
following twists, Phase 7 is solved:
R2 F2 U F2 U ′ L2 U R2 U
Visually, the cube is nearly solved, and we only need to
solve opposing faces for the correct color.
Phase 8
Unsurprisingly, Phase 8 solves the cube, using only half-
turns of the outer faces. Since we previously corrected for the
permutation and orientation of both the edges and corners,
we can fully solve the cube using the following sequence of
moves:
R2 D2 R2 U2 R2 B2 D2 R2 F2 L2 B2 D2

8
Fig. 14. After Phase 7: G7 = {R2, L2, F2, B2, U2, D2}
Fig. 15. Completion of Phase 8 results in solved Revenge
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we investigated if a method can be developed
to solve Rubik’s Revenge in phases by considering the works
done on Rubik’s Cube. Indeed by conﬁrmation of enthusiasts
such as Bruce Norskog and Charles Tsai, phase solutions akin
to Thistlethwaite’s proposed scheme exist and are completely
computational in real time. We have shown that an eight-phase
solver exists, and that for the arbitrarily chosen scramble, only
67 moves are necessary to solve it using this scheme. While
this is only one such example, many other phase solutions are
bound to exist; an existence only limited by the computation
time necessary for each phase given the properties outlined in
the methodology section.
It is clear that a multi-phase solution is useful and perhaps
most efﬁcient when subdividing the problem. With the group-
theoretic properties discussed in this paper, a brute-force
solution for each possible conﬁguration is impossible given
our current computing power. It is then necessary to subdivide
the problem into solvable sub-problems, which can then be
solved in phases. The method employed has the beneﬁt of
providing real-time results that are sub-optimal by nature.
Should a least-moves solution be necessary, this method can
yield an upper bound on the number of moves constrained
only by the construction of the subgroups.
Furthermore, given that the method discussed is derived
within the properties of group theory, we may use it to
an advantage to calculate worst-case analyses. As mentioned
above, this method can yield an upper bound on the number of
moves given a deﬁnition of the subgroups. Because of this, one
may determine the strength of this construction by calculating
this upper bound and comparing to other constructions. In
this light it is possible to experiment with ﬁnding the most
optimum N-phase solver.
Lastly, we note that this method can be applied to other
puzzles of similar design. As we have seen, this method
stems from its development for Rubik’s Cube, and has been
employed for Rubik’s Revenge. Larger N × N cubes such
as Professor’s Cube share the same characteristics and group
properties as already discovered and could quickly adopt the
methods used for Rubik’s Revenge. Furthermore, non-square
cubes such as the Tetrahedron and Megaminx are suspect to
also be able to adopt this method, as their properties are fully
observable. Thus, similar constructions can be made.
Fig. 16. Tetrahedron and Megaminx Puzzles
VIII. FUTURE WORK
Given that the phases are independent of one another,
one small improvement that can be made is to consider the
boundaries between each phase to reduce redundancies. As an
example, if Phase N had the solution
U B R′ L2 U
and then Phase N + 1 had the solution
U2 R2 L2 F2
we may note that between the boundary, a U twist followed
by a U2 twist occurs, which is equivalent to U ′. However, U ′
may not necessarily be a move ”allowed” in phase N +1. This
is a correction that would be applied post-solution.
Secondly, the metric used in the method is such that
all twists, disregarding the distance of rotation, have equal
weighting. Other metrics can be investigated which may reveal
different results. For instance, a penalty can be added to twists
that are half-turns instead of quarter-turns. Alternatively, one
can consider a block-turn metric, where both the outer and
inner slices of a face can be turned together (as if they were
glued), with the same weight as a single-slice turn. Such a
metric has been used when constructing algorithms, where an
example notation is Ll or (Uu)′.
Since the orientation of Rubik’s Revenge is not ﬁxed in
space (note that in this method an arbitrary orientation was
given), another improvement that can be made is to allow
rotations of the entire cube in the solution planning. Doing this
can result in at least a reduction factor of 24, since we then
can approach any of the 24 symmetries by virtue of not having
a ﬁxed orientation. Understandably, introducing rotation in the
planning may result in a need to reconﬁgure the scheme for

9
which the cube is identiﬁed, and adjusted so that it is rotation-
dependent.
Lastly, note it was previously mentioned that the optimality
of successive phases are dependent on the solution of their pre-
decessors. It is possible to introduce an additional relaxation
factor, which can potentially assist in ﬁnding more appropriate
solutions over time. As an example, once a solution is found
requiring a total of t1+t2+t3+. . . twists (where ti represents
the number of twists to solve phase i) we can introduce a
relaxation into the ﬁrst phase, allowing a solution for that
phase to require t1 + 1 twists. By doing this, the resulting
conﬁguration may be solvable in the next phases requiring
less moves than before.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
For the many Rubik’s puzzle diagrams, the author would
like to thank David Whogg, for his Interactive Cube program
written in Python. It is available for public use under the GNU
General Public License. The program can be found on GitHub
at the following link:
https://github.com/davidwhogg/MagicCube
