186 
HA ET AL. 
UAI2001 
Similarity Measures on Preference Structures, Part II: Utility 
Functions 
Vu Ha* 
* Department of EE&CS 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
PO Box 784 
Milwaukee, WI 53211 

Peter Haddawy*t 
t CSIM Program 
John Miyamotog 
+ Department of Psychology 
University of Washington 
Box 351525 
School of Advanced Technologies 
Asian Institute of Technology 
Bangkok, Thailand 

Seattle, WA 98195 

Abstract 
In previous work [8] we presented a case­
based approach to eliciting and reasoning 
with preferences. 
A key issue in this ap­
proach is the definition of similarity between 
user preferences. 
We introduced the prob­
abilistic distance as a measure of similarity 
on user preferences, and provided an algo­
rithm to compute the distance between two 
partially specified value functions. This is for 
the case of decision making under certainty. 
In this paper we address the more challenging 
issue of computing the probabilistic distance 
in the case of decision making under uncer­
tainty. 
We present algorithms to compute 
the probabilistic distance between two com­
pletely or partially specified utility functions. 
We demonstrate the use of this algorithm 
with a medical data set of partially specified 
patient preferences, where none of the other 
existing distance measures appear definable. 
Using this data set, we also demonstrate that 
the case-based approach to preference elici­
tation is applicable in domains with uncer­
tainty. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
In previous work [8], we propose a case-based approach 
to preference elicitation. Assuming the existence of a 
population of users from whom we have elicited com­
plete or incomplete preferences, we propose eliciting 
the preferences of a new user interactively and incre­
mentally, using the closest existing preference struc­
tures as potential defaults. We envision our system to 
maintain a population of users with their preferences 
partially or completely specified in a given domain. 
When encountering a new user A, the system elicits 
some preference information from A and then deter-
mines which user in the population has the preference 
structure that is closest to the preference structure of 
A. The preference structure of that user will be used 
to determine an initial default representation of A's 
preferences. 
This approach originates from the observation that 
people tend to form clusters according to their pref­
erences or tastes, an observation that has been ana­
lyzed in the area of market segmentation [7]. 
It is 
also inspired by recent work on collaborative filtering 
[15], in which the filtering system predicts how inter­
esting a user will find items he has not seen based on 
the ratings that other users give to items. Each user 
in a population rates various alternatives, e.g. news­
group postings or movies, according to a numeric scale. 
The system then correlates the ratings in order to de­
termine which users' ratings are most similar to each 
other. Finally, it predicts how well users will like new 
articles based on ratings from similar users. 
One key issue common to this approach and the works 
in collaborative filtering is the choice of a distance 
measure on preference orders. 
In [8], we introduced 
a novel distance measures, called the probabilistic dis­
tance. 
According to this measure, the distance be­
tween two preference orders is determined by the prob­
ability that they disagree in their relative rankings of 
two randomly picked decision consequences. We pro­
vided an approximate algorithm to compute the prob­
abilistic distance between two partial preference or­
ders in the case of decision making under certainty. 
This work was later implemented in DIVA, a Decision­
Theoretic Video Advisor that recommends movies [13]. 
Empirical analysis with DIVA showed that using the 
probabilistic distance results in more accurate recom­
mendations than using the predominant Pearson's cor­
relation measure. 
In this paper, we tackle the outstanding issue of com­
puting the probabilistic distance on preference orders 
in the case of decision making under uncertainty. We 
show that, under a reasonable assumption, this prob-

UAI2001 
HA ET AL. 
187 
lem is reduced to the well-studied problem of com­
puting the volumes of convex bodies for which effi­
cient, randomized algorithms have been developed. A 
key ingredient of these algorithms is a Markov chain­
based, polynomial time sampling algorithm that sam­
ples points from a convex body according to a nearly 
uniform distribution. 
We propose to use this sam­
pling algorithm directly to estimate the probabilistic 
distance on partially specified utility functions. 
2 
A MOTIVATING EXAMPLE 
In the area of collaborative filtering, recommender sys­
tems such as GROUPLENS [15] and the DIVA video rec­
ommender [13] all require the use of a distance measure 
on preferences. Because all of these systems concern 
with decision making under certainty, it is not clear 
whether a study of distance measures on preferences 
is warranted in the case of uncertainty. We argue that 
it is. The concept of "how different is my preference 
from yours" is intuitive, but far from well-understood, 
especially when the preferential information is incom­
plete, or the choices are uncertain, or both. We shall 
now describe an example to illustrate this point. 
Miyamoto and Eraker [12] described a psychology ex­
periment with 44 undergraduate students at the Uni­
versity of Michigan. The experiment is designed to test 
several assumptions about people's preferences and at­
titudes towards risks with regards to survival duration. 
The subjects were asked to assign certainty equiva­
lences (CE) to a total of 42 standard gamble questions 
involving duration of survival. Below is a typical ques­
tion: 
For any non-negative number n, let n be the 
event that you will live exactly n more years 
in good health, and then have a sudden and 
relatively painless death. 
Let (m, .5, n), 0 :::; 
m < n, be a lottery of 50% chance form and 
50% chance for n. What is the number p for 
which you regard (m, .5, n) and p as equiva­
lent (denoted (m, .5, n) "'p)? 
Suppose that u denotes the utility function of a sub­
ject. 
Each answer of the form (m, .5, n) 
"' p trans­
lates into the following constraint on u: u( m) + u( n) = 
2u(p). Thus for each subject, we have a set of 42 con­
straints on his/her utility function u. Given two sub­
jects with utility functions u and u', how should we 
define a distance measure between u and u'? A sim­
plistic approach may use some well-known statistical 
measures such as Spearman's footrule, Ulam distance, 
or various correlation coefficients. The problem with 
this approach is twofold. 
First, it typically requires 
that the constraints on u and u' are obtained from ex­
actly the same set of CE questions, which substantially 
reduce its applicability. Second, this approach has to 
address sensitivity issues with respect to additional 
available constraints. Another possible approach is to 
completely determine u and u' (using methods such as 
interpolation, curve-fitting, or parameter estimation), 
and compute the distance on two completely specified 
utility functions. We believe that because of the strong 
assumptions required to compute the complete util­
ity functions, the suitability of this approach can only 
be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
As we shall 
show in this paper, the probabilistic distance provides 
a principled solution for this problem that can be used 
in a wide range of other problems as well. 
3 
PRELIMINARY 
In this section, we introduce the necessary background 
on orders, partial orders, value functions, utility func­
tions, and utility theory. We will occasionally use the 
terms decision alternative and decision consequence in­
terchangably, as we are mainly interested in the con­
sequence of a decision. 
Complete Preference Orders 
A preference order-< on a set of decision consequences 
V is a weak order, i.e. an asymmetric (a-< b::::} b-/: a), 
negatively transitive (a -/: b, b -/: c =? a f: c) binary 
relation on V. 
For a, b E V, a -< b indicates that 
the decision maker prefers b to a. 
W hen neither of 
the two consequences is preferred to the other (a f: 
b, b f: a), we say that the decision maker is indifferent 
between them and denote this relation by a "' b. An 
important technique that is often used in association 
with preference orders is the use of consistent functions 
that capture preference orders. A real-valued function 
f : V .-. ȭ is said to be consistent with a preference 
order -< on V if for all a, b E V, a -< b <::} f(a) < 
f(b). Any real-valued function f : V --. Ȯ induces a 
preference order -<t according to the above<::}. 
When the decision consequences are certain, we call 
them outcomes, and denote the set of outcomes by n 
(thus V = 0). We will assume throughout the paper 
that n is finite and n = {1, 2, . .. , n }. It can be proven 
that for any preference order -< over n there exists 
a function v, called a value function, that is consis­
tent with -<. When the decision consequences are un­
certain, they are modeled by probability distributions 
over outcomes and called prospects. 
We denote the 
set of all prospects, which is the set of all probability 
distributions over n by S. The central result of util­
ity theory is a representation theorem that identifies a 
set of conditions guaranteeing the existence of a func-

188 
HA ET AL. 
UAJ2001 
tion consistent with the preference of a decision maker 
[17]. This theorem states that if the preference order 
of a decision maker satisfies a few "rational" proper­
ties, then there exists a real-valued function, called a 
utility function u : !l --+ 3?, over outcomes such that 
p-< q ¢::> (p, u) < (q, u). Here (p, u), the inner product 
of the probability vector p and the utility vector u, is 
the expected value of function u with respect to the 
distribution p: (p, u) == Ep[u]. It is often convenient 
to extend u, by means of expectation, to a function 
u: S---. 3? that maps a prospect pES to (p, u). This 
function is clearly consistent with the preference order 
(S, -<). In this paper, we work only with preference 
orders that satisfy the above rational properties. 
Two value (or utility) functions that induce identical 
preference orders are said to be strategically equivalent. 
(Note that strategic equivalence is an equivalence re­
lation, denoted :::::.) 
Otherwise, they are said to be 
strategically different. 
Partial Preference Orders 
How should one represent partial preferences? For the 
purpose of the case-based preference elicitation, a par­
tial preference of a person is obtained via an incom­
plete elicitation, such as the one described in Section 2. 
For the most generality, we may assume that a partial 
preference order -< is a binary relation on the set V of 
decision consequences. Furthermore, it is reasonable 
to assume that this binary relation is asymmetric: if 
we know that a person prefers a to b, then it is not 
the case that he prefers b to a. We may also assume 
transitivity: if he prefers a to b, and b to c, then he 
prefers a to c. In the theory of orders, an asymmetric, 
transitive binary relation is a called a partial order, or 
a poset. In this framework, we thus represent partial 
preferences using partial orders1. We have a slightly 
different concept of consistent functions for partial or­
ders. A real-valued function f : D ---. lR over the deci­
sion consequences is said to be consistent with a par­
tial preference order -< if for any decision consequences 
a,b, a-< b => f(a) < f(b) and a,...., b => f(a) = f(b). 
The set of all functions that are consistent with -< 
is denoted as C( -<). Intuitively, consistent functions 
capture all information contained in the partial orders, 
and they might contain more than that. Consequently, 
functions that are consistent with a partial preference 
order -< may be strategically different, as they induce 
weak orders that are different extensions of -<. There 
1 Note that the difference between the definition of com­
plete preference order and that of partial preference order is 
the difference between negative transitivity and transitiv­
ity. Given asymmetry, transitivity is weaker than negative 
transitivity, i.e. the latter implies the former. This "weak­
ness" reflects the incompleteness of our information about 
the person's preference. 
is however a one-to-one correspondence between the 
weak order extensions of -< and the equivalence classes 
of ( C (-<), ƞ). 
4 
THE PROBABILISTIC 
DISTANCE ON COMPLETE 
PREFERENCES 
In [8] we introduce the probabilistic distance as a mea­
sure of distance between two complete preference or­
ders. 
Given two persons with corresponding (com­
plete) preference orders -<1 and -<2, the probabilistic 
distance, denoted 5(-<1,-<2), is defined as the prob­
ability that a uniformly randomly chosen pair (a, b) 
of decision consequences causes a conflict between the 
two users, i.e, the two users rank 
a and b differ­
ently. 
Formally, let the conflict indicator function 
C-<1,-<2 : D2 ---. {0, 1} be defined as follows: 
if (a :51 b 1\ b -<2 a) 
V (a -<1 b 1\ b :52 a) 
V (a :52 bl\b -<1 a) 
V (a -<2 b 1\ b :51 a) 
otherwise. 
The probabilistic distance is formally defined as 
(1) 
Here the expectation is taken with respect to a and 
b, which are two independent identically distributed 
uniform random variables on 'D. The probabilistic dis­
tance is a metric on the set of preference orders: it 
is symmetric, and satisfies the triangle inequality and 
the "distinguishability of non-identicals" property [8]. 
4.1 
THE CASE OF CERTAINTY 
When the decision problem does not involve uncer­
tainty, the distance J( -<1, -<2) can be computed by sim­
ply averaging the conflict function c-<1 ,-<2 ( i, j) over all 
n2 pairs (i, j) E 02• Other popular metric on the set of 
permutations of { 1, 2, . .. , n} include Pearson's corre­
lation coefficient, Spearman's rho, Spearman's footrule, 
Ulam 's distance. 
See Critchlow [5] for a discussion 
these metrics from a statistical point of view. 
4.2 
THE CASE OF UNCERTAINTY 
In the case of certainty, defining and computing dis­
tance measures on preference orders seem relatively 
straightforward. 
Things get a little bit more com­
plicated in the case of uncertainty. Let -<1 and -<2 
be two preference orders on the set S of prospects. 

UAI2001 
HA ET AL. 
189 
Table 1: Algorithm for uniform sampling on S. 
1. Generaten-1 numbersx;,i= 1,2, ... ,n-1 according 
to n -1 independent uniform random variables on [0, 1]. 
2. Sort x; 's: 0 :s; X(>) :s; X(2) :s; . . . :s; X(n-1) :s; 1. This 
is the order statistics of the sample. Let X(o) 
= 0 and 
X(n) 
= 1. 
3. Let p; = X(;) - X(i-1), i = 1, 2, . .. , n. (p, 's are called 
the spacings of the sample). Return (p,,p2, •
•
.
 ,pn)· 
The probabilistic distance is defined as 6(-<1,-<2) = 
E[c-<t,-<2(p,q)], where p and q are two independent 
identically distributed uniform random variables on 
the set V of decision consequences. There are two 
possible ways to approach this definition. In the first 
approach, we assume no knowledge about the available 
decision alternatives and thus take D to be S, the set 
of all prospects: 
In previous work [8], we introduced this definition, 
but left open the non-trivial issue of how to com­
pute the above integral. The main difficulty here is 
that while it can be noted that computing this in­
tegral amounts to computing the volume of a poly­
tope in the (2n - 2)-dimension space (both p and 
q have n - 1 coordinates that can vary), the result­
ing volume-computing problem in general is computa­
tionally intractable [1]. There is, however, a simple 
Monte Carlo approximation algorithm for this par­
ticular problem. This algorithm works by sampling 
p(i), i = 1, 2, . . . , k and q(i), i = 1, 2, . .. , k according 
to the uniform distribution on S, and taking the av­
erage c = f .L7=l c-<1 ,-<2 (pli), q{i) ). With a sufficiently 
big sample size k, the sample mean c can approxi­
mate 5(-< 1, -<2) with arbitrary precision, according to 
the Central Limit Theorem. Sampling p(i) and q(i) ac­
cording to the uniform distribution on S is basically 
the well-studied problem of mndom division of the unit 
interval and can be performed using the algorithm in 
Table 1 (see [14] for more details). 
The probabilistic distance between two preference or­
ders, defined this way, depends only on the orders. It 
can be computed given the two orders, or two utility 
functions that are consistent with the two orders. This 
definition can be useful when the two preference or­
ders, or the two consistent utility functions are given, 
but little is known about the available decision alter­
natives. When we have more information about the 
decision alternatives and their consequences, it is de­
sirable that we tailor the definition of the probabilistic 
distance to reflect this knowledge. So in the second 
approach to defining the probabilistic distance, we as­
sume that the set D of decision consequences is finite 
and known. The probabilistic distance is defined as 
(3) 
The computation of this (discrete) formula is obviously 
much simpler than the integral formula of Equation 2, 
provided that we know the set of decision alternatives 
D. Note that it is a subtle issue to determine which 
alternatives to include in 'D in the above definition. 
5 
PROBABI LISTIC DISTANCE ON 
PARTIAL PREFERENCES 
In [8], we proposed to extend the definition of proba­
bilistic distance to partial orders in the following way. 
Let -<1 and -<2 be two partial orders with correspond­
ing sets of weak order extensions E1 and E2• Recall 
that Ei can be viewed as a set of strategically differ­
ent value/utility functions fi consistent with -<i, for 
i = 1, 2. These functions form a one-to-one correspon­
dence with the weak order extensions of -<i (note that 
in the uncertainty case, the correspondence is with 
only extensions that satisfy the "rational properties" 
required for the existence of a utility function). We 
define the probabilistic distance 0(-<I, -<2) to be the 
average of the probabilistic distance between pairs of 
extensions of -<1 and -<2, respectively. Formally, 
5( -<1, -<2) 
E [o( -<h, -<tJl 
= E [E[c--<11 ,-<12 (a, b)]] , 
where fi are uniform random variables on Ei, i = 1, 2, 
and a and bare uniform random variables on D. Note 
that this distance is not a metric on the set of par­
tial orders, since the distance between two identical 
partial orders that are not complete orders is always 
positive (which violates the "distinguishability of non­
identicals" property). This, however, is desirable if 
the two orders represent the preferences of two differ­
ent users, since the complete preference orders for the 
two may actually differ. 
5.1 
THE CERTAINTY CASE 
In previous work [8], we have addressed the issue of 
computing the probabilistic distance on partial orders 
for the case of decision making under certainty. In this 
case, the set n of decision alternatives is finite, and so 
are the sets Et, E2 of weak order extensions of partial 
orders -<1, -<2. Thus, a simplistic approach would be 
to evaluate the conflict function c for all possible 4-
tuples {(ft,h,i,j)lft E E1,h E E2,i,j E !!} and 

190 
HA ET AL. 
UA12001 
take the average. This however is impractical because 
the number of weak order extensions of a partial order 
can be exponentially large (the number of strict order 
extensions of a vacuous partial order - a partial order 
in which everything is incomparable with everything -
is n!). To get around this problem, we turned to an 
approximation approach. Instead of taking the (real) 
average of the conflict function c for all h E E1 and 
h E Ez, we use the Monte Carlo method and take the 
average of c for only a sample set of (fl, fz). This is 
made possible using an algorithm that samples almost 
uniformly randomly from E1 and E2. The sampling 
algorithm is due to Bubley and Dyer [2]. 
5.2 
THE UNCERTAINTY CASE 
In Section 4, we have seen that computing the proba­
bilistic distance on complete orders become more com­
plex when we go from the certainty to the uncertainty 
case. 
This suggests that the hardest issue of all is 
computing the probabilistic distance on partial pref­
erence orders in the uncertainty case. 
Let -< 1 and 
-<2 be the partial preference orders of two persons, 
A1 and A2. 
Recall that the probabilistic distance 
8(-<1,-<2) is defined as 8(-<1,--<2) 
== E[8(-<h,-<J,)], 
where h, h are uniform random variables on E1, E2, 
the sets of weak order extensions of -< 1, -<2, respec­
tively. 
Exactly how should we interpret this defini­
tion? 
In the certainty case, this is easy since E1 
and E2 are finite sets (a finite poset has only finitely 
many extensions) and we can just take the average of 
{5( -<h, -<h)ih E E1, h E E2}. But in the case of un­
certainty, the set E1 and E2 are typically infinite. For 
example, consider a typical partial preference elicita­
tion process. We may have determined that the utility 
function of A1 is additive over two binary attributes 
{x1,x2}: 
In addition, we have also elicited the sub-utility func­
tions u1, u2. We have not, however, assessed the scal­
ing constants (or tradeoff coefficients) k1, k2• The set 
E1 is thus the set of all utility functions of the form in 
Equation 4, which is obviously infinite. 
Partial Utility Functions As Polyhedral Cones 
Defining the expectation of a quantity involving ran­
dom variables over infinite, multi-dimensional domains 
often requires the language and formalism of mea­
sure theory. 
With a simplifying assumption, how­
ever, we can define the probabilistic distance 6 us­
ing more elementary concepts. 
Note that since a 
utility function u : n 
---+ iR can be viewed 
as a 
point in the n-dimensional Euclidean space iltn: 
u = 
(u(l), u(2), . . . , u(n)), we can (and will) talk about the 
sets E1, E2 of consistent utility functions as sets of 
points in lRn. 
The simplifying assumption we shall 
make regarding E1, E2 is that they are determined by 
linear, homogeneous inequalities. Formally, they are 
sets of the forms 
(5) 
where A is some m x n matrix of real numbers, and 0 is 
the m x 1 zero vector. In geometric terms, such a set is 
the intersection of m half-spaces, each of which crosses 
the origin and having one of the rows of matrix A as its 
outward normal vector, and is called a polyhedral cone. 
Partial utility functions satisfying the above assump­
tion encompass most of the common kinds of partial 
utility functions encountered in the practice of decision 
analysis. For example, a multi-linear utility function 
with known sub-utility functions and unknown scaling 
coefficients satisfies this assumption [9]. It is not diffi­
cult to see that the same is true for multiplicative and 
additive utility functions with known sub-utility func­
tions and unknown scaling constants. 
Furthermore, 
a constraint on the partial preference order :::S of the 
form p :::S q, for some p, q E S would also translate to 
a homogeneous linear inequality: (u, p- q) $ 0. 
The nice thing of having E1 and E2 as polyhedral cones 
is that in the defining formula of the probabilistic dis­
tance 
we can interpret the integral on the right hand side 
as the volume of a bounded polyhedral cone in some 
multi-dimensional Euclidean space. 
But more im­
portantly, we can reduce the problem of computing 
the probabilistic distance on partially specified utility 
functions to the well-studied problem of computing the 
volume of polyhedral cones. (In fact, the Problem of 
computing the probabilistic distance on partial orders 
in the certainty case can also be reduced to the volume­
computing problem, using some elementary geometric 
arguments.) 
Computing the Volume of Convex Bodies 
The problem of computing the volume of convex bod­
ies has received considerable interest in the theoretical 
computer science community in the past fifteen years. 
Early results were negative for the prospect of finding 
an efficient deterministic algorithm [1]. But random­
ization techniques once again come to the rescue. The 

UA12001 
HA ET AL. 
191 
first work that uses randomization to obtain a polyno­
mial time algorithm for this problem is due to Dyer et 
al [6]. A series of work followed and refined the algo­
rithm of Dyer et al, substantially reducing its complex­
ity [11]. These works are all based on various Mar9ov 
chain-based sampling techniques that samples pomts 
from the convex body according to a nearly uniform 
distribution. The convex body is input to the algo­
rithm by means of a membership oracle, i.e. a black 
box that provides the answer whether a given point 
belongs to the convex body. 
Note that this require­
ment fits excellently with the assumption that the set 
E1, E2 are polyhedral cones determined by a set of ho­
mogeneous linear inequalities as in Equation 5: we _9an 
check if a utility function i1 is consistent if Au $ 0 in 
time O(m) (recall that m is the number of rows of A). 
In the rest of this section, we sketch out the main ideas 
behind the sampling algorithm. To sample uniformly 
from a convex body K, we perform a random walk on 
the points of K. Starting at an arbitrary point inside 
K, we move at each step to a uniformly selected ran­
dom point in a ball of radius E about the current point 
(if this remains inside K, if the new point is outside 
K we remain where we were). The size E of the radius 
is 8ypically 1/ .,fii. It follows from elementary Markov 
chain theory that the distribution of the point after t 
step tends to the uniform distribution as t tends to in­
finity. The crucial issue is, how long to walk before the 
walking point becomes nearly uniformly distributed? 
There are two reasons for needing a long walk: 
we 
have to get to the "distant parts" of K, and we may 
get stuck in "corners", especially "sharp corner" of K. 
The first reason suggests that we choose a step-size 
that is large enough relative to the diameter of K, 
while the probability of the second can be reduced by 
choosing a small step-size. A number of advanced tech­
niques have been developed to address this dilemma 
to ensure that the Markov chain settles quickly to a 
nearly uniform distribution (in technical terms, such a 
chain is called rapidly mixing). See Lovasz et a! [11] 
for a comprehensive treatment of this topic. 
W hile this Markov chain-based sampling algorithm 
was developed for the purpose of computing the vol­
ume of convex bodies (and thus can be used to com­
pute the volume of the polyhedron that is o (--< 1, --<2)), 
we can use it directly to perform a Monte Carlo es­
timation of the probabilistic distance on partial util­
ity functions. 
Specifically, we can estimate 8( --<1 
) b 
l. 
f(i) . 
1 2 
k 
d f(t) i -
, -<2 
y samp mg 
1 , d 
= 
, 
, ... , 
an 
2 , 
-
l, 2, . .. , k according to nearly uniform distributions 
on E1 and E2 respectively, and taking the average 
8 
= i 2::;=1 8(f:i), f;i)). Again, the Central Limit 
Theorem ensures that with a sufficiently big sample 
size k, the sample mean J can approximate o( -<1, -<2) 
with arbitrary degree of precision. 
6 
AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE 
In this section, we illustrate the algorithm to compute 
the probabilistic distance on partially specified utility 
functions. 
The data we use are taken from the psy­
chology experiment by Miyamoto and Eraker [12], as 
described in Section 2. Out of the 44 subjects, 6 were 
dropped due to failure to complete the interview in the 
allocated time, or failure to understand the CE task. 
The effective sample size is thus 38. There are a total 
of 42 CE questions (see Table 2). Note that with this 
data set, it is not possible to define a distance measure 
that requires the knowledge of the decision alternatives 
(Equation 3). 
Since the survival duration in the CE questions ranges 
from 0 to 36, we scale the utility functions so that 
u(O) = 0 and u(36) = 1. The next step is to discretize 
the outcome space, which is discretizing the number of 
years of survival. Because each subject gave 4 different 
answers (at 4 different time points) to each CE ques­
tions, we take the average of the 4 answers as the CE. 
Because each answer is either integers or integers plus 
0.5 (e.g. (1, .5, 10) ,..., 4.5), we discretize the number 
of years of survival to the granularity of 1/8, resulting 
in 36 x 8 + 1 = 289 outcomes. We also assume that 
all subjects prefer longer survival to shorter survival: 
u(i)::::; u(it1 ), i = 0, 1, ... , 287. Framed this way, the 
utility function u of each subject has a total of 288 
inequality constraints and 42 + 2 = 44 equality con­
straints. It is easy to see that these linear constraints 
determine a convex set of consistent utility functions. 
To find a starting point for the random walk, we need 
to find a consistent utility function, i.e, a feasible solu­
tion for the linear constraints. For this we use the lin­
ear programming facility LINPROG of Matlab® Opti­
mization Toolbox, with some randomly generated tar­
get function. Interestingly, we found that out of the 
38 subjects, only 3 provided consistent answers; the 
rest provided answers that lead to linear programs 
that are infeasible. 
This inconsistency can be at­
tributed to the fact that the expected utility paradigm 
is normative but not descriptive [10]. An example of 
this school of thought is the approach called subjec­
tive expected utility (SEU) [16], according to which a 
CE statement (m, .5, n) ,..., p translates into the equa­
tion : 
(1 - w(.5))u(m) + w(.5)u(n) 
= u(p). 
Here 
0 < w(. 5) < 1 is the probability distortion for a .5 prob­
ability applying to the superior outcome. Note that in 
the standard expected utility paradigm, w(.5) = .5. 
But even with more general utility models such as 
SEU, it is likely that subjects will have inconsistent 
preferences, due to variations in subject responses. 

192 
HA ET AL. 
UAI2001 
Table 2: 
Standard gamble questions. 
X/Y denotes a 
50/50 gamble between X andY years of survival. 
J Basic 
Times 2 
Times 3 
Plus 10 
Plus 20 
Zero 
1 10 
2/20 
3/30 
11/20 
21730 
0732 
2 10 
4/20 
6/30 
12(20 
22/30 
0/36 
3; '10 
o;:m 
9/30 
10/20 
23/30 
410 
8 20 
12/30 
14/20 
24 30 
1 12 
2 24 
3 36 
11/22 
21 32 
2 12 
4 24 
6, 36 
12(22 
22, '32 
3 12 
6 24 
9 36 
13/22 
23 32 
4/12 
8/24 
12/36 
14/22 
24;32 
Our approach is to stay within the standard expected 
utility paradigm and account for the inconsistency in 
some way. While the fact that random error in judge­
ment exists is well-known, the question of how to deal 
with it remains open. For the purpose of our experi­
ment, we take the following simple approach. We keep 
all of the 288 inequality constraints that capture the 
"longer survival is better" assumption. For each sub­
ject, from the set of the 42 equality constraints pro­
vided by the CE answers, we incrementally randomly 
add one at a time to LINPROG and keep doing this as 
long as a feasible solution exists. 
Note that due to 
differences between subjects' responses and the ran­
domness of this method, different sets of CE answers 
may be taken into account for different subjects. For­
tunately, this is not a problem for the probabilistic 
distance. 
Now that a set of consistent CE answers is selected for 
each subject, we simultaneously start 38 random walks 
from 38 consistent utility functions, one for each sub­
ject. The radius f of the ball is initialized to 0.001. At 
each iterations, we generate a random point in each 
ball of radius E. 
If the generated point is consistent 
with the constraints, we move to the new point and 
mark the iteration a success; otherwise we stay at the 
current location and call the iteration a failure. If two 
successes occur consecutively, we double the radius. 
If two failures occur consecutively, we halve the ra­
dius. We stop the random walk after 1000 iterations 
at which point we obtain a random sample of consis7 
tent utility functions for the 38 subjects. We compute 
the distance between any two consistent utility func­
tions and record the distances in a square dissimilarity 
matrix of size 38 x 38. This computation is performed 
by a routine that implements the algorithm in Table 1. 
We repeat the whole process for a total of 1000 times, 
updating the averages of the distances as we go. Fi­
nally, we input the average distance matrix to the hier­
archical clustering algorithm of ClustanGraphics® to 
obtain the hierarchical clustering shown in Figure 1. 
The method used was average-linkage. 2 
2 All of the codes were written in JavaTM and the math-
7 
SUMMARY AND DISCUSS ION 
In previous work [8], we introduced the probabilis­
tic distance as a measure of dissimilarity among peo­
ple preferences, and provided algorithms to estimate 
this measure in the case of decision making under cer­
tainty. In this paper we complete the discussion of the 
probabilistic distance by providing algorithms to esti­
mate this measure in the uncertainty case. Under unc­
etainty, the problem is innately harder, because of the 
complexity introduced by probabilities and utilities. 
We have shown that with the reasonable assumption 
that the set of consistent utility functions is linearly 
bounded, computing the probabilistic distance can be 
reduced to the well-studied problem of computing the 
volumes of convex bodies for which efficient approxi­
mate algorithms exist. A key ingredient of these al­
gorithms is a Markov chain-based, polynomial time 
sampling algorithm that samples points from a con­
vex body according to a nearly uniform distribution. 
We use this sampling algorithm directly to estimate 
the probabilistic distance on partially specified utility 
functions. 
We demonstrate this procedure on a set 
of partially specified utility functions elicited from 44 
subjects who are undergraduates at the University of 
Michigan. We show how the probabilistic distance be­
tween subjects can be computed based on arbitrary 
sets of answers to standard gamble questions. 
Note 
that in computing the probabilistic distance, we can 
incorporate any prior knowledge about user utilities 
in the form of utility constraints, as long as the con­
straints are linear. 
The more constraints there are, 
the more accurately the distance measure can be com­
puted. 
To our knowledge, this work is the first at­
tempt to define a similarity measure on partial utility 
functions and to develop a method to compute this 
measure. The implication of the probabilistic distance 
goes beyond the context of case-based preference elic­
itation, since it is in its most general form a distance 
measure on partial orders - a topic that has not been 
received adequate treatment. 
We are currently investigating several medical decision 
problems as potential candidates for implementing the 
case-based preference elicitation approach. 
For such 
candidates, the basic requirement is that a database 
of patient utilities is available. Since utility data are 
routinely collected for a wide range of medical decision 
problems, and since the standard gamble CE method 
is one of the most widely used techniques to elicit util­
ities, we believe that the case-based approach using 
the probabilistic distance has serious potential to see 
ematical programming language of MatLab®. The com­

tem with 512MB RAM running Windows® 2000, and took 
about an 30 minutes to finish. 

UAI 2001 
HA ET AL. 
193 
12 
9 
15 
18 
+ 
27 
20 
31 
36 
38 
34 
4 
14 
13 
2! 
22 
23 
11 
32 
6 
10 
I 
I, 
3 
16 
8 
24 
21 
3! 
7 
33 
II 
28 
2 
26 
31 
30 
211 
Figure 1: Hierarchical cluster of the 38 subjects. 
real-world application. 
Chajeswska et al. [3] pursue an approach to utility 
elicitation that is somewhat similar to ours. They also 
start from an assumption that there exists a database 
of utility functions, partially or completely specified. 
This assumption differs from ours in that here the 
database needs to contain the actual utilities (as op­
posed to constraints on utilities). The novelty of this 
approach is that utilities are treated as random vari­
ables, and if drawn from a mixture of Gaussians, as 
they were postulated to, their density functions can 
be learned from the utility database using Bayesian 
learning techniques. 
Also, using standard Bayesian 
techniques, it is possible to determine the relevance of 
an elicitation question based on its value of informa­
tion [4]. In contrast, our case-based approach requires 
fewer structural assumptions and as such has an edge 
over Chajewska et al.'s approach in those situations 
where these assumptions are not applicable.
