Averaged HausdorﬀApproximations of Pareto Fronts
based on Multiobjective Estimation
of Distribution Algorithms
2015
Luis Mart´ı
Christian Grimme
Departamento de Engenharia El´etrica
Information Systems and Statistics
PUC Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
University of M¨unster, Germany

Pascal Kerschke
Heike Trautmann
Information Systems and Statistics
Information Systems and Statistics
University of M¨unster, Germany
University of M¨unster, Germany

G¨unter Rudolph
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University, Germany

Abstract
In the a posteriori approach of multiobjective optimization the Pareto front is approximated
by a ﬁnite set of solutions in the objective space. The quality of the approximation can be mea-
sured by diﬀerent indicators that take into account the approximation’s closeness to the Pareto
front and its distribution along the Pareto front. In particular, the averaged Hausdorﬀindicator
prefers an almost uniform distribution. An observed drawback of multiobjective estimation of
distribution algorithms (MEDAs) is that - as common for randomized metaheuristics - the ﬁnal
population usually is not uniformly distributed along the Pareto front. Therefore, we propose a
postprocessing strategy which consists of applying the averaged Hausdorﬀindicator to the com-
plete archive of generated solutions after optimization in order to select a uniformly distributed
subset of nondominated solutions from the archive. In this paper, we put forward a strategy for
extracting the above described subset. The eﬀectiveness of the proposal is contrasted in a series
of experiments that involve diﬀerent MEDAs and ﬁltering techniques.
arXiv:1503.07845v1  [cs.AI]  26 Mar 2015

1
Introduction
page 2
1
Introduction
Many real-world optimization problems involve more than one goal to be optimized and are known
as multiobjective optimization problems (MOPs), i.e. a set of objective functions f1(x), . . . , fM(x)
should be jointly optimized; formally,
min F (x) = ( f1(x), . . . , fM(x) ) ; x ∈S ;
(1)
where S ⊆Rn is known as the feasible set and could be expressed as a set of restrictions over the
decision or search space Rn. The image set O ⊆RM of S produced by the vector-valued function
F (·) is called feasible objective set or criterion set. The solution to this type of problem is a set of
trade-oﬀpoints. The optimality of a solution can be expressed in terms of the Pareto dominance
relation.
Deﬁnition 1 (Pareto dominance) In the optimization problem (1) and having x, y ∈S, x is
said to dominate y (expressed as x ≺y) if ∀j = 1, . . . M: fj(x) ≤fj(y) and ∃i ∈{1, . . . , M}:
fi(x) < fi(y). The non-dominated subset A∗of set A ⊆S is deﬁned as
A∗= {x ∈A |̸ ∃x′ ∈A : x′ ≺x} .
The solution of (1) is S∗, the non-dominated subset of S. S∗is known as the eﬃcient set or
Pareto-optimal set [1]. Its image in objective space is known as the Pareto-optimal front, O∗. As
ﬁnding the explicit formulation of S∗is often impossible, generally, an algorithm solving (1) yields
a discrete non-dominated set, P∗, that approximates S∗. The image of P∗in objective set, PF∗,
is known as the non-dominated front.
A broad range of heuristic and metaheuristic approaches has been used to address MOPs [1].
Of these, evolutionary multiobjective optimization algorithms (EMOAs) [2] have been found to
be a competent approach in a wide variety of application domains. Alternatively, multiobjective
estimation of distribution algorithms (MEDAs) were introduced which aim at learning the problem
structure and characteristics along the run. In this paper, we will experimentally investigate how
representative MEDAs perform compared to classical EMOAs and how especially MEDAs can be
improved after the run by means of a postprocessing approach in order to get more equally spaced
solutions on the ﬁnal Pareto front approximation.
The crucial task is how to measure the performance in the multiobjective setting, i.e. how to
asses the relation of PF∗to O∗. Several performance indicators have been proposed including the
hypervolume indicator or the R indicators, see [3, 4] for an overview. Each indicator concentrates
on special desired characteristics of the front approximation while one frequently discussed aim
is that elements of PF∗should be evenly spread along the true Pareto front in order to present
an unbiased solution set to the decision maker (e.g. [5]). On the application side, speciﬁcally
optimization systems or online control could proﬁt from such approximations such that changes
from one solution to the other are quite moderate and of equal extent. In [6] an approach for
evolving Pareto front approximations with uniform gap is presented. However, most indicators do
not address this issue.
The ∆p indicator introduced in [7] speciﬁcally favors approximations with the desired characteristic
based on averaged Hausdorﬀdistances between PF∗and O∗. Several algorithmic approaches have
been introduced so far (e.g. [8, 9, 10] to generate quite equally spaced Pareto front approximations
but all of them are focusing on integrating the ∆p based subset selection into the EMOA. In this
paper, we present a strategy to be applied posterior to an approximation run to extract a most
uniformly distributed subset from the archive of all nondominated solutions generated within the
course of the used EMOA.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 the methodological background
is provided regarding multiobjective estimation of distribution algorithms and the postprocessing
strategy. Experimental results are presented and discussed in Section 3. Conclusions are drawn
in Section 4 supplemented by an outlook on further research directions.

2
Methodology
page 3
2
Methodology
2.1
Multiobjective Estimation of Distribution Algorithms
The inclusion of learning as part of the search process can improve the performance of evolutionary
multiobjective optimization algorithms [11]. It can be argued that learning would allow to grasp
the characteristics of the problem being solved and, hence, explore the search space in a more
eﬃcient manner. There are some approaches that perform this task by providing hybrid evolu-
tionary/machine learning methods, like, for example, the learnable evolution model (LEM) [12].
Other approaches attempt to infer the ﬁtness landscape of the problem in order to ﬁnd promising
search directions [13, 14, 15]. Another alternative for carrying out this task is to resort to what
has been denominated as estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs) [16]. This is because of
EDAs capacity of learning the problem structure. EDAs replace the application of evolutionary
operators in the oﬀspring generation process with the creation of a statistical model of the ﬁttest
elements of the population in a process known as model-building. This model is then sampled
to produce new elements. Nevertheless, the so called multiobjective EDAs (MEDAs) [17] have
not lived up to their a priori expectations. This can be attributed to the fact that most MEDAs
have limited themselves to transforming single-objective EDAs into a multiobjective formulation
by including an existing multiobjective ﬁtness assignment function.
Bosman and Thierens [18] proposed the successful multiobjective mixture-based iterated den-
sity estimation algorithms (MIDEAs). They also proposed a novel Pareto-based and diversity-
preserving ﬁtness assignment function. MIDEA considered several types of probabilistic models
for both discrete and continuous problems. A mixture of univariate distributions and a mixture of
tree distributions were used for discrete variables. A mixture of univariate Gaussian models and
a mixture of multivariate Gaussian factorizations were applied for continuous variables. Diﬀerent
variants of MIDEAs implement this in a particular form. For example, naive MIDEA the naive
Bayes algorithm.
It can also be argued that the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategies (CMA-ES) [19]
are also EDAs, as they construct an abstract model of the population and then sample it to
produce new individuals. CMA-ES provides a method for updating the covariance matrix of the
multivariate normal mutation distribution used in an evolution strategy [20].
The covariance
matrix describes the pairwise dependencies between the variables in the distribution. Adaptation
of the covariance matrix is equivalent to learning a second-order model of the underlying objective
function. The multi-objective CMA-ES (MO-CMA-ES) [21] is the extrapolation to the multi-
objective domain.
It has been pointed out that the current model-building algorithms of MEDAs have a set of
drawbacks that would prevent those algorithms from yielding substantially better results.
In
particular, the tendency of MEDAs loosing population diversity has repeatedly been reported
[22, 23]. This situation, although already described in single-objective EDAs [24], is particularly
dramatic in the multiobjective case, as diversity and homogeneity are among the desired features
of the ﬁnal non-dominated set. An analysis of the results yielded by current MEDAs and their
scalability with regard to the number of objectives leads to hypotheses regarding the issues that
might be hampering the obtention of substantially better results with regard to other evolutionary
approaches [25].
The incorrect handling of data outliers is a paradigmatic example of insuﬃcient comprehension
of the nature of the model building problem. In ‘standard’ machine learning practice, outliers are
treated as noisy, inconsistent or irrelevant data. Therefore, this type of data is expected to have
little inﬂuence on the model or just to be disregarded. However, that behavior is not adequate
for model building. In this case, it is known beforehand that all elements in the data set should
be taken into account as they represent newly discovered or candidate regions of the search space
and therefore must be explored. Therefore, these instances should be at least equally represented
by the model and perhaps even reinforced. This situation is further aggravated by the mating
selection scheme employed in most MEDAs.
The continuous selection of the best part of the

2
Methodology
page 4
population might lead to a premature homogenization of the population and, therefore, to the
stagnation of the search process. In the second case, the loss of diversity can be traced back to the
above-described outliers issue of model-building algorithms and also to the incorrect estimation
or sampling of the model. This fact leads us back to the statement referring that model building
has not been correctly acknowledged as a diﬀerent problem with particular requirements.
There have been some works that propose to improve this situation by introducing model building
algorithms better suited for the task. That is the case of the MIDEA algorithm family, with the
introduction of the adaptive variance scaling (AVS) and the standard deviation ratio (SDR) [26].
The AVS and SDR combination helps ﬁght the early reduction of the mixture densities variances
and therefore the premature convergence and diversity loss. Another important milestone has
been the introduction of the anticipated mean shift (AMS) that takes into account the previous
values of the means of the distribution to “push” solutions towards the Pareto-optimal front. AMS
has been conjointly used with AVS in the multiobjective adapted maximum-likelihood Gaussian
mixture model (MAMaLGaM-X) [27]. Similarly, the multiobjective optimization neural EDA
(MONEDA) [28] embeds a custom-made model building algorithm [29] that is able to maintain
diversity by correctly handling the outlier elements. This approach has been improved by the in-
troduction of the match-based learning paradigm of adaptive resonance theory (ART) [30] leading
to the multiobjective ART EDA (MARTEDA) [31].
Other approaches propose modiﬁcations to currently existing methods. For example, in [23] a
method that avoids too sudden drops (to zero) of the variances of a multivariate Gaussian model
is proposed. Similarly, in [32] a permutation sampling is introduced that eliminates the sampling
errors of UMDA [33]. Other approaches [34, 35] have tried strategies to re-inject “fresh” individuals
that are kept on a evolutionary algorithm that is run in parallel. In spite of these eﬀorts, the issue
of population diversity and lack of homogeneity is still an open topic that must be addressed.
2.2
Postprocessing of MEDA results
Suppose we are particularly interested in a ﬁnite size approximation of O∗= F (S∗) that exhibits
a suﬃciently good spread and a small distance to O∗. Previous work in the context of EMOA (see
e.g. [9]) has shown that the averaged Hausdorﬀdistance [7] can be used to achieve this goal.
Deﬁnition 2 Let A, B ⊂RM be non-empty ﬁnite sets. The value
∆p(A, B) = max(GDp(A, B), IGDp(A, B)) with
GDp(A, B) =
 
1
|A|
X
a∈A
d(a, B)p
!1/p
and
IGDp(A, B) =
 
1
|B|
X
b∈B
d(b, A)p
!1/p
for p > 0 is termed the averaged Hausdorﬀdistance between sets A and B where d(u, A) :=
inf{∥u −v∥: v ∈A} for u, v ∈RM and some vector norm ∥· ∥.
Suppose that some MEDA has generated an approximation of the Pareto front for some MOP.
Typically, this approximation does not yield a ﬁnite point set in objective space that is evenly
distributed. Therefore, we propose the following postprocessing approach:
1. Run your favorite MEDA that is equipped with a tiny add-on: store a copy of each oﬀspring
that is generated and evaluated in a ﬁle.
2. After termination of your favorite MEDA:
construct an evenly spaced reference front from a given approximation of the Pareto front
(e.g. from last population of favorite MEDA); then feed each stored oﬀspring into the ∆p
archive updater (see alg. 1) sequentially; the ﬁnal content of the archive A is the desired
approximation.

3
Experiments
page 5
For bi-objective problems the reference front R can be constructed as follows: calculate a linear
interpolation from a given approximation of the Pareto front. Since the length L of the resulting
polygonal line can be derived easily, division by the number of desired archive points m yields
the size of the equal spacing δ = L/m which is used to place m points along the polygonal line
with distance δ, where the extreme points of the discretization are moved half the length inwards
the polygonal line. After the reference front R has been constructed it is used in the ∆p archive
updater to decide which point should be added to or deleted from the archive.
An update operation can be realized as sketched in alg.1. This naive approach takes Θ(|A| · (|A| ·
|R| · M)) time units, but there exists a quick update version [9] that only needs Θ(|A| · |R| · M)
time units.
Algorithm 1 Naive ∆1-update [9]
Require: archive set A, reference set R, new element x
1: A = NDf(A ∪{x}, ⪯)
2: if |A| > NR := |R| then
3:
for all a ∈A do
4:
h(a) = ∆1(A \ {a}, R)
5:
end for
6:
A∗= {a∗∈A : a∗= argmin{h(a) : a ∈A}}
7:
if |A∗| > 1 then
8:
a∗= argmin{GDp(A \ {a}, R) : a ∈A∗}
9:
end if
10:
A = A \ {a∗}
11: end if
The most obvious order of feeding the stored pairs (x, F (x)) into the archive updater is the order
of their generation. We call this the ‘forward update.’ In this manner, many individuals will pass
the initial dominance check, so that subsequent ∆p calculations are necessary. Some time saving
may be achieved by feeding the stored pairs into the archive update in inverted order. We call this
the ‘backward update.’ Since points that have been generated in later iterations of the MEDA
are more likely to dominate previous points, most points from the rear of the inverted sequence
will probably not pass the initial dominance check, so that subsequent ∆p calculations can be
avoided. Since the order of the points presented to the archive clearly aﬀects the ﬁnal outcome of
the archive, we shall compare both approaches experimentally in the next section.
3
Experiments
3.1
Experimental Setup
In order to experimentally evaluate the ∆p archive approximation for multiple multiobjective
EDAs, we implemented two oﬄine strategies in the JAVATM jMetal framework [36]: a forward
∆p-approach (+fDP), starting with the initial population and iteratively updating with previ-
ously traced generations, whereas the backward-strategy (+bDP) starts with the ﬁnal population.
Within the ∆p-update mechanisms, a linear interpolation and a PSA-based strategy, both using
the aggregated solutions of the whole run, were used for deriving a set of evenly spaced reference
points. Based on that set, a solution was eventually added to the archive.
We then used well known MOPs for benchmarking [8]: an instance of the sphere problem with
X ⊆R2 and a connected convex Pareto front, the DENT problem with X ⊆R2 and a connected
convex-concave-convex front, ZDT3 with X ⊆R20 and a disconnected convex/concave front, as
well as WFG1 with X ⊆R2+4, also with a convex-concave front.
Then, reference fronts covered by 1,000 uniformly spaced points were created in order to compare
our ∆p approximation quality for all algorithms. With the exception of WFG1, we were able to

3
Experiments
page 6
MARTEDA
F2 vigilance threshold (ρ)
0.05
Initial standard deviations (ϕ)
0.01
Selection percentile (α)
0.3
ˆ
Pt to N ∗ratio (γ)
0.5
Substitution percentile (ω)
0.25
MONEDA
Number of initial GNG nodes (N0)
2
Maximum edge age (νmax)
40
Best node learning rate (ϵb)
0.1
Neighboring nodes learning rate (ϵv)
0.05
Insertion error decrement rate (δI)
0.1
General error decrement rate (δG)
0.1
Accumulated error threshold (ρ)
0.2
Selection percentile (α)
0.3
ˆPt to Nmax ratio (γ)
0.5
Substitution percentile (ω)
0.25
Naive MIDEA
Selection percentile (τ)
0.3
Diversity percentile (δ)
15
Number of parents of a variable (κ)
2
Maximum number of clusters ⌈0.5⌊τnpop⌋⌉
Threshold for the leader algorithm
0.1
MO-CMA-ES
Initial step size (σ)
1
Damping for step-size (d)
1 + npop/2
Target success rate
0.181
Cumulation time horizon 2/(npop + 2)
Covariance learning rate 2/(n2
pop + 6)
Threshold success rate
0.44
Table 1: Parameters of the algorithms used in the experiments following the notation of the corresponding
author(s).
ﬁnd a parametric form for exactly calculating the optimal fronts’ length L (by rectiﬁcation), for
all benchmark problems. Given that form 1,000 points were placed uniformly on the PF using
distance ∆L = L/1,000 between points and starting with the extreme points moved inwards by
∆L / 2. In case of WFG1 [37], the neighborhood of the known Pareto set was explored using
a very ﬁne grid (per dimension of the decision space), in order to ﬁnd a PF. Then 1,000 well-
distributed solutions among the non-dominated solutions were kept. As the number of reference
solutions is by far larger than the approximated set’s size, a not perfectly uniform distribution of
the Pareto-optimal solutions is acceptable.
Our evaluation is based on four state-of-the-art general purpose EMOAs and four MEDAs. From
the former group, we employed the NSGA2 [5] and SMS-EMOA [38] with standard parameter
settings – SBX crossover with px = 0.9 and polynomial mutation with pmut = 1/n – as well
as PSEMOA as special purpose EMOA with inherent internal clustering for generating evenly
distributed solutions. For the same reason we also used a modiﬁed version of NSGA2 [39] – the
sequential crowding distance NSGA2 (SCD-NSGA2) – which successively alternates between re-
moving the individuals with the smallest crowding distance and recomputing the crowding distance
values, until only µ solutions are left.
Considering the MEDAs we deal with two well-known approaches: the naive MIDEA [18] and the
multiobjective CMA-ES (MO-CMA-ES) [21]. We also include MONEDA [28] and MARTEDA
[31] as they are supposed to have a better handling of diversity. The parameters of the MEDAs
are summarized in Table 1.
During our experiments, all test problems were optimized 20 times by all algorithms, given a
budget of 50,000 function evaluations each and population sizes µ ∈{10, 20, 100}. The data,
which were generated from the optimizers’ runs, have been submitted to the oﬄine ∆p archivers.
Both update strategies were parameterized with p ∈{1, 2}.

3
Experiments
page 7
Figure 1: Comparison of MEDAs with EMOAs regarding Hypervolume.
3.2
Results
At ﬁrst, overall algorithm behavior is investigated by comparing the MEDAs with the classical
EMOA approaches in terms of the Dominated Hypervolume indicator (HV, [4]) as well as ∆p
(Figures 1 and 2) based on the generated reference fronts as described in Section 3.1. It becomes
obvious that the MEDAs lead to very stable results over the repeated runs which is reﬂected by
both indicators while no MEDA is superior to the others. Moreover, for all test problems the
respective performance is comparable to the best performing algorithm out of the classical EMOA
set.
While over all test problems but WFG1 PSEMOA and SCD-NSGA2 can be considered
as best regarding ∆p, the SMS-EMOA unsurprisingly outperforms the other classical EMOA
in terms of HV as it internally optimizes the HV indicator. The test problem WFG1 results in
diﬀerent algorithm rankings within the classical EMOA, i.e. NSGA2 clearly is best regarding both
indicators. The stability of MEDA results is very noticeable here as the variability of PSEMOA,
SMS-EMOA as well as SCD-NSGA2 is large. Concluding, the MEDAs are at the least competitive
with the classical EMOAs on the considered test problems.
In Figures 3 - 5 results of the postprocessing strategies applied to the MEDA variants are visualized
in terms of ∆p regarding the generated reference fronts for population sizes µ ∈{10, 20, 100}. In
general, experimental results become more distinguishable with increasing population size but the
basic ﬁndings are reﬂected for the smallest population size as well. However, varying p does not
have a noticeable eﬀect in this setting, thus the analysis concentrates on p = 1 for illustration
purposes.
Clearly, the postprocessing improves the ﬁnal approximation quality of the MEDA’s run as the
primary algorithm in terms of ∆p for all population sizes. As the Pareto front of ZDT3 is discon-
nected, the performance of the considered postprocessing diﬀers from the remaining test problems.
Here, the two PSA-based strategies (+(fPSA) and +(bPSA)) outperform the archive strategy
using linear interpolations of the set of all nondominated points generated in the course of the
algorithm run (+(fDP) and +(bDP)). This is intuitive as the latter approach ignores the discon-
tinuity in the interpolation and tends to place reference points also in unattainable regions [40].
Thus, this eﬀect increases with the population size as more points have to placed on the linear
interpolation of the front. For µ = 10 the strategies +(fDP) and +(bDP) are comparable or
even slightly better than the PSA-based ones. For all other test problems +(fDP) and +(bDP)
generate the largest improvement in terms of ∆p. Diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant in most
settings reﬂected by a Wilcoxon rank sum test (p ≤0.05) and annotated with a ⋆in Figures 3 - 5.

3
Experiments
page 8
Figure 2: Comparison of MEDAs with EMOAs regarding ∆p.
Interestingly, for µ = 100 and WFG1 diﬀerences between the primary MEDA and all postprocess-
ing variants are very small and not statistically signiﬁcant. This is due to the special challenges the
test problem poses onto the algorithms. Thorough analysis of the ﬁnal approximation sets of the
MEDAs revealed that those runs do not allow for substantial improvements of the ﬁnal solution
sets as the algorithm performance is not good enough and the archive of solutions does not provide
the means for selecting a better subset regarding ∆p. However, substantially increasing the bud-
get of the MEDAs will lead to results showing the same tendencies as described above for smaller
population sizes. As expected, the direction of the archive update strategy has no inﬂuence on the
ﬁnal approximation quality. However, our experiments revealed that the backward strategy which
starts from the ﬁnal population of the primary MEDA requires much less updating iterations until
the selected subset becomes stable than the forward strategy. Therefore, we recommend to favor
this approach over the forward update in general such that the postprocessing will be much more
computationally eﬃcient.

3
Experiments
page 9
Figure 3: ∆p- and PSA-postprocessing applied to MEDA results for µ = 10 and p = 1.
Figure 4: ∆p- and PSA-postprocessing applied to MEDA results for µ = 20 and p = 1.
