Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
MODEL-PREDICTIVE POLICY LEARNING WITH
UNCERTAINTY REGULARIZATION FOR DRIVING
IN DENSE TRAFFIC
Mikael Henaff ∗
Courant Institute, New York University

Alfredo Canziani *
Courant Institute, New York University

Yann LeCun
Courant Institute, New York University
Facebook AI Research

ABSTRACT
Learning a policy using only observational data is challenging because the distri-
bution of states it induces at execution time may differ from the distribution ob-
served during training. We propose to train a policy by unrolling a learned model
of the environment dynamics over multiple time steps while explicitly penalizing
two costs: the original cost the policy seeks to optimize, and an uncertainty cost
which represents its divergence from the states it is trained on. We measure this
second cost by using the uncertainty of the dynamics model about its own pre-
dictions, using recent ideas from uncertainty estimation for deep networks. We
evaluate our approach using a large-scale observational dataset of driving behav-
ior recorded from trafﬁc cameras, and show that we are able to learn effective
driving policies from purely observational data, with no environment interaction.
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, model-free reinforcement learning methods using deep neural network controllers
have proven effective on a wide range of tasks, from playing video or text-based games (Mnih et al.,
2015; 2016; Narasimhan et al., 2015) to learning algorithms (Zaremba et al., 2015) and complex
locomotion tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). However, these methods often require
a large number of interactions with the environment in order to learn. While this is not a problem if
the environment is simulated, it can limit the application of these methods in realistic environments
where interactions with the environment are slow, expensive or potentially dangerous. Building a
simulator where the agent can safely try out policies without facing real consequences can mitigate
this problem, but requires human engineering effort which increases with the complexity of the
environment being modeled.
Model-based reinforcement learning approaches try to learn a model of the environment dynamics,
and then use this model to plan actions or train a parameterized policy. A common setting is where
an agent alternates between collecting experience by executing actions using its current policy or
dynamics model, and then using these experiences to improve its dynamics model. This approach
has been shown empirically to signiﬁcantly reduce the required number of environment interac-
tions needed to obtain an effective policy or planner (Atkeson & Santamaria, 1997; Deisenroth &
Rasmussen, 2011; Nagabandi et al., 2017; Chua et al., 2018).
Despite these improvements in sample complexity, there exist settings where even a sin-
gle poor action executed by an agent in a real environment can have consequences which
are not acceptable.
At the same time, with data collection becoming increasingly inex-
pensive, there are many settings where observational data of an environment is abundant.
∗Equal contribution. MH is now at Microsoft Research.
1
arXiv:1901.02705v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
action
cost
Learned functions
(different initializations)
True function
Training points
Figure 1:
Different mod-
els ﬁtted on training points
which cover a limited region
the function’s domain. Mod-
els make arbitrary predictions
outside of this region.
This suggests a need for algorithms which can learn policies pri-
marily from observational data, which can then perform well in a
real environment. Autonomous driving is an example of such a
setting: on one hand, trajectories of human drivers can be easily
collected using trafﬁc cameras (Halkias & Colyar, 2006), resulting
in an abundance of observational data; on the other hand, learning
through interaction with the real environment is not a viable solu-
tion.
However, learning policies from purely observational data is chal-
lenging because the data may only cover a small region of the space
over which it is deﬁned. If the observational data consists of state-
action pairs produced by an expert, one option is to use imitation
learning (Pomerleau, 1991). However, this is well-known to suffer
from a mismatch between the states seen at training and execution
time (Ross & Bagnell, 2010), and may need to be augmented by
querying an expert (Ross et al., 2011). Another option is to learn a
dynamics model from observational data, and then use it to train a
policy (Nguyen & Widrow, 1989). However, the dynamics model may make arbitrary predictions
outside the domain it was trained on, which may wrongly be associated with low cost (or high re-
ward) as shown in Figure 1. The policy network may then exploit these errors in the dynamics model
and produce actions which lead to wrongly optimistic states. In the interactive setting, this problem
is naturally self-correcting, since states where the model predictions are wrongly optimistic will be
more likely to be experienced, and thus will correct the dynamics model. However, the problem
persists if the dataset of environment interactions which the model is trained on is ﬁxed.
In this work, we propose to train a policy while explicitly penalizing the mismatch between the
distribution of trajectories it induces and the one reﬂected in the training data. We use a learned
dynamics model which is unrolled for multiple time steps, and training a policy network to minimize
a differentiable cost over this rolled-out trajectory. This cost contains two terms: a policy cost which
represents the objective the policy seeks to optimize, and an uncertainty cost which represents its
divergence from the states it is trained on. We measure this second cost by using the uncertainty of
the dynamics model about its own predictions, calculated using dropout. We evaluate our approach
in the context of learning policies to drive an autonomous car in dense trafﬁc, using a large-scale
dataset of real-world driving trajectories which we also adapt into an environment for testing learned
policies; both dataset and environment will be made public. We show that model-based control using
this additional uncertainty regularizer substantially outperforms unregularized control, and enables
learning good driving policies using only observational data with no environment interaction or
additional labeling by an expert. We also show how to effectively leverage an action-conditional
stochastic forward model using a modiﬁed posterior distribution, which encourages the model to
maintain sensitivity to input actions.
2
MODEL-PREDICTIVE POLICY LEARNING WITH UNCERTAINTY
REGULARIZATION
We assume we are given a dataset of observational data which consists of state-action pairs D =
{(st, at)}t. We ﬁrst describe our general approach, which consists of two steps: learning an action-
conditional dynamics model using the collected observational data, and then using this model to
train a fast, feedforward policy network which minimizes both a policy cost and an uncertainty cost.
2.1
ACTION-CONDITIONAL FORWARD MODEL
In this work, we consider recent approaches for stochastic prediction based on Variational Autoen-
coders (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Babaeizadeh et al., 2017; Denton & Fergus, 2018). The stochastic
model fθ(s1:t, at, zt) takes as input a sequence of observed or previously predicted states s1:t, an
action at, and a latent variable zt which represents the information about the next state st+1 which
is not a deterministic function of the input. During training, latent variables are sampled from a
distribution whose parameters are output by a posterior network qφ(s1:t, st+1) conditioned on the
past inputs and true targets. This network is trained jointly with the rest of the model using the
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Loss
Stochastic policy 
network (optimized)
sample
sample
sample
Initial state
Figure 2: Training the policy network using the stochastic forward model. Gradients with respect to
costs associated with predicted states are passed through the unrolled forward model into a policy
network.
reparameterization trick, and a term is included in the loss to minimize the KL divergence between
the posterior distribution and a ﬁxed prior p(z), which in our case is an isotropic Gaussian.
The per-sample loss used for training the stochastic model is given by:
L(θ, φ; s1:t, st+1, at) = ∥st+1 −fθ(s1:t, at, zt)∥2
2 + βDKL(qφ(z|s1:t, st+1)∥p(z))
(1)
After training, different future predictions for a given sequence of frames can be generated by sam-
pling different latent variables from the prior distribution.
Recent models for stochastic video prediction (Babaeizadeh et al., 2017; Denton & Fergus, 2018)
do not use their model for planning or training a policy network, and parameterize the posterior
distribution over latent variables using a diagonal Gaussian. In our case, we are training an action-
conditional video prediction model which we will later use to train a policy. This leads to an addi-
tional requirement: it is important for the prediction model to accurately respond to input actions,
and not use the latent variables to encode factors of variation in the outputs which are due to the
actions. To this end we propose to use a mixture of two Gaussians, with one component ﬁxed to the
prior, as our posterior distribution:
(µφ, σφ) = qφ(s1:t, st+1)
u
∼B(pu)
zt
∼(1 −u) · N(µφ, σφ) + u · p(z)
This is related to the dropout approximating distribution described in (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016),
and can be seen as applying a form of global dropout to the latent variables at training time 1.
This forces the prediction model to extract as much information as possible from the input states
and actions by making the latent variable independent of the output with some probability. In our
experiments we will refer to this parameterization as z-dropout.
2.2
TRAINING A POLICY NETWORK WITH UNCERTAINTY MINIMIZATION
Once the forward model is trained, we use it to train a parameterized policy network πψ, which we
assume to be stochastic. We ﬁrst sample an initial state sequence s1:t from the training set, unroll the
forward model over T time steps, and backpropagate gradients of a differentiable objective function
with respect to the parameters of the policy network (shown in Figure 2). During this process the
weights of the forward model are ﬁxed, and only the weights of the policy network are optimized.
1If the variances of both Gaussians are zero, this becomes equivalent to applying a form of dropout to the
latent code where all units are either set to zero or unchanged with probability pu.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Stochastic policy 
network (optimized)
sample
Variance
Model 
Uncertainty cost
Different dropout 
masks applied to 
forward model
Policy Cost
Total Cost
Previous state
Predicted next state
Figure 3: Training the policy network using the differentiable uncertainty cost, calculated using
dropout.
This objective function contains two terms: a policy cost C, which reﬂects the underlying objective
the policy is trying to learn, and an uncertainty cost U, which reﬂects how close the predicted state
induced by the policy network is to the manifold which the data D is drawn from.
Training the policy using a stochastic forward model involves solving the following problem, where
latent variables are sampled from the prior and input into the forward model at every time step:
argmin
ψ
h
T
X
i=1
C(ˆst+i) + λU(ˆst+i)
i
, such that:



zt+i ∼p(z)
ˆat+i ∼πψ(ˆst+i−1)
ˆst+i = f(ˆst+i−1, ˆat+i, zt+i)
The uncertainty cost U is applied to states predicted by the forward model, and could reﬂect any
measure of their likelihood under the distribution the training data is drawn from. We propose here
a general form based on the uncertainty of the dynamics model, which is calculated using dropout.
Intuitively, if the dynamics model is given a state-action pair from the same distribution as D (which
it was trained on), it will have low uncertainty about its prediction. If it is given a state-action pair
which is outside this distribution, it will have high uncertainty.
Dropout (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014) is a regularization technique which consists
of randomly setting hidden units in a neural network to zero with some probability. The work of
(Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) showed that a neural network trained with dropout is equivalent to an
approximation of a probabilistic deep Gaussian Process model. A key result of this is that estimates
of the neural network’s model uncertainty for a given input can be obtained by calculating the co-
variance of its outputs taken over multiple dropout masks. We note that this uncertainty estimate
is the composition of differentiable functions: each of the models induced by applying a different
dropout mask is differentiable, as is the covariance operator. Furthermore, we can summarize the
covariance matrix by taking its trace (which is equal to the sum of its eigenvalues, or equivalently the
sum of the variances of the outputs across each dimension), which is also a differentiable operation.
This provides a scalar estimate of uncertainty which is differentiable with respect to the input.
More precisely, let fθ1, ..., fθK denote our prediction model with K different dropout masks applied
to its hidden units (this can also be viewed as changing its weights). We deﬁne our scalar measure
of uncertainty U as follows:
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
U(ˆst+1) = tr
h
Cov[{fθk(s1:t, at, zt)}K
k=1]
i
=
d
X
j=1
Var({fθk(s1:t, at, zt)j}K
k=1)
where d is the dimensionality of the output. Minimizing this quantity with respect to actions en-
courages the policy network to produce actions which, when plugged into the forward model, will
produce predictions which the forward model is conﬁdent about 2.
A simple way to deﬁne U given an initial sequence of states s1:t from D would be to set
U(ˆst+k) = ∥ˆst+k −st+k∥2, which would encourage the policy network to output actions which
lead to a similar trajectory as the one observed in the dataset.
This leads to a set of states
which the model is presumably conﬁdent about, but may not be a trajectory which also satisﬁes
the policy cost C unless the dataset D consists of expert trajectories. If this is the case, setting
C(ˆst+i) = U(ˆst+i) = 1
2∥ˆst+k −st+k∥2 gives a model-based imitation learning objective which
simultaneously optimizes the policy cost and the uncertainty cost. The problem then becomes:
argmin
ψ
h
T
X
i=1
∥ˆst+i −st+i∥2
i
, such that:



zt+i ∼qφ(z|s1:t, st+1)
ˆat+i ∼πψ(ˆst+i−1)
ˆst+i = f(ˆst+i−1, ˆat+i, zt+i)
We call the ﬁrst approach MPUR , for Model-Predictive Policy with Uncertainty Regularization,
and the second MPER , for Model-Predictive Policy with Expert Regularization. A key feature of
both approaches is that we optimize the objective over T time steps, which is made possible by
our learned dynamics model. This means that the actions will receive gradients from multiple time
steps ahead, which will penalize actions which lead to large divergences from the training manifold
further into the future, even if they only cause a small divergence at the next time step.
2.3
RELATIONSHIP TO BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS
Our MPUR approach can be viewed as training a Bayesian neural network (BNN) (Neal, 1995)
with latent variables using variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999; Kingma & Welling, 2013). The
distribution over model predictions for st+1 is given by:
p(st+1|s1:t, a, D) =
Z
p(st+1|fθ(s1:t, a, z))p(θ, z|D)dθdz
The distribution p(θ, z|D) reﬂects the posterior over model weights and latent variables given the
data, and is intractable to evaluate. We instead approximate it with the variational distribution q
parameterized by η = {φ, θ∗}:
qη(z, θ) = qφ(z|s1:t, st+1) · qθ∗(θ)
Here qφ represents a distribution over latent variables represented using a posterior network with
parameters φ, which could be a diagonal Gaussian or the mixture distribution described in Section
2.1. The distribution qθ∗is the dropout approximating distribution over forward model parameters
described in (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), a mixture of two Gaussians with one mean ﬁxed at zero.
We show in Appendix B that training the stochastic forward model with dropout by minimizing the
loss function in Equation 1 is approximately minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
this approximate posterior and the true posterior.
2In practice, we apply an additional step to normalize this quantity across different modalities and rollout
lengths, which is detailed in Appendix D.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Preprocessing pipeline for the NGSIM-I80 data set. Orange arrows show same vehicles
across stages. Blue arrows show corresponding extracted context state. (a) Snapshots from two of
the seven cameras. (b) View point transformation, car localisation and tracking. (c) Context states
are extracted from rectangular regions surrounding each vehicle. (d) Five examples of context states
it extracted at the previous stage.
Once the forward model is trained, for a given input we can obtain an approximate distribution over
outputs p(ˆst+1|s1:t, a) induced by the approximate posterior by sampling different latent variables
and dropout masks. We now show that the covariance of the outputs ˆst+1 can be decomposed into
a sum of two covariance matrices which represent the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty, using a
similar approach as (Depeweg et al., 2018). Using the conditional covariance formula we can write:
cov(ˆst+1|s1:t, a) = covθ(Ez[ˆst+1|s1:t, a, θ]) + Eθ[covz(ˆst+1|s1:t, a, θ)]
(2)
The ﬁrst term is the covariance of the random vector Ez[ˆst+1|s1:t, a, θ] when θ ∼qθ∗(θ). This
term ignores any contribution to the variance from z and only considers the effect of θ. As such it
represents the epistemic uncertainty. The second term represents the covariance of the predictions
obtained by sampling different latent variables z ∼p(z) averaged over different dropout masks, and
ignores any contribution to the variance from θ. As such it represents the aleatoric uncertainty. Our
uncertainty penalty explicitly penalizes the trace of the ﬁrst matrix where the expectation over z is
approximated by a single sample from the prior. Note also that the covariance matrix corresponding
to the aleatoric uncertainty will change depending on the inputs. This allows our approach to handle
heteroscedastic environments, where the aleatoric uncertainty will vary for different inputs.
3
DATASET AND PLANNING ENVIRONMENT
We apply our approach to learn driving policies using a large-scale dataset of driving videos taken
from trafﬁc cameras. The Next Generation Simulation program’s Interstate 80 (NGSIM I-80) dataset
(Halkias & Colyar, 2006) consists of 45 minutes of recordings from trafﬁc cameras mounted over a
stretch of highway. The driver behavior is complex and includes sudden accelerations, lane changes
and merges which are difﬁcult to predict; as such the dataset has high enviroment (or aleatoric)
uncertainty. After recording, a viewpoint transformation is applied to rectify the perspective, and
vehicles are identiﬁed and tracked throughout the video. This yields a total 5596 car trajectories,
which we split into training (80%), validation (10%) and testing sets (10%). In all, the dataset
contains approximately 2 million transitions.
We then applied additional preprocessing to obtain a state and action representation (st, at) for
each car at each time step, suitable for learning an action-conditional predictive model. Our state
representation st consists of two components: an image it representing the neighborhood of the car,
and a vector ut representing its current position and velocity. The images it are centered around
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
the ego car and encode both the lane emplacements and the locations of other cars. Each image has
3 channels: the ﬁrst (red) encodes the lane markings, the second (green) encodes the locations of
neighboring cars, which are represented as rectangles reﬂecting the dimensions of each car, and the
third channel (blue) represents the ego car, also scaled to the correct dimensions. This is summarized
in Figure 4. The action at at a given time step consists of a 2-dimensional vector representing the
acceleration/braking of the car and its change in steering angle. We also deﬁne two cost functions
which together make up the policy cost: a proximity cost which reﬂects how close the ego car is to
neighboring cars, and a lane cost which reﬂects how much the ego car overlaps with lane markings.
These are represented as a cost vector at each timestep, ct = (Cproximity(st), Clane(st)). Full details
can be found in Appendix A.
We also adapted this dataset to be used as an environment to evaluate learned policies, with the
same interface as OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). Choosing a policy for neighboring cars is
challenging due to a cold-start problem: to accurately evaluate a learned policy, the other cars would
need to follow human-like policies which would realistically react to the controlled car, which are
not available. We take the approach of letting all the other cars in the environment follow their
trajectories from the dataset, while a single car is controlled by the policy we seek to evaluate. This
approach avoids hand-designing a policy for the neighboring cars which would likely not reﬂect
the diverse nature of human driving. The limitation is that the neighboring cars do not react to the
controlled car, which likely makes the problem more difﬁcult as they do not try to avoid collisions.
4
RELATED WORK
A number of authors have explored the use of learned, action-conditional forward models which are
then used for planning, starting with classic works in the 90’s (Nguyen & Widrow, 1990; Schmidhu-
ber, 1990; Jordan & Rumelhart, 1992), and more recently in the context of video games (Oh et al.,
2015; Pascanu et al., 2017; Weber et al., 2017), robotics and continous control (Finn et al., 2016;
Agrawal et al., 2016; Nagabandi et al., 2017; Srinivas et al., 2018). Our approach to learning poli-
cies by backpropagating through a learned forward model is related to the early work of (Nguyen
& Widrow, 1989) in the deterministic case, and the SVG framework of (Heess et al., 2015) in the
stochastic case. However, neither of these approaches incorporates a term penalizing the uncertainty
of the forward model when training the policy network.
The works of (McAllister & Rasmussen, 2016; Chua et al., 2018) also used model uncertainty esti-
mates calculated using dropout in the context of model-based reinforcement learning, but used them
for sampling trajectories during the forward prediction step. Namely, they applied different dropout
masks to simulate different state trajectories which reﬂect the distribution over plausible models,
which were then averaged to produce a cost estimate used to select an action.
Our model uncertainty penalty is related to the cost used in (Kahn et al., 2017), who used dropout
and model ensembling to compute uncertainty estimates for a binary action-conditional collision
detector for a ﬂying drone. These estimates were then used to select actions out of a predeﬁned set
which yielded a good tradeoff between speed, predicted chance of collision and uncertainty about
the prediction. In our work, we apply uncertainty estimates to the predicted high-dimensional states
of a forward model at every time step, summarize them into a scalar, and backpropagate gradients
through the unrolled forward model to then train a policy network by gradient descent.
The work of (Depeweg et al., 2018) also proposed adding an uncertainty penalty when training
paramaterized policies, but did so in the context of BNNs trained using α-divergences applied
in low-dimensional settings, whereas we use variational autoencoders combined with dropout for
high-dimensional video prediction. α-BNNs can yield better uncertainty estimates than variational
inference-based methods, which can underestimate model uncertainty by ﬁtting to a local mode of
the exact posterior (Depeweg et al., 2016; Li & Gal, 2017). However, they also require computing
multiple samples from the distribution over model weights when training the forward model, which
increases memory requirements and limits scalability to high-dimensional settings such as the ones
we consider here.
The problem of covariate shift when executing a policy learned from observational data has been
well-recognized in imitation learning. It was ﬁrst noted in the early work of (Pomerleau, 1991), and
was shown in (Ross & Bagnell, 2010) to cause a regret bound which grows quadratically in the time
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
(a) Ground truth sequence
(b) Deterministic Model
(c) Stochastic Model, sample 1
(d) Stochastic Model, sample 2
Figure 5: Video prediction results using a deterministic and stochastic model over 200 time steps
(images are subsampled across time). Two different future predictions are generated by the stochas-
tic model by sampling two different sequences of latent variables. The deterministic model averages
over possible futures, producing blurred predictions.
horizon of the task. The work of (Ross et al., 2011) proposed a method to efﬁciently use expert
feedback if available, which has also been applied in the context of autonomous driving (Zhang &
Cho, 2016). Our approach also addresses covariate shift, but does so without querying an expert.
Our MPER approach is related to the work of (Englert et al., 2013), who also performed imitation
learning at the level of trajectories rather than individual actions. They did so in low-dimensional
settings using Gaussian Processes, whereas our method uses an unrolled neural network representing
the environment dynamics which can be applied to high-dimensional state representations. The
work of (Baram et al., 2017) also used a neural network dynamics model in the context of imitation
learning, but did so in the interactive setting to minimize a loss produced by a discriminator network.
Several works have applied deep learning methods in the context of autonomous driving. The works
of (Pomerleau, 1991; LeCun et al., 2006; Bojarski et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2017) used neural net-
works to control policies trained by imitation learning, while (Williams et al., 2017) learned models
of the vehicle dynamics. These works focused on lane following or avoiding static obstacles in vi-
sually rich environments and did not consider settings with dense moving trafﬁc, which we focus
on in this work. The work of (Sadigh et al., 2016) developed a model of the interactions between
the two drivers which was then used to plan actions in simple settings, using symbolic state repre-
sentations. In our work, we consider the problem of learning driving policies in dense trafﬁc, using
high-dimensional state representations which reﬂect the neighborhood of the ego car.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We now report experimental results. We designed a deterministic and stochastic forward model
to model the state and action representations described in Section 3, using convolutional layers to
process the images it and fully-connected layers to process the vectors ut and actions at. All model
details can be found in Appendix C and training details can be found in Appendix D. Additional
video results for the model predictions and learned policies can be found at the following URL:
https://sites.google.com/view/model-predictive-driving/home.
5.1
PREDICTION RESULTS
We ﬁrst generated predictions using both deterministic and stochastic forward models, shown in
Figure 5. The deterministic model produces predictions which become increasingly blurry further
into the future. Our stochastic model produces predictions which stay sharp far into the future.
By sampling different sequences of latent variables, different future scenarios are generated. Note
that the two sequences generated by the stochastic model are different from the ground truth future
which occurs in the dataset. This is normal as the future observed in the dataset is only one of many
possible ones. Additional video generations can be viewed at the URL.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Method
Model
Mean Distance
Success Rate (%)
Human
209.4
100.0
No action
87.3
16.2
1-step IL
73.8 ± 7.9
7.3 ± 4.1
SVG
stochastic
17.1 ± 4.3
0.0 ± 0.0
VG
deterministic
11.9 ± 4.2
0.0 ± 0.0
MPUR
stochastic+z-dropout
171.2 ± 4.5
74.8 ± 3.0
MPUR
stochastic
166.8 ± 2.4
71.8 ± 1.0
MPUR
deterministic
162.4 ± 2.8
69.1 ± 1.6
MPER
stochastic
70.0 ± 8.0
4.6 ± 2.1
MPER
deterministic
157.4 ± 0.7
63.7 ± 0.5
(a)
1
3
5
10
20
30
40
Rollout length
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Mean distance (meters)
MPUR (stochastic + z-dropout)
MPUR (stochastic)
MPUR (deterministic)
MPER (deterministic)
1
3
5
10
20
30
40
Rollout length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Success %
MPUR (stochastic + z-dropout)
MPUR (stochastic)
MPUR (deterministic)
MPER (deterministic)
(b)
Human
The human trajectories observed in the testing set, which are all collision-free.
No action
A policy which outputs an action of zero, maintaining constant speed and direction.
1-step IL
A policy network trained with single-step imitation learning.
SVG
A policy network trained with stochastic value gradients. This is the same setup
as (Heess et al., 2015), with the difference that the agent does not interact with the
environment and learns from a ﬁxed observational dataset.
VG
A policy trained with value gradients, using the deterministic forward model. This
is similar to SVG, but does not involve latent variables.
MPUR
A policy trained with MPUR , using a deterministic or stochastic model. A cost
term is included to penalize the uncertainty of the dynamics model.
MPER
A policy trained with MPER , using a deterministic or stochastic model. The policy
is trained to match expert trajectories from the training set.
(c)
Figure 6: a) Performance different methods, measured in success rate and distance travelled. Includ-
ing a cost term penalizing the dynamics model’s uncertainty is essential for good performance. Us-
ing the modiﬁed posterior distribution (z-dropout) improves performance when using the stochastic
forward model. b) Training policies by performing longer rollouts through the environment dynam-
ics model also signiﬁcantly improves performance. c) Summary of compared methods.
5.2
POLICY EVALUATION RESULTS
We evaluated policies using two measures: whether the controlled car reaches the end of the road
segment without colliding into another car or driving off the road, and the distance travelled before
the episode ends. Policies which collide quickly will travel shorter distances.
We compared our approach against several baselines which can also learn from observational data,
which are described in Figure 6c. Table 6a compares performance for the different methods, opti-
mized over different rollout lengths. The 1-step imitation learner, SVG and VG all perform poorly,
and do not beat the simple baseline of performing no action. Both MPUR and MPER signiﬁcantly
outperform the other methods. Videos of the learned policies for both MPER and MPUR driving in
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
1-step IL
MPER (20 step)
MPUR (20 step)
Figure 7: Driving trajectories for MPUR , MPER and a single-step imitation learner policies over
the stretch of highway. The single-step imitation learner policy often veers across lanes, whereas the
other policies stay within their lanes. These policies also change their speed to avoid collisions (not
shown, see URL).
the environment can be found at the URL. The policies learn effective behaviors such as braking,
accelerating and turning to avoid other cars. Figure 7 shows trajectories on the map for different
methods. We see that the single-step imitation learner produces divergent trajectories which turn
into other lanes, whereas the MPUR and MPER methods show trajectories which primarily stay
within their lanes.
MPUR becomes equivalent to VG in the deterministic setting if we remove the uncertainty penalty,
and the large difference in performance shows that including this penalty is essential. Table 1 shows
the average predicted policy cost and uncertainty cost of the two methods. VG produces much
lower predicted policy cost, yet very high uncertainty cost. This indicates that the actions the policy
produces induce a distribution over states which the forward model is highly uncertain about. The
policy trained with MPUR produces higher policy cost estimates, but lower uncertainty cost, and
performs much better when executed in the environment.
The stochastic model trained with a standard Gaussian posterior yields limited improvement over
the deterministic model. However, the stochastic model trained with the z-dropout parameterization
yields a signiﬁcant improvement. Comparisons of action-conditional predictions using both models
can be seen at the URL. The stochastic model which uses the standard posterior is less responsive
to input actions than the model trained with the modiﬁed posterior, which likely accounts for their
difference in performance. This lack of responsiveness is especially pronounced when the model
is given latent variables inferred by the posterior network, as opposed to latent variables which are
sampled from the prior. We also trained a policy network using MPUR with inferred rather than
sampled latent variables, and observed a large drop in performance (see Appendix E). A possible
explanation is that the stochastic forward model uses the latent variables to encode some factors of
variation of the output which are in fact due to the actions. The sequence of latent variables sampled
from the prior are independent, which may cause these effects to partially cancel each other over
the sequence. However, the latent variables inferred from a sequence of states in the training set
are highly dependent, and together they may explain away the effects of the actions. Our modiﬁed
posterior distribution discourages the model from encoding action information in the latent variables,
since factors of variation in the output which are due to the actions cannot be encoded in the latent
variables when they are sampled from the prior, and the loss can better be lowered by predicting
them from the actions instead.
Figure 6b shows the performance of MPUR and MPER for different rollout lengths. All methods
see their performance improve dramatically as we increase the rollout length, which encourages
the distribution of states the policy induces and the training distribution to match over longer time
horizons. We also see that the stochastic model with z-dropout outperforms the standard stochastic
model as well as the deterministic model over most rollout lengths.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a general approach for learning policies from purely observational
data. The key elements are: i) a learned stochastic dynamics model, which is used to optimize a
policy cost over multiple time steps, ii) an uncertainty term which penalizes the divergence of the
trajectories induced by the policy from the manifold it was trained on, and iii) a modiﬁed posterior
distribution which keeps the stochastic dynamics model responsive to input actions. We have applied
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Method
Mean Distance (m)
Success Rate (%)
Total Predicted Cost
U
VG
14.9
0.0
0.05
1081.2
MPUR
168.8
73.5
0.13
0.4
Table 1: Policy and uncertainty costs with and without uncertainty regularization. The policy trained
with unregularized VG exploits errors in the forward model to produce actions which yield low
predicted cost but high uncertainty. Including the uncertainty cost yields higher predicted cost, but
better performance when the policy is executed in the environment.
this approach to a large observational dataset of real-world trafﬁc recordings, and shown it can
effectively learn policies for navigating in dense trafﬁc, which outperform other approaches which
learn from observational data. However, there is still a sizeable gap between the performance of
our learned policies and human performance. We release both our dataset and environment, and
encourage further research in this area to help narrow this gap. We also believe this provides a
useful setting for evaluating generative models in terms of their ability to produce good policies.
An interesting next step would be to optimize actions or policies to produce more complex and
targeted behaviors, such as changing to a speciﬁed lane while avoiding other cars. Finally, our
approach is general and could potentially be applied to many other settings where interactions with
the environment are expensive or unfeasible, but observational data is plentiful.
