RabindraNet, Creating Literary Works in the Style
of Rabindranath Tagore
Asadullah Al Galib
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, M.Sc in CSE
BRAC University
Dhaka, Bangladesh

Abstract—Bengali literature has a rich history of hundreds
of years with luminary ﬁgures such as Rabindranath Tagore
and Kazi Nazrul Islam. However, analytical works involving the
most recent advancements in NLP have barely scratched the
surface utilizing the enormous volume of the collected works
from the writers of the language. In order to bring attention
to the analytical study involving the works of Bengali writers
and spearhead the text generation endeavours in the style of
existing literature, we are introducing RabindraNet, a character
level RNN model with stacked-LSTM layers trained on the works
of Rabindranath Tagore to produce literary works in his style
for multiple genres. We created an extensive dataset as well
by compiling the digitized works of Rabindranath Tagore from
authentic online sources and published as open source dataset
on data science platform Kaggle.
Index Terms—stacked-lstm, recurrent neural network, nlp, text
generation, literature, rabindranath tagore
I. INTRODUCTION
The ﬁeld of NLP, specially the domain of text generation
has seen massive improvements in recent years with more
sophisticated and powerful models built on top of recurrent
neural network models such as LSTM as well as more recent
transformer based models. The potential applications of AI
generated text in domains such as healthcare and hospitality
sector is boundless. However, there is a signiﬁcant gap in
utilizing these advancements in AI to better understand human
literature and carry out literary analysis in terms of themes,
concepts, societal values, norms at the time of writing. This
is more true for Bengali literature due to the lack of quality
datasets available online. As a result, our treasured literary
works remain completely out of usage for advanced machine
learning techniques.
In order to bridge this gap between NLP and Bengali literature,
we are proposing a character level RNN model based on
stacked-LSTM to generate various literary works in the style
of Rabindranath Tagore. In the process of creating this model,
we also recognised the lack of readily available quality datasets
of Tagore that provided granular access to individual literary
items such as poems, songs, dramas, essays. To mitigate this
issue, we set about creating a compilation of all of Tagore’s
works in easily accessible formats which can be used for
literary analysis as well as inputs for deep learning models.
II. RELATED WORK
Recurrent neural networks, known as RNN are neural
networks with hidden state and a recurrence nature which
allows them to work with sequential data such as textual data
in literature or time series data [3]. However, with very long
sequence of textual data, it gets very difﬁcult to train RNNs
due to the vanishing or exploding gradient problem, where it
gets difﬁcult to pass on gradient backward for training purpose
over longer sequence of training data. To solve this problem,
various approaches have been applied to effectively train
RNNs over longer sequence of data. One of these approaches
is to create gated paths for the gradients to travel over long
sequence of neural network units without much change. Long
short term memory or LSTM and Gated recurrent unit, also
known as GRU use this gate mechanism to be effectively
trained on datasets with longer sequence. Recurrent neural
networks and its variants have been used extensively in text
generation due to their ability to handle sequential data most
effectively [3]. More recent advancements in text generation
have come from auto-encoders and generative adversarial net-
works [3]. Character level RNN with Hessian-Free optimizer
and comparatively small number of hidden units produced
high quality text with sophisticated grammatical structure [4].
RNNs have been used to classify poem meters in order to
better understand the literary style of the poetry in arabic
literature [5]. Recently Transformer based models such as
BERT and GPT-2/3 have shown great promise in generating
extremely high quality text [6].
III. DATASET COMPILATION
A. Crawling & Extraction
One of the main hindrance to advanced literary analysis
in Bengali literature using machine learning is the lack of
quality datasets in user friendly formats which can be used
for multitude of tasks such as exploratory data analysis which
demands granular access to individual songs, poems or dramas,
at the same time aggregated corpus which can be then fed into
deep learning models for prediction or classiﬁcation tasks.
At the start of this project we could not ﬁnd any open source
corpus of Tagore that provided both individual and aggregated
content of all of his literary works. To ﬁll in this gap of an
open source dataset of the aforementioned type, we initiated a
arXiv:2202.00481v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2022

Fig. 1. Crawling ﬂow chart
compilation project to collect and prepare a dataset of Tagore
that would contain complete collection of works for all of
his genres. We found the digitized collection of Tagore’s
work published online by the Department of Information
Technology & Electronics, Government of West Bengal, India
[2] to be an excellent source to compile the target dataset from.
Their online collection included entire works of Tagore in the
following genres -
• Novel
• Poem
• Song
• Story
• Essay
• Drama
• Miscellaneous
Each of the genres included collection of individual items. To
extract the raw content from the website by maintaining proper
hierarchy of items, we created a versatile crawler to handle
multiple use cases present in the underlying raw html content.
The crawler adjusted its extraction methods based on different
genres. The entire crawling process includes extraction of
collection items, extraction of individual items inside each
collection, extraction of paginated content of individual items
and storing data in raw textual format after parsing from html
(see Figure 1).
B. Preprocessing & Formatting
After collecting individual literary items in raw textual
format from each genre, we placed them in hierarchy by
maintaining proper genre and parent collection. After that,
we executed an aggregator that compiled all individual items
of a genre into a single ﬁle. Before adding each item into
corresponding genre, we passed raw text through a basic
pre-processor which removed title names, page numbers and
other special symbols using regex rules. We prepared two
ﬁle formats for each genre, CSV and TXT. The CSV format
contained comma separated values including literary item
Fig. 2. Generated poem from single LSTM model
name, parent collection, genre and content. This type of
format is useful for various exploratory analysis. On the
other hand TXT format contained aggregated content from
all individual literary items concatenated together which is
useful for training deep learning models. We then published
this dataset in the data science competition platform Kaggle
for the beneﬁt of the community [1].
IV. METHODOLOGY
We used the prepared dataset from previous step [1] to train
a character level RNN model consisting of single LSTM layer.
For initial step, we trained the model only on poem dataset
with epoch set to 40. After training the model, we studied the
quality of the generated text for poem genre. See Figure 2 for
an excerpt of the generated poem,
From the generated text it is evident that the model learned
basic word formation, however it failed to learn how to choose
consecutive words so that it would form a coherent content.
From this ﬁnding, we were inspired to explore stacked-
LSTM in order to increase the model capacity for abstract
understanding over long sequence of data and give the model
ability to learn word association better.
Different sections of the process starting from analyzing the
dataset to generating new content are described below in
details (see Figure 3). In our work, we experimented with
datasets from 3 different genres, namely song, poem and story.
All the dataset samples provided in the following sections are
taken from song genre.
A. Analyze Dataset
At ﬁrst we analyzed the dataset to ﬁnd out basic information
regarding the dataset at hand. The song dataset had total
733280 characters. Following is an excerpt form the dataset
(see Figure 4).
The dataset had 100 unique characters. Some of which are
listed below (see Figure 5).

Fig. 3. Methodology diagram
Fig. 4. Excerpt from song dataset
B. Process Dataset
At this stage, the dataset consisted of sequence of characters.
In order to feed the data into our training model we had to
convert the dataset from a sequence of characters to a sequence
of numbers. To achieve that, we ﬁrst created a vocabulary
or mapping of character-to-index using the unique character
extracted in the previous step and replaced all the characters
in the dataset with corresponding index numbers. Followings
are some samples from the character to index mapping.
” ’”
:
3 ,
’( ’
:
4 ,
’) ’
:
5 ,
’ , ’
:
6 ,
’ −’
:
7 ,
’. ’
:
8 ,
’: ’
:
9 ,
’; ’
:
10 ,
’? ’
:
11 ,
’[ ’
:
12 ,
’] ’
:
13 ,
. . .
We also created an index-to-character mapping to be used
during the text generation step to convert the predicted index
number to corresponding character.
C. Create Training Batch
To create training batch, we ﬁrst divided the dataset into
sequences of 101 characters. For our experiment, we consid-
ered sequence length as 100. The additional character in the
sequence was used during the shifting of each sequence to
generate input and corresponding output sequence. After this
Fig. 5. Unique characters
Fig. 6. Input output sequence
Fig. 7. Next character prediction using previous character
step, the dataset had altogether 7260 sequences of length 101
for each epoch. After that, we created input-output sequences
from each sequence in the dataset by removing the trailing
index for the input sequence and ﬁrst index for the output
sequence. The result is 7260 input and output sequence pairs
of length 100. See Figure 6 for an example.
During training, at the ﬁrst step, the model receives the
index number for ﬁrst character as the input and using that
it tries to predict the index number for the next character.
During next step, model receives the index number of the next
character and uses that and previous step context to predict
the index for next character (see Figure 7). To run the training
process efﬁciently, we shufﬂed the dataset and divided into
batch size of 64.
D. Build Model
Finally, we built the model using Embedding layer as our
ﬁrst input layer, then we stacked 3 LSTM layers as our RNN
layers before adding a Dense layer as the ﬁnal and output
layer. We set the embedding dimension of the ﬁrst layer to 256
and used 1024 RNN units for each LSTM layer. The output
dimension was the vocabulary size which was 100 for the song
dataset. Followings are the model summary (see Figure 8) and
structure (see Figure 9),
For each character, the model passes it into the embedding
layer to get the embedding of stated dimension and executes
the LSTM for one step to generate the log likelihood of
the next character using the output dimension of vocabulary
length. Before training, the model does not have any knowl-
edge of the dataset. See Figure 10 for a sample of generated
using initial parameters of the model before the training step.
E. Train Model
We treated the training stage similar to a classiﬁcation
problem. Given the state of the model up to previous time
step and current input character, the model had to predict the

Fig. 8. Model summary
Fig. 9. Model structure
class of next character which had the dimension of 100, the
vocabulary size. To train the model, we used Adam optimizer
and Categorical cross entropy as the loss function and ran it
for 40 epochs for all datasets.
F. Generate New Content
After the model had been trained, we generated new text
by providing it with a starting sequence of characters and the
number of characters to generate. We also used a temperature
variable to control the predictability of next character selec-
tion. For each generated character, we use it as the previous
character and feed it into the model to generate the next one.
V. RESULTS
As previously mentioned, we executed the same training
procedure with 3 different datasets from different genres,
namely song, poem and story. First we present the output of
the model after it was trained on poem dataset for single-layer
LSTM (see Figure 11) and 3-layer stacked-LSTM (see Figure
Fig. 10. Predicted output before training
Fig. 11. Generated poem from single layer LSTM
12) with temperature value set to 1 and starting text as ”Aji
Amar”
We can observe that stacked LSTM model not only learned
how to form correct words but the generated text seems
more coherent than the single layer LSTM model. However
when we provided the stacked-LSTM model with same
starting sequence of characters but temperature value of 1.5,
it produced more surprising text (see Figure 13).
Next, we present the output of the stacked-LSTM model
after it was trained on song dataset with different temperature
value (see Figure 14, 15).
We can notice the 3-fold increase in elapsed time during train-
ing from single-layer LSTM to stacked-LSTM with epoch=40,
Elapsed time for training the single later LSTM with
epoch=40:
• Poem: 3113s
• Story: 3095s
Elapsed time for training the 3-Layer stacked LSTM with
epoch=40:
• Poem: 9934s
• Story: 10175s
VI. FUTURE WORKS
In future, we wish to train the stacked-LSTM model for
larger epoch values and evaluate the generated text with
evaluation metrics other than human perception using literary
analysis. We also hope to experiment with other generative
models and compare the results with the current LSTM
model. Finally, we are working towards publishing this model
for general public to explore and enjoy by generating texts

Fig. 12. Generated poem from 3 layer stacked-LSTM
Fig. 13. Generated poem from 3 layer stacked-LSTM, temperature=1.5
Fig. 14. Generated song from stacked-LSTM, temperature=1.0
Fig. 15. Generated song from stacked-LSTM, temperature=1.5
using trained models for different genres. Currently we are
producing texts of 500 to 1000 characters of three genres
which the model was trained upon. We plan to experiment
with much longer texts as found in stories and essays.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have taken the ﬁrst step of diving into Bengali literature
and experimenting with text generation in the style of the
literary giant Rabindranath Tagore using character level RNN
model with stacked-LSTM layers. We have shown that simple
stacked LSTM layers can produce high quality text in literary
genres such as poem, song and story. This is promising to take
on the challenges of much longer texts involving dramas or
essays. Gradually we hope to work on more advanced theme
analysis and comparative analysis of literary styles of Bengali
writers using more sophisticated NLP tools.
