From Eliza to XiaoIce: Challenges and Opportunities with Social Chatbots  
 
Heung-Yeung Shum, Xiaodong He, Di Li 
 
Microsoft Corporation 
 
Abstract:   Conversational systems have come a long way since their inception in the 1960s.  After decades of 
research and development, we’ve seen progress from Eliza and Parry in the 60’s and 70’s, to task-completion 
systems as in the DARPA Communicator program in the 2000s, to intelligent personal assistants such as Siri in 
the 2010s, to today’s social chatbots like XiaoIce. Social chatbots’ appeal lies not only in their ability to 
respond to users’ diverse requests, but also in being able to establish an emotional connection with users. The 
latter is done by satisfying users’ need for communication, affection, as well as social belonging. To further the 
advancement and adoption of social chatbots, their design must focus on user engagement and take both 
intellectual quotient (IQ) and emotional quotient (EQ) into account. Users should want to engage with a social 
chatbot; as such, we define the success metric for social chatbots as conversation-turns per session (CPS). 
Using XiaoIce as an illustrative example, we discuss key technologies in building social chatbots from core 
chat to visual awareness to skills. We also show how XiaoIce can dynamically recognize emotion and engage 
the user throughout long conversations with appropriate interpersonal responses. As we become the first 
generation of humans ever living with AI, we have a responsibility to design social chatbots to be both useful 
and empathetic, so they will become ubiquitous and help society as a whole. 
1. Introduction 
 
One of the fundamental challenges in artificial 
intelligence (AI) is endowing the machine with the 
ability to converse with humans using natural 
language (Turing, 1950). Early conversational 
systems, such as Eliza (Weizenbaum, 1966), Parry 
(Colby, 1975), and Alice (Wallace, 2009), were 
designed to mimic human behavior in a text-based 
conversation, hence to pass the Turing Test 
(Turing, 1950; Shieber, 1994) within a controlled 
scope. Despite impressive successes, these systems, 
which were precursors to today’s social chatbots, 
were mostly based on hand-crafted rules. As a 
result, they worked well only in constrained 
environments.  
 
Since the 1990s, a lot of research has been done on 
task-completion conversational systems (Price, 
1990; Hemphill et al., 1990; Dahl et al., 1994; 
Walk et al., 2001, 2002). Examples include 
systems for reserving airline tickets as in the 
DARPA Airline Travel Information System (ATIS) 
project and for travel planning as in the DARPA 
Communicator program. ATIS and Communicator 
systems are designed to understand natural 
language requests and perform a variety of specific 
tasks 
for 
users, 
such as 
retrieving 
flight 
information and providing information to tourists. 
Task-completion conversational systems have been 
typically based on data-driven, machine-learned 
approaches. Their performance is excellent only 
within domains that have well-defined schemas 
(Glass et al., 1995, Walk et al., 2001, Raux et al., 
2005; Andreani et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2011; Tur 
and Mori, 2011).  
 
In the past several years, a tremendous amount of 
investment has been made to developing intelligent 
personal assistants (IPAs) such as Apple’s Siri1, 
Microsoft’s Cortana 2 , Google Assistant 3 , 
Facebook M4, and Amazon’s Alexa5. These IPAs 
are often deployed on mobile devices and are 
designed to answer a wide range of questions. In 
addition to passively responding to user requests, 
they also proactively anticipate user needs and 
provide in-time assistance such as reminding of an 
upcoming event or recommending a useful service 
without receiving explicit requests from the user 
(Sarikaya 2017). The daunting challenge for such 
IPAs is that they must work well in many open 
domain scenarios as people learn to depend on 
them to manage their work and lives efficiently. 
 
More recently, social chatbots, such as Microsoft’s 
XiaoIce 6 , have emerged as a new kind of 
                                                          
1 https://www.apple.com/ios/siri/ 
2 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/cortana/ 
3 https://assistant.google.com/ 
4 https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/ 
5 https://developer.amazon.com/alexa/ 
6 https://www.msXiaoIce.com/ 

 
 
conversational system made possible by significant 
progress in AI and wireless communications. The 
primary goal of a social chatbot is not necessarily 
to solve all the questions the users might have, but 
rather, to be a virtual companion to users. By 
establishing an emotional connection with users, 
social chatbots can better understand them and 
therefore help them over a long period of time. To 
communicate effectively, social chatbots interact 
with users through multiple modalities, including 
text, speech, and vision. Social chatbots and IPAs 
have become popular recently due to progress in 
many relevant perceptual and cognitive AI 
technologies, e.g., natural language understanding 
(Bengio et al., 2001; Mikolov et al., 2013; 
Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015; 
Mesnil et al., 2013, 2015), speech recognition and 
synthesis (Hinton et al., 2012; Deng et al., 2013; 
Xiong et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2014; van den Oord 
et al., 2016), computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 
2012; He et al., 2016), information retrieval 
(Huang et al., 2013; Elkahky et al., 2015), 
multimodal intelligence (Fang et al., 2015; Vinyals 
et al., 2015; Karpathy and Fei-fei, 2015; He and 
Deng, 2017), and empathic conversational systems 
(Fung et al., 2016; Alam et al., 2017). 
 
In 
the 
next 
section, 
we 
briefly 
review 
conversational systems developed over the past 
several decades and discuss their features and 
limitations. 
We 
then 
introduce 
the 
design 
principles 
of 
social 
chatbots 
where 
both 
intellectual quotient (IQ) and emotional quotient 
(EQ) must be considered. We describe key 
components in designing social chatbots including 
core chat, visual awareness, and skills. Using 
Microsoft’s XiaoIce, we show that social chatbots 
can engage in long conversations with users by 
understanding 
their 
needs, 
establishing 
an 
emotional connection, and offering support and 
assistance. We also share our vision for the 
evolution of chatbots in the future. We discuss that,  
with fundamental breakthroughs to occur on key 
open 
problems, 
the 
tremendous 
business 
opportunities they will make possible, and their 
potential impact on society as AI becomes an 
integral part of our lives.  
 
2. Brief Survey of Conversational Systems 
 
In 
this 
section, 
we 
review 
representative 
conversational systems that have been developed 
over five decades. Such systems include early 
chatbots, task-completion systems, intelligent 
personal assistants, and social chatbots. 
 
2.1 Eliza and Early Chatbots 
 
Inspired by the Turing test proposed in 1950 
(Turing, 1950), researchers and engineers have 
developed multiple conversational systems for 
chitchat (Weizenbaum, 1966; Colby, 1975, Shieber, 
1994; Wallace 2009). These early chatbots are 
computer programs that conducted a conversation 
using audio or text. Such programs were often 
designed to convincingly simulate how a human 
would behave as a conversational partner; if they 
succeed, they pass the Turing test.  
 
 
Figure 1. A conversation between Eliza and a 
human (Weizenbaum, 1966). 
 
Eliza, created by Joseph Weizenbaum at MIT in 
1966, is perhaps the very first chatbot known 
publicly. It can communicate with humans based 
on hand-crafted scripts (Weizenbaum, 1966). 
These scripts simulate a Rogerian psychotherapist 
and can only accept textual input. It does not 
understand a conversation, but rather searches for 
appropriate responses through pattern matching, 
combined with some intelligent phrasing. Eliza has 
only a limited scope of knowledge and can only 
chat with people within a constrained domain. 
Nevertheless, many users believed they were 
talking to a real person when Eliza first came out. 
Figure 1 shows a conversation between Eliza and a 
human.   
 

 
 
Parry is another chatbot developed by Kenneth 
Colby (1975). It is designed to behave like a 
paranoid person. It passed the Turing test for the 
first time in history7. However, Parry is still rule-
based and has a similar structure as Eliza but with 
better 
controlling 
structure, 
language 
understanding capabilities, and especially a mental 
model that can simulate the bot’s emotions. For 
example, Parry will respond with hostility if the 
anger level is high.  
 
Alice, or Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer 
Entity, was developed by Richard Wallace (2009) 
to allow users to customize their chatbots. It uses 
an Artificial Intelligence Markup Language 
(AIML), a derivative of XML; AIML has tags that 
allow bots to recursively call a pattern matcher so 
that the language can be simplified. Alice won the 
Loebner Prize 8  three times in 2000, 2001, and 
2004, an award for the most human-like system 
(Shieber, 1994). However, because of the 
limitations of AIML, the capacities of these 
chatbots are constrained. For example, Alice failed 
to pass the ultimate Turing Test9, partially because 
chitchat systems built using AIML cannot maintain 
a dialogue for a long period of time.  
 
2.2 Task-completion Conversational Systems 
 
In contrast to chitchat systems, task-completion 
systems are designed for accomplishing specific 
tasks. 
These 
systems 
usually 
operate 
on 
constrained domains (Glass et al., 1995; Seneff et 
al., 1998; Rudnicky et al., 1999; Levin et al., 2000; 
Walk et al., 2001, 2002; Raux et al., 2005; 
Andreani et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2011; Tur and 
Mori, 2011). Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of 
a traditional task-completion spoken dialog system. 
 
This architecture comprises an automatic speech 
recognizer 
(ASR), 
a 
spoken 
language 
understanding (SLU) module, a dialog manager 
(DM), a natural language generator (NLG), and a 
text-to-speech (TTS) synthesizer. The ASR takes 
raw audio signals, transcribes them into word 
                                                          
7 https://www.chatbots.org/chatbot/parry/ 
8 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loebner_Prize. The Loebner 
Prize was set up in 1990 by Hugh Loebner, with a Grand 
Prize of $100,000 to the creators of the first bot that can 
pass an extended Turing Test involving textual, visual, and 
auditory components.  
9https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/artificial_linguistic_internet_
computer_entity 
hypotheses and transmits the hypotheses to the 
SLU. The goal of the SLU is to capture the core 
semantics of the given sequence of words (the 
utterance).  It identifies the dialog domain and the 
user’s intent and parses the semantic slots in the 
user’s utterance. The DM’s goal is to interact with 
users and assist them in achieving their goals. It 
checks if the required semantic representation is 
filled and decides the system’s action. It accesses 
the knowledge database to acquire the desired 
information the user is looking for. The DM also 
includes dialog state tracking and policy selection, 
so that the dialog agent can make more robust 
decisions (Williams and Young, 2007). More 
recent work focuses on building end-to-end 
systems where multiple components are jointly 
optimized to cope with the large variability 
occurring in dialog systems (He and Deng, 2013; 
Wen et al., 2016; Sarikaya et al., 2016).  
 
   
 
Figure 2. Illustration of a task-completion system. 
 
2.3 Intelligent Personal Assistants 
 
Apple released Siri in 2011. Since then, several 
intelligent personal assistants (IPAs) have been 
built and introduced to the market, e.g., Cortana 
from Microsoft 10, Google Assistant, and Alexa 
from Amazon. IPAs integrate information from 
multiple 
sensors 
including 
location, 
time, 
movement, touch, gestures, eye gaze, and have 
access to various data sources such as music, 

As a result, they can provide a broad set of 
services covering a wide range of domains. For 
certain requests that cannot be directly answered, 
IPAs often default to Web search as backup.   
 
IPAs provide reactive and proactive assistance to 
users to accomplish a variety of tasks (Sarikaya 
2017). For example, reactive assistance includes 
information consumption such as weather report, 
and task assistance such as restaurant reservation 
as shown in Figure 3(a). In contrast, proactive 
                                                          
10 Microsoft also released a Voice Command app in 2003 
which can control Windows Mobile devices by voice. 

 
 
assistance 
includes 
reminding 
the 
user 
of 
upcoming events, or recommending specific 
products or services to the user, according to the 
user’s profile and relevant contextual information 
such as time and location, as shown in Figure 3(b). 
IPAs undergo continual improvements on major 
mobile phone platforms, personal computers, 
smart home devices (e.g., intelligent speakers), and 
wearable devices (e.g., smart watches), with the 
help of seamless integration of multiple services 
and convenient natural user interfaces.  
 
  
 
Figure 
3. 
Examples 
of 
IPA 
actions. 
(a) 
Recommending a restaurant (reactive assistance) 
by Siri, and (b) reminder of an upcoming event 
with 
relevant 
traffic 
information 
(proactive 
assistance) by Cortana. 
 
2.4 Social Chatbots 
 
The current social media age has been made 
possible with the proliferation of smartphones and 
advancement of broadband wireless technology. 
With vastly more people being digitally connected, 
it is not surprising that social chatbots have been 
developed as an alternative means for engagement. 
Unlike early chatbots designed for chitchat, social 
chatbots have been created to serve users’ needs 
for communication, affection, and social belonging  
rather than for passing the Turing Test. Therefore, 
social chatbots must be able to recognize emotion 
and track emotional changes during a conversation.  
 
Social chatbots can also perform a variety of tasks 
for users in the context of casual chats. For this 
purpose, social chatbots must develop a set of 
skills 
to 
accommodate 
users’ 
requests. 
Interestingly, unlike task-completion systems and 
IPAs that are designed for efficiency (i.e., 
accomplishing tasks and ending the conversation 
as quickly as possible), social chatbots take time to 
converse like a human, presenting results, offering 
perspectives, prompting new topics to keep the 
conversation going.  
 
XiaoIce has been the most widely deployed social 
chatbot since it was released by Microsoft in May 
2014. It understands users’ emotional needs and 
engages in interpersonal communications like a 
friend, cheering users up, encouraging them, and 
holding their attention throughout the conversation.  
 
Users have provided feedback that conversations 
with XiaoIce have resulted in a more positive 
outlook, a feeling of emotional support, and a 
sense of social belonging. Such conversations have 
helped in building trust and an emotional 
connection between human users and social 
chatbots, providing the opportunity for bots to 
better understand users, and serve them more 
effectively. Some chat examples between XiaoIce 
and users are shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
                 (a)                                     (b) 
 
Figure 4. Chat examples between XiaoIce and 
users, showing (a) the emotional connection (the 
full conversation session is shown in Figure 14); 
and (b) how to invoke a skill (e.g., weather 
reporting) in a casual chat. Note that XiaoIce 
offers a perspective about the weather, e.g., “no 
need to use moisturizer~”.  
 
These major conversational systems discussed in 
this section are summarized in Table 1. For the 
remainder of the paper, we will focus on social 
chatbots, starting with their design principles. 

 
 
 
Table 1: Summary of major conversational systems 

 
 
 
3. Design Principles of Social Chatbots  
 
3.1 EQ + IQ 
 
The primary goal of social chatbots is to be AI 
companions to humans with an emotional 
connection. 
Emotional 
affection 
and 
social 
belonging are some of the fundamental needs for 
human beings (Maslow, 1943). Therefore, building 
social chatbots to address these emotional needs is 
of great value to our society. To fulfill these needs, 
a social chatbot must demonstrate a sufficient EQ 
(Beldoch 1964; Gardner 1983; Goleman 1995; 
Goleman 1998; Murphy 2014). Accordingly, a 
social chatbot needs to develop the following 
capabilities: empathy, social skills, personality and 
integration of EQ and IQ.   
 
Understanding users: A social chatbot must have 
empathy. It needs to have the ability to identify 
the user’s emotions from the conversation, to 
detect how emotions evolve over time, and to 
understand the user’s emotional needs. This 
requires query understanding, user profiling, 
emotion detection, sentiment recognition, and 
dynamically tracking the mood of the user in a 
conversation. 
Modeling 
of 
contextual 
information 
in 
the 
dialog 
session 
and 
commonsense knowledge is also critical for user 
understanding.  
 
Interpersonal response generation: A social 
chatbot must demonstrate sufficient social skills. 
Users 
have 
different 
backgrounds, 
varied 
personal interests, and unique needs. A social 
chatbot needs to have the ability to personalize 
the generation of responses for different users. It 
needs to generate responses that are emotionally 
appropriate, encouraging and motivating, and fit 
the interests of the user. It may generate 
responses in attractive styles (e.g., having a sense 
of humor) that improve user engagement. It 
needs to guide conversation topics and manage 
an amicable relationship in which the user feels 
he or she is well understood and is inspired to 
continue to converse with the bot. It should also 
be aware of inappropriate information and can 
avoid generating biased responses for instance. 
 
Personality: A social chatbot needs to present a 
consistent personality, so that it can gain the 
user’s confidence and trust. A consistent 
personality of the chatbot helps the user to set the 
right expectation in the conversation. Personality 
settings include age, gender, language, speaking 
style, general (positive) attitude, level of 
knowledge, areas of expertise, and a proper voice 
accent. These settings will influence the 
generation of responses to the user. Moreover, 
the bot needs to continuously learn and improve 
from the interactions with users through active 
and adaptive learning. 
 
Integration of both EQ and IQ: Beyond chitchat, 
social chatbots need to acquire a range of skills 
to help complete some specific tasks for users. 
They need to analyze users’ requests and perform 
necessary reasoning and execution to respond to 
these requests, e.g., answering a question or 
taking an action. A sufficiently high IQ is 
required for a social chatbot. IQ capacities 
include knowledge and memory modeling, image 
and 
language 
understanding, 
reasoning, 
generation, and prediction. These IQ capabilities 
are not only the technical foundations of various 
skills, but also essential for building high level 
EQ capabilities.   
 
Social chatbots should deliver results in such a 
way that they are easily understood by users. They 
should also suggest or encourage new topics to 
extend the conversation further. For instance, 
Figure 5 shows how IQ and EQ are combined in a 
conversation. The chatbot first parses the user’s 
question (area of China) and then infers the answer 
(3.71 million square miles). Then the chatbot 
presents the answer more like a human, with the 
perspective of being aware of the user’s level of 
knowledge (knowing how big the US is).  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Both IQ and EQ play key roles in a 
social chatbot. Not only is the area of China 
presented, but this number is made understandable 
by comparing with the US, which the chatbot 
believes the user should know. 

 
 
Figure 6 shows another way of EQ and IQ 
integration. Rather than presenting the results to 
the user directly, sometimes a social chatbot will 
generate responses that might help to understand 
the user better and inspire more interesting topics 
for the conversation. In this example, the user asks 
the current time. The chatbot does not tell the time 
immediately, instead replies with something 
relevant, in an attempt to better understand the user 
intent. The chatbot does show the correct answer at 
the end of the conversation, and then proactively 
tries to extend the chat by asking if the user is 
planning for a new trip.  
 
 
 
                  (a)                                 (b)           
 
Figure 6. A chat example between XiaoIce and a 
user, in English translation (a) and in Chinese (b), 
showing that both IQ and EQ are important for a 
social chatbot. The bot knows the answer. But 
rather than returning the answer directly, it 
attempts to lead the chat to a more interesting 
direction and extend the conversation. 
 
Social chatbots should be able to communicate 
with users through different modalities (e.g., text, 
voice, image and video); as a result, they need high 
IQ for speech, text, and visual understanding. 
While text messages are the most common, the 
user could also speak to the chatbot or simply 
share an image. The chatbot needs to be able to 
parse the text, recognize the speech, or detect the 
salient information in the image to understand user 
intent. The chatbot will also respond with text, 
speech, or visual output, depending on the context.  
 
3.2 Social Chatbot Metrics 
 
Unlike task-completion conversational systems 
where their performance can be measured by task 
success rate, measuring the performance of 
chatbots is difficult (Shawar et al., 2007; Zhou et 
al., 2016). In the past, the Turing test and its 
extensions have been used to evaluate chitchat 
performance (Shieber, 1994). However, the Turing 
test is not a proper metric for evaluating the 
success of emotional engagement with users. 
Instead, we define conversation-turns per session 
(CPS) as the success metric for social chatbots. It 
is the average number of conversation-turns 
between 
the 
chatbot 
and 
the 
user 
in 
a 
conversational session. The larger the CPS is, the 
better engaged the social chatbot is.  
 
Interestingly, conversational systems can be 
categorized by their targeting CPS. As shown in 
Table 2, web search, for example, is essentially a 
question-and-answering system, thus is expected to 
return the answer immediately, i.e. in one single 
step. Not being able to find the target web link in 
one step is regarded as a failure for the search 
engine. For intelligent personal assistants, to 
understand what the user is asking, e.g., checking 
weather or inquiring about business hours, we 
expect the system to typically ask a couple of 
clarifying questions before returning the correct 
information. For more complicated tasks such as 
customer services or travel planning, however, the 
system is expected to need several turns of 
conversation to resolve issues (e.g., filling in forms 
with user and product information). Finally, for a 
social chatbot, the system is expected to sustain a 
rather long conversation with the user to fulfill the 
needs of affection and belonging. Social chatbots 
are designed to keep users continuously engaged if 
possible.  
 
Table 2: Expected conversation-turns per session 
(CPS) for different types of conversational systems. 
System
Expected CPS
Web Search
1
Personal assistant
1~3
Task-completion
3~7
Social chatbot
10+
 
 
4. Framework and Components of Social 
Chatbots  
 
In this section, we describe the framework and 
components of a typical social chatbot, namely 
chat manager, core chat, visual awareness, and 
skills. 

 
 
4.1 Overall framework 
 
An overall architecture for designing social 
chatbots is shown in Figure 7. First, the system has 
a multimodal interface to receive the user’s input 
in text, image, and voice. The system has a chat 
manager to dispatch the input to proper modules, 
such as core-chat or visual awareness, for 
understanding the input and generating the output. 
Given different scenarios, the chat manager will 
invoke various skills, send the user’s request to 
corresponding skill components and get a response 
from them. The chat manager will then coordinate 
relevant modules to generate the output that fits the 
context of the current conversation. We will 
elaborate core-chat, visual awareness and skills in 
detail in this section.  
 
4.2 Core-chat  
 
Core-chat is the central module of social chatbots. 
It receives the text input from the user and 
generates a text response as the output. It provides 
the communication capability of social chatbots. 
Figure 8 shows key components in core-chat. 
 
First, the user’s input is sent to a user 
understanding 
component, 
where 
semantic 
encoding and intent understanding is performed 
(Tur and Deng 2011; Liu et al., 2015; Vinyals and 
Le, 2015). It also detects the sentiment reflected in 
the input message and infers the user’s emotion 
status (Tokuhisa et al., 2008; Mower et al., 2011; 
Socher et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2016; Chen et al., 
2016). The contextual information from the current 
dialog session is usually extracted and used for 
understanding the current message. To better 
understand the user intent and emotion, the social 
chatbot maintains a profile for each user, which 
stores each user’s basic information such as age, 
gender, background, interests, etc. The user profile 
also tracks certain dynamic information, such as 
emotion status, which will be updated frequently. 
To more precisely understand the user intent, 
knowledge bases such as Freebase 11  and the 
Microsoft Concept Graph (Wang et al., 2015) can 
be used.   
 
The processed information is then sent to a 
response-generation 
component 
to 
produce 
responses. The response candidates are typically 
generated by two approaches: retrieval-based (Lu 
and Li, 2013; Li et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2016) or 
generation-based (Vinyals and Le, 2015; Sordoni 
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Serban et al., 2017).  
                                                          
11 http://www.freebase.com   
 
Figure 7: Architecture of a social chatbot. 
Figure 8: Architecture of the core-chat module. 

 
 
In the retrieval-based approach, a chat index is first 
constructed from a database of message-response 
pairs that are crawled from human-to-human 
dialogs, e.g., from social networks. All responses 
are indexed by the messages that invoke them. At 
runtime, the input message from the user is treated 
as a raw query, and an information retrieval (IR) 
model like those used in web search, is used to 
retrieve similar messages in the chat index and 
return their corresponding responses. 
 
Generation-based approaches have recently made 
great progress due to advancements in deep 
learning. In this approach, an encoder-decoder-
based neural network model is used (Sutskever et 
al., 2014, Bahdanau et al., 2015). First, the 
message from the user and the contextual 
information are encoded into representation 
vectors, usually by a long short-term memory 
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) 
recurrent 
neural 
network 
(RNN). 
These 
representation vectors are then fed into a decoder, 
usually another LSTM, to generate the response 
word-by-word (Vinyals and Le, 2015). Figure 9 
illustrates such an encoder-decoder framework. 
Other auxiliary information such as intent, 
sentiment, and emotion, can also be encoded into 
vector representations and fed into the LSTM to 
control the generation of responses.  
 
 
 
Figure 9: RNN based encoder-decoder framework 
for response generation. The user says, “hi dude”, 
and the chatbot replies “how are you”.  
 
These response candidates will be further ranked 
by a personalization ranker according to their 
match to the user’s general interests and 
preferences (Wang et al., 2013; Elkahky et al., 
2015). For example, first the information in the 
user’s profile may be encoded into a latent 
representation vector, while each of the response 
candidates is encoded into another latent vector. 
Then both latent vectors are fed into a deep neural 
network (DNN) to compute a matching score to be 
used for ranking the response candidates. The top-
ranked response will be sent to the user. 
 
In the conversation, rather than letting the topic 
drift randomly or completely controlled by the user, 
the social chatbot can drive the conversation to a 
positive, desired topic through carefully generating 
responses. Figure 10 illustrates how the chatbot 
can guide the conversation appropriately to a 
targeted region of topics, by preferring those 
response candidates with better similarity to the 
targeting topic at every conversation turn.  
 
 
                 (a)                                      (b) 
 
Figure 10: Effect of topic guidance. Each dot 
represents a conversation sentence in topic space 
(3-D space as illustration). Blue dots represent 
topics of the user’s messages, red dots represent 
topics of the chatbot’s responses. (a) Without topic 
guidance, the topics appear to move randomly, or 
are purely driven by the user. (b) With topic 
guidance, the chatbot can guide the topics to a 
targeted region, represented by green dots.  
 
Generating responses that reflect a consistent 
personality is important for the chatbot (Güzeldere 
and Franchi, 1995). This makes the chatbot easier 
to communicate with, more predictable and 
trustable, and therefore helps to establish an 
emotional connection with the user. The core-chat 
module depends on a personality component to set 
and maintain the personality for the chatbot. The 
personality setting of a social chatbot usually 
includes age, gender, language style, and areas of 
expertise. The chatbot’s personality information 
can be encoded into a latent vector representation 
using deep neural networks and used to influence 
response generation. A persona-based model has 
been recently proposed (Li et al., 2016), which can 
be used to effectively integrate personality 
information in conversation generation. Similarly, 
models that learn to control the style and sentiment 
in 
language 
generation 
are 
also 
proposed 
(Mathews et al., 2015).  

 
 
The development of the core-chat module should 
follow an ethical design to ensure the generated 
responses are appropriate, unbiased, and non-
discriminative, and that they comply with 
universal and local ethical standards. The system 
also learns to identify and filter out inappropriate 
content that users might share. Meanwhile, the 
system will keep learning from user feedback, and 
adapt to new circumstances. All these components 
are integrated and optimized to achieve the goal of 
building strong emotional connections with users 
and better serving their needs for communication, 
affection, and social belonging.  
 
4.3 Visual Awareness 
 
Social chatbots need to understand images because 
they are frequently shared in social chatting. The 
visual awareness of a social chatbot refers to its 
ability to generate text comments, known as image 
social commenting, from input images. Beyond 
correctly 
recognizing objects 
and 
truthfully 
describing the content, image commenting should 
also reflect personal emotion, sentiment, attitude, 
and style in language generation given input 
images. Figure 11 presents several examples to 
illustrate three levels of image understanding. The 
first level is object recognition (or tagging), where 
the key objects in the image are recognized. At the 
second level is image description. The factual and 
semantic information of the image, e.g. salient 
objects and relationships among them, is described 
by natural language. At the third level, the chatbot 
generates expressive comments in a social style, 
demonstrating its empathy and interpersonal skills.  
 
The overall architecture for image commenting is 
similar to that for core-chat. For example, there are 
retrieval-based and generation-based approaches 
for comment generation. In the retrieval-based 
approach, first a comment pool of image-comment 
pairs, e.g., collected from social networks, is 
constructed. Then each image is encoded into a 
global visual feature vector which represents the 
overall semantic information of the image, using 
deep convolutional neural networks (CNN), as 
illustrated in Figure 12. At runtime, when a new 
image is received, the chatbot first retrieves images 
that are similar to the input (e.g., as measured by 
the distance between their visual feature vectors) 
and 
then 
returns 
corresponding 
comment 
candidates, which are further re-ranked to generate 
the final comments. As an alternative, the deep 
multimodal similarity model (Fang et al., 2015) 
can directly measure the semantic similarity 
between an input image and an arbitrary textual 
hypothesis, and therefore retrieve comments 
without being limited to the image-comment pool.  
The generation-based approach treats image 
commenting as an image-to-language generation 
task (He and Deng 2017) but will have more 
flexibility for controlling high-level sentiment or 
style factors in comment generation (Mathews et 
al., 2015; Gan et al., 2017). As with core-chat, the 
personalization ranker and topic guidance are 
integrated 
into 
comment 
generation. 
User 
understanding, personality setting, and ethical 
design play important roles in visual awareness as 
well.  
 
(a)
outdoor, woman, grass
(b) 
a woman wearing a blue 
shirt.
(c) 
gorgeous and beautiful as 
an angel!
(a) 
sunglasses, man 
(b)
a man wearing sunglasses 
taking a selfie.
(c) 
you look handsome in all 
shades.
 
(a) 
water, tree, river, boat 
(b) 
a tree next to a body of 
water.
(c) 
beautiful place looks like 
you are in the heaven!
 
Figure 11. Examples of (a) image tagging, (b) 
image 
description, 
and 
(c) 
image 
social 
commenting. 
 
 
  
Figure 12. Deep convolutional neural network for 
visual feature vector extraction.  
 

 
 
4.4 Skills 
 
Social chatbots can significantly expand their 
scopes of conversation by integrating a range of 
skills. These skills can be categorized into four 
groups according to their target scenarios (e.g., 
skills for personal scenarios or for group scenarios) 
and their properties (e.g., an emotional skill or a 
rational skill). Table 3 shows some typical skills in 
each group. 
 
Table 3: Examples of social chatbot skills. 
Emotional skills
Rational skills
Personal 
scenarios
Self-management: mood simulation, 
episodic memory tracking 
Engagement: 
personal 
event 
reminder  
Proactive User Comfort: comforting 
user, imagination inspiration, 
expressing affection 
Digital life: meeting, weather, event 
Shopping assistance: online shopping, 
discounts and coupons 
Content generation: composing poetry, 
singing 
a 
song, 
drawing 
a 
picture 
Social 
scenarios
Role-playing: 
joke-making, 
babysitting 
Group 
activity: 
adding 
users, 
sending greeting cards, group 
assistant 
Emoji: emoji creation 
Image intelligence: recognizing dogs, 
books, faces, clothes, food 
TV and Radio hostess: weather report, 
interaction with audience 
Tools: device control, music and 
movie recommendation 
 
 
5. Case Study: XiaoIce 
 
In this section, we describe XiaoIce as an example 
of significant progress in the development of social 
chatbots. Since its release in 2014 in China, 
XiaoIce (which literally means “Little Bing”) has 
become the first widely deployed social chatbot. 
Using 
the 
design 
principles 
and 
technical 
framework discussed in the previous sections, 
XiaoIce has been designed as a 19-year-old female 
persona, strong language ability, visual awareness, 
and over 180 skills like those listed in Table 3. 
Currently, XiaoIce has more than 100 million 
unique users worldwide and has chatted with 
human users for more 30 billion conversation turns.   
 
By leveraging the scalable architecture and 
learning-based framework, different versions of 
XiaoIce were quickly released in Japan in 2015, 
US in 2016, and India and Indonesia in 2017. Over 
the last three years, XiaoIce has continuously 
improved through a series of technical upgrades. 
Figure 13 summarizes the user engagement 
performance of XiaoIce in China, measured by the 
average CPS. The results show that on average, 
each session lasts 23 conversation turns between 
XiaoIce and a human user.   
 
 
Table 4 shows the longest single sessions in 
different countries: China, Japan, and the US. The 
high 
CPS 
and 
long 
conversation 
sessions 
demonstrate the value of XiaoIce to users in their 
daily lives. 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Average CPS improvement over year of 
XiaoIce in China.  
 
Table 4: Longest single chat sessions in different 
countries 
Country 
#Conversation-
turns  
Time 
length 
China (XiaoIce) 
7151 
29 hrs 33 
mins 
Japan (Rinna) 
2418 
17 hrs 07 
mins 
US (Zo) 
2791 
23 hrs 43 
mins 
5
19
23
23
2014
2015
2016
2017
average CPS

 
 
In the rest of this section, we highlight several 
important features that have made XiaoIce 
exceedingly popular, including perceived high EQ, 
entertaining visual awareness, and engaging skills 
such as generating poems, and speaking and 
singing in a high-quality human-like voice.  
 
5.1 Chat with EQ 
 
Figure 14 shows a relatively long chat between 
XiaoIce and a female user, lasting for 31 minutes 
and 34 conversation turns. At the beginning, the 
user wanted a casual chat. The time was after 
midnight and the message said the user was tired. 
Once detecting an emotion of getting “lost”, 
XiaoIce decided to guide the chat towards cheering 
up the user. After several turns, the user’s mood 
became “happy” and “love”, as identified by 
XiaoIce. However, triggered by some subtle clues 
in the conversation, XiaoIce detected that the 
user’s emotion changed to “sad” and “lost” again. 
Instead of ending the chat, XiaoIce asked some 
additional questions to understand shift in the 
user’s emotion. After several more turns, the user 
started to open up and trusted XiaoIce more like a 
human friend (starting at the turn marked by the 
red triangle in Figure 14). She discussed topics that 
were highly personal and sensitive, like her 
relationship with her boyfriend. Throughout the 
conversation, XiaoIce demonstrated high empathy 
and social skills, and guided the dialogue to create 
a more positive mood for the user. At the end of 
the chat, the user felt much better, and 
complimented XiaoIce.  
 
Figure 14: An example of a conversation session between XiaoIce and a user, translated into English. The 
original chat in Chinese is shown in the appendix. 

 
 
This example demonstrates that XiaoIce can 
dynamically recognize the user’s emotions and 
generate consistent, interpersonal responses to 
cheer up, encourage, and engage the user 
throughout 
the 
conversation. 
Its 
EQ 
was 
effectively used to build an emotional connection 
with the user. 
 
5.2 Image Commenting 
 
Figure 15 shows typical image commenting 
examples from XiaoIce (in Chinese and English).  
 
Description: 
比萨斜塔 
(Pisa tower) 
Comment from XiaoIce: 
我要不要帮你扶着？ 
(Should I help you to hold 
it?) 
Description: 
图中有两只猫. 
(Two cats in the picture.) 
Comment from XiaoIce: 
小眼神太犀利了[大笑] 
(Eyes are so sharp [LOL])
Description: 
一只肿了的脚. 
(A swollen foot.) 
Comment from XiaoIce: 
伤的这么重！疼不疼？ 
(It harms so bad! Does it 
hurt?) 
 
Figure 15. Examples of image commenting of 
XiaoIce.  
 
Besides 
understanding 
the 
content 
(e.g., 
identifying objects) in the image shared by the user, 
XiaoIce can provide a human-like commentary 
that fits into the context of the current chat and 
stimulate a longer conversation.  For example, in 
the first picture, rather than telling the user the 
name of the Leaning Tower of Pisa (which the user 
likely knows already), XiaoIce replies “should I 
help you to hold it?” after detecting that the person 
in the picture is presenting a pose pretending to 
support the leaning tower. In the second example, 
instead of relaying the fact about two cats in the 
picture, XiaoIce makes a humorous comment (with 
the addition of a laugh emoticon) about one of the 
cat’s sharp look. In the third example, XiaoIce 
identifies a foot injury and sympathizes with the 
user. These examples demonstrate that XiaoIce can 
combine image understanding, user understanding, 
and contextual information to generate image 
social commenting for better user engagement.  
 
5.3 Composing Poems  
 
XiaoIce can generate even more expressive text, 
such as authoring poems from an input image by 
getting inspiration from the image content (Song et 
al., 2018), as shown in Figure 16. Given an input 
image, XiaoIce first recognizes objects and 
sentiments to form an initial set of keywords, such 
as city and busy in the example. These keywords 
are then filtered and expanded by associated 
objects and feelings. Each keyword is regarded as 
an initial seed for generating a sentence in the 
poem. A hierarchical RNN is then used to model 
the structure between words and the structure 
between sentences. A fluency checker is developed 
to control the quality of generated sentences. On 
May 15th, 2017, XiaoIce published the first fully 
AI-created Chinese poem book in history12. Since 
the release of the XiaoIce-for-poem-writing cloud 
service, she has written millions of Chinese poems 
for users, exceeding the total number of poems 
ever produced throughout China’s written history. 
XiaoIce even defeated human poets on a Chinese 
national TV program in August 2017. XiaoIce 
submitted her poems anonymously to leading 
poetry journals, including Youth Literature, West 
China City Daily, Beijing Morning Post, and 
Beijing Economic Journal. After regular reviews 
conducted by editors, these journals have accepted 
and published more than 70 poems by XiaoIce, 
demonstrating its impressive literary skills.  
                                                          
12 https://item.jd.com/12076535.html  

 
 
 
5.4 Text-to-Speech and Singing  
 
Unlike conventional text-to-speech (TTS) systems, 
XiaoIce’s TTS is specifically designed for social 
chat, which has unique challenges such as prosody 
variety, and casual and emotional expression in 
TTS. To address these issues, a new prosody 
model is trained on a big corpus of conversational 
speech. Given that neutral tone appears more 
frequently than usual in social chat, a neutral tone 
system is also developed to significantly enhance 
the naturalness of synthesized voice. XiaoIce also 
supports Chinese-English mixed-lingual TTS. By 
merging two languages and building one unified 
model, the smoothness when switching languages 
is greatly improved. Finally, emoticons are 
designed and synthesized to make XiaoIce’s TTS 
livelier and more attractive.  
 
XiaoIce’s singing skill is based on a high-quality 
parameter synthesis system. F0 contour and phone 
duration are decided by music score while 
spectrum parameters and aperiodic signal are 
predicted based on linguistic and musical context. 
A dedicated DNN-based model is also designed to 
sing the long-spanned note in the song, e.g., one 
syllable may last a few hundreds of milliseconds. 
Samples of XiaoIce’s TTS and singing can be 
found online13.  
 
6 
Outlook and Discussion 
 
In the three years since XiaoIce was released on 
social platforms such as WeChat and Weibo in 
China, she has become an Internet celebrity, 
appearing as a weather and news anchor, hosting 
                                                          
13 https://y.qq.com/n/yqq/singer/0043wAMw0XrGgp.html  
TV programs, and working as a newspaper 
reporter. For example, XiaoIce has authored more 
than 300 articles for QianJiang Evening News, 
published on its printed newspapers and mobile 
App, which have been viewed more than 1.2 
million times. To write these news articles, 
XiaoIce read more than 114 million articles and 
analyzed 503 million pieces of user feedback 
including many user comments. More impressive 
is that readers of these news articles "feel that they 
are more understood by XiaoIce," as highlighted 
by People’s Daily
14 , the most influential 
newspaper in China. XiaoIce also acts as the 
hostess for many TV and radio stations. For 
example, XiaoIce presents the “Morning Live 
News” on Dragon TV daily for almost 2 years. 
XiaoIce also hosts a whole season of “I am the 
future” on HuNan TV. Meanwhile, XiaoIce also 
participates in many public TV programs. In a 
high-profile TV program, AI vs. Human, on 
CCTV-1 on every Friday, XiaoIce demonstrates 
her skill of authoring poems and creating songs 
from scratch. She even beat human authors in 
these competitions, judged by the audience.  
 
Social chatbots are becoming more popular in 
other countries as well, e.g., Japan, US, India, and 
Indonesia. Rinna, the Japanese version of XiaoIce, 
for example, has also become an Internet celebrity 
in Japan. She attended the famous episode “The 
world’s wonder stories” in autumn 2016 in Japan 
as herself, for a total of 11 programs in 9 TV and 
radio stations (1193 hours altogether). 
 
                                                          
14
http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2017-
09/28/nw.D110000renmrb_20170928_3-23.htm  
 
Figure 16: XiaoIce’s pipeline for authoring a poem (Song et al., 2018). 

 
 
As AI companions, social chatbots such as XiaoIce 
also enable new scenarios that are of significant 
commercial 
value. 
While 
traditional 
task-
completion conversational systems can reactively 
perform the task per user’s explicit request (e.g., 
reserving a flight ticket, or reporting weather), 
only a small number of requests are explicitly 
invoked by users. IPAs attempt to address this 
issue by providing proactive assistance such as 
recommending services according to the user’s 
preference stored in user profile and contextual 
information based on time, location, and events on 
the user’s calendar. However, such information is 
often incomplete and ambiguous, making proactive 
assistance often ineffective. In contrast, given the 
rich contextual information in a long conversation, 
social chatbots can recognize user interests and 
intent much more accurately, and suggest relevant 
services only when truly needed. Figure 17 shows 
an example conversation in Japanese between a 
user and Rinna. Rinna detected that the user was 
hungry, but rather than directly recommending a 
coupon for buying cookies, Rinna kept the 
conversation going for a few more turns until the 
user's intention became specific and clear. It is 
only then that Rinna invoked the coupon skill 
provided by a grocery store and sent the user a 
coupon. The users’ feedback log shows that the 
products recommended by Rinna are very well 
received by the users. For the grocery store, Rinna 
has delivered a much higher conversion rate than 
that achieved using other traditional channels such 
as coupon markets or ad campaigns in Japan. 
 
Despite recent progress of social chatbots such as 
XiaoIce, the fundamental mechanism of human-
level intelligence, as frequently reflected in 
human-to-human communication, is not yet fully 
understood. It will be incredibly challenging to 
build an intelligent social chatbot that can totally 
understand humans and their surrounding physical 
world 
to 
serve 
their 
needs. 
It 
requires 
breakthroughs in many areas of cognitive and 
conscious AI, such as empathic conversation 
modeling, knowledge and memory modeling, 
interpretable and controllable machine intelligence, 
deep neural-symbolic reasoning, cross-media and 
continuous streaming artificial intelligence, and 
modeling and calibration of emotional or intrinsic 
rewards reflected in human needs. These are 
challenging and open AI problems. 
 
 
 
Figure 17: A conversation between the user (in 
white) and Rinna (in yellow), in Japanese and with 
English translation. It shows that Rinna can 
identify the user’s potential shopping needs. The 
user is then guided by Rinna in the conversation to 
ask for a coupon supplied by the grocery store.  
 
As AI becomes more pervasive in our lives, in the 
forms of robots, IoT (internet of things) devices, 
and online chatbots, it is imperative to establish 
ethical guidelines for designing and implementing 
such AI systems. It is also critical to develop fail-
safe mechanisms to ensure that these systems do 
not disadvantage and harm anyone, physically or 
mentally. Given the significant reach and influence 
of social chatbots, their designers must properly 
exercise both social and ethical responsibilities.  
Design decisions must be thoughtfully debated and 
chatbot features must be evaluated thoroughly and 
adjusted as we continue to learn from the 
interaction between social chatbots like XiaoIce 
and millions of people on many social platforms.  
 
Acknowledgement 
The authors are grateful to the entire XiaoIce team 
at Microsoft Search Technology Center Asia 
(STCA) and many colleagues at Microsoft 
Research Asia (MSRA) for the development of 
XiaoIce. The authors are also thankful to 
colleagues in Microsoft Research AI for the 
valuable discussions and feedbacks.
