Emo-CNN for Perceiving Stress from Audio
Signals: A Brain Chemistry Approach
1st Anup Anand Deshmukh
University of Waterloo, Canada

2nd Catherine Soladie
Centralesupelec, France

3rd Renaud Seguier
Centralesupelec, France

Abstract—Emotion plays a key role in many applications like
healthcare, to gather patients emotional behavior. While typical
ASR (Automated Speech Recognition) problems focus on what
was said, it is equally important to understand how it was said.
There are certain emotions which are given more importance
due to their effectiveness in understanding human feelings. In
this paper, we propose an approach that models human stress
from audio signals. The research challenge in speech emotion
detection is ﬁnding the appropriate set of acoustic features
corresponding to an emotion. Another difﬁculty lies in deﬁning
the very meaning of stress and being able to categorize it in a
precise manner. Supervised Machine Learning models, including
state of the art Deep Learning classiﬁcation methods, rely on
the availability of clean and labelled data. One of the problems
in affective computation and emotion detection is the limited
amount of annotated data of stress. The existing labelled stress
emotion datasets are highly subjective to the perception of the
annotator.
We address the ﬁrst issue of feature selection by exploiting
the use of traditional MFCC features in Convolutional Neural
Network. Our proposed Emo-CNN architecture treats speech
representations in a manner similar to how CNNs treat images
in a computer vision problem. Our experiments show that Emo-
CNN consistently and signiﬁcantly outperforms the popular
existing methods over multiple datasets. It achieves 90.2%
categorical accuracy on the Emo-DB dataset. We claim that
Emo-CNN is robust to speaker variations and environmental
distortions. The proposed approach achieves 85.5% speaker-
dependant categorical accuracy for SAVEE dataset, beating the
existing CNN based approach by 10.2%.
To tackle the second and the more signiﬁcant problem of
subjectivity in stress labels, we use Lovheim’s cube, which is a 3-
dimensional projection of emotions. Monoamine Neurotransmit-
ters are a type of chemical messengers in the brain that transmit
signals on perceiving emotions. The cube aims at explaining the
relationship between these neurotransmitters and the positions of
emotions in 3D space. The learnt emotion representations from
the Emo-CNN are mapped to the cube using three component
PCA (Principal Component Analysis) which is then used to model
human stress. This proposed approach not only circumvents
the need for labelled stress data but also complies with the
psychological theory of emotions given by Lovheim’s cube. We
believe that this work is the ﬁrst step towards creating a
connection between Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the chemistry of
human emotions.
Index Terms—Deep Learning, Speech, Lovheim’s cube, Brain
Chemistry
Fig. 1. Lovheim’s cube of emotions [4]
I. EMO-CNN
It has become increasingly important to understand human
emotions especially stress in many healthcare applications.
The ultimate goal of this work is to build a model capable
of classifying stress and non-stress audio signals. Within the
ﬁrst step, we use CNN which is trained for a classiﬁcation
task over seven emotions. Those seven emotions are: Angry,
Boredom, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Neutral and Sad. The feature
set used for each audio signal is 199 × 39 dimensional.
In order to investigate the performance of Emo-CNN, we
compare our algorithm with SBS+SVM [1], MSF+LDA [2]
and Semi-CNN [3] methods on Emo-DB dataset. The Emo-
DB dataset has 535 clips from 10 actors, 429 of which are
used for training. Table I shows the improvement of Emo-CNN
over aforementioned methods with regards to the classiﬁcation
accuracy.
TABLE I
ENTRIES DESCRIBE THE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE EMO-CNN AND
OTHER APPROACHES
Model
Categorical Accuracy
SBS+SVM [1]
80%
MSF+LDA [2]
85.6%
Semi-CNN [3]
88.3%
Emo-CNN
90.2%
arXiv:2001.02329v1  [cs.HC]  8 Jan 2020

Fig. 2. The proposed approach which circumvents the subjectivity in stress labels
II. LOVHEIM’S CUBE
There have been lot of efforts in deﬁning emotions in a
multi-dimensional space. Such models of emotions aim at
modelling human emotions by deﬁning where they lie in two
or three dimensions. The key idea behind having multiple
dimensions is to incorporate the neurophysiological system
which causes different affective states in humans.
To fulﬁll our ﬁnal goal of identifying stress from audio
signals, we take the help of Lovheim’s cube [4]. This cube
gives the direct relation between speciﬁc combinations of
the levels of the signal substances which are produced in
our bodies and eight basic emotions. These signal substances
are called as Neurotransmitters which are nothing but the
messengers transmitting signals across a chemical synapse in
our bodies. The ﬁgure 1 shows a Lovheim’s cube of emotion
where three Neurotransmitters, dopamine, noradrenaline and
serotonin form the axes of a coordinate system. The eight
basic emotions including seven emotions on which our CNN
is trained and the emotion - stress (distress), are placed in the
eight corners.
We ﬁrst take the 64 dimensional representation from the
second last layer of Emo-CNN and feed it to 3 PCA. This 3
dimensional representation of audio signal is then mapped onto
the Lovheim’s cube. The table II shows the mapped values of
test audio signals by CNN + 3 PCA. The emotion Happy (Joy)
according to the Lovheim’s model is produced by the combina-
tion of low noradrenaline, high dopamine and high serotonin.
Our CNN + 3 PCA model’s learnt representation gives the
levels of these 3 Neurotransmitters as -2.00, 0.16 and 0.69
resp. From table II we can see that this computational method
complies with the theory of Lovheim’s cube from psychology.
Since our proposed method can model the Lovheim’s cube we
can now use the 3 dimensional features of audio signals and
check their proximity to the stress (Distress) point of the cube.
Since Lovheim’s cube gives us the relative position of stress
from other emotions in 3D space, the proposed approach can
easily identify the stressed audio speech without using the
labelled stress data. Refer to ﬁgure 2.
TABLE II
MAPPING OF CNN + 3 PCA ON LOVHEIM’S CUBE
Emotion label
CNN + 3PCA
Dopamine
Noradrenaline
Serotonin
Angry
1.49
0.58
-0.21
Happy
0.16
-2.00
0.69
Fear
0.19
-0.68
-1.77
Disgust
-0.34
-0.14
0.16
III. FUTURE WORK
This work shows the potential of Deep Learning models
in understanding the chemistry of human emotions. It is very
interesting to note that although Emo-CNN was just trained
on audio signals and emotion labels, it was also able to model
the brain chemistry of these emotions. There is signiﬁcant
amount of research still to be conducted to determine the
validity and reliability of this model, particularly in having
the generalizable and meaningful mapping of features onto
Lovheim’s cube. Speciﬁcally, next steps would be to have a
more precise method to ﬁnd the proximity of test audio signals
to the stress (Distress) point of the cube.
