Graph Ordering: Towards the Optimal by Learning
Kangfei Zhao

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Yu Rong

Tencent AI Lab
Jeffrey Xu Yu

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Junzhou Huang

Tencent AI Lab
Hao Zhang

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ABSTRACT
Graph representation learning has achieved a remarkable success
in many graph-based applications, such as node classification, link
prediction, and community detection. These models are usually
designed to preserve the vertex information at different granularity
and reduce the problems in discrete space to some machine learn-
ing tasks in continuous space. However, regardless of the fruitful
progress, for some kind of graph applications, such as graph com-
pression and edge partition, it is very hard to reduce them to some
graph representation learning tasks. Moreover, these problems are
closely related to reformulating a global layout for a specific graph,
which is an important NP-hard combinatorial optimization prob-
lem: graph ordering. In this paper, we propose to attack the graph
ordering problem behind such applications by a novel learning
approach. Distinguished from greedy algorithms based on prede-
fined heuristics, we propose a neural network model: Deep Order
Network (DON) to capture the hidden locality structure from par-
tial vertex order sets. Supervised by sampled partial order, DON
has the ability to infer unseen combinations. Furthermore, to al-
leviate the combinatorial explosion in the training space of DON
and make the efficient partial vertex order sampling , we employ a
reinforcement learning model: the Policy Network, to adjust the
partial order sampling probabilities during the training phase of
DON automatically. To this end, the Policy Network can improve
the training efficiency and guide DON to evolve towards a more
effective model automatically. The training of two networks is per-
formed interactively and the whole framework is called DON-RL.
Comprehensive experiments on both synthetic and real data vali-
date that DON-RL outperforms the current state-of-the-art heuristic
algorithm consistently. Two case studies on graph compression and
edge partitioning demonstrate the potential power of DON-RL in
real applications.
1
INTRODUCTION
Graphs have been widely used to model complex relations among
data, and have been used to support many large real applications
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
(a) Order by GO [42]
(b) Order by DON-RL
Figure 1: Matrix Visualization for the Reordered Facebook
including social networks, biological networks, citation networks
and road networks. In the literature, in addition to the graph al-
gorithms and graph processing systems designed and developed,
graph representation learning have also been studied recently
[3, 7, 14, 15, 19, 21, 29, 31, 35, 37, 41, 46]. They are designed to pre-
serve vertex information at different granularity from microscopic
neighborhood structure to macroscopic community structure, and
are effectively used for node classification, link prediction, influence
diffusion prediction, anomaly detection, network alignment, and
recommendation. The surveys can be found in [12, 20].
In this paper, we concentrate ourselves on a rather different set
of graph problems: graph visualization [6], graph compression [22],
graph edge partitioning [9, 45]. Here, graph visualization is to pro-
vide an effective way to visualize complex data, graph compression
is to find a compact edge layout, and graph edge partitioning is to
partition edges instead of vertices for better load balancing [16, 17].
Such problems can be addressed if we can arrange all vertices in
a good order. The-state-of-art graph ordering [42] reassigns every
vertex a unique number in [1..n] where n is the number of vertices
in the graph by maximizing a cumulated locality score function for
vertices in a sliding window of size w (> 1), which is an NP-hard
combinatorial optimization problem as a general form of the maxi-
mum Travel Salesman Problem (TSP) (w = 1). The GO algorithm
1
arXiv:2001.06631v1  [cs.SI]  18 Jan 2020

proposed in [42] achieves
1
2w -approximation, and its real perfor-
mance is very close to the optimal in their testing, as it is close to
the upper bound of the optimal solution.
Given such a high-quality solution for graph ordering, a nat-
ural question is if we can do better by learning. The answer is
yes. We demonstrate it in Fig. 1, which shows the matrix visualiza-
tion for the Facebook [27] reordered by the GO algorithm and our
new learning-based approach over graph. The left figures are the
overall visualizations and the right are the zoom-in details of the
upper-left part of the overall ordering. Comparing with the GO algo-
rithm [42] (Fig. 1(a)), our learning-based approach (Fig. 1(b)) keeps
the compact permutation better from the local perspective, and has
the advantage of avoiding stucking in forming local dense areas
from the global perspective. Moreover, the learned permutation
has a large potential to support other real applications. Based on
our case studies, the learned permutation reduces the storage costs
larger than 2× compared with the order for real-graph compres-
sion [22]. And the edge partitioning deriving from our approach
outperforms the widely-used partitioning algorithm [9] up to 37%.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized below.
• For the graph ordering problem, distinguished from the tra-
ditional heuristics-based algorithm, we propose a neural net-
work based model: Deep Order Network (DON) to replace
the predefined evaluation function to capture the complex
implicit locality in graphs. Hence our proposed model can
produce a better graph ordering than the current state-of-
the-art heuristics-based algorithm.
• To address the combinatorial explosion in the training space
of DON, we exploit the idea of reinforcement learning and
construct a policy network to learn the sampling probability
of vertices. This policy network enables DON to focus on
vertices which have more remarkable contribution in the
solution and guides DON to evolve towards a more effective
model automatically. The whole learning framework is called
DON-RL.
• We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real-world graphs with different properties. Experimental
results show that DON-RL consistently outperforms the other
algorithms. Furthermore, we conduct two case studies: graph
compression and graph edge partitioning to demonstrate the
potential value of our algorithm in real applications.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the pre-
liminaries, including the problem definition, the intuitions and
challenges. Section 3 gives an overview of our learning framework,
which is composed of a central network for ordering and an aux-
iliary Policy Network. The design principles of these two neural
networks are introduced in Section 4 and Section 5, respectively.
Section 6 presents the experimental result of our approach in solv-
ing the graph ordering problem. We review the related works in
Section 7. Finally, we conclude our approach in Section 8.
2
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, first, the graph ordering problem and its existing
solution are introduced. Then, we elaborate on our intuitive im-
provement and the challenges.
Table 1: Frequently Used Notations
Notations
Definitions
G = (V, E)
directed graph with the vertex set V , the edge set E.
S(u, v)
The pair-wise similarity function of vertex u and v.
F(Φ)
The locality score function of a permutation Φ.
w
The given window size.
ˆQ(S, v; Θ)
Deep Order Network (DON).
Π(s; Θ′)
Policy Network.
prob (probt)
The vertices sampling probability (at time t).
a (at)
The tuning action of vertices sampling probability (at time t).
Dt /DE
The training data at time t / The evaluation data.
Algorithm 1 GO (G = (V, E))
1: S ←∅;
2: while |S| , |V | do
3:
v∗= argmax∀v ∈V Q(S,v) ;
4:
S ←S ∪{v∗};
5: end while
6: return S;
2
1
12
5
4
10
11
9
6
7
3
8
(a) A Directed Graph
2
3
12
1
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
(b) Maximize F(Φ)
Figure 2: An Example of Graph Ordering [42]
2.1
Graph Ordering
Given a graph G = (V, E) where V (G) is a set of vertices and E(G)
is a set of edges of G, the graph ordering problem is to find the
optimal order for all vertices. In brief, let Φ(·) be a permutation
function which assigns a vertex a unique number in [1..n] where
n = |V (G)|. The problem is to find the optimal graph ordering Φ(·)
by maximizing a cumulated locality score F(·) (Eq. (1)) over a sliding
window of size w.
F(Φ) =
Σ
0<Φ(v)−Φ(u)⩽w
S(u,v)
(1)
Here, u, v are two vertices ordered within a window of size w
in the permutation, and S(u,v) is a pair-wise similarity function
to measure the closeness of u and v. In [42], S(u,v) is defined as
S(u,v) = Ss(u,v) + Sn(u,v), where Ss(u,v) is the number of times
that u and v are sibling, and Sn(u,v) is the number of times that u
and v are neighbors.
Example 2.1: Taking the directed graph shown in Fig. 2(a) as an
example, there are 12 nodes numbered from 1 to 12, which is con-
sidered as one possible graph ordering. Table 2 lists the pair-wise
S(u,v) values, in a matrix form for vertices 1 −5 in Fig. 2(a) due
to limited space. Given a window size w = 3, consider a partial
permutation of length 3, Φ = [1, 2, 5] for the vertices in Fig. 2(a),
its locality score F(Φ) = S(1, 2) + S(2, 5) + S(3, 5) = 4. Fig. 2(b)
shows the optimal graph ordering which maximizes F(Φ) given the
window size w = 3.
2
2

Table 2: S(u,v) Values for Fig. 2(a)
S(u, v)
1
2
3
4
5
1
-
2
0
1
1
2
2
-
0
1
1
3
0
0
-
0
0
4
1
1
0
-
1
5
1
1
0
1
-
In general, maximizing F(Φ) is a variant of maximum TSP (for
w = 1) with the sum of weights within a window of size w > 1 and
thus is NP-hard as proven in [42].
Wei et al. in [42] proposed a greedy algorithm (named GO), as
sketched in Algorithm 1, which iteratively extends a partial solution
S by a vertexv∗. The vertexv∗is selected by maximizing a potential
function Q(S,v), which measures the quality of the partial solution
extended by a vertex v, based on the current partial solution S.
In details, in i-th iteration, it computes the cumulated weight
k(v) (Eq.2) for each vertex v and inserts the one with maximum
k(v) in the permutation:
k(v) =
Σ
j=max(1,i−w)
S(vj,v),
(2)
wherek(v) serves as the potential functionQ, {vj |j = max(1,i−w)}
are the last max(1,i −w) inserted vertices. This procedure repeats
until all the vertices in G are placed. The total time complexity of
GO is O(wdmaxn2), where dmax denotes the maximum in-degree
of the graph G. There are n iterations, and in each iteration, it scans
the remaining vertices in O(n) and computes the score k(v) for
the scanned vertex v in O(wdmax). The algorithm achieves
1
2w -
approximation for maximizing F(Φ). It can achieve high-quality
approximations with small window size and its practical perfor-
mance is close to the optimal in the experiments.
2.2
Intuitions and Challenges
Intuitions: Given the current greedy-based framework, Algorithm 1
can be regarded as a discrete Markov Decision Process (MDP) [34]
, where the states are feasible partial permutations, actions are
to insert one vertex to the permutations. For traditional greedy
algorithm with predefined heuristics, the solution is built by a
deterministic trajectory which has locally optimal reward. With
regards to the graph ordering problem, Q(s,a) (Eq. (3)) is simply
approximated by the evaluation function Q(S,v), which is specif-
ically defined in Eq. (2). A natural question arises that can we do
better by learning an expressive, parameterized ˆQ(S, v; Θ) instead.
Inspired by universal approximation theorem [11], deep rein-
forcement learning (DRL) learns a policy π from states to actions
that specifies what action to take in each state. We can formulate
Algorithm 1 as MDP, which is composed by a tuple (S, A, R, P,γ)
: 1) S is a set of possible states, 2) A is a set of possible actions, 3)
R = r(st,at ) is the distribution of reward given state-action (st,at )
pair. 4) P = P(st+1|st,at ) is the transition probability given (st,at )
pair. 5) γ is the reward discount factor. The policy π is a function π:
S →A that specifies what action to perform in each state.
The objective of RL is to find the optimal policy π∗which maxi-
mizes the expected cumulative discounted reward. This cumulative
discounted reward can be defined by the Bellman Equation as below
for all states recursively:
Q(s,a) = E[r(s,a) + γmaxa′Q(s′,a′)|s,a],
(3)
where Q(s,a) and Q(s′,a′) are the maximum expected cumulative
rewards achievable from the state-action pair (s,a) and the previous
state-action pair (s′,a′), respectively. To avoid exhaustively explor-
ing the MDP, Monte Carlo simulation is used to sample the state-
action trajectory (s0,a0,r0,s1,a1,r1, · · · ,sT ,aT ,rT ) to estimate the
values of downstreaming state-action pairs. In this vein, DRL is
adopted to solve the combinational optimization problem [8, 23],
whose policy is learned by specific deep neural networks.
Challenges: Recently, these RL-based approaches [8, 23] have sur-
passed traditional greedy strategies on finding better feasible solu-
tions. However, in practice, the pure RL framework is inefficient
as the discrete action space becomes large. This drawbacks ob-
stacles RL-base approaches to solve the graph ordering problem
over a single large real-world graph. Concretely, RL algorithms use
Thompson Sampling [18] to explore trajectories and estimate the
expected cumulative reward (Eq. (3)). The larger the action space is,
the lower probability trajectories with high accumulated reward can
be sampled in limited steps. The low-quality samples will extremely
degrade the effectiveness of the model as well as the convergence
in the training phase. Therefore, [8, 23] can only support training
on graphs with tens to one hundred of vertices, where their optimal
solutions are provided by state-of-the-art integer programming
solvers [5, 10]. Recall that AlphaGo [32] has 19 × 19 actions at most,
which in fact is an enormously large action space requiring high
computation power of a large cluster to explore. Unfortunately, due
to the combinatorial explosion in the training space of Q(S,v), any
real large graph has a larger searching space than that of AlphaGo.
In a nutshell, the construction of the parametric model ˆQ(S, v; Θ)
and the efficient training in an exponential training space are two
main challenges when we try to adopt the model-based framework
to solve the graph ordering problem.
3
A NEW APPROACH: DON-RL
In order to address the challenges mentioned in Section 2.2, we
propose a new framework: Deep Ordering Network with Reinforce-
ment Learning (DON-RL) to capture the complex combinatorial
structures of a single large graph in solving the graph ordering
problem. To make the better approximation of the evaluation func-
tion Q(S,v), we propose a new model: Deep Order Network (DON)
which take the partial vertex order set S as input and predict the
next vertex which can maximize the cumulated locality score. Fur-
thermore, to prune the exponential training space and improve the
training of DON efficiency, we employ a policy gradient RL model:
the Policy Network to explore the valuable vertex order segments
efficiently. Fig. 3 demonstrates the overall learning framework.
Deep Order Network: As a parametric permutation-invariant
model of the evaluation function Q(S,v) (Algorithm 1), DON takes
a partial vertex order solution, i.e., a set of vertices as input, and
outputs the probability distribution of the decision of next vertex
to be selected. In other words, DON is to learn a parameterized
ˆQ(S, v; Θ) function by exploiting vertex sets over the whole graph
G, where every set encodes the contribution of vertices in the set
for constructing F(Φ) if they coexist in a window of size w. DON
3

Deep Order Network
Prediction
State prob𝒕
Action 𝒂𝒕
Policy Network
State prob𝒕+𝟏
Training Set
⋯
Sampling 
by prob𝒕+𝟏
Evaluation Set
⋯
Sampling 
by prob𝟎
Evaluation
Training
Reward
Graph
Update 
prob𝒕+𝟏
DON Training
DON-RL Training
Figure 3: The overview of DON-RL. DON-RL contains two components. One is in the blue box named DON. The other is in
the orange box named the Policy Network. DON-RL learns a ˆQ(S, v; Θ) by sampling partial solutions over a graph. The Policy
Network takes the sampling probability probt as input to predict a sampling tuning action at. The training of the two networks
is performed interactively, where the updating of the Policy Network is controlled by the evaluation result of DON.
is trained by supervised learning over partial solutions. Here, a
partial solution is a set of m ≤w vertices for a window of size m
by first sampling m −1 vertices from G followed by computing the
likelihood of th e last vertex to be in the window. The last vertex
to be added for a partial solution is by the ground truth of Q value,
which is easy to be calculated when m is small.
Since the function ˆQ(S, v; Θ) has the property of permutation
invariant regarding any permutation of the vertices in S, we employ
a permutation invariant neural network architecture to model it. We
present the design and principle of our Deep Order Network in
Section 4 in details.
RL-based Training: In practice, the space of the all possible par-
tial vertex order solution is exponential with respect to the number
of vertices of a graph. Theoretically, a neural network can memo-
rize and serve as an oracle for any query solution. However, it is
intractable to enumerate all the partial solutions in training DON.
Hence, sampling the high-quality partial solutions, i.e., sets of ver-
tices, is vital to train DON model with high generalization ability
which can inference unseen vertex combinations rather than mem-
orization.
In other words, DON should have the ability to inference unseen
vertex combinations rather than memorization. Hence, sampling
the high-quality partial solutions, i.e., sets of vertices, is vital for
the training of DON.
Rather than specifying the sampling probability uniformly or by
human experience, we employ Policy Network to explore how to
make adjustments on the probability, based on the evaluation result
of DON dynamically. In this vein, we regard DON as an environment
and the Policy Network is an agent which obtains rewards from
the environment and predicts an adjusting action. The sampler
of vertex sets adopts the adjusted sampling probability (i.e., the
state transformed from adjusting action of the Policy Network), to
sample the training data for next time slot and feeds these data to
DON. After DON is trained for a certain number of iterations, the
evaluation result of DON is received by the Policy Network as the
rewards for updating its weights, as well as subsequent prediction.
The training of the two networks is performed interactively as
shown in Fig. 3.
The significance of using an RL framework to control the input
pipeline is two folds. First, it improves the training efficiency by
a self-adaptive sampling scheme. Second, it guides DON to evolve
towards a more effective model automatically.
In contrast to applying RL to solve the problem directly, using
RL to make decisions on the sampling probability adjustment is
feasible. On one hand, in practice, the action space of this prob-
ability adjustment task is smaller than that of directly attacking
the whole problem. Since a main property of real-world graph is
scale-free, we find that among the vertices there exists skewness
regarding the significance to build high-quality solutions so that
the pattern of rising up and pushing down vertex sampling proba-
bility is not diverse. On the other hand, in DON-RL framework, RL
only serves as an auxiliary model to improve the training effective-
ness and efficiency of DON, instead of estimating ˆQ(S, v; Θ) directly.
Thus, the effectiveness of DON is less sensitive to low-quality state-
action trajectories. Section 5 introduces the RL formulation and our
algorithm in details.
4
DEEP ORDER NETWORK
In this section, we propose the model Deep Order Network (DON)
as a parameterized evaluation function ˆQ(S, v; Θ) to replace the
evaluation function Q(S,v) in Algorithm 1. Concretely, ˆQ(S, v; Θ)
takes a vectorized representation of partial solution S of w −1
vertices as input, and outputs a vector v ∈RN where vi represents
the likelihood of inserting a vertex vi to the permutation, given the
current partial solution S. And ˆQ(S, v; Θ) being learned will replace
Q(S,v) seamlessly in Algorithm 1 to generate a solution.
4

To learn ˆQ(S, v; Θ), we learn a vertex representation with the
preservation of quality of the partial solutions, i.e., partial permuta-
tions Φ(S) which are composed by any subsets of vertices of size
w. For a given graph, this representation encodes the hidden opti-
mality structure of vertices in F(Φ(S)) within a window. Intuitively,
vertices with a higher ˆQ value tend to cluster in the vector space,
whereas vertices with a lower ˆQ value are kept away. A high-quality
feasible solution can be constructed by set expansion towards a
high ˆQ value in the vector space. It is worth mentioning that, for a
partial permutation S within a window, the locality score function
F(Φ(S)) should permutation invariant with respect to Φ(S). There-
fore, the learned evaluation function ˆQ is permutation invariant
with any permutation of the elements in S.
Property 1. [44] A function of sets f : X →y, is permutation in-
variant, i.e., for any set x = {x1, · · · ,xM } ∈X with any permutation
π of the elements in x, f ({x1, · · · ,xM }) = f ({xπ(1), · · · ,xπ(M)}).
DeepSets [44] is a neural network architecture to model the per-
mutation invariant function defined on sets. For a set x whose
domain is the power set of a countable set, any valid, i.e., permu-
tation invariant function can be represented in the form of Eq. (4),
for two suitable functions ϕ and ρ.
f (x) = ρ(ΣM
i=1ϕ(xi))
(4)
In Eq. (4), xi ∈RD is the i-th element in the set x, ϕ : RD →RK,
and ρ : RK →R. Intuitively, ϕ generates the element-wise repre-
sentation for each xi, and Σ is a pooling function which performs
a generalization of classic aggregation functions, e.g., SUM, AVG
and MAX on the set. The added-up representation is processed by
ρ in the same manner as any neural network. In our problem, the
domain of partial solutions S is the combinations of V with size
w −1, where V = {v1,v2, · · ·vN } is the vertex set. The evaluation
function ˆQ(S, v; Θ) for any such S can be learned by parameterizing
the two functions (ϕ and ρ) with a specified pooling function Σ.
We measure the output of ˆQ(S, v; Θ) by a distribution p(v|S),
where p(vi |S) is the i-th element of p(v|S), meaning how probable
the i-th vertex can be added into the current partial solution S. With
the Bayes rule, this probability is in Eq. (5).
p(vi |S) = p(vi,S)
p(S)
∝p(S ∪{vi })
(5)
In Eq. (5), p(S ∪{vi }) is the marginal probability of the extended
solution, which can be estimated by computing F score of the partial
permutation ϕ(S ∪{vi }) explicitly.
p(S ∪{vi }) =
F(ϕ(S ∪{vi }))
ΣN
i=1F(ϕ(S ∪{vi }))
(6)
Additionally, we use the normalized F(ϕ(S ∪{vi })) values (Eq. (6))
to make training more stable. As shown in Fig. 3, a training instance
is constructed by sampling a partial solution S with w −1 vertices
as input feature, then p(v|S) (Eq. (6)) serves as the soft label for
training. We use the cross entropy as the training loss, as given in
Eq. (7). Here, ˆp(v|S) is the prediction of DON.
L(S) = ΣN
i=1 −p(vi |S) log(ˆp(vi |S))
(7)
5e+4
1e+5
1.5e+5
2e+3
4e+3
6e+3
F
0
2e+2
4e+2
2e+3
4e+3
6e+3
Delta-F
0
4e+2
8e+2
Degree
(a) Wiki-vote
1e+3
2e+3
3e+3
4e+2
8e+3
1.2e+3
F
0
10
4e+2
8e+3
1.2e+3
Delta-F
15
30
Degree
(b) Air Traffic
Figure 4: The F score, the increment of F score and the vertex
degree of the permutation results of GO on two real graphs:
Wiki-Vote and Air Traffic.
To model ˆQ(S, v; Θ), batches of partial solutions are fed into DON,
where a partial solution S is generated by sampling w −1 vertices
over V by a probability distribution prob without replacement.
5
RL-BASED TRAINING
In this section, we discuss how we adjust the sampling probability
adaptively. As shown in Section 4, the feasible input of ˆQ(S, v; Θ)
is all possible combinations of the vertices with size w −1, which
indicates that it is intractable to enumerate all the partial solutions
in training DON. To alleviate the combinatorial explosion issue, we
can employ the sampling strategy in the training space to reduce
the candidate partial solutions.
By intuition, high-degree vertices sharing many common neigh-
bors play a significant role in constructing high-quality feasible
solutions. However, since the graph ordering is a discrete optimiza-
tion problem, the significance of a discrete element that contributes
to a solution can be very different from others, and there exists
skewness regarding such significance among all elements.
To validate this claim, we report the permutation results of two
real graphs: Wiki-vote [27] and Air Traffic [1] in Fig. 4. Here, the
horizontal axis is the linear graph ordering. In vertical, we show
the F score, the increment of F, and the degree of the vertex from
top to bottom in three subfigures, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4
we can observe that the patterns of the two solutions are very
different. For Wiki-vote, over 2/3 vertices in the ordering almost
make no contribution to enlarging the F score, while it is not the
case for Air Traffic, as vertex adding into the permutation, the F
score increases continuously. Interestingly, it is counterintuitive
that the high-degree vertices do not always make a significant
contribution to increasing the F score.
This result inspires us that what if adjusting the sampling prob-
ability dynamically during the training phase. This further motives
us to use RL framework to tune sampling probability. Therefore,
we model the tuning sampling probability in an MDP as follows:
States: a state s is a vector of sampling probability prob ∈(0, 1)n,
prob = {prob(vi)}n
i=1 where n is the number of vertices. prob(vi) is
the probability of sampling vertex vi for one training instance and
prob is normalized, i.e., Σn
i=1prob(vi) = 1. It is worth mentioning
that the initialization of prob cannot be random. What the Policy
Network does is to adjust the experienced-based prob slightly in-
stead of learning it directly without any bias, which is extremely
difficult for on-policy RL in an online fashion.
5

Actions: an action is a vector of 0-1, a = {a(i)}n
i=1 ∈{0, 1}n. Each
element a(i) denotes a tuning action imposed on prob(vi), i.e., in-
crease (0) or decrease (1). There is a tuning rate λ ∈R to control
the constant delta changes of each element prob(vi) for a given
a(i). The adjustment is specified in Eq. (8). The final step of an
adjustment is the L1 normalization of prob.
prob(vi) =
(
prob(vi) + λ,
a(i) = 0
prob(vi) −λ,
a(i) = 1
(8)
Transition: given the state-action pair (probt, at) at time t, the
transition to next state probt+1, is deterministic.
Reward: the reward rt = r(probt, at) reflects the benefits of updat-
ing a state probt by an action at at time t. We use the evaluation
results (e.g., root mean square error, cross entropy, etc.) of DON
trained on the training data generated by updating probt as rt . To
avoid the over-fitting of DON, instead of sampling the evaluation
set DE according to probt directly, we adopt the fixed degree sam-
pler, i.e., the initial prob to sample the first vertex and generate
the optimal partial solution with window size w. The evaluation
is performed on a selected evaluation set, DE, after training DON
a certain number of steps. The cumulative reward is computed by
adding future reward discounted by a discounting factor γ ∈[0, 1].
Policy: A policy function π(at|probt) specifies a tuning operation
at to perform on a given state probt. Here we employ a paramet-
ric function πΘ′(at|probt) with parameter Θ′ to analog output of
the policy. This model can be any any multi-label classification
model [38], e.g., multilayer perceptron (MLP), which takes prob as
input and outputs the probability of an action a. We use πΘ′(at|st )
to denote the output probability at time t. To distinguish from DON
ˆQ(S, v; Θ), we use Π(s; Θ′) to denote the Policy Network.
5.1
Train Tuning Policy
To find the optimal policy, there are two kinds of RL algorithms [34].
One is value-based, e.g., Q-learning, which learns the optimal state-
action values in Eq. (3) and the corresponding optimal policy is to
take the best action in any state. The other is policy-based, which
learns the optimal policy directly from a collection of policies. Since
the policy-based RL algorithm is more suitable for high dimen-
sional action space and has better convergence properties, we use a
model-free, policy-based RL algorithm to train the Policy Network
directly. The objective is to find the optimal policy π∗by maximiz-
ing the following expected accumulated and discounted rewards
of Eq (9), which is estimated by sampling state-action trajectory
ς (s0,a0,r0,s1,a1, ...) of T steps.
J(Θ′) = E[Σt=T
t=0 γ trt |πΘ′] = Eς∼πΘ′(ς)[Σt=T
t=0 γ trt ]
(9)
The gradient of the Eq. (9) is formulated using the REINFORCE
algorithm [43] as given in Eq. (10).
∇J(Θ′) = Eς∼πΘ′(ς)[∇log π(st )(Σt=T
t=0 γ trt −b(st )]
(10)
Here, as the raw reward of a trajectory, Σt=T
t=0 γ trt , is always positive,
a baseline function b(s) is introduced to reduce the variance of the
gradients. The formula Σt=T
t=0 γ trt −b(s) indicates whether a reward
is better or worse than the expected value we should get from state
Algorithm 2 Train the Policy Network Π(s; Θ′)
1: Input: graph G, initial state prob0, evaluation set DE, learning
rate α, discounting factor γ
2: Initialize Π(s; Θ′)
3: for each RL step do
4:
for t = 0 to T do
5:
Sample at ∝πΘ′(at|st ), where st = probt
6:
Compute probt+1 by at and normalization
7:
Train and update ˆQ(S, v; Θ) based on Dt+1, where Dt+1 is
sampled from G by probt+1
8:
Evaluate ˆQ(S, v; Θ), and receive the reward rt computed
on DE
9:
end for
10:
for t = 0 to T do
11:
Compute cumulated reward Rt = Σi=T
i=t γ i−tri
12:
Θ′ ←Θ′ + α(Rt −b(st ))∇log π(st )
13:
end for
14: end for
15: Output: the Policy Network Π(s; Θ′)
s. For the baseline function b(s), we adopt the widely-used moving
average of the historical rewards, i.e., the evaluation result of DON.
The training algorithm of the Policy Network is given in Algo-
rithm 2. It takes a graphG, an initial and experience-based sampling
probability prob0, the evaluation set DE, and the learning rate of RL
as input, and trains Policy Network Π(s; Θ′) by interacting with the
training process of Deep Order Network ˆQ(S, v; Θ). The intuition is
if the reward of an action is positive, it indicates the action is good
and the gradients should be applied to make the action even more
likely to be chosen in the future. However, if the reward is negative,
it indicates the action is bad and the opposite gradients should be
applied to make this action less likely in the future.
We briefly explain the algorithm below. First, Policy Network
Π(s; Θ′) is initialized (line 2). The training of policy gradient starts
at line 3. Before that, the training of DON has started several steps
to collect enough evaluation results for computing the baseline. In
each RL step, the algorithm updates Π(s; Θ′) once by one Monte
Carlo sampling of a trajectory of length T (line 4). For each time
t, it repeats the following 4 steps one by one. First, draw a ran-
dom action at based on the probability output by Policy Network,
i.e., πΘ′(at|probt) (line 5). Instead of directly choosing the action
with the highest probability, the random action manages a balance
between exploring new actions and exploiting the actions which
are learned to work well. Second, apply the action at on the state
probt by imposing an increment/decrement of λ (line 6), to generate
the next state probt. Third, generate the training data set Dt+1 of
DON by sampling G with probability probt+1, and feed Dt+1 to
train ˆQ(S, v; Θ) (line 7). Fourth, after training ˆQ(S, v; Θ) in a certain
number of steps, we use the evaluation set DE to evaluate DON, and
collect the evaluation result as reward rt (line 8). When a trajectory
is simulated, we compute the cumulative rewards (line 11) and apply
gradient ascent to update the Policy Network Π(s; Θ′) (line 12).
6

Table 3: Datasets
Graphs
|V |
|E|
Density
Description
Wiki-vote [27]
7,115
103,689
0.0020
vote graph
Facebook [27]
4,039
88,234
0.0108
social graph
p2p [27]
6,301
20,777
0.0005
file sharing graph
Arxiv-HEP [27]
9,877
25,998
0.0003
co-authorship graph
Cora [1]
23,166
91,500
0.0001
citation graph
PPI [27]
21,557
342,353
0.0015
biological graph
PL10K_1.6
10,000
121,922
0.0024
power-law graph
PL10K_1.8
10,000
58,934
0.0011
PL10K_2.0
10,000
31,894
0.0006
ER10K_0.02
10,000
1,000,337
0.0200
ER graph
ER10K_0.05
10,000
2,498,836
0.0500
ER10K_0.1
10,000
5,004,331
0.1000
u
v1
v2
v3
(a) Order Equivalence
u
v∗
(b) Merged Vertex
Figure 5: Reducing the Sampling Classes V (G)
6
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
In this section, we present our experimental evaluations. First, we
give the specific setting of the testing including datasets, settings
of the models and training. Then, we compare the proposed model:
DON-RL with the state-of-the-art algorithmic heuristic, conduct an
A/B testing to validate the effect of Policy Network, and observe
the performance of models as w varies. Finally, two case studies of
compressing graph and deriving a competitive edge partitioning
from model-based ordering are presented.
6.1
Experimental Setup
Datasets: We use six real graphs collected from Stanford SNAP [27]
and KONECT (The Koblenz Network Collection) [1]: Wiki-vote is
the Wikipedia adminship vote network. Facebook is the Facebook
friendship network. p2p is a snapshot of the Gnutella peer-to-peer
file sharing network. Arxiv-HEP is the Arxiv collaboration network
between authors in the field of High Energy Physics. Cora is the
cora scientific paper citation network. PPI is a protein-protein in-
teraction network where vertices represent human proteins and
edges represents physical interactions between proteins.
In addition, to validate the performance of our models on graphs
with different structures explicitly, we generate six synthetic graphs
by SNAP random graph generator: power-law and Erdös-Rényi. For
power-law, we choose three power-law distributions with shape pa-
rameterγ ∈{1.6, 1.8, 2.0} and adopt Newman’s method [30] to gener-
ate three power-law graphs: PL10K_1.6, PL10K_1.8 and PL10K_2.0.
For Erdös-Rényi, we utilize the parameter p ∈{0.02, 0.05.0.1}
which indicates the probability of edge existence between two
vertices to generate three synthetic graphs with different densi-
ties, that are, ER10K_0.02,ER10K_0.05 and ER10K_0.1. All synthetic
graphs have 10,000 vertices. Table 3 summarizes the information of
these real and synthetic graphs.
Table 4: The Hyper-parameter Configuration
Hyper-parameters
Values
DON
learning rate
10−3 ∼10−4
mini-batch size
64 ∼512
# hidden units
32, 64, 128, 256
global steps
5 × 103 ∼×106
Policy Network
learning rate
10−3 ∼10−5
trajectory length T
1 ∼10
RL steps
50 ∼300
discounting factor γ
0.9, 0.95
tuning rate λ
0.1n ∼0.2n
# hidden units
32, 64, 128, 256
# evaluation set
2000, 5000
Reduce the Sampling Classes: Recall that DON takes a vertices
set sampled from V (G) as input to predict the likelihood of ap-
pending each vertex to the permutation. Based on the RL-based
sampling probability tuning approach we have explored, we can
further reduce the sampling classes V (G) by a simple but effective
strategy. The reduction is based on the automorphism of vertices
on the trig of the graph. We use an example in Fig. 5 to illustrate
this reduction. In Fig. 5(a), vertices v1, v2 and v3 have a common
in-neighbor u, which is also their only neighbor. For vi (i = 1, 2, 3),
we have S(vi,u) = 1 and the S value is 0 for all the other vertices.
v1, v2 and v3 are automorphism so that permuting them can be re-
garded as permuting one vertex v∗three times, where S(v∗,u) = 1
and S is 0 for the other vertices. In other words, if three positions
for the three verticesvi are targeted in the permutation, the F value
will be equivalent for all the 3! assignments of vi. In this vein, we
mergev1,v2 andv3 to one vertexv∗as shown in Fig. 5(b). Sampling
vertex sets and inference to generate permutation can be directly
conducted on the merged graph (Fig. 5(b)). Each time the model
selects v∗to extend the permutation, we insert a vertex randomly
drawn from v1, v2, v3. For real-world graph, due to its power-low
degree distribution, our experiments show this preprocessing can
reduce about 9% vertices on average.
Model settings: In DON, both the ϕ and ρ networks are two-layer
MLP. We use the SUM as the pooling layer to add up the represen-
tations of ϕ and the output is further processed by ρ. The input
of ϕ is an identity vector representation, {0, 1}n, of a partial solu-
tion with size w −1 and the output is a probability distribution
p(v|S) ∈(0, 1)n generated by a softmax function. All the hidden
units are activated by ReLU function ReLU (x) = max(0,x).
The Policy Network is a multi-label classifier of two-layers MLP.
The input is the state probt ∈(0, 1)n and the output layer predicts
the probability to perform action at, i.e., a vector (0, 1)n by sigmoid
activation. Similar to DON, the hidden units are activated by ReLU
function.
Implementation and training: The learning framework is built
on Tensorflow [2] 1.8 with Python 2.7. We use Adam [24] and RM-
SProp optimizer to train DON and the Policy Network, respectively,
which are trained interactively as shown in Algorithm 2.
Table 4 shows the hyper-parameters settings in the training. The
models are learned with these parameters tuned in the correspond-
ing experienced range. In Table 4, the global steps and RL steps
are the numbers of parameter updating of DON and the Policy
Network, respectively. For one RL step, a trajectory of length T
DON training is conducted. To this end, (global steps) / (RL steps
7

Table 5: Result of Graph Ordering
F(Φ)
|V ′|
GO
DON
DON-RL
Wiki-vote
5,880
145,736
156,871
157,669
Facebook
3,974
230,031
207,511
234,151
p2p
5,624
20,472
21,422
22,086
Arxiv-HEP
9,877
85,958
90,629
91,001
Cora
22,317
98,334
101,063
100,966
PPI
19,041
383,343
347,237
404,728
PL10K_1.6
8,882
166,540
190,021
197,622
PL10K_1.8
8,292
66,272
86,840
89,930
PL10K_2.0
8,484
29,373
37,332
38,071
ER10K_0.02
10,000
136,925
145,084
162,462
ER10K_0.05
10,000
615,706
673,357
724,743
ER10K_0.1
10,000
2,319,250
2,554,032
2,647,686
×T) DON steps are trained in one timestamp. For computing the
rewards, we use the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) as the eval-
uation metric of the evaluation set. The reward is defined as the
opposite number of RMSE. We use the best neighbor heuristic to
generate the evaluation set by randomly choose the first vertex
with initial prob, the degree distribution. A bare DON is trained by
setting sampling probability as prob0. In this section, we use DON
and DON-RL to denote the bare DON model and DON with Policy
Network respectively.
6.2
Result of Graph Ordering
Table 5 shows the overall results of the F score of the permutations
generated by DON, compared with the baseline graph ordering
algorithm GO [42]. As a preprocessing step, vertices on the trig of
the graph, i.e., vertex whose degree is 1 are merged to one equiv-
alent vertex as shown in Fig. 5. In Table 5, the column |V ′| is the
compacted vertex number of the graph. We can see that this trick
compresses up to 17% vertices for real and power-low graphs but
it is invalid for three Erdös-Rényi graphs due to their degree dis-
tribution. With regards to maximize F, the solutions of DON and
DON-RL surpass that of the greedy algorithm significantly. For the
real graphs, all the solutions of DON-RL outperform that of GO from
1.8% up to 8.2%. And the solution of DON, on the 3 reals graphs,
Wiki-Vote, p2p and Cora, the improvements of F are 7.6%, 4.7%
and 2.8%, respectively. For the synthetic graphs, both the DON and
DON-RL can generate solutions of much higher F score than GO.
The DON-RL performs best and its solutions surpass that of GO up
to 35.0% for powerlaw graph, and 18.6% for ER graph. As the matrix
visualization results shown in Fig. 1, the model-based approach
DON-RL focuses on the overall performance and can optimize the
permutation of the sub-significant vertices. The greedy heuristic
is powerful for ordering the top significant vertices while for the
sub-significant vertices, it fails to capture the global information as
ordering them w.r.t. the common neighbor relations. It is easy for
GO to stuck in forming local dense areas while incurring sparsity
in the global scope. This phenomenon agrees with our intuition,
that is, the greedy algorithm could neglect better solutions in the
future scope.
6.3
Adaptive Training by RL
In order to validate the effectiveness of the Policy Network, we
perform A/B test to observe the effect of RL-based adaptive training,
i.e, using the same hyper-parameters to train a DON model and
a conjuncted DON-RL model. During the overall training process,
we generate a solution after per 10% global training steps of DON
ends. We directly observe the changes of objective function F(Φ)
as the loss function of the model is not a direct reflection of the
objection of this NP-hard problem. Fig. 6 presents the results over
the 12 graphs in Table 3.
We observe that the performance of DON and DON-RL are differ-
ent among different graphs during training. In general, imposing RL
on the sampling probability adjustment improves the performance
of DON in most cases. As shown in Fig. 6(a), 6(c), 6(e)-6(g) and
6(j)-6(l), DON-RL can achieve better results than DON in graphs
with high density since the locality of vertices is significantly skew
on the graph. On the other hand, for the graph with low density and
flat degree distribution, such as Cora (Fig. 6(d)) and p2p (Fig. 6(b)),
using RL does not make significant improvement during the train-
ing. We conjecture, in this scenario, the potential action space is
relatively large so that it is difficult for RL algorithm to find an
action trajectory with high reward, especially when the locality
has been well captured by DON. In addition, due to the dynamic
adjusting mechanism, DON-RL can make the training process ro-
bust and avoid over-fitting. As shown in Fig. 6(b) and 6(i), DON
reaches its best effect much earlier than DON-RL then it goes worse
as over-fitting. In contrast, DON-RL can rectify the over-fitting
autonomously in Fig. 6(c) and 6(h). The performance of DON-RL
increases constantly and surpasses DON in the end.
Therefore, the RL-based DON-RL is suitable for the graphs whose
structures are highly skew. The results in Fig. 6 also confirms the
effectiveness of the Policy Network in DON-RL.
6.4
Varying the Window Size w
In this section, we investigate the effect of the window size w in
Eq. (1). Fig. 7 shows for graph PL10K_1.6, the F scores of 5 models
training with w is set to {4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. For these DON models, they
perform stably better than GO as w grows. In Fig. 7, DON-RL is the 5
models associated with RL training, which generates permutations
of highest F. Recall that the approximate ratio of GO is
1
2w , which
means theoretically, the larger the w, the larger the gap between
GO and the optimal solution, i.e., the improvement space of GO.
Interestingly, in Fig 7, as w grows, the increment of locality score
of model-based approaches grow a little faster than that of GO. It
implies that the model-based approaches can better take advantage
of the gap to optimized the learned solution.
In addition, another interesting observation is that models trained
with smaller w have better performance than that of larger w. It in-
dicates that we can use pre-trained models with small w to generate
different permutations of larger w.
6.5
Case Studies
In this section, we perform two case studies to demonstrate the
power of DON-RL in solving real-world problems.
Graph Compression: First, we explore the potential of using DON-
RL to deal with graph compression problem. Concretely, given a
8

300k
325k
350k
375k
400k
3k
6k
9k
12k
15k
F
Global Steps
DON-RL
DON
(a) PPI
20k
21k
22k
22.5k
40k
80k
120k
160k
F
Global Steps
DON-RL
DON
(b) p2p
220k
225k
230k
235k
1k
2k
3k
4k
5k
F
Global Steps
DON-RL
DON
(c) Facebook
30k
70k
110k
10k
30k
50k
70k
F
Global Steps
DON-RL
DON
(d) Cora
50k
100k
150k
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
F
Global Steps
(e) Wikivote
160k
180k
200k
15k
30k
45k
60k
F
Global Steps
(f) PL10K_1.6
60k
80k
100k
15k
30k
45k
55k
F
Global Steps
(g) PL10K_1.8
30k
34k
38k
42k
10k
20k
30k
40k
F
Global Steps
(h) PL10K_2.0
83k
86k
89k
92k
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
F
Global Steps
(i) Arxiv-HEP
110k
130k
150k
2k
4k
6k
8k
F
Global Steps
(j) ER10K_0.02
650k
670k
690k
710k
5k
15k
25k
F
Global Steps
(k) ER10K_0.05
2.4m
2.5m
2.6m
2.7m
2.5k
7.5k
10k
F
Global Steps
(l) ER10K_0.1
Figure 6: DON vs. DON-RL
130k
170k
210k
250k
290k
4
5
6
7
8
F
window size
GO
DON-RL
DON w=4
DON w=5
DON w=6
DON w=7
DON w=8
Figure 7: Varying Window Size w
graph, we want to layout its edges so that its adjacency matrix A is
easy to be compressed. Formally, this problem is equivalent to find a
vertex ordering to minimize the storage cost costnz(A,b), whereb is
the block width. Concretely, we divide the matrix A intob×b square
matrix blocks and count the number of the nonempty block as
costnz(A,b) [22]. Since costnz(A,b) is not comparable for different
block size b. Here we adopt a normalized version costr (A,b):
costr (A,b) = costnz(A,b)
⌈N/b⌉2
,
(11)
where ⌈N/b⌉2 is the number of blocks in A. A good ordering for
the compression should have low costnz(A,b) for given block size
b.
Fig. 8 demonstrates the compression cost costr (A,b) on the 5 real
graphs in Table 3, when the block wide b is 8 (Fig. 8(a)), 16 (Fig. 8(b))
and 32 (Fig. 8(c)). We compare the compression performance with
two methods: Degree permutes the vertex based on the decreasing
degree. SlashBurn [22] is the graph ordering algorithm proposed
for graph compression. We set w = 5 for our method: DON-RL for
all datasets. As shown in Fig. 8, DON-RL outperforms the other
methods on three datasets (Wikivote, Facebook and Cora) and
achieves comparable results on two datasets (p2p and PPI). For the
number of nonempty blocks, DON-RL reduces the counts by 2.97×
and 2.25× compared with the second best orderings on Facebook
and Cora. Interestingly, Degree is a quite good heuristic ordering
for the graph compression. It achieves the best performance on p2p
and PPI. The results validate that our learned vertex order is a good
potential criteria for graph compression.
Graph Edge Partitioning: The second application we investigate
is graph edge partitioning, which can achieve better load balancing
than traditional vertex partitioning for skew graph data in the
parallel/distribution environment. The problem is, given a partition
number k, partitioning the edge set E disjointly into k balanced
subsets Ei, to minimize the replication factor (RF) of the vertices in
k partitions:
RF(E1, · · · , Ek) =
1
|V | Σi ∈[k]|V (Ei)|, where ∪i ∈[k] Ei = E,
(12)
The problem is also NP-hardness [45]. Since the graph ordering is
based on vertex locality, we use the ordering result of DON-RL to
generate an edge partitioning directly. The partition is conducted
9

Wiki-voteFacebook
p2p
Cora
PPI
Dataset
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
0.225
costr(A, b)
Degree
SlashBurn
DON-RL
(a) b = 8
Wiki-voteFacebook
p2p
Cora
PPI
Dataset
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
costr(A, b)
Degree
SlashBurn
DON-RL
(b) b = 16
Wiki-vote Facebook
p2p
Cora
PPI
Dataset
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
costr(A, b)
Degree
SlashBurn
DON-RL
(c) b = 32
Figure 8: Compression Costs
1
2
5
10
15
20
4
8
12
16
20
24
Replication Factor
# partitions
Random
SlashBurn
Greedy
NE
SNE
DON-RL
Figure 9: Edge Partitioning of Facebook
by assigning edges of adjacent vertices in the permutation to one
partition under the balance constraint.
Fig 9 shows the partitioning derives from DON-RL with w = 5,
and 5 other edge partitioning and graph ordering algorithms over
Facebook. Here, Random [9] assigns each edge independently and
uniformly to k partitions. The Greedy [9] heuristic preferentially
assigns an edge to a partition already contains the two or one of
its end vertices with trading off the balance. NE and SNE [45] are
the state-of-the-art edge partitioning heuristic based on neighbor
expansion. The replication factor of DON-RL is smaller than that of
the widely used Greedy up to 37%. Also, as the number of partition
increases, the replication factor of DON-RL increases much slower
than Greedy and SlashBurn . It is interesting that a good partitioning
derives from a high-quality ordering result.
7
RELATED WORKS
Graph Representation Learning is to learn an effective graph
representation to encode sufficient features for downstream ma-
chine learning/deep learning tasks. Recently, graph representation
learning have been extensively studied. The surveys can be found
in [12, 20]. The traditional graph representation learning, that uses
matrix factorization to find a low-rank space for the adjacency ma-
trix [3, 7, 15], cannot be used to solve our problem, because they
are designed to reconstruct the original graph. Structure preserving
representation learning techniques can encode/decode graph struc-
tures and properties. DeepWalk [31] and Node2Vec [19] encode the
neighborhood relationship by exploiting truncated random walks
as embedding context. Furthermore, there are the graph represen-
tations to preserve vertex information at different granularity from
microscopic neighborhood structure to macroscopic community
structure. [35, 37, 46] carry high-order proximity and closeness
measures, to provide flexible and diverse representations for un-
supervised graph learning tasks. M-NMF [41] incorporates graph
macroscopic proximity, the community affiliation of vertex. Such
approaches are designed to machine learning tasks (e.g., node classi-
fication, link prediction, as well as recommendation). Unfortunately,
these representations cannot be directly applied to our problem.
First, these representations are learned by unsupervised fashion.
Second, they do not contain abundant vertex features, the learned
graph proximity is insufficient. Third, our problem aims to find an
optimal combinatorial structure instead of performing inference
on individual instances which only involves local information.
There are reported studies on representation learning over spe-
cial graphs, such as representation of heterogeneous graphs [13],
dynamic graphs [36], attributed graphs [25]. And there are speci-
fied graph machine learning applications that require specialized
graph representation, for instance, influence diffusion prediction
[14], anomaly detection [21], and network alignment [29]. These
models are too specific to deal with our problem.
Neural Networks for Combinatorial Optimization: Early works
that use neural network to construct solutions for NP-hard opti-
mization problems are summarized in [33]. Recently, deep learning
has also been adopted to solve combinatorial optimization. A new
attention-based sequence-to-sequence neural architecture, Pointer
Network [40], is proposed and is used to solve the planar Travel
Salesman Problem (TSP). Pointer Network learns the planar convex
hull supervised by a set of problem instances and solutions alone,
and then [8] uses reinforcement learning, the Actor-Critic algo-
rithm [26], to train Pointer Network. Instead of using given training
instances, an actor network makes trials of tour and evaluates the
trials using a critic network. To further improve the performance,
[4] proposes an alternative neural network which encodes input
nodes with multi-head attention [39]. These approaches [4, 8, 40]
concentrate on 2D Euclidean space TSP, and it is non-trivial to
extend them to deal with graphs. For graph data, Dai et. al. [23]
propose a framework to learn a greedy meta-algorithm over graphs.
First, a graph is encoded by a graph embedding network. Second, the
embedding is fed into some more layers to estimate an evaluation
function. The overall network is trained by deep Q-learning [43]
in an end-to-end fashion. The framework is demonstrated to solve
Minimum Vertex Cover, Maximum Cut and TSP. These studies aim
to generalize the process of problem-solving for a distribution of
problem instances offline. A recent study provides a supervised
10

learning approach to deal with NP problems equivalent to maxi-
mum independent set (MIS). It adopts graph convolutional network
(GCN) [25] to predict the likelihood whether each vertex is in the
optimal solution [28]. Since it relies on the state-of-the-art MIS
local search heuristics to refine the candidate solutions, the bare
utility of the model needs to be further studied.
8
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we focus on an NP-hard problem, graph ordering, in a
novel, machine learning-based perspective. Distinguished from re-
cent research, the NP-hard problem is over an specific larger graph.
We design a new model: Deep Order Network (DON) to learn the
underlying combinatorial closeness over the vertices of graph, by
sampling small vertex sets as locally partial solutions. To further
improve the sampling effectiveness, we propose an adaptive train-
ing approach based on reinforcement learning, which automatically
adjusts the sampling probabilities. Compare with the high-quality
greedy algorithm, our overall model, DON-RL improves the quality
of solution up to 7.6% and 35% for real graphs and synthetic graphs,
respectively. Our study reveals that a simple neural network has the
ability to deal with NP optimization problem by encoding hidden
features of the combination structures. We will public our code and
pre-trained models later.
