Zombie Account Detection Based on 
Community Detection and Uneven 
Assignation PageRank 
Qiu Yaowen1, Li Yin1, Lu Yanchang1 
(1) BNU-HKBU United International College (UIC), 2000 
Jintong Road, Zhuhai, China 
Abstracts 
In the social media, there are a large amount of potential 
zombie accounts which may has negative impact on the 
public opinion. In tradition, PageRank algorithm is used to 
detect zombie accounts. However, problems such as it 
requires a large RAM to store adjacent matrix or adjacent list 
and the value of importance may approximately to zero for 
large graph exist. To solve the first problem, since the 
structure of social media makes the graph divisible, we 
conducted a community detection algorithm – Louvain to 
decompose the whole graph into 1,002 subgraphs. The 
modularity of 0.58 shows the result is effective. To solve the 
second problem, we performed the uneven assignation 
PageRank algorithm to calculate the importance of node in 
each community. Then, a threshold is set to distinguish the 
zombie account and normal accounts. The result shows that 
about 20% accounts in the dataset are zombie accounts and 
they center in tier-one cities in China such as Beijing, 
Shanghai, and Guangzhou. In the future, a classification 
algorithm with semi-supervised learning can be used to detect 
zombie accounts.  
 
Key words: Zombie Account, Community Detection, 
PageRank, Louvain 
 
1. Introduction 
Zombie accounts refer to the fake fans on Weibo, which 
are usually malicious registered users automatically 
generated by the system. However, too many zombie 
accounts will make the graphical network between each 
account more complex, and each zombie account may only 
point to others, which seriously affects the quality of 
community classification. Therefore, before data analysis or 
classification, we need to screen out zombie accounts in 
advance to help us clean up the data set. We found that where 
there is a network, there will be out degrees and in degrees. 
So we can calculate the PageRank value and use PageRank 
algorithm. We can extend the PageRank algorithm to the 
social networks. We regard each account as a page and we 
should find out which account is less important. Because the 
PageRank of an account is larger, the account is more 
important and less likely to be a zombie account. This is the 
traditional PageRank social relation matrix. However, if an 
account is followed by some high PageRank accounts that it 
also should have high PageRank, so we need to use uneven 
assignation PageRank. However, there are some problems 
with PageRank. It requires huge RAM to store adjacent 
matrix/list and importance vector. It costs a long time to 
iterate the result. The behaviors of zombie fans make lots of 
divisible community. What’s more, the importance of many 
nodes are approximate to zero (1e-8), unable to distinguish 
zombie account. As a result, we need to introduce community 
detection to optimize our approach. To complete the 
community detection task, we use Louvain algorithm as our 
algorithm to detect overall 1,002 community with acceptable 
modularity. Then, we applied the statistical method to 
consider accounts with extremely low importance value as 
detected zombie account. To measure the performance of the 
algorithm, we manually label 50 normal accounts and 50 
zombie accounts and use our algorithm to scan the sample. 
The result suggests that the accuracy of the algorithm is 79%. 
The result also reveals that that around 20% of accounts in 
the dataset are zombie accounts and most of them located in 
tier-one cities in China. In the future, we expect to build a 
classifier with semi-supervised learning algorithm to classify 
each account or use the behaviors of users instead.  
2. Related Work 
2.1 PageRank Algorithm 
PageRank (PR) is an algorithm used by Google Search 
to rank websites in their search engine results. PageRank was 
named after Larry Page, one of the founders of Google. 
PageRank is a way of measuring the importance of website 
pages. According to Google, PageRank works by counting 
the number and quality of links to a page to determine a rough 
estimate of how important the website is. The underlying 
assumption is that more important websites are likely to 
receive more links from other websites. 
The 
PageRank 
algorithm 
outputs 
a 
probability 
distribution used to represent the likelihood that a person 
randomly clicking on links will arrive at any particular page. 
PageRank can be calculated for collections of documents of 
any size. It is assumed in several research papers that the 
distribution is evenly divided among all documents in the 
collection at the beginning of the computational process. The 
PageRank computations require several passes, called 
“iterations”, through the collection to adjust approximate 
PageRank values to more closely reflect the theoretical true 
value. 
2.2 Community Detection 
In the real life and the Internet, there are numerous 
networks. Entities network likes urban transportation 
networks and power transmission networks, or virtual 
network likes social networks are all playing important roles. 
Among all sorts of different networks, social networks are the 
most representative and the most studied one since the scale 
is extremely large and it can reveal a large amount of social 
phenomena. 
Herbert Simon proposed that the complex systems have 
modular structure characteristics in the first 1960s, which 
actually started the academic study of the community. The 
community reflects the local characteristics of individual 
behaviors in the network and their mutual relationships. In 
fact, community discovery has played a role in many fields: 
metabolic network analysis, gene regulatory network 
analysis, and master gene identification in the biological field 
such as predicting complexes and complexes in protein 
interaction networks. The community module is of great 
significance for understanding the organization and function 
of biological systems and the prediction of unknown protein 
functions. In addition, with the development of the internet 
and social applications, companies, governments, and 
scholars are also interested in studying the social networks for 
different 
purposes 
such 
as 
improving 
advertising 
recommendation system, fighting potential criminals, and 
performing social analysis. 
In tradition, community refers to a group of nodes in the 
network that have a large similarity, resulting in a close 
internal connection and a sparse external group structure. 
First, using similarity to perform hierarchical clustering or 
spectral method were used in detecting the community. 
However, the average time complexity of this kind to method 
is approximately equal to O(n3) since it involves lots of 
calculation 
of 
matrix 
eigenvectors. 
Although 
some 
approximation methods at the expense of accuracy have been 

proposed later, in general, the efficiency of these algorithm 
still became a huge problem. Girvan and Newman [1] proved 
the existence of non-overlapping communities in many real 
networks and they also proposed the GN algorithm, which 
started the research on community detection. Later, Newman 
[2] 
proposed 
a 
widely 
used 
community 
structure 
measurement function called Modularity, turned the 
community detection problem into an optimization problem 
and unparalleled the development of non-overlapping 
community detection research. 
3. Methodology 
3.1 Uneven Assignation PageRank 
PageRank is calculated by the page’s hyperlink to 
evaluate the pages in the view of quantity and quality. 
However, we can apply this method into the community to 
detect the zombie account.  
Let’s see how to calculate PageRank first. There are two 
concepts: in-degree and out-degree. The in-degree means the 
number of links that come in and out-degree means the 
number of links that get out. The weight of each page is 
calculated by this function: 
𝑃(𝑢) = ෍𝑃(𝑣)
𝐿(𝑣)
௩∈஻ೠ
(1) 
The u means the pages needed to evaluate. 𝐵௨ is the set 
of in-degree links. Through this function, we can calculate 
each page’s weight in the set and get a PageRank matrix. 
However, we regard each account as a page and we 
should find out which account is less important because the 
PageRank of an account is larger, the account is more 
important and less likely to be a zombie account. In real life, 
when an account concerns to the other N accounts, this 
account needs to evenly assign its PageRank value to the 
other N accounts. However, the weights of the N concerned 
accounts are different, so this even assignation way will affect 
the order of the actual PageRank. If the account is concerned 
by more fans, then this account’s PageRank will be higher 
and if an account is followed by some high PageRank 
accounts that it also should have high PageRank. Then here 
we use a new work called IO to represent the credibility of 
the account according to its fans and follow accounts.  
𝐼𝑂=
𝐹𝑎𝑛𝑁𝑢𝑚
𝐹𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑁𝑢𝑚+ 𝐹𝑎𝑛𝑁𝑢𝑚
(2) 
Fan-Num is the number of in degree of the account, 
namely the fans amount, while the FollowNum is the number 
of out degrees. Then we should calculate each account’s IO 
value and they will be needed to find the new social matrix. 
Each account’s value in the social relations matrix is calculate 
by this function: 
𝐾௩=
𝐼𝑂௏
∑
𝐼𝑂௜
௡
௜ୀଵ
(3) 
The new value in the matrix will be based on the IO value 
of each account, this upper one is the account the target 
account’s IO value and the bottom one is the sum of all output 
account’s IO value. Through this uneven assignation 
PageRank method, we can easily find out the zombie 
accounts with very low PageRank in the communities. 
3. 2 Modularity 
To measure the performance of community detection 
algorithm, Commonly, the modularity Q is used: 
                       𝑄= 1
2m ෍ 
௜ஷ௝
ቆ𝐴௜௝−𝑘௜𝑘௝
2𝑚ቇ𝛿൫𝐶௜, 𝐶௝൯              (4) 
where𝐴௜௝ is an element in the adjacent matrix in the 
network (if node i is connected with node j, then A = 1 else 
0).𝐶௜ represents the community that node i located in. m is the 
total number of edges in the network.𝛿൫𝐶௜, 𝐶௝൯ = 1 if node i 
and j locate in the same community, else 𝛿൫𝐶௜, 𝐶௝൯= 0.𝑘௜ 
represents the degree of node. 𝑘௜= ∑𝐴௜௪
௪
. 
Modularity is a measurement method to evaluate the 
division of a community network. Its physical meaning is the 
difference between the sum of the weights of the connected 
edges of nodes in the community and the sum of the weights 
of the connected edges under random conditions. It ranges 
from [-0.5, 1]. 
The Q value is calculated during each iteration, and the 
maximum value of Q is the ideal division of the network. The 
Q value ranges from 0-1. The larger the Q value, the higher 
the accuracy of the community structure divided by the 
network. In actual network analysis, the highest point of the 
Q value generally appears between 0.3-0.7. 
3.3 Community Detection Algorithms 
After defining the measurement, we will implement 
some algorithm for nonoverlapping community detection and 
overlapping detection. For non-overlapping community 
detection, we plan to use algorithms based on modularity 
optimization such as Fast unfolding (Louvain) [4] and 
dynamic algorithms such as Infomap [7]. We compare the 
result from each algorithm and choose the result with the 
largest Q as the final result. And we will also compare the 
time 
consuming. 
In 
addition, 
detecting 
overlapped 
community is also important since it really exists in lots of 
real scenarios. We adopted the CPM algorithm and get the 
result of overlapping community.  
The Louvain algorithm mainly has two stages: First, 
Each point sets as a community. Then consider the neighbor 
nodes of each community and merge into the community. 
Find the largest positive modularity Q and merge the point to 
community. It could be better to repeat this stage many times 
until the modularity Q without changing. Second, the second 
phase of the algorithm consists in building a new network 
whose nodes are now the communities found during the first 
phase. To do so, the weights of the links between the new 
nodes are given by the sum of the weight of the links between 
nodes in the corresponding two communities. Links between 
nodes of the same community lead to self-loops for this 
community in the new network.  
As Table 1 illustrates the pseudocode of Louvain 
algorithm. Typically, i represents a node in the graph, j is 
another node (except node i itself) in the graph, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐴௜௝ is the 
weight between node i and node j, it is assigned the value 1 if 
node i and j are adjacent else it is assigned the value 0. 
Character m is the sum of all the weight, 𝑘௜,௜௡ is the sum of 
edge weights of all nodes in the community of node I and 𝐾௜ 
is the sum of edge weights of all nodes in the whole graph of 
node i. 
Table 1 Pseudocode of Louvain algorithm 
Algorithm 1. Louvain 
Input: i, A 
Output: community 
initialize each node i as a community 
calculate 𝐴௜௝ 
calculate m 
repeat 
        repeat 
         calculate each i’s Q with j 
         calculate each i’s △Q with j 
         merge node i into the largest Q’s community 
         until no change 
 repeat 

         update the 𝐴௜௝ 
         update the m 
         update the 𝑘௜,௜௡ 
         update the 𝐾௜ 
         until stopping criterion is met 
until reaches the maximum iteration times 
return Louvain community information 
 
 
3.4 Dataset 
We choose Sina Weibo, the most influential social media 
in China, as our research object. We will use the dataset 
provided in a paper [3] which studies the social influence 
locality for modelling retweeting behaviors. The data set was 
crawled in the following ways: To begin with, 100 random 
users were selected as seed users, and then they were 
collected. The crawling process produced in total 1.7 million 
users and 0.4 billion following relationships among them, 
with average 200 followees per user. For each user, the 
crawler collected her 1,000 most recent microblogs 
(including tweets and retweets). The process resulted in 
totally 1 billion microblogs. The dataset also includes all the 
users’ profiles with contain name, gender, verification status, 
and microblogs. Table 1 shows the statistic of the dataset. 
Table 2 Statistics of the dataset 
Dataset 
Users 
Relationships 
Microblogs 
Retweets 
Weibo 
1,776,950 
308,489,739 
300,000 
23,755,810 
The dataset includes 4 parts: uidlist, user_profile1, 
user_profile2, weibo_network. First, uidlist provides the 
original id of each Weibo user in the dataset. User_profile1 
and user_profile2 both include all the information of each 
user which not only has the basic information like name, city, 
but also give message such as the number of the reciprocal 
relationships, the number of followers, the number of 
published/retweeted tweets and so on. Main dataset is the 
weibo_network. This file describes the Sina Weibo sub-
network at the very first timestamp. First line consists of two 
integers, representing the number of users N and number of 
the follow relationships M respectively. In the following N 
lines, each line starts with an integer v1_id, representing the 
user_id of user v1, followed by another integer k. And the 
following 2k numbers describes the user followed by v1, each 
represented by a user id v2_id and a number indicating the 
type of relationship. In weibo data set, "1" indicates that user 
v1 and v2 have a reciprocal follow relationship, while "0" 
indicates that their relationship is not reciprocal. After 
reorganizing the dataset, we figure out 116,815,889 edges in 
total. 
 
Figure 1 Kernel Density Estimation of the distribution of numbers 
of Adjacent Edges 
    As Figure 1 shows the kernel density estimation of the 
distribution of numbers of adjacent edges of all nodes. The 
distribution is seriously right skewed which means most of 
the amount of adjacent edges are less than 500. And some of 
them exceeds 1500. The total distribution is imbalance and 
will inevitably increase the time complexity of algorithms. 
 
Figure 2 The region distribution of the users 
Figure 2 illustrates the region distribution of users in the 
dataset. The distribution is polarized since most of the users 
locate in Guangdong province and Beijing. Except these 
users, most of the rest are in coastal areas and Sichuan 
province. The proportion of users located in northwest, 
northeast, and southwest is low. 
3.5 Detect Zombie Account using outliers 
Instead of detecting zombie account in the whole dataset, 
we detected it in each separate community. After executing 
the uneven assignation PageRank algorithm, the importance 
vector of all nodes in each community is available and the 
summation of the value should be all equal to 1. It's intuitive 
that considering those nodes with extremely low PageRank 
value as zombie account. Since it is one-dimensional data, it 
is reasonable to set a threshold that any node with PageRank 
value lower than this threshold should be considered as 
zombie account. It is defined as:  
𝐼𝑄𝑅= 𝑄3 −𝑄1
(5) 
𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑= 𝑄1 −1.5 ∗𝐼𝑄𝑅
(6) 
Q1 and Q3 represent the 25th percentile and 75th 
percentile of the vector of PageRank value in each 
community. Thus, IQR is the difference between Q3 and Q1. 
The threshold is set to be equal to the difference between the 
25th percentile and 1.5 IQR. If an account’s PageRank value 
is lower than the threshold, it should be considered as zombie 
account. 
As Figure 3 demonstrates the boxplot of a community 
without zombie account and Figure 4 demonstrates the 
boxplot of a community with several zombie accounts. It is 
apparently that there is no node with PageRank value lower 
than the threshold in Figure 3 and there are several nodes in 
red in the left side that lower than the threshold in Figure 4. 
These nodes are considered as zombie account. 
 
Figure 3 Boxplot of community without zombie account 

 
Figure 4 Boxplot of community with zombie account 
4 Result 
4.1 Community Detection 
      Table 3 illustrates the result of community detection by 
Louvain algorithm. The number and edge of the node is the 
same as the dataset shows. The algorithm divides 1,002 
community on the whole dataset with modularity equals to 
0.5658. According to the definition of modularity, the quality 
of community detection is considered as effective. 
Table 3 Result of community detection by Louvain algorithm 
Type 
Nums 
Nodes 
1,776,950 
Edges 
58,409,237 
# Community 
1,002 
Modularity 
0.5658 
 
Figure 5 Visualization of community detection of small size, 
medium size, and large size. From top to the bottom,  
    Figure 5 illustrates the Visualization of community 
detection of small size (with number of nodes between 500 to 
1000), medium size (with number of nodes between 1000 to 
2000), and large size (with node larger than 5,000), from left 
to the right, respectively. The visualization shows that the 
community detection algorithm can effectively clusters 
community with different scale. And it also shows that the 
connections across community become more and more 
significant when the size of community increases. It may 
suggest that the detection algorithm may work well on the 
small community but work slightly worse in the larger 
community. 
4.2 Zombie Account Detection 
      After executing the PageRank algorithm on all the 
community, the classification of zombie account is available. 
In the whole dataset, there are over 190,000 zombie accounts 
are detected by the algorithm and the proportion of zombie 
account in the whole dataset is 19.6%, as the Figure 6 shows. 
Figure 7 illustrates the location of zombie account based on 
the dataset, it is apparently that most of the zombie accounts 
are located in one-tier cities in China such as Beijing, 
Shanghai, and Guangzhou. The most likely reason is that 
zombie accounts are used by some companies that spreading 
public opinion. Since the dataset was collected in 2014, the 
proportion of zombie accounts is more likely to increase 
nowadays. And with the development of the internet, many 
bloggers eager to increase their ‘visual’ fans number or some 
companies need public opinion to increase their sales. These 
jobs are done by most of media company located in one-tier 
cities, thus the proportion of the location of zombie fans in 
one-tier city is likely to increase either. 

 
Figure 6 Proportion of zombie accounts in the dataset 
 
Figure 6 Location of all zombie account 
4.3 Performance of the algorithm 
      It is reasonable to combine the community detection 
algorithm and uneven assignation PageRank algorithm to 
detect zombie account. However, misclassification problem 
always exists. It is time-consuming to verify the whether the 
classification on each account is correct or wrong. In order to 
measure the performance of our model, we randomly select 
50 zombie account and 50 non-zombie account in the dataset 
and use the result of zombie account detection to draw a 
confusion matrix, as Table 4 demonstrates. 
The result shows that most of the classification is correct and 
take most of the proportion. And the number of classifying 
Non-Zombie Account to a Zombie Account is two times the 
number of classifying Zombie-Account to Non-Zombie 
Account. It means the algorithm tends to classify an account 
to a zombie Account. 
 
 
 
Table 4 Confusion matrix of 100 manual labeled sample 
 
Zombie 
Account 
Non-Zombie 
Account 
Zombie 
Account 
41 
17 
Non-Zombie 
Account 
9 
33 
      Figure 8 is the numerical performance of the algorithm. 
Overall, the accuracy of the algorithm is around 74%. The 
score of recall is 81% and the precision score is 89%. The 
general score, f1-score is around 83%. The data also suggest 
that the algorithm prefers to classify a normal account into 
zombie account. Thus, the threshold can be set to lower value 
or we should set more constraints of the algorithm to prevent 
it classify a normal account to a zombie account. 
 
Figure 7 Performance of the algorithm 
5 
Future Works 
There are possible improvements for our projects. First, 
a classifier can help to classify zombie account. In the original 
dataset, there are many features related to a typical account: 
number of followers and followees, register date, region, 
post, etc. A classical machine learning algorithm such as 
support vector machine and decision tree can be used to 
complete this binary classification task. Since it is impossible 
to label all the data in the dataset, it is wise to use semi- 
supervised learning algorithm to do this job. In the second, 
instead of using the relationships between users, users’ 
behaviour can be used to detect zombie account. Paper 
Optimizing Opinions with Stubborn Agents Under Time-
Varying Dynamics by D. Scott Hunter, Tauhid Zaman from 
MIT can be referred 
6 
Conclusion 
Zombie accounts refer to the fake fans on Weibo, which 
are usually malicious registered users automatically 
generated by the system. It is not conducive to data analysis 
and classification. PageRank algorithm is an algorithm able 
to compute the importance of nodes in the graph network. 
However, it exists some problems in our project. First, it 
requires the computer to store the adjacent matrix or adjacent 
list in the RAM. It is hard for our machine to store such a big 
data in the computer. Second, for a graph with millions of 
even billions of nodes, the importance of each node is quite 
small or approximate to zero. It is difficult to tell the 
difference of importance of nodes with similar value. To 
solve the first problem, considering the links between nodes 
make graph divisible while keeping the main structure of it, a 
community detection algorithm – Louvain is used to divide 
the graph into several communities. To solve the second 
problem, the uneven assignation PageRank algorithm is used. 
It does not ignore the contribution of each node: node with 
more fans number is more important and contribute more than 
the other node. For each importance vector in the community, 

a threshold is set to distinguish zombie account and normal 
account. 
A weibo social dataset contains 1.3 million nodes and 50 
million edges is used. The result suggests that there are total 
1,002 communities with modularity 0.58. The uneven 
PageRank algorithm detect about 18 thousand zombie 
accounts, which take the proportion of about 20% of the 
dataset. The location of this zombie account are centred in 
one-tier cities in China, such as Beijing, Shanghai, and 
Guangzhou. 
In the future, a classification algorithm with semi-
supervised learning can be helped to classify zombie accounts, 
take features of an account like register date or number of fans. 
Or user’s behaviours instead of the relationship in the graph 
can be used to do so.
