Intelligence Graph
Han Xiao 1
Abstract
In fact, there exist three genres of intelligence
architectures: logics (e.g. Random Forest, A∗
Searching), neurons (e.g. CNN, LSTM) and prob-
abilities (e.g. Naive Bayes, HMM), all of which
are incompatible to each other. However, to con-
struct powerful intelligence systems with various
methods, we propose the intelligence graph (short
as iGraph), which is composed by both of neural
and probabilistic graph, under the framework of
forward-backward propagation. By the paradigm
of iGraph, we design a recommendation model
with semantic principle. First, the probabilistic
distributions of categories are generated from the
embedding representations of users/items, in the
manner of neurons. Second, the probabilistic
graph infers the distributions of features, in the
manner of probabilities. Last, for the recommen-
dation diversity, we perform an expectation com-
putation then conduct a logic judgment, in the
manner of logics. Experimentally, we beat the
state-of-the-art baselines and verify our conclu-
sions.
1. Introduction
In fact, there exist three genres of intelligence architectures:
logics (e.g. Random Forest (Zhou & Feng, 2017), A∗Search-
ing (Munos, 2012)), neurons (e.g. CNN (He et al., 2016),
LSTM(Xiao, 2017a)) and probabilities (e.g. Naive Bayes
(Koller & Friedman, 2009), HMM (Murphy, 2012)). The
proposed neural graph (Xiao, 2017b) uniﬁes the methodol-
ogy of logics and neurons, which provides a more powerful
form for intelligence systems. However, from the perspec-
tive of uncertainty, neural graph only characterizes the sys-
tem in a deterministic way. In order to model intelligence in
1State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, De-
partment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Univer-
sity, Beijing 100084, PR China. Correspondence to: Han Xiao

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
both deterministic and stochastic manner, we shall unify the
neural and probabilistic graph in this paper as intelligence
graph, or iGraph. From the perspective of practice, the
system designer could freely employ the models from both
neural and probabilistic graph (Xiao, 2017b; Jordan, 2004)
in one architecture at the same time.
Speciﬁcally, the neural and probabilistic parts corporate in
the framework of forward-backward propagation, (Rumel-
hart et al., 1988; Xiao, 2017a). In iGraph, we indicate the
interface between neurons and probabilistic variables, where
input interface links neurons to stochastic parts and output
interface plays the otherwise corresponding role. As shown
in Figure 1, we leverage the topic model (Murphy, 2012)
(notice the difference between pLSI) to classify documents,
where the topic distribution of words P(zk|wi) stem from
the hidden representations of LSTM, rather than the directly
learned distribution vectors. Then, the soft-max layer is
employed for the document classiﬁcation with the corre-
sponding topic distribution P(zk|dj). Mathematically, we
could derive the system as below:
P(zk|wi) .= softmax(Mhi), hi = LSTM({wi})
P(zk|dj) =
X
wi
P(zk|wi)P(wi|dj)
(1)
yj = softmax(Wfj), fj .= P(zk|dj)
(2)
where M, W is the parameter of softmax and LSTM is
the conventional network of LSTM.
Figure 1. The illustration of the interface between neurons and
probabilities for the task of text classiﬁcation. To start, the sen-
tence is parsed by LSTM to generate the context-based word repre-
sentations, which are leveraged as P(zk|wi) in next probabilistic
graph to calculate P(zk|dj). Last, a softmax layer is employed to
classify the documents with the corresponding topic distributions.
arXiv:1801.01604v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2018

Intelligence Graph
Figure 2. The iGraph of Our Model. First, the probabilistic dis-
tributions of categories are generated from the embedding rep-
resentations of users/items, in the manner of neurons. Second,
the probabilistic graph infers the distributions of features, in the
manner of probabilities. Last, for the diversity of recommenda-
tion, we perform an expectation computation then conduct a logic
judgment, in the manner of logics.
In essence, the gradients could be automatically derived,
only if we could formulate the probabilistic part. Sim-
ply, in the forward pass, we treat the input/output inter-
face as input/output probabilistic distribution, while the
sum-product algorithm formulates this process for calcu-
lation, (Kschischang et al., 2001). For the example of Fig-
ure 1, the input/output distribution is P(zk|wi)/P(zk|dj).
To start, we work out the joint probabilistic distribution as
P(zk, wi, dj) = P(zk|wi)P(wi|dj), and then the formu-
lation of sum-product algorithm is presented in Equation
(1). In the backward pass, the gradient propagates though
Equation (1) to LSTM, in a conventional manner. Notably,
given the speciﬁc iGraph, all of the deductions could be
performed automatically.
With this principle of iGraph, we tackle the task of recom-
mendation in Figure 2, as an extension of SAR (Xiao &
Meng, 2017). SAR is a probabilistic model, which applies
semantic principle (Xiao, 2016), to represent users/items
semantically, and then treats the recommendation as a pro-
cess of semantic matching. There exist two disadvantages
for SAR, listed as (1.) The characterization of category
distribution that a distribution vector is too simpliﬁed to
achieve better performance. (2.) There is no mechanism for
considering recommendation diversity.
Regarding the ﬁrst disadvantage, we employ a neural net-
work to generate the category distributions from user and
item embedding representations. In this way, the category
distributions are modeled precisely. Regarding the second
disadvantage, we respectively process the situations where
the predicted rating is high or medium. Actually, a war-
movie fan would not expect all the recommended ﬁlms are
war-related, because some high-quality movies would not
make a perfect semantic match, but still could be highly
rated. In the ﬁnal stage of our iGraph, for the diversity
of recommendation, we check out the case of high-quality
movies and make an appropriate recommendation based on
the quality and popularity.
We conduct the experiments of rating prediction on Movie-
lens dataset to verify our model.
Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our model,
because our model beats all the state-of-the-art baselines.
We also vary the hyper-parameters to testify our model,
and conclude that our model is robust for hyper-parameter
settings.
Contributions. We list two contributions: (1.) Intelligence
graph (iGraph) could represent all the combinations and
iterations of almost every intelligence method, which in-
curs a complete representation theory of intelligence. (2.)
We design a novel graph for recommendation based on SAR
and tackle two issues that the oversimpliﬁed category distri-
bution and recommendation diversity. Besides, we achieve
the state-of-the-art performance in the task of rating predic-
tion.
2. Related Work
We have surveyed the relevant papers and roughly classiﬁed
the existing recommendation methods into ﬁve categories:
matrix factorization, neighborhood based method, regres-
sion based method, social information integration method
and semantic analysis. Notably, most methods are based on
rating matrix completion, which is a conventional setting
for recommendation, (Xiao & Meng, 2017).
Matrix Factorization is a classic recommendation method-
ology. First, this paradigm factorizes the rating matrix
M ≈UV to get the user/item-speciﬁc latent matrices U,V .
Then, the method multiplies UV ≈ˆ
M to estimate the un-
observable ratings, where ˆ
M is the complete rating matrix.

Intelligence Graph
Because this branch hypothesizes different assumptions on
latent matrices U and V , there also exist four primary sub-
categories according to the applied hypotheses. (1.) Basic
matrix factorization generally constrains latent factors as
positive/non-negative, such as NMF (Wang & Zhang, 2013),
SVP (Meka et al., 2009), MMMF (Rennie & Srebro, 2005),
PMF (Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2012). (2.) Matrix factor-
ization jointed with neighborhood-based modeling, such
as CISMF (Guo et al., 2015). (3.) Matrix factorization
under various rank assumptions explores the effects of rep-
resentation and generalization ability for the matrix rank
to boost the performance, such as LLORMA (Lee et al.,
2016)(Ko et al., 2015), R1MP (Wang et al., 2014b), SoftIm-
pute (Rahul Mazumder, 2010), (Ganti et al., 2015), (Zhang
et al., 2013), (Kirly et al., 2012). (4.) Matrix factorization
with discrete outputs treats each item of the rating matrix
as discrete value to avoid noise and obtains more interpreta-
tions, such as ODMC (Huo et al., 2016).
Neighborhood Based Method is one of the most seminal
approaches, assuming that the similar items/users trigger
similar rating preference. There exist three main variants
including item-based, user-based and global similarity, sur-
veyed in (Guo et al., 2015) and (Ricci et al., 2011).
Regression Based Method formulates recommendation or
matrix completion as a regression problem, such as graph
regression method GRALS (Cai et al., 2011), blind regres-
sion (Song, 2016), Riemannian manifold based regression
(Vandereycken, 2013), and others (Davenport et al., 2014).
Social Information Integration applies social information
to strengthen the recommendation such as relationship be-
tween users, personalized proﬁles or movies’ attributes.
There list some latest researches: SR (Ma, 2013), PRMF
(Liu et al., 2016), geo-speciﬁc personalization (Liu et al.,
2014), social network based methods (Deng et al., 2014)
and other social context integration methods (Wang et al.,
2014a).
Semantic Analysis takes the advantage of semantic princi-
ple or multi-view clustering methodology for recommenda-
tion (Xiao & Meng, 2017). Semantic principle conjectures
that clusters and semantics are equivalently corresponded,
(Xiao, 2016). Simply, SAR (Xiao & Meng, 2017) clusters
the users/items in different views, where each view corre-
sponds to a speciﬁc semantic style. Then, summarizing
the cluster information in each semantic view, we obtain
the user/item-speciﬁc semantic representation. Last, SAR
performs a process of semantic matching to discriminate
the highly rated items for users (better match triggers higher
rating). This method is based on probabilistic graph, thus
lacking of non-linear function and complex neural network
structures leads to unsatisfactory performance. Also, there
exist the recommendation diversity issue as previously dis-
cussed.
3. Methodology
Our iGraph is illustrated in Figure 2. In this paper, we design
a recommendation model with semantic principle. First, the
probabilistic distributions of categories are generated from
the embedding representations of users/items, in the manner
of neurons. Second, the probabilistic graph infers the distri-
butions of features, in the manner of probabilities. Last, for
the recommendation diversity, we perform an expectation
computation then conduct a logic judgment, in the manner
of logics.
3.1. Architecture
In the sequel, we discuss our graph in corresponding ﬁve
components: embedding layer, user/item-speciﬁc network,
semantic component, rating generation and logic judgment.
Embedding Layer. It is necessary to represent users/items
in a latent manner, because the input of recommendation
is oversimple. Actually, most recommendation methods
take the idea of embedding. For the example of PMF, the
row/column of factor matrices represent the user/item in a
manner of probabilistic distribution. Speciﬁcally, regarding
SAR, the category distribution of P(zk|u)/P(zk|t) corre-
sponds to the functionality of embedding representation.
In this paper, we take the k-dimensional real vector as our
embedding, and then we concatenate the corresponding user
and item embedding vector as the embedding of this entry
Mu,t.
User/Item-Speciﬁc Network. SAR simply supposes the
user/item category distribution is only related to the corre-
sponding user/item. However, we conjecture user category
distribution should vary slightly with the different items,
and similar case for item. By the ﬂexibility provided by
iGraph, we employ two speciﬁc networks to transform the
embedding of rating matrix entry Mu,i into the correspond-
ing category distributions, which is the input interface of
probabilistic part. Notably, we customize the network as
multiple layer perceptions in the hyper-parameter setting.
Semantic Component. This component is a direct copy of
SAR, which is a two-level hierarchical generation process.
Simply, the model generates different features in the ﬁrst-
level process, while the user/item generates the categories
for each feature in the second-level process, correspondingly.
Finally, the categories in each feature generate the prefer-
ence p ∈[1...|R|], where |R| is the range of rating. There
introduce three factors: P(zi|u), P(yi|t) and P(p|zi, yi),
two of which are described in the previous paragraph. Re-
garding the remaining distribution P(p|zi.yi), we should
consider the the effect of semantic matching as:
P(ˆp|zn, yn, fn, u, t) = τˆp|zn,yn,fne−|P(zn|u,fn)−P(yn|t,fn)|
σ
(6)
where τˆp|zn,yn,fn is tabular model parameters which can be

Intelligence Graph
P(ˆp, zn, yn, fn|u, t) = P(zn|u, fn)P(yn|t, fn)P(ˆp|zn, yn, fn, u, t)
(3)
P(ˆp|f, u, t)
=
F irst−Level: F eature Mixture
z
}|
{
|F |
X
n=1
P(fn|u, t)
Second−Level: Category Mixture
z
}|
{
|C|
X
i,j=1
P(zn = i|u, fn)P(yn = j|t, fn)P(ˆp|zn = i, yn = j, fn, u, t)
(4)
=
|F |
X
n=1
P(fn|u, t)
|C|
X
i,j=1
P(zn = i|u, fn)P(yn = j|t, fn)τˆp|zn,yn,fne−|P(zn=i|u,fn)−P(yn=j|t,fn)|
σ
(5)
tuned in the learning process and σ is the hyper-parameter.
Though the deduction of probabilistic part is automatically
performed by sum-product rule, we still present the corre-
sponding probabilistic form for clarity, where two-level mix-
ture indicates the process of multi-view clustering method-
ology, according to semantic principle.
Rating Generation. Regarding the task of prediction, ac-
cording to SAR, rating is estimated as the expectation of
soft-max distribution, as formulated in (7).
r|u,t .= Er|u,t(r) =
P|R|
p=1 p × eˆpωuωt
P|R|
p=1 eˆpiωuωt
(7)
where p corresponds to the rating range, and ˆp is the output
interface as P(p|f, u, t), which has |R| entries.
Algorithm 1 Diversity Recommendation.
Input: Predicted ratings r|u,t, hyper-parameter [ra, rb], fea-
ture distribution P(ˆp|f, u, t) and another item embed-
ding tdiversity.
Output: Final predicted rating ˆr|u,t.
1: ˆr|u,t = r|u,t
2: if r|u,t ∈[ra, rb] then
3:
ˆr|u,t = r|u,t + NN(tdiversity, P(ˆp|f, u, t))
4: end if
5: return ˆr|u,t
Logic Judgment. Argued in the “Introduction”, we should
consider the high-quality movies for recommendation di-
versity. It is necessary to judge the match degree, because
we only perform diversity recommendation for a special
range of predicted rating, such as [ra, rb]. In fact, the highly
rated items need no extra processing, thus we limit the upper
bound as ra, while extremely semantically unmatched items
should not be considered as recommended, even if it is pop-
ular or high-quality, hence we limit the lower bound as rb.
Notice that ra, rb are two distinguishable hyper-parameters.
Generally, we complement the rating in the range [ra, rb]
with a neural network as ˆru,t = r|u,t + rdiversity, where
rdiversity is the output of the corresponding network and
the input is another item embedding tdiversity and feature
distribution P(ˆp|f, u, t). To summarize, we present this pro-
cess in Algorithm 1. Notice that the network is customized
as a multiple layer perception in the hyper-parameter setting.
3.2. From the Perspective of Interpretability
Commonly agreed by our community, neural networks or
neural parts are black-box. The critical point of neural style
is strong data-ﬁtting ability, while the ﬂaw is lacking of
interpretability.
However, a better interpretability takes at least three advan-
tages. First, a good intuition inspires a better architecture.
Well-deﬁned interpretability may even promote the perfor-
mance in the breakthrough level. Second, many areas need
the cooperation between machines and humans, where in-
terpretability is a necessary option. Last, interpretability
could joint with handy work such as rules, which opens an
industrial way for intelligence system. Thus, logic and prob-
abilistic part, which could provide strong interpretability,
are critical in intelligence graph.
On the other side, the methods from traditional algorithms
and probabilistic graphs perform less satisfactory than neu-
ral networks, because of a weaker data-ﬁtting ability. Data-
ﬁtting ability, which brings the research trend of deep learn-
ing, is also critical for intelligence systems. In summary,
we shall jointly consider the data-ﬁtting ability and inter-
pretability in the intelligence graph.
In my opinion, interpretable (i.e. probabilistic and logic)
parts should dominate the overview framework of iGraph,
and neural parts are responsible for feature extraction and
links between the interpretable parts. In this way, the entire

Intelligence Graph
architecture is interpretable with strong data-ﬁtting ability.
4. Experiment
This section has not been ready in this version.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a complete representation theory
of intelligence, as intelligence graph (iGraph). Based on
this novel paradigm, we design a graph for recommendation
to tackle two issues, that the oversimple category distribu-
tion and diversity recommendation. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our model.
