UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
353 
Causal Mechanism-based Model Constructions 
Tsai-Ching Lu & Marek J. Druzdzel 
Decision Systems Laboratory 
School of Information Sciences 
and Intelligent Systems Program 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 

Abstract 
We propose a framework for building graph­
ical causal model that is based on the con­
cept of causal mechanisms. Causal models 
are intuitive for human users and, more im­
portantly, support the prediction of the ef­
fect of manipulation. We describe an imple­
mentation of the proposed framework as an 
interactive model construction module, Ima­
GeNie, in SMILE (Structural Modeling, In­
ference, and Learning Engine) and in GeNie 
(SMILE's Windows user interface). 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Graphical probabilistic models, such as Bayesian net­
works and influence diagrams, have become popular 
modeling tools for supporting decision making under 
uncertainty. The normative character of the graphi­
cal decision models guarantees the correctness of the 
inference procedure. Consequently, the quality of the 
advice suggested by the models depends directly on 
the requisiteness of the models. A model is requisite if 
it contains everything that is essential for solving the 
problem and no new insights about the problem will 
emerge by elaborating on it (Philips 1982). To build 
a requisite model requires human intuition and cre­
ativity since the notion of requisiteness is subjective. 
Construction of graphical models, therefore, is labo­
rious and demanding in terms of domain expertise. 
While support for obtaining model parameters, such 
as prior and conditional probability distribution, has 
received much attention in behavioral decision theory 
literature (see von Winterfeldt and Edwards (1988) for 
a review) and in artificial intelligence (Druzdzel & van 
der Gaag 2000), relatively little work has been done on 
composing model structure. At the same time, there 
are strong indications that the quality of advice is more 
sensitive to the model structure than to the precision 
Tze Yun Leong 
Medical Computing Laboratory 
Department of Computer Science 
School of Computing 
National University of Singapore 
Singapore 119260 

of its numerical parameters (Pradhan et al. 1996). 
There are essentially four approaches to aid model 
building. The first approach focuses on providing more 
expressive building tools. The Noisy-OR model (Pearl 
1988; Henrion 1989) and its generalizations (Dlez 1993; 
Srinivas 1993) simplify the representation and elici­
tation of independence interactions among multiple 
causes. Beckerman (1990) developed the similarity 
network and partition as tools for representing subset 
independence to facilitate the structure construction 
and probability elicitation. The second approach, usu­
ally referred to knowledge-based model construction 
(KBMC), emphasizes aiding model building by auto­
mated generation of decision models from a domain 
knowledge-base guided by the problem description and 
observed information (see a special issue at the journal 
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 
on the topic of KBMC (Breese, Goldman, & Wellman 
1994)). The third approach focuses on algorithms that 
can learn the model structure and parameters from a 
database of observations (Cooper & Herskovits 1991; 
Pearl & Verma 1991; Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines 
1993). Although model construction from data can 
reduce the knowledge engineering effort, the learning 
approach faces other problems such as small data sets, 
unmeasured variables, missing data, selection bias, and 
the flexibility of model granularity. 
While we acknowledge that in the future it may be 
possible to build powerful computer systems that will 
model human creativity, sense for relevance, and sim­
plicity, we believe that these tasks are and will long be 
performed better by humans. Our view is that model 
building, a task that relies on all these capacities, is 
best implemented as an interactive process. The fourth 
approach on aiding model construction that is most re­
lated to our work is to apply system engineering and 
knowledge engineering techniques for aiding the pro­
cess of building Bayesian networks. Laskey and Ma­
honey (1996; 1997) address the issues of modulariza­
tion, object-orientation, knowledge-base, and evalua-

354 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
tion in a spiral model of development cycle. Koller 
and Pfeffer (1997; 1999) developed Object-Oriented 
Bayesian Networks (OOBN) that use objects as orga­
nizational units to reduce the complexity of modeling 
and increase the speed of inference. 
Our approach on aiding model construction is based 
on the concept of causal mechanisms. Causal mecha­
nisms, which are local interactions among domain vari­
ables, are building blocks that determine the causal 
structure of a model. As they encode our understand­
ing of local interactions and are fairly model inde­
pendent, causal mechanisms can be easily reused in 
various models. When the algebraic form of the in­
teraction is known, causal mechanisms are captured 
by so called structural equations. When less informa­
tion is available about the interaction, it can be spec­
ified in a probabilistic format. As shown by Druzdzel 
and Simon (1993), conditional probability tables in 
Bayesian networks that model causal relations among 
their variables can be also viewed as descriptions of 
causal mechanisms. Similarly to object-hierarchy ab­
straction, causal mechanism can be organized hierar­
chically in nearly decomposable system (Iwasaki & Si­
mon 1994). At the same time they provide a valu­
able heuristic for acquiring and managing knowledge: 
causality. 
In our framework, we encode causal mechanisms as 
functional relations among variables and, wherever 
causal mechanisms are asymmetric, the direction of 
causal influence among variables. We extend Simon's 
causal ordering algorithm (Simon 1953) to develop a 
modeling process that uses the output graph of this 
algorithm in the interaction with users. We assist the 
model building process by helping user (1) to identify 
a set of mechanisms related to the current model and 
to bring them into model workspace (2) to integrate 
the newly added mechanisms with the model under 
construction (3) to specify the variables that can be 
manipulated, and (4) to extract reusable causal mech­
anisms from existing models into the knowledge base. 
The final model structures generated by our modeling 
process are guaranteed to be causal if the underlying 
structural equations reflect causal mechanisms of the 
modeled problem. 
In addition to being intuitive for human users and facil­
itating crucial user interface functions such as explana­
tion, causal models support prediction of the effect of 
manipulation, i.e., changes in structure (Simon 1953; 
Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines 1993; Pearl 1995). The 
users of such models (and that includes autonomous 
robots) can ask questions like "What will happen if 
I perform action A?" Manipulation is especially im­
portant in strategic planning, where it is important to 
derive creative decision options and not only evaluate 
existing decision options. In the process of creating a 
model, a user may want to explore the possibility of 
manipulating its different elements. Supporting this 
manipulation is not straightforward, as some mecha­
nisms may be reversible, i.e., acting in reverse direc­
tion. For example, when driving up the hill, car engine 
causes the wheels to turn; but when driving down the 
hill in a low gear, the model should be able to predict 
that the wheels will cause the engine to slow down. 
Our approach supports causal modeling that includes 
reversible causal mechanisms and offers an integrated 
framework for building and using causal models. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 gives an overview of structural equation mod­
els, causal mechanisms, and how these support changes 
in structure. Section 3 discusses the process of inter­
active model construction, including issues related to 
the representation of causal mechanism, assistant in­
terface, and the extension of causal ordering algorithm. 
Section 4 presents an example of user interaction with 
our system, ImaGeN/e. Finally, we discuss the impli­
cations of our approach and outline the direction for 
our future work. 
2 
STRUCTURAL EQUATION 
MODELS 
When scientists study phenomena or problems, they 
normally focus on systems, pieces of the real world 
that can reasonably be studied in isolation. Scien­
tists identify the relevant variables, the ranges of the 
variables' values, and the relations among variables to 
form abstractions of these systems, known as mod­
els. One way of representing models is by systems 
of structural equations where each structural equa­
tion describes a conceptually distinct causal mecha­
nism active in the system. Such systems are known as 
Structural Equation Models (SEMs) (Haavelmo 1943; 
Simon 1953). A structural equation describing a causal 
mechanism M is often encoded as an implicit function 
where f is some algebraic function and its arguments 
V; are variables that directly participate in the mech­
anism M. 
A variable in a SEM is exogenous if it summarizes 
an outside influence on the system, i.e., its value is 
determined outside of the model. An exogenous vari­
able is truly exogenous if it represents a variable in the 
real world system that we cannot manipulate without 
changing the boundaries of the system. An exogenous 
variable is a policy variable if it represents a variable 
that we can manipulate, i.e., set its value. For exam­
ple, we normally model outside temperature as a truly 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
355 
exogenous variable in an agricultural model, but we 
can model the temperature as a policy variable in a 
model of a greenhouse. For each exogenous variable, 
there is a value assignment structural equation to des­
ignate the observed value (or a probability distribution 
over observed values) for the truly exogenous variable 
or the chosen value for the policy variable. A variable 
in a SEM is endogenous if its value is derived by substi­
tuting the values of exogenous variables into the core 
structural equations that depict the relations among 
modeled variables in the system and by solving these 
equations in SEM . 
A SEM S with m causal mechanisms and n variables 
is represented as 
m 
S = U fM,(Vl, V2, V3, ... , Vn). 
i=l 
Since the knowledge of which variables participate in 
which mechanisms is sufficient to determine the di­
rection of causation, 1 in the remainder of this paper 
we will only use structure matrix (Druzdzel & Simon 
1993), a qualitative representation of a SEM. 
Definition 1 (structure matrix) A structure ma­
trix A of a SEM S = U:1 fM,(Vl, V2, V3, . .. , Vn) = 0 
is a m x n matrix with element a;j = x if Vj participates 
in f M;, where x is a marker, and a;j = 0 otherwise. 
Let Amxn be the structure matrix of a SEM S with m 
equations and n variables. S is non-over-constrained 
if following property holds. 
Definition 2 (non-over-constrained system) A 
system of 
m structural equations S is non-over­
constrained if in any subset of k ::; m equations of 
S at least k different variables appear with nonzero co­
efficients. 
A non-over-constrained Amxn is self-contained if m = 
n. A non-over-constrained Amxn is under-constrained 
if m < n. Amxn is over-constrained if it violates non­
over-constrained property. 
Example: The University Performance Budget Planning 
Model (UPBPM) (Simon, Kalagnanam, & Druzdzel 2000) 
is comprised of 38 core equations that describe interactions 
among 88 variables in the university strategic budget plan­
ning context. The model has been adopted by the Office 
for Planning and Budget at Carnegie Mellon University for 
the purpose of strategic planning of university operations. 
The following simple model, StudentFacultyRatio model, 
extracted from UPBPM, consists of one core equations and 
two value assignment equations and describes the interac­
tion among three variables: StudentFacultyRatio (SF R), 
NumberOJStudents (NS), and NumberOfFaculty (NF). 
1 Only when calculating the strength of the influences, 
we need the exact form of equations. 
The corresponding structure matrix for this self-contained 
model is shown at the right hand side. 
{ " 
NS 
= 22102 
NS 
NF 
SFR 
/2: 
NF 
= 3006 
h 
X 
0 
0 
h: 
SFR 
= NSjNF 
h 
0 
X 
0 
h 
X 
X 
X 
0 
2.1 
Causal Ordering 
As shown by Simon (1953), a self-contained SEM ex­
hibits asymmetries that can be represented by a di­
rected acyclic graph and interpreted causally. Simon 
developed a causal ordering algorithm that takes a self­
contained structure matrix A as input and outputs 
a causal graph G = {N(G), A( G)}, where the nodes, 
N(G), are sets of variables and the arcs, A(G), describe 
causal relations among them. 
Let B be a subset of equations in a non-over­
constrained SEM and Cpxq be the structure matrix 
of B. 
We say that B is a self-contained subset if 
p = q; B is a under-constrained subset if p < q. A 
self-contained subset is minimal if it does not contain 
any self-contained (proper) subsets itself. A minimal 
self-contained subset is a strongly coupled component 
if it contains more than one equation, which usually 
represents a feedback system in the real world. 
The causal ordering algorithm starts with identifying 
the minimal self-contained subsets in input A. These 
identified minimal self-contained subsets are called 
complete subsets of 0-th order and a node is created 
for each subset. Next, the algorithm removes the equa­
tions of the complete subsets of 0-th order from A as 
solving the values of variables. Then it removes all 
variables that occur in the complete subsets of 0-th or­
der from the remaining equations in A as substituting 
the values of solved variables into remaining equations. 
The remaining set of equations is called the derived 
system of first order, a self-contained structure. The 
algorithm repeats the process of identifying, solving, 
and substituting on the derived system of k-th order 
until it is empty. In addition, whenever a node m is 
created for a minimal self-contained subset M, the al­
gorithm refers the set of equations EM of M back to 
the original set of equations OEM in A and adds arcs 
from the nodes representing variables in OV M \ V M to 
m, where V M is the set of variables participating in 
EM and OV M is the set of variables participating in 
OEM· 
Example: 
The UPBPM (Simon, 
Kalagnanam, 
& 
Druzdzel 2000) implements Simon (1953) causal ordering 
algorithm that given an assignment of values to 50 exoge­
nous variables, derives the structure of the model. 
When applying the causal ordering algorithm to the struc­
ture matrix of StudentFacultyRatio model, we first identify 

356 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
h and h as the complete subset of 0-th order. 
After 
solving and substituting of NS and NF, we then identify 
fK as the complete subset of 1-st order. The structure ma­
trix and the corresponding causal graph are shown below. 
NS 
NF 
X 
0 
0 
X 
X 
X 
SFR 
0 
0 
X 
Given the causal graph, we can read off the causal rela­
tions among the nodes by focusing on the node of interest 
and its parents. For example, SF R directly depends on 
NF and NS. 
D 
Notice that the causality that we read off causal graphs 
is defined within models and causal asymmetries arise 
when mechanisms are placed in context. If the context 
has changed, it may result in changes in structure. 
2.2 
Changes in Structure 
The main value of structural equation models is that 
they support prediction of the effects of changes in 
structure, i.e., external manipulations that intervene 
in the mechanisms captured by the original system of 
equations. Such changes are modeled by modifying 
the equations that describe the affected mechanisms 
and leaving those equations that correspond to unaf­
fected mechanisms unmodified. The causal ordering 
algorithm applied to the modified SEMs derives the 
new causal structure of the system. 
Normally, the effect of external manipulation is lo­
cal and, when related back to the graph, amounts to 
arc cutting (Pearl 1995; Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines 
1993). The assumption underlying the arc-cutting op­
eration is that imposing a value on a variable by an 
external intervention makes that variable independent 
of its direct causes. This assumption is valid for mech­
anisms with strong asymmetric relationship between 
a variable and its causes; for example, wearing sun­
glasses protects our eyes from the sun but it does 
not make the sun go away. However, when a model 
contains reversible causal mechanisms (Simon 1953; 
Druzdzel & van Leijen 2000), manipulation can have 
a drastic effect on the graph. 
Example: From the causal graph of StudentFacultyRa­
tio model in previous example, we k now that changing NS 
will affect SFR but not NF. Now, consider that the budget 
planning officer would like to set the StudentFacultyRa­
tio to advertise their faculty availability. 
If needed, she 
is willing to adjust the NumberOfFaculty (e. g. , hire more 
faculty) . According to the revised modeling context, she 
needs to designate the variable SF R as exogenous, e. g. ,  
j4 : SF R = 10, and release h : N F = 3, 006. The result­
ing structure matrix and corresponding causal graph are: 
NS 
X 
X 
0 
NF 
0 
X 
0 
SFR 
0 
X 
X 
()liL-D NF 
~ 
In the revised system, the causal ordering shows that N F 
has become an endogenous variable affected by N S and 
SFR. 
Now, changing the number of students will affect 
the number of faculty. Manipulation has lead to a change 
in structure. 
D 
Figure 1: Interactive and Iterative Model Construction 
System Architecture. The arcs show the direction of 
the information flow. 
3 
INTERACTIVE MODEL 
CON STRUCTION 
We have developed an interactive and iterative model 
construction environment, ImaGeNie, that assists 
users in building graphical decision model in causal 
form. We use the causal ordering algorithm to gen­
erate the causal model structures which can later be 
associated with different node types and parameters 
and transformed into Bayesian networks or influence 
diagrams. Figure 1 shows the architecture of ImaGe­
N/e. It includes three knowledge structures: mech­
anism knowledge bases, which hold domain knowl­
edge expressed as causal mechanisms, model build­
ing workspace, which serve as a blackboard for model 
composition, and models. 
The domain knowledge 
can be maintained either by the equation authoring 
interface, where model builders can compose struc­
tural equations directly, or by the mechanism ex­
traction operation that enables model builders to ex­
tract reusable causal mechanisms from existing mod­
els. Model builders can use hierarchy navigation in­
terface to locate the mechanisms of interest and select 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
357 
them into the model building workspace with assis­
tance of the mechanism selection operation. In ad­
dition to mechanism selection and traditional model 
authoring operations, model builders can manipulate 
variables and merge mechanisms as model building 
process evolves. The underlying causal ordering mod­
ule will restructure the models according to the user 
actions. 
3.1 
Knowledge Representation 
In ImaGeNie, the fundamental knowledge representa­
tion units are causal mechanisms, which are encoded as 
structural equations. For example, we can specify the 
student faculty ratio as h(S F R, NS, N F). Users may 
optionally provide explicit functions for causal mech­
anisms such as algebraic functions, conditional prob­
ability tables, truth tables, value/utility tables, and 
choice tables. 
While most mechanisms will be described in one, per­
haps their only, mode of operation, some mechanisms 
are reversible in the sense of being flexible as to the 
direction of causality that they imply when they are 
embedded in different contexts. We define the manip­
ulativeness and observability for each variable in our 
domain knowledge base to express the characteristics 
of the variable that may aid in the process of model 
building. Along with the manipulativeness character­
istic, a variable can be truly exogenous, manipulatable, 
or truly endogenous. For the sun and sunglasses exam­
ple, we may use two structural equations !5(S, G) and 
f6(S) to describe causal relation between S and G and 
assign S as a truly exogenous variable to express the 
fact that it is impossible to manipulate the sun in the 
current modeling domain. We may assign G as manip­
ulatable to designate it as a potential policy variable. 
A variable is truly endogenous if its value has to be de­
rived from embedded mechanisms. The observability 
is important in deciding whether adding this variable 
(observable or unobservable) will be of benefit to the 
model. In the diagnostic domain, it may be desired to 
develop the cost model that can associate manipulation 
cost/ observation cost with manipulatable/ observable 
variables. 
Our domain knowledge base is organized as a hierar­
chical system that consists of subsystems and causal 
mechanisms as its fundamental building elements. The 
hierarchical approach not only helps domain experts to 
express their domain knowledge in cognitively mean­
ingful units but also helps knowledge engineers to 
access stored mechanisms easily. 
Our approach is 
similar to type-hierarchy in (Koller & Pfeffer 1997; 
Laskey & Mahoney 1997) but without imposing the 
inheritance constraint since knowledge can be pos­
sibly organized hierarchically from different perspec-
tives. More details on the syntax of our knowledge 
representation language can be found in (Lu 1999). 
3.2 
Extending Causal Ordering to 
Under-constrained Model 
In ImaGeNie, the model construction process is a re­
flection of our problem solving. The under-constrained 
models evolved in such process reveal different problem 
recognition stages. In an under-constrained model, the 
mechanisms are our observations of how the problem 
should be described so far. Model building process is 
strongly related to causal manipulation. The exoge­
nous variables are those outside influences that have 
been committed. 
An under-constrained model can­
not be drawn as a directed acyclic graph, as the di­
rection of causal interactions is not completely deter­
mined until the model is self-contained. However, it 
is desired to have a graphical representation of under­
constrained models during the whole process of model 
construction, since the graphical representation may 
help model builder identify her focus and change her 
commitments of the outside influences. We extend Si­
mon's causal ordering algorithm to explicate the causal 
ordering that has been identified in under-constrained 
models. We also propose a graphical representation 
to depict the causal ordering results in an informative 
graphical form that aims to help user in model build­
ing. 
In order to formalize our extensions, we need to re­
state the theorem that was originally proved by Simon 
(1953). 
Theorem 1 Let A and B be two minimal self­
contained subsets of equations of a non-over­
constrained SEM, S. 
Then the structural equations 
of A and B, and likewise the variables in A and B are 
disjunct. 
Consider any subset B of the equations of a non-over­
constrained SEM. We will denote the number of equa­
tions in Bas ne8, and the number of variables appear­
ing in B as nvB. 
Theorem 2 Let S be a non-over-constrained system 
and D be the derived system of structural equations 
from S by applying identification, solving, and sub­
stitution. 
If D is not empty, then D is non-over­
constrained. 
Proof: 
In the process of identification, let M be the 
union of all the minimal self-contained subsets, M = M 1 U 
M2 U ... U Mk, and the remainder R. We k now R is not 
empty since V is not empty. 
Suppose that V violates the non-over-constrained property. 
Then there exists a subset £' of V such that net:' > nvt:'· 

358 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Let & be the subset of R that &' derives from. We know 
that ne£ = ne£1· Now, consider the subset :F = M U &. 
The equations of M and & are disjunct because M and R 
are disjunct and & = R. Therefore, ne;: = neM + ne£ = 
neM + ne£1. Since &' derives from & by substitution, the 
variables appearing in & are either in M or in &'. 
Con­
sequently, the variables in :F are either in M or in &'. 
Moreover, the variables in M and &' are disjunct because 
&' derives from & by substituting out the variables in M. 
Therefore, nv;: = nvM + nV£1. Since the equations of Mi, 
and likewise the variables in Mi, are disjunct by Theo­
rem 1, we have nVM = L;nvM, and neM = L;neM;· 
Hence nVM = neM. 
Therefore, ne;: = neM + ne£ = 
neM + ne£1 > neM + nV£1 = nvM + nV£1 = nv;:, i.e., the 
number of equations of :F is greater than the number of 
variables of :F. In other words, the set :F violates Defini­
tion 2 contradicting the fact that S is non-over-constrained. 
We conclude that V must be non-over-constrained. 
D 
Given Theorem 2, we can keep applying identifica­
tion, solving, and substitution operations on derived 
non-over-constrained system until either V is empty 
or there are no more minimal self-contained subsets 
that can be identified. If V is empty, we know that S 
is self-contained. If V is not empty and no more self­
contained subsets can be identified, we know that S 
is under-constrained and we call V the derived strictly 
under-constrained subsets. 
Definition 3 (strictly 
under-constrained sub­
sets) The strictly under-constrained subsets of a non­
over-constrained SEM are those under-constrained 
subsets that do not contain any self-contained subsets. 
Theorem 3 A SEM, S, is under-constrained if and 
only if there exists a derived strictly under-constrained 
subset inS. 
Proof (sketch): We can prove => by construction and 
¢:: by contradiction given Theorem 2. See (Lu 1999) for 
the formal proof. 
D 
Figure 2 outlines our extended causal ordering algo­
rithm that is based on Theorem 3. The input of the 
algorithm is a non-over-constrained structure matrix 
A. The output is a graph G = {V, A( G)}, where the 
nodes V are variables and A(G) is a set of directed, 
hi-directed, or undirected arcs. The algorithm essen­
tially follows the steps of identification, solving, and 
substitution as Simon's causal ordering algorithm un­
til there are no more self-contained subsets that can be 
identified from the derived system. The algorithm will 
explicitly depict the causal relations and relevant rela­
tions encoded in the strictly under-constrained subset, 
if there remains one. 
The graph generated by our extended causal ordering 
algorithm is specifically designed to aid the process of 
Procedure ExtendedCausalOrdering 
Input: 
A 
structure 
matrix 
A 
of 
a 
non-over-
constrained SEM. 
Output: 
A graph G 
= 
{V, A( G)}, where V are 
the variables in A and A( G) is a set of directed, hi­
directed, or undirected arcs. 
Let i := 0 and V0 := A 
while there exists Mi c Vi, where Mi is 
the complete subset of i:th order and Vi is 
the derived structure of i-th order. 
1. for each minimal self-contained subset 
Mj E Mi, where 1:::; j:::; IMil 
(a) Create nodes Nj for all variables in 
vM •. · 
J 
(b) Add arcs from the nodes represent 
OV M'. \ V M'. to nodes in Nj, where 
J 
J 
OV M'. is the set of the variables 
J 
in OEM'., the original equations of 
J 
equations EM'. of Mj in A. 
J 
(c) if INJI 
> 1, 
add pair-wise hi­
directed arcs among elements of Nj. 
2. Remove Mi from Vi to deriveR; (solv­
ing) and remove variables of Mi from 
Ri to derive V (substituting). 
3. Let i := i + 1 and Vi := V. 
if vi is not empty 
for each remaining equation ek in 
vi, where 1:::; k:::; IV'I 
1. Create nodes Nek for the set 
of variables, v.k' in ek. 
2. Add arcs from nodes repre­
senting OV.k \ Vek to N.k. 
3. Add pair-wise undirected arcs 
between nodes N.k. 
Figure 2: Extended Causal Ordering Algorithm 
model construction. Unlike the original causal order­
ing algorithm, each variable in the system is repre­
sented as a separate node so that the model builder 
can access and manipulate it directly. Directed arcs 
depict the causal relations among variables. In addi­
tion to these, our algorithm explicates the causal re­
lations encoded in the under-constrained system. Bi­
directed arcs denote feedback mechanisms in strongly­
coupled subsets. User can visualize the effect of break­
ing the feedback system by manipulating one of vari­
ables connected by the hi-directed arc. Undirected arcs 
visually express relevant but undetermined causal rela­
tions among variables so that model builder can focus 
on clarifying the mechanisms governing these variables 
and complete the model. 
Example: Suppose the budget planning officer wants to 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
359 
extend the StudentFacultyRatio model to take the average 
class size into account. She adds the structural equations 
h : CS = (NS * CL)/(NF * TL) and Is : CL 
= 15 to 
describe the relations among ClassSize ( CS), ClassLoad 
( CL), TeachingLoad ( TL), NS and NF. The structure ma­
trix of the extended model is as follows. 
NS 
NF 
SFR 
cs 
CL 
TL 
/1 
X 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
h 
0 
X 
0 
0 
0 
0 
h 
X 
X 
X 
0 
0 
0 
h 
X 
X 
0 
X 
X 
X 
Is 
0 
0 
0 
0 
X 
0 
After applying the extended causal ordering algorithm to 
the system, she obtains the following under-constrained 
causal graph. 
CL 
TL 
From the under-constrained causal graph, she can read 
off the current stage of problem formulation as follows: 
StudentFacultyRatio is determined by NumberOIStudents 
and NumberOfFaculty; 
currently 
both ClassSize 
and 
TeachingLoad 
depend 
on 
NumberOfStudents, 
Num­
berOfFaculty, and ClassLoad, but the relation between 
ClassSize and TeachingLoad is not yet determined, which 
is the consequence of the fact that the system is still 
under-constrained. 
D 
3.3 
Modeling Process 
The modeling process starts with an initial focus, 
which is normally, in the spirit of value-focused think­
ing (Keeney 1994), the value variable. Users can also 
start with other focus variables, for example decision, 
observation, and whatever else is relevant or impor­
tant a-priori. With the assistant interface, users can 
interactively browse the mechanisms related to their 
focus variables, select those that best depict the prob­
lem at hand, merge them, or specify exogenous vari­
ables to set the boundary of the system. However, we 
suggest the users to focus on one variable and add rel­
evant mechanisms one at a time as the model evolves, 
since it resembles the action of focusing on a variable 
of interest, explaining or observing it in terms of its 
underlying mechanism. The user repeats the process 
iteratively until the model is requisite. In other words, 
users make decisions on the level of granularity and 
when to stop with the model building process. The 
system only plays the passive role of an assistant: sug­
gesting mechanisms to choose from, indicating the pos­
sible mechanisms to merge, and denoting the manipu­
latable variables. 
Normally a model evolves from an under-constrained 
system to a self-contained system. Designating rna-
nipulatable variables as exogenous helps in obtaining 
a self-contained system, i.e., orienting all arcs in the 
model graph. If the user assigns a potential policy 
variable, a manipulatable variable that is endogenous 
in a self-contained system, as exogenous, the whole 
model becomes over-constrained, because the num­
ber of equations is greater than the number of vari­
ables. We allow a model to be under-constrained or 
self-contained at any stage of the model development 
in ImaGeNie, but we disallow a model to be over­
constrained. When a model becomes over-constrained, 
the system pops up a list of mechanisms that are 
currently in the model and asks users to release one 
of them in order to change the system into a self­
contained or an under-constrained system. 
4 
EXAMPLE MODEL BUILDING 
SESSION 
We continue on extending our simple model to demon­
strate how to interact with ImaGeNie to build a sim­
plified university budget model from UPBPM knowl­
edge base encoded in ImaGeN/e. Suppose the officer 
has designated T L variable as exogenous with equa­
tion fg : T L = 6. Figure 3 shows ImaGeNie interface 
with the navigation tree of the knowledge base and the 
model we have built so far in the workspace. 
'f GeNie GeNie1 
PId 
Urver:sity_Mecharum_ 
Smple Unversity c 
UnivetsityCore 
ClassSete 
Figure 3: ImaGeNie Interface: Navigation Tree and 
the Graphical Model Including Equations: JI, ]2, h, 
h, fs, and fg. 
Suppose she would like to plan the expenses related to 
faculty salary. She may use the navigation tree to lo­
cate mechanisms for faculty salary. Suppose she identi­
fies the mechanism f10: FS =(OJ +TA*NS)j(NF* 
( 1  + 0)) that describes the interactions among vari­
ables: FacultySalary (FS), Otherlncome (OJ), Tu­
itionAmount (TA), Overhead (0), NS and NF. She 
drags it into the workspace. In order to maintain the 
unique variable identifiers in the model, ImaGeNie au­
tomatically renames the N S and N F into N SO and 

360 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
N FO. The extended causal ordering algorithm gener­
ates the graph shown in Figure 4. 
IJGeNiel 
1!!1!1
£1 
Figure 4: Model builder selects and drags !Io into 
workspace; the extended causal ordering algorithm 
generates a corresponding graph. 
She can then integrate the added mechanism with the 
model by merging N S to N SO and N F to N FO. (See 
Figure 5). 
iii! GeNiel 
IIII!J
E'l 
Figure 5: Model builder performs the merge opera­
tions for N S (top). The causal ordering generates the 
corresponding graph (bottom). 
She then makes T A, 0, and OJ exogenous by assigning 
equations: fn : T A = 1, 200, !I2 : 0 = 0.48, and 
JI3 : OJ= 30,000,000 and obtains a complete model 
that describes the dependence relations among those 
variables of interests (See Figure 6 top). She can now 
read off the following dependency relations from the 
complete model: 
• Faculty salary is determined by the number of stu­
dents, the number of faculty, tuition amount, other 
income, and overhead. 
• Student-faculty ratio is determined by the number of 
students and the number of faculty. 
• Class size is determined by the number of students, 
the number of faculty, class load, and teaching load. 
After inspecting the current self-contained model, she 
would like to analyze the model under the condition 
that the average class size is fixed at 15 students per 
class. She makes the variable C S exogenous by spec­
ifying a value assignment equation as fi4 : CS = 15. 
Consequently the original self-contained model will be­
come over-constrained. ImaGeNie will ask her to re­
lease one of the equations ( Figure 6 top). Suppose that 
she chooses to release the value assignment equation 
for the variable T L. The resulting graph generated by 
the causal ordering is shown in Figure 6 bottom. 
CS •INS "Cl.)/(NF"TLJ 
.,e;;:__.c;:_-j'(:()JtJA"NS)I(NF•(1 +0)) 
CL • 15 
NF • 3006 
01 • 3000 00 
ill GeNiel 
I!II(!J £l 
Figure 6: A change in structure on a self-contained 
model. 
The user manipulates C S by setting JI4 : 
CS = 15 and releasing f9: TL = 6 (top). The causal 
ordering generates the corresponding graph (bottom). 
Now, she can read off the local effect of her change 
on the system from the causal graph: teaching load is 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
361 
determined by the number of students, the number of 
faculty, class load, and class size. 
ImaGeNie also supports model builder in extract­
ing reusable mechanisms from the workspace into the 
knowledge base. 
Model builder simply selects the 
nodes of interest and drags them into the destination 
branch in the navigation tree. Due to space limita­
tions, we are omitting this example. 
5 
DISCUSSION A N D  FUTURE 
WORK 
Support for building model structure is one of the 
best ways of improving the quality of advice based on 
decision-theoretic models. While existing approaches 
focus on automatic model construction either from 
knowledge base or directly from data, our approach 
favors a closely-coupled loop between the system and 
its user. This is based on our belief that human judge­
ment with respect to relevance, model size, complete­
ness, and granularity is more reliable. Built on the 
assumption that under-constrained models reflect our 
problem recognition stages, ImaGeNie assists users in 
encoding their conceptual problem framing in a causal 
graph generated by the extended causal ordering al­
gorithm. Furthermore, ImaGeNie provides users with 
the flexibility to choose building blocks from knowl­
edge base to extend the model, to manipulate the 
variables in order to observe the effect of intervention 
(structure changes), and to extract reusable mecha­
nisms from existing models to knowledge bases. The 
concept of causal mechanisms, on which ImaGeNie re­
lies, provides a general mean to accommodate different 
forms of knowledge description and makes knowledge 
acquisition task easier. 
Recent research in applying the object-oriented frame­
work to extend Bayesian networks for modeling com­
plex domains (Koller & Pfeffer 1997; Laskey & Ma­
honey 1997; Pfeffer et al. 1999) is closely related to 
our work. Each of these approaches organizes do­
main knowledge into a hierarchical system. In Object­
Oriented Bayesian Network (OOBN), the domain 
knowledge is structured explicitly as class-hierarchy 
for the type system and as object-hierarchy for the 
real model. In our framework, we do not impose any 
constraint on how users should organize their domain 
knowledge in the knowledge base. In the future, we 
would like to explore the semantics for combining type 
system with causal mechanisms so that our knowledge 
base can efficiently store the domain knowledge and be 
effectively used by users. As for the constructed mod­
els, ImaGeNie provides submodels to group nodes into 
a graphical organization unit for the sake of succinct 
presentation, but there is no special semantic meaning 
attached to submodels in terms of inference. We plan 
to impose d-sepset (Xiang, Poole, & Beddoes 1993) 
constraint on submodels composition such that each 
submodel has well defined 1/0 sets to resemble object 
hierarchy in O OB N. 
Once the model structures generated from our frame­
work are associated with variable ranges and their nu­
merical parameters such as explicit equations or con­
ditional probability tables ( CP Ts), manipulation on 
the model may invalidate these numerical parameters. 
Druzdzel and van Leijen (2000) have shown the special 
conditions under which the CPTs in Bayesian networks 
can be reversed under manipulation. As for the ex­
plicit equations, ImaGeNie tries to solve the manipu­
lated system symbolically if there exists a solution. We 
would like to further explore conditions under which 
we can derive the numerical parameters from the mix­
ture models after manipulation. 
ImaGeNie provides a flexible interactive model build­
ing environment for users to build models in causal 
form with as much system assistance as possible but 
without giving up their control over the model build­
ing process. We believe our efforts in incorporating 
causality as a heuristic in aiding model building and 
knowledge acquisition is an important extension to the 
existing approaches.
