Predicting Forest Fire Using
Remote Sensing Data And Machine Learning
Suwei Yang, 1 Massimo Lupascu, 2 Kuldeep S. Meel, 1
1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2 Department of Geography, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Over the last few decades, deforestation and climate change
have caused increasing number of forest ﬁres. In Southeast
Asia, Indonesia has been the most affected country by tropi-
cal peatland forest ﬁres. These ﬁres have a signiﬁcant impact
on the climate resulting in extensive health, social and eco-
nomic issues. Existing forest ﬁre prediction systems, such as
the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System, are based on
handcrafted features and require installation and maintenance
of expensive instruments on the ground, which can be a chal-
lenge for developing countries such as Indonesia. We propose
a novel, cost-effective, machine-learning based approach that
uses remote sensing data to predict forest ﬁres in Indonesia.
Our prediction model achieves more than 0.81 area under the
receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve, performing sig-
niﬁcantly better than the baseline approach which never ex-
ceeds 0.70 area under ROC curve on the same tasks. Our
model’s performance remained above 0.81 area under ROC
curve even when evaluated with reduced data. The results
support our claim that machine-learning based approaches
can lead to reliable and cost-effective forest ﬁre prediction
systems.
1
Introduction
Over the last few decades, forest ﬁres, especially peatland
forest ﬁres, have been a major environmental issue in South-
east Asia, with signiﬁcant impacts on the atmosphere, car-
bon cycle and various ecosystem services (Page et al. 2009).
Forest ﬁres can affect a large portion of the population, caus-
ing economic difﬁculties and disruption to businesses and
short and long term health problems (Jaafar and Loh 2014;
Chisholm, Wijedasa, and Swinﬁeld 2016; Huijnen et al.
2016; Stockwell et al. 2016). The smoke and haze produced
by the ﬁres can also cause disruptions and economic losses
to neighbouring countries in hundreds of millions (Doerr
and Sant´ın 2016; World Bank 2016). Thus it is important to
be able to predict forest ﬁres and take mitigating measures
to reduce their devastating impacts.
We focus on Indonesia because it accounts for 83% of
total peatland forests by area in Southeast Asia (Page and
Rieley 2016). Peatland forests are important primarily be-
cause of their function as carbon storage (Page, Rieley, and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Banks 2011). If peatland forests are burnt, the stored carbon
would be released into the atmosphere as CO2, CH4, CO,
etc. Indonesia is estimated to have 28.1 gigatons of carbon
pool (Warren et al. 2017) in its peatlands. Whenever there is
a large scale forest ﬁre, the effects are devastating as shown
by previous events of 1998, 2015 and 2019. For instance,
in 2015 4.6M hectares were burned and 0.89 gigatons of
carbon dioxide equivalent were released (Lohberger et al.
2017).
Existing forest ﬁre prediction systems mainly take a mod-
eling approach and use handcrafted features to perform
predictions (Stocks et al. 1989; Finney 1998; San-Miguel-
Ayanz et al. 2012). One existing system is the Canadian For-
est Fire Danger Rating System (Stocks et al. 1989), which is
designed to evaluate environmental factors that inﬂuence the
ignition, spread, and behavior of wildland ﬁre. The system is
managed by the Canadian government and has been adopted
by other organizations around the world such as the New
Zealand Forest Service (Fogarty et al. 1998) and European
Commission which oversees the European Forest Fire In-
formation System (EFFIS) (L´opez, San-Miguel-Ayanz, and
Burgan 2002).
Modeling-based approaches with handcrafted features
and closed-form equations suffer from two drawbacks.
Firstly, comprehensive ﬁre prediction models have to deal
with numerous weather-related and soil variables and their
complex inter-relationships. It is difﬁcult to describe all
these intricate relationships with a set of mathematical
equations. Consequently, scientists working on ﬁre pre-
diction systems approximate relationships between various
weather-related factors by introducing simplifying assump-
tions (Kloprogge, van der Sluijs, and Petersen 2011). This
might lead to a lack of robustness in the predictions, re-
quiring system recalibration according to different deploy-
ment environments. Secondly, the models tend to rely on
data from instruments on the ground and this leads to high
operating costs. For example, the Canadian Forest Fire Dan-
ger Rating System operates on data from over 750 weather
stations on the ground. Operating a similar system may be
challenging in terms of cost for a developing country such
as Indonesia. In light of the previously mentioned draw-
backs coupled with recent advances in machine learning
techniques and availability of remote sensing data, we want
to answer Can machine-learning based techniques be used
arXiv:2101.01975v1  [cs.CV]  6 Jan 2021

for forest ﬁre prediction using remote sensing data?
In this work, we use supervised learning to train a neural
network with remote sensing data to predict forest ﬁres in
Indonesia. In particular, the remote sensing data consists of
historical Landsat 7 satellite images (U.S. Geological Sur-
vey 2019) and Fire Information for Resource Management
System (FIRMS) (Davies et al. 2009) hotspot dataset. We
designed our model to predict forest ﬁres one month into
the future, in line with the prediction time-frame of prior
work (Maulana et al. 2019). The time-frame requirement for
prediction into the future stems from the need for time to
plan resource intensive operations in remote terrains to ei-
ther respond to potential forest ﬁres (Maulana et al. 2019) or
prevent ﬁres in the ﬁrst place. More formally, at time t, our
model takes in a year of historical data (i.e., sliding window
of data belonging to [t −52week, t]) and outputs conﬁdence
of the presence of ﬁre for t + 5week, which is referred to as
ﬁfth week into future for rest of the paper.
We performed extensive empirical evaluations on the pro-
totype implementation of our system, called Agni. In par-
ticular, Agni achieves more than 0.81 area under the re-
ceiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve in our evalua-
tions. We also performed comparative studies with the lo-
gistic regression-based baseline that was proposed in prior
work (Maulana et al. 2019). Agni performed signiﬁcantly
better than the baseline. The baseline approach never ex-
ceeded 0.70 area under ROC curve while Agni always stayed
above 0.80.
Given the need for cost-effectiveness, we further evalu-
ated Agni with reduced data. We limited the duration of his-
torical data available to Agni for training and prediction to
just 3 months and its performance still remained above 0.81
area under the ROC curve. In summary, our empirical evalu-
ation demonstrates that Agni, a machine-learning based ap-
proach using remote sensing data, is effective while being
more cost-effective than existing systems that required in-
struments on the ground.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, we
discuss related prior works in Section 2, then we provide
details of the data used and its challenges in Section 3. In
Section 4, we discuss the details of our approach and the
challenges encountered. Subsequently, we provide details of
the evaluation in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.
2
Related work
Existing forest ﬁre forecasting systems, such as the popular
Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index System (Wagner 1987),
rely on data from weather stations (over 750 in this case) on
the ground to operate. For the Canadian Forest Fire Weather
Index System, the input data is then processed according to
closed-form mathematical equations to attain Fire Weather
Index (FWI) which is a numerical rating of ﬁre intensity.
As discussed above, our work seeks to develop alternative
techniques based on publicly available satellite image data
to provide cost-effective prediction systems for developing
countries such as Indonesia.
While our work is the ﬁrst in its kind to use neural network
with remote sensing data to predict forest ﬁres, a related
study by Maulana et al. (2019) tried to predict peatland for-
est ﬁres using a spatial logistic regression approach. Specif-
ically, Maulana et al. employ careful expert-driven manual
feature engineering involving features such as river network
density and peat soil depth. Such features, while useful in
their smaller case study, are not readily available across In-
donesia. In contrast, our model takes only the satellite im-
ages as input, and is not restricted to peatland forest ﬁres but
predicts for forest ﬁres in general.
Apart from the study by Maulana et al., there are other
existing machine-learning based approaches in the domain
of forest ﬁres but they do not speciﬁcally focus on ﬁre pre-
diction. Wijayanto et al. used Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inter-
face System to predict whether a ﬁre alarm trigger is a false
positive and explored the relationship of ﬁre with human ac-
tivities (Wijayanto et al. 2017). Cortez and Morais used lo-
gistic regression, decision tree and support vector machines
to predict the potential burn area given weather station data
(Cortez and Morais 2007). FireNet performs real-time detec-
tion and annotation of ﬁre boundaries in drone video feeds
(Doshi et al. 2019). FireCast, on the other hand, tries to pre-
dict how a ﬁre will spread in the near future (Radke, Hessler,
and Ellsworth 2019).
3
Data
Supervised learning requires both input data and ground
truth labels to train a model. We used Landsat 7 satellite
images, retrieved from Google Earth Engine (Gorelick et al.
2017), as inputs to the neural network. For ground truth la-
bels, we used FIRMS hotspot dataset and we refer to forest
ﬁres as hotspots for consistency with FIRMS. In this section,
we discuss details of the data used and their associated chal-
lenges. Finally, we describe the data preparation process.
3.1
Landsat 7 satellite images
Landsat 7 (U.S. Geological Survey 2019) satellite is part of
the Landsat program, under NASA and U.S. Geological Sur-
vey. Landsat 7 has an orbit period of 16 days. Satellite im-
ages from Landsat 7 are used as the input source for our
hotspot prediction model. The imaging instrument on Land-
sat 7 satellite, Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus(ETM+),
produces imagery of Earth as eight spectral bands. The satel-
lite image speciﬁcations are as shown in Table 1. Band col-
umn shows the respective names of the Landsat 7 satellite
bands. Resolution column shows the resolution of the re-
spective band. A resolution of 30m means that one pixel in
the image band represents an area of 30m × 30m. Chan-
nel column shows what each respective band represents and
Wavelength column shows the respective wavelengths of
each band in µm.
Six of the bands have a resolution of 30m, except bands
B6 and B8. However, band B6 is already resampled to the
resolution of 30m in the Landsat 7 data available on Google
Earth Engine. Since all bands except band B8 have the same
resolution (30m × 30m), we focus on usage of bands B1 to
B7.

Band
Resolution
Channel
Wavelength (µm)
B1
30m
Blue
0.45-0.52
B2
30m
Green
0.52-0.60
B3
30m
Red
0.63-0.69
B4
30m
Near IR
0.77-0.90
B5
30m
IR 1 Shortwave
1.55-1.75
B6 1
60m
Low-gain IR 1
10.40-12.50
B6 2
60m
High-gain IR 1
10.40-12.50
B7
30m
Shortwave IR 2
2.09-2.35
B8
15m
Panchromatic
0.52-0.90
Table 1: Speciﬁcations of different bands on Landsat 7
3.2
Fire Information for Resource Management
System (FIRMS) hotspot data
In order to train a neural network, we need to provide ground
truth labels of ﬁre. We found the FIRMS hotspot dataset
(Davies et al. 2009) to be the most comprehensive open ﬁre
dataset available. The FIRMS dataset, provided by NASA, is
used by several ﬁre prediction systems such as the Canadian
Wildland Fire Information System, the European Forest Fire
Information System and the U.S. Forest Service - Missoula
Fire Sciences Lab. In this work, we use the FIRMS hotspot
data as labels for training and evaluation of prediction mod-
els.
The FIRMS dataset consists of hotspots detected by
LANCE 1 system after processing the MODIS 2 and VI-
IRS 3 instrument data on Terra, Aqua EOS and Suomi-NPP
satellite (National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) 2020a,b,c, 2012, 2007; Karl Hille 2015). The reso-
lution of the FIRMS dataset is 1km × 1km per hotspot pixel.
Each detected hotspot instance is associated with a conﬁ-
dence level ranging from 0% to 100%, indicating certainty
of the detection. For a given area, we assign the label to be
the maximum conﬁdence value within that area.
3.3
Challenges
Figure 1: Effect of damaged SLC (source: U.S. Geological
Survey)
Imperfect orbit and damaged SLC
We encountered two
primary sources of missing data: imperfect orbit of satellite
and damaged scan-line calibrator (SLC). The ﬁrst source of
missing data arises from Landsat 7’s imperfect orbit. Ideally,
a satellite with a perfect orbit can produce images of the
1Land, Atmosphere Near real-time Capability for EOS
2Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
3Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite
exact same area during each orbit. In reality, the Landsat
7 satellite images do not overlap perfectly with each other
between orbits and sometimes parts of an area are missing
due to imperfect orbit. To overcome the issue of imperfect
image overlap, we choose a reference image and crop the
remaining satellite images to the area of the reference image.
When the satellite images are sliced up into smaller images,
to the correct prediction area, some slices may be missing,
i.e. entire image slice is ﬁlled with zero entries.
The other source of missing data mentioned earlier is
Landsat 7’s scan-line calibrator (SLC). The scan-line cali-
brator (SLC) ensures that the imaging instrument on Land-
sat 7 satellite scans in the correct manner when producing
satellite images in a row-wise manner. A normal imaging
motion with a working SLC is shown by the arrows on the
left of Figure 1. When the SLC is damaged in the case of
Landsat 7, the imaging motion is in a zigzag form, shown
by the arrows on the right of Figure 1. The resulting satellite
image produced by the damaged SLC has triangular strips
of missing data.
For both sources of missing data encountered, we did not
perform statistical imputation.4 Our hypothesis is that the
model should be able to learn from the remaining data. Our
results show that the model is still able to perform well, sup-
porting our hypothesis of the models learning ability on the
remaining data. More details will be discussed in Section 5.
Resolution and data size trade-off
Ideally, we would
want to use satellite image data at full resolution (30m by
30m per pixel for Landsat 7) for model training and eval-
uation. However, the capacity to handle full resolution im-
ages requires extensive storage. At full resolution, a refer-
ence satellite image area and its associated historical satellite
images require around 2 gigabytes of storage. We used 800
such satellite image time series, requiring more than 1.6 ter-
abytes of storage if full resolution satellite images are used.
File size is still an issue, even when the image is downscaled.
As a result, each image in a historical satellite image time se-
ries is ﬁrst downscaled, then sliced into smaller images and
subsequently converted to a histogram. In particular, each
band of the image is converted to a histogram of 32 evenly
spaced intervals that are referred to as bins, with each bin
representing counts of 8 pixel values as each band has pixel
value range from 0 to 255. For an image band b, the ﬁrst bin
in the histogram would be the total count of pixel values in
band b, in the range of 0 to 7 inclusive. Since we work with 8
bands (B1 to B7), each image is converted into 8 histograms
of 32 bins. The resultant histograms are a storage efﬁcient
representation of an 8km by 8km area.
3.4
Data preparation
In the data preparation stage, retrieved historical satellite
images are sliced into smaller images that represent 8km by
8km areas. Subsequently, the sliced images are then con-
verted to histograms and paired with the respective ground
truth hotspot label from the FIRMS data. The data prepara-
4Statistical imputation refers to the process of replacing missing
data through statistical techniques.

Figure 2: Data preparation process: The big satellite image
time series is sliced into 8 x 8km area time series, then each
channel is converted to histogram of 32 equal bins
Algorithm 1 dataPrep algorithm: algorithm to retrieve and
preprocess satellite images and FIRMS labels. wk stands for
week.
Input: ts and te which represents start and end date
Output: Historical satellite image histogram and future
labels (5th week into future)
1: refImgList ←−getRefImgs(ts, te)
2: for ri in refImgList do
3:
tri ←−getDate(ri)
4:
pastImgs ←−getHistoricalImgs(ri, 52wk)
5:
label ←−getFirmsLabel(ri, tri + 4wk, tri + 5wk)
6:
imgLabelTensor ←−combine(pastImgs, label)
7:
slicedDataList ←−slice(imgLabelTensor, 8km)
8:
for slicedData in slicedDataList do
9:
if !allZero(slicedData) then
10:
ﬁnalData ←−toHist(slicedData)
11:
save(ﬁnalData)
tion process is illustrated in Figure 2 and Algorithm 1 pro-
vides further details about the process.
In line 1, the algorithm retrieves all reference satellite im-
ages of Indonesia within the interval speciﬁed by the input
ts and te. For each reference image, the past one-year of
satellite images of the same area are retrieved in subrou-
tine getHistoricalImgs on line 4. The getHistoricalImgs sub-
routine crops historical images to the exact area of the ref-
erence image. The getFirmsLabel subroutine on line 5 re-
trieves FIRMS hotspot data for the ﬁfth week in the future
with respect to the reference image date. The highest FIRMS
value per pixel within the week long hotspot data is taken as
the ground truth label. Line 6 combines the label with corre-
sponding historical images. The combined image and label
data are then sliced into smaller pieces to achieve the cor-
rect area of 8km by 8km in line 7. If an image is not entirely
ﬁlled with zeros due to missing data (line 9), the subroutine
toHist on line 10 converts each band of the sliced data into a
histogram of 32 bins.
4
Approach and Challenges
We employed neural networks for the supervised learning
task. We ﬁrst present the architecture of the neural network
employed and then shed light on two key design choices to
handle the challenges speciﬁc to our application domain.
4.1
Neural network architecture
Layer
Operation
Hidden Units
1
Conv2D (3 × 3)
64
2
LSTM
64
3
Dropout
-
4
Dense (ReLU)
256
5
Dense (ReLU)
32
Output
Dense (Sigmoid)
1
Table 2: Neural network architecture
The neural network architecture is shown in Table 2. The
Layer column indicates the positions of layers in the archi-
tecture. The Operation column indicates the type of layer
and the Hidden Units column indicates the number of hid-
den units in the respective layer. The neural network takes as
input a histogram time series that represents an 8km by 8km
area. The input is a one year time series of satellite image
histograms with T timesteps. Each timestep consists of in-
formation from 8 bands, with 32 equally divided histogram
bins for each band. The network ﬁrst performs convolution
(Fukushima 1980) on each input timestep of the data, which
is the histogram of individual satellite images in the one year
of historical satellite images. The convolution with 64 ker-
nels of size 3 × 3 is applied to histogram bins of the different
bands to learn representations of relationships between the
different bands. The representation attained from the con-
volution layer, during each timestep, is passed to the Long-
Short Term Memory (LSTM) layer (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber 1997) with 64 hidden units. The LSTM layer learns
the temporal relationship of the historical data. This is fol-
lowed by dropout with a rate of 0.3 and three dense layers
with 256, 32 and 1 hidden units respectively. The last dense
layer uses sigmoid activation to get an output value between
0 and 1. The output is interpreted as the predicted conﬁdence
of hotspot in that area for the ﬁfth week into the future, from
the most recent historical data timestep.
The neural network has a custom loss function L as fol-
lows:
L =|ytrue −ypred|×
min(105, max(1, 10((ytrue−ypred)× 100
k )))
ytrue is the label and ypred is the predicted value for conﬁ-
dence of hotspot presence. Both ytrue and ypred take values
between 0 and 1. In L, k is a hyper-parameter set to be 30 for
best performance after hyper-parameter tuning. Other values
of k that we have tried include 100, 50 and 10.
The choice of loss function is primarily inﬂuenced by two
factors: (1) the presence of skewed data, and (2) the cost of
mis-predictions. As discussed below, the input data is heav-
ily skewed towards absence of hotspots (i.e., ytrue being
mostly 0). The presence of skewed data requires us to steer
the model away from always predicting ypred to be close
to 0, and therefore, we provide high penalty for the case of

(a) September 2019 hotspots, AUC = 0.8480
(b) August 2019 hotspots, AUC = 0.8428
Figure 3: Area under ROC curve(AUC) for evaluation on (a)September and (b)August 2019 hotspots
ytrue > ypred. Secondly, in practice, higher values of ypred
may give rise to false alarms but lower values of ypred than
the actual ground truth leads to unpreparedness and as such,
leads to substantial loss of human, social, and economic cap-
ital.
4.2
Challenges
Heavily skewed data
As brieﬂy mentioned above, the nat-
ural distribution of the data is heavily skewed towards ab-
sence of hotspots. Empirical analysis of the data indicates
that for a typical month, over 99% of locations do not have
presence of hotspots. As such, a machine learning model
may achieve 99% accuracy by simply predicting ypred to
be 0. In addition to the design of the custom loss function
L discussed above, we perform the standard practice of re-
sampling of the training data to achieve a 3:1 ratio for zero
to non-zero labels.
Batch size limitations during training
As discussed in
Section 3.3, the imperfect orbit of Landsat 7 leads to missing
data for several timesteps when the data is viewed as a time
series. The lack of data for certain timesteps has implications
on the batch size for the training procedure of the neural net-
work. In order to perform batch training, our data has to be
of the same dimensions. However, that is not the case for our
data because of missing timesteps in our data. Therefore, we
train the neural network with a batch size of 1. An alternate
approach would have been the usage of padding to ensure
that the input training data instances within the same batch
have the same dimensions. The lack of prior research about
possible padding approaches for satellite image time series
limited its use in our work but we believe exploring its role
in future work is an interesting technical challenge.
5
Evaluation setup and results
To empirically validate our models, we implemented the
prototype, Agni, using Tensorﬂow 1.12 and Python 2.7. We
conducted the training and evaluation on high performance
machines on compute clusters with the following speciﬁca-
tions: Intel Xeon Silver 4108 with Nvidia Titan V and Intel
Xeon Silver 4108 with Nvidia Tesla V100.
We employ a logistic regression approach as baseline,
similar to prior work by Maulana et al.. In our baseline, we
used mean squared error loss instead of binary cross entropy
loss as the labels are real numbers from 0 to 1.
The choice of training dataset is inﬂuenced by three key
considerations: (1) the need to minimize the amount of train-
ing data for computational efﬁciency, (2) the usage of data
with less heavy skew towards the absence of hotspots, and
(3) the usage of recent data so as to allow testing and valida-
tion of the model for recent months. Therefore, we employed
data from 2014-18 as they coincided with large scale for-
est ﬁres in Indonesia. We employed hotspots from April’18
as test set and hotspots from June’19 to September’19 as
our validation set. Recall that we train Agni to predict la-
bels based on historical data for the past year. In particu-
lar, the model is trained to predict labels for the 5th week
(t + 5week) given a sliding window of one year of data,
i.e., from [t−52week, t]. This prediction period of 5th week
into future is also in line with the spatial logistic regression
work (Maulana et al. 2019). As mentioned in Section 4.2
the training data is of 3:1 ratio for zero to non-zero labels.
Apart from 3:1 ratio, we also experimented with other ratios,
speciﬁcally 4:1 and 2:1, but did not see a signiﬁcant change
in Agni’s performance.
The objective of our evaluations was to answer the fol-
lowing questions:
RQ 1 How well does Agni predict hotspots?
RQ 2 How does the length of sliding window affect Agni’s
performance?
RQ 3 How does our custom loss function affect model per-
formance?
5.1
Performance of Model (RQ 1)
For unambiguous communication with general public and
across different agencies, we are often interested in the bi-
narized output: whether there is going to be a hotspot or not.
The standard process in machine learning community is to
choose a threshold τ and binarize the output value based
on τ. Any prediction value greater than τ is classiﬁed as
hotspot, otherwise the prediction is classiﬁed as no hotspot.
We interpret a non-zero label from FIRMS as hotspot and

Hotspot
label
Window
∼3 Month
∼6 Month
∼9 Month
1 Year
June’19
0.8344
0.8428
0.8277
0.8125
July’19
0.8623
0.8707
0.8596
0.8519
Aug’19
0.8269
0.8471
0.8511
0.8428
Sept’19
0.8239
0.8464
0.8449
0.8480
Table 3: Area under ROC curve values for varying size of sliding window
Hotspot
label
Model
Agni
Agni(MSE)
LR(custom loss)
LR(MSE)
June’19
0.8125
0.7483
0.6966
0.6355
July’19
0.8519
0.7081
0.7312
0.6967
Aug’19
0.8428
0.7264
0.7171
0.6613
Sept’19
0.8480
0.6956
0.7304
0.6560
Table 4: LR stands for logistic regression baseline and MSE stands for mean squared error loss function
zero label from FIRMS as no hotspot. We plot the Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve5, Figure 3, to show
the behavior of our model across different τ values and we
use area under ROC curve (AUC) as an indication of the
model’s performance. Figure 3 shows the ROC curves for
August and September’19 and the AUC values for both Au-
gust and September’19 are above 0.84. In this context, it is
worth noting that if a model were to always predict no ﬁre,
the expected AUC would be 0.5, illustrated by the dotted
lines in Figures 3a and 3b.
Hotspot label
Total labels
Positive hotspot labels
June’19
122416
495 (0.4%)
July’19
95594
1017 (1.1%)
Aug’19
104725
2885 (2.8%)
Sept’19
115934
6216 (5.4%)
Table 5: Distribution of labels of evaluation data. Postive
hotspot labels - labels indicating non-zero conﬁdence of
hotspot presence. Total labels - total number of labels.
Further evaluations of the prediction model are conducted
with June and July hotspots in 2019. The model had an AUC
of 0.8519 and 0.8125 for prediction of July’19 and June’19
hotspots respectively. As evident from Table 5, there were
signiﬁcantly fewer hotspots for June and July’19 in com-
parison to August and September’19. The consistent perfor-
mance of Agni across different months with varying distri-
bution of data provides strong evidence in favor of robust-
ness and versatility of the model. It is also worth noting that
our model performs signiﬁcantly better than the logistic re-
gression baseline as shown in Table 6. In the evaluations,
Agni’s AUC remained above 0.80 whereas the baseline’s
AUC never exceeded 0.70.
5The relevant notation deﬁnitions are included in the appendix
Hotspot label
Agni (our model)
LR baseline
June’19
0.8125
0.6355
July’19
0.8519
0.6967
Aug’19
0.8428
0.6613
Sept’19
0.8480
0.6560
Table 6: Area under ROC curve for Agni and LR base-
line(logistic regression)
5.2
Impact of Sliding Window on Performance
(RQ 2)
To understand the data requirements of Agni, we train and
evaluate Agni with the length of sliding window varying
from 3 months to 1 year. Table 3 shows the AUC values
for the different lengths of sliding window used for training
and prediction. Each column in Table 3 indicates the length
of sliding window and each row corresponds to the month
of hotspots predicted. For example, the cell corresponding
to Sept’19 and ∼3 Month shows the AUC value for Agni
trained using a sliding window of the 6 most recent satellite
images available and evaluated for Sept’19 hotspots.
5.3
Impact of custom loss function on
performance (RQ 3)
To understand how much our custom loss function deﬁned
in Section 4.1 contributes to model prediction performance
for t + 5week, we conducted ablation studies for the choice
of loss function. We use the same evaluation data as before
and compare against the performance of models in Table 6.
Speciﬁcally, we conducted additional evaluations on a veri-
son of Agni with mean squared error as loss function and
separately for a version of logistic regression model with our
custom loss function. Our results, shown in Table 4, show
that our custom loss function greatly improves the perfor-
mance of both models and establishes its necessity. When

we trained logistic regression using our custom loss func-
tion, its performance could exceed 0.70 AUC unlike before.
Similarly, when we trained Agni using mean squared error,
its performance dropped to lower than 0.75 AUC and some
cases worse than logistic regression trained with our custom
loss function. This strongly supports our choice of custom
loss function.
5.4
Summary
In summary, Agni trained with our custom loss function per-
forms consistently better than the baseline model across dif-
ferent evaluation scenarios, as demonstrated by Tables 6 and
3, thereby providing strong evidence in support of the pre-
dictive power of machine-learning techniques using remote
sensing data. Furthermore, Agni can be trained and evalu-
ated with a signiﬁcantly smaller sliding window, thereby re-
quiring less storage of data during deployment and thus po-
sitioning itself as a cost-effective ﬁre prediction system for
developing countries such as Indonesia.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we trained a neural network to perform forest
ﬁre prediction. While existing prediction models are effec-
tive, they use data collected from instruments on the ground,
leading to high operating costs. Our model uses readily
available remote sensing data in the form of satellite im-
ages to predict ﬁre hotspots. We showed that our model per-
forms consistently well under extensive evaluations, provid-
ing an afﬁrmative answer to the initial question Can machine
learning-based techniques be used for forest ﬁre prediction
using remote sensing data?
An interesting area to explore in the future is using mul-
tiple data sources, such as precipitation, soil moisture and
human activity data, to achieve better performance. In par-
ticular, human activity data may be useful for predicting ﬁres
started by humans. It is a common practice to use ﬁre to clear
land before planting crops, but the ﬁre could spread to forest
areas, becoming forest ﬁres. The challenge in using multi-
ple data sources would be integrating sources with different
resolutions. This would require a redesigning of the neural
network architecture to include multiple inputs and merging
them within the network.
