Dyna-T: Dyna-Q and Upper Conﬁdence Bounds Applied to Trees
Tarek Faycal1 and Claudio Zito2∗
Abstract— In this work we present a preliminary investi-
gation of a novel algorithm called Dyna-T. In reinforcement
learning (RL) a planning agent has its own representation of
the environment as a model. To discover an optimal policy to
interact with the environment, the agent collects experience in
a trial and error fashion. Experience can be used for learning
a better model or improve directly the value function and
policy. Typically separated, Dyna-Q is an hybrid approach
which, at each iteration, exploits the real experience to update
the model as well as the value function, while planning its
action using simulated data from its model. However, the
planning process is computationally expensive and strongly
depends on the dimensionality of the state-action space. We
propose to build a Upper Conﬁdence Tree (UCT) on the
simulated experience and search for the best action to be
selected during the on-line learning process. We prove the
effectiveness of our proposed method on a set of preliminary
tests on three testbed environments from Open AI. In contrast
to Dyna-Q, Dyna-T outperforms state-of-the-art RL agents in
the stochastic environments by choosing a more robust action
selection strategy.
I. INTRODUCTION
At the core of reinforcement learning (RL) there is the
problem of how to update an approximate value function
such that a policy is found. Some methods require a model
of the environment to reﬁne a policy by interacting with
simulated experience from the modelled environment. These
methods are typically referred to as planning methods. Other
methods learns directly from experience without the need
of a model, and they are referred to as direct RL meth-
ods. Within planning agents, it is still possible to use the
experience collected by interacting with the environments
to improve the model, called model-learning or indirect
RL. Both direct and indirect approaches present advantages
and disadvantages. Indirect methods tend to exploit better a
limited amount of experience, thanks to their models, and
thus achieve better policies with few interactions. On the
other hand, direct methods are typically simpler and do not
suffer any bias from the design of the model.
Dyna-Q is a form of hybrid method that uses the real ex-
perience generated by acting on the environment for learning
a model as well as a value function. The value function is
then reﬁned by simulated experience generated by the model.
Acting, direct RL, model learning, and planning happen in
the Dyna agent at each interaction. The planning process is
usually the computationally intensive phase of the algorithm
which strongly depends on the dimensionality of the state-
action space, as well as the complexity of the problem.
1IRLab, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, United
Kingdom
2Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE

In this paper, we propose to improve the planning efﬁ-
ciency of Dyna-Q by constructing a upper bound conﬁdence
tree (UCT) on sampled simulated experience. We call this
new algorithm Dyna-T.
UCT is a state-of-the-art approach to solving large state-
space planning problems. The algorithm estimates the utility
of a state by building and searching on a tree of simulated
experience via a procedure called rollout. The key aspect is
that not all the branches of the tree are equally sampled so
to dedicate the most of the resources versus most promising
paths. UCT achieves that by treating each node of the tree
as a multi-armed bandit problem. Since random sampling
is used to discover nodes with a good return, UCT could
take a long time to converge to good performance. Many
enhancements have been proposed to address this problem
by either (i) tweaking the action selection formula (e.g.
which arm is pulled), or (ii) designing better-informed rollout
policies. Our proposed approach fall in the second category.
However, different than many of the previous attempts, we do
not based our rollout exploration on heuristic-based policies,
but on a model-based RL policy provided by the Dyna-Q
algorithm.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the basic concepts
about the nature of RL and the speciﬁcs of designing agents
for this machine learning paradigm. We will focus on state-
of-the-art approaches relative to this work and highlight some
of their strengths and drawbacks. A comprehensive review
of this topic is out of scope and we redirect the interested
reader to a few available sources, such as [1], [6], [9].
A. Reinforcement Learning
A traditional reinforcement learning setting consists of
two components: An agent and an environment. The agent
receives an observation from the environment that contains
the current state the agent is in, as well as a reward signal
that describes how favorable that current state is compared
to others. The agent would then map that state to an action
using its policy function returns an action to the environment
that is intended to alter the current state [6].
One iteration of this loop is a single step in the en-
vironment. The agent will continue taking steps in the
environment until a predetermined number is reached or
some environment-speciﬁc termination condition is met. This
interaction is termed episodic, because it has a clearly deﬁned
start and end.
This way of learning poses a unique difﬁculty when
compared to other branches of machine learning. The sim-
arXiv:2201.04502v2  [cs.LG]  19 Jan 2022

ulation of experience might be computationally expensive
depending on environment complexity, added to the existing
cost associated with learning. Furthermore, the environments
can vary greatly making a general purpose reinforcement
learning algorithm or agent difﬁcult to construct.
B. Markov Decision Processes
One mathematical framework that can be used to model
reinforcement learning problems is a Markov Decision Pro-
cess (MDP) [1]. An MDP consists of a set of states S
that describe the environment, a set of actions A available
to the agent, a reward function R(s, s′), which returns the
reward gain from moving from state s to state s′, and a
transition model P(s′|s, a) that returns the probability of
moving to state s′ given the current state s and action
a. The solution to this problem comes in the form of a
policy function π(s) that returns an action given a state.
The optimal policy is the one that maximizes the rewards
collected by the agent [9]. The important assumption in
this framework is the process follows the Markov property,
meaning the current state of the environment must contain
all information required by the agent to make a decision
regarding what action to take, which implies that the agent
does not need access to the history of this process. However,
many real-world applications in robotics are characterised
by continuous state, action and observational spaces and/or
physical interactions with the environment challenge the
MDP formulation, although several attempts have been made
in the past [5], [11]–[14].
C. Active RL and the role of policy in exploration
There are two approaches to learning within the MDP
framework: active and passive. Passive RL evaluates a ﬁxed
policy over a certain number of trials in the environment to
derive the utility value associated with each state. Utility is a
concept borrowed from Economics and represents how good
a state is in the context of the problem and policy being
evaluated. It is computed as the expected sum of discounted
rewards U π(s) = E[
∞
P
t=0
γR(st)]. The π symbol is the policy
being evaluated, γ ϵ [0, 1] is a discount factor used to control
the inﬂuence of future states on the value of the current one,
and R(st) is the reward gain in state s at time t.
Active RL adopts a different approach, the agent must
interact with the environment and dynamically adjust its
policy in order to arrive at an optimal one. This intro-
duces a new problem, known as the exploration/exploitation
dilemma. How much time should an agent spend exploring
its environment, and when should it stop and exploit the
knowledge it has gathered so far to maximize the reward?
There is no single answer to this question because of the
wide range of possible environments. For example, in an
environment with very sparse rewards, the agent may need to
spend a signiﬁcant amount of time exploring before ﬁnding
any reward signal. Additionally, If it does come across a
solution early, how will the agent know to stop then? and
how can it guarantee that there aren’t any higher rewards to
be gained from further exploration? [9]. This work will focus
on active RL given that it is a more accurate representation of
how biological agents learn, in addition to the fact that some
environments cannot be simulated due to high complexity or
dynamics that are not well understood.
One of the most commonly used strategy to guarantee
exploration is ϵ −greedy. The agent always takes the best
action according to the information gathered so far, but with
a small probability ϵ of choosing a random action from
those currently available. Presented by Sutton and Barto
in 1998 [9], it has remained one of the most commonly
used strategies in state of the art research, albeit with
some modiﬁcations such starting with ϵ = 1 and gradually
reducing it to converge on the learned policy.
D. Model-Free and Model-Based Learning
One approach to solving MDPs is framing it as an opti-
mization problem. Adaptive Dynamic Programming (ADP)
was one of the ﬁrst passive RL methods utilized. The
underlying principle is that the utility values of each state
obey the Bellman Equation [3] for a ﬁxed policy π:
U π(s) = R(s) + γ
X
s′
P(s′|s, π(s))U π(s′)
(1)
Given a ﬁxed policy, and the above condition, the agent
can learn the transition model P(s′|s, π(s)) by going through
a certain number of episodes and collecting statistics about
state transitions and observed rewards. This information can
be plugged in to Eq. 1 and solved for each state, either
directly or through iterative methods, giving us a utility
estimate for each state:
Ui+1(s) ←R(s) +
X
s′
P(s′|s, πi(s))Ui(s′)
(2)
Equation 2 shows a simpliﬁed iterative update to the utility
where i is the current iteration of the algorithm. The above
equation can be used as part of a method called policy
iteration [6] that starts with a random policy and updates
it after every run of utility evaluation to take the actions that
maximize the ﬁnal reward gathered.
Such a method is called model-based because it explicitly
learns the transition model of the MDP. However, since the
policy updates are based solely on an estimated model, it
may not capture the true model and may learn a sub-optimal
policy. Moreover, this approach will translate poorly into
an active RL setting because of how long it might take
for the collected statistics to reﬂect the true nature of the
environment.
Model-free methods rely heavily on the Law of Large
Numbers to update the utility values without ever learning
the model. This approach provides both computational and
memory advantages because the state transitions and model
does not need to be kept in memory and updated after each
step in the environment. Temporal Difference (TD) learning
[7] is one of the most prominent model-free approaches that
uses the estimated value of the next encountered state to
update the value of the current one. Whenever a transition

from state s to state s′ occurs, the utility value of state s is
updates as follows:
U π(s) ←U π(s) + α(R(s) + γU π(s′) −U π(s))
(3)
The added parameter α ϵ [0, 1] is the learning rate, that
value of which ranges from The average value of U π(s)
will converge after a large number of episodes, taking longer
than ADP but at a lower cost and with added ﬂexibility of
application to domains where the model cannot be learned
[9]. TD learning can be seen as a ﬁrst approximation of ADP
because it does not take into account all future states during
each update (Recall the summation over all possible s′ in
Eq. 2). This means that, given a good exploration strategy
and enough iteration, TD methods surpass ADP in active RL.
In both these approaches, updating value estimates is done
using other estimates; a process known as bootstrapping.
A major advance in model-free RL came in the form of
Q-learning [10], where an agent would learn the function
Q(s, a) that represents the quality of taking action a in
state s. This is much more practical than methods based on
utility because the policy can be derived directly from the
Q-function.
The RL algorithms implemented in this work rely heavily
on these ideas, and will be further elaborated on in Sec. V.
E. Drawbacks of bootstrapping rewards
While methods that use bootstrapping can provide guar-
antees for a solution (even an optimal one), it is conditioned
on inﬁnite exploration and assumes that a reward signal
will be encountered in the environment [9]. In environments
where rewards are very sparse, delayed in time compared to
when an action was taken, or when multiple actions need
to be executed in a speciﬁc order, bootstrapping cannot
be guaranteed to succeed in a timely manner. Of course,
inﬁnite exploration and learning using ϵ −greedy means
that successful strategies will be learned at some point
given enough data [10], which is not practical in cases
where simulations are computationally expensive or time
consuming.
F. Q-Learning
Q-learning is a fairly ﬂexible approach that can be applied
to a host of different problems. Q-learning is a TD method,
with an update equation identical to Eq. 3:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α(R(s) + γmaxa′Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a))
(4)
This algorithm operates in an off-policy manner, meaning
that the target value used in the TD update in Eq. 4 is
the best possible future value that can be achieved in the
next state, maxa′Q(s′, a′), and not the value of the action
actually taken. Standard Q-learning only looks ahead one-
step ahead to update the value of the current state, making
no use of longer sequences of steps to update multiple
values. However, Q-learning is guaranteed to converge given
inﬁnite exploration and learning making it a good baseline
for comparison.
Fig. 1: Illustration of SARSA(λ): Uses an additional table
to store the eligibility traces of state-action pairs in order
execute multi-step updates, as opposed to the one-step
updates in our Q-Learning implementation
G. SARSA(λ)
SARSA is another model-free algorithm that closely mir-
rors Q-learning, with a slight modiﬁcation. SARSA is on-
policy, so the value update is not carried out for the current
state, until an actual action is taken in the next state.
This approach can lead to faster convergence but is highly
dependent on the policy used. Moreover, it is brittle when
compared to Q-learning, which is more ﬂexible when applied
to different types of environments and robust across different
hyperparameters and policies. The λ portion of the title refers
to the eligibility traces mechanism [9] that allows for multi-
step look-ahead when updating the current state’s value.
Effectively, this maintains a memory of the sequence of
state-action pairs that contribute to the currently encountered
rewards and updates the entire sequence in the q-table.
This is done by maintaining a separate table, refer to
Fig. 1, where the eligibility of states for an update is
maintained. Whenever a state-action pair is encountered, one
is added to the corresponding table entry, and after each
update, the entire table is multiplied by λ (a hyperparameter,
λ ϵ [0, 1]) which represents the decay of eligibility for each
state-action pair for the next update. Updates occur as
follows:
∆= R(s) + γQ(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)
Q ←Q + α ∗∆∗Z
(5)
Note the lack of a maxa′ operator, which makes it on-
policy. Also note the fact that the entire Q-table is updated
at each step which does lead to increased computation when
compared to Q-learning, especially with a high λ. Setting
λ = 0 makes the algorithm one-step, as described in 3.1.1.
H. Dyna-Q
The algorithms presented thus far do not use a model
of the environment to learn. Using one however, would
facilitate planning via simulated experience. One of the
earliest methods to do so came with the Dyna architecture
[8].
The model is built by adding newly encountered transitions
to memory in a table of states and actions. The transition

Fig. 2: Dyna-Q Architecture: Incorporates a model of the
environment to facilitate planning, which is done by
sampling the stored transitions at every step and executing
the same update as Q-Learning
is stored as a tuple (r, s′) where r is the reward received
from taking the chosen action in the current state, and s′
is the next state the agent ends up in. The learning process
is the same as Q-learning, with added planning steps. After
each transition and Q-table update, previously encountered
state-action pairs are sampled from the model and the stored
tuple is used to execute the Q-learning update again on the
sampled state-action pair. The added planning steps increase
the speed of convergence.
The original implementation presented in [8] assumes that
the environment is deterministic, which means that taking
action a in state s will always result in reward and next
state (r, s′). This is not a completely accurate representation
of most environments encountered in everyday life, where
a multitude of unconsidered factors can affect the conse-
quences of agent actions, whereas simulated environments
tend to be rigorously controlled. Moreover, this type of model
will fail if the transitions are not the same every time. So in
order to try making a more robust model that can handle
stochastic environments, we implement both the original
Dyna-Q in addition to a modiﬁed version that builds a
model of the environment in a similar fashion to ADP, called
Stochastic Dyna-Q. This is done by counting the number
of times state-action pairs are encountered, in addition to
the number of times the speciﬁc state-action pair leads to
state s′. Using this gathered information, we can compute
the expected reward of taking a certain action in a state and
use that for the planning portion of the algorithm. Planning
differs signiﬁcantly in this case because the Q-table entry
being updated must reﬂect the new probabilities across all
possible next states meaning that the target value of the TD
update will be:
X
s′
P(s′|s, a) maxa′Q(s′, a′).
(6)
III. DYNA-T
While a stochastic model is more robust, it is affected
by the same problems as ADP, namely, the estimated model
might take too long to accurately reﬂect the environment,
which signiﬁcantly slows down learning or even deteriorate
it. To remedy this problem, we utilize the concept of Upper
Conﬁdence Bounds applied to Trees [4]. This technique is
used to improve Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods
by computing a statistical interval whose upper bound would
represent the potential reward to be gained, while also
emphasizing the exploration of new state-action pairs. The
algorithm computes the upper bounds associated with a state-
action pair with minimal increase in memory cost, but with a
slightly increased computational one. The upper bounds are
computed in a Dyna agent as follows:
Quct(s, a) = Q(s, a) + c
s
ln ns
ns,a
(7)
Where c is an experimentally determined exploration
parameter, ns is the number of times state s has been
encountered, and ns,a is the number of times action a was
taken in state s. An important fact to note is that this is
not a modiﬁcation to learning, but an improvement to the
policy. Dyna-T does not use an ϵ −greedy policy like the
rest of the algorithms presented so far, but chooses the action
with the highest upper bound, which is initialized to inﬁnity
for unexplored state-action pairs to encourage exploratory
behavior. This leads to an increase in the chances of en-
countering a reward in the environment via more directed
exploration when compared to occasionally choosing random
actions.
IV. TEST ENVIRONMENTS
In this section we will introduce the environments used
for our evaluation. We focus on deterministic or stochastic
single-agent environments with fully observable states, dis-
crete states and actions. All the environments are available
in the OpenAI Gym toolkit [2].
A. Cliff Walking
The ﬁrst environment considered is a deterministic one
with a dense reward distribution, presented in [9]. The agent
must move from position S to G, and receives a -1 reward at
every white square. If the agent falls in the cliff, it receives
a reward of -100 and the episode is terminated. The goal
square gives a reward of 0 and also terminates the episode.
The agent’s available actions are Up, Down, Left and Right
that move it one square in the desired direction. The best
performers are the ones that ﬁnd the shortest path to the
goal, and minimize the negative reward.
B. N-Chain
The second environment is called N-Chain. There are only
ﬁve states and two actions, forward and back, and a small
probability that the action chosen is not the one actually taken
in the environment. The agent starts in state S1. Moving
forward yields a reward of 0 except in S5 where the reward
for moving forward is 10. Moving back sends the agent to
state S1 and gives a reward of 1. Forward is represented
by solid lines and backwards with a dashed line, as shown
in Fig. 7. Optimal behavior in this environment means to

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3: CliffWalking Results: Stochastic Dyna-Q and Dyna-T fail to converge as quickly as the other algorithms.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4: NChain Results: Dyna-T converges on an optimal policy much quicker in the stochastic environment, besting the
rest of the algorithms tested.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5: FrozenLake Results: Dyna-T shows signiﬁcantly better results on the most complex of the three environments
presented, indicating a more robust action selection strategy.

Fig. 6: The CliffWalking Environment: An agent must get
from the start to the goal in the shortest amount of steps
since each additional step provides -1 as a reward. The
agent loses if it steps into the cliff.
Fig. 7: The NChain Environment: The agent can only move
forward and back, and the optimal agent ignores the small
reward of moving back and chooses to go forward, despite
the probability of ”slipping” and taking the opposite action
forgo the immediate rewards gained by moving back and
continuously go forward to seek the larger reward available
in the last state.
C. Frozen Lake
The last environment combines elements from both of
theones presented above and it is shown in Fig. ??. The
agent must navigate from S to G, and avoid holes, the grey
squares, which terminate the episode with a reward of 0.
The blue squares are frozen, meaning the agent can slip in a
random direction whenever it takes an action while it’s on a
blue square. The available actions are Up, Down, Left, and
Right. The rewards are sparse when compared to the previous
environments because the agent only receives a reward of 1
if it manages to reach the goal state. Due to the nature of
the environment, for an algorithm to solve this task it must
achieve an average score of 0.74, at least, over 100 episodes.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this work, we assess the performance of Dyna-T against
Q-Learning, SARSA(λ), Dyna-Q, and Stochastic Dyna-Q
using as a benchmarking platform the OpenAI Gym toolkit
[2]. Our chosen experimental scenarios are Cliff Walking,
Frozen Lake, and NChain.
Q-Learning, SARSA(λ), Dyna-Q, Stochastic Dyna-Q, and
Dyna-UCT were implemented and run on each of the three
chosen environments. CliffWalking and FrozenLake were
tested for 2000 episodes, while NChain was tested for 500.
Their behavior with different hyperparameters was observed
using parameter evaluation scripts, that test each algorithm
with different parameter values, such as learning rate or
planning steps. The primary measure of performance was
the reward collected in the environment, we also measure
Fig. 8: The FrozenLake Environment: The agent must
navigate from start to ﬁnish, the grey squares are holes that
terminate the episode with a reward of 0, while the blue
squares are frozen and can cause an agent to slip in a
random direction. The only positive reward available is 1,
if the agent reaches the goal.
the duration across iterations of each algorithm for further
insight into their practicality.
VI. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
The algorithms all behave as expected in the deterministic
CliffWalking setting Fig. 3. SARSA(λ) and Dyna-Q converge
faster than one-step Q-learning, while Stochastic Dyna-Q
and Dyna-T fail to learn the appropriate environment model
quickly enough. Moreover, due to the added computational
cost of storing transitions and updating expected rewards at
every step Stochastic Dyna-Q and Dyna-T take a signiﬁcantly
longer time. This is also partially due to the use of the
Pandas package to handle the tabular representation, storage,
and retrieval operations of the algorithms. Pandas tends to be
slower than a numerical computation package like NumPy,
but does provide some advantages such as multi-indexing
which was very helpful in the implementation.
The balance shifts once the algorithms are tested in a
stochastic environment. In NChain, as shown in Fig. 4, one-
step Q-learning and Dyna-Q fail to converge on an optimal
solution within the allotted timeframe while SARSA(λ),
Stochastic Dyna-Q and Dyna-T perform much better. Dyna-
T converges on the best solution which is in line with our
expectations.The time difference is apparent, but less extreme
due to the smaller state space and episode length. Note the
particularly poor performance of Dyna-Q, because it assumes
a deterministic environment, meaning that its model will
store transitions that are not guaranteed to occur every time
which can inhibit learning.
FrozenLake is where we really start seeing the beneﬁts of
UCT, shown in Fig. 5. Dyna-T latches onto solutions much
quicker than the rest of the algorithms. While all of them
are guaranteed to converge, Dyna-T will ﬁnd the appropriate
solutions faster despite taking no random actions to explore
the environment, it is completely driven by the upper bounds
computation.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a novel algorithm for on-
line model-based reinforcement learning, called Dyna-T. We
combined the beneﬁts of two popular technique: i) Dyna-
Q and ii) UCT. The former is a hybrid RL approach that

combines planning, acting, model-learning, and direct-RL in
a unique framework, all occurring continually at each itera-
tion of the algorithm. However, the planning process can be
computationally expensive and a drawback for this approach.
On the other hand, UCT is a state-of-the-art sampling-
based method for exploring large trees in an efﬁcient way.
We demonstrated that our Dyna-T is efﬁcient in exploring
the simulated experience generated by the Dyna-Q model
leading to a more efﬁcient action selection during the on-
line learning. By interacting with the environment with better
actions, our model converges quicker to the optimal solution
than several state-of-the-art methods in two testbed environ-
ments from Open AI. We also compared the performance
of our propose model in a deterministic scenario. Although
Dyna-Q is deterministic by nature, the combination with the
UCT degraded its performance in such scenario. Future work
will focus on testing in larger environments and to compare
it against deep-learning techniques.
