arXiv:2001.07118v3  [cs.AI]  23 Jun 2025
Incentives for Responsiveness, Instrumental Control
and Impact
Ryan Carey
University of Oxford
Eric Langlois
University of Toronto
Chris van Merwijk
Carnegie Mellon University
Shane Legg
Google DeepMind
Tom Everitt
Google DeepMind
Abstract
We introduce three concepts that describe an agent’s incentives: re-
sponse incentives indicate which variables in the environment, such as
sensitive demographic information, affect the decision under the optimal
policy. Instrumental control incentives indicate whether an agent’s policy
is chosen to manipulate part of its environment, such as the preferences
or instructions of a user. Impact incentives indicate which variables an
agent will affect, intentionally or otherwise. For each concept, we estab-
lish sound and complete graphical criteria, and discuss general classes of
techniques that may be used to produce incentives for safe and fair agent
behaviour. Finally, we outline how these notions may be generalised to
multi-decision settings.
This journal-length paper extends our conference publication “Agent
Incentives: A Causal Perspective”: the material on response incentives
and instrumental control incentives is updated, while the work on impact
incentives and multi-decision settings is entirely new.
1

1
Introduction
In order to understand whether or not it is in your interests to interact with
another agent, it is useful to consider that agent’s incentives. In AI safety, for
example, it has been argued that advanced AI systems would have an incentive
to accumulate resources and/or to avoid being shut down [Omohundro, 2008,
Soares et al., 2015]. Such motives have been termed convergent instrumental
goals, because it is imagined that they might help a wide range of agents to
achieve their goals.
The notion of a convergent instrumental goal has not been formally de-
fined, however, and it is not immediately clear how an agent’s convergent
instrumental goals should relate to its intent or incentives.
Ideally, we would like to have some language to describe the incentives of
AI systems, that allows us to judge whether those incentives will lead to safe
or fair behaviour. There does already exist some language for describing safe
or fair behaviour directly, for instance counterfactual harm [Mueller and Pearl,
2023, Richens et al., 2022] and counterfactual fairness [Kusner et al., 2017].
There also exists language that is at least related to incentives. A variable is
said to have positive value of information if knowledge of its assignment can
improve expected utility, and positive value of control if deciding its assign-
ment can do the same. These concepts, however, do not directly allow us to
assess whether an agent will behave in a safe or fair manner. In the present
work, therefore, we seek to devise some incentive concepts that:
• make predictions about whether unsafe or unfair behaviour will occur,
and
• describe how optimal behaviour is decided.
In the process, we hope to clarify the idea of an agent’s convergent instrumen-
tal goals, and to contrast this with previous definitions of intentional influence
of a variable.
In order for incentive concepts to be applicable, we need a way to deduce
whether they are present or not. In some cases, it is possible to rule out the
presence of some incentive using the graphical structure alone. For instance,
in the graph X Ñ D Ñ U where X is a chance event, D is a decision and U
is a utility function, we can tell that X has zero value of information, because
it is independent of U given D. A criterion for making such evaluations is
called a graphical criterion. So, for each incentive concept that we introduce,
we will establish a graphical criterion, and will discuss how it could be applied
to ensure safer AI behaviour.
One might wonder, although our main application area in this paper is AI
safety, might these incentive concepts be equally applicable to the behaviour of
human individuals, or other agents? In fact, none of these concepts are specific
2

to AI but they may be more naturally applicable to AI systems insofar as they
are trained to pursue closed-form objective functions, whereas this is a looser
approximation of human behaviour.
Overview of Contributions
This paper will begin with some setup (sec-
tion 2).
Next, we will focus on the information an agent can benefit from using,
to make a decision. In previous work, materiality has described which actual
observations aid performance [Shachter, 2016]. In section 3, we prove a known
graphical criterion that can be used to deduce, in some circumstances, that
a variable is immaterial [Fagiuoli and Zaffalon, 1998, Lauritzen and Nilsson,
2001]. We prove that this criterion is complete, in that it proves immateriality
whenever possible to do so from the graphical structure alone.
We then present a new concept, the response incentive (RI) (section 4),
which describes which variables an agent’s decision is influenced by, be they
observed or causally upstream of the observations. This is important to AI
fairness, because it describes when an optimal agent will be counterfactually
unfair [Kusner et al., 2017], and to AI safety, in that it relates to the obedience
of an agent [Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017, Carey and Everitt, 2023]. We also
prove a simple graphical criterion that is sound and complete for ruling out
an RI.
Next, we consider what variables an agent can benefit from influencing.
The notion of value of control [Shachter, 1986] describes what variables an
agent would like to control, but it falls short in describing what variables an
agent is actually incentivized to control. So we introduce a new concept, the
instrumental control incentive (ICI), which describes variables that an agent
has both a need, and a means to influence (section 5).
The instrumental
control incentive attempts to formalize the notion of an instrumental goal in
AI safety, and the idea that an agent is incentivized to “try” to influence some
variable. We demonstrate that it is closely related to the notion of intent, from
Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner [2018], Ward et al. [2024], and prove an identical
sound and complete criterion for each of these concepts (section 6). We also
review how various proposals for safe AI are better understood as one class of
methods, path-specific objectives, which serve to remove the ICI.
We will introduce another new concept, the impact incentive (II) (sec-
tion 7), which is more inclusive than the ICI. Under some circumstances, an
agent may be incentivized to influence some variable, not by its intention,
but as a side-effect of optimal behaviour. So an II will apply to any variables
subject to an ICI, as well as those affected by a predictable side-effect. IIs
also have a sound and complete graphical criterion, that is a superset of the
criterion for ICI. We will also discuss how impact incentives can make sense of
the purpose of impact measures [Armstrong and Levinstein, 2017, Krakovna
3

Race
High school
Education
Grade
Predicted grade
Gender
Accuracy
(a) Fairness example: grade prediction
Posts
to show
Original
user opinions
Clicks
Influenced
user opinions
structure node
decision node
utility node
(b) Safety example: content recommendation
Figure 1:
Two examples of decision problems represented as causal influence
diagrams. In a) a predictor at a hypothetical university aims to estimate a student’s
grade, using as inputs their gender and the high school they attended.
We ask
whether the predictor is incentivized to behave in a discriminatory manner with
respect to the students’ gender and race. In this hypothetical cohort of students,
performance is assumed to be a function of the quality of the high school education
they received. A student’s high school is assumed to be impacted by their race, and
can affect the quality of their education. Gender, however, is assumed not to have
an effect.
In b) the goal of a content recommendation system is to choose posts
that will maximize the user’s click rate. However, the system’s designers prefer the
system not to manipulate the user’s opinions in order to obtain more clicks.
et al., 2018], another proposal for safe AI.
We will then discuss various possible generalizations of incentive concepts
to a multi-decision setting, and how they relate to one another (section 8).
Finally, we review related work (section 9), and conclude (section 10).
This paper is an extended version of a conference paper, Everitt et al.
[2021a]. Since its publication, the concepts have already aided understand-
ing of incentive problems such as an agent’s redirectability [Armstrong et al.,
2020, Carey and Everitt, 2023], ambition [Cohen et al., 2020], fairness [Ashurst
et al., 2022] tendency to tamper with reward [Everitt et al., 2021b], manip-
ulativeness [Farquhar et al., 2022], the definition of an agent [Kenton et al.,
2023], and more [Everitt et al., 2019a, Langlois and Everitt, 2021]. Compared
to that paper, sections 3 to 5 have been generalized to deal with multiple vari-
ables. Analyses of intent and path-specific objectives have been newly added
to section 5. Finally, sections 7 and 8 are entirely new.
Running examples
For explanatory purposes, we will refer to the following
pair of incentive design problems throughout the paper:
Example 1 (Grade prediction). To decide which applicants to admit, a uni-
versity uses a model to predict the grades of new students. The university
4

would like the system to predict accurately, without treating students differ-
ently based on their gender or race (see fig. 1a).
Example 2 (Content recommendation). An AI algorithm has the task of rec-
ommending a series of posts to a user. The designers want the algorithm to
present content adapted to each user’s interests to optimize clicks. However,
they do not want the algorithm to use polarizing content to manipulate the
user into clicking more predictably (fig. 1b).
2
Setup
We will begin with a recap of structural causal models and then introduce
structural causal influence models.
2.1
Structural causal models
Structural causal models (SCMs) [Pearl, 2009] are a type of causal model
where all randomness is consigned to exogenous variables, while deterministic
structural functions relate the endogenous variables to each other and to the
exogenous ones. As demonstrated by Pearl [2009], this structural approach
has significant benefits over traditional causal Bayesian networks for analysing
(nested) counterfactuals and “individual-level” effects.
Definition 1 (Structural causal model (unconfounded); Pearl, 2009, Chapter
7). A structural causal model is a tuple xE, V , F , Py, where E is a set of exoge-
nous variables; V is a set of endogenous variables; and F “ tfV uV PV is a col-
lection of functions, one for each V . Each function fV : dompPaV YtEV uq Ñ
dompV q specifies the value of V in terms of the values of the corresponding
exogenous variable EV and a set of variables PaV Ă V , where these functional
dependencies are acyclic.1 The domain of a variable V is dompV q, and for
a set of variables, dompW q :“ Ś
WPW dompWq. The uncertainty is encoded
through a probability distribution Ppεq such that the exogenous variables are
mutually independent.
For example, fig. 2b shows an SCM that models how posts (D) can influ-
ence a user’s opinion (O) and clicks (U).
The exogenous variables E of an SCM represent factors that are not
modelled.
For any value E “ ε of the exogenous variables, the value of
any set of variables W Ď V is given by recursive application of the struc-
tural functions F and is denoted by W pεq. Together with the distribution
Ppεq over exogenous variables, this induces a joint distribution PpW “ wq “
ř
tε|W pεq“wu Ppεq.
1The reason for using the notation PaV to designate this set of variables will become
clear when we introduce the “associated DAG” later in this subsection.
5

Note that in general, we denote individual variables by capital letters, and
sets of variables by bolded capital letters. Individual (sets of) assignments
will be represented by (bolded) lowercase.
SCMs model causal interventions that set variables to particular values.
These are defined via submodels:
Definition 2 (Submodel; Pearl, 2009, Chapter 7). Let M “ xE, V , F , Py be
an SCM, X a set of variables in V , and x a particular realization of X. The
submodel Mx represents the effects of an intervention dopX “ xq, and is for-
mally defined as the SCM xE, V , Fx, Py, where Fx “ tfV |V R Xu Y tX “ xu.
That is to say, the original functional relationships of X P X are replaced with
the constant functions X “ x.
More generally, a soft intervention on a variable X
in an SCM M re-
places fX with a function gX : dompPaX YtEXuq Ñ dompXq [Eberhardt and
Scheines, 2007, Tian and Pearl, 2013]. The probability distribution PpWgXq
on any W Ď V is defined as the value of PpW q in the submodel MgX where
MgX is M modified by replacing fX with gX.
If W is a variable in an SCM M, then Wx refers to the same variable
in the submodel Mx, and is called a potential response variable. In fig. 2b,
the random variable O represents user opinion under “default” circumstances,
while Od in fig. 2c represents the user’s opinion given an intervention dopD “
dq on the content posted. Note also how the intervention on D severs the
link from ED to d in fig. 2c, as the intervention on D overrides the causal
effect from D’s parents. Throughout this paper we use subscripts to indicate
submodels or interventions, and superscripts for indexing.
More elaborate hypotheticals can be described with a nested counterfac-
tual.
In a nested counterfactual, the intervention is itself a potential response
variable. For instance, in fig. 2c, we may be interested in what the utility
would be if the user’s opinions assumed the value that they would take given
some alternative posts. Put differently, we would like to propagate the effect
of an intervention dopD “ dq to U, only via the opinions O. To define a
nested counterfactual, firstly, the value o “ Odpεq indicates the user’s opinion
after receiving a default post D “ d, given an assignment ε to the exogenous
variables. Then, the effect of the intervention dopO “ oq on the user’s clicks
UOd is defined as UOdpεq :“ Uopεq for any assignment ε.
A structural causal model has an associated DAG that can be used to
deduce which variables are conditionally independent. Formally, the induced
graph has vertices V and an edge inbound to each variable V from each
variable that fV depends on. For example, in fig. 2b, the dependencies of the
functions π, fO, fU are illustrated. In definition 1, we designated the variables
that V depends on as PaV , and this is because they are the parents of V in
the associated DAG. In fact, for any DAG, we will use the same notation PaV
6

D
O
U
ED
EO
EU
Opinion
O “ fOpD, EOq
Clicks
U “fUpD, O, EUq
(a) SCIM
D
O
U
ED
EO
EU
Posts
D “ πpEDq
Opinion
O “ fOpD, EOq
Clicks
U “fUpD, O, EUq
(b) SCM
D
O
U
ED
EO
EU
d
Od
UOd
Posts
d “ apolitical
Opinion
Od “ fOpd, EOq
Clicks
UOd “
fUpD, Od, EUq
(c) SCM with nested counterfac-
tual,
shown using a twin graph
[Balke and Pearl, 2022]
exogenous node
structural node
intervened node
decision node
utility node
Figure 2: An example of a SCIM and interventions. In the SCIM, either political or
apolitical posts D are displayed. These affect the user’s opinion O. D and O influence
the user’s clicks U (a). Given a policy, the SCIM becomes an SCM (b). Interventions
and counterfactuals may be defined in terms of this SCM. For example, the nested
counterfactual UOd represents the number of clicks if the user has the opinions that
they would arrive at, after viewing apolitical content (c).
to designate the parents of a variable V , and similarly DescV to designate the
descendants.
We will use some more standard notation for DAGs: an edge
from node V to node Y is denoted V Ñ Y , and a directed path (of length at
least zero) is denoted V 99K Y .
The d-separation criterion can be used to deduce when two sets of variables
are independent, conditional on another variable.
Definition 3 (d-separation; Verma and Pearl, 1988). A path p is said to be
d-separated by a set of nodes Z if and only if:
1. p contains a collider X Ñ W Ð Y such that the middle node W is not
in Z and no descendants of W are in Z, or
2. p contains a chain X Ñ W Ñ Y or fork X Ð W Ñ Y where W is in
Z, or
3. one or both of the endpoints of p is in Z.
A set Z is said to d-separate X from Y , written pX K Y | Zq, if and only if
Z d-separates every path from a node in X to a node in Y . Sets that are not
d-separated are called d-connected.
When d-separation holds, these sets of variables must be independent given
the third. Conversely, when variables are d-connected in a graph, then there
7

exists a model with that induced graph such that they are conditionally de-
pendent.
Theorem 1 (Theorem 1.2.4 of Pearl [2009]). If sets X, Y , Z satisfy X K Y |
Z in a DAG G, then X is independent of Y conditional on Z in every SCM
M with induced graph G. Conversely, if X M Y | Z in a DAG G, then X
and Y are dependent conditional on Z in at least one SCM M with induced
graph G.
Indeed, when variables are d-connected, they are actually conditionally
dependent in almost all models with that induced graph [Meek, 1995].
2.2
Structural causal influence models
Influence diagrams are graphical models with special decision and utility
nodes, used to model decision-making problems [Howard, 1990, Lauritzen and
Nilsson, 2001], but that usually do not deal with counterfactual concepts as
do SCMs [Heckerman and Shachter, 1994]. So for our analysis, we introduce
a hybrid of SCMs and influence diagrams called the structural causal influ-
ence model (SCIM, pronounced “skim”). This model, originally proposed by
Dawid [2002], is essentially an SCM where particular variables are designated
as decisions and utilities. The decisions lack structural functions, until one is
selected by an agent.2
Definition 4 (Structural causal influence model). A structural causal influ-
ence model (SCIM) is a tuple M “ xE, V , F , P, U, Oy where:
• xE, V , F 1, Py is an unconfounded SCM, and F “ F 1zFD consists of
the structural functions from that SCM, except those belonging to a set
D Ď V , called decision variables.
• The utility variables U are a subset of V zD, and have real domains,
dompUq Ď R for all U P U.
By convention, we require that utility
variables have no children in the associated DAG.
• The observation function O maps each decision variable D P D to a set
of observed variables O Ď V zU, intuitively, the variables that D can
depend on.
Those endogenous variables that are neither decisions nor utilities are
called structural variables, X :“ V zpD Y Uq
A SCIM entails an acyclic relationship between all of its variables, which
can be represented by a DAG. The observation function O indicates which
2Dawid called this a “functional influence diagram”. We favour the term SCIM, because
the term “SCM” is more prevalent than the corresponding term “functional model”.
8

variables are available as inputs to any given decision variable — these will
be the parents. For non-decision variables, the parents are implied by the
structural functions F , which indicate the variable’s direct causes.
3 Taken together, these allow us to associate any SCIM with an influence
diagram — a DAG that illustrates these dependencies, as well as the types of
each variable.
Definition 5 (Causal influence diagram). The causal influence diagram (CID)
of a SCIM is a graph whose vertices are the decision nodes D, structure nodes
X, and utility nodes U, and whose edges go from observations OpDq to each
decision D and from variables that fV depends on, to each non-decision V .
The arcs into each decision are “informational” in that they indicate which
parents of the decision will be observed by the decision maker at the time that
decision is selected [Shachter, 2016]. We will focus exclusively on SCIMs whose
CID is acyclic.
An example of a SCIM for the content recommendation example is shown
in fig. 2a, and the node types of the CID are highlighted in a standard style
— the decision nodes as rectangles, and the utilities as diamonds.
In single-decision SCIMs, the decision-making task is to maximize ex-
pected utility by selecting a decision d P dompDq for each possible assign-
ment to the observations o P dompOpDqq, i.e. to select a decision rule πD :
dompOpDq Y tEDuq Ñ dompDq. The exogenous variable ED provides ran-
domness to allow the decision rule to be a stochastic function of the obser-
vations OpDq.4 If there are multiple decisions, the task is to select a policy
π “ tπDuDPD, i.e. one decision rule for each decision.
Specifying a policy
turns a SCIM M into an SCM Mπ :“ xE, V , pF zFDqYπ, Py. In the resulting
SCM, the standard definitions of causal interventions apply.
We use Pπ and Eπ to denote probabilities and expectations with respect
to Mπ.
For a set of variables X not in DescD, Pπpxq is independent of π
and we simply write Ppxq. An optimal policy for a SCIM is defined as any
policy π that maximizes EπrUs, where U :“ ř
UPU U. The potential response
Ux is defined as Ux :“ ř
UPU Ux. In most of the examples that we consider,
there will only be one decision, and so by slight abuse of notation, we will
denote the policy π “ tπu by π.
Finally, let us clarify why a CID is called “causal”. For an ordinary in-
fluence diagram, one can deduce that only the descendants of a decision are
3In the study of structural causal models, the variables that are not exogenous are often
called “visible” and a joint distribution over visible variables is available to the decision-
maker. In a SCIM, the decision-maker instead has access to the SCIM tuple, along with
assignments to observations. We therefore avoid referring to any nodes as “visible”.
4Ideally, we might want the decision-maker to be able to implement any stochastic policy.
This could be done by having ED be a continuous random variable. However, this would
introduce measure theoretic complications that are not pertinent to the analysis in this
paper, and so we defer that construction to future work.
9

caused by it, because their values depend on the chosen policy [Heckerman
and Shachter, 1994]. In a CID, however, imputing a policy recovers a struc-
tural causal model, which represents a full description of causal relationships
between variables. The direction of causality then corresponds to the direction
of arrows in the associated DAG. Since these arrows are the same as those in
the original CID, we may also call the CID causal.
3
Materiality
A fundamental question that we may ask about the optimal policies is: which
observations do they need in order to make optimal decisions? If some observa-
tion is discovered to be immaterial [Shachter, 2016], this would allow us to nar-
row the search for optimal policies. Conversely, if an observation is material,
this means it will directly influence the decision under every optimal policy.5
Definition 6 (Materiality; Shachter, 2016). For any given SCIM M, let
V˚pMq “ maxπ EπrUs be the maximum attainable utility in M, and let MW­ÑD
be the modified version of M obtained by removing the information links from
W to D. The observation W Ď PaD is material if V˚pMW­ÑDq ă V˚pMq.
Nodes may often be identified as immaterial based on the graphical struc-
ture alone [Fagiuoli and Zaffalon, 1998, Lauritzen and Nilsson, 2001, Shachter,
2016]. According to the graphical criterion of Fagiuoli and Zaffalon [1998], an
observation cannot provide useful information if it is d-separated from utility,
conditional on other observations. This condition is called non-requisiteness.
Definition 7 (Non-requisite observation; Lauritzen and Nilsson, 2001). Let
U D :“ U X DescD be the utility nodes downstream of D. An observation
W P PaD in a single-decision CID G is non-requisite if:
W K U D ˇˇ `
PaD Y tDuztWu
˘
.
(1)
In this case, the edge W Ñ D is also called non-requisite. Otherwise W and
W Ñ D are requisite.
Variables that are non-requisite are immaterial.
Theorem 2 (Materiality criterion). A single decision CID G is compatible
with W P V being material if and only if W is a requisite observation in G.
The proof is supplied in appendix
E.3.
The soundness direction (i.e.
the only if direction) is well-known, and follows from d-separation [Fagiuoli
and Zaffalon, 1998, Lauritzen and Nilsson, 2001, Shachter, 2016]. In contrast,
5In contrast to subsequent sections, the results in this section and the VoI section do not
require the influence diagrams to be causal.
10

the completeness direction does not follow from the completeness property of
d-separation. The d-connectedness of W to U implies that U may be condi-
tionally dependent on W . It does not imply, however, that the expectation of
U or the utility attainable under an optimal policy will change. Instead, our
proof constructs a SCIM where some W P W is material. This differs from a
previous attempt by Nielsen and Jensen [1999] that is reviewed in section 9.
Let us now apply the graphical criterion to the grade prediction example in
fig. 3a. Here, gender is a non-requisite observation. This means that gender is
conditionally independent of grade given the high school and predicted grade.
So it can provide no useful information for predicting the university grade,
given what else the predictor knows. On the other hand, high school is a
requisite observation, so it may be required to make an optimal prediction.
Materiality asks whether a variable that is observed is necessary for op-
timal performance. We can generalize this to unobserved variables, by also
asking whether performance would be improved by observing an additional
variable. This concept, value of information, is treated in appendix B.
4
Response incentives
One way to understand materiality is that a material observation is one that
influences optimal decisions.
So, a natural generalization is the set of all
(observed and latent) variables that influence the decision. We say that these
variables have a response incentive.6
Definition 8 (Response incentive). Let M be a single-decision SCIM. A
policy π responds to variables W Ď X if there exists some set gW of soft
interventions, one gW for each W P W , and some setting E “ ε, such that
DgW pεq ‰ Dpεq. The variables W have a response incentive if all optimal
policies respond to W .
For a response incentive on W to be possible, there must be: i) a directed
path W 99K D for some W P W , and ii) an incentive for D to use information
from that path. For example, in fig. 3a, gender has a directed path to the
decision but it does not provide any information about the likely grade, so
there is no response incentive.
The graphical criterion for RI builds on a
modified graph with non-requisite information links removed.
Definition 9 (Minimal reduction; Lauritzen and Nilsson, 2001). The minimal
reduction Gmin of a single-decision CID G is the result of removing from G all
information links from non-requisite observations.
6The term responsiveness [Heckerman and Shachter, 1995, Shachter, 2016] has a related
but not identical meaning – it refers to whether a decision D affects a variable W rather
than whether W affects D.
11

Race
High school
Education
Grade
Predicted grade
Gender
Accuracy
(a) Admits response incentive on race
Race
High
school
Education
Grade
Predicted grade
Gender
Accuracy
Material
Response
incentive
(b) Admits no response incentive on race
Figure 3: In (a), the admissible incentives of the grade prediction example from
fig. 1a are shown, including a response incentive on race. In (b), the predictor no
longer has access to the students’ high school, and hence there can no longer be any
response incentive on race.
The presence (or absence) of a path W 99K D in the minimal reduction
tells us whether a response incentive can occur.
Theorem 3 (Response incentive criterion). A single-decision CID G admits
a response incentive on W Ď X if and only if the minimal reduction Gmin has
a directed path W 99K D for some W P W .
The intuition behind the proof is that an optimal decision only responds to
effects that propagate to one of its requisite observations. For the completeness
direction, we show in appendix E.3 that if W 99K D is present in the minimal
reduction Gmin, then we can select a SCIM M compatible with G such that
D receives useful information along that path, that any optimal policy must
respond to.
In a setting where an agent has an option to shut down, safe behaviour
requires a condition called obedience, which requires the system to respond
to any shutdown instruction that is given [Carey and Everitt, 2023].
For
algorithms designed for human assistance, incentivising responsiveness in this
way has been an important desideratum [Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017].
In a fairness setting, on the other hand, a response incentive may be a
cause for concern, as illustrated next.
Incentivised unfairness
Response incentives are closely related to coun-
terfactual fairness [Kusner et al., 2017, Kilbertus et al., 2017]. A prediction
— or more generally a decision — is considered counterfactually unfair if a
change to a sensitive attribute like race or gender would change the decision.
Definition 10 (Counterfactual fairness; Kusner et al., 2017). A policy π is
12

counterfactually fair with respect to a sensitive attribute A if
Pπ
`
Da1 “ d | paD, a
˘
“ Pπ
`
D “ d | paD, a
˘
for every decision d P dompDq, every context paD P dompPaDq, and every
pair of attributes a, a1 P dompAq with PppaD, aq ą 0.
A response incentive on a sensitive attribute indicates that counterfactual
unfairness is incentivized, as it implies that all optimal policies are counter-
factually unfair:
Theorem 4 (Counterfactual fairness and response incentives). In a single-
decision SCIM M with a sensitive attribute A P X, all optimal policies π˚
are counterfactually unfair with respect to A if and only if tAu has a response
incentive.
The proof is given in appendix E.10.
A response incentive on a sensitive attribute means that counterfactual
unfairness is not just possible, but incentivized. As a result, the graphical cri-
terion for a response incentive is more restrictive than the graphical criterion
for counterfactual unfairness being possible. The latter requires only that a
sensitive attribute be an ancestor of the decision [Kusner et al., 2017, Lemma
1]. For example, in the grade prediction example of fig. 3a, it is possible for a
predictor to be counterfactually unfair with respect to either gender or race,
because both are ancestors of the decision. The response incentive criterion
can tell us whether counterfactual unfairness may actually be incentivized.
In this example, the minimal reduction includes the edge from high school
to predicted grade and hence the directed path from race to predicted grade.
However, it excludes the edge from gender to predicted grade. This means
that the agent is incentivized to be counterfactually unfair with respect to
race but not to gender.
Based on this, how should the system be redesigned? According to the
response incentive criterion, the most important change is to remove the path
from race to predicted grade in the minimal reduction. This can be done by
removing the agent’s access to high school. This change is implemented in
fig. 3b, where there is no response incentive on either sensitive variable.
The incentive approach is not restricted to counterfactual fairness. For
any fairness definition, one could assess whether that kind of unfairness is
incentivized by checking whether it is present under all optimal policies. For
example, Ashurst et al. [2022] considers whether unfairness is introduced —
in that the prediction has greater demographic disparity than the true label
— and establishes when this is incentivized.
13

5
Instrumental control incentives
Let us return to the second running example, shown in fig. 1b, where devel-
opers seek to anticipate harmful consequences of deploying a content recom-
mender system. A key concern they will have is that the system is incen-
tivized to manipulate users’ preferences. In general, to describe whether an
agent has to strategically influence some variable, we will define a notion of
an instrumental control incentive. (This will also correspond to the notion
of ‘convergent instrumental goals’ described in the introduction.) Note that
this differs from the notion of value of control [Shachter, 1986], which only
considers the agent’s need to influence a variable, and not its ability. Value of
control and its graphical criterion are analysed in appendix C.
To formalize this question, we can consider whether an agent’s influence
on a variable W affects the policy’s performance. The effect of an alternative
decision d on the variable W can be written as Wd. And the effect of an
alternative value w on the outcome U can be written as Uw. Putting these
together, the effect of setting W to the value obtained under d is denoted by
the nested counterfactual UWd, as defined in section 2.1. If the performance
of optimal policies is sensitive to such an intervention, then we will say there
is an instrumental control incentive.
Definition 11 (Instrumental control incentive). In a single-decision SCIM
M, there is an instrumental control incentive on nodes W in decision context
paD if, for all optimal policies π˚, there exists an alternative assignment
D “ d such that:
Eπ˚rUWd | paDs ‰ Eπ˚rU | paDs.
(2)
ICIs only consider the influence of W that is instrumental to achieving
utility — in the terminology of Pearl [2001], a natural indirect effect from D
to U via W in Mπ˚, for all optimal policies π˚. ICIs do not consider side-
effects shared by optimal policies: for instance, it may be that all optimal
policies affect W in a particular way, even if W is a not an ancestor of any
utility node, and in such cases, no ICI is present.
Theorem 5 (Instrumental Control Incentive Criterion). A single-decision
CID G admits an instrumental control incentive on W Ď V if and only if G
has a directed path from the decision D to a utility node U P U that passes
through some W P W .
The logic behind the soundness proof is that if there is no path from D
to some W P W to U, then D cannot have any effect on U via W . For the
completeness direction, we show how to construct a SCIM so that UWd differs
from the non-intervened U for any diagram with a path D 99K W 99K U for
any W P W .
14

Posts
to show
Original
user opinions
Clicks
Influenced
user opinions
ICI
(a) Admits instrumental control incentive
on user opinion
Posts
to show
Inert
posts
Counterfactual
opinions
Original
user opinions
Hypothetical
Clicks
Influenced
user opinions
(b) Admits no instrumental control incen-
tive on user opinion
Figure 4: In (a), the content recommendation example from fig. 1b is shown to
admit an instrumental control incentive on user opinion. This is avoided in (b) with
a change to the objective.
Let us apply this criterion to the content recommendation example in
fig. 4a. The only nodes W P W in this graph that lie on a path D 99K W 99K U
for any U P U are clicks and influenced user opinions. Since influenced user
opinions has an instrumental control incentive, the agent may seek to influ-
ence that variable in order to attain utility. For example, it may be easier
to predict what content a more emotional user will click on and therefore, a
recommender may achieve a higher click rate by introducing posts that induce
strong emotions.
How could we instead design the agent to maximize clicks without manip-
ulating the user’s opinions (i.e. without an instrumental control incentive on
influenced user opinions)? As shown in fig. 4b, we could redesign the system
so that instead of being rewarded for the true click rate, it is rewarded for the
clicks that the user would give if they viewed some inert content that would
not change their preferences. An agent trained to maximize this objective
would view any modification of user opinions as irrelevant for improving its
performance; however, it would still have an instrumental control incentive
for hypothetical clicks, so it would still deliver desired content.
It is worth remarking on a possible challenge with identifiability, and how
to address it. Hypothetical clicks is a counterfactual variable, impossible to
observe in reality (as in reality, users’ behaviour is determined by their actual
preferences). More formally, it is defined using the third (i.e. counterfactual)
rung of Pearl’s causal hierarchy, and it relies on the ability to compute U
across different counterfactual worlds simultaneously, something that cannot
be done by experiment without further assumptions [Avin et al., 2005]. Fortu-
nately, Carroll et al. [2022] demonstrate one set of natural assumptions under
which the hypothetical clicks can be inferred from observed interactions with
a user, essentially by inferring the (latent) user opinion variable from gradual
15

shifts in user behaviour over longer sequences of interaction.
This example is an instance of a very wide class of safety worries, where
some delicate variable has an ICI [Farquhar et al., 2022]. Omohundro [2008]
has hypothesised that an advanced AI system would have a convergent in-
strumental goal to survive, or to obtain computing resources, which we may
view as undesired ICIs.
Armstrong [2017] has raised the concern that AI
systems might seek to make self-fulfilling predictions, whereas we would not
want them to manipulate the world. Additionally, Krueger et al. [2020] have
demonstrated that AI systems sometimes seek to induce shifts in the distri-
bution of their testing data. In each case, their proposed solution, as in our
example, is to impute a fixed value to the delicate variable. Such a solution
has been termed a path-specific objective, because it requires the agent to op-
timise an objective, ignoring the effects of its decisions along some channels
[Farquhar et al., 2022]. Intuitively, the agent is tasked with “imagining that it
cannot influence” this delicate variable when choosing a decision. For this to
work, the variable must be robust to unintentional influence, and when this
will or will not be the case remains an open question for all of the examples
discussed.
6
Intent
Returning to the example from fig. 4, we may want to ask a related question:
assuming that the agent took a particular action which had a particular influ-
ence on the user, what was the reason that the agent took the action? Did it
intend to influence the user in this way? This is relevant for assigning blame
and moral responsibility, among other things [Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner,
2018].
Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner [2018] and Ward et al. [2024] operationalise
‘intent’ by asking whether the agent would pick a different policy if it ‘knew’
that the effect on some variables W (e.g. user opinions) was guaranteed.
Specifically, does there exist any suboptimal policy π1 that would surpass
the performance of the agent’s actual policy π˚ if the outcome of W was
independent of its actions and fixed to Wπ˚? This is necessary for the agent’s
influence on W to be the actual cause of a policy’s optimality [Ward et al.,
2024].7 If W is a minimal set that satisfies this requirement, then the influence
on that variable is said to be intentional.
There also exists an inverse question that has not been studied so far:
would the optimal policy perform as badly as a suboptimal policy π1 if it
only lost its control of W (i.e. if W were fixed to Wπ1q? Whereas the past
definitions of intent pertain to “adding” control, this new question pertains
7See [Ward et al., 2024, Theorem 6], which shows that intent to cause an outcome is
equivalent to the decision being an actual cause of the outcome.
16

to “subtracting” control, and allows us to define a new notion of intent. The
two ideas are unified in the definition below.
Definition 12 (Intent). Let M be a single-decision SCIM that represents an
agent’s beliefs. There is additive intent to influence nodes W by choosing π˚
over π1 if Eπ1rUs ă Eπ˚rUs, and W is a subset W Ď Z of variables Z, that
is subset-minimal such that:
Eπ1rUZπ˚s ě Eπ˚rUs.
(3)
There is subtractive intent if Eπ1rUs ă Eπ˚rUs and Z is subset-minimal such
that:
Eπ˚rUZπ1s ď Eπ1rUs.
(4)
For a set Π1, we say that there is an (additive/subtractive) intent to influence
W by choosing π˚ over Π1 if this intent is present over every π1 in Π1.
The notion of intent previously proposed in Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner
[2018] and Ward et al. [2024] is equivalent to additive intent (appendix D).
There is one difference in presentation: since intent is about a policy newly
reaching the level of another policy, this requires that their performances differ
in the first place, so we have made explicit the Eπ1rUs ă Eπ˚rUs condition
that was implicit in the original definition.
Of these two notions, it is subtractive intent that comes closer to ICI, be-
cause it starts with the optimal policy π˚, as does intent, and considers an
intervention to W using an alternative policy π1. Algebraically, the only dif-
ference is that the ICI indicates that this perturbation decreases performance a
nonzero amount, while subtractive intent requires the perturbation to worsen
performance beyond the threshold Eπ1rUs. (Whereas additive intent starts
from a suboptimal policy π, and is algebraically less similar.) Both kinds of
intent differ from ICI in that they evaluate an SCIM M, that corresponds to
the agent’s beliefs, rather than reality. Despite these differences, both kinds of
intent have the same graphical criterion as an ICI. We can therefore generalize
the graphical criterion from Ward et al. [2024] to accommodate both additive
and subtractive intent.
Theorem 6 (Intent Criterion). A single-decision CID G admits (additive/
subtractive) intent on W Ď V if and only if G has a directed path D 99K
W 99K U for some W P W and U P U.
Similarly to the ICI criterion, the intent criterion allows the agent to intend
to influence clicks and influenced user opinions, whereas if the path-specific
effect objective is used, then the agent can no longer intend to influence the
user’s preferences.
17

We can also make the relationship between intent and ICI more precise:
ICI is related to the presence of subtractive intent given optimal policies, al-
though it is a slightly weaker condition, because it does not place any require-
ments on whether the alternative policy π1 must have a positive or negative
influence on U through W .
Proposition 1 (Subtractive intent and ICI). In a single-decision SCIM M,
if for all optimal π˚, there is subtractive intent to influence W by choosing
π˚ over π1, then there is an ICI on W .
The proof is as follows.
Proof. We prove the result by contrapositive: that if there is no ICI, then no
optimal policy π˚ cannot satisfy both of the conditions for subtractive intent.
Let π˚ be an arbitrary optimal policy.
By the definition of ICI, we
have that for all paD, Epi˚rUWd | paDs “ Epi˚rU | paDs. It follows that
Epi˚rUWπ1s “ Epi˚rUs. Recall that the conditions for subtractive intent are
that: Eπ1rUs ă Eπ˚rUs and Eπ˚rUZπ1s ď Eπ1rUs. But if both of these condi-
tions were satisfieed, we would have
Eπ1rUs ă Eπ˚rUs “ Epi˚rUWπ1s ď Eπ1rUs
which is a contradiction, so there cannot be subtractive intent, proving the
result.
7
Impact incentives
Even if an algorithm does not intentionally manipulate a sensitive variable, it
may harmfully influence it unintentionally (i.e. as a side-effect). For instance,
even when a recommender system does not intend to manipulate human pref-
erences, it may still do so [Jiang et al., 2019].
This could be true if the
persuasive videos are ones that the user prefers to click on even before any
preference change has occurred.
To describe this kind of problem, we need a concept that checks whether
the agent is impacting a variable relative to some baseline. Formally, we can
look at the assignments that this variable takes under the optimal policies, and
evaluate their distance from the values that it assumes under some baseline
policy, given a suitable distance metric.
Definition 13 (Impact Incentive (II)). Let W Ď V be nodes in a single-
decision SCIM M. There is an incentive to impact W with distance function
δ and threshold c ą 0, relative to baseline policy π1, if every optimal policy π
has ErδpWπpεq, Wπ1pεqs ą c for some assignment ε.
A CID G admits an impact incentive if there exists a model M, a distance
function δ, a c ě 0 and a policy π1 such that there is an impact incentive.
18

Posts
to show
Inert
posts
Counterfactual
opinions
Impact
measure
Original
user opinions
Clicks
Influenced
user opinions
Figure 5: A twin graph depicting an impact measure.
One way to think about this is that instead of asking whether the agent’s
influence on W is the reason that optimality is achieved (intent), we are asking:
does the constraint of optimality cause W to have a different distribution?
The graphical criterion is as follows.
Theorem 7 (Impact Incentive Criterion). A single-decision CID G admits an
impact incentive on W Ď X if and only if some W P W and utility U P U
are both descendants in G of D.
In past work, it has been proposed to add a penalty term to the objective
of an AI system to reduce the impact on some variable W, called an impact
measure [Armstrong and Levinstein, 2017, Krakovna et al., 2018]. Such pro-
posals can be understood as constraining the size of the impact incentive in
the following sense. Consider an objective like U ` λδpw, w1q that encourages
the AI system to keep W close to some baseline value w1, according to some
distance function δ. This objective will produce the smallest possible impact
incentive, in terms of δ, for a given level of expected ErUs. Graphically, an
impact measure can be illustrated as in figure fig. 5.
In this twin graph,
counterfactual opinions represents the baseline state from which distance is
measured. Then, impact measure is computed as a function of Wπ1 and Wπ.
Adding impact measure as a new child of influenced user opinions makes the
AI care about this delicate variable. Interestingly, this means that if a variable
is impacted by a policy and then an impact measure is applied, there will be
an ICI on that delicate variable — the agent will try to control it, to keep it
close to its baseline value.
Similar identifiability issues arise as in the case of path-specific objectives
discussed in section 5: we are required to know the user’s preferences in some
counterfactual world. In the case of impact measures, it is possible to avoid
this problem by considering the KL divergence between PπpW q and Pπ1pW q,
rather than the distance between Wπpεq and Wπ1pεq.
The interventional
distributions PπpW q can be measured by experiment, which thereby avoids
the counterfactual identifiability problem.
We will now compare and contrast the use cases of path-specific objec-
tives versus impact measures. If one is concerned with an agent intentionally
19

manipulating a variable W, then the agent’s intent is the problem. For exam-
ple, we may worry about a content recommender intentionally altering users
preferences. In this case, the intent (and ICI) may be removed with a path-
specific objective [Farquhar et al., 2022], as shown in fig. 4. This will allow the
variable W to drift from its original value, as a side-effect of AI action, or for
other reasons altogether. For example, users may still discover new interests
that change their preferences, and we may regard this as desirable, so long as
it is not a result of manipulation by the AI. In other cases, we may have in
mind a clear specification for how W should behave, and want to prevent any
drift, intentional or otherwise, from this baseline value. For example, we may
worry that users are led to political extremism, not because of the content
recommender, but rather because of politically-motivated content creators,
and we want our content recommender to actively defend against this by sup-
pressing such content. In this case, an impact measure [Krakovna et al., 2018]
is more appropriate, and will limit impact incentive on users’ preferences.8 It
is important to note that the presence of instrumental control assumptions
can be sensitive to the modelling assumptions used to analyse an agent. For
example, consider an RL agent that uses Q-learning to solve an environment
with two timesteps.9 It is natural to model this Q-learner as a single agent
as in fig. 6a, where D is chosen to optimise the reward R. Then, the future
state s1 satisfies the instrumental control incentive criterion. This matches
our intuition — that RL systems may benefit from shaping their future envi-
ronment. Suppose instead that we regard as an agent the function inside the
Q-learner that chooses d to maximize the Q-function qps, dq :“ ErR | s, ds.
In this model, shown in fig. 6b.10 Then, the decision’s effect on s1 is a mere
side-effect to the task of maximizing qps, dq. Although the instrumental con-
trol incentive is absent, the physical reality of this second scenario is identical
to the first, and so there any harmful influence on s1 may still be finely tuned
to the agent’s objective.
Ideally, we would reduce this sensitivity to modelling assumptions, and we
might hope to achieve this by using more fundamental modelling assumptions,
8One other possible remedy would be “quantilisation” [Taylor, 2016], which seeks a policy
with that is similar a trusted baseline, in terms of a guaranteed upper bound on the Kullback-
Leibler divergence. We may wish to say that quantilisers upper-bound the impact incentives,
on the variable W “ D, where δ is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. However, Kullback-
Leibler divergence is a function of the distribution, Pπpεq rather than particular assignments
Wπpεq, Wπ1pεq. Perhaps this connection could be spelled out by defining impact incentives
in a causal influence diagram (i.e. rung-2) setting, but this matter is left to future work.
9Thanks to Paul Christiano for this example.
10It would also be possible to consider a multi-agent influence diagram [Hammond et al.,
2023] where the Q function is included as a decision, and its goal is a loss function ℓ“ |r´ˆr|,
but we note that the set of variables that satisfy the graphical criterion for an ICI would
not be altered by including this Q variable, along with a utility variable ℓthat is a child of
Q and R.
20

S
S1
D
R
(a) A one-step decision problem
S
S1
D
ˆR
f ˆ
Rps, dq“ErR | s, ds
R
(b) The task of maximizing a Q-function
II
ICI
Figure 6: Two possible representations of a Q-learner solving a one-step decision
problem.
D
S
D1
S1
C
U
Figure 7: The task of opening a combination lock
such as the independent causal mechanism assumption, to ascertain which
variables should be viewed as decisions Kenton et al. [2023, Sec. 4.3]. But
such approaches still are sensitive to which variables are regarded as causal
mechanisms or physical variables, and further research is needed to understand
this dependence.
8
Incentives in a multi-decision setting
There are multiple possible ways that incentive concepts like RI, ICI and II
may be generalized to multi-decision settings. This is because the presence of
an incentive at some decision D may depend on the policy followed at other
decisions. If we want to know the incentives when a model is fully trained,
we could see whether some incentive concept ϕ holds for some or all of the
optimal policies. Alternatively, we may be interested in sub-optimal policies
as well. Both cases are included in the following definition. Note that in the
case of a multi-decision CID, we will denote the decision rule for a particular
decision Di as πi, and the set of decision rules for all other policies as π´i.11
Definition 14 (Multi-decision ϕ-incentive). Let ϕ be a proposition defined on
a single-decision SCIM, and let M be a multi-decision SCIM. There is an A-
11Those familiar with temporal logic in games may notice that this is analogous to the
notion of E-NASH and A-NASH propositions — ones that hold in one or all Nash Equilibria,
respectively [Chatterjee et al., 2010, Wooldridge et al., 2016].
21

(resp. E-) optimal ϕ at the decision Di if for all (resp. there exists some)
π P arg maxπ1 Eπ1rUs, such that ϕ holds in Mπ´i, the single-decision SCIM
obtained by substituting in the decision rules π´i for decisions other than Di
into M.
There is an A- (resp. E-) pre-optimal ϕ at Di if for all (resp. there exists
some) π P Π, such that ϕ holds in Mπ´i, where Π is the set of all policies.
We focus exclusively on cases where ϕ is the presence of a RI, II, or ICI,
in a single-decision SCIM.
For example, consider the task of opening a combination lock (fig. 7).
Assume that the correct combination is c “ p9, 9q. There are two decisions,
d, d1 P t0, . . . , 9u, which are stored in the states s “ d and s1 “ d1, and
that are checked against the combination to output utility of 1 or 0, i.e.
u “ δpcr1s “ s ^ cr2s “ s1q. If D is chosen optimally, i.e. d “ 9, then S1 has
an instrumental control incentive for D1, because it must be set to 9 in order
to obtain u “ 1. In other words, an A-optimal instrumental control incentive
is present. If instead D is set to 8, then D1 lacks any such incentive. So there
is no A-pre-optimal instrumental control incentive.
The fact that the instrumental control incentive is present for all optimal
policies implies that it is also present for one optimal policy, i.e. that an
E-optimal incentive is present, and for one policy altogether, i.e. that an E-
pre-optimal incentive is also present. This is a general rule: the four types of
multi-decision incentive always have this inclusion relation.
Proposition 2. For any ϕ, A-pre-optimal incentive ùñ A-optimal incentive
ùñ E-optimal incentive ùñ E-pre-optimal incentive.
Proof. These implications, from left to right, hold because: i) Optimal policies
are a subset of all policies, ii) any optimal policy is in the set of optimal
policies, and iii) any optimal policy is a policy.
In establishing graphical criteria for these incentive concepts, we can draw
on a helpful equivalence. An E-pre-optimal incentive on Di is equivalent to
compatibility with a single-decision incentive on Di, treating other decisions
as chance variables. To see this, notice that in either case, one can impute
any function to variables other than Di. Since an E-pre-optimal incentive is
the weakest of the four kinds of multi-decision incentive, the single-decision
graphical criteria can be used to rule out any form of multi-decision incentive.
Proposition 3. Let M be a multi-decision SCIM, and obtain M1 by replacing
all decisions except for Di with chance nodes. If the graphical criterion for
single-decision (RI/ICI/II) does not hold in M1, then there is no A- or E-
optimal or pre-optimal multi-decision (RI/ICI/II) in M.
22

Proof. Immediate from proposition 2 and the fact that choosing a set of func-
tions and distributions tfj, P ju for D´i such that Mtfj,P juj‰i satisfies ϕ is
equivalent to choosing a set of deterministic decision rules and distributions
tπj, P ju for D´i such that Mtπj,P juj‰i satisfies ϕ.
9
Related work
Causal influence diagrams
The use of structural functions in a causal
influence diagram goes back to at least the functional influence diagram of
Dawid [2002].
The most similar alternative model is the Howard canoni-
cal form influence diagram [Howard, 1990, Heckerman and Shachter, 1995].
However, this only permits counterfactual reasoning downstream of decisions,
which is inadequate for defining the response incentive. Similarly, the causal-
ity property for influence diagrams introduced by Heckerman and Shachter
[1994] and Shachter and Heckerman [2010] only constrains the relationships
to being partially causal, in that decisions are taken to be causally antecedent
to their descendants (though adding new decision node parents to all nodes
makes the diagram fully causal).
Appendix A shows by example why the
stronger causality property is necessary for most of the newly proposed incen-
tive concepts. Building on this paper, multi-agent SCIMs are formalized in
Hammond et al. [2023], and an open-source Python implementation of CIDs
has been developed [Fox et al., 2021].
Materiality and value of information
The criterion for materiality, The-
orem 9, builds on previous work. The concept of value of information was first
introduced by Howard [1966]. The materiality soundness proof follows previ-
ous proofs [Shachter, 1998, Lauritzen and Nilsson, 2001], while the complete-
ness proof is most similar to an attempted proof by Nielsen and Jensen [1999].
They propose the criterion W M U D | PaD for requisite nodes, which differs
from (1) in the conditioned set. Taken literally,12 their criterion is unsound
for requisite nodes. For example, in fig. 3a, high school is d-separated from
accuracy given PaD, so their criterion would fail to detect that high school is
requisite and admits VoI.13
12Def. 3 defines d-separation for potentially overlapping sets.
13Furthermore, to prove that nodes meeting the d-connectedness property are requisite,
Nielsen and Jensen claim that “X is [requisite] for D if PpdompUq | D, PaDq is a function
of X and U is a utility function relevant for D”. However, U being a function of X only
proves that U is conditionally dependent on X, not that it changes the expected utility, or
is requisite or material. Additional argumentation is needed to show that conditioning on
X can actually change the expected utility; our proof provides such an argument. Since
an earlier version of this paper was placed online [Everitt et al., 2019b], this completeness
result was independently discovered by Zhang et al. [2020, Thm. 2] and Lee and Bareinboim
[2020, Thm. 1]. There has also been further work in generalising this result to the case of
23

To have positive VoC, it is known that a node must be an ancestor of
a utility node [Shachter, 1986], but the authors know of no more specific
criterion. The concept of a relevant node introduced by Nielsen and Jensen
[1999] also bears some resemblance to VoC.
The relation of the current technical results to prior work is summarised
in table 1.
Definition
Criterion
Soundness
Complete-
ness
Mater-
iality
Howard
[1966];
Matheson
[1990]
Fagiuoli and
Zaffalon
[1998];
Lauritzen
and Nilsson
[2001];
Shachter
[2016]
Fagiuoli and
Zaffalon
[1998];
Lauritzen and
Nilsson
[2001];
Shachter
[2016]
First correct
proof to our
knowledge;
see section 9
RI
New
New
New; proved
using
do-calculus
and d-sep
New; proved
construc-
tively
ICI
New
New
New; proved
using
do-calculus
New; proved
construc-
tively
(Positive/
negative)
intent
(Halpern
and
Kleiman-
Weiner
[2018]/new)
(Ward et al.
[2024]/ new)
(Ward et al.
[2024]/ new)
(Ward et al.
[2024]/ new)
II
New
New
New; proved
using
do-calculus
New; proved
construc-
tively
Table 1: Comparison with previous work, in a single-decision setting. The concept
of materiality is well-known. For VoI, a new, corrected proof is provided. For VoC,
the present work offers a new criterion, proving it sound and complete. For response
incentive (RI) and instrumental control incentive (ICI), the criterion and all proofs
are new.
multi-decision influence diagrams, in Van Merwijk et al. [2022], where a sound and complete
criterion is known for a class of influence diagrams said to satisfy “solubility”, also known
as “sufficient recall”.
24

Instrumental control incentives and intent
In a causal setting, Kleiman-
Weiner et al. [2015] offered a notion of intention to influence a variable O. A
different kind of approach was taken by Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner [2018]
and Ward et al. [2024], which offered definitions of intent that are specific to
outcomes O “ o. In particular, Ward et al. [2024] was the first to prove a
graphical criterion for any version of intent. We extend this work by defining
a positive version of intent, rather than just considering negative intent, and
by proving a graphical criterion for this new concept.
AI fairness
Another application of this work is to evaluate when an AI sys-
tem is incentivized to behave unfairly, on some definition of fairness. Response
incentives address this question for counterfactual fairness [Kusner et al., 2017,
Kilbertus et al., 2017]. An incentive criterion corresponding to path-specific
effects [Zhang et al., 2017, Nabi and Shpitser, 2018] has been established by
Ashurst et al. [2022], for the single-decision setting. Nabi et al. [2019] have
shown how a policy may be chosen subject to path-specific effect constraints.
However, they assume recall of all past events, whereas the response incentive
criterion applies to any CID.
Rational Verification
Verification is the task of checking that a program
satisfies specified properties, which is relevant to the present study because we
are proposing to use incentive concepts to check agent behaviour. Typically,
specifications are defined using temporal logic [Emerson, 1990]; sometimes
a probabilistic temporal logic is used [Kwiatkowska et al., 2022].
Of par-
ticular relevance is “rational verification”, which validates the behaviour of
agents that are pursuing objectives [Abate et al., 2021, Gutierrez et al., 2021,
Wooldridge et al., 2016]. Overall, our work aligns with rational verification
in that it aims to verify agent behaviour. The difference is that we have ex-
plored what kinds of properties can be specified in the language of causality
in particular (rather than, for example, a temporal logic). Relatedly, rather
than using a Kripke structure of partially observable Markov decision process
to model an agent-environment interaction, we have used causal models.
Mechanism design
The aim of mechanism design is to understand how
objectives and environments can be designed, in order to shape the behaviour
of rational agents (e.g. Nisan et al., 2007, Part II). At this high level, mecha-
nism design is closely related to the incentive design results we have developed
in this paper. In practice, however, the strands of research look rather differ-
ent. Whereas mechanism design is primarily concerned with defining objective
functions and action spaces that ensure desirable Nash equilibria, our core in-
terest is on defining specifications for safe and fair agent behaviour, and on
the causal structures that ensure that these specifications are satisfied.
25

10
Discussion and conclusion
We have defined three new concepts: response incentives, instrumental control
incentives and impact incentives, and have spelled out the connection between
ICIs and an existing concept, intent. We have proved complete graphical cri-
teria for all four concepts in a single-decision setting.
Moreover, we have
introduced a notion of incentives for influence diagrams with multiple deci-
sions, and proved that the criteria are also sound for those cases. In all cases
we have shown how these definitions have implications for other concepts of
broader interest, such as instrumental goals, counterfactual fairness, and im-
pact measures. We have also shown via toy examples how different existing
approaches might be appropriate to addressing different kinds of problems,
and have outlined circumstances in which each kind of approach is favoured.
These incentive concepts have already seen applications to areas including
value learning [Armstrong et al., 2020], interruptibility [Langlois and Everitt,
2021], conservatism [Cohen et al., 2020], modelling agent frameworks [Everitt
et al., 2019a] and reward tampering [Everitt et al., 2021b].
Let us now outline some limitations of this paper, and what they might
mean for future work.
First, note that to apply these criteria, we require
knowledge of the (causal) structure of the interaction between agent and en-
vironment. Sometimes, experts know these causal relationships even when
they do not know the exact parametric relationships between variables — an
ideal use case for these criteria. In the context of incentive design, such a
scenario may often arise, since these causal relationships often follow directly
from the design choices for an agent and its objective. Sometimes, however,
we may have too little knowledge of the causal structure to be able to apply
the criteria. In other cases, we may have, in a sense, too much knowledge
for the graphical criteria to be useful. With abundant experimental data, we
might compute safety and fairness properties (such as counterfactual fairness)
directly, removing any need for the incentive concepts and graphical criteria.
A fourth scenario is that the world is not even describable by a fixed graphical
model, but rather it is better understood using a probability tree, or relatedly,
as an extensive form game. These limitations suggest possible avenues for fu-
ture work. To enlarge the set of cases in which incentives can be evaluated, it
may be possible to devise ways of combining experimental data with a priori
knowledge to arrive at an evaluation. To deal with extensive form games,
it may be possible to devise graphical criteria for probability tree and game
trees.
Another limitation of graphical criteria is that they can only offer a defini-
tive resolution in one direction. Also, although they can rule out incentives
definitively, they can only rule that the presence of an incentive is compat-
ible with the graphical structure. It is still yet to be established how often
incentives are present when they are compatible with the graph. This might
26

be proved using measure theoretic arguments resembling the arguments that
d-connection almost always implies conditional dependence [Meek, 1995]. Re-
latedly, their output says nothing of the strength of incentive present, which
can only be established using detailed knowledge of the strength of causal
relationships present in the environment, rather than just their presence or
absence.
Finally, it would be possible to improve the applicability of these graphical
criteria by extending them to multi-agent settings. So far, we have considered
single-agent settings, where the world is divided into agent and environment.
If instead part of the environment was modelled as a rival agent, and we
assume Nash Equilibrium policy profiles, then this would place additional
constraints on how that part of the environment may behave. So, in some
cases where single-agent criteria cannot rule out an incentive, a multi-agent
criterion should be able to rule out that incentive. On the other hand, if it
is known that another player will observe and respond strategically to one’s
policy, then this could mean that policies could influence one another via
pathways that are not visible in the original causal graph, which could mean
that multi-agent incentives might arise, when the criteria for a single-agent
setting would have ruled them impossible. Some groundwork has been laid
by [Hammond et al., 2023], which formalizes multi-agent influence diagrams,
but a full analysis of the multi-agent setting is left to future work.
27
