Autonomic Resource Management in Virtual Networks  
 
Rashid Mijumbi, Juan-Luis Gorricho and Joan Serrat 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 
08034 Barcelona, Spain 
 
 
Abstract — Virtualization enables the building of multiple virtual 
networks over a shared substrate. One of the challenges to 
virtualisation is efficient resource allocation. This problem has 
been found to be NP hard. Therefore, most approaches to it have 
not only proposed static solutions, but have also made many 
assumptions to simplify it. In this paper, we propose a 
distributed, autonomic and artificial intelligence based solution 
to resource allocation. Our aim is to obtain self-configuring, self-
optimizing, self-healing and context aware virtual networks.  
 
Keywords — Virtual Networks, Resource Allocation, Autonomic 
Systems, Artificial Intelligence, Context Awareness. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
 
The Internet has advanced to such levels that its users are 
no longer only concerned with being able to communicate, but 
also by the quality and cost of this service. Achieving such 
user demands requires a specialization of resources and 
protocol stacks on the side of service providers. However, it 
would be economically unfeasible for each service provider to 
deploy independent infrastructures for every service or 
business context. Virtualization allows for a given network 
infrastructure to be shared by many service providers. 
Resource Allocation is one of the main concerns in 
virtualisation [1]. Most approaches to this problem assume 
that all virtual network requirements are known in advance, 
and do not consider changes in network conditions, which 
makes them inefficient [2]. While some solutions such as [2] 
[3] [4] consider dynamic changes in the network, these 
approaches do not consider the node assignment problem [1]. 
We propose a distributed and autonomic [5] approach that 
is based on artificial intelligence [6]. Our idea is to use 
distributed artificial intelligence to make the virtual networks 
self-configuring, self-optimizing, self-healing and context 
aware. We propose to represent each network by an intelligent 
agent [7] and use Reinforcement Learning [8] to improve long 
term decision making capabilities and hence efficiency. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Sections II, 
III and IV present the main concepts related to the subject of 
our proposal, as well as a justification of our choice for this 
kind of solution. We present the related works in section V. 
Section VI explains the solution proposed in this paper, as 
well the scenarios that can develop from our proposed 
solution. We present future work and conclusions in sections 
VII and VIII respectively. 
 
II. NETWORK VIRTUALIZATION 
 
Network virtualization is currently a subject of many 
research teams and has been proposed as a new technique to 
allow for the de-ossification of the current Internet and also 
facilitate new service deployment [9]. In a network 
virtualization environment, multiple service providers are able 
to create heterogeneous virtual networks (VNs) to offer 
customized end-to-end services to the end-users by leasing 
shared resources from one or more infrastructure providers 
(InPs) without significant investment in physical infrastructure 
[10]. Fig. 1, shows a representation of two virtual networks 
sharing resources from a single substrate network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Network Virtualisation 
 
 
Substrate Node 
 
Substrate Links 
Virtual Node 
 
Virtual links 
Subscribers 
 
Resource Hosts 

Autonomous 
System
Self‐
Configuring
Self‐
Protecting
Self‐
Optimizing
Self‐
Healing
Environment
Agent
III.    AUTONOMIC SYSTEMS 
 
Due to the growing complexity of systems, the concept of 
Autonomous systems [5] has recently received growing 
interest from both industry and Academia. The idea is to 
always let a given system take care of its requirements with 
minimal human intervention. As defined by [5], the term 
“autonomic” comes from an analogy to the autonomic central 
nervous system in the human body, which adjusts to many 
situations automatically without any external help. According 
to [5], an autonomous system should posses the different self-
CHOP characteristics, which are: self-Configuring – ability to 
adapt to changes in the system, self-Healing – ability to 
recover from detected errors, self-Optimizing – ability to 
improve use of resources and self-Protecting – ability to 
anticipate and cure intrusions. We show these characteristics 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Attributes of an Autonomous System 
 
For a system to be autonomous, the actors involved should 
be able to manage themselves, while at the same time 
communicating in order to manage each other. An important 
aspect of such systems is that while each of them can take its 
own decisions, they should cooperate and coordinate at a 
higher level so as to achieve overall system goals and/or 
policies. 
IV.  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) [6] has been defined differently 
by different authors. For purposes of this paper, we define AI 
according to [11], as “the branch of computer science that is 
concerned with the automation of intelligent behaviour”.  
In order to tackle the resource allocation problem, an 
interesting approach comes from Markov process [12] 
modeling commonly used in AI. In fact, we could achieve 
more accurate modeling by using Markov Decision Processes 
(MDPs) in which case we influence how the system makes 
decisions in transiting from a given state to another. In this 
case, the aim is always to establish a policy for system 
transition from one state to another. One alternative for 
learning a policy, also considered one of the main research 
branches within AI, is the reinforcement learning technique. 
 
A. Reinforcement Learning 
 
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a part of Artificial 
Intelligence in which an agent is situated in an environment 
and is entrusted with taking autonomous decisions so as to 
maximize the reward it gets from the environment [8]. RL is a 
feedback based approach where an agent receives an 
immediate reward for its previous action, and from there on, it 
will try to learn a better policy for the long run, in order to 
maximize a given utility function. Therefore, the agent's goal 
– roughly speaking – is to maximize the total amount of 
reward it receives in the long run [8]. 
Fig. 3 shows an interaction between an agent and an 
environment in a typical Reinforcement Learning situation. 
The Agent while in a given state st performs action at and gets 
a reward rt from the environment. Reinforcement learning 
methods specify how the agent changes its policy as a result 
of its experience.  
 
Fig. 3: Agent – Environment interactions in Reinforcement Learning 
Reinforcement Learning has been proposed [13] for a 
resource allocation problem with capacity constraints, while 
[14] has used a Reinforcement Learning approach to solve a 
problem that is characterised as NP hard. In each case, 
improvements have been reported as compared to previous 
solutions. 
 
B. Multi-Agent Systems 
 
A multi-agent system (MAS) can be defined as a group of 
autonomous, 
interacting 
entities 
sharing 
a 
common 
environment, which they perceive with sensors and upon 
which they act with actuators [15]. Depending on the 
application, the interaction between the agents in a MAS can 
either be cooperative or competitive.  
MASs have – for some time now – been a subject of 
research for applications in fields which require autonomous 
and intelligent behaviour such as Robotics, distributed control 
and telecommunications [7]. Multi-agent systems are ideal for 
problems 
that 
require 
autonomous 
decision 
making 
capabilities [16]. 
,
t
Action a
, t
State s
Reward, tr

V.    RELATED WORK 
 
The resource allocation problem is NP hard [10]. 
Therefore, it has been addressed mainly using heuristic 
solutions. While heuristics and meta-heuristics are useful for 
very large instances of the problem, it should be noted that 
there are still challenging issues in distribution, survivability 
and cooperation that must be considered in these kinds of 
problems [9].  
 [10], [17] and [18] present static solutions to resource 
allocation, in a way that they assume that all the requests of 
the different virtual networks are known in advance. 
[19] proposes path splitting and migration to improve 
virtual network resource allocation. However, the authors 
assume that resource requests can be delayed for some time. 
[20] presents a solution which is “partially” dynamic as it only 
allows for reconfiguration of the most critical virtual networks 
or services. It also assumes infinite capacity of substrate nodes 
and links so as to avoid the effects of rejected requests from 
virtual networks. [21] proposes a re-optimization solution that 
can be considered dynamic. However, the solution is reactive, 
in a way that re-optimization is only carried out after 
rejections. 
[22] proposes a distributed resource management approach 
but restricts the network topology. [23] proposes a framework 
and algorithm that aims to reduce resource contention by 
reducing the loading of the links. However, the solution is also 
based on a specific network topology, does not consider 
changes in customer and network conditions and the 
allocation mechanism is based on central server decisions. 
[24] also considers a specific virtual network topology. 
Artificial intelligence techniques have been proposed by 
[25] for the design of an efficient, dynamic and autonomic 
network management system. In particular, multi-agent 
systems are rapidly finding applications in a variety of 
domains, 
including 
robotics, 
distributed 
control, 
telecommunications, and economics [15].  [26] proposes a 
multi-agent 
based 
approach 
to 
autonomic 
resource 
management, while [13] proposes reinforcement learning for 
dynamic resource allocation in a telecommunication network.  
The solutions above make simplifying assumptions such as 
unbounded network resources or a fixed topology, and most 
are static. None of the solutions provides an autonomic 
resource allocation solution which is self-configuring, self-
optimizing, self-healing and context aware. 
VI. PROPOSED SOLUTION 
 
To face the complexity of the problem we are faced with, 
we propose to decentralize the solution such that the virtual as 
well as substrate networks are represented by intelligent 
agents. Specifically, we propose that the agents use RL for 
resources allocation.  
 
 
A. Scenario-based Approach 
 
 
Our approach to the resource allocation problem is to develop 
a solution that is initially based on specific scenarios, and later 
on extended to general contexts. In Fig. 4, we present a 
problem case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Virtual Network Environment Proposed Framework 
In our solution scenario, the physical nodes and links have 
limited capacities such as CPU capacity and link bandwidth, 
and the all the agents know these constraints.  
Each virtual network agent (VNA) always has information 
on the loadings of the substrate network, which is supplied by 
the substrate network agent (SNA). The objective of SNA is 
to minimise the number of virtual network requests rejected, 
and ensure that based on traffic, the links and nodes have 
balanced loads. On the other hand, the objective of each VNA 
is to minimise the costs they incur (resulting from use of SN 
resources), while at the same time ensuring satisfaction of 
their users. The agents can communicate amongst themselves, 
and can carry out negotiations. 
Users send requests for service to the virtual networks. The 
users, in their requests specify the nature of service required 
(which will in effect determine the final destination) as well as 
bandwidth requirements. 
 
With the above features in consideration, we now present 
some of the cases that can result from our model: 
 
 
I) 
Self-Configuration: As users make requests for 
resources, VNAs continuously evaluate their network 
topologies to establish if they could do better considering the 
status of the substrate network. Whenever they find 
possibilities for optimization, they can make requests for this 
to the SNA. VNAs can also negotiate and cooperate amongst 
themselves so as to agree on the usage of substrate resources 
and achieve the best utility both on individual and system 
levels 
II) 
Self-Optimization: As the conditions of the substrate 
network change, SNA should exhibit proactive as well as 
reactive characteristics. For example, if a physical node and/or 
link is added to the network, or if their capacities are changed, 
SNA should re-evaluate the network loadings to establish 
possibilities for re-allocation of resources. While this would 
ideally not require any action on the part of the VNAs, in our 
solution we require that these agents always look out for 
possibilities of optimizing their resource usage whenever there 
are changes to the substrate network.  

III) 
Self-Healing: If for any reason a node and/or link 
becomes un available, SNA – in collaboration with VNAs – 
should make decisions so as to cause the minimal possible 
disruptions in customer services. This situation is different 
from II) in a way that while self-optimization is mainly aimed 
at optimizing costs, and possible improvements in customer 
service levels, self-healing is much more urgent as in such 
cases there are possibilities of violating agreements with 
customers. Therefore, if the VNAs have to cooperate and/or 
negotiate in one of these two cases, an agent will adjust its 
objectives considering the possible conflict between utility 
optimisation and customer satisfaction. 
 
IV) 
Context Awareness: Whenever users are connected to 
the network, they will send periodic updates about their 
location. Based on these locations, VNAs will determine not 
only the exact location of the customer, but may also reason 
about the actual state of the user, for example; the agent can 
know if a user is walking, driving or stationary. Based on this 
context information, the virtual network may take decisions 
about the resources being used by the user. For example, a 
user whose location is near a Wi-Fi hot spot AND this user is 
stationary AND this user is occupying a high bandwidth – say 
for a video on demand service – could be offloaded to the Wi-
Fi and if there are necessary changes to the nodes for this 
specific customer, these changes can be effected by SNA. 
VII. 
FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a work in progress. Over the course of 
this work, we will propose a resource allocation algorithm 
based on reinforcement learning, as well as a negotiation 
protocol based on network and user context to allow for the 
coordinated and profitable use of substrate network resources. 
We will also propose a RL based utility model on the basis 
of which intelligent agents that represent the different network 
owners make autonomous decisions aimed at efficient and 
optimal resource allocation. To allow for reasoning and hence 
intelligent decision making, a representation of the different 
instances of our model will also be proposed. To this end, if 
we deem it necessary, an ontology representing these 
instances will be proposed. Lastly, we will carry out 
simulations to prove our concept. 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed an autonomic and 
distributed solution to virtual network resource management. 
We have proposed that each virtual network can be 
represented by an intelligent each with individual objectives, 
and that these agents can cooperate with each other so as to 
achieve overall system objectives. In order to solve the space 
and time complexities that are associated with this problem, 
we have proposed a reinforcement learning approach such that 
the agents learn to perform better over time. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This work has been started within the project TEC2009-14598-C02-02 
granted by the MEC Spanish Ministry and partially funded with FEDER 
funding. We also want to acknowledge the EVANS EU project funded under 
contract PIRSES-GA-2010-269323.
