arXiv:2001.05462v1  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2020
OFFLINE GRID-BASED COVERAGE PATH PLANNING FOR
GUARDS IN GAMES
A PREPRINT
Wael Al Enezi
Department of Computer Science
McGill University
Montréal, Canada

Clark Verbrugge
Department of Computer Science
McGill University
Montréal, Canada

January 16, 2020
ABSTRACT
Algorithmic approaches to exhaustive coverage have application in video games, enabling automatic
game level exploration. Current designs use simple heuristics that frequently result in poor perfor-
mance or exhibit unnatural behaviour. In this paper, we introduce a novel algorithm for covering a
2D polygonal (with holes) area. We assume prior knowledge of the map layout and use a grid-based
world representation. Experimental analysis over several scenarios ranging from simple layouts to
more complex maps used in actual games show good performance. This work serves as an initial
step towards building a more efﬁcient coverage path planning algorithm for non-player characters.
Keywords Path-planning · Coverage · More
1
Introduction
Coverage path planning (CPP) is the process of planning a path for an agent that traverses across all areas of a speciﬁc
location. One of the most challenging aspects of this problem is to optimize the planned path of the agent to cover the
area of interest [1]. CPP can be categorized into two types: off-line or online [2]. In off-line coverage, the environment
layout is known to the agent, while in on-line coverage the agent has no prior knowledge of the environment. This
problem can be approached by several methods. In this paper we use a grid-based approach to implement a novel
algorithm to cover an area of interest. Our algorithm is easy to implement, but also guaranteed to solve any area of
interest. The algorithm does not guarantee an optimal solution, but it provides the basis for extending the coverage to
multiple agents without additional complexity.
In the next section we introduce the related work in the ﬁeld of coverage path planning, then we describe the method-
ology of our work. After that, we describe the results the algorithm achieved on selected scenarios. Lastly, we draw
our conclusions and future work.
2
Related Work
Coverage path planning has been well studied in the ﬁeld of robotics for a wide variety of applications, such as
vacuum cleaning robots [3], lawnmowers [4], unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) surveillance [5], etc. The literature
includes several methods for CPP, but the methods heavily depend on the representation of the space, either relying on
continuous space representations, such as using convexity, or on discrete, grid-based models.
Convex Decomposition
decomposes the traversable space into simple, non-overlapping convex regions. After the
decomposition, solving the problem of coverage path planning relies on ﬁnding the shortest path to visit these regions
along with the coverage pattern for each region. Examples of appropriate coverage patterns are zigzag [6], spiral

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 16, 2020
[7]. Once the space has been decomposed into convex sub-regions, an adjacency graph can be used to represent the
decomposed space. In the graph, the nodes are the convex regions and the edges between the nodes represent the
adjacency between the convex regions. The agent uses this graph to plan the shortest path to traverse all convex
regions and recursively the shortest coverage pattern for each region.
Grid-Based
approaches decompose the space into a grid of uniformly distributed nodes [8]. Each node can be
traversable or non-traversable. In this representation, CPP is accomplished by traversing all reachable nodes, associat-
ing either a binary or probabilistic [9] property to coverage. Grid-based methods are resolution-dependent, and their
completeness relies on the granularity of the grid. Grid-based representation is one of the simplest methods to use.
However, for larger spaces, this method becomes computationally expensive compared to other methods [10].
3
Methodology
In this section, we describe the space representation method chosen for our algorithm. After that, we explain how our
algorithm accomplishes coverage path planning to an area of interest.
3.1
Space Representation
For our method, we use a 2D grid-based representation; The space is discretized into a grid of nodes, and each node has
three possible states: untraversable, seen and unseen. The grid connectivity is based on von Neumann neighborhood
where the agent moves by taking a step to the adjacent nodes in four directions; up, down, left and right. The agent’s
ﬁeld of view is represented by a cone with a limited range and angle; other FoV models are also possible. Once
an unseen node falls within the vision cone that node becomes seen. The condition to consider a scenario to be
successfully ﬁnished is when all the traversable nodes are seen. Figure 1 shows an example of the simulation.
Figure 1: An example of the simulation. The map is taken from the game “Metal Gear Solid”. The darkest nodes are
unseen traversable nodes. Once an unseen node is seen it becomes transparent. The lighter nodes are untraversable.
The number on the center indicates the percentage of unseen nodes.
3.2
RippleFront Algorithm
For our approach, we based our implementation on the WaveFront coverage algorithm [11]. We refer to it as the
“RippleFront algorithm.” It works by propagating the distance from the unseen nodes through the seen nodes. The
propagation procedure is constantly executed every ﬁxed time interval.
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code for the RippleFront where N is the list of nodes in the grid, D(n) is the Manhattan
distance to the closest unseen node. At every iteration, D(n) is updated by assigning the Min(D(l)) where l is an
adjacent to n. D(n) value will be updated by adding the value of D(ni) + 1, where ni is the neighbor node with the
shortest distance from the closest unseen node. The added 1 is the step cost from n to ni.
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 16, 2020
Algorithm 1 RippleFront Algorithm
Require: N, the list of nodes in the grid.
1: Initialize D(n) = 0, for all n ∈N
2: repeat
3:
for each n ∈N do
4:
if IsSeen(n) then
5:
do ←D(n)
6:
D(n) ←GetMinDistanceT oUnseenInNeighbourhood(n)
7:
if do! = D(n) + 1 then
8:
D(n) ←D(n) + 1
9:
end if
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
13: until All Seen
The RippleFront focuses on creating an overall road map that makes it trivial for the agent to decide the direction
of its next step to discover unseen locations. However, the coverage path is not guaranteed to be optimal due to the
greedy decision process the agent adopts, which is simply to face and step towards the node closest to an unseen node.
Nevertheless, this approach provides a guarantee to solve the map.
4
Results
We ran our simulation using Unity3D game engine 1. We tested the algorithm on 4 scenarios with different complex-
ities. Figure 2 shows the layout of the maps used for our simulations. The maps have different complexities but they
all have the same grid size.
(a) Square
(b) Passage ways
(c) Metal Gear Solid Docks
(d) King Snurre’s Hall
Figure 2: Maps used for the simulation.
To measure the agent’s performance, we used the number of steps the agent required to cover a map. The length of
a step is the distance between two adjacent nodes, vertically or horizontally. To assess the overall performance, We
logged the total steps the agent took for each episode and ran 200 episodes for each scenario. For every episode the
1www.unity.com
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 16, 2020
agent had a random starting position and tasked with covering the overall map. Figure 3 shows the performance of
our algorithm on the 4 scenarios. While all scenarios have the same grid size, each scenario has a different number of
traversable nodes. This led to the difference in performance between these scenarios.
Figure 3: The performance for 200 episodes for each of the 4 scenarios.
5
Conclusions & Future work
In this paper, we introduced a novel ofﬂine grid-based algorithm for coverage path planning. Our algorithm is simple
to implement and guaranteed to solve any scenario. This is of course preliminary work. Our future goals include
conducting performance comparisons with other, existing algorithms or heuristics, considering computation time as
well as number of steps. We are also interested in extending the design to the context of multiple agents, where
communicating agents cooperate to perform concurrent coverage.
6
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Natural Science and Engi-neering Research Council of Canada, Computing Hardware
for Emerging Intelligent Sensing Applications (COHESA).
