Towards Multifaceted Human-Centered AI
Sajjadur Rahman, Hannah Kim, Dan Zhang, Estevam Hruschka, Eser Kandogan
Megagon Labs

Abstract
Human-centered AI workﬂows involve stakeholders with multiple roles interacting
with each other and automated agents to accomplish diverse tasks. In this paper,
we call for a holistic view when designing support mechanisms, such as interaction
paradigms, interfaces, and systems, for these multifaceted workﬂows.
1
Introduction
Human-centered AI (HCAI) research focuses on various aspects: analyzing practitioners’ work
practices along dimensions such as collaboration [6, 29], explainability [21], and trust [14]; conceptu-
alizing speciﬁc workﬂows to inform design guidelines [11, 13, 16, 17, 24]; and developing supporting
tools and frameworks [1, 20, 28]. HCAI workﬂows are multi-faceted, wherein stakeholders with
different roles — e.g., product managers, subject matter experts, and data scientists — perform
diverse tasks in various phases using different tools. Multiple roles introduce challenges related to
collaboration among stakeholders and interaction with tools. The iterative workﬂows necessitate
ﬁne-grained provenance management [20]. The scope and diversity of domains (e.g., NLP, ML,
Vision) introduce challenges related to the modeling of domain semantics. To this end, we propose a
holistic design that employs plastic interfaces to enable seamless interactions, integrated workﬂows
for ease of task completion, and a graph-based system for managing workﬂows and provenance.
Figure 1: Multifaceted Human-centered AI (M-HCAI) conceptual diagram.
2
M-HCAI Challenges
Figure 1 depicts the conceptual diagram of M-HCAI with various workﬂow components and system
requirements. A workﬂow is iterative with transitions among phases (a). However, a ﬁne-grained
characterization, proposed by Rahman et al. [17], reveals the iterative nature of a phase with stake-
holders performing diverse tasks (c). Stakeholders may interact with different tools and interfaces
depending on their task requirement, familiarity, and expertise (d) [20, 27]. Stakeholders with differ-
ent roles collaborate in various phases within the workﬂow both synchronously (in-person and virtual

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
arXiv:2301.03656v1  [cs.DB]  9 Jan 2023

Such complexity of an MHCAI workﬂow introduces several challenges. First, iteration: iterative
workﬂows often force the users to switch multiple tools tediously, often within a single phase [3, 17,
20]. Second, interface rigidity: existing tools lack the plasticity to accommodate diverse roles and
expertise as stakeholders ideate and deliberate [5, 14]. Third, non-standardized collaboration: as
stakeholders collaborate, there may be conﬂict and misunderstanding [25, 26]. However, there is
a lack of standardization around documentation to record these discussions [10, 19, 29]. Finally,
domain diversity: when we factor in diverse domains within the HCAI setting such as text [4, 20],
image, graphs, and tables [15], the lack of formal abstractions and grammar makes it difﬁcult to
deﬁne and instrument operations in the interfaces systematically.
Another aspect lacking from the HCAI discourse is the management of complicated workﬂows, which
necessitate robust system design. Zhang et al. [29] identiﬁed lack of provenance as a contributing
factor in obfuscation and loss of knowledge when data science teams share data. Rahman et
al. [17] advocate for instrumenting provenance management mechanisms as built-in features of
systems. Kandogan et al. [7] highlight how existing systems fail to connect and exploit context across
stakeholders and agents due to a lack of initiative in modeling data, people, and interactions.
3
Multifaceted Human-centered AI: A Holistic View
We posit that the workﬂow- and system-level challenges are interdependent. Capturing the provenance
of interactions and decisions within the workﬂow requires provenance-aware interfaces with built-in
logging capabilities. For the underlying system to effectively persist and catalog the provenance
information, the interactions deﬁned on the interfaces need grounding on sound principles. Such
principled design requires (a) building abstractions to capture domain semantics (e.g., texts contain
words, sentences, POS tags, and opinions), (b) deﬁning operators that represent interactions over
those abstractions in an interface (similar to the grammar of interaction graphics [22]), and (c) explicit
modeling of stakeholder roles. Finally, managing these human-centered iterative workﬂows requires
developing frameworks that enable the integration of tools and enhance interface scalability [2, 18].
In response, we propose the following design considerations for M-HCAI:
An integrated workﬂow supporting multiple paradigms. Avoiding the context switching overhead
during iteration requires integrating different modalities: programming environments and interactive
interfaces (e.g., spreadsheets and visualization tools.) Computational notebooks are suitable for such
integration where programming can be complemented by introducing interactive widgets [8, 28].
However, notebooks are not suitable for non-programmers involved in the HCAI process. Moreover,
these tools neither manage the ﬁne-grained provenance of user interactions nor support versioning.
Therefore, research efforts for bridging these gaps are crucial for the holistic M-HCAI system design.
Plastic interfaces as the basis for interaction. The multi-role inclusion challenge with computa-
tional notebooks can be addressed by developing custom interfaces that may act as boundary objects
for the stakeholders. Boundary objects are artifacts that are “both plastic enough to adapt to local
needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a
common identity across site” [9, 23]. Recent work introduces cross-platform capabilities to transform
interactive widgets in notebooks into web dashboards that enable shared understanding among stake-
holders within an organizational workﬂow [1]. However, these widgets are not provenance-aware,
and the corresponding interactions are domain semantics agnostic. Therefore, further augmentation
is required to employ these interfaces to operate in concert with the underlying system.
Systems for supporting M-HCAI. Interactions among automated agents and stakeholders of dif-
ferent expertise and roles may occur at any phase. Therefore, the context (where and when a task
or interaction occurred), scope (speciﬁc data domain and phase), and abstractions of interactions
will vary depending on the scenario. To this end, knowledge graphs [12] (KGs) may serve as the
core data model for the support systems managing M-HCAI workﬂows. KGs can explicitly capture
diverse stakeholder roles and automated agents, different interaction types, and the corresponding
context [7]. Existing work deﬁne grammars to capture operations for text [4, 20], and tabular data
analysis [15]. Capturing domain-speciﬁc interaction contexts such as operations and data types would
require deﬁning such abstractions for M-HCAI.
In this position paper, we draw attention to the multi-faceted nature of HCAI while identifying
workﬂow and system-level challenges. We propose a research agenda that requires multi-disciplinary
research efforts spanning databases, AI, visualization, and HCI.
2
