Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models
for High-dimensional Causal Inference
Md Musfiqur Rahman 1 Murat Kocaoglu 1
Abstract
Sound and complete algorithms have been pro-
posed to compute identifiable causal queries using
the causal structure and data. However, most of
these algorithms assume accurate estimation of
the data distribution, which is impractical for high-
dimensional variables such as images. On the
other hand, modern deep generative architectures
can be trained to sample from high-dimensional
distributions. However, training these networks
are typically very costly. Thus, it is desirable
to leverage pre-trained models to answer causal
queries using such high-dimensional data. To ad-
dress this, we propose modular training of deep
causal generative models that not only makes
learning more efficient, but also allows us to uti-
lize large, pre-trained conditional generative mod-
els. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm,
Modular-DCM is the first algorithm that, given
the causal structure, uses adversarial training to
learn the network weights, and can make use of
pre-trained models to provably sample from any
identifiable causal query in the presence of la-
tent confounders. With extensive experiments
on the Colored-MNIST dataset, we demonstrate
that our algorithm outperforms the baselines. We
also show our algorithm’s convergence on the
COVIDx dataset and its utility with a causal in-
variant prediction problem on CelebA-HQ.
1. Introduction
Evaluating the causal effect of an intervention on a system
of interest is one of the fundamental questions that arise
across disciplines. Pearl’s structural causal models (SCMs)
1School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue Uni-
versity, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Md Mus-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
Covid-19
Symptom (C)
Chest
X-ray(X)
Pneumonia
Diagnosis (N)
Hospital
Location
(a) Causal graph
N
C
X
nC ∼N(0, 1)
nX ∼N(0, 1)
nN ∼N(0, 1)
UCN ∼N(0, 1) (Represents the confounder)
+
+
+
GC(nC, UCN)
GN(X, nN, UCN)
GX(C, nX)
(b) Deep Causal Generative Model
Figure 1. Causal graph for the XrayImg example (top) and its
deep causal generative model (bottom). For each variable, an NN
(GC, GX, GN) is trained to mimic the true mechanism.
provide a principled approach to answering such queries
from data. Using SCMs, today we have a clear understand-
ing of which causal queries can be answered from data,
and which cannot without further assumptions (Pearl, 1995;
Shpitser & Pearl, 2008; Huang & Valtorta, 2012; Barein-
boim & Pearl, 2012b). These identification algorithms find
a closed-form expression for an interventional distribution
using only observational data, by making use of the causal
structure via do-calculus rules (Pearl, 1995). Today, most
of our datasets contain high-dimensional variables, such
as images. Modern deep learning architectures can handle
high-dimensional data and solve non-causal machine learn-
ing problems such as classification, detection or generation.
The existing causal inference algorithms can answer any
identifiable causal question, but they cannot handle high-
dimensional variables as they require access to the joint
distribution, which is not practical with image data.
As an example, consider a healthcare dataset of Covid symp-
toms (C), Pneumonia diagnosis (N) and chest X-rays (X)
of patients from hospitals in two cities with different socio-
economic status, which we do not observe to ensure patient
privacy. Then, hospital location acts as a latent confounder
for both C and N since it might have effect on how likely pa-
1
arXiv:2401.01426v2  [cs.LG]  27 Oct 2024

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
tients are getting sick on average and if they have access to
better trained doctors. In this scenario, the data-generating
process can be summarized by the causal graph in Figure 1.
We would like to understand how likely an average person
across the two cities is to be diagnosed with pneumonia if
they have Covid symptoms, i.e., the causal effect of Covid
symptoms on pneumonia diagnosis, PC(N). The causal
effect can be computed from the observational distribution
as
R
x,c′ p(x|c)p(n|x, c′)p(c′) through the front-door adjust-
ment (Pearl, 2009). However, it is not possible to reliably es-
timate P(x|c) or marginalize over all possible XrayImage
due to its high dimensionality. To the best of our knowledge,
no existing algorithm can address this problem.
Although the use of such structured deep generative mod-
els has been explored recently, existing solutions either
assume no unobserved confounders (Kocaoglu et al., 2018;
Pawlowski et al., 2020), consider specific graphs (Louizos
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021) or are effective for low-
dimensional variables (Xia et al., 2021; 2023) due to the
challenge of learning high-dimensional joint distribution.
Furthermore, these methods do not have the flexibility to
use pre-trained models without affecting their weights. This
is useful since state-of-the-art deep models, such as large
image generators, can only be successfully trained by a few
industrial research labs with expensive resources.
In this paper, we propose a modular, sampling-based solu-
tion to address the high-dimensionality challenge the exist-
ing algorithms face while learning deep causal generative
models. Our solution uses deep learning architectures that
mimic the causal structure of the system such as in Figure
1b. We offer efficient and flexible training facilitated by
our key contribution: the ability to identify which parts
of the deep causal generative models can be trained sepa-
rately (such as {GX} in Figure 1b), and which parts should
be trained together ({GS, GD}). We show that after this
modularization, there is a correct training order for each
sub-network (ex:{GX} →{GS, GD}). Our algorithm fol-
lows such an order to train the sub-networks while freezing
weights of already trained ones in the previous steps. After
training, our method can be used to obtain samples from the
interventional distribution (ex: PC(N)), which is implicitly
modeled. Thus the modularity in our method enables the
flexibility to plug in pre-trained generative networks, and
paves the way to utilize large pre-trained models for causal
inference. The following are our main contributions.
• We propose an adversarial learning algorithm for
training deep causal generative models with latent
confounders for high-dimensional variables.
We
show that, after convergence, our model can produce
high-dimensional samples according to interventional
queries that are identifiable from the data distributions.
• To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first algorithm
that can modularize the training process in the pres-
ence of latent confounders while preserving their the-
oretical guarantees, thereby enabling the use of large
pre-trained models for causal effect estimation.
• With extensive experiments on Colored-MNIST, we
demonstrate that Modular-DCM converges better com-
pared to the closest baselines and can correctly gen-
erate interventional samples. We also show our con-
vergence on COVIDx CXR-3 and solve an invariant
prediciton problem on CelebA-HQ.
2. Related Works
In recent years, a variety of neural causal methods have
been developed in the literature to answer interventional
queries (Gao et al., 2022; Jerzak et al., 2022; Dash et al.,
2022; Qin et al., 2021; Castro et al., 2020). Shalit et al.
(2017); Louizos et al. (2017); Nemirovsky et al. (2020) offer
to solve the causal inference problem using deep generative
models. Yet, they do not offer theoretical guarantees of
causal estimation in general, but for some special cases.
Researchers have recently focused on imposing causal struc-
tures within neural network architectures. Particularly, Ko-
caoglu et al. (2018) introduced a deep causal model that
produces interventional image samples after training on
observational data. Chao et al. (2023) offer similar contri-
bution with diffusion-based (Song et al., 2020) approaches.
Pawlowski et al. (2020); Ribeiro et al. (2023) apply normal-
izing flows and variational inference to predict exogenous
noise for counterfactual inference. Dash et al. (2022) use
an encoder and a generator to produce counterfactual im-
ages in order to train a fair classifier. A major limitation
of these works is the causal sufficiency assumption, i.e.,
each variable is caused by independent unobserved vari-
ables. Semi-Markovian models (Tian et al., 2006) which
allow unobserved confounders affect pairs is more practical.
For semi-Markovian models, Xia et al. (2021); Bal-
azadeh Meresht et al. (2022); Xia et al. (2023) follow a
similar approach as Kocaoglu et al. (2018) to arrange neural
models as a causal graph. They propose a minimization-
maximization method to identify and estimate causal effects.
Xia et al. (2023) extend these to identify and estimate coun-
terfactual queries.
Most of the existing methods described above can handle
only discrete or low-dimensional (Bica et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2021) variables and it is not clear how to extend
their results to continuous high-dimensional image data.
Moreover, if these methods are given a pre-trained neural
network model, they do not have the ability to incorporate
them in their training. To the best of our knowledge, our
approach is the first to address this problem in the presence
of unobserved confounders, unlocking the potential of large
2

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
pre-trained models for causal inference.
3. Background
Definition 3.1 (Structural causal model (SCM) (Pearl,
2009)). An SCM M is a 5-tuple M = (V, N, U, F, P(.)),
where each observed variable Vi ∈V is realized as an eval-
uation of the function fi ∈F which looks at a subset of
the remaining observed variables Pai ⊂V, an unobserved
exogenous noise variable Ei ∈N, and an unobserved con-
founding (latent) variable Ui ∈U. P(.) is a product joint
distribution over all unobserved variables N ∪U.
Each SCM induces a directed graph called the causal graph,
or acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG) with V as the
vertex set. The directed edges are determined by which
variables directly affect which other variable by appearing
explicitly in that variable’s function. Thus the causal graph
is G = (V, E) where Vi →Vj iff Vi ∈Paj. The set Paj
is called the parent set of Vj. We assume this directed graph
is acyclic (DAG). Under the semi-Markovian assumption,
each unobserved confounder can appear in the equation of
exactly two observed variables. We represent the existence
of an unobserved confounder between X, Y in the SCM by
adding a bidirected edge X ↔Y to the causal graph. These
graphs are no longer DAGs although still acyclic.
Vi is called an ancestor for Vj if there is a directed path
from Vi to Vj. Then Vj is said to be a descendant of Vi.
The set of ancestors of Vi in graph G is shown by AnG(Vi).
A do-intervention do(vi) replaces the functional equation
of Vi with Vi = vi without affecting other equations. The
distribution induced on the observed variables after such an
intervention is called an interventional distribution, shown
by Pvi(V). P∅(V) = P(V) is called the observational dis-
tribution. In this paper, we use L1 and L2 as notation for
observational and interventional distributions, respectively.
Definition 3.2 (c-components). A subset of nodes is called
a c-component if it is a maximal set of nodes in G that are
connected by bi-directed paths.
4. Deep Causal Generative Model with Latents
Suppose the ground truth data-generating SCM is made up
of functions Xi = fi(Pai, Ei). If we have these equations,
we can simulate an intervention on, say X5 = 1, by eval-
uating the remaining equations. However, we can never
hope to learn the true functions and unobserved noise terms
from data. The fundamental observation of Pearl is that
even then there are some causal queries that can be uniquely
identified as some deterministic function of the causal graph
and the joint distribution between observed variables, e.g.,
p(n|do(c)) = ξ(G, p(c, x, n)) in Figure 1a for some de-
terministic ξ. This means that, if we can, somehow, train
a causal model made up of neural networks that fits the
data ∼p(v), and has the same causal graph, then it has
to induce the same interventional distribution p(d|do(s)) as
the ground truth SCM, irrespective of what functions the
neural network uses. This is a very strong idea that allows
mimicing the causal structure, and opens up the possibility
of using deep learning algorithms for performing causal
inference through sampling even with high-dimensional
variables. This is the basic idea behind (Kocaoglu et al.,
2018) without latents. Motivated by their work, we define
a deep causal generative model for semi-Markovian model
and show identifiability 1 results. Now, we formalize the
above simple observations.
Definition 4.1 (DCM). A neural net architecture G is called
a deep causal generative model (DCM) for an ADMG G =
(V, E) if it is composed of a collection of neural nets, one Gi
for each Vi ∈V such that i) each Gi accepts a sufficiently
high-dimensional noise vector Ni, ii) the output of Gj is
input to Gi iff Vj ∈PaG(Vi), iii) Ni = Nj iff Vi ↔Vj.
We define Q as the distribution induced by the DCM. Noise
vectors Ni replace both the exogenous noises and the unob-
served confounders in the true SCM. They are of sufficiently
high dimension to induce the observed distribution. We say
that a DCM is representative enough for an SCM if the neu-
ral networks have sufficiently many parameters to induce
the observed distribution induced by the SCM. For the neu-
ral architectures of variables in the same c-component, we
can consider conditional GANs (Mirza & Osindero, 2014),
as they are effective in matching the joint distribution by
feeding the same prior noise Ni = Nj (as confounders) into
multiple generators. For variables that are not confounded
(Ni ̸= Nj), we can use conditional models such as diffusion
models (Ho & Salimans, 2022). With Defintion4.1, we have
the following, similar to (Xia et al., 2021):
Theorem
4.2.
Consider
any
SCM
M
=
(G, N, U, F, P(.)).
A DCM G for G entails the same
identifiable interventional distributions as the SCM M if it
entails the same observational distribution.
Thus, even with high-dimensional variables in the true SCM,
given a causal graph, in principle, any identifiable interven-
tional query can be sampled from, with a DCM that fits
the observational distribution. However, to learn the DCM,
(Kocaoglu et al., 2018; Xia et al., 2021) suggest training
all neural nets G in the DCM together. Such an approach
to match the joint distribution containing all low and high-
dimensional variables is empirically challenging in terms
of convergence. Any modularization not only is expected
to help train more efficiently for better solution quality, but
also allow the flexibility to use pre-trained image generative
models. Now, we focus on uncovering how to achieve such
modularization and how it contributes along the two aspects.
1Identifiability here refers to our ability to uniquely sample
from an interventional distribution. See Definition C.1 for details.
3

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
Z3
Z1
Z2
X1
X2
Causal Graph
CZ3Z1Z2
CX1,X2
Step (1/ 3):
Build H-graph:
Z3
Z1
Z2
X1
Step (2/ 3): Train Z1, Z2, Z3
Or, use pre-trained Z1, Z2, Z3
Match P(z1, z2, z3|x1)
= Q(z1, z2, z3|do(x1))
Z3
Z1
X1
X2
Step (3/3):
Train X1, X2
Match P(x1, x2, z1, z3)
= Q(x1, x2, z1, z3)
(a) Step 1: Since P(x1, x2|do(z1)) ̸= P(x1, x2|z1), add edge from c-component
H1 : [Z1, Z2, Z3] to c-component H2 : [X1, X2]. Step 2: train only networks
in H1 to match P(z1, z2, z3|x1) = Q(z1, z2, z3|do(x1)). Step 3: train only H2
while using pre-trained Z1, Z3 to match P(x1, x2, z1, z3) = Q(x1, x2, z1, z3).
Z
W
X
Y
CW
CXZ
CY
X0
W0
Y0
X1
X2
W1
Y1
CW0
CX0,Y0
CW1
CX1,X2,Y1
X
Z
Y
CZ
CXY
(b) The rectangular box represents each h-node
and which networks we have to train together.
The partial order of the h-graph represents in
which order we should train the mechanisms
Figure 2. (Left:) Modular training in 3 steps. (Right:) Causal graphs and their h-graphs showing modularization of the training process.
4.1. Modular-DCM Intuitive Explanation
Consider the graph G in Figure 2a. Suppose, we have an
observational dataset D ∼P(V). Based on Theorem 4.2,
we can to sample from different L2 distributions such as
P(x2|do(x1)) and P(z2|do(x1)) by training a DCM G that
is consistent with G and fits the observational data P(V).
The DCM will contain one feed-forward neural net per
observed variable, i.e., G = {GZ1, GZ2, GZ3, GX1, GX2}.
If we follow the naive way and jointly train all networks in G
together, we have to match P(x1, x2, z1, z2, z3) containing
all low and high dimensional variables in a single training
phase. Matching this joint distribution by training all models
at the same time could be difficult, since we are attempting
to minimize a very complicated loss function. Thus, the
question we are interested in is, which neural nets can be
trained separately, and which need to be trained together to
be able to fit the joint distribution.
Suppose we first train the causal generative model GZ1, i.e.,
learn a mapping that can sample from P(z1|z3, x1). Even if
we provide the unobserved confounder N1 (Definition 4.1),
which also affects Z2 and Z3, the neural network might
learn a mapping that later makes it impossible to induce the
correct dependence between Z1, Z2, or Z1, Z3 no matter
how GZ2 or GZ3 are trained later. This is because fitting the
conditional P(Z1|Z3, X1) does not provide any incentive
for the model GZ1 to induce the correct confounding depen-
dency (through the latent variables) with Z2 and Z3. If the
model ignores the confounding dependence, it cannot in-
duce the dependence between Z3 and Z2 conditioned on Z1
(Z3 ̸⊥⊥Z2|Z1). This observation suggests that the causal
mechanisms of variables that are in the same c-component
should be trained together. Therefore, we have to train
[GZ1, GZ2, GZ3] together; similarly [GX1, GX2] together.
To match the joint P(V) for semi-Markovian models while
preserving the integrity of c-components, we propose using
Tian’s factorization (Tian & Pearl, 2002). It factorizes P(V)
into c-factors: the joint distributions of each c-component
Cj intervened on their parents, i.e., Ppa(cj)(cj).
P(v) = P(x1, x2|do(z1))P(z1, z2, z3|do(x1))
(1)
Due to this factorization, fitting P(V) is equivalent to fitting
each of the c-factors. If we had access to the L2 distribu-
tions from do(z1) and do(x1), ∀z1x1, we could intervene
on GZ1 and GX1 in the DCM to obtain do(z1) and do(x1)
samples and train the models to match these L2 distributions.
However, we only have access to the P(V) dataset.
Note that it is very difficult to condition in feedforward mod-
els during training, which is the case in a DCM. To sample
from Q(x2|z1) it is not sufficient to feed z1 to the network
GX2. In fact, observe that this is exactly the intervention
operation, and would give us a sample from Q(x2|do(z1)).
It is trivial to intervene on the inputs to a neural network,
but highly non-trivial to condition since feedforward models
cannot easily be used to correctly update the posterior via
backdoor paths. Thus, we need to find some interventional
distribution such that the DCM can generate samples for
this distribution and can be trained by comparing them with
some equivalent true observational samples.
Our key idea is to leverage the do-calculus rule-2 (Pearl,
1995) to use observational samples and pretend that they
are from these L2 distributions. This gives us a handle on
how to modularize the training process of c-components.
For example, in Figure 2a, c-factor P(z1, z2, z3|do(x1)) =
P(z1, z2, z3|x1) since do-calculus rule-2 applies, i.e., inter-
vening on X1 is equivalent to conditioning on X1. We can
then use the conditional distribution as a proxy/alternative
to the c-factor to learn Q(z1, z2, z3|do(x1)) with the DCM.
However, P(x1, x2|do(z1)) ̸= P(x1, x2|z1). To overcome
this issue, we seek to fit a joint distribution that implies
this c-factor, i.e., we find a superset of X1, X2 on which
rule-2 applies. We can include Z1 into the joint distribution
that needs to be matched together with X1, X2 and check if
the parent set of {X1, X2, Z1} satisfy rule-2. We continue
4

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
including variables until we reach the joint P(x1, x2, z1, z3)
to be the alternative distribution for {X1, X2}’s c-factor.
After identifying which sub-networks of the DCM can
be trained separately, we need to decide a valid or-
der in which they should be trained.
For the same
example, we can first train [GZ1, GZ2, GZ3] together
to induce Q(z1, z2, z3|do(x1))
=
P(z1, z2, z3|x1)
=
P(z1, z2, z3|do(x1)). This is shown in step (2/3) in Fig-
ure 2a: We can produce samples from the mechanisms
of Z1, Z2, Z3 by intervening on their parent X1 with real
observations from dataset D. Thus, we do not need GX1
to be pre-trained. Now, we train mechanisms of the next
c-component [GX1, GX2] in our training order (step 3/3).
As discussed, we need to ensure Q(x1, x2, z1, z3|do(∅)) =
P(x1, x2, z1, z3|do(∅)) = P(x1, x2, z1, z3|∅). Since mech-
anisms of Z1, Z3 were trained in the previous step, we can
freeze the network weights of [GZ1, GZ3]. These are used to
correctly sample from Z1 given X1, and feed this correctly
sampled value into the network of X2. In Appendix D.1, we
show that the c-factors in Equation 1 will correctly match
the true c-factors after fitting these two conditional prob-
abilities in this order. Therefore, DCM matches the joint
distribution P(V) as well. On the other hand, if we first
trained the networks [GX1, GX2], it would not be possible
to match the joint P(x1, x2, z1, z3) as the mechanisms of
Z1, Z3 are not yet trained. Thus, this order would not work.
4.2. Training Algorithm for Modular-DCM
In this section, we generalize the discussed ideas, into a
modular algorithm that has mainly two phases: 1) arranging
the c-components in a valid training order and 2) training
(sets of) c-components to match their c-factors.
Arranging the c-components: Consider a c-component Ct.
When should a c-component Cs be trained before Ct? Since
we need rule 2 of do-calculus to hold on the parents of Ct
for training, if Cs contains some parents of Ct that are
located on the backdoor paths between any two variables
in Ct, then Cs must be pre-trained before Ct. Conditioning
and intervening on those parents of Ct is not the same, i.e.,
P(Ct|do(pa(Ct) ∩Cs) ̸= P(Ct|pa(Ct) ∩Cs). Thus we
include pa(Ct) ∩Cs in the joint distribution that we want to
match for Ct, which requires those parents in Cs to be pre-
trained. For the front-door graph in Figure 2b, we observe
that P(X, Y |do(Z)) ̸= P(X, Y |Z). Thus, we train GX,
GZ, GY in [CZ : {GZ}] →[CXY : {GX, GY }] order.
To obtain a partial order among all c-components, we con-
struct a directed graph structure called H-graph that contains
c-components as nodes. While adding edges, if any cycle
is formed, we merge c-components on that cycle into a
single h-node indicating that they will need to be trained
jointly. Thus some h-nodes may contain more than one
c-component. The final structure is a DAG and gives us a
Algorithm 1 Modular Training(G, D)
1: Input: Causal Graph G, Dataset D.
2: Initialize DCM G
3: H ←Construct Hgraph(G)
4: for each Hk ∈H in partial order do
5:
Initialize Ak ←∅
6:
while IsRule2(Hk, Ak) = 0 do
7:
Ak ←PaG(Hk, Ak)
8:
GHk ←TrainModule(GHk, G, Hk, Ak, D)
9: Return: G
valid partial order T for modular training (Proposition D.14).
Formally, an H-graph is defined as:
Definition 4.3 (H-graph). Given a causal graph G with c-
components C = {C1, . . . Cn}, let {Hk}k be some partition
of C. The directed graph (VH, EH) where VH = {Hk}k
and Hs →Ht ∈EH iff P(Ht|do(paG(Ht) ∩Hs)) ̸=
P(Ht|paG(Ht)∩Hs), is called an H-graph for G if acyclic.
We run Algorithm 7:Contruct Hgraph() to build an H-
graph by checking the edge condition on line 5. In Fig-
ure 2 and Appendix E.1, we provide some examples of
H-graphs. Note that we only use the H-graph to obtain
a partial training order of h-nodes. For any h-node Hk,
An(Hk) and Pa(Hk) below refer to ancestors and par-
ents in the causal graph G, not in the H-graph. Train-
ing c-components: We follow H-graph’s topological order
and train the c-components in an h-node Hk. If we can
match Ppa(Hk)(Hk), it will ensure that the DCM will learn
their corresponding c-factors Ppa(Cj)(Cj), ∀Cj ∈Hk as
well. As mentioned earlier, we can generate fake interven-
tional samples from Qpa(Hk)(Hk) induced by the DCM,
but they cannot be used to train GHk as we do not have
access to real data samples from the interventional distri-
bution Ppa(Hk)(Hk). Thus, we train GHk to learn a larger
joint distribution that can be obtained from the observa-
tional dataset as an alternative to its c-factors. We search
for a set Ak that can be added to the joint with Hk such
that PP a(Hk,Ak)(Hk, Ak) = P(Hk, Ak|Pa(Hk, Ak)), i.e.,
true interventional and conditional distribution are the same.
This enables us to take conditional samples from the in-
put dataset and use them as true interventional samples to
match them with the DCM-generated fake interventional
samples from QP a(Hk,Ak)(Hk, Ak) and train GHk. The
above condition is generalized as a modularity condition:
Definition 4.4. Let Hk be an h-node in the H-graph. A set
Ak ⊆AnG(Hk) \ Hk satisfies the modularity condition if
it is the smallest set with P(Hk, Ak|do(Pa(Hk, Ak))) =
P(Hk, Ak|Pa(Hk, Ak)).
As mentioned earlier, such L1 and L2 distributional equiva-
lence holds when the do-calculus rule-2 applies:
PP a(Hk,Ak)(Hk, Ak) = P(Hk, Ak|Pa(Hk, Ak)),
if (Hk, Ak ⊥⊥Pa(Hk, Ak))GP a(Hk,Ak)
(2)
5

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
This suggests a graphical criterion to find such a set Ak
and we apply it at line 6 in Algorithm 1. Intuitively, if the
outgoing edges of Pa(Hk, Ak) are deleted (GP a(Hk,Ak))
and they become d-separated from {Hk, Ak}, then there
exists no backdoor path from Pa(Hk, Ak) to {Hk, Ak} in
G. Therefore, for a specific Hk, we start with Ak = ∅and
check if Pa(Hk, Ak) satisfies the conditions of the rule-2
for {Hk, Ak}. If not, we add parents of {Hk, Ak} to Ak.
We include ancestors, since only they can affect Hk’s mech-
anisms from outside of the c-component. We continue the
process until Pa(Hk, Ak) satisfies rule-2. Finally, finding
a set Ak satisfying the modularity condition implies that we
can train GHk by matching:
Qpa(Hk,Ak)(Hk, Ak) = P(Hk, Ak|Pa(Hk, Ak))
; Now training: Hk, Pre-trained: Ak
(3)
We utilize adversarial training to train the generators in GHk
on observational dataset D to match the above. This is done
by Algorithm 3: TrainModule() called in line 8. More
precisely, this sub-routine uses all mechanisms in {Hk, Ak}
to produce samples but only updates the mechanisms in
GHk corresponding to the current h-node and returns those
models after convergence. Even though we will train only
GHk i.e., GV , ∀V ∈Hk, Ak appears together with Hk in
the joint distribution that we need to match. Thus, we use
pre-trained causal mechanisms of Ak, i.e., GV , ∀V ∈Ak
here. The partial order of H-graph ensures that we have
already trained Ak before Hk.
Training GHk to match the distribution in Equation 3, is suf-
ficient to learn the c-factors PP a(Cj)(Cj), ∀Cj ∈Hk. After
training each GHk according to the partial order of H-graph,
Modular-DCM will learn a DCM that induces Q(V)=P(V).
Finally, the trained DCM can sample from interventional L2
distributions identifiable from P(V). These are formalized
in Theorem 4.5. Proofs are in Appendix D.6.
Assumptions: 1. The true ADMG is known. 2. The causal
model is semi-Markovian. 3. The data distribution is strictly
positive. 4. Each conditional generative model Gi, ∀i in the
DCM can correctly learn the target conditional distribution.
Theorem
4.5.
Consider
any
SCM
M
=
(G, N, U, F, P(.)).
Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold.
Algorithm 1 on (G, D) returns a DCM G that entails i)
the same observational distribution, and ii) the same
identifiable interventional distributions as the SCM M.
5. Experimental Evaluation
We present Modular-DCM performance on two semi-
synthetic Colored-MNIST experiments and training con-
vergence on a real-world COVIDx CXR-3 dataset provided
in Appendix F.5. We also propose a solution to an invari-
ant prediction problem for classification in CelebA-HQ.
For distributions and image quality comparison, we use
metrics such as the total variation distance (TVD), the KL-
divergence, and the Frechet Inception Distance (FID). We
share our implementation at https://github.com/
Musfiqshohan/Modular-DCM.
5.1. Semi-Synthetic Colored-MNIST Experiments
MNIST frontdoor graph: We constructed a synthetic SCM
that induces the graph in Figure 4a. Image variable I shows
an image of the digit value of Digit(D). We pick some
random projection of the image as Attribute(A) such that
P(A|do(D = 0)) ̸= P(A|do(D = 1)) holds, ensuring a
strong causal effect. A hidden variable U affects both D
and A such that P(A|do(D)) ̸= P(A|D). Suppose we are
given a dataset D sampled from P(D, A, I). Our goal is
to estimate the causal effect P(A|do(D)). We can use the
backdoor criterion (Pearl, 1993), to measure the ground
truth P(A|do(D)) =
R
U P(A|D, U)P(U).
To estimate P(A|do(D)) by training on the observational
dataset D[D, A, I], we construct the Modular-DCM archi-
tecture with a neural network GD having fully connected
layers to produce D, a CNN-based generator GI to generate
images, and a classifier GA to classify MNIST images into
variable A such that D and A are confounded. Now, if we
can train all mechanisms in the DCM to match P(D, A, I),
we can produce correct samples from P(A|do(D)). For this
graph, the corresponding H-graph is [I] →[D, A]. Thus,
we first train GI by matching P(I|D). Instead of training
GI, we can also employ a pre-trained generative model
that takes digits D as input and produces an MNIST image
showing D digit in it. Next, we freeze GI and train GD and
GA, to match the joint distribution P(D, A, I) since {I} is
ancestor set A for c-component {D, A}. Convergence of
generative models becomes difficult using the loss of this
joint distribution since the losses generated by both low and
high dimensional variables are non-trivial to compare and re-
weight (see Appendix F.3). Thus, we map samples of I to a
low-dimensional representation, RI with a trained encoder
and match P(D, A, RI) instead of the joint P(D, A, I).
Evaluation: In Figure 3, we compare our method with (Xia
et al., 2023): NCM and a version of our method: DCM-
Rep that does not use modular training (to serve as abla-
tion study). First, we evaluate how each method matches
the L1 and L2 distributions in Figure 3b. Since NCM
trains all mechanisms with the same loss function involving
both low and high-dimensional variables, it learns marginal
distribution P(I) but does not fully converge to match
P(A|do(D = 0)) finishing with TVD= 0.43 at epoch
300. DCM-Rep uses a low-dim representation of images:
RI and matches the joint distribution P(D, A, RI) as a
proxy to P(D, A, I) without modularization. We observe
DCM-Rep to converge slower (TVD= 0.36 at epoch 300
6

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
Inconsitent
Low quality Consistent, 
Good quality
(a) Generated Images
(b) TVD for frontdoor graph
Total Variation Distance (TVD) ↓
P (D, A)
P (A|do(D = 0))
P (A|do(D = 1))
Epochs
25
150
300
25
150
300
25
150
300
NCM
0.14
0.16
0.17
0.48
0.42
0.43
0.08
0.11
0.11
DCM-Rep
0.38
0.17
0.16
0.36
0.45
0.36
0.22
0.1
0.11
DCM (Ours)
0.27
0.17
0.08
0.43
0.36
0.13
0.14
0.1
0.04
(c) FID for frontdoor graph
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) ↓
Epochs
25
150
300
NCM
61.40
59.28
59.59
NCM
Pre-trained
26.60
184.40
192.27
DCM-Rep
151.41
78.69
80.65
DCM (Ours)
27.02
27.37
27.20
(d) FID for Diamond graph
Frechet Inception Distance FID(I1) ↓
Epochs
25
150
300
NCM
101.00
67.82
80.54
DCM (Ours)
79.96
35.74
32.88
Frechet Inception Distance FID(I2) ↓
NCM
112.61
67.56
65.17
DCM (Ours)
22.22
15.47
11.80
Figure 3. For the frontdoor graph in Figure 4a, NCM produces good images but not consistent with do(D). Modular-DCM without modular
training (DCM-rep) produces consistent but low-quality images. Our modular approach (DCM) with training order: {I} →{D, A}
produces consistent, good images and converges faster (as shown in Figure 3a, 3b, 3c). In Figure 3d, we show our performance for the
graph in Figure 4b that contains two image variables.
for P(A|do(D = 0))) compared to the original Modular-
DCM. Finally, Modular-DCM matches P(D, A, RI) and
converges faster with TVD= 0.08 for P(D, A) and 0.13 for
P(A|do(D = 0)). In Figure 3a, we show generated images
of each method for do(D = 0)(top) and do(D = 1)(bottom)
and evaluate their quality with FID scores in Figure 3c.
We observe that NCM produces good-quality images (Fig-
ure 3a left, FID= 59.59 at epoch 300) but is inconsistent
with do(D) intervention since it learns only marginal P(I).
DCM-Rep generates consistent but low-quality images (Fig-
ure 3a middle, FID= 80.65). Modular-DCM equipped with
a pre-trained model produces good-quality (FID= 27.20),
consistent P(I|do(D)) images (Figure 3a right). To justify
the necessity of modularity, we add another method (NCM
Pre-trained) in our ablation study, where we equip it with
a pre-trained model but have to match the original joint by
training all mechanisms together, the same as NCM. Note
that it starts with a low FID (26.60) but ends up worsening
the image quality with FID= 192.27 (Figure 3c, row 2).
For a more rigorous evaluation, we use the effectiveness
metric proposed in (Monteiro et al., 2023) and employ a clas-
sifier to map all images generated according to P(I|do(D))
back to discrete digits D. Next, we compute the exact like-
lihoods and compare with the true uniform intervention
do(D) : [0.5, 0.5] that we perform for P(I|do(D)). We
observe that the results are consistent with Figure 3a. NCM
generated images are classified as [0.19, 0.81], implying that
NCM learns only marginal P(I). On the other hand, DCM-
Rep and DCM generated images are classified as uniform
distribution with 98% and 99% accuracy.
MNIST diamond graph: We illustrate our performance
with a second synthetic SCM for the graph in Figure 4b. It
contains multiple image nodes {I1, I2} and discrete vari-
ables Digit(D) and Color(C). We consider a hidden con-
Digit
I
U
Att
(a) Frontdoor graph
I1
Digit
Color
I2
(b) Diamond graph
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Number of nodes (N)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Largest number of models 
 trained together
Modular-DCM
Joint training in NCM
(c) Largest number of networks need to be
trained together for different number of nodes.
Figure 4. Modular DCM on specific and arbitrary graphs.
founders between {I1, C} and one between {D, C}. Base-
line NCM matches P(I1, D, I2, C) by training mechanisms
of all variables at the same time. Whereas we utilize the
modularity offered by c-components {I1, D, C} and {I2}.
We i) first train I2 to match P(I2|D) and then ii) train
I1, D, C to match P(I1, D, I2, C) while freezing weights of
I2. At the first step, I2 trains well. In the 2nd step, since we
don’t have to train I2 anymore, we optimize a less complex
loss function compared to NCM. In Figure 3d, we compare
the FID scores of I1 and I2 generated by Modular-DCM
and NCM. We observe that while both matches P(D, C)
(thus TVD omitted), DCM achieves FID(I1) = 32.88 and
FID(I2) = 11.80 while NCM achieves FID(I1) = 80.54
and FID(I2) = 65.17 after running for 300 epochs.
Arbitrary graphs: In this experiment, we showcase the
benefit of modularization over a random ensemble of graphs.
We numerically visualize the largest number of mechanisms
we have to update and train together compared to the full
training of existing works. We sample random DAGs with a
varying number of nodes (N ∈[15 −50]) keeping the arc
ratio and the number of latents equal to N/3. We call Al-
7

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
gorithm 7: Construct H-graph(.) to find the largest training
component. We took the average of five runs and plot it in
Figure 4c. This plot demonstrates the number of networks
that are trained together in a single training phase.
We observe that the number of models NCM trains together
increases linearly with respect to N whereas the growth in
our method is relatively smaller since it does not depend on
the number of nodes, but rather on the number of latents.
For a graph of N = 50 variables, NCM updates the 50
networks corresponding to the mechanisms of all variables
with a common loss function. Whereas, we train the same
set of neural networks but modularly c-component by c-
component with average max size of 20 (for the setting in
Figure 4c). We achieve better convergence since we min-
imize a less complex loss function at each training phase.
We experience such convergence for Colored-MNIST with
a low total variation distance compared to NCM (Figure 3c).
We discuss complexity evaluation of our algorithm in Ap-
pendix F.2.
5.2. Invariant Prediction on CelebA-HQ
In this section, we design a causal invariant classifier f
for the high-dimensional image dataset, CelebA-HQ (Lee
et al., 2020) such that its specific attribute classification
Eyeglass = f(Image); does not experience low accuracy
with domain shift.
Motivation: Among all attributes of CelebA-HQ, some
attributes, such as Sex and Eyeglass have spurious cor-
relations between them (Shen et al., 2020) (men are more
likely to wear eyeglasses, correlation coefficient 0.47). A
classifier trained on this dataset might consider the facial
features of a male as an indicator to predict the presence
of eyeglasses. As a result, if there is a shift in the sex dis-
tribution in the test domain, i.e., P(Sex|domain = test)
̸= P(Sex|domain = train) (Figure 5a), and the classifier
has to predict more images of females, it might have low
eyeglass accuracy. For example, in Figure 5b (row-1), the
accuracy for such a classifier in the Sex = 0, Eyeglass = 1
sub-population is 0.81 (comparatively lower). We model
the above scenario with the causal graph in Figure 5a (top-
left). We assume Eyeglass and Sex attributes determine how
the Image variable would look like (shown with directed
edges). The spurious correlation between the attributes is
represented with a bi-directed edge. We reflect the distri-
bution shift in P(Sex), with an edge from the Domain
variable.
To make the CelebA-HQ attribute classification independent
of the domain shift, we employ causal invariant prediction.
Causal invariant prediction refers to the problem of learning
a predictive model which is invariant to specific distribution
shifts. According to (Subbaswamy et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2023), to build a causal invariant predictor, we need to train
it on an interventional dataset where the target attribute is
independent of spuriously correlated/sensitive attributes due
to the intervention performed. In our context, we need inter-
ventional samples from the high-dimensional interventional
distribution P(Eyeglass, Image|do(Sex)) to train the in-
variant classifier, since the connection between Domain
and Eyeglass is cut off by do(Sex). The first step to ob-
tain these interventional samples is to train a deep causal
generative model and learn the observational distribution
P(Sex, Eyeglass, Image). For this purpose, we utilize
our algorithm Modular-DCM.
Dataset: The original CelebA-HQ dataset contains 1468
images of Eyeglasses = 1. We distribute these samples
among 5380 train samples and 1280 test samples maintain-
ing the joint distribution in Figure 5a such that the distribu-
tion shift in P(Sex) is reflected across domains.
Training: Here we discuss three classifiers that we trained.
TrainDomain: This classifier is trained on the train-
ing dataset.
Intervention:
According to
(Sub-
baswamy et al., 2019), if we can generate a dataset
D[Eyeglass, Image] ∼P(Eyeglass, Image|do(Sex))
and train a classifier on this dataset, its prediction will be in-
variant to the Domain and Sex, since intervention on Sex
removes their influence. To generate this high-dimensional
interventional dataset, Modular-DCM employs neural net-
works (GEyeglass, GSex, GI) for each of Eyeglass, Sex
and Image and connects them according to the causal graph
in Figure 5a. First, we train {GEyeglass, GSex} together
(same c-component). Now, for GI, Modular-DCM’s flexi-
bility to incorporate pre-trained networks in its causal gener-
ative models allows us to utilize InterFaceGAN (Shen et al.,
2020), that uses StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019) under the
hood to produce realistic human faces. This pre-trained
model plays an important role for a classifier since it needs
to see realistic images and training a model from scratch to
match the true P(I|Eyeglass, Sex) will be costly. Next,
we uniformly intervene on Sex = 0 and Sex = 1 and push
forward through the trained models to generate 10k samples
D ∼P(Eyeglass, Image|do(Sex)) of both females and
males. Finally, we train a new classifier Intervention
on this dataset for eyeglass prediction. Augmented : To
obtain the benefits of both classifiers, we create an aug-
mented dataset by combining the training dataset and the
interventional dataset generated by Modular-DCM. We train
a new classifier Augmented on it.
Evaluation: We evaluate the accuracy of the classifiers in
the test domain (Figure 5b). Since TrainDomain (row-1)
learns the Male-Eyeglass bias, it achieves accuracy= 0.90
in the Sex = 1, Eyeglass = 1 sub-population but it per-
forms badly for Sex = 0, Eyeglass = 1 (accuracy 0.81).
Intervention (row-3) is trained on images generated
by InterFaceGAN, but due to the large support of the im-
8

Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models for High-dimensional Causal Inference
Domain
Sex
Eyeglass
Image
Train
EG=0
EG=1
Sex=0
0.60
0.018
Sex=1
0.18
0.20
Test
Sex=0
0.31
0.14
Sex=1
0.47
0.08
(a) Train & Test distribution
Classifier/
Accuracy ↑
Sex=0
Sex=1
Eyeglass=0
Eyeglass=1
Sex=0
Eyeglass=0
Sex=0
Eyeglass=1
Sex=1
Eyeglass=0
Sex=1
Eyeglass=1
TrainDomain
0.948
0.946
0.971
0.847
0.998
0.810
0.953
0.90
IRM
0.880
0.866
0.918
0.681
0.980
0.600
0.877
0.800
Intvention
(Ours)
0.913
0.944
0.993
0.674
1.000
0.669
0.988
0.68
Augmented
(Ours)
0.970
0.981
0.994
0.905
0.995
0.901
0.993
0.91
(b) Image samples and classifier accuracy for different sub-population
Figure 5. (Top-Left): Invariant prediction causal graph. (Top-right) Images generated by InterFaceGAN from P(I|Sex, Eyeglass = 1).
(Bottom-left): Joint distribution of P(Sex, Eyeglass). (Bottom-right): Eyeglass prediction accuracy of 3 classifiers in different sub-
populations. Three classifiers are trained on the training dataset, the interventional dataset, and the augmented dataset (combined both).
Note that the Augmented has better accuracy in the Sex = 0, Eyeglass = 1 sub-population which was our target to achieve.
age manifold, samples generated by InterFaceGAN from
P(Image|Eyeglass, Sex) might not represent all types of
images that are present in the original CelebA-HQ dataset.
For example, CelebA-HQ contains more variety of sun-
glasses compared to the InterFaceGAN generated images
(Figure 22 vs 21). As a result, Intervention does not
perform very well in the Eyeglass = 1 sub-population
(0.67). However, the generated interventional dataset con-
tains images of both Sex = 0, 1 wearing eyeglasses which
are free from the training dataset bias. Thus, when we
combine both datasets, samples from the training dataset
introduce the Augmented classifier (row-4) to different
varieties of Eyeglass = 1 images and samples from the
interventional dataset enforce it to focus on only eyeglass
property in an image. We observe that Augmented im-
proves accuracy in the three sub-populations (bolded in
Figure 5b) : i){Sex = 0} : 0.948 →0.97 ii){Eyeglass =
1} : 0.847 →0.905 and iii){Sex = 0, Eyeglass = 1} :
0.810 →0.901. Thus, even though we have access to only
the biased observational dataset, Modular-DCM offered a
bias-free interventional dataset and enabled us to train a
domain invariant classifier.
Note that we also evaluate the Invariant Risk Minimization
(IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019) method for this specific exper-
iment although the problem setup of IRM and our proposed
method are different. We train IRM on data from two envi-
ronments: Sex = 0 and Sex = 1. We provide its accuracy
in Figure 5b (row-2) and show that the classifiers trained
according to our approach outperform it in most cases.
6. Conclusion
We propose a modular adversarial training algorithm for
learning deep causal generative models and estimate causal
effects with high-dimensional variables in the presence of
confounders. After convergence, Modular-DCM can gen-
erate high-dimensional samples from identifiable interven-
tional distributions. We assume the causal model to be semi-
Markovian which aim to relax in our future work. Some
potential application of our algorithm includes: continual
learning (Busch et al., 2023) of deep causal generative mod-
els or high-dimensional interventional sampling in federated
setting (Vo et al., 2022).
