Submitted to:
Causality and the Semantics of Provenance
James Cheney
LFCS
University of Edinburgh

Provenance, or information about the sources, derivation, custody or history of data, has been stud-
ied recently in a number of contexts, including databases, scientiﬁc workﬂows and the Semantic
Web. Many provenance mechanisms have been developed, motivated by informal notions such as
inﬂuence, dependence, explanation and causality. However, there has been little study of whether
these mechanisms formally satisfy appropriate policies or even how to formalize relevant motivating
concepts such as causality. We contend that mathematical models of these concepts are needed to
justify and compare provenance techniques. In this paper we review a theory of causality based on
structural models that has been developed in artiﬁcial intelligence, and describe work in progress on
a causal semantics for provenance graphs.
1
Introduction
Provenance is a general term referring to the origin, history, chain of custody, derivation or process that
yielded an object. In analog settings such as art and archaeology, such information is essential for un-
derstanding whether an artifact is authentic, valuable or meaningful. In the digital world, provenance is
now recognized as an important problem because it is very easy to silently alter or forge digital infor-
mation. We already pay a price because of the lack of robust mechanisms for recording and managing
provenance: serious economic losses have been incurred due to the lack of provenance on the Web [3],
and lack of transparency of scientiﬁc processes and results is routinely used to sow confusion and doubt
about climate change [25].
Much work on provenance considers the following basic scenario: we have some input data and
some complex process that will be run on the input, for example a large program, possibly split into
many smaller jobs and executed in parallel or on a distributed system. In this setting, a proposed solution
generally records some additional information as the program runs. The additional information is often
called provenance and it is supposed to provide an “explanation” showing how the results were obtained.
Of course, this is a loose speciﬁcation if we do not clarify what we mean by an explanation (apart
from whatever provenance information happens to be recorded by the system). There are at least two
obvious-seeming choices, neither of which seems satisfactory in practice:
• First, we might record the program that was run along with its input data (and any intermediate
inputs such as user or network interactions). This, at least, allows us to rerun the program later and
check that we get the same result, and it also allows us to vary the inputs to see how changes affect
the output. But this is nearly useless as an explanation, especially for end-users who are not (and
should not be expected to be) proﬁcient at debugging black-box systems. Moreover, the inputs and
outputs may be huge (for example, gigabytes of climate data), and it may not be possible for users
to manually inspect the data. In the longer term, just recording the program is also problematic
since the computational environment in which the program runs will change — in some sense, this
is also an “input” that we cannot feasibly record.
arXiv:1004.3241v1  [cs.PL]  19 Apr 2010

2
• Second, we might record everything that can be recorded about the computation, in the hope that
it might someday be useful. This also sounds straightforward but is surprisingly difﬁcult to pin
down, since “everything that can be recorded” can be interpreted in many different ways. Should
we record every function call? Every instruction? Every molecular interaction? Do we need
to record what the programmer had for breakfast on the day the program was written? Clearly
we have to stop somewhere, and for efﬁciency reasons we should probably stop far short of any
reasonable deﬁnition of “everything”.
Most extant approaches pick some intermediate point between these two extremes, committing to some
(often not explicitly stated) choices about what is important about the computation that should be recorded
in its provenance.
For example, in databases, there are models such as where-provenance [2] (tracking the “sources” of
copied data), lineage [10], why-provenance [2] or how-provenance [14] (tracking tuples “used by” or that
“justify” a result tuple), or dependency provenance [7] (a computable approximation of the information
ﬂow behavior of the program).
Provenance has also been studied extensively in other settings, particularly “scientiﬁc workﬂow”
systems (e.g. [21, 20, 18]). Scientiﬁc workﬂows are usually high-level, visual programming languages,
often based on dataﬂow or Petri-net models of concurrent computation, and often executed on grid or
cloud computing platforms. This architecture has the advantage that it puts considerable computational
power into the hands of scientists without forcing them to learn how to program parallel or distributed
systems at a low level in C++ or Java. However, it also has a serious drawback: distributing a program
over a heterogeneous network dramatically increases the number of things that can go wrong, typically
makes the computation nondeterminstic and makes it hard for the user to trust the results.
Scientists are reluctant to publish results based on programs that may contain subtle bugs, and whose
behavior is different every time they are run, or depends on libraries or other environmental factors
in subtle ways. Provenance is perceived as important for helping users understand whether results of
such computations are repeatable and trustworthy, and in particular for scientists to be able to judge the
scientiﬁc validity of results they may wish to publish.
The work on database provenance is distinctive in that several different formal models have now been
deﬁned for database query languages with well-understood semantics. This makes it easier to compare,
relate and generalize these approaches, though such comparisons are only starting to appear [8, 14]. For
most of these models, there are semantic guarantees (or even exact semantic characterizations) relating
the provenance records to the denotation of the program. On the other hand, for workﬂow provenance,
formal deﬁnitions of the meaning of workﬂow programs have only started to appear recently (see for
example [29, 17]), while the provenance semantics of these tools is usually speciﬁed informally, at
best [21]. As a result there is a confusing variety of models and styles of provenance for workﬂows.
To address this problem, there has been an ongoing community effort, centered on a series of “Prove-
nance Challenges” [23], to understand and compare the qualitative behavior of these different systems
and synthesize a common format for exchanging provenance among them. This effort has recently
yielded a draft Open Provenance Model, or OPM [22]. Instances of this model are graphs whose nodes
represent agents, processes or artifacts and whose edges represent dependence, generation or control re-
lationships. The OPM has “semantics” in the sense of the Semantic Web, in that the nodes and edges
are expected to have names that are meaningful to reasonably well-informed users. The OPM standard
draws heavily on informal motivations such as “provenance is the process that led to a result” and “edges
denote causal relationships linking the cause to the effect”. But while the OPM speciﬁes a graph notation,
controlled vocabulary for the edges, and inference rules for inferring new edges from existing edges, it

J. Cheney
3
does not have a “semantics” in the denotational or operational sense by which we might judge whether a
graph is consistent or complete or whether inferences on the graph are valid.
In this paper, we investigate the use of structural causal models [24] as a semantics for these graphs,
and relate the informal motivations invoked in deﬁning OPM graphs with the formal deﬁnitions of actual
cause and explanation due to Halpern and Pearl [15, 16]. We do not argue that structural causal models
provide the only or best causal account of provenance. However, structural causal models are quite
close to OPM-style provenance graphs (modulo cosmetic differences), so the analogy is compelling.
Moreover, structural models have been studied extensively (e.g.
[24, 15, 16, 11, 12, 13]) and have
proven useful to both philosophical accounts of scientiﬁc explanation [30] and psychological theories
of understanding [27]. Nevertheless, it may be enlightening to apply other mathematical theories of
causality and explanation to provenance, or investigate variations and extensions of Halpern and Pearl’s
approach.
The broader aim of this paper is to argue by example that semantics (in the mathematical sense) is
badly needed for research on provenance. One of the major motivations for provenance is to improve
scientiﬁc communication, by allowing scientists to generate and exchange computational “explanations”
or “justiﬁcations” of their results. In biology, for example, some journals now require both data and
workﬂow programs describing how results were obtained, and some scientists anticipate that scientiﬁc
publication will evolve into richer documents incorporating text, data, and computation [26]. However, if
the techniques used to do so are poorly speciﬁed and unveriﬁed then we can expect errors and confusion.
Programming languages and semantics researchers can and should be involved in making sure that these
techniques are clearly described and robust, to help ensure that scientiﬁc communications retain long-
term value as they gain computational structure.
2
Examples
Before delving into technical details, we give a high-level example comparing OPM-style provenance
graphs with structural causal models.
The left-hand side of Figure 1 shows a simple OPM graph, based on a standard example showing the
“provenance of a cake” [22]. The right-hand side shows a structural causal model, depicted as a graph.
These two graphs are intentionally very similar. In the OPM graph, the ovals denote “artifacts” (ﬂour,
water, pan, cake) while the boxes denote “processes” (baking, mixing).
The OPM standard does not specify a semantics of provenance graphs as computations that might
take place in the future; rather, it speciﬁes a syntax for graphs that are supposed to describe processes
that have taken place in the past. Nevertheless, it is natural to read an OPM graph as an expression or
straight-line program that can be rerun to produce the output in the same way as the original process did.
Conversely, a causal model such as the one in Figure 1 does have an intended computational seman-
tics. Each node in a causal model is equipped with a function specifying how to compute the value of
the node given values for the parent nodes. An acyclic causal graph can be viewed as a piece of straight-
line code, assigning values to variables as shown along the bottom of Figure 1. Here, we considered a
simplistic boolean-valued model whose transfer functions are conjunctions. We can interpret these def-
initions as saying that if all of the needed ingredients for each step of the process are present, then that
step will succeed.
Causal models also typically distinguish between the set of exogenous parameters U and endogenous
variables V. The former are meant to represent unknowns, measurement error, or environmental factors
not otherwise taken into account in the model. Here, for example, we included one exogenous parameter

4
bake
cake
wasGeneratedBy
sugar
eggs
ﬂour
butter
water
used
used
used
used
used
mix
pan
batter
used
used
wasGeneratedBy
bake
cake
wasGeneratedBy
sugar
eggs
ﬂour
butter
water
used
used
used
used
used
mix
pan
batter
used
used
wasGeneratedBy
Mix
:=
(Water ∧Sugar ∧Eggs∧Flour ∧Butter)⊕U1
Batter
:=
Mix⊕U2
Bake
:=
(Batter ∧Pan)⊕U3
Cake
:=
Bake⊕U4
Figure 1: Top left: An OPM graph. Top right: the corresponding causal model. Bottom: a straight-line
code description of both processes. Variables U1,U2,U3,U4 are exogenous variables (error terms, inputs)
abstracting away unknown environmental inﬂuences that are not explicitly modeled.
Ui for each computation step, representing the possibility that something might go wrong.
Causal models are closely related to Bayesian networks, and causal models can also be given a
probabilistic interpretation. For example, to model a scenario where the oven explodes and destroys the
cake with probability 0.01, we can employ a probability distribution giving U3 the expected value 0.01.
In artiﬁcial intelligence, probabilistic causal models are used either to represent domain knowledge
that enables a system to reason about cause and effect, or as a representation of hypotheses about some
data whose behavior is believed to be causal. Bayesian inference can then be used to learn causal models
from data. This kind of inference is appropriate for data generated by controlled experiments where
a single parameter can be varied to identify cause-effect relationships, but can also be used to analyze
situations with less ideal experimental designs [24].
In this paper, however, we will consider only the deterministic form of causal models and focus
on their use as a semantic tool, not on inference of causal models. We will show how to interpret a
provenance graph as a causal model and relate syntactic and semantic techniques for reasoning about
causality in provenance graphs.
3
Provenance Graphs
For the purposes of this paper, we will employ a simpliﬁed model of OPM-style provenance graphs,
which we will just call provenance graphs. Fix a set of data values D, and a set of process names P.
Recall that a bipartite graph G = (V,W,E) is a (here, directed) graph with vertices V ∪W and edges
E ⊆(V ×W) ∪(W ×V). A provenance graph is a bipartite graph in which the vertices are labeled.
We call the vertices of V the artifacts and the call vertices of W the processes, and the artifact nodes
are labeled with data values and the process nodes are labeled with process names. Intuitively, an edge

J. Cheney
5
(a, p) ∈E means that a was generated by process p, also written a wasGeneratedBy p, and an edge
(p,a) ∈E means that a was used by process p, also written p used a.
We call a provenance graph functional if for each process node p ∈W there is exactly one artifact
a ∈V such that (p,a) ∈E. We also call a provenance graph sorted if there is a function ar : P →N such
that each process node x has ar(x) inputs (with in-edges labeled 1,...n). Note that a sorted functional
provenance graph is essentially a ﬁrst-order term with sharing, i.e. a ﬁrst-order term with nonrecursive
let-binding. However, for the purposes of this paper this sharing is important and it is more convenient
to think in terms of graphs.
In this paper, we consider the simple case where provenance graphs are functional and both prove-
nance graphs and causal graphs are acyclic. (Note that acyclic causal models are called “recursive” in
the causal models literature.)
Now let us consider the provenance recording scenario described in the introduction: say we have
some program that computes a function f : Dn →D whose implementation is unknown. We assume a
ﬁxed set of artifact nodes V that includes at least n input nodes v1,...,vn and a distinguished result node
v0. A provenance graph semantics for f is a function P f : Dn →PG(V), where PG is the set of all
provenance graphs over V.
What properties should a provenance graph semantics have, beyond simply assigning each input a
graph? We argue that there should be some relationship between the function f being described and
the “meaning” of the provenance graph. But for this to be sensible, we ﬁrst need to assign the graph a
computational meaning.
Given a sorting ar, an interpretation J−K associates each process name with a function JpK : Dar(p) →
D. (Such an interpretation is essentially an algebra over the ﬁrst-order signature (P,ar).) Given a graph
G with n input nodes v1,...,vn, we can therefore deﬁne a function JGK : Dn →D that takes a tuple of
values for the input nodes, applies the interpretation functions to calculate the values for all of the nodes,
and ﬁnally returns the value of the result node v0.
Given a provenance semantics P f for an unknown function f, we say that P f is a pointwise approxi-
mation of f if for each input⃗u, we have JP f(⃗u)K(⃗u) = f(⃗u). In other words, we can recompute the value
of f at⃗u directly using the provenance graph returned for⃗u.
Most graph-based provenance semantics implicitly satisfy this property. But observe that there is
always a trivial pointwise provenance semantics deﬁned by taking P f(⃗u) to be a graph where the result
node has no connection to the inputs and is labeled with f(⃗u). This is a pointwise approximation, but
gives us no insight into how the result depends on the inputs. Thus, capturing the original function point-
wise is intuitively necessary, but not sufﬁcient for the provenance graph to be informative. Something
more is needed.
Given a provenance semantics P for f, we say that P approximates f globally provided that for each
⃗u, we have JP f(⃗u)K = f. In other words, a global approximation yields a provenance graph that simulates
f on all inputs. Note that a global approximation exists if (and only if) the language of provenance graphs
is rich enough to express f. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne P f as the constant function that returns a provenance
graph that simply say “apply f”. Of course, if f is a large, opaque program then this may not be helpful.
The global criterion seems very strong: it requires the provenance graph to describe what would
happen under an arbitrary change to the input, which may be far more information than we need to
understand just one run of the program. Moreover, a global approximation semantics may not exist for
reasonable combinations of provenance graph languages and semantics. For example, if the provenance
graphs can make use of only arithmetic functions then we cannot globally approximate the behavior of
a program that calculates a properly recursive function such as factorial — there is no ﬁxed arithmetic
circuit that calculates factorials. On the other hand, for certain simple classes of workﬂows, global

6
approximation is possible, and clearly desirable.
Instead of an all-or-nothing correctness property, we now consider the possibility of measuring how
powerful a provenance semantics is as a way of predicting the function it is meant to represent.
Let P be a provenance semantics for f. We deﬁne a relation on input tuples⃗u as follows:
⃗u ⇝⃗u′ ⇐⇒JP f(⃗u)K(⃗u′) = f(⃗u′)
In other words, ⃗u ⇝⃗u′ holds just in case the provenance graph for f on ⃗u correctly predicts the value of
f on ⃗u′. That is, the relation ⇝quantiﬁes how the generality of the provenance graphs produced by f.
We call the relation ⇝the predictive power of provenance semantics P.
Observe that ⇝is reﬂexive if and only if P is pointwise approximation, and it is total if and only if
P is a global approximation. Furthermore, given two provenance semantics P1 and P2, we can compare
them by comparing their predictive power ⇝1 and ⇝2. Speciﬁcally, if ⇝1⊆⇝2 then P2 has at least as
much predictive power as P1, which we might write formally as P1 ≤P2. Note that two provenance
semantics might have equal predictive power but be very different as functions.
Given a language of provenance graphs and a ﬁxed interpretation of the process names they may
use, consider the problem of designing a provenance semantics for a given function f whose predictive
power is as great as possible. Some interesting questions we will leave for future work include: Is there
a unique “most powerful” semantics? Given the program text of f, is there an effective way to produce
the most powerful (or a reasonably good) semantics?
4
Causal models
In the discussion so far, the function f being investigated is essentially a black box — we can provide
inputs and observe the output, and nothing else. There may be intermediate states and values calculated
by f that are not visible externally, nor can we gain understanding of f by artiﬁcially altering intermediate
states. Understanding can often be aided by considering hypothetical changes in the middle of a process.
For example, suppose f is deﬁned as follows:
f(x,y,⃗z) =
g(⃗z)
(x2 −1)y
Then f(1,0,⃗z) is undeﬁned (division by zero), but there is no way to change just one input variable to
a value such that f is deﬁned. Of course, inspecting the deﬁnition of the function makes it obvious that
both x and y need to change, but if f is a black box and x and y are just two of many input parameters then
ﬁnding a way to change the inputs to ﬁx the problem would require many blind guesses. If we could see
inside of f and possibly change some intermediate error results to dummy valid results, then we might
be able to ﬁnd the problem more easily.
Structural causal models are (from a certain point of view) models of computation that permit some
inspection and intervention upon the intermediate results. We will now review standard deﬁnitions of
causal models and actual causes from [15, 16]
A causal model M = (U,V,F) is a structure where U is a set of inputs (or exogenous variables), V is
a set of (endogenous) variables, and F is a family of functions FX : (DV∪U →D) mapping each vertex X
in V to a function from tuples of data values to data values indexed by V. A causal graph G = (U ∪V,E)
for M is a directed graph whose vertices are inputs or events of M and such that FX depends only on
the values corresponding to parent vertices of X in G. We restrict attention to causal models whose
underlying graph is acyclic (these are sometimes called “recursive” models in the structural-models

J. Cheney
7
literature). For each acyclic causal model there is a unique least causal graph expressing all and only
the true dependencies of the functions FX.
A valuation is simply a V-indexed tuple of values in D, or σ : DV. We say a valuation is consistent if
for each X we have F(X)(σ) = σ(X). A causal model paired up with a (consistent) valuation is called a
(consistent) causal situation.
Interventions are a distinctive feature of causal models. Given a model M, we can form another
models M[X:=x] by ﬁxing the value of vertex X to x and making the value of X independent of its former
inputs. This reﬂects the fact that although the causal model represents the behavior of a closed system,
we can reach into the system (at least as a thought experiment) and change X to a value of our choice.
Deﬁnition 1. If M = (V,U,F) is a causal model, then the result of setting X to x in M is M[X:=x] =
(V,U,F′), where:
F′
Y(σ)
=
 x
| X = Y
FY(σ)
| X ̸= Y
If the appropriate variable X is clear from context, this may be written Mx.
We also review Halpern and Pearl’s deﬁnition of “actual cause”.
Deﬁnition 2 (Actual cause). Let (M,σ) be a causal situation. Let ⃗X be a subset of V and Y ∈V, and
suppose⃗x = σ(⃗X) and y = σ(Y). Suppose that:
1. σ(⃗X) =⃗x and σ(Y) = y.
2. Some set of variables W ⊆V −X and values⃗x′ ∈D, and ⃗w′ ∈D exist such that:
(a) Y ̸= y holds in M⃗x′,⃗w′
(b) Y = y holds in M⃗x,⃗w′,⃗z for all Z ⊆V −(X ∪W), where⃗z are the values of ⃗Z in M.
Then we say that ⃗X =⃗x is an weak cause of Y = y. Moreover, if no proper subset of ⃗X =⃗x is a weak
cause, then ⃗X =⃗x is an actual cause of Y = y.
The deﬁnition of actual cause deserves explanation. Brieﬂy, the idea is that an actual cause must
ﬁrst describe the true state of affairs (part 1). Secondly, there must be a way to change the value of Y
by changing the values of X (possibly plus some other variables W), and there must not be a way of
changing the value of Y by ﬁxing the values of X =⃗x, W = ⃗w′ and setting any other variables to their
original values. (In fact, the variables Z are usually between X and Y.)
For additional discussion we must refer the reader to Halpern and Pearl [15]. The discussion of actual
causes later in this paper does not depend heavily on the details of this deﬁnition.
5
Causal interpretations of provenance graphs
Given a ﬁxed interpretation of the process identiﬁers of a provenance graph G = (V,W,E), we can deﬁne
a causal model and a valuation (MG,σG). Suppose V = U′ ⊎V ′ where U′ is the set of input nodes in G
(that is, artifact nodes not generated by any process). Let MG = (U′,V ′ ∪W,F), where we deﬁne Fv(σ)
for v ∈V ′ as the (unique) value of σ(p) where p is the process node that generates v′, and Fp(σ) is the
interpretation function for node p in G, lifted to apply to σ by ignoring all values of nodes not used by p
in σ. Moreover, we deﬁne the valuation σG for MG by taking σG(v) to be the data value assigned to v in
G.
Just as the functional interpretation of a provenance graph can be viewed as a local approximation of
some unknown (functional) process, its causal model interpretation can be viewed as an approximation

8
of some unknown (causal) process. To make this idea precise, we introduce an abstract notion of “causal
functions” that support both ordinary evaluation and intervention.
A causal function over variables (U,V) is a family of functions fτ : DU →DV, one for each partial
valuation τ : V ⇀D. We write f for f/0, and we require that for each partial valuation τ and input
valuation σ we have τ ⊆fτ(σ). Thus, for example, f(σ) computes all of the values of variables directly
from the inputs without any interference, while f[X:=x,Y:=y](σ) calculates the values when X is forced to
be x and Y is forced to be y. Note that a causal model M deﬁnes a unique causal function, which we will
write JMK. On the other hand, the deﬁnition of causal function makes sense without talking about the
speciﬁc propagation mechanism used to calculate the values.
Suppose that f is a causal function with inputs U and variables V, and let P f be a function mapping
input values ⃗u ∈DU to causal models P f(⃗u) over inputs U and variables V. Then JP f(⃗u)K is again a
causal function for each⃗u.
We say that a provenance semantics P approximates f pointwise if for any⃗u, we have JP f(⃗u)K(⃗u) =
f(⃗u). That is, both the end results and intermediate states of P f agree with f. As with pointwise
approximations in the functional case, this is a rather weak speciﬁcation, since it is satisﬁed by deﬁning
P f(⃗u) as a disconnected causal process that simply deﬁnes each variable X ∈V to be a constant f(⃗u)(X).
Likewise, we can deﬁne P f to be a global approximation of f when JP f(⃗u)K = f for any ⃗u. Again,
this is very strong, since it says that f must be expressible as a single causal model — that is, the
provenance graph for f tells us everything about the causal structure of f.
Casual functions admit a third natural notion of approximation, which is strictly in between pointwise
and global approximation. We say that provenance semantics P f approximates f locally if for any⃗u, we
have
JP f(⃗u)Kτ(⃗u) = fτ(⃗u)
That is, approximating f locally does not require that showing how f would behave on arbitrary inputs,
but does ensure that we can predict how the particular run of f(⃗u) would change if we had intervened by
ﬁxing the values of the variables in V.
Local approximation is strictly stronger than pointwise approximation: clearly local implies point-
wise, but for a simple process such as Y := X +1;Z := Y ∗2 the trivial pointwise approximation is not a
local approximation. The requirement to handle arbitrary interventions forces us to do more than simply
record the actual values of the intermediate variables; instead, we must record at least some information
about how they were related.
On the other hand, global approximation obviously implies local approximation, but not the converse.
Local approximation is strictly weaker than global approximation, since there is no requirement that the
causal model obtained for a run on input ⃗u will be useful for predicting results or causal structure of f
running on another input. This allows different causal models to be used for different inputs, as long
as the causal structure of the model chosen for f only depends on depend on the input parameters, not
intermediate variable values.
For example, consider f(u;x,y) = (x+y)u, where the provenance graph may only employ multipli-
cation and addition. Then there is no single provenance graph that approximated f globally, but for each
choice of u there is a graph that describes the causal function x,y 7→f(u;x,y).
As with the functional case, we might also expect a causal model to have partial explanatory power
for other input settings. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the predictive power of P f as the relation:
⃗u ⇝⃗u′ ⇐⇒∀τ.JP f(⃗u)Kτ(⃗u′) = fτ(⃗u′)
In other words, ⃗u ⇝⃗u′ holds when the causal model generated from the provenance of ⃗u is a faithful
model of the behavior of f at⃗u′ under arbitrary interventions.

J. Cheney
9
For this deﬁnition of predictive power, local and global approximation correspond to reﬂexivity and
totality of ⇝. As with the functional case, we can compare provenance semantics by their predictive
power.
6
Inferences about causality in provenance
The OPM standard also describes inferences on provenance graphs. These inferences are formalized as
Datalog-style inference rules that allow us to infer new edges from existing edges. For our provenance
graphs, the relevant rules from the OPM standard include:
x wasDerivedFrom y
:−
x wasGeneratedBy p∧p used y
p wasTriggeredBy q
:−
p used x∧x wasGeneratedBy q
x wasDerivedFrom+ y
:−
x wasDerivedFrom y∨(x wasDerivedFrom z∧z wasDerivedFrom+ y)
p wasTriggeredBy+ q
:−
p wasTriggeredBy q∨(p wasTriggeredBy r ∧r wasTriggeredBy+ q)
For example, if process p “used” artifact x which “was generated by” process q, then we infer that p
“was triggered by” q. However it is important to note that the terms “used”, “was generated by” and
“inﬂuenced” are simply different edge labels whose relationship is being axiomatized by the Datalog
rules — there is no connection in the standard to the causal-model interpretation of provenance graphs
which we have introduced in this paper.
We want to give these edge relations meaning in terms of the causal model interpretation, and use this
as a basis for judging the correctness of inferences. In particular, we would like the edges to correspond
to causal relationships, as they are expected to do in OPM.
Consider a naive interpretation in which we interpret p used x as meaning that x = σ(x) was part of an
actual cause of p = σ(p) in MG, and likewise interpret x wasGeneratedBy p as meaning that p = σ(p)
was part of a actual cause of x = σ(x) in MG. However, this is a little too naive, since it is possible
for X = x to actually cause Y = y and Y = y to actually cause Z = z, while in OPM graphs, the used
and wasGeneratedBy edges should not have this behavior. We can ﬁx this by further constraining these
relations to hold only when there is no other actual cause “between” p and x. Using these deﬁnitions of
the basic edges, we can extrapolate meanings for the other edges using the Datalog rules: for example,
x wasDerivedFrom y means that Y = y is part of an actual cause of X = x and there is no other artifact
strictly between x and y, and wasDerivedFrom+ is the transitive closure, which (for a ﬁnite causal model)
is equivalent to saying that Y = y is part of an actual cause of X = x without any constraints. (We leave
these observations as conjectures for now.)
However, there is an important problem with the above situation: namely, we have deﬁned the mean-
ings of the edges in terms of the deﬁnition of actual cause, not in terms of the presence or absence of edges
in M. Although every actual cause relationship corresponds to an edge, there may also be edges that are
syntactically present in MG but do not correspond to immediate actual causes. The possible ﬂows of
information exhibited by the causal model do not always correspond to actual causes. In other words, the
Datalog rules are complete, but unsound, with respect to actual causality; the naive approach of simply
following all syntactic links to ﬁnd all nodes reachable from a given node is a safe over-approximation
(but it may be very inaccurate).
To clarify this point, we review some of the complexity results of Eiter and Lukasiewicz [11]. For
deterministic causal models, they study the complexity of several deﬁnitions of causality, including the
“actual cause” deﬁnition introduced by Halpern and Pearl [15]. They show that determining whether

10
a set of variables and values is an actual cause of another event is NP-hard, even for Boolean causal
models. These complexity lower bounds hold whether or not the function deﬁnitions are considered part
of the problem, since in the Boolean case the amount of information needed to describe the operators is
small. Datalog queries can be computed in polynomial time [19], so cannot in general correctly calculate
actual causes.
7
Related and future work
As discussed in the introduction, we draw on previous work on causality based on structural models in
artiﬁcial intelligence (see for example [24] for a comprehensive discussion of this work and its applica-
tions). The worst-case complexity and special cases of computing actual causes and causal explanations
is comprehensively studied by a series of papers by Eiter and Lucasiewicz [11, 12, 13]. As we have
noted, these have immediate applications to showing that simple transitive closure algorithms for ex-
tracting actual causes from provenance cannot sufﬁce for provenance inference, at least if Halpern and
Pearl’s deﬁnitions are used.
Halpern gave a well-received invited presentation on causality, responsibility and blame at a recent
workshop on provenance [5]. The analogy between causal models and provenance has been “in the air”
since then, and has been discussed in more recent work by Chapman et al. [4] and an overview paper by
Cheney et al. [9]
The treatment of causality here plays a similar role to dependence in previous work with Acar and
Ahmed on dependency provenance [7], and subsequently on a “complete provenance trace” model [6].
These models support some inference concerning how hypothetical changes to (parts of) the input affect
(parts of) the output. However, these techniques are based on a database query language supporting
arbitrarily nested sets and records, which do not seem to match structural causal models over atomic
data. Acar et al. [1] presents a translation from a core database query language to OPM-style provenance
graphs; the graphs in that work do not have a causal or computational interpretation, but exploring this
possibility is an obvious next step.
In this paper, we have focused on a (perhaps deceptively) simple setting where the provenance graphs
are directly analogous to causal models. It is not clear how far this analogy can be pushed using known
forms of causal models; it is possible that extensions to the causal framework are needed to provide
semantics for provenance models describing richer computational models. For example, matters likely
become more interesting in the presence of concurrent processes that may interact with one another (see
for example [28]). This is a common case in scientiﬁc workﬂow provenance and causal provenance
semantics should be developed for (or adapted to) models such as dataﬂow networks or process.
There are several other developments in structural causal models that would be interesting to ex-
plore from the point of view of provenance, including using probabilistic causal models to explain how
provenance can make unreliable computations statistically “repeatable”, and using existing deﬁnitions of
explanation, responsibility and blame for provenance.
Finally, as illustrated by the “cake” example, provenance records sometimes employ an implicit
notion of state and resource consumption. For example, in baking a cake, some inputs are “consumed”
(e.g. the ingredients), while others are only catalysts (e.g. the cake pan). The provenance model also
does not reﬂect time or resource usage. Of course, this kind of information can be added to the data
model (and the OPM draft already allows for both time and domain-speciﬁc annotations), but it would
be interesting to explore applications of linear or resource-sensitive logics to this setting.

J. Cheney
11
8
Conclusions
We have explored an analogy between the OPM-style provenance graphs that are becoming popular
in scientiﬁc workﬂow systems (and other settings) and structural causal models as developed by Pearl,
Halpern and others in artiﬁcial intelligence. In particular, a provenance graph can be interpreted as a
causal model in a natural way, provided that we know how to interpret the processing steps as func-
tions. We considered the problem of using provenance graphs to represent particular runs of a program.
Existing deﬁnitions and results concerning causal models can be lifted to provenance graphs.
We also investigated the problem of inferring actual causes over provenance graphs using Datalog-
style rules. As shown by the complexity of computing or calculating explanations in the Halpern-Pearl
approach is quite high (usually at least NP-hard), which shows that, for example, queries about actual
cause or explanation cannot be expressed using Datalog rules, even in the special case of provenance
graphs over Boolean functions. This shows that Halpern and Pearl’s deﬁnitions of actual cause and the
ad hoc rules that have been proposed for reasoning about provenance graphs are incompatible.
These observations are not deep — they amount to applying known results in the structural causality
literature to analyze informal claims in the provenance literature. Adopting a different model of causality
might lead to different conclusions. Nevertheless, we believe that the exercise of trying to formalize
the relationship between provenance and causal explanation has not been seriously tried before and is
worthwhile, if for no other reason than to provoke others to do a better job.
