arXiv:2401.00776v2  [cs.RO]  9 Jun 2025
Edge Computing based Human-Robot Cognitive
Fusion: A Medical Case Study in the Autism
Spectrum Disorder Therapy
Qin Yang
Intelligent Social Systems and Swarm Robotics Lab (IS3R)
Computer Science and Information Systems Department
Bradley University, Peoria, USA

Abstract—In recent years, edge computing has served as
a paradigm that enables many future technologies like AI,
Robotics, IoT, and high-speed wireless sensor networks (like 5G)
by connecting cloud computing facilities and services to the end
users. Especially in medical and healthcare applications, it pro-
vides remote patient monitoring and increases voluminous multi-
media. From the robotics angle, robot-assisted therapy (RAT) is
an active-assistive robotic technology in rehabilitation robotics,
attracting researchers to study and benefit people with disability
like autism spectrum disorder (ASD) children. However, the main
challenge of RAT is that the model capable of detecting the
affective states of ASD people exists and can recall individual
preferences. Moreover, involving expert diagnosis and recom-
mendations to guide robots in updating the therapy approach
to adapt to different statuses and scenarios is a crucial part of
the ASD therapy process. This paper proposes the architecture
of edge cognitive computing by combining human experts and
assisted robots collaborating in the same framework to achieve a
seamless remote diagnosis, round-the-clock symptom monitoring,
emergency warning, therapy alteration, and advanced assistance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Edge Computing offers the full computation or part of the
computation that can process the data at the edge network,
which enables low latency, faster response, and more compre-
hensive data analysis [1]. The connected devices can provide
services in AI, robotics, autonomous driving, smart cities,
healthcare, medical diagnosis, smart grids, multimedia, and
security through the edge network. As one of the significant
components of the smart city, the field of smart healthcare
emerges from the need to improve the management of the
healthcare sector, better utilize its resources, and reduce its
cost while maintaining or even enhancing its quality level [2].
Traditional smart healthcare systems can be divided into three
layers: the collection layer (gathering the sensing data from
patients), the transmission layer (sending the data to the base
station through the intelligent terminal), and the analysis layer
(analyzing the data in the cloud data center), which lack of
real-time monitor, emergency service, and comprehensive dis-
ease analysis, high communication latency, inflexible network
resource deployment, etc [3]. Although the recent 5G network
can support edge computing–based healthcare systems, several
challenges still hinder its application and benefits to the entire
Edge Cognitive Computing
Expert 
Recomendations
Medical Resources
Legend:
Edge Layer
Cloud Layer
IoT Layer
Cognitive Data
Collection & 
Fusion
Cognitive Data
Server
Medical
Sensors
Edge 
Intelligent
Robots
Ambient
Sensors
Cloud
Gateway
...
...
Bsae
Station
Resource & Therapy
Management Server
Cognitive Data
Alaysis and Risk
Evaluation
Updated Therapy Scheme
Real-time Cognitive Fusion Data
& Daily Behavior Data 
Resources
Optimization
Strategy
Fig. 1. The illustration of the proposed architecture of cognitive computing
based on Human-Robot cognitive fusion.
human community, such as large-scale healthcare, big data
management, and patient information privacy [4]. Especially
when integrating AI and robotics technology, future medical
and healthcare applications will involve vast amounts of real-
time clinical data computation and analysis. Moreover, com-
bining human experts’ feedback based on real-time results
from intelligent terminals is also critical for the future of
medical systems and smart healthcare, which can provide pro-
fessional recommendations, personalized services, and corre-
sponding accurate medical treatment measures. Taking robot-
assisted therapy (RAT) for autism spectrum disorder (ASD)1 as
an example, it is essential to enable RAT to adapt to individual
unique and changing needs. [5] formalized personalization as
a hierarchical human-robot learning framework consisting of
five controllers mediated by a meta-controller that utilized
reinforcement learning to personalize instruction challenge
levels and robot feedback based on each user’s unique learning
patterns. To some extent, although it achieves long-term in-
home deployments with children with ASD, it is hard to clarify
1ASD is a developmental disability caused by differences in the brain,
which affects the patients’ normal interactions, such as learning, moving,
communicating, and paying attention.

the role of human experts in the therapy section and further
improve their social skills in the real world. Therefore, the
quality of the machine-to-machine communication and the
human-robot interaction data fusion is the pre-condition for
providing efficient and effective medical service, which can
improve patient care experience and increase flexibility and
adaptability from a business perspective [6].
From the cognitive computing perspective, [3] introduces
the
Edge-Cognitive-Computing-based
(ECC-based)
smart
healthcare system, which can monitor and analyze users’
physical health using cognitive computing and solve the prob-
lems of inflexible network resource deployment. [7] develops
a multi-language robot interface based on edge computing,
helping evaluate seniors’ mental health by interacting through
questions. However, from the edge intelligent devices (like
robots) angle [8], there are still several open questions in
RAT for healthcare, such as what the best roles for robots
are in therapy, how to develop a general approach to integrate
robots into interventions adapting various patients’ needs and
recognize their status, and who among individuals with the
specific symptoms are best suited for this approach, especially
in RAT for ASD [9].
From the system design perspective, edging computing in-
volves complex and heterogeneous architecture, which makes
it hard to build a general framework for every edging comput-
ing application ultimately [10]. Particularly, smart healthcare
systems are dynamic, flexible, and complex systems with
unpredictable behaviors and need to organize resources and
personalize diverse services efficiently [2].
In order to address those challenges, this paper proposes
the architecture of the edge computing by combining hu-
man experts and assisted robots collaborating in the same
framework to help ASD patients with long-term support. By
integrating the real-time computing and analysis of a new
cognitive robotic model for ASD therapy based on cognitive-
behavior therapy (CBT) [11] with the proposed architecture,
it can achieve a seamless remote diagnosis, round-the-clock
symptom monitoring, emergency warning, therapy alteration,
and advanced assistance. Fig. 1 outlines the proposed archi-
tecture of edge cognitive computing and we list the main
contributions of this research as follow:
• We introduce the edge intelligent robot integrating cog-
nitive data from patients and related ambient information
by building the corresponding network architecture to
achieve timely human expert recommendations and real-
time medical resource optimization strategies;
• We design four stages of robot-assisted therapy (RAT)
based on cognitive models of humor development to help
ASD patients gradually master different levels of social
and communication skills.
II. BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES
This section briefly reviews cognitive robotics and provide
a brief background to the cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT).
When describing a specific method, we use the notations and
relative definitions from the corresponding papers.
A. Cognitive Robotics
Cognitive robotics studies the mechanisms, architectures,
and constraints that allow lifelong and open-ended improve-
ment of perceptual, reasoning, planning, social, knowledge
acquisition, and decision-making skills in embodied machines
[12]. Since cognitive modeling uses symbolic coding schemes
depicting the world, perception, action, and symbolic repre-
sentation become the core issues in cognitive robotics [13]–
[15]. Related disciplines are not just artificial intelligence
and robotics but also neuroscience, cognitive science, devel-
opmental psychology, sociology, and so on [16]. Especially
building a value system to mimic the “brain” of an AI agent
mapping behavioral responses for sensed external phenomena
is the core component of cognitive robotics, which is also an
emerging and specialized sub-field in neurorobotics, robotics,
and artificial cognitive systems research [17].
Here, the value measures an agent’s effort to expend to
obtain a reward or avoid punishment [18]. It is not hard-
wired for an AI agent, even a biological entity, and the specific
value system achieved through experience reflects an agent’s
subjective evaluation of the sensory space [19]. And the value
mechanisms usually have been defined as the expected values,
particularly in uncertain environments. Moreover, the innate
value reflects an agent’s subjective evaluation of the sensory
space, but the acquired value is shaped through experience
during its development.
According to the development of cognitive robotics, the
existing value systems can mainly be classified into three
categories. Neuroanatomical Systems discuss the explainable
biologically inspired value systems design from neuroanatomy
and physiology perspectives [20]; Neural Networks Systems
build more abstract models through mathematical approaches
to mimic the agent’s value systems; Motivational Systems
consider the model that agents interact with environments
to satisfy their innate values, and the typical mechanism is
reinforcement learning (RL) [21]–[23].
B. Cognitive-Behavior Therapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychother-
apeutic treatment that helps people learn how to identify
and change destructive or disturbing thought patterns that
negatively influence their behavior and emotions [24]. It is
based on the cognitive model [25], which hypothesizes that
people’s emotions, behaviors, and physiology are influenced
by their perception of events. In all forms of CBT that are
derived from Beck’s model [26], treatment is based on a
cognitive formulation, beliefs, and behavioral strategies that
characterize a specific disorder [27].
CBT involves a wide range of strategies to help peo-
ple overcome negative patterns, such as identifying negative
thoughts, practicing new social skills, SMART goal-setting,
stress problem-solving, and self-monitoring [11]. It can be
used as a short-term treatment to help individuals learn to
focus on present thoughts and beliefs (symptoms like ad-
diction, anger issues, anxiety, depression, etc.) and improve

mental health conditions (like chronic pain, insomnia, stress
management, etc.) [24].
III. APPROACH OVERVIEW
This section discusses the details of the proposed architec-
ture of cognitive computing and cognitive models of the edge
intelligent robot based on cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT)
for ASD.
A. Cognitive Computing Architecture
To organize the medical resources and manage a real-time
healthcare system, it is crucial to define cognitive computing
modules in the network edge clearly and implement corre-
sponding cognitive analysis of the users’ physical health data
and ambient information. It can lower latency and guarantee
the delivery of reliable and latest patient information and
analysis results to doctors or experts.
Our proposed edge cognitive computing architecture (Fig. 1)
leverages information collection and recognition, data fusion
and analysis, resource strategy optimization, human expert
recommendations, and real-time therapy updating, providing
high energy efficiency, low cost, and high user Quality of
Experience (QoE).
1) Cloud Layer: In the cloud layer, we consider two kinds
of servers – Cognitive Data Server and Resource and Therapy
Management Server – to analyze cognitive data, evaluate
patients’ risks, optimize resource strategies, and update therapy
schemes. We introduce them as follow:
a. Cognitive Data Server
The server collects the cognitive fusion data from all edge
intelligent robots, including users’ physical signals and daily
behavior data, and related internal network information such
as the network type, service data flow, communication qual-
ity, and other dynamic environmental parameters. Moreover,
according to users’ priority level, the cognitive data server
will distribute corresponding network and medical resources
based on patients’ risk evaluation. Furthermore, doctors or
experts will receive the results of analyzed cognitive data
and provide professional suggestions about the specific user
case, such as updated prescriptions and medical instructions.
Combining the surveillance cognitive information of users,
the dynamic network resource information, and professional
recommendations from experts provides the maximum edge
computing resources to users based on their disease risk levels
and significantly improves the QoE and healing probability.
b. Resource and Therapy Management Server
Through receiving the analysis results from the cognitive
data server, this server will learn resources about edge cloud
computing, network communication, and medicine. Then, it
optimizes scheduling strategies and distributes correspond-
ing resources in real-time. Moreover, the server sends the
integrated resource data back to the cognitive data server,
updating its database. Specifically, the server can achieve
resource optimization and energy saving by implementing the
computing unload, handover strategy, caching and delivery,
and the corresponding intelligent algorithms [3], which can
meet various heterogeneous application requirements.
2) Edge Layer: Instead of constantly moving data to the
cloud for computing operations, which accounts for the energy
costs, in the edge layer, data can be mined and processed on
edge devices and servers closer to the user [28]. Moreover,
compared with traditional edge devices, we define a novel
edge intelligent robot for medical applications and smart health
care, which not only can collect and process data from users
and the environment but also serve as the medical equipment
or tool to cure patients.
Specifically, the edge intelligent robot needs to first integrate
its perception data, such as voice, image, and video, with
the data of medical sensors worn in patients and ambient
sensors deployed in environments as a standard structure
data flow uploading to the cloud layer through a high-speed
sensor network like 5G. Furthermore, it executes the current or
updated therapy scheme or instructions from the cloud layer to
interact with patients, guiding them to fulfill the corresponding
treatment. Moreover, it records all the interaction data and
related medical parameters, sending them to the cloud layer
for deeper analysis and human expert references.
More importantly, the edge intelligent robot can provide
patients with 24-hour surveillance and care. If any emergency
happens, it will inform the hospital or doctors through the
network the first time and get the corresponding resources
to tackle them, avoiding many human errors in traditional
medical treatment.
3) IoT Layer: The IoT layer contains various devices and
sensors, which can be classified into medical and ambient cate-
gories. The medical sensors were worn by patients, monitoring
their status and recording related health parameters. They
mainly collect the real-time physiological data of the user,
which include electrocardiography (ECG), electromyography
(EMG), respiration, heartbeat, body temperature, systolic pres-
sure, and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2). The physiological
data will be uploaded to the nearby edge computing node (edge
intelligent robot) at the same time.
On the other hand, the ambient sensors are in charge of the
surveillance of patient treatment environments and reserving
various ambient information, such as ambient temperature,
humidity, air quality, atmospheric pressure, etc., for further
medical analysis and reference. Moreover, these devices trans-
mit data to the edge intelligent robot and exchange informa-
tion with the cloud through the high-speed communication
network.
B. Cognitive Models of the Edge Intelligent Robot
In this section, we take the treatment of autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) as an example and propose robot-assisted ther-
apy (RAT) based on cognitive models of humor development
to help ASD patients gradually master different levels of social
and communication skills.
Through above discussed edge cognitive computing net-
work, the edge intelligent robot implements this therapy based
on the results of cognitive data analysis and is guided by expert
recommendations at each stage to cure the patients. We discuss
more details as follow:

(a) Entry Level: an Example of the Assisted Robot’s
Behavior Trees of “Aladdin and the Magic Lamp”.
(b) Basic Level: Assisted Robot’s Behavior Trees (c) Middle Level: an Example of the Assisted
Robot’s Behavior Trees of the Knock knock joke.
(d) Advanced Level: Examples of Assisted
Robot’s Behavior Trees of the Sarcastic Jokes.
TABLE I
FOUR STAGES OF HUMOR DEVELOPMENT THROUGH RAT
Therapy
Stage
Cognitive
Stage
Humor
Style
RAT
Data
Type
Entry
Level
Sensorimotor
Stage
Incongruous
Actions
Funny
Behaviors
images
Basic
Level
Sensorimotor
Stage
Incongruous
Events
Interesting
Expression
Image,
Voice
Middle
Level
Preoperational
Stage
Conceptual
Incongruity
Knock-
Knock Jokes
Image,
Voice
Advanced
Level
Concrete
Operations
Multiple
Meanings
Sarcastic
Jokes
Image,
Voice
1) Humor Styles for Cognitive Distortions: The type of
humor reflects the cognitive development of people and the
level of their social skills [29]. Humor styles are potential me-
diators of the association between cognitive and interpersonal
vulnerability factors and psychological dysfunction, distress,
or poor interpersonal functioning [30]. To some extent, by
improving their sense of humor, ASD patients can gradually
enhance their communication skills and enter the mutual
socialization process with others [31].
Based on what McGhee [32] described, this research con-
siders four stages of humor development in the whole CBT
process. Using the assisted robot to design different funny sce-
narios and jokes treats ASD patients, especially the children,
in their corresponding periods. Tab. I illustrates the four stages
of human development through RAT in our research.
2) Behavior Tree based Humor Styles Representation:
According to the above discussion, we design four specific
application cases representing them as behavior trees (BT)
[33] to improve patients’ experience and enhance the effect
of the RAT in different stages of ASD.
a. Entry Level: Funny Behaviors
Patients with less social skills enjoy interactions with famil-
iar objects or games by creating something new or different
out of them. Therefore, at the entry level, we design three sce-
narios (playing ball, chasing, and spinning) to let the assisted
robot interact with patients, helping them develop interests and
willingness to communicate and make new friends. Fig. 2(a)
shows the three scenarios as the BT.
b. Basic Level
As patients develop interests and are not resistant to com-
municating with new partners, they become willing to use
language and gestures for fun and to engage others. There
may be some overlap between Entry Level and Basic Level in
humor development, but the distinguishing feature of the Basic
Level is that a ”verbal statement alone creates the incongruity
and leads to laughter” [32].
At this point, humor becomes a significant part of social
skill development. In order to help patients gain positive
emotional reactions from their partners, we create a simple
pretend game2 – Aladdin and the Magic Lamp – to let
them play with the robot, adding social reinforcement to the
fun. Fig. 2(b) illustrates an example of the Assisted Robot’s
Behavior Trees of “Aladdin and the Magic Lamp”. Here, the
assisted robot plays the Magic Lamp and the patient plays the
Aladdin.
c. Middle Level
When patients master the above two levels of humor, their
cognition will develop to Piaget’s Preoperational Stage [35].
Humor can be regarded as the intellectual play expressed
through language [36], and the production and appreciation
of humor also change.
In this intellectual linguistic play, the listener needs to
understand the double meanings of words to find it humorous
[31]. At this stage, making others laugh becomes the reward of
social approval, which can drive patients to develop this social
language skill. Knock-knock jokes and other ready-made jokes
are popular at this level. Considering knock-knock jokes and
other ready-made jokes are popular, we design the scenarios
of knock-knock jokes to support patients interacting with the
robot at this level (Fig. 2(c)).
d. Advanced Level
2Pretend game is a loosely structured form of play that generally includes
role-play, object substitution, and nonliteral behavior [34].

In the cognitive stage of concrete operations [35], patients
will improve mental operations to analyze multiple aspects
of a situation and perform tasks at a higher level than they
could in the preoperational stage. They need to understand
the meanings of puns and other forms of more abstract humor
and can use inductive and deductive reasoning and reversibility
in thinking about the beginning, middle, and end points of
a funny story or joke [31]. Teasing and sarcastic jokes are
commonly used at this level. Fig. 2(d) illustrates two examples
of assisted robot’s BT of sarcastic jokes.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper introduces a novel architecture of edge cognitive
computing integrating human experts and edge intelligent
robots collaborating in the same framework to form the next
generation of medical and smart healthcare systems. It can
achieve a seamless remote diagnosis, round-the-clock symp-
tom monitoring, emergency warning, therapy alteration, and
advanced assistance.
For the next step, we want to implement our methods
in real robots, such as Unitree Go2, and test them in the
AWS wavelength framework. Furthermore, we want to apply
the architecture in a real hospital medical system to test its
robustness and effectiveness.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the NSF Foundational Research
in Robotics (FRR) Award 2348013.
