Robust Average-Reward Markov Decision Processes
Yue Wang,1 Alvaro Velasquez, 2 George Atia, 3 Ashley Prater-Bennette, 4 Shaofeng Zou 1
1 University at Buffalo, The State University of New York
2 University of Colorado Boulder
3 University of Central Florida
4 Air Force Research Laboratory

Abstract
In robust Markov decision processes (MDPs), the uncertainty
in the transition kernel is addressed by ﬁnding a policy that
optimizes the worst-case performance over an uncertainty set
of MDPs. While much of the literature has focused on dis-
counted MDPs, robust average-reward MDPs remain largely
unexplored. In this paper, we focus on robust average-reward
MDPs, where the goal is to ﬁnd a policy that optimizes the
worst-case average reward over an uncertainty set. We ﬁrst
take an approach that approximates average-reward MDPs
using discounted MDPs. We prove that the robust discounted
value function converges to the robust average-reward as the
discount factor γ goes to 1, and moreover, when γ is large,
any optimal policy of the robust discounted MDP is also an
optimal policy of the robust average-reward. We further design
a robust dynamic programming approach, and theoretically
characterize its convergence to the optimum. Then, we in-
vestigate robust average-reward MDPs directly without using
discounted MDPs as an intermediate step. We derive the robust
Bellman equation for robust average-reward MDPs, prove that
the optimal policy can be derived from its solution, and further
design a robust relative value iteration algorithm that provably
ﬁnd its solution, or equivalently, the optimal robust policy.
Introduction
A Markov decision process (MDP) is an effective mathemat-
ical tool for sequential decision-making in stochastic envi-
ronments (Derman 1970; Puterman 1994). Solving an MDP
problem entails ﬁnding an optimal policy that maximizes a
cumulative reward according to a given criterion. However,
in practice there could exist a mismatch between the assumed
MDP model and the underlying environment due to various
factors, such as non-stationarity of the environment, model-
ing error, exogenous perturbation, partial observability, and
adversarial attacks. The ensuing model mismatch could result
in solution policies with poor performance.
This challenge spurred noteworthy efforts on developing
and analyzing a framework of robust MDPs e.g., (Bagnell,
Ng, and Schneider 2001; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Iyengar
2005). Rather than adopting a ﬁxed MDP model, in the robust
MDP setting, one seeks to optimize the worst-case perfor-
mance over an uncertainty set of possible MDP models. The
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
solution to the robust MDP problem provides performance
guarantee for all uncertain MDP models, and is thus robust
to the model mismatch.
Robust MDP problems falling under different reward op-
timality criteria are fundamentally different. In robust dis-
counted MDPs, the goal is to ﬁnd a policy that maximizes
the discounted cumulative reward in the worst case. In this
setting, as the agent interacts with the environment, the re-
ward received diminishes exponentially over time. Much of
the prior work in the robust setting has focused on the dis-
counted reward formulation. The model-based method, e.g.,
(Iyengar 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Bagnell, Ng, and
Schneider 2001; Satia and Lave Jr 1973; Wiesemann, Kuhn,
and Rustem 2013; Tamar, Mannor, and Xu 2014; Lim and
Autef 2019; Xu and Mannor 2010; Yu and Xu 2015; Lim, Xu,
and Mannor 2013), where information about the uncertainty
set is assumed to be known to the learner, unveiled several
fundamental characterizations of robust discounted MDPs.
This was further extended to the more practical model-free
setting in which only samples from a simulator (the cen-
troid of the uncertainty set) are available to the learner. For
example, the value-based method (Roy, Xu, and Pokutta
2017; Badrinath and Kalathil 2021; Wang and Zou 2021;
Tessler, Efroni, and Mannor 2019; Zhou et al. 2021; Yang,
Zhang, and Zhang 2021; Panaganti and Kalathil 2021; Goyal
and Grand-Clement 2018; Kaufman and Schaefer 2013; Ho,
Petrik, and Wiesemann 2018, 2021; Si et al. 2020) optimizes
the worst-case performance using the robust value function
as an intermediate step; on the other hand, the model-free
policy-based method (Russel, Benosman, and Van Baar 2020;
Derman, Geist, and Mannor 2021; Eysenbach and Levine
2021; Wang and Zou 2022) directly optimizes the policy and
is thus scalable to large/continuous state and action spaces.
Although discounted MDPs induce an elegant Bellman op-
erator that is a contraction, and have been studied extensively,
the policy obtained usually has poor long-term performance
when a system operates for an extended period of time. When
the discount factor is very close to 1, the agent may prefer
to compare policies on the basis of their average expected
reward instead of their expected total discounted reward, e.g.,
queueing control, inventory management in supply chains,
scheduling automatic guided vehicles and applications in
communication networks (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013).
Therefore, it is also important to optimize the long-term aver-
arXiv:2301.00858v2  [cs.LG]  1 Mar 2023

age performance of a system.
However, robust MDPs under the average-reward crite-
rion are largely understudied. Compared to the discounted
setting, the average-reward setting depends on the limiting
behavior of the underlying stochastic process, and hence is
markedly more intricate. A recognized instance of such in-
tricacy concerns the one-to-one correspondence between the
stationary policies and the limit points of state-action frequen-
cies, which while true for discounted MDPs, breaks down
under the average-reward criterion even in the non-robust
setting except in some very special cases (Puterman 1994;
Atia et al. 2021). This is largely due to dependence of the
necessary conditions for establishing a contraction in average-
reward settings on the graph structure of the MDP, versus the
discounted-reward setting where it simply sufﬁces to have
a discount factor that is strictly less than one. Heretofore,
only a handful of studies have considered average-reward
MDPs in the robust setting. The ﬁrst work by (Tewari and
Bartlett 2007) considers robust average-reward MDPs un-
der a speciﬁc ﬁnite interval uncertainty set, but their method
is not easily applicable to other uncertainty sets. More re-
cently, (Lim, Xu, and Mannor 2013) proposed an algorithm
for robust average-reward MDPs under the ℓ1 uncertainty
set. However, obtaining fundamental characterizations of the
problem and convergence guarantee remains elusive.
Challenges and Contributions
In this paper, we derive characterizations of robust average-
reward MDPs with general uncertainty sets, and develop
model-based approaches with provable theoretical guarantee.
Our approach is fundamentally different from previous work
on robust discounted MDPs, robust and non-robust average-
reward MDPs. In particular, the key challenges and the main
contributions are summarized below.
• We characterize the limiting behavior of robust dis-
counted value function as the discount factor γ →1.
For the standard non-robust setting and for a speciﬁc tran-
sition kernel, the discounted non-robust value function con-
verges to the average-reward non-robust value function as
γ →1 (Puterman 1994). However, in the robust setting, we
need to consider the worst-case limiting behavior under all
possible transition kernels in the uncertainty set. Hence, the
previous point-wise convergence result (Puterman 1994)
cannot be directly applied. In (Tewari and Bartlett 2007),
a ﬁnite interval uncertainty set is studied, where due to its
special structure, the number of possible worst-case transi-
tion kernels of robust discounted MDPs is ﬁnite, and hence
the order of min (over transition kernel) and limγ→1 can be
exchanged, and therefore, the robust discounted value func-
tion converges to the robust average-reward value function.
This result, however, does not hold for general uncertainty
sets investigated in this paper. We ﬁrst prove the uniform
convergence of discounted non-robust value function to
average-reward w.r.t. the transition kernels and policies.
Based on this uniform convergence, we show the conver-
gence of the robust discounted value function to the robust
average-reward. This uniform convergence result is the
ﬁrst in the literature and is of key importance to motivate
our algorithm design and to guarantee convergence to the
optimal robust policy in the average-reward setting.
• We design algorithms for robust policy evaluation and
optimal control based on the limit method. Based on the
uniform convergence, we then use robust discounted MDPs
to approximate robust average-reward MDPs. We show that
when γ is large, any optimal policy of the robust discounted
MDP is also an optimal policy of the robust average-reward,
and hence solves the robust optimal control problem in the
average reward setting. This result is similar to the Black-
well optimality (Blackwell 1962; Hordijk and Yushkevich
2002) for the non-robust setting, however, our proof is fun-
damentally different. Technically, the proof in (Blackwell
1962; Hordijk and Yushkevich 2002) is based on the fact
that the difference between the discounted value functions
of two policies is a rational function of the discount factor,
which has a ﬁnite number of zeros. However, in the robust
setting with a general uncertainty set, the difference is no
longer a rational function due to the min over the transition
kernel. We construct a novel proof based on the limiting
behavior of robust discounted MDPs, and show that the
(optimal) robust discounted value function converges to the
(optimal) robust average-reward as γ →1. Motivated by
these insights, we then design our algorithms by applying
a sequence of robust discounted Bellman operators while
increasing the discount factor at a certain rate. We prove
that our method can (i) evaluate the robust average-reward
for a given policy and; (ii) ﬁnd the optimal robust value
function and, in turn, the optimal robust policy for general
uncertainty sets.
• We design a robust relative value iteration method
without using the discounted MDPs as an intermedi-
ate step. We further pursue a direct approach that solves
the robust average-reward MDPs without using the limit
method, i.e., without using discounted MDPs as an interme-
diate step. We derive a robust Bellman equation for robust
average-reward MDPs, and show that the pair of robust rel-
ative value function and robust average-reward is a solution
to the robust Bellman equation under the average-reward
setting. We further prove that if we can ﬁnd any solution
to the robust Bellman equation, then the optimal policy
can be derived by a greedy approach. The problem hence
can be equivalently solved by solving the robust Bellman
equation. We then design a robust value iteration method
which provably converges to the solution of the robust Bell-
man equation, i.e., solve the optimal policy for the robust
average-reward MDP problem.
Related Work
Robust discounted MDPs. Model-based methods for robust
discounted MDPs were studied in (Iyengar 2005; Nilim and
El Ghaoui 2004; Bagnell, Ng, and Schneider 2001; Satia and
Lave Jr 1973; Wiesemann, Kuhn, and Rustem 2013; Lim and
Autef 2019; Xu and Mannor 2010; Yu and Xu 2015; Lim, Xu,
and Mannor 2013; Tamar, Mannor, and Xu 2014), where the
uncertainty set is assumed to be known, and the problem can
be solved using robust dynamic programming. Later, the stud-
ies were generalized to the model-free setting where stochas-

tic samples from the centroid MDP of the uncertainty set are
available in an online fashion (Roy, Xu, and Pokutta 2017;
Badrinath and Kalathil 2021; Wang and Zou 2021, 2022;
Tessler, Efroni, and Mannor 2019) and an ofﬂine fashion
(Zhou et al. 2021; Yang, Zhang, and Zhang 2021; Panaganti
and Kalathil 2021; Goyal and Grand-Clement 2018; Kaufman
and Schaefer 2013; Ho, Petrik, and Wiesemann 2018, 2021;
Si et al. 2020). There are also empirical studies on robust
RL, e.g., (Vinitsky et al. 2020; Pinto et al. 2017; Abdullah
et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2020; Rajeswaran et al. 2017; Huang
et al. 2017; Kos and Song 2017; Lin et al. 2017; Pattanaik
et al. 2018; Mandlekar et al. 2017). For discounted MDPs,
the robust Bellman operator is a contraction, based on which
robust dynamic programming and value-based methods can
be designed. In this paper, we focus on robust average-reward
MDPs. However, the robust Bellman operator for average-
reward MDPs is not a contraction, and its ﬁxed point may
not be unique. Moreover, the average-reward setting depends
on the limiting behavior of the underlying stochastic process,
which is thus more intricate.
Robust average-reward MDPs. Studies on robust average-
reward MDPs are quite limited in the literature. Robust
average-reward MDPs under a speciﬁc ﬁnite interval uncer-
tainty set was studied in (Tewari and Bartlett 2007), where the
authors showed the existence of a Blackwell optimal policy,
i.e., there exists some δ ∈[0, 1), such that the optimal robust
policy exists and remains unchanged for any discount factor
γ ∈[δ, 1). However, this result depends on the structure of
the uncertainty set. For general uncertainty sets, the existence
of a Blackwell optimal policy may not be guaranteed. More
recently, (Lim, Xu, and Mannor 2013) designed a model-free
algorithm for a speciﬁc ℓ1-norm uncertainty set and charac-
terized its regret bound. However, their method also relies on
the structure of the ℓ1-norm uncertainty set, and may not be
generalizable to other types of uncertainty sets. In this paper,
our results can be applied to various types of uncertainty sets,
and thus is more general.
Preliminaries and Problem Model
In this section, we introduce some preliminaries on dis-
counted MDPs, average-reward MDPs, and robust MDPs.
Discounted MDPs. A discounted MDP (S, A, P, r, γ) is
speciﬁed by: a state space S, an action space A, a transi-
tion kernel P = {pa
s ∈∆(S), a ∈A, s ∈S}1, where pa
s is
the distribution of the next state over S upon taking action a
in state s (with pa
s,s′ denoting the probability of transitioning
to s′), a reward function r : S × A →[0, 1], and a discount
factor γ ∈[0, 1). At each time step t, the agent at state st
takes an action at, the environment then transitions to the
next state st+1 according to pat
st , and produces a reward sig-
nal r(st, at) ∈[0, 1] to the agent. In this paper, we also write
rt = r(st, at) for convenience.
A stationary policy π : S →∆(A) is a distribution over
A for any given state s, and the agent takes action a at state
s with probability π(a|s). The discounted value function of
a stationary policy π starting from s ∈S is deﬁned as the
1∆(S): the (|S| −1)-dimensional probability simplex on S.
expected discounted cumulative reward by following policy
π: V π
P,γ(s) ≜Eπ,P [P∞
t=0 γtrt|S0 = s].
Average-Reward MDPs. Different from discounted MDPs,
average-reward MDPs do not discount the reward over time,
and consider the behavior of the underlying Markov process
under the steady-state distribution. More speciﬁcally, under a
speciﬁc transition kernel P, the average-reward of a policy π
starting from s ∈S is deﬁned as
gπ
P(s) ≜lim
n→∞Eπ,P
 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rt|S0 = s

,
(1)
which we also refer to in this paper as the average-reward
value function for convenience.
The average-reward value function can also be equiva-
lently written as follows: gπ
P = limn→∞1
n
Pn−1
t=0 (Pπ)trπ ≜
Pπ
∗rπ, where (Pπ)s,s′
≜P
a π(a|s)pa
s,s′ and rπ(s) ≜
P
a π(a|s)r(s, a) are the transition matrix and reward func-
tion induced by π, and Pπ
∗≜limn→∞1
n
Pn−1
t=0 (Pπ)t is the
limit matrix of Pπ.
In the average-reward setting, we also deﬁne the following
relative value function
V π
P (s) ≜Eπ,P
 ∞
X
t=0
(rt −gπ
P)|S0 = s

,
(2)
which is the cumulative difference over time between the
reward and the average value gπ
P. It has been shown that
(Puterman 1994): V π
P = Hπ
Prπ, where Hπ
P ≜(I −Pπ +
Pπ
∗)−1(I −Pπ
∗) is deﬁned as the deviation matrix of Pπ.
The relationship between the average-reward and the rel-
ative value functions can be characterized by the following
Bellman equation (Puterman 1994):
V π
P (s) = Eπ

r(s, A) −gπ
P(s) +
X
s′∈S
pA
s,s′V π
P (s′)

.
(3)
Robust discounted and average-reward MDPs. For robust
MDPs, the transition kernel is not ﬁxed but belongs to some
uncertainty set P. After the agent takes an action, the envi-
ronment transits to the next state according to an arbitrary
transition kernel P ∈P. In this paper, we focus on the (s, a)-
rectangular uncertainty set (Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Iyen-
gar 2005), i.e., P = N
s,a Pa
s, where Pa
s ⊆∆(S). We note
that there are also studies on relaxing the (s, a)-rectangular
uncertainty set to s-rectangular uncertainty set, which is not
the focus of this paper.
Under the robust setting, we consider the worst-case perfor-
mance over the uncertainty set of MDPs. More speciﬁcally,
the robust discounted value function of a policy π for a dis-
counted MDP is deﬁned as
V π
P,γ(s) ≜
min
κ∈N
t≥0 P Eπ,κ
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt|S0 = s
#
,
(4)
where κ = (P0, P1...) ∈N
t≥0 P.

In this paper, we focus on the following worst-case average-
reward for a policy π:
gπ
P(s) ≜
min
κ∈N
t≥0 P lim
n→∞Eπ,κ
"
1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rt|S0 = s
#
,
(5)
to which, for convenience, we refer as the robust average-
reward value function.
For robust discounted MDPs, it has been shown that the
robust discounted value function is the unique ﬁxed-point of
the robust discounted Bellman operator (Nilim and El Ghaoui
2004; Iyengar 2005; Puterman 1994):
TπV (s) ≜
X
a∈A
π(a|s)
 r(s, a) + γσPas (V )

,
(6)
where σPas (V ) ≜minp∈Pas p⊤V is the support function of
V on Pa
s. Based on the contraction of Tπ, robust dynamic
programming approaches, e.g., robust value iteration, can
be designed (Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Iyengar 2005) (see
Appendix for a review of these methods). However, there is
no such contraction result for robust average-reward MDPs.
In this paper, our goal is to ﬁnd a policy that optimizes the
robust average-reward value function:
max
π∈Π gπ
P(s), for any s ∈S,
(7)
where Π is the set of all stationary policies, and we denote
by g∗
P(s) ≜maxπ gπ
P(s) the optimal robust average-reward.
Limit Approach for Robust Average-Reward
MDPs
We ﬁrst take a limit approach to solve the problem of robust
average-reward MDPs in eq. (7). It is known that under the
non-robust setting, for any ﬁxed π and P, the discounted value
function converges to the average-reward value function as
the discount factor γ approaches 1 (Puterman 1994), i.e.,
lim
γ→1(1 −γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P.
(8)
We take a similar idea, and show that the same result holds
in the robust case: limγ→1(1 −γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P under a mild
assumption. Based on this result, we further design algo-
rithms (Algorithms 1 and 2) that apply a sequence of robust
discounted Bellman operators while increasing the discount
factor at a certain rate. We then theoretically prove that our
algorithms converge to the optimal solutions.
In the following, we ﬁrst show that the convergence
limγ→1(1 −γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P is uniform on the set Π × P.
In studies of average-reward MDPs, it is usually the case
that a certain class of MDPs are considered, e.g., unichain
and communicating (Wei et al. 2020; Zhang and Ross 2021;
Chen, Jain, and Luo 2022; Wan, Naik, and Sutton 2021). In
this paper, we focus on the unichain setting to highlight the
major technical novelty to achieve robustness.
Assumption 1. For any s ∈S, a ∈A, the uncertainty set
Pa
s is a compact subset of ∆(S). And for any π ∈Π, P ∈P,
the induced MDP is a unichain.
The ﬁrst part of Assumption 1 amounts to assuming that
the uncertainty set is closed. We remark that many standard
uncertainty sets satisfy this assumption, e.g., those deﬁned
by ϵ-contamination (Huber 1965), ﬁnite interval (Tewari and
Bartlett 2007), total-variation (Rahimian, Bayraksan, and
De-Mello 2022) and KL-divergence (Hu and Hong 2013).
The unichain assumption is also widely used in studies of
average-reward MDPs, e.g., (Puterman 1994; Wan, Naik, and
Sutton 2021; Zhang and Ross 2021; Lan 2020; Zhang, Zhang,
and Maguluri 2021). Also it is worth noting that under the
unichain assumption, the robust average-reward is identical
for every starting state, i.e., gπ
P(s1) = gπ
P(s2), ∀s1, s2 ∈S
(Bertsekas 2011).
Remark 1. The results in this section actually only re-
quire the uniform boundedness of ∥Hπ
P∥, ∀π ∈Π, P ∈P
(Lemma 2 in Appendix). Assumption 1 is one sufﬁcient condi-
tion.
In (Puterman 1994), the convergence limγ→1(1 −
γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P for a ﬁxed policy π and a ﬁxed transition
kernel P (non-robust setting) is point-wise. However, such
point-wise convergence does not provide any convergence
guarantee on the robust discounted value function, as the
robust value function measures the worst-case performance
over the uncertainty set and the order of lim and min may not
be exchanged in general. In the following theorem, we prove
the uniform convergence of the discounted value function
under the foregoing assumption.
Theorem 1 (Uniform convergence). Under Assumption 1,
the discounted value function converges uniformly to the
average-reward value function on Π × P as γ →1, i.e.,
lim
γ→1(1 −γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P, uniformly.
(9)
With uniform convergence in Theorem 1, the order of the
limit γ →1 and minP can be interchanged, then the follow-
ing convergence of the robust discounted value function can
be established.
Theorem 2. The robust discounted value function in eq. (4)
converges to the robust average-reward uniformly on Π:
lim
γ→1(1 −γ)V π
P,γ = gπ
P uniformly.
(10)
We note that a similar convergence result is shown in
(Tewari and Bartlett 2007), but only for a special uncertainty
set of ﬁnite interval. Our Theorem 2 holds for general com-
pact uncertainty sets. Moreover, it is worth highlighting that
our proof technique is fundamentally different from the one
in (Tewari and Bartlett 2007). Speciﬁcally, under the ﬁnite
interval uncertainty set, the worst-case transition kernels are
from a ﬁnite set, i.e., V π
P,γ = minP∈M V π
P,γ for a ﬁnite set
M ⊆P. This hence implies the interchangeability of lim and
min. However, for general uncertainty sets, the number of
worst-case transition kernels may not be ﬁnite. We demon-
strate the interchangeability via our uniform convergence
result in Theorem 1.
The previous two convergence results play a fundamental
role in limit method for robust average-reward MDPs, and
are of key importance to motivate the design of the following

two algorithms, the basic idea of which is to apply a sequence
of robust discounted Bellman operators on an arbitrary ini-
tialization while increasing the discount factor at a certain
rate.
We ﬁrst consider the robust policy evaluation problem,
which aims to estimate the robust average-reward gπ
P for a
ﬁxed policy π. This problem for robust discounted MDPs
is well studied in the literature, however, results for robust
average-reward MDPs are quite limited except for the one
in (Tewari and Bartlett 2007) for a speciﬁc ﬁnite interval
uncertainty set. We present the a robust value iteration (robust
VI) algorithm for evaluating the robust average-reward with
general uncertainty sets in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Robust VI: Policy Evaluation
Input: π, V0(s) = 0, ∀s, T
1: for t = 0, 1, ..., T −1 do
2:
γt ←t+1
t+2
3:
for all s ∈S do
4:
Vt+1(s) ←Eπ[(1 −γt)r(s, A) + γtσPA
s (Vt)]
5:
end for
6: end for
7: return VT
At each time step t, the discount factor γt is set to t+1
t+2,
which converges to 1 as t →∞. Subsequently, a robust
Bellman operator w.r.t discount factor γt is applied on the
current estimate Vt of the robust discounted value function
(1 −γt)V π
P,γt. As the discount factor approaches 1, the es-
timated robust discounted value function converges to the
robust average-reward gπ
P by Theorem 2. The following result
shows that the output of Algorithm 1 converges to the robust
average-reward.
Theorem 3. Algorithm 1 converges to robust average reward,
i.e., limT →∞VT = gπ
P.
Besides the robust policy evaluation problem, it is also of
great practical importance to ﬁnd an optimal policy that max-
imizes the worst-case average-reward, i.e., to solve eq. (7).
Based on a similar idea as the one of Algorithm 1, we ex-
tend our limit approach to solve the robust optimal control
problem in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Robust VI: Optimal Control
Input: V0(s) = 0, ∀s, T
1: for t = 0, 1, ..., T −1 do
2:
γt ←t+1
t+2
3:
for all s ∈S do
4:
Vt+1(s) ←max
a∈A

(1 −γt)r(s, a) + γtσPa
s (Vt)
	
5:
end for
6: end for
7: for s ∈S do
8:
πT (s) ←arg maxa∈A

(1 −γt)r(s, a) + γtσPas (VT )
	
9: end for
10: return VT , πT
Similar to Algorithm 1, at each time step, the discount fac-
tor γt is set to be closer to 1, and a one-step robust discounted
Bellman operator (for optimal control) w.r.t. γt is applied to
the current estimate Vt. The following theorem establishes
that VT in Algorithm 2 converges to the optimal robust value
function, hence can ﬁnd the optimal robust policy.
Theorem 4. The output VT in Algorithm 2 converges to the
optimal robust average-reward g∗
P: VT →g∗
P as T →∞.
As discussed in (Blackwell 1962; Hordijk and Yushkevich
2002), the average-reward criterion is insensitive and under
selective since it is only interested in the performance un-
der the steady-state distribution. For example, two policies
providing rewards: 100 + 0 + 0 + · · · and 0 + 0 + 0 + · · ·
are equally good/bad. Towards this issue, for the non-robust
setting, a more sensitive term of optimality was introduced
by Blackwell (Blackwell 1962). More speciﬁcally, a policy
is said to be Blackwell optimal if it optimizes the discounted
value function for all discount factor γ ∈(δ, 1) for some
δ ∈(0, 1). Together with eq. (8), the optimal policy obtained
by taking γ →1 is optimal not only for the average-reward
criterion, but also for the discounted criterion with large γ.
Intuitively, it is optimal under the average-reward setting, and
is sensitive to early rewards.
Following a similar idea, we justify that the obtained policy
from Algorithm 2 is not only optimal in the robust average-
reward setting, but also sensitive to early rewards.
Denote by Π∗
D the set of all the deterministic optimal poli-
cies for robust average-reward (proved to exist in Lemma 7),
i.e. Π∗
D = {π ∈ΠD : gπ
P = g∗
P} .
Theorem 5 (Blackwell optimality). There exists 0 < δ < 1,
such that for any γ > δ, the deterministic optimal robust
policy for robust discounted value function V ∗
P,γ belongs to
Π∗
D. Moreover, when Π∗
D is a singleton, there exists a unique
Blackwell optimal policy.
This result implies that using the limit method in this sec-
tion to ﬁnd the optimal robust policy for average-reward
MDPs has an additional advantage that the policy it ﬁnds not
only optimizes the average reward in steady state, but also is
sensitive to early rewards.
It is worth highlighting the distinction of our results from
the technique used in the proof of Blackwell optimality
(Blackwell 1962). In the non-robust setting, the existence
of a stationary Blackwell optimal policy is proved via contra-
diction, where a difference function of two policies π and ν:
fπ,ν(γ) ≜V π
P,γ −V µ
P,γ is used in the proof. It was shown by
contradiction that f has inﬁnitely many zeros, which however
contradicts with the fact that f is a rational function of γ with
a ﬁnite number of zeros. A similar technique was also used in
(Tewari and Bartlett 2007) for the ﬁnite interval uncertainty
set. Speciﬁcally, in (Tewari and Bartlett 2007), it was shown
that the worst-case transition kernels for any π, γ are from a
ﬁnite set M, hence fπ,ν(γ) ≜minP∈M V π
P,γ −minP∈M V µ
P,γ
can also be shown to be a rational function with a ﬁnite num-
ber of zeroes. For a general uncertainty set P, the difference
function fπ,ν(γ), however, may not be rational. This makes
the method in (Blackwell 1962; Tewari and Bartlett 2007)
inapplicable to our problem.

Direct Approach for Robust Average-Reward
MDPs
The limit approach in Section is based on the uniform conver-
gence of the discounted value function, and uses discounted
MDPs to approximate average-reward MDPs. In this section,
we develop a direct approach to solving the robust average-
reward MDPs that does not adopt discounted MDPs as inter-
mediate steps.
For average-reward MDPs, the relative value iteration
(RVI) approach (Puterman 1994) is commonly used since
it is numerically stable and has convergence guarantee. In
the following, we generalize the RVI algorithm to the robust
setting, and design the robust RVI algorithm in Algorithm 3.
We ﬁrst generalize the relative value function in eq. (2) to
the robust relative value function. The robust relative value
function measures the difference between the worst-case
cumulative reward and the worst-case average-reward for a
policy π.
Deﬁnition 1. The robust relative value function is deﬁned as
V π
P (s) ≜
min
κ∈N
t≥0 P Eκ,π
 ∞
X
t=0
(rt −gπ
P)|S0 = s

,
(11)
where gπ
P is the worst-case average-reward deﬁned in eq. (5).
The following theorem presents a robust Bellman equation
for robust average-reward MDPs.
Theorem 6. For any s and π, (V π
P , gπ
P) is a solution to the
following robust Bellman equation:
V (s) + g =
X
a
π(a|s)
 r(s, a) + σPas (V )

.
(12)
It can be seen that the robust Bellman equation for average-
reward MDPs has a similar structure to the one for discounted
MDPs in eq. (6) except for a discount factor. This actually
reveals a fundamental difference between the robust Bellman
operator of the discounted MDPs and the average-reward
ones. For a discounted MDP, its robust Bellman operator is
a contraction with constant γ (Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004;
Iyengar 2005), and hence the ﬁxed point is unique. Based on
this, the robust value function can be found by recursively ap-
plying the robust Bellman operator (see Appendix ). In sharp
contrast, in the average-reward setting, the robust Bellman
is not necessarily a contraction, and the ﬁxed point may not
be unique. Therefore, repeatedly applying the robust Bell-
man operator in the average-reward setting may not even
converge, which underscores that the two problem settings
are fundamentally different.
We ﬁrst derive the following equivalent optimality condi-
tion for robust average-reward MDPs.
Theorem 7. For any (g, V ) that is a solution to
max
a

r(s, a) −g + σPas (V ) −V (s)
	
= 0, ∀s,
(13)
g = g∗
P. If we further set
π∗(s) = arg max
a

r(s, a) + σPa
s (V )
	
(14)
for any s ∈S, then π∗is an optimal robust policy.
Theorem 7 suggests that as long as we ﬁnd a solution
(g, V ) to eq. (13), which though may not be unique, then g is
the optimal robust average-reward g∗
P, and the greedy policy
π∗is the optimal policy to our robust average-reward MDP
problem in eq. (7).
In the following, we generalize the RVI approach to the
robust setting, and design a robust RVI algorithm in Algo-
rithm 3. We will further show that the output of this algo-
rithm converges to a solution to eq. (13), and further the
optimal policy could be obtained by eq. (14). Here 1 de-
Algorithm 3: Robust RVI
Input: V0, ϵ and arbitrary s∗∈S
1: w0 ←V0 −V0(s∗)1
2: while sp(wt −wt+1) ≥ϵ do
3:
for all s ∈S do
4:
Vt+1(s) ←maxa(r(s, a) + σPas (wt))
5:
wt+1(s) ←Vt+1(s) −Vt+1(s∗)
6:
end for
7: end while
8: return wt, Vt
notes the all-ones vector, and sp denotes the span semi-norm:
sp(w) = maxs w(s)−mins w(s). Different from Algorithm
2, in Algorithm 3, we do not need to apply the robust dis-
counted Bellman operator. The method directly solves the
robust optimal control problem for average-reward robust
MDPs.
To study the convergence of the robust RVI algorithm, we
ﬁrst make an additional assumption as follows.
Assumption 2. There exists a positive integer J such that for
any P = {pa
s ∈∆(S)} ∈P and any stationary deterministic
policy π, there exists κ > 0 and a state s ∈S, such that
((Pπ)J)x,s ≥κ, ∀x ∈S.
This assumption is shown to be equivalent to assuming
unichain and aperiodic (Bertsekas 2011). It can be also re-
placed using some weaker ones, e.g., Proposition 4.3.2 of
(Bertsekas 2011), or be removed by designing a variant of
RVI, e.g., Proposition 4.3.4 of (Bertsekas 2011). In the fol-
lowing theorem, we show that our Algorithm 3 converges to
a solution of eq. (13), hence according to Theorem 7 if we
set π according to (14), then π is the optimal robust policy.
Theorem 8. (wt, Vt) converges to a solution (w, V ) to
eq. (13) as ϵ →0.
Remark 2. In this section, we mainly present the robust RVI
algorithm for the robust optimal control problem, and its con-
vergence and optimality guarantee. A robust RVI algorithm
for robust policy evaluation can be similarly designed by
replacing the max in line 4, Algorithm 3 with an expectation
w.r.t. π. The convergence results in Theorem 8 can also be
similarly derived.
Examples and Numerical Results
In this section, we study several commonly used uncertainty
set models, including contamination model, Kullback-Lerbler
(KL) divergence and total-variation deﬁned model.

As can be observed from Algorithms 1 to 3, for different
uncertainty sets, the only difference lies in how the support
function σPas (V ) is calculated. In the sequel, we discuss
how to efﬁciently calculate the support function for various
uncertainty sets.
We numerically compare our robust (relative) value itera-
tion methods v.s. non-robust (relative) value iteration method
on different uncertainty sets. Our experiments are based on
the Garnet problem G(20, 40) (Archibald, McKinnon, and
Thomas 1995). More speciﬁcally, there are 20 states and
30 actions; the nominal transition kernel P = {pa
s ∈∆(S)}
is randomly generated according to the uniform distribu-
tion, and the reward functions r(s, a) ∼N(0, σs,a), where
σs,a ∼Uniform[0, 1]. In our experiments, the uncertainty
sets are designed to be centered at the nominal transition ker-
nel. We run different algorithms, i.e., (robust) value iteration
and (robust) relative value iteration, and obtain the greedy
policies at each time step. Then, we use robust average-
reward policy evaluation (Algorithm 1) to evaluate the robust
average-reward of these policies. We plot the robust average-
reward against the number of iterations.
Contamination model. For any (s, a) the uncertainty set Pa
s
is deﬁned as Pa
s = {q : q = (1 −R)pa
s + Rp′, p′ ∈∆(S)},
where pa
s is the nominal transition kernel. It can be viewed
as an adversarial model, where at each time-step, the en-
vironment transits according to the nominal transition ker-
nel p with probability 1 −R, and according to an arbi-
trary kernel p′ with probability R. Note that σPas (V ) =
(1 −R)(pa
s)⊤V + R mins V (s). Our experimental results
under the contamination model are shown in Figure 1.
(a) Robust VI.
(b) Robust RVI.
Figure 1: Comparison on contamination model with R = 0.4.
Total variation. The total variation distance is another
commonly used distance metric to measure the differ-
ence between two distributions. For two distributions p
and q, it is deﬁned as DT V (p, q) =
1
2∥p −q∥1. Con-
sider an uncertainty set deﬁned via total variation: Pa
s =
{q : DT V (q||pa
s) ≤R}. Then, its support function can be ef-
ﬁciently solved as follows (Iyengar 2005): σPas (V ) = p⊤V −
R minµ≥0 {maxs(V (s) −µ(s)) −mins(V (s) −µ(s))} .
Our experimental results under the total variation model
are shown in Figure 2.
Kullback-Lerbler (KL) divergence. The Kullback–Leibler
divergence is widely used to measure the distance be-
tween two probability distributions. For distributions p, q,
it is deﬁned as DKL(q||p) = P
s q(s) log q(s)
p(s). Consider
an uncertainty set deﬁned via KL divergence: Pa
s
=
{q : DKL(q||pa
s) ≤R}. Then, its support function can be
efﬁciently solved using the duality result in (Hu and Hong
(a) Robust VI.
(b) Robust RVI.
Figure 2: Comparison on total variation model with R = 0.6.
2013): σPa
s (V ) = −minα≥0
n
Rα + α log

p⊤e
−V
α
o
.
Our experimental results under the KL-divergence model
are shown in Figure 3.
(a) Robust VI.
(b) Robust RVI.
Figure 3: Comparison on KL-divergence model with R = 0.8.
It can be seen that our robust methods can obtain policies
that achieve higher worst-case reward. Also, both our limit-
based robust value iteration and our direct method of robust
relative value iteration converge to the optimal robust policies,
which validates our theoretical results.
Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated the problem of robust MDPs
under the average-reward setting. We established uniform
convergence of the discounted value function to average-
reward, which further implies the uniform convergence of the
robust discounted value function to robust average-reward.
Based on this insight, we designed a robust dynamic pro-
gramming approach using the robust discounted MDPs as an
approximation (the limit method). We theoretically proved
their convergence and optimality and proved a robust version
of the Blackwell optimality (Blackwell 1962). We then de-
signed a direct approach for robust average-reward MDPs,
where we derived the robust Bellman equation for robust
average-reward MDPs. We further designed a robust RVI
method, which was proven to converge to the optimal robust
solution. Technically, our proof techniques are fundamen-
tally different from existing studies on average-reward robust
MDPs, e.g., those in (Blackwell 1962; Tewari and Bartlett
2007).
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grants CCF-2106560, CCF-2007783, CCF-2106339
and CCF-1552497.
