A Morphology-aware Network for Morphological Disambiguation
Eray Yildiz
Caglar Tirkaz
H. Bahadir Sahin
Huawei Turkey Research and Development Center, Umraniye, Istanbul, Turkey

Mustafa Tolga Eren
Ozan Sonmez
Abstract
Agglutinative languages such as Turkish, Finnish and
Hungarian require morphological disambiguation be-
fore further processing due to the complex morphol-
ogy of words. A morphological disambiguator is used
to select the correct morphological analysis of a word.
Morphological disambiguation is important because it
generally is one of the ﬁrst steps of natural language
processing and its performance affects subsequent anal-
yses. In this paper, we propose a system that uses deep
learning techniques for morphological disambiguation.
Many of the state-of-the-art results in computer vi-
sion, speech recognition and natural language process-
ing have been obtained through deep learning models.
However, applying deep learning techniques to morpho-
logically rich languages is not well studied. In this work,
while we focus on Turkish morphological disambigua-
tion we also present results for French and German in
order to show that the proposed architecture achieves
high accuracy with no language-speciﬁc feature engi-
neering or additional resource. In the experiments, we
achieve 84.12 , 88.35 and 93.78 morphological dis-
ambiguation accuracy among the ambiguous words for
Turkish, German and French respectively.
Introduction
Morphological analysis is generally achieved through the
use of ﬁnite state transducers (FST) (Kaplan and Kay 1981;
Koskenniemi 1984; Beesley and Karttunen 2003; Oﬂazer
1993). During morphological analysis, the surface form of
the word is given as input and an FST is used to output possi-
ble morphological analyses of the input word. A morpholog-
ical analysis contains a root and a set of tags so called mor-
phemes, minimal units of meaning in a language (Oﬂazer
1993).
A morphological disambiguator is used to select the cor-
rect analysis among the possible analyses of a word using
the context that the word appears in. The output of morpho-
logical disambiguation contains syntactic and semantic in-
formation about a word such as its POS tag, tense, polarity
and it being accusative, possessive or genitive. This informa-
tion is vital for some NLP tasks such as dependency parsing
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
and semantic role labeling whereas it can be utilized in other
NLP tasks such as topic modeling, named entity recognition
and machine translation.
While morphological disambiguation is important for
natural language processing in any language, it is vital
in morphologically rich languages. We speciﬁcally focus
on Turkish which is an important language spoken by
over 70 million people and has a complex morphology
that allows construction of thousands of word forms from
each root through inﬂectional and derivational sufﬁxation
(Hakkani-T¨ur, Oﬂazer, and T¨ur 2000). For instance, y¨ur¨u
(walk), y¨ur¨ud¨um (I walked), y¨ur¨uyeceksiniz (you will walk),
y¨ur¨utt¨uler (they made somebody walk), y¨ur¨uy¨unce (When
(he/she/it) walks) and y¨ur¨uyecektiler (They were going to
walk) are some of the possible word formations of a Turkish
verb root y¨ur¨u. In all the examples “y¨ur¨u” is the root of the
words whereas the sufﬁxes are used to change meaning.
Morphological analysis of a word might produce more
than one analysis since there might be multiple interpreta-
tions of a single word. Consider the example given in Ta-
ble 1 where the Turkish word “dolar” is analyzed. The out-
put of the morphological analyzer for this word contains four
possible analyses. The reason for that is each of the words
“dolar”, “dola”, “dol” and “do” can be used as roots and at
the same time “r”, “ar” and “lar” are all valid sufﬁxes in
Turkish. Thus, all four of the analyses are valid that lead to
quite different meanings.
Table 1: Morphological analyses of the Turkish word “dolar”
Morphological
English
Analysis
Translation
dolar +Noun +3sg +Pnon +Nomina-
tive
dollar
dola +Verb +Positive +Aorist +3sg
he/she wraps
dol +Verb +Positive +Aorist +3sg
it ﬁlls
do +Noun +3pl +Pnon +Nominative
Multiple C
(musical note)
Another reason for multiple morphological analyses is
due to the fact that a morpheme might change meanining
depending on the context of the word. Consider the example
given in Table 2. In the ﬁrst row “evi” is used in the ac-
arXiv:1702.03654v1  [cs.CL]  13 Feb 2017

cusative case whereas in the second row it is used as a pos-
sessive noun. The word “evi” has two morphological anal-
yses sharing the same root. Thus, the only difference in the
analyses is at the sufﬁx of the word. The sufﬁx “–i” in the
ﬁrst sentence transforms the word into “accusative marker”,
while its interpretation is “third person possessive” in the
second one. In addition, some root words might have mul-
tiple meanings. For instance, the Turkish word “y¨uz” could
be interpreted as a noun (face), a verb (swim) or a number
(hundred) depending on its context.
Table 2: Multiple interpretations of the Turkish word “evi”
Turkish sentence and its transla-
tion
Morphological
Analysis
Evi bulabildiniz mi? – Did you
ﬁnd the house?
ev +Noun +3sg
+Pnon +Accusative
Evi gerc¸ekten g¨uzelmis¸. –
His/Her house is really beau-
tiful.
ev +Noun +3sg
+P3sg +Nominative
As we noted before, morphological disambiguation is im-
portant for NLP in most of the languages. For instance, al-
though German and French do not have a morphology as
rich as Turkish, NLP in these languages can still beneﬁt from
morphological disambiguation. Higher accuracies in NLP
tasks such as POS tagging and dependency parsing can be
obtained if the morphology of the words are taken into ac-
count (Sennrich et al. 2009), (Candito et al. 2010). We apply
our general purpose morphological disambiguation method
to these languages and show that high accuracies can be ob-
tained for POS tagging and lemmatization. Possible word
formations and morphological analyses of the German word
“Haus” and the French word “savoir” are given in Table 3
and Table 4 respectively.
Table 3: Possible word formations and morphological anal-
yses of the German word “haus”
Word
Morphological Analyses
haus
Noun Neuter Nominative Singular
Noun Neuter Dative Singular
Noun Neuter Accusative Singular
h¨auser
Noun Neuter Accusative Plural
Noun Neuter Nominative Plural
Noun Neuter Genitive Plural
h¨ausern
Noun Neuter Dative Plural
hause
Noun Neuter Dative Singular
hauses
Noun Neuter Genitive Singular
There are various approaches proposed for morphological
disambiguation based on lexical rules or statistical models.
Rule based methods apply hand-crafted rules in order to se-
lect the correct morphological analyses or eliminate incor-
rect ones (Oﬂazer and Kuru¨oz 1994; Oﬂazer and Tur 1996;
Daybelge and Cicekli 2007). Y¨uret and T¨ure (2006) pro-
posed a decision list learning algorithm for extraction of
Table 4: Possible word formations and morphological anal-
yses of the French word “savoir”
Word
Morphological Analyses
savoir
Noun Masculine Singular
Verb Inﬁnitive
sais
Verb Present SecondPerson Singular
Verb Present FirstPerson Singular
savons
Verb Present FirstPerson Plural
savaient
Verb Imperfect ThirdPerson Plural
saches
Verb Subjunctive SecondPerson Singular
sachant
Verb Present Participle
su
Verb Past Participle Masculine Singular
Turkish morphological disambiguation rules from disam-
biguated training data. T¨ur et al. (2000) developed a sta-
tistical model which scores the probability of each analy-
sis using trigram models of the tags and roots. Sak et al.
(2007) applied a multilayer perceptron algorithm which uses
n-grams of the roots and tags as features. A CRF based dis-
ambiguation model was proposed by Razieh et al. 2012.
Finally, hybrid models which combine statistical and rule
based approaches are also proposed (Oﬂazer and Tur 1996;
Kutlu and Cicekli 2013).
We propose a deep neural architecture followed by
the Viterbi algorithm for morphological disambiguation of
words in a sentence. In this paper we focus on Turkish as
an example even though the proposed model can be utilized
in all morphologically rich languages. We test our approach
in German and French in order to prove that the proposed
method is able to work well for other languages as well. The
network architecture in this paper is designed to produce a
classiﬁcation score for a sequence of n-words. It consists of
two layers and a softmax layer. The ﬁrst layer of the model
builds a representation for each word using root embeddings
and some syntactic and semantic features. The second layer
takes as input the learned word representations and incorpo-
rates contextual information. A softmax layer uses the out-
put of the second layer to produce a classiﬁcation score. We
use the neural network to produce a score for each n length
sequence in a given sentence. We then employ the Viterbi
algorithm to produce the morphological disambiguation for
each word in the sentence by ﬁnding the most probable se-
quence using the output of the softmax layer.
Related Works
In a natural language processing pipeline morphological dis-
ambiguation can be considered at the same level as POS tag-
ging. In order to perform POS tagging in English, various
approaches such as rule-based models (Brill 1992), statisti-
cal models (Brill 1995), maximum entropy models (Ratna-
parkhi 1997), HMMs (Cutting et al. 1992), CRFs (Lafferty,
McCallum, and Pereira 2001) and decision trees (Schmid
1994) are proposed. However, morphological disambigua-
tion is a much harder problem in general due to the fact
that it requires the classiﬁcation of both roots, sufﬁxes and
the corresponding labels. Moreover, compared to an agglu-

tinative language such as Turkish, English words can take
on a limited number of word forms and part-of-speech tags.
Y¨uret and T¨ure (2006) observe that more than ten thousand
tag types exists in a corpus comprised of a million Turk-
ish words. Thus, due to the high number of possible tags
and the number of possible analyses in languages with pro-
ductive morphology, morphological disambiguation is quite
different from part-of-speech tagging in English.
The previous work on morphological disambiguation in
morphologically rich languages can be summarized into
three categories: rule based, statistical and hybrid ap-
proaches. In the rule-based approaches a large number of
hand crafted rules are used to select the correct morpho-
logical analyses or to eliminate incorrect ones (Karlsson et
al. 1995; Oﬂazer and Kuru¨oz 1994; Oﬂazer and Tur 1996;
Daybelge and Cicekli 2007). Statistical approaches gen-
erally utilize the statistics of root and tag sequences for
selection of the best roots and tags. A statistical Turk-
ish morphological disambiguation model which scores the
probability of each tag by considering the statistics over
the derivational boundaries and roots using trigrams has
been proposed by T¨ur et al. (2000). They test their model
on a manually disambiguated test data consisting of 2763
words and obtain 93.5% accuracy in morphological dis-
ambiguation (including non-ambiguous words). A similar
morphology-aware nonparametric Bayesian model is pro-
posed in (Chahuneau, Smith, and Dyer 2013). They inte-
grate their generative model to NLP applications such as
language modeling, word alignment and morphological dis-
ambiguation and obtain state-of-the-art results for Russian
morphological disambiguation. Y¨uret and T¨ure (2006) ex-
tract Turkish morphological disambiguation rules using a
decision list learner, Greedy Prepend Algorithm (GPA), and
they achieve 95.8% accuracy on manually disambiguated
data consisting of around 1K words. Megyesi (1999) adapt
a transformation based syntactic rule learner (Brill 1995)
for Hungarian and Hajic (1998) extend his work for Czech
and ﬁve other languages. Sak et al. (2007) apply a multi-
layer perceptron algorithm using a set of 23 features includ-
ing tri-gram and bi-gram statistics of morphological tags
and roots. They obtain 96.8% accuracy on test data con-
sisting of 2.5K words. Ehsani et al. (2012) apply condi-
tional random ﬁelds (CRFs) using several features derived
from morphological and syntactic properties of words and
achieve 96.8% accuracy. G¨org¨un and Yildiz (2011) use a J48
decision tree and achieve 95.6% accuracy. There are also
several studies that combine statistical and rule based ap-
proaches such as (Ezeiza et al. 1998; Oﬂazer and Tur 1996;
Kutlu and Cicekli 2013; Orosz and Nov´ak 2013).
Although deep learning techniques have been success-
fully used in various NLP tasks in English(Collobert and
Weston 2008; Collobert et al. 2011; Le and Mikolov 2014;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Luong, Socher, and
Manning 2013; Socher et al. 2012), this study is unique in
that we create a deep learning architecture speciﬁcally suited
for handling morphologically rich languages. One similar
work to ours is the recent work of Luong et al. (2013) who
introduce morphological RNNs to create word representa-
tions through composition of morphemes. However, they
present their results only for English which is not morpho-
logically as rich as languages such as Turkish or Finnish.
There are also recent works that suggest integrating mor-
phological knowledge into distributed word representations
such as (Cotterell and Sch¨utze 2015) and (Cui et al. 2015).
Cotterell and Sch¨utze (2015) extend log-bilinear model (an
instance of language models that make the Markov assump-
tion as n-gram language models) in order to jointly predict
the next morphological tag along with the next word, en-
couraging the resulting embeddings to encode morphology.
On the other hand, (Cui et al. 2015) propose a method for
learning embeddings which is a modiﬁed version of skip-
gram algorithm (Mikolov et al. 2013) that beneﬁts from mor-
phological knowledge when predicting the target word. Us-
ing morphology-based word representations improves the
performance for different NLP tasks such as word similar-
ity and statistical machine translation according to empirical
evaluation of Botha and Phil (2014).
Our work uses a convolutional architecture and handles
any number of morphological features in order to build
word representations while performing disambiguation at
the same time.
Method
In this work we propose an architecture with the ability to
represent morphologically rich words and model spatial de-
pendencies among word vectors. A softmax layer that is
trained on top of the layers is used to predict the likelihood
of a window of words. Finally, the Viterbi algorithm is used
on the outputs of the softmax layer in order to ﬁnd the op-
timal disambiguation of the words in a sentence. We also
show how unsupervised pre-trainining can be used to im-
prove the performance of the designed system and achieve
the state-of-the-art accuracy for Turkish morphological dis-
ambiguation.
The input to our model is a sentence where each word
in the sentence needs to be disambiguated. We ﬁrst tok-
enize the sentences and then use morphological analyzers to
ﬁnd possible analyses of each word in the sentence. HFST
tool (Lind´en, Silfverberg, and Pirinen 2009) is used to per-
form morphological analysis in German and French whereas
(Oﬂazer 1993) is used for Turkish morphological analysis.
NLP systems that use deep learning generally employ word
embeddings in order to represent each word in a dictionary.
Word embeddings are dense low dimensional real-valued
vectors with each dimension corresponding to a latent fea-
ture of the word (Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010). In a
morphologically rich language, representing words in sur-
face form might not be a good idea since lots of surface form
words can be derived from a single root. Thus, in our design,
each word in surface form is represented with a root and a
set of morphological features where each root and feature
has individual embeddings that are learned during training.
Root and morphological feature embeddings can have vary-
ing lengths and through their concatenation surface form
words are represented with ﬁxed length embeddings.
Our architecture is illustrated in Figure 1 where individ-
ual layers are marked with (a), (b) and (c). The ﬁrst layer (a)
takes the root and morphological features of a single word

Figure 1: Structure of morphology-aware model. Layer (a) construct word vectors using the morphological features of the
input word. Layer (b) allows the model to utilize contextual information by considering a window of words. Layer (c) is the
softmax layer that makes a binary decision of whether or not the current disambiguation result is correct.
as input and propagates to the next layer. The second layer,
(b), takes a window of n words as input and propagates to
the softmax layer, (c). The non-linearity in both the ﬁrst and
the second layers are provided through the use of tanh as
the transfer function. The softmax layer is responsible for
deciding the likelihood of the current morphological analy-
sis of the words, i.e., a binary decision is produced with the
expected result of 1 if the analysis is correct, 0 otherwise.
We train our network with the possible sequences of mor-
phological analyses in the training data. For each sentence,
and for each word, we select the n-2 words preceding the
word and their groundtruth annotations along with the pos-
sible annotations of the last two words. We also add n-1 out
of sentence tokens at the beginning of each sentence so that
all words in the sentence are included in the training data.
We label the sequences containing the correct morphologi-
cal analysis as positive whereas the remaining sequences are
labeled as negative. This way the model is trained to predict
the correct annotation for the last two words in a sequence
given that the ﬁrst n-2 words have correct annotations. Train-
ing is performed with stochastic gradient descent and Ada-
Grad (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) as the optimization
algorithms. At inference time, given a sentence containing
words to disambiguate, we use the network to make predic-
tions for window of words in the sentence and then use the
Viterbi algorithm to select the best morphological analysis
for each word.
Unsupervised pre-training of word embeddings have been
employed in various NLP tasks, and their usage have im-
proved recognition accuracies (Collobert et al. 2011; Turian,
Ratinov, and Bengio 2010). In order to improve the perfor-
mance of our disambiguation system we also use unsuper-
vised methods to pre-train root embeddings of words. We
created a corpus comprised of 1 billion Turkish words that
we collected from various sources, such as e-books and web
sites. Although our corpus is rather small compared to En-
glish corpora, it is the largest text corpus in Turkish that
we know of. After we trained the supervised disambiguation
system as described above, we disambiguated each word in
the corpus and extracted the roots of words. Next, we built
representations for root forms of the words using the unsu-
pervised skip-gram algorithm (Mikolov et al. 2013). After
obtaining the pre-trained root vectors, we retrained our dis-
ambiguation system with pre-trained root embeddings. This
technique allowed us to further improve the disambiguation
accuracies we obtained.
As discussed earlier, the ﬁrst layer takes as input the root
and the morphological features of a word. The morphologi-
cal features of words we use are presented in Table 5. Specif-
ically, the set of morphological features we consider con-
tains the root, main POS tag, minor POS tag, person and
possessive agreements, plurality, gender, case marker, polar-
ity and tense. Note that the information contained in a sur-
face word form may differ due to morphological character-
istics of a language. For instance, German and French have
gender feature contrary to Turkish while Turkish words have
possesive agreement and polarity. Main POS tag, describes
the category of a word and can take on values such as noun,

Table 5: The morphological (morphosyntactic and morphosemantic) features we used to represent each word
Morphosyntactic and Morphosemantic Features
Language
Root
Main
POSTag
Minor
POSTag
Person
Agreement
Plurality
Gender
Possesive
Agreement
Case
Marker
Polarity
Tense
Turkish
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
German
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
French
+
+
-
+
+
+
-
-
-
+
verb, adjective and adverb. Minor POS tag determines the
minor morphological properties of a word such as seman-
tic markers, causative markers and post-position. ”Since”,
”While”, ”Propernoun”, ”Without” can be given as exam-
ples to this kind of morphological features in Turkish. Per-
son and possessive agreement are used to answer the ques-
tions “who” and “whose” respectively, i.e., they are used to
indicate a person or an ownership relationship. Case marker
relate the nouns to the rest of the sentence as prepositions do
in English. Nominative (none), dative(to, for), locative (at,
in, on), ablative (from, out of) and genitive (of) forms are ex-
amples of the forms that can be observed in a sentence. Po-
larity of a word is positive if the word is not negated and neg-
ative otherwise. Tense indicates the tense of the verbs such as
present, past and future tense. Additionally, we consider the
moods of the verbs within tense feature. Moods express the
speaker’s attitude such as indicative, imperative or subjunc-
tive moods. In languages with grammatical gender such Ger-
man and French, every noun is associated with a gender. The
morphological analyzer we use associates each French word
with one of the two genders (masculine and feminine) while
it associates each German word with one of the four pos-
sible genders (masculine, feminine, neuter and no gender).
Some of the sufﬁxes in Turkish change word meaning cre-
ating derivational boundaries in the morphological analyses.
The morphological features of a word given in Table 5 are
extracted after the ﬁnal derivational boundary. In Turkish,
we add one more feature to each word named previous tags
in order to account for the previous sufﬁxes that the word
might have. This way, our model learns the effect of sufﬁxes
that change word meaning. Some of the described morpho-
logical features exist only for certain word categories. For
instance possessive agreement and case marker features can
only exist in nouns, polarity and tense exist in verbs and per-
son agreement exist in nouns and verbs. If a morphological
feature cannot be extracted from a word, we label it as hav-
ing NULL for the feature.
Experiments
For Turkish, we used a semi-automatically disambiguated
corpus containing 1M tokens (Y¨uret and T¨ure 2006). Since
this dataset is annotated semi-automatically, it also contains
noise. In order to reduce the effect of noise to the recogni-
tion accuracies, we created a test set by randomly selecting
sentences containing 20K of the tokens and manually anno-
tating them. We make this test data publicly available 1 so
that Turkish morphological disambiguation algorithms can
be compared more accurately in the future.
1http://indigof:8080/Genie/disambiguationTestSet.html
We use SPMRL 2014 dataset (Seddah and Tsarfaty 2014)
for German and French. This data set is created in the Penn
tree bank format and used for a shared task on statistical
parsing of morphologically rich languages. This dataset con-
tains 1M and 500K sentences with POS tag and morpho-
logical information for German and French respectiveley. It
provides 90% of all sentences as training set and %10 of
rest of the sentences as test set. We align the features in the
tree bank to the HFST outputs in order to determine the cor-
rect morphological analyses generated by the HFST tool. We
use this data set for both training and testing. The develop-
ment sets for each language are randomly separated from the
training data and are used to optimize the embedding lengths
of morphological features.
We noticed that similar parameters lead to the best per-
formance. Thus, in the experiments, we used embedding
lengths 50, 20 and 5 for roots, POS tags and the other mor-
phological features respectively. The number of ﬁlters in the
ﬁrst and second layers are 30 and 40 respectively. The win-
dow length, n, that determines the number of words input to
the second layer is set to 5.
Table 6: POS tagging, lemmatization and morphological dis-
ambiguation accuracies of the proposed approach for Turk-
ish, German and French.
Turkish(%)
German(%)
French(%)
POS Tagging
96.85
98.35
98.47
Lemma.
97.59
95.95
99.52
M. disamb.
84.12
88.35
93.78
The experiment results for POS tagging, lemmatization
and morphological disambiguation in Turkish, German and
French are presented in Table 6. Notice that the POS tagging
and lemmatization accuracies are refer to the percentages of
POS tags and lemmas predicted correctly while morpholog-
ical disambiguation accuracies are refer to the percentages
of the words disambiguated correctly among the ambiguous
words According to the results, we observe that even though
our initial target was to be able to achieve Turkish morpho-
logical disambiguation, our model consistently obtains high
accuracies in French and German as well.
In Table 7, we present the results of various models for
Turkish morphological disambiguation on our hand-labeled
test data. The results of the multilayer perceptron developed
in (Sak, G¨ung¨or, and Sarac¸lar 2007) and the decision list
learning algorithm developed in (Y¨uret and T¨ure 2006) are
presented in lines 1 and 2 respectively. We present Turk-
ish morphological disambiguation results obtained by our

Table 7: The comparison of the disambiguation accuracy of
the proposed approach with the state-of-the-art models in
Turkish.
Method
Accuracy(%)
Multilayer Perceptron
82.13
Decision List
83.31
Proposed Model - w/o pre-training
84.12
Proposed Model - with pre-training
85.18
model with and without pre-training in lines 3 and 4 respec-
tively. As we discussed before, unsupervised pre-training of
the embeddings can boost accuracies of neural networks. As
expected, morphological disambiguation accuracy increases
by around 1% (around 6% reduction in error) when root em-
beddings are pre-trained instead of randomly initialized. We
see that even without unsupervised pre-training our algo-
rithm outperforms the current state of the art models and
we are able to further improve the accuracy by pre-training
of the embeddings.
Although we do not evaluate the effects of unsupervised
pre-training for German and French, it is expected that
higher accuracies can be achieved using unsupervised pre-
training of the embeddings for these languages as well. Error
analysis for Turkish morphological disambiguation shows
that the root is incorrectly decided in 30% of errors. The
root is correct but the POS tag is incorrectly decided in 40%
of errors while 30% of errors caused by wrong decisions on
other inﬂectional groups. When compared with the study of
Sak et al. 2007, there is no signiﬁcant difference in the distri-
bution of mistakes. However our method performs better in
root decisions due to unsupervised learning of root embed-
dings. As discussed before, the available data for Turkish
morphological disambiguation task contains some system-
atic errors. Y¨uret and T¨ure (2006) report that the accuracy
of the training data is below 95%. According to our obser-
vation there is a major confusion between noun and adjective
POS tags in training data which affects the decision of the
morphological disambiguation systems. In our experiment,
we observe that 18% of the errors are caused by such con-
fusion, whereas the ratio of these errors are reported as 22%
in the experiments of Sak et al. (2007).
Summary and Future Work
In this paper, we present a model capable of learning word
representations for languages with rich morphology. We
show the utility of our approach in the task of Turkish,
German and French morphological disambiguation. We also
show the effect of unsupervised pre-training on recognition
accuracies and improve the current state-of-the-art in Turk-
ish morphological disambiguation. We publicly make avail-
able a manually annotated test set containing 20K tokens
which we believe will beneﬁt Turkish NLP.
This paper presents a deep learning architecture specif-
ically aiming to handle morphologically rich languages.
Nonetheless, NLP systems that work on languages such as
English can also beneﬁt from our work. Using our model,
English words can be separated into morphemes so that they
can be better represented. This allows creating systems that
are less affected from problems such as data sparsity (Lu-
ong, Socher, and Manning 2013).
While using pre-training, we only considered the pre-
trained root embeddings. It would be preferred to pre-train
all the embeddings using our text corpus which we leave as
future work. Another point of note is the selected embedding
sizes that we used in our experiments. While we worked on a
development set separated from training data for parameter
selection, further investigation in parameter selection might
improve the obtained accuracies.
