arXiv:1702.05112v1  [cs.DL]  16 Feb 2017
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem:
Ontologies, Mathematical Knowledge Analytics
and Management
1Alexander Elizarov, 1Alexander Kirillovich, 1Evgeny Lipachev, and
2Olga Nevzorova
1Kazan (Volga Region) Federal University, 18 Kremlyovskaya ul. Kazan,
420008, Russian Federation,
2Research Institute of Applied Semiotics of Tatarstan Academy of Sciences,
36 Levo-Bulachnaya ul. Kazan, 420111, Russian Federation

http://kpfu.ru/;http://www.ips.antat.ru
Abstract. In this article we consider the basic ideas, approaches and
results of developing of mathematical knowledge management technolo-
gies based on ontologies. These solutions form the basis of a specialized
digital ecosystem OntoMath which consists of the ontology of the logical
structure of mathematical documents Mocassin and ontology of mathe-
matical knowledge OntoMathPRO, tools of text analysis, recommender
system and other applications to manage mathematical knowledge. The
studies are in according to the ideas of creating a distributed system of
interconnected repositories of digitized versions of mathematical docu-
ments and project to create a World Digital Mathematical Library.
Keywords: OntoMath, OntoMathPRO, Mocassin, World Digital Math-
ematical Library, WDML, Digital libraries, DML, Ontology, Linked Data,
Information retrieval, Mathematical content search, Semantic search,
Formula search.
1
Introduction
The Digital Era has changed crucially as the methods of research, and the ways in
which scientists search, produce, publish, and disseminate their scientiﬁc work.
At the present time information and communication technologies are actively
implemented in research and development. Therefore, it became possible to use
the entire corpus of accumulated scientiﬁc knowledge in conducting new re-
search. Such use requires creation of complex of technologies that ensure opti-
mal management of available knowledge, the organization has eﬀective access to
this knowledge, as well as sharing and multiple use of new kinds of knowledge
structures. In mathematics also accumulated considerable experience in using
of electronic mathematical content within the various projects on creation of
mathematical digital libraries (see, e.g., [1]).

2
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
Since inception of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc information systems, mathematicians
have been involved in the full cycle of software product development, from idea
to implementation. Well-known examples are an open source system TEX [2] and
commercial systems Wolfram Mathematica and WolframAlpha, led by Stephen
Wolfram according to his principles of computational knowledge theory [3], [4].
Tools for mathematical content management are developed with the help of com-
munities of mathematicians, e.g. MathJax by American Mathematical Society,
information system Math-Net.Ru is developed at the Steklov Mathematical In-
stitute of the Russian Academy of Sciences [5]–[7] and the collection of publicly
available preprints arXiv.org (https://arxiv.org/).
Main challenges of mathematical knowledge management (MKM) are dis-
cussed in [8]–[11]. In [12] we frame the most urgent tasks: modeling representa-
tions of mathematical knowledge; presentation formats; authoring languages and
tools; creating repositories of formalized mathematics, and mathematical digital
libraries; mathematical search and retrieval; implementing math assistants, tu-
toring and assessment systems; developing collaboration tools for mathematics;
creating new tools for detecting repurposing material, including plagiarism of
others’ work and self-plagiarism; creation of interactive documents; developing
deduction systems. The solution of this task requires formalization of mathe-
matical statements and proofs. While mathematics is full of formalisms, there is
currently none of widely accepted formalisms for computer mathematics.
At the present time one of the largest formal mathematical libraries is Mizar
(http://www.mizar.org/), which is a collection of papers prepared in the Mizar
system of formal language), containing deﬁnitions, theorems and proofs [13], [14].
Mizar is one of the pioneering systems for mathematics formalization, which still
has an active user community. The project has been in constant development
since 1973.
Note the important results related to the level of formalization of repre-
sentations of mathematical articles. For these purposes, developed languages
of presentation of mathematical texts, specialized formal languages, as well as
conversion software languages [15]–[19]. These technologies are also used to con-
struct the mathematical ontology and creating semantic search service [9], [12],
[20]. Eﬀective communication requires a conceptualization as well as the sharable
vocabulary. Ontologies suﬃce this requirement [9], [12], [21].
In mathematical content important part of the search service is to ﬁnd the
fragments of formulas. For example, such a service is implemented in a digital
repository Lobachevskii Journal of Mathematics (http://ljm.kpfu.ru/). For
this we use converting documents in XML-format and formulas – in of MathML-
notation [15]. The above and many other mathematical implemented projects
paved the way for the realization of a new idea — the creation of the World
Digital Mathematical Library (WDML).
At the present time it formed a special type of information system called
“digital ecosystem” [22]. The Digital Ecosystem is forming as the Information
Technology, Telecommunications, and Media and Entertainment industries con-
verge, users evolve from mere consumers to active participants, and governments

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
3
face policy and regulatory challenges [23]. Research on digital ecosystems model
adaptation to scientiﬁc and educational ﬁelds are described in [24]–[27].
This paper is devoted the development of the digital ecosystem OntoMath,
whose task is the mathematical knowledge management in digital scientiﬁc col-
lections. This ecosystem is a semantic publishing platform, which forms the
semantic representation for the collections of mathematical articles and the set
of ontologies and mathematical knowledge management services.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we consider the problems
related to the management of digital mathematical libraries content. In Section
3 we present the object paradigm of representation of mathematical knowledge.
Then we present the architecture and the tools OntoMath ecosystem.
2
Digital Mathematics Libraries
At present, research activities in the ﬁeld of mathematics associated with the
use of modern information technology (cloud, semantic, etc.). These technologies
are used in research of distributed scientiﬁc teams, the preparation and dissemi-
nation of mathematical knowledge in an electronic form, the formation of math-
ematical digital libraries and of intellectual processing of their content. Special
attention is given to the creation of a common information space by mathe-
matical integration of existing and organizing new digital mathematical library
(DML) (see, e.g., [28]–[31]). The largest projects are Math-Net.RU ([5]–[7], [32]),
CEDRAM [33], DML-CZ [34], [35], DML-PL [36], GDZ [37], NUMDAM [38],
Zentralblatt MATH [39], EMIS ELibM [40], BulDML [41]. Mathematical con-
tent is presented in a multidisciplinary digital libraries, for example, scholarly
journals archives JSTOR [42] and eLIBRARY [43].
This class also includes information of scientiﬁc publishing platform Elsewier
(https://www.elsevier.com/), Springer (http://link.springer.com/), Plei-
ades Publishing (http://pleiades.online/ru/publishers/), as well as sys-
tem support of scientiﬁc journals, for example, Elpub (http://elpub.ru/).
Realization and development of digital mathematics libraries involve the
development of special tools and continuous improvement of their functional-
ity. An example is the Open Journal Systems (OJS) [44]–[46]. The platform
used in many projects, particularly in Lobachevskii Journal of Mathematics
(http://ljm.kpfu.ru/), one of the ﬁrst digital mathematical journals. In the
practice of this journal, since 1998, been introduced intelligent information pro-
cessing tools [15], [47]–[50], in particular, we performed automated MathML-
markup articles of this journal [15], [50]. In paper [51] presents a system of ser-
vices for the automated processing of large collections of scientiﬁc documents.
These services provide veriﬁcation of document compliance to the accepted rules
of formation of collections and their conversion to the established formats; struc-
tural analysis of documents and extraction of metadata, as well as their inte-
gration into the scientiﬁc information space. The system allows to automatically
perform a set of operations that cannot be realized for acceptable time with the

4
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
traditional manual processing of electronic content. It is designed for the large
collections of scientiﬁc documents.
The idea of creating a World Digital Mathematical Library (WDML) arose in
2002. The initial aim of this project was digitizing the entire set of mathematical
literature (both modern and historical) and link it to the present literature, and
make it clickable (see [28], [52]–[55]). As noted in [53], the success of this project
and its future impact on mathematics, science and education could be the most
signiﬁcant event since the invention of scientiﬁc journals and to become a pro-
totype for a new model of scientiﬁc and technical cooperation, a new paradigm
for the future of science electronically connected world. At the same time, the
implementation of such a large project will inevitably cause a series of problems.
These problems and ways to overcome them were analyzed in [56]. In particular,
one of the recommendations was the proposal to develop and coordinate some
local projects of creating DML (see [29], [56]).
Basic plans for the construction of WDML in 2014–2015 discussed various
mathematical communities and enshrined in a number of documents (see [57],
[58]). In particular, it was noted that the next step in the development of the
project WDML will building information networks, knowledge-based, contained
in mathematical publications. In the discussion of these ideas was attended
by many research groups of mathematicians all over the world, including our
group of Kazan Federal University. In February 2016 in the Fields Institute
(Toronto, Ontario) by the Wolfram Foundation, the Fields Institute, and the
IMU/CEIC working group for the creation of a World Digital Mathematics Li-
brary it was organized the Semantic Representation of Mathematical Knowledge
Workshop [59]. Our report on this symposium was devoted to the modeling and
software solutions in the area of semantic representation of mathematical knowl-
edge [60]. These results correspond to the general ideology WDML project of
part semantic representation and processing of mathematical knowledge and are
a strategic direction of research of our group. In particular, they are connected
with the construction OntoMath ecosystem, which is described below.
3
Moving Towards the Object Paradigm of Mathematical
Knowledge Representation
E-libraries as a collection of electronic documents provide a document search
by their bibliographic descriptions and thematic classiﬁcation codes, as well as
full-text search within the documents by keywords. Creating a full text index is
a main mechanism for text search.
The global initiative WDML speciﬁes key areas related to both organizational
eﬀorts of the international mathematical community, including mathematical
literature publishers, and research and technology eﬀorts aimed at development
of existing and introduction of new (semantic) technologies of representation
and processing of mathematical content. These semantic technologies include
the following:

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
5
– Aggregation of diﬀerent ontologies, indexes, and other resources created by
the mathematical community, and ensuring broad access to their replenish-
ment and editing;
– Improving the access to mathematical publications – not only to searching
and browsing, but for annotating, navigation, linking to other sources, data
computing, data visualization, and so on.
The move towards the representation of the internal structure of mathematical
knowledge creates a new paradigm of representation. The focus of representa-
tion has shifted to the selection of elements (classes) and their relationships,
which allows researchers to create various network conceptual frameworks (e.g.
the citation graph, the graph of mathematical concepts, etc.). Classiﬁcation of
mathematical objects and organization of the relevant repositories provide new
computing capabilities for data processing such as extraction and processing of
formulas, ﬁnding similar papers and so on.
WDML project is focused on the object system of organization and storage of
mathematical knowledge. Unlike traditional electronic mathematical libraries in
which the unit storage in the database is an electronic document, it is proposed
to provide the mathematical knowledge of the collections of documents in the
form of specially organized repository of mathematical objects.
One of the key ideas is to develop the classes of objects for adequate descrip-
tion and study of mathematical content. In a mathematical document it is easy
enough to identify a set of basic classes of mathematical objects (sequences, func-
tions, transformations, identity, symbols, formulas, theorems, statements, etc.).
As noted in WDML project, one of the most important tasks is to build a list
of mathematical objects in diﬀerent areas of mathematics.
Standard classes of mathematical objects are theorems, axioms, proofs, math-
ematical deﬁnitions, etc. Important elements of the object model are semantic
links (relations) between the elements. In order to build a document object
model, it is proposed to use modern technologies of the Semantic Web. This
representation of mathematical knowledge requires development of new manage-
ment tools that will be relevant to mathematical knowledge (aggregation tools,
semantic search, search formulas and identiﬁcation of similar objects) [54], [57],
[58].
Let us consider the key objects of mathematical knowledge management
tools.
Aggregation tools provide automatic collection of objects that meet certain
criteria, as well as automatic replenishment of object lists. Object lists can be
built according to diﬀerent criteria, depending on the target application. For
example, a useful list is a list of objects of a given domain (for example, a list of
all known theorems of the group theory), or a list of objects of a particular class
(e.g. theorem) related to the study of the mathematical properties of a given ob-
ject (e.g. the geometric object “triangle”). These lists allow to actually creating
custom search indexes which would accumulate mathematical knowledge.
Navigation tools (with search tools) provide opportunities for navigation to
target objects within the document. For example, the classical task is to ﬁnd a

6
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
given mathematical object and its properties, and to search for this given math-
ematical object and other mathematical objects related to certain mathematical
equations. Another important task is to ﬁnd the given mathematical object and
scientiﬁc articles on this subject. At the same time, in contrast to the keyword
search, object search would allow to take into account the semantics of links for
object search, thereafter to improve search results.
For example, using the object properties for a given mathematical object
(e.g., “Sobolev space”) it is possible to ﬁnd and view relevant information about
such properties as its mathematical deﬁnition, educational literature, context-
related objects and others (see, e.g., Section 4.5).
Semantic search is the method of information retrieval which determines the
relevance of the document to the request semantically rather than syntactically.
Semantic search in the object repository is organized by following semantic links
that allow to ﬁnd objects by their description (implicit reference to object), as
well as by given object properties. For example, the following query is classiﬁed
as an implicit reference to the object: “Find all the theorems, the proof of which
is used Fermat’s theorem.”
Search by formulas: this search tool provides search of mathematical formu-
las and additional information about them (such as the name of the formula,
the list of scientiﬁc and educational publications, etc.). Formula search queries,
in general, can have diﬀerent forms. For example, a text query to the variables
(“Find a formula connecting the area of the circle and the length of its cir-
cumference”), or computing request (“Find a formula equivalent to the formula,
the F”), or text query to the mathematical object connected with this formula
(“Find evidence of Euler’s formula”).
Thus, the main purpose of WDML is to unite digital versions of all mathe-
matical repositories, including both contemporary sources and sources that have
become historical, on new conceptual base and to provide intelligent information
retrieval and data processing [57], [58].
At the same time more and more popular in the scientiﬁc community have
become new ways to detect objects of scientiﬁc knowledge directly through the
web, as well as tools and services for creating and sharing of new types of knowl-
edge structures. In the context of the concept of Linked Data, and the Semantic
Web these tools and services can be used to create “cooperation graphs” (col-
laboration graph), which are used, for example, to calculate the collaboration
distance between the authors and searching similar documents. These facilities
open up new possibilities of ﬁne-tuning searching and browsing (see, e.g., [61]).
Many authors (e.g. [9], [12], [21]) highlight the importance of developing new
domain ontologies, in particular in mathematics, because the traditional bibli-
ographic classiﬁcation is no longer suﬃcient. It needs a deeper representation
that would contain more detailed descriptions by taking into account diﬀerent
points of view.
We proposed in [59] model of representation of mathematical content in the
form of a Mobius strip (Fig. 1).

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
7
Fig. 1. Levels of representation of mathematical content.
4
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
4.1
General Description
OntoMath is a digital ecosystem of ontologies, textual analytics tools, and ap-
plications for mathematical knowledge management. This system consists of the
following components:
– Mocassin, an ontology of structural elements of mathematical scholarly pa-
pers;
– OntoMathPRO, an ontology of mathematical knowledge concepts;
– Semantic publishing platform;
– Semantic formula search service;
– Recommender system.
Fig. 2. OntoMath ecosystem architecture.
Brieﬂy we describe these basic elements of the architecture of OntoMath
digital ecosystem (Fig. 2).
The core component of the OntoMath ecosystem is its semantic publish-
ing platform. It builds an LOD representation for a collection of mathematical
articles in LATEX. The generated mathematical dataset includes metadata, the

8
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
logical structure of documents, terminology, and mathematical formulas. Arti-
cle metadata, the logical structure of documents, and terminology are expressed
in terms of AKT Portal, Mocassin and OntoMathPRO ontologies respectively.
Mocassin ontology, in turn, is built on Semantically Annotated LATEX (SALT)
Document Ontology that is ontology of the rhetorical structure of scholarly pub-
lications [62]. Mocassin and OntoMathPRO ontologies are parts of OntoMath
ecosystem but SALT is an external ontology. Two applications are built using
the semantic publishing platform: a semantic formula search service and a rec-
ommender system.
As any digital ecosystem, OntoMath has components that are used for socio-
technical purposes. Such components are the ontologies and the semantic pub-
lishing platform. They can be used by mathematicians and software developers.
4.2
Semantic Publishing Platform
As was mentioned above, the semantic publishing platform which constitutes
the core of the OntoMath ecosystem makes an LOD representation for a given
sample of mathematical articles in LATEX [63], [64]. Its main features are:
– Indexing mathematical articles in LATEX-format as LOD-compatible RDF-
data;
– Extracting articles’ metadata in terms of AKT Portal Ontology [65];
– Mining the document logical structure using our ontology of structural ele-
ments of mathematical papers;
– Eliciting instances of mathematical entities as the concepts of OntoMathPRO
ontology;
– Connecting the extracted textual instances to symbolic expressions and for-
mulas in the mathematical notation;
– Establishing the relationship between published data and RDF-existing sets
of LOD data.
The developed technology has the following features:
– Mathematics RDF-set is based on a collection of mathematical articles in
Russian;
– The RDF-built set that includes metadata and also speciﬁc semantic knowl-
edge such as the knowledge generated as a result of special treatment of
mathematical formulas (binding textual deﬁnitions of variables with the
symbols of variables in formulas) and also the instances of OntoMathPRO
ontology and the structural elements of the mathematical articles;
– Semantic annotation of mathematical texts based on ontologies Mocassin
and OntoMathPRO;
– The MathLang Document Rhetorical (DRa) Ontology [66] enables to inter-
pret the elements of document structure using mathematical rhetorical roles
that are similar to the ones deﬁned in the statement level of OMDoc on-
tology. This semantics focuses on formalizing proof skeletons for generation
proof checker templates.

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
9
4.3
Ontologies
Mocassin [67] is an ontology, intended to annotate a logical structure of a math-
ematical document [63], [68]. This ontology extends SALT Document Ontology,
deﬁning concepts and relations, speciﬁc to mathematical documents. Mocassin
ontology represents a mathematical document as a set of interconnecting seg-
ments.
Mocassin ontology deﬁnes15 concepts such as Document segment, Claim,
Deﬁnition, Proposition, Example, Axiom, Theorem, Lemma, Proof, Equation,
and others. The ontology deﬁnes relations between segments such as dependsOn,
exempliﬁes, hasConsequence, hasSegment, proves, refersTo.
Fig. 3. Mocassin ontology Elements [69].
OntoMathPRO [70] is an ontology of mathematical knowledge [12], [71], [72].
Its concepts are organized into two taxonomies:
– Hierarchy of areas of mathematics: Logics, Set theory, Geometry, including
its subﬁelds, such as Diﬀerential Geometry and so on;
– Hierarchy of mathematical objects such as a set, function, integral, elemen-
tary event, Lagrange polynomial etc.
The ontology deﬁnes relations:
– Taxonomic relation (for example, “Lambda matrix” is a “Matrix”);

10
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
– Logical dependency (for example, “Christoﬀel Symbol” is deﬁned by “Con-
nectedness”);
– Associative relation between objects (for example, “Chebyshev Iterative Method”
see also “Numerical Solution of Linear Equation Systems”);
– Belongingness of objects to ﬁelds of mathematics (for example, “Barycentric
Coordinates” belongs to “Metric Geometry”);
– Associative relation between problems and methods (for example, “System
of linear equations” is solved by “Gaussian elimination method”).
Fig. 4. OntoMathPRO ontology Elements.
Each concept description has Russian and English labels, textual deﬁnitions,
relations with other concepts, and links to external terminologies, such as DB-
pedia [73], [74] and ScienceWISE [75].
4.4
Applications
OntoMath Formula Search Engine is a semantic search service that uses a seman-
tic representation of math document built on the base of Semantic Publishing
Platform [64], [71]. OntoMath Formula Search Engine implements new search
on names of variables using OntoMath ontology. A variable in the formula is a
symbol that denotes a mathematical object. Mathematical symbols can desig-
nate numbers (constants), variables, operations, functions, punctuation, group-
ing, and other aspects of logical syntax. Speciﬁc branches and applications of
mathematics usually have speciﬁc naming conventions for variables. However,
nonstandard names of variables may be used in some formulas. OntoMath For-
mula Search Engine allows ﬁnding the mathematical formulas containing a given
mathematical object regardless of its name for the variable. For example, if we

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
11
would like to ﬁnd a formula that contains a mathematical object (e.g. the cur-
vature), the service will ﬁnd all the formulas that include this object (even with
diﬀerent names for the variable). Using an inference, the service can ﬁnd the
formulas containing not only the given object, but the objects below in the hi-
erarchy of the ontology. For example, for searching the formulas which contain
the polygon, OntoMath Formula Search can ﬁnd the formulas which contain not
only the polygon but other objects in the hierarchy (e.g. the triangle, the par-
allelogram, the trapezium, the hexagon and others). OntoMath formula search
also allows restricting your search to the document area that you deﬁne. For
example, you can search only in the deﬁned areas or in a certain theorem area.
These search functions of OntoMath Formula Search Engine diﬀer from those of
popular search services, such as (uni) quation, Springer LATEX search, Wikipedia
search formula, Wolfram search formula. These services have a great potential,
including their stability for renaming variables and for expression transforma-
tion. However, they are syntactic and seek formulas containing a predetermined
formula pattern.
We have implemented two applications for mathematical formula search
such as syntactical search of formulas in MathML, and semantic ontology-based
search.
The syntactical search leverages formula description from documents for-
matted in TEX. Our algorithm [15] transforms formulas from TEX format to
MathML format. We set up an information retrieval system prototype for a col-
lection of articles in Lobachevskii Journal of Mathematics. For the end-user, the
query input interface supports a convenient syntax. The search results include
highlighted occurrences of formulas as well as document metadata.
Fig. 5. OntoMath Search UI.

12
OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
4.5
OntoMath Recommender System
As ecosystem OntoMath application we have developed a recommender system
for collections of physical and mathematical documents. One of the main func-
tions of this system is the creation of the list of related documents (see [76]–[78]).
Traditionally, the list of related documents is based on the keywords given by
the authors, as well as bibliographic references available in the documents.
This approach has several disadvantages:
– A list of keywords may be missing or incomplete;
– A keyword may be ambiguous;
– It is necessary to take into account the hierarchy of concepts;
– It should be noted that the article may use the terminology in diﬀerent
languages.
Thus, the created recommender system has the following features:
– It takes into account the professional proﬁle of a particular user;
– It forms diﬀerent recommendations for diﬀerent scenarios of work with the
system (referee, user being introduced in the topic, etc.);
– It assigns diﬀerent weights to diﬀerent concepts. Thus, for a scientiﬁc review,
concepts denoting areas of mathematics are more important than those re-
lated to mathematical objects. While for a beginning researcher, survey pa-
pers containing notions from diﬀerent areas of mathematics and references
to original works are more important.
Fig. 6. Math-Net article page. Extracted keywords and related articles are added.

OntoMath Digital Ecosystem
13
5
Conclusion
The basic ideas, approaches and results of developing the discussed mathemat-
ical knowledge management technology are based on targeted ontologies in the
ﬁeld of mathematics. These solutions form the basis of the specialized digital
ecosystem OntoMath which consists of a set of ontologies, text analytics tools
and applications for managing mathematical knowledge. The studies are in line
with the project aimed to create a World Digital Mathematical Library whose
objective is to design a distributed system of interconnected repositories of dig-
itized versions of mathematical documents.
The future of the OntoMath ecosystem is related to the development of new
services for semantic text analytics and control of mathematical knowledge. The
developed technologies are supposed to be evaluated with the help of the digital
mathematical collections of Kazan Federal University.
The present work is aimed at further research in the ﬁeld of mathemati-
cal knowledge management; it has been carried out by the authors of the paper
since 1998, with the support of grants from the Russian Foundation for Basic Re-
search, Kazan Federal University and the Academy of Sciences of the Tatarstan
Republic.
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by the subsidy allocated to Kazan Federal University
for the state assignment in the sphere of scientiﬁc activities, grant agreement
no. 1.2368.2017).
