QUERYING TRIADIC CONCEPTS THROUGH PARTIAL OR
COMPLETE MATCHING OF TRIPLES
A PREPRINT
Pedro Henrique B. Ruas
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Quebec in Outaouais
Gatineau, Quebec, Canada

Rokia Missaoui∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Quebec in Outaouais
Gatineau, Quebec, Canada

Mohamed Hamza Ibrahim
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Quebec in Outaouais
Gatineau, Quebec, Canada

January 22, 2024
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce a new method for querying triadic concepts through partial or complete
matching of triples using an inverted index, to retrieve already computed triadic concepts that contain
a set of terms in their extent, intent and/or modus. As opposed to the approximation approach
described in Ananias, this method (i) does not need to keep the initial triadic context or its three
dyadic counterparts, (ii) avoids the application of derivation operators on the triple components
through context exploration, and (iii) eliminates the requirement for a factorization phase to get triadic
concepts as the answer to one-dimensional queries. Additionally, our solution introduces a novel
metric for ranking the retrieved triadic concepts based on their similarity to a given query. Lastly, an
empirical study is primarily done to illustrate the effectiveness and scalability of our approach against
the approximation one. Our solution not only showcases superior efficiency, but also highlights a
better scalability, making it suitable for big data scenarios.
Keywords Data mining · Triadic Concept Analysis · Querying Triadic Concepts · Triple Matching
1
Introduction
In information systems, users can be overwhelmed by data and even patterns (knowledge), yet they are often interested
by specific knowledge nuggets or would like to find some specific ones. The scope for exploring patterns can vary
widely among users and often evolves over time, with a common preference for an exploratory and iterative process
that uncovers patterns using relational operations on lattices such as selection and projection [Kwuida et al., 2010].
In this particular context, Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) presents a valuable mathematical framework for representing
and extracting knowledge from data. The inception of FCA dates back to the 1980s when Wille and Ganter first
proposed it [Ganter and Wille, 1999] as a framework for constructing and exploring concept lattices and extracting
association rules.
Despite its success in various applications, the classical approach may not always be sufficient, and some situations
require an extension with an additional dimension to obtain a more complete characterization and representation of
∗http://w3.uqo.ca/missaoui/
arXiv:2401.10271v1  [cs.DB]  4 Jan 2024

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
the data. [Lehmann and Wille, 1995] took the initiative to extend FCA in their work, introducing Triadic Concept
Analysis (TCA) to describe a ternary relationship among object, attribute, and condition sets. An instance where such
an extension is beneficial is in a social resource sharing system, commonly referred to as a folksonomy [Jäschke et al.,
2008], where users, resources, and keywords (tags) establish a ternary relationship through users’ annotations. In their
paper, [Lehmann and Wille, 1995] proposed a three-dimensional graphical representation known as a trilattice.
A few researchers have attempted to simplify the visualization and navigation through triadic concepts [Missaoui et al.,
2020, Rudolph et al., 2015] by proposing navigation strategies and graphical representations based on the classical
Hasse diagram.
In our previous work [Missaoui et al., 2020], we introduced the T-iPred algorithm, which is an adaptation of the iPred
algorithm [Baixeries et al., 2009] used for efficiently computing links between concepts in FCA. This adaptation aims to
represent the Hasse diagram of triadic concepts, and its graphical representation facilitates the exploration and discovery
of hidden knowledge within triadic contexts.
However, when exploring triadic concepts through the Hasse diagram, it is common to encounter a diagram with
hundreds or even thousands of triadic concepts. Indeed, yet triadic contexts with a reduced number of objects, attributes,
and conditions can produce a vast amount of triadic concepts.
In this regard, manually exploring triadic concepts can become an impractical task due to the large number of concepts
involved. It would require the user to navigate through the entire diagram to analyze the concepts of interest. In this
study, we propose an approach based on an inverted index which allows users to make queries on all triadic concepts.
Users can search for a triple (A1, A2, A3), and if the query corresponds to a triadic concept, the platform will return
this concept. In case the searched triple is not a triadic concept, a set of more similar triadic concepts will be returned.
Furthermore, our solution enables users to conduct searches through queries specifying only one dimension (objects or
attributes or conditions), two dimensions (objects and attributes, objects and conditions, or attributes and conditions),
or all three dimensions.
The structure of this article is as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the theoretical foundation of Triadic
Concept Analysis and inverted index, whereas Section 3 presents the related work. Section 4 presents the proposed
approach to query triadic concepts. Section 5 describes an empirical study using both synthetics and real data sets. A
conclusion and further investigations are given in Section 6.
2
Background
Within this section, we aim at introducing fundamental definitions of Formal Concept Analysis and Triadic Concept
Analysis. Our primary focus will be on the triadic approach.
2.1
Formal Concept Analysis
Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) was introduced in [Ganter and Wille, 1999] as a branch of applied mathematics, which
is based on a formalization of concept and concept hierarchy. It starts from a formal binary context K := (G, M, I)
where G, M and I are a set of objects, a set of attributes, and a binary relation between G and M respectively , to
construct a concept (Galois) lattice whose nodes are formal concepts (maximal rectangles) described by an extent (set
of objects) and an intent (set of attributes).
Given arbitrary subsets A ⊆G and B ⊆M, the following derivation operators are defined:
A′ = {m ∈M | ∀g ∈A, (g, m) ∈I}, A ⊆G and
B′ = {g ∈G | ∀m ∈B, (g, m) ∈I}, B ⊆M
where A′ is the set of attributes common to all objects of A and B′ is the set of objects sharing all attributes from B.
The pair c = (A, B) is called a formal concept of K with extent A and intent B if A′ = B, and B′ = A.
A partial order ⪯exists between two concepts c1 = (A1, B1) and c2 = (A2, B2) ⇐⇒A1 ⊆A2 (or, equivalently,
B2 ⊆B1). The set C of all concepts together with the partial order form a concept lattice.
2.2
Triadic Concept Analysis
Triadic Concept Analysis (TCA) was initially introduced by Lehmann and Wille [Lehmann and Wille, 1995,
Wille, 1995] as an extension of Formal Concept Analysis [Ganter and Wille, 1999].
It serves to analyze
data described by three sets: K1 (objects), K2 (attributes), and K3 (conditions), along with a ternary rela-
tion Y
⊆K1×K2×K3.
This structure is named a triadic context and denoted as K := (K1, K2, K3, Y ).
2

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
An example of such a context is illustrated in Table 1, representing customers’ purchases in K1
=
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} from suppliers in K2 = {Peter, Nelson, Rick, Kevin, Simon, Trevor} of products in K3 =
{accessories, books, computers, digital cameras}.
P
N
R
K
S
T
1
abd
abd
ac
ab
a
a
2
ad
abcd
abd
ad
ad
a
3
abd
ad
ab
ab
a
a
4
abd
abd
ab
ab
ad
a
5
ad
ad
abd
abc
a
ab
6
abcd
abcd
abcd
abcd
abcd
abcd
Table 1: A triadic context
The notation (a1, a2, a3) ∈Y indicates that the object a1 possesses the attribute a2 under the condition a3. For instance,
the value ac at the intersection of Row 1 and Column R means that Customer 1 orders products a and c from Supplier
R.
The triadic context K := (K1, K2, K3, Y) can be converted into three dyadic contexts as follows.
K(1) := (K1, K2 × K3, Y (1)) with a1Y (1)(a2, a3) ⇔(a1, a2, a3) ∈Y
K(2) := (K2, K1 × K3, Y (2)) with a2Y (2)(a1, a3) ⇔(a1, a2, a3) ∈Y
K(3) := (K3, K1 × K2, Y (3)) with a3Y (3)(a1, a2) ⇔(a1, a2, a3) ∈Y
A Triadic Concept (TC) or closed tri-set within a triadic context K is a triple (A1, A2, A3) with A1 ⊆K1, A2 ⊆K2,
A3 ⊆K3, and A1×A2×A3 ⊆Y that is maximal in Y . In other words, none of the three subsets can be expanded
without violating the ternary relation Y . Thus, this triple represents a maximal cuboid filled with ones (or crosses).
For instance, the tri-set (5 6, K R, a b) is not closed because 5 6 × K R × a b ⊊3 4 5 6 × K R × a b ⊆Y . We use
(A1, A2, A3) or A1 × A2 × A3 interchangeably to refer to a triadic concept.
The terms extent, intent and modus refer to A1, A2 and A3 of the concept, respectively. We propose to name the pair
(A2, A3) as the feature associated with A1.
To compute triadic concepts, two derivation operators are introduced. Let K := (K1, K2, K3, Y ) be a triadic context,
and let {i, j, k} = {1, 2, 3} with j < k. Consider Xi ⊆Ki and (Xj, Xk) ⊆Kj×Kk2. The (i)-derivation [Lehmann
and Wille, 1995] is defined as follows:
X(i)
i
:= {(aj, ak) ∈Kj×Kk | (ai, aj, ak) ∈Y ∀ai ∈Xi}
(Xj, Xk)(i) := {ai ∈Ki | (ai, aj, ak) ∈Y for all (aj, ak) ∈Xj×Xk}
As an illustration, the application of the first derivation operator on the set 34563 leads to two concept features (K, ab)
and (R, ab) after the factorization of the pairs (K, a), (K, b), (R, a) and (R, b), i.e., after the computation of maximal
rectangles involving attributes and conditions in this example. Similarly, by applying the second derivation operator
on the pair (KPR, ab), we find the extent 346, meaning that only Customers 3, 4 and 6 buy Products a and b from
Suppliers K, P and R.
Once computed, the set of triadic concepts grouped under the same extent can be ordered using the order relations ≤1
determined by the quasi-order ≲1 to form a poset. This sorting creates a Hasse diagram where each node represents all
the triadic concepts with the same extent. However, it is important to note that the generated nodes do not constitute a
complete lattice since the intersection of extents is not necessarily an extent in the triadic setting.
We recall that for two elements x and y in a poset, if x ≤y (resp. x < y), then x is below (resp. strictly below) y. If
x < y and there is no element between x and y, x is called a lower cover of y, and y an upper cover of x, and we write
x ≺y.
Figure 1 presents the Hasse diagram generated by the T-iPred algorithm, where the value inside each node represents an
extent while the pairs of values attached to a dotted line are the corresponding features. For instance, the node labelled
256 encompasses the extent 256 of the TCs (256, R, abd) and (256, NPR, ad).
2We use (Xj, Xk) ⊆Kj×Kk to indicate that Xj ⊆Kj and Xk ⊆Kk.
3Throughout this paper, we will frequently employ simplified notations for sets. For instance, 1 2 5 (or simply 125) represents the
set {1, 2, 5}, while a b (or simply ab) denotes {a, b}.
3

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
Figure 1: The Hasse diagram of triadic concepts
2.3
Inverted index
An inverted index is a powerful data structure commonly used in information retrieval systems. Its primary purpose
is to facilitate efficient and quick access to relevant information from large data collections. The main idea behind
an inverted index is to map terms or keywords found in documents to the corresponding positions where these terms
appear. Instead of looking for the entire document set for a specific term, the inverted index allows direct access to the
documents containing that specific term, significantly reducing search time.
The benefits of utilizing an inverted index are manifold. Firstly, it greatly accelerates search operations, making it
ideal for applications involving vast amounts of text data, such as search engines and document retrieval systems.
Additionally, an inverted index supports diverse advanced search functionalities like Boolean queries, phrase searches,
and ranking, enabling precise and context-aware retrieval [Zobel and Moffat, 2006].
In the context of inverted index-based information retrieval, re-rank algorithms have a crucial role in fine-tuning the
ranking of retrieved documents to provide users with more relevant results. After using the inverted index to quickly
identify documents containing the query terms, the initial ranking may not fully capture the user’s intent or context.
Re-rank algorithms step in to reevaluate and adjust the document rankings based on additional features or criteria,
improving the overall accuracy of the search results. By incorporating re-rank algorithms, information retrieval systems
can enhance the user experience and deliver more accurate results.
3
Related work
To the best of our knowledge, there is only one related work to our proposed approach. In a recent study, [Ananias et al.,
2021] introduced an approach to unveil patterns from triadic contexts by querying the computed triadic concepts. The
proposed search strategy utilizes the diagram generated by T-iPred to showcase the query’s exact answer or the upper
and lower covers for concepts that approximate the given query expressed as a triple of object, attribute, and condition
sets. This methodology provides a powerful means to explore and extract valuable insights from triadic data structures.
In the approach proposed by [Ananias et al., 2021], the triadic context is first converted into three distinct dyadic
contexts as indicated earlier. However, the computational cost and execution time to perform the Cartesian product
among the two out of the three dimensions of the triadic context can be prohibitive even for a context with just a few
dozen attributes and/or conditions. Furthermore, the derivation operation is performed several times during the process
of querying triadic concepts, which can result in excessive processing time. Another limitation concerns the number of
triadic concepts returned. By adopting derivation operators, the answer to queries often leads to one triadic concept in
the scenario of an approximate search. This limitation prevents the user from exploring other triadic concepts that are,
in fact, similar to the specified query and hence could be relevant to the user.
4

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
In [Ananias et al., 2021], when the user asks for a one-dimensional query (X1, −, −), X′
1 is first computed then
factorized to get maximal rectangles as the set F of individual features Fi = (X2i, X3i) associated with X1. Then,
the set of the smallest triadic concepts that have at least X1 ⊆K1 in their extent is calculated. For a two-dimensional
query (X1, X2, −), Proposition 3 in [Wille, 1995] is used to compute (A1, A2, A3) by first calculating A3 and then A1
followed by A2 (or A2 followed by A1) using the second derivation on pairs (see Section 2), leading to one or two
triadic concepts. The case of three-dimensional queries (X1, X2, X3) is converted into three two-dimensional queries
whenever the triple is not a triadic concept.
Regarding the exploration of triadic concepts, the prototype known as “FCA Tools Bundle" [Kis et al., 2016] offers
visualization and navigation capabilities through a set of triadic concepts by utilizing dyadic projections. It also
aids in identifying concepts within a triadic context without computing all closed trisets. Nevertheless, the present
paper investigates triple matching, which has not been examined in the mentioned prototype. Another approach to
approximating triadic concepts is through OAC-triclusters, akin to OA-biclusters approximating formal concepts by
relaxing the closed triset properties. However, no specific query formulation is pursued in the quest for triadic concepts
that precisely or partially match a given input triple.
4
Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
In this section, we present a new approach for extracting knowledge from triadic contexts through partial or complete
matching of triples. The process of querying triples within the TCA framework involves searching for patterns in the
form of triadic concepts, utilizing our proposed approach that requires only the triadic concepts as input.
Our primary objective with this solution is to identify all the triadic concepts that either match the user’s query
completely or partially. For instance, consider the triadic context of customers represented in Table 1. This context
captures transactions between customers and suppliers over products. A specialized professional might be interested
in determining if there exists a set of products bought by a specific group of customers from suppliers. For example,
the formal concept (346, KPR, ab) denotes that customers 3, 4, and 6 purchased the same products a and b from the
suppliers K, P, and R.
If one seeks concepts with an extent equal to {146}, the resulting set would be (146, KNP, ab) and (146, NP, abd).
Conversely, specifying the set {1, 3} reveals that there is no concept with just these two objects in the Hasse diagram
(see Figure 1). This indicates that Customers 1 and 3 likely made purchases alongside other ones. However, there are
six triadic concepts in which the set {1, 3} is a subset of the extent : (1346, KP, ab), (1346, P, abd), (13456, K, ab),
(123456, NP, ad), (123456, KNPRST, a) and (123456, ∅, abcd). These concepts provide valuable information
about the purchases that the two clients share with other costumers.
Another user might be interested in triadic concepts that partially match the elements in the query, in case there is
no exact match. For instance, when searching for {1, 3}, we could return the concepts that have only one of the
two elements in the query. In this scenario, the following triadic concepts would be returned to the user: (16, R, ac),
(146, KNP, ab), (146, NP, abd), (346, KPR, ab), (3456, KR, ab), (1246, N, abd), (23456, R, ab).
Both scenarios are possible to be executed in our approach. The proposed algorithm uses an inverted index that is
created based on the triadic concepts, which enables not only an extremely efficient search, but also allows greater
flexibility in the number of returned triadic concepts given a query.
However, this flexibility can lead to a significant number of triadic concepts being returned, and in some cases, we
might have several dozen concepts. In this regard, we also propose the Re-rank algorithm to indicate the most similar
triadic concepts to the user’s query. Each returned concept is assigned a score based on the similarity of the query with
the triadic concepts in the inverted index.
Figure 2 presents a diagram of how the proposed solution works. The initial step in the diagram involves comprehending
all the triadic concepts. Subsequently, each constituent element of a triadic concept is scrutinized, and the inverted index
is established, encompassing the mapping of elements to the concepts in which they appear. When a user submits a
query, the inverted index is queried for concepts possessing one or more elements present in the query. The assemblage
of concepts that intersect with the query is referred to as “Relevant Triadic Concepts”. Then, this set of triadic concepts
is ranked based on their similarity with the query and then presented to the user.
For a better understanding of the proposed approach, we illustrate the first three steps of the workflow in Figure 3.
On the left, we have the set of triadic concepts associated with a unique identifier. Then, in the center of the figure,
each element (objects, attributes and conditions) composing the concepts is examined (terms), and an inverted index is
created, indicating in which triadic concept (ID) each term occurs. This structure is used to perform matches based on a
5

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
Figure 2: Workflow of our proposed solution
user’s query. For example, when executing the query (16, R, c) and submitting it to the inverted index, the response is
the document with ID 2, corresponding to the concept (16, R, ac).
Figure 3: Process of creating the Inverted-Index from triadic concepts and retrieving a matched concept
The proposed metric is primarily based on the intuition that in the query (X1, X2, X3), the component Xi with the
greatest number of elements should be assigned a greater weight than the other dimensions, indicating a likely higher
level of interest. For instance, when the user addresses the query (−, R, a), the elements of the second and third
dimensions of the query will carry equal weight in ranking the triadic concepts that include these elements. However,
when entering the query (−, R, abcd), the third dimension will hold a higher weight, as out of the five elements present
in the query, four pertain to the conditions component (third dimension). Consequently, triadic concepts that exactly
match the query’s elements in the conditions (abcd) should possess a higher score than concepts that solely possess
the attribute R and/or a subset of the elements forming the set of conditions. The Re-rank procedure is presented in
Algorithm 1.
In the first line of Algorithm 1, the procedure starts with three input: (i) the inverted index Invert of terms (objects,
attributes and conditions) and their corresponding concepts, (ii) the query and (iii) the tolerance parameter Θ. The
purpose of the tolerance parameter is to allow the user to specify how many elements of the query might not be present
in the returned triadic concepts. For instance, given the query (156, −, −) and a tolerance parameter = 0, only the
triadic concepts containing all the three objects 1, 5 and 6 should be returned. If the tolerance parameter is = 1, triadic
concepts that partially match the query with one missing element (here object) can also be returned, such as the concept
(56, K, abc).
6

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
Algorithm 1 Re-rank algorithm
Input: Invert, Query, ToleranceΘ
Output:TC-Set: Ranked relevant TCs.
1: TCs ←getRelevantConcepts(Invert, Query, Θ);
2: X1, X2, X3 ←Query;
3: rankedConcepts ←[]
4: for TC in TCs do
5:
A1, A2, A3 ←TC; ∆A1 ←∆A2 ←∆A3 ←0;
6:
∆A1 ←0;
7:
∆A2 ←0;
8:
∆A3 ←0;
9:
if |X1| > 0 then
10:
∆A1 = |X1 ∩A1|;
11:
∆A1 +=
∆A1
max(|X1|,|A1|);
12:
end if
13:
if |X2| > 0 then
14:
∆A2 = |X2 ∩A2|;
15:
∆A2 +=
∆A2
max(|X2|,|A2|);
16:
end if
17:
if |X3| > 0 then
18:
∆A3 = |X3 ∩A3|;
19:
∆A3 +=
∆A3
max(|X3|,|A3|);
20:
end if
21:
ranking = (∆A1 ×
|X1|
|query|) + (∆A2 ×
|X2|
|query|) + (∆A3 ×
|X3|
|query|)
22:
rankedConcepts.append(TC, ranking)
23: end for
24: Return TC-Set;
In Line 2, the query is separated into three variables, each representing one of the three components of the triple. In
Line 3, the variable that stores the triadic concepts and the calculated score is also initialized to an empty list. In Lines 4
to 23, all the triadic concepts returned after querying the inverted index undergo the Re-rank process. This process
begins with the separation of the concept’s components (Line 5). In Lines 6 to 8, three variables that will store the count
of different elements between the user’s query and the triadic concept are initialized to 0.
In Line 9, it is checked whether the query includes elements from the first dimension (objects). If affirmative, in Line
10, the cardinality of the intersection between the query’s objects and the elements that comprise the concept’s extent is
computed. Subsequently, in Line 11, this value is added to the result of dividing the variable ∆A1 by the maximum of
X1 and A1.
The same reasoning is repeated for the second and third components of each triadic concept (Lines 13 to 20). In Line 21,
the final score is calculated by summing up all the deltas and weighting them by the cardinality of each component in the
query relative to the total length of the search string. To better illustrate the procedure, consider the query (3456, −, a).
Out of the five elements present in the query, four are from the first component (objects). Consequently, triadic concepts
with a larger intersection with the query’s elements in the first dimension will receive a higher score than concepts that
only intersect in the third component (conditions). Finally, in Line 23, the triadic concept along with the score are
appended to the variable that stores the output.
4.1
One-dimensional queries
One-dimensional queries carry out the process of matching concepts by focusing on a single dimension from the three
available. When dealing with a triple where only one dimension is given, the procedure of conducting a one-dimensional
query entails the identification of triadic concepts that exhibit the highest similarity to the elements provided within the
query.
Formally, a one-dimensional query can be precisely defined as a triple in which solely one dimension is known, and this
approach can be applied to any of the three dimensions. In this context, three distinct triples are established: for the
extent (X1, −, −), the intent (−, X2, −), or the modus (−, −, X3).
7

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
4.1.1
Example
The list of concepts below contains the top 3 triadic concepts returned for the query (−, KP, −).
1. (1346, KP, ab) −[3.0]
2. (146, KNP, ab) −[2.67]
3. (346, KPR, ab) −[2.67]
The first concept is the only one that includes all the elements specified in the query and, thus, has the highest value for
the similarity metric (3.0). The second and third concepts have KP in their intent. However, each one has an additional
attribute (N and R, respectively) and hence, have the same similarity value.
For comparison, we executed the same query using the algorithm proposed by [Ananias et al., 2021] and obtained the
unique TC (1346, KP, ab). We observe that both solutions found the same concept as the closest answer to the query.
However, in our method, the user has the option to explore more similar concepts with their similarity score value.
4.2
Two-dimensional queries
A two-dimensional query facilitates either the identification of an existing concept or the detection of TCs that offer the
closest match to that query. The objective is to uncover information linked to concepts that exhibit the highest similarity
with any two components from the available three ones.
The formulation of a two-dimensional query involves a triple in which two dimensions are provided, while the third one
remains unknown. Consequently, three distinct variants of this triple can be established: (X1, X2, −), (X1, −, X3),
and (−, X2, X3).
4.2.1
Example
The top 3 concepts for the two-dimensional query (−, R, ab) are as follows:
1. (23456, R, ab) −[2.67]
2. (3456, KR, ab) −[2.5]
3. (246, NR, ab) −[2.5]
The concept in the first place is the only triadic concept that exactly matches the elements in the query, and for this
reason, it received the highest similarity value (2.67). The second and third returned concepts also encompass the
sought-after elements but with an additional element in the intent (K and N respectively), thus sharing the same value
of 2.5.
When we execute the same query by applying the approach from [Ananias et al., 2021], we get only the concept
(23456, R, ab) as a response, which once again is the top-1 concept returned by our solution. Despite its correct
response, we consider that the number of returned concepts by the approximation approach can discourage or even
hinder the exploration of concepts similar to a specific user query, requiring the user to make multiple queries to explore
a larger set of options.
4.3
Three-dimensional queries
The final type of query for matching triadic concepts involves a query where the three components are known. The
formulation of a three-dimensional query is then (X1, X2, X3) and aims at checking if the triple is a triadic concept or
identifying the concepts that are the closest to it based on our similarity formula.
4.3.1
Example
The following three triadic concepts constitute the top 3 concepts returned for the three-dimensional query (3, R, c).
1. (16, R, ac) −[1.17]
2. (23456, R, ab) −[1.07]
3. (3456, KR, ab) −[0.92]
8

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
As observed, there is no triadic concept that exactly matches the query. However, the most similar concept to this triple
is (16, R, ac), where the sought-after extent is absent, but there is an exact match for the attribute component (R)
and one additional element a to the requested value of c for the condition component. The second concept lacks the
condition c but exactly possesses the sought-after R attribute and the element 3 in its object component along with four
extra objects, compared to the requested triple. Lastly, there is the concept (3456, KR, ab), where the condition c is
missing, but its intent contains the extra element K, and its extent also includes the three additional objects 4, 5, and 6.
Regarding the result generated by [Ananias et al., 2021] for the same query, we obtained the following triadic concepts:
(16, R, ac), (123456, ∅, abcd), and (23456, R, ab). Comparing the results, we can see that two triadic concepts are
present in the output of both approaches: (16, R, ac) and (23456, R, ab).
However, the solution from [Ananias et al., 2021] also returned (123456, ∅, abcd), a concept that was ranked as the
top 5 in our solution. In other words, our method identified two more relevant concepts to present to the user before the
concept (123456, ∅, abcd) inside the supremum (see Figure 1), which might not be so interesting to the user.
Furthermore, another crucial aspect to highlight is the significance of ranking the responses, in addition to using a
similarity metric. The concepts returned by [Ananias et al., 2021] lack any order. As stated before, the search for a
query answer in [Ananias et al., 2021] exploits derivation operators and includes sometimes concepts that are in the
neighbourhood of the generated concepts. Concept (123456, ∅, abcd) is indeed in the upper cover of (23456, R, ab)
and has the particularity that its extent and its modus cover their counterparts in the second concept.
5
Empirical study
The purpose of this section is to carry out a validation process and provide empirical insights on the execution times of
each one of the two solutions: ours and the approximation approach [Ananias et al., 2021] using our software platform.
The tests were conducted on both real and synthetic data sets.
Given that execution times might exhibit slight variations for the same context across different code runs, the two
approaches were executed three times each, and the average execution time was calculated along with the standard
deviation.
Furthermore, we conducted a comparative analysis between the algorithms proposed in this study and the approximation
solution. The primary goal is to assess the scalability of each approach and evaluate the execution time in large contexts.
For all tests, random queries were created in order to compare the solutions.
Both algorithms were implemented in Python (3.11), and all empirical tests were carried out on a macOS 13.4.1-based
system equipped with 16 GB of RAM and an Apple M2 Pro 10-core processor.
The experiments are aimed at validating our hypothesis that our solution, based on an inverted index, will exhibit
superior scalability and, consequently, improved execution times compared to the approximation approach.
5.1
Mushroom dataset
The Mushroom Data Set4 is a well-known one in data mining validation tests. This dataset contains descriptions of
hypothetical samples corresponding to 23 species of mushrooms, characterized by 22 variables each one with two to
twelve modalities. In order to have a synthetic triadic context, we first converted the multivariate dataset into a formal
context from which we selected 128 binary attributes, decomposed the latter group into a set of 32 attributes and a set
of 4 corresponding conditions. For this experiment, the synthetic triadic context has 8416 objects, 32 attributes and
4 conditions, resulting in a total of 1859 triadic concepts. Table 2 presents the execution time for the three types of
queries, namely one, two, and three-dimension ones, along with the execution time for the data structure creation in
both solutions.
The first noticeable point is the execution time for creating the data structure used to perform the queries. In the
approximation approach, the transformation of the triadic context into three dyadic contexts is required, which involves
calculating the Cartesian product of two dimensions out of three in the original context. Thus, just the Cartesian product
between the set of objects and the set of attributes resulted in a context with 269,312 cells in the dyadic context K(3).
Consequently, this demands a longer execution time, averaging 12.2 seconds for creating this data structure.
In contrast, for creating the inverted index, it is only necessary to traverse the list of triadic concepts once to get the
concepts associated with each dimension element. In this way, we have an average execution time of 65.8 milliseconds
for its creation.
4Available at: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/mushroom
9

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
Table 2: Mushroom dataset - Execution time comparison
Concept approximation
Our solution
Create data structure
12.2 s ± 481 ms
65.8 ms ± 4.11 ms
One-dimensional query
(−, −, X3)
Execution time
3min 9s ± 607 ms
18.5 ms ± 2.7 ms
One-dimensional query
(−, X2, −)
Execution time
1.41 s ± 9.47 ms
0.607 ms ± 0,323 ms
One-dimensional query
(X1, −, −)
Execution time
4.19 ms ± 680 ms
26.9 ms ± 6.66 ms
Two-dimensional query
(−, X2, X3)
Execution time
210 ms ± 7.74 ms
2.39 ms ± 0,280 ms
Two-dimensional query
(X1, −, X3)
Execution time
2.28 ms ± 0.307 ms
8.11 ms ± 0.815 ms
Two-dimensional query
(X1, X2, −)
Execution time
48 ms ± 3.44 ms
5.64 ms ± 0.922 ms
Three-dimensional query
(X1, X2, X3)
Execution time
257 ms ± 9.95 ms
28.8 ms ± 4.49 ms
Regarding the execution of queries, the run time for both algorithms was measured in milliseconds, with the exception
of the first two queries in the solution of [Ananias et al., 2021]. For the first one-dimensional query, all derivation
operations are performed on the context K(3) with 269,312 cells. Furthermore, the derivation of a single element
can generate a large set of pairs, which subsequently undergoes a factorization process. This excessive amount of
processing results in an average execution time of 3 minutes and 9 seconds, while our solution runs in an average of
18.5 milliseconds.
In the second one-dimensional query, the number of cells in the generated dyadic context is also a bottleneck. For this
query, the derivations are performed on the context K(2) with 33,664 cells, resulting in an average time of 1.41 seconds.
On the other hand, our solution took only 0.607 milliseconds on average.
It is also important to highlight the number of triadic concepts returned by each solution. In all queries, our approach
was able to identify a higher number of concepts with their similarity score. In the approximation approach, the size of
the query answer depends on the query and the TC set without any hint from the user. Moreover, the returned concepts
are not ranked, requiring manual and meticulous exploration from the user to identify the most relevant ones.
5.2
Groceries dataset
The Groceries database5 contains 38765 transactions, 3898 customers, 167 products (items) and 728 distinct transaction
dates. The dataset we are analyzing contains transactions made by customers who bought a set of items during a given
month (rather than a specific date) between 2014 and 2015 and has a total of 17456 triadic concepts. Table 3 displays
the execution times for each potential query type, namely one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional
queries, as well as the time taken for data structure creation in both approaches.
In this experiment, we can observe that the approximation approach, once again, requires more time for data structure
creation. In this case, the fact that we have a larger number of objects, attributes, and conditions has a negative impact
on the creation of dyadic contexts, requiring an average time of one minute and 27 seconds for its completion. In
contrast, the creation of the inverted index is not significantly affected, even with a considerably large number of triadic
concepts in this dataset, taking only 21.9 milliseconds to create the index.
Using this dataset, the limitation of the approximation approach becomes evident, where three queries took more than
1.5 seconds to return a response, with the slowest one being the first query in Table 3, which took an average of 58.2
seconds. Once again, the number of cells in the dyadic context K(2) generated by the Cartesian product of objects
and attributes (650,966 cells), along with the derivation and factorization operations, prove to be non scalable and
impractical for larger contexts.
This dataset led to a large set of 17,456 triadic concepts. However, our solution was efficient to find the concepts using
the inverted index as discussed earlier.
5Available at: https://www.kaggle.com/heeraldedhia/groceries-dataset
10

Querying Triadic Concepts through Partial or Complete Matching of Triples
A PREPRINT
Table 3: Groceries dataset - Execution time comparison
Concept approximation
Our solution
Create data structure
1 min 27s ± 456 ms
21.9 ms ± 3.09 ms
One-dimensional query
(−, −, X3)
Execution time
58.2 s ± 232 ms
23.9 ms ± 3.94 ms
One-dimensional query
(−, X2, −)
Execution time
429 ms ± 18.6 ms
4.53 ms ± 0.313 ms
One-dimensional query
(X1, −, −)
Execution time
3.87 ms ± 0.873 ms
2.05 ms ± 0.375 ms
Two-dimensional query
(−, X2, X3)
Execution time
48.8 ms ± 7.02 ms
57.5 ms ± 8.56 ms
Two-dimensional query
(X1, −, X3)
Execution time
1.65 s ± 5.02 ms
33.6 ms ± 5.59 ms
Two-dimensional query
(X1, X2, −)
Execution time
40.8 ms ± 8 ms
6.02 ms ± 0.779 ms
Three-dimensional query
(X1, X2, X3)
Execution time
6.74 s ± 9.88 ms
92.9 ms ± 2.59 ms
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to querying triadic concepts based on partial or complete matching of
triples. This approach, based on using an inverted index, does not need to store or explore any context, nor rely on
derivation or factorization operations to identify the triadic concepts most similar to a given query.
This solution not only shows higher efficiency compared to the most related existing approach in the literature but also
indicates enhanced scalability, making it applicable in big data scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
other algorithms or methods capable of partial or complete matching of triples without the need to perform derivation
operators or to transform the triadic context into dyadic ones. Moreover, the query answer sounds close to the user’s
triple.
Currently, we are conducting additional tests and code improvement for the two compared approaches as well as
working on an open-source platform for exploring and mining patterns in Triadic Concept Analysis.
