Plagiarism Detection in Polyphonic Music using Monaural Signal Separation
Soham De1, Indradyumna Roy1, Tarunima Prabhakar2, Kriti Suneja3,
Sourish Chaudhuri4, Rita Singh4, Bhiksha Raj4
1Computer Science & Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, WB, India.
2DA-IICT, Gandhinagar, GJ, India.
3Electronics & Communication Engineering, LNM-IIT, Jaipur, RJ, India.
4Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Abstract
Given the large number of new musical tracks released
each year, automated approaches to plagiarism detection
are essential to help us track potential violations of copy-
right. Most current approaches to plagiarism detection
are based on musical similarity measures, which typically
ignore the issue of polyphony in music. We present a
novel feature space for audio derived from compositional
modelling techniques, commonly used in signal separa-
tion, that provides a mechanism to account for polyphony
without incurring an inordinate amount of computational
overhead. We employ this feature representation in con-
junction with traditional audio feature representations in
a classiﬁcation framework which uses an ensemble of dis-
tance features to characterize pairs of songs as being pla-
giarized or not. Our experiments on a database of about
3000 musical track pairs show that the new feature space
characterization produces signiﬁcant improvements over
standard baselines.
Index Terms:
music plagiarism detection,
poly-
phonic music, similarity measures, compositional mod-
els, monaural signal separation
1. Introduction
Music-plagiarism is the use or close imitation of another
author’s music without proper acknowledgement.
Ev-
ery year, vast numbers of new music tracks are released
globally, and questionable similarities exist in some sec-
tions of music tracks. Aided by the internet, plagiarism
is now noticeable globally, not just across authors, but
also across languages and countries. In 2008 alone, 1.4
billion music tracks were sold internationally. This num-
ber has since increased to over 1.8 billion. In 2004, the
SACEM, an organization that seeks to protect the rights
of the original authors, composers and publishers, was
able to manually check only a small percentage of reg-
istered pieces for potential copyright violations.
With
such vast numbers of tracks to monitor, the need for auto-
matic techniques for identiﬁcation of potential copyright
violations and detection of music-plagiarism is clear and
paramount.
Current approaches to plagiarism detection use tech-
niques based on musical similarity analysis, which em-
phasizes ﬁnding musical pieces in large databases for
retrieval.
Various feature sets have been proposed for
characterization of musical tracks, including the use of
pitch contours, loudness, and cepstral features [1, 2].
Approaches to computing similarity given the character-
izations of two musical tracks use various approaches
including n-gram based similarity, geometric distances,
and string-matching algorithms [3, 4].
There are two
main issues with adopting similar techniques for pla-
giarism detection– ﬁrst, these approaches typically ig-
nore the issue of polyphony in the recordings, simply
using a monophonic approximation instead [4].
Poly-
phonic music can have multiple overlapping notes and
is far more complex from an analysis perspective than
monophony. Feature extraction techniques traditionally
used for monophonic music cannot be expected to do a
good job of representing polyphonic characteristics. As a
result, these methods have limited success when applied
on polyphonic music. Second, unlike similarity compu-
tation for retrieval where a system returns a ranked list,
a plagiarism detector needs to decide whether a pair of
songs are sufﬁciently similar that one may have been pla-
giarized from the other.
In this paper, we present an approach that can ef-
fectively deal with these issues. To tackle the problem
of polyphony, we present a novel feature set derived
from signal separation based on compositional models
[5]. This feature set represents the magnitude spectrum
of each frame in a musical data segment as an additive,
weighted combination of a set of bases. The bases are not
constrained to be physically meaningful in this work, but
such constraints may be applied as well; e.g. each base
could represent the different notes that are expected to be
present. In this framework, the weights assigned to bases
arXiv:1503.00022v1  [cs.SD]  27 Feb 2015

to compose each spectral vector can be used as a feature
representation for the audio frame.
The second problem of requiring a decision, as op-
posed to a ranked list in case of retrieval, is tackled by
formulating the problem as a discriminative classiﬁca-
tion task. Given a pair of musical segments and vari-
ous feature characterizations, we compute an ensemble
of distance-based features.
These computed distances
serve as a representation of the pair of musical pieces.
Each pair is a datapoint with a corresponding label that
indicates whether one of the songs is plagiarized from
the other or not. We use the labels in conjunction with
the distance-based features to train a classiﬁcation model.
Now, given a pair of test musical segments, the system
can use this model to decide whether one of the segments
may have been plagiarized from the other.
While applications aside from plagiarism detection
are beyond the scope of this paper, the techniques de-
scribed can easily be applied to other related tasks. For
instance, for the task of retrieving similar segments, given
a musical segment (M1), one can query the classiﬁcation
model using M1 and all other musical segments in the
database. Such a system could use the distance from the
decision boundary as a score to create a ranked similar-
ity list. The use of signal separation-based embedding
for musical segments can also be adopted for other music
tasks in polyphonic settings.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in Section 2, we present a detailed formulation of the
problem of music-plagiarism detection. Section 3 dis-
cusses the feature representations we use for music tracks
as well as to characterize pairs of musical segments as
plagiarized or not. In Section 4, we describe the dataset
used in our experiments and present our results and our
discussion of the same. We conclude the paper in Section
5.
2. Problem Formulation
In this paper, we approach the task of detection of mu-
sic plagiarism in a pairwise discriminative classiﬁcation
framework, where given a pair of musical segments, we
wish to predict whether the pair are sufﬁciently similar so
as to be considered plagiarized. Each musical track (x) is
ﬁrst represented using a set of feature vectors denoted by
F(x) = {f1, f2, ..., fn}. Each of the individual fk here
represent a class of features, e.g. Mel-Frequency Cepstral
Coefﬁcient features, pitch contour features.
We then deﬁne a set of n distance functions (one for
each feature class extracted for a song), φ1, φ2, ..φn, over
pairs of such tracks, xi and xj, where each of these func-
tions φk computes the distance between the feature vec-
tors of the two music tracks for the k-th feature class:
φk(xi, xj) = D(fk(xi), fk(xj)), ∀k ∈[1, 2...n]
(1)
where D represents a distance function that is com-
puted over the k-th feature classes for each of the music
tracks. As we describe in Section 3.3, we use an edit-
distance measure to compute distance for our task; we
note, however, that any other distance metric could be
used in this framework, if applied to a different task. The
set of distance scores, thus computed, behaves, in effect,
as a feature characterization of the degree of difference
between the two songs.
F(xi, xj) = {φ1(xi, xj), φ2(xi, xj), ..φn(xi, xj)} (2)
At training time, given information about whether the
pair of songs, xi, xj, represent a positive instance of
plagiarism, we can use the distance based feature set in
a supervised classiﬁcation framework to train a model
that can predict plagiarism, given a pair of music tracks.
Let ¯w represent the set of weights for the features learnt
at training time, and G represent the function that com-
putes a score for the datapoint (e.g. G( ¯w, F(xi, xj)) =
Pn
k=1 wkFk, for linear regression) . We can then obtain
a label L for the pair of music tracks using a thresholded
classiﬁer score as follows:
H(xi, xj) = G( ¯w, F(xi, xj)) −ρ
(3)
L =
(
+1,
if H(xi, xj) > 0,
−1,
if H(xi, xj) ≤0.
(4)
where L = +1 denotes plagiarized. Unlike tasks requir-
ing similarity computation between tracks for search-like
applications, our task of detecting plagiarism is differ-
ent in that we cannot simply pick the few most similar
songs as potentially plagiarized, since this would result
in a large number of songs that need manual examina-
tion. The parameter ρ is therefore used as a threshold in
this formulation, and we try to ﬁnd an optimal value for
this parameter so that we make the fewest mistakes.
3. Feature Representations from
compositional models
Our feature-space design is primarily motivated by the
fact that most current approaches do not explicitly ad-
dress the issue of polyphony in recordings, simply us-
ing a monophonic approximation instead, while others
consider polyphony as a more general multidimensional
mathematical issue. While an ideal solution to this prob-
lem would involve separating out the multiple notes or
voices in the recording into different tracks, this would
require information for each track that is not likely to be
available.
We introduce a novel feature set that is based on
compositional representation of the magnitude spectra.
Speciﬁcally, we use a non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF)-based embedding for the music tracks [6], that
we expect will account for polyphony much better than

the feature sets traditionally used for music representa-
tion. These NMF-based features are used in conjunction
with traditional feature representations. In the follow-
ing, we ﬁrst describe the NMF-based feature extraction
technique for audio, and then brieﬂy describe tradition-
ally used feature sets in Section 3.2. In Section 3.3, we
discuss the distance function used to create a characteri-
zation for pairs of tracks.
3.1. NMF features
NMF is a subspace analysis technique which obtains
a parts-based representation of data by imposing non-
negative constraints [6]. Given training data, NMF can
learn a set of basis vectors so that we can represent any
datapoint as a linear weighted non-negative combination
of these vectors. We use the magnitude spectra of the au-
dio signals as our data, since they are guaranteed to be
non-negative. We can represent Mt, a magnitude spectral
vector at time t as:
Mt =
N
X
i=1
biwi,t
(5)
where bi is the i-th basis vector and wi,t is the weight of
the basis in frame t. N is the number of basis vectors.
If we represent the set of basis vectors using matrix
BN = [b1, ..., bN], the model and the weights using the
matrix [WN]i,t = wi,t, we can write the model as,
M = BW
(6)
NMF has been applied to various audio tasks, includ-
ing blind source separation and separation of speech from
music [5, 7]. The intuition behind using the NMF formu-
lation for music is that a polyphonic music segment will
be composed additively from various notes, and NMF can
estimate the contribution of the various notes. Thus, each
audio frame can be represented using the NMF technique
in the N-dimensional basis space, where the weights for
the frame correspond to the co-ordinates for the frame in
this space. NMF has a signiﬁcant advantage over dimen-
sionality reduction techniques such as PCA and ICA in
that the number of bases used need not be less than the
original space, resulting in an overcomplete basis space.
For this task, the basis vectors may be thought of as indi-
vidual notes present in the music.
We use an exemplar-based basis set for our exper-
iments in this paper, where bases are drawn randomly
from a collection of spectral vectors for the source (mag-
nitude spectra vectors in the music data, in our case).
Such bases, although lacking an intuitive interpretation,
have useful theoretical properties [8]. For alternate tasks,
where more information about the notes and instruments
is available, one could constrain the basis set to consist of
true notes or learn them from audio libraries.
Once the set of bases B is selected, each magnitude
spectral vector in the dataset can be represented as a non-
negative-weighted combination of the bases. The weights
are obtained using an iterative update rule minimizing a
generalized Kullback Leibler divergence [9] between M
and BW as follows:
W = W ⊗BT .[ M
BW]
BT .1
(7)
where 1 is a matrix of ones and the operation ⊗denotes
element-wise multiplications. All divisions are element-
wise, as well. Weights W are initialized to unity, and
we iterate equation (7) to convergence. For each mu-
sic piece, we now have a sequence of weight vectors W
which can be used as a feature representation for the au-
dio in the basis space. These sequences correspond to
one feature class, as described in Section 2. We used a
1024-dimensional representation of each audio frame in
the data and 64 basis vectors for all experiments reported
in this paper.
3.2. Traditional Representations for Audio
In addition to the features extracted from the NMF, we
extract features using traditional means of analysis of
the audio content, that describe the temporal and spectral
sound structures effectively. We use the F-score for iden-
tifying the more discriminative features for the dataset
used [10].
We expect that augmenting these with the
NMF-based features will lead to increased efﬁciency in
the detection of similar music documents in polyphonic
settings.
In general, perception of structural boundaries in mu-
sic is mostly inﬂuenced by variations in timbre, tonality
and rhythm. Timbral features, such as spectral rolloff,
which estimates the amount of high frequency of the sig-
nal, and zero crossing rate are extracted. Key strength,
a tonality feature which indicates the cross-correlation
score for each different tonality candidate, is another fea-
ture extracted. Other features extracted from the audio
include Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients, the relative
Shannon entropy, indicating predominant peaks, kurto-
sis, indicating trends in the audio signal, standard devia-
tion, skewness, and the amplitude envelope. We also use
the novelty curve, obtained from convolution along the
main diagonal of the similarity matrix using a Gaussian
checkerboard. We use this feature set as the baseline for
comparison with the enhanced system that also includes
the NMF-based features.
3.3. Distance Features for Pair Characterization
In the previous subsections, we described the sets of fea-
tures extracted for each music track. We use these fea-
tures to compute distances which we use to characterize
pairs of tracks as plagiarized or not. Given the feature

representations for the two tracks, we use the Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) algorithm to compute distances
between the corresponding feature sequences. Dynamic
time warping is a dynamic programming algorithm for ef-
ﬁciently computing the optimal alignment of non-linearly
expanded or contracted sequences.
Based on an inspection of the dataset, we observed
that the music in a pair of plagiarized pieces usually
differed in rhythm, while retaining other properties that
made them sound similar. We incorporate this intuition
into our distance computation by using a modiﬁed ver-
sion of the DTW algorithm for rhythm-based features,
with local weights to prefer insertions or deletions to sub-
stitutions to better account for the variation in rhythm.
The modiﬁcation is as follows:
D(i, j) = min





D(i −1, j −1) + wsub.d(i, j)
D(i, j −1) + wdel.d(i, j)
D(i −1, j) + wins.d(i, j)
(8)
We make wsub much larger than wdel and wins. This
follows from the fact that, even though the DTW would
effectively match two sequences having the same musical
property with varying rhythm, the distance between the
two sequences would still be large owing to the numerous
insertions and deletions required. Thus, using a lower
weight for insertion and deletion would help in bringing
out this similarity.
However, this modiﬁcation has a potential disadvan-
tage in that the warping path might begin to prefer axis-
parallel trajectories due to the signiﬁcantly lower costs of
insertions and deletions. This is overcome by constrain-
ing the slope of the warping path over short windows to
be within a pre-speciﬁed range.
4. Experimental Results
We used the MIRToolBox in MATLAB [11] to extract
the traditional audio-based features described in Section
3.2. This was followed by extraction of the NMF fea-
tures, and the DTW-based distance computation to set up
pairwise characterization of tracks, as described in Sec-
tion 3. These distance features and true class labels for
the training data were then used to train a random forest
classiﬁer [12] with 150 trees.
4.1. Dataset
We created a database of 2966 song pairs, comprising
of 966 plagiarized (positive data set) and 2000 non-
plagiarized (negative data set) song pairs. The positive
instances were obtained from music covers and plagia-
rism lawsuits [13, 14] including the Music Copyright In-
fringement Resource of the UCLA School of Law. The
dataset is comprised of music from a wide range of gen-
res and languages. All recordings were resampled to a
uniform 16 kHz sampling rate with a frame length of 40
Table 1: Overall classiﬁcation accuracy comparison for
the various systems on entire test data
Baseline
NMF-only
Enhanced
45.1%
72.6%
78.4%
Figure 1: (L): Precision-Recall ROC curves for the vari-
ous systems on the plagiarized instances in test data; (R)
Corresponding Area Under the Curve (AUC) for the var-
ious systems
ms. The training and test data were separated randomly
to provide a 9:1 train-test split.
4.2. Results
We compare performance of 3 systems on the test data.
We use the traditional feature sets described in Section
3.2 as the baseline, and compare it with performance us-
ing the NMF-features only, as well as an enhanced fea-
ture set using baseline features along with NMF-features.
First, a comparison of overall classiﬁcation accuracy on
the test set is shown in Table 1. We ﬁnd that the NMF-
only system signiﬁcantly outperforms the system using
the baseline feature set, while the enhanced system sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms both of them.
Figure 1 compares performance of the systems using
ROC plots for precision and recall for the plagiarized in-
stances in the test data. Since precision and recall are
both metrics of accuracy, the higher the Area Under the
Curve (AUC), the better the performance. We note that
the NMF-only outperforms the baseline, but the enhanced
system signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline and NMF-
only systems.
Figure 2 shows the successful and failed detection
rates for plagiarized track pairs from different genres.
Our method performs the best in the country, jazz and
rock categories, and worst in hip-hop. This may be be-
cause the presence of rap sequences make the detection
of these song pairs difﬁcult.
An inspection of plagiarized sequences shows that
plagiarized pieces often contain only a small sequence

Classical
Country
Hip−Hop
Jazz
R&B
Rock
Pop
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Genre of Music
% value
 
 
Successful Detection
Failed Detection
Figure 2: Performance across genres (Baseline+NMF
features)
that is similar to the original, and our feature set does
not do anything to explicitly address this. To account for
such cases, one may consider deriving features from the
alignment trajectories, to detect local occurrences of sys-
tematically varied rhythms.
While existing systems for the detection of near-
duplicate music documents can be used for plagiarism
detection [4], we observe that their performance wors-
ens in polyphonic settings, failing in a number of cases
where our method proves successful, e.g. song pairs He’s
So Fine and My Sweet Lord, Oye Mi Canto and Paginas
De Mujer. Our method proves least effective in cases
where the similar portions are in the background, e.g. a
copied guitar riff in the musical pieces involved in the La
Cienega Music Co. v. ZZ Top plagiarism suit.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a novel feature space derived
from techniques commonly used in signal separation to
account for polyphony in music recordings. We formu-
lated the task of plagiarism detection in a supervised clas-
siﬁcation framework which using distance features over
pairs of music tracks to learn the model. Our approach re-
sulted in a signiﬁcant improvement in performance over
the baseline metrics. It is worth noting that our method
does not dispense with the need for agencies that track
potential copyright violations. Ideally, it should be used
as a ﬁltering mechanism that identiﬁes extremely similar
music samples.
This work used exemplar bases obtained from the
data for NMF– alternate learning methods for the bases
(such as training of the basis set from the data, using ex-
amples of expected notes for initialization) and effects of
changing the basis set size are directions that we expect
to explore in future work.
The NMF-based feature representation should be use-
ful in other tasks that deal with polyphonic music as well.
However, for music retrieval tasks such as query by hum-
ming or song-matching tasks, we need to be especially
careful in the training/selection of basis vectors, because
such retrieval tasks are often applied to databases that in-
clude user-generated content, typically of a worse quality
than studio recordings due to background noise. For such
tasks, we would need to have an additional step for noise
removal/reduction or ensure that the basis vectors are not
trained from studio-quality recordings only. We continue
to actively explore these directions.
6. References
[1] A. Ghias, J. Logan, D. Chamberlin, and B.C. Smith.
Query by humming: musical information retrieval in an
audio database. Proc. of Third ACM Int. Conf. on Multi-
media, MULTIMEDIA 95, 6:231–236, 1995.
[2] B. Logan and A. Salomon. A music similarity function
based on signal analysis. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Multi-
media and Expo (ICME), 00(C):745–748, 2001.
[3] S. Doraisamy and S. R¨uger. Robust polyphonic music re-
trieval with n-grams. JIIS, 21(1):53–70, 2003.
[4] P. Hanna, P. Ferraro, and M. Robine. On Optimizing Edit-
ing Algorithms for Evaluating Similarity Between Mono-
phonic Musical Sequences. J. of New Music Research,
36(4):267–279, 2007.
[5] B. Raj, T. Virtanen, S. Chaudhuri, and R. Singh. Non-
Negative Matrix Factorization Based Compensation of
Music for Automatic Speech Recognition. Interspeech,
(Sept.):717–720, 2010.
[6] D D Lee and H S Seung.
Learning the parts of
objects by non-negative matrix factorization.
Nature,
401(6755):788–91, 1999.
[7] T Virtanen. Monaural sound source separation by non-
negative matrix factorization with temporal continuity and
sparseness criteria. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Pro-
cessing, (3):1066–1074.
[8] P Smaragdis, M Shashanka, and B Raj. A Sparse Non-
Parametric Approach for Single Channel Separation of
Known Sounds. NIPS, pages 1–9, 2009.
[9] D D Lee and H S Seung. Algorithms for non-negative
matrix factorization. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 13(1):556–562, 2001.
[10] Yi-wei Chen and Chih-jen Lin.
Combining SVMs
with Various Feature Selection Strategies.
Strategies,
324(1):1–10, 2006.
[11] O. Lartillot and P. Toiviainen. MIR in Matlab (II): A Tool-
box for Musical Feature Extraction From Audio. In In-
ternational Conference on Music Information Retrieval,
2007.
[12] L Breiman. Random Forests. Machine Learning, (1):5–
32.
[13] School of Law UCLA. Music Copyright Infringement Re-
source.
[14] ItwoFS. Chronicles of Plagiarism in Indian Film Music.
