IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
35
Decision Support Systems (DSS) in Construction Tendering 
Processes 
Rosmayati MOHEMAD1, Abdul Razak HAMDAN2, Zulaiha ALI OTHMAN2 and Noor Maizura MOHAMAD NOOR1 
 
 1 Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, University Malaysia Terengganu 
Kuala Terengganu, 21030, Terengganu, Malaysia 
 
 
2 Faculty of Information Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Bangi, 43600, Selangor, Malaysia 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The successful execution of a construction project is heavily 
impacted by making the right decision during tendering 
processes. Managing tender procedures is very complex and 
uncertain involving coordination of many tasks and individuals 
with different priorities and objectives. Bias and inconsistent 
decision are inevitable if the decision-making process is totally 
depends on intuition, subjective judgement or emotion. In 
making transparent decision and healthy competition tendering, 
there exists a need for flexible guidance tool for decision support. 
Aim of this paper is to give a review on current practices of 
Decision Support Systems (DSS) technology in construction 
tendering processes. Current practices of general tendering 
processes as applied to the most countries in different regions 
such as United States, Europe, Middle East and Asia are 
comprehensively 
discussed. 
Applications 
of 
Web-based 
tendering processes is also summarised in terms of its properties. 
Besides that, a summary of Decision Support System (DSS) 
components is included in the next section. Furthermore, prior 
researches on implementation of DSS approaches in tendering 
processes are discussed in details. Current issues arise from both 
of paper-based and Web-based tendering processes are outlined. 
Finally, conclusion is included at the end of this paper. 
Keywords: Construction industry, decision-making, decision 
support systems, tendering. 
1. Introduction 
Planning for construction project involving millions 
ringgit is a challenging and complex task faced by 
multiple parties such as clients, consultants and 
contractors. The successful execution of a construction 
project is heavily impacted by making the right decision at 
the right time. The construction project life cycle involves 
three stages namely as pre-construction, construction and 
post-construction [16]. Tendering processes is in the first 
stage [21].  
 
Tendering 
processes 
in 
construction 
industry 
are 
fragmented and different with the other domain of 
tendering practices [24]. Managing tender procedures is 
often very complex and uncertain, involving coordination 
of many tasks and individuals. Different individuals have 
different priorities and objectives. It increases the need for 
efficient decisions from clients, consultants (acting on 
behalf of clients) or contractors. For example, contractor is 
required to make decision to determine either to 
participate in the tender or not and selection of the most 
qualified contractor to run the project by clients. 
Conventionally, decision makers tend to make decision 
based on a blend of their intuition, subjective judgement 
which based on past experience and emotion. This kind of 
practice does not guarantee consistent decision and lead to 
be bias. In complex environment, undetermined and 
insufficient external information as input during making 
decision could trigger to unfair, incomplete and poorly 
constructed result [30]. Meanwhile, despite the existing of 
diverse Web-based tools for supporting online tendering, 
current approaches do not include with decision support 
tools. The adoption of ICT in tendering processes does not 
help in making fair and structured decision. Thus, 
Decision Support Systems (DSS) play a great important 
role in order to ensure the confidentiality, greater 
transparency and healthy competition in tendering.  
 
DSS are computer-based systems that assist business and 
organizational in complex decision-making environment. 
According to Marakas [32], DSS manage and process 
input of unstructured or semi-structured problems in order 
to support rather than replace decision-making process. 
The final selection in decision-making is under human 
authority. DSS act as supporting tools in assisting users by 
giving 
suggestions 
especially 
when 
fragmented 
information and complex problem involved.  
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
36
Aim of this paper is to give a review on current practices 
of DSS technology in construction tendering processes. 
The organisation of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 presents in general current practices of 
construction tendering processes. General concepts and 
components of DSS are outlined in Section 3. Further, 
Section 4 reviews on the implementation of DSS in 
tendering practices. Current challenges faced in DSS are 
discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a 
summary of this paper. 
2. Tendering Processes in Construction 
Industry 
As  defined by Halaris et al. [36], tendering is the list of 
processes to produce, display and manage tender 
documents by client or consultant. It also involves action 
to perform bidding by interested contractors in order to 
win the contract by responding to tenders with their 
capabilities and skills formation. Meanwhile, according to 
Ng et al. [37], tendering processes begin with the analysis 
to ensure tender specification meets with end users need, 
followed by contractor selection, tender invitation and 
ending with contract awarding and contract monitoring. 
The period of tendering processes is defined to begin with 
tender preparation and to end with tender completion. 
2.1 Types of Tender Method 
In construction industry, there are three different types of 
tender including open tender, restricted tender and 
negotiated tender. These types of tender are largely 
practiced in Europe [26], Nigeria [4], Malaysia [38, 39], 
and Turkey [28]. Table 1 differentiates each type of 
tender. 
2.2 General Tendering Processes 
Tendering processes in construction sector involve set of 
parties. They are client and consultant as contracting 
authorities as well as interested organizations or 
contractors. Usually in many countries, the government is 
the largest construction client. Client is also identified as 
project owner [28], consultant as info broker and 
contractor as provider or tenderer [36]. Despite the use of 
different terms for describing actors in tendering, the role 
of each of them remains similar.  
Initiate project
Client
Consultant 
Contractor
Invite tenders
Tender Specification 
Preparation 
Access tenders and select 
contractor
View tender 
Interested
Purchase tender 
documents
Fill tender documents
Submit tender
Yes
Prequalified
Short list contractors
Qualified
Open submitted tenders
End
Yes
Yes
No
No
Tender Aggregation 
1
st Stage Evaluation
2
nd Stage Evaluation
No
End
Tender Awarding
Sign Contract
Fig. 1.  General tendering processes in construction industry according to 
client, consultant and contractor perspectives. The grey boxes represent main 
phases in tendering. It starts with tender specification preparation, tender 
invitation, tender submission/tender bidding, tender aggregation, tender 
assessment and tender awarding.  
Table 1: Types Tender Method 
Types of Tender 
Description 
Open Tender 
All interested contractors are invited to submit tenders. 
This method opens the opportunity for new or 
unfamiliar contractor to compete for the contract [4]. 
Restricted 
/ 
Selected Tender 
Only invited/selected contractors are allowed to bid the 
tender. This approach makes competition among 
contractors lesser. Normally, it is applied when 
construction contract needs special expertise and high 
technology. Those contractors who filled these 
requirements are invited. Most organizations in UK and 
many countries as well adopt this method [11]. 
Negotiation 
Tender 
Client consults the chosen contractors and negotiates the 
term of contract with them. Normally, it is applied under 
special circumstances such as: 
 when the construction contract is too complex or 
unique to identify technical and financial properties,  
 when there is an emergency situation that require the 
project to be completed in a short time,  
 when there is only one contractor that fulfils the 
contract requirement in terms of expertise and 
technology,  
 when 
involves 
security 
project 
of 
national 
importance 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
37
Conventional tendering involves receiving, checking, 
copying, 
and 
distributing 
processes 
which 
are 
implemented based on paper-based. The approach remains 
predominant in developing countries such as Malaysia [24, 
40], Nigeria [41], and Oman [42]. Strong emphasize on 
the need of ICT in Malaysian construction tendering were 
discussed by Lou and Syed Alwee [43] and Mastura et al. 
[44] through their analysis  according to Technology 
Readiness Index. However, until now the real-world 
implementation of Web-based technology in Malaysian 
construction tendering faced the biggest challenge to 
realism. Fig. 1 summarizes the general tendering processes 
according client, consultant and contractor perspectives. 
Most countries in different region such as United States, 
Europe, Middle East and Asia have similar execution of 
tendering. 
 
The process starts when the client initializes a construction 
project. Client hires consultant to prepare tender 
specification by conducting feasibility study. It involves 
typical activities such as determining estimated cost, time 
for project completion and procurement procedures. 
Consultant also responsible to prepare tender documents 
including qualification documents and bill of quantities. 
These documents require an approval from client. In order 
to ensure fair competition and transparency, it is 
compulsory for client to display notice call for tender 
invitation. Normally, client advertises the notice within a 
period of time on printed media such as newspaper, public 
media or website. Construction tendering procedures 
under European Union legislation requires a notice to be 
displayed in the official Journal of the European 
Commission [26]. Meanwhile in Nigeria, contractors are 
invited for tender submission through advertisement in 
major national publications [41]. The procedure also 
known as Request for Tender (RFT), Notice to Bidders or 
Invitation to Tender (ITT).  
 
Subsequently, contractor who intends to bid for the tender 
will purchase the tender documents and give appropriate 
information required, and then submits the completed 
tender before reaching the deadline. Normally, tender 
documents consist of information regarding on instruction 
to 
tenderers, 
conditions 
of 
contract, 
technical 
specifications, drawings, bill of quantities (BQ) and list of 
forms to be completed by the contractor. All the submitted 
tenders will be aggregated and opened after the deadline. 
 
All the tenders received will be assessed in order to select 
the most eligible contractor. Assessment is the most 
crucial stage in tendering processes because it contributes 
to the decision in choosing the most qualified contractor to 
win the tender. It is an unstructured and complex process 
where multi criteria need to be considered during 
assessment such as bid price, time for project completion, 
financial capability, work experience, technical staff 
available, equipment facilities and current list of works. 
These criteria contribute to identify potential contractor 
that capable to deliver high quality of completed service, 
within time and under budget allocated [28]. Usually, the 
assessment is carried out by the group of appointed 
committees. This task is under responsibility of client or 
his representative and tender administration committee as 
practices in China [45]. There are two stages of 
assessment before qualified contractors will be listed out.  
 
The first stage of evaluation is the prequalified stage for 
contractors where they are primarily evaluated for their 
minimum capabilities to satisfactorily carry out the 
contract if they are awarded [11]. In this paper, we called 
this stage as prequalification phase. This stage helps to 
screen out ineligible or unsuitable candidates thus 
minimizing the amount of available contractors in the list. 
Different countries or organizations might evaluate 
dissimilar criteria. For example, in Hong Kong and 
Malaysia, the criteria for the first stage evaluation are 
based on basic requirements specified in tender 
notification or advertisement such as sufficiency of tender 
documents 
submitted 
(compulsory 
and 
supporting 
documents), 
consistency 
of 
information 
provided, 
adequate financial resources and others. It is different in 
other countries practices like in Turkey and Nigeria where 
their first evaluation are based on detailed technical 
evaluation. 
Contractors 
who 
have 
passed 
these 
requirements according to certain standard value will be 
preceded to the next stage of evaluation.  
 
The second stage of evaluation normally comprises a 
detailed technical evaluation of prequalified candidates. 
For instance, in Hong Kong and Malaysia, contractors are 
evaluated according to critical criteria such as such as 
working experience, current work performance, technical 
staff, plant and equipment as well as estimated project 
duration. There are some evaluations practices only 
consider on the lowest bidding price as implemented in 
Nigeria and Turkey. 
 
The qualified applicants who have fulfilled all the 
requirements and conditions are ranked in ascending order 
according to their points/credits. Contractors who do not 
fulfil any stage of evaluation will be automatically 
removed from the list. Finally, the result will be 
announced by client and display it either on printed media 
or website. Generally, the construction contract is awarded 
to the contractor with the highest score. 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
38
2.3 Web-based Tendering 
The 
advent 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology (ICT) has opened up a broad exploration to 
the use of Web-based technology in tendering processes. 
The necessity of devising strategies to automate current 
business processes in order to incorporate the technology 
in day-to-day business processes is become crucial [38, 
46]. This can be seen from various existing electronic 
tendering applications in many countries such as United 
States, Canada, Australia, Singapore, Japan, Europe, and 
Taiwan [47]. Online tender management systems have 
been developed using Internet technology such as 
ePerolehan [48], Tender Direct [49], e-Construction [50], 
MERX [51], e-Procurement [52], e-Procurement System 
[53], Public Contracts Scotland [54], Tender Electronic 
Daily [55], UK Tenders Direct [56], FACNET [47, 57], 
and JETRO [58]. These online applications purposely 
designed for managing government tenders. Table 2 
compares electronic tender applications that have been 
developed in several countries such as Malaysia, Canada, 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Europe, United States, 
Australia, and Japan based on their preferences in 
tendering process. 
Most of public sectors offer tender advertisements, online 
tender forms as well as download and upload related 
tender documents through online Web services. However, 
none of these applications include evaluation of tender 
documents electronically and with support of decision-
making process. This only benefited clients and 
consultants for example in terms of reducing printing costs 
but the evaluation part requires group of decision makers 
to do the assessment process manually. Lack of 
computerized evaluation tools in current Web-based 
tendering applications requires decision maker to 
manually screening for criteria to be evaluated for each 
tender documents. It is impractical and time consuming for 
human to manually process the information. Thus, the 
adoption of ICT in construction industry remains low and 
at the same time encourage to the increasing use of large 
volume of unstructured tender documents. 
3. Decision Support Systems (DSS) 
The main purpose of developing DSS is to support 
decision makers in decision-making process in order to 
handle complex problem environment. DSS have been 
applied in various research area of applications as 
discussed by Power [59]. This section explains the 
overview of DSS technology in terms of its definition and 
categories.  
3.1 Definition of DSS 
DSS definition is evolving from theory to practice as well 
as the improvement of various supporting technologies 
such as minicomputers and user friendly software 
applications. There is no standard and universal definition 
of DSS as different people with different background have 
different views on DSS [60].  
 
Different researchers used a variety of overlapping terms 
such as online analytical processing (OLAP), executive 
information system (EIS), group DSS, knowledge 
discovery systems and business intelligence (BI) for 
computer-based system which capable to support decision 
maker or manager in making decision instead of DSS. 
Less use of DSS label in trade journals and vendors 
website show the emergence of other new marketable 
terms [61]. Thus, DSS often passed through some stages 
of development with name changes. Kopackova and 
Skrobackova [62] argued that scientific researchers 
Table 2: Summary of Electronic Tender Applications between countries 
Country 
Electronic Tender Application 
Tender Display 
Online Tender Forms 
Download Tender Documents 
Upload Tender Documents 
Online Bidding 
Tender Evaluation Tools 
Tender Award Notify 
Malaysia 
ePerolehan 
√ 
X 
√ 
√ 
√ 
X 
√ 
Tender 
Direct 
√ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
e-
Construction 
√ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Canada 
MERX 
√ 
X 
√ 
X 
√ 
X 
√ 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Tender 
Management 
System 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
X 
√ 
Chhattisgarh 
e-
Procurement 
System 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
X 
√ 
Europe 
Public 
Contract 
Scotland 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
X 
√ 
Tender 
Electronic 
Daily (TED) 
√ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
√ 
UK Tenders 
Direct 
√ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
United 
States 
FACNET 
√ 
X 
√ 
√ 
√ 
X 
√ 
Japan 
JETRO 
√ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
√ 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
39
frequently used DSS term whilst vendors defined BI term 
and both terms refer to any tools with decision-making 
functionality. 
 
The term DSS initially coined by Gorry and Scott-Morton 
[63] in Sloan Management Review article. They claimed 
DSS focus to support semi-structured and unstructured 
decisions. Since then, growing amount of studies in terms 
of interpreting DSS have been discussed and argued. 
Donovan [64] extended DSS as the systems with the 
capability to deal with complex problems by providing 
information and necessary analysis. Another definition of 
DSS is defined as “computer-based to support decision 
making rather than to increase transaction processing and 
record keeping” [65]. Despite of different variation of 
early definitions have been proposed, there is an 
acceptable understanding that DSS are system supported 
by computer technology in which capable to provide 
decision analysis for ill-structured problem. 
 
Keen [66] argued that previous definition of DSS is for 
specific application. He redefined the term DSS as a 
completed system comes out through dynamic interactions 
between users, designer and systems, analysis models as 
well as support for technology availability. Turban and 
Watkins [67] classified DSS as an interactive computer-
based system which employ decision rules, models and 
database. Further, Holsapple [68] viewed DSS as a 
computerized system with knowledge representation and 
knowledge processing in order to strengthen decision-
making to be more productive, agile, innovative and 
reputable. More recent definition of DSS is regarded to 
DSS with intelligent behaviour. 
3.2 Categories of DSS 
Basic DSS design consists of user interface, data 
management and model-based management. According to 
Shim et al. [69], user interface is useful to support direct 
communication between decision makers and the system. 
Friendly user interface is paramount with respect to 
achieve intensive interaction between decision makers and 
the computer. Meanwhile, data management system 
includes a database that stores relevant data for the 
situation and normally is managed by database software 
[1]. It also functions to store and access internal and 
external data. Model management supports the system 
with analytical capabilities by formulating data. Fig. 2 
shows a schematic view of DSS as defined by Turban et 
al. [1]. There are five key approaches of DSS defined 
based on the input they can handle and type of decision 
processes they can support including communication-
driven, data-driven, document-driven, model-driven and 
knowledge-driven DSS [59, 70, 71]. DSS have been 
applied in diverse research area of applications. In real-
world practices, DSS applications could be implemented 
by overlapping approaches. This includes a great number 
of studies that have implemented DSS in construction 
tendering processes. Tendering is a complex problem with 
conflicting interests between construction managers, 
multiple sets of objectives, criteria and solution 
possibilities. 
Multiple decision makers in geographically dispersed 
locations can have interactive communication and 
collaboration via networking technologies by using 
communication-driven DSS approach. It is also known as 
group decision support systems (GDSS). Data and 
decision models are shared by a set of group decision 
makers. In some particular problems, it could be the 
integration of communication-driven and model-driven 
approach. Further, data-driven DSS allows accessing, 
manipulation, process and analysing large volumes of 
structured data using computerised techniques such as for 
examples, data warehousing and OLAP. It highlights to 
process and manipulate time-series of historical data, real-
time operational data and external data [72]. Document-
driven DSS is relatively new approach in DSS. It helps 
decision makers to access, retrieve, manage and analyse 
unstructured 
documents 
by 
integrating 
document 
databases and processing technologies. 
Main function of model-driven DSS is based on 
quantitative approach. It is used to provide decision 
support with analytical model by using tools of decision 
analysis, algebraic, financial, simulation, optimization, 
statistics, stochastic and logic modelling. According to 
Shim et al. [69], this approach can be classified into three 
phases namely as formulation, solution and analysis. 
Knowledge-driven DSS uses knowledge inference engines 
to understand and solve problems domain as well as 
suggest actions to decision makers. Knowledge about a 
particular domain is stored in a reusable form with the 
help of different AI methods such as rule-based, statistic-
DSS Environment
Recommendation
Input 
User Interface 
Data Management System 
Model Management System 
Recommend actions
Other computer‐
based systems 
Internet, intranets, 
extranets 
External and 
internal data
Store
Extract
Queries
Fig. 2.  A Schematic View of DSS as defined in [1].  

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
40
based, heuristic, object-based, logic-based or induction 
based [59, 73]. 
4. Related Works of DSS in Tendering 
Processes 
The potential of DSS as computerized tools in assisting 
decision-making process has been attracting many 
researchers for the last fifty years to improve decisions in 
tendering processes. Most phases in tendering processes 
involve crucial decisions that need to be made either by 
client, consultant or contractors. Prior researches that 
implemented decision-making concept in the area of 
construction tendering process are reviewed. Tender 
specification 
preparation, 
tender 
submission/tender 
bidding, tender assessment and contract monitoring are 
classified 
into 
communication-driven, 
data-driven, 
document-driven, model-driven and knowledge-driven.  
4.1 Tender Specification Preparation 
Tender specification preparation is the feasibility study to 
analyse and consider risk and opportunity when proposing 
a 
construction 
project. 
During 
preparing 
tender 
documents, several set descriptors of criteria and relative 
weights are identified for the evaluation purpose. Table 3 
summaries several researches that have included DSS 
technology during preparing tender specification. Costa et 
al. [5] proposed an approach to structure screening, 
evaluation and weight using decision conferencing 
process. Further, Noor et al. [8] applied process modelling 
to support real time communication between clients and 
consultants during tender preparation stage. Meanwhile in 
model-driven approach, several analytical model have 
been proposed to determine budget estimation and risk 
analysis model including cost and risk analysis model 
[13], predictive modelling and Monte Carlo simulation 
using Crystal Ball software [19] and Analytic Hierarchy 
Process (AHP) [22]. 
4.2 Tender Bidding/Tender Submission 
Bidding is the most common method in competition to win 
the construction tender. It is concerned with two crucial 
decisions. The first is decision-making strategies in project 
selection whether or not to bid for the job when the 
invitation has been received and the latter is prediction of 
reasonable bid price if contractors opt to bid [74]. 
Reasonable bid price or mark-up price is defined as the 
minimum price that possible to win the tender and could 
maximize profit at the same time [7]. Fuzziness in 
information on current new construction project, the client 
preferences, the potential competitors and the overall 
construction market make it a very complex process for 
contractor to make decision. Table 4 reviews on several 
researches that proposed approaches to assist contractor in 
making decision. In model-driven approach, Delphi 
method has been used to identify relevant factors that 
effectively contribute to decision for contractors either to 
take part in tender bidding or not, and estimate price to bid 
[2]. Bid reasoning model operates on several crucial 
factors from perspectives of reasoning goals that 
contribute to the overall decision whether or not to bid [7]. 
Meanwhile, fuzzy linguistic approach has been proposed 
by Lin and Ying-Te [12] to quantify imprecise and vague 
factors to make decision and recommend decision in 
linguistic terms. Further, case-based reasoning model was 
developed 
to 
estimate 
the 
risk, 
opportunity 
and 
competition ratings which in turn converted to estimated 
bid amount value using linear utility function [17]. 
Table 3: Prior Researches of DSS in Tender Specification Preparation 
Tendering 
Processes 
Communication-
Driven 
Data-Driven 
Document-
Driven 
Model-Driven 
Knowledge-
Driven 
Tender Specification Preparation 
Decision 
conferencing [5] 
Process 
modelling 
for 
online 
communication 
system [8]  
 
NIL 
NIL 
Schedule and 
cost 
risk 
analysis 
model [13] 
Predictive 
modelling 
and 
Monte 
Carlo 
simulation 
[19] 
Analytic 
Hierarchy 
Process [22] 
NIL 
Table 4: Prior Researches of DSS in Tender Bidding/Tender Submission 
Tendering 
Processes 
Communication-
Driven 
Data-Driven 
Document-
Driven 
Model-Driven 
Knowledge-
Driven 
Tender Bidding/Tender 
Submission 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
Delphi [2] 
Bid Reasoning 
Model [7] 
Fuzzy 
Linguistic 
Approach [12] 
Case-Based 
Reasoning and 
Linear Utility 
Function [17] 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
41
4.3 Tender Assessment 
Tender assessment is the most crucial stage in tendering 
processes and has gained extensive study from researchers 
in terms of the implementation of DSS technology as 
depicted in Table 5. It can be divided into two sub phase 
namely screening and evaluation. Screening is the process 
to ensure each candidate complies with minimal threshold 
before proceeding to comparative evaluation. Noor 
Maizura et al. [6] implemented Web-based technology 
with Javascript approach to control sufficiency of 
supporting documents attached.  
 
Meanwhile, evaluation phase for communication-driven 
approach, web-based approach facilitated information 
transfer 
and 
collaborative 
environment 
between 
contractors in evaluating sub contractors [10]. Several 
researches in data-driven approach also support the 
assessment stage where databases have been developed to 
store large volume of data for evaluation purposes [15]. In 
knowledge-driven approach, several artificial intelligent 
techniques have been integrated into DSS models such as 
case-based reasoning [31], genetic algorithm and neural 
networks [33], binary goal programming [34] and support 
vector machine [35] to predict contractor performance. All 
these mechanisms train their analysis based on historical 
evaluation datasets. 
 
Further, extensive researches have been done in model-
driven approach. As early as 1995, a prototype of DSS 
was proposed for contractor prequalification where they 
used performance assessment scoring system to evaluate 
performance, 
management 
capability, 
reputation, 
resources, progress, competitiveness and activeness 
separately 
[20]. 
Sirajuddin 
and 
Al-Bulaihed 
[23] 
transformed criteria measures provided by each contractor 
in tabular format in order to ease evaluation procedure. 
Multi criteria utility theory model has been proposed to 
evaluate diverse set of criteria for contractor selection [25, 
26]. Multi criteria decision model using AHP was applied 
for contractor selection where several criteria and sub 
criteria were equally analyse hierarchically [27]. It was 
also proposed for contractor selection in Turkey where 
contractors were required to pass two stages of evaluation, 
bid price and prequalification threshold filter [28]. In 
addition, similar model also was proposed by Al-
dughaither [29] to tackle contractor selection problem in 
Saudi Arabia. The model is expected to reduce the 
possibility of inconsistency with data entry to the AHP 
matrices. 
4.4 Contract Monitoring 
Contract monitoring is to regularly checks on the 
contractor performance and progress of running project 
after awarding the contract. Several researches have been 
delivered in communication-driven, data-driven and 
knowledge-driven approach accordingly as shown in 
Table 6. Deng et al. [3] used Internet technology as the 
communication platform and developed to support project 
monitoring activity. The modules including data sharing 
using File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and Telnet, information 
exchange 
by 

Internet 
chat 
for 
real-time 
communication, live video-cam, and search engine for 
data collection purpose. Further, database technology is 
applied to store, query, display, and analyse data on claims 
for additional payments and time for completion of 
Table 6: Prior Researches of DSS in Contract Monitoring 
Tendering 
Processes 
Communicatio
n-Driven 
Data-Driven 
Document-
Driven 
Model-Driven 
Knowledge-
Driven 
Contract Monitoring 
Total 
information 
transfer 
system [3] 
Relational 
database 
for 
monitoring 
claims 
and 
time [9] 
Project 
Performance 
Management 
System [14] 
 
 
Project 
Cost 
Control 
System 
Based on 
Data 
Mining 
[18] 
 
Table 5: Prior Researches of DSS in Tender Assessment 
Tendering 
Processes 
Communicat
ion-Driven 
Data-Driven 
Document-
Driven 
Model-
Driven 
Knowledge-
Driven 
Tender Assessment 
Screening 
NIL 
Web-
based 
Prequalifi
cation [6] 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
Evaluation 
Web-
based sub 
contractor 
Evaluation 
System 
[10] 
Database 
Developm
ent 
for 
Tender 
Evaluation 
[15] 
 
NIL 
 
Performance 
Assessment 
Scoring 
System [20] 
Tabulated 
procedure 
[23] 
Multi 
Criteria 
Utility 
Theory [25, 
26] 
Analytic 
Hierarchy 
Process [27-
29] 
Case-based 
reasoning 
[31] 
Hybrid 
of 
Genetic 
Algorithm 
and Neural 
Network 
[33]  
Binary 
Goal 
Programmi
ng 
Model 
[34] 
Support 
vector 
machine 
[35] 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
42
ongoing project [9]. In similar approach, Cheung et al. 
[14] made use of Web-based and database to manipulate 
data on current ongoing project by plotting graph to 
compare and measure performances. Meanwhile, data 
mining approach is integrated with DSS model to control 
and analyse cost of a project in order to determine project 
performances, predict trends and support in decision-
making [18]. 
5. Current Issues 
The exponential growth of unstructured information lead 
to the necessity of devising strategies to improve and 
enhance individual and organizational decision-making by 
associating with automated tool in decision systems [75]. 
It is one of the current research challenges in DSS since 
the standard tools designed for structured data analysis. 
Traditional DSS lack of capability to confront with 
dynamics and ill-defined data. Current existing decision 
support tools in construction tendering processes are 
focused on quantitative data processing where the systems 
are specifically analyses factual values. Quantitative 
system could not directly scrutinize exact problem 
structure from text. According to Froelich & Ananyan 
[76], current challenges in decision-making requires 
comprehensive analysis of large volumes of both 
structured and unstructured data.  
 
Issuing free text documents either in paper or electronic 
forms (i.e contracts, policies, catalogues, certificates, 
transcripts, financial statements, surveys, medical reports) 
are 
inevitable 
in 
daily 
business 
for 
auditing, 
authentication, information exchange and recording 
purposes [38, 77-79]. A survey conducted by Building 
Cost Information Services (BCIS) on [80] showed that 
despite of active electronic tendering practices, document 
in hard copy is still required at the end of the process. It is 
because users prefer final documentation in black and 
white copy. Furthermore, there are potential limitations in 
web-based implementation as it is designed to solve 
specific application in which human effort is needed to 
maintain and modify the changes either interface or 
process with sufficient programming skills. The dominant 
use of paper-based approach is also due to the fact that 
Web-based applications do not meet the technological 
demands of end users to improve the whole processes [77, 
81].  
 
Supporting documents or attachments or appendices are 
essential in order to verify and acknowledge the 
information provided in the application. For example in 
Web-based 
tendering 
processes, 
client 
side 
form 
validation with Javascript approach is proposed to validate 
the sufficiency of the supporting documents attached [38]. 
Despite of the existing Web-based application, current 
approach requires users to manually go through the 
documents, check and evaluate the consistency of 
information in these documents with the information 
provided either in the compulsory documents or database. 
Current web-based tendering processes faces limitation in 
verifying tender documents in which tender documents 
need to be reviewed through computer monitors or in 
paper-based format [43, 47]. Hence, a framework is 
necessary to automatically detect outlier specification in 
terms of syntactic and semantic contents of supporting 
documents with respect to contextual application.  
6. Conclusion 
Traditional tendering processes in construction industry 
are complex and fragmented. This paper summarizes 
current practices of general tendering processes around the 
world such as Unites States, Europe, Middle East and 
Asia. Related researches on DSS in tendering processes 
have been successfully reviews in this paper. The benefit 
of decision support has attracted various researchers to 
implement the system in tendering. Despite efforts to 
integrate and transform the whole construction tendering 
processes into electronic or digital form by using Web-
based Technology, the use of unstructured documents 
either in hard copy or digital could not be neglected in 
daily business processes especially for recording, 
authentication and information exchange purposes. Large 
volumes of unstructured tender documents need to be 
analysed. It is the biggest challenge to automate the 
analysis using computerised tools. It becomes harder when 
to automatically convert unstructured data to structured 
format data for input in decision-making processes.  
 
The need to extract and represent information in machine-
readable formats becomes obvious. In order to automate 
the tendering processes, integrating ontology in DSS 
model seems to be a promising approach. We proposed a 
framework of ontological-based extraction for decision 
support system in order to improve tender assessment 
process. For electronic government, as far as we are 
concern, none of the research has been found to use 
ontological modelling as part of decision support 
components. For the future research, we intend to 
construct domain ontology for tendering processes using 
standard methodology for ontology building. The ontology 
will represent rule-based for supporting decision-making 
process. 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
43
