CI-AVSR: A Cantonese Audio-Visual Speech Dataset
for In-car Command Recognition
Wenliang Dai★, Samuel Cahyawĳaya★, Tiezheng Yu★, Elham J. Barezi★,
Peng Xu†, Cheuk Tung Shadow Yiu, Rita Frieske, Holy Lovenia,
Genta Indra Winata†, Qifeng Chen, Xiaojuan Ma, Bertram E. Shi, Pascale Fung
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
With the rise of deep learning and intelligent vehicles, the smart assistant has become an essential in-car component to facilitate
driving and provide extra functionalities. In-car smart assistants should be able to process general as well as car-related
commands and perform corresponding actions, which eases driving and improves safety. However, there is a data scarcity
issue for low resource languages, hindering the development of research and applications. In this paper, we introduce a new
dataset, Cantonese In-car Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (CI-AVSR), for in-car command recognition in the Cantonese
language with both video and audio data. It consists of 4,984 samples (8.3 hours) of 200 in-car commands recorded by 30
native Cantonese speakers. Furthermore, we augment our dataset using common in-car background noises to simulate real
environments, producing a dataset 10 times larger than the collected one. We provide detailed statistics of both the clean and the
augmented versions of our dataset. Moreover, we implement two multimodal baselines to demonstrate the validity of CI-AVSR.
Experiment results show that leveraging the visual signal improves the overall performance of the model. Although our best
model can achieve a considerable quality on the clean test set, the speech recognition quality on the noisy data is still inferior and
remains as an extremely challenging task for real in-car speech recognition systems. The dataset and code will be released at
https://github.com/HLTCHKUST/CI-AVSR.
Keywords: Multimodal, Audio-visual, Automatic Speech Recognition, Cantonese, Smart Assistant
1.
Introduction
The research of intelligent transportation systems covers
a broad spectrum, including monitoring the driver’s
inattention (Haghani et al., 2021), traﬃc monitoring
for both surveillance and traﬃc management (Buch
et al., 2011), and video-based lane tracking for smart
driving assistance (Tang et al., 2021). More recently,
the area of self-driving (or autonomous driving) has
been developed rapidly with a lot of attention from both
academia (Van Brummelen et al., 2018; Zhou et al.,
2019) and the industry.
Autonomous driving aims to notably improve driving
convenience and safety by automating some of the driv-
ing tasks, helping drivers to focus more on driving itself.
The fast prosperous growth of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
and deep neural networks has led to the growth of au-
tonomous driving. However, there is still a long journey
to meet the highest level of automation required for
autonomous driving systems to deal with various road
environments and noise conditions for various driver
languages and abilities (Zhou et al., 2019).
Voice controllable systems (VCS), which lean on Auto-
matic Speech Recognition (ASR) methods, have gained
remarkable progress with the advances in deep learn-
ing and big data. It allows drivers to use simple voice
commands to handle complex operations, which is a
paramount future demand of advanced driving vehi-
★These authors contributed equally.
† The work was done when the author was studying in
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
cles (Zhou et al., 2019). However, one of the largest
issues of building such an ASR system, especially for
low-resource languages, is the lack of data (Winata et
al., 2020a; Winata et al., 2020b; Lovenia et al., 2021),
which is crucial for achieving commendable speech
recognition quality for a VCS system. On the other
hand, the audio-visual speech recognition (AVSR) task
is proposed to leverage visual data of the speakers to
support ASR (Afouras et al., 2018a; Xia et al., 2020).
It is shown that visual information is beneﬁcial to the
ASR, especially when the audio itself is noisy or even
unavailable.
To further push the boundary of this research area and
mitigate the aforementioned problems, in this paper, we
collect a multimodal dataset in the Cantonese language,
called Cantonese In-car Audio-Visual Speech Recogni-
tion (CI-AVSR), which includes both visual and acoustic
signals of the drivers reading various in-car commands.
Speciﬁcally, it contains 200 unique commands recorded
by 30 native Cantonese speakers, forming a dataset of
4,984 samples. Furthermore, we augment it with 10
common in-car background noises to simulate real envi-
ronments, which increase both the scale and applicability
of the dataset. This dataset can beneﬁt the Cantonese
and also multilingual AVSR task.
The visual information provided in the CI-AVSR dataset
can further enhance the quality of the ASR task. Various
research works using audio-visual information (Zadeh
et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020; Dai et al., 2021) have
shown the advantage of utilizing multiple modalities
over a single modality. More speciﬁcally, recent works
arXiv:2201.03804v2  [cs.CL]  14 Mar 2022

in audio-visual speech recognition (Zhou et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2020; Alam et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021)
have shown that audio-visual information can produce
more precise and reliable speech recognition quality
compared to only using audio data and can further avoid
hidden voice commands that can stealthily control such
intelligent systems (Carlini et al., 2016). Moreover,
since the in-car voice can be quite noisy, using the visual
information helps to enhance the audio and further
improve the overall ASR performance.
Overall, our contribution can be summarized as three-
fold: 1) we collect and will release the ﬁrst AVSR
dataset for in-car command recognition in the Cantonese
language, which could beneﬁt future research and ap-
plications; 2) we augment the data with 10 common
background noises to simulate real in-car environments
and improve the scale; and 3) we provide details statistics
of the dataset and train two baseline models to validate
its eﬀectiveness.
2.
Related Work
2.1.
AVSR and In-car Datasets
In the past few years, many multimodal datasets have
been released to facilitate the study of in-car speech
recognition, driver behavior, emotion recognition, etc.
Jenness et al. (2008) conduct an empirical research
study about the use of the voice control system (VCS)
by drivers as well as potential measures that could be
used for evaluating possible distraction from using these
systems while driving a car. To this end, they collect 30
minutes of data on car-driving on two US roads to explore
the performance of vehicle voice control interface. The
data cover various situations, including the highway,
heavy arterials, residential, and commercial streets.
On the other hand, Ivaneck`y and Mehlhase (2012) in-
troduce a speech dataset in German for addressing the
ASR task for physically disabled drivers. This dataset
is recorded by 10 speakers and each of them is asked
to record 2 × 30 commands. Furthermore, to include
environmental noises, the speakers conduct the data
recording at a distance of 20 to 30 centimeters from the
microphone.
While in the AVSR task, Afouras et al. (2018a) have
proposed a large-scale dataset named LRS2-BBC, which
is collected from the British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC). The dataset contains thousands of hours of
spoken sentences from various BBC programs that con-
tain talking faces together with transcripts. Moreover,
Afouras et al. (2018b) further introduce a multimodal
dataset for visual and audio-visual speech recognition.
It includes face tracks from over 400 hours of TED and
TEDx videos, along with the corresponding subtitles
and word alignment boundaries.
More recently, (Stappen et al., 2021) propose the MuSe-
Sent challenge that aims to predict ﬁve sentiment classes
for each emotion dimension (arousal or valence) on a
segment level, based on audio-visual recordings from
the MuSe-CaR dataset about car review videos. The
dataset is crawled from YouTube which contains 291
videos. However, to the best of our knowledge, none of
the previous work focuses on in-car command AVSR
for low-resource languages, such as Cantonese, which
hinders the research and applications of AVSR in those
languages.
2.2.
AVSR Models
Various architectures have been proposed to tackle the
AVSR task. Petridis et al. (2018) use bidirectional GRUs
to encode the visual and acoustic data separately and
adopt a late fusion for two modalities. It shows that even
with a simple model, visual information can improve
the performance. Afouras et al. (2018a) propose to
leverage the Transformer self-attention and compare
the eﬀectiveness of two objectives: the Connectionist
Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) loss and the sequence-
to-sequence language modeling loss. They show that
visual information can further reduce the word error rate
up to 1.2% in a clean environment, and 23.2% in a noisy
environment on a very large-scale dataset. It indicates
that the visual information of lip movement can beneﬁt
a lot when the audio is noisy.
In recent years, the use of attention-based models has
been increasing for solving the AVSR task.
Xu et
al. (2020) propose a double visual awareness multi-
modality speech recognition (AE-MSR) network to use
the visual information with two steps, ﬁrst to enhance
the noisy audio data, and then as a second modality
using an Element-wise-Attention Gated Recurrent Unit
(EleAtt-GRU), which is potentially more eﬀective than
Transformer for long sequences. More recently, Ma et
al. (2021a) introduce a novel architecture by combining
convolutional layers with Transformer, achieving state-
of-the-art performance on common benchmarks. In
this paper, we build two multimodal baseline models to
demonstrate the validity of our collected dataset.
3.
Dataset Collection and Statistics
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the data collection
pipeline for CI-AVSR, which includes the command tem-
plate creation, the data recording interface, the recording
equipment and format, and the data recording strategy.
Then, we provide detailed statistics of the CI-AVSR
dataset.
Finally, we introduce a data augmentation
method to increase the data scale and simulate in-car
environments.
3.1.
The Template of In-car Commands
Before the data recording phase, we ﬁrst prepare a
template of commands for the speakers to read, in which
the commands should be diverse and cover common
scenarios. We classify template of commands into four
general categories: 1) navigation; 2) music playing;
3) weather inquiry; and 4) others. This categorization
strategy allows us to cover all the common scenarios
of the in-car voice commands while maintaining the
diversity of the commands and further simplifying the
commands creation process.

Command Category
Command Patterns
Named Entities
Complete Commands
Navigation
1. 導航唔該車我去[LOCATION]。
(Please navigate me to [LOCATION], thanks.)
2. 帶我去[LOCATION]呀，導航。
(Take me to [LOCATION], navigation.)
3. [LOCATION]，行邊條路最快去到？
([LOCATION], what is the fastest path to go there?)
4. 邊條路去[LOCATION]最近？
(What is the shortest path to [LOCATION]?)
...
15. [LOCATION]可唔可以去到？
(Could you drive me to [LOCATION]?)
1. 香港科技大學
(HKUST)
2. 香港藝術館
(HK Art Museum)
3. 尖沙咀
(Tsim Sha Tsui)
4. 海洋公園
(Ocean Park)
...
15. 維多利亞港
(Victoria Harbour)
1. 導航唔該車我去香港科技大學。
(Please navigate me to HKUST, thanks.)
2. 導航唔該車我去香港藝術館。
(Please navigate me to the HK art museum, thanks.)
3. 帶我去尖沙咀呀，導航。
(Take me to Tsim Sha Tsui, navigation.)
4. 海洋公園，行邊條路最快去到？
(The ocean park, what is the fastest path to go there?)
...
225. 維多利亞港可唔可以去到？
(Could you drive me to the Victoria harbour?)
Music Playing
1. 播放[SINGER]的[SONG]。
(Play [SINGER]’s [SONG].)
2. 我想聽[SONG]。
(I’d like to listen [SONG].)
3. 我想聽[SINGER]唱
歌。
(I want to hear a song by [SINGER].)
4. [SINGER]歌唔錯，播
聽下。
(The songs by [SINGER] are good, play some please.)
...
12.
首[SINGER]的[SONG]。
(Play the [SONG] by [SINGER].)
(SONG/SINGER)
1. 我/張國榮
2. 海闊天空/Beyond
3. 富士山下/陳奕迅
4. 亂世巨星/陳小春
...
20. 紅日/李克勤
1. 播放張國榮的我。
2. 播放Beyond的海闊天空。
3. 我想聽陳奕迅唱
歌。
4.
首陳小春的亂世巨星。
...
240. 李克勤歌唔錯，播
聽下。
Weather Inquiry
1. [TIME]天氣如何？
(What’s the forecast for [TIME]?)
2. 想睇下[TIME]
天氣點。
(I’d like to know the weather on [TIME].)
3. 幫我查下[TIME]
天氣。
(Please help me to check the weather [TIME].)
4. 唔該講下[TIME]天氣點啊？
(What’s the weather [TIME]? Thanks.)
...
7. [TIME]天氣好，定係[TIME]天氣好？
(The weather [TIME] seems to be good, is it?)
1. 明天
(Tomorrow)
2. 今天晚上
(Tonight)
3. 星期三
(Wednesday)
4. 禮拜天
(Sunday)
...
10. 週六
(Saturday)
1. 明天天氣如何？
(What’s the forecast for tomorrow?)
2. 今天晚上天氣如何？
(What’s the forecast for tonight?)
3. 唔該講下星期三天氣點啊？
(What’s the weather on Wednesday? Thanks.)
4. 幫我查下禮拜天
天氣。
(Please help me to check the weather on Sunday.)
...
70. 週六天氣好，定係週六天氣好？
(The weather on Saturday seems to be good, is it?)
Table 1: Examples of command patterns, named entities, and the combination of them to form complete commands
for the three categories, including navigation, music playing, and weather inquiry. English translations are provided
in the parentheses, except the singers and songs that cannot be translated directly.
For the ﬁrst three categories, we construct the template
of commands with three steps. Firstly, for each cate-
gory, we construct multiple command patterns without
specifying named entities, but instead, we use place-
holder tags. For the navigation, we use a placeholder tag
[LOCATION], for the music playing, we use placeholder
tags [SINGER] and [SONG], and for the weather inquiry,
we use a placeholder tag [TIME]. We then replace the
placeholder tag with a suitably named entity to ﬁll in the
command patterns. Finally, for each command pattern,
we iteratively inﬁll all the placeholder tags with name
entities to form complete commands. Examples of this
procedure are shown in Table 1.
In addition to the ﬁrst three categories, there are also
other frequently used in-car commands. However, these
commands cannot be created by following the aforemen-
tioned procedure. We categorize these commands as
others, including commands to ask the system to turn on
or oﬀsome functionality in the car (e.g., air-conditioner,
radio, light, etc.), ask the system to broadcast or send
messages, and inquiry the status of the car (e.g., how
much electricity or gas remains).
To ensure the created commands conform to the spoken
Cantonese language, we hire two human experts who
are native Cantonese speakers. First of all, each expert
is asked to design command candidates for all categories
Command Category
#Patterns
#Entities
#Commands
Navigation
15
15
225
Music Playing
12
20
240
Weather Inquiry
7
10
70
Others
-
-
40
Table 2: Statistics of commands among diﬀerent cate-
gories before the sampling.
(command patterns and named entities for the ﬁrst three,
and complete commands for the last). Then, we swap
their designed results and ask them to conduct a gram-
mar and correctness check for each other. Finally, we
assemble all the commands and ask these two experts
to ﬁlter out command patterns with high similarities to
increase the diversity. Statistics of these preliminary
commands are shown in Table 2.
One drawback of creating commands in this way is that
many commands share the same pattern with only a
small diﬀerence in the named entities, which reduces
the overall diversity of the commands. To mitigate this
problem, we uniformly sample ∼30% commands from
the ﬁrst three categories while keeping all the commands
from the others category. Finally, after sampling, we
collect 200 commands in total, in which 160 are from

the ﬁrst three categories and 40 are from the others
category1. We show the distribution of command length
in Figure 1.
3.2.
Data Recording
Data Recording Interface.
To reduce the diﬃculty
of data recording, we make a dedicated website so that
speakers can conduct the recording on their own com-
puter (equipped with a camera and a microphone) at
their own place2. The interface of the website is shown
in Figure 3. In the top left part, we show a basic intro-
duction to the speakers as well as a tutorial to teach them
how to use this website and how to record. The control
panel is on the bottom left, where there is the current
recording command shown, the buttons to perform ac-
tions (start/stop the recording and save/download the
recorded data), a live preview window to show the real-
time camera view, and a playback window to play the
last recorded video. Once the speakers are satisﬁed with
the recording of the current command, they can proceed
to the next one until all the commands are recorded.
On the right-hand side, we show an overview of all the
commands that the speakers need to fulﬁll, which also
shows the current progress.
Data Recording Equipment and Format.
Although
the previously mentioned setting is convenient to dis-
tribute data collection jobs and reduce the cost, there
is a problem that the speakers may have diﬀerent types
of cameras and microphones. To mitigate this problem,
we ask the speakers to use a camera with at least 720p
(1280 × 720 px) resolution, which gives us suﬃcient
room for further processing. After the recording, we
crop all videos to 640×480 with the person at the center
area. For the recorded audios, we process them to the
same format with the 16kHz frame rate, mono channel,
and encoded as 16-bit pulse-code modulation (PCM),
producing a total bit rate of 256 kbps.
Data Recording Strategy.
We divide the whole data
recording process into two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we
perform a preliminary data collection session to test
the robustness of our system and the correctness of
the created commands. To this end, we hire 10 native
Cantonese speakers (5 males and 5 females) and ask
each of them to record 100 commands. Based on their
feedback, we improve the user experience on the website,
provide more detailed instructions in the tutorial, and add
a more potent data auto-saving strategy of the website to
avoid data lost. In the second stage, we expand the data
collection scale by hiring 20 native Cantonese speakers
(10 males and 10 females) and asking each of them
to record the full list of 200 commands. In the total
of two stages, there are 5,000 samples collected. We
perform a manual check on each of the data samples and
1The full command list will be released along with our
dataset in https://github.com/HLTCHKUST/CI-AVSR.
2This is especially important during the COVID-19 pan-
demic as people usually work from home and there is a
government regulation on the number of people for gatherings.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16+
Number of characters per command
0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of commands
Figure 1: Distribution of the number of characters in
all commands. For commands that contains English
words, each English word is counted as one character.
The last column on the right represents commands that
have more than 16 characters.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11+
Duration (s)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Number of samples
Figure 2: Duration distribution of the recorded data.
The last column on the right represents samples that are
longer than 11 seconds.
ﬁlter out 16 samples with low quality. Therefore, we
have 4,984 data samples for the ﬁnal dataset with a total
duration of 30,049 seconds. The distribution of sample
duration is shown in Figure 2. Finally, as illustrated
in Table 3, we split the data into training, validation,
and test sets by speakers while maintaining a balanced
gender distribution on each split.
3.3.
Data Augmentation
To simulate in-car environments and increase the data
scale, we augment each sample from the collected dataset
by combining it with 10 diﬀerent in-car background
noises3 that are commonly heard in the daily usage of
cars, including alarm, horn, background music, ignition,
hail, rain, windscreen wiper, road ambience, door opens
and closes, and people talking. For each type of noise, we
use ﬁve variants to increase the diversity and uniformly
sample one when applying to the data. The volume of the
noise is adjusted by human experts so that the original
3The sounds are downloaded from https://freesound.
org/.

Split
#Male (Dur.)
#Female (Dur.)
Total Dur.
Train
10 (10,803s)
10 (11,813s)
22,616s
Valid
2 (1,849s)
2 (1,829s)
3,678s
Test
3 (1,902s)
3 (1,843s)
3,745s
Table 3: Statistics of the train/valid/test splits of our
recorded dataset. We split data by the speaker id, i.e.
speakers in a set will not appear in another. Here, Dur.
denotes duration and s represents seconds.
Figure 3: The web interface for conducting data record-
ing. It helps us to distribute works and reduce the time
cost. Details are explained in Section 3.2.
commands are still recognizable and all the sounds are
on the same level of loudness. Therefore, the resulting
augmented dataset is 10 times as large as the original
clean one and more in line with actual in-car scenarios,
which could potentially beneﬁt the generalization and
applicability of the trained model.
4.
Experiments
In this section, we aim to demonstrate the validity of
our collected multimodal Cantonese data and the ef-
fectiveness of using the visual signals to help speech
recognition.
4.1.
Baseline models
Conformer-based multimodal ASR model.
Follow-
ing Ma et al. (2021b), for the audio input, we use a modi-
ﬁed ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) with all 2D-convolution
layers changed to 1D, and then a Convolution-augmented
Transformer (Conformer (Gulati et al., 2020)) encoder
to further process the representations. For the visual
input, it is also ﬁrst processed by a ResNet-18 with
the ﬁrst layer replaced by a 3D convolutional layer,
and then another Conformer encoder to get ﬁnal visual
representations. The audio and visual representations
are fused by a Multi-Layer-Perceptron (MLP), which
consists of two linear layers with batch normalization
and ReLU activation in between. Finally, we apply a
GPT-based (Radford et al., 2019) four-layer decoder to
decode the audio-video information to text.
Wav2Vec 2.0-based multimodal ASR model.
The
pre-trained Wav2Vec 2.0 model (Baevski et al., 2020)
gives strong speech representations and shows excellent
performance on downstream tasks. We further extend
it with a video encoder to allow audio-visual speech
recognition. We adopt a ResNet-18 model pre-trained
the ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) to get the visual
representations from each video frame. Moreover, we
incorporate another 1D-convolutional layer with a kernel
size of 3 to add interaction between frame-level features.
To fuse the representations from two modalities, we align
the audio framerate with the video framerate and fuse
them by summing representations from both modalities.
Lastly, we apply a linear transformation to convert the
fused representations into predicted tokens.
4.2.
Implementation Details
Data Preprocessing
In our experiment, we preprocess
the multimodal data to get a standardized input format of
the audio and the image data. For the audio data, we keep
using 16kHz mono-channel audio data and normalize
the value with zero mean and standard deviation of one.
For the image data, we extract 25 image frames per
second from the video using FFMPEG (Tomar, 2006).
To reduce the computational cost, we extract only the
lip part of each image with the face landmark detection
module (Kazemi and Sullivan, 2014) from the DLIB
library (King, 2009) by using a face landmark detection
model 4 that is pre-trained on the iBUG 300-W face
dataset (Sagonas et al., 2016) 5.
Training Details.
During training, we grayscale and
downsize the image samples into 32 × 32 pixels. We
use the Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) optimizer to
optimize all the models in all experiments. For the
Conformer-based model, we use a learning rate of 5𝑒−5,
a batch size of 3, and minimize the cross-entropy loss
from the output of the transformer decoder. Except the
ResNet-18 for extracting the visual features, all other
modules in the model are trained from scratch. As
for Wav2Vec 2.0-based model, we utilize a pre-trained
Wav2Vec 2.0 model which has been ﬁne-tuned on the
Cantonese CommonVoice dataset 6. For the Wav2Vec
4http://dlib.net/files/shape_predictor_68_
face_landmarks.dat.bz2
5https://ibug.doc.ic.ac.uk/resources/
facial-point-annotations
6https://huggingface.co/ctl/
wav2vec2-large-xlsr-cantonese

Model
Audio only (CER)
Audio + Video (CER)
clean
noisy
clean
noisy
Conformer
31.29%
167.63%
26.97%
132.68%
Wav2Vec2
4.06%
12.75%
3.48%
7.19%
Table 4: The character error rate (CER) on the test set
of our collected data. The two models are only trained
on the clean training set and tested on both the clean and
augmented (noisy) test sets.
2.0 model, we ﬁne-tuned the whole model’s parameters
using a learning rate of 5𝑒−5 and a batch size of 16 by
minimizing the CTC loss (Graves et al., 2006) of the
output with regard to the label.
Evaluation Details.
We use the character error rate
(CER) (Wang et al., 2013) rather than the word error rate
(WER) as an evaluation metric because the Cantonese
language is character-based.
In detail, the CER is
calculated by adding the number of substituted, inserted,
and deleted characters together and then dividing them
by the total number of characters. For the multimodal
Conformer model, the output transcripts are generated
in an auto-regressive manner with a beam search size of
4 and a length penalty of 1. For the multimodal wav2vec
2.0 model, the output transcription is generated using
the CTC decoding method.
4.3.
Results and Analysis
We train the Conformer-based and Wav2Vec-based mod-
els only on the clean training set of our data with two
settings: 1) audio-only; and 2) multimodal (audio and
video). As shown in Table 4, we evaluate their perfor-
mance on both clean and augmented (noisy) test sets.
Compared to the audio-only setting, models trained on
multimodal data achieve lower CER by a large margin
on both clean and noisy data. Moreover, similar to prior
work (Afouras et al., 2018a; Xu et al., 2020; Ma et al.,
2021a), we ﬁnd that the visual signal contributes more
when the audio is noisy. The rich visual data provide
complementary and supplementary information to the
audio data for the models to generate transcripts. How-
ever, the performance of the Conformer-based models
is far from satisfactory. We conjecture that the model is
overﬁtted to the training set since our clean training data
is limited, which could be mitigated by using the aug-
mented data to train. On the other hand, the pre-trained
Wav2Vec-based model has great generalization ability
and shows promising results after ﬁnetuning. Addition-
ally, to ablate the eﬀects of each background noise, in
Table 5, we show the test result of each of them using the
Wav2Vec-based model. The model is more sensitive to
alarm and horn compared to the others, and the visual
information helps more under these situations.
5.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a new dataset, Cantonese
In-car Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (CI-AVSR), for
Type of Noise
CER
Audio
Audio + Video
Clean
4.06%
3.48%
0 (background music)
11.53%
5.42%
1 (rain)
12.16%
6.19%
2 (hail)
17.03%
10.03%
3 (ignition)
21.73%
13.65%
4 (windscreen wiper)
13.57%
8.50%
5 (horn)
16.26%
9.06%
6 (people talking)
13.53%
7.78%
7 (road ambience)
13.25%
7.36%
8 (alarm)
17.13%
8.58%
9 (car door)
7.19%
3.38%
Avg (0 to 9)
14.34%
7.99%
Table 5: The character error rate of the Wav2Vec 2.0
model (trained on the clean training set only) on the
augmented noisy data. We report its performance on
each type of noise and the average of them.
audio-visual speech recognition of in-car commands.
It consists of 200 unique commands with 8.3 hours of
recorded data. Furthermore, we augment the dataset
with 10 commonly seen background sounds to simulate
real scenarios, resulting in more than 80 hours of data.
We evaluate the collected data with two baseline models,
showing the eﬀectiveness of AVSR. When testing on the
augmented data with background noises, we observe a
clear performance drop, which we believe would be a
challenging and interesting future research direction to
tackle.
6.
