Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
MULTI-CLASS
CLASSIFICATION
WITHOUT
MULTI-
CLASS LABELS
Yen-Chang Hsu1, Zhaoyang Lv1, Joel Schlosser2, Phillip Odom2, and Zsolt Kira12
1Georgia Institute of Technology
2Georgia Tech Research Institute

ABSTRACT
This work presents a new strategy for multi-class classiﬁcation that requires no
class-speciﬁc labels, but instead leverages pairwise similarity between examples,
which is a weaker form of annotation. The proposed method, meta classiﬁcation
learning, optimizes a binary classiﬁer for pairwise similarity prediction and through
this process learns a multi-class classiﬁer as a submodule. We formulate this
approach, present a probabilistic graphical model for it, and derive a surprisingly
simple loss function that can be used to learn neural network-based models. We then
demonstrate that this same framework generalizes to the supervised, unsupervised
cross-task, and semi-supervised settings. Our method is evaluated against state of
the art in all three learning paradigms and shows a superior or comparable accuracy,
providing evidence that learning multi-class classiﬁcation without multi-class labels
is a viable learning option.
1
INTRODUCTION
One of the most common settings for machine learning is classiﬁcation, which involves learning a
function f to map the input data x to a class label y ∈{1, 2, .., C}. The most successful method for
learning such a function is deep neural networks, owing its popularity to its capability to approximate
a complex nonlinear mapping between high-dimensional data (e.g. images) and the classes. Despite
the success of deep learning, a neural network demands a large amount of class-speciﬁc labels for
learning a discriminative model, i.e. P(y|x). This type of labeling can be expensive to collect,
requires a-priori knowledge of all classes, and limits the form of supervision required. For example,
the classes may be ambiguous or non-expert human annotators may be able to more easily provide
information about whether two instances are of the same class or not, rather than identifying the
speciﬁc class. A ﬁnal problem is that different methods are necessary depending on what type of data
is available, ranging from supervised learning (known classes) to cross-task unsupervised learning
(unknown classes in the target domain) and semi-supervised learning (mix of labeled and unlabeled
with known classes). Unsupervised learning with unknown classes is especially difﬁcult to support.
To relax these limitations, we propose to reduce the problem of classiﬁcation to a meta problem that
underlies a set of learning problems. Instead of solving the target task directly (learning a multi-class
discriminative model such as a neural network), we instead learn a model that does not require
explicit class label y but rather a weaker form of information. In the context of classiﬁcation, the
meta problem that we use is a binary decision problem. Note that such a conversion to a different task
(e.g. binary) is called a problem reduction method (Allwein et al., 2000) which has had a long history
in the literature, especially in ensemble methods and binarization techniques (Galar et al., 2011).
The most well-known strategies are "one-vs-all" (Anand et al., 1995; Rifkin & Klautau, 2004) and
"one-vs-one" (Knerr et al., 1990; Hastie & Tibshirani, 1998; Wu et al., 2004). Although they have
varied ensembling strategies, all of them share the same task encapsulating scheme, as illustrated in
Figure 1a; speciﬁcally the binary classiﬁers are the sub-modules of a multi-class classiﬁer (i.e. the
multi-class classiﬁer consists of multiple binary classiﬁers). These schemes still require that the class
The demo code is available at https://github.com/GT-RIPL/L2C
1
arXiv:1901.00544v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Multi-class classifier
Binary classifier
Binary classifier
Learning criterion
Multi-class classifier
Binary classifier
Binary classifier
Training
Testing
(a) Binary classiﬁer ensemble
Binary classifier
Multi-class 
classifier
Learning criterion
Training
Testing
Multi-class 
classifier
(b) Meta classiﬁcation learning
Figure 1: Problem reduction schemes for multi-class classiﬁcation. This work proposes scheme (b),
which introduces a binary classiﬁer that captures sij. Note that sij represents the probability that xi
and xj belong to the same class.
label y be available to create the inputs for each binary classiﬁer, and therefore these strategies do not
relax the labeling requirements mentioned earlier.
In this work, we propose a novel strategy to address the above limitations. Our method reverses the
task encapsulation order so that a multi-class classiﬁer becomes a sub-module of a binary classiﬁer, as
illustrated in Figure 1b. The connection between the two classiﬁers is elucidated in Section 3. There
are two highlights in Figure 1b. First, class labels yi are not required in the learning stage. Instead,
our method uses pairs of data (xi, xj) as input and pairwise similarity sij for the supervision. Second,
there is only one binary classiﬁer in the scheme and it is present only during the training stage. In
other words, the ephemeral binary task assists the learning of a multi-class classiﬁer without being
involved in the inference. When using a neural network with softmax outputs for the multi-class
classiﬁer, the proposed scheme can learn a discriminative model with only pairwise information.
We speciﬁcally make the following contributions: 1) We analyze the problem setting and show
that the loss we can use for this encapsulation can be easily derived, and we present an intuitive
probabilistic graphical model interpretation for doing so, 2) We evaluate its performance compared to
vanilla supervised learning of neural networks which uses multi-class labels, and visualize the loss
landscape to better understand the underlying optimization difﬁculty, and 3) We demonstrate support
for learning classiﬁers in more challenging problem domains, e.g. in unsupervised cross-task transfer
and semi-supervised learning. We show how our meta classiﬁcation framework can support all three
learning paradigms, and evaluate it against several state-of-the-art methods. The experimental results
show that the same meta classiﬁcation approach is superior or comparable to state of the art across the
three problem domains (supervised learning, unsupervised cross-task learning, and semi-supervised
learning), demonstrating ﬂexibility to support even unknown types and numbers of classes.
2
RELATED WORK
Supervised learning and problem reduction: Allwein et al. (2000) presents a unifying framework
for multi-class classiﬁcation by reducing it to multiple binary problems. The concepts for achieving
such reduction, one-vs-all and one-vs-one, have been widely adopted and analyzed (Galar et al.,
2011). The two strategies have been used to create several popular algorithms, such as variants of
support vector machine (Weston & Watkins, 1998), AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1997; Schapire
& Singer, 1999), and decision trees (Fürnkranz, 2003). Despite the long history of reduction, our
proposed scheme (Figure 1b) has not been explored. Furthermore, the scheme can be deployed
easily by replacing the learning objective, which is fully compatible with deep neural networks for
classiﬁcation, a desirable property for broad applicability.
Unsupervised cross-task transfer learning: This learning scheme is proposed by Hsu et al. (2018).
The method transfers the pairwise similarity as the meta knowledge to an unlabeled dataset of
different classes. It then uses a constrained clustering algorithm with predicted pairwise constraints
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
X1
X2
X3
Y1
Y2
Y3
S12
S13
S23
ᶚ
Figure 2: Graphical representation for the meta classiﬁcation task; Xi represents the node of input
data, Yi represents the class label, Sij is pairwise similarity between instances i and j, and θ represents
the neural network parameters.
(binarized pairwise similarity) to discover the unseen classes. This learning scheme shares the same
supervision (pairwise similarity) as ours, and therefore relates our method to constrained clustering
algorithms. One class of such approaches uses the constraints to learn a distance metric, and then
applies a generic clustering algorithm such as K-means or hierarchical clustering to obtain the cluster
assignments. This includes DML (Xing et al., 2003), ITML (Davis et al., 2007), SKMS (Anand et al.,
2014), SKKm (Anand et al., 2014; Amid et al., 2016), and SKLR (Amid et al., 2016). The second
class of methods incorporates the constraints into the cluster assignment objective. Some constrained
spectral clustering algorithms, e.g. CSP (Wang et al., 2014) and COSC (Rangapuram & Hein, 2012)
use this strategy. There are also approaches combine both distance metric learning and a clustering
objective jointly, such as MPCKMeans (Bilenko et al., 2004), CECM (Antoine et al., 2012), and
Kullback–Leibler divergence based contrastive loss (KCL) (Hsu & Kira, 2016; Hsu et al., 2018).
Our new learning objective for Figure 1b can replace the above objectives in the cross-task transfer
learning scheme.
Semi-supervised learning: Our meta classiﬁcation strategy can easily plug into a semi-supervised
learning scheme. Our comparison focuses on state-of-the-art methods which solely involve adding a
consistency regularization (Laine & Aila, 2017; Sajjadi et al., 2016; Miyato et al., 2018; Tarvainen &
Valpola, 2017) or Pseudo-Labeling (Lee, 2013) for training a neural network. Another line of strategy
combines weak supervision, such as similar pairs, and unlabeled data to learn a binary classiﬁer (Bao
et al., 2018). We present a new method by augmenting Figure 1b with the Pseudo-Labeling strategy.
3
META CLASSIFICATION LEARNING
A natural way to analyze problems with observed and unobserved information is through a prob-
abilistic graphical model. In ﬁgure 2, we show the graphical model for our problem, where class-
speciﬁc labels Y are latent while pairwise similarities S are observed. Speciﬁcally, we denote
X = {X1, .., Xn}, Y = {Y1, .., Yn}, and S = {Sij}1≤i,j≤n to represent the nodes for samples,
class labels, and pairwise similarities, respectively. In the model, we have Yi ∈{1, 2, .., C} and
Sij ∈{0, 1}. Then we have P(Sij = 1|Yi, Yj) = 1 when Yi = Yj and zero probability otherwise;
similarly, P(Sij = 0|Yi, Yj) = 1 when Yi ̸= Yj. The output of a discriminative classiﬁer with
parameters θ is f(xi; θ) = P(Yi|xi; θ), where f(xi; θ) outputs a categorical distribution. Now we
describe the likelihood that the model explains the observed labeling (either with class labeling or
pairwise labeling).
L(θ; X, Y, S) = P(X, Y, S; θ) = P(S|Y)P(Y|X; θ)P(X)
(1)
When S is fully observed while Y is unknown, calculating the likelihood requires marginaliz-
ing Y by computing P
Y P(S|Y)P(Y|X; θ), which is intractable. The pairwise term P(S|Y) =
Q
i,j P(Sij|Yi, Yj) makes all Yi dependent on each other and prohibits efﬁcient factorization. Thus, we
approximate the computation by imposing additional independences such that Sij ⊥S\{Sij}|Xi, Xj
(see Appendix D for a discussion of these). Now we can compute the likelihood with the observed
nodes Xi = xi and Sij = sij:
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
L(θ; X, S) ≈
X
Y
P(S|Y)P(Y|X; θ)
(2)
≈
Y
i,j
 X
Yi=Yj
1[sij = 1]P(Yi|xi; θ)P(Yj|xj; θ)+
X
Yi̸=Yj
1[sij = 0]P(Yi|xi; θ)P(Yj|xj; θ)

.
(3)
Equation (2) omits the P(X) since X are observed leaf nodes. It is straightforward to take a negative
logarithm on equation 3 and derive a loss function:
Lmeta(θ) = −
X
i,j
log
 X
Yi=Yj
1[sij = 1]P(Yi|xi; θ)P(Yj|xj; θ)+
X
Yi̸=Yj
1[sij = 0]P(Yi|xi; θ)P(Yj|xj; θ)

(4)
= −
X
i,j
sij log(f(xi; θ)T f(xj; θ)) + (1 −sij) log(1 −f(xi; θ)T f(xj; θ)).
(5)
Then we deﬁne the function g by the probability of having the same class label, which is calculated
by the inner product between two categorical distributions:
g(xi, xj, f(·, θ)) = f(xi; θ)T f(xj; θ) = ˆsij
(6)
Here we use ˆsij to denote the predicted similarity (as opposed to ground truth similarity sij). By
plugging equation 6 into equation 5, Lmeta has the form of a binary cross-entropy loss:
Lmeta = −
X
i,j
sij log ˆsij + (1 −sij) log(1 −ˆsij).
(7)
In Figure 1b, the multi-class classiﬁer corresponds to f while the binary classiﬁer corresponds to g. In
other words, it is surprisingly simple to wrap a multi-class classiﬁer by a binary classiﬁer as described
above. Since there are no learnable parameters in g, the weights optimized with the meta criterion
Lmeta are all in the neural network f. To minimize Lmeta, f(xi; θ) and f(xj; θ) must output a
sharply peaked distribution with the peak happening only at the same output node when sij = 1.
In the case of sij = 0, the two distributions must have as little overlap as possible to minimize the
loss. In the latter case, the two samples are pushed to be activated at the output nodes of different
classes. Both properties of f’s output distribution are typical characteristics of a classiﬁer learned
with class labels and using multi-class cross-entropy. The properties also illustrate the intuition of
why minimizing Lmeta helps f learn outputs similar to a multi-class classiﬁer.
Lastly, because of the likelihood nature of Lmeta, we call the learning criterion a Meta Classiﬁcation
Likelihood (MCL) in the rest of the paper.
4
LEARNING PARADIGMS
The supervision used in MCL is the pairwise labeling S. Due to its weaker form compared to class
labels, we have the ﬂexibility to collect it in a supervised, cross-task transfer, or semi-supervised
manner. The collection method determines the learning paradigms. In the ﬁrst two learning paradigms,
other methods (see Related Work Section) have also used pair-wise constraints similarly; our novelty
is the derivation of our new learning objective, MCL, which can replace the other objectives. In
the semi-supervised learning scenario, the proposed Pseudo-MCL is a new method. Details are
elaborated below.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Binary classifier
Multi-class 
classifier
Binary Cross-Entropy
(a) Supervised learning
Binary classifier
Multi-class 
classifier
Binary Cross-Entropy
SPN
(static)
Auxiliary 
dataset
(b) Unsupervised transfer learning
Binarize
Binary classifier
Multi-class 
classifier
Multi-class Cross-Entropy
Binary Cross-Entropy
(c) Pseudo-MCL for semi-supervised learning
Figure 3: The training ﬂows for each learning paradigm. XL represents the labeled data with class
label YL. XUL is unlabeled data. ˆS is the predicted pairwise similarity while S is used as the learning
target. The similarity prediction network (SPN) in (b) is learned on a labeled auxiliary dataset and
transferred to the target dataset XUL.
4.1
SUPERVISED LEARNING
Supervised pairwise labeling can be directly collected from humans, or converted from existing class
labeling by having S = {sij}1≤i,j≤n, where sij = 1 if xi and xj belong to the same class, otherwise
sij = 0. In our experiments, we use the latter setting to enable comparison to other supervised
algorithms. Figure 3a illustrates the training process.
4.2
UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
Pairwise labeling can come from several natural cues, such as spatial and temporal proximity. For
example, the patches in an image can be similar because of their spatial closeness, and the frames of
video in a short time usually have similar content. Additionally, useful pairwise information can be
found in the edges in social networks or in the network of academic citations. All of the above are
potential applications of this work.
Another strategy that is unsupervised in the target domain is to collect pairwise labels through transfer
learning. Hsu et al. (2018) proposes a method in which a similarity prediction network (SPN) can be
learned from a labeled auxiliary dataset. Then the SPN is applied on the unlabeled target dataset to
predict S (the probability of being in the same class). In the last step, the predicted S is fed into a
network (in that case optimized via Kullback–Leibler divergence based contrastive loss) to discover
the categories in the unlabeled target dataset. Figure 3b illustrates above process. Note that the
classes between the auxiliary dataset and target dataset may have an overlap (cross-domain transfer)
or not (cross-task transfer) (Hsu et al., 2018). In both cases, the predicted pairwise similarity is noisy
(especially in the latter case); therefore the transfer learning strategy creates a challenging scenario
for learning classiﬁers. Its difﬁculty makes it a good benchmark to evaluate the robustness of our
methods and is used in our experiments.
4.3
SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING
We propose a new strategy to obtain the S for semi-supervised learning. Figure 3c illustrates the
method under the typical semi-supervised learning setting, which takes a common dataset D used for
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
supervised learning and discards the labels for most of the dataset. The labeled and unlabeled portions
in D are DL = (XL, YL) and DUL = XUL correspondingly. The main idea is to create a pseudo-
similarity SL+UL for the meta classiﬁer (similar to Pseudo-Labeling (Lee, 2013)) by binarizing
the predicted ˆSL+UL at probability 0.5. We call the method Pseudo-MCL, and we note that here
interestingly g is not static as it iteratively improves as f improves. Another way to create similarity
is data augmentation, inspired by the Π-model (Laine & Aila, 2017) or Stochastic Perturbations
(Sajjadi et al., 2016). An image perturbed in different ways naturally belong to the same class, and
thus provides free ground-truth similarity. The similarity from both methods can be easily combined
to SL+UL by having a logical-OR operation for the two binarized similarities. The learning objective
is the sum of the multi-class cross-entropy and Pseudo-MCL, so the mapping between output nodes
and classes are automatically decided by the supervised part of learning.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND NETWORK OPTIMIZATION
In all experiments, we use a standard gradient-based method for training a neural network by
optimizing the learning criterion. For example, with stochastic gradient descent, we calculate MCL
within a mini-batch of data. In that case, the i and j correspond to the index of data in a mini-batch
b. The outputs of f(·; θ) are enumerated in |b|(|b| −1)/2 pairs in a mini-batch before calculation of
MCL. Our empirical ﬁnding is that this enumeration introduces a negligible overhead to the training
time. We also note that for large datasets, this only samples from the full set of pairwise information.
One limitation of learning a classiﬁer without class labels is losing the mapping (the identiﬁability)
between the output nodes and the semantic class. A simple method to obtain the mapping is by using
a part of the training data with class labels and assigning the output nodes to the dominant class
which activates the node (here we obtain the optimal assignment by the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn,
1955), which is commonly used in evaluating the clustering accuracy (Yang et al., 2010)). Note,
however, that for unsupervised problems we do not need to do this except to quantitatively evaluate
our method; otherwise the outputs can be seen as arbitrary clusters.
5.2
SUPERVISED LEARNING WITH WEAK LABELS
This section empirically compares MCL to multi-class cross-entropy (CE) and the strong baseline
using pairwise similarity (Kullback–Leibler divergence based contrastive loss (KCL) (Hsu & Kira,
2016; Hsu et al., 2018)), in a supervised learning setting. Speciﬁcally, we would like to demonstrate
that we can achieve similar classiﬁcation rates as cross-entropy (the standard objective for multi-class
classiﬁcation) using only pairwise similarity, and show that the previous pairwise criterion cannot do
this likely due to a poor loss landscape. We compare the classiﬁcation accuracy of these criteria with
varied network depths and varied dataset difﬁculty. The visualization of loss landscape is provided in
Appendix A. The formulation of KCL and how it relates to MCL is available in Appendix B.
5.2.1
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
We compare the classiﬁcation accuracy on three image datasets: MNIST (LeCun, 1998) is a 10-class
handwritten digit dataset with 60000 images for training, and 10000 for testing; CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) instances are colored 32 × 32 images of objects such as cat, dog, and
ship. They both have 50000 images for training and 10000 for testing.
Network Architectures: We use convolution neural networks with a varied number of layers: LeNet
(LeCun et al., 1998) and VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). We add VGG8, which only has one
convolution layer before each pooling layer, as the supplement between LeNet and VGG11. The list
of architectures also includes ResNet (He et al., 2016a) with pre-activation (He et al., 2016b)). The
number of output nodes K in the last fully connected layer is set to the true number of categories for
this section. Since the learning objectives KCL and MCL both work on pairs of inputs, we have a
pairwise enumeration layer (Hsu et al., 2018) between the network outputs and the loss function.
Training Conﬁgurations: All networks in this section are trained from scratch with randomly
initialized weights. By default, we use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) to optimize the three criterion
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Table 1: The classiﬁcation error rate (lower is better) on three datasets with different objective
functions and different neural network architectures. CE denotes that the network uses class-speciﬁc
labels for training with a multi-class cross-entropy. MCL only uses the binarized similarity for
learning with the meta-classiﬁcation criterion. KCL is a strong baseline which also uses binarized
similarity. The * symbol indicates the worst cases of KCL. The performance in parenthesis means
its network uses a better initialization (VGG16 and VGG8) or a learning schedule which is 10
times longer (VGG11). The two treatments are discussed in Section 5.2.1. We only use VGG8 for
CIFAR100 since KCL performs the best with it on CIFAR10. Each value is the average of 3 runs.
Dataset
#class
Network
(Class label)
(Pairwise label)
CE
KCL
MCL
MNIST
10
LeNet
0.6%
0.5%
0.6%
CIFAR10
10
LeNet
14.9%
16.4%
15.1%
VGG8
10.2%
10.2%
10.2%
VGG11
8.9%
72.2(10.4)%
9.4%
VGG16
7.6%
*81.1(10.3)%
8.3%
ResNet18
6.7%
73.8%
6.6%
ResNet34
6.6%
79.3%
6.3%
ResNet50
6.6%
79.6%
5.9%
ResNet101
6.5%
79.9%
5.6%
CIFAR100
100
VGG8
35.4%
*45.3(40.2)%
36.1%
with mini-batch size 100 and initial learning rate 0.001. On MNIST the learning rate was dropped
every 10 epochs by a factor of 0.1 with 30 epochs in total. On CIFAR10/100 we use the same setting
except that the learning rate is dropped at 80 and 120 epochs with 140 epochs in total. For CIFAR100,
the mini-batch size was 1000 and the learning rate dropped at epoch 100 and 150 with 180 epochs
in total. In the experiments with ResNet, we use SGD instead of Adam since SGD converges to a
higher accuracy when keeping other settings the same as above. The learning rate for SGD starts
with 0.1 and decays with a factor of 0.1 at the number of epochs described above.
Results and discussion: The results in Table 1 show that MCL achieves similar classiﬁcation
performance as CE with different network depths and three datasets. In contrast, KCL has degenerate
performance when the networks are deeper or the dataset is more difﬁcult. This might be due to a
limitation of using KL-divergence, speciﬁcally that when two probability distributions are the same,
the divergence will be zero no matter what the values are. This property may introduce bad local
minima or small gradients for learning. To investigate such a perspective, we apply two strategies.
First, we use a large learning rate (0.2) with SGD to avoid bad local minima and make the training
schedule 10 times longer for exploring the parameter space. This setting helps KCL with VGG11, in
that the error rate drops from 72.2% to 10.4%, but not with VGG16 (from 81.1% to 76.8%). In the
second strategy, we select the worst conditions (the values with * notion) in Table 1 for KCL and
pre-train the networks with only 4k labels with CE to initialize the networks. Then we use KCL with
the full training set to ﬁnish the training. With a better initialization, KCL can reach a performance
close to CE and MCL. The performance is shown with parenthesis in Table 1. The results of both
strategies indicate that KCL has bad local minima or plateaus in its loss surface (see Section A in
Appendix). Unlike KCL, MCL can converge to a performance close to CE with random initialization
in all of our experiments. Furthermore, MCL outperforms CE with a deeper network (error rate 5.6%
versus 6.5% with ResNet101). Such a result indicates that MCL is less prone to overﬁtting (in the
Table 1, all ResNets achieve a training error less than 0.1%).
5.3
UNSUPERVISED CROSS-TASK TRANSFER LEARNING
The second experiment follows the transfer learning scenario proposed by Hsu et al. (2018) and is
summarized in Section 4.2. This scenario has two settings. The ﬁrst is when the number of output
nodes K equal to the number of ground truth classes C in a dataset. This setting is the same as a
multi-class classiﬁcation task, except no labels (both class labels or similarity labels) are provided
in the target dataset. The second setting is having an unknown C, which is closer to a clustering
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Table 2: Unsupervised cross-task transfer learning on Omniglot. The performance (higher is better)
is averaged across 20 alphabets (datasets), in which each has 20 to 47 letters (classes). The ACC and
NMI without brackets have the number of output nodes K equal to the true number of classes in a
dataset, while columns with "(K=100)" represent the case where the number of classes is unknown
and a ﬁxed K = 100 is used.
Method
ACC
ACC (K=100)
NMI
NMI (K=100)
K-means (MacQueen et al., 1967)
21.7%
18.9%
0.353
0.464
LPNMF (Cai et al., 2009)
22.2%
16.3%
0.372
0.498
LSC (Chen & Cai, 2011)
23.6%
18.0%
0.376
0.500
ITML (Davis et al., 2007)
56.7%
47.2%
0.674
0.727
SKKm (Anand et al., 2014)
62.4%
46.9%
0.770
0.781
SKLR (Amid et al., 2016)
66.9%
46.8%
0.791
0.760
CSP (Wang et al., 2014)
62.5%
65.4%
0.812
0.812
MPCK-means (Bilenko et al., 2004)
81.9%
53.9%
0.871
0.816
KCL (Hsu et al., 2018)
82.4%
78.1%
0.889
0.874
MCL (ours)
83.3%
80.2%
0.897
0.893
problem. One strategy to address the unknown C is to set a large K, and we rely on the clustering
algorithm to use only a necessary number of clusters to describe the dataset while leaving the extra
clusters empty.
We use constrained clustering algorithms as the baselines since they can use the pairwise inputs from
a similarity prediction network (SPN) (Hsu et al., 2018). In this section, the same set of binarized
pairwise similarity prediction is provided to all algorithms for a fair comparison. The metric in
this section is still the classiﬁcation accuracy. The mapping between output nodes and classes is
calculated by the Hungarian algorithm, in which each class only matches to one output node. The
unmapped output nodes are all subject to the classiﬁcation error. We also include the normalized
mutual information (NMI) (Strehl & Ghosh, 2002) metric. We use two datasets in the evaluation.
Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015): This dataset has 20 images for each of 1623 different handwritten
characters. The characters are from 50 different alphabets and were separated into 30 background
sets (Omniglotbg) and 20 evaluation sets (Omnigloteval) by the dataset author. The procedure
uses the Omniglotbg set (964 characters in total) to learn the similarity function and applies it to
the cross-task transfer learning on the 20 evaluation sets (this same input is used for all compared
algorithms). In this test, the backbone network for classiﬁcation has four convolution layers and has
weights randomly initialized. Both MCL and KCL are optimized by Adam with mini-batch size 100.
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009): The 1000-class dataset is separated into 882-class and 118-class
subsets as the random split in Vinyals et al. (2016). The procedure uses ImageNet882 for learning the
similarity prediction function and randomly samples 30 classes (∼39k images) from ImageNet118
for the unlabeled target data. In this test, the backbone classiﬁcation network is Resnet-18 and has
weights initialized by classiﬁcation on ImageNet882. Both learning objectives (KCL and MCL) are
optimized by SGD with mini-batch size 100.
Results and Discussion: We follow the evaluation procedure (including network architectures) used
in Hsu et al. (2018), therefore the results can be directly compared. The results shown in Table 2
and 3 demonstrate a clear advantage for MCL over other methods. KCL also performs well, but
MCL beats its performance with a larger gap when C is unknown (ACC with K=100). MCL also
estimates the number of classes in a dataset better than KCL (Appendix Table 5). The advantage of
MCL over KCL in this section is not due to the ease of optimization, since the network is shallow in
the Omniglot experiment and the network is pre-trained in the ImageNet experiment. The advantage
may due to the fact that MCL is free of hyper-parameters and so performs better than KCL which
uses a heuristic threshold (σ = 2) (Hsu & Kira, 2016) for its margin.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Table 3: Unsupervised cross-task transfer learning on ImageNet. The values (higher is better) are
the average of three random subsets in ImageNet118. Each subset has 30 classes. The "ACC" has
K = 30. All methods use the features (outputs of average pooling) from Resnet-18 pre-trained with
ImageNet882 classiﬁcation.
Method
ACC
ACC(K=100)
NMI
NMI(K=100)
K-means
71.9%
34.5%
0.713
0.671
LSC
73.3%
33.5%
0.733
0.655
LPNMF
43.0%
21.8%
0.526
0.500
KCL
73.8%
65.2%
0.750
0.715
MCL
74.4%
71.5%
0.762
0.765
Table 4: Test error rates (lower is better) obtained by various semi-supervised learning approaches
on CIFAR-10 with all but 4,000 labels removed. Supervised refers to using only 4,000 labeled
samples from CIFAR-10 without any unlabeled data. All the methods use ResNet-18 and standard
data augmentation.
Method
CIFAR10 4k labels
Supervised
25.4 ± 1.0%
Pseudo-Label
19.8 ± 0.7%
Π-model
19.6 ± 0.4%
VAT
18.2 ± 0.4%
SPN-MCL
22.8 ± 0.5%
Pseudo-MCL
18.0 ± 0.4%
5.4
SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING
We evaluate the semi-supervised learning performance of the Pseudo-MCL on the standard benchmark
dataset CIFAR-10. The Pseudo-MCL is compared to two state-of-the-art methods, which are
VAT (Miyato et al., 2018) and Π-Model (Laine & Aila, 2017; Sajjadi et al., 2016). Our list of
baselines additionally includes Pseudo-Labeling (Lee, 2013) and SPN-MCL since they share a similar
strategy with Pseudo-MCL. The SPN-MCL uses the same strategy presented in the Section 4.2 for
unsupervised learning, except that the SPN is trained with only the labeled portion (e.g. 4k labeled
data) of CIFAR10 in this section. We also note that the SPN serves as a static function to provide the
similarity for optimizing the regular MCL objective.
Experiment Setting: To construct the DL, four thousand labeled data are randomly sampled from
the training set (50k images) of CIFAR10. This leaves 46k unlabeled data for DUL. We use 5 random
DL/DUL splits to calculate the average performance. The images are augmented by the standard
procedure which includes random cropping, random horizontal ﬂipping, and normalization to zero
mean with unit variance. The model for all method is the ResNet-18 (pre-activation version, He
et al. (2016b)), which has no dropout as in a standard model. We use Adam to optimize the objective
functions of all methods. The procedure begins with learning the supervised model with only the 4k
labeled data; then all other methods have a ﬁne-tuning with DL+DUL based on the learned supervised
model. The supervised model (with only 4k data) is trained with initial learning rate 0.001 and a
decay with factor 0.1 at epochs 80 and 120 for a total of 140 epochs. All the semi-supervised methods
are trained with initial learning rate 0.001 and have a decay with factor 0.1 at epoch 150 and 250 for a
total of 300 epochs. We use a shared implementation among all methods so that the major difference
between methods is the regularization term in the learning objective. Appendix C.1 provides the
description for hyperparameter tuning.
Results and Discussion:
Table 4 presents the comparison and shows that Pseudo-MCL is on-par with the state-of-the-art
method VAT (Miyato et al., 2018). The performance difference between SPN-MCL and Pseudo-MCL
clearly demonstrates the beneﬁts of having the binary classiﬁer and the multi-class classiﬁer optimized
together. Note that comparing our Table 4 and a recent review (Oliver et al., 2018), we have a lower
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
baseline performance due to a lighter regularization (no dropout) and no extra data augmentation
(such as adding Gaussian noise), but the relative ranking between methods is consistent. Therefore
we conﬁrm the effectiveness of Pseudo-MCL. Lastly, Pseudo-MCL is free of hyperparameter, which
is a very appealing characteristic for learning with few data.
6
CONCLUSION
We presented a new strategy to learn a multi-class classiﬁcation via a binary decision problem. We
formulate the problem setting via a probabilistic graphical model and derive a simple likelihood
objective that can be effectively optimized via neural networks. We show how this same framework
can be used for three learning paradigms: supervised learning, unsupervised cross-task transfer
learning, and semi-supervised learning. Results show comparable or improved results over state of
the art, especially in the challenging unsupervised cross-task setting. This demonstrates the power of
using pairwise similarity as weak labels to relax the requirement of class-speciﬁc labeling. We hope
the presented perspective of meta classiﬁcation inspires additional approaches to learning with fewer
labeled data (e.g. domain adaptation and few-shot learning) as well as application to domains where
weak labels are easier to obtain.
