Adversarial Disentanglement with Grouped Observations
Jozsef Nemeth
Ultinous, Hungary

Abstract
We consider the disentanglement of the representations of the
relevant attributes of the data (content) from all other factors
of variations (style) using Variational Autoencoders. Some
recent works addressed this problem by utilizing grouped ob-
servations, where the content attributes are assumed to be
common within each group, while there is no any supervised
information on the style factors. In many cases, however, these
methods fail to prevent the models from using the style vari-
ables to encode content related features as well. This work
supplements these algorithms with a method that eliminates
the content information in the style representations. For that
purpose the training objective is augmented to minimize an ap-
propriately deﬁned mutual information term in an adversarial
way. Experimental results and comparisons on image datasets
show that the resulting method can efﬁciently separate the
content and style related attributes and generalizes to unseen
data.
1
Introduction
In the ﬁeld of representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013), autoencoder based approaches (Tschannen,
Bachem, and Lucic 2018) are among the most effective meth-
ods to learn compact and meaningful representations even
without any supervision. Such representations then can be
used to solve downstream tasks like classiﬁcation or cluster-
ing efﬁciently. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling 2014) attracted probably the most attention
in recent years. By employing stochastic variational infer-
ence (Zhang et al. 2019), VAEs can learn intractable posterior
distributions of the latent variables.
Disentangled
representation
learning
(Desjardins,
Courville, and Bengio 2012; Kumar, Sattigeri, and Balakr-
ishnan 2018; Achille and Soatto 2018; Esmaeili et al. 2019;
Xiang and Li 2019) aims to assign the different factors
of variations to different dimensions of the representation
vectors. This problem has been heavily studied in recent
years, for example, it has been proved that learning
disentangled representations without any inductive bias or
supervision is theoretically impossible (Locatello et al. 2019).
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
At the same time, it has been observed that using increased
regularization weight, the VAE model learns disentangled
latent spaces (Higgins et al. 2017).
In this work, we consider the problem of learning a dis-
entangled representation in which the relevant attributes of
the observations (which determine some kind of identity or
class of a given sample) and the other irrelevant factors (like
pose, lighting conditions, etc.) are separated. Following the
notations of (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018),
we refer to the relevant attributes and the other factors as
content and style, respectively. Recently, grouped observa-
tions based methods have been proposed for content-style
disentanglement (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018;
Hosoya 2019). Grouping data elements that represent the
same content is a way to induce weak supervision, and the
main motivation behind this approach is that collecting and
cleaning such datasets is less expensive. For example, in
case of classiﬁcation based methods it is expected that dif-
ferent classes represent different identities. At the same time,
in case of learning from grouped data, we only expect that
members of a given group share the same content, whereas
different groups are not required to represent different classes.
These methods (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018;
Hosoya 2019) share the idea of accumulating the content
representation of the individual group members into a single
common group-level content representation, while they learn
individual style representations for each of the group mem-
bers. However, these methods have no explicit mechanism to
prevent the model from using the style variable to represent
not only style attributes but also certain amount of content
information. For example, the number of dimensions for the
style variable had to be adjusted for the style variability, oth-
erwise the model used the style variable to learn content
related aspects of the data (Hosoya 2019). Our experiments
also conﬁrm this observation.
We show that the results of these methods can be signiﬁ-
cantly improved by suppressing the content information in the
style variable. More speciﬁcally, the proposed method trains
a neural network to estimate the mutual information (Belg-
hazi et al. 2018) between the style representations and the
observations corresponding to the same groups whereas the
encoder network is trained in an adversarial manner. Exper-
arXiv:2001.04761v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2020

iments prove that this enhanced training process provides
more useful representations. The improvements are the most
signiﬁcant for small group sizes, which makes the proposed
method more applicable in practice.
This paper is organized as follows. First, we brieﬂy
overview the related literature and the grouped observations
based methods (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and Nowozin 2018;
Hosoya 2019) in Section 2. Then Section 3 introduces our
adversarial disentanglement approach. Experimental results
and comparisons can be found in Section 4 and in the supple-
mentary material. The source code of the experiments and
supplementary material are available online1.
2
Related Work
The different variants of autoencoders are powerful tools for
learning efﬁcient data representations (Tschannen, Bachem,
and Lucic 2018). Among them Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014) are the most heavily
studied approaches. VAEs were developed to model prob-
abilistic latent representations based on the variational in-
ference principle. It has also been shown that by slightly
modifying the VAEs objective function, the models tend to
disentangle the latent space (Higgins et al. 2017; Burgess et
al. 2017). This phenomenon was further investigated by Kim
and Mnih (2018) leading to the FactorVAE method. Chen et
al. (2018) also studied the disentangling properties of VAEs.
They proposed to split the regularization term up to four parts
and assign different weights to each term. Another group
of methods uses structured latent spaces to learn efﬁcient
data representations (Grathwohl and Wilson 2016; Maaløe et
al. 2019; Ranganath, Tran, and Blei 2016; Klys, Snell, and
Zemel 2018). It has also been demonstrated that VAEs are
capable to separate the continuous and discrete generative fac-
tors (Dupont 2018), furthermore, disentanglement can also be
achieved in the semi-supervised setting (Kingma et al. 2014;
Siddharth et al. 2017).
Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
are probabilistic methods designed to model high dimen-
sional data distributions. They can be extended to representa-
tion learning, for example, the InfoGAN model (Chen et al.
2016) can learn disentangled representations by maximizing
the mutual information between the generated data and a sub-
set of latent variables. Another GAN based model has been
proposed recently which can be used to control the content
and the style of the generated images (Chen, Denoyer, and
Arti`eres 2018). During training, the generator aims to pro-
duce image pairs from shared content vectors but independent
style vectors, while the discriminator tries to distinguish these
fake pairs from real image pairs. The generator can compete
with the discriminator only by producing image pairs con-
taining the same object. Donahue et al. (2018) proposed a
similar method although their approach to the discriminator
differs.
Adversarial training to disentangle content and style at-
tributes has been proposed recently (Mathieu et al. 2016).
The basic idea of this work is to pair the content variable of a
data sample with the style variable of another sample from
1https://github.com/jonemeth/aaai20
the same group during training. The resulting representation
should be suitable to recover the the latter sample using the
decoder. This approach is similar in spirit with the grouped
observations based methods (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and
Nowozin 2018; Hosoya 2019), on which the current work is
based. The main difference is that the latter methods do not
require access to class labels. Kulkarni et al.(2015) proposed
a method to disentangle the generative factors and create
a compact and interpretable representation. The algorithm
encourages the different dimensions of the latent variable to
represent speciﬁc attributes of the images. Recently, Wu et
al. (2019) proposed an architecture to disentangle geometry
and style information using prior knowledge on structure.
Other GAN and autoencoder based generative models were
successfully applied to face frontalization (Yin et al. 2017)
and recognition (Liu et al. 2018). Learning representations
that are invariant to speciﬁc factors is also highly related to
the current work (Jaiswal et al. 2018). It has recently been
shown that invariance can be obtained without adversarial
training as well (Moyer et al. 2018).
2.1
Multi-Level Variational Autoencoders
To separate the content and style representations Boucha-
court, Tomioka, and Nowozin (2018) introduced the Multi-
Level Variational Autoencoder (MLVAE) which utilizes a
dataset of grouped observations. In this section, we brieﬂy
overview this approach. Let the training dataset consist of N
observation groups xn =

xn
1, . . . , xn
Kn
	
for n = 1, . . . , N,
where Kn = |xn| denote the number of individual obser-
vations within the group and xn
i ∈Rd is the ith member
of the nth group. The group index n is omitted sometimes
for the sake of simplicity and in this work we consider only
datasets with Kn = K, i.e., all the groups in the dataset
are of the same size. The underlying empirical data distri-
bution represented by the dataset is denoted by pD(x). We
also deﬁne the distribution of individual observations pD(x).
Note that sampling from pD(x) can be performed by ﬁrst
sampling a group from pD(x) then choosing a member uni-
formly at random. We assume that the members in a given
group share some content attributes that we want to capture
by the latent variable c ∈Rdc, while the individual group
members have style attributes represented by the latent vari-
ables s =

si ∈Rds : i = 1, . . . , K
	
. The Evidence Lower
Bound (ELBO) for a group (Bouchacourt, Tomioka, and
Nowozin 2018) is given by:
log pθ(x) ≥Eqφ(c,s|x)
K
X
i=1
log pθ(xi|c, si)
−
K
X
i=1
KL(qφ(si|xi)|p(si))
−KL(qφ(c|x)|p(c)) = Lθ,φ(x),
(1)
where p(si) and p(c) are priors on the latent variables, while
θ is the parameter of the generative model and φ is the varia-
tional parameter of both the content and style variables. The
training process maximizes this lower bound for the whole

dataset:
Lθ,φ(D) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
Lθ,φ(xn).
(2)
As usually in case of Variational Autoencoders, both the
generative model pθ and the approximate inference model qφ
are realized by neural networks Pθ and Qφ with parameters
θ and φ, respectively. In the experiments presented in this
paper the encoder neural network estimated the expected
value and log-variance of the Gaussian approximate posterior
distribution and we used standard normal priors everywhere.
Furthermore, we considered Bernoulli likelihood for binary
images and Gaussian likelihood (with ﬁxed variance of 1.0)
for color images.
Content Accumulation
For the MLVAE method, it was
proposed to deﬁne the single content posterior for a given
group based on the content encodings obtained from the
individual observations withing that group. More speciﬁcally,
the product of the posterior density functions provided by the
encoder was considered:
qφ(c|x) = 1
Z
K
Y
i=1
qφ(c|xi),
(3)
where Z is a normalization constant. Although theoreti-
cally other approaches are also feasible (such as accumulating
as a Gaussian mixture), in our experiments we focus on Eq.
(3). In (Hosoya 2019), another accumulation method has
been proposed. Our experiments in the supplemental show
that their simpliﬁed accumulation approach slightly improves
the results, but the adversarial method described in the next
section is still important to obtain signiﬁcantly better disen-
tanglement.
3
Adversarial Disentanglement
From the point of view of disentangling the latent space, the
accumulation of the content posteriors over group members
effectively discourages the encoder from storing style related
information in the content variables. This is because the de-
coder reconstructs the inputs from the accumulated contents
and individual styles. On the other hand, there is no explicit
mechanism that would prevent the model from encoding con-
tent in the style variable s. For example, in case of the Chairs
dataset (Yang et al. 2015), in which the only factors of style
variations are two rotation angles, it is important to choose a
low number of dimensions for s (e.g., ds = 2) to prevent the
model from storing content in it (Hosoya 2019).
Here we argue that the reason why maximizing the Group-
ELBO in Eq. (1) can result in disentanglement (at least to
some extent) is the imbalanced regularization approach. In-
formally speaking, Eq. (1) puts more weight on regularizing
the style variable (which in turn minimizes its information
content about the data (Kim and Mnih 2018)) and thus en-
courages the encoder to use the content variable as well. As
experimental results in Section 4 and in the supplementary
material show, larger group size leads to better disentangle-
ment, however, for small group sizes the algorithm ignores
the content variable c, and uses only s to represent all as-
pects of the data. One might expect to obtain better results
by increasing the regularization on s and thus encouraging
the model to use the content vector c. Experiments presented
in Section 4 show that while this approach increases the dis-
entanglement indeed, it also harms the overall performance
of the method. This is because increased regularization re-
duces the capacity of s and weaker style encoding affects the
quality of the content representation as well.
In this section, we show how to minimize only the content
related information in the style representation. The group
members are assumed to share the same content, but the
style attributes are independent. Therefore, we expect that
the style representation of a given sample can not be inferred
from other data samples within the same group. The content
information encoded in s can be measured as the mutual
information between s and other data samples in the given
group. To formulate this concept, let us ﬁrst deﬁne:
rφ(s|x) = rφ(s|x = xn
i ) ≡
1
K −1
K
X
j=1,j̸=i
qφ(s|xn
j )
(4)
and
rφ(x) ≡pD(x),
(5)
where pD(x) is the underlying distribution of individual ob-
servations. The joint distribution of the observations and
style representations of other group members is rφ(x, s) =
rφ(x)rφ(s|x), furthermore, it can be easily shown that
rφ(s) = qφ(s) (see the supplementary material). More-
over let us denote the factorized distribution rφ(x)rφ(s) by
¯rφ(x, s). We can express the mutual information between
data samples and the style representations of other group
members as the mutual information between s and x w.r.t.
the distribution rφ:
Irφ(x; s) = KL(rφ(x, s)∥¯rφ(x, s))
= Erφ(x,s) log rφ(x, s)
¯rφ(x, s).
(6)
The goal of the proposed method is to maximize the lower
bound in Eq. (2), while keeping Irφ(x; s) low enough to
make s invariant to content and thus force the encoder to use
only the latent vector c to represent content attributes. Instead
of handling the problem as a constrained optimization task,
we propose to take its Lagrangian relaxation by penalizing
the mutual information, which leads to the following training
objective:
maximize
θ,φ
Lθ,φ(D) −λIrφ(x; s),
(7)
where the parameter λ controls the weight of the mutual
information term. We can estimate the mutual information
term in Eq. (7) using a parametric neural estimator (Belghazi
et al. 2018) as it is possible to generate samples from both
rφ(x, s) and ¯rφ(x, s). For example, to generate a sample
from rφ(x, s) we can ﬁrst choose a group xn and pick two
members xn
i and xn
j (i ̸= j) uniformly at random. Then
let x = xn
i and s ∼qφ(s|xn
j ). The samples from ¯rφ(x, s)
are pairs of independent points from rφ(x) = pD(x) and
rφ(s) = qφ(s). Thus to generate a sample, we can ﬁrst pick

Algorithm 1: Generating samples from rφ(x, s) and
¯rφ(x, s)
Input
:B = {xb : b = 1, . . . , NB}.
1 R ←∅, ¯R ←∅.
2 foreach xb ∈B do
3
Choose i and j (i ̸= j) uniformly at random from
{1, . . . , K}.
4
Sample sb
j ∼qφ(s|xb
j).
5
R ←R ∪{(xb
i, sb
j)}.
6
m ←1 + (b mod NB)
# Index of next
group
7
Choose k uniformly at random from {1, . . . , K}.
8
Choose l uniformly at random from {1, . . . , K}.
9
Sample sm
l ∼qφ(s|xm
l ).
10
¯R ←¯R ∪{(xb
k, sm
l )}.
11 end
12 return R, ¯R
two observations xn
i ∼pD(x) and xm
j ∼pD(x), then choose
x = xn
i and s ∼qφ(s|xm
j ).
As usually in practice, we train our models using mini-
batch based stochastic optimization methods, thus it is the
most efﬁcient to draw samples from rφ(x, s) and ¯rφ(x, s)
based on the same mini-batches of groups that we use to
maximize Eq. (2). The pseudo-code of our mini-batch based
sampling approach is described in Algorithm 1. We note
that to generate a sample from ¯rφ(x, s) we never choose x
and s from the same group otherwise such pairs would be
over-represented. For the same reason, to generate samples
from rφ(x, s) a given data point x is never paired with a style
vector sampled from its style posterior qφ(s|x).
Since samples from rφ(x, s) and ¯rφ(x, s) are accessible,
it is possible to estimate Irφ(x; s) as:
Irφ(x; s) ≥sup
ψ

Er[Tψ(x, s)] −log(E¯r[eTψ(x,s)])
	
, (8)
where Tψ is a neural network parameterized by ψ, see (Bel-
ghazi et al. 2018; Nguyen, Wainwright, and Jordan 2010).
Let R and ¯R be sets of samples from rφ(x, s) and ¯rφ(x, s),
respectively. We train Tψ to maximize
Lψ(R, ¯R) =
X
(x,s)∈R
Tψ(x, s)
|R|
−log
X
(x,s)∈¯
R
eTψ(x,s)
| ¯R|
, (9)
and use this approximation to minimize the mutual infor-
mation in Eq. (7) in an adversarial manner. To achieve a
sufﬁciently small mutual information, we adaptively adjust
the weight of the mutual information term in Eq. (7) in each
iteration of the training process:
λ ←λ + α
 Lψ(R, ¯R)/I⋆−1

,
(10)
where I⋆is the target value for the mutual information (we
set I⋆= 0.2 in our experiments), Lψ(R, ¯R) is evaluated
based on the current training mini-batch, while α is a step-
size (we used α = 0.1 in our experiments). This update rule
Algorithm 2: MLVAE with Adversarial Disentanglement
Input
:Dataset {xn : n = 1, . . . , N}, mini-batch size
NB, number of training iterations it, number
of Tψ update steps itT , optimizers gθ,φ and gψ.
1 Initialize θ,φ, ψ, and λ.
2 repeat it times
3
Sample a mini-batch of observation groups
B = {xb : b = 1, . . . , NB}.
4
Use Algorithm 1 with B as input to obtain two sets
R and ¯R containing samples from rφ(x, s) and
¯rφ(x, s), respectively.
5
θ, φ←gθ,φ
 −Lθ,φ(B) + λLψ(R, ¯R)

.
6
Update λ using Eq. (10).
7
repeat itT times
8
Sample a mini-batch of groups
B = {xb : b = 1, . . . , NB}.
9
Use Algorithm 1 with B as input to obtain
two sets R and ¯R containing samples from
rφ(x, s) and ¯rφ(x, s), respectively.
10
ψ←gψ
 −Lψ(R, ¯R)

.
11
end
12 end
increases (decreases) the weight λ if the current estimation
of the mutual information is higher (lower) than the target
value I⋆.
As experimental results prove, the method described in
this section makes the style variable s less informative about
the content, thus forcing the method to learn more effective
content representation in c. We refer to MLVAE improved
with our adversarial disentanglement method as MLVAE-AD.
The pseudo code in Algorithm 2 shows the main steps of the
proposed algorithm.
4
Experiments
In our experiments we focused on testing the effect of the
proposed adversarial disentanglement approach. We used
three image datasets that exhibit different variability in both
content and style. To evaluate the disentanglement in the
learned representations simple classiﬁers were trained on
both the content and style mean variables. For that purpose,
each of the datasets had been split into three parts. For a given
dataset, the ﬁrst set was used to form the groups for training
the models, the classiﬁers were trained on the second, while
the classiﬁcation performances were evaluated on the last
part. Herein, we present the classiﬁcation results obtained
by standard SVM. In the supplemental, evaluation using
linear regression classiﬁer shows that such a simpler method
can also easily distinguish different classes in the content
representations, but performs weaker in discovering content
information in style encodings.
The MNIST (LeCun et al. 1998) dataset is composed of
only 10 classes of handwritten digits, while there is a wide
range of variability in style. We split the set of 50000 training
images into two parts. The models were trained on 45000

Fixed Content
Fixed Style
(a) MLVAE
Fixed Content
Fixed Style
(b) MLVAE-AD
Figure 1: Example results from the qualitative experiments on MNIST using dc = 2, ds = 14, and K = 2. The ﬁgure contains
generated images obtained from swapped encodings (see text) and scatter plots for 2-dimensional content embeddings.
Table 1: Evaluation of the results obtained on the MNIST test
set using different numbers of latent dimensions and group
sizes. Results for dc = 2, ds = 14 and dc = 8, ds = 8 are
shown in rows 1-3 and 4-6, respectively.
K
MLVAE
MLVAE-AD
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
2
65.0%
89.2%
75.2
97.6%
41.2%
78.2
5
92.9%
85.2%
76.0
97.3%
40.2%
80.6
10
94.1%
85.9%
75.7
96.3%
57.9%
79.5
2
84.6%
79.6%
77.4
98.4%
26.8%
79.6
5
97.3%
61.9%
81.5
98.5%
29.4%
85.3
10
97.6%
60.9%
83.5
98.0%
30.6%
86.0
samples, in case of a given group size we randomly formed
10000 groups from each of the 10 classes. The remaining
5000 images were used to train the classiﬁers, while the
MNIST test set was used for evaluation. The original 28 × 28
pixels images were padded to 32 × 32 pixels to ﬁt to the
network architecture.
The Chairs (Yang et al. 2015) dataset contains rendered
images of about one thousand different three-dimensional
chair models, but the intra-class variability is very low as
the images within a given class differ only by the view of
the model. The version of this dataset that we used contains
64×64 pixel images of 809 different three-dimensional chair
models rendered from 62 different views. In the experiments,
our algorithm was trained on 659 randomly chosen classes,
while the remaining 150 classes were used for evaluation. For
a given group size, 100 random groups were formed from
each of the 659 training classes. From each of the 150 test
classes we used 31 random images to train the classiﬁers,
while their accuracies were measured on the remaining 31
samples.
Finally, the VGGFace2 (Cao et al. 2018) face recognition
dataset represents high variability in both content and style.
It contains more than 3 million in-the-wild images of about
9000 identities. The training set consist of 8631 classes, for
each class we formed 50 random groups for a given group
size. From each of the 500 test classes, we randomly selected
Table 2: Results of MLVAE on MNIST (dc = 2, ds = 14,
K = 2) with increased style regularization weight β.
β
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
1.5
87.6%
77.4%
80.4
2.0
93.5%
55.5%
85.2
5.0
95.6%
30.9%
106.8
10.0
94.3%
20.3%
128.7
20.0
94.5%
29.2%
141.3
50 images to train the classiﬁers and 10 other images for eval-
uation. The images were aligned based on facial keypoints
provided with the dataset and resized to 64 × 64 pixels.
For the Chairs and VGGFace2 datasets the classes used
to train the models were disjoint from the classes used for
evaluation. Thus, experiments on these sets show the ability
of the method to generalize to unseen contents.
To implement the encoder, the decoder, and Tψ we used
simple convolutional neural networks. Note that Tψ is un-
usual in the sense that it takes a (higher dimensional) data
point and a (lower dimensional) representation vector as in-
put. To implement such a network, we ﬁrst used a similar
neural-network structure that we used for the encoder to map
x into a lower dimensional vector. Then we concatenated the
resulting vector with s and applied some more layers to obtain
the output of Tψ. Note that the neural network architectures
and training hyper-parameters were not ﬁne-tuned to obtain
high quality results. Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba 2015)
was applied in all of the experiments. The description of the
neural networks and the optimization parameters used for
the different experiments can be found in the supplementary
material.
For qualitative evaluation we created image plots with
swapped latents. For such image grids, we encoded a few
images from the test datasets and swapped the content and
style vectors to obtain new representations. These representa-
tions were then fed into the decoder to generate the images.
In such an image grid, the ﬁrst row and the left-most column
contain the input samples.

Fixed Content
Fixed Style
(a) Chairs
Fixed Content
Fixed Style
(b) VGGFace2
Figure 2: Qualitative experiments on Chairs (dc = 32, ds = 32, K = 2) and VGGFace2 (dc = 64, ds = 64, K = 2) datasets:
decoding outputs from swapped representations.
Table 3: Quantitative results on Chairs test set with dc = 32,
ds = 32, and different group sizes.
K
MLVAE
MLVAE-AD
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
2
76.3%
74.5%
85.7
93.8%
8.6%
111.7
5
82.4%
72.3%
89.8
95.0%
15.4%
110.7
10
92.3%
60.9%
97.9
92.8%
25.7%
113.1
4.1
Evaluation
When the representation is successfully disentangled, we
expect to obtain high classiﬁcation accuracy on content rep-
resentations while low accuracy on style representations. In
our tables, the classiﬁcation accuracies obtained on the con-
tent and style representations are denoted by C(c) and C(s),
respectively. We also present the average reconstruction er-
rors (average per-sample negative log-likelihoods) obtained
on the test sets which is denoted by Lrec. A signiﬁcant in-
crease in reconstruction error would suggest that adversarial
disentanglement weakens the representation capacity of the
model. In our experiments, we focused on small group sizes
(K = 2, 5, 10). For a given setting, the models were trained
both with and without adversarial disentanglement.
In case of the MNIST handwritten digits, the focus of the
experiments was on examining whether the proposed method
is capable of forcing the model to represent the 10 classes on
a very low-dimensional content vector (dc = 2). We tested
the algorithm for dc = 2, ds = 14 and for dc = 8, ds = 8
as well. Results in Table 1 show that the original MLVAE
Table 4: Results on the test set of VGGFace2 with dc = 64,
ds = 64, and different group sizes.
K
MLVAE
MLVAE-AD
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
C(c)
C(s)
Lrec
2
21.4%
27.5%
209.4
39.0%
6.8%
260.9
5
31.7%
27.9%
212.7
36.8%
13.1%
251.0
10
39.6%
27.5%
215.5
41.1%
14.1%
249.9
method obtains poor disentanglement when the group size is
small. At the same time when adversarial training is applied,
the method can separate the content and style attributes well.
Figure 1 shows an example where MLVAE failed to use
only c to represent the content, while MLVAE-AD formed a
content distribution in which the 10 classes are well separated.
Additional experiments on the MNIST dataset can be found
in the supplementary material.
As it was mentioned previously, one might expect that the
original MLVAE method could obtain better disentanglement
with increased regularization weight on the style posterior,
as it would force the model to use the content vector. This
would be a simple alternative to our adversarial approach.
On the other hand, increased regularization decreases the
mutual information between the latents and the data, thus it
suppresses not only the content but also the style information
in s. To show this, we assigned a weight β to the second term

Fixed Content
Fixed Style
Figure 3: Latent traversals between encodings of test images
at the upper-left and bottom-right. These results are from the
experiment with K = 2.
of the MLVAE objective:
Eqφ(c,s|x)
K
X
i=1
log pθ(xi|c, si)
−β
K
X
i=1
KL(qφ(si|xi)|p(si)) −KL(qφ(c|x)|p(c)). (11)
Results for different values of β can be found in Table 2. The
table shows classiﬁcation accuracies and average reconstruc-
tion errors measured on the MNIST test set. Comparing these
results to the ﬁrst row of Table 1, it can be seen that although
increased regularization results in better disentanglement, it
also weakens the overall capacity of the model (higher recon-
struction errors) while the content representations are less
effective compared to those of the proposed method.
In case of the Chairs dataset, the intra-class variability is re-
stricted to the view (rotation) of the objects and this low style
variability can be efﬁciently represented with a low dimen-
sional style variable, e.g., ds = 2 (Hosoya 2019). Therefore,
we tested the performance of our adversarial approach for a
case when the style variable is strongly over-parameterized
(ds = 32). Experimental results presented in Table 3 and Fig-
ure 2(a) show that the proposed method efﬁciently eliminates
content related information from s.
Separating the facial identity from other factors like fa-
cial expression, pose or illumination is a more challenging
task. Quantitative results in Table 4 shows that adversarial
disentanglement improves the results of the original MLVAE
method while Figure 2(b) and Figure 3 demonstrate that the
proposed method was able to separate the most important
attributes corresponding to facial identity. Additional qualita-
tive experiments can be found in the supplementary material.
4.2
Comparisons
To learn representations that are invariant to speciﬁc factors,
an autoencoder based approach was recently proposed by
Jaiswal et al. (2018). This method is similar to the current
work as it is unsupervised on the considered nuisance factors
Table 5: Classiﬁcation results (C(c)) and comparison on
MNIST-ROT. For the MLVAE and MLVAE-AD methods,
means and standard deviations over 10 runs are presented.
Jaiswal et al.
MLVAE
MLVAE-AD
Θ
97.7%
52.2% (± 3.8)
95.1% (± 0.2)
±55◦
85.6%
41.9% (± 3.4)
85.7% (± 0.6)
±65◦
69.6%
29.3% (± 3.2)
71.0% (± 0.9)
and applies adversarial training to induce invariance, but dif-
fers in that it requires supervision on the target variables and
in its non-probabilistic nature. We considered their experi-
ment on a rotated version of MNIST (MNIST-ROT), using the
same single hidden layer network architectures, except that
our encoder outputs latent variances as well. Both the method
and the classiﬁer were trained on Θ ∈{0◦, ±22.5◦, ±45◦}
with dc = 10, ds = 20, K = 2 and tested with rotations Θ,
±55◦, and ±65◦. The results and comparison to (Jaiswal et
al. 2018) can be found in Table 5.
As a further experiment, we considered (Kingma et
al. 2014). Although this method was proposed for semi-
supervised learning, it can also be used in a supervised setting.
For the MNIST dataset with all available training labels a
test-set accuracy of 99.04% was reported. For comparison
we employed the same two-hidden MLPs and set dc = 10
and ds = 50. Averaged over 10 runs, using our method we
achieved a classiﬁcation accuracy of 97.86% (±0.13), while
with the simpliﬁed content accumulation strategy of (Hosoya
2019) using our method we obtained 98.09% (±0.08).
These results indicate that our adversarial method renders
grouped observations based learning competitive to super-
vised methods that learn from explicit target labels.
5
Conclusion
This paper proposed an adversarial disentanglement approach
to improve the results of grouped observations based meth-
ods. To eliminate content related information in the style
variable, the algorithm minimizes the predictability of the
style representation of a given data sample from other mem-
bers within the same group. This idea was formulated as the
minimization of an appropriately constructed mutual informa-
tion term. We proposed to estimate this mutual information
using a parametric neural estimator and train the encoder
in an adversarial manner. Experiments and comparisons on
image datasets demonstrated the efﬁcacy of the proposed
method in separating the content and style related attributes
and its ability to generalize to unseen classes.
