arXiv:1007.0614v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jul 2010
Online Cake Cutting
Toby Walsh
Abstract
We propose an online form of the cake cutting problem. This models situations where
players arrive and depart during the process of dividing a resource. We show that well
known fair division procedures like cut-and-choose and the Dubins-Spanier moving
knife procedure can be adapted to apply to such online problems. We propose some
desirable properties that online cake cutting procedures might possess like online
forms of proportionality and envy-freeness, and identify which properties are in fact
possessed by the diﬀerent online cake procedures.
1
Introduction
Congratulations. Today is your birthday so you take a cake into the oﬃce to
share with your colleagues. At tea time, people slowly start to arrive. However,
as some people have to leave early, you cannot wait for everyone to arrive before
you start sharing the cake. How do you proceed fairly?
This is an example of what we call an online cake cutting problem. Most previous studies
of cake cutting procedures have assumed that all the players are available at the time of
the division. Here, players arrive and depart (either with their cake or perhaps after they
have eaten their cake) as the cake is being divided. Such online problems occur in the real
world as in our birthday example, but also on the internet where agents are often connecting
asynchronously.
Online cake cutting poses some new challenges. On the one hand, the online aspect of
such problems makes fair division more diﬃcult than in the oﬄine case. How can we ensure
that a player does not envy another player when we may have to distribute cake to the
second player before the ﬁrst player is present (and we can hope to determine information
about their valuation function)? On the other hand, the online aspect of such problems may
make fair division easier than in the oﬄine case. If players don’t see cake that has already
been distributed before they arrive, perhaps they do not envy it?
2
Online cake cutting
As is common in the literature [2], we will often assume that each player is risk averse so
they maximize the minimum value of the cake that they will receive, regardless of what
the other players do. A risk averse player will not choose a strategy that could yield more
value if it also entails the possibility of getting less value. We will also usually assume that
each player is ignorant of the value functions of the other players. We disuss relaxing these
assumptions in the conclusions.
We formulate cake cutting as dividing the unit interval between the diﬀerent players,
where each player has a (typically additive and continuous) valuation function on the in-
tervals that they are allocated. We do not suppose that players assigns the same value
to the whole cake. Although we can normalize the valuation functions, we shall see that
is not necessary as all the cake cutting procedures are scale invariant. Depending on the
application, we may demand that players receive a continuous slice of cake or some union
of slices.
1

In an online cake cutting problem, the players arrive in some given order. Players are
allocated their cake and then depart. The order in which players depart can be ﬁxed or
can be change according to how they value the cake. For example, the player present who
most values a cut slice of cake might be the next to depart. Alternatively, the player to
depart might always be the player who arrived the longest time ago. We will assume that
at least one player departs before the last player arrives (otherwise we can formulate this
as an oﬄine cake cutting procedure). To prevent trivial allocations, we also assume that
at least one player receives some cake. However, we do not assume that all players receive
cake or that all the cake is allocated. Formally an online cake cutting problem is deﬁned
by a procedure which given the valuation functions of the players who are present in the
room and the number of players who will take part in total either allocates some cake to
one of the present players (who then departs) or indicates that we wait until the next player
arrives. This can model both a ﬁxed arrival and departure order, as well as one in which
the order depends on the valuation functions.
An important dimension of online cake cutting is what is known and by whom about
the total number of players. For example, the total number of players might be known
by all players.
On the other hand, the players might only know a bound on the total
number of players (e.g. you’ve invited 20 work colleagues to share your birthday cake but
not all of them might turn up). However, there are several other possibilities (e.g. certain
players might have complete certainty about n whilst others have complete uncertainty).
In addition, an interesting generalization is when cake is being allocated before the total
number of players is ﬁxed.
3
Desirable properties
What properties do we want from an online cake cutting procedure? The literature on cake
cutting studies various notions of fainerness like proportionality and envy freeness, as well as
various forms of strategy proofness. The generalization of cake cutting to an online setting
gives rise to some natural extensions of these notions.
3.1
Proportionality
A cake cutting procedure is proportional iﬀeach of the n players assigns at least 1
n of the
total value to their piece(s). Unfortunately, as we shall show, online cake cutting procedures
cannot always be proportional. Suppose you only like icing. The problem is that you may
not be able to prevent all the cake that is iced being distributed before you enter the room.
We therefore consider weaker forms of proporitionality that are achievable. One more limited
form of proportionality is that any player receives a fair proportion of the cake that remains
when they arrive. A cake cutting procedure is forward proportional iﬀeach player assigns
at least
r
n−k of the total value of the cake to their pieces where r is the fraction of the total
value assigned by the player to the (remaining) cake when they arrive and k is the number
of players who have already left at this point.
3.2
Envy freeness
A stronger notion of fairness is envy freeness. A cake cutting procedure is envy free iﬀ
no player values another player’s pieces more than their own.
Note that envy freeness
implies proportionality but not vice versa. With online cake cutting, envy freeness is also
impossible to achieve in general. We therefore consider weaker forms of envy freeness that
are achievable. A cake cutting procedure is forward envy free iﬀno player values the pieces
of cake allocated to other players after their arrival more than their own.
Players can,
2

however, value the cake allocated to players who have already departed more than our own
cake. This models situations where, for instance, we do not envy cake we don’t see being
allocated, or players eat their cake before departing and we do not envy cake that has already
been eaten. Note that forward envy freeness implies forward proportionality but not vice
versa. Similarly, envy freeness implies forward envy freeness but not vice versa. An even
weaker form of envy freeness is when a player does not envy cake that is allocated to other
players whilst they are in the room. A cake cutting procedure is immediately envy free iﬀ
no player values the pieces of cake allocated to another player after their arrival and before
their departure more than their own. Note that forward envy freeness implies immediate
envy freeness but not vice versa.
3.3
Equitability
Another fairness property is equitability. A cake cutting procedure is equitable iﬀall players
assign the same value to the pieces of cake to which they are allocated (and so no player
envies anothers valuation). For 3 or more player, equitability and envy freeness can be
incompatible [2]. Equitability is a diﬃcult property to achieve, even more so in our online
setting.
Unlike proportionality or envy freeness, there seems little merit in considering
weaker forms of equitability. Either all players assign the same value to their allocated cake
or they do not. There is no advantage to ignoring the value of the cake allocated to players
who have already departed.
3.4
Eﬃciency
Another important notion is eﬃciency. Eﬃciency is also called Pareto optimality. A cake
cutting procedure is Pareto optimal iﬀthere is no other allocation to the one returned
that is more valuable for one player and at least as valuable for the others.
Note that
Pareto optimality does not in itself ensure fairness since allocating all the cake to one player
is Pareto optimal. A cake cutting procedure is weakly Pareto optimal iﬀthere is no other
allocation to the one returned that is more valuable for all players. A cake cutting procedure
that is Pareto optimal is weakly Pareto optimal but not vice versa.
3.5
Strategy proofness
Another consideration is whether players have an incentive to act truthfully. A cake cutting
procedure is weakly truthful iﬀa player will do at least as well by telling the truth whatever
valuations are held by the other players [1]. A stronger notion (often called strategy proof-
ness in social choice) is that players must not be able to proﬁt even when they know how
others value the cake. As in [3], we say that a cake cutting procedure is truthful iﬀthere
are no valuations where a player will do better by lying.
4
Other properties
We consider some other properties of (online) cake cutting procedures.
4.1
Surjectivity
This property has been studied in social choice but appears to have received less attention
in fair division. It indicates whether the cake can be divided in every possible way. A cake
cutting procedure is surjective iﬀthere are valuation functions for the players such that
every possible partition of the cake into n pieces is possible. Note that this deﬁnition only
3

considers allocations where each player receives one continuous slice of cake. However, the
deﬁnition of surjectivity could be easily extended to allocations where players can receive
multiple slices. Our deﬁnition of surjectivity also ignores which player receives a particular
slice. If an online cake cutting procedure is surjective, then there is an arrival ordering of
the players and valuation functions such that any given player can receive a particular slice.
4.2
Scale invariance
Players may have diﬀerent scales for their valuation functions. Scale invariance indicates
that this is unimportant. A cake cutting procedure is scale invariant iﬀthe allocation of
cake is unchanged when a player’s valuation is uniformly multiplied by a constant factor. It
turns out that scale invariance is not diﬃcult to achieve. Indeed, all the online cake cutting
procedures we shall consider here are scale invariant.
4.3
Sequentiality
In some situations we may want cake to be cut from one end. This may be the case, for
instance, when the cake represents time on a shared device. An onlike cake cutting procedure
is sequential iﬀthe slice given to any player is to the left of any slice given to a player who
is later to depart.
4.4
Order monotonicity
A player’s allocation of cake typically depends on their arrival order. We say that a cake
cutting procedure is order monotonic iﬀa player’s valuation of their cake does not decrease
when they are moved earlier in the arrival ordering (and all other players have the same
arrival ordering). Note that as the moved player can receive cake of greater value, players
who depart after them may now receive cake with less value. A positive interpretation of
order monotonicity is that players are encouraged to participate as early as possible. On
the other hand, players who have to arrive late may receive less value.
5
General results
The fact that some players may depart before others arrive place some fundamental limita-
tions on the fairness of online cake cutting procedures.
Theorem 1. No online cake cutting procedure is proportional, envy free or equitable.
Proof:
Suppose the procedure is proportional. Then every player is allocated some cake.
As the cake cutting procedure is online, at least one player departs before the ﬁnal player
arrives. Since the valuation function of the ﬁnal player to arrive is not known when the
ﬁrst player departs, the cake allocated to the ﬁrst player to depart cannot depend on the
valuation function of the ﬁnal player to arrive. Similarly, the valuation function of the ﬁnal
player to arrive cannot change who is the ﬁrst player to depart. Consider the situation in
which the ﬁnal player to arrive has a valuation function that only values the cake allocated
to the ﬁrst player to depart. Whatever cake is allocated to the ﬁnal player to arrive will be
of no value to them. Hence the cake cutting procedure cannot be proportional.
Suppose the procedure is envy free. We consider the case where all players have valu-
ation functions that assign some value to every slice. Every player is allocated some cake
otherwise they will envy the players who are allocated cake (and by assumption a cake
cutting procedure must allocate cake to at least one player). As before, the cake allocated
to the ﬁrst player to depart cannot depend on the valuation function of the ﬁnal player to
4

arrive. We now modify the valuation function of the last player to arrive so that the value
of the cake remaining when the ﬁrst player departs is
1
n2 of the value it was before. Even if
we allocate all the remaining cake to the last player to arrive, the value of this cake cannot
now equal the value they assign to the cake allocated to the ﬁrst player to depart. Hence
the last player to arrive will envy the ﬁrst player to depart. By a similar argument, the
procedure cannot be equitable. ♥
Online cake cutting procedures can, however, possess many of the other properties.
Theorem 2. Online cake cutting procedures can be forward proportional, forward envy free,
weakly Pareto optimal, truthful, scale invariant, sequential and order monotonic.
Proof: Consider the online cake cutting procedure which allocates all the cake to the ﬁrst
player to arrive. ♥
Unfortunately, allocating all the cake to one player is not very fair to the other players.
We therefore consider some speciﬁc online cake cutting procedures which divide the cake
more equitably. It remains an important open problem to identify natural axioms that these
procedures satisfy which are not satisﬁed by the trivial allocation of all cake to one player.
6
Online Cut-and-Choose
The cut-and-choose procedure for two players dates back to antiquity. It appears nearly
three thousand years ago in Hesiod’s poem Theogeny where Prometheus divides a cow and
Zeus selects the part he prefers. Cut-and-choose is also enshrined in the United Nation’s 1982
Convention of the Law of the Sea where it is put forward to divide the seabed for mining.
In cut-and-choose, one player cuts the cake and the other takes the “half” that they most
prefer.
Cut-and-choose is proportional, envy free, Pareto optimal, weakly truthful, and
surjective. However, it is not equitable, nor it is truthful.
We can use cut-and-choose as the basis of an online cake cutting procedure. The ﬁrst
player to arrive cuts the cake and waits for the next player to arrive. Either the next player
to arrive chooses this piece and departs, or the next player to arrive declines this piece and
the waiting player takes this piece and departs. If more players are to arrive, the remaining
player cuts the cake and we repeat the process. Otherwise, the remaining player is the last
player to be allocated cake and departs with whatever is left. We assume that all players
know how many players will arrive.
Running Example:. Suppose there are three players, the ﬁrst player values only [ 1
2, 1],
the second player values only [ 1
3, 1], and the third player values only [0, 3
4]. We suppose
that they uniformly value slices within these intervals. If we operate the online version of
cut-and-choose, the ﬁrst player will arrive and cut oﬀthe slice [0, 2
3] as they assign this slice
1
3 the total value of the cake. The second player then arrives. As they assign this slice with
1
2 the total value of the cake and they are only expecting 1
3 of the total, the second player
is happy to take this slice and depart. The ﬁrst player then cuts oﬀthe slice [ 2
3, 5
6] as they
assign this 1
3 of the total value of the cake (and 1
2 of the value remaining after the second
player departed with their slice). The third player then arrives. As they assign the slice [ 2
3, 5
6]
with all of the total value of the remaining cake and they are only expecting 1
2 of whatever
remains, the third player is happy to take this slice and depart. The ﬁrst player now takes
what remains, the slice [ 5
6, 1]. It can be claimed that everyone is happy as the ﬁrst player
received a “fair” proportion of the cake, whilst the other two players received slices that were
of even greater proportional value to them.
This online version of the cut-and-choose procedure has many (but not all) of the desir-
able properties described earlier.
5

Theorem 3. The online cut-and-choose procedure is forward proportional, immediately envy
free, weakly truthful, surjective, scale invariant and sequential. However, it is not propor-
tional, (forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly) Pareto optimal, truthful or order monotonic.
Proof:
Consider the player cutting the cake. As they are risk averse, and as there is
a chance that they will have to take the slice of cake that they cut, they will cut a slice
that is at least 1
k of the total remaining value where k is the number of players still to be
allocated cake. Similarly they will not cut a slice that is more than 1
k of the total remaining
value for fear that the next player to arrive will take it, leaving behind cake that if it is
divided proportionally gives them a slice of small value. Hence, the procedure is forward
proportional and weakly truthful.
It is also immediately envy free since each slice that
the cutting player sees being allocated has the same value. To demonstrate surjectivity,
consider the partition that allocates the ith player with the slice [ai, ai+1] where a1 = 0 and
an+1 = 1. We construct a valuation for the ith player (i < n −1) that assigns a value 0
to [0, ai], a value 1 to [ai, ai+1], a value 0 to [ai+1, ai+2], a value n −i to [ai+2, 1]. For the
n −1th player, we construct a valuation function that assigns a value 0 to [0, an−1], and
values of 1 to both [an−1, an] and [an, 1]. Finally, we construct a valuation function for the
nth player that assigns a value 0 to [0, an], and a value of 1 to [an, 1]. With these valuation
functions, the ith player gets the slice [ai, ai+1]. Finally, it is easy to see that the procedure
is scale invariant and sequential.
To show that this procedure is not proportional, (forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly)
Pareto optimal truthful or order monotonic consider 4 players and a cake in which the ﬁrst
player places a value of 3 units on [0, 1
4], 1 unit on [ 1
4, 3
4] and 8 units on [ 3
4, 1], the second
player places a value of 0 units on [0, 1
4], 4 units on [ 1
4, 1
2], 8 units on [ 1
2, 5
8], and 0 units on
[ 5
8, 1], the third player places a value of 6 units on [0, 1
4] 0 units on [ 1
4, 1
2], 1 unit on [ 1
2, 5
8],
2 units on [ 5
8, 3
4], and 3 units on [ 3
4, 1], and the fourth player places a value of 0 units on
[0, 1
4], 9 units on [ 1
4, 1
2], 1 unit on [ 1
2, 3
4], and 2 units on [ 3
4, 1].
If we apply the online cut-and-choose procedure, the ﬁrst player will cut oﬀand keep
the slice [0, 1
4], the second player will cut oﬀand keep [ 1
4, 1
2], The third player will now cut
the cake into two pieces: [ 1
2, 3
4] and [ 3
4, 1]. The fourth player will take the slice [ 3
4, 1], leaving
the third player with the slice [ 1
2, 3
4]
The procedure is not proportional as the fourth player only receives 1
6 of the total value
of the cake, not (forward) envy free as the ﬁrst player envies the fourth player, and not
equitable as players receive cake of diﬀerent value. The procedure is not (weakly) Pareto
optimal as allocating the ﬁrst player with [ 3
4, 1], the second player with [ 1
2, 3
4], the third
player with [0, 1
4], and the fourth player with [ 1
4, 1
2] gives all players a slice of greater value.
The proceure is not truthful as the second player can get a larger and more valuable
slice by misrepresenting their preferences and cutting the cake into the slice [ 1
4, 5
8]. Finally,
the procedure is not order monotonic as the value of the cake allocated to the fourth player
decreases from 2 units to 3
2 units when they arrive before the third player. ♥
7
Online moving knife
Another class of procedure for cutting cakes uses one or more moving knives. For example,
in the Dubins-Spanier procedure for n players [6], a knife is moved across the cake from left
to right. When a player shouts “stop”, the cake is cut and this player takes the piece to the
left of the knife. The procedure then continues with the remaining n −1 players until just
one player is left (who takes whatever remains). This procedure is proportional but is not
envy-free. However, only the ﬁrst n−2 players to be allocated slices of cake can be envious.
We can use the Dubins-Spanier procedure as the basis of an online moving knife proce-
dure. The ﬁrst k players (k ≥2) to arrive perform one round of a moving knife procedure
6

to select a slice of the cake. Whoever chooses this slice, departs. At this point, if all players
have arrived, we continue the moving knife procedure with k −1 players. Alternatively the
next player arrives and we start again a moving knife procedure with k players. As before,
we assume that all players know how many players will arrive.
Running Example:. Consider again the example in which there are three players, the ﬁrst
player values only [ 1
2, 1], the second player values only [ 1
3, 1], and the third player values only
[0, 3
4]. If we operate the online version of the moving knife procedure, the ﬁrst two players
will arrive and perform one round of the moving knife procedure. The second player will be
the ﬁrst to call “cut” and will depart with the slice [0, 5
9] (as this has 1
3 of the total value
of the cake for them). The third player will now arrive and perform a round of the moving
knife procedure with the ﬁrst player using the remaining cake, [ 5
9, 1]. The third player will
be the ﬁrst to call “cut” and will depart with the slice [ 5
9, 47
72] (as this has 1
2 the total value
of the remaining value for them). The ﬁrst player will then depart with what remains, the
slice [ 47
72]. It can be claimed that everyone is happy as the second and third players received
a “fair”’ proportion of the cake that was left when they ﬁrst arrived, whilst the ﬁrst player
received an even greater proportional value.
This online version of the moving knife procedure has the same desirable properties as
the online version of the cut-and-choose procedure.
Theorem 4. The online moving knife procedure is forward proportional, immediately envy
free, weakly truthful, surjective, scale invariant and sequential. However, it is not propor-
tional, (forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly) Pareto optimal, truthful or order monotonic.
Proof: Suppose j players (j > 1) have still to be allocated cake. Consider any player who
has arrived. They will call “cut” as soon as the knife reaches 1
j of the value of the cake left
for fear that they will will receive cake of less value at a later stage. Hence, the procedure
is weakly truthful and forward proportional. The procedure is also immediately envy free
as they will assign less value to any slice that is allocated after their arrival and before their
departure. To demonstrate surjectivity, consider the partition that allocates the ith player
with the slice [ai, ai+1] where a1 = 0 and an+1 = 1. We construct a valuation for the ith
player (i < n) that assigns a value 0 to [0, ai], a value 1 to [ai, ai+1], a value n−i to [ai+1, 1].
Finally, we construct a valuation function for the nth player that assigns a value 0 to [0, an],
and a value of 1 to [an, 1]. With these valuation functions, the ith player gets the slice
[ai, ai+1]. Finally, it is easy to see that the procedure is scale invariant and sequential.
To show that this procedure is not proportional, (forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly)
Pareto optimal truthful consider again the example with 4 players used in the last proof.
We suppose that k = 2 (i.e. at any one time, two players are watching the knife). The
ﬁrst player calls “cut” and departs with the slice [0, 1
4]. The second player calls “cut” and
departs with the slice [ 1
4, 1
2]. Finally, the third player calls “cut” and departs with the slice
[ 1
2, 2
4], leaving the fourth player with the slice [ 3
4, 1].
The procedure is not proportional as the fourth player only receives 1
6 of the total value
of the cake, not (forward) envy free as the ﬁrst player envies the fourth player, and not
equitable as players receive cake of diﬀerent value. The procedure is not (weakly) Pareto
optimal as allocating the ﬁrst player with [ 3
4, 1], the second player with [ 1
2, 3
4], the third
player with [0, 1
4] and the fourth player with [ 1
4, 1
2] gives all players a slice of greater value.
The proceure is not truthful as the second player can get a larger and more valuable
slice by misrepresenting their preferences and not calling “cut” until the knife is about to
reach 5
8th of the way along the cake.
Finally, to show that the procedure is not order monotonic consider 3 players and a cake
in which the ﬁrst player places a value of 2 units on each of [0, 1
3], [ 1
3, 2
3], and [ 2
3, 1], the
second player places a value of 0 units on [0, 1
3], 3 units on each of [ 1
3, 2
3] and [ 2
3, 1], and the
7

third player places a value of 2 units on [0, 1
6], 0 units on each of [ 1
6, 1
3] and [ 1
3, 2
3], and 4 units
on [ 2
3, 1]. As before, we suppose that k = 2 (i.e. at any one time, two players are watching
the knife). The ﬁrst player calls “cut” and departs with the slice [0, 1
3]. The second player
calls “cut” and departs with the slice [ 1
3, 2
3], leaving the third player with the slice [ 2
3, 1].
On the other hand, if the third player arrives ahead of the second player then the value of
the cake allocated to them drops from 4 units to 2 units. Hence the procedure is not order
monotonic. ♥
8
Online Mark-and-Choose
A possible drawback of both of the online cake cutting procedures proposed so far is that
the ﬁrst player to arrive can be the last player to depart. What if we want a procedure in
which players can depart soon after they arrive? The next procedure has such a property.
Players will depart as soon as the next player arrives (except for the last player to arrive
who takes whatever cake remains). However, the new procedure is no longer sequential. It
may not allocated cake from one end. In addition, the new procedure does not necessarily
allocate continuous slices of cake.
In the online mark-and-choose procedure, the ﬁrst player to arrive marks the cake into
n pieces. The second player to arrive selects one piece to give to the ﬁrst player who then
departs. The second player then marks the remaining cake into n −1 pieces and waits for
the third player to arrive. The procedure repeats in this way until the last player arrives.
The last player to arrive selects which of the two halves marked by the penultimate player
should be allocated to the penultimate player. The last player then takes whatever remains.
Running Example:. Consider again the example in which there are three players, the ﬁrst
player values only [ 1
2, 1], the second player values only [ 1
3, 1], and the third player values only
[0, 3
4]. If we operate the online version of the mark-and-choose procedure, the ﬁrst player will
arrive and mark the cake into 3 equally valued pieces: [0, 2
3], [ 2
3, 5
6], and [ 5
6, 1], The second
player then arrives and selects the least valuable piece for the ﬁrst player to take. In fact,
both [ 2
3, 5
6] and [ 5
6, 1] are each worth 1
4 of the total value of the cake to the second player.
They will therefore choose between them arbitrarily. Suppose the second player decides to
give the slice [ 2
3, 5
6] to the ﬁrst player. Note that the ﬁrst player assigns this slice with 1
3
of the total value of the cake. This leaves behind two sections of cake: [0, 2
3] and [ 5
6, 1].
The second player then marks what remains into two equally valuable pieces: the ﬁrst is the
interval [0, 7
12] and the second contains the two intervals [ 7
12, 2
3] and [ 5
6, 1]. The third player
then arrives and selects the least valuable piece for the second player to take. The ﬁrst piece
is worth
7
12 of the total value of the cake to the third player. As this is over half the total
value, the other piece must be worth less. In fact, the second piece is worth 1
4 of the total
value. The third player therefore gives the second piece to the second player. This leaves the
third player with the remaining slice [0, 7
12]. It can again be claimed that everyone is happy
as the ﬁrst players received a “fair”’ proportion of the cake that was left when they arrived,
whilst both the second and third player received an even greater proportional value.
This procedure again has the same desirable properties as the online version of the
cut-and-choose and moving knife procedures.
Theorem 5. The online mark-and-choose procedure is forward proportional, immediately
envy free, weakly truthful, surjective, and scale invariant. However, it is not proportional,
(forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly) Pareto optimal, truthful, order monotonic or sequen-
tial.
Proof:
Any player marking the cake will divide it into slices of equal value (for fear that
they will be allocated one of the less valuable slices). Similarly, a player selecting a slice for
8

another player will select the slice of least value to them (to maximize the value that they
will receive next). Hence, the procedure is weakly truthful and forward proportional. The
procedure is also immediately envy free as they will assign less value to the slice that they
select for the departing player than the value of the slices that they mark. To demonstrate
surjectivity, consider the partition that allocates the ith player with the slice [ai, ai+1] where
a1 = 0 and an+1 = 1. We construct a valuation for the ith player (i < n) that assigns a
value 0 to [0, ai], a value 1 to [ai, ai+1], a value n −i to [ai+1, 1]. Finally, we construct a
valuation function for the nth player that assigns a value 0 to [0, an], and a value of 1 to
[an, 1]. With these valuation functions, the ith player gets the slice [ai, ai+1]. Finally, it is
easy to see that the procedure is scale invariant.
To show that this procedure is not proportional, (forward) envy free, equitable, (weakly)
Pareto optimal or truthful consider again the example with 4 players used in the last two
proofs. The ﬁrst player marks and is assigned the slice [0, 1
4] by the second player. The
second player then marks and is assigned the slice [ 1
4, 1
2]. The third player then marks and
is assigned the slice [ 1
2, 3
4], leaving the fourth player with the slice [ 3
4, 1].
The procedure is again not proportional as the fourth player only receives 1
6 of the total
value of the cake, not (forward) envy free as the ﬁrst player envies the fourth player, and not
equitable as players receive cake of diﬀerent value. The procedure is not (weakly) Pareto
optimal as allocating the ﬁrst player with [ 3
4, 1], the second player with [ 1
2, 3
4], the third
player with [0, 1
4], and the fourth player with [ 1
4, 1
2] gives all players a slice of greater value.
The proceure is not truthful as the second player can get a larger and more valuable
slice by misrepresenting their preferences and marking the cake into the slices [ 1
4, 5
8], [ 5
8, 3
4],
and [ 3
4, 1]. In this situation, the third player will allocate the second player with the slice
[ 1
4, 5
8] which is of greater value to the second player. It is also easy to see that the procedure
is not sequential.
Finally, to show that the procedure is not order monotonic consider 3 players and a cake
in which the ﬁrst player places a value of 4 units on each of [0, 1
3], [ 1
3, 2
3] and [ 2
3, 1], the second
player places a value of 0 units on [0, 1
3], 6 units on [ 1
3, 2
3], and 3 units on each of [ 2
3, 5
6], and
[ 5
6, 1], and the third player places a value of 2 unit on [0, 1
6], 0 units on each of [ 1
6, 1
3] and
[ 1
3, 2
3], and 5 units on each of [ 2
3, 5
6] and [ 5
6, 1]. The ﬁrst player marks and is allocated the
slice [0, 1
3]. The second player marks and is allocated the slice [ 1
3, 2
3], leaving the third player
with the slice [ 2
3, 1]. On the other hand, suppose the third player arrives ahead of the second
player. In this case, the third player marks the cake into two slice, [ 1
3, 5
6] and [ 5
6, 1]. The
second player allocates the third player the slice [ 5
6, 1]. Hence, the value of cake allocated
to the third player drops from 10 units to 5 units when they go second in the arrival order.
Hence the procedure is not order monotonic. ♥
9
Bounded number of players
One variation of online cake cutting is when the number of players is not known but all
players have the (same) upper bound, nmax on the number of persons to be allocated cake.
We consider three cases: players know their arrival position and when the last player arrives;
players do not know their arrival position but do know when the last player arrives; players
do not know when the last player arrives.
9.1
Known arrival order and last player
In this case, each player knows how many players have arrived before them, and players
know when no more players are to arrive. In this case, we can still operate the online cut-
and-choose procedure. Given the risk averse nature of the players, each player will cut oﬀa
9

slice of cake of value
1
nmax−k of the total where k is the number of players who have already
been allocated cake.
9.2
Unknown arrival order but known last player
In this case, players do not know how many players have arrived before them, but do
know when no more players are to arrive. We can again operate the online cut-and-choose
procedure. The ﬁrst player will cut oﬀa slice of cake of value
1
nmax−k of the total where k
is the number of players already allocated cake (e.g. in the ﬁrst round, the ﬁrst player cuts
oﬀa slice of value
1
nmax of the total, if this is accepted by the second player, they then cut
oﬀa slice of value
1
nmax−1 of the total, and so on).
We can suppose that the second player to arrive will look at the cake and deduce they
are the second player to arrive (since they will assign the total value of the cake to the two
pieces). If they are not the last player to arrive, they will accept the oﬀered slice if it is
greater than or equal to
1
nmax of the total. If they are the last player to arrive, they will
accept the oﬀered slice if it is greater than or equal to 1
2 of the total. Otherwise, if there
are no more players are to arrive, they will take whatever cakes remain. If there are more
players to arrive, they will cut oﬀa new slice of value
1
nmax−j of the total where j is the
number of players already allocated cake (e.g. the second player ﬁrst cuts oﬀa slice of value
1
nmax−1 of the total, if this is accepted by the next player to arrive, the second player then
cuts oﬀa slice of value
1
nmax−2 of the total, and so on).
We can suppose that the third (or any later) player to arrive can only deduce that they
are not the ﬁrst or second player to arrive. If they are not the last player to arrive, they will
accept the oﬀered slice if it is greater than or equal to
1
nmax−1 of the total. If they are the
last player to arrive, they will accept the oﬀered slice if it is greater than or equal to 1
2 of the
total. Otherwise, if there are no more players are to arrive, they will take whatever cakes
remain. If there are more players to arrive, they will cut oﬀa new slice of value
1
nmax−j of
the total where j is the number of players already allocated cake (e.g. they ﬁrst cut oﬀa
slice of value
1
nmax−2 of the total, if this is accepted by the next player to arrive, they then
cut oﬀa slice of value
1
nmax−3 of the total, and so on).
9.3
Unknown last player
In the third case, players do know when no more players are to arrive. We now have a
potential deadlock problem in operating the online cut-and-choose procedure.
We need
some mechanism to ensure that the last player to arrive is allocated cake. One option is to
introduce a clock. If a player waits longer than a certain time, then they can take whatever
cake remains.
With this modiﬁcation, we can again operate the online cut-and-choose
procedure.
9.4
Moving knife procedures
We can also use the online moving knife procedure when there is only a bound on the number
of players to be allocated cake. The results are very similar to the online cut-and-choose
procedure, and depend on whether players know when the last player arrives and on whether
players know how many players have been allocated cake before them.
10

10
Related work
There is an extensive literature on fair division and cake cutting procedures. See, for in-
stance, [2] for an introduction. There has, however, been considerably less work on fair
division problems similar to those considered here.
Thomson considers a generalization of fair division problems where the number of players
may increase [7]. He explores from an axiomatic perspective whether it is possible to have
a procedure in which players’ allocations are monotonic (i.e. their values do not increase as
the number of players increase) combined with other common properties like weak Pareto
optimality.
Cloutier et al. consider a diﬀerent generalization of the cake cutting problem in which the
number of players is ﬁxed but there are multiple cakes [5]. This can model situations where,
for example, players wish to choose shifts across multiple days. Note that this problem can
be reduced to multiple single cake cutting problems unless the players’ valuations across
cakes are linked (e.g. you prefer the same shift each day compared to diﬀerent shifts).
A number of authors have studied distributed mechanisms for fair division (see, for
example, [4]).
In such mechanisms, players typically agree locally on deals to exchange
some of the goods in their possession. The usual goal is to identify conditions under which
the system converges to a fair or envy free allocation.
11
Conclusions
We have proposed an online form of the cake cutting problem. This permits us to explore
the concept of fair division when players arrive and depart during the process of dividing
a resource. It can be used to model situations, such as on the internet, when we need to
divide resources asynchronously. There are many possible future directions for this work.
One extension would be to indivisible goods. Another extension would be to undesirable
goods (like chores) where we want as little of them as possible.
In addition, it would
be interesting to consider variants of the online cake cutting problem where players have
information about the valuation functions of the other players.
