Probabilistic Extension to the Concurrent
Constraint Factor Oracle Model for Music
Improvisation
Mauricio Toro
Universidad EAFIT
Abstract
We can program a Real-Time (RT) music improvisation system in C++ without a formal
semantic  or we can  model it  with process  calculi  such as  the Non-deterministic Timed
Concurrent Constraint (ntcc) calculus. “A Concurrent Constraints Factor Oracle (FO) model for
Music Improvisation” (Ccfomi) is an improvisation model specified on ntcc. Since Ccfomi
improvises non-deterministically, there is no control on choices and therefore little control over
the sequence variation during the improvisation. To avoid this, we extended Ccfomi using the
Probabilistic  Non-deterministic  Timed  Concurrent  Constraint  calculus.  Our  extension  to
Ccfomi does not change the time and space complexity of building the FO, thus making our
extension compatible with RT. However, there was not a ntcc interpreter capable of RT to
execute Ccfomi. We developed Ntccrt –a RT capable interpreter for ntcc– and we executed
Ccfomi on Ntccrt. In the future, we plan to extend Ntccrt to execute our extension to Ccfomi. 
Keywords:  Factor  oracle,  concurrent  constraints  programming,  ccp,  machine  learning,
machine improvisation, Ccfomi, Gecode, ntcc, pntcc, real-time. 
1  Introduction
There are two different approaches to develop multimedia interaction systems (e.g.,
machine improvisation). 
One may think that in order to implement real-time capable systems, those
systems should be written directly in C++ for efficiency. In contrast, one may argue
that multimedia interaction systems –inherently concurrent– should not be written
directly in C or C++ because there is not a formalism to reason about concurrency in
C++. We argue that those systems should be modeled using a process calculus with
formal semantics and verification procedures, and execute those models on a real-
time capable interpreter. That will be our definition for real-time in the rest of this
document. 
Garavel explains in [13] that models based on process calculi are not widespread
because there are many calculi and many variants for each calculus, being difficult to
choose the most appropriate. In addition, it is difficult to express an explicit notion of
time and real-time requirements in process calculi. Finally, he argues that existing
tools for process calculi are not user-friendly. 
1.1  Motivation
Defending  the  calculi  approach,  Rueda  et  al.  [38],[40]  explain  that  using  the
semantics and logic underlying the Non-deterministic Timed Concurrent Constraint
(ntcc) [24] calculus, it is possible to prove properties of the ntcc models before
executing them and execute the models on a ntcc interpreter. We define soft real-
1

time multimedia interaction means that the system reacts fast enough to interact with
human players without letting them notice delays.
One may disagree with Rueda et al., arguing that although there are several
interpreters for ntcc such as Lman [22] and Rueda’s Interpreter [40], there is not a
generic interpreter to run ntcc models in real-time.
We agree with Rueda et al. about the way to develop those systems, but we also
argue that currently there are no ntcc interpreters capable of real-time. We argue, in
agreement with Rueda et al.’s argument, that models based on  ntcc such as  “A
Concurrent Constraints Factor Oracle model for Music Improvisation” (Ccfomi) [40]
are a good alternative to model multimedia interaction because synchronization is
presented  declaratively  by  means  of  variable  sharing  among  concurrent  agents
reasoning about information contained in a global  store. However, due to non-
deterministic choices, improvisation in Ccfomi can be repetitive (i.e., it produces
loops without control). In addition, since Ccfomi does not change the intensity of the
learned  notes, Ccfomi  may produce  a  sharp difference in the relative loudness
between what a musician plays and what the improviser plays.
Process calculi has been applied to the modeling of interactive music systems [3,
58, 54, 26, 52, 49, 51, 53, 4, 57, 50, 55, 56, 48] and ecological systems [30, 60, 31,
59]. 
Our main objective is extending Ccfomi to model probabilistic choice of musical
sequences. We also want to show that a ntcc model can interact with a human player
in soft real-time using a ntcc interpreter. For that reason, we developed Ntccrt, a
generic real-time interpreter for ntcc.
The  rest  of  this  introduction is  organized  as  follows. First  section, gives  a
definition of music improvisation. Second section, explains machine improvisation.
Third section, gives a brief introduction to ntcc and presents systems modeled with
ntcc.  After  explaining  the  intuitions  about  music  improvisation,  machine
improvisation, and ntcc we explain our solution to extend Ccfomi in Section fourth
section. Fifth section explains the contributions of this thesis work. Finally, sixth
section explains the organization of the following chapters.
1.2  Music improvisation
“Musical improvisation is the spontaneous creative process of making music while it
is being performed. To use a linguistic analogy, improvisation is like speaking or
having a conversation as opposed to reciting a written text. Among jazz musicians
there  is  an  adage,  improvisation  is  composition  speeded  up,  and  vice  versa,
composition is improvisation slowed down.”[23]
Improvisation exists in almost all music generel. However, improvisation is most
frequently associated with melodic improvisation as it is found in jazz. However,
spontaneous real-time variation in performance of tempo and dynamics within a
classical performance may also be considered as improvisation [23]
The reader may see an example of music improvisation in [35], where musician
Alberto Riascos improvised in the Colombian music genre Guabina1 and explained us
how he did it.
1.3  Machine improvisation
Machine improvisation is the simulation of music improvisation by the computer.
This process builds a representation of music, either by explicit coding of rules or
applying  machine  learning  methods.  For  real-time  machine  improvisation  it  is
necessary  to  perform  two  phases  concurrently:  Stylistic  learning and  Stylistic
1 Guabina is a Colombian traditional music very common in the regions of Antioquia,
Santander, Boyacá, Cundinamarca, Tolima, and Huila.

simulation. In addition, to perform both phases concurrently, the system must be able
to interact in real-time with human players [40].
Rueda et al. define Stylistic learning as the process of applying such methods to
musical sequences in order to capture important musical features and organize these
features into a model, and the Stylistic simulation as the process producing musical
sequences stylistically consistent with the learned style [40]. An example of a system
running concurrently both phases is Ccfomi, a system using the Factor Oracle (FO) to
store the information of the learned sequences and the ntcc calculus to synchronize
both phases of the improvisation.
1.4  Introduction to ntcc
The  ntcc calculus is a mathematic formalism used to represent reactive systems
with synchronous, asynchronous and/or non-deterministic behavior. This formalism
and its extensions have been used to model systems such as: musical improvisation
systems [40], [29], [45], an audio processing framework [42], and interactive scores
[2], [45].
Ntcc is not only useful for multimedia semantic interaction, it has also been used
in other fields such as modeling molecular biology [41], analyzing biological systems
[16], and security protocols [20] because these fields also include the study of
complex interactions where we want to observe certain properties showing up and to
model the answer of the system to them. Modeling of molecular biology, security
protocols, and multimedia semantic interaction using process calculi are the base of
the  project  Robust  Theories  for  Emerging  Applications  in  Concurrency  Theory
(REACT2). 
The novelty of this approach is the specification of the synchronization in a
declarative  way,  opposed  to  programming  languages  such  as  C++,  where  the
programmer has to specify multiple steps to guarantee a correct synchronization and
safe access to shared resources. Further explanation about ntcc and how to model
musical processes in ntcc is presented in Chapter 1.
1.5  Our solution
To avoid a repetitive improvisation, we extend Ccfomi with the Probabilistic Non-
deterministic Timed Concurrent Constraint (pntcc) calculus [29] to decrease the
probability of choosing a sequence previously improvised. This idea is based on the
Probabilistic Ccfomi model [29] developed by Pérez and Rueda. That model, chooses
the  improvised  sequences  probabilistically,  based  on  a  probability  distribution.
Unfortunately,  Probabilistic  Ccfomi does  not  give  information  about  how  that
probability distribution can be built nor how it can change through time according to
the user and the computer interaction. Our model is the first pntcc model, as far as
we know, where probability distributions change from a time-unit to another.
For instance, consider that our system can play in a certain moment the pitches
(i.e., the frecuency of the notes) a,b and c with an equal probability. Then it outputs
the sequence “aaba”. After that, it is going to choose another pitch. When choosing
this pitch,  c has a greater probability to be chosen than  b, and  b has a greater
probability to be chosen than a because a was played three times and b once in the
last sequence. Using this probabilistic extension, we avoid multiple cycles in the
improvisation which can happen without control in Ccfomi.
On the other hand, to be coherent with the relative loudness on which the user is
currently playing, we change the intensity of the improvised notes. This idea is based
on interviews with musicians Riascos [35] and Juan Manuel Collazos [7], where they
2 This thesis is partially funded by the REACT project, sponsored by Colciencias.
3

argue that this is a technique they use when improvising and improves the “quality”
of the improvisation, when two or more persons improvise at the same time.
For instance, if the computer plays five notes with intensities (measured from 0 to
127) 54, 65, 30, 58, 91 and the user plays, at the same time, four notes with intensities
10, 21, 32, 5; they are incoherence results because the user is playing low and the
computer is playing loud. For that reason, our system multiplies its intensities by a
factor of 0.29 (the relation of the average of both sequences) changing the intensities
of the computer output to 16, 19, 9, 17, 26. 
1.6  Contributions
Gecol 2. Our first approach to provide an interface for Gecode to Common Lisp was
to extend Gecol to work with Gecode 2. Using Gecol 2 we wrote several prototypes
for  the  ntcc interpreter.  Examples,  sources,  and  binaries  can  be  found  at
http://common-lisp.net/project/gecol/.
Ntccrt. A real-time capable interpreter for  ntcc. Using Ntccrt, we executed
Ccfomi. Examples, sources and binaries can be found at http://ntccrt.sourceforge.net.
An article about Ntccrt is to be published this year. Gelisp. A new graphical constraint
solving library for OpenMusic. We plan to use it in the future for a closer integration
between  Ntccrt and OpenMusic. Examples, sources, and binaries can be found at
http://gelisp.sourceforge.net. An article about Gelisp is to be publish this year. The
original version of Gelisp was developed by Rueda for Common Lisp [39]. Technical
report. A report including all the implementation details of Ntccrt, the graphical
interface for Gelisp, Gecol 2, applications of Ntccrt, and our previous attempts to
develop a real-time ntcc interpreter [48].
1.7  Organization
The structure of this thesis is the following. In Chapter 1, we explain the background
concepts. Chapter 2 focuses on the modeling of Ccfomi to allow probabilistic choice
of musical  sequences. Chapter 3 explains the modifications to  Ccfomi to allow
variation of the intensity of learned notes during the style simulation phase. Chapter 4
describes our model in pntcc. Chapter 5 explains the design and implementation of
Ntccrt, our real-time interpreter for ntcc. Chapter 6 shows some results and tests
made with the interpreter. Finally, in Chapter 7, we present a summary of this thesis,
concluding remarks, and propose some future work.
2  Background
2.1  Concurrent Constraint Programming (CCP)
Concurrent Constraint Programming (CCP [44]) is a model for concurrent systems.
In CCP, a concurrent system is modeled in terms of constraints over the system
variables and in terms of agents interacting with partial information obtained from
those variables. A constraint is a formula representing partial information about the
values of some of the system variables. Programming languages based on the CCP
model, provide a propagator for each user-defined constraint.
Propagators can be seen as operators reducing the set of possible values for some
variables. For instance, in a system with variables  and  taking Musical Instrument
Digital Interface (MIDI) values, the constraint  specifies possible values for  and
(where  is at least one tone higher than ). In MIDI notation, each MIDI pitch unit
represents a semi-tone. 
The CCP model includes a set of constraints and a relation to know when a
constraint can be deduced from others (named entailment relation ). This relation
⊧

gives  a  way  of  deducing  a  constraint  from  the  information  supplied  by  other
constraints. 
“The idea of the  CCP model  is  to accumulate information in a  store. The
information on the  store can increase but it cannot decrease. Concurrent processes
interact with the  store by either adding more information or by asking if some
constraint can be deduced from the current store. If the constraint cannot be deduced,
this process blocks until there is enough information to deduce the constraint” [40].
Consider for instance four agents interacting concurrently (fig. 1). The processes
tell  and tell add new information to the store. The processes ask do P and ask do Q
launch process  P and  Q (P and  Q can be any process) respectively, when their
condition can be entailed from the store. After the execution of the  tell processes,
process ask  do P launches process P, but the process ask  do Q will be suspended
until its condition can be entailed from the store.
 
0.6
0.6
 
Figure 1: Process interaction in CCP
Formally, the  CCP model  is  based  on the  idea  of  a  constraint  system.  “A
constraint system is a structure <D,
,
⊢Var> where D is a (countable) set of primitive
constraints (or tokens), ⊢∈D×D is an inference relation (logical entailment) that
relates tokens to tokens and Var is an infinite set of variables” [44]. A (non primitive)
constraint can be composed out of primitive constraints.
The formal definition of CCP does not specify which types of constraints can be
used. Thus, a constraint system can be adapted to a particular need depending on the
5

set  D.  For  instance,  finite  domain  (FD) constraint  system  provides  primitive
constraints (also called basic constraints) such as x∈R, where R is a set of ranges of
integers. On the other hand,  finite set (FS) constraint system provides primitive
constraints such as y∈S, where S is a set of FD variables and y is an FD variable.
Constraints systems may also include expressions over trees, graphs, and sets.
Valencia and Rueda argue in [43] that the CCP model posses difficulties for
modeling reactive systems where information on a given variable changes depending
on the interactions of a system with its environment. The problem arises because
information can only be added to the store, not deleted nor changed.
2.2  Non-deterministic Timed Concurrent 
Constraint (ntcc)
Ntcc introduces the notion of discrete time as a sequence of time-units. Each time-
unit starts with a store (possibly empty) supplied by the environment, then  ntcc
executes all processes scheduled for that  time-unit. In contrast to CCP, in  ntcc
variables, changing values along time can be modeled. In  ntcc we can have a
variable x taking different values along time-units. To model that in CCP, we would
have to create a new variable  each time we change the value of x.
Following, we give some examples of how the computational agents of ntcc can
be used. The operational semantic of all ntcc agents can be found in Appendix 9.5
and a summary can be found in table 1. Using the tell agent with a FD constraint
system, it is possible to add constraints such as  (meaning the  must be equal to 60) or
(meaning that  is an integer between 60 and 100). 
The when agent can be used to describe how the system reacts to different events,
for instance when  do tell(CMayor=true) is a process reacting as soon as the pitch
sequence C, E, G (represented as 48, 52, 55 in MIDI notation) has been played,
adding the constraint CMayor=true to the store in the current time-unit. 
 Agent
Meaning
 tell (c)
Adds the constraint c to the current 
store
when (c) do A
If c holds now run A
local (x) in P
Runs P with local variable x
A | B
Parallel composition
next A
Runs A at the next time-unit
unless (c) next A
Unless c can be inferred now, run A
 when  do 
Non deterministically chooses  s.t.  
holds
*P
Delays P indefinitely (not forever)
!P
Executes P each time-unit (from now)
 
Table 1: Ntcc Agents
Parallel composition allows us to represent concurrent processes, for instance
tell  |  when  do tell (Instrument=1) is a process telling the  store that  is 62 and
concurrently reacts when  is in the octave -1, assigning instrument to 1 (fig. 2). The
number one represents the acoustic piano in MIDI notation.

The next agent is useful when we want to model variables changing through time,
for instance when  do next tell , means that if  is equal to 60 in the current time-unit,
it will be different from 60 in the next time-unit.
 
 0.6
Figure 2: Tell, when, and parallel agents in Ntcc
The  unless agent is useful to model systems reacting when a condition is not
satisfied or it cannot be deduced from the  store. For instance,  unless  next tell
(lastpitch<>60), reacts when  is false or when  cannot be deduced from the store (i.e.,
was not played in the current time-unit), telling the store in the next time-unit that
lastpitch is not 60 ( fig. 3).
 
7

 0.6
Figure 3: Unless agent in ntcc
The * agent may be used in music to delay the end of a music process indefinitely,
but not forever (i.e., we know that the process will be executed, but we do not know
when). For instance, *tell (End=true). The ! agent executes a certain process in every
time-unit after its execution. For instance, !tell (PlaySong=true). The  agent is used to
model non-deterministic choices. For instance, !  when true do tell (pitch=i) models a
system where each time-unit, a note is chosen from the C major chord (represented by
the MIDI numbers 48,52 and 55) to be played (fig. 43).
The agents presented in table 2 are derived from the basic operators. The agent A
+  B non-deterministically  chooses  to  execute  either  A or  B.  The  persistent
assignation process  changes the value of x to the current value of t in the following
time-units. In a similar way, the agents in table 3 are used to model cells. Cells are
variables which value can be re-assigned in terms of its previous value. x: (z) creates a
new cell  x with initial value  z,  changes the value of a cell (this is different from
which changes the value of x only once), and  exchanges the value of cell x and z.
 
3  ! when true do tell (pitch=i) can be expressed as !(tell (pitch=48) + tell (pitch=52)
+ tell (pitch=55))

 0.6
Figure 4: Execution of a non-deterministic process in ntcc
 Agent
Meaning
 A + B
 when true do (when i=1 do A | when i=2 do B )
local v in  when t=v do next !tell (x=v)
 
Table 2: Derived ntcc agents
 Agent
Meaning
 x: (z)
tell(x=z) | unless change(x) next x: (z)
local v  when x=v do (tell change(x) | next x: g(v) )
local v  when t=v do (tell(change(x) | (tell(change(y)
| next (x: g(v) | y: (v))
 
Table 3: Definition of cells
Finally, a basic recursion can be defined in ntcc with the form , where q is the
process name and  is restricted to call q at most once and such call must be within the
scope of a “next”. The reason of using “next” is that we do not want an infinite
9

recursion within a  time-unit. Recursion is used to model iteration and recursive
definitions. For instance, using this basic recursion, it is possible to write a function to
compute the factorial function. Further information about recursion in ntcc can be
found at [24].
2.3  Generic Constraint Development 
Environment (Gecode)
Gecode is a constraint solving library written in C++. Gecode is based on Constraints
as Propagation agents (CPA) according to [39]. A CPA system provides multiple
propagators  to  transform  a  (non-primitive)  constraint  into  primitive  constraints
supplying the same information. In a finite domain constraint system, primitive
constraints have the form x∈[a..b]. For instance, in a store containing , , a propagator
would add constraints  and .
The reader may notice that there is a similarity between CPA and ntcc. Both of
them are based on concurrent agents working over a constraint store. In chapter 6, we
explain how we can encode ntcc agents as propagators.
Gecode works on different operating systems and is currently being used as the
constraint library for Alice[36] and soon it will be used in Mozart-Oz, therefore it will
be maintained for a long time. Furthermore, it provides an extensible API, allowing us
to create new propagators. Finally, we conjecture that Gecode’s performance is better
than the constraints solving tool-kits used in Sicstus Prolog and Mozart-Oz based on
Gecode’s benchmarks4.
2.4  Factor Oracle (FO)
The Factor Oracle (FO)[1] is a finite automaton that can be built in linear time and
space, in an incremental fashion. The FO recognizes at least all the sub-sequences
(factors) of a given a sequence (it recognizes other sequences that are not factors). All
the states of the FO are considered as accepting states. A sequence of symbols s =  is
learned by such automaton, which states are 0,1,2...n. There is always a transition
arrow (called factor link) from the state i−1 to the state i and there are some transition
arrows directed “backwards”, going from state i to j (where i>j), called suffix links.
Suffix links, opposed to factor links, are not labeled. For instance, a FO automaton for
s = ab is presented in Figure 5, where black headed arrows represent the factor links
and white headed arrows represent the suffix links. 
 
 0.6
  
4 Benchmarks presented in http://www.gecode.org

Figure 5: A FO automaton for s=ab
The FO is built on-line and their authors proved that its algorithm has a linear
complexity in time and space[1]. For each new entering symbol σ, a new state i is
added and an arrow from i−1 to i is created with label . Starting from i−1, the suffix
links are iteratively followed backward, until a state is reached where a factor link
with label  going to some state j, or until there are no more suffix links to follow. For
each state met during this iteration, a new factor link labeled by  is added from this
state to i. Finally, a suffix link is added from i to state j or to state 0 depending on
which condition terminated the iteration. Further formal definitions and the proof of
FO complexity can be found in [1]. The on-line construction algorithm is presented
with detail in Appendix 9.1
Since the FO has a linear complexity in time and space, it was found in [14] that it
is appropriate for machine improvisation. In addition, all attribute values for a music
event can be kept in an object attached to the corresponding node, since the actual
information structure is given by the configuration of arrows (factor and suffix links).
Therefore a tuple with pitch (the frecuency of the note), duration (the amount of time
that the note is played), and intensity (the volume on which is the note is played) can
be related to each arrow according to [14].
2.5  Concurrent Constraint Factor Oracle Model 
for Music Improvisation
Concurrent Constraint Factor Oracle Model for Music Improvisation (Ccfomi) is
defined in [40]. Following, we present a briefly explanation of the model taken from
[40].  Ccfomi has  three  kinds  of  variables  to  represent  the  partially  built  FO
automaton: Variables  are the set of labels of all currently existing factor links going
forward from k. Variables  are the suffix links from each state i, and variable  give the
state reached from k by following a factor link labeled . For instance, the FO in figure
5 is represented by ,, , , , .
Although it is not stated explicitly in Ccfomi, the variables  and  are modeled as
infinite rational trees [34] with unary branching, allowing us to add elements to them,
each time-unit. Infinite rational trees have infinite size. However, they only contain a
finite number of distinct sub-trees. For that reason, they have been subjects of
multiple axiomatizations to construct a constraint system based on them. For instance,
posting the constraints cons(c,nil,B), cons(b,B,C), cons(a,C,D) we can model a list of
three elements [a,b,c].
Ccfomi is divided in three subsystems: learning (ADD), improvisation (CHOICE)
and playing (PLAYER) running concurrently. In addition, there is a synchronization
process (SYNC) that takes care of synchronization.
The  ADD process is in charge of building the  FO (this process models the
learning phase) by creating the  factor links and  suffix links. Note that the process
ADD calls the LOOP process. 
  !tell() | () 
“Process  adds (if needed) factor links labeled  to state i from all states k reached from
i−1 by suffix links, then computes , the suffix link from i” [40]. 
  
when k≥0 do 
unless  
next(!tell () | !tell() | ) 
| when k=−1 do !tell() 
11

| when  do !tell()
“A musician is modeled as a PLAYER process playing some note p every once in a
while. The  PLAYER process non-deterministically chooses between playing a note
now or postponing the decision to the next time-unit” [40]. 
  
  when true do (!tell() | tell(go=j) | next ) 
 + (tell (go=j−1) | next ) 
The learning and the simulation phase must work concurrently. In order to achieve
that, it is required that the simulation phase only takes place once the sub-graph is
completely built. The  process is in charge of doing the synchronization between the
simulation and the learning phase to preserve that property. 
Synchronizing both phases is greatly simplified by the used of constraints. When
a variable has no value, the when processes depending on it are blocked. Therefore,
the  process is “waiting” until  go is greater or equal than one. It means that the
process has played the note i and the  process can add a new symbol to the FO. The
other condition  is because the first suffix link of the FO is equal to -1 and it cannot be
followed in the simulation phase. 
  
when  do ( | next ) 
 | unless  next  
“The improvisation process  uses the distribution function Φ : . The process starts
from state k and stochastically, chooses according to probability q, whether to output
the symbol  or to follow a backward link ”[40].
  
when  do next( tell () | ) 
 | tell () 
 | when  do next (tell () | ) 
 | unless  
 next  when  do ( tell (out=σ) |  
The  whole system  is  represented  by a process  doing all  the  initializations  and
launching the processes when corresponding. Improvisation starts after  n symbols
have been created by the PLAYER process. 
  
!tell(q=p) | !tell() |  |  
| !when go=n do CHOICE(n)
2.6  Probabilistic Non-deterministic Timed 
Concurrent Constraint (pntcc)
“One possible critique to CCP is that it is too generic for representing certain complex
systems. Even if counting with partial information is extremely valuable, we find that
properly  taking  into  account  certain  phenomena  remains  to  be  difficult,  which
severely affects both modeling and verification. Particularly challenging is the case of
uncertain behavior. Indeed, the uncertainty underlying concurrent interactions in areas
such as computer music goes way beyond of what can be modeled using partial
information only.” [29].
The first attempt to extend ntcc to work with probabilities was the Stochastic
Non-deterministic  Timed  Concurrent  Constraint  (sntcc [25]) calculus.  Sntcc

provides an operator  to decide whether to execute or not a process with a certain
probability . Using 
ϱ
sntcc, Ccfomi models the action of choosing between a suffix
link or a  factor link with a probability . However, when using  
ϱ
sntcc, it is not
possible  to  use  a  probability  distribution  to  choose  among  all  the  factor  links
following a state in the  FO. The probability distribution describes the range of
possible values that a random variable can take.
Pntcc overcomes that problem, it provides a new agent to the calculus for
probabilistic choice  ⨁. The probabilistic choice  ⨁ operator has the following
syntax:
 when  do (),
where I is a finite set of indexes, and for every  we have . 
“The intuition of this operator is as follows. Each  associated to  represents its
probability of being selected for execution. Hence, the collection of all  represents a
probability distribution. The  guards  that  can be  entailed from  the  current  store
determine a subset of enabled processes, which are used to determine an eventual
normalization of the ’s. In the current time interval, the summation probabilistically
chooses one of the enabled process according to the distribution defined by the
(possibly normalized) 's. The chosen alternative, if any, precludes the others. If no
choice is possible then the summation is precluded.” [29].
Using the probabilistic choice we can model a process choosing a factor link from
the FO with a probability distribution . 
ϱ
 when  do (tell(output=σ),)
The operational semantic of the ⨁ agent and other formal definitions about pntcc
can be found in Appendix 9.5.
3  Probabilistic Choice of Musical Sequences 
When modeling machine improvisation, we want to choose a certain music sequence,
based on the history of user and computer interaction. For instance, when traversing
the Factor Oracle (FO) in the simulation phase, we want some information to choose
among the factor links and the suffix link following a certain state. To achieve that, we
propose to assign integers to the links in the  FO. Using those integers, we can
calculate probabilities to choose a link based on a probability distribution. We recall
from  the  introduction  that  our  main  objective  is  extending  Ccfomi to  model
probabilistic choice of musical sequences.
In the beginning of this thesis work, we developed a probabilistic model which
changes the complexity in time for building the FO to quadratic (see Appendix 9.2.1).
The idea behind it was changing the probabilities of all the factor links coming from
state i when modifying a factor link leaving from that state. This idea was discarded
for not being compatible with soft real-time (consider soft real-time as defined in the
introduction).
The probabilistic model we chose is based on a simple, yet powerful concept.
Using  the  system  parameters,  the  probability  of  choosing  a  factor  link in  the
simulation phase will decrease each time a  factor link is chosen. Additionally, we
calculate the length of the common suffix (context) associated to each  suffix link.
Using the context, we reward the suffix links. Further information about the context
can be found at [19].
We represent the system with four kind of variables used to represent: the  FO
states and transitions; the musical information attached to the FO; the probabilistic
information; and the information to change musical attributes in the notes, based on
the user style.
In addition to the variables described before, the system has some information
parametrized by the user: α,β,γ,τ and n. The constant α is the recombination factor,
13

representing the proportion of new sequences desired. β represents the factor for
decreasing the importance of a factor link when it is chosen in the simulation phase. γ
represents the importance of a new factor link in relation with the other factor links
coming from the same state. τ (described in Chapter 4) is a parameter for changing
musical attributes in the notes. Finally, n is a parameter representing the number of
notes that must be learned before starting the simulation phase. In Chapter  5 we
describe how can we use n to synchronize the improvisation phases.
We label each factor link by the pitch. Moreover, outside the FO definition, we
create a tuple of three integers for each  factor link:  pitch,  duration, and  intensity.
These three characteristics are represented by integers. The pitch and the intensity are
represented  by  integers  from  0  to  127  and  the  duration is  represented  by
milliseconds5. That way we can build a pitch FO (i.e., a FO where the symbols are
pitches) associating to it other musical information.
At the same time we build a FO, we also create three integer arrays: , 
ϱ C and
sum. There is an integer  for every factor link,  for every suffix link, and  for every
state i. Note that  would represent the probability of choosing a factor link if suffix
links were not considered, and  is the context.
Next, we show the learning and simulation phases for the probabilistic extension.
We present some simple examples explaining how the probabilities are calculated in
the learning phase and how they are used in the simulation phase. Finally, we present
some concluding remarks and other improvisation models related to our model.
3.1  Stylistic learning phase
During the learning phase we store an integer  for each  factor link going from  i
labelled by σ. We also store an integer  for each state i of the automaton. The initial
value for  is  (fig. 6), where γ is a system parameter representing the importance of a
new sequence in relation with the sequences already learned. When a factor link from
i labeled by  is the first factor link leaving from i, we assign to  and  the constant c.
We want c to be a big integer, allowing us to have more precision when reasoning
about .
The reader may notice that this approach gives a certain importance to a new
factor link leaving from  i labeled by , without changing the value of all the other
quantities  leaving from i. Furthermore, we preserve the sum of all the values  in the
variable , for each state i. This system exhibits a very important property: For each
state i, . The sum of all the probabilities associated to the factor links coming from the
same state are equal to one. This property is preserved, when changing the values of
and  in both improvisation phases.
 
5 Pitch, duration and intensity are represented according to MIDI 1.0 standard

  0.7
Figure 6: Adding a factor link to the FO
On the other hand, we give rewards to the  suffix link using the  context. To
calculate the context, Lefebvre and Lecroq modified the FO construction algorithm,
conserving its linear complexity in time and space [19]. This approach has been
successfully used by Cont, Assayag and Dubnov on their anticipatory improvisation
model [11].
Figure 7 is a simple example of a FO and the integer arrays presented previously.
First, we present the score of a fragment of the Happy Birthday song; then we present
a sequence of possible tuples <pitch,  duration,  intensity> for that fragment; and
finally the FO with the probabilistic information.
 
15

0.8

17

(a) The Score of the fragment
(G, 375,80), (G, 125,60), (A, 500,100), (G, 500,90), (C, 500,100), (B, 1000,60)
(b) Fragment of the Happy Birthday Song represented with tuples
 0.7
(c) Factor Oracle with the probabilistic information
Figure 7: Factor Oracle used to represent a Happy Birthday fragment
3.2  Stylistic simulation phase
In the simulation phase, we use all the information calculated in the learning phase to
choose the notes probabilistically. Factor links chosen in this phase, will decrease the
importance proportionally to β. In addition, the probability of choosing secondary
factor links is proportional to γ . We consider primary factor links those going from

the state i to i+1, and all the others as secondary . On the other hand, the suffix links
are rewarded by the context, calculated on-line in the learning phase.
If there were not suffix links, we would choose a factor link leaving from the state
i with a probability distribution (
ϕ i,σ) such that . Later on, we will explain how we
can extend this concept to work with the  suffix links, rewarded by their  context.
However, the concept of decreasing the probability of a factor link when it is chosen
remains invariant.
When the system chooses a certain factor link leaving from i and labeled by , the
value of  is decremented, multiplying it by β. Subsequently, we update the new value
of  by subtracting  (fig. 8). That way, we preserve the property  for each state i. Note
that we are only adding constant time operations, making our model compatible with
soft real-time.
 
  0.7
Figure 8: Choosing a factor link from k labelled by 
Following only the  factor links we obtain all the factor (subsequences) of the
original sequence. This causes two problems: first, if we always follow the  factor
links, soon we will get to the last state of the automaton; second, we only improvise
over the subsequences of the information learned from the user, without sequence
variation. This would make the improvisation repetitive. Following the suffix link we
achieve sequence variation because we can combine different suffixes and prefixes of
the sequences learned. For instance, in Omax [6] –a model for music improvisation
processing in real-time audio and video– this is called recombination and it is
parametrized by a recombination factor.
Rueda  et  al  approaches  this  problem  in  Ccfomi by  creating  a  probability
distribution parameterized by a value α. The probability of choosing a factor link is
given by α and the probability of choosing a suffix link is given by 1−α. There is a
drawback in this approach. Since it does not reward the suffix links with the context
(the length of the common suffix), this system may choose multiple times in a row
suffix links going back one or two states, creating repetitive sequences.
Our approach is based on rewarding the suffix links by their context. The intuition
is choosing between the factor links leaving a state i and the factor links leaving the
state reached by following the current state’s suffix link. Rewarding the last ones by
the product of the recombination factor α and the context . Consider S(i) a function
19

returning the state where a suffix link leads from a state i. If we only consider the
factor links, we would have two probability distributions  and  and no way to relate
them. Using the context , we create a probability distribution Φ(i,σ) ranking the factor
links leaving from the state S(i) with the product C(i). 
[Sorry. Ignored \begin{cases} ... \end{cases}]
 Using Φ(i,σ), the system is able to choose a symbol at any state of the  FO. The
advantage of this probability distribution over the one presented in Ccfomi, is that it
takes into account the context, as well as the recombination factor α.
To exemplify how to build this probability distribution, consider the FO with the
probabilistic information in figure 9. That example correspond to the FO for s=ab and
random values for the integer arrays described in this chapter. Table 4 shows how to
build a probability distribution Φ(i,σ) for the FO in figure 9.
Note that for the states zero and two in the table, the probabilities calculated are
the same. This happens because the first state does not have a  suffix link to go
backwards and the last state does not have factor links to go forward. On the other
hand,  the  probabilities  calculated  for  the  state  one  combine  the  probability  of
choosing a factor link following state 1 or choosing the suffix link and then choosing a
factor link from state zero.
 
  0.7
Figure 9: A Factor Oracle including probabilities, for the sequence s=ab
 
 i
σ
Φ(i,σ)
i
σ
Φ(i,σ)
i
σ
Φ(i,σ)
 0
a
3/4
1
a
2
a
3/4
0
b
1/4
1
b
2
b
1/4
 
Table 4: Probability distribution Φ(i,σ) for figure 9 9
3.3  Summary
In  this  chapter  we  explained  how  we  can  model  music  improvisation  using
probabilities, extending the notion of non-deterministic choice described in Ccfomi.
The intuition is decreasing the probability of choosing a factor link, each time it is

chosen and rewarding a suffix link based on the context. Furthermore, we explained
how the parameters α, β, and γ allow us to parameterize the computation of the
probabilities. 
This procedure is simple enough so that the probabilities can be computed in
constant time when the  FO is built, preserving the linear complexity in time and
space of the  FO on-line construction algorithm. Additionally, using probabilities
allows us to generate different sequences, without repeating the same sequence
multiple times in a row like Ccfomi.
3.4  Related work
For Omax, Assayag and Blonch recently proposed a new way to traverse the oracle
based on heuristics [5]. They argue that traversing the oracle using only the suffix
links and not using the factor links, produces more “interesting” sequences.
There is an extension of Ccfomi using pntcc. The use of pntcc makes possible
to choose the sequences in the simulation phase, based on a probability distribution.
Although Perez and Rueda modeled the probabilistic choice of sequences using the
FO, they do not provide a description of how those probabilities can be calculated
during the learning phase.
4  Changing Musical Attributes of the Notes
According to Conklin [8], music-generation systems aim to create music based on
some predefined rules and a corpus (i.e., a collection of musical pieces in a certain
music style) learned previously. Those systems can create new musical material based
on the style of the  corpus learned. Unfortunately, they use algorithms with high
complexity in time and space, making them inappropriate for music interaction
according to [14]. On the other hand, interactive systems for music improvisation
(e.g., Ccfomi) are usually based on the recombination of sequences learned from the
user.
Although recombination creates new sequences based on the user style, it does
not create new notes. In fact, it does not even change a single characteristic of a note.
To solve that problem, one of the objectives of this thesis work is changing at least
one musical attribute of the notes generated during the style simulation.
In the beginning of this work, we tried to develop an algorithm for creating new
notes, based on the learned style. The idea was calculating the probability of being on
a certain music scale. Based on that probability, we choose a random pitch from that
scale. A music scale is an ascending or descending series of notes or pitches. We also
developed an algorithm to calculate the duration of those new notes (see Appendix
9.2.5). 
We did not include those ideas in this thesis work. First, because choosing a pitch
based on a supposition of the scale cannot be generalized to music which is not based
on scales. In addition, because the procedure for calculating the probability of being
on a certain scale was not very accurate, as we found out during some tests. Finally,
because the algorithm to generate new durations is not compatible with soft real-time.
The approach we chose to change a musical attribute is again based on simple, but
powerful concept. We store the average intensity (the other musical attributes are not
changed in our model for the reasons mentioned above) of the notes currently being
played (current dynamics) by the computer. We also store the current dynamics of the
user. Then, we compare them and change the current dynamics of the computer (if
necessary), making it similar to the user  current dynamics. The idea behind this
intensity variation was originally proposed by musicians Riascos [35] and Collazos
[7]. It is based on a concept that they usually apply when improvising with other
musicians.
21

In order to formalize that concept, we calculate, in the learning phase, the current
dynamics of the last τ (a system parameter) notes played by both, the user and the
computer, separately. Concurrently, in the simulation phase, we compare the two
current dynamics. If they are not equal, we multiply the intensity of the current note
being played by the computer by a factor proportional to relation of the user and
computer current dynamics. As follows, we explain in detail how we can calculate the
current dynamics in the learning phase and how to change the  intensity of notes
generated in simulation phase.
4.1  Stylistic learning phase
The  intensity in music represents two different  things  at the same time. When
analyzing the intensity of a single note in a sequence, we reason about that intensity as
a musical accent meaning the importance of certain notes or defining rhythms. On the
other hand, we reason about the  average intensity of a sequence of notes as the
dynamics of that sequence of notes. The accents may be written explicitly in the score
with a symbol  bellow the note and the dynamics for relative loudness may be written
explicitly in the score as piano (p), forte (f), fortissimo (ff), etc.
To capture these two concepts, in the learning phase we store the intensity in a
tuple <pitch,duration,intensity>. In addition, we store the current dynamics for the
last τ notes played by the user  and the computer .
To calculate the  current dynamic we propose the Calculate-Current-Dynamics
algorithm. The idea of this algorithm is storing the last τ intensities in a queue . This
algorithm receives a sequence of intensities I, the value for τ, a reference to the queue
, and the  current dynamic . The invariant of the algorithm is always having the
average of the queue data in the variable  and the sum in the variable IntensitySum.
Append 9.1.3 gives an example of the operation of this algorithm.
 CALCULATE-CURRENT-DYNAMICS(, τ, , ) 
01    new Queue(τ) 
02  IntensitySum  0 
03  QueueSize  0 
04  for i  0 to m do 
05  if QueueSize<τ then 
06  IntensitySum   
07  else IntensitySum  IntensitySum +  -  
08  .push() 
09    IntensitySum/QueueSize 
4.2  Stylistic simulation phase
In this phase, we traverse the FO using the probabilistic distribution Φ(i,σ) proposed
in chapter 3. Remember that there is an intensity and a duration associated to each
pitch in the FO. If we play the intensities with the same value as they were learned,
we could have a problem of coherence between the current dynamics of the user and
the current dynamics of the sequences we are producing.
To give an example of this problem, consider the Happy Birthday fragment
presented in figure 7. The current dynamics for that fragment is 98. Now, suppose the
computer current dynamics is 30. This poses a problem, because the user is expecting
the  computer  to  improvise  in  the  same  dynamics that  he  is,  according  to  the
interviews with Riascos and Collazos.
The solution we propose is multiplying by a factor  the intensity of every note
generated by the computer. In the previous example, the next note generated by the
computer would be multiplied by a factor of 30/98.

4.3  Summary
We explained how we can change the  intensity of the notes generated during the
improvisation. The idea is to maintain the current dynamics of the notes generated by
the computer similar the current dynamics of the notes generated by the user. This
corresponds  to  formalizing  an  improvisation  technique  used  by  two  musicians
interviewed for this thesis work.
This kind of variation in the intensity is something new for machine improvisation
systems as far as we know. We believe that this kind of approach, where simple
variations  can  be  made  preserving  the  style  learned  from  the  user  and  being
compatible with real-time, should be a topic of investigation in future works.
4.4  Related work
To solve this problem of creating new notes and changing the attributes of the notes
during the improvisation, the Omax model has a parameter called innovation rate,
indicating the amount of new material desired [6]. Furthermore, Omax calculates a
rhythmic quality function to compare the density (the number of events for overall
duration) between the current state and the place where a link is leading. 
Using that rhythmic quality function, the improvisation does not “jump” abruptly
between different rhythmic patterns. Therefore, Omax improvisation is rhythmically
coherent within itself. However, generating new rhythms coherent with the user style
on machine improvisation is still an open problem.
The anticipatory model developed by Cont et al [10] presents some results where
the sequences produced in the improvisation have different pitches, compared to the
original sequence. To achieve this, they improvise on a  pitch intervals FO (a  FO
learning the intervals of the pitches played by the user), allowing them to calculate
new pitches, when using the pitch intervals attribute to improvise.
Neither Ccfomi nor its probabilistic extension provides a way to change musical
attributes of the notes nor creating new material based on the user style.
5  Modeling the system in pntcc
Ntcc has been used in a large variety of situations for synchronizing musical
processes. From the introduction chapter, we recall the models for interactive scores,
audio processing, formalizing musical processes, and music improvisation. In those
models, the synchronization is made declaratively. It means that  ntcc hides the
details on how the processes are synchronized and how the shared resources (in the
store) are accessed. One objective of this work is modeling our improvisation system
with  ntcc. So far, we presented the modifications for the improvisation phases
allowing  probabilistic  choice  of  musical  sequences  and  changing  the  musical
attributes  in  the  simulation  phase.  Since  we  are  choosing  the  sequences
probabilistically, we use pntcc (the probabilistic extension of ntcc) for modeling
our improvisation system.
In order to synchronize the improvisation phases, the learning phase must take
place from  the beginning. However, the simulation phase is  launched once the
learning  phase  has  learned  n notes.  After  that,  both  phases  run  concurrently.
Synchronization must be provided because the improvisation phase must not work in
partially built  graphs, it  can  only improvise in the fragment  of  the graph  that
represents a FO. Additionally, the simulation phase can only work in state k once the
value for the current dynamics, the context, and the probabilistic distribution has been
calculated up to state k.
Our approach to synchronize the improvisation phases is similar to the one used
in  Ccfomi. Remember that  Ccfomi synchronizes the improvisation phases using a
23

variable go and the variables . The PLAYER process can post constraints over those
variables and the processes for building the FO (ADD and LOOP) are activated when
they can deduce certain information from those variables. We extend that concept
using some of the new variables introduced in this model.
In addition to the variables , , and  used in Ccfomi, our model has a few more
variables: , , , and  represent the probabilistic choice of musical sequences;  and
represent the musical attributes associated to each pitch σ; and ,  and  represent the
intensity variation. The variables , , , , and  are represented with rational trees of FD
variables because they do not change their value from a  time-unit to another. The
other variables are represented with cells (cells are defined in chapter 2).
In this chapter, we explain how we can write a sequential algorithm for the
learning phase combining the algorithm for building on-line the FO, calculating the
context, calculating the probabilistic distribution  and the  current dynamics. After
that, we show how both phases can be modeled in pntcc. Finally, we give some
concluding remarks and we present related work.
5.1  Modeling the stylistic learning phase
The learning phase can be easily integrated to the on-line algorithm that builds a FO
and calculates the  context (the original algorithms are presented in Appendix  9.1).
The  learning  phase  is  represented  by  the  functions  Ext_Oracle_On-line and
Ext_Add_Letter. To calculate the context we use the Length_Repeated_Suffix function
proposed by Lefevre et al. The Length_Repeated_Suffix calculates the context. It finds
the length of a repeated suffix of P[1..i+1] in linear time and space complexity.
The Ext_Add_Letter function is in charge of adding new pitches to the FO. It also
creates a tuple <pitch,duration,intensity>; updates values of  and ; and calculates the
current dynamics of the user , and the context  for state i+1. This function receives a
FO with i states, a pitch σ, the duration, the intensity, the system parameters γ and τ,
and the Intensity Queue . During its execution, it uses the constant c, the function S(i),
and the temporal variable π. C is a big integer constant, S(i) is a function returning the
suffix link for state i, and π is a temporal variable used to calculate the context. 
 EXT_ADD_LETTER(Oracle(P[1..i]),σ,duration,intensity,γ,τ,) 
01 Create a new state i+1 
02  
03  
04  
05  
06  
07 if QueueSize<τ then 
08 intensitySum  IntensitySum+intensity 
09 else IntensitySum  intensity -  
10 .push() 
11   IntensitySum/QueueSize 
12  duration 
13  intensity 
14 While k>−1 and δ(k,σ) is undefined do 
15  
16  
17  
18  
19  
20 if k=−1 then  
21 else  
22  

23 Return Oracle(P[1..i]σ) 
The Ext_Oracle_On-line function is a sequential algorithm representing the learning
phase. It receives three vectors: the pitches, the durations, and the intensities. In
addition, it takes γ, the system parameter for ranking the importance of a new note
added to the FO, and the system parameter τ, representing the number of notes taken
into account to calculate the current dynamics . Figure 10 presents the execution of
this function for the three first symbols of the Happy Birthday Fragment presented in
figure 7.
 EXT_ORACLE_ON_LINE(P[1..m],D[1..m],I[1..m],γ,τ) 
01 Create Oracle(ε) with one single state 0 and S(0)=−1 
02   new Queue(τ) 
03 IntensitySum  0 
04 for i  1 to m do Oracle([1..i])  
05 EXT_ADD_LETTER(Oracle(P[1..i−1]),,,,γ,τ,) 
 
25

 0.8
Figure 10: Executing the Ext Oracle On-line algorithm with τ=2
The learning phase is modeled in pntcc by the processes PHI, ADD, LOOP, ,
PLAYER,  CONTEXT, and . Process  PHI calculates the values for the probability
distribution , used to choose A factor link leaving from state k labeled by a symbol σ.
Where the recombination factor is parameterized by α. The process  represents the act
of adding a “fresh” variable to the infinite rational tree (as described in chapter 2). We
use infinite rational trees to represent the variable such as from and δ that represents
the transitions of the FO.
 PHI(k,σ,α)  

when  do !tell () 
|when  do !tell () |  
The Process ADD is the one in charge of adding new pitches to the FO. In addition,
this process updates the values of the cells  and the variable φ calling the function
ϱ
PHI. 
   
 | !tell () |  (c) |  (c) 
|  |  |  |  |  | next () 
The LOOP process represents the “while” loop in the Ext_Add_Letter function. This
process adds a new factor link in the FO that points to the new state i, while k is
greater than -1 and there is not a transition from  k labeled by σ. The values for k
depends on the suffix links. In addition, it calculates the values for the context  and the
probabilistic information. 
   
when k≥0 do( 
when  do 
 (!tell () |  |  ) 
|unless  next (
   |  ||    |  |  
|| next ( !tell () || !tell ()
||  |  | )))
|when k=−1 do ( !tell () |  |  )
In the  CONTEXT process the reader may notice how we can use when a≠b do P
instead of unless a≠b next P because we know that a,b always have a value. The
values π, s,  and  are used to calculate efficiently the context according to Lefevre et
al.’s algorithm. 
 CONTEXT(i,π,s)  
when s=0 do !tell ()
|when s≠0 do (
when  do !tell ()
|when  do ) 
   
when  do !tell ()
|when  do next 
The  process calculates the value for the current dynamics. In addition, it updates sum
based on the parameter τ. 
   
when index≥τ do  
|when index<τ do  |  
Finally, the PLAYER stores the values of pitch, duration, and intensity received from
the environment when a note is played by the user. Furthermore, it updates the
current dynamics . 
   
when P>0∧D>0∧I>0 do (
 
| next ( !tell () |  | !tell 
| !tell () | !tell () | tell (go=i) | )) 
|unless P>0∧D>0∧I>0 next (tell (go=j−1) |  )
27

5.2  Modeling the style simulation phase
In this phase, we use the ⨁ agent, defined in pntcc to model probabilistic choice.
This  model is an extension of the model presented in [29]. In our model, the
IMPROV process  chooses  a  link  according  to  the  probability  distribution  .
Furthermore, it updates the values for sum and , sets-up the outputs, and updates the
ϱ
computer current dynamics .
In order to ask if a constraint A∧B or A∨B can be deduced from the store, we use
reification. For instance, the process  when a=b∧c=d do P, can be codified as the
process when g do P and the constraints , , . 
 IMPROV(k,τ,β)  
 || when  do (
  when  do ( 
next( tell () || tell () 
 || tell () || tell () 
 || )
 || when  do next (IMPROV(k+1,τ,β) + ) 
 || unless  next ( 
 ||  ||  )
 || unless  next ( IMPROV(k+1,τ,β)
 ||  || ),) 
 || unless  next IMPROV(k,τ,β) 
5.3  Synchronizing the improvisation phases
Synchronizing both phases is greatly simplified by the used of constraints. When a
variable has no value, when processes depending on it are blocked. Therefore, the
process is “waiting” until go is greater or equal than one. That means that the  process
has played the note i and the  process can add a new symbol to the FO. The other
condition  is because the first suffix link of the FO is equal -1 and that  suffix link
cannot be followed in the simulation phase. In addition, the  SYNC process is also
“waiting” for the current dynamics  to take a value greater of equal than 0. 
   
when  do ( | next ) 
||unless  next  
A  process is necessary to wait until  n symbols have been learned to launch the
IMPROV process. 
 WAIT(n,τ,β)  
when go=n do next IMPROV(n,τ,β) || unless go=n next WAIT(n,τ,β) 
The system is modeled as the PLAYER and the SYNC process running in parallel with
a process waiting until n symbols have been played to start the IMPROV process. The
reader should remeber that α is the recombination factor, representing the proportion
of new sequences desired. β represents the factor for decreasing the importance of a
factor link when it is chosen in the simulation phase. γ represents the importance of a
new factor link in relation with the other factor links coming from the same state. τ is
a parameter for changing musical attributes in the notes. Finally, n is a parameter
representing the number of notes that must be learned before starting the simulation
phase.
 SYSTEM(n,α,β,γ,τ)  
 !tell () ||  ||  || WAIT(n,τ,β)

5.4  Summary
We modeled all the concepts described in previous chapters using pntcc. Although
synchronization and probabilistic choice are modeled declaratively, matching the
time-units is not an easy task because the value of a cell only can be changed in the
following time-unit. If we change the value of a cell in the scope of an unless process,
we need to be aware that the value will only be changed two time-units after.
5.5  Related work
The  Omax model  uses  FO,  but  instead  of  using  ntcc,  it  uses  shared  state
concurrency  (for  synchronizing  the  improvisation  phases)  and  message  passing
concurrency  (for  synchronizing  OpenMusic  and  Max/Msp).  Although  this  a
remarkable model, we believe that ntcc can provide an easier way to synchronize
processes and to reason about the correctness of the implementation because it is
obviously easier to synchronize declaratively. Constraints provide a much more
powerful way to express declaratively complex synchronizing patterns. Since the
ntcc model has a logical counterpart [24], it is possible to prove properties of the
model. For instance, the fact that it always (or never or sometimes) chooses the
longest context, or that repetitions of some given subsequence are avoided.
Probabilistic Ccofmi [29] fixes the problems with synchronization and extends
the notion of probabilistic choice in the improvisation phase, giving it a clear and
concise semantic. However, it does not model how can probabilistic distributions may
change from a time-unit to another based on user and computer interaction. 
6  Implementation
A ntcc interpreter is a program that takes ntcc models and creates a program that
interacts with an environment, simulating the behavior of the ntcc models. Ntcc
interpreters (including our interpreter) are designed to simulate a finite ntcc model.
It means that they only simulate a finite number of time-units.
During the last decade, three interpreters for ntcc have been developed. Lman
[22] by Hurtado and Muñoz in 2003, NtccSim (http://avispa.puj.edu.co) by the Avispa
research group in 2006, and Rueda’s sim in 2006. They were intended to simulate
ntcc models, but they were not made for real-time interaction. Recall from the
introduction that soft real-time interaction means that the user does not experience
noticeable delays in the interaction.
When designing a  ntcc interpreter, we need a constraint solving library or
programming language allowing us to check stability (i.e., know when a time-unit is
over), check entailment (i.e., know if a constraint can be deduced from the store), post
constraints, and synchronize the concurrent access to the store. These tasks must be
performed efficiently to achieve a good performance.
The authors of the ntcc model for interactive scores proposed to use Gecode as a
constraint solving library for future  ntcc interpreters, and create an interface for
Gecode to OpenMusic to specify multimedia interaction applications. Furthermore,
they proposed to extend Lman to work under Mac OS X using Gecode.
One objective of this thesis is to develop a prototype for a ntcc interpreter real-
time capable. We followed the advise from the authors of the interactive scores model
and we tried out several alternatives to develop an interpreter using Gecode.
Our first attempt was using a thread to represent each  ntcc process in the
simulation. However, we found out that using threads adds  an overhead in the
performance of the interpreter because of the context-switch among threads, even
29

when using lightweight (lw) threads. Then, we tried using event-driven programming.
Performance was better compared with threaded implementations. However, each
time a  when process asks if a condition can be entailed, we need to check for
stability, thus adding an unnecessary overhead. The reader may find more information
about our previous attempts in Appendix 9.3 and performance results in chapter 7.
Our  implementation,  Ntccrt,  is  once  again  based  on  a  simple  but  powerful
concept. The when and  processes are encoded as propagators in Gecode. That way
Gecode manages all the concurrency required for the interpreter. Gecode calls the
continuation of a process when a process condition is assigned to true.
On  the  other  hand,  tell processes  are  trivially  codified  to  existing  Gecode
propagators and timed agents (i.e. *, !,  unless,  and  next) are managed providing
different process queues for each time-unit in the simulation.
Our interpreter works in two modes, the developing mode and the interaction
mode. In the developing mode, the users may specify the ntcc system that they want
to simulate in the interpreter. In the interaction mode, the users execute the models
and interact with them.
This chapter is about the design and implementation of Ntccrt. We explain how to
encode  all  the  ntcc processes.  We also  explain  the  execution  model  of  the
interpreter. After that, we show how to run Ccfomi in the interpreter.
In addition, we describe how we made an interface to OpenMusic and how we
can generate binary plugins for data-flow programming languages: Pure Data (Pd)
[32] or Max/Msp [33] where MIDI, audio, or video inputs/outputs can interact with a
Ntccrt binary. Finally, we give some conclusions, future work, and a short description
of the other existing interpreters. A detailed description of Ntccrt, the generation of
binary plugins, Pure Data, Max/Msp, and the previous Ntccrt prototypes can be found
in a previous publication [48].
6.1  Design of Ntccrt
Our first version of Ntccrt allowed us to specify ntcc models in C++ and execute
them as stand-alone programs. Current version offers the possibility to specify a
ntcc model on either Lisp, Openmusic or C++. In addition, currently, it is possible
to execute ntcc models as a stand-alone program or as an external object (i.e., a
binary plugin) for Pd or Max.
6.1.1  Developing mode
In order to write a ntcc model in Ntccrt, the user may write it directly in C++, use a
parser that takes Common Lisp macros as input or defining a graphical “patch” in
OpenMusic. Using either of these representations, it is possible to generate a stand-
alone program or an external object (fig 11).
 

 0.6
Figure 11: Ntccrt: Developing mode
To make an interface for OpenMusic, first, we developed a Lisp parser using
Common Lisp macros to write an ntcc model in Lisp syntax and translate it to C++
code. Lisp macros extend Lisp syntax to give special meaning to characters reserved
for users for this purpose. Executing those macros automatically compile a  ntcc
program.
After the success with Lisp macros, we created OpenMusic methods to represent
ntcc processes.  Openmusic  methods  are  a  graphical  representation  using  the
Common Lisp Object System (CLOS). Those graphical objects are placed on a
graphical “patch”. Executing the “patch” generates a Ntccrt C++ program.
6.1.2  Execution mode
To execute a Ntccrt program we can proceed in two different ways. We can create a
stand-alone program that can interact with the Midishare library [12], or we can
create an external object for either Pd or Max. An advantage of compiling a ntcc
model as an external object lies in using control signals and the message passing API
provided by Pd and Max to synchronize any graphical object with the Ntccrt external.
 
31

 0.6
Figure 12: Ntccrt: Interaction mode
To handle MIDI streams (e.g., MIDI files, MIDI instruments, or MIDI streams
from other programs) we use the predefined functions in Pd or Max to process MIDI.
Then, we connect the output of those functions to the Ntccrt binary plugin. We also
provide an interface for Midishare, useful when running stand-alone programs (fig.
12). 
6.2  Implementation of Ntccrt
Ntccrt is the first ntcc interpreter written in C++ using Gecode. In this section, we
focus on describing the data structures required to represent each ntcc agent. Then,
we explain how the interpreter makes a simulation of a ntcc model. Ntcc agents
are represented by classes. To avoid confusions, we write the agents with bold font
(e.g., when C do P) and the classes with italic font (e.g., When class).
6.2.1  Data structures
To represent the constraint systems we need to provide new data types. Gecode
variables work on a particular store. Therefore, we need an abstraction to represent
ntcc variables present on multiple  stores with the same variable object. Boolean
variables are represented by the  BoolV class, FD variables by the  IntV class, FS
variables by the  SetV class, and infinite rational trees (with unary branching) by
SetVArray, BoolVArray, and IntVArray classes.
After encoding the constraint  systems, we  defined  a way  to represent  each
process. All of them are classes inheriting from AskBody. AskBody is a class, defining
an Execute method, which can be called by another object when it is nested on it. 
To represent the tell agent, we defined a super class Tell. For this prototype, we
provide three subclasses to represent these processes: tell (a=b), tell (a∈B), and tell

(a>b). Other kind of  tell agents can be easily defined by inheriting from the  Tell
superclass and declaring an Execute method.
For the when agent, we made a When propagator and a When class for calling the
propagator. A process  when C do P is represented by two propagators:  (a reified
propagator for the constraint C) and if b then P else skip (the When propagator). The
When propagator checks the value of b. If the value of b is true, it calls the Execute
method of P. Otherwise, it does not take any action. Figure 13 shows how to encode
the process when a=c do P using the When propagator 
 
0.7
      0.7
 
Figure 13: Example of the When propagator
To represent the  agent (i.e. non-deterministic choice ) we made the  parallel
conditional propagator. This propagator receives a sequence of tuples , where  is a
Gecode boolean variable representing the condition of a reified propagator (e.g., )
33

and  (a pointer to an AskBody object) is the process to be executed when  is assigned
to true. 
The When propagator executes the process  associated to the first guard that is
assigned to true. It means  such that . Then, its work is over. If all the variables are
assigned to false, its work is over too.
The When propagator is based on the idea of the Parallel conditional combinator
proposed  by  Schulte  [46].  A curious  reader  might  ask  how  we  obtain  a  non-
deterministic behavior. In order to make a non-deterministic choice, we pass the
parameters to the propagator in a random order. That way, the propagator always
chooses  the first  process  which  condition is  true, but  since  the  processes  (and
conditions) are given in a random order, it will simulate a non-deterministic choice.
Figure  14 shows how to encode the process  when  do tell () using the  parallel
conditional propagator. This process is explained in Appendix 9.4.
 

0.7
0.7
Figure 14: Example of the Parallel conditional propagator
Local variables are easily represented by an instruction allowing the user to create
a new variable at the beginning of a procedure. Then, that new variable persists
during  the  following  time-units being  simulated.  This  implementation  of  local
variables is useful when there is a process !P and P contains local variables. The other
variables are declared at the beginning of the simulation.
Timed agents are represented by the  TimedProcess class.  TimedProcess is an
abstract class providing a pointer for the current time-unit, for a queue used for the
unless processes, for a queue used for the persistent assignation processes, for a
queue used for the other processes, and for the continuation process. Each subclass
defines a different  Execute method. For instance, the  Execute method for the  Star
35

class randomly chooses the time-unit to place the continuation (an AskBody object) in
its corresponding process queue. 
The Unless class and the Persistent assignation class are different. The Execute
method of the  Unless objects and the the  Persistent assignation objects are called
after  calculating a  fixpoint common  to  all  the  processes  in the  process queue.
Formally, a propagator can be seen as a function , receiving a store and returning a
store. A  fixpoint for a  propagator is a  store x such that  F(x)=x. When Gecode
calculates a store, which is a fixpoint for all propagators, we said that the store is
stable.
After calculating a  fixpoint, if the condition for the  Unless cannot be deduced
from the stable store, its continuation is executed in the next time-unit. On the other
hand, the Persistent assignation copies the domain D of the variable assigned, when
the store is stable. Then, it assigns D to that variable in following time-units (creating
a tell object for each following time-unit).
We also have a  Procedure class used to model both,  ntcc simple definitions
(e.g., A  tell(a=2)) and  ntcc recursive definitions (e.g., B(i)  B(i+1)), which are
invocated using the  Call class. For  ntcc recursive definitions, we create local
variables simulating call-by-value (as it is specified in the formalism). Recursion in
ntcc is restricted. Parameters have to be variables in the store and we can only make
a recursive call in a recursive procedure. However,  Ntccrt does not check these
conditions (they are left to the user) and implements general recursion.
6.2.2  Execution model
In order to execute a simulation, the users write a ntcc mdel in Ntccrt, compile it,
and then they call the compiled program with the number of units to be simulated and
the parameters  (if any) of the main  ntcc definition. For each  time-unit i, the
interpreter executes the following steps: First, it creates a new store and new variables
in the store. Then, it processes the input (e.g., MIDI data coming from PD or Max). If
it  is  simulating  the  first  time-unit,  it  calls  the  main  ntcc definition  with  the
arguments given by the user.
After  that,  it  moves  the  unless processes  to  the   unless queue,  moves  the
persistent assignation processes to the  persistent assignation queue, and executes all
the remaining processes in the  process queue. Then, it calculates a fixpoint. Note how
we only calculate one fixpoint each time-unit, opposed to the previous prototypes.
After calculating a fixpoint, it executes the unless processes in the  unless queue
and executes the persistent assignations in the  persistent assignation queue. Then, it
calls the output processing method (e.g., sending some variable values to the standard
output or through a MIDI port). Finally, it deletes the current  store. Figure  15
illustrates the execution model.
 

 0.5
37

Figure 15: Execution model of the ntcc interpreter
6.3  Implementation of Ccfomi
Rueda et al ran Ccfomi on their interpreter. They wrote Lisp macros to extend Lisp
syntax for the definition of ntcc processes. We provide a similar interface to write
ntcc processes in Lisp. Furthermore, we can write Ccfomi definitions in Ntccrt in an
intuitive way using OpenMusic. For instance, the  process (presented in chapter 2), in
charge of the synchronization between the  and the  processes, is represented with a
few boxes:  one for  parallel processes, one for the ≤ condition, one for the =
condition, and one for when and unless processes (fig. 16)
 
 0.4
Figure 16: Writing the  process in OpenMusic
39

We successfully ran  Ccfomi as an stand-alone program using Midishare. We
present  the results  of our tests with the stand-alone program  in Chapter  Error:
Reference source not found. We also ran it as a Pd plugin generated by Ntccrt. The
plugin is connected to the midi-input, midi-output, and a clock (used for changing
from a time-unit to the other). For simplicity, we generate a clock pulse for each note
played by the user (fig. 17). In the same way, we could connect a Metronome object.
Metronome is an object that creates a clock pulse with a fixed interval of time.
 
 0.5
Figure 17: Running Ccfomi in Pure Data (Pd)
6.4  Summary
Further than just developing an interpreter, we developed an interface for OpenMusic
to write ntcc models for Ntccrt. Although the OpenMusic interface generates code
for Ntccrt, it is not able to embed Lisp code in the interpreter. In addition, the current
version of the interpreter does not support probabilistic choice nor cells, required to
run our model. This is acceptable because our objective was just to develop a ntcc
interpreter prototype. For that reason, we still do not support pntcc nor cells (which
are not basic operators on ntcc). In the following, we will describe the possibilities
and limitations of the interpreter and possible solutions for future work.

Additionally, since we encoded the When processes as a Gecode propagators, we
are able to use search in ntcc models without using the  agent. This is not possible
when encoding the  when processes as lightweight threads or OS threads because
threads  cannot  be  managed  inside  Gecode  search  engines.  Models  using  non-
deterministic choices are incompatible with the recomputation used in the search
engines.
Ntccrt cannot simulate processes leading the Store to false. For instance, 
when false do next tell (fail=true) 
|tell (a=2)|tell (a=3)
Since the when agent is represented as a propagator, once the propagation achieves a
fail state no more propagators will be called in that time-unit, causing inconsistencies
in the rest of the simulation. Fortunately, processes reasoning about a false Store can
be rewritten in a different way, avoiding this kind of situations. For instance, the
process above can be rewritten as: 
when state=false do next tell (fail=true) 
|tell (a=2)|tell (a=3)|tell (state=false)
Although in many applications we do not want to continue after the store fails in a
time-unit because a failed store is like an exception in a programming language (e.g.,
division by zero).
In addition, Ntccrt restricts the domains for the different constraint systems. The
domain for FD variables is  and each set or tree in the FS and the rational trees
variables cannot have more than  elements6. This limitation is due to Gecode, which
uses the C++ integer data type for representing its variables.
Another problem arises when we want to call Lisp functions in the interpreter.
This will be usefull to make computer music programs (written in Lisp) to interact
with Ntccrt. Currently, we are only using Lisp to generate C++ code. However, it is
not possible to embed Lisp code in the interpreter (e.g., calling a Lisp function as the
continuation of a when process). To fix that inconvenient, we propose using Gelisp
for writing a new interpreter, taking advantage of the call-back functions provided by
the Foreign Function Interface (FFI) to call Lisp functions from C++. That way a
propagator will be able to call a Lisp function. Although, this could have a negative
impact on performance and in the correctness of the system (e.g., when the Lisp
function does not end).
The implementation of cells is still experimental and it is not yet usable. The idea
for a real-time capable implementation of cells is extending the implementation of
persistent assignation. Cells, in the same way than persistent assignation, require to
pass  the domain of a variable from the current  time-unit to a future  time-unit.
However, persistent assignation usually involves simple equality relations. On the
other hand, the cells assignation may involve any mathematical function g(x) (e.g ).
Probabilistic choice is not yet possible neither. For achieving it, we propose
extending the idea used for non-deterministic choice agent . To model , it was enough
by determining the first condition than can be deduced and then activate the process
associated to it. For probabilistic choice, we need to check the conditions after
calculating a fixpoint, because we need to know all the conditions that can be entailed
before calculating the probabilistic distribution. When multiple probabilistic choice
⨁ operators are nested, we need to calculate a fixpoint for each nested level. 
By implementing cells and probabilistic choice it would be easy to implement the
model proposed for this work. Valencia proposed in [61] to develop model checking
tools for ntcc. In the future, we propose using model checking tools for verifying
properties of complex systems, such as ours.
6 It is not  because one bit is used for the sign.
41

In addition, Pérez and Rueda proposed in [29] exploring the automatic generation
of models for probabilistic model checker such as Prism [18]. The reader should be
aware that Prism has been used successfully to check properties of real-time systems.
We believe that this approach can be used to verify properties in our system.
Finally, we found out that the time-units in Ntccrt do not represent uniform time-
units, because in the stand-alone simulation they have different durations. This is a
problem when synchronizing a  ntcc program with other programs. To fix it, we
made the duration of each time-unit take a fixed time. We did that easily by using the
clock provided by Pd or Max and providing a clock input in Ntccrt plugins. That way
we only start simulating a new time-unit once we receive a clock pulse.
On the other hand, fixing the duration of a time-unit has two problems. First, if the
fixed time is less than the time required to compute all the processes in a time-unit,
this makes the simulation incoherent. Second, it makes the simulation last longer
because the fixed time has to be an upper limit for the time-unit duration.
6.5  Related work
Lman was developed as a framework to program RCX Lego Robots. It is composed
of three parts: an abstract machine, a compiler and a visual language. We borrowed
from this interpreter the idea of having several queues for storing ntcc’s processes,
instead  of  using  threads.  Regrettably, since  Lman only  supports  finite  domain
constraints.
NtccSim was used to simulate biological models [16]. It was developed in Mozart-
Oz [37]. It is able to work with finite domains (FD) and a constraint system to reason
about real numbers. We conjecture (it has not been proved) that using Mozart-Oz for
writing a ntcc interpreter it is not as efficient as using Gecode, based on the results
obtained in the benchmarks of Gecode, where Gecode performs better than Mozart-
Oz in constraint solving.
Rueda’s sim was developed as a framework to simulate multimedia semantic
interaction applications. This interpreter was the first one representing rational trees,
finite domain , and finite domain sets constraint systems. One drawback of this
interpreter is the use of Screamer [47] to represent the constraint systems. Screamer is
a  framework  for  constraint  logic  programming  written  in  Common  Lisp.
Unfortunately,  Screamer is  not  designed  for  high performance.  This  makes  the
execution of the ntcc models in Rueda’s sim not suitable for real-time interaction.
7  Tests and Results
Since the creation of Lman, performance and correctness have been the main issues to
evaluate a  ntcc interpreter.  Lman was a great success in the history of  ntcc
interpreters because by using  Lman it was possible to program Lego Robots, and
formally predict the behavior of the robots. A few years later,  Rueda’s sim was
capable to model multimedia interaction systems. 
Although, it is beyond the scope of this research to evaluate whether those
interpreters are faster than Ntccrt or whether they are able to interact in real-time with
a human player, we conjecture that they are not appropriate for real-time interaction
for simulating hundreds of time-units in complex models such as Ccfomi, based on
the results presented by their authors.
In  this  chapter  we  want  evaluate  the  performance  of  our  ntcc interpreter
prototypes and also to evaluate the behavior of Ntccrt. In order to achieve these goals,
we performed different tests to Ntccrt and to our previous implementations of ntcc. 
First, we tried to develop a generic implementation of lightweight threads that
could be used in Lispworks. The purpose was to use threads to manage concurrency
in  ntcc interpreters. We compared Lisp processes (medium-weight threads), our

implementation of threads based on continuations, and our implementation of threads
based on event-driven programming.
We found out that continuations are not efficient in Lispworks. We also found out
that the event-driven implementation of threads is faster than using Lisp processes or
continuations. However, it is very difficult to express instructions such as go-to
jumps, exceptions and local variable definition on event-driven programming.
Then,  we  tried  using  both  Lisp  processes  and  the  event-driven  threads  to
implement ntcc interpreters (explained in Appendix 9.3). We found out that context-
switch of threads and the fact that it checks for stability constantly adds an overhead
in the performance on the ntcc interpreter. For those reasons, we discarded using
threads for the ntcc interpreter. We also found out that encoding ntcc processes as
Gecode propagators outperforms the threaded implementations of the interpreter.
Each test presented in this chapter was taken with a sample of 100 essays. Time
was measured using the time command provided by Mac OS X and the time macro
provided by Common Lisp. All tests were performed under Mac OS X 10.5.2 using
an Imac Intel Core 2 duo 2.8 Ghz and Lispworks Professional 5.02.
In the graph bars, we present the average of those samples. The vertical axe is
measure in seconds in all graphs. We do not present standard deviation nor other
statistical  information  because  the  differences  of  performances  between  one
implementation and another were considerable high to reason about the performance
of the implementations. Sometimes, we do not present all the bars in a graph because
they do not fit the scale of the graph.
7.1  Testing Ntccrt performance
In order to test Ntccrt performance, we made two tests. First, we compared a ntcc
specification to find paths in a graph with other three implementations. Second, we
tested Ccfomi using Ntccrt. Recall from the beginning of this chapter that each test
was taken with a sample of 100 essays. Time was measured using the time command
provided by Mac OS X and the time macro provided by Common Lisp. All tests were
performed under Mac OS X 10.5.2 using an Imac Intel Core 2 duo 2.8 Ghz and
Lispworks Professional 5.02.
7.2  Test: Comparing implementations of ntcc 
interpreters
We compared the execution times of simulating the specification presented to find
paths in graph concurrently (explained in detail in Appendix  9.4) running on the
event-driven Lisp interpreter and Ntccrt. We also compared them with a concurrent
constraint implementation on Mozart/OZ and a recursive implementation in Lisp (fig.
18).
 
43

 0.8
Figure 18: Comparing implementation to find paths in a graph
7.3  Test: Executing Ccfomi
Ccfomi is able to receive up to one note each  time-unit. A reasonable measure of
performance is the average duration of a ntcc time-unit during the simulation. We
ran Ccfomi in Ntccrt with a player interpretating at most the first 300 notes of J.S
Bach’s two-part  Invention  No.  5,  as  studied  in  [9].  The  player  chooses  (non-
deterministically) to play a note or postpone the decision for the next  time-unit. It
took an average of 20 milliseconds per time-unit, scheduling around 880 processes
per time-unit, and simulating 300  time-units. We simulated these experiment 100
times. Detailed results can be found at Appendix  9.6. We do not present musical
results, since it is out of the scope of this work to conclude whether Ccfomi produces
or not an improvisation “appealing to the ear”. We are only interested on performance
tests.
Pachet argues in [28] that an improvisation system able to learn and produce
sequences in less than 30ms is appropriate for real-time interaction. Since Ccfomi has
a response time of 20ms in average for a 300 time-units simulation, we conclude that
it is capable of real-time interaction according to Pachet’s research.
7.4  Summary
Ntccrt,  our  ntcc interpreter  based  on  encoding  ntcc processes  as  Gecode
propagators  outperforms  our  threaded  and  our  event-driven  implementations  of
ntcc.
Since we are learning and producing sequences with a response time lower than
30 milliseconds then, according to the authors of the Continuator, we have a system
fast enough to interact with a musician.

7.5  Related work
Lman’s developers ran a specification to play a MIDI pitch with a fixed duration each
time-unit [21]. The tests were made using a Pentium III 930 MHz, 256 MB Ram,
Linux Debian Woody (3.0), and the RCX 2.0 Lego robot with running BrickOS 2.6.1.
They made a simulation with 100 time-units.
This simple process takes an average of 281.25 ms to run each time-unit using
Lman, unfortunately it is not suitable for real-time interaction in music, even if we
would run it on modern computers. 
On  the  other  hand,  Rueda’s  interpreter  ran  Ccfomi on  a  1.67  GHz  Apple
PowerBook G4 using Digitool’s MCL version of Common Lisp, taking an average of
25 milliseconds per time-unit, scheduling around 20 concurrent processes. They also
made a simulation with 100 time-units.
Unfortunately, Rueda’s implementation uses some MCL’s functions (not defined
in the Common Lisp standard) and we were not able to run his interpreter in Mac OS
X Intel to compare it with Ntccrt. On the other hand, Lman is designed for Linux and
it is no longer maintained for current versions of Linux and Tcl/tk. 
8  Conclusions
In this chapter, we present a summary of the thesis, some concluding remarks, and we
propose some future work thoughts. 
8.1  Summary
•
We explained how we can model music improvisation using probabilities, 
extending the notion of non-deterministic choice described in Ccfomi. Although 
this idea is very simple, the probabilities are computed in constant time and space 
when the FO is built. We managed to preserve the linear complexity in time and 
space of the FO on-line construction algorithm.
•
Calculating the probability of being on a certain scale makes the model more 
appropriate for certain music genres, but it requires to calculate multiple 
constants, which vary according to the genre of tonal music where the user is 
improvising. For that reason, it is discarded.
•
We explained how we can change the intensity of the notes generated in the 
improvisation. This kind of variation in the intensity is something new for 
machine improvisation systems as far as we know. We believe that this kind of 
approach, where simple variations can be made while preserving the style learned 
from the user and being compatible with real-time implementations, should be a 
topic of investigation in future work.
•
We used cells to represent the variables changing from a time-unit to another. 
Using cells we modeled a probabilistic distribution that changes according to the 
user and computer interaction. As far as we know, this is the first pntcc model 
where probabilistic distributions change between time-units. Unfortunately, 
current version of Ntccrt does not support cells nor probabilistic choice. 
•
We ran Ccfomi in Ntccrt taking an average of 20 milliseconds per time-unit (see 
Chapter 7). Since we are learning and producing sequences with a response time 
less than 30 milliseconds then, according to the authors of the Continuator, we 
have a system fast enough to interact with a musician.
45

•
Although Gecode was designed for solving combinatory problems using 
constraints, we found out that using Gecode for Ntccrt give us outstanding results 
for writing a ntcc interpreter.
•
Unfortunately, the interpreter is not able to execute processes leading the store to 
false. However, processes reasoning about a false store can be rewritten in a 
different way, avoiding this kind of situations.
8.2  Concluding remarks
We show how we can make a probabilistic extension of  Ccfomi using the Factor
Oracle. This extension has three main features. First, it preserves the linear time and
space complexity of the on-line Factor Oracle algorithm. The Factor Oracle was
chosen as the data structure to capture the user style in Ccfomi because of its linear
complexity. Our extension would not be worth if we had changed the complexity fo
the  Factor  Oracle  on-line  construction  algorithm  in  order  to  add  probabilistic
information to the model, making it incompatible with real-time.
Second, we are using pntcc (a probabilistic extension of ntcc) for our model.
The advantage of pntcc is that we do not need to to model all the processes in a new
calculus to extend  Ccfomi, instead we use  pntcc where we have all the agents
defined in ntcc (except the * agent, which is not used in this work) and a new agent
for probabilistic choice. Adding probabilistic choice to  Ccofmi, we avoid loops
without control during the improvisation that may happen without control in Ccfomi
due to its non-deterministic nature. In addition, changing the probability distribution,
we could favor repetitions in the improvisation, if desired.
Third, the variation in the intensity during the improvisation. This is, as far as we
know, the first model considering this kind of variation. Generating variations in the
intensity during improvisation, we avoid sharp differences between the user and
computer intensity, making the improvisation appealing to the ear (according the
musicians we interviewed). Variations in the musical attributes are well-known for
decades  in Computer Assisted Composition, but in interactive systems (such as
machine improvisation) variations are still an open subject, in part, due to the real-
time requirements of the interactive systems.
If the reader does not consider relevant using process calculi (such as pntcc) to
model, verify and execute a real-time music improvisation system, we pose the reader
the following questions. Has the reader developed a real-time improvisation system
on a programming language mixing non-deterministic and probabilistic choices? Try
verifying the system formally! Is it an easy task? Would the reader be able to write
such system in 50 lines of code? Using pntcc, we did it.
If we can model such systems using pntcc and process calculi have been well-
known in theory of concurrency for the past two decades, why they have not been
used in real-life applications? Garavel argues that models based on process calculi are
not widespread because there are many calculi and many variants for each calculus,
being difficult to choose the most appropriate. In addition, it is difficult to express an
explicit notion of time and real-time requirements in process calculi. Finally, he
argues that existing tools for process calculi are not user-friendly. 
We want to make process calculi widespread for real-life applications. We left the
task of representing real-time in process calculi and choosing the appropriate variant
of each calculus for each application to senior researchers. This work focuses on
developing a real-life application with pntcc and showing that our interpreter Ntccrt
is a user-friendly tool, providing a graphical interface to describe  ntcc processes
easily and compile models such as Ccfomi to efficient C++ programs capable of real-
time user interaction. We also showed that our approach to design Ntccrt offers better

performance  than  using  threads  or  event-driven  programming  to  represent  the
processes.
The reader may argue that although we can synchronize Ntccrt with an external
clock provided by Max or Pd, this does not solve the problem of simulating models
when the clock step is smaller than the time necessary to compute a  time-unit. In
addition, the reader may argue that we encourage formal verification of ntcc and
pntcc models, but there is not an existing tool to verify these models automatically,
not even semi-automatically.
The  reader  is  right!  For  that  reason,  currently  the  Avispa  research  group
(sponsored by Pontificia Universidad Javeriana de Cali) is developing an interpreter
for an extension of  ntcc capable of modeling  time-units with fixed duration. In
addition, Avispa is proposing to Colciencias a project called Robust theories for
Emerging  Applications  in  Concurrency  Theory:  Processes  and  Logic  Used  in
Emergent  Systems  (REACT-PLUS).  REACT-PLUS  will  focus  on  developing
verification tools for ntcc, pntcc and other process calculi. In addition, the project
will continue developing faster and easier to use interpreters for them.
We invite the reader to read the following section to know about the future work
thoughts that we propose. In addition, the reader may find more information about the
REACT-PLUS proposal at http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/comete/pp.html.
8.3  Future work
In the future, we propose extending our research in the following directions.
8.4  Extending our model
We propose capturing new elements in the music sequences. For instance, considering
the  music  timbre,  music  pitch/amplitude  variation  (e.g.,  vibrato,  bending  and
acciaccatura), and resonance effects (e.g., delay, reverb and chorus).
8.5  Improvisation set-ups
Several concurrent improvisation situation set-ups have been proposed [6], [10], but
none of them have been implemented for real-time music improvisation. Rueda et al.
in [40] propose the following set-ups:  n performers and  n oracles learning and
performing; one performer, one oracle learning, and several improvisation processes
running concurrently in the same oracle; one performer and several oracles learning
from different viewpoints of the same performance.
8.6  Using Gelisp for Ntccrt
Currently, we are only using Lisp to generate C++ code. However, it is not possible to
embed Lisp code in the interpreter. To work around that, we propose using Gelisp for
writing a new interpreter, taking advantage of the call-back functions provided by the
Foreign Function Interface (FFI) to call Lisp functions from C++. That way a process
can trigger the execution of a Lisp function.
8.7  Adding support for cells for Ntccrt
The  idea  for  a  real-time  capable  implementation  of  cells  is  to  extend  the
implementation of persistent assignation. Cells, in the same way than persistent
assignation, require to pass the domain of a variable from the current time-unit to a
future time-unit. 
47

8.8  Developing an interpreter for pntcc
Pérez and Rueda already propose an interpreter for pntcc. To achieve probabilistic
choice in Ntccrt, we propose extending the idea used for non-deterministic choice
agent . To model , it was enough by determining the first condition that can be
deduced and then activate the process associated to it. For probabilistic choice, we
need to check the conditions after calculating a fixpoint, because we need to know all
the conditions that can be entailed before calculating the probabilistic distribution.
When multiple probabilistic choice ⨁ operators are nested, we need to calculate a
fixpoint for each nested level. 
8.9  Developing an interpreter for rtcc
There is not a way to describe the behavior of a ntcc time-unit if the fixed time is
less than the time required to execute all the processes scheduled. For that reason, we
propose developing an interpreter for the Real Time Concurrent Constraint (rtcc)
[45] calculus. 
Rtcc is an extension of ntcc capable of dealing with strong time-outs. Strong
time-outs allow the execution of a process to be interrupted in the exact instant in
which internal transitions cause a constraint to be inferred from the store. Rtcc is
also capable of delays inside a single time unit. Delays inside a single time unit
allows to express things like “this process must start 3 seconds after another starts”.
Sarria proposed in [45] developing an interpreter for rtcc. We believe that we can
extend Ntccrt to simulate rtcc models.
8.10  Adding other graphical interfaces for Ntccrt
For this work, we conducted all the tests under Mac OS X using Pd and stand-alone
programs. Since we are using Gecode and Flext to generate the externals, they could
be easily compiled to other platforms and for Max. We used Openmusic to define an
iconic representation of ntcc models. In the future, we also propose exploring a way
of making graphical specifications for ntcc similar to the graphical representation of
data structures in Pd.
8.11  Developing model checking tools for Ntccrt
Valencia proposed using model checking tools for verifying properties in complex
ntcc models. In addition, Pérez and Rueda proposed developing model checking
tools for pntcc. For instance, they propose exploring the automatic generation of
models for  Prism based on a  pntcc model. We propose generating models to
existing model checkers automatically to prove properties of the systems before
simulating them on Ntccrt.
