Hybrid Generative/Discriminative Learning for Automatic Image Annotation
Shuang Hong Yang
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

Jiang Bian
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

Hongyuan Zha
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Automatic
image
annotation
(AIA)
raises
tremendous challenges to machine learning
as it requires modeling of data that are both
ambiguous in input and output, e.g., images
containing multiple objects and labeled with
multiple semantic tags. Even more challenging
is that the number of candidate tags is usually
huge (as large as the vocabulary size) yet each
image is only related to a few of them. This pa-
per presents a hybrid generative-discriminative
classiﬁer to simultaneously address the extreme
data-ambiguity
and
overﬁtting-vulnerability
issues in tasks such as AIA. Particularly: (1)
an Exponential-Multinomial Mixture (EMM)
model is established to capture both the input
and output ambiguity and in the meanwhile
to encourage prediction sparsity; and (2) the
prediction ability of the EMM model is explicitly
maximized through discriminative learning that
integrates variational inference of graphical
models and the pairwise formulation of ordinal
regression. Experiments show that our approach
achieves both superior annotation performance
and better tag scalability.
1
Introduction
As the exponential growth of internet photographs (e.g.
Flickr) and videos (e.g. Youtube), automatic image annota-
tion (AIA) is increasingly important for indexing, manag-
ing and retrieving multimedia data. AIA usually includes
two types of tasks: (1) image annotation assigns descrip-
tive metadata (e.g. caption) to a given (entire) image; and
(2) region annotation annotates each object (e.g., image re-
gion) within a given image with appropriate textual tags.
AIA raises tremendous challenges to machine learning al-
gorithms.
Firstly, because each image usually contains
multiple objects in a consistent scene, to recognize each
object thus requires modeling of input-ambiguous systems,
i.e., each input example (e.g., image) contains a set of cor-
related instances (e.g., objects), for which each individual
output (e.g., tag prediction) is of interest. This triggers the
nontrivial application of multi-instance learning (Dietterich
et al, 1998; Carneiro et al, 2007). In addition, due to the
huge image volumes and extremely diverse scene topics, it
is prohibitive to employ skilled experts to manually label a
set of training data that are sufﬁciently large to support sta-
tistical learning. Instead, we only have access to partially
labeled images, e.g., photos with captions specifying only
names of persons in each photo but not which name goes
with which face. Learning from such ambiguously labeled
multi-instance data opens a new frontier for machine learn-
ing, i.e., modeling systems/data that are both ambiguous in
input and output, motivating the recently emerged frame-
work of multi-label multi-instance classiﬁcation (Cour et
al, 2009; Yang et al, 2010; Zhou and Zhang, 2007).
Perhaps even more challenging in AIA is that, in a real
world AIA task, the number of candidate tags is usually
huge (as large as the size of a natural language vocabu-
lary) yet each image is only related to a few of them. In-
deed, because the scene topics of internet images/videos
are extremely diverse, any noun-phrase can be a valid tag.
This makes naive classiﬁer extremely vulnerable to over-
ﬁtting because (1) that a few relevant tags could easily be
eclipsed in the crowd of a huge number of irrelevant ones;
and (2) that the data could be extremely scarce for train-
ing the classiﬁer corresponding to each individual tag. For
example, considering a setting consists of 1000 evenly dis-
tributed tags, even with 100K labeled training images, we
only have 100 examples for each tag, and 0.1% expected
accuracy for a baseline random guessing classiﬁer. To re-
duce the risk of overﬁtting, it is desirable to pursue clas-
siﬁers that are scalable to class (tag) size. However, little
progress has been made so far on this topic.
In this paper, we abstract AIA as a generic learning task
called many-class multi-label multi-instance classiﬁcation
(M3C), which aims at learning decision rules from data
that (1) are ambiguous in both input and output and (2)
involve massive classes. Typically, in an M3C data set,
each example (e.g. image) consists of multiple instances

(e.g. objects) and is associated with several out of a huge
number of classes (e.g. tags). In this paper, we present a
hybrid generative-discriminative classiﬁer to address both
the extreme data ambiguity and overﬁtting vulnerability
(due to massive classes) issues involved in M3C. Particu-
larly, an Exponential-Multinomial Mixture (EMM) model
is established, which is able to capture both the input and
output ambiguity of M3C data, and in the meanwhile to
encourage prediction sparsity so as to automatically rule
out irrelevant classes (e.g., tags). Furthermore, to maxi-
mize discriminant ability and to handle the small-sample
problem incurred by the massive classes as well, we de-
rive inference and learning algorithms based on the prin-
ciple of margin maximization (Sha and Saul, 2007; Zhu et
al, 2009), leading to a learning formulation integrating the
variational inference of graphical model (Jaakkola and Jor-
dan, 2000) and the pariwise preference formulation of ordi-
nal regression (Herbrich et al, 1999), which is further efﬁ-
ciently solved by convex optimization. Compared with tra-
ditional MLE learning, the discriminative learning formu-
lation not only explicitly optimizes the predication (classiﬁ-
cation) performance, but also enjoys additional advantages
such as stronger supervision and perfect data balance.
Our AIA system builds the multi-instance multi-label cor-
pora by (1) segmenting each image into instances (i.e. re-
gions) and (2) using words in the caption as labels. Each
region is represented using the standard bag-of-discrete-
feature framework (Nowak et al, 2006). In this way, an ex-
ample (i.e., image) is analogous to a document, an instance
(i.e., region) to a paragraph, and a feature to a word. Exper-
iments on image and caption collections from Alipr and
LabelMe show that our algorithm achieves not only supe-
rior annotation accuracy but also better tag-scalability, i.e.,
performance robustness against (1) label size increasing, or
(2) training size decreasing.
2
Related Works
Automatic image annotation is usually addressed using
machine translation approaches (Blei and Jordan, 2003;
Duygulu et al, 2002; Li and Wang, 2008; Wang et al, 2009),
in which image-caption pairs are viewed as bi-lingual texts
and machine translation techniques are applied to align
(translate) the textual vocabulary (e.g., tags) with the vi-
sual vocabulary (e.g., blobs clustered from image regions).
In this paper, instead of learning the loose correspondences
between tags and visual words, we attempt to learn a clas-
siﬁer that is able to directly discriminate the semantic tags
based on the visual content/context of the image regions.
There are two critical challenges in AIA, one is the data
ambiguity (in both input and output), the other is the over-
ﬁtting vulnerability due to massive tags. Substantial ef-
forts have been made to address the former issue. Tra-
ditional multi-class image classiﬁcation assigns a single
tag to an entire image and thus captures neither the in-
put nor the output ambiguity.
Multi-label classiﬁcation
(Carneiro et al, 2007), annotating each image with one or
more tags, only captures output ambiguity and is applica-
ble only to task (1) (i.e., image annotation); whereas multi-
instance classiﬁcation (Viola et al, 2006; Yang et al, 2005),
which annotates each image region with a single tag, only
captures input ambiguity and thus cannot annotate multi-
tag images. Quite recently, several approaches (Cour et
al, 2009; Zha et al, 2009; Yang et al, 2010) were developed
for multi-label multi-instance classiﬁcation, which natu-
rally address both input and output ambiguity. Although
all these approaches were observed to achieve superior per-
formances for ambiguity modeling (though not directly ap-
plied to AIA), none of them addresses the massive-tag is-
sue, which is a fundamental challenge of real-world tasks.
As a result, they are only applicable to task with moderate
number of classes. In this paper, we attempt to simulta-
neously address both the data ambiguity and massive-tag
issues. Our model builds on the Dirichlet-Bernoulli Align-
ment (DBA) model (Yang et al, 2010) to capture data am-
biguity. DBA is a Dirichlet-Multinomial mixture model,
similar to the sLDA (Blei et al, 2003) topic model but with
supervised topics (topics explicitly aligned to class labels).
A limitation of DBA is that the classiﬁcation prediction
turns to be smoothed over all the classes, making its perfor-
mance deteriorate exponentially as the number of classes
increases. In this paper, we take two measures to improve
tag-scalability.
First, instead of using Dirichlet prior to
smooth prediction among tags (e.g., sLDA and DBA), we
adopt Exponential prior to encourage prediction sparsity.
This signiﬁcantly restricts the number of active tags for
a given image, ensuring the classiﬁer effectively identify
the most relevant tags while automatically ruling out irrel-
evant ones. Secondly, unlike traditional MLE learning, our
model is trained discriminatively to explicitly maximize
prediction accuracy.
We also noticed a surge of needs for sparse topic models
in machine learning community. We believe our model is
a good start. In its simpliﬁed version, our model seam-
lessly integrates two very important learning tools: topic
modeling and sparse coding, and enjoys the advantages
of both:
the outstanding interpretability of topic mod-
els in discovering topics that are intuitively comprehensi-
ble, and the extraordinary performance of sparse-coding
in learning predictive topics.
Indeed, sparsity turns to
be an highly-preferable property (or even requirement)
for learning algorithms.
In some cases, the objective
(likelihood) is not convex or the solution space is ﬂat in
some areas, nonsparse learning algorithms usually lead
to local optima or under-learned models.
With sparsity
prior/regularization/constraint, the solutions become more
distinguishable (i.e., only solutions in or close to the sur-
faces of the hyper-polyhedron are preferred) and hence
lead to better generalization ability. From the information-
theoretic viewpoint, being sparser might also imply smaller
description length.

χ1
χ2
λ
C
β
y
θ
z
f K
M
N
w
C
η
Figure 1: The Exponential-Multinomial Mixture (EMM)
model.
3
Hybrid Generative/Discriminative
Learning for M3C
3.1
Formulation
In traditional multiclass classiﬁcation, we are given a set
of labeled examples {xn, yn}N
n=1, where xn is a point in a
vector space X ⊂RD, while yn is a point in a moderate-
sized set Y = {1, 2, . . . , C} (C > 2). The goal is to ﬁnd a
decision rule y = φ(x) : X →Y.
In a Many-Class Multi-Label Multi-Instance Classiﬁcation
(M3C) task such as AIA, the number of classes are ex-
tremely large C ≫2, and each example as well as its la-
bel are neither points but both sets, that is: given a labeled
training set D = {Xn, Yn}N
n=1, each example (e.g., image)
Xn contains a set of instances (e.g., objects within the im-
age) xmn ∈X (m = 1, 2, . . . , Mn), and its label (e.g.,
caption of the image) Yn ⊂Y consists of a set of class la-
bels (e.g., tag words in the caption). The goal of M3C is to
ﬁnd a decision rule Y = ϕ(X) : 2X →2Y, where 2A de-
notes the power set of a set A. We make the the following
assumptions:
• Exchangeability: A data set is a bag of examples (e.g.
images), and each example is a bag of instances (e.g.
objects within an image).
• Parsimoniousness: Each example is related to a very
limited number of classes, i.e., ∀n, |Yn| ≪C.
• Distinguishablity: Each instance (region) within an
example belongs to a single class.
3.2
Exponential-Multinomial Mixture
In this section, we develop a Bayesian hierarchical model
to model the data ambiguity in M3C. The model is built
on recent advances in probabilistic topic models (Blei et
al, 2003; Blei and Mcauliffe, 2008). By modeling a docu-
ment as an admixture of latent topics, topic models allow
each document to be associated with multiple topics with
different proportions, and thus provide a principled way to
capture the ambiguity in the data. However, the topics dis-
covered by topic model are essentially multinomial distri-
butions over words. Although for textual data, it is possible
to interpret the discovered topics based on human expertise
(Blei et al, 2003), for image data, multinomial distributions
of visual features are generally incomprehensible. Here,
we use natural language tags as explicit topics, which not
only allows us to learn classiﬁers (rather than dimension-
ality reducers) from ambiguously labeled data, but also en-
ables discriminative learning. Also, by using exponential
rather than Dirichlet prior, our model seamlessly integrates
two important learning tools, i.e., topic modeling (Blei et
al, 2003) and sparse coding (Lee et al, 2009).
We develop a Bayesian hierarchical model for M3C based
on the aforementioned assumptions.
The Exponential-
Multinomial Mixture (EMM) model (Figure 1) assume that
each example X in D is generated by the following process:
1. Sample θ∼Exp(λ)
2. For each of the M instances in X:
a) Choose a label z ∼Mult(˜θ);
b) Generate an instance x ∼p(x|z, B);
3. Generate the example-level label y∼p(y|z1:M, w).
In the model, an exponential distribution p(θ| λ) is used
to model the property of label parsimoniousness, where
λ=[λ1, . . . , λC]⊤with λc > 0 (c = 1, . . . , C) is the prior
parameter.
The instance-level class indicator z is a bi-
nary C-vector with the 1-of-C code (zc = 1 if the c-th
class is chosen; ∀i ̸= c, zi = 0), which is generated
from a multinomial distribution with parameter ˜θ=θ/||θ||1.
The example-level label y = [y1, . . . , yC]⊤is also a bi-
nary C-vector with yc = 1 if the pattern X belongs to
the c-th class (i.e., c ∈Y) and yc = 0 otherwise. We
assume the example-level label is generated by a cost-
sensitive voting process based on the instance-level labels.
Denote the average of the instance-level label assignments
¯z = [¯z1, . . . , ¯zC]⊤, where ¯zc =
1
M
PM
m=1 zmc, we use a
degraded soft-max regression model:
p(yc|¯z, w) ∝exp(ycwc¯zc).
(1)
We assume that each instance x is described by a bag
of discrete features {f (1), . . . , f (K)}, although it is quite
straightforward to substitute with other instance models,
e.g. mixtures of Gaussian. Bag-of-feature representation
for images has been popularized in computer vision due
to its simplicity, robustness and effectiveness (Nowak et
al, 2006). For AIA, this can be achieved by building a
vocabulary of visual codewords, e.g., by clustering rep-
resentative image patches (see Section 4 for details). Let
F = {f1, f2, . . . , fD} be the dictionary of discrete fea-
tures, we therefore have a multinomial model:
p(x|z, B) ∝βx1
c1 βx2
c2 . . . βxD
cD |zc=1,
(2)
where xd (d = 1, . . . , D) is the frequency of the d-th
feature fd in x, K is the total frequency of all features:
K = PD
d=1 xd, and B=[β1, . . .,βC]⊤is a C × D-matrix
with the (c, d)-th entry βcd = p(fd = 1|zc = 1).
The joint distribution of an example (X, Y) and the latent
variables θ and {z}, given the model parameters B,λ and

w, is deﬁned by:
p(X, Y, {z}, θ|B, λ, w)
(3)
=p(θ|λ)
M
Y
m=1
Ã
p(zm|θ)
D
Y
d=1
p(fmd|B, zm)
!
p(y|¯z, w)).
As the number of classes, C, is typically very large in M3C,
the parameters, λ and B, could have very high dimen-
sions. This usually leads to severe problems of overﬁtting
when maximum likelihood estimators are used. To cope
with this problem, we adopt a fully Bayesian treatment by
posing conjugate priors over these variables. Particularly,
we assume that {λ1, . . . , λC} are i.i.d.
generated from
a Gamma distribution: λc ∼Gamma(χ), χ=[χ1, χ2]⊤;
and {β1, . . .βC} are sampled from a Dirichlet distribu-
tion βc ∼Dir(η), where η= [η1, . . . , ηD]⊤with ηd ⩾0,
c = 1, . . . , C, d = 1, . . . , D. The overall model is depicted
with a graphical representation in Figure 1.
3.3
Max-Margin Learning
Traditional topical mixture models are usually trained by
MLE style estimators (e.g., variational EM, expectation
propagation) or Gibbs sampling, where the likelihood of
the observations are approximately maximized (Blei et
al, 2003; Blei and Mcauliffe, 2008):
max
λ,η,w
L = log p(D|λ, η, w)
In this paper, by casting topics explicitly as class labels,
we are eligible for discriminative learning. Here we de-
velop maximum margin algorithms for inference and learn-
ing of EMM, leading to a hybrid generative/discriminative
approach. By taking advantage of max-margin learning’s
well-known ability in handling small-sample problem, we
hope to relieve the overﬁtting issue incurred by the massive
classes in M3C. We also hope to improve the classiﬁcation
accuracy by directly maximizing the discriminative ability
using max-margin optimization. None of these concerns
could be otherwise addressed by MLE learning.
The formulation is based on margin-maximization, a prin-
ciple used in training SVMs. Our algorithm is an integra-
tion of variational inference (Jaakkola and Jordan, 2000)
and pariwise ordinal regression (Herbrich et al, 1999), at-
tempting to ﬁnd parameters that place decision boundaries
between each relevant vs. irrelevant label pair as far apart
as possible. The learning problem is formulated as follows:
min
λ,η,w

ν1
2 w⊤w −L + ν2
N
X
n
1
|Yn||Y◦
n|
X
i,j
ξi,j
n


s.t. : E[wi¯zni −wj ¯znj] ⩾1 −ξij
n , ∀i ∈Yn, j ∈Y◦
n
ν1 ⩾0, ν2 ⩾0, ξij
n ⩾0,
(4)
where ν1 and ν2 are trade-off parameters, the irrelevant la-
bel set is the complement of the relevant label set: Y◦
n =
Y −Yn, and L denotes the log likelihood for observing the
labeled samples D = {Xn, Yn}N
n=1.
Our discriminative formulation enjoys two additional ad-
vantages: (1) it exploits stronger supervision – suppose
a training example has m relevant tags and n irrelevant
ones, the pairwise formulation extends supervision size
from O(m + n) to O(m × n); (2) it relieves the data im-
balance issue – typically, in a massive (e.g. thousands) tag
set, relevant tags per example only occupy a tiny propor-
tion (e.g., 3-5 per example), thus the MLE formulation suf-
fers severe supervision imbalance (i.e., the prior positive-
negative ratio m/n ≪1), whereas our max-margin for-
mulation is perfectly balanced, i.e.: a priori, each pair is
equally positive (correctly ranked) or negative (incorrectly
ranked).
The Lagrangian of Eq(4) is given by:
L =ν1
2 w⊤w + ν2
N
X
n
1
|Yn||Y◦
n|
X
i,j
ξi,j
n
−L +
X
nij
αij
n (1 −ξij
n −E[wi¯zni −wj ¯znj]),
where αij
n ⩾0 are Lagragian multipliers. As both the last
two terms (the likelihood objective L and the constraints)
involve marginal probabilities that requires integration over
the latent variables, the exact computation of which is not
tractable, we therefore use mean-ﬁeld variational method to
derive an upper bound to approximate the Lagrangian ob-
jective, and then optimize the upper bound instead. The
overall learning algorithm is a EM optimization, where
the E-step uses variational method to approximate the La-
grangian, whereas the M-step in turn optimizes it to learn
the model parameters.
3.3.1
Variational Approximation
We bound the intractable terms in the Lagrangian by apply-
ing the mean-ﬁeld variational method (Jaakkola and Jor-
dan, 2000). Particularly, for the loglikelihood L, we have:
L = log p(D|λ, η, w)
=
X
n
log
Z
θ
X
{z}
p(Xn, Yn, {z}n, θn)dθ
=L(γ, Φ, µ, ρ) + KL(q||p)
≈
max
γ,Φ,µ,ρ L(γ, Φ, µ, ρ),
(5)
where we have introduced a full-factorized variational dis-
tribution:
q
= Q
c Dir(βc|µc)Q
n(Gamma(θn|γn,ρn)
Q
m Mult (znm|φnm)), KL(q||p) is the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between q and the posterior distribution of
the latent variables. Denote Hq the entropy of q, L is the
variational lower bound for L:
L(γ, Φ, µ, ρ) = Eq[log p(D, {z}, {θ}, {β}|λ, w, η)]+Hq.

The main terms in the variational bound L are given by:
Eq[log p(θ|λ)] =
XC
c=1(log λc −λcγcρc)
Eq[log p(zm|θ)] =
XC
c=1 φmc(Ψ(γc) + log ρc)
Eq[log p(X|B, {z})] =
M
X
m=1
C
X
c=1
D
X
d=1
φmcxmd log βcd
Eq[log p(y|¯z, w)] = 1
M
XM
m=1
XC
c=1 ycwcφmc
Hq[θ] =
XC
c=1(log ρc + γc + log Γ(γc) −(γc −1)Ψ(γc))
where Ψ(·) is the digamma function, and we have used the
fact Eq[log θc] = Ψ(γc) + log ρc. The other terms are stan-
dard in the topical model literature (Blei et al, 2003).
The Lagrangian L is therefore approximated by solving:
max
γ,Φ,µ,ρ
L +
X
nij
αij
n (wiEq[¯zni] −wjEq[¯znj]).
(6)
where Eq[¯zni] =
1
Mn
PMn
m=1 φnmi. We use a coordinate
ascent method, which leads to the following iterative up-
dating equations:
ρnc =
λcγnc
1 + PMn
m=1 φnmc
(7)
φnmc ∝ρnc
YD
d=1(βcd)xnmdeΨ(γnc)+ wc
Mn (ync+δnc)
(8)
µcd = ηd +
N
X
n=1
Mn
X
m=1
φnmcxnmd
(9)
where δnc is a quantity related to the Lagrangian multipli-
ers α’s due to the margin constraints, we have:
δnc =
½ P
j /∈Yn αcj
n ,
if c ∈Yn
−P
i∈Yn αic
n ,
else
Note that there is no closed-form update for γnc, instead,
they are solved using Newton-Raphson algorithm from a
nonlinear equation:
(
X
m φnmc −γnc + 1)Ψ′(γnc) + 1 −λcρnc = 0. (10)
It is worth mentioning that by using exponential (instead
of Dirichlet) topic mixtures, our model is able to identify
relevant labels more effectively. This could be seen from
Eq.(4), in which:
−Lθ|λ ∝||λ ◦θ||1 =
XC
c=1 λcθc.
As in LASSO (Tibshirani, 1994) and sparse-coding (Lee et
al, 2009), this weighted ℓ1 regularization will naturally lead
to sparse topic mixtures θ, that is, although the dimension
of θ (i.e. the total number of classes C) might be huge, only
a few of its components θc have nonzero values1, therefore,
it effectively reduces the number of candidate classes to
which an given example X is relevant. Considering that the
instance-level labels z’s are sampled according to θ and the
example-level label y is generated based on ¯z, the exponen-
tial membership is acting like a ﬁlter which automatically
identiﬁes a few relevant labels while ruling out a large num-
ber of irrelevant ones.
3.3.2
Parameter Estimation
The optimization in Eq.(4) is decomposable to the three
parameters λ, η and w. Since λ and η 2 are only involved
in the likelihood L, we can learn these parameters by an
approximate empirical Bayesian procedure, i.e., maximiz-
ing the variational likelihood L while keeping the varia-
tional parameters ﬁxed. Speciﬁcally, taking into account
the Gamma prior over λ, we have:
λc = (χ1 + N −1)/(χ2 +
XN
n=1 γncρnc),
whereas the Dirichlet smooth prior η can be learned again
by a Newton-Raphson procedure, similar to what is used in
the standard LDA model (Blei et al, 2003).
To learn w, we need to solve the quadratic programming
(QP) Eq.(4), where
E[wi¯zni] =
1
Mn
wi
XMn
m=1 φnmi.
In this paper, we use SVMperf (Joachims, 2006), a cutting-
plane SVM solver. Note that although Eq.(4) involves a
huge number (order O(C2N)) of constraints, only a little
proportion of them are actually active (i.e., support vec-
tors) because most of the Lagrangian multipliers α’s will
become exact zero at optima. Also, by cutting-plane opti-
mization, which progressively adds only the most violated
constraints, we can guarantee that the working set is always
of a controllable size.
3.3.3
Prediction
We consider both task (1) and (2) mentioned in §1. For
task (1), i.e., label (caption) prediction for a given example
(image) X, we ﬁrst run the variational inference procedure,
and approximate the label distribution by:
p(Y|X) ≈ˆθw/||ˆθw||1.
where ˆθw
c = wcˆθc, and ˆθc is inferred by an MAP estimator:
ˆθc = [(γc −1)ρc]+ .
1If we adopt a max a posterior (MAP) inference for θ, from
Eq(10), non-zero θc can only be achieved by class c satisfying
P
m φmc > λcρc−1
Ψ′(γc) .
2We implemented exchangeable Dirichlet, i.e., ∀d: ηd=η.

1
2
4
8
15
30
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
k

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
Num of Tags

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
1200
800
600
500
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Num of Training Data

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
1
2
4
8
15
30
60
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
k

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
20
50
100
200
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Num of Tags

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
2000
1200
800
600500
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
Num of Trainin Data

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
Figure 2: Image annotation performance and tag-scalability comparison. (Left) Top-k accuracy vs. k. (Middle) Top-5
Accuracy vs. tag size. (Right) Top-5 Accuracy vs. training set size. (Top) Results on Alipr. (Bottom) Results on LabelMe.
Note that all the irrelevant tags {c : P
m φmc ⩽λcρc−1
Ψ′(γc) }
would lead to exact zero response θc = 0. Also note that,
the exponential term exp( wc
Mn (ync + δnc)) should be re-
moved when updating φ in Eq.(8) since the label of a test-
ing example X is unobserved.
For the task (2), i.e., label (tag) prediction for each instance
(image region), we have:
p(zm|·) =
Z
θ
p(zm, θ|·)dθ ≈q(zm|φm)
That is , we ﬁrst run variational inference on X (unlabeled
image) or (X, Y) (labeled image), then predict the instance
label by p(zmc = 1) = φmc.
4
Experimental Results
We evaluate our method on two data sets that are from pop-
ular online annotation engines Alipr (Li and Wang, 2008)
and LabelMe (Russell et al, 2007) respectively. The Alipr
data consists of 2359 images and a total number of 142
unique tags, on average there are 2.02 tags per image. The
LabelMe data set contains 4053 images and 1017 tags, 7.81
tags per image. Both of them cover sufﬁciently diverse
scenes, e.g., indoor, urban, village, road and landscape.
For each image-caption pair, the image is segmented by
the N-Cuts algorithm (Shi and Malik, 2000), each region is
used as an instance and each word in the caption is used as
a label3. The geometry-free bag-of-discrete-feature model
is then adopted to represent each region due to its simplic-
ity, robustness and good performance (Nowak et al, 2006).
3We only keep tags that present more than three times, leaving
with us 93 tags on Alipr and 291 tags on LabelMe.
5
10
20
50
100
200
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
k

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
5
10
20
50
100
200
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
k

 
 
EMMd
EMMm
DBA
CorrLDA
Figure 3:
Region annotation performance comparison:
Top-k accuracy vs. k for annotated regions in captioned
images (left) and images without captions (right). Both re-
sults are obtained on LabelMe data set.
Particularly, we randomly sample a ﬁxed-size (1000) set
of local patches (scale of each patch is chosen randomly
between 5×5 to 1/4 of the image size) from each image,
characterize each patch using the 128-dimensional SIFT
descriptor (8 orientations, 4×4 blocks of 3×3-scaled cells)
(Lowe, 2004), and encode the descriptor using hard mem-
bership to the nearest codebook center. In this way, each
image is analogous to a ﬁxed-length (1000 words) docu-
ment, each region to a paragraph and represented by a his-
togram of visual word counts. The visual vocabulary is
built by running the k-mean algorithm (k = 1000; 5 repeti-
tions with random initialization) to vector quantize descrip-
tors of patches sampled from randomly chosen 500 images.
We tested both discriminatively trained EMM (EMMd) and
MLE trained EMM (EMMm). For comparison, we con-
sidered only models that are capable to model ambiguity.
Particularly, we compared with two approaches: one is the

snow mountain, cloud, boat, harbor
water, boat, snow, mountain, sky
snow, water, mountain, sky, plane
mountain, plane, house, water, indoor
water, mountain, snow, plant, bridge
house, lawn, people, tree
people, tree, house, road, bear
tree, house, road, people, outdoor
tree, people, bridge, plant, garden
people, tree, cloud, sky, road
house, car
car, water, people, tree, cloud
car, tree, house, water, sky
house, car, bird, water, urban
car, water, house, bear, sign
building, night
building, sun, ﬂower, ﬁreworks, night
building, sun, ﬂower, sky, tree
sun, building, cloud, pattern, water
building, land, sun, tree, animal
Figure 4: Example annotations on Alipr data by different methods: (from top to bottom) true caption, the hybrid approach
(EMMd), EMMm, CorrLDA and DBA.
CorrLDA model (Blei and Jordan, 2003) (200 topics were
used), a machine-translation-based method that have been
shown to outperform many methods of this class (Blei and
Jordan, 2003; Wang et al, 2009); the other is DBA (Yang
et al, 2010), a MLE-trained Dirichlet-Multinomial mixture
model for multi-label multi-instance classiﬁcation.
The
trade-off parameters ν1 and ν2 are tuned by a 5-fold cross
validation procedure. The reported results of testing accu-
racy are also estimated by 5-fold cross validation.
We ﬁrst apply all these approaches to image-level anno-
tation, i.e., image caption prediction.
As all the mod-
els output probabilistic predictions, we use the Top-k ac-
curacy as evaluation metric, which is the Micro-averaged
F1 measure computed on the top-ranked k-sublist of the
predictions.
The results are illustrated in Figure 2 (the
leftmost column). Firstly, we observe that classiﬁcation
based approaches generally achieves better performance
than machine-translation based approach, validating that it
is beneﬁcial solving AIA as a classiﬁcation task. Among
the three classiﬁcation approaches, the hybrid approach
(the discriminatively trained EMM) achieves consistently
the best accuracies ∀k = 1, . . . , 40 on both data sets. In-
terestingly, between the two MLE trained classiﬁers, on
Alipr, EMMm performs better than DBA for the head (i.e.,
k < 19) predictions and slightly worse for tail predictions
(larger k), whereas on LabelMe, whose tag size is bigger,
EMMm performs almost consistently for the top 40 pre-
dictions, indicating that the EMM model might have better
tag-scalability. It is worth noting that both the two mea-
sures (i.e., prediction sparsity and max-margin learning)
turns out to signiﬁcantly improve the performances, par-

diction sparsity, the EMM model alone (EMMm vs DBA)
improves the performance by 18.84% on Alipr and 22.79%
on LabelMe; (2) by max-margin learning, the hybrid ap-
proach (EMMd) further gains 9.08% (on Alipr) or 15.04%
(on LabelMe) improvements over EMMm. The annotation
results of our AIA system is satisfactorily good. As an in-
tuitive demonstration, Figure 4 shows some example im-
ages and the top-5 annotations by each algorithm. As we
can see, most of the annotations by the hybrid approach are
reasonably relevant to the image scenes, much better than
other competitors. It even accurately identiﬁed the global
theme of a scene (e.g., “night” in the rightmost graph).
We further test the label-scalability of each algorithm. Also
shown in Figure 2 is the Top-5 accuracy of each algorithm
trained on (1) ﬁxed-size image set with increasing-number
of tags; and (2) decreasing-size image set with a ﬁxed num-
ber of tags. As expected, the performances of DBA dete-
riorate exponentially for both cases. In contrast, although
the hybrid approach is also based on classiﬁcation, its per-
formance is very stable. In fact, the scalability of EMMd
is much better even compared to the machine translation
based approach CorrLDA.
We ﬁnally compare the three algorithms on region-level an-
notation. We conduct this task for both (1) captioned im-
ages and (2) uncaptioned images. Note that the Alipr data
set does not include region-level labels (ground truth) and
hence cannot be used to assess the performances in this
task. The results on LabelMe data are depicted in Figure
3. For the ﬁrst setting, the hybrid approach outperforms the
other competitors consistently; for the latter, it performs the
best for the top-relevant predictions and comparably for tail
predictions, which is still quite encouraging because the top
predictions are usually the most important, upon which the
ﬁnal tags are ﬁnally decided. We also observe that all the
classiﬁcation-based algorithms, EMMd, EMMm and DBA,
substantially outperform the machine-translation-based ap-
proach CorrLDA, suggesting that the former are more pow-
erful for disambiguating scenes.
5
Conclusion
Automatic image annotation involves modeling data that
are both extremely ambiguous (both input and output) and
sparse (e.g., too many tags making data too scarce for
learning each), critically challenging existing learning al-
gorithms. In this paper, we investigated the generic task
of “Many-Class Multi-Label Multi-Instance Classiﬁca-
tion” (M3C) and devised a hybrid generative-discriminative
learning approach to M3C tasks such as AIA. The proposed
approach includes a Bayesian Hierarchical model, which is

able to capture both the input and output ambiguity and in
the meanwhile encourage prediction sparseness, and a dis-
criminative learning formulation, which integrates the vari-
ational inference and pairwise ordinal regression to maxi-
mize the prediction power. We tested our approach on two
real-world benchmarks and showed satisfactory annotation
performance as well as superior scalability to the tag size.
One limitation of the current model is that, by assuming
instance exchangeability, it does not account for context
correlations, for example, the tag “Apple” is more likely
to mean computer rather than fruit if it appears in a scene
together with “CDs”, “USB” and “mouse”. We plan to
explore such context correlation in future work.
Also,
the scale of our evaluation is limited by the availability
of labeled data, we plan to extend it to real-world scale
(e.g., tens of thousand of tags) as soon as larger labeled
data are available. We also plan to empirically compare
our model with state-of-art annotation algorithms (e.g.,
weighted kNN, (Verbeek et al, 2010)) to provide a big pic-
ture of existing annotation methods.
