Product-Aware Answer Generation
in E-Commerce Question-Answering
Shen Gao∗
ICST, Peking University

Zhaochun Ren
JD.com

Yihong Zhao
JD.com

Dongyan Zhao
ICST, Peking University

Dawei Yin
JD.com

Rui Yan†
ICST, Peking University

ABSTRACT
In e-commerce portals, generating answers for product-related ques-
tions has become a crucial task. In this paper, we propose the task of
product-aware answer generation, which tends to generate an accu-
rate and complete answer from large-scale unlabeled e-commerce
reviews and product attributes. Unlike existing question-answering
problems, answer generation in e-commerce confronts three main
challenges: (1) Reviews are informal and noisy; (2) joint modeling
of reviews and key-value product attributes is challenging; (3) tra-
ditional methods easily generate meaningless answers. To tackle
above challenges, we propose an adversarial learning based model,
named PAAG, which is composed of three components: a question-
aware review representation module, a key-value memory network
encoding attributes, and a recurrent neural network as a sequence
generator. Specifically, we employ a convolutional discriminator to
distinguish whether our generated answer matches the facts. To ex-
tract the salience part of reviews, an attention-based review reader
is proposed to capture the most relevant words given the question.
Conducted on a large-scale real-world e-commerce dataset, our
extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of each module in
our proposed model. Moreover, our experiments show that our
model achieves the state-of-the-art performance in terms of both
automatic metrics and human evaluations.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Question answering;
KEYWORDS
Question answering, e-commerce, product-aware answer genera-
tion
∗Work performed during an internship at JD.com.
†This author is the corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

WSDM ’19, February 11–15, 2019, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5940-5/19/02...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3289600.3290992
ACM Reference Format:
Shen Gao, Zhaochun Ren, Yihong Zhao, Dongyan Zhao, Dawei Yin, and Rui
Yan. 2019. Product-Aware Answer Generation in E-Commerce Question-
Answering. In The Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web Search and
Data Mining (WSDM ’19), February 11–15, 2019, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3289600.3290992
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the explosive popularity of question-answering (QA)
is revitalizing the task of reading comprehension with promising
results [25, 34]. Unlike traditional knowledge-based QA methods
that require a structured knowledge graph as the input and output
resource description framework (RDF) triples [10], most of reading
comprehension approaches read context passages and extract text
spans from input text as answers [23, 34].
E-commerce are playing an increasingly important role in our
daily life. As a convenience of users, more and more e-commerce
portals provide community question-answering services that allow
users to pose product-aware questions to other consumers who
purchased the same product before. Unfortunately, many product-
aware questions lack of proposer answers. Under the circumstances,
users have to read the product’s reviews to find the answer by them-
selves. Given product attributes and reviews, an answer is manually
generated following a cascade procedure: (1) a user skims reviews
and finds relevant sentences; (2) she/he extracts useful semantic
units; (3) and the user jointly combines these semantic units with
attributes, and writes a proper answer. However, the information
overload phenomenon makes this procedure an energy-draining
process to pursue an answer from a rapidly increasing number of re-
views. Consequently, automatic product-aware question-answering
become more and more helpful in this scenario. The task on which
we focus is the product-aware answer generation given reviews and
product attributes. Our goal is to respond product-aware questions
automatically given a large amount of reviews and attributes of
a specific product. Unlike either a “yes/no” binary classification
task [13] or a review ranking task [17], product-aware answer gen-
eration provides a natural-sounding sentence as an answer.
The definition of our task is similar as the reading comprehen-
sion. However, most of existing reading comprehension solutions
only extract text spans from contextual passages [37]. Since the
target of product-aware answer generation is to generate a natural-
sounding answer instead of text spans, most of reading comprehen-
sion methods and datasets (e.g., SQuAD [20]) are not applicable. As
far as we know, only few of reading comprehension approaches
arXiv:1901.07696v2  [cs.CL]  24 Jan 2019

aim to generate a natural-sounding answers from extraction re-
sults [16, 29]. With a promising performance on MS-MARCO [18],
S-Net framework proposed by Tan et al. [29] focuses on synthe-
sizing answers from extraction results. However, S-Net requires a
large amount of labeling data for extracting text spans, which is
still unrealistic given a huge number of reviews. Moreover, product
reviews from e-commerce website are informal and noisy, whereas
in reading comprehension the given context passages are usually
in a formal style. Generally, existing reading comprehension ap-
proaches confront three challenges when addressing product-aware
question answering: (1) Review text is irrelevant and noisy. (2) It’s
extremely expensive to label large amounts of explicit text spans
from real-world e-commerce platforms. (3) Traditional loss function
calculation in reading comprehension tends to generate meaning-
less answers such as “I don’t know”.
In this paper, we propose the product-aware answer generator
(PAAG), a product related question answering model which incor-
porates customer reviews with product attributes. Specifically, at
the beginning we employ an attention mechanism to model interac-
tions between a question and reviews. Simultaneously, we employ
a key-value memory network to store the product attributes and
extract the relevance values according to the question. Eventually,
we propose a recurrent neural network (RNN) based decoder, which
combines product-aware review representation and attributes to
generate the answer. More importantly, to tackle the problem of
meaningless answers, we propose an adversarial learning mecha-
nism in the loss calculation for optimizing parameters. Conducted
on a large-scale real-world e-commerce dataset, we evaluate the
performance of PAAG using extensive experiments. Experimen-
tal results demonstrate that the PAAG model achieves significant
improvement over other baselines, including the state-of-the-art
reading comprehension model. Furthermore, we also examine the
effectiveness of each module in PAAG. Our experiments verify
that adversarial learning is capable to significantly improve the
denoising and facts extracting capacity of PAAG.
To sum up, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a product-aware answer generation task.
• To tackle this task, we propose an end-to-end learning method
to extract fact that is helpful for answering questions from reviews
and attributes and then generate answer text.
• Due to the review is in an informal style with noise, we propose
an attention based review reader and use the Wasserstein distance
based adversarial learning method to learn to denoise the review
text. The discriminator can also give an additional training signal
for generating more consistence answer.
• Experiments conducted on a large-scale real-world dataset
show that our PAAG method outperforms all baselines, include the
state-of-the-art model in terms of all metrics. The effectiveness of
each module in PAAG is also demonstrated in our experiments.
2
RELATED WORK
We detail related work on product-aware question-answering, read-
ing comprehension, and sequence-to-sequence architecture.
Product-aware question answering. In recent years, product-
aware question answering has received several attention. Most of
existing strategies aim at extracting relevant sentences from input
text to answer the given question. Yu et al. [39] propose a frame-
work for opinion QA, which first organizes reviews into a hierarchy
structure and retrieves review sentence as the answer. Yu et al. [40]
propose an answer prediction model by incorporating an aspect
analytic model to learn latent aspect-specific review representation
for predicting the answer. External knowledge has been considered
with the development of knowledge graphs. McAuley et al. [13]
propose a method using reviews as knowledge to predict the an-
swer, where they classify answers into two types, binary answers
(i.e. “yes” or “no”) and open-ended answers. Incorporating review
information, recent studies employ ranking strategies to optimize
an answer from candidate answers [17, 38]. Meanwhile, product-
aware question retrieval and ranking has also been studied. Cui
et al. [4] propose a system which combines questions with RDF
triples. Yu et al. [38] propose a model which retrieves the most
similar queries from candidate QA pairs, and uses corresponding
answer as the final result.
However, all above task settings differ from our task. Unlike above
approaches, our method is aimed to generate an answer from
scratch, based on both reviews and product attributes.
Reading Comprehension. Given a question and relevant pas-
sages, reading comprehension extracts a text span from passages
as an answer [20]. Recently, based on a widely applied dataset, i.e.,
SQuAD [20], many appraoches have been proposed. Seo et al. [23]
use bi-directional attention flow mechanism to obtain a query-
aware passage representation. Wang et al. [34] propose a model
to match the question with passage using gated attention-based
recurrent networks to obtain the question-aware passage repre-
sentation. Consisting exclusively of convolution and self-attention,
QANet [37] achieves the state-of-the-art performance in reading
comprehension. As mentioned above, most of the effective methods
contain question-aware passage representation for generating a
better answer. This mechanism make the models focus on the im-
portant part of passage according to the question. Following these
previous work, our method models the reviews of product with a
question aware mechanism.
Sequence-to-sequence architecture. In recent years, sequence-
to-sequence (seq2seq) based neural networks have been proved
effective in generating a fluent sentence. The seq2seq model [28] is
originally proposed for machine translation and later adapted to var-
ious natural language generation tasks, such as text summarization
and dialogue generation [31, 36]. Rush et al. [21] apply the seq2seq
mechanism with attention model to text summarization field. Then
See et al. [22] add copy mechanism and coverage loss to generate
summarization without out-of-vocabulary and redundancy words.
The seq2seq architecture has also been broadly used in dialogue
system. Tao et al. [30] propose a multi-head attention mechanism
to capture multiple semantic aspects of the query and generate
a more informative response. Different from seq2seq models, our
model utilizes not only the information in input sequence but also
many external knowledge from user reviews and product attributes
to generate the answer that matches the facts. Unlike traditional
seq2seq model, there are several tasks which input data is in key-
value structure instead of a sequence. In order to utilize these data
when generating text, key-value memory network (KVMN) is pur-
posed to store this type of data. He et al. [10] incorporate copying
and retrieving knowledge from knowledge base stored in KVMN

to generate natural answers within an encoder-decoder framework.
Tu et al. [32] use a KVMN to store the translate history which gives
model the opportunity to take advantage of document-level infor-
mation instead of translate sentences in an isolation way. We will
use the KVMN architecture in our model to store and retrieve the
product attributes data.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Before introducing our answer generation task for product-aware
question, we introduce our notation and key concepts.
At the beginning, for a product, we assume there is a question
Xq = {xq
1 ,xq
2 , . . . ,xq
Tq }, Tr reviews Xr = {xr
1,xr
2, . . . ,xr
Tr } and Ta
key-value pairs of attributesA = {(ak
1 ,av
1 ), (ak
2 ,av
2 ), . . . , (ak
Ta,av
Ta )},
where ak
i is the name of i-th attribute and av
i is the attribute con-
tent. In our task, we assume that each attribute, both key ak
i and
value av
i are represented as a single word. Given a question Xq,
an answer generator reads the reviews Xr and attributes A, then
generates an answer ˆY = { ˆy1, ˆy2, . . . , ˆyTy }. The goal is to gener-
ate an answer ˆY that is not only grammatically correct but also
consistent with product attributes and opinions in the reviews.
Essentially, the generator tries to optimize the parameters to maxi-
mize the probability P(Y |Xq,Xr ,A) = ÎTy
t=1 P(yt |Xq,Xr ,A) where
Y = {y1,y2, . . . ,yTy } is the ground truth answer.
4
PAAG MODEL
4.1
Overview
In this section, we propose our product-aware answer generator
model, abbreviated as PAAG. The overview of PAAG is shown in
Figure 1. PAAG can be split into two main parts: answer generator
and consistency discriminator. We start by detailing the answer
generator which generates an answer according to the reviews and
attributes. We then describe the consistency discriminator which
distinguishes whether the generated answer matches the facts given
by reviews and attributes.
• Answer generator. (1) Review reader: (See Section 4.2) In this
part, we encode the review text into vector representations. By
matching the relevance of the given question, we signify important
semantic units of reviews. (2) Attributes encoder: (See Section 4.3)
Our model stores the product attributes information into a key-
value memory network. For each key-value pair, a correlation score
between a key and the question is aggregated into the value. (3)
Facts decoder: (See Section 4.4) To generate the answer, we use the
RNN-based decoder which fuses the facts extracted from reviews
and attributes when generating words.
• Consistency discriminator. (See Section 4.5) Existing approaches
easily generate a grammatically correct answer but conflicts to the
facts. In order to produce factual answer, we use a discriminator to
determine whether the generated sentence matches the facts. By
employing the earth-mover distance to optimize our network, we
use the result of discriminator as a training signal to encourage our
model to produce a better answer.
4.2
Review reader
At the beginning, we use an embedding matrix e to map one-hot
representation of each word in the question Xq, reviews Xr , and at-
tributes A to a high-dimensional vector space. We denote e(x) as the
embedding representation of word x. From these embedding rep-
resentations, we employ a bi-directional recurrent neural network
(Bi-RNN) to model the temporal interactions between words:
hq
t = Bi-RNNq(e(xq
t ),hq
t−1),
(1)
hr
i,t = Bi-RNNr (e(xr
i,t ),hr
i,t−1).
(2)
where hq
t and hr
i,t denote the hidden state of t-th step in Bi-RNN
for question Xq and i-th review in Xr respectively. We denote the
final hidden state hq
Tq of Bi-RNNq as the vector representation of
the question Xq. Following [11, 23], we choose the long short-term
memory (LSTM) as a cell of Bi-RNN.
For producing a fixed size vector representation of reviews, an
intuitive method is to conduct an average-pooling strategy on all the
hidden states of each review, which neglects the question-oriented
salient part of the review. Accordingly, we propose a gated attention-
based method to incorporate the focus point of question into the
review representation. Furthermore, we add an additional gate
which learns the relevance between question Xq and review Xr
via a soft-alignment, so we have:
sk
i,j = v⊺tanh(Wqhq
k +Wrhr
i,j),
(3)
si,j = max(s1
i,j,s2
i,j, . . . ,sTq
i,j ),
(4)
αi,j = exp(si,j)/ÍT i
r
t=1 exp(si,t ),
(5)
where Wq,Wr ,v are all trainable parameters. αi,j ∈R refers to
the importance score of the j-th word in the i-th review given
Xq. Thereafter, we apply the attention-pooling operation on each
review hidden state hr
i, · to produce the question-aware review
representation cr
i , shown in Equation 6:
cr
i = ÍT i
r
t=1 αi,thr
i,t,
(6)
Given an answer generation procedure, not all the reviews are
useful to answer the question due to the informal style problem.
Thus if we directly calculate the arithmetic mean vector of all
reviews’ representations, we can not capture salient passages. To
tackle this problem, a gated fusion method is utilized here to sum
up all the review representations. We first calculate the relevance
between each review representation cr
i and question representation
hq
Tq via a bi-linear layer shown in Equation 7:
ui = cr
i Wf hq
Tq,
(7)
u
′
i = exp(ui)/ÍTr
t=1 exp(ut ),
(8)
where Wf is a trainable parameter. Afterwards, we use a softmax
function to simulate the relevance score ui, i.e., u
′
i, shown in Equa-
tion 8. Then we use u
′
i as the weight of the i-th review to do
weighted-average on review representation cr
i over all reviews,
so we have:
cr = ÍTr
i=1 u
′
icr
i .
(9)

Consistency
Discriminator
Facts Decoder 
Review hidden states
Question hidden states
Attribute Encoder
Review Reader
Bi-RNN
Review 1
Bi-RNN 
Review 2
Question aware attention
Question aware attention
Key Matching
Question Encoder
Review Gated Fusion
Value Combining
Attribute Key
Attribute Value
Answer Decoder 
Question Aware Review Representation
Review Attention Distribution
Attribute Key
Matching Score
Generated
Answer
Representation
attention
attention
Generated
Answer  
Representation
Answer
Encoder
Ground Truth
Answer
Ground Truth
Answer
Representation
Figure 1: Overview of PAAG. We divide PAAG into four parts: (1) Review reader reads the review to extract relevant semantic
parts. (2) Attribute encoder encodes the attribute key-value pairs using key-value memory network. (3) Facts decoder gener-
ates the final answer according to the facts learned by the two modules introduced before. (4) Consistency discriminator dis-
tinguishes whether the generated answer matches the extracted facts, and we also use the result of discriminator as another
training signal.
4.3
Attributes encoder
The attributes of a product can be seen as structured knowledge
data in our task. As key-value memory network (KVMN) is shown
effective in structured data utilization [10, 14, 32], in our work we
employ KVMN to store product attributes for generating answers.
Correspondingly, we store the word embedding of each attribute’s
key and value in the KVMN. The read operation in our KVMN is
divided into two steps: key matching and value combination.
Key matching The goal of key matching is to calculate the
relevance between each attribute and the given question. Given
question Xq, for the i-th attribute ai = (ak
i ,av
i ) ∈A, we calculate
the probability of ai over Xq, i.e., P(ai |Xq), as the matching score.
To this end, we exploit the question representation hq
Tq to calculate
the probability distribution:
P(ai |Xq) =
exp(hq
TqWae(ak
i ))
ÍTa
t=1 exp(hq
TqWae(ak
t ))
,
(10)
Since question representation hq
Tq and attribute key representa-
tion e(ak
i ) are not in the same semantic space, following [15, 27],
we use a trainable key matching parameter Wa to transform these
representations into a same space.
Value combination As the relevance between question Xq and
attribute ai, the matching score P(ai |Xq) can help to capture the
most relevant attribute for generating a correct answer. Therefore,
as shown in Equation 11, the attribute encoder reads the information
m from KVMN via summing over the stored attribute values, and
guide the follow-up answer generation, so we have:
m = ÍTa
i=1 P(ai |Xq)e(av
i ).
(11)
4.4
Facts decoder
PAAG generates an answer based on a set of facts extracted from re-
views and attributes. Same as our encoder settings, we set LSTM as
a cell in our RNN-based facts decoder. We concatenate the question,
review and attribute representations and apply a linear transform,
then use this vector as the initial state d0; at every decoding step,
we feed a context vector дt into RNN cell. At t-th decoding step,
context vector дt summarizes the input question and review, and
we will show the detail of producing дt at follows. The procedure
of t-th decoding step is shown in Equation 13. We use the notion
[·; ·] as the concatenation of two vectors.
d0 = We
h
m;hq
Tq ;cr i
+ be,
(12)
dt = LSTM (dt−1, [дt−1;e(yt−1)]) ,
(13)
where We,be are the trainable parameters, dt is the hidden state of
t-th decoding step.
Similar with the seq2seq with attention mechanism, we use the
hidden state of previous step dt−1 to attend the question hidden
states and review hidden states to get the context vector дt of
current decoding step. The algorithm of attending reviews hidden
states is same as attending question hidden states, so we use h∗
i to

represent the hidden state where ∗can be r or q.
β
′
i,t = z⊺tanh  Wsh∗
i +Wddt
 ,
(14)
βi,t = exp

β
′
i,t

/ÍT q
j=1 exp

β
′
j,t

,
(15)
д∗
t = ÍT
i=1 βi,th∗
i ,
(16)
where Ws,Wd are all trainable parameters. After two attention
procedures of question and review finished, we concatenate context
vector дr
t and дq
t with a balanced gate γ which is determined by
decoder state dt :
γ = σ  Wдdt + bд
 , дt =

γдr
t ; (1 −γ)дq
t

,
(17)
The context vector дt , which can be seen as a representation of
reading from the question and reviews, is concatenated with the
decoder state dt and then fed into a linear transformation layer to
conduct the generated word distribution Pv over the vocabulary.
do
t = (Wo[dt ;дt ] + bo) ,
(18)
Pv = softmax  Wvdo
t + bv
 ,
(19)
At the t-th decoding step, we set the loss as the negative log
likelihood of the target word yt :
lossд = −1/Ty
ÍTy
t=1 log Pv(yt ).
(20)
In order to handle the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem, we
equip the pointer network [7, 22, 33] with our decoder, which makes
our decoder capable to copy words from question. The procedure
of pointer network is the same as the model proposed by See et
al. [22], and we omit this procedure in our paper due to the limited
space.
Up to now, we can use lossд to compute gradients for all the
parameters in answer generator and use gradient descent method
to update these parameters. But the correctness constraint given
by cross entropy loss lossд is not enough. So we need a classifier to
judge whether the generated answer is consistent with the facts.
In this way, we use this classification result to guide the answer
generator to produce more consistent answers.
4.5
Consistency discriminator
To generate sentences which are more consistent with the facts,
we add a discriminator to provide additional training signals for
the answer generator. We propose a convolutional neural network
(CNN) based classifier as discriminator. The goal of this classifier
is to distinguish whether a sentence is consistent with the given
facts. So we can use the confidence of classifying a sentence as a
training signal to encourage the answer generator to produce a
better answer. We use the answer generated by the facts decoder
presented in Section 4.4 as the negative sample for classification,
and use the representation of ground truth answer as the positive
sample.
As for giving a positive sample for discriminator, we use an RNN
to encode the ground truth answer into a vector representation.
˜dд
t = LSTM(yt, ˜dд
t )
(21)
Since the ground truth is encoded by another RNN which is different
from the decoder RNN of do
t , we use a linear transformation to
transform the high-dimensional space of ˜dд
t to the same space as
do
t in.
dд
t = Wz ∗˜dд
t + bz
(22)
where Wz and bz are all trainable parameters.
For training the discriminator ability of capturing whether an
answer is consistent with the facts, we construct another negative
samples to train the discriminator. We present an answer decoder
(shown at the bottom of Figure 1), which employs the same decod-
ing mechanism as the facts decoder but no fact is attached during
decoding. Specifically, we use the hidden state do
t shown in Equa-
tion 18 as the representation of each word in the generated sentence
by the facts decoder. Similarly, the decoder RNN without feeding
facts representation дt generates hidden states df
t . We use df
t as
the representation of generated answer without facts support.
Then a two-dimensional convolutional layer convolves the hid-
den statesd∗
t with multiple convolutional kernels of different widths.
Each kernel corresponds a linguistic feature detector which extracts
a specific pattern of multi-grained n-grams [12]. A convolutional
filterWc maps hidden states in the receptive field to a single feature.
As we slide the filter across the whole sentence, we obtain a se-
quence of new features n = [n1,n2, . . . ,nl], shown in Equation 23:
n∗
t = relu  d∗
t ⊗Wc + bc
 ,
(23)
where Wc,bc are all trainable parameters and ⊗denotes the con-
volution operation. For each convolutional filter, the max-pooling
layer takes the maximal value among the generated convolutional
features nf , no and nд respectively, resulting in a fixed-size vector
N f , N o and Nд. Then we obtain the classification result D(d∗
t ) ∈R
through an interaction between N ∗and the facts, i.e., attribute
representation m and review representation cr . So we have:
D(d∗
t ) = Whrelu  N ∗+ m + cr  + bh,
(24)
whereWh,bh are all trainable parameters. Here we apply the Vanilla
generative adversarial network (GAN) with a sigmoid function on
the D(d∗
t ) to produce the classification probability and tries to min-
imize the Jensen-Shannon divergence between real and generated
data distribution.
However, as vanilla GAN often leads to gradient vanishing as the
discriminator saturates [8], which makes the discriminator can not
give the correct training signal. Inspired by previous work [2, 8],
we tackle this problem by minimize the earth-mover (also called
Wasserstein-1) distanceW (Pr , Pд) instead of Jensen-Shannon diver-
gence. Informally, given a distribution Pr of ground truth answer
and a distribution Pд of facts-based answer or answer without facts.
Then we minimize the cost of transporting mass from Pr to Pд. The
discriminator D ∈D is a 1-Lipschitz function, where D is the set
of 1-Lipschitz functions [8].
In order to meet the Lipschitz constraint of discriminator D,
we use an alternative way to enforce the Lipschitz constraint. We
add a gradient norm of the output of D with respect to its input,
which is simply sampled uniformly along a straight line between
points sampled from the ground truth representation dд
t and the
facts based output do
t . Then our objective function is shown in
Equation 26.

d
′
t = ϵdo
t + (1 −ϵ)dд
t ,
(25)
lossd = 1
Ty
Ty
Õ
t
D(df
t ) + D(do
t ) −D(dд
t ) + λ


∇d′
t D(d
′
t )

2 −1
2
.
(26)
where ϵ ∼U [0, 1] is a random number and λ is a coefficient of
gradient penalty term. Then we can use the optimization methods
to update the parameters of discriminator use the loss function
lossd. Meanwhile, we add the −D(do
t ) to the previous defined lossд
in Equation 20 to encourage the answer generator produce better
result.
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
5.1
Research questions
We list four research questions that guide the remainder of the
paper: RQ1: What is the overall performance of PAAG? Does it
outperform state-of-the-art baselines? RQ2: What is the effect of
each module in PAAG? Does the discriminator give a useful training
signal to the answer generation module? RQ3: Is PAAG capable to
extract useful information from noisy reviews? RQ4: What is the
performance of PAAG at different data domain?
5.2
Dataset
We collect a large-scale dataset from a real-world e-commerce web-
site, including question-answering pairs, reviews, and product at-
tributes. This dataset is available at https://github.com/gsh199449/
productqa. On this website, users can post a question about the
product. Most questions are asking for an experience of user who
has already bought the product. In the collected data, each QA pair
is associated with the reviews and attributes of the corresponding
product. We remove all QA pairs without any relevant review and
split the whole dataset into training and testing set. In total, our
dataset contains cover 469,953 products and 38 product categories.
The average length of question is 9.03 words and ground truth
answer is 10.3 words. The average number of attribute is 9.0 key-
value pairs. There are 78.74% of training samples have more than
10 relevant reviews and 75.33% of training samples have more than
5 attributes.
5.3
Evaluation metrics
To evaluate our proposed method, we employ BLEU [19] to mea-
sure the quality of generated sentence by computing overlapping
lexical units (e.g., unigram, bigram) with the reference sentence.
We also consider three embedding-based metrics [6] (including
Embedding Average, Embedding Greedy and Embedding Extreme)
to evaluate our model, following several recent studies on text
generation [24, 30, 35]. These three metrics compute the semantic
similarity between the generated and reference answer according
to the word embedding.
Since automatic evaluation metrics may not always consistent
with human perception [26], we use human evaluation in our ex-
periment. Three annotators are invited to judge the quality of 100
randomly sampled answer generated by different models. These an-
notators are all well-educated Ph.D. students and they are all native
Table 1: Ablation models for comparison.
Acronym Gloss
RAGF
Review reader + Attributes encoder + Gated Fusion
RAGFD
RAGF + consistency Discriminator
RAGFWD
RAGF + Wasserstein consistency Discriminator
PAAG
RAGFWD + Gradient Penalty
speakers. Two of them have the background of NLP/summarization
and another annotator does not major in computer science. We
show human annotators a question, several reviews and attributes
of the product along with answers generated from each model.
Statistical significance of observed differences between the per-
formance of two runs are tested using a two-tailed paired t-test and
is denoted using ▲(or ▼) for strong significance for α = 0.01.
5.4
Comparisons
In order to prove the effectiveness of each module in PAAG, we
conduct some ablation models shown in Table 1.
To evaluate the performance of our dataset and the proposed
framework, we compare our model with the following baselines: (1)
S2SA: Sequence-to-sequence framework [28] has been proposed
for language generation task. We use seq2seq framework which is
equipped with attention mechanism [3] and copy mechanism [7]
as baseline method. The input sequence is question and ground
truth output sequence is the answer. (2) S2SAR: We implement a
simple method which can incorporate the review information when
generating the answer. Different from the S2SA, we use an RNN to
read all the reviews and concatenate the final state of this RNN with
encoder final state as the initial state of decoder RNN. (3) SNet:
S-Net [29] is a two-stage state-of-the-art model which extracts
some text spans from multiple documents context and synthesis
the answer from those spans. Due to the difference between our
dataset and MS-MARCO [18], our dataset does not have text span
label ground truth for training the evidence extraction module. So
we use the predicted extraction probability to do weighted sum the
original review word embeddings, and use this representation as
extracted evidence to feed into the answer generation module. (4)
QS: We implement the query-based summarization model proposed
by Hasselqvist et al. [9]. Accordingly, we use product reviews as
original passage and answer as a summary. (5) BM25: BM25 is a
bag-of-words retrieval function that ranks a set of reviews based on
the question terms appearing in each review. We use the top review
of ranking list as the answer. (6) TF-IDF: Term Frequency-Inverse
Document Frequency is a numerical statistic that is intended to
reflect how important a question word is to a review. We use this
statistic to model the relevance between review and question and
select the most similar review as the answer of question.
5.5
Implementation details
Without using pre-trained embeddings, we randomly initialize the
network parameters at the beginning of our experiments. All the
RNN networks have 512 hidden units and the dimension of word
embedding is 256. To produce better answers, we use beam search
with beam size 4. Adagrad [5] with learning rate 0.1 is used to
optimize the parameters and batch size is 64. We implement our

model using TensorFlow [1] framework and train our model and
all baseline models on NVIDIA Tesla P40 GPU.
6
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT
6.1
Overall performance
For research question RQ1, to demonstrate the effectiveness of
PAAG, we examine the overall performance in term of BLEU, em-
bedding metrics and human evaluation. Table 2 and Table 3 list
performances of all comparisons in terms of two automatic evalua-
tion metrics. Significant differences are with respect to SNet (row
with shaded background). In these experimental results, we see that
PAAG achieves a 111%, 8% and 62.73% increment over the state-
of-the-art baseline SNet in terms of BLEU, embedding greedy and
consistency score, respectively. In Table 3, we see that our PAAG
outperforms all the baseline significantly in semantic distance with
respect to the ground truth.
For human evaluation, we ask annotators to rate each generated
answer according to two aspects: consistency and fluency. The
rating score ranges from 1 to 3, and 3 is the best. We finally take
the average across answers and annotators, as shown in Table 4. In
Table 4, we can see that PAAG outperforms other baseline models in
both sentence fluency and consistency with the facts. We calculate
the variance score in Table 4, which shows that annotators agree
with each other’s judgments in most cases. Although the BLEU score
of S2SAR is lower than the S2SA, the embedding score and human
score for S2SAR are higher than S2SA. Regardless of few word
overlapping between generated and ground answer, the human
evaluation and results in terms of embedding metrics verify S2SAR
outperforms S2SA. This observation demonstrates the effectiveness
of incorporating review in answer generation.
To explore the difficulty of this task, we use a very intuitive
method by adding the review information into decoder shown in
S2SAR. Although there is a small increment of S2SAR with respect
to S2SA in all metrics, we still find a noticeable gap between S2SAR
and PAAG. This observation demonstrates that PAAG makes better
use of review and attribute information than the simple method
S2SAR. In view of the facts extracted from the review and attributes,
we examine directly using the most similar review to question as
the answer. More specifically, we evaluate the performance of the
top of review ranking list which is ranked by text similarity algo-
rithm such as BM25 and TF-IDF. From the result of three metrics,
the performance of extractive methods is worth than all the gener-
ative methods. It is worth noting that since the answer generated
by extractive methods is written by human, it have very high flu-
ency scores. But these answers may not match the question, so
the consistency score is very low. Consequently, using the most
similar review to question as answer is not a better method than
generating answers from scratch.
As our task definition and query based text summarization have
some similarities in some way, we can see the reviews as original
passage and answer as a query based summary. We also use the
query-based text summarization algorithm [9] to generate answer.
Similarly, we also employ a reading comprehension method SNet
to tackle this task. Since query-based text summarization and read-
ing comprehension models are not defined to tackle QA task in
Table 2: BLEU scores comparison between baselines.
BLEU
BLEU1
BLEU2
BLEU3
BLEU4
Text generation methods
S2SA
1.6186
15.4754
3.1437
0.8267
0.1706
S2SAR
1.7549
15.1708
3.2156
0.9078
0.2142
SNet
0.9550
13.7029
2.5374
0.4007
0.0597
QS
1.6848
15.4961
2.9508
0.8315
0.2119
PAAG
2.0189▲
16.2232▲
3.5711▲
1.0290▲
0.2787▲
Sentence extraction methods
BM25
0.4125
6.9630
0.7097
0.1333
0.0439
TF-IDF
0.2548
5.5480
0.5127
0.0779
0.0190
Table 3: Embedding scores comparison between baselines.
Average
Greedy
Extrema
Text generation methods
S2SA
0.410013
98.653415
0.269461
S2SAR
0.419979
99.742679
0.278666
SNet
0.397162
95.791356
0.277781
QS
0.400291
93.255031
0.252164
PAAG
0.424218▲
103.912364▲
0.288321▲
Sentence extraction methods
BM25
0.325946
76.814465
0.172976
TF-IDF
0.308293
85.020442
0.155390
Table 4: Consistency and fluency comparison by human
evaluation.
Fluency
Consistency
mean
variance
mean
variance
Text generation methods
S2SA
2.22
0.3
1.62
0.29
S2SAR
2.405
0.365
1.82
0.39
SNet
1.93
0.36
1.355
0.225
QS
2.335
0.285
1.725
0.355
PAAG
2.865▲
0.105
2.205▲
0.445
Sentence extraction methods
BM25
2.70
0.24
1.45
0.29
TF-IDF
2.48
0.38
1.14
0.12
Table 5: BLEU scores of different ablation models.
BLEU
BLEU1
BLEU2
BLEU3
BLEU4
RAGF
1.7931
15.7213
3.3705
0.9385
0.2079
RAGFD
1.8597
15.9021
3.4160
0.9409
0.2340
RAGFWD
1.9389
16.1755
3.5986
0.9865
0.2461
PAAG
2.0189
16.2232
3.5711
1.0290
0.2787
e-commerce scenario, it can not fully utilize the interactions be-
tween question, review, and attributes. These methods also lack of
ability of denoising the reviews.
6.2
Ablation studies
Next we turn to research question RQ2. We conduct ablation tests
on the usage of adversarial learning method. The BLEU score of
each ablation model is shown in Table 5. In the method RAGFD,
we use the vanilla GAN architecture which minimize the diver-
gence. There is a slight increment from RAGF to RAGFD, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of discriminator. From Table 5, we
find that RAGFWD achieves a 4.3% improvement over RAGFD in
terms of BLEU, and PAAG outperforms RAGFWD 4.1% in terms
of BLEU. Accordingly, we conclude that the performance of PAAG

Figure 2: Visualizations of question-aware review attention
map.
benefits from using Wasserstein distance based adversarial learn-
ing with gradient penalty. This approach can help our model to
achieve a better performance than the model using the vanilla GAN
architecture.
6.3
Denoising ability
To address RQ3, in this section we provide an analysis of the de-
noising ability of our model. According to Table 2 and Table 5, we
observe RAGF achieves 2.1% improvement over SASAR, in terms
of BLEU. Such observation demonstrates that question-aware re-
view generation module gives the denoising ability to the model.
To further investigate the effectiveness of extracting facts from
reviews, we visualize two question-review attention maps, shown
in Figure 2. Question of the left figure in Figure 2 is “Will the color
fade when cleaning?” and the right is “Is it convenient to clean”.
The review of the left figure is “Good shopping experience. The
pants were washed without discoloration and no color difference
compared to the picture. It looks good, comfortable and cheap.” and
the right is “The color looks good and the texture is great. I haven’t
started it yet, but it’s very easy to clean”. In this figure, we can see
that there is a very strong interaction between question word 清洗
(cleaning) and phrase in review 清洗会很方便(very easy to clean).
Concretely, these figures show that the question-review attention
module can capture the salience semantic part in review according
to the question.
In the most cases, the higher word overlap between question
and review, the more useful the review is. To prove the ability of
review gated fusion module shown in Equation 8, we use the BM25
algorithm to calculate the similarity between question and each
review. Then we calculate the cosine distance between the salience
score produced by review gated fusion module calculated and BM25
similarity score, shown in Figure 3. In order to demonstrate the
denoising ability of adversarial learning method, we compare our
full model PAAG with the baseline model RAGF, this experiment
proves that the usage of WGAN can encourage our model to capture
the salience review better.
6.4
Discussions
Finally, we address RQ4. Table 6 shows an example and its cor-
responding generated answers by different methods. We observe
Figure 3: Similarity between
review gates and BM25 score.
Figure 4: Greedy embedding
metric with training epoch.
Table 6: Examples of the generated natural answers by
PAAG and other models.
reviews
衣服质量很好，就是我比较瘦，这个S 号对于我来说还是比较肥。很适
合孕妇穿。(The quality of the clothes is very good. Because I am thin, the
S size is still quite fat for me. It is suitable for pregnant women to wear.)
颜色漂亮，宽松舒服，就是线头有点多，竟然还有口袋，方便实
用！(The clothes are beautiful in color, comfortable to wear, and the thread
is a bit more. This dress has a pocket and it is convenient and practical!)
不轻的雪纺连衣裙，很有垂坠感，觉得夏天春天都适合穿，很衬肤色
白呢，胸前会有透，不过不影响穿着(This chiffon dress feels heavy when
worn. I think summer and spring are suitable for wearing. Putting on this
dress will bring out my skin white. But this dress will be transparent on the
chest, but it will not affect the wear.)
attributes
裙长: 中裙||裙型: A 字裙||材质: 涤纶||袖长: 七分袖||领型: 其它||袖型: 其
它||上市时间: 2018 春季||版型: A 型
question
怀孕五个多月能穿吗(I have been pregnant for more than five months, can
I wear it?)
reference
能穿到生都没问题的(You can wear it until your child is born)
S2SA
可以的，我儿子三个月就穿了(I can wear it, my son wore it when he was
three months old.)
RAGF
可以啊，我的就是五个月(I can wear it, my pregnancy is five months.)
PAAG
可以的，我就是(I can wear it, I am pregnant.)
Table 7: Comparison of BLEU scores between different prod-
uct categories.
PAAG
S2SA
S2SAR
BLEU1
BLEU2
BLEU1
BLEU2
BLEU1
BLEU2
Jewelry
19.53
6.35
17.65
4.26
18.74
4.69
Mattress
18.89
4.14
16.35
3.00
17.52
5.57
Clothing
18.18
5.17
18.39
4.98
18.36
4.68
Kitchenware
18.00
4.31
15.23
3.19
17.15
4.09
Power and Handtools
16.34
3.98
13.73
3.20
15.60
3.22
Skin Care
18.01
4.57
15.39
3.55
18.33
4.40
Gardening
13.67
2.30
11.86
1.52
15.74
2.30
Baby
18.22
4.51
16.95
3.71
17.27
3.75
Automotive Accessories
17.46
3.43
15.49
3.14
17.86
3.00
Gift
19.25
3.93
17.23
3.06
18.39
4.24
that S2SA only generates the answer which is fluent, but generated
answers are contradictory to the facts. Due to there is no fact con-
sistency constraint in RAGF, it will also face this problem when
generating answers However, PAAG overcomes this shortcoming
by using consistency constraint given by discriminator at training,
and then produce the answer which is not only fluent but also
consistent with the facts.
We evaluate performances of PAAG on different categories. Shown
in Table 7, we see that our proposed model beats the other two
baselines (S2SA and S2SAR), on majority of product categories in
terms of BLEU score. To prove the significance of the above results,
we also do the paired student t-test between our model and base-
line methods, the p-value of S2SA is 0.0086 and S2SAR is 0.0100.
From the t-test, we can see that the performance of our model is
significantly higher than other baselines.
To investigate the robustness of parameter, we train our model
in different parameter size and evaluate them by embedding metric
shown in Figure 4. As the training progresses, the performance of
each model is rising. However, the model with a large number of

parameters does not have a great advantage in the final performance
of the model with a smaller parameters.
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed the task of product-aware answer
generation, which aims to generate an answer for a product-aware
question from product reviews and attributes. To address this task,
we have proposed product-aware answer generator (PAAG): An
attention-based question aware review reader is used to extract
semantic units from reviews, and key-value memory network based
attribute encoder is employed to fuse relevant attributes. In order to
encourage the model to produce answers that match facts, we have
employed an adversarial learning mechanism to give additional
training signals for the answer generation. To tackle the shortcom-
ings of vanilla GAN, we have applied the Wasserstein distance as
value function in the training of consistency discriminator. In our
experiments, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of PAAG and
have found significant improvements over state-of-the-art base-
lines in terms of metric-based evaluations and human evaluations.
Moreover, we have verified the effectiveness of each module in
PAAG for improving product-aware answer generation.
Future work involves extending our model to multiple hop of
memory network used as attribute encoder.
