A
Formal and Computational Properties of the
Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
JOS´E L. BALC´AZAR, Universidad de Cantabria
Some existing notions of redundancy among association rules allow for a logical-style characterization and
lead to irredundant bases of absolutely minimum size. One can push the intuition of redundancy further
and ﬁnd an intuitive notion of interest of an association rule, in terms of its “novelty” with respect to other
rules. Namely: an irredundant rule is so because its conﬁdence is higher than what the rest of the rules
would suggest; then, one can ask: how much higher?
We propose to measure such a sort of “novelty” through the conﬁdence boost of a rule, which encompasses
two previous similar notions (conﬁdence width and rule blocking, of which the latter is closely related to the
earlier measure “improvement”). Acting as a complement to conﬁdence and support, the conﬁdence boost
helps to obtain small and crisp sets of mined association rules, and solves the well-known problem that, in
certain cases, rules of negative correlation may pass the conﬁdence bound. We analyze the properties of two
versions of the notion of conﬁdence boost, one of them a natural generalization of the other. We develop
eﬃcient algorithmics to ﬁlter rules according to their conﬁdence boost, compare the concept to some similar
notions in the bibliography, and describe the results of some experimentation employing the new notions
on standard benchmark datasets. We describe an open-source association mining tool that embodies one of
our variants of conﬁdence boost in such a way that the data mining process does not require the user to
select any value for any parameter.
General Terms: Algorithms, Theory, Human factors
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Association rule mining, association rule quality, conﬁdence
ACM Reference Format:
ACM V, N, Article A (January YYYY), 36 pages.
DOI = 10.1145/0000000.0000000 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/0000000.0000000
1. INTRODUCTION
As the now well-known task of association rule mining was deﬁned, the problems faced
were twofold. First, the quantity of candidate itemsets for antecedent X and consequent Y
of association rules X →Y grows exponentially with the often already large universe of
items. The introduction of a support threshold parameter was a key advance that allowed
for the design of eﬃcient frequent set miners and for the computation of association rules
in large datasets: there, exploration is limited to those itemsets that appear “often enough”
as subsets of the transactions, that is, their relative frequency exceeds a certain ratio of the
transactions; see [Agrawal et al. 1996] and the references there. Then, the second problem is
that, often, the set of rules provided as output is too large, specially if we consider that its
purpose is to be read, and understood, by a human. We consider that this problem warrants
further research, and we attempt at providing here yet one more approach to it.
Address at the time of submission: Departmento de Matem´aticas, Estad´ıstica y Computaci´on, Av Los Cas-

by project TIN2007-66523 (FORMALISM) of Programa Nacional de Investigaci´on, Ministerio de Ciencia e
Innovaci´on (MICINN), Spain, and by the Pascal-2 Network of the European Union.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage
and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any
component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be
requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA,

c⃝YYYY ACM 0000-0000/YYYY/01-ARTA $10.00
DOI 10.1145/0000000.0000000 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/0000000.0000000
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.
arXiv:1103.4778v1  [cs.DB]  24 Mar 2011

A:2
Jos´e L Balc´azar
These two diﬃculties are of very diﬀerent sorts. The exponential growth of candidates is
essentially a combinatorial, almost technological problem, and all the existing solutions are
based on the acceptance that, as not all the billions of candidates can be considered within
reasonable running times, we make do with those that obey the support constraint. However,
this solution puts unto the shoulders of the user the heavy responsibility of choosing the
support threshold, with little or no guidance about how to do it.
On the other hand, it is no problem for our current computing equipments to extract
association rules from frequent sets. The proposal in [Agrawal et al. 1996] (and already in
the early [Luxenburger 1991] where, however, the support bound proposal does not appear)
is to impose upon association rules X →Y a conﬁdence constraint, that is, a threshold on
the conditional probability of Y conditioned to X.
Indeed, association rule mining, in essence, amounts to enumerating all the rules that
are not disproved by the data. As there are exponentially growing quantities of potential
associations, even relatively large datasets are unable to disprove most of them. Therefore,
in the standard “support and conﬁdence” framework, it is well-known, and easy to check
using any of the public datasets and free association miners available on the web, that
whereas high, demanding thresholds for these parameters generally yield few somewhat
obvious rules, softening them, as much as the algorithmics (and the user patience) would
allow, leads to large amounts of rules, with many of them looking very much like each
other; often, they are not a user-friendly enough result of a data mining process, due to the
presence of these intuitive redundancies.
As a preliminary ﬁlter, there are several essentially logical deﬁnitions of redundancy,
patterned after similar intuitions in Propositional or First-Order Logic. This leads to
minimum-size bases, such as the Representative (or Essential) Rules [Aggarwal and Yu 2001;
Kryszkiewicz 1998b] for plain redundancy or the basis B⋆
γ [Balc´azar 2010c] for closure-based
redundancy, at conﬁdence threshold γ, that spares the computation of minimal generators
needed by the Representative Rules, but needs to be complemented with a basis for full im-
plications. All these questions are thoroughly surveyed in [Balc´azar 2010c]. But even taking
redundancies into account, the results are, in many cases, unsatisfactory; therefore, many
alternative quality measures exist for association rules, essentially due to the facts that,
ﬁrst, the conﬁdence of a rule X →Y can be high even in cases where the actual correla-
tion between X and Y is negative, and, second, it is often extremely diﬃcult to settle for
thresholds where interesting rules are kept but the total amount of rules can be handled;
see [Geng and Hamilton 2006; Lenca et al. 2008; Tan et al. 2004] and their references for
information about the rich research area opened up by these diﬃculties. We note that, from
the point of view of the user, the usage of alternative implicational measures leads to an
even worse situation, as (s)he has to choose again both the measures to apply and their
corresponding thresholds. The literature on this topic is huge and cannot be reviewed here;
a discussion of the relationships of our contributions with the most relevant ones among the
published proposals is deferred to Subsections 7.1 and 7.2.
Our development is based on the simple consideration that rules can be evaluated for
“novelty”, by comparison with the rest of the rules mined. Actually, the outcome of every
Data Mining project is expected to oﬀer some degree of novelty. If one ends up identifying
only facts whose validity is obvious, these would not be really useful. However, to formally
study the novelty of Data Mining results is far from being a trivial task. Indeed, novelty
is, in an intuitive sense, a relative notion: it refers to facts that are, somehow, unexpected;
hence, some “low expectation” reason must exist, and must be due to alternative facts
or prediction mechanisms. That is: a piece of information is novel or is not, always with
respect to a given context of previously known facts; deﬁnitions of novelty must take into
account, then, some form of previously available knowledge, a notion hard to formalize
(Subsection 7.1 describes some approaches, but see e.g. [Padmanabhan and Tuzhilin 2000]
and the references therein).
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:3
However, as one very partial and probably insuﬃcient, but necessary action, we claim
that, as a minimum, each rule should be evaluated for novelty by comparison with the rest
of the rules mined, treated as “alternative” mechanism [Balc´azar 2009]. One can attempt
at measuring to what extent the conﬁdence of the rule is substantially higher than that
of related rules that would, intuitively, explain the same facts. In the same reference, the
conﬁdence width is proposed as a measure of a relative form of objective novelty or surpris-
ingness of each individual rule with respect to other rules that hold in the same dataset.
As some intuitive redundancies are not covered by that measure, the same paper proposes
also to allow some rules to block other rules in case the blocked rule does not bring in
enough novelty with respect to the blocker. (We give below the precise deﬁnitions of these
notions.) Essentially, these proposals measure novelty through the extent to which the con-
ﬁdence value is “robust”, taken relative to the conﬁdences of related rules, as opposed to
the absolute consideration of the single rule at hand.
To give a hint of the sort of process we are discussing, assume a rule, of conﬁdence say
75%, is found in a census-like dataset, stating that young people earn lesser salaries; in the
presence of such a rule, a more complex one stating that young, unmarried people earn lesser
salaries could be novel, but only if its conﬁdence turns out to be substantially higher than
75%, maybe 90%. Otherwise, it would not be novel, the simpler rule should be preferred,
and even the complex rule discarded (or blocked), all depending on thresholds on conﬁdence
and on some other parameter such as improvement [Bayardo et al. 1999], blocking factor,
or conﬁdence boost (to be introduced here). Further discussion will be provided along the
body of the paper.
It was empirically demonstrated in [Balc´azar 2009] that better results were obtained using
both a conﬁdence width threshold and a blocking threshold, than using a single one of these
ﬁlters (or none). However, no really fast way of testing a rule for blockings was provided.
Thus, our contribution here is a new attempt at formalizing the notion of novelty, the
conﬁdence boost, similar in its syntactic deﬁnition to conﬁdence width, but diﬀerent in its
semantics, which is more restrictive; its main feature is that it encompasses at once both the
bound on the conﬁdence width and the ability to detect that a rule would be blocked, so that
the conﬁdence boost bound embodies both of the bounds proposed in [Balc´azar 2009], yet
it is computable with reasonable eﬃciency. Conﬁdence boost comes in two ﬂavors: a “plain”
one, that we develop in Section 3, and a more general variant that takes into account the
closure space implicit in the data, developed in Section 4.
Three short extended abstracts of three, six, and seven pages respectively have announced
results from this paper in scientiﬁc meetings; reference [Balc´azar 2010b] contains the deﬁ-
nition of conﬁdence boost, fragments of Section 2 (where we also review a small number of
necessary facts from [Balc´azar 2010c]), part of Section 3 (the deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost),
and the algorithm in Subsection 3.2 (but not its correctness proof). Reference [Balc´azar
2010a] contains the deﬁnition of closure-based conﬁdence boost and part of the materials
in Section 4, again including the main algorithm but not its correctness proof, as well as
materials from Subsection 5.2. The tool yacaree which embodies closure-based conﬁdence
boost into a parameter-free association miner (Section 6) was advertised at [Balc´azar 2011]
(demo track). The rest of Sections 3, 4, and 5, as well as the discussions in Section 7, are
unpublished.
2. PRELIMINARIES
A given set of available items U is assumed; its subsets are called itemsets. We will denote
itemsets by capital letters from the end of the alphabet, and use juxtaposition to denote
union, as in XY . The inclusion sign as in X ⊂Y denotes proper subset, whereas improper
inclusion is denoted X ⊆Y . For a given dataset D, consisting of n transactions, each of
which is an itemset labeled with a unique transaction identiﬁer, we can count the support
sD(X) of an itemset X, which is the cardinality of the set of transactions that contain X. An
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:4
Jos´e L Balc´azar
alternative rendering of support is its normalized version, the relative frequency or empirical
probability sD(X)/n; we will work with the unnormalized quantity.
Association miners explore datasets in search of valid expressions of the form X →Y ,
where X and Y stand for itemsets. Intuitively, an association rule X →Y means that, in the
given dataset, the transactions that contain X “tend to contain” Y as well. The conﬁdence
of a rule X →Y is cD(X →Y ) = sD(XY )/sD(X), akin to an empirical approximation to a
conditional probability. It is important to observe that the precise deﬁnition of association
rules depends on the formalization chosen for the informal expression “tend to”, as only
then these syntactical expressions become endowed with a concrete semantics and associated
speciﬁc properties. For instance, if we deﬁne the meaning of X →Y through conﬁdence,
then rules X →Y and X →XY are equivalent, whereas, if we use lift (deﬁned below),
then they may not be equivalent.
Conﬁdence is a very natural notion to prune and rank the output of an association rule
mining algorithm, but we must point out that, due to some objections that we review in
Subsection 2.2, there exist other proposals of notions to replace conﬁdence. When conﬁdence
is 1, the maximum value, we say that X →Y is an implication: every transaction containing
X contains as well Y . Sometimes we use the term partial rule for an association rule of
conﬁdence less than 1. The support of a rule X →Y is sD(X →Y ) = sD(XY ). When
the dataset is clear from the context, we will omit the subscript D from both support and
conﬁdence. We do allow X = ∅as antecedent of association rules: then the conﬁdence
coincides with the normalized support, c(∅→Y ) = s(Y )/s(∅) = s(Y )/n. Allowing Y = ∅
as consequent as well is possible but not very useful, as this case leads only to trivial rules
equivalent to reﬂexivity statements; therefore we assume that such rules are omitted from
all our sets of rules. In the proposal of [Agrawal et al. 1996], association rules are restricted
to |Y | = 1. This allows for faster algorithmics, as rules are directly obtained from each
frequent set. In fact, whereas conﬁdence 1 implications, say, A →B and A →C jointly
are indeed equivalent to A →BC, for conﬁdence less than 1 they are not. A →BC says
that B and C appear jointly often with A, whereas associations A →B and A →C, even
together, provide less information, as B and C could appear often with A but not so much
together (we oﬀer an example below). Thus, we do not force |Y | = 1.
In many cases we assume that the context provides for a threshold on the conﬁdence,
imposing a constraint c(X →Y ) ≥γ on rules, and likewise a support threshold constraint
s(X →Y ) > τ. It is formally convenient to use strict inequality in the latter case, to easily
cater for the case where no support bound is imposed, by simply taking τ = 0; whereas,
for conﬁdence, we prefer to be able to select full-conﬁdence implications via the nonstrict
inequality with γ = 1.
Remark 2.1. As we consider mainly conﬁdence and support, rules X →Y and X →XY
are equivalent in almost all our statements, as are all rules where some part of the left-hand
side X is repeated in the right-hand side. Our novelty notions will respect as well this
equivalence. The only exceptions will be in our brief considerations of lift. Two natural
canonical choices to simplify the discussion are to restrict the discussion either to the rules
of the form X →Y or to those of the form X →XY , where, in both cases, X ∩Y = ∅.
We will see in Subsection 7.2 that failing to clarify this option risks overlooking subtle
diﬀerences among sets of rules enjoying, however, quite diﬀerent properties. Based on the
similar developments in implications and functional dependencies, we choose the latter: we
will make explicit always what part of the consequent is already in the antecedent and write
all our association rules as X →XY where X ∩Y = ∅. However, this choice is somewhat
arbitrary, and whomever prefers association rules with disjoint sides only needs to remove
the copy of the antecedent from the consequent. In fact, in our implementations, at the time
of showing a rule to the user, of course only the Y part of the consequent is shown.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:5
Fig. 1.
An example closure space, with
three minimal generators; the dataset
contains
the
following
transactions:
ABCDE (×6),
ABC (×2),
AB (×2),
CDE (×1), BC (×1)
Given a dataset D, an itemset X ⊆U is closed if the support of any strictly larger
itemset is strictly smaller; and is free, or a minimal generator, if the support of any strictly
smaller itemset is strictly larger. We denote as X the closure of itemset X with respect to a
given dataset: X is the smallest closed itemset that includes X or, equivalently, the largest
itemset that includes X and has the same support as X in the dataset. It is easy to check
that it is unique. The intersection of closed itemsets is closed and, ordered by inclusion,
the closed itemsets form a lattice which we call “closure space”. We will make liberal use
of the three characteristic properties of closure operators, namely, extensivity: X ⊆X;
monotonicity: X ⊆Y implies X ⊆Y ; and idempotency: X = X. We will mention below
further details about the connections of closure operators and free sets with association
mining; see e. g. [Boulicaut et al. 2003; Zaki 2004] for further information.
Example 2.2. We will employ as running example through most of this paper the closure
space obtained from a speciﬁc dataset. For this example, the universe U includes the ﬁve
items A, B, C, D, and E. The dataset consists of 12 transactions, six of which include
all of U; two more consist of ABC, again two transactions consist of AB, and then one
transaction consists of CDE and another one consists of BC. It is easy to see that the
associated closure-space lattice is as depicted in Figure 1, where transitive arcs have been
omitted and, besides the closed sets, three minimal generators (connected to their closures)
have been indicated in broken lines. The supports of all closed sets are reported in the ﬁgure
for convenience. The support of each minimal generator coincides with that of its closure.
Note that sometimes the minimal generator coincides with its closure, as in set BC, for
one. This example illustrates that, at conﬁdence 9/11, both the association rules B →A
and B →C hold, whereas the stronger rule B →AC does not, as its conﬁdence is only
8/11. That is, if and when B →AC holds, it would give more information than B →A
and B →C holding jointly.
We will propose to measure the novelty of each rule with respect to the rest of the outcome
of the same data mining process, through a variant of the intuitive idea of redundancy.
Several notions of redundancy for association rules exist. In the early proposal [Luxenburger
1991], a rule is redundant if its conﬁdence can be computed from that of other rules.
Later, this idea has been reﬁned, making precise what information is maintained and which
operations are allowed to infer conﬁdence or support of redundant rules: see the survey of
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:6
Jos´e L Balc´azar
several concise representations and redundancy notions in [Kryszkiewicz 2002]. In [Pasquier
et al. 2005] (and in earlier conference versions of their work) the following set of rules is
shown to be suﬃcient to compute the conﬁdence and support of any given partial rule:
Deﬁnition 2.3.
Given a dataset and a support threshold τ acting on all sets and rules:
(1) The min-max rules are those of the form X →XY where XY is a closed set and X is
a minimal generator; they are split into the following two cases.
(2) The min-max approximate rules are those of the form X →XY where XY is a closed
set, X is a minimal generator, and X ⊂XY . They have conﬁdence less than 1.
(3) The min-max exact rules are those of the form X →XY where XY is a closed set, X
is a minimal generator, and X = XY . They have conﬁdence 1.
Similar notions of redundancy are studied in [Zaki 2004], where, however, the approximate
bases are constructed as rules having minimal generators both at the left- and at the right-
hand sides. These bases are quite more succinct than the sets of all association rules that
hold in a speciﬁc dataset, yet they still conform far too large quantities in many cases of
interest. Therefore, less demanding notions of redundancy for association rules have been
studied. If we assume that the set of frequent closures is kept, so that conﬁdences are easily
computed from them, and focus on the “user-centric” view, there is a very precise and
natural notion that allows us to identify irredundant bases of absolutely minimum size. For
the whole paper, we concentrate basically on this redundancy notion, and on a somewhat
more sophisticate variant that we will describe in Section 4.
Lemma 2.4.
Consider two association rules, X0 →X0Y0 and X1 →X1Y1. The follow-
ing are equivalent:
(1) The conﬁdence and support of X0 →X0Y0 are always larger than or equal to those
of X1 →X1Y1, in all datasets; that is, for every dataset D, we will have cD(X0 →
X0Y0) ≥cD(X1 →X1Y1) and sD(X0Y0) ≥sD(X1Y1) in it.
(2) X1 ⊆X0 ⊆X0Y0 ⊆X1Y1.
When these cases hold, we say that X1 →X1Y1 makes X0 →X0Y0 redundant, or also
that X1 →X1Y1 is logically stronger than X0 →X0Y0. The notions come, essentially, from
[Aggarwal and Yu 2001; Kryszkiewicz 1998b]. For a ﬁxed conﬁdence threshold, those rules
that reach it, and are not made redundant by other rules also above the threshold, form
the representative (or essential) rule basis for that conﬁdence threshold [Aggarwal and Yu
2001; Kryszkiewicz 1998b; Phan-Luong 2001]; that is, every rule that reaches the conﬁdence
threshold is either in the corresponding representative basis, or made redundant by a rule
in the basis. Hence, a redundant rule is so because we can know beforehand, from the
information in a basis, that its conﬁdence will be above the threshold. These references also
explain how to compute the representative basis out of the closed itemsets for the dataset.
The fact that statement (2) implies statement (1) in Lemma 2.4 is easy to see and was
already pointed out in [Aggarwal and Yu 2001; Kryszkiewicz 1998b; Phan-Luong 2001] (in
somewhat diﬀerent terms). The converse implication is nontrivial and much more recently
shown [Balc´azar 2010c]; see this reference as well for the proof that the representative
basis has the minimum possible size among all bases for this notion of redundancy, and
for discussions of other related redundancy notions. In particular, several other natural
proposals are shown there to be equivalent to this redundancy. Also, from this same source,
we will consider later on a variant which makes a deeper use of the closure operator.,
A known property that relates representative rules to closure-based miners is:
Proposition 2.5.
On a given dataset and in the presence of a ﬁxed support threshold τ,
consider the association rule X →XY , and set γ = c(X →XY ). The following are
equivalent:
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:7
(1) X →XY is a representative rule for some conﬁdence threshold.
(2) X →XY is a min-max rule: XY is a closed set and X is a minimal generator.
(3) X →XY is a representative rule for conﬁdence threshold γ.
Hence, whenever we refer to X →XY as a representative rule, without mention of
the speciﬁc conﬁdence threshold γ for which it is so, we implicitly understand that we
mean γ = c(X →XY ). The implication from (1) to (2) is from [Kryszkiewicz 1998a] (see
also [Kryszkiewicz 2001] for a clearer notation): if X →XY is a representative rule then
s(X) < s(X′) for all X′ ⊂X, and s(Z) < s(XY ) for all Z with XY ⊂Z; that is, X is a
minimal generator and XY is closed.
We have not found the other implications explicitly stated, but they appear implicitly,
in a sense, in the references that discuss these notions. We sketch here the rather simple
proofs for completeness. Set γ = c(X →XY ). We assume that X →XY is a min-max
rule, and consider a diﬀerent rule, X′ →X′Y ′, logically stronger than X →XY ; we
must argue that it fails the conﬁdence threshold. By Lemma 2.4, we have X′ ⊆X and
XY ⊆X′Y ′. If the left-hand sides diﬀer, X′ ⊂X and, X being a minimal generator,
s(X′) > s(X); then c(X′ →X′Y ′) ≤c(X′ →XY ) < c(X →XY ) = γ. If, instead,
X′ = X, then XY ⊂X′Y ′ and, XY being closed, s(X′Y ′) < s(XY ); we obtain that
c(X′ →X′Y ′) = c(X →X′Y ′) < c(X →XY ) = γ again. The remaining implication,
(3) to (1), is obvious.
Example 2.6.
One can check that the dataset and the closure space of Example 2.2
lead to seven representative rules at conﬁdence threshold 0.8, namely, A →BC, C →AB,
B →C, ∅→C, ∅→AB, and D →ABCE, and E →ABCD. The ﬁrst two have conﬁdence
exactly 0.8, the others have conﬁdences slightly higher.
For ﬁxed conﬁdence thresholds, the representative rules at that conﬁdence form often a
properly smaller basis than the min-max rules; this can be achieved because of two reasons.
One is that, obviously, min-max rules of conﬁdence below the threshold are omitted. But a
more sophisticate reason is that a representative rule at a given conﬁdence γ may cease to
be so at lower conﬁdences: at a lower threshold γ′ it is possible that a stronger rule appears
that makes it redundant. This observation is key in the notion of conﬁdence width that we
review next.
2.1. Conﬁdence Width
Along most of our discussions in this paper, we assume that a dataset D and a support
threshold τ have been ﬁxed: all our rules are assumed to reach strictly above that support
threshold on D.
According to the deﬁnition of redundancy in Lemma 2.4, all rules in the representative
basis provide some irredundant information. However, it is often the case that still the
representative basis contains more rules than reasonable for human inspection. In [Balc´azar
2009], the intuition of redundancy is pushed further in order to gain a perspective of novelty
of association rules. An irredundant rule of a given conﬁdence c belongs to the basis for
that conﬁdence threshold γ = c: no rule of that conﬁdence or higher makes it redundant;
equivalently, all rules that make it redundant have lower conﬁdence. Then, one can ask:
“how much lower?”. This can be evaluated by means of the following deﬁnition from the
same reference:
Deﬁnition 2.7.
For an association rule X →XY , consider all rules that are not equiv-
alent to X →XY (as per Remark 2.1), but such that X →XY is redundant with respect
to them, and pick one with maximum conﬁdence in D among them, say X′ →X′Y ′. The
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:8
Jos´e L Balc´azar
conﬁdence width of X →XY in D is:
w(X →XY ) =
c(X →XY )
c(X′ →X′Y ′)
The condition that X →XY is redundant with respect to X′ →X′Y ′ implies that
c(X′ →X′Y ′) ≤c(X →XY ), hence the conﬁdence width is always 1 or larger. In fact,
w(X →XY ) is strictly higher than 1 if and only if X →XY is a representative rule.
To explain better the intuition behind the notion of conﬁdence width, consider a rule
X →XY of a given conﬁdence, say c(X →XY ) = c0 ∈[0, 1], and let us see what happens
as we mine the representative basis at a varying conﬁdence threshold γ. If c0 < γ, the
rule at hand will not play any role at all, being of conﬁdence too low for the threshold. At
γ = c0, the rule becomes part of the output of any standard association mining process,
but it could be that some other “logically stronger” rule appears at the same conﬁdence c0.
For instance, it could be that both rules A →AB and A →ABC have conﬁdence c0: then
A →AB is redundant and will not belong to the basis for that conﬁdence. In this case, the
conﬁdence width is 1, its smallest possible value.
If no stronger rule appears at threshold γ = c0, then X →XY will belong to the
representative basis for that threshold. Let us keep decreasing the threshold. At some lower
conﬁdence, a logically stronger rule may appear. If a logically stronger rule shows up early,
at a conﬁdence threshold γ very close to c0, then the rule X →XY is not very novel: it
is too similar to the logically stronger one, and this shows in the fact that the interval of
conﬁdence thresholds where it is a representative rule is narrow. Its conﬁdence width will
be barely above 1. To the contrary, a stronger rule may take long to appear: in that case,
only rules of much lower conﬁdence entail X →XY , so that the fact that it does reach
conﬁdence c0 is novel in this sense. The interval of conﬁdence thresholds where X →XY
is a representative rule is wide, as will be the value of the conﬁdence width. For instance,
if the conﬁdence of A →AB is 0.9, and all rules that make it redundant have conﬁdences
below 0.75, the rule is a much better candidate to novelty than it would be if some rule
like A →ABC would have a conﬁdence of 0.88: in this last case, A →AB indeed brings
in additional information, but its novelty, with respect to the other rules, is not high; it
only belongs to the basis when the conﬁdence threshold is in the interval (0.88, 0.9]. In the
other case where all rules that could make it redundant have conﬁdences, say, 0.75 or less,
then A →AB would belong to the basis for a considerably wider interval of conﬁdences,
(0.75, 0.9]. It states something really diﬀerent from the rest of the information mined. As
an objective novelty measure, thus, conﬁdence width measures the width of the interval of
conﬁdences in which the rule at hand belongs to the representative basis.
It is proved in [Balc´azar 2009] that, in Deﬁnition 2.7, it suﬃces to consider representative
rules for the role of X′ →X′Y ′.
Example 2.8. For association rule A →BC, of conﬁdence 0.8, in Example 2.2, the
conﬁdence width is 1.2. The conﬁdence of that rule is at least 20% higher than that
of any rule that entails it. Indeed, there are two representative rules logically stronger,
namely A →BCDE (of conﬁdence 0.6) and ∅→ABC (of higher conﬁdence, 2/3); hence,
w(A →BC) = (8/10)/(2/3) = 1.2.
Below we will need Deﬁnition 2.7 in a single formula; for this, we can replace the redun-
dancy condition with its characterization according to Lemma 2.4: w(X →XY ) =
=
c(X →XY )
max{c(X′ →X′Y ′)
 (X →XY ) ̸= (X′ →X′Y ′), X′ ⊆X, XY ⊆X′Y ′}
where again we are assuming that X ∩Y = ∅and X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:9
For each ﬁxed support, there are rules that are not redundant with respect to any other,
diﬀerent rule; then, this quotient is undeﬁned due to the emptiness of the set in the de-
nominator, for instance, if all candidate rules to it are of too low support. By convention,
we use ∞as value of the conﬁdence width in that case (equivalently, likening the max to
a zero). We can identify easily which rules have inﬁnite width (this proposition is reported
here for the ﬁrst time):
Proposition 2.9.
The value of w(X →XY ) is ﬁnite and well-deﬁned if and only if
either X ̸= ∅, or Y has some proper superset Z with s(Z) > τ.
Proof. Indeed, if X = ∅and no proper superset of Y reaches support above τ in the dataset,
then no rule can make ∅→Y redundant; conversely, for s(Z) > τ, ∅→Z is diﬀerent from
X →XY and makes it redundant if either X ̸= ∅and Z = XY , or XY ⊂Z; since this
second case only needs to be applied to rules with X = ∅, Y ⊂Z suﬃces.
Thus, the only rules of inﬁnite width are of the form ∅→Z with Z maximal under the
condition that s(Z) > τ, and their conﬁdence would coincide with the normalized support
of Z. We observe in passing that, in practice, such maximal Z’s usually have a support
barely above τ, because all supersets must have a support falling below τ; whenever the
conﬁdence threshold is substantially higher than the normalized support threshold (which
does not happen always but extremely often), all rules of inﬁnite width will be ﬁltered out
by the conﬁdence constraint.
It is easy to prove a simple observation, that will be useful to compare below with conﬁ-
dence boost: consider the condition XY ⊆X′Y ′ in the rules entering the maximization of
the denominator; it can be written equivalently as follows, using the other condition that
X′ ⊆X and the empty-intersection assumptions:
Proposition 2.10.
Assume X′ ⊆X, X ∩Y = ∅, and X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅. Then XY ⊆
X′Y ′ ⇐⇒(X −X′) ⊆Y ′ and Y ⊆Y ′.
In [Balc´azar 2009], some intuitions are described that suggest that, for a conﬁdence thresh-
old γ, a natural choice could be to set the conﬁdence width threshold at 2 −γ; however, so
far no formal support for this proposal (or any other proposal, for that matter) is known.
2.2. Blocking Rules
On the basis of a clear, simple intuition described in many papers (e.g. [Bayardo et al. 1999;
Liu et al. 1999; Padmanabhan and Tuzhilin 2000; Shah et al. 1999; Toivonen et al. 1995] just
to name a few), [Balc´azar 2009] proposes also a notion of “rule blocking”, whereby a subset
of the antecedent may “block” an association rule, that is, forbid its being provided in the
output, if the conﬁdence of the rule with the smaller antecedent and the same consequent
is higher enough.
The main question behind this option is the following. Consider an association rule X →
XY , and reduce the antecedent to a smaller Z ⊂X. Whereas, intuitively, the rule with larger
antecedent should be subsumed by the other, this is due to the human intuitive habit of
working with full implications, where indeed this is the case. But this is not so anymore with
association rules. For instance, at conﬁdence 1, if A →C holds, then AB →C also holds,
and does not bring new information. But association rules are not implications; instead,
they relate relative frequencies: compared to X →XY , a smaller antecedent Z ⊂X does
not lead to a new rule Z →ZY that entails it. Actually, for Z ⊂X, either of X →XY
or Z →ZY may have arbitrarily higher conﬁdence than the other. Indeed: rule X →XY
speaks about the abundancy of Y among the population of transactions that contain X;
reducing the antecedent into Z changes the population into, in principle, a larger one, and
Y can be distributed at very diﬀerent rates along each of these two sets of transactions. The
distribution of Y in the larger population supporting Z can be very imbalanced, so that Y
can appear more frequently in either.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:10
Jos´e L Balc´azar
Example 2.11. Consider two association rules like A →C and AB →C. It is easy to
construct examples where almost all transactions with A and B have C, but they are a
small fraction of those having A, and thus the conﬁdence of A →C is very small, whereas
that of AB →C is high, even 1; conversely, C might hold for nearly all of the transactions
having A, but it could be that the only transactions having both A and B are those without
C and, then, the conﬁdence of AB →C can be zero yet the conﬁdence of A →C can be
very high.
Example 2.12.
Returning brieﬂy to the dataset of Example 2.2, it is easy to check that
c(∅→BC) < c(A →BC) whereas c(∅→C) > c(B →C).
As a consequence, we also ﬁnd the fundaments of the criticism that conﬁdence does not
detect negative correlations.
Example 2.13. Fix a conﬁdence threshold at 0.75, and consider a simple dataset with
10 transactions: 3 transactions BC, 6 transactions just C, and 1 transaction B. Then
c(B →BC) = 0.75, reaching the conﬁdence threshold. Most association miners would
report B →C as interesting at that threshold. However, the correlation between B and C
is actually negative. Indeed, C is less frequent among the transactions having B than in
the total population, as c(∅→C) = s(C)/n = 0.9.
The natural reaction, consisting of a normalization by dividing the conﬁdence by the
(normalized) support of the consequent of the rule, gives a parameter that we ﬁnd in the
references going by several diﬀerent names: it has been called interest [Silverstein et al. 1998]
or, in a slightly diﬀerent but fully equivalent form, strength [Shah et al. 1999]; “lift” seems
to be catching up as a short name, possibly aided by the fact that the Intelligent Miner
system from IBM employed that name. The quantity is well-known in basic probability, as
it measures the deviation from independence, as a multiplicative distance from the case of
fully independent X and Y , which would give value 1 for it:
Deﬁnition 2.14.
The lift of rule X →Y is c(X→Y )
s(Y )/n =
s(XY )×n
s(X)×s(Y ).
(If supports are already normalized, then the factor n for the dataset size in the numera-
tor has to be omitted.) The related parameter leverage [Piatetsky-Shapiro 1991] measures
essentially the same thing, just that it does so as an additive distance. It must be noted
that, contrary to conﬁdence, the lift of X →Y does not coincide with the lift of X →XY :
if we are to use lift, then we must be careful to keep the right-hand side Y disjoint from
the left-hand side: X ∩Y = ∅. Otherwise, misleadingly higher lift values are obtained. Note
also that, in case X = ∅, the lift trivializes to 1.
However, this natural measure lacks the ability to orient the rules, because, in it, the
roles of X and Y are symmetric. Additionally, lift is limited in its ability to control cases
where c(Z →Y ) > c(X →Y ) for ∅̸= Z ⊂X. We describe a case found in data from real
census information, pointed out also in [Balc´azar 2009]. Mining for association rules at 5%
support and 100% conﬁdence the Adult dataset from Irvine [Asuncion and Newman 2007],
67 (out of 71) rules in the basis are of the form “Husband” + something else →“Male”,
and the other four rules are also of this form except for the addition of one more item in
the consequent. The reason is that the rule “Husband” →“Male”, that we would expect to
hold, does not reach 100% conﬁdence: indeed, tuple 7110 includes the items “Husband” and
“Female” (instead of “Male”). This opens the door to many rules, intuitively uninformative,
that enlarge a bit the left-hand side, just enough to avoid tuple 7110 so as to reach conﬁdence
100%. The whole issue would not be solved by dividing all conﬁdences by the support of
“Male”. Further examples are given in the same paper, and in many others such as those
cited above.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:11
It is desirable to react to the negative correlation problem for conﬁdence and still maintain
orientability. As an alternative approach to this problem, in [Balc´azar 2009] the conﬁdence
parameter is used in an intuitive way to ﬁnd a threshold at which a smaller antecedent
would suggest to omit a given rule. The proposal there is fully equivalent to the following
one:
Deﬁnition 2.15. Given rule X →XY , with X ∩Y = ∅, a proper subset Z ⊂X blocks
X →XY at blocking threshold b if
s(XY ) −c(Z →ZY )s(X)
c(Z →ZY )s(X)
≤b.
The threshold b is intended to take positive but small values, say around 0.2 or lower.
The intuition behind this deﬁnition is as follows: we will want to discard rule X →XY in
case we ﬁnd a rule Z →ZY , with Z ⊂X (and therefore ZY ⊂XY , also properly), having
“almost” the same conﬁdence, or larger. (In the presence of a support threshold τ, we would
be requiring as well, naturally, that s(Z →ZY ) > τ.) To do this, we compare the number
of tuples having XY with the quantity that would be predicted from the conﬁdence of the
rule Z →ZY .
More precisely, let c(Z →ZY ) = c. If Y is distributed along the support of X at the
same ratio as along the larger support of Z, we would expect s(XY ) ≈c × s(X): we are,
thus, considering the relative error committed by c × s(X) used as an approximation to
s(XY ). In case the diﬀerence in the numerator is negative, it would mean that s(XY ) is
even lower than what Z →ZY would suggest. If it is positive but the quotient is low,
c(Z →ZY ) × s(X) still suggests a good approximation to c(X →XY ), and the larger rule
does not bring high enough conﬁdence with respect to the simpler one to be considered: it
remains blocked. But, if the quotient is larger, and this happens for all Z, then X →XY
becomes interesting since its conﬁdence is higher enough than suggested by other rules of
the form Z →ZY .
The higher the block threshold, the more demanding the constraint is. It can be checked
that the particular problems of the Adult dataset indicated above are actually solved
already by imposing just a generously tiny blocking threshold (around 0.000075). Again
the speciﬁc choice of value for the blocking threshold is justiﬁed in [Balc´azar 2009] just in
merely intuitive terms; however, note for later use that the conﬁdence width bound and the
blocking threshold are related in that paper as follows: if the conﬁdence width bound is b,
then the blocking threshold proposed is b −1.
Example 2.16.
Due to the inequalities in Example 2.12, we can see that, at any non-
negative blocking threshold, ∅blocks B →C:
s(XY ) −c(Z →ZY )s(X)
c(Z →ZY )s(X)
= s(BC) −c(∅→C)s(B)
c(∅→C)s(B)
≈9 −9.16
9.16
< 0.
Likewise, considering A →BC, we have
s(ABC) −c(∅→BC)s(A)
c(∅→BC)s(A)
= 8 −(9/12) ∗10
(9/12) ∗10
≈0.066
so that this rule would be blocked by ∅as soon as a blocking threshold higher than this
quantity is imposed.
2.3. Support Ratio
We will relate our values of conﬁdence width and of conﬁdence boost to an expression
essentially employed ﬁrst, to our knowledge, in [Kryszkiewicz 2001], where no particular
name was assigned to it. Together with other similar quotients, it was introduced with the
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:12
Jos´e L Balc´azar
aim of providing a faster algorithm for computing representative rules; it turns out that,
as demonstrated in [Balc´azar and Tˆırn˘auc˘a 2011], this approach is eﬃcient and useful in
practice but runs into the risk of providing incomplete output, as actual representative
rules may be missed. The same reference provides further analysis, including almost equally
eﬃcient alternatives whose output is complete.
Here we introduce this notion because it is related to all of our three parameters of
conﬁdence width, blocking, and conﬁdence boost; it will allow us to explain more carefully
their mutual relationships, and it allows for conﬁdence boost constraints to be “pushed”
into a closure mining process, as we will do in Section 6.
Deﬁnition 2.17.
In the presence of a support threshold τ, the support ratio of an asso-
ciation rule X →XY is
σ(X →XY ) =
s(XY )
max{s(Z)
 XY ⊂Z, s(Z) > τ}
We see that this measure does not depend on the antecedent X but just on XY . Again,
we set its value to ∞if no Z exists as required for the maximization in the denominator.
We have the following relationship:
Proposition 2.18.
If the value of σ(X →XY ) is ﬁnite and well-deﬁned then the
conﬁdence width w(X →XY ) is also ﬁnite, and then
w(X →XY ) ≤σ(X →XY ).
Proof. This is easy to see from Proposition 2.9, and by observing that X →Z, for the
Z ̸= XY that maximizes the support in the denominator of support ratio, leads to w(X →
XY ) ≤c(X →XY )/c(X →Z) = s(XY )/s(Z) = σ(X →XY ) by simplifying the value of
s(X) ̸= 0.
It is clear that σ(X →XY ) ≥1 for all rules; σ(X →XY ) = 1 exactly when XY is not
closed, since these sets are those that have some proper superset Z with the same support.
The following easy consequence is worth mentioning: many of the quantities we study for an
association rule X →XY are bounded from above by the support ratio and, therefore, will
trivialize to values less than or equal to 1 unless we consider only closed sets XY as right
hand sides. Together with Proposition 2.5, this is the reason of the importance of the closure
notion in our context, and of the introduction of a closure-aware version of conﬁdence boost
in Section 4.
Example 2.19. Looking again at association rule A →BC in Example 2.2, we see that
σ(A →BC) = s(ABC)/s(ABCDE) = 4/3.
3. CONFIDENCE BOOST
This section introduces the ﬁrst, simpler version of our main notion; it is very similar to the
one given for conﬁdence width, but with a twist that, even though formally tiny, semantically
changes it far enough so as to encompass the notion of blocking.
Deﬁnition 3.1.
The conﬁdence boost of an association rule X →XY (always with
X ∩Y = ∅) is β(X →XY ) =
=
c(X →XY )
max{c(X′ →X′Y ′)
 (X →XY ) ̸= (X′ →X′Y ′), X′ ⊆X, Y ⊆Y ′}
As in previous cases, the rules in the denominator are implicitly required to clear the
support threshold: s(X′ →X′Y ′) > τ. Again, in case the set in the denominator is empty,
the conﬁdence boost is inﬁnite by convention. As in Proposition 2.9, we can point out
exactly which rules fall in that case: the same ones, in fact.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:13
Proposition 3.2.
The value of β(X →XY ) is ﬁnite and well-deﬁned if and only if
either X ̸= ∅, or Y has some proper superset Z with s(Z) > τ. That is: the set of rules of
inﬁnite conﬁdence boost coincides with the set of rules of inﬁnite width.
Proof. Like in Proposition 2.9, if X = ∅and no proper superset of Y reaches support above
τ in the dataset, then no diﬀerent rule (of suﬃcient support) is available for the set in the
denominator. Conversely, ∅→Z belongs to that set if either X ̸= ∅, or Y ⊂Z.
As indicated above, these cases of inﬁnite conﬁdence boost hardly ever appear in practice,
due to their conﬁdence being below the threshold.
Example 3.3. Considering again association rule A →BC in Example 2.2, we ﬁnd a
value of the conﬁdence boost of 16/15 for this rule. This is obtained as follows: we consider
all rules X′ →X′Y ′ with X′ ⊆A and BC ⊆Y ′ (and diﬀerent from it); one can see that
the maximum conﬁdence among them is 0.75, attained by ∅→BC. Then β(A →BC) =
0.8/0.75 = 16/15 ≈1.066.
The fact that a low conﬁdence boost corresponds to a low novelty is similar to the
analogous explanation for width, and can be argued intuitively as follows. Suppose that
β(X →XY ) is low, say β(X →XY ) ≤b, where b is just slightly larger than 1. Then,
according to the deﬁnition, there must exist some diﬀerent rule X′ →X′Y ′, with X′ ⊆X
and Y ⊆X′Y ′, such that
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) ≤b, or c(X′ →X′Y ′) ≥c(X →XY )/b. This
inequality says that the rule X′ →X′Y ′, stating that transactions with X′ tend to have
X′Y ′, has a conﬁdence relatively high, not much lower than that of X →XY ; equivalently,
the conﬁdence of X →XY is not much higher (it could be lower) than that of X′ →X′Y ′.
But all transactions having X do have X′, and all transactions having Y ′ have Y , so that
the conﬁdence found for X →XY is not really that novel, given that it does not give so
much additional conﬁdence over a rule that states such a similarly conﬁdent, and intuitively
stronger, fact, namely X′ →X′Y ′.
At a bare minimum, we should not consider association rules with conﬁdence boost 1 or
less. Notice that this solves the objection against conﬁdence that negative correlations go
undetected: for instance, if the support of B is, say, 80%, a rule A →B of conﬁdence less
than that would yield a conﬁdence boost below 1, due to the rule ∅→B.
3.1. Boost, Lift, Support Ratio, Width, and Blocking
We present now some analyses clarifying the properties of the conﬁdence boost. First, we
see that it allows one to ﬁlter out rules that would be discarded on the basis of lift, since
rules of low lift have low conﬁdence boost.
Proposition 3.4.
Let X ̸= ∅; then, the conﬁdence boost β(X →XY ) is bounded from
above by the lift of X →Y .
Proof. We simply consider the rule ∅→Y , which diﬀers from X →Y since X ̸= ∅. Its
support is above that of X →Y and thus above the support threshold. Clearly, it appears
among the rules considered to maximize the conﬁdence in the denominator of the deﬁnition
of β(X →XY ), hence β(X →XY ) ≤
c(X→XY )
c(∅→Y ) ; but c(∅→Y ) = s(Y )/n and then
c(X→XY )
c(∅→Y )
is exactly the lift of X →Y .
In the case where X = ∅, the lift is 1, as already indicated; this value turns out to be
uninformative in this case, since any right-hand side is independent from ∅. Conﬁdence
boost does apply to this case, being able to detect low novelty through larger consequents.
The only formal diﬀerence between conﬁdence boost and conﬁdence width of a rule X →
XY is that, upon exploring alternative rules X′ →X′Y ′, in the conﬁdence boost the
antecedent X is not required anymore to be a subset of the consequent X′Y ′, whereas it
must be for X′ →Y ′ to qualify in the computation of the width. More precisely, given that
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:14
Jos´e L Balc´azar
X ∩Y = ∅and X′ ⊆X, it follows X′ ∩Y = ∅, so that the condition Y ⊆Y ′ is equivalent
to the condition Y ⊆X′Y ′. Proposition 2.10 tells us that XY ⊆X′Y ′ ⇐⇒(X −X′) ⊆
Y ′ and Y ⊆Y ′, and we see that conﬁdence boost simply keeps the inclusion among the
right-hand sides Y ⊆Y ′ and does not require additionally that (X −X′) ⊆Y ′ anymore.
This also tells us that all rules X′ →X′Y ′ that are considered for the maximization in the
denominator in the deﬁnition of conﬁdence width are also considered for the corresponding
maximization in conﬁdence boost. Thus, the value of the maximum itself is at least the
same, or possibly larger, and the diﬀerence is that the boost case may consider further
candidates to X′ →X′Y ′. That is:
Proposition 3.5.
The conﬁdence boost of a rule is bounded above by its conﬁdence
width: β(X →XY ) ≤w(X →XY ). Hence, β(X →XY ) ≤σ(X →XY ).
The last sentence comes from Proposition 2.18, and was proved directly ﬁrst in [Balc´azar
et al. 2010b]. For the next theorem, we state separately a simple technical equivalence.
Lemma 3.6.
Z ⊂X blocks X →XY at block threshold b−1 if and only if c(X→XY )
c(Z→ZY ) ≤b.
Proof. By deﬁnition, Z ⊂X blocks X →XY at blocking threshold b −1 if and only if
s(XY ) −c(Z →ZY )s(X)
c(Z →ZY )s(X)
≤b −1.
Multiplying both sides of the inequality by c(Z →ZY ), separating the two terms of the left-
hand side, and replacing s(XY )/s(X) by its meaning, c(X →XY ), we ﬁnd the equivalent
expression
c(X →XY ) −c(Z →ZY ) ≤(b −1)(c(Z →ZY )
where solving for b leads to
c(X →XY )
c(Z →ZY ) ≤b.
All the algebraic manipulations are reversible (in particular, conﬁdences and supports ap-
pearing all along are never zero so we can multiply or divide by them without trouble.)
We show next that conﬁdence boost embodies exactly both blocking and conﬁdence width,
precisely with the same relation between the thresholds as used in [Balc´azar 2009], under
the already stated proviso that all the association rules involved must clear the support
threshold.
Theorem 3.7.
For an association rule X →XY , β(X →XY ) ≤b if and only if either
w(X →XY ) ≤b or X →XY is blocked at a blocking threshold b −1.
Proof. First we prove that either of low width or blocking imply low boost. We have already
argued in Proposition 3.5 that β(X →XY ) ≤w(X →XY ). Likewise, assume that Z ⊂X
(proper subset) blocks X →XY at a blocking threshold b −1. Clearly the rule Z →ZY
diﬀers from X →XY since Z is a proper subset of X and fulﬁlls the conditions to enter the
maximum conﬁdence denominator in the deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost. This means that
this maximum is at least as large as c(Z →ZY ), and therefore, by Lemma 3.6,
β(X →XY ) ≤c(X →XY )
c(Z →ZY ) ≤b.
Conversely, we assume now that β(X →XY ) ≤b and prove that either w(X →XY ) ≤b
or X →XY is blocked at a blocking threshold b−1. The deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost tells
us that there is a diﬀerent rule X′ →X′Y ′ (X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅) for which s(X′Y ′) > τ, X′ ⊆X,
Y ⊆Y ′, and
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) ≤b. We consider two cases, according to whether X = X′. If
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:15
X = X′, necessarily Y ⊂Y ′ properly, thus XY ⊂X′Y ′ properly, and s(X) = s(X′) plus
s(X′Y ′) > τ tells us that
w(X →XY ) ≤σ(X →XY ) ≤s(XY )
s(X′Y ′) =
c(X →XY )
c(X′ →X′Y ′) ≤b.
Otherwise, X′ ⊂X properly, and Y ⊆Y ′ (and a fortiori X′ ∩Y = ∅) gives us c(X′ →
X′Y ) ≥c(X′ →X′Y ′) whence
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ) ≤
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) ≤b. Applying again Lemma 3.6,
we obtain that X′ blocks X →Y at blocking threshold b −1.
Hence, bounding the conﬁdence boost at b ensures us that the rules that would be ﬁltered
by that conﬁdence boost bound are exactly the same as those that would be ﬁltered by
either (or both) of the checks w(X →XY ) ≤b or blocking at threshold b −1. In this sense,
conﬁdence boost embodies both low-novelty tests from [Balc´azar 2009], and with the same
thresholds employed there.
We brieﬂy consider the case of rules with a single item in the antecedent.
Proposition 3.8.
Assume that |X| = 1 in rule X →XY , that is, the left hand side
is a single item. Then β(X →XY ) coincides with the minimum among the lift of X →Y
and σ(X →XY ).
Proof. Let X′ →X′Y ′ be the rule that leads to β(X →XY ) = c(X →XY )/c(X′ →X′Y ′).
It must be diﬀerent from X →XY , and must clear the support threshold.
If X′ ⊂X, as X is a singleton, we have X′ = ∅, s(X′) = n (the number of transactions
in the dataset), Y ⊆Y ′, s(Y ′) ≤s(Y ), and
β(X →XY ) =
c(X →XY )
c(X′ →X′Y ′) = c(X →Y )
s(Y ′)/n
≥c(X →Y )
s(Y )/n
= s(XY ) × n
s(X) × s(Y )
which is the value of the lift; but the boost is also less than or equal to the lift by Proposition
3.4, and they must coincide. The support ratio must be higher by Proposition 3.5, so the
conﬁdence boost equals the stated minimum.
The other case is where X′ = X; then, as the two association rules are diﬀerent, neces-
sarily XY ̸= X′Y ′ = XY ′, so that σ(X →XY ) ≤s(XY )/s(XY ′) = c(X →XY )/c(X →
XY ′) because we can divide by s(X) ̸= 0; that is, σ(X →XY ) ≤β(X →XY ).
The converse inequality is furnished by Proposition 3.5 and, once we have the equality
σ(X →XY ) = β(X →XY ), the fact that this value is the indicated minimum comes from
Proposition 3.4.
Corollary 3.9.
Assume a threshold b in place such that σ(X →XY ) ≥b is known,
for |X| = 1, that is, for a rule with a single antecedent item. If the lift of X →Y is less
than b, then it equals β(X →XY ).
Example 3.10.
We revisit again association rule A →BC in Example 2.2. For this rule,
the lift is 16/15, less than the support ratio 4/3, so that the former coincides with the
conﬁdence boost as per Proposition 3.8. The quantities evaluated in previous examples lead
now to the inequalities
β(A →BC) = 16/15 < w(A →BC) = 6/5 < σ(A →BC) = 4/3
which obey, of course, all inequalities we have proved so far and, at the same time, witness
that each inequality may well be proper.
3.2. Double-Threshold Conﬁdence
In order to be of practical use, we need a deeper study of the conﬁdence boost. As it
currently stands, it makes no sense to traverse all the alternative rules to be taken into
account for computing the maximum conﬁdence in the denominator. The same sort of
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:16
Jos´e L Balc´azar
diﬃculty appears for conﬁdence width and for blocking. A mild precomputation allows one
to compute quite eﬃciently the width [Balc´azar 2009], but the same method does not seem
to work for blocking or boost. In fact, the experiments reported in that reference resort, as
indicated there, to an approximation to blocking.
By the reasons already discussed, we will not be interested in conﬁdence boost bounds of
1 or less; above 1, by Proposition 3.5, we only ﬁnd representative rules. Given conﬁdence
threshold γ, we will show that, in order to test the conﬁdence boost threshold, it suﬃces
to do so against the set of representative rules computed at a lower conﬁdence threshold,
namely γ/b. Indeed, consider Algorithm 1. The comparisons are written there in such a way
so as to avoid division by zero in the cases of inﬁnite boost, such as s(XAY ) = 0, which
may potentially be the case.
Algorithm 1: A double conﬁdence threshold algorithm
Data: dataset D; thresholds for support τ, for conﬁdence γ, and for conﬁdence boost
b > 1; rule X →XY with X ∩Y = ∅, c(X →XY ) ≥γ, and s(XY ) ≥τ
Result: boolean value indicating whether β(X →XY ) > b
mine D for the representative rules R at threshold γ/b
for each rule X′ →X′Y ′ ∈R such that X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅, X′ ⊆X and Y ⊆Y ′ do
if ∃Z ⊂X −X′ such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ) then
return False
if ∃A ∈Y ′ −XY such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X →XAY ) then
return False
return True
Theorem 3.11.
Let X →XY be a rule of conﬁdence at least γ. Then, Algorithm 1
accepts it if and only if β(X →XY ) > b.
Proof. First we see that the rejections are correct. In each case, we just found a rule X′′ →
X′′Y ′′ with X′′ ⊆X and Y ⊆Y ′′, be it X′Z →X′ZY or X →XAY ; also X′′ →X′′Y ′′ ̸=
X →XY : in the ﬁrst case, Z is a proper subset of X −X′, so X′Z ̸= X, and in the second
case the item A did not appear in X →XY . In each case, the rule X′′ →X′′Y ′′ enters the
maximization in the denominator of the conﬁdence boost and shows that its value is less
than or equal to b.
To see that acceptance is correct, assume β(X →XY ) ≤b: we prove that, at some point,
rule X →XY must fail one of the two tests in the algorithm. By the deﬁnition of conﬁdence
boost, there must exist some rule X′′ →X′′Y ′′, diﬀerent from X →XY , with X′′ ⊆X
and Y ⊆Y ′′, such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′).
Then, from c(X →XY ) ≥γ we infer c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≥γ/b, so that there must exist a
representative rule at conﬁdence γ/b, let it be X′ →X′Y ′ ∈R, that makes X′′ →X′′Y ′′
redundant (possibly itself): by Lemma 2.4, X′ ⊆X′′ and X′′Y ′′ ⊆X′Y ′. At some point
(unless a correct negative answer is found earlier), the algorithm will consider this rule
X′ →X′Y ′ ∈R. As in the proof of Theorem 3.7, we distinguish two cases.
First assume that X′′ is a proper subset of X, X′′ ⊂X. Since X′ ⊆X′′, we can consider
Z = X′′ −X′ ⊂X −X′: at some point, the algorithm will compare c(X →XY ) to
b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ). But it holds that X′Z = X′′ and that Y ⊆Y ′′, resulting in c(X →
XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≤b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ) and failing the test.
Alternatively, assume X′′ ⊆X holds with equality: X′′ = X. From X′′ →X′′Y ′′ ̸=
X →XY (and using X ∩Y = ∅and X′′ ∩Y ′′ = ∅) we know that Y ⊂Y ′′ is a proper
inclusion: there is some A ∈Y ′′ ⊆X′Y ′ that is not in Y . Such A is not in X either, because
X′′ ∩Y ′′ = X ∩Y ′′ = ∅, and then, in fact, A /∈X′, so that A ∈Y ′ −XY . In due time, the
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:17
algorithm will compare c(X →XY ) to b × c(X →XAY ). But X = X′′, and A ∈Y ′′ so
that AY ⊆Y ′′, hence c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≤b × c(X →XAY ) and the test
will fail as well. This completes the proof.
4. CLOSURE-BASED CONFIDENCE BOOST
Representative rules are a minimum size basis for redundancy, deﬁned as per Lemma 2.4;
still, they constitute often a large set. Prior to accepting the option of losing information
in a quantiﬁable manner, as we are doing via conﬁdence boost, one could consider the
option of using stronger notions of redundancy. Several earlier papers, e. g. [Luxenburger
1991; Pasquier et al. 2005; Zaki 2004], suggest to treat separately the implications, which
allow for more compact bases, from the partial rules. In [Balc´azar 2010c], besides another
more complicated alternative, we follow up this suggestion as well, and employ a notion
of closure-based redundancy which also turns out to provide a complete basis of provably
minimum size, denoted B⋆. This option has deﬁnite advantages: whereas it provides bases
comparable in size with, and often clearly smaller than, the set of representative rules,
it has the desirable property that the portion of it that refers to partial associations (of
conﬁdence below 1) can be computed faster. The best approaches to the representative
rules need to work on the basis of both the closures lattice plus all the minimal generators
of each closure ([Kryszkiewicz 2001], but see the related discussion in [Balc´azar and Tˆırn˘auc˘a
2011]); instead, the B⋆basis can be computed just from the closures. In this section, we
port conﬁdence boost into closure-based redundancy and the corresponding minimum-size
basis B⋆.
Closure-based redundancy corresponds to restricting consideration of datasets as a func-
tion of the closure operator they induce. It is well-known that the closure operator is equiv-
alently speciﬁed by a set of implications, that is, association rules of conﬁdence 1 (see
e. g. [Zaki 2004]). Closure-based redundancy [Balc´azar 2010c] takes into account the closure
operator indirectly as follows:
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let B be a set of implications. Partial rule X0 →X0Y0 has closure-based
redundancy relative to B with respect to rule X1 →X1Y1 if the inequalities
c(X0 →X0Y0) ≥c(X1 →X1Y1)
and
s(X0 →X0Y0) ≥s(X1 →X1Y1)
hold in any dataset D in which all the rules in B hold with conﬁdence 1.
This redundancy has a characterization parallel to that of Lemma 2.4, proved in the same
reference:
Lemma 4.2.
Let B be a set of implications. Consider two association rules, X0 →X0Y0
and X1 →X1Y1. The following are equivalent:
(1) Rule X0 →X0Y0 has closure-based redundancy relative to B with respect to rule X1 →
X1Y1.
(2) X1 ⊆X0 and X0Y0 ⊆X1Y1.
The closure operator in the second statement is the one corresponding to the set of implica-
tions B.
In all applications, B is the set of full-conﬁdence implications holding in the dataset,
so that the closure operator is actually the one induced by the dataset. For closure-based
redundancy, a minimum-size basis can be constructed as well. Essentially, this basis, denoted
B⋆
γ for conﬁdence threshold γ, is deﬁned in a manner analogous to that of the representative
rules, except that it is restricted to rules of the form X →XY where both X and XY are
closed sets, instead of X being a minimal generator as in representative rules. All these
deﬁnitions are studied in depth in [Balc´azar 2010c].
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:18
Jos´e L Balc´azar
If we are to employ this notion of redundancy and the B⋆basis, then the deﬁnition
of conﬁdence boost requires some ﬁne tuning. This basis is often smallish because many
diﬀerent representative rules could correspond to many left-hand sides that are minimal
generators of the same closure. Such sets of rules become a single rule in B⋆. But, if we use
the given deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost, these rules are syntactically diﬀerent from the one
in B⋆and “kill it” by forcing its boost down to 1. Thus, to avoid trivializing B⋆, we need
to take into account the closure operator in the deﬁnition of boost. The main notion of this
section is as follows:
Deﬁnition 4.3. The closure-based conﬁdence boost of a rule X →XY is β(X →XY ) =
=
c(X →XY )
max{c(X′ →X′Y ′)
 (X ̸= X′ ∨XY ̸= X′Y ′), X′ ⊆X, Y ⊆X′Y ′}
This is the natural deﬁnition paralleling the conﬁdence boost when the notion of redun-
cancy is closure-based: on one hand, the rules in the denominator may resort to the use of
closures to make the rule at hand redundant, widening the options of redundancy; on the
other hand, rules that are syntactically diﬀerent from the rule at hand, but equivalent to
it in closure-based redundancy, must be discarded, as they trivially entail the rule at hand.
Failing to discard them unduly trivializes the conﬁdence boost in many cases. Observe that
the notion of conﬁdence boost in the previous section corresponds to the particular case
where the closure operator is the identity function.
Example 4.4.
Out of the seven representative rules at conﬁdence threshold 0.8 that we
enumerated in Example 2.6, some are unchanged in B⋆
0.8, such as C →AB, B →C, ∅→C,
and ∅→AB. Instead of A →BC, we ﬁnd AB →C, which is equivalent to it due to the
implication A →B; and, due to the implications D →CE and E →CD, it suﬃces to
keep CDE →AB instead of the other two. If we were to employ plain conﬁdence boost,
β(CDE →AB) ≤1, due to rules D →ABCE and E →ABCD. Closure-based conﬁdence
boost is able to perform a ﬁner distinction. As these two rules have the same closure of the
antecedent as D = E = CDE, and the same associated closed set ABCDE, they do not
enter the computation of closure-based conﬁdence boost of CDE →AB, which is actually
β(CDE →AB) = c(CDE →AB)/c(C →ABDE) = 10/7 > 1.
4.1. Double-Threshold Conﬁdence Revisited
We develop next an algorithm to compute closure-based conﬁdence boost. We just need to
make a number of adjustments to the one given for plain conﬁdence boost: ﬁrst, one must
explore the rules of the B⋆basis for conﬁdence γ/b, instead of the representative rules for
it, since that is the appropriate basis for closure-based redundancy; and, second, one must
take into account the closure operator at the time of checking whether a speciﬁc B⋆rule
may lead to guaranteeing low boost of the input rule.
Theorem 4.5.
Let X →XY be a rule of conﬁdence at least γ. Algorithm 2 accepts it
if and only if β(X →XY ) > b.
Proof. We follow essentially the same steps as in Theorem 3.11, although we must argue
more carefully about the places where the closure operator plays a role. Again, we see
ﬁrst that the rejections are correct. In each case, we just found a rule X′′ →X′′Y ′′ with
X′′ ⊆X and Y ⊆Y ′′, be it X′Z →X′ZY or X →XAY . In both cases, (X ̸= X′′ ∨XY ̸=
X′′Y ′′) holds: in the ﬁrst case, X′Z ̸= X is explicitly checked, whereas, for the second case,
A ∈XAY ⊆XAY but A /∈XY . In each case, the rule X′′ →X′′Y ′′ contributes to the
maximization in the denominator of the conﬁdence boost and shows that its value is less
than or equal to b.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:19
Algorithm 2: A variant of Algorithm 1 for closure-based conﬁdence boost
Data: dataset D; thresholds for support τ, for conﬁdence γ, and for closure-based
conﬁdence boost b > 1; rule X →XY with X ∩Y = ∅, c(X →XY ) ≥γ, and
s(XY ) ≥τ
Result: boolean value indicating whether β(X →XY ) > b
mine D for the basis B⋆at threshold γ/b
for each rule X′ →X′Y ′ ∈B⋆
γ/b where X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅, with X′ ⊆X and Y ⊆X′Y ′ do
if ∃Z ⊂X −X′ such that X′Z ⊂X (with inequality) and
c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ) then
return False
if ∃A ∈X′Y ′ −XY such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X →XAY ) then
return False
return True
To see that acceptance is correct, assume β(X →XY ) ≤b: we prove that, at some point,
rule X →XY must fail one of the two tests in the algorithm. By the deﬁnition of closure-
based conﬁdence boost, there must exist some rule X′′ →X′′Y ′′ with X′′ ⊆X, Y ⊆X′′Y ′′,
and (X ̸= X′′ ∨XY ̸= X′′Y ′′), and such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′). Then,
from c(X →XY ) ≥γ we infer c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≥γ/b, so that there must exist a rule in
the basis B⋆
γ/b, let it be X′ →X′Y ′, that makes X′′ →X′′Y ′′ redundant (possibly itself)
under closure-based redundancy. By Lemma 4.2, X′ ⊆X′′ and X′′Y ′′ ⊆X′Y ′ = X′Y ′,
where the last equality is due to the fact that X′ →X′Y ′ ∈B⋆
γ/b so that X′Y ′ is closed. At
some point (unless a correct negative answer is found earlier), the algorithm will consider
this rule X′ →X′Y ′ ∈B⋆
γ/b. As in the proof of Theorem 3.7, we distinguish two cases.
First assume that X′′ ⊂X. Since X′ ⊆X′′, we can consider Z = X′′ −X′ ⊂X −X′: at
some point, the algorithm will compare c(X →XY ) to b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ). But it holds
that X′Z = X′′ and that Y ⊆X′′Y ′′, resulting in c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) =
b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≤b × c(X′Z →X′ZY ) and failing the test.
Alternatively, let’s consider the case where X′′ ⊆X holds with equality: X′′ = X, so
that XY ̸= X′′Y ′′; on the other hand, we know now X ⊆X = X′′ ⊆X′′Y ′′, and also
Y ⊆X′′Y ′′, so that XY ⊆X′′Y ′′.
Assume brieﬂy that Y ′′ ⊆XY : as X′′ ⊆X′′ = X ⊆XY , we would obtain X′′Y ′′ ⊆XY
and, therefore, the equality XY = X′′Y ′′; however, we know that this equality does not
hold.
Hence, Y ′′ is not included in XY , and there is some A ∈Y ′′ ⊆X′Y ′ that is not in XY ,
that is, A ∈X′Y ′ −XY . (If we know that X = X, for instance when the rule X →
XY comes from a B⋆basis, X′ ⊆X′′ = X = X tells us that the search for A can be
circumscribed further to just A ∈Y ′ −XY .) In due time, the algorithm will compare
c(X →XY ) to b×c(X →XAY ). But X = X′′, and A ∈Y ′′ so that XAY ⊆X′′Y ′′, hence
c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) = b × c(X′′ →X′′Y ′′) ≤b × c(X →XAY ) and the test
will fail as well. This completes the proof.
We report on a second algorithm below.
4.2. Inequalities
Compared to conﬁdence boost, closure-based conﬁdence boost relaxes the alternative rules
to which a given rule is compared, e.g. by allowing left hand sides included in X that are
not included in X; but, on the other hand, restricts them by the proviso that the rules are
“inequivalent” in a closure-based sense, and not just diﬀerent. Therefore, either can end
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:20
Jos´e L Balc´azar
up being higher than the other, and the relationship with other quantities like width or
support ratio become less clear. We must review which inequalities still hold; we start with
the (partial) analogs of Propositions 3.5 and 3.4.
Proposition 4.6.
Assume XY closed. Then, the closure-based conﬁdence boost is
bounded by the support ratio: β(X →XY ) ≤σ(X →XY ).
Proof. Let Z be the proper superset of XY of largest support above τ, so that σ(X →XY ) =
s(XY )/s(Z). As XY is closed, Z ̸= XY . Rule X →Z enters, therefore, the maximization in
the denominator of the closure-based conﬁdence boost and leads to β(X →XY ) ≤c(X →
XY )/c(X →Z) = s(XY )/s(Z) = σ(X →XY ).
Proposition 4.7.
Assume s(X) < n, the dataset size; then, the closure-based conﬁ-
dence boost β(X →XY ) is bounded above by the lift of X →Y .
Proof. We consider the rule ∅→Y . For it to play a role in closure-based conﬁdence boost,
we need ∅̸= X, which is equivalent to s(X) < n. The rest of the argumentation is as in
Proposition 3.4: its support is above the threshold, and β(X →XY ) ≤c(X→XY )
c(∅→Y )
which is
the lift of X →Y .
It is interesting to note that the condition about the left-hand side being nonempty in
Proposition 3.4 corresponds now to having support less than the dataset size: the intuition
is that any items that appear in all transactions become part of the closure of the empty
set, which is now the limit case.
We discuss now some relationships between the plain and the closure-based versions of
the conﬁdence boost.
Proposition 4.8.
Let X →XY be an association rule where XY is a closed set and
X is a minimal generator. Then, β(X →XY ) ≤β(X →XY ).
Proof. Let β(X →XY ) = b: there must be a diﬀerent rule X′ →X′Y ′ such that X′ ⊆X,
Y ⊆Y ′, and
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) = b. Assume ﬁrst that X′ ⊂X. As X is a minimum generator,
any subset of X has strictly larger support. Hence, s(X) = s(X) ̸= s(X′) = s(X′), which
implies that X ̸= X′; then, the same rule X′ →X′Y ′ is accounted for in β as well, and
leads to a value of at most b.
The remaining case is X = X′, which requires that XY ̸= X′Y ′. Moreover, both X =
X′ ⊆X′Y ′ and Y ⊆X′Y ′ by the deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost, and XY is closed, so that
XY = XY ⊂X′Y ′ ⊆X′Y ′. Again in this case X′ →X′Y ′ is accounted for in β, and the
stated inequality holds.
Corollary 4.9.
Let X →XY be a representative rule at any conﬁdence threshold;
then β(X →XY ) ≤β(X →XY ).
One interesting particular case is that of rules of conﬁdence 1 formed when X is a mini-
mum generator of the closed set XY itself; these rules form the min-max exact basis from
Deﬁnition 2.3 [Pasquier et al. 2005] (a nonminimal basis for the implications of conﬁdence 1,
as the GD basis is sometimes smaller [Guigues and Duquenne 1986]). Proposition 4.8 applies
to these rules as well, of course. On the other hand, we have:
Proposition 4.10.
Let X →XY be an association rule where both X and XY are
closed sets. Then, β(X →XY ) ≤β(X →XY ).
Proof. Let β(X →XY ) = b: there must be a rule X′ →X′Y ′ such that
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) = b,
fulﬁlling the conditions X′ ⊆X, Y ⊆X′Y ′, and either X ̸= X′ or XY ̸= X′Y ′. We observe
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:21
ﬁrst that, as X is closed, X′ ⊆X = X. Together with X ∩Y = ∅, we get for later use that
X′ ∩Y = ∅as well.
We modify the rule X′ →X′Y ′ by extending its right-hand side into a closed set, as
X′ →X′Y ′, which has the same conﬁdence, and then rewrite it into X′ →X′Y ′′ by setting
Y ′′ = X′Y ′ −X′. Note that Y ⊆X′Y ′, together with X′ ∩Y = ∅, leads to Y ⊆Y ′′.
Hence, with that rule written in this form, the properties become
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′′) = b, X′ ⊆
X = X, Y ⊆Y ′′, and either X ̸= X′ or XY ̸= X′Y ′′. It suﬃces to show that X′ →X′Y ′′
and X →XY are diﬀerent rules to ensure that X′ →X′Y ′′ participates in the computation
of β(X →XY ) and, hence, to obtain the desired inequality. But: if X ̸= X′, then necessarily
X ̸= X′; and, in the other case, XY = XY ̸= X′Y ′′ = X′Y ′′ as both XY and X′Y ′′ = X′Y ′
are closed sets. This completes the proof.
As the B⋆basis consists of rules where both antecedent X and consequent XY are closed
sets, we obtain:
Corollary 4.11.
Let X →XY be a rule in the B⋆basis (at conﬁdence c(X →XY ));
then, β(X →XY ) ≤β(X →XY ).
For the not unusual cases where a representative rule participates as well in the B⋆basis,
Section 3 suggests measuring its conﬁdence boost, whereas Section 4 would propose to
measure its closure-based conﬁdence boost. Now we see that there is no conﬂict:
Corollary 4.12.
If X →XY is both a representative rule and a member of the B⋆
basis (both at conﬁdence c(X →XY )), then β(X →XY ) = β(X →XY ).
This follows at once from Corollaries 4.9 and 4.11.
Example 4.13. In general, either of β and β can be strictly larger, when permitted by the
statements we have proved so far. In Example 4.4, we saw a B⋆rule for which β(CDE →
AB) > β(CDE →AB). This also shows that Corollary 4.9 cannot be extended to the
B⋆basis. Conversely, as A = AB in our running example, rule B →C is taken into
account for the closure-based conﬁdence boost of the representative rule A →BC, leading
to β(A →BC) < 1, whereas β(A →BC) = 16/15 as we saw in Example 3.10.
We develop some further inequalities and yet another algorithm that we will employ in
Section 6.
Theorem 4.14.
Assume that a threshold b has been ﬁxed for the closure-based con-
ﬁdence boost. Consider rule X →XY where both X and XY are closed sets. Then
β(X →XY ) ≤b if and only if either σ(X →XY ) ≤b, or there is some closed proper
subset X′ ⊂X, c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′ →X′Y ).
Proof. Assume ﬁrst β(X →XY ) ≤b. Let X′ →X′Y ′ be the rule in the denominator of the
deﬁnition of β that leads to its actual value. Due to Y ⊆X′Y ′, we have c(X′ →X′Y ) ≥
c(X′ →X′Y ′). If X′ ̸= X, as X is assumed closed, we can state X′ ⊆X = X so that, by
monotonicity, X′ ⊆X′ ⊂X = X. Thus,
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ) ≤
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) = β(X →XY ) ≤b, and
the second case holds. If, on the other hand, X′ = X, then s(X) = s(X) = s(X′) = s(X′)
and, necessarily, XY ̸= X′Y ′; yet XY = XY ⊆X′Y ′ ⊆X′Y ′ as XY is closed, hence
XY = XY ⊂X′Y ′, leading to σ(X →XY ) ≤
s(XY )
s(X′Y ′) =
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ′) = β(X →XY ) ≤b.
Conversely, if σ(X →XY ) ≤b then β(X →XY ) ≤b by Proposition 4.6. Also, assuming
X′ ⊂X gives us c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(X′ →X′Y ), where both X and X′ are closed,
X′ = X′ ⊂X = X so that X′ ̸= X, and rule X′ →X′Y participates in the computation
of β(X →XY ), leading to β(X →XY ) ≤
c(X→XY )
c(X′→X′Y ) ≤b.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:22
Jos´e L Balc´azar
For convenience in a later application, we restate this theorem in its contrapositive form:
Corollary 4.15.
Assume that a threshold b has been ﬁxed for the closure-based con-
ﬁdence boost. Consider rule X →XY where both X and XY are closed sets. Then
β(X →XY ) > b if and only if both σ(X →XY ) > b and for every closed proper sub-
set X′ ⊂X, c(X →XY ) > b × c(X′ →X′Y ).
Yet another application of this theorem is to identify the analog of Proposition 3.8 for
the closure-based case. To get there, it is convenient to factor oﬀthe proof the following
technical but easy fact:
Lemma 4.16.
Let X be a closed singleton, that is, X = X and |X| = 1. If s(X) < n,
then there is exactly one closed proper subset of X, namely ∅= ∅; and, besides, X is free,
that is, it is a minimum generator of itself.
Proof. By deﬁnition, ∅contains exactly those items that appear in all the transactions. By
monotonicity, as ∅⊆Z for all Z, ∅is a subset of all closures. If X is a closed singleton, either
∅= ∅or ∅= X; this second case is ruled out by the condition s(X) < n, as s(∅) = s(∅) = n.
Our statements follow.
Proposition 4.17. Assume that |X| = 1 in rule X →XY , that is, the left hand side
is a single item. Further, assume that s(X) < n, and that X and XY are closed. Then
β(X →XY ) coincides with the minimum among the lift of X →Y and σ(X →XY ).
Proof. By Propositions 4.6 and 4.7, we already know that β(X →XY ) is less than or equal
to both quantities, under the given conditions. To complete the proof, we only need to show
the converse inequality, that is, β(X →XY ) is larger than or equal to the minimum among
the lift of X →Y and σ(X →XY ). For this, we will apply Theorem 4.14: β(X →XY ) ≤b
if and only if either σ(X →XY ) ≤b or there is some closed proper subset X′ ⊂X,
c(X →XY ) ≤b×c(X′ →X′Y ). We observe that, by Lemma 4.16, in our current conditions
there is exactly one such X′, namely ∅, and the last inequality becomes, then, the statement
that the lift of X →Y is at most b; indeed, the lift coincides with c(X→XY )
c(∅→Y ) .
As we can chose any value of b, we pick simply b = β(X →XY ) itself, so that we can
infer that either σ(X →XY ) ≤b = β(X →XY ) or the lift of X →Y is also at most
b = β(X →XY ). Thus, either σ(X →XY ) or the lift of X →Y are less than or equal
to β(X →XY ) and, certainly, the lesser of both quantities obeys the same bound, which
completes the proof.
We obtain the corresponding variant of Corollary 3.9:
Corollary 4.18.
Assume a threshold b in place such that σ(X →XY ) ≥b is known,
for |X| = 1, that is, for a rule with a single antecedent item. If s(X) < n, X and XY are
closed, and the lift of X →Y is less than b, then it equals β(X →XY ).
As a consequence, β(X →XY ) = β(X →XY ) for these cases. This is also consistent
with Corollary 4.12: as we have stated in Lemma 4.16, in this case X is both closed and a
minimal generator; if c(X →XY ) < 1, then this implies that it is equivalent to state that
X →XY is a representative rule and to state that it is in the B⋆basis. This corollary will
be very relevant in the implementation described in Section 6.
4.3. Alternative Algorithm
Theorem 4.14 leads to an alternative algorithm to ﬁlter rules from the B⋆basis according
to their closure-based conﬁdence boost; we present it as Algorithm 3. Its correctness is
immediate from Theorem 4.14. This algorithm is part of the tool described in Section 6;
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:23
it tends to be better than the previous one when left-hand sides tend to be small. It pays
the price of traversing all closed subsets of a given closed set but spares traversing the
alternative basis at lower conﬁdence. In our implementation, as described below, the test of
the support ratio is actually pushed into the closure mining, so that it becomes unnecessary
to repeat it at the time of evaluating rules.
Algorithm 3: An alternative algorithm for closure-based conﬁdence boost
Data: dataset D; thresholds for support τ, for conﬁdence γ, and for closure-based
conﬁdence boost b > 1; rule X →XY with X ∩Y = ∅, X and XY both closed,
c(X →XY ) ≥γ, and s(XY ) ≥τ
Result: boolean value indicating whether β(X →XY ) > b
if σ(X →XY ) ≤b then
return False
if ∃Z ⊂X closed such that c(X →XY ) ≤b × c(Z →ZY ) then
return False
return True
5. EMPIRICAL VALIDATION
This section describes the outcomes of several empiric applications of the notions of con-
ﬁdence boost; the next section describes a complete tool that employs closure-based con-
ﬁdence boost, and the properties we have developed, to oﬀer parameter-less association
mining. With respect to speciﬁc datasets, we report ﬁrst on objective ﬁgures: numbers of
rules passing rather mild conﬁdence boost thresholds on three datasets, all consisting of
real world data, but of very diﬀerent characteristics. Subsequently, we brieﬂy discuss the
much more diﬃcult and subjective question of whether the rules that we ﬁnd are actually
the rules one may want.
5.1. Quantitative Evaluation
Dataset Adult is the training set part of the Adult US census dataset from UCI [Asun-
cion and Newman 2007]. Dataset Retail was downloaded from the FIMI repository, and
contains typical market basket data (http://fimi.cs.helsinki.fi/); and dataset Now
(based on the Neogene of the Old World dataset, public release 030710 [Fortelius 2003]) is
a transactional version of a paleontological dataset from Europe: we downloaded and pre-
processed slightly ﬁle NOW public 030710.xls, so that each paleontological site has been
casted into a transaction, where the items in the transactions are the species of which fossile
remains have been found at that site. Additional information such as name or geographical
position of the site have been omitted, in order to keep the transactional format.
Table I gives some information about the datasets: their size (in number of transactions),
the number of items involved, and the total of item occurrences. Each dataset has been
mined at two diﬀerent levels of support and three diﬀerent levels of conﬁdence. Support
thresholds were chosen so as to produce noticeable numbers of rules, and also to make
sure that the closure spaces were nontrivial in size (several thousand closures). Table II
reports, for each pair of support and conﬁdence values, the basis size (RR/B⋆, standing for
representative rules and B⋆basis respectively) and then the number of these basis rules, for
Table I. Information about datasets
Dataset
Size
Items
Occurrences
Adult
32561
269
358171
Retail
88162
16470
908576
Now
1597
3873
14135
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:24
Jos´e L Balc´azar
Table II. Sizes of RR/B⋆bases at conﬁdence boosts 1 to 1.3
Retail
τ: 0.2%
τ: 0.2%
τ: 0.2%
τ: 0.1%
τ: 0.1%
τ: 0.1%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
basis
111 / 111
205 / 205
572 / 572
248 / 233
652 / 643
1990 / 1984
≥1.00
89 / 89
179 / 179
529 / 529
180 / 169
568 / 559
1819 / 1808
≥1.05
26 / 26
87 / 87
384 / 384
44 / 43
327 / 323
1367 / 1362
≥1.10
25 / 25
51 / 51
253 / 253
34 / 34
169 / 168
891 / 888
≥1.15
25 / 25
35 / 35
150 / 150
34 / 33
113 / 112
545 / 543
≥1.20
25 / 25
33 / 33
101 / 101
30 / 30
69 / 69
331 / 331
≥1.25
24 / 24
32 / 32
63 / 63
27 / 27
53 / 53
178 / 178
≥1.30
24 / 24
31 / 31
52 / 52
27 / 27
42 / 42
102 / 102
Adult
τ: 5.0%
τ: 5.0%
τ: 5.0%
τ: 2.5%
τ: 2.5%
τ: 2.5%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
basis
817 / 812
851 / 848
781 / 777
2288 / 2240
2090 / 2069
2004 / 1971
≥1.00
308 / 290
281 / 274
316 / 309
898 / 823
729 / 698
803 / 768
≥1.05
17 / 17
47 / 47
62 / 62
50 / 48
117 / 113
171 / 166
≥1.10
7 / 7
17 / 17
33 / 33
19 / 18
51 / 50
82 / 81
≥1.15
1 / 1
8 / 8
18 / 18
9 / 8
26 / 25
48 / 47
≥1.20
0 / 0
3 / 3
12 / 12
4 / 3
14 / 13
35 / 34
≥1.25
0 / 0
2 / 2
8 / 8
3 / 2
9 / 8
23 / 22
≥1.30
0 / 0
2 / 2
8 / 8
1 / 0
7 / 6
19 / 18
Now
τ: 0.4%
τ: 0.4%
τ: 0.4%
τ: 0.3%
τ: 0.3%
τ: 0.3%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
γ: 90%
γ: 80%
γ: 70%
basis
246 / 30
483 / 347
596 / 489
1646 / 30
2789 / 1710
3368 / 2443
≥1.00
202 / 30
445 / 310
590 / 481
1302 / 30
2529 / 1295
3213 / 2189
≥1.05
202 / 30
438 / 299
565 / 454
1302 / 30
2505 / 1255
3156 / 2104
≥1.10
193 / 23
393 / 250
549 / 435
1284 / 23
2403 / 1126
3026 / 1971
≥1.15
116 / 14
260 / 131
514 / 402
1097 / 14
2011 / 822
2602 / 1582
≥1.20
108 / 14
242 / 120
466 / 359
526 / 14
1285 / 466
2049 / 1090
≥1.25
91 / 9
204 / 94
431 / 327
500 / 9
1236 / 443
1991 / 1051
≥1.30
76 / 4
184 / 85
404 / 308
473 / 4
1158 / 384
1842 / 929
each basis, passing the corresponding conﬁdence boost thresholds as given. Of course, for
the B⋆case we bound the closure-based conﬁdence boost.
Our implementation was not particularly aimed at speed. Still, for instance, computing
all the ﬁgures regarding the representative rule basis took less than 35 minutes on a low-
range laptop. For the higher support threshold in each dataset, each computation time was
between 20 and 45 seconds. For the larger, more demanding closure lattice at the lower
support threshold of each dataset, these ﬁgures required between 2 minutes and up to a
maximum of 6 minutes. It will not be diﬃcult to improve the running times in future work,
as a number of known accelerations can be applied; we are already undertaking this task.
Computationally, the slowest part was always the construction of the closure lattice.
With respect to the outcome, we see that the reduction of the number of rules is clear,
and in some cases it is very considerable. Recall that the bound at 1 of the conﬁdence boost
discards those basis rules for which a rule with higher conﬁdence can be obtained by either
reducing the antecedent, enlarging the consequent, or both; in the ﬁrst case, it would mean
that the rule is actually a case of negative correlation that is better left oﬀfrom the output.
5.2. Subjective Evaluation
Quantitatively, the ﬁgures just given imply that large fractions of representative rules are
somewhat uninteresting in that they fully lack any novelty, measured according to conﬁdence
boost. However, one may question whether the actual rules passing the thresholds are “the
right ones”. To our subjective perception, after seeing the outcome of our experiments,
the whole process makes a lot of sense, but, in order to argue that indeed bounding the
conﬁdence boost leads to a worthy data mining scheme, we should ﬁnd a more convincing
argumentation. We hasten to add here that using the mined rules for classiﬁcation will
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:25
Table III. Number of rules passing closure-based conﬁdence boost bounds
Conf.
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
70%
948
824
689
554
417
331
247
175
142
112
85
75%
639
541
444
356
266
212
161
112
97
76
56
80%
367
298
231
182
132
101
78
54
43
36
26
Table IV. Abbreviations of subjects for Tables V and VI below
subject:BC
Brain-Computer Interfaces
subject:CI
Computational, Information-Theoretic Learning with Statistics
subject:IR
Information Retrieval and Textual Information Access
subject:LS
Learning/Statistics and Optimisation
subject:MV
Machine Vision
subject:TA
Theory and Algorithms
not provide a reasonable evaluation, since for such applications we must focus on single
pairs of attribute and value as right-hand side, thus making useless to consider larger right-
hand sides; and, also, the classiﬁcation will only be sensible to minimal left-hand sides
independently of their conﬁdences (as in Subsection 7.2 below). Because of these properties,
a classiﬁcation task is not ﬁne enough to provide information about the usefulness of the
subtler conﬁdence quotients involved in the conﬁdence boost bounds.
Clearly, the diﬃculty of this evaluation lies in the fact that the issue is largely subjec-
tive. At the present moment, our way through is to involve “end-users” in the evaluation
of the obtained association rules: persons that are extremely well-versed on the dataset at
hand. Both for our version of conﬁdence boost, and for a sensible extension of it to handle
absence of items besides presence of items in the transactions, we are developing an anal-
ysis of educational datasets, containing information about online courses on multimedia
systems and on the Linux operating system, in close cooperation with the teachers of said
courses [Balc´azar et al. 2010a]. Here, however, instead of looking for experts on a given
dataset, we use a dataset for which some readers of this paper might be expected to be rea-
sonably knowledgeable: in the same vein as the evaluations in [Gallo et al. 2007], we employ
the titles, topics, and abstracts of all the reports submitted to the e-prints repository of
the Pascal Network of Excellence along its early years of existence. This dataset, extracted
from the repository by Professor Steve Gunn, was the object of a visualization challenge
of the Pascal Network in 2006. (Professor Gunn has also kindly furnished to this author a
similar but much larger dataset, to which we plan to apply the same scheme in the near
future.)
The collection of papers was processed starting from a plain text ﬁle containing one line
for each of the 721 papers, including the title, the subjects chosen from among the speciﬁc
choices allowed by the repository (marked by a ’!’ sign that we changed into the word “sub-
ject”), and the whole text of the abstract of the report. The (mild) preprocessing consisted
in removing punctuation and nonprintable characters, mapping all letters into lowercase,
stripping oﬀstop words as per the list from www.textfixer.com, and removing duplicate
words from each of the transactions so obtained. This left 45185 total word occurrences cho-
sen from a vocabulary of 8233 items. We checked the size of the closure space at supports of
10% (135 closures) and 5% (830 closures, still somewhat small), and then at 1% (too large,
as after a few minutes the program was still computing the closure lattice’s edges—in fact,
a later run showed that it consists of 59713 closures). We settled for a far from trivial but
manageable closure space consisting of 9621 closed itemsets obtained at 2% support. Then,
we computed the B⋆basis at conﬁdences 70% (1070 rules), 75% (729) rules, and 80% (412
rules), and cut them down by ﬁltering them at closure-based conﬁdence boosts of 1, 1.05,
1.1, 1.15, 1.2, 1.25, 1.3, 1.35, 1.4, 1.45 and 1.5. All the runs were almost instantaneous. The
ﬁgures obtained, given in Table III, make it indeed possible to proceed to manual inspection
of many of these options.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:26
Jos´e L Balc´azar
Table V. The 26 rules at 2% support, 80% conﬁdence, 1.5 boost
conf.
supp %
0.842
2.219
principal
⇒
component
0.842
2.219
unlabeled
⇒
data
0.882
2.080
approach method show
⇒
data
0.850
2.358
features selection
⇒
feature
0.842
2.219
methods subject:MV
⇒
images
0.833
2.080
nonlinear subject:LS
⇒
learning
0.810
2.358
kernel used
⇒
method
0.889
3.329
presents
⇒
paper
0.833
2.080
solve
⇒
problem
0.941
2.219
art
⇒
state
0.800
2.219
brain
⇒
subject:BC
0.914
4.438
document
⇒
subject:IR
0.907
5.409
documents
⇒
subject:IR
0.826
2.635
web
⇒
subject:IR
0.900
2.497
feature learning
⇒
subject:LS
0.850
2.358
features subject:TA
⇒
subject:LS
0.842
2.219
linear problem
⇒
subject:LS
0.833
2.080
data second
⇒
subject:LS
0.818
2.497
data subject:MV
⇒
subject:LS
0.818
2.497
more use
⇒
subject:LS
0.919
4.716
object
⇒
subject:MV
0.895
4.716
bound
⇒
subject:TA
0.889
5.548
bounds
⇒
subject:TA
0.818
2.497
graphs
⇒
subject:TA
0.813
3.606
variables
⇒
subject:TA
0.813
10.264
support
⇒
vector
Next, as a particular case, we chose to perform an examination of the 26 rules found at
2% support, 80% conﬁdence, and 1.5 (closure-based) conﬁdence boost, which revealed rules
with little or no redundancy among themselves, all of them semantically sensible, and with
a handful of them actually quite interesting (for this author). The whole process leading
to these “nuggets” lasted less than two hours, including all the preprocessing, for a single
person (the author) and quite limited computing power (an old Centrino Solo laptop). These
rules are given in Table V. The predeﬁned subjects of the e-prints Pascal server appearing
in the table have been shortened to ﬁt the page; Table IV reports the abbreviations used
for them in Tables V and VI.
By way of comparison, at the same level of support, at the most demanding possible
level of conﬁdence (100%), with the less redundant basis computation currently known
(the Guigues-Duquenne basis, [Guigues and Duquenne 1986]), the result is 44 rules, with
considerably more “intuitive redundancy” and less interest overall, and requires somewhat
longer time to be computed. Note that, by their own deﬁnition, the rules in the B⋆basis do
not attempt at capturing rules with 100% conﬁdence, but just at complementing them with
partial rules; hence, the Guigues-Duquenne basis has some additional information. For the
sake of comparison, this basis is given in Table VI. The considerable redundancy is clear:
many variants of “support” implies “vector” become reduced to a single one under the
conﬁdence boost bound. One may ask why the similar case of “vector” implies “support”
is missing from the list of 26 rules: the answer is that its conﬁdence is slightly under 75%
and, thus, it is not reported under the 80% threshold. Once more we see that setting the
thresholds with no formal guidance runs into very risky processes. It would be necessary to
try and help the user by some sort of self-adjustment of the thresholds. We have attempted
at one ﬁrst approach along this line, which is reported next.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:27
Table VI. The 44 implications in the Guigues-Duquenne basis at 2% support
supp %
2.358
al
⇒
et
2.219
machine models
⇒
learning
2.219
subject:LS support svms vector
⇒
machines
2.358
hidden markov
⇒
models
2.080
bci
⇒
subject:BC
2.080
eeg
⇒
subject:BC
2.080
collections
⇒
subject:IR
2.219
document paper
⇒
subject:IR
2.358
documents paper
⇒
subject:IR
2.358
document new
⇒
subject:IR
2.497
document documents
⇒
subject:IR
2.774
document information
⇒
subject:IR
2.080
data results vector
⇒
subject:LS
2.497
data learning problem set
⇒
subject:LS
2.080
object results
⇒
subject:MV
2.219
image images subject:LS
⇒
subject:MV
2.358
image object
⇒
subject:MV
2.358
images recognition
⇒
subject:MV
2.358
object recognition
⇒
subject:MV
2.635
images results
⇒
subject:MV
2.774
images object
⇒
subject:MV
2.219
algorithm generalization
⇒
subject:TA
2.358
bound subject:LS
⇒
subject:TA
2.080
based machines vector
⇒
support
2.080
machines used vector
⇒
support
2.080
paper show vector
⇒
support
2.080
classiﬁcation machine vector
⇒
support
2.080
learning svm vector
⇒
support
2.219
machines svm vector
⇒
support
2.358
kernel machines vector
⇒
support
2.497
machines method vector
⇒
support
2.497
machines paper vector
⇒
support
3.467
machines using vector
⇒
support
2.774
machines such vector
⇒
support
2.358
machines svms
⇒
support vector
2.080
method problem support
⇒
vector
2.080
new subject:TA support
⇒
vector
2.219
support well
⇒
vector
2.497
machines methods subject:LS
⇒
vector
2.635
support svms
⇒
vector
2.635
learning machines subject:LS
⇒
vector
2.913
machines subject:LS subject:TA
⇒
vector
3.606
kernel support
⇒
vector
6.380
machines support
⇒
vector
6. TOWARDS PARAMETER-FREE ASSOCIATION MINING
In this section we describe an open-source software tool that proﬁts from closure-based
conﬁdence boost and its properties to oﬀer a sensible association mining process, while
refraining from asking the user to select any value of any parameter: our system yacaree
(Yet Another Closure-based Association Rule Experimentation Environment), a proof-of-
concept currently implemented fully in pure Python. It combines several processes using lazy
evaluation by means of the functional programming facilities available in current versions
of Python to mine high-boost B⋆association rules. Its key property is the self-tuning of the
support and the conﬁdence boost thresholds.
As in most current proposals, yacaree mines only frequent closed itemsets; initially, it
enforces a support bound that starts ridiculously low (namely, at 5 transactions). In most
applications, one cannot rely on mining all frequent closures at this threshold: this might or
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:28
Jos´e L Balc´azar
might not be possible, depending on the dataset; therefore, along the process, the threshold
will be automatically increased. Frequent closures are mined via a simpliﬁed variant of
ChARM [Zaki and Hsiao 2005], rather close to a depth-ﬁrst search but with the proviso
that closed itemsets are produced in order of decreasing support, so that increasing the
support threshold does not invalidate the closures found so far.
This idea is reminiscent of the decreasing support in the version of “apriori” implemented
in the Weka tool [Witten and Frank 2005], but in that well-known system the user still has
to provide a maximum and a minimum values to try the support threshold, and a “delta”
by which the support keeps decreasing; then, the “apriori” algorithm is run repeatedly for
the corresponding sequence of support thresholds. Further, the process stops when a given
number of rules, also chosen by the user, has been found. This makes it unlikely to ﬁnd rules
of low support. The “predictive apriori” alternative, present in that tool as well [Scheﬀer
2005; Witten and Frank 2005], also attempts at adjusting the support, by balancing it with
respect to conﬁdence. Our system works very diﬀerently, as it is able to mine closures in
order of decreasing support by its own algorithmics, and self-adjusts the internal eﬀective
support bound on the basis of technological limitations, in a manner that is autonomous
and independent of the conﬁdence or of any other parameter of the mining process.
The closed set miner takes the form of an iterator, and searches for the next closed set
to be reported only when asked to do so. Each closure found is analyzed, upon yielding it
to the next phase, to see whether it can be further extended without failing the current
support threshold, and all those extensions, with their explicit supporting transaction lists,
are added to a heap which provides instantaneously the largest-support closed set that has
not been extended so far.
The closures are passed on to a lattice constructor, a “border” algorithm which computes
the lattice structure, so that immediate predecessors of each closed set are readily available,
as it is convenient for computing the basis B⋆. The lattice constructor itself is based on
[Baixeries et al. 2009] and works also as an iterator, constructing Hasse edges only when
they are needed. Rules are, then, constructed from the lattice. Closures and candidate rules
are either discarded, if we can guarantee that future threshold adjustments will never recover
them; or processed, if they obey the thresholds; or maintained separately on hold, if they
fail the current thresholds but might turn to obey them after future adjustments.
The support threshold changes along the process. It starts, as indicated, at an almost
trivial level, and grows, if necessary, as the monitorization of the mining process reveals
that the memory consumption surpasses internal thresholds. More precisely, the heap where
unexpanded closures are stored is considered in overﬂow when either its length, or the
total memory it uses, or the sum of the lengths of the associated support lists, exceeds
a corresponding predeﬁned threshold. At that point, the minimal support constraint is
recomputed and raised as necessary so that the exploration can continue. In this way, both
the risk of entering a huge closure space, and the risk of memory overﬂow upon computing
the supports of the closed sets (as sometimes happens for dense datasets) are avoided.
We impose a very mild conﬁdence threshold that remains ﬁxed, letting large quantities
of rules pass; but we control the number of rules to be provided to the user via a threshold
on the closure-based conﬁdence boost, which is adjusted also along the run. We use the
approximation to the conﬁdence boost provided by the support ratio (Proposition 4.6) to
push the conﬁdence boost constraint into the mining process, and we use the lift, applied
to the particular cases to which Corollary 4.18 applies, to self-adjust the boost threshold.
In fact, as the Hasse edges of the closures lattice are identiﬁed, the support ratio can be
computed easily. If it is lower than the current conﬁdence boost threshold, the closure is not
adequate to yield high boost rules, but it could become so if, in the future, the conﬁdence
boost threshold decreases. Therefore, the conﬁdence boost constraint is partially “pushed
into” the mining process by temporarily omitting the expansion of such closed sets. Instead,
they are maintained separately into a dedicated data structure, from where they are “ﬁshed
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:29
oﬀ” again in case a decrease of the boost bound promotes them to candidate closures for
creating high-boost rules. We take advantage of the support ratio constraint also to compute
the conﬁdence boost of rules, as per Algorithm 3: we know that, if the closed set reaches
that stage, then its support ratio is high enough, so we do not need to test it again.
The mining process starts with a somewhat demanding conﬁdence boost bound, that
requires a rule to have at least 15% more conﬁdence than any of the rules participating in
its conﬁdence boost in order to qualify as interesting. In some datasets, this ﬁgure is not
that restrictive, and dozens of rules still make it. By default, the system writes oﬀas result
the up to 50 rules of highest boost.
In many datasets, though, that conﬁdence boost bound is too demanding. The program
monitors the lift of rules having one single item as antecedent and obtained from a closed
set that has support ratio above the conﬁdence boost bound (cf. Corollary 4.18). If these
lift values keep decreasing, they enter a weighted average with the current conﬁdence boost
bound and may decrease it. In this way, we track the degree of correlation empirically found
in the dataset to reduce conveniently the conﬁdence boost bound. There is a static limit to
this boost bound: it is never allowed to drop below 1.05. (All the hardwired limits can be
modiﬁed easily in the same module statics.py of the source code.)
The result is a functional preliminary system, where ample room still remains for eﬃciency
and algorithmic improvements, which shows that it is possible to ﬁnd interesting association
rules in a fully autonomous manner: the user simply selects a dataset and launches the
process, which takes just one to ﬁve minutes in many easy datasets, and up to ten to twenty
minutes on a modern laptop for a few diﬃcult, highly dense datasets. The output is a
set of rules which, in most cases, is reasonably small and shows independent and sensible
associations.
The
open
source,
plus
some
example
datasets,
can
be
downloaded
from
http://sourceforge.net/projects/yacaree/;
these
example
datasets
are
already
preprocessed into transactional form, and come from [Asuncion and Newman 2007] or
[Fortelius 2003], or from the e-prints repository of the Pascal Network of Excellence. The
screenshot provided in Figure 2 shows the simple interface (button “Run” is disabled as
the system has been just run) and the two text ﬁles generated: the log, where we can see
that the process took a bit over ﬁve minutes, and the start of the ﬁle containing the rules
found. Both the console and the log indicate the self-adjustments of the support; along this
particular run, no adjustment was performed on the boost threshold, as enough high-boost
rules were found for its initial value.
7. DISCUSSION
The main contribution of this paper is the closure-based conﬁdence boost: a new concept
that measures a form of objective novelty for association rules, which we have studied from
the formal and algorithmic perspective and which we have used to construct open source
association mining tools.
Our starting point was the study of notions of redundancy in a “logical” spirit. When a
rule is irredundant, we still can use relative conﬁdences to assess the degree of irredundancy,
which we see as a potentially useful formalization of objective novelty.
A redundancy due to larger consequents can be measured by the support ratio; as such,
both earlier notions like conﬁdence width and our new proposals are related to it. A re-
dundancy due to smaller antecedents only in some cases is handled appopriately by the
preexisting conﬁdence width, due to the stringent condition of “logical” redundancy; with
the also preexisting notion of blocking, the case of smaller antecedents is handled in a less
strict, more intuitively useful way. A bound on the simplest of the two versions of conﬁ-
dence boost is exactly equivalent to bounding both preexisting notions, width and blocking;
therefore, our ﬁrst new proposal allows for much smoother handling of the combination of
the previously studied concepts.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:30
Jos´e L Balc´azar
Fig. 2.
A screenshot of yacaree with the rules and log output ﬁles
As the notion of plain conﬁdence boost turns out to be debatable for one speciﬁc “closure-
aware” basis, the B⋆rules, we have proposed also a more sophisticate “closure-aware”
version of the conﬁdence boost, for which we have developed the corresponding formal and
algorithmic study.
An obvious drawback of using a conﬁdence boost bound is the need to choose yet another
parameter for the mining process, besides conﬁdence and support. However, in our experi-
ments, this problem did not seem to be that serious: a noticeable aspect of the conﬁdence
boost bound is that the outcome of the mining shows relatively quite low sensitivity both
with respect to its precise value and with respect to the values of other parameters such as
conﬁdence: quite similar sets of rules are obtained. We quickly learned to use two standard
values, at 1.05 to prune oﬀjust really low novelty rules and at 1.2 to prune more aggres-
sively; whereas, in case the dataset still gives many rules above this threshold, occassionally
we would employ the very drastic value of 1.5. This scheme tends to work well, and not only
that: it also make less critical the choice of the conﬁdence threshold, that can be safely left
at a somewhat low value (say, around 0.6 to 0.7), leaving to the boost parameter the task
of reducing the output size. These empirical facts were widespread to such an extent that
we attempted at using (closure-based) conﬁdence boost to try and construct a parameter-
free association miner: the yacaree system, able to self-tune the closure-based conﬁdence
boost and the support thresholds. We believe that the embodiment of the computation of
the B⋆basis together with closure-based conﬁdence boost bounds in an open source tool will
promote its use in data mining practice, as yacaree exhibits a unique quality of “turnkey”
system that works with just the few clicks needed to choose the input dataset. Of course,
it can be used as well in the standard manner, as the default initial values of conﬁdence,
support, and other internal parameters can be manually tuned eﬀortlessly, if necessary, by
data mining experts. However, this action is not anymore necessary, as yacaree is ready to
do its best with no need of user choices. The system is platform independent, although in a
system with small memory, the control of the heap size may require some initial tuning (to
be made just once) to avoid runtime errors for lack of memory; whereas, in very powerful
systems, obtaining the most of them may also require some tuning.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:31
The shortcomings of conﬁdence thresholds discussed at the beginning of Subsection 2.2
have been often interpreted as an inadequacy of the very notion of conﬁdence. Yet, we
prefer to develop our proposal in the context of support and conﬁdence bounds, for several
reasons.
First, conditional probability is a concept known to many educated users from a number
of scientiﬁc and engineering disciplines, so that communication between the data mining
expert and the domain expert is often simpliﬁed if our measure is conﬁdence. Second, as
a very elementary concept, it is the best playground to study other proposals, such as our
contribution here, which could be then lifted to other similar parameters.
Third, and more importantly, we believe that, in fact, our approach of complementing it
with relative measures will make up for many of the objections raised against conﬁdence.
In fact, our interpretation of this sort of objections is not the widespread consequence that
“conﬁdence is inapproprate” to ﬁlter and rank association rules, but that “an absolute
threshold on conﬁdence is inappropriate” to ﬁlter and rank association rules. This does not
mean that it has to be replaced as a measure of intensity of implication, and, in fact, it
has been observed and argued that (at least in somewhat sparse transactional datasets)
the combination of support and conﬁdence is already very good at discarding rules that
are present only as statistical artifacts and do not really correspond to correlations in the
phenomenon at the origin of the dataset [Megiddo and Srikant 1998]; instead, we consider
that our message is that it should be complemented with relative conﬁdence thresholds that
assess the novelty of each rule by comparison with the conﬁdence of logically (or intuitively)
stronger rules. The identiﬁcation of the precise notion for this task is a clear research issue,
to which we have contributed via our two variants of the notion of conﬁdence boost.
A number of connected approaches to association rule quality exist in the literature. We
discuss here those that we have found most closely related; Subsection 7.2 is devoted to the
deeper analysis of a particularly close contribution. We ﬁnish the paper with a description
of forthcoming work.
7.1. Comparisons to Related Work
We refer to [Geng and Hamilton 2006] for an excellent survey of many options to relate
supports of left and right hand sides of association rules to construct indicators of interest-
ingness. Many of these only work on a single rule, with no reference to alternative rules with,
say, smaller but otherwise arbitrary left-hand sides. A notable case is lift, which implicitly
refers to a rule with the same right-hand side and an empty left-hand side, as discussed in
the proof of Proposition 3.4. Compared to this family of measures, conﬁdence boost is ﬁner
as it can distinguish among many alternative antecedents to compare, at the price of being
potentially more expensive to evaluate due to the search for smaller but arbitrary left-hand
sides, and larger but arbitrary right-hand sides. We have shown several algorithms that
attempt at circumscribing this search to smaller spaces.
More sophisticated interestingness measures are possible, for instance those based on
the KL-divergence between probability distributions induced with and without the given
rule [Jaroszewicz and Simovici 2002]: the induced distributions satisfy the supports of the
rule and of its antecedent but otherwise maximize the entropy. In preliminary tests, our
approach, with quite robust settings of conﬁdence (between 0.6 and 0.7) and boost (stardard
threshold of 1.2) gives results very close to those in [Jaroszewicz and Simovici 2002].
Several published works attempt at a similar detection of the “exceptionality” or “surpris-
ingness” of rules; many of these work in the relational setting, instead of the transactional
setting where our work ﬁts. Relational data can be analysed in the transactional setting
by converting a pair given by an attribute name and a value for the attribute into a single
item, as we do in the Adult dataset in Table II. Assuming the relational structure of the
data, however, brings in the extra power of “implicit negation” of attributes, due to the
incompatibility among simultaneous values of the same attribute. This implicit negation is
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:32
Jos´e L Balc´azar
useful to explain novelty by comparing more speciﬁc rules stating a consequent of the form
A = V to more general rules stating a consequent of the form A = V ′ for V ′ ̸= V , and
quite interesting results along this line can be found in [Padmanabhan and Tuzhilin 2000;
Suzuki 1997; Suzuki and Kodratoﬀ1998], among others. Our purely transactional setting
(like for the Retail or Now datasets) does not allow us to employ this method of implicit
negation and, therefore, such contributions are not directly comparable to ours.
A few additional contributions that still lie in the transactional setting and are similar to
ours are discussed next. The notions of conﬁdence width and rule blocking from [Balc´azar
2009] are similar to the “pruning” proposal from [Liu et al. 1999], in that the intuition is the
same; also our proposal here follows an analogous intuitive path. Major diﬀerences are that,
in the proposals we discuss, a large portion of the pruning becomes unnecessary because we
work on minimum-size bases, namely representative rules, and, more importantly, that the
pruning in [Liu et al. 1999] is based on the χ2 statistic, whereas we will look instead into
the conﬁdence thresholds that would make the rule “redundant”, either in a “formal logic”
sense or in a more intuitive, but still logical-style relaxation. Our notions are also similar
to the notion of improvement, proposed in [Bayardo et al. 1999] and also discussed in [Liu
et al. 1999; Webb 2007]; but improvement is a measure of an absolute, additive conﬁdence
increase, with no reference to representative rules or redundancy, and it only allows for
varying the antecedent into a smaller one, keeping the same consequent.
7.2. Minimum Antecedent and Maximum Consequent
Many works suggest further notions of redundancy, in most cases based upon mere intuition.
The fact that a rule X →XY is redundant with respect to X →XY ′ whenever Y ⊂
Y ′ (in the sense of having at least the same conﬁdence) is pointed out in many places
(e.g. [Aggarwal and Yu 2001; Kryszkiewicz 1998b; Phan-Luong 2001; Shah et al. 1999]).
Our starting point being the representative basis, we only would keep X →XY if its
conﬁdence is higher than that of X →XY ′, by a factor indicated by the conﬁdence boost;
this quantiﬁcation is an eﬀective reﬁnement of that known proposal.
On the other hand, redundancy of X →XY with respect to X′ →X′Y , where X′ ⊂X, is
debatable. As we have already discussed in Subsection 2.2, rules X →XY and X′ →X′Y ,
where X′ ⊂X, provide diﬀerent, orthogonal information. Still, one may wish to forget
about AB →C if A →C is already present; this seems a natural attitude, and, in fact,
explicit proposals of removing the seemingly redundant rule appear in many references,
often jointly with the (correct) observation of redundancy due to larger consequents. This
happens in the structural cover of [Toivonen et al. 1995], and in some of the pruning rules of
[Shah et al. 1999] (which focuses on a slightly diﬀerent approach since their main measure is
actually lift, but, in fact, most of their developments work for conﬁdence as well); and also
in [Scheﬀer 2005]. All these proposals may make sense as heuristics, and their connection
to conﬁdence boost is developed below; however, if taken as redundancy statements then
they are incorrect and, in some cases, where a precise mathematical statement and its proof
are provided (like [Scheﬀer 2005]), the proof can be seen to switch into a “full implication”
meaning of the “arrow” connective, and is actually wrong, therefore, since it does not
apply to partial rules. Discarding the apparently weaker rule requires more care and a ﬁner
discussion and, actually, the conﬁdence boost provides for this.
In fact, without pretending to argue redundancy, one could consider rules with mini-
mal antecedent and maximal consequent simply as an heuristic for handling a large set of
mined rules, acting as a sort of summaries of rules with larger antecedents or shorter con-
sequents, or both. As a representative of these proposals, we chose to discuss the approach
of [Kryszkiewicz 1998c] which can be casted as follows:
Deﬁnition 7.1.
For a ﬁxed conﬁdence threshold γ and a ﬁxed support threshold τ, the
minimal-antecedent, maximal-consequent rules MMRτ,γ are those rules X →XY (with
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:33
X ∩Y = ∅) such that c(X →XY ) ≥γ, s(X →XY ) ≥τ, and for which the following
holds: the only rule X′ →X′Y ′ with X′ ∩Y ′ = ∅, c(X′ →X′Y ′) ≥γ, s(X →XY ) ≥τ
which satisﬁes that X′ ⊆X and Y ⊆Y ′, is itself: X = X′ and Y = Y ′.
The following holds [Kryszkiewicz 1998c]:
Proposition 7.2.
For a conﬁdence threshold γ and a support threshold τ, all MMRτ,γ
rules are representative rules for these thresholds.
Let us point out that these rules are subtly diﬀerent from the min-max approximate basis
of [Pasquier et al. 2005], given in Deﬁnition 2.3, their apparent similarity notwithstanding.
There, the closed set forming the whole right-hand side is to be maximal, including the
antecedent; here, only the part of the closed set that does not belong to the antecedent is
to be maximal. As the antecedent is itself minimal, the notions diﬀer. In a sense, MMR are
to min-max rules as conﬁdence boost is to conﬁdence width.
Example 7.3. In our running example, we ﬁnd that rule BC →A has conﬁdence γ = 8/9.
It is a representative rule at its conﬁdence threshold γ = 8/9, hence it is a min-max rule by
Proposition 2.5; but it is not in MMRτ,γ since c(B →A) = 10/11 > γ. This example also
proves that the converse of Proposition 7.2 does not hold.
As discussed in depth in Subsection 2.2, we must be aware that MMR’s may lose in-
formation, since rules that have nonminimal antecedents may be actually irredundant and
potentially interesting. Our main proposal in this paper, conﬁdence boost, can be interpreted
as a quantitative variant of MMR’s, whereby nonminimal antecedents or nonmaximal con-
sequents are likely to be considered not novel (and conversely), yet this connection depends
on how well the rule clears the conﬁdence and support thresholds. More precisely:
Proposition 7.4. Fix support and conﬁdence thresholds τ and γ.
(1) If X →Y is a MMRτ,γ rule, then β(X →Y ) ≥min

s(X→Y )
τ
, c(X→Y )
γ

.
(2) If X →Y is not a MMRτ,γ rule, then β(X →Y ) ≤c(X→Y )
γ
.
Proof.
(1) Consider an MMRτ,γ rule X →Y . Any diﬀerent rule X′ →Y ′ with X′ ⊆X and
Y ⊆Y ′ must fail either the support threshold τ or the conﬁdence threshold γ. First
we show that, for such a rule, c(X′ →Y ′) ≤max(
τ
s(X), γ), considering two cases.
Assume X′ ̸= X, and consider rule X′ →Y , which is also diﬀerent from X →Y .
We have s(X′Y ) ≥s(XY ) > τ so that it must fail the conﬁdence threshold; hence,
c(X′ →Y ′) ≤c(X′ →Y ) < γ ≤max(
τ
s(X), γ). Assume now X′ = X: either c(X′ →
Y ′) < γ, or X′ →Y ′ fails the support threshold, s(X′Y ′) = s(XY ′) ≤τ, whence
c(X′ →Y ′) = s(X′Y ′)
s(X′)
≤
τ
s(X′) =
τ
s(X); thus c(X′ →Y ′) ≤max(
τ
s(X), γ) again.
Now we can bound the conﬁdence boost easily: any rule considered for the maxi-
mization in the denominator of the deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost has conﬁdence at
most max(
τ
s(X), γ), and there are ﬁnitely many of them, so that the denominator itself
obeys the same bound, which implies that β(X →Y ) ≥min

c(X→Y )
τ
s(X)
, c(X→Y )
γ

=
min

s(X→Y )
τ
, c(X→Y )
γ

.
(2) This part is quite simple. If X →Y is not an MMRτ,γ rule, then there must exist
some diﬀerent rule X′ →Y ′ with X′ ⊆X and Y ⊆Y ′ passing the support and
conﬁdence thresholds; this rule enters the maximization in the denominator of the
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

A:34
Jos´e L Balc´azar
deﬁnition of conﬁdence boost, which is, then, at least γ, resulting in a conﬁdence boost
β(X →Y ) ≤c(X→Y )
γ
.
That is: a rule that is not an MMRτ,γ rule, and barely clears the conﬁdence threshold γ,
can be appropriately pruned as not novel due to low boost; but, if its conﬁdence is much
higher than the threshold, even if it is not MMR, it may exhibit enough novelty to make
it debatable whether it must be pruned oﬀthe output. Conversely, an MMRτ,γ rule that
clears barely the support and conﬁdence thresholds may turn out to be of low conﬁdence
boost, and it could be better to omit it from the output. Essentially, the same purpose is
attempted by both approaches but conﬁdence boost bounds oﬀers a quantitative evaluation
of the extent to which representative rules are appropriate as rules to choose for the output of
the mining process: they will often coincide with the MMRτ,γ but these will be occassionally
inadequate.
7.3. Further Work
Of course, the use of conﬁdence boost does not preclude a combination with lift or any other
measure of intensity of implication; to what extent these separate measures interact with
conﬁdence boost, and which ones perform best, is one among many open lines of future
research.
Indeed, whatever method is proposed to reduce the output of an association miner leaves
a major doubt: are these the rules one really wants? We plan to continue working on
this rather subjective issue, and intend to employ further actual end-user evaluations from
dataset providers, as we have started to do with respect to partial aspects. We are working on
datasets coming from an e-learning platform, for which we have a manually recorded labeling
of the interest of each rule, provided by the dataset suppliers, namely, the teachers of the
courses where the datasets originated, who are also available for consultation. The particular
characteristics of this dataset require us ﬁrst to extend our approach into handling both
presence and absence of each item [Balc´azar et al. 2010a; 2010b]. Also, sometimes, some
of the full-conﬁdence implications would be desirable indeed for inclusion in the output,
given that working on the basis B⋆leaves them fully out; however, it is unclear whether
conﬁdence boost would still be the right notion, and, even so, full-conﬁdence implications
require to compute the minimal generators of each closure, therefore losing the desirable
advantage oﬀered by closure-based conﬁdence boost operating on top of B⋆rules, which can
be computed much faster since they only use the closures lattice. We continue to investigate
this problem, and some partial progress, on which we still hope to improve, is reported in
[Balc´azar et al. 2010b].
The yacaree tool has many developments open to further work. First, since we mine
frequent closures in descending support, instead of ascending, some of the optimizations
in ChARM require further work before being readily applicable; also, the best algorithm
in [Baixeries et al. 2009] (namely iPred) to compute Hasse edges is not applied, as it as-
sumes a cardinality-ordered traversal of the closed sets instead of a support-oriented one;
the theorems that guarantee its applicability have been obtained only recently, and a forth-
coming version of yacaree will sport this faster algorithm, iPred. Also, it seems possible
that a smarter coupling of the miner with the lattice computation might provide further
accelerations. On the other hand, from the point of view of the user, and beyond eﬃciency
improvement considerations, a few alternative internal conﬁgurations of the parameters
might reveal themselves useful, provided one can hit with intuitive descriptions that make
them clearly understandable by nonexperts: indeed, whereas the user is grateful for being
able to run the program with no parameter selection, yacaree is not snake oil, and it is
likely that, for certain datesets, and after seeing the result, the user may be tempted to “try
again” in some alternative way.
ACM Journal Name, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.

Conﬁdence Boost of Association Rules
A:35
Hence, we will work next on improving the speed of the system, on ﬁnding sensible ways
of reporting interesting full-conﬁdence implications without paying too much as a time
overhead, and on developing interactions with end users to study their evaluations of the
generated sets of rules, possibly leading thus to further reﬁnements of the conﬁdence boost
notion and of any other aspect that might be considered. In the meantime, researchers
interested in conducting their own evaluation can download the system freely and analyze
the output of conﬁdence-boost-bounded mining on their datasets; this author would be
grateful to be informed of the results.
