SDDs are Exponentially More Succinct than OBDDs
Simone Bova
Technische Universit¨at Wien

Abstract
Introduced by Darwiche [7], sentential decision diagrams (SDDs) are essentially as tractable as
ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDDs), but tend to be more succinct in practice. This makes
SDDs a prominent representation language, with many applications in artiﬁcial intelligence and
knowledge compilation.
We prove that SDDs are more succinct than OBDDs also in theory, by constructing a family of
boolean functions where each member has polynomial SDD size but exponential OBDD size. This
exponential separation improves a quasipolynomial separation recently established by Razgon [13],
and settles an open problem in knowledge compilation [7].
1
Introduction
The idea of knowledge compilation is to deal with the intractability of certain computational tasks on a
knowledge base by compiling it into a diﬀerent data structure where the tasks are feasible. The choice of
the target data structure involves an unavoidable trade-oﬀbetween succinctness and tractability.
Darwiche and Marquis [5] systematically investigated this trade-oﬀin the fundamental case where
the knowledge bases are boolean functions and the data structures are classes of boolean circuits
(representation languages).
In their setting, decomposable negation normal forms (DNNFs) and ordered binary decision diagrams
(OBDDs) arise as benchmark languages for succinctness and tractability respectively [6, 5]. On the one
hand, DNNFs are exponentially more succinct than OBDDs; moreover, in contrast to OBDDs, they
implement eﬃciently conjunctive normal forms of small treewidth [6, 12, 8, 14]. On the other hand, the
vast applicability of OBDDs in veriﬁcation and synthesis relies on the tractability of equivalence testing
(speeded up by canonicity) and boolean combinations, which DNNFs lack [5].
This gap between DNNFs (succinct but hard) and OBDDs (verbose but tractable) led to the quest
for intermediate languages exponentially more succinct than, but essentially as tractable as, OBDDs.
Introduced by Darwiche [7], sentential decision diagrams (SDDs) are a most prominent candidate to
narrow the gap between DNNFs and OBDDs. They are designed by strengthening the decomposability
property [10] and further imposing a very strong form of determinism [11]. The resulting language can
implement decisions of the form
m
_
i=1
Pi(X) ∧Si(Y ),
(1)
where X and Y are disjoint sets of variables nicely structured by an underlying variable tree, and the
subcircuits P1, . . . , Pm, called primes,1 implement an exhaustive case distinction into exclusive and
consistent cases.2 Binary (or Shannon) decisions in OBDDs boil down to very special sentential decisions
having the form
(¬x ∧S1(Y )) ∨(x ∧S2(Y )),
1The Si’s are called subs.
2Formally, the models of P1, . . . , Pm partition the set of assignments of X to {0, 1} into m nonempty blocks; see
Section 2.
1
arXiv:1601.00501v1  [cs.LO]  4 Jan 2016

where the variable x is not in the variable set Y .
Indeed, SDDs properly contain OBDDs, and hence are at least as succinct as OBDDs, while preserving
tractability of all key tasks that are tractable on OBDDs. For this reason, they have been used in a
variety of applications in artiﬁcial intelligence and probabilistic reasoning, as reported, for instance, by
[2, 9].
Not only SDDs are as tractable as OBDDs, but they also tend to be more succinct than OBDDs in
practice; in fact, knowledge compilers often produce much smaller SDDs than OBDDs by heuristically
leveraging the additional ﬂexibility of variable trees in SDDs with respect to variable orderings in OBDDs
[4, 9].
Nonetheless, the basic theoretical question about the relative succinctness of OBDDs and SDDs has
been open since Darwiche introduced SDDs [7, 13]:
Are SDDs exponentially more succinct than OBDDs?
The results in the literature did not even exclude the possibility for OBDDs to polynomially simulate
SDDs [16], until recently Razgon proved a quasipolynomial separation [13]. The above question stands,
though, as for instance OBDDs could still quasipolynomially simulate SDDs.
Contribution.
We prove in this article that SDDs are exponentially more succinct than OBDDs.
Thus, in particular, OBDDs cannot quasipolynomially simulate SDDs.
More precisely, we construct an inﬁnite family of boolean functions such that every member of the
family has polynomial compressed SDD size but exponential OBDD size (Theorem 4).
Compressed SDDs contain OBDDs,3 and are regarded as a natural SDD class because of their
canonicity: two compressed SDDs computing the same function are syntactically equal up to syntactic
manipulations preserving polynomial size [7]. The restriction to compressed SDDs makes our result
stronger, because general SDDs are believed (despite not known) to be exponentially more succinct than
compressed SDDs [2].
We separate compressed SDDs and OBDDs by a function, which we call the generalized hidden
weighted bit function because, indeed, it contains the hidden weighted bit function (HWB) as a subfunction.
HWB is perhaps the simplest function known to be hard on OBDDs [3]: it computes the subsets of
{1, . . . , n} having size i and containing the number i, for i = 1, . . . , n.
It turns out that HWB itself has small (uncompressed) SDDs (Theorem 3), which immediately
separates SDDs and OBDDs. The construction, a slight variation of which gives the compressed case
(Lemma 1 and Lemma 2), is based on the following two observations.
The ﬁrst observation is that HWB can be expressed as a sentential decision of the form (1) by
distinguishing the following primes:
• for i = 1, . . . , n, the subsets of size i containing the number i (each of these n primes is taken by
HWB, so their subs will be equivalent to ⊤);
• the empty subset, and the subsets of size i not containing the number i for i = 1, . . . , n −1 (none
of these n primes is taken by HWB, so their subs will be equivalent to ⊥).
The second observation is that each of the above primes has small OBDD size under any variable ordering
(Proposition 2). With these two observations it is fairly straightforward to implement the hidden weighted
bit function by a small (uncompressed) SDD (Theorem 3).
A direct inspection of our construction allows to straightforwardly derive some facts about compression
previously observed in the literature [2], namely that the SDD size may increase exponentially either by
compressing SDDs over ﬁxed variable trees, or by conditioning (unboundedly many variables) over ﬁxed
variable trees (see Section 4).
3More precisely, compressed SDDs contain reduced OBDDs; see [15, Deﬁnition 1.3.2].
2

Organization.
The article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the technical background,
culminating in the quasipolynomial separation of SDDs and OBDDs proved by Razgon (Theorem 1).
In Section 3, we separate (uncompressed) SDDs and OBDDs by the hidden weighted bit function
(Theorem 3) and then modify the construction to separate compressed SDDs and OBDDs (Theorem 4).
We discuss our results in Section 4.
2
Background
We collect background notions and facts from the literature [5, 10, 7, 13].
Structured Deterministic NNFs.
Let X be a ﬁnite set of variables. Let C be a boolean circuit
on input variables X, built using fanin 0 constant gates (labelled by ⊥or ⊤), fanin 1 negation gates
(labelled by ¬), and unbounded fanin disjunction and conjunction gates (labelled by ∨and ∧). The
unique sink node (outdegree 0) in the underlying directed acyclic graph (DAG) of C is called the output
gate of C; source nodes (indegree 0) are called input gates, and are labelled by constants or variables in
X; in particular, C is allowed to not read some of the variables in X, see Figure 1 (left).
A boolean circuit C on variables X is in negation normal form, in short an NNF, if the gates labelled
by ¬ have wires only from input gates. Without loss of generality we assume that NNFs have input
gates labelled by constants or literals on variables in X (and no internal gates labelled by ¬).
As usual, an NNF C on input variables X computes a boolean function f : {0, 1}X →{0, 1}; in this
case we also write C ≡f. Two NNFs C and C′ on the same input variables are equivalent if they
compute the same boolean function; again we write C ≡C′.
The size of an NNF C, in symbols size(C), is the number of arcs in its underlying DAG. Let f be a
boolean function and let L be a class of NNFs. The size of f relative to L (or, in short, the L size of f),
denoted by L(f), is equal to the minimum over the sizes of all circuits in L computing f:
L(f) = min{size(C): C ∈L, C ≡f}.
Let C be an NNF on input variables X, and let g be a gate of C. We denote by Cg the subcircuit
of C having g as its output gate, that is, the circuit whose underlying DAG is the subgraph of the
underlying DAG of C induced by the nodes having a directed path to g (labelled as in C).
An NNF C on input variables X is deterministic if, for every ∨-gate g in C, say of the form Wm
i=1 gi,
it holds that
Cgi ∧Cgj ≡⊥
for all 1 ≤i < j ≤m, where we formally regard Cgi, Cgj, and ⊥as NNFs on input variables X. We
denote by NNFd the class of all deterministic NNFs.
Let Y be a ﬁnite nonempty set of variables. A variable tree (in short, a vtree) for the variable set Y
is a rooted, full, ordered, binary tree T whose leaves correspond bijectively to Y ; indeed, we identify
each leaf in T with the variable in Y it corresponds to.
Let v be an internal node of the vtree T. We let vl and vr denote respectively the left and right child
of v, and Tv denote the subtree of T rooted at v. We also let Yv ⊆Y denote (the variables corresponding
to) the leaves of Tv; clearly Tv is a vtree for the variable set Yv.
Let C be an NNF on input variables X, and let T be a vtree for the variable set Y .
We say that C respects T if the following holds. First, every ∧-gate g in C has fanin exactly 2.
Second, let g be an ∧-gate in C having wires from gates h1 and h2. Then there exists an internal node v
in T such that the input gates of the subcircuit Ch1 mention only variables in Tvl and the input gates of
the subcircuit Ch2 mention only variables in Tvr. In this case, we also say that g respects v.
Note that, in particular, the sets of variables mentioned by Ch1 and Ch2 are disjoint; it follows that
C is decomposable [6]. Also note that, by deﬁnition, if an NNF reading all the variables in a set X is
structured by a vtree for the variable set Y , then X ⊆Y and the inclusion can be strict; see Figure 1.
This feature is crucial in our construction (see, for instance, the proof of Theorem 3).
A structured NNF is an NNF respecting some vtree. See Figure 1. We denote by NNFs the class of
all structured NNFs.
3

x2
y
x3
∧
⊥
x1
x2
x4
Figure 1: A circuit on input variables {x2, x4} on the left (in the underlying DAG, the edges are oriented
upwards), respecting the vtree for the variable set {x1, x2, x3, x4, y} on the right. The left subtree is a
vtree for the variable set {x1, x2, x3, x4}, and the right subtree is a vtree for the variable set {y}. The
∧-gate in the circuit respects the root of the vtree.
SDDs and OBDDs.
A sentential decision diagram (SDD) C respecting a vtree T is deﬁned inductively
as follows.
• C is a single gate labelled by a literal on a variable x, and x is in the variable set of T.
• C is a single gate labelled by a constant, and T is any vtree.
• C is formed by an output gate g labelled by ∨, with m ≥2 wires from gates g1, . . . , gm labelled by
∧, where each gi has wires from two gates pi and si, that is,
C =
m
_
i=1
Cpi ∧Csi,
(2)
such that for some internal node v of T the following holds (i = 1, . . . , m):
(S1) Cpi is an SDD respecting a subtree of Tvl.
(S2) Csi is an SDD respecting a subtree of Tvr.
(S3) Cpi ̸≡⊥.
(S4) Cpi ∧Cpj ≡⊥(1 ≤i < j ≤m).
(S5) Wm
i=1 Cpi ≡⊤.
In the equivalences in (S3)-(S5), we formally regard the Cpi’s, ⊥and ⊤as NNFs on variables Yvl. In
words, conditions (S3)-(S5) say that the Cpi’s deﬁne a partition of {0, 1}Yvl into m nonempty blocks,
where the ith block contains exactly the models of Cpi (i = 1, . . . , m).
An SDD is an SDD respecting some vtree. We let SDD denote the class of all SDDs.
An SDD C is called compressed if the following holds. Let h be an ∨-gate of C, so that h =
Wm′
i=1 Cp′
i ∧Cs′
i speciﬁed as in (2) relative to some node v′ in T. Then
(C) Cs′
i ̸≡Cs′
j (1 ≤i < j ≤m′),
where we formally regard Cs′
i as an NNF on variables Yv′r for i = 1, . . . , m′. We let SDDc denote the
class of all compressed SDDs.
An ordered binary decision diagram (OBDD) is a compressed SDD respecting a right-linear vtree T
(that is, where each left child is a leaf); see Figure 2. We let OBDD denote the class of all OBDDs.4
Let C be an OBDD respecting a vtree T, and let σ = x1 < · · · < xn be the variable ordering induced
by a left ﬁrst traversal of T; in this case, we also say that C respects σ. For an ordering σ of a set of
variables, we let OBDDσ denote the class of all OBDDs respecting σ.
4Reduced OBDDs as usually deﬁned in the literature [15, Deﬁnition 1.3.2] are indeed compressed SDD respecting
right-linear vtrees [7, Section 6].
4

x3
x1
x2
x4
Figure 2: A right-linear vtree; its left ﬁrst traversal induces the variable ordering x1 < x2 < x3 < x4.
Quasipolynomial Separation.
It follows from the deﬁnitions that
OBDD ⊆SDDc ⊆SDD ⊆NNFs ∩NNFd
(3)
which raises the natural question how OBDDs and SDDs are related in succinctness; indeed, the quest
for the relative succinctness of OBDDs and SDDs has been an open problem in knowledge compilation
since Darwiche introduced SDDs [7].
Recently, Razgon [13, Corollary 3] has established a quasipolynomial separation of OBDDs from
compressed SDDs.
Theorem 1 (Razgon). There exists an unbounded arity class of boolean functions F such that every
arity n function f ∈F has SDDc size in O(n3) and OBDD size in nΩ(log n).
We remark that the restriction to compressed SDDs in the above statement is nontrivial; to the best
of our knowledge, compressed SDDs might be exponentially more succinct than uncompressed SDDs [2];
see also the discussion in Section 4.
3
Exponential Separation
The quasipolynomial separation stated in Theorem 1 implies that OBDDs do not simulate SDDs in
polynomial size, but leaves open the possibility for OBDDs to simulate SDDs in quasipolynomial size.
In this section we exclude this possibility by establishing an exponential separation of OBDDs from
compressed SDDs.
Hidden Weighted Bit.
The separation is obtained by (a variant of) the hidden weighted bit function
HWBn(x1, . . . , xn),
that is the boolean function on n inputs x1, . . . , xn such that, for all assignments f : {x1, . . . , xn} →{0, 1},
it holds that f is a model of HWBn if and only if f(x1) + · · · + f(xn) = i and f(xi) = 1 (i ≥1).
It is well known that the hidden weighted bit function has exponential OBDD size [3].
Theorem 2 (Bryant). The OBDD size of HWBn is 2Ω(n).
Intuitively, a model of HWBn is a subsets of {1, . . . , n} of size i containing the number i, for
i = 1, . . . , n. For instance, HWB2(1, 0) = 1, because the set {1} has size 1 and contains the number 1,
and HWB2(0, 1) = 0, because the set {2} has size 1 but does not contain the number 1.
The simple but crucial observation underlying our construction is that the models of HWBn can be
decided arguing by cases, as follows: If S is a subset of {1, . . . , n} of size i, then S is a model of HWBn
if and only if i ∈S (i = 1, . . . , n). With this insight it is not hard to setup an exhaustive and exclusive
case distinction equivalent to HWBn; the key observation is that each individual case in the distinction
is computable by a small OBDD with respect to any variable ordering.
We formalize the above intuition. For i ∈{0, 1, . . . , n}, let
Ei
n(x1, . . . , xn)
5

x1
x2
x2
x3
x3
x3
x4
x4
⊥
⊥
⊥
x4
x4
⊥
⊤
v
Figure 3: An OBDD for the boolean function E2
4 respecting the variable ordering x1 < x2 < x3 < x4,
drawn (in an unreduced form) using the graphical conventions for decision diagrams [15]. Each decision
node generates 6 wires in the circuit; for instance, the decision node v generates a 6-wire subcircuit
isomorphic to (¬x4 ∧⊥) ∨(x4 ∧⊤).
be the boolean function on n inputs x1, . . . , xn such that, for all assignments f : {x1, . . . , xn} →{0, 1},
it holds that f is a model of Ei
n if and only if f(x1) + · · · + f(xn) = i. Hence Ei
n computes the subsets
of {1, . . . , n} of size i (i ≥0). Let now
Pn = {P0, Pn} ∪{Pi,0, Pi,1 : i = 1, . . . , n −1}
(4)
be the family of 2n boolean functions, each over the variables {x1, . . . , xn}, deﬁned as follows:
• P0 ≡E0
n
• Pn ≡En
n
and for i = 1, . . . , n −1 let
• Pi,0 ≡Ei
n ∧¬xi
• Pi,1 ≡Ei
n ∧xi
See Figure 4 for an illustration.
Each function in Pn computes a family of subsets of {1, . . . , n}. Namely, P0 computes the empty
subset, Pn computes {1, . . . , n}, Pi,0 computes the subsets of {1, . . . , n} of size i not containing the
number i, and Pi,1 computes the subsets of {1, . . . , n} of size i containing the number i (i = 1, . . . , n −1).
It is readily observed that the members of Pn partition the powerset of {1, . . . , n} in nonempty blocks.
Formally,
Fact 1. Let Pn be as in (4), and let P, P ′ ∈Pn with P ̸= P ′.
• P ̸≡⊥.
• P ∧P ′ ≡⊥.
• W
P ∈Pn P ≡⊤.
We now establish the key property, that each member of Pn is computable by a small OBDD with
respect to any variable ordering.
First consider the functions Ei
n. An OBDD computing Ei
n with respect to the variable ordering
σ = x1 < · · · < xn is displayed in Figure 3 for the case n = 4 and i = 2. Generalizing the construction,
we have that an OBDD C computing Ei
n and respecting σ has at most 1 + 2 + · · · + n = n(n + 1)/2
decision nodes, each contributing 6 wires in the circuit; hence C has size O(n2).
Since Ei
n is symmetric [15, Deﬁnition 2.3.2 and Lemma 4.7.1], the following holds.
Proposition 1. Let σ be an ordering of x1, . . . , xn. The OBDDσ size of Ei
n is O(n2).
It follows that every P ∈Pn has a small OBDD with respect to every variable ordering.
6

x1
x2
x2
x3
x3
x4
⊥
⊥
⊥
x4
x4
⊥
⊤
Figure 4: An OBDD for the boolean function E2
4 ∧¬x2 respecting the variable ordering x1 < x2 < x3 < x4.
Proposition 2. Let σ be an ordering of x1, . . . , xn and let P ∈Pn, where Pn is as in (4). The OBDDσ
size of P is O(n2).
Proof. For P0 and Pn the statement follows directly from Proposition 1. For i = 1, . . . , n −1 we have
that Pi,0 ≡Ei
n ∧¬xi and Pi,1 ≡Ei
n ∧xi.
Recall that if f and f ′ are boolean functions on X, and ρ is any ordering of X, then [15, Theorem 3.3.6]:
OBDDρ(f ∧f ′) ≤OBDDρ(f) · OBDDρ(f ′).
(5)
Regarding the literals ¬xi and xi as boolean functions on {x1, . . . , xn} whose OBDDσ size is constant
(6 wires), the statement follows from (5) and Proposition 1.
SDDs vs OBDDs.
We now prove that the hidden weighted bit function has small (uncompressed)
SDD size; a slight modiﬁcation of the construction, described later, gives the compressed case.
The key observation is that, by the deﬁnition of Pn, the hidden weighted bit function HWBn is
equivalent to
(P0 ∧⊥) ∨(Pn ∧⊤) ∨
n−1
_
i=1
((Pi,0 ∧⊥) ∨(Pi,1 ∧⊤))
(6)
because the latter is equivalent to
(E1
n ∧x1) ∨· · · ∨(En
n ∧xn)
which is in turn equivalent to HWBn. Using the form (6), it is easy to build an SDD computing HWBn
and respecting a vtree for {x1, . . . , xn, y} like the one on the right in Figure 1; upon implementing the
Pi’s and Pi,j’s by OBDDs, the construction has polynomial size by Proposition 2. Note that the SDD is
not compressed because ⊥and ⊤are reused n times. The details follow.
Theorem 3. The SDD size of HWBn is O(n3).
Proof. We ﬁrst deﬁne an NNF C on input variables X = {x1, . . . , xn} computing (6) as follows. The
output gate of C is a fanin 2n ∨-gate, with wires from 2n fanin 2 ∧-gates g0, gn, and gi,j for i = 1, . . . , n−1
and j = 0, 1.
Let p0 and s0 be the two gates wiring g0, let pn and sn be the two gates wiring gn, and for
i = 1, . . . , n −1 and j = 0, 1 let pi,j and si,j be the two gates wiring gi,j.
Let σ be any ordering of x1, . . . , xn. All the subcircuits of C rooted at p0, s0, pn, sn, pi,j, and si,j
(i = 1, . . . , n −1, j = 0, 1) are OBDDs respecting the ordering σ. Moreover:
• Cpi computes Pi for i ∈{1, n};
• Cpi,j computes Pi,j for i = 1, . . . , n −1, j = 0, 1;
• Cs0 and Csi,0 compute ⊥for i = 1, . . . , n −1;
• Csn and Csi,1 compute ⊤for i = 1, . . . , n −1.
7

We prove that C is an SDD respecting a suitable vtree T for the variable set X ∪{y}. Roughly, T is
a right-linear vtree with the exception of the variable y; see the diagram on the right in Figure 1 for the
case n = 4 and σ = x1 < x2 < x3 < x4. Formally, T is deﬁned as follows. Let v be the root of T. The
left subtree Tl = Tvl of T is a right-linear vtree for {x1, . . . , xn} such that the variable ordering induced
by its left ﬁrst traversal is σ. Similarly, the right subtree Tr = Tvr of T is a vtree for {y}.
We check that C is an SDD respecting T.
• The subcircuits Cp0, Cpn, and Cpi,j are OBDDs respecting σ, and hence SDDs respecting Tl
(i = 1, . . . , n −1, j = 0, 1). This settles (S1).
• The subcircuits Cs0, Csn, and Csi,j are input gates labelled by a constant, and hence SDDs
respecting Tr (i = 1, . . . , n −1, j = 0, 1). This settles (S2).
Note how the construction crucially exploits the special position of y in the vtree T, while the circuit C
does not even read y.
The partitioning properties (S3)-(S5) follow by construction and Fact 1. Therefore, C is an SDD
respecting T. It remains to check that C has size cubic in n.
By construction, C contains the 2n subcircuits Cp0, Cpn, and Cpi,j for i = 1, . . . , n −1 and j = 0, 1;
each has size O(n2) by Proposition 2 hence, altogether, they contribute O(n3) wires in C. There remain
O(n) wires entering the output gate and the gates g0, g1, . . . , gm.
Combining Theorem 2 and Theorem 3, we conclude that OBDDs and SDDs are exponentially
separated by the hidden weighted bit function.
Compressed SDDs vs OBDDs.
A slight variant of the previous construction gives an exponential
separation of OBDDs and compressed SDDs.
Let y0, y1, . . . , yn be fresh variables. The boolean function Fn of the variables x1, . . . , xn, y0, y1, . . . , yn,
called generalized hidden weighted bit function, is deﬁned by
(P0 ∧¬y0) ∨(Pn ∧yn) ∨
n−1
_
i=1
((Pi,0 ∧¬yi) ∨(Pi,1 ∧yi)).
(7)
Notice that the form (7) is exactly as the form (6), except that the n copies of ⊥and the n copies of
⊤are replaced by the 2n pairwise nonequivalent formulas ¬y0, yn, yi, and ¬yi (i = 1, . . . , n −1), so that
(7) has indeed a compressed SDD implementation. The details follow.
Lemma 1. The SDDc size of Fn is O(n3).
Proof. We construct an NNF C on input variables X = {x1, . . . , xn, y0, y1, . . . , yn} computing (7) along
the lines of Theorem 3. The only modiﬁcation is that Cs0 is an input gate labelled ¬y0, Csn is an input
gate labelled yn, Csi,0 is an input gate labelled ¬yi, and Csi,1 is an input gate labelled yi (i = 1, . . . , n−1).
We claim that C is a compressed SDD respecting a vtree T for the variable set X built exactly as
in Theorem 3 except that the right subtree Tr = Tvr of T is a right-linear vtree for {y0, y1, . . . , yn}
such that the variable ordering induced by its left ﬁrst traversal is ρ. See Figure 5 for the case n = 4,
σ = x1 < · · · < x4, and ρ = y0 < y1 < · · · < y4.
To check that C is a compressed SDD respecting T, notice that the subcircuits Cp0 and Cpi,j
are OBDDs respecting σ, and hence compressed SDDs respecting Tl (i = 1, . . . , n, j = 0, 1), and
the subcircuits Cs0 and Csi,j are OBDDs respecting ρ, and hence compressed SDDs respecting Tr
(i = 1, . . . , n, j = 0, 1). Moreover, it is easily veriﬁed that the output gate of C is compressed as by
condition (C). Hence C is compressed. The rest of the proof is identical to that of Theorem 3.
We now prove that the generalized hidden weighted bit function Fn needs large OBDDs.
Lemma 2. The OBDD size of Fn is 2Ω(n).
8

x3
x1
x2
x4
y1
y2
y3
y4
y0
Figure 5: The vtree for F4 in the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof. Let N be the size of a smallest OBDD on variables X = {x1, . . . , xn, y0, y1, . . . , yn} computing
Fn, and let ρ be any ordering of X such that OBDDρ(Fn) = N.
Let Gn(x1, . . . , xn) be the subfunction of Fn where y0, y1, . . . , yn are replaced by 1, in symbols:
Gn ≡Fn(x1, . . . , xn, 1, 1, . . . , 1).
(8)
Since conditioning (unboundedly many variables of) an OBDD does not increase its size [15, Theo-
rem 2.4.1], we have that
OBDDρ(Gn) ≤OBDDρ(Fn).
(9)
We now claim that Gn is the hidden weighted bit function on n variables. Indeed, by construction,
Gn ≡Fn(x1, . . . , xn, 1, 1, . . . , 1)
≡Pn ∨
n−1
_
i=1
Pi,1
which we already observed being equivalent to HWBn. Therefore OBDD(Gn) = 2Ω(n) by Theorem 2,
and in particular OBDDρ(Gn) ≥2Ω(n). By (9), we are done.
An exponential separation of OBDDs and compressed SDDs follows.
Theorem 4. There exists an unbounded arity class of boolean functions F such that every arity n
function f ∈F has SDDc size in O(n3) and OBDD size in 2Ω(n).
Proof. Take F = {Fm : m ∈N}, where Fm is as in (7). Then Fm has compressed SDD size O(m3) by
Lemma 1 and OBDD size 2Ω(m) by Lemma 2. Since Fm has n = 2m + 1 variables, it follows that Fm
has SDDc size in O(n3) and OBDD size in 2Ω(n).
Notably, the function class giving the exponential separation is as hard on compressed SDDs as the
function class giving the quasipolynomial separation (cubic in both cases, see Theorem 1).
4
Discussion
We have shown that OBDDs and SDDs are exponentially separated by the hidden weighted bit function,
while OBDDs and compressed SDDs are exponentially separated by the generalized hidden weighted bit
function, Fn in (7), that contains the hidden weighted bit function as a subfunction:
Fn(x1, . . . , xn, 1, 1, . . . , 1) = HWBn(x1, . . . , xn).
(10)
Separating OBDDs and SDDs by the hidden weighted bit function, instead of by a function designed
adhoc, further corroborates the theoretical quality of SDDs. As articulated by Bollig et al. [1], any useful
extension of OBDDs is expected to implement the hidden weighted bit function eﬃciently.
9

The SDD C described in the proof of Theorem 3 is not compressed, because ⊥and ⊤are reused n
times. In view of the canonical construction of an SDD over a vtree [7, Theorem 3], it is readily observed
that compressing C with respect to the vtree T in the proof of Theorem 3 implies ﬁnding a small SDD
for HWBn with respect to the left subtree of T, that is, a small OBDD for HWBn; but this is impossible
by Theorem 2. The fact that compressing an SDD over its vtree may increase the size exponentially has
been observed already [2, Theorem 1]. We reiterate the observation here only because our argument is
signiﬁcantly shorter.
We conclude mentioning a nonobvious, and perhaps even unexpected, aspect of our separation result.
An inspection of our construction shows that SDDs are already exponentially more succinct than general
OBDDs even allowing only one sentential decision (and possibly many Shannon decisions); recall (6)
and (7). The construction by Xue et al. [16] already uses nested sentential decisions even to separate
OBDDs over a ﬁxed variable ordering from SDDs!
Questions.
We do not know whether the hidden weighted bit function has superpolynomial compressed
SDD size for all vtrees; a positive answer would separate compressed and uncompressed SDDs in
succinctness and, in view of Lemma 1 and (10), would prove that compressed SDDs do not support
conditioning (of unboundedly many variables) in polynomial size.
In view of Theorem 1, it is natural to ask which SDDs are quasipolynomially simulated by OBDDs.
Our separating family shows that SDDs with unbounded fanin disjunctions cannot be quasipolynomially
simulated by OBDDs. On the other hand, recent work by Darwiche and Oztok essentially shows that
SDDs over binary disjunctions (fanin 2) admit a quasipolynomial simulation by OBDDs [9, Theorem 1].
In this light, it is tempting to conjecture that the above criterion is exact, that is, every SDD class over
bounded fanin disjunctions does indeed admit a quasipolynomial simulation by OBDDs.
Finally, a natural question arising in the context of the present work is about the relative succinctness
of SDDs and structured deterministic NNFs (see (3)); to the best of our knowledge, the question is open.
By Theorem 3, at least we now know that the hidden weighted bit function is not a candidate to separate
the two classes.
