arXiv:1504.03386v1  [cs.DB]  13 Apr 2015
Tractable Query Answering and Optimization
for Extensions of Weakly-Sticky Datalog±
Mostafa Milani and Leopoldo Bertossi
Carleton University, School of Computer Science, Ottawa, Canada

Summary.
We consider a semantic class, weakly-chase-sticky (WChS), and a
syntactic subclass, jointly-weakly-sticky (JWS), of Datalog± programs. Both ex-
tend that of weakly-sticky (WS) programs, which appear in our applications to
data quality. For WChS programs we propose a practical, polynomial-time query
answering algorithm (QAA). We establish that the two classes are closed under
magic-sets rewritings. As a consequence, QAA can be applied to the optimized
programs. QAA takes as inputs the program (including the query) and seman-
tic information about the “ﬁniteness” of predicate positions. For the syntactic
subclasses JWS and WS of WChS, this additional information is computable.
Datalog± .
Datalog, a rule-based language for query and view-deﬁnition in
relational databases [5], is not expressive enough to logically represent interesting
and useful ontologies, at least of the kind needed to specify conceptual data
models. Datalog± extends Datalog by allowing existentially quantiﬁed variables
in rule heads (∃-variables), equality atoms in rule heads, and program constraints
[2]. Hence the “+” in Datalog± , while the “−” reﬂects syntactic restrictions on
programs, for better computational properties.
A typical Datalog± program, P, is a ﬁnite set of rules, Σ ∪E ∪N, and an
extensional database (ﬁnite set of facts), D. The rules in Σ are tuple-generating-
dependencies (tgds) of the form ∃¯xP(¯x, ¯x′) ←P1(¯x1), . . . , Pn(¯xn), where ¯x′ ⊆
S ¯xi, and ¯x can be empty. E is a set of equality-generating-dependencies (egds) of
the form x = x′ ←P1(¯x1), . . . , Pn(¯xn), with {x, x′} ⊆S ¯xi. Finally, N contains
negative constraints of the form ⊥←P1(¯x1), . . . , Pn(¯xn), where ⊥is false.
Example 1. The following Datalog± program shows a tgd, an egd, and a neg-
ative constraint, in this order: ∃x Assist(y, x) ←Doctor(y);
x = x′ ←
Assist(y, x), Assist(y, x′);
⊥←Specialist(y, x, z), Nurse(y, z).
□
Below, when we refer to a class of Datalog± programs, we consider only Σ, the
tgds. Due to diﬀerent syntactic restrictions, Datalog± can be seen as a class
of sublanguages of Datalog∃, which is the extension of Datalog with tgds with
∃-variables [10].
The rules of a Datalog± program can be seen as an ontology O on top of
D, which can be incomplete. O plays the role of: (a) a “query layer” for D,
providing ontology-based data access (OBDA) [9], and (b) the speciﬁcation of a
completion of D, usually carried out through the chase mechanism that, starting
from D, iteratively enforces the rules in Σ, generating new tuples. This leads to
a possibly inﬁnite instance extending D, denoted with chase(Σ, D).
The answers to a conjunctive query Q(¯x) from D wrt. Σ is a sequence of con-
stants ¯a, such that Σ∪D |= Q(¯a) (or yes or no in case Q is boolean). The answers
can be obtained by querying as usual the universal instance chase(Σ, D). The

chase may be inﬁnite, which leads, in some cases, to undecidability of query an-
swering [8]. However, in some cases where the chase is inﬁnite, query answering
(QA) is still computable (decidable), and even tractable in the size of D. Syn-
tactic classes of Datalog± programs with tractable QA have been identiﬁed and
investigated, among them: sticky [4, 7], and weakly-sticky [4] Datalog± programs.
Our Need for QA Optimization. In our work, we concentrate on the stick-
iness and weak-stickiness properties, because these programs appear in our ap-
plications to quality data speciﬁcation and extraction [11], with the latter task
accomplished through QA, which becomes crucial.
Sticky programs [4] satisfy a syntactic restriction on the multiple occurrences
of variables (joins) in the body of a tgd. Weakly-sticky (WS) programs form a
class that extends that of sticky programs [4]. WS-Datalog± is more expressive
than sticky Datalog±, and results from applying the notion of weak-acyclicity
(WA) as found in data exchange [6], to relax acyclicity conditions on stickiness.
More precisely, in comparison with sticky programs, WS programs require a
milder condition on join variables, which is based on a program’s dependency
graph and the positions in it with ﬁnite rank [6].1
For QA, sticky programs enjoy ﬁrst-order rewritability [7], i.e. a conjunctive
query Q posed to Σ ∪D can be rewritten into a new ﬁrst-order (FO) query
Q′, and correctly answered by posing Q′ to D, and answering as usual. For WS
programs, QA is PTIME-complete in data, but the polynomial-time algorithm
provided for the proof in [4] is not a practical one.
Stickiness of the Chase.
In addition to (syntactic) stickiness, there is a
“semantic” property of programs, which is relative to the chase (and the data,
D), and is called “chase-stickiness” (ChS). Stickiness implies semantic stickiness
(but not necessarily the other way around) [4]. For chase-sticky programs, QA
is tractable [4].
Intuitively, a program has the chase-stickiness property if, due to the appli-
cation of a tgd σ: When a value replaces a repeated variable in the body of a
rule, then that value also appears in all the head atoms obtained through the
iterative enforcement of applicable rules that starts with σ. So, that value is
propagated all the way down through all the possible subsequent steps.
a
a
Fig. 1. The chase for a non-ChS program and the chase for a ChS program, resp.
Example 2. Consider D = {Assist(a, b), Assist(b, c)}, and the following set,
Σ1, of tgds: Nurse(y, z) ←Assist(x, y), Assist(y, z);
∃z Specialist(x, y, z) ←
1 A position refers to a predicate attribute, e.g. Nurse[2].
2

Nurse(x, y);
Doctor(y) ←Specialist(x, y, z).
Σ1 is not ChS, as the chase
on the LHS of Figure1 shows: value b is not propagated all the way down to
Doctor(c). However, program Σ2, which is Σ1 without its third rule, is ChS, as
shown on the RHS of Figure1.
□
Weak-Stickiness of the Chase. Weak-stickiness also has a semantic version,
called “weak-chase-stickiness” (WChS); which is implied by the former. So as
for chase-stickiness, weak-chase-sticky programs have a tractable QA problem,
even with a possibly inﬁnite chase. This class is one of the two we introduce and
investigate. They appear in double-edged boxes in Figure 2, with dashed edges
indicating a semantic class.
By deﬁnition, weak-chase-stickiness is obtained by relaxing the condition
for ChS: it applies only to values for repeated variables in the body of σ that
appear in so-called inﬁnite positions, which are semantically deﬁned. A position
is inﬁnite if there is an instance D for which an unlimited number of diﬀerent
values appear in Chase(Σ, D).
Given a program, deciding if a position is inﬁnite is unsolvable, so as decid-
ing in general if the chase terminates. Consequently, it is also undecidable if a
program is WChS. However, there are syntactic conditions on programs [6, 12]
that determine some (but not necessarily all) the ﬁnite positions. For exam-
ple, the notion of position rank, based on the program’s dependency graph, are
used in [6, 4] to identify a (sound) set of ﬁnite positions, those with ﬁnite rank.
Furthermore, ﬁnite-rank positions are used in [4] to deﬁne weakly-sticky (WS)
programs as a syntactic subclass of WChS.
Finite Positions and Program Classes. In principle, any set-valued function
S that, given a program, returns a subset of the program’s ﬁnite positions can
be used to deﬁne a subclass WChS(S) of WChS. This is done by applying the
deﬁnition of WChS above with “inﬁnite positions” replaced by “non-S-ﬁnite
positions”. Every class WChS(S) has a tractable QA problem.
S could be computable on the basis of the program syntax or not. In the
former case, it would be a “syntactic class”. Class WChS(S) grows monotoni-
cally with S in the sense that if S1 ⊆S2 (i.e. S1 always returns a subset of the
positions returned by S2), then WChS(S1) ⊆WChS(S2). In general, the more
ﬁnite positions are (correctly) identiﬁed (and the consequently, the less ﬁnite
positions are treated as inﬁnite), the more general the subclass of WChS that is
identiﬁed or characterized.
For example, the function S⊥that always returns an empty set of ﬁnite po-
sitions, WChS(S⊥) is the class of sticky programs, because stickiness must hold
no matter what the (in)ﬁnite positions are. At the other extreme, for function
S⊤that returns all the (semantically) ﬁnite positions, WChS(S⊤) becomes the
class WChS. (As mentioned above, S⊤is in general uncomputable.) Now, if
Srank returns the set of ﬁnite-rank positions (for a program P, usually denoted
by ΠF (P) [6]), WChS(Srank) is the class of WS programs.
Joint-Weakly-Stickiness. The joint-weakly-sticky (JWS) programs we intro-
duce form a syntactic class strictly between WS and WChS. Its deﬁnition appeals
3

to the notions of joint-acyclicity and existential dependency graphs introduced
in [12]. Figure 2 shows this syntactic class, and the inclusion relationships be-
tween classes of Datalog± programs.2
If Sext denotes the function that speciﬁes ﬁnite positions on the basis of the
existential dependency graphs (EDG), implicitly deﬁned in [12], the JWS class is,
by deﬁnition, the class WChS(Sext). EDGs provide a ﬁner mechanism for cap-
turing (in)ﬁnite positions in comparison with positions ranks (deﬁned through
dependency graphs): Srank ⊆Sext. Consequently, the class of JWS programs,
i.e. WChS(Sext), is a strict superclass of WS programs, i.e. WChS(Srank).3
QAA for WChS. Our query answering algorithm for WChS programs is pa-
rameterized by a (sound) ﬁnite-position function S as above. It is denoted with
ALS, and takes as input Σ, D, query Q, and S(Σ), which is a subset of the
program’s ﬁnite positions (the other are treated as inﬁnite by default).
The customized algorithm ALS is guaranteed to be sound and complete only
when applied to programs in WChS(S): ALS(Σ, D, Q) returns all and only the
query answers. (Actually, ALS is still sound for any program in WChS.) ALS
runs in polynomial-time in data; and can be applied to both the WS and the
JWS syntactic classes. For them the ﬁnite-position functions are computable.
ALS is based on the concepts of parsimonious chase (pChase) and freezing
nulls, as used for QA with shy Datalog, a fragment of Datalog∃[10]. At a pChase
step, a new atom is added only if a homomorphic atom is not already in the
chase. Freezing a null is promoting it to a constant (and keeping it as such in
subsequent chase steps). So, it cannot take (other) values under homomorphisms,
which may create new pChase steps. Resumption of the pChase means freezing
all nulls, and continuing pChase until no more pChase steps are applicable.
Query answering with shy programs has a ﬁrst phase where the pChase runs
until termination (which it does). In a second phase, the pChase iteratively re-
sumes for a number of times that depends on the number of distinct ∃-variables in
the query. This second phase is required to properly deal with joins in the query.
Our QAA for WChS programs (AL) is similar, it has the same two phases, but a
pChase step is modiﬁed: after every application of a pChase step that generates
nulls, the latter that appear in S-ﬁnite positions are immediately frozen.
Magic-Sets Rewriting.
It turns out that JWS, as opposed to WS, is closed
under the quite general magic-set rewriting method [5] introduced in [1]. As a
consequence, AL can be applied to both the original JWS program and its magic
rewriting. (Actually, this also holds for the superclass WChS.)
2 Rectangles with dotted-edges show semantic classes, and double-edged rectangles
show the classes introduced in this work. Notice that programs in semantic classes
include the instance D, but syntactic classes are data-independent (for any instance
as long as the syntactic conditions apply).
3 The JWS class is diﬀerent from (and incomparable with) the class of weakly-sticky-
join programs (WSJ) introduced in [3], which extends the one of WS programs with
consideration that are diﬀerent from those used for JWS programs. WSJ generalizes
WS on the basis of the weakly-sticky-join property of the chase [3, 4] and is related
to repeated variables in single atoms.
4

joint-acyclic 
(JA) 
weakly-sticky 
(WS) 
terminating 
chase 
non-terminating 
chase 
weakly-acyclic 
(WA) 
joint-weakly- 
sticky (JWS) 
weakly-chase-
sticky (WChS) 
sticky-chase 
sticky 
weakly-sticky- 
join (WSJ) 
Fig. 2. Generalization relationships among program classes.
It can be proved that (our modiﬁcation of) the magic-sets rewriting method
in [1] does not change the character of the original ﬁnite or inﬁnite positions.
The speciﬁcation of (in)ﬁniteness character of positions in magic predicates is not
required by AL, because no new nulls appear in them during the AL execution.
As consequence, the MS method rewriting can be perfectly integrated with our
QAA, introducing additional eﬃciency.
Acknowledgments: We are very grateful to Mario Alviano and the DLV team for
providing us with information and support in relation to existential Datalog. We also
appreciate useful conversations with Andrea Cali and Andreas Pieris on Datalog±, and
important comments from Andrea Cali on an earlier version of this paper.
