A Rational Distributed Process-level Account of Independence Judgment
Ardavan S. Nobandegani1,2
Ioannis N. Psaromiligkos1

1Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, McGill University
2Department of Psychology, McGill University
Abstract
It is inconceivable how chaotic the world would look to hu-
mans, faced with innumerable decisions a day to be made un-
der uncertainty, had they been lacking the capacity to distin-
guish the relevant from the irrelevant—a capacity which com-
putationally amounts to handling probabilistic independence
relations. The highly parallel and distributed computational
machinery of the brain suggests that a satisfying process-level
account of human independence judgment should also mimic
these features. In this work, we present the ﬁrst rational, dis-
tributed, message-passing, process-level account of indepen-
dence judgment, called D∗. Interestingly, D∗shows a curi-
ous, but normatively justiﬁed tendency for quick detection of
dependencies, whenever they hold. Furthermore, D∗outper-
forms all the previously proposed algorithms in the AI litera-
ture in terms of worst-case running time, and a salient aspect
of it is supported by recent work in neuroscience investigat-
ing possible implementations of Bayes nets at the neural level.
D∗nicely exempliﬁes how the pursuit of cognitive plausibil-
ity can lead to the discovery of state-of-the-art algorithms with
appealing properties, and its simplicity makes D∗potentially
a good candidate for pedagogical purposes.
Keywords: Rational process models; Distributed computing;
Probabilistic independence judgment; Pearl’s d-separation
1
Introduction
Is there any connection between the quality of your last night
sleep and the color of the shirt your colleague happened to
be wearing at work today? How about Mars’ current weather
and your mood today? We humans judge innumerable such
possible connections a day rather effortlessly, appearing to be
quite good at teasing apart pertinent from impertinent factors
when making decisions. But how does the mind do that? The
famous frame problem (Icard & Goodman, 2015; Nobande-
gani & Psaromiligkos, 2017), a puzzle in philosophy of mind
and epistemology, further highlights this intriguing ability of
the mind in distinguish the relevant from the irrelevant, and
asks a closely related question: “How do we account for our
apparent ability to make decisions on the basis only of what
is relevant to an ongoing situation without having explicitly
to consider all that is not relevant?” (Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy). Computationally, the mind’s ability of dis-
tinguishing the relevant from irrelevant can be characterized
in terms of handling probabilistic (in)dependence relations,
with ‘dependency’ implying the existence of connection or
relevance between factors and ‘independence’ the contrary
(Pearl, 1986, 1988, 2000). For example, assuming that the
random variable x encodes the quality of your sleep, and y
the color of the shirt your colleague happened to wear the
next day, the nonexistence of any connection between x and
y (which seems to be a rational judgment) can be formally
characterized using the notion of probabilistic independence:
x ⊥⊥y (read x is independent of y).
In this work, we are concerned with developing a plausi-
ble, process-level account of human independence judgment.
Adopting causal Bayes nets (CBNs) (Pearl, 1988; Gopnik et
al., 2004, inter alia) as a normative model to represent how
the reasoner’s internal causal model of the world is struc-
tured (i.e., reasoner’s mental model), the aforesaid task com-
putationally amounts to checking for independencies in the
distribution encoded by a CBN. Interestingly, Pearl (1986)
put forth a graph-theoretic notion called d-separation, allow-
ing for reading off probabilistic independence relations from
the mere structure of a CBN (Pearl, 1986).1
Ever since
its inception, d-separation has proved fundamental in a va-
riety of domains in artiﬁcial intelligence, e.g., probabilistic
reasoning (Pearl, 1988), causal reasoning (Pearl, 2000), de-
cision making (Shachter, 1998; Koller & Friedman, 2009),
and has played important roles in a broad range of areas,
e.g., handling missing data (Mohan & Pearl, 2014), extrap-
olation across populations (Pearl & Bareinboim, 2014), and
deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016). In that light, algo-
rithms for implementing d-separation could potentially serve
as a rational, process-level model of human independence
judgment. But what should such a model look like? The
highly parallel and distributed computational machinery of
the brain suggests that a satisfying process-level account of
human independence judgment should also mimic these fea-
tures. Sadly enough, all past algorithms for the implemen-
tation of d-separation have been sequential (aka serial), i.e.,
without any parallelism in computation, and, arguably worse,
centralized, i.e., their executions are fully coordinated by a
supervisory unit, analogous to homunculus (Geiger et al.,
1989; Lauritzen et al., 1990; Shachter, 1998; Koller & Fried-
man, 2009; Butz et al., 2016), features that strongly call into
question their psychological plausibility.
The notion of (conditional) probabilistic independence is
a quintessential feature of CBNs, and, interestingly, the re-
alization that probabilistic independence plays a crucial role
in human cognition was a key element in the development of
the CBN formalism (Pearl, 1986). In Pearl’s (1986) words:
“Whereas a person may show reluctance to giving a numeri-
cal estimate for a conditional probability P(xi|xj), that person
can usually state with ease whether xi and xj are dependent
or independent, namely, whether or not knowing the truth of
xi will alter the belief in xj.” He then continues: “Likewise,
people tend to judge the three-place relationships of condi-
tional dependency (i.e., xi inﬂuences xj given xk) with clarity,
1More accurately, Pearl’s (1986) d-separation is equally valid for
Bayes nets wherein the edges do not enjoy causal interpretations.
arXiv:1801.10186v1  [cs.AI]  30 Jan 2018

conviction, and consistency. This suggests that the notions
of dependence and conditional dependence are more basic to
human reasoning than are the numerical values attached to
probability judgments.” Some psychological literature, how-
ever, does not fully embrace the statement “with clarity, con-
viction, and consistency” as Pearl put it. For example, the
experimental work by Rehder (2014) suggests that adults ex-
hibit deviations from the Markov condition (i.e., CBN’s inde-
pendencies entailed by d-separation). In contrast, drawing on
the experimental studies of Park and Sloman (2013), Sloman
and Lagnado (2015) conclude that people indeed uphold the
Markov condition and the reason behind the observed devia-
tions is that, under experimental conditions, people may not
solely adhere to the information provided by the experimenter
and may bring their own background knowledge into the ex-
periment (see also Rehder & Waldmann, 2017). Speciﬁcally,
Park and Sloman (2013) found strong support for their con-
tradiction hypothesis followed by the mediating mechanism
hypothesis, and ﬁnally concluded that people do conform to
Markov condition once the causal structure people are using
is correctly speciﬁed (i.e., people’s mental causal models).
In this work, we present the ﬁrst rational, distributed,
process-level account of independence judgment, called D∗.
More formally, D∗is the ﬁrst asynchronous, message-
passing, distributed algorithm for implementing d-separation,
with substantial parallelism in computation, and without any
need for a supervisory unit to coordinate its execution (i.e., no
synchrony is assumed in D∗’s execution)—fully in the spirit
of the celebrated parallel distributed processing (PDP) re-
search program in brain and cognitive sciences (McClelland,
1989). Similar to the well-known belief propagation infer-
ence algorithm (Pearl, 1986, 1988), which has played impor-
tant roles in the theoretical neuroscience literature (see e.g.,
Gershman & Beck, 2017; George & Hawkins, 2009; Litvak
& Ullman, 2009; Rao, 2004; Lochmann & Deneve, 2011),
D∗is a message-passing algorithm, wherein computation is
carried out by propagating messages between computational
units. Interestingly, D∗shows a curious, normatively justiﬁed
tendency for quick detection of probabilistic dependencies,
whenever they hold. Furthermore, D∗outperforms all the
previously proposed algorithms in the AI literature in terms
of worst-case running time, and a salient aspect of it is sup-
ported by recent work in neuroscience investigating possible
implementations of Bayes nets at the neural level (e.g., Ger-
shman & Beck, 2017; Lochmann & Deneve, 2011).
We provide a comprehensive analysis of the computational
properties of D∗, along with several reﬁned time-complexity
bounds. In the Discussion section, we provide a detailed com-
parison between D∗and previously proposed algorithms, and
elaborate on the implications of the work presented here for
neuroscience and psychology.
2
Preliminaries and Notations
Let us introduce the notation adopted in this work. Lower
bold-faced letters (e.g., x) denote random variables and upper
bold-faced letters (e.g., X) represent sets of random variables.
A generic d-separation relation is denoted by (A ⊥⊥B|C)G
with A,B, and C representing three mutually disjoint sets
of variables belonging to the directed acyclic graph (DAG)
G, where G represents the topology of the underlying CBN.
Read (A ⊥⊥B|C)G as follows: C d-separates A from B in
DAG G. Similarly, (A ̸⊥⊥B|C)G denotes that C does not d-
separate A from B in DAG G. For ease of notation, we use
(A ⊥⊥B|C)G to denote both a d-separation relation (i.e., C d-
separates A from B in DAG G) and to denote a d-separation
query (i.e., does C d-separate A from B in DAG G?); the dis-
tinction should be clear from the context. Let also GAn(K)
denote the ancestral graph for the variables in set K belong-
ing to the underlying DAG G (Lauritzen et al., 1990), i.e.,
the set of nodes for GAn(K) comprises the nodes in K and all
the ancestors of the nodes in K (hence, GAn(K) is an induced
subgraph of the underlying DAG G).
Informally speaking, throughout that paper, (A ⊥⊥B|C)G
should be interpreted as follows: “A and B are probabilisti-
cally independent of each other, given C,” and, in the query
format, as follows: “Are A and B probabilistically indepen-
dent of each other, given C?” Likewise, (A ̸⊥⊥B|C)G should
be interpreted as follows: A and B are dependent, given C.2
Next, a notion called refutation-module is introduced; this
will be used later in our formal analysis of D∗.
x
y
z
v
t1
t3
t5
t2
t4
x
y
z
v
t2
t4
x
y
t3
t2
t4
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Examples for refutation modules. (a) The underlying
DAG G is depicted, for which (x ̸⊥⊥y|z)G. (b,c) Two refutation-
modules for the query (x ⊥⊥y|z)G are depicted.
Def. 1.
(Refutation-Module) Let X,Y,Z be three mu-
tually disjoint sets belonging to a DAG G. Let also (X ̸⊥⊥
Y|Z)G. A connected subgraph of G, M(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G, serves as a
refutation-module for the query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, iff M(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G
satisﬁes the following two conditions: (1) M(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G con-
tains an active path P (Pearl, 1986) between a node x ∈X
and a node y ∈Y, and (2) for every head-to-head node v on
P, M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G contains a directed path between v and a node
c ∈C. See Fig. 1 for some examples.
Def. 2.
(Minimal Refutation-Module) Let A,B,C be
three disjoint sets of nodes belonging to a DAG G. Also, let
(X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G. Let M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G denote the refutation-module
for the d-separation query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G which possesses the
2Formally, the said interpretations are not fully granted; how-
ever, for all purposes of this work, they can be taken to be accurate
enough characterizations (see Pearl, 2000, for a complete elabora-
tion on the precise relation between d-separation and conditional
independence.)

smallest number of edges. We refer to M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G as the min-
imal refutation-module in G for the query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G.
It is easy to prove by construction that the minimal
refutation-module M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G need not be unique.
3
The Three-Color Algorithm D∗
In this section, we show how the proposed algorithm D∗al-
lows us to decide if a generic d-separation query of the form
(A ⊥⊥B|C)G holds in a DAG G; D∗is an asynchronous, dis-
tributed, message-passing algorithm. More speciﬁcally, in
D∗, nodes of the underlying DAG G—symbolizing computa-
tional units—autonomously engage in communicating mes-
sages to their immediate neighbors via the edges of the DAG
G—symbolizing communication channels. We assume that
communication channels are reliable, bidirectional, and ﬁrst-
in ﬁrst-out (FIFO) (Lynch, 1996).
The proposed algorithm D∗is outlined next. Throughout
an execution of D∗, variables in C ignore all messages re-
ceived from any of their children, and do not send any mes-
sage to any of their children. The variables in the sets A,
B, and C initially activate in the states represented by col-
ors green (•), red (•), and white (◦), respectively. Follow-
ing the prescriptions of the original Belief Propagation algo-
rithm (Pearl, 1986, Sections 1.3 and 2.2.3), we assume that
the variables in the sets A,B,C acquire their initial states in a
self-activated manner.3 Assuming that a CBN’s node can be
represented at the neural level by a single (Deneve, 2008b,a)
or a population of neurons (Ma et al., 2006), self-activation
reﬂects the content-addressability of the corresponding mem-
ory traces. D∗begins with nodes in A,B, and C sending their
colors as messages to their parents. Node x, upon receiving a
message, follows two simple steps in the following order:
(i) If x’s current color differs from that of the received mes-
sage, x replies by sending back its own color as a message
to the transmitter node. If x is in the state of having no
color (denoted by ∅) prior to the receipt of the message, it
does not send back any message to the transmitter node.
(ii) x updates its color in accord with the following primitive
rules, altogether composing the Color Update Grammar
(CUG):
(∅,•) →•,(∅,•) →•,(∅,◦) →◦,
(•,•) →•,(•,•) →•,(◦,◦) →◦,
(◦,•) →•,(◦,•) →•,
(•,◦) →•,(•,◦) →•,
(•,•) →clash,(•,•) →clash,
where the syntax is: (x’s current color, received message)
→x’s new color. If x’s new color turns out to be differ-
ent from its old color, with the exception of the transmitter
3Alternatively, we provide an asynchronous, distributed, O(l)-
time message-passing algorithm in Sec. C-VII of Appendix C, which
permits a predesignated source node to disseminate information re-
garding the initial states of the nodes through the graph G, where l
denotes the length of the longest undirected path in G.
node, x sends its new color as a message to all its parents,
and only those children of x with which x has communi-
cated before.
The rules given in the ﬁrst row of the CUG correspond to
white-, green-, and red-colored nodes sending their colors to
their yet-uncolored parents. Rules in the second row ensure
that the colors of white-, green-, and red-colored nodes persist
upon interacting with nodes of the same color. Rules stated
in the third row bear on the key understanding that the white
color functions as a mere place-holder getting “replaced” by
interacting with green-, or red-colored nodes. Rules in the
fourth row guarantee the persistence of colors green and red
upon interacting with white. Finally, rules given in the last
row correspond to the clash event the implication of which is
discussed in Remark 1 below.
Remark 1. A clash between colors green (•) and red (•)
at a node, any time throughout an execution of D∗, signals
the falsity of the input d-separation query, upon which D∗
decides that (A ̸⊥⊥B|C)G.
Note that the asynchrony of D∗stems from the fact that
there exists no global clock for the system and hence any
node, upon receiving a message, follows Steps (i) and (ii) au-
tonomously, i.e., informally, without having to attend to what
computations other nodes in G are performing.
Some of the computational properties of the proposed al-
gorithm D∗are formally articulated in Proposition 1 below.
Proposition 1. The following statements hold for D∗.
(1) For a given d-separation query (A ⊥⊥B|C)G and DAG G,
“C does not d-separate A from B in G” ⇐⇒
“Clash takes place during D∗’s execution”.
(2) D∗’s message-passing is conﬁned within the ancestral
graph GAn(A∪B∪C).
(3) During D∗’s execution, either a clash between colors red
(•) and green (•) takes place (see Remark 1) upon which
D∗decides that (A ̸⊥⊥B|C), or a state of equilibrium will
be reached in O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) time where lAn(A∪B∪C) denotes
the length of the longest undirected path in the ancestral
graph GAn(A∪B∪C).
(4) Message-passing terminates in O(1) time after reaching
the state of equilibrium, thereby guaranteeing the termi-
nation of D∗.
(5) Message-complexity of D∗is O(|EAn(A∪B∪C)|) where
EAn(A∪B∪C) is the set of the edges of the ancestral graph
GAn(A∪B∪C).
(6) Communication-complexity of D∗is O(|EAn(A∪B∪C)|) bits
where EAn(A∪B∪C) is the set of the edges of the ancestral
graph GAn(A∪B∪C).
The reader is referred to Sec. C-VI of Appendix C for the
proof of Proposition 1.

3.1
High-Level Understanding of D∗
D∗has a simple machinery as we informally discuss here.
Upon variables in A∪B∪C sending their colors to their par-
ents, colors white (◦), green (•), and red (•) begin to propa-
gate in a backwards manner throughout the network. In the
midst of this process, white-color nodes which have a neigh-
boring node colored either red (•) or green (•), change their
color to that of their neighbors, and if a clash ever occurs
between colors red and green, D∗decides that the input d-
separation query is false (i.e., it is a NO-instance d-separation
query). Informally put, white-color nodes function as relays,
which, by copying the colors of their neighbors, facilitate the
possibility of a (permissible) collision between colors red and
green.
3.2
A Note On The Termination of D∗
According to Proposition 1, if the input d-separation query
presented to D∗is true (i.e., it is a
YES-instance d-
separation query), the system reaches a state of equilibrium in
O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) time and message-passing is guaranteed to ter-
minate in O(1) time after that. However, due to its local view,
a node cannot know if such a global state has been reached.
This is a fairly standard situation for an asynchronous dis-
tributed algorithm to ﬁnd itself in (Mattern, 1987; Tel, 2000),
leading to the introduction of the fundamental concept of
Termination-Detection (TD) in the distributed systems litera-
ture; see (Tel, 2000, Ch. 8). There exist a variety of TD al-
gorithms in the literature (e.g., Dijkstra et al., 1983; Mattern,
1987; Mittal et al., 2004, 2007). For example, Mittal et al.
(2004) proposed two TD algorithms, each having detection
latency of O(D) where D is the diameter of the underlying
graph G, and G is allowed to have an arbitrary topology.
4
D∗in Action: A Case Study
In this section, we present an example to illustrate an execu-
tion and highlight the simplicity of D∗. Consider the CBN
depicted in Fig. 2(a). Let the posed d-separation query be
(X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G where X = {x1,x2}, Y = {y1,y2}, and Z = {z}.
According to the d-separation criterion (Pearl, 1988), obser-
vation of z activates the path x1 ←t1 ←t2 ←t3 →t4 ←t5 →
t6 →t7 →y1, thereby yielding the falsity of the d-separation
query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G (hence, the input is a NO-instance query);
see Fig. 2(a). An execution of D∗is illustrated using succes-
sive snapshots shown in Figs. 2(b-f) with each ﬁgure depict-
ing the global state of the system (i.e., nodes’ colors) at some
instance in global time (aka system’s conﬁguration).4 As de-
picted in Fig. 2(b), variables in sets X,Y, and Z initially self-
activate in the states represented by colors green (•), red (•),
and white (◦), respectively. Also recall that, as explicated in
Sec. 3, variables in Z ignore any message received from any
of their children, and also do not send any message to any of
their children—depicting the downlinks of the variables in Z
4Cast into Lamport’s space-time diagram (Lamport, 1978), each
ﬁgure depicts the global state of the system which corresponds to a
vertical time-cut positioned at a global time (see Mattern, 1987) and
the time-cuts corresponding to Figs. 2(b-f) are successively ordered.
in a dash-dotted format simply illustrates this statement pic-
torially in Fig. 2(b). The colors green (•), red (•), and white
(◦) propagate in a backwards manner (Figs. 2(c-d)). Also, the
color of a white node gets replaced by green or red once a
neighboring node acquires such colors (Figs. 2(d-f)). Even-
tually, in the conﬁguration depicted in Fig. 2(f), a clash takes
place between colors green and red at a node (circled node in
Fig. 2(f)), upon which D∗decides that (X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G.
Notice that, since w is unobserved (Fig. 2(a)), the path
x2 →w ←y2 indeed remains blocked (Pearl, 2000); this is
nicely captured by the machinery of D∗. Algorithm D∗pre-
vents x2 and y2 from sending their colors in the forward di-
rection (i.e., along the edges pointing to w), thereby guar-
anteeing the occurrence of no clash along the blocked path
x2 →w ←y2. Also notice that, since z is observed (Fig. 2(a)),
the path x2 ←z →y2 is blocked as well (Pearl, 2000). Once
again the machinery of D∗, due to z refraining from engaging
in message-exchange with its children, ensures that no clash
takes place due to the blocked path x2 ←z →y2.
5
Technical Discussion
A number of algorithms for the implementation of d-
separation are proposed in the literature (Geiger et al., 1989;
Lauritzen et al., 1990; Shachter, 1998; Koller & Friedman,
2009; Butz et al., 2016).
Assuming |E| ≥|V|, to decide
if (A ⊥⊥B|C)G holds in G, the worst-case running time of
Geiger et al.’s, Koller and Friedman’s, Shachter’s, and Butz
et al.’s is O(|E|) and that of Lauritzen et al.’s algorithm5 is
O(|V|2) where |V| and |E| denote the number of the nodes
and the edges of the underling DAG G, respectively. Note
that, since for any DAG G, |E| ≤|V|2, an O(|E|)-time algo-
rithm (e.g., Geiger et al.’s) outperforms an O(|V|2)-time algo-
rithm (e.g., Lauritzen et al.’s) in terms of worst-case runtime6
(see (Geiger et al., 1989) for more discussions on this). Ac-
cording to Proposition 1, the time-complexity of the proposed
algorithm D∗is O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) where lAn(A∪B∪C) denotes the
length of the longest undirected path in the ancestral graph
GAn(A∪B∪C). Since, for any DAG G, lAn(A∪B∪C) ≤|E| ≤|V|2,
the proposed algorithm D∗outperforms all the previously
proposed algorithms in terms of the worst-case running time.7
5The reader is referred to (Geiger et al., 1989) for a detailed anal-
ysis of the running-time of Lauritzen et al.’s algorithm.
6The gain in particularly signiﬁcant in sparse graphs, where
|E| = O(|V|).
7According to Proposition 1, a NO-instance d-separation query
can be decided by D∗in time O(lAn(A∪B∪C)); see also Sec. C-
II of the Appendix C. The upper-bound O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) is an im-
provement over the worst-case runtime of all the previously pro-
posed algorithms. Also note that, adopting a TD-algorithm with
detection latency of O(D) (see Mittal et al. 2004, 2007, for such
TD-algorithms), a YES-instance d-separation query can be decided
by D∗in time O(lAn(A∪B∪C) + D) where D is the diameter of G.
Once again, since lAn(A∪B∪C) ≤|E|,D ≤|E|,|E| ≤|V|2, the upper-
bound O(lAn(A∪B∪C) + D) is an improvement over the worst-case
runtime of all the previously proposed algorithms.
(Notice that,
for any DAG G, 1
2(lAn(A∪B∪C) + D) ≤|E|, hence follows |E| =
Ω(lAn(A∪B∪C) +D).)

x1
(a)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
t5
t1
t2
t4
t3
t6
t7
x1
(b)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
x1
(c)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
x1
(d)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
x1
(e)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
x1
(f)
y1
x2
y2
z
w
Figure 2: Illustrative example. The underlying DAG G is shown in (a). The initial conﬁguration of the system is portrayed in (b), wherein
variables in sets X,Y, Z self-activate in the states represented by green (•), red (•), and white (◦), respectively. Depicting the downlinks of
the variables in Z in a dash-dotted format simply symbolizes that the variables in Z ignore any message received from any of their children,
and also do not send any message to any of their children. D∗begins by nodes in X,Y, Z sending their colors as messages to their parents and
proceeds as shown in (c-f) with each ﬁgure depicting a snapshot of the global state of the system at some instance in global time. Eventually,
upon occurrence of a clash between colors green and red (at the circled node in (f)), D∗decides that (X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G.
Particularly, the gain is signiﬁcant in dense DAGs. Note that,
in the limit as the underlying DAG G gets denser, the worst-
case runtime performances of the previously proposed algo-
rithms become identical, i.e., O(|V|2).
The
proposed
algorithm
D∗
restricts
its
exploration
solely
in
the
ancestral
graph
GAn(A∪B∪C), as formalized by Statement (2) of Proposi-
tion 1. The idea of exploring the ancestral graph is at the core
of Lauritzen et al.’s algorithm for d-separation (Lauritzen et
al., 1990). However, in sharp contrast to Lauritzen et al.’s
algorithm, the proposed algorithm D∗need not moralize the
ancestral graph GAn(A∪B∪C). As Geiger et al. (1989) point
out, the moralization step of Lauritzen et al.’s algorithm
requires O(|V|2) time in the worst-case.
Another noteworthy property of D∗is its tendency to-
ward quick detection of false d-separation queries (i.e., NO-
instance queries), manifested in an occurrence of a clash ac-
cording to Remark 1. For a NO-instance d-separation query,
Proposition 2, below, gives a more reﬁned upper-bound on
the time required for an occurrence of a clash, thereby for-
malizing the said claim. The reader is referred to Sec. C-III
of Appendix C for the proof of Proposition 2.
Proposition 2. Let A = {ai}i, B = {bj}j, C = {ck}k be
three disjoint sets of nodes belonging to a DAG G.
Let
ld
An(A∪B∪C) denote the length of the longest directed path in
the ancestral graph GAn(A∪B∪C), and li j
An(A∪B∪C) the length
of the shortest unblocked path between the nodes ai and bj
in GAn(A∪B∪C).
As a convention, if all paths between ai
and bj are blocked, lij
An(A∪B∪C) = ∞. If (A ̸⊥⊥B|C)G then a
clash between colors green (•) and red (•) occurs in time
O
 ld
An(A∪B∪C) +min
i,j lij
An(A∪B∪C)

, upon which D∗decides that
(A ̸⊥⊥B|C)G.
In Sec. 2, we formally deﬁned a notion called refutation-
module (see Def. 1). In the language of computational com-
plexity and theorem-proving, a refutation-module M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G
can serve as a certiﬁcate (or witness) for disproving a d-
separation query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G.
This interpretation is re-
lated to the veriﬁer-based deﬁnition of the complexity class
coNP. Next, in Proposition 3, we provide an even more re-
ﬁned upper-bound on the time required for an occurrence of
a clash, thereby strengthening our claim as to D∗’s tendency
toward quick detection of false d-separation queries.
The
reader is referred to Sec. C-IV of Appendix C for the proof of
Proposition 3.
Proposition 3. Let X,Y,Z be three disjoint sets of nodes
belonging to a DAG G. Also, let (X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G. Let M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G
denote a refutation-module for the query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G with
ld
M and |PM | denoting the length of the longest directed path
and the shortest unblocked path in M(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G, respectively.
Finally, let M ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G denote the minimal refutation-module
for the query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, with EM ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G denoting the set of
the edges of M ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G. Then the following statement holds
true: A clash between colors green (•) and red (•) occurs
in time O(minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M +|PM |}) ≤O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G |), upon
which D∗decides that (X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G.

To further highlight the signiﬁcance of Proposition 3, let us
consider the following nondeterministic algorithm A. Algo-
rithm A takes as input a DAG G along with a d-separation
query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, and outputs YES or NO depending on
whether the input query is a YES-instance or a NO-instance
query, respectively.
(i) Nondeterministically guess (1) the minimal refutation-
module M ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G in G for the d-separation query
(X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G (by deﬁnition, M ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G contains an ac-
tive path, P∗, between a node x∗∈X and a node y∗∈Y,
and also contains a set of observed variables Z∗⊆Z)8,
and (2) the corresponding nodes x∗,y∗,Z∗belonging to
M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G.
(ii) Verify that (1) x∗∈X, y∗∈Y, and Z∗⊆Z (this can be
straightforwardly veriﬁed in O(|X| + |Y| + |Z∗||Z|) time),
(2) M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G is a subgraph of G (this can be straight-
forwardly veriﬁed in O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G|) time), and (3) d-
separation relation (x∗⊥⊥y∗|Z∗) does not hold in DAG
M ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G (this can be veriﬁed in O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G|) time,
using Geiger et al.’s algorithm (Geiger et al., 1989)). If all
the veriﬁcation steps (1)-(3) pass, output NO; otherwise,
output YES.
Altogether, presented with a NO-instance d-separation
query
(X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G,
algorithm
A
outputs
NO
in
O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G| + |X| + |Y| + |Z∗||Z|)
nondeterministic
time.
Interestingly according to Proposition 3, presented
with a NO-instance d-separation query (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, the
machinery of D∗ensures that a clash between colors green
(•) and red (•) occurs within at most O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G |) time,
upon which D∗decides that (X ̸⊥⊥Y|Z)G. It is crucial to
note that the presented argument solely concerns NO-instance
d-separation queries.
Proposition 4, given below, further strengthens the claim of
Proposition 3. The reader is referred to Sec. C-V of Appendix
C for the proof of Proposition 4.
Proposition 4.
The upper-bound O(minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M +
|PM |}) given in Proposition 3 is tighter than the one given
in Proposition 2.
Finally, we would like to point out an interesting prop-
erty of the CUG, referred to as order-invariance, which is
characterized informally as follows: The order according to
which nodes in the network receive their messages is irrel-
evant. More formally, the order-invariance property can be
stated as follows: Assume that a node x is at state Sx
i and upon
receiving the sequence of messages M1,M2,··· ,Mn ends up
in state Sx
f . Then the following holds true for the node x. For
any permutation π deﬁned on the set {1,2,··· ,n}, the node x,
starting at state Sx
i , would end up in the state Sx
f upon receiv-
ing the sequence of messages Mπ(1),Mπ(2),··· ,Mπ(n). The
8Note that if P∗does not contain any head-to-head node, then
Z∗= ∅
reader is referred to Sec. C-VIII of Appendix C for a formal
treatment of the order-invariance property and its proof.
6
General Discussion
The Algorithm D∗, in the spirit of Pearl’s (1986) belief prop-
agation scheme, employs the edges of the underlying CBN as
the medium through which message-passing between nodes
takes place. The latter echos Pearl’s (1986) insight when he
advocated the idea that a CBN must not be viewed “merely
as a passive parsimonious code for storing factual knowledge
but also as a computational architecture for reasoning about
that knowledge.” D∗adheres to this idea. Recent literature in
neuroscience investigating possible implementation of CBNs
at the neural level supports Pearl’s idea (see Lochmann &
Deneve, 2011; Gershman & Beck, 2017).
Lochmann and
Deneve (2011) advocate the idea that a CBN’s node can be
represented at the neural level by a single (Deneve, 2008a,b)
or a population of neurons (Ma et al., 2006) with the neu-
ral network resembling a “mirror image” of the CBN it
implements—though sometimes not a ‘perfect’ mirror—and
the links of the neural network providing the medium for in-
ference to be carried out—either in the form of belief propa-
gation or sample-based methods like Gibbs sampling.9
Interestingly, the peculiar tendency of D∗toward quick de-
tection of NO-instance d-separation queries is consistent with
our pre-theoretical intuition that humans tend to detect possi-
ble dependencies between concepts and propositions rather
swiftly, once such dependencies do exist.
The following
question then presents itself: Could this tendency be sup-
ported based on any rational grounds? In what follows we
provide an argument supporting the rationality of the fore-
going tendency. (†) Assuming that the mind incurs a higher
rate of loss (deﬁned as incurred cost per unit of time) for dis-
covering a dependency when one does exist, compared to the
condition wherein one does not exist and the mind recognizes
that, we formally show that the foregoing tendency is sim-
ply a consequence of the mind acting as a boundedly-rational
satisﬁcer (Simon, 1957), trying to attain good performance in
terms of expected runtime (i.e., average-case analysis). But
why should the rate of loss under the condition wherein a de-
pendency does exist be higher? Informally put, why should
the mind be so hasty in detecting dependencies under that
condition? One possible explanation is that it is crucial for
the mind to swiftly detect dependencies under that condition,
with the rationale being that delay in detecting those depen-
dencies could be harmful to the reasoner and potentially jeop-
ardize their life, hence important from an evolutionary stand-
point. Furthermore, given the prominent role that explana-
tion and inference play in human cognition (see Lombrozo,
2016), it is crucial for the mind to promptly detect those fac-
tors deemed (probabilistically) relevant to the task faced by
the reasoner.
Let us formally characterize a general condition under
9For more on how probability distributions can be encoded at the
neural level, the reader is referred to Lochmann and Deneve (2011).

which the aforesaid tendency can be given a rational basis.
Let TA denote the runtime of an algorithm A implementing
d-separation criterion, πYES and πNO denote the prior proba-
bility of the input being a YES-instance and NO-instance d-
separation query, respectively. Let also TYES
A
and TNO
A denote
the worst-case runtime of A on YES-instance and NO-instance
d-separation queries, respectively. Finally, let LYES and LNO
denote the cost per unit of time incurred by A for delay in de-
tecting a YES-instance and NO-instance d-separation query,
respectively. Then, for any underlying DAG G, the following
holds true: E[TA] ≤
LYES
LYES+LNO TYES
A πYES +
LNO
LYES+LNO TNO
A πNO,
where the expectation E[·] is taken with respect to the (un-
known) distribution of all d-separation queries. It is then easy
to show that, under the condition (∗) LNOπNO ≥LYESπYES,
it is rational for the mind trying to attain good performance
in terms of expected runtime to demonstrate the said ten-
dency toward quick detection of NO-instance d-separation
queries. The setting portrayed in (†) above is a special case
of Condition (∗): It corresponds to Condition (∗) subject to
the assumptions πNO = πYES (reﬂecting the reasoner’s unin-
formative, a priori expectation that YES- and NO-instance
queries are equiprobable) and LNO ≥LYES (reﬂecting a higher
rate of loss for erring on NO-instance queries, as alluded to
earlier).
Future work should experimentally investigate if
humans demonstrate the forgoing normatively justiﬁed ten-
dency in probabilistic (in)dependence judgment tasks, or that,
on the contrary, they systematically deviate from that.
Also interestingly, the forgoing tendency of D∗toward fo-
cusing its search on the minimal refutation module can be
taken as evidence for its least-effort-like characteristic, and
is fully consistent with recently proposed frameworks which
seek rational understanding of the mind at the algorithmic
level of analysis by appealing to the notion of economical use
of limited computational and cognitive resources (in our case,
by striving for minimizing the size of the module required to
be investigated for refuting a false d-separation query); see
Nobandegani (2017) and Grifﬁths et al. (2015). Although we
brieﬂy discussed the idea of termination detection for asyn-
chronous distributed algorithms, a boundedly-rational agent
may decide to only run an asynchronous distributed algorithm
for a period of time which is justiﬁed based on the oppor-
tunity cost incurred by delaying another task. In that light,
the boundedly-rational agent may plausibly decide to adopt
termination detection algorithms only in settings wherein the
opportunity costs involved would be relatively low. Also no-
tably, D∗exempliﬁes how the pursuit of cognitive plausibility
can lead to the discovery of state-of-the-art algorithms.
Perhaps the biggest limitation of D∗(and, likewise, of be-
lief propagation) is the assumption that communication chan-
nels are faultless, allowing for reliable message exchange.
The brain’s neural circuits involve much stochasticity and re-
sponse variability (e.g., Ma & Jazayeri, 2014; Ma, Beck, and
Pouget, 2008; Summerﬁeld & Tsetsos, 2015), undermining
this assumption. Future work should investigate extensions
of D∗that are more robust to neural noise.
While many
questions remain open, we hope to have made some progress
toward understanding human probabilistic (in)dependence
judgment at the algorithmic level, a capacity without which
the world would seem too chaotic for humans to live by.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Michael Pacer
for providing constructive comments on an earlier draft of
this work, and, Tom Shultz and Luc Devroye for helpful dis-
cussions. This work was supported in part by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under
grant RGPIN 262017.
Appendix C
Throughout Appendix C, let (A ⊥⊥B|C)G denote the posed
d-separation query with DAG G representing the topology of
the underlying BN. Throughout the proofs and arguments to
follow, it is assumed that communication channels are reli-
able, bidirectional, and ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out (FIFO) (Lynch, 1996).
For the time-complexity analysis of D∗, we adhere to the
same assumptions adopted in (Lynch, 1996). More speciﬁ-
cally, we assume: (ASM-1) an upper-bound of α for a pro-
cess to perform Steps (i) and (ii) upon receipt of a message,
and (ASM-2) an upper-bound of β on the delivery time for
each message in a channel. Note that the parameters α and β
are arbitrary but ﬁnite constants. Also note that, as the num-
ber of messages exchanged by D∗on an edge is O(1) (see
Statement (5) of Proposition 1 in the main text), the effect of
pileups (aka congestion) on a channel has been considered in
Assumptions (ASM-1) and (ASM-2).10
C-I
D∗: Proof of Correctness
In what follows, we prove three statements which, taken to-
gether, grant the correctness of D∗. The three statements are
given below.
(I) For a given d-separation query (A ⊥⊥B|C)G and DAG G,
“C does not d-separate A from B in G” ⇐⇒
“Clash takes place during D∗’s execution”.
(II) During D∗’s execution, either a clash between colors red
(•) and green (•) takes place (cf. Remark 1 in the main
text) upon which D∗decides that (A ̸⊥B|C), or a state of
equilibrium will be eventually reached.
(III) Message-passing terminates in O(1) time after reaching the
state of equilibrium, thereby guaranteeing the termination
of D∗.
The proofs of Statements (I) to (III) are presented next.
C-I.I
Proof of Statement (I)
Next, the proof of Statement (I) is presented. First, the proof
of the forward direction is outlined (Sec. C-I.I.I), followed by
the proof of the backward direction (Sec. C-I.I.II).
10Since the number of messages exchanged by D∗on an edge is
O(1), the following holds: (a) the number of messages in any chan-
nel queue is at most O(1), and (b) the number of messages awaiting
in a process’s send buffer is at most O(1).

C-I.I.I
Proof of Statement (I): Forward Direction
We
prove the forward direction of Statement (I) next. This is ac-
complished by proving the following: Conditioned on the set
C, if there exists an unblocked path between a ∈A and b ∈B
(for any a,b), a clash of the kind stated in Remark 1 is un-
avoidable during D∗’s execution. A path l is said to be un-
blocked (Pearl, 1988) if and only if (a) for every collider node
n on l, either n or some of n’s descendants are in C, and (b)
for every non-collider node m, m ̸∈C. The proof rests on
a simple understanding that a generic unblocked path can be
decomposed into v-structured and non-v-structured modules
as illustrated in Fig. 3. Neighboring modules share a com-
mon vertex which we refer to as joint vertex (e.g., the nodes
j1,j2 in Fig. 3(a)). The end-point vertex of a non-v-structured
subpath which is not a joint vertex is termed source vertex;
see Fig. 3(b1) and Fig. 3(b3). In principle, an unblocked path
s1
s2
v
j1
j2
(a)
s1
j1
v
j1
j2
s2
j2
(b1)
(b2)
(b3)
Figure 3: Decomposition of a generic unblocked path into
v-structured and non-v-structured modules. (a) A generic un-
blocked path p comprised of v-structured as well as non-v-
structured modules. The nodes s1 and s2 are source vertices.
The nodes j1 and j2 are joint vertices. The node v is a col-
lider. Without loss of generality, s1,s2, and v are assumed to
be initialized with colors green, red and white, respectively.
(b1) A non-v-structured module of the unblocked path p with
the source vertex s1. (b2) The v-structured module of the
unblocked path p. (b3) A non-v-structured module of the un-
blocked path p with the source vertex s2.
may have multiple v-structured modules. For ease of expo-
sition, the unblocked path p depicted in Fig. 3(a) possesses
only one v-structured module. Note that the proof that fol-
lows does not make this restrictive assumption.
Next, we prove the inevitability of a clash for unblocked
paths possessing non-v-structured as well as v-structured
modules.11
The proof comprises two parts. In Part I, we
show the inevitability of a clash over such an unblocked path,
l∗, provided that no message is destined from a node outside
l∗to a node belonging to l∗. Using the arguments provided
11The adaptation of the argument for the other two cases where
the unblocked path is solely comprised of either non-v-structured
modules or v-structured modules is straightforward.
in Part I, in Part II we show that regardless of the messages
destined from nodes outside l∗to the nodes belonging to l∗,
the occurrence of a clash on l∗is inevitable (i.e., eventually
happens).
Proof of Part I: Rules (∅,•) →•, and (∅,•) →• sketched
in Step (ii) of D∗, along with D∗’s initialization phase
wherein all the nodes in the sets A,B, and C propagate their
colors to their parents, ensure that all non-v-structured mod-
ules are fully explored and, by the end of exploration, all the
nodes within each non-v-structured module will be homoge-
neously colored consistent with that of the respective source
vertex, except for the joint vertex which requires more care-
ful consideration (†). The propagation of white (◦) through
the DAG G in a backward manner ensures that v-structured
modules are fully explored and, by the end of exploration,
all the nodes within each v-structured module will be homo-
geneously colored in white (◦), except for the joint vertices
which require more careful consideration (‡). The consid-
eration advised in (†) and (‡) is explicated next.12 The joint
vertex connecting a non-v-structured module to a v-structured
module may ﬁrst become white (◦) or whatever the color of
the source vertex of the non-v-structured module is, depend-
ing on whether the joint vertex ﬁrst receives a message from
the non-v-structured module or the v-structured module, re-
spectively. However, and quite importantly, its color eventu-
ally becomes that of the source vertex of the non-v-structured
module and, according to Step (ii) of D∗, it sends its color
down the v-structured module. In short, any joint vertex j
will eventually serve as a relay transferring the color of one
side to the other in one of the following two ways: (1) either
j becomes white and then, upon receiving a red- or green-
colored message from a neighbor on one side, j changes it
color and sends its new color down the other side, or (2) j
ﬁrst becomes green or red (due to receiving, respectively, a
green or red message from a neighbor on one side) and then
receives a white-colored message (◦) from a neighbor w re-
siding on the other side, upon which—in an act analogous to
handshaking in communication networks—j sends back its
color to w which, in turn, initiates a chain reaction thereby
w and its white-colored neighbors alter their color to that of
j and so do their white-colored neighbors and so forth. This
key understanding that joint vertices, as just explained, essen-
tially serve as a relay transferring the color of one module to
the other neighboring module, in addition to the fact that the
color of the two source vertices are different, together, grants
the conclusion that a clash between the colors green and red
along the unblocked path l∗eventually takes place. This con-
cludes the proof of Part I.
Proof of Part II: As stated earlier, Part II concerns with
showing the following: A message received by a node be-
longing to an unblocked path l∗which is sent from a node
12The analysis of the case for the joint vertex between two ad-
jacent v-structured modules does not require special consideration
since it will become white (◦) ﬁrst and thereafter, according to the
CUG, will function as a relay, transferring the color of one branch
to the other.

lying outside l∗cannot prevent the clash from happening on
l∗. That is, informally, the occurrence of a clash cannot be
prevented by any message coming from a node residing out-
side l∗to a one belonging to l∗, say nin. We consider all the
possible scenarios (i.e., scenarios (c1) to (c6) listed below)
and show that indeed the claim of Part II holds true. Before
we proceed further, let us introduce a notation. Let ⟨α,β⟩de-
note the following: nin’s current color is α and the color of the
message (coming from a node residing outside l∗) destined to
nin is β. For example, ⟨◦,•⟩implies that nin’s current color is
white and the incoming message is red.
(c1) For ⟨◦,◦⟩, ⟨•,•⟩, ⟨•,•⟩: According to the CUG, if nin re-
ceives a message whose color is identical to its current
color, nin’s current color persists. Hence, the claim of Part
II remains true under such circumstances.
(c2) For ⟨•,•⟩, ⟨•,•⟩: According to the CUG, these cases im-
mediately lead to the occurrence of a clash. Hence, the
claim of Part II remains valid under such circumstances.
(c3) For ⟨•,◦⟩, ⟨•,◦⟩: According to the CUG, if nin’s current
color is green or red, it preserves its color upon receiving
a white-colored message. Hence, the claim of Part II holds
true under such circumstances.
(c4) For ⟨∅,•⟩, ⟨◦,•⟩: According to the CUG, if nin’s current
color is white or nin does not currently have any color,
upon receiving a green-colored message, nin’s color be-
comes green and thereafter it acts as a green-colored source
vertex for l∗.13 This can only expedite the occurrence of a
clash on l∗.
(c5) For ⟨∅,•⟩, ⟨◦,•⟩: The line of reasoning is similar to the
one given for (c4).
(c6) For ⟨∅,◦⟩: According to the CUG, this interaction changes
nin’s color to white. However, due to the machinery of
D∗, color white merely acts as a placeholder awaiting to
be replaced by green or red upon interacting with one of
the kind. In this light, altering the state of nin from ∅to
white cannot prevent a clash from happening on l∗.
This concludes the proof of Part II and, together with Part I,
concludes the proof of the forward direction of Statement (I).
■
C-I.I.II
Proof of Statement (I): Backward Direction
We prove the backward direction of Statement (I) next, us-
ing proof by contraposition. That is, we prove: For a given
d-separation query (A ⊥⊥B|C)G and DAG G,
“C d-separates A from B in G” ⇒
“Clash does not take place during D∗’s execution”.
13More speciﬁcally, once nin becomes green it acts as a green-
colored source vertex for the two subpaths of l∗which lie at the
two sides of nin and share nin as their common node. For example,
for the path v1 ←v2 ←v3 →nin →v4 ←v5, the two subpaths are
v1 ←v2 ←v3 →nin and nin →v4 ←v5.
According to (Pearl, 1988), the statement “C d-separates A
from B in G” is equivalent to the following: Every path be-
tween any a ∈A and any b ∈B is blocked. According to
(Pearl, 1988), a path l is said to be blocked if and only if at
least one of the two statements holds: (a2) There exists a col-
lider node n on l where neither n nor any of n’s descendants
is in C, (b2) There exists a non-collider node m on l where
m ∈C. Therefore, altogether, the statement “C d-separates
A from B in G” is equivalent to the statement that every path
connecting a ∈A and b ∈B has to at least contain a subpath
of the type speciﬁed in (a2) and (b2). Hence, for a clash to
take place on path l, one of the colors green or red has to pass
through l’s corresponding subpath and collide with the other
color. In what follows, we consider all such subpaths and
show that, the very existence of such subpaths on every path
connecting a ∈A and b ∈B, grants the impossibility of an
occurrence of a clash during D∗’s execution. These subpaths
can be of three types: (1) the green node and the red node are
separated by a head-to-tail node which is observed (Fig. 4(a)),
(2) the green node and the red node are separated by a com-
mon cause (aka confounder) which is observed (Fig. 4(b)),
and ﬁnally (3) the green node and the red node are separated
by a common effect (aka collider) which is neither itself nor
any of its descendants is observed (Fig. 4(c)).
(a)
c
(b)
(c)
v
c
Figure 4: The three types of subpaths. Depicting the down-
links of a variable c ∈C in a dash-dotted format simply sym-
bolizes a crucial property of D∗according to which c ignores
any message received from any of its children, and also does
not send any message to any of its children. (a) The green
node and the red node are separated by a head-to-tail variable
c ∈C. (b) The green node and the red node are separated
by a confounder c ∈C. (c) The green node and the red node
are separated by a collider v where neither v nor any of v’s
descendants is in the set C.
Next, we consider each case at a time and prove that D∗’s
machinery prevents the occurrence of a clash along any of
the aforesaid subpaths depicted in Figs 4(a-c). The proof for
(1) and (2) immediately follows form the following crucial
property of D∗: Variables in C ignore any message received
from any of their children, and also do not send any mes-
sage to any of their children (depicting the outgoing edges
from c in Figs 4(a-b) simply symbolizes this property). Case
(3) requires more careful consideration. The only way for
color green/red (on the one side) to reach color red/green (on
the other side)—thereby generating a clash—was for the col-

lider to be white-colored so that, by being replaced by either
green or red, it would allow colors green and red to meet and
hence a clash would occur. However, since (i) neither the
collider nor any of its descendants is observed (and hence
none of them are white), and also (ii) D∗’s machinery dic-
tates the propagation of the color white in a backwards man-
ner through the corresponding ancestors of the white-colored
nodes, altogether, the collider cannot become white during an
execution of D∗. This concludes the proof.
■
C-I.II
Proof of Statement (II)
The state transition diagram for D∗is given in Fig. 5. The
states represent a node’s color and the edges represent transi-
tions due to receiving messages whose colors are depicted on
the edges.
∅
Clash
Clash
/
/
Figure 5: State transition diagram. The message which ought
to be received for a transition to take place is depicted on
the corresponding edge. In case multiple messages engender
the same transition, they are all detailed on the corresponding
edge separated by slashes.
A simple inspection of the diagram reveals that a node’s
color cannot alternate between any two states. This is due
to the fact that the diagram has no cycles of length two or
greater.
This observation implies that either a clash takes
place upon which D∗decides that the input d-separation
query is false, or a state of equilibrium will eventually be
reached. By deﬁnition, equilibrium is a global state of a net-
work G according to which none of the nodes in G alters its
state (i.e., its color) once that state is reached. This concludes
the proof of Statement (II).
C-I.III
Proof of Statement (III)
In the analysis to follow, we adhere to Assumptions (ASM-
1) and (ASM-2) presented in the ﬁrst paragraph of Appendix
C. We analyze all potential post-equilibrium, in-transit mes-
sages.14 An in-transit message can be of three colors: (a1)
14Cast into Lamport’s space-time diagram (Lamport, 1978), these
are the messages that cross a vertical time-cut positioned at a (global)
time which is after the occurrence of the state of equilibrium; see
(Mattern, 1987).
green, (b1) red, or (c1) white. We consider each possibil-
ity next. Case (a1): If the state of equilibrium has indeed
been reached, a green-colored in-transit message must be des-
tined to a green-colored node. Indeed, if the green-colored in-
transit message were destined to a red-, white-, or ∅-colored
node, it would lead, respectively, to a clash, a change in the
color of the destination node, and once again, a change in
the color of the destination node—all of which are in con-
tradiction with the assumption that the state of equilibrium
has already been reached.
According to D∗, therefore, a
green-colored in-transit message will be absorbed by the cor-
responding destination node (which is of the same color) in
time at most β leading to the generation of no new messages.
The same line of reasoning can be adopted to conclude the
following (Case (b1)): A red-colored in-transit message will
be absorbed by the corresponding destination node (which is
of the same color) in time at most β leading to the genera-
tion of no new messages. Next, we consider the possibility of
an in-transit message being white. A white-colored in-transit
message could be destined to: (a2) a white-colored node, (b2)
a green-colored node, or (c2) a red-colored node. (A white-
colored in-transit cannot be destined to an ∅-colored node,
as it would lead to a change in the color of the destination
node—contradicting with the equilibrium assumption.) We
consider each possibility in order. Case (a2): A white-colored
in-transit message which is destined to a white-colored node
reaches its destination in time at most β and, according to D∗,
will be absorbed upon reception leading to the generation of
no new messages. Case (b2): A white-colored in-transit mes-
sage from node x to a green-colored node g reaches its desti-
nation, g, in time at most β and, according to Step (i) of D∗,
g replies, in time at most α, by sending a green-colored mes-
sage to x which, according to Case (a1), will be absorbed by x
without generating any further new messages. (Note that, ac-
cording to the CUG, the receipt of a white-colored message
by a green-colored node does not lead to any color update,
and hence g does not generate any messages due to Step (ii)
of D∗.) Case (c2) can be handled in the same manner as Case
(b2).
■
C-II
Time-Complexity Analysis of D∗
We present the results in the form of two lemmas as follows.
Lemma C.1. For a given DAG G and disjoint sets A,B,
and C, if (A ̸⊥B|C)G (hence, a NO-instance d-separation
query), then D∗’s execution grants that a clash of the kind
stated in Remark 1 occurs in O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) time where
lAn(A∪B∪C) denotes the length of the longest undirected path
in the ancestral graph GAn(A∪B∪C).
Proof. The proof relies on the high-level understanding
of D∗’s machinery as discussed in Sec. 3.1, and Statements
(1) and (2) of Proposition 1 (see Sec. C-VI of Appendix
C for the proof).
To obtain an upper bound on the time
it takes for the clash to happen, we perform the propaga-
tion of colors through the DAG G in two phases as follows.
Phase-I: Starting at the nodes in C, color white (◦) propa-

gates backwards through the DAG G. Phase-I ensures that
all the nodes in G which could potentially become white in
the absence of colors red and green in the graph, indeed be-
come white. Adopting (ASM-1) and (ASM-2) and the no-
tation introduced therein, Phase-I is completed by time (α +
β)ld
An(A∪B∪C) where ld
An(A∪B∪C) denotes the longest directed
path in GAn(A∪B∪C).
Hence, Phase-I takes O(ld
An(A∪B∪C))
time. Phase-II: colors green (•) and red (•) (corresponding to
the nodes in A and B, respectively) will be introduced back
into G and begin to propagate through G as dictated by the
machinery of D∗until along some path between a node in
A and a node in B a clash takes place.15 Adopting (ASM-1)
and (ASM-2) and the notation introduced therein, after the
completion of Phase-I, within time (α+β)lAn(A∪B∪C) a clash
takes place on a path between a node in A and a node in B
where lAn(A∪B∪C) denote the length of the longest undirected
path in GAn(A∪B∪C). Hence, putting Phase-I and Phase-II to-
gether, by time (α+β)(ld
An(A∪B∪C)+lAn(A∪B∪C)) a clash takes
place. Note that the parameters α and β are arbitrary but ﬁnite
constants. Since for any DAG G, lAn(A∪B∪C) ≥ld
An(A∪B∪C),
the claimed upper bound O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) follows.
■
Using the above line of reasoning, we can prove the fol-
lowing lemma.
Lemma C.2. For a given DAG G and disjoint sets A,B,
and C, if (A ⊥⊥B|C)G (hence, a YES-instance query), then
D∗’s execution grants that a state of equilibrium will be
reached in O(lAn(A∪B∪C)) time where lAn(A∪B∪C) denotes the
length of the longest undirected path in ancestral graph
GAn(A∪B∪C).
Note that, in the context of Lemma C.2, the inevitability of
equilibrium state follows from Statement (1) of Proposition 1
and Statement II given in Sec. C-I of Appendix C.
C-III
Proof of Proposition 2
The analysis presented next follows the same line of rea-
soning presented in the proof of Lemma C.1 in Sec. C-II
of Appendix C. For the time-complexity analysis presented
blow we adhere to Assumptions (ASM-1) and (ASM-2) out-
lined in the ﬁrst paragraph of Appendix C.16 Note that both
the parameters α and β are arbitrary but ﬁnite constants.
The claimed upper-bound O
 ld
An(A∪B∪C) + min
i,j li j
An(A∪B∪C)

follows from the following two statements: (s1) By time
15Introducing colors green (•) and red (•) back into the DAG G
should be interpreted as follows: Through exerting external signals,
the colors of the nodes in A and B are altered to green and red, re-
spectively. The provided interpretation is equivalent to endowing
each node n ∈A ∪B with a dummy child next and having next col-
ored (instead of n) green (if n ∈A) or red (if n ∈B) in the initial-
ization phase of D∗, thereby making any node in n ∈A ∪B inherit
its red/green color from its newly introduced dummy child instead
of being initialized by the corresponding color in the initialization
phase of D∗. By this construction, we purposefully delay the occur-
rence of a clash.
16 Note that, as the number of messages exchanged by D∗on
an edge is O(1) (see Statement (5) of Proposition 1), the effect of
pileups (aka congestion) on a channel has been considered in As-
sumptions (ASM-1) and (ASM-2).
(α + β)ld
An(A∪B∪C), all the nodes in G which could poten-
tially become white in the absence of colors red and green
in the graph, become white, and (s2) After the completion
of (s1), a clash takes place on the shortest unblocked path
between ai and bj in the ancestral graph GAn(A∪B∪C), within
time (α+β)lij
An(A∪B∪C), ∀i, j (note that, according to the proof
of Statement (1) of Proposition 1, on any unblocked path be-
tween ai and bj a clash eventually takes place). Hence, by
time (α + β)(ld
An(A∪B∪C) + lij
An(A∪B∪C)) a clash will have oc-
curred. Note that (s2) holds for all i, j : 1 ≤i ≤|A|,1 ≤j ≤
|B|. Also note that (s1) and (s2) correspond, respectively,
to Phase-I and Phase-II presented in the proof of Lemma
C.1 in Sec. C-II of Appendix C. From (s1) and (s2) follows
the claimed upper-bound O
 ld
An(A∪B∪C) + min
i,j lij
An(A∪B∪C)

in
Proposition 2.
■
C-IV
Proof of Proposition 3
The analysis presented next follows the same line of reason-
ing presented in the proof of Proposition 2 (see Sec. C-III for
the proof). For the time-complexity analysis presented blow
we adhere to Assumptions (ASM-1) and (ASM-2) outlined in
the ﬁrst paragraph of Appendix C; see also footnote 16. Let
M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G denote a refutation-module for (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, with
EM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G denoting the set of the edges of M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G. Let
ld
M and |PM | denote, respectively, the length of the longest
directed path and the shortest unblocked path in M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G.
(Recall that, according to Lemma 1 in the main text, DAG G
must contain at least one refutation-module for (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G,
and, due to Deﬁnition 1 in the main text, M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G must
contain at least one unblocked path between a node in X
and a node in Y.) Also, let M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G denote the minimal
refutation-module for (X ⊥⊥Y|Z)G, with EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G denot-
ing the set of the edges of M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G, and ld
M ∗and |PM ∗|
denoting the length of the longest directed path and the short-
est unblocked path in M ∗
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G, respectively. The claimed
upper-bound O(minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M + |PM |}) follows from the
following two statements: (s1) By time (α + β)ld
M , all the
nodes in M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G which could potentially become white
in the absence of colors red and green in the graph, become
white, and (s2) After the completion of (s1), a clash takes
place along the shortest unblocked path PM in M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G
within (α + β)|PM |. (Note that (s1) and (s2) correspond, re-
spectively, to Phase-I and Phase-II presented in the proof of
Lemma C.1 in Sec. C-II of Appendix C.) Hence, taken to-
gether, a clash will have occurred along PM by time (α +
β)(ld
M + |PM |). Since the above argument holds for any ar-
bitrary refutation-module M(X̸⊥Y|Z)G, it follows that a clash
will have occurred by time (α+β)minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M +|PM |},
hence the claimed upper-bound O(minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M +|PM |})
in Proposition 3. Finally, since minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G (ld
M + |PM |) ≤
ld
M ∗+ |PM ∗|, ld
M ∗≤|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G|, and |PM ∗| ≤|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G|,

it follows that minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G{ld
M + |PM |} ≤O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G|),
hence the claimed upper-bound O(|EM ∗
(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G|) on the time
for the occurrence of a clash. This concludes the proof.
■
C-V
Proof of Proposition 4
Consider any refutation-module M †
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G satisfying the fol-
lowing condition: M †
(X̸⊥Y|Z)G contains the unblocked path
mini,j lij
An(X∪Y∪Z).
By deﬁnition, it immediately follows
that |PM †| ≤mini,j li j
An(X∪Y∪Z) and ld
M † ≤ld
An(X∪Y∪Z); for
the notation, see Propositions 2 and 3 in the main text.
Hence, ld
M † + |PM †| ≤ld
An(X∪Y∪Z) + mini,j li j
An(X∪Y∪Z). Since
minM(X̸⊥
⊥Y|Z)G {ld
M +|PM |} ≤ld
M † +|PM †|, the claim of Propo-
sition 4 follows.
■
C-VI
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof of Statement (1)
The reader is referred to Sec. C-I.I
of Appendix C for the proof.
Proof of Statement (2)
Let IT denote the set of all nodes
i in G which have ever sent a message up to a (global) time
T. Then, the validity of Statement (2) follows from the fol-
lowing recursion. If (†) Prior to applying Steps (i) and (ii) on
the corresponding recipients of i’s messages, i ∈IT, the set IT
satisﬁes the following two conditions: (⋆) Any node in the set
belongs to GAn(A∪B∪C), and (⋆⋆) Any node to which a mem-
ber of the set has ever sent a message belongs to GAn(A∪B∪C),
then (‡) After applying Steps (i) and (ii) on the correspond-
ing recipients of i’s messages (denoted by the set recp(i)) for
all i ∈IT, the set (∪i∈IT recp(i))∪IT indeed satisﬁes (⋆) and
(⋆⋆). Note that at the initial conﬁguration of D∗, nodes in
A ∪B ∪C send their corresponding colors to their parents.
Hence, Statement (†) holds at the initial conﬁguration. Let us
now assume that Statement (†) holds for the set of all nodes
i in G that have ever sent a message up to a (global) time T,
i.e., i ∈IT. According to Step (i) of D∗, a node x which is the
recipient of a message from i replies back by sending its own
color to the sender. Note that, according to Statement (†), the
sender must adhere to (⋆) and (⋆⋆). According to Step (ii) of
D∗, the node x sends its updated color to (a) all its parents,
and (b) those children of x with which x has communicated
before. Based on the argument provided above regarding Step
(i), x sending messages to its parents guarantees that the set
(∪i∈IT recp(i)) ∪IT indeed satisﬁes (⋆) and (⋆⋆). Also, due
to the constraints “with which x has communicated before”
in (b) and Statement (⋆⋆), x sending messages to the nodes
prescribed in (b) guarantees that the set (∪i∈IT recp(i)) ∪IT
indeed satisﬁes (⋆) and (⋆⋆). The above argument establishes
the validity of the recursion. The recursion given above, to-
gether with the fact that Statement (†) holds at the initial con-
ﬁguration of D∗, grants the validity of Statement (2). This
concludes the proof.
■
Proof of Statement (3)
Statement (3) follows from State-
ment (I) (see Sec. C-I.I of Appendix C), Lemma C.1 and
Lemma C.2 (see Sec. C-II of Appendix C).
Proof of Statement (4)
The reader is referred to Sec. C-I.III
of Appendix C for the proof.
Proof of Statement (5)
In what follows we prove that the
number of messages exchanged on an edge is bounded above
by a constant which is independent of the size of the graph.
Based on Step (ii) of D∗, a node sends out a message upon
updating its color and discovering that its new color is differ-
ent from its pre-update color. According to the state transition
diagram depicted in Fig. 5, throughout an execution of D∗a
node could pass through at most ﬁve states {∅,◦,•,•,clash},
and once a node changes its state it cannot go back to that
state ever again (due to the nonexistence of any loop of the
length at least two in the state transition diagram, see Fig. 5).
Hence, Step (ii) of D∗results in O(1) messages to be ex-
changed per channel. There are
 5
2

= 10 possible ways of
pairing nodes of different colors together. By inspection, Step
(i) of D∗results in having the highest number of messages
exchanged on the edge between a white-colored node and a
green-colored node, which, as we show, results in O(1) mes-
sages to be exchanged on that edge. When a (newly) white-
colored node p sends a white-colored message to its green-
colored neighbor q the following exchange of messages takes
place due to Step (i): white-colored message (sent by the
white-colored initiator node p) will be received by the green-
colored node q; q will send back a green-colored message
(due to Step (i)). Upon receipt of the green-colored message
by p, p will send a new white-colored message to q (due to
Step (i)) and also will updates its color to green based on
the CUG. Upon receipt of the new white-colored message, q
will send back a green-colored message (due to Step (i)) to p.
However, since p’s color has been updated to green (hence,
identical to that of the received message), this time p does
not send any message to q due to Step (i). This completes the
proof.
■
Proof of Statement (6)
Throughout an execution of D∗
there exist three types of messages which can be exchanged
between nodes, namely, a white-, a green-, or a red-colored
message. Therefore, to encode the said three types two bits
are required. Statement (6) then follows from Statement (5)
and the argument provided above.
■
C-VII
Alternative, Centralized Initialization
of D∗
Below, we explain how the initialization phase of D∗can be
accomplished, in a distributed manner, in O(l) time, where l
denotes the length of the longest undirected path in G.
First, using a combination of broadcast and convergecast, a
pre-assigned initiator node, s, sends the initialization message
⟨INITIALIZE⟩(containing the list of nodes in sets A, B, and
C) to all the other nodes in G, and receives an acknowledge-
ment that all nodes have received ⟨INITIALIZE⟩. Using the
AsynchSpanningTree algorithm in (Lynch, 1996), this can be
done in time O(l); cf. (Lynch, 1996, p. 499, 2nd paragraph).

Then, s broadcasts the control message, ⟨STARTD∗⟩, to all
the nodes in G. Using the AsynchSpanningTree algorithm,
this can be done in time O(D), where D denotes the diameter
of G. Upon receipt of ⟨STARTD∗⟩by a node in A ∪B ∪C, it
sends its color to its parents, as prescribed in the initialization
phase of D∗outlined in Sec. 3 in the main text.
C-VIII
On the Order-Invariance Property
Before we state the result in a form of a lemma, let us in-
troduce the following notation.
We adopt the expression
Sx
i
M1,···,Mn
⇝
Sx
f to state the following: Starting at the state Sx
i ,
node x transits to the state Sx
f upon receiving the sequence
of messages M1,··· ,Mn where M1,··· ,Mn ∈{◦,•,•} and
Sx
i ,Sx
f ∈{∅,◦,•,•,clash} . Let us now formally state the re-
sult as a lemma.
Lemma C.3. Let x be a node in the network. Then, the
following holds:
(Sx
i
M1,M2
⇝Sx
f ) ⇒(Sx
i
M2,M1
⇝Sx
f ).
Proof. The proof can be straightforwardly accomplished
by examining all the possible cases and showing that the
statement holds true for all of them. To provide a sample
case, consider ◦
◦,•
⇝•. Using the CUG given in Sec. 3, it is
straightforward to check that ◦
•,◦
⇝• holds true.
■
The order-invariance property is captured in the following
lemma.
Lemma C.4 Let x be a node in the network and let π be an
arbitrary permutation deﬁned on the set {1,2,··· ,n}. Then,
the following holds:
(Sx
i
M1,···,Mn
⇝
Sx
f ) ⇒(Sx
i
Mπ(1),···,Mπ(n)
⇝
Sx
f )
Proof.
The
proof
follows
from
Lemma
C.3
and
the
understanding
that
the
sequence
Mπ(1),··· ,Mπ(n) (for an arbitrary permutation π) can be
constructed from the original sequence M1,··· ,Mn through a
series of pairwise permutations.17
■
It is worth noting that the order-invariance property formal-
ized above is analogous to the key notion of exchangeability
in probability theory.
