View Independent Vehicle Make, Model and
Color Recognition Using Convolutional Neural
Network
Afshin Dehghan
Syed Zain Masood
Guang Shu
Enrique G. Ortiz

Computer Vision Lab, Sighthound Inc., Winter Park, FL
Abstract. This paper describes the details of Sighthound’s fully auto-
mated vehicle make, model and color recognition system. The backbone
of our system is a deep convolutional neural network that is not only
computationally inexpensive, but also provides state-of-the-art results
on several competitive benchmarks. Additionally, our deep network is
trained on a large dataset of several million images which are labeled
through a semi-automated process. Finally we test our system on sev-
eral public datasets as well as our own internal test dataset. Our results
show that we outperform other methods on all benchmarks by signiﬁcant
margins. Our model is available to developers through the Sighthound
Cloud API at https://www.sighthound.com/products/cloud
1
Introduction
Make, model and color recognition (MMCR) of vehicles [1,2,3] is of great interest
in several applications such as law-enforcement, driver assistance, surveillance
and traﬃc monitoring. This ﬁne-grained visual classiﬁcation task [4,5,6,7,8,9] has
been traditionally a diﬃcult task for computers. The main challenge is the subtle
diﬀerences between classes (e.g BMW 3 series and BMW 5 series) compared
to some traditional classiﬁcation tasks such as ImageNet. Recently, there have
been eﬀorts to design more accurate algorithms for MMCR such as those in
the works of Sochor et al in [1] and Hsieh et al [2]. Moreover, many researchers
have focused on collecting large datasets to facilitate research in this area [4].
However, the complexity of current methods and/or the small size of current
datasets lead to sub-optimal performance in real world use cases. Thus, there
are still considerable short-comings for agencies or commercial entities looking
to deploy reliable software for the task of MMCR. In this paper, we present a
system that is capable of detecting and tagging the make, model and color of
vehicles irrespective of viewing angle with high accuracy. Our model is trained
to recognize 59 diﬀerent vehicle makes as well as 818 diﬀerent models in what
we believe is the largest set available for commercial or non commercial use. 1
The contributions of Sighthound’s vehicle MMCR system are listed as follows:
1 Our system covers almost all popular models in North America.
arXiv:1702.01721v1  [cs.CV]  6 Feb 2017

■To date, we have collected what we believe to be the largest vehicle dataset,
consisting of more than 3 million images labeled with corresponding vehicle
make and model. Additionally, we labeled part of this data with correspond-
ing labels for vehicle color.
■We propose a semi-automated method for annotating several million vehicle
images.
■We present an end-to-end pipeline, along with a novel deep network, that
not only is computationally inexpensive, but also outperforms competitive
methods on several benchmarks.
■We conducted a number of experiments on existing benchmarks and obtained
state-of-the-art results on all of them.
2
System Overview
The overview of our system is shown in Figure 1. Our training consists of a
3-stage processing pipeline including data collection, data pre-processing and
deep training. Data collection plays an important role in our ﬁnal results, thus
collecting data, which requires the least eﬀort in labeling, is of great importance.
We collected a large dataset with two diﬀerent sets of annotations. All the images
are annotated with their corresponding vehicle make and model and part of the
data is annotated with vehicle colors 2. In order to prepare the ﬁnal training data
we further process the images to eliminate the eﬀect of background. Finally these
images are fed into two separate deep neural networks to train the ﬁnal model.
3
Training
Below we describe in more detail diﬀerent components of our 3-stage training
procedure.
■Data Collection: Data collection plays an important role in training any
deep neural network, especially when it comes to ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
tasks. To address this issue we collected the largest vehicle dataset known
to date, where each image is labeled with corresponding make and model of
the vehicle. We initially collected over 5 million images from various sources.
We developed a semi-automated process to partially prune the data and re-
move the undesired images. We ﬁnally used a team of human annotators to
remove any remaining errors from the dataset. The ﬁnal set of data contains
over 3 million images of vehicles with their corresponding make and model
tags. Additionally, we labeled part of this data with the corresponding color
of the vehicle, chosen from a set of 10 colors; blue, black, beige, red, white,
yellow, orange, purple, green and gray.
2 Please note the number of color categories is far less than number of vehicle models

Data Collection
Make/Model
Colors
Automatic Data 
Pruning 
Human 
Annotators
3,000,000 images all labeled with make/model 
and partially labeled with vehicle color
Vehicle Detection
Final Labeled Data
Final Labeled Data
Deep Training
Final Labeled Data
Final Deep Model
Data Collection
Data Pre-processing
Training
Elliptical 
Masking
10% 
margin
Fig. 1. This ﬁgure shows the pipeline of our system. Images are collected from
diﬀerent sources. They are later pruned using a semi-automated process with
a team of human annotators in the loop. The images are passed through
Sighthound’s vehicle detector and steps are taken to align them. The images
are then fed to our proprietary deep network for training.
■Data Pre-processing: An important step in our training is alignment. In
order to align images such that all the labeled vehicles are centered in the
image, we used Sighthound’s vehicle detection model available through the
Sighthound Cloud API 3. Vehicle detection not only helps us align images
based on vehicle bounding boxes but also reduces the impact of the back-
ground. This is especially important when there is more than one vehicle in
the image. Finally we consider a 10% margin around the vehicle box to com-
pensate for inaccurate (or very tight) bounding boxes. For the task of color
recognition, we took pains to further eliminate any inﬂuence the background
may have on the outcome. To achieve this, we further mask the images with
an elliptical mask as shown in Figure 1. Note that in certain cases the ellip-
tical mask removes some boundary information of the vehicle. However, this
had little eﬀect on the color classiﬁcation accuracy.
■Deep training: The ﬁnal stage of our pipeline in Figure 1 involves training
two deep neural networks. One is trained to classify vehicles based on their
make and model and the other is trained to classify vehicles based on their
color. Our networks are designed such that they achieve high accuracy while
remaining computationally inexpensive. We trained our networks for four
days on four GTX TITAN X PASCAL GPUs. Once the model is trained,
we can label images at 150 fps in batch processing mode.
3 https://www.sighthound.com/products/cloud

4
Experiments on SIN 2014 Test set
In this section, we report experimental results on two publicly available datasets;
the Stanford Cars dataset [10] and the Comprehensive Car (compCar) dataset
[4]. The Stanford Cars dataset consists of 196 classes of cars with a total of
16, 185 images. The data is divided into almost a 50-50 train/test split with
8, 144 training images and 8, 041 testing images. Categories are typically at the
level of Make, Model, Year. This means that several categories contain the same
model of a make, and the only diﬀerence is the year that the car is made. Our
original model is not trained to classify vehicle models based on the year of their
production. However, after ﬁne-tuning our model on the Stanford Cars training
data, we observe that we can achieve better results compared to previously
published methods. This is mainly due to the sophistication in the design of our
proprietary deep neural network as well as the sizable amount of data used to
train this network. The quantitative results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Top-1 car classiﬁcation accuracy on Stanford car dataset.
Methods
Accuracy (top1)
Sighthound
93.6%
Krause et al. [10]
92.8%
Lin et al. [5]
91.3%
Zhang et al. [11]
88.4%
Xie et al. [6]
86.3%
Gosselin et al. [12]
82.7%
We also report results on the Comprehensive Car dataset which has recently
been published. The task here is to classify data into 431 diﬀerent classes based
on vehicle make and model. The data is divided into 70% training and 30%
testing. There are a total of 36, 456 training images and 15, 627 test images.
The top-1 and top-5 accuracy are reported in Table 2. We compare our results
with the popular deep network architectures reported in [4]. We can clearly see
that our ﬁne-tuned model outperforms the existing methods by 4.68% in top-1
accuracy. It is also worth noting that the our model is an order of magnitude
faster than GoogLeNet.
Lastly we test the veriﬁcation accuracy of the proposed method on compCar
dataset. The compCar dataset includes three sets of data for veriﬁcation ex-
periments, sorted by their diﬃculties. Each set contains 20,000 pairs of images.
The likelihood ratio of each image pair is obtained by computing the euclidean
distant between features computed using our the deep network. The likelihood
ratio is then compared against a threshold to make the ﬁnal decision. The results
are shown in Table 3. As can be seen our model, ﬁne-tuned on the veriﬁcation
training data of compCar dataset, outperforms other methods. It is worth to

Table 2. Top-1 and top-5 car classiﬁcation accuracy of compCar dataset. We
compare our results with popular deep networks of GoogLeNet, Overfeat and
AlexNet reported in [4]
Methods
Accuracy (top1) Accuracy (top5)
Sighthound
95.88%
99.53%
GoogLeNet [4]
91.2%
98.1%
Overfeat [4]
87.9%
96.9%
AlexNet [4]
81.9%
94.0%
mention that , even without ﬁne-tuning our features can achieve a high veriﬁca-
tion accuracy of 92.03%, 86.52%, 80.17% on diﬀerent sets of easy, medium and
hard respectively.
Table 3. Veriﬁcation accuracy of three diﬀerent sets, easy, medium and hard in
[4]. Sighthound is our ﬁne-tuned model trained on Sighthound data. It can be
seen that the model outperforms previous methods by a large margin.
Methods
Accuracy(Easy) Accuracy(Medium) Accuracy(Hard)
Sighthound
93.00%
86.18%
80.05%
Yang et. al. [4]
83.3%
82.4%
76.1%
Sochor et. al. [1]
85.0%
82.7%
76.8%
5
Quantitative Results
We demonstrate some quantitative results in Figures 2 and 3, capturing diﬀerent
scenarios. Figure 2 shows results for images mostly taken by people. Figure
3 shows a surveillance-like scenario where the camera is mounted at a higher
distance from the ground. These images are illustrative of the robustness of our
large training dataset, captured from diﬀerent sources, to real world scenarios.
6
Conclusions
In this paper we presented an end to end system for vehicle make, model and
color recognition. The combination of Sighthound’s novel approach to the design
and implementation of deep neural networks and a sizable dataset for training
allow us to label vehicles in real time with high degrees of accuracy.We conducted
several experiments for both classiﬁcation and veriﬁcation tasks on public bench-
marks and showed signiﬁcant improvement over previous methods.

Fig. 2. Quantitative results of the proposed method in surveillance cameras.
