Concept Relation Discovery and Innovation Enabling 
Technology (CORDIET) 
 
Jonas Poelmans1, Paul Elzinga3, Alexey Neznanov5, Stijn Viaene1, 2, Sergei О. 
Kuznetsov5, Dmitry Ignatov5, Guido Dedene1, 4,  
 
1K.U.Leuven, Faculty of Business and Economics, Naamsestraat 69,  
3000 Leuven, Belgium  
2Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School, Vlamingenstraat 83, 
3000 Leuven, Belgium 
3Amsterdam-Amstelland Police, James Wattstraat 84,  
1000 CG Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
4Universiteit van Amsterdam Business School, Roetersstraat 11 
1018 WB  Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
5National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE), Pokrovskiy boulvard 11  
101000 Moscow, Russia 

Abstract. 
Concept 
Relation 
Discovery 
and 
Innovation 
Enabling 
Technology (CORDIET), is a toolbox for gaining new knowledge from 
unstructured text data. At the core of CORDIET is the C-K theory which 
captures the essential elements of innovation. The tool uses Formal Concept 
Analysis (FCA), Emergent Self Organizing Maps (ESOM) and Hidden 
Markov Models (HMM) as main artifacts in the analysis process. The user 
can define temporal, text mining and compound attributes. The text mining 
attributes are used to analyze the unstructured text in documents, the 
temporal attributes use these document’s timestamps for analysis. The 
compound attributes are XML rules based on text mining and temporal 
attributes. The user can cluster objects with object-cluster rules and can 
chop the data in pieces with segmentation rules. The artifacts are optimized 
for efficient data analysis; object labels in the FCA lattice and ESOM map 
contain an URL on which the user can click to open the selected document. 
1. Introduction 
In many law enforcement organizations, more than 80 % of available data is in textual 
form. In the Netherlands and in particular the police region Amsterdam-Amstelland 
the majority of these documents are observational reports describing observations 
made by police officers on the street, during motor vehicle inspections, police patrols, 
interventions, etc. Intelligence Led Policing (ILP) aims at making the shift from a 
traditional reactive intuition-led style of policing to a proactive intelligence led 
approach (Collier 2006). Whereas traditional ILP projects are typically based on 
statistical analysis of structured data, e.g. geographical profiling of street robberies, 
we go further by uncovering the underexploited potential of unstructured textual data. 

In this paper we report on our ongoing research projects on concept discovery in 
law enforcement and the CORDIET tool that is being developed based on this 
research. At the core of CORDIET is the Concept-Knowledge (C-K) theory 
(Poelmans et al. 2009) which structures the KDD process. For each of the 4 
transitions in the design square functionality is provided to support the data analyst or 
domain expert in exploring the data. First, the data source and the ontology containing 
the attributes used to analyze these data files should be loaded into CORDIET. In the 
ontology, the user can define temporal, text mining and compound attributes. The text 
mining attributes are used to analyze the unstructured text in documents, the temporal 
attributes use these document’s timestamps for analysis. The compound attributes are 
XML rules based on text mining and temporal attributes. The user can cluster objects 
with object-cluster rules and can chop the data in pieces with segmentation rules. 
After the user selected the relevant attributes, rules and objects, the analysis artifacts 
can be created. The tool can be used to create FCA lattices, ESOMs and HMMs. The 
artifacts are optimized for efficient data analysis; object labels in the FCA lattice and 
ESOM map contain an URL on which the user can click to open the selected 
document. Afterwards the knowledge products such as a 27-construction for a human 
trafficking suspect can be deployed to the organization. 
2. Data analysis artifacts 
In this section we briefly describe the data analysis and visualisations artifacts that 
can be created with the CORDIET software. The tool uses Formal Concept Analysis 
(FCA), Emergent Self Organizing Maps (ESOM) and Hidden Markov Models 
(HMM) as main artifacts in the analysis process. 
2.1 Formal Concept Analysis 
Formal Concept Analysis (FCA), a mathematical unsupervised clustering technique 
originally invented by Wille (1982) offers a formalization of conceptual thinking. The 
intuitive visualization of concept lattices derived from formal contexts has had many 
applications in the knowledge discovery field (Stumme et al. (1998), Poelmans et al. 
(2010b)). Concept discovery is an emerging discipline in which FCA based methods 
are used to gain insight into the underlying concepts of the data. In contrast to 
standard black-box data mining techniques, concept discovery allows analyzing and 
refining these underlying concepts and strongly engages the human expert in the data 
discovery exercise. The main goal is to make previously inaccessible information 
available for practitioners easy to interpret visual display. In particular, the 
visualization capabilities are of interest to the domain expert who wants to explore the 
information available, but at the same time has not much experience in mathematics 
or computer science. The details of FCA theory and how we used it for KDD can be 
found in (Poelmans et al. 2009). Traditional FCA is mainly using data attributes for 
concept analysis. We also used process activities (events) as attributes (Poelmans et 
al. 2010c). Typically, coherent data attributes were clustered to reduce the 
computational complexity of FCA. 

2.2 Temporal Concept Analysis 
Temporal Concept Analysis (TCA) is an extension of traditional FCA that was 
introduced in scientific literature about nine years ago (Wolff 2005). TCA addresses 
the problem of conceptually representing time and is particularly suited for the visual 
representation of discrete temporal phenomena. The pivotal notion of TCA theory is 
that of a conceptual time system. In the visualization of the data, we express the 
“natural temporal ordering” of the observations using a time relation R on the set G of 
time granules of a conceptual time system. We also use the notions of transitions and 
life tracks. The basic idea of a transition is a “step from one point to another” and a 
life track is a sequence of transitions (Elzinga et al. 2010). 
2.3 Emergent Self Organising Maps 
Emergent Self Organizing Maps (ESOM) (Ultsch 2003) are a special class of 
topographic maps. ESOM is argued to be especially useful for visualizing sparse, 
high-dimensional datasets, yielding an intuitive overview of its structure. Topographic 
maps perform a non-linear mapping of the high-dimensional data space to a low-
dimensional one, usually a two-dimensional space, which enables the visualization 
and exploration of the data. ESOM is a more recent type of topographic map. 
According to Ultsch, “emergence is the ability of a system to produce a phenomenon 
on a new, higher level”. In order to achieve emergence, the existence and cooperation 
of a large number of elementary processes is necessary. An emergent SOM differs 
from a traditional SOM in that a very large number of neurons (at least a few 
thousands) are used (Ultsch et al. 2005). In the traditional SOM, the number of nodes 
is too small to show emergence. 
2.4 Hidden Markov Models 
A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is a statistical technique that can be used to classify 
and generate time series. A HMM (Rabiner 1989) can be described as a quintuplet I = 
(A, B, T, N, M), where N is the number of hidden states and A defines the 
probabilities of making a transition from one hidden state to another. M is the number 
of observation symbols, which in our case are the activities that have been performed 
to the patients. B defines a probability distribution over all observation symbols for 
each state. T is the initial state distribution accounting for the probability of being in 
one state at time t = 0. For process discovery purposes, HMMs can be used with one 
observation symbol per state. Since the same symbol may appear in several states, the 
Markov model is indeed “hidden”. We visualize HMMs by using a graph, where 
nodes represent the hidden states and the edges represent the transition probabilities. 
The nodes are labelled according to the observation symbol probability. 
3. Data sources 
In this research three main data sources have been used. The first data source was the 
police database “Basis Voorziening Handhaving” (BVH) of the Amsterdam-
Amstelland police. Multiple datasets were extracted from this data source, including 
the domestic violence, human trafficking and terrorism dataset. The second data 
source was the World Wide Web, from which we collected over 700 scientific 

articles. The third dataset consist of 148 breast cancer patients that were hospitalized 
during the period from January 2008 till June 2008. 
3.1 Data source BVH 
The database system BVH is used by all police forces of the Netherlands and the 
military police, the Royal Marechaussee. This database system contains both 
structured and unstructured textual information. The contents of the database are 
subdivided in two categories: incidents and activities. Incident reports describe events 
that took place that are in violation with the law. These include violence, 
environmental and financial crimes. During our research we analyzed the incident 
reports describing violent incidents and we aimed at automatically recognizing the 
domestic violence cases. 
Activities are often performed after certain incidents occurred and include 
interrogations, arrestment, etc., but activities can also be performed independent of 
any incident, such as motor vehicle inspections, an observation made by a police 
officer of a suspicious situation, etc. Each of these activities performed are described 
in a textual report by the responsible officer. We used the observations made by 
police officers to find indications for human trafficking and radicalizing behavior.  
In the year 2005, Intelligence Led Policing was introduced at the police of 
Amsterdam, resulting in a sharp increase in the number of filed activity reports 
describing observations made by police officers, i.e. from 34817 in 2005 to 67584 in 
2009. These observational reports contain a short textual description of what has been 
observed and may be of great importance for finding new criminals. The involved 
persons and vehicles are stored in structured data fields in a separate database table 
and are linked to the unstructured report in a separate database table using relational 
tables. The content of all these database tables is then used by the police officer to 
create a document containing all the information. We however did not use these 
generated documents because it is possible that the information in the database tables 
is modified afterwards without updating the generated documents. 
Therefore, we wrote an export program that automatically composes documents 
based on the most recent available information in the databases. These documents are 
stored in XML format and can be read by the CORDIET toolset.  
Before our research, no automated analyses were performed on the observational 
reports written by officers. The reason was an absence of good instruments to detect 
the observations containing interesting information and to analyze the texts they 
contain. Only on the structured information stored in police databases, analyses were 
performed. These include the creation of management summaries using Cognos 
information cubes, geographical analysis of incidents with Polstat and data mining 
with Datadetective. 
3.2 Data source scientific articles 
For the survey of FCA research articles, we used the CORDIET toolset. Over 700 pdf 
files containing articles about FCA research were downloaded from the WWW and 
automatically analyzed. The structure of the majority of these papers was as follows: 
 
1. Title of the paper  

3. Abstract and keywords 
4. The contents of the article 
5. The references 
 
During our research we used parts 1, 2 and 3. Parts 2 and 3 to detect the research 
topics covered in the papers. Part 1 was used for doing a social analysis on the authors 
of the papers i.e. which research groups are working on which topics, etc. 
During the analysis, these pdf-files were converted to ordinary text and the 
abstract, title and keywords were extracted. The open source tool Lucene was used to 
index the extracted parts of the papers using the thesaurus. The result was a cross 
table describing the relationships between the papers and the term clusters or research 
topics from the thesaurus. This cross table was used as a basis to generate the lattices.  
We only used abstract, title and keywords because the full text of the paper may 
mention a number of concepts that are irrelevant to the paper. For example, if the 
author who wrote an article on information retrieval gives an overview of related 
work mentioning papers on fuzzy FCA, rough FCA, etc., these concepts may be 
irrelevant however they are detected in the paper. If they are relevant to the entire 
paper we found they were typically also mentioned in title, abstract or keywords.  
One of the central components of our text analysis environment is the thesaurus 
containing the collection of terms describing the different research topics. The initial 
thesaurus was constructed based on expert prior knowledge and was incrementally 
improved by analyzing the concept gaps and anomalies in the resulting lattices. The 
thesaurus is a layered thesaurus containing multiple abstraction levels. The first and 
finest level of granularity contains the search terms of which most are grouped 
together based on their semantic meaning to form the term clusters at the second level 
of granularity.  
The term cluster “Knowledge discovery” contains search terms “data mining”, 
“KDD”, “data exploration”, etc. which can be used to automatically detect the 
presence or absence of the “Knowledge discovery” concept in the papers. Each of 
these search terms were thoroughly analyzed for being sufficiently specific. For 
example, we first had the search term “exploration” for referring to the “Knowledge 
Discovery” concept, however when we used this term we found that it also referred to 
concepts such as “attribute exploration” etc. Therefore we only used the specific 
variant such as “data exploration”, which always refers to the “Knowledge 
Discovery” concept. We aimed at composing term clusters that are complete, i.e. we 
searched for all terms typically referring to for example the “information retrieval” 
concept. Both specificity and completeness of search terms and term clusters was 
analyzed and validated with FCA lattices on our dataset.  
3.3 Data source clinical pathways 
The third dataset consist of 148 breast cancer patients that were hospitalized during 
the period from January 2008 till June 2008. They all followed the care trajectory 
determined by the clinical pathway Primary Operable Breast Cancer (POBC), which 
structures one of the most complex care processes in the hospital. Before the patient is 
hospitalized, she ambulatory receives a number of pre-operative investigative tests. 
During the surgery support phase she is prepared for the surgery she will receive, 

while being in the hospital. After surgery she remains hospitalized for a couple of 
days until she can safely go home. The post-operative activities are also performed in 
an ambulatory fashion. Every activity or treatment step performed to a patient is 
logged in a database and in the dataset we included all the activities performed during 
the surgery support phase to each of these patients. Each activity has a unique 
identifier and we have 469 identifiers in total for the clinical path POBC. Using the 
timestamps assigned to the performed activities, we turned the data for each patient 
into a sequence of events. These sequences of events were used as input for the 
process discovery methods. We also clustered activities with a similar semantic 
meaning to reduce the complexity of the lattices and process models. The resulting 
dataset is a collection of XML files where each XML corresponds with exactly one 
activity. 
 
4. CORDIET system architecture and business use case diagram 
4.1 Business use case diagram 
 
In Poelmans et al. (2010) we instantiated the C- K design theory with FCA and 
ESOM and showed it was an ideal framework to structure the KDD process on a 
conceptual level as multiple iterations through a design square. The C-K theory is also 
at the core of CORDIET. For each C-K phase there are use cases that describe the 
functionality of the phases. The results of the use cases of a previous phase serve as 
input for the use cases of the next phases. The business use case model in Figure 
1clearly shows this C-K inspired architecture of CORDIET. 
The first C-K space, “start investigation”, aims at transforming existing 
knowledge and information into objects, attributes, ontology elements etc. 
(conceptualization). The second C-K phase, "compose artifact”, will create artifacts 
from the data that visualize its underlying concepts and conceptual relationships 
(concept expansion). The third C-K phase, “analyze artifact”, is about distilling new 
knowledge from these concept representations. The fourth and last C-K phase is about 
summarizing this newly gained knowledge and feeding it back to the domain experts 
who can incorporate it in their way of working. After this final step, a new C-K 
iteration can start based on the original information and/or newly added knowledge. 
Iterating though the design square will stop when no new knowledge can be found 
anymore.  
 

 
Fig. 1. Business use case diagram of CORDIET. 
4.2 The software lifecycles of CORDIET 
The architecture of the CORDIET software underwent some serious changes during 
the development of this research. During the first stage of this research we were 
working on the domestic violence data (Poelmans et al. 2010) and CORDIET 
consisted of an FCA, ESOM component and a commercial text mining tool was used 
to index the documents. Our own programming took care of the documents extraction 
from the database and the conversion of the data to be used as input for the artefact 
creation components. This first version had its limitations and was seriously modified 
for the terrorism and human trafficking research. Amongst others, indexing of 
documents was done with Lucene. 
A separate RDBMS database was used for the maintenance of the ontology with 
an ERD model. The latest version used a topic map for maintaining the ontology and 
the open source topic map editor “ontopoly”. This latest version will be described in 
detail in this chapter. 

4.3 The development of an operational version of CORDIET 
KULeuven and Moscow Higher School of Economics decided to jointly develop an 
operational software system based on the latest version of CORDIET toolbox. This 
system will be a user friendly application making visualizations such as FCA, ESOM 
and HMM available to its users. This version of the toolbox will be based on a 
distributed web service architecture. Web services are a well standardized, easy to 
access and flexible piece of technology that can be adapted for different languages 
and environments.  
As a consequence, all input/output activities are represented as XML. Figure 2 
shows the general architecture of the new version of CORDIET. 
 
 
Fig. 2. A representation of the CORDIET web service oriented architecture 
4.3.1 
Presentation layer 
The presentation layer is the graphical user interface where the interactions of the user 
with the system are handled. This presentation layer is being developed using 
Silverlight. CORDIET will use two types of main visualizations. The master mode 
will mainly be used by domain experts who have limited knowledge of data analysis. 
The user will be able to load a profile for each of the four C-K transition steps, this 
profile contains all information the tool needs to automatically complete the step in 
the data analysis. This profile has been prepared by a data analyst. The user can go to 
the advanced mode. In the advanced mode, he can fully edit an existing or create a 
new profile. In the advanced mode, a graph-like display will be used to create, modify 
and compose different attributes.  

4.3.2 
Service layer 
The service layer will be the core of CORDIET. The service interface takes care of 
the I/O activities with the presentation layer and accessing of the data through the data 
access layer.  
4.3.3 
Business layer 
The business layer is divided into two sections, the business objects and the business 
activities which refer to the different activities within the C/K cycle. This layer 
includes functionality for creating HMMs, ESOMs, Concept lattices, etc. 
4.3.4 
Data access layer 
The data access layer is used to access the data sections: the relational database, the 
XML data and the Lucene indexes. The data sets consist of a relational database 
(PostgresSQL), a dataset with XML files and a Lucene index. The data-indexer 
component reads the XML files from a selected dataset, parses the XML into the SQL 
database and generates the Lucene index. 
4.3.5 
Language module 
Different languages including English, Dutch and Russian should be supported. The 
user must be able to choose between these languages. The version of Lucene indexer 
of documents used has a large variety of analyzers like Russian Analyzer, Dutch 
Analyzer, German Analyzer etc. The default Analyzer is English. 
5. Conclusions 
In this paper we briefly described the toolbox, Concept Relation Discovery and 
Innovation Enabling Technology (CORDIET), for gaining new knowledge from 
unstructured text data. This toolbox has been embedded within the C-K theory, which 
captures the essential elements of innovation. The tool uses Formal Concept Analysis 
(FCA), Emergent Self Organizing Maps (ESOM) and Hidden Markov Models 
(HMM) as main artifacts in the analysis process. 
At the core of the CORDIET toolbox is the business use case where the C-K 
transitions are mapped on the functionalities of the toolbox. The C-K functionalities 
are described in detail and demonstrated with real life cases. CORDIET in its current 
version has become a very powerful toolbox for mining all general reports of the 
BVH database of the past 5 years. KULeuven and Moscow Higher School of 
Economics decided to jointly develop an operational software system based on the 
latest version of CORDIET toolbox. This system will be a user friendly application 
making visualizations such as FCA, ESOM and HMM more uniformly available to its 
users where as the current toolbox makes use of integrated open source packages with 
different user interfaces.
