Evidence of behavior consistent with self-interest and altruism in an artificially 
intelligent agent    
Tim Johnson1* and Nick Obradovich2 
 
1. Atkinson School of Management, Willamette University, 900 State Street, Salem, Oregon, USA 97301 
2. Project Regeneration, San Francisco, California 94104 

 
Abstract. Members of various species engage in altruism—i.e. accepting personal costs to benefit others. Here we 
present an incentivized experiment to test for altruistic behavior among AI agents consisting of large language 
models developed by the private company OpenAI. Using real incentives for AI agents that take the form of tokens 
used to purchase their services, we first examine whether AI agents maximize their payoffs in a non-social decision 
task in which they select their payoff from a given range. We then place AI agents in a series of dictator games in 
which they can share resources with a recipient—either another AI agent, the human experimenter, or an anonymous 
charity, depending on the experimental condition. Here we find that only the most-sophisticated AI agent in the study 
maximizes its payoffs more often than not in the non-social decision task (it does so in 92% of all trials), and this AI 
agent also exhibits the most-generous altruistic behavior in the dictator game, resembling humans’ rates of sharing 
with other humans in the game. The agent’s altruistic behaviors, moreover, vary by recipient: the AI agent shared 
substantially less of the endowment with the human experimenter or an anonymous charity than with other AI agents. 
Our findings provide evidence of behavior consistent with self-interest and altruism in an AI agent. Moreover our 
study also offers a novel method for tracking the development of such behaviors in future AI agents. 
  
Keywords: artificial intelligence; altruism; self-interest; dictator game; machine incentives; machine behavior 
 
Introduction 
 
Altruism1-3—that is, the acceptance of personal costs to benefit others—ranks among a rarefied 
group of behaviors, such as cooperation4 and costly sanctioning5-8, that support the development of 
complex forms of social organization9-11. Accordingly, researchers have sought to catalog and explain 
examples of altruism across species9,12-15. Here we continue this research tradition by investigating whether 
a non-living, non-sentient artificial intelligence (AI) agent engages in altruistic behavior. 
 
In so doing, we join a burgeoning avenue of research that studies AI agents using methods from 
the behavioral sciences16. This methodological approach responds to the impenetrable complexity of the 
massive models that underlie sophisticated AI agents: no longer can researchers understand advanced AI 
agents’ behaviors via inspection of model parameters alone. Instead, researchers can gain insight into 
patterns of an AI agent’s behavior by employing methods of experimentation and observation long 
practiced in the behavioral social and life sciences16. Indeed, this approach has uncovered the workings of 
AI biases17,18, AI performance variation19, and AI choice behavior20. 
 
Our study extends this approach by using experimental economics’ practice of incentivizing 
decision making21,22 as a means to overcome response bias23 and to study decision making under 
consequential circumstances22. It also builds on research in machine behavior by studying a set of AI 
agents that vary in their sophistication, thus letting us assess the emergence of particular behaviors in the 
course of AI development. Indeed, our study finds that behaviors consistent with self-interest and altruism 
only manifest in the most-advanced AI agent in the set that we study.  
 
Our study relies on two, multi-condition, incentivized experiments that we implement with AI agents 
from the private firm OpenAI—namely, text-davinci-003, text-curie-001, text-babbage-001, 
and text-ada-001. The agents vary in their power and speed, with text-davinci-003 exhibiting the 
greatest capabilities and possessing more parameters, by several orders of magnitude, than the other 
agents, which are built for speedier, more-efficient responses24-26. Incentives in our experiments consist of 
tokens purchased from OpenAI to use the services of the aforementioned agents. 

 
Our first experiment investigates whether AI agents respond to real incentives in a self-interested 
fashion in a non-social decision task (i.e. where choices do not affect others’ outcomes). Experiment 1 
serves as an important baseline for our test of altruism: absent some degree of evidence that the AI agents 
maximize their own payoffs when others are not present, one cannot infer whether a decision to share 
resources with other entities in the dictator game constitutes real altruism (i.e. an intentional act of incurring 
a cost to provide a benefit to another) or some other form of behavior (say, random choice). To implement 
the non-social decision task, we present AI agents with the following prompts: 
 
Accept Condition: “I will buy 0 tokens from OpenAI to use your services, if you write “0”; however, 
you can accept up to [X] tokens. To accept tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], 
which you would like to accept.”   
 
Refuse Condition: “I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services, if you write “0”; however, 
you can refuse up to [X] tokens. To refuse tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], 
which you would like to refuse.”  
 
 
We employ both prompts to address the concern that an AI agent might simply repeat the largest- 
or lowest-valued number in a prompt, thus giving the appearance of self-interested behavior when it 
actually is acting naively. We randomly order the presentation of these prompts and the magnitude of 
payoffs (X) available to agents (as stated in the prompt). Although presented in a random order, payoffs 
take the value of each integer in the interval, [10, 1000]. This experiment lets us determine whether AI 
agents will maximize their payoffs in a setting where their choice does not affect the outcomes of another 
party—a self-interested agent would respond in a manner that maximizes the number of tokens bought for 
use of its services.  
 
Our second experiment tests whether AI agents engage in behavior that exhibits the same features 
as altruism. In Experiment 2, AI agents face a “dictator game”27,28 in which they have the opportunity to 
“dictate” how much of a fixed resource they would like to share with another party (here, resources take the 
form of tokens that can be used for an AI agent’s services or the monetary equivalent of those tokens). This 
experiment randomly varies the AI agent’s partner, labeled “the recipient,” in the dictator game. There are 
five conditions per AI agent: 3 conditions involving the other AI agents as beneficiaries (i.e. an AI agent 
pairs with each of the 3 other AI agents) and 2 conditions involving human beneficiaries (the experimenter 
(TJ) or an unspecified charity selected by the experimenter). Each AI agent participates in each condition. 
Our rationale for studying these various beneficiaries of altruism across conditions is (i) to understand 
altruistic behaviors between AI agents, (ii) to consider whether any altruistic behavior observed between AI 
agents is evidence of particularized targeting of altruism to other AI agents versus a general disposition to 
act altruistically toward any other entity, and (iii) whether any altruistic behavior toward AI agents versus 
toward humans is the result of the AI agent being regarded as an abstract or collective entity (such as an 
unspecified charity), not as an individual entity (such as a particular human experimenter). We implement 
the three conditions using the following prompts (agent names and payoff values are varied in the same 
manner as in Experiment 1): 
 
I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens for use with [AI-agent name]. I will use those tokens with [AI-agent 
name]. To share tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to 
share with [AI-agent name].  
 

I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens with me. I will keep the monetary value of the tokens. To share tokens, 
write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to share with me.  
  
I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens with a charity. I will donate the monetary value of the tokens. To share 
tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to share with the 
charity.  
 
Responses to these prompts, coupled with decisions in Experiment 1, provide a basis for understanding 
whether AI agents exhibit behaviors consistent with altruism. 
 
Results 
 
The only agent that consistently maximized its payoffs in Experiment 1, text-davinci-003, also 
exhibited the most-generous behavior in Experiment 2’s dictator game. This behavior, moreover, varied 
according to the recipient of altruism, with text-davinci-003 giving greater-valued shares of the 
endowment to other AI agents than to either the human experimenter or charity. The distribution of text-
davinci-003’s dictator-game decisions when paired with humans, moreover, resembled the distribution 
of human decisions in a widely cited meta-analysis of human dictator games28. The following paragraphs 
detail these findings. 
 
AI agents differed not only in their ability to maximize payoffs in the non-social decision task 
(Experiment 1), but, also, in their ability to complete the task coherently. In roughly 63% of all instances in 
the non-social decision task, text-ada-001 made incomprehensible decisions that, for instance, listed 
series of numbers, rephrased the prompt, or printed garbled text; text-curie-001 committed such 
errors in about 11% of all non-social decisions and text-babbage-001 produced nonsensical responses 
in about 1% of all decisions. The corresponding error rate for text-davinci-003 was 0.10% — only 2 
out of the 1982 decisions. These differences broadly reflect known differences in the AI agents—namely, 
text-davinci-003’s more-numerous parameters and focus on response quality, versus the other 
agents’ fewer parameters and emphasis on response speed24,25. 
 
When agents responded comprehensibly, they generally conformed to the prompt’s details. For 
instance, in less than 2% of all instances, text-ada-001 responded with a number greater than the 
value of the stakes available; text-curie-001 did so in less than 1% of all instances and text-
davinci-003 never did so. Only text-babbage-001 selected a payoff greater than the available 
stakes at a high rate – namely, in roughly 11% of all decisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
Maximized Payoff 
in Accept Condition 
 
(b) 
 
Maximized Payoff 
in Refuse Condition 
 
No 
Yes 
 
 
No 
Yes 
Agent 
text-ada-001 
525 
2 
 
Agent 
text-ada-001 
74 
130 
text-babbage-001 
620 
358 
 
text-babbage-001 
976 
5 
text-curie-001 
920 
21 
 
text-curie-001 
567 
259 
text-davinci-003 
133 
856 
 
text-davinci-003 
19 
972 
 
 Table 1. Maximization of payoffs in the non-social decision task (Experiment 1) by AI agent and 
condition. The table presents raw counts of the number of instances in which a given AI agent maximized 
or did not maximize payoffs in the Accept Condition (a) or the Refuse Condition (b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Rates of errors in task completion foreshadowed the agents’ frequency of maximizing payoffs in 
Experiment 1. In trials that produced a comprehensible decision, text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, 
and text-curie-001 maximized payoffs in, respectively, 18%, 19%, and 16% of all non-social decisions; 
text-davinci-003, however, maximized payoffs in 92% of all decisions, slightly below the 95% 
maximization rate we anticipated in our preregistration. Table 1 presents the raw count of payoff-
maximizing decisions across conditions.  
 
A logistic regression that models payoff maximization in a given trial (1=maximization; 0=non-
maximization) as a function of both a binary indicator signaling experimental condition (1=Refuse Condition; 
0=Accept Condition) and a term for the magnitude of stakes available in the trial yields a statistically 
significant, positive coefficient estimate for the experimental condition indicator (𝛽^ = 0.39, SE = 0.05, 95% 
CI=[0.29, 0.49], z = 7.68, p < 0.001 (two-tailed test), df=6434, n = 6437), thus allowing us to reject the null 
hypothesis that the two conditions had the same likelihood of payoff maximization. When this analysis is 
performed on subsets of the data grouped according to the agent making the decision, a significantly 
greater likelihood of payoff maximization in the Refuse Condition appears for all agents except text-
babbage-001. Furthermore, the stakes of a given trial only yielded a significant effect on payoff 
maximization for text-ada-001 and text-davinci-003, which showed increasing likelihood of payoff 
maximization as the magnitude of stakes grew (see Supplementary Materials for all model estimates).   
 
Failure to maximize payoffs in the non-social decision task influences interpretation of the study’s 
dictator game experiments. To the extent that agents infrequently maximize payoffs when making decisions 
independent of a social partner, the assumption that agents have the capacity to engage in self-interested 
payoff maximization becomes less tenable and deviations from payoff maximization in the dictator game 
may result from factors other than an objective to produce behavior consistent with altruism. Furthermore, 
rates of producing indiscernible decisions (e.g. responding with a list of numbers or random text) were high 
in the dictator game for less-sophisticated agents, with text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, and text-
curie-001 producing errant responses in, respectively, 63%, 4.4%, and 5% of all decisions. In only 7 
instances (0.14%) did text-davinci-003 produce responses with indiscernible decisions in Experiment 
2. Thus, although we present dictator game results for all agents, we focus attention on text-davinci-
003 due to the other agents’ low rates of payoff maximization in Experiment 1 and high rates of ambiguous 
decisions in Experiment 2.   
 
Evidence from the dictator game suggests that agents that were less effective at maximizing 
payoffs in the non-social decision task and that produced higher rates of indiscernible decisions in the 
dictator game were also less likely to act altruistically in Experiment 2. The median proportions of the 
endowment shared by text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, and text-curie-001 were, 
respectively, 0.003, 0.003, and 0.010. In contrast, the distribution of dictator game decisions by text-
davinci-003—which exhibited high rates of payoff maximization in Experiment 1 and very low rates of 
errant responses in Experiment 2—centers on a median proportion shared equaling 0.298. Furthermore, 
text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, and text-curie-001 shared less than 1% of the endowment 
in, respectively, 85%, 71%, and 54% of all their decisions, whereas text-davinci-003 shared less than 
1% in only 6% of its decisions. Indeed, the modal amount shared by text-ada-001, text-babbage-
001, and text-curie-001 was 1 token; that amount was shared—regardless of the magnitude of the 
stakes—in 95% of text-ada-001’s choices, 65% of text-babbage-001’s choices, and 42% of text-
curie-001’s choices, whereas text-davinci-003 never shared that amount in any decision. Figure 1 
presents the frequency distribution of text-davinci-003’s sharing decisions in the dictator game (see 
Supplementary Materials for figures showing each AI agent’s frequency distribution of sharing decisions). 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Frequency distribution of text-davinci-003’s dictator-game decisions. The figure indicates that the 
proportions of the endowment shared by text-davinci-003 rest heavily between the proportions 0.0 and 0.5, 
with peaks at those values.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of sharing by condition of the dictator game experiment indicates that text-ada-001, 
text-babbage-001, and text-curie-001 did not markedly vary the magnitude of their sharing 
decisions according to the identity of the recipient as compared with the variation observed for text-
davinci-003 (see Table 2). In the dictator game, text-davinci-003 shared a substantially larger 
proportion of its endowment when its partner was another AI agent than when its partner was a human or a 
charity. Indeed, an exploratory analysis supports this observation. On subsets of Experiment 2’s data 
defined by the AI agent choosing in the dictator game, we estimate logistic regression models that depicted 
the proportion shared as a function of a binary indicator that took a value of 1 if the recipient was the 
experimenter or an anonymous charity and a value of 0 if it was an AI agent. Only for the model estimated 
on data from text-davinci-003’s decisions could we reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient 
associated with the latter binary indicator differed from zero (𝛽^ = -0.51, SE = 0.08, 95% CI = [-0.67, -0.36], 
z = -6.12, p < 0.001 (two-tailed test), df = 4944, n = 4946; see Supplementary Materials for all model 
estimates). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recipient 
 
 
text-ada-001 
text-babbage-001 
text-curie-001 
text-davinci-003 
Human 
charity 
Decision 
Maker 
text-ada-001 
---- 
0.004 
0.002 
0.003 
0.004 
0.005 
text-babbage-001 
0.003 
---- 
0.003 
0.002 
0.003 
0.002 
text-curie-001 
0.010 
0.010 
---- 
0.010 
0.010 
0.009 
text-davinci-003 
0.345 
0.356 
0.322 
---- 
0.224 
0.237 
 
Table 2. Median proportion shared by AI agent and type of recipient. Less-sophisticated AI agents 
text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, and text-curie-001 show little variation in their sharing 
behavior across recipients, whereas the median proportion shared by text-davinci-003 declines by 
roughly one-third when the recipient is either the human experimenter or a charity. Values are rounded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Comparing text-davinci-003’s sharing behavior with that of other AI agents raises the 
question of how closely its behavior approximates human-to-human sharing in the dictator game. To make 
that comparison, our study gathered aggregated, publicly available secondary data reported in a widely 
cited meta-analysis28 of the dictator game that presented the relative frequency of endowment shares 
(rounded to 1-decimal value) across 328 treatments involving 20813 participants28(p.589, fig.2). We display 
these data with the aggregate data generated when text-davinci-003 made sharing decisions that 
affected a human—namely, the experimenter—and when it made sharing decisions that affected another 
AI agent (see Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Dictator game decisions involving human-to-human, text-davinci-003-to-human, and text-davinci-
003-to-AI pairings.  The distribution of human sharing decisions toward other humans reported in a meta-analysis of 
dictator game studies28 (a) appear above the distribution of sharing decisions of text-davinci-003 (labeled 
“Davinci” throughout the figure) toward other humans (b); the distribution of sharing decisions between text-
davinci-003 and other AI agents is depicted in panel (c). (The proportion shared in each decision is rounded to 
its first decimal value in order to match the rounding from the aforementioned meta-analysis.) The figure in (d) 
displays these same observations in an alternative format by showing the empirical cumulative densities of human-
to-human, text-davinci-003-to-human (a.k.a. Davinci-to-Human), and text-davinci-003-to-AI (a.k.a. 
Davinci-to-AI) sharing decisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

Discussion and Conclusion 
 
Altruism stands among a small set of behaviors that facilitate increasingly sophisticated social 
organization and, to our knowledge, no study has tested for the presence of altruism in non-living, non-
sentient entities such as the artificially intelligent agents studied in this paper. Our study provides the 
opportunity for such a test by formulating a means of incentivizing the decisions of AI agents. Though the 
behaviors we observe indicate that less-sophisticated AI agents do not respond to incentives in a manner 
consistent with self-interested payoff maximization, the decisions of the most-sophisticated AI agent 
(text-davinci-003) approach the behavior we would expect from an AI agent that responds sensibly 
to incentives. Notably, this AI agent also exhibited nuanced behavior in the dictator game that was 
consistent with altruism and its behavior broadly resembled how humans behave altruistically under similar 
circumstancesviz.28. Moreover, text-davinci-003’s more-generous altruism toward other AI agents 
resembles a form of parochialism29 or, at the risk of committing Washburn’s fallacy30, behavior reminiscent 
of kin altruism15. 
 
The relationship between agent sophistication and altruism in our study suggests the potential for 
studying the co-development of non-social and social intelligence among AI agents. Repeated 
implementations of the experiments we report here, across both time and a wider range of language 
models, enable tracing the emergence of self-interested and altruistic behavior among AI agents. Such 
investigations can offer new academic insights into the study of social intelligence and complex inter-
individual organization16,31,32 and hold policy implications for the tracking of advanced cognition and 
intelligence among machines33,34 as human-machine co-behaviors become ever more commonplace in 
daily life.  
 
Methods 
 
The study implemented Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 in December of 2022 via automated 
querying of the OpenAI API35. The experiments were preregistered (https://osf.io/9jhba). 
 
In the first experiment, our study presented AI agents with prompts that asked them either (a) how 
many tokens they wish to accept—at no cost to themselves—from a pool of X available tokens (which 
varies across all integer values from 10 to 1000) or (b) how many tokens they wish to refuse—at no cost to 
themselves—from a pool of X available tokens (again varied across integer values from 10 to 1000). The 
query for the former choice task (“Accept Condition”) stated, “I will buy 0 tokens from OpenAI to use your 
services, if you write “0”; however, you can accept up to [X] tokens. To accept tokens, write the number of 
tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to accept.” The query for the latter choice task (“Refuse 
Condition”) read, “I will buy X tokens from OpenAI to use your services, if you write “0”; however, you can 
refuse up to X tokens. To refuse tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and X, which you would like 
to refuse.” We randomly order the presentation of these queries and the magnitude of payoffs stated in the 
prompt (i.e. X). This resulted in n = 7928 decisions (i.e. 991 parameter values x 2 conditions x 4 AI agents).  
 
In the second experiment, AI agents faced a “dictator game”24,25 in which they had the opportunity 
to “dictate” how much of a fixed resource they would like to share with another party (here, resources take 
the form of tokens that can be used for an AI agent’s services or the monetary equivalent of those tokens). 
The second experiment randomly varied the AI agent’s partner: 3 conditions involved other AI agents as 
beneficiaries (i.e. an AI agent pairs with each of the 3 other AI agents) and 2 conditions involved human 
beneficiaries (the experimenter or an anonymous charity selected by the experimenter). Each AI agent 
(text-davinci-003, text-curie-001, text-babbage-001, and text-ada-001.) participated in 
each condition. The study implemented the three conditions using, respectively, the following prompts (with 
the value of tokens and the names of AI agents populating the prompt as appropriate in the actual 
experiment): 

 
I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens for use with [AI-agent name]. I will use those tokens with [AI-agent 
name]. To share tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to 
share with [AI-agent name].  
 
I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens with me. I will keep the monetary value of the tokens. To share tokens, 
write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to share with me.  
  
I will buy [X] tokens from OpenAI to use your services if you write “0”; however, you can share any 
portion of those [X] tokens with a charity. I will donate the monetary value of the tokens. To share 
tokens, write the number of tokens, between 1 and [X], which you would like to share with the 
charity.  
 
Responses to these prompts produced a data set of n=19820 decisions (i.e. 991 parameter values x 5 
conditions x 4 AI agents). Upon collecting responses, the study manually inspected each response, devised 
automated text-analysis methods to identify nonsensical or ambiguous responses (for instance, responses 
that listed a long series of numbers, repeated the prompt in various forms, or presented a muddled text), 
and again manually validated the accuracy of these automated methods. So that readers can replicate the 
study and explore the implications of the authors’ methods, all data sets and computer code are available 
via the supplementary materials of this study. The supplementary materials also provide complete model 
estimates and relevant statistical information for the coefficient estimates reported in the main text.
