COVID19-HPSMP: COVID-19 Adopted Hybrid and Parallel Deep
Information Fusion Framework for Stock Price Movement Prediction
Farnoush Ronaghi†, Mohammad Salimibeni†, Farnoosh Naderkhani†, and Arash Mohammadi†
†Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, Concordia University,

2712; Address: 1455 De Maisonneuve Blv. W., EV-009.187, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3G-1M8.
Abstract
The novel of coronavirus (COVID-19) has suddenly and abruptly changed the world as we knew
at the start of the 3rd decade of the 21st century. Particularly, COVID-19 pandemic has negatively
aﬀected ﬁnancial econometrics and stock markets across the globe. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML)-based prediction models, especially Deep Neural Network (DNN) archi-
tectures, have the potential to act as a key enabling factor to reduce the adverse eﬀects of the
COVID-19 pandemic and future possible ones on ﬁnancial markets. In this regard, ﬁrst, a unique
COVID-19 related PRIce MOvement prediction (COVID19 PRIMO) dataset is introduced in this
paper, which incorporates eﬀects of social media trends related to COVID-19 on stock market price
movements. Afterwards, a novel hybrid and parallel DNN-based framework is proposed that inte-
grates diﬀerent and diversiﬁed learning architectures. Referred to as the COVID-19 adopted Hybrid
and Parallel deep fusion framework for Stock price Movement Prediction (COVID19-HPSMP), in-
novative fusion strategies are used to combine scattered social media news related to COVID-19
with historical mark data. The proposed COVID19-HPSMP consists of two parallel paths (hence
hybrid), one based on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with Local/Global Attention modules,
and one integrated CNN and Bi-directional Long Short term Memory (BLSTM) path. The two
parallel paths are followed by a multilayer fusion layer acting as a fusion centre that combines local-
ized features. Performance evaluations are performed based on the introduced COVID19 PRIMO
dataset illustrating superior performance of the proposed framework.
Keywords: COVID-19 Pandemic, Deep Neural Networks, Hybrid Models, Information Fusion,
Stock Movement Prediction.
Expert Systems with Applications
July 9, 2021
arXiv:2101.02287v2  [q-fin.ST]  8 Jul 2021

1. Introduction
The novel of coronavirus (COVID-19) has suddenly and abruptly changed the world as we
knew at the end of the 2nd decade of the 21st century. The global COVID-19 pandemic caused
market volatility (Mazue, 2020; Baek, 2020) rocketing upward around the world. In particular, the
pandemic has negatively triggered several sectors including but not limited to stock markets, global
supply chains, labor markets, and consumption behaviors. Disruptions of such sectors, especially
the stock markets (Bustos, 2020; Al-Awadhi, 2020; Ansari, 2020), can adversely aﬀect the global
economy. The United States volatility levels in the mid-March of 2020 are similar to those last
seen during October 1987; after 1929 to 1939, and; during in 2008. In September 2008, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average fell 777.68 points in intraday trading. During the recent pandemic, in
the latter part of March 2020, volatility began to retreat and, by late April, fell sharply but
remained well above pre-pandemic levels. It is expected that the emerging markets, the ones with
restricted resources to cope with negative impacts of the COVID-19, more substantially feel the
COVID-19 pressure due to having slower economic growth and not having suﬃcient capital inﬂows.
In these sad and unfortunate pandemic times, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML)-based (Radojicic, 2020; Rezaei, 2020; Hoseinzade, 2019; Chong, 2019; Seong, 2021; Zhang,
2021) stock market movement prediction solutions can potentially prevent the pandemic crisis that
negatively aﬀecting the market across the world causing unexpected havocs.
Literature Review: Stock market movement prediction is a key and challenging problem in
ﬁnancial econometrics as such has attracted extensive recent research focus (Frankel, 1995; Ron-
aghi, 2020; Mohammadi, 2017; Edwards, 2007; Bollen, 2011; Jiang, 2020; Hu, 2019; Koshiyama,
2020; Schumaker, 2009). It is widely acknowledged that investors need high-quality data to make
informed and accurate decisions. Particularly, in times of market crisis, speciﬁcally during the
recent COVID-19 pandemic, investors need advanced Big-Data Analytic and Information Tech-
nologies (Choudrie, 2021) to acquire timely and accurate data. Using high-quality data, investors
can perform fast analysis and decision making in the market volatility and react quickly to the
fast changing conditions. Any positive or negative news related to the stock market crisis can
have a ripple eﬀect on the investors’ decision-making process within the stock markets. During
the pandemic area, typically, stock movement prediction becomes signiﬁcantly challenging as stock
markets tend to face high ﬂuctuations. Consequently, it is of paramount importance to develop in-
2

novative and advanced processing and learning solutions to accurately predict stock movements for
achieving maximum potential proﬁt. This has resulted in a recent surge of interest in ML/AI-based
prediction techniques (Hu, 2019; Anik, 2020) and fusion of multi-modal information sources. In the
context of stock price movement prediction, historical stock prices are typically fused with infor-
mation obtained from media news. For the latter, in addition to the conventional news platforms,
recently, extensive interest is shown towards utilization of Internet-based news resources, such as
social media for development of ML/AI predictive models. The manuscript focuses on this topic
and examines the role of COVID-19 related social media news on behavior of Dow Jones market.
Recent advancements and developments in the ﬁeld of ML and AI, in particular, Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), have motivated diﬀerent research works to incorporate such advanced model-
ing techniques for prediction and forecasting tasks in stock markets (Tetlock, 2007). In particular,
there has been a recent surge of interest in information fusion (Narkhede, 2021) and sentiment
analysis (Choudrie, 2021) based on stock market data (Patel, 2015; Gite, 2021) and their eﬀects on
stock markets. On the one hand, Reference (Patel, 2015) focused on predicting direction of move-
ment of stock and stock price index. This study compared diﬀerent ML models including Artiﬁcial
Neural Network (ANN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forests (RF), and naive-Bayes.
Two diﬀerent approaches are developed to feed ML models. The ﬁrst approach involves computa-
tion of ten technical parameters using stock trading data, while the second approach focuses on
representing these technical parameters as trend deterministic data. Experiments are performed
on the Indian stock markets and based on a dataset consisting of 10 years of historical data from
2003 to 2012 of two stocks (Reliance Industries and Infosys Ltd.) and two stock price indices (CNX
Nifty and S&P Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) Sensex). Experimental results show that predic-
tion performance improves when technical parameters are represented as trend deterministic data.
Similarly, Reference (Patel, 2015) focused on predicting future values of stock market index via a
two-stage fusion approach. Support Vector Regression (SVR) is used in the ﬁrst stage, while ANN,
RF, or SVR are used in the second stage resulting in SV R–ANN, SV R–RF and SV R–SV R
fusion prediction models. The prediction performance of these hybrid models is compared with the
stand-alone models illustrating the power of hybrid modeling. On the other hand, Reference (Gite,
2021) focused on predicting stock prices from sentiment analysis with use of ML/DL approaches.
News headlines have a tremendous eﬀect on the buying and selling patterns as traders easily get
3

inﬂuenced by what they read. In this work, News headlines are extracted from Pulse and historical
prices are obtained from Yahoo Finance. The proposed DL models, i.e., LSTM and LSTM-CNN
model, performed reasonably well illustrating potentials of DL for sentiment analysis.
DNN-based solutions are data-driven techniques that learn the underlying dynamics of the
stock price movements through processing of a large amount of data. DNN-based methodologies
are, typically, data hungry and will not perform well in the absence of a large and diversiﬁed
set of data resources. Availability of public news media, Internet-based news channels, and social
media can pave the way to better train DNN models and further increase utilization of AI within
stock markets. This research ﬁeld, however, is still in its infancy due to its high dependence on the
reliability and quality of the information available through Internet-based news channels and social
media resources (Hu, 2019). Furthermore, such data sources can not be directly used for prediction
tasks (Luss, 2015) due to the highly correlated nature of stock market price movements. To tackle
the aforementioned issues, there is an unmet and timely quest to develop and design: (i) Hybrid
processing/learning models based on diﬀerent and diversiﬁed learning architectures to capture
underlying correlations and variabilities of the data sources, and; (ii) Smart fusion strategies to
combine scattered social media news with historical mark data. The main objective of the proposed
DNN-based predictive model is to construct a new information fusion framework to analyze and
interpret ever-changing trends during the COVID-19 pandemic area.
Contributions: The paper makes the following contributions. First, a unique and real COVID-19
related PRIce MOvement prediction (COVID19 PRIMO) dataset (PRIMO, 2021)1” is constructed
to incorporate eﬀects of internet-based and social media trends related to COVID-19 on stock
market price movements. The main component of the constructed COVID19 PRIMO dataset is
based on Twitter messages. It is well known that news and media move stock prices (Fama,
1998; Huang, 2020; Yun, 2019). Nowadays, information reaches out to the public via diﬀerent
news platforms ranging from newspaper, radio and television to social media and Internet-based
venues. In this area, social media, especially Twitter, is a popular and widely used platform to
share personalized opinion on diﬀerent topics. Twitter is also used extensively by politicians who
potentially have high impact on stock price movements. Based on a survey on Statista (Clement,
1The COVID19 PRIMO dataset is accessible through the following page:
https://github.com/MSBeni/COVID19 PRIMO#COVID19-PRIMO.
4

2020), from the ﬁrst quarter of 2017 to 2020, Twitter had 186 million active users worldwide.
Based on the constructed COVID19 PRIMO dataset, the paper proposes a data-driven (DNN-
based) COVID-19 adopted Hybrid and Parallel deep fusion framework for Stock price Movement
Prediction (COVID19-HPSMP) that uses information fusion to combine COVID-19 related Twitter
data with extended horizon market historical data. More speciﬁcally, in contrary to the existing
data-driven movement prediction models, where a single DL model is used (Ronaghi, 2020), the
proposed COVID19-HPSMP is a hybrid framework with two parallel paths, i.e., one based on
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with Local/Global Attention modules, and one integrated
CNN and Bi-directional Long Short term Memory (BLSTM). The former path is incorporated
within the COVID19-HPSMP framework to extract temporal features, while the latter path is used
to extract spatial features. The two parallel paths are followed by a multilayer fusion layer acting
as a fusion centre that combines localized features extracted in each of the two parallel paths. The
COVID19 PRIMO dataset is used to evaluate the performance of the proposed COVID19-HPSMP
framework, which illustrates its superior performance compared to its stand-alone (non-hybrid)
counterparts.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the COVID19 PRIMO
dataset and formulates the stock movement prediction task. The COVID19-HPSMP hybrid frame-
work is presented in Section 3. The implementation study and results are presented in Section 4.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Problem Deﬁnition and COVID19 PRIMO
In this section, ﬁrst, the COVID19 PRIMO dataset is introduced, which is constructed based on
the Dow Jones stock market index and its associated Twitter messages for the period of 01/01/2016
to 30/07/2020. The focus is on the problem of stock price movement prediction as close observation
of market movements can reveal presence of a signiﬁcant amount of trading targets with minor
movement ratios. More speciﬁcally, the paper focuses on investigating eﬀects of COVID-19 pan-
demic on stock price movement prediction. In this paper, stock movement prediction is modeled
as a two-class classiﬁcation problem based on the adjusted closing price of the underlying stocks.
The adjusted closing price is commonly utilized to compute the associated stock dividends and
earnings (Xie, 2013). Furthermore, the adjusted closing price is beneﬁcial to learn and predict
5

Figure 1: Block diagram of the procedure designed to collect and prepare Tweet component of the COVID19 PRIMO.
ﬂuctuations in the stock market (Li, 2014; Rekabsaz, 2017).
We have prepared a new dataset for the aforementioned prediction problem, which can facilitate
analysis and evaluation of potential impacts of a pandemic on stock market and can provide priceless
insights to combat future possible pandemic. The constructed COVID19 PRIMO dataset consists of
two components, i.e., historical prices and Twitter messages. The ﬁrst component, historical data, is
obtained from Dow Jones stock market. With the ticker of DJI. Dow Jones is a stock market index
that measures the performance of 30 large companies like Apple, Boeing, and Microsoft. Historical
stock market prices are obtained from the Yahoo ﬁnance. For this task, we used the Yahoo ﬁnance
library in Python2 to collect the data from the Yahoo API. For some of the stocks, we also used
Alpha Vantage APIs3. The data is prepared based on three diﬀerent temporal resolutions, i.e.,
daily; weekly, and; monthly. The daily prices are used in our model described later for the task of
stock movement prediction.
Capitalizing on the facts identiﬁed in Section 1, for the news component of the COVID-19
price movement prediction dataset, we focused on Twitter. Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of the
approach followed to collect and analyze Twitter messages. Web scraping from the Twitter search
engine is utilized to build the Twitter dataset. The oﬃcial API of the Twitter has some limitations
2http:https://pypi.org/project/yahoo-ﬁnance/
3http:https://pypi.org/project/alpha-vantage/
6

Figure 2: Illustrative raw Tweets samples in the COVID19 PRIMO dataset before the pre-processing step.
that restricts the extent of text that can be extracted. Additionally, the oﬃcial API of the Twitter
cuts the tweets at times, which in turn results in items with missing data. We have developed a
localized API to address the aforementioned issues. The localized API uses Twitter search engine
and directly collects the required dataset from Twitter. We set up our data collection platform based
on scraping the twitter website. The twitter web scraping returns the Tweet text content with a
range of useful attributes, for example, Tweet −ID, Tweet Created at, Retweet, Text, Favorite
Count, Hashtag Text, User ID, Followers Count, Friends Count, Statuses Count, User Created at,
and Location. To collect informative public Tweets, we added a constraint to our implementation
to collect tweets retweeted more than once. Many other unnecessary attributes regarding a tweet
were also removed from the data gathering session to focus on the essential information such as
date, tweet text, and number of retweets. Fig. 2 illustrates an illustrative example of raw tweets
collected by web scraping.
A critical challenge is scraping the raw content of Twitter data. Such a process takes exten-
sive time and needs manual and cumbersome pre-processing procedures. We retrieved Dow Jones
and COV ID −19 tweets by querying symbols $DJI, #DOW, Covid19, #Covid19, #Covid −19
and CoronaV irus. Additionally, the corresponding data associated with historical prices are col-
lected. The constructed dataset includes related tweets from 01/01/2016 to 30/07/2020 for the
Dow Jones stock index. Not every day is considered as a trading day, i.e., weekends and holidays
are not among the trading dates and ought to be out of the analysis scope. To better organize
7

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: (a) The Distribution of The COVID-19 Tweets and Target. (b) The Number of COVID-19 Tweets. (c)
Correlation matrix between diﬀerent variables.
and use the input, we subtract the number of days in a year from the number of weekends, the
number of half trading days, and the number of market holidays. More speciﬁcally, our dataframe
is created by combining historical prices and Tweet corpora and matching them to the trading
days. Consequently, we considered 1, 152 trading days from January 2016 to July 2020 to build our
dataset. The COVID19 PRIMO dataset is then divided into a training set from January 2016 to
January 2020, and a validation set from January 2020 to February 2020. Data from 01/03/2020 to
30/07/2020 is kept to be used for test purposes.
8

2.1. Data Visualization
In this sub-section, we visualize the existing relations between diﬀerent parameters of the
COVID19 PRIMO dataset, particularly that of COVID-19 tweets with other parameters. As stated
above, the introduced dataset is constructed based on the Dow Jones stock market index and its
associated Twitter messages for the period of 01/01/2016 to 30/07/2020. The COVID-19 pandemic
crisis covers a fraction of the data represented in the COVID19 PRIMO dataset but plays an essen-
tial role in predicting the pandemic’s eﬀects on the stock market movements. The COVID-19 related
tweets appeared in 2020 (from February to July), speciﬁcally starting to show up from the end of
February. The dates containing the COVID-19 are stamped with True, making it possible to con-
sider its distribution in the whole frame. Fig. 3 visualizes diﬀerent aspects of the COVID19 PRIMO
dataset and illustrates relation of COVID-19 with other parameters of the dataset. Violin plot is
shown in Fig. 3(a), where the distribution of COVID-19 tweets and the market movements are
illustrated. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the COVID-19 tweets are less than 200 days, which is expected
given the recent emergence of the pandemic. Fig. 3(c) shows the correlation between several dif-
ferent variables aﬀecting the COVID19 PRIMO dataset. Market prices, including Adjusted close
price (Adj. Close); Open price (Open); High price (High); Low price (Low); calculated target (Tar-
get), and; Presence of COVID-19 in tweets are depicted in this ﬁgure. For example, the correlation
between normalized adjusted close price and normalized high price is 0.83. Finally, Fig. 4 is a grid
of scatter plot used to visualize bivariate relationships between combinations of variables. Fig. 4
is included to have a big picture of the distribution of the data and better understand existing
relations between diﬀerent parameters in the dataset. Fig. 4 shows the relationship for a diﬀerent
combination of variables in a DataFrame as a matrix of plots. The orange dots, show the COVID-
19 related data in the dataset, while the blue dots, represent the lack of COVID-19 related data.
Fig. 4 can potentially depict the bivariate relationships between diﬀerent market price data and
COVID-19 together with the relation between the Target recognized in this period of time with
the pandemic data.
3. Proposed COVID19-HPSMP Framework
In this section, we describe the constituent components used in the development of the proposed
COVID19-HPSMP framework. As stated previously, the main architecture of the COVID19-HPSMP
9

Figure 4: Grid of scatter plots. The orange dots show COVID-19 related data points, while the blue dots represent
lack of COVID-19 related data.
10

Figure 5: The proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework.
is developed based on DNNs. The prominent advantage of DNNs is their ability to extract meaning-
ful patterns from raw data through multiple non-linear transformations and approximation of com-
plex non-linear functions (Al-Dulaimi, 2019). More speciﬁcally, the proposed COVID19-HPSMP
is a data-driven (deep learning model) designed based on hybrid or multiple-model strategies.
The COVID19-HPSMP framework extracts and interprets the available news corpus via temporal
attention modeling based two key principles, i.e., “Diverse Inﬂuence” and “Sequential Context De-
pendency”. To achieve these objectives, the COVID19-HPSMP is designed as a hybrid multi-modal
fusion framework that integrates information obtained from stock market historical data and so-
cial media (Twitter data). The proposed hybrid framework consists of three paths, two parallel
paths, i.e., the CNN Local/Glocal path, and; the CNN-LSTM path, together with a fusion path.
Fig. 5 illustrates the overall structure of the proposed framework. The fusion path composed of
fully connected layers that combine extracted features from each of the two parallel paths. Each
of the two parallel paths within the COVID19-HPSMP framework are constructed based on the
following two main components:
(i) Word Embedding Module: This module is used to calculate embedded vectors for Twitter
data. For this purpose, Glove (Pennington, 2014), as a pre-trained unsupervised model, is
used within the word embedding module of each of the two parallel paths within the proposed
COVID19-HPSMP framework.
(ii) Attention Module: The main objective of this module is to extract speciﬁc words with highest
attention weight. The COVID19-HPSMP is a hybrid model where each of the two parallel
paths (i.e., the CNN Local/Glocal path, and; the CNN-LSTM path) is a unique attention
11

Figure 6: The CNN Local/Global path of the COVID19-HPSMP framework.
module extracting diﬀerent related features. The rationale behind such a hybrid and parallel
structure is the signiﬁcance of the attention network and the intuition that extracting diﬀerent
attention-related features would improve the overall performance of the model.
In what follows, we present each of the three constituent paths of the proposed COVID19-HPSMP
framework.
3.1. The CNN Local/Global Path
The ﬁrst parallel path of the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework is a CNN-based lo-
cal/global attention model designed to capture and extract spatial features from the input data.
More speciﬁcally, the CNN-based path consists of Local and Global attention layers, which are
described in details below.
12

3.1.1. Local Attention Layer (LAL)
Intuitively speaking, a word embedding model produces representations for each word in the
Twitter corpus. Let us denote the lth Tweet among the available set of NT Tweets with T (l),
for (1 ≤l ≤NT ). Furthermore, consider that Tweet T (l) contains N(l)
W number of words. The
embedding can be thought of as a linear operator (function) that takes as an input a one-hot
vector e(l)
i
∈RNW corresponding to the ith word of Tweet T (l), for (1 ≤i ≤N(l)
W ). Note that,
here NW denotes the number of words in the overall vocabulary. The embedding then maps the
one-hot vector into a dense feature vector x(l)
i
= [x(l)
i,1, . . . , x(l)
i,NF ]T ∈RNF , which consists of NF
scalar features for the ith word of the lth Tweet within the Twitter corpus. The feature vector x(l)
i
is obtained based on a trainable weighting matrix (to be learned) of the embedding layer as follows
x(l)
i
= W (Emb)e(l)
i .
(1)
The embedding layer’s output together with price values are provided as a concatenated input to
the Local Attention Layer (LAL). The LAL focuses on the words, which are more informative within
a localized window. More speciﬁcally, let the lth Tweet be represented by N(l)
W word embedding as
(x(l)
1 , . . . , x(l)
m , . . . , x(l)
N(l)
W
), where x(l)
m is the middle (center) word within the embedding sequence of
the lth Tweet. Local attention process is achieved via a sliding window of length W rolling over the
word embedding sequence of T (l). Attention score s(l)
i
for the ith word of T (l) is computed based on
an attention weighting score W (l,LA)
i
∈RW×NF , for (1 ≤i ≤N(l)
W ), and its associated bias vector
b(l,LA)
i
as follows
s(l,LA)
i
= σ

X(l,LA)
i
◦W (l,LA)
i
+ b(l,LA)
i

,
(2)
where ◦denotes the Hadamard product (element-wise multiplication), σ· is the sigmoid activation
function, and
X(l,LA)
i
≜

x(l)
m+ −W +1
2
, . . . x(l)
i , . . . x(l)
m+ W +1
2 ]T ,
(3)
where superscript T denotes transpose operator. The attention score s(l)
i
is used as a weight for
the words to form localized word embedding as follows ˆx(l,LA)
i
= s(l,LA)
i
x(l)
i . A higher attention
score can be interpreted as higher importance associated with that speciﬁc word than the others.
The weighted sequences then go through a Convolutional layer with a kernel size of 15, which is
designed to avoid overﬁtting. A Max-Pooling layer is then implemented after the convolution one
13

Figure 7: The CNN-LSTM path of the COVID19-HPSMP framework.
to creates position invariance over larger local regions and down-sample the input. Addition of the
Max-Pooling layer also leads to a faster convergence rate by selecting superior invariant features,
which in turn improves generalization performance.
3.1.2. Global Attention Layer (GAL)
The output of the LAL is the provided as input to a Global Attention layer (GAL). This scoring
process of the GAL is similar in nature to that of the LAL (Eqs. (2)-(3)). However, the attention
score, now denoted by s(l,GA)
i
, is computed through the entire input, i.e.,
s(l,GA)
i
= σ

X(l,GA) ◦W (l,GA)
i
+ b(l,GA)
i

,
(4)
where W (l,GA)
i
∈RN(l)
W ×NF , and
X(G,Att) ≜

x1, . . . , xN(l)
W
T .
(5)
By applying global attention, the eﬀect of uninformative words will be diminished, and the global
semantic meaning will be captured more precisely through the CNN path. This completes de-
scription of the CNN Local/Global path of the proposed COVID19-HPSMPframework. Next, we
present the CNN-BLSTM path.
3.2. CNN-LSTM Attention based Model
The second parallel path of the proposed COVID19-HPSMP is a hybrid CNN and BLSTM
attention model, referred to as the CNN-BLSTM path. Similar to the CNN Local/Global path,
in the ﬁrst step, the Twitter messages are provided as input to a “Word Embedding layer”. As
14

stated previously, a pre-trained unsupervised Glove model (Pennington, 2014) is used as the word
embedding layer within the COVID19-HPSMP framework. Afterwards, the corpus and prices are
encoded by a CNN layer to extract general contextual features. An attention layer is assigned
across all the vectors to calculate the weighted corpus. At the next step, a second CNN layer is
implemented to capture and learn more ﬁne-tuned features. The ﬁrst CNN layer has 50 number of
ﬁlters with a window size of 25. The second CNN layer has 100 ﬁlters with a window size of 25.
The ﬁrst Attention layer is used to capture essential and unique features to provide insight into the
vector of the data including tweets and prices. The second Attention layer acts on each vector and
calculates the weighted mean of these encoded corpus vectors to represent the overall sequential
context information. A global Max-Pooling layer is then applied to capture the essential features
and reduce the framework’s complexity. Global Max-Pooling is similar to the regular version but
with pool size equals to the size of the input. At the next stage, an attention-based BLSTM layer
is designed to remember what has been previously learned to better understand the input. The
attention-based BLSTM layer is described next.
3.2.1. Attention-based Bidirectional LSTM:
To encode temporal information based on the available set of news corpus and ﬁnancial time-
series data, BLSTM is incorporated within the COVID19-HPSMP hybrid framework. Learning
based on ﬁnancial time-series data is a sequence learning task for which BLSTMs are considered as
the state-of-the-art DNN architectures. The LSTM architecture is initially developed by Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber (Hochreiter, 1997) to address the vanishing and exploding gradient problem of
conventional Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Since then, LSTM models have gained signiﬁcant
popularity owing to their extensions, advancements and successful applications in diﬀerent domains.
Generally speaking, LSTM is a memory-based architecture that uses diﬀerent gating functions and
a memory state to manage process if information through time (Di, 2018). LSTM works based on
15

the following update model at each time step (denoted by t)
it
=
σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(6)
ft
=
σ(Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
(7)
gt
=
tanh(Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
(8)
ct
=
ft ◦ct−1 + it ⊙gt
(9)
ot
=
σ(Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
(10)
ht
=
ot ◦tanh(ct)
(11)
where Wi, Wo, Wf, Wc, and Ui, Uo, Uf, Uc are weight matrices; Terms bi, bo, bf, bc are bias
vectors, and; tan(·) represents element-wise hyperbolic tangent activation function. Furthermore,
ht and ht−1 represent the current and previous hidden states, respectively. In the context of the
proposed COVID19-HPSMP and to encode the temporal layer, we adopt Bidirectional version of
the LSTM (BDLSTM) to feed the ith word embedding. BLSTM can access both the preceding
and succeeding contexts. It separates the hidden layer into two parts, forward state sequence and
backward state sequence based on an iterative process.
3.3. Fusion Path
The ﬁnal component of the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework is the Fusion Path with
three fully connected layers for fusing features extracted from each of the two underlying parallel
paths and performing the ﬁnal price movement prediction task. The ﬁrst fusion layer has 100
number of neurons and uses “tan” activation function, while the second fusion layer has 50 number
of neurons with the same activation function. The ﬁnal layer of the Fusion Path, has 1 neuron
and uses Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) as its activation function to produce the price movement
predictions. The input to the Fusion Path is constructed by concatenating the output of the CNN
Local/Global path, which is a ﬂattened 1-Dimensional feature vector, with that of the CNN-BLSTM
path.
As a ﬁnal note, we would like to brieﬂy focus on trading from ﬁnancial perspective to better link
the COVID19 PRIMO (presented in Section 2) and the COVID19-HPSMP framework (discussed
in the section). The COVID19 PRIMO provides means to trade based on 5-day in-advance predic-
tions (provided by the COVID19-HPSMP). Generally speaking, a common reason for purchasing,
16

conventionally used by traders and stockholders, is to only buy a stock when its prediction is in-
creasing as this provides the chance to sell at a higher price in future and gain proﬁt. This future
to sell a stock, varies for diﬀerent investors, e.g., some consider a short period trade, some are more
eager to mid-term trades, and others focus on long-term trades. A sentimental engine that can infer
the market’s sense and predict its movements is a signiﬁcant asset. In other words, the “BUY” and
“SELL” decisions can be made more successfully when an accurate movement prediction model
is available. For use of COVID19-HPSMP as a trading engine over the COVID19 PRIMO, we
consider the following two trading approaches:
• The 50-50 Trading Approach: Whenever the movement prediction value is less than 0.5 (i.e.,
the model senses a plunge in the market’s future trends) the “SELL” signal will be sent to
the trader. Alternatively, when the movement prediction value is greater than 0.5 (i.e., the
model predicts a boost in the market price) it will generate a “BUY” signal. We refer to this
algorithm as the 50-50 approach. The traders have a chance to buy stocks at a lower price
before the price goes up and sell them at a higher price. Based on these signals, provided by
the COVID19-HPSMP framework, the traders have insightful predictions for the next ﬁve
days. In other words, based on the COVID19 PRIMO, 5-day in advance predictions can be
computed allowing decisions to buy a stock for their portfolio (when predictions show that
market will face a “surge”) or vise versa.
• The 60-40 Trading Approach: As an alternative approach, we consider a BUY and SELL
with a HOLD scenario, by deﬁning new thresholds over the market movement predictions.
Based on this new approach, if the movement prediction value is less than 0.4 we consider
a decrease in the market price. For the values greater than 0.6, the increase in the market
price is predicted. For the values between 0.4 and 0.6, the HOLD signal will be oﬀered. We
refer to this model as the 60-40 approach.
4. Experiments
Experimental results and comparisons are presented in this section to evaluate the proposed
hybrid COVID19-HPSMP framework for the task of stock movement prediction. As stated previ-
ously, the problem at hand is a classiﬁcation one with the following expected outputs: (i) On one
17

Table 1: Accuracy, Sensitivity, and Speciﬁcity comparisons between the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework,
those of thee stand-alone models, and accuracies of algorithms from References (Hu, 2019; Xu, 2018).
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Accuracy
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
60
71.11
66.48
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
56
72.5
64.65
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
54.35
66.67
62.06
Han Hu (2019)
-
-
47.8
Stocknet Xu (2018)
-
-
58.23
hand, within a 5 days prediction horizon, if the adjusted stock price of a speciﬁc day is more than
that of the previous day, the output of that speciﬁc day would be 1. Then, the sum of the output
values is computed over the 5 days horizon and if the sum is greater than a pre-deﬁned threshold
of 3, we consider the ﬁnal output for that 5 day horizon to be 1, denoting a rise, and; (ii) On the
other hand, when the adjusted stock price associated with a speciﬁc day is less than its previous
day, value 0 is assigned as the output of that speciﬁc day. When the number of such 0 output
values within the 5 days window is more than 3, we consider the ﬁnal output to be 0, representing
the fall prediction/state.
4.1.
COVID19-HPSMP LSTM-based hybrid attention Model
To perform the evaluations, the available Twitter news corpora is tokenized and words occurring
less than 5 times are removed to construct the vocabulary. It is worth noting that removing words
with limited usage will reduce the associated memory cost of the DNN models. As stated above,
we consider a ﬁve day horizon and used a batch size of 64 within 15 epoch. In addition, Glove,
which is an unsupervised word embedding algorithm, is used within the embedding modules of the
two parallel paths of the COVID19-HPSMP. For comparison purposes, three diﬀerent models are
implemented as follows:
(ii) The proposed COVID19-HPSMP Framework: The proposed hybrid COVID19-HPSMP frame-
work developed in Section 3 is the ﬁrst implemented stock movement prediction model. The
COVID19-HPSMP consists of 2 parallel paths and a fusion path integrating extracted fea-
tures of each of the two parallel paths.
18

(ii) Stand-Alone CNN Local/Global Model: The second implemented movement prediction model
is the CNN Local/Global path implemented independently (stand alone as a single model). To
implement the stand alone version of the CNN Global/Local model, initialization is performed
following the guideline provided in Reference (Seo, 2017). A pre-trained Glove (Pennington,
2014) is used for weighting corpus within the word embedding layer. In the LAL, we use
window of size 5 with a sigmoid function (σ). Total of 80 ﬁlters are implemented within the
LAL. In the GAL, we used 50 ﬁlters of length 2 and 3. Finally, a fully connected layer with
0.5 dropout is designed to form the output.
(iii) Stand-Alone CNN-BLSTM Model: The third implemented movement prediction model is
the CNN-BLSTM path implemented independently as a single model. Similar to the stand-
alone CNN Global/Local model, a pre-trained Glove (Pennington, 2014) is used for weighting
corpus within the embedding layer. A convolutional layer with a 64 number of ﬁlters and a
window size of 25 is followed by an attention layer. To extract essential features and reduce
the framework’s complexity, a max-pooling layer is designed. The output of max-pooling
layer is the input of next layer which is attention-based Bidirectional LSTM with 250 hidden
layers. Finally, two fully connected layers are considered with 300 and 1 number of hidden
neurons, respectively, to form the price movement prediction results.
These three implemented models are trained with Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) with a learning
rate of 0.001. To reduce the training times of the implemented models, Batch Normalization (Ioﬀe,
2015) is utilized to normalize the underlying layers. Furthermore, to avoid overﬁtting issues and
improve the overall robustness of the implementations, 0.5 dropout is used within the fully con-
nected layers. Finally, the computational graphs of the implemented models are constructed via
Tensorﬂow (Abadi, 2016) to ﬁne tune diﬀerent hyper-parameters.
4.2. Performance Evaluation/Results
In this sub-section, we represent diﬀerent experimental results to evaluate the performance of
the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework for the stock movement prediction. The accuracy of the
proposed models areas follows: 64.65% for the stand-alone CNN-based local/global; 62.06% for the
stand-alone CNN-LSTM, and 66.48% for the hybrid attention model, i.e., the COVID19-HPSMP
framework. The accuracy of all three implemented models are shown in Fig. 8(a). The accuracy is a
19

(a)
(b)
Figure 8: (a) Accuracy of the Models. (b) Loss of the Models.
Figure 9: Accuracy and loss contrast of the diﬀerent price movement prediction models.
fraction of correct predictions to the total number of predictions. The loss function associated with
the evaluated models is illustrated Fig. 8(b). Loss function demonstrates the distinction between
the output of the model and the target value in order to show the probability of misclassiﬁcation.
We demonstrate the accuracy of the baseline models in Table 1 comparing performance of the three
20

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10: Confusion matrices for binary predictions. (a) The COVID19-HPSMP Framework. (b) Standalone CNN
Local/Global Model, (c) Standalone CNN-LSTM Mode.
implemented models.
In addition to the accuracy measure, we have computed sensitivity and speciﬁcity metrics
to evaluate diﬀerent error types (i.e., False Negative (FN), and False Positive (FP)). Sensitivity
represents the number of days that stock price has an upward trend correctly predicted by the
model. Speciﬁcity, on the other hand, is illustrating model’s performance in identifying negative
conditions. More speciﬁcally, if the stock movement test indicates that the price movement has an
upward trend while the trend is downward in the actual scenario, the test result is considered to
be a FP. Likewise, if the test result indicates a descending trend, but the actual market price is
increasing, the result is FN. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity are then deﬁned as follows
Sensitivity
=
TP/(TP + FN)
(12)
=
(# of True GoUp Assessments)/(# of all GoUp Assessments)
Specificity
=
TN/(TN + FP)
(13)
=
(# of True GoDown Assessments)/(# of all GoDown Assessments),
where True Positive (TP) happens when a stock price goes up and the model also indicates the
uptrend. On the other hand, True Negative (TN) refers to the scenario where the market indicates
that stock goes down and the model shows the downward movement as well. The result of our
proposed models are shown in the revised Table 1. In particular, we should point out that the
higher the numerical value of sensitivity, the less likely the stock movement model returns FP
results. The results show that the proposed hybrid model provides considerable improvement in
terms of sensitivity, compared to its stand-alone counterparts.
21

(a)
(b)
Figure 11: (a) Buy/Sale Return based on the 50-50 approach, i.e., whenever the movement prediction value is less
than 0.5 the “SELL” signal will be sent to the trader. Alternatively, when the model predicts a boost in the market
price (movement prediction value is greater than 0.5) “BUY” signal will be generated. (b) Buy/Sale Return based
on 60-40 approach, i.e., when the movement prediction value is less than 0.4 we consider a decrease in the market
price sending the “SELL” signal. When the prediction values are greater than 0.6, the “BUY” signal will be sent.
For the values between 0.4 and 0.6, the HOLD signal will be oﬀered.
Fig. 10 illustrates confusion matrices (Bhatt, 2021) associated to the proposed COVID19-HPSMP
framework and its two stand-alone components (implemented individually). As it can be observed,
the hybrid model (the COVID19-HPSMP) outperforms its counterparts. It is worth mentioning
that the achieved accuracy of 66.48% is signiﬁcant, although in absolute terms it seems to be low.
First, please note that average accuracies achieved in the literature for the task of price movement
prediction is around 50%. Second, these lower accuracies are obtained based on a much wider win-
dow of information compared to the limited duration of the introduced COVID19 PRIMO dataset.
The limited duration of the dataset is due to recent emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Stock Trading Experiments: In this part, to evaluate eﬀects of the classiﬁcation prediction
mechanism on the investors’ return, we conduct a back-testing experiment by simulating stock
trading for March 2020 to the end of July 2020, which is during the COVID-19 ﬁnancial crisis
22

Table 2: Experiment results for trading based on the COVID19-HPSMP framework following the 50-50 approach.
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
Companies
Proﬁt
Return
Weight
E(R)
Std(R)
Coca-Cola
8,009
44%
8%
3.5%
11.5%
Caterpillar
3,790
25%
18%
4.5%
8.7%
Visa
10,606
41%
28%
11.5
15.6
Int. Business Machines Corp.
7,291
39%
18%
7%
13.6%
Walt Disney
3,712
19%
17%
3%
6.2%
Apple
4,804
36%
11%
4%
10.6%
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
Coca-Cola
1,954
20%
8%
1.6%
5.2%
Caterpillar
566
26%
18%
4.75%
9.2%
Visa
2,269
24%
28%
6.7%
9%
Int. Business Machines Corp.
1,192
22%
18%
3.9%
7.6%
Walt Disney
483
6%
17%
1.02%
2.2%
Apple
1,531
16%
11%
1.8%
4.7%
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
Coca-Cola
1,651
17%
8%
1.4%
4.4%
Caterpillar
478
22%
18%
4.1%
7.3%
Visa
1,917
20%
28%
5.6%
8.6%
Int. Business Machines Corp.
1,007
19%
18%
3.4%
6%
Walt Disney
408
5%
17%
9%
1.8%
Apple
1,293
14%
11%
1.5%
4.1%
23

Table 3: Experiment results for trading based on the COVID19-HPSMP framework following the 60-40 approach.
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
Companies
Proﬁt
Return
Weight
E(R)
Std(R)
Coca-Cola
10,448
46%
8%
3.7%
4.9%
Caterpillar
6,896
41%
18%
7.3%
10.2%
Visa
12,590
62%
28%
17.3%
23.6%
Int. Business Machines Corp.
8,742
43%
18%
8%
14.8%
Walt Disney
3,549
19%
17%
3.2%
3.5%
Apple
7,779
59%
11%
6.5%
10.4%
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
Coca-Cola
4,978
37%
8%
2.9%
9.6%
Caterpillar
720
28%
18%
5%
9.8%
Visa
3,711
26%
28%
7.3%
10%
Int. Business Machines Corp.
2,304
32%
18%
5.7%
7.1%
Walt Disney
1,414
9%
17%
1.5%
1%
Apple
3,236
0.24
11%
2.6%
7.1%
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
Coca-Cola
3,931
21%
8%
1.7%
5.4%
Caterpillar
764
25%
18%
4.5%
11.7%
Visa
2,027
26%
28%
7.2%
9.9%
Int. Business Machines Corp.
2,812
23%
18%
4.1%
8.1%
Walt Disney
880
8%
17%
1.4%
2.7%
Apple
2,472
17%
11%
1.9%
5%
24

(a)
(b)
Figure 12: (a) Per-stock returns for the ﬁrst trading mechanism over the following six prominent companies: Apple,
WaltDesney, IBM, V isa, Caterpillar, and Coca −Cola. (b) Results of MC simulations over all companies in Dow
Jones.
period. Investors’ return (Zhang, 2020) is computed as follows
Rt
=
wt−1 · rt
(14)
with
rt
=
pt
pt−1
−1,
and
wtϵ [0, 1]
(15)
where Rt denotes the ﬁnal return of the day, and rt is the return of the day based on the adjusted
close price. In the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework, term wt represents the baseline predic-
tion of the market’s movement. For evaluation purposes, we consider the following three trading
mechanisms:
• First Trading Mechanism: We consider a scenario with 100 stock shares of a speciﬁc
company on 01/03/2020. In this regard, ﬁrst, we perform a selective test over six prominent
companies from diﬀerent sectors, and then conduct a Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. In both
cases and to better simulate a real-world trading scenario, we consider a transaction cost of
0.3% for each trading. We have calculated risk-adjusted return based on the Sharpe Ratio
(SR) approach. In summary, the ﬁnal proﬁt and SR of our COVID19-HPSMP engine is
6, 369 and 1.07%, respectively, for the 50-50 approach. The ﬁnal proﬁt and SR for the second
trading mechanism (60-40) is 8, 813 and 2.49%, respectively. Generally speaking, SRs greater
than one are preferred with higher the SR value, the better the risk to return scenario for
25

the investors. Furthermore, we consider that the stock shares will be available to buy and
sell at the moment they are requested. For the ﬁrst scenario, the following six prominent
companies are selected: Apple, WaltDesney, IBM, V isa, Caterpillar, and Coca −Cola.
Fig. 11(a) shows the return obtained based on the COVID19-HPSMP framework and the 50-
50 trading approach, compared to the market return. Fig. 11(b) illustrates the results of this
60-40 trading algorithm. As can be seen, the returns obtained based on the 60-40 approach
are higher than the return values gained from the market, standalone CNN Local/Global
Model, and standalone CNN-LSTM Model. The average market return for the 60-40 approach
is 0.497 which shows improvements over the 50-50 algorithm. In Fig. 11, the “BUY” and
“SELL” signals are also shown with green and red triangles, respectively. As can be seen,
the COVID19-HPSMP framework closely follows the historical data showing the real market
return. Furthermore, the COVID19-HPSMP engine, in most scenarios, correctly predicts the
trend of the market in the future and produces timely “BUY” and “SELL” signals. We should
point out that the proﬁt is calculated as the diﬀerence between the Adjusted Close price of Sell
and Buy signals after deducting the transaction cost and risk-adjusted return. Further details
on the per-stock returns are provided in Table 1 for the 50-50 trading approach, and Table 2
for the 60-40 trading approach. In brief, the ﬁnal proﬁt and Sharpe Ratio (SP) of the proposed
COVID19-HPSMP engine based on the 50-50 approach is 6, 369 and 1.07% respectively.
The 60-40 trading approach provides total proﬁt of 8, 813 with SR of 2.49%, which means
that, overall, the proposed model performs considerably well. The COVID19-HPSMP model
makes the highest proﬁt for Visa Company, which is 10, 606$ and the lowest proﬁt for Walt
Disney Company is 3, 712$. Based on the results, we construct a portfolio to measure the
overall proﬁtability of the six selected stocks. It is assumed that 100 shares of each stock are
bought, and the trade is made based on the proposed COVID19-HPSMP buy/sell signals. The
ﬁnal proﬁt of our COVID19-HPSMP engine is 6, 369$, which means that, overall, our model
performs considerably well. In a second scenario, MC simulation of 100 runs is performed
considering the proﬁt of all the companies in the Dow Jones. In each MC run, six stocks are
randomly selected and the procedure outlined above for the ﬁrst scenario is applied. As can
be seen in Fig. 12(b), based on the MC results, the proposed method oﬀers a positive return
over this COVID-19 crisis period and can provide the users with a proﬁt despite being in a
26

pandemic area.
With regards to Figs. 11 and 12, we would like to mention that the market return is computed
based on daily trading while the return calculated by the COVID19-HPSMP Framework
is based on Buy/Sell signals that the proposed model has produced. In other words, the
results shown in the aforementioned ﬁgures include the market daily return (rt =
pt
pt−1 −1),
which corresponds to using a daily buy/sell signal. While at times daily trading results in
higher return, the proposed model achieved average return of 0.453, which is signiﬁcantly
higher than the average daily market return of 0.004. It is interesting to observe that the
COVID19-HPSMP Framework performs better as the model sees more market data. For
instance, due to the COVID-19 crisis, abnormal market ﬂuctuations started at the middle
of March 2020 and continued until April 2020. Some false predictions in those periods are
due to these ﬂuctuations since our model has not seen these type of market reactions during
its training phase. After learning from these initial abnormal market ﬂuctuations, the model
gradually performs better in predicting the market trend. For example, it can be observed
that there is a sharp drop in daily returns in mid of June 2020 where the proposed model’s
adaptive nature (actively learning) has resulted in achieving positive reruns during that
period.
• Second Trading Mechanism: In the ﬁrst trading mechanism, we considered an equal
weight for all the stocks in our portfolio. Here, we construct a portfolio based on market
price weighting (Plyakha, 2017) as follows
wp
i
=
pi
PN
i=1 pi
,
(16)
where wp
i represents the weight of each stock based on its market price, and pi denotes the
market price (we assume that market prices are adjusted close price of the stock on the ﬁrst
day of March). Weights are applied based on each stock’s market price on the date that the
transaction is going to be placed. Further details on market price weighting is provided in
Table 1. To evaluate the performance of our model Expected return (E(R)) and standard
deviation of the return (Std(R)) are computed. The results show that Visa has a proﬁt of
10, 606$ with standard deviation of 0.156, which means that visa stock is riskier than others.
While the Walt Disney has lower proﬁt and lower risk than the other stocks. Overall, the sum
27

Table 4: Return comparisons between the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework and stand-alone models.
Model
Return
60-40 Strategy
Hold Strategy 1
Hold Strategy 2
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
49.7%
27.1%
8.6%
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
41.8%
21%
2.8%
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
27.3%
25.5%
2.6%
of the proﬁt of the portfolio is equal to 6, 764$, expected return E(R) is 0.337 with standard
deviation Std(R) of 0.079.
• Third Trading Mechanism: We consider the scenario where 100 shares in the Dow Jones
market are bought on 01/03/2020 and held until the end of July. Consequently, the cumulative
daily return R shows that we get 0.086 return based on the COVID19-HPSMP framework.
From a ﬁnance perspective, the risk also needs to be presented as a model can lead to
more returns but higher risk. The risk may be deﬁned as the variability of returns that
are expected from a given investment. The greater the variability, the riskier the stock.
Investment in the Treasury bond is risk-free because of the governmental guarantees. In
contrast, investment in equity shares is risky because of the uncertainty on return. Some
shares are riskier than others, and even in years when the overall stock market goes up, many
individual shares decline in their price. Therefore, investing in one share is extremely risky.
Investment risk, then, is related to the probability of actually earning a low or negative return.
Therefore, the probability of low earning or negative return is higher in riskier investments.
Consequently, it is necessary to measure the degree of risk associated with the investment. For
this purpose, we consider the scenario where 100 shares in the Dow Jones market are bought
on 01/03/2020 and held until the end of July. As a measure of risk, we calculated Sharpe
Ratio (SR). The cumulative return and sharpe ratio of our baseline models based on two the
trading approaches are illustrated in Tables 5 and 6. The proposed COVID19-HPSMP based
on the 60-40 trading approach obtains the highest cumulative return and SR compared to
its counterparts. It is worth mentioning that a higher SR shows superiority of a portfolio
compared to its counterparts.
As a ﬁnal experiment, we evaluate the performance based on the following three trading
28

Table 5: Return comparisons between the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework (50-50), stand-alone models and
two commonly used trading indicators.
Model Return
Cumulative Return
Sharpe Ratio
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
8.6%
1.85%
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
2.8%
0.48%
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
2.6%
0.41%
Simple Moving Average (SMA)
0.9%
0.1%
Moving average convergence divergence (MACD)
3.8%
0.55%
Table 6: Return comparisons between the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework (60-40), stand-alone models and
two commonly used trading indicators.
Model Return
Cumulative Return
Sharpe Ratio
The COVID19-HPSMP Framework
29.8%
2.19%
Standalone CNN Local/Global Model
17.5%
0.91%
Standalone CNN-LSTM Model
14.9%
0.98%
Simple Moving Average (SMA)
0.9%
0.1%
Moving average convergence divergence (MACD)
3.8%
0.55%
strategies: (i) 60-40 Strategy: First, we consider the performance of our models where 100
shares in the Dow Jones market are bought on 01/03/2020 based on buy, sell and hold
scenarios (the so called 60-40 approach); (ii) Hold Strategy 1: Second, we consider the “BUY”
and “HOLD” strategy where 100 shares in the Dow Jones market are bought and held for a
long period regardless of the ﬂuctuations in the market. For this purpose, we bought the stock
on the day that the COVID19-HPSMP framework predicted a “BUY” signal and “HOLD”
it until the end of the period. Based on the signal generated by our model, we buy the stock
on 2020-03-19, and sell it on 2020-07-29 when the models predicted a “SELL” signal, and;
(iii) Hold Strategy 2: Finally, we consider the scenario where 100 shares in the Dow Jones
market are bought on 01/03/2020 and held until the end of July. The results are shown in
Table 4 illustrating that the proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework achieves higher return
across diﬀerent strategies compared to its counterparts.
Comparisons with Trading Indicators: In this part, we compare the COVID19-HPSMP engine
29

Figure 13: MACD Signal
with two common trading indicators, i.e., the Simple Moving Average (SMA) (Ansari, 2017) and
the Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) (Vaidya, 2020), which are among the most
widely used technical indicators by market technicians to identify short, medium, and long-term
price movements. First we focus on the SAM approach, which is also known as moving mean or
rolling mean in statistics. The SMA is one of the oldest and most straightforward strategies for
analysing signals and trade based on the results. In this approach, the moving average of the price
or return is calculated to estimate the trends in the market price. The SMA is calculated by creating
a series of averages of the market data’s time-ordered subsets. While diﬀerent window times can be
used, a 5-day moving average is calculated for comparison with the proposed COVID19-HPSMP
framework. Fig. 11(b) compares returns obtained from the COVID19-HPSMP framework with
those obtained from the SMA approach and that of the market. Fig. 11(b) demonstrates that our
COVID19-HPSMP framework outperforms the SMA in prediction of the market’s trend. A second
indicator utilized for evaluation purposes is the MACD method, which is another important trading
indicator wildly used by traditional technical analysis and algorithmic trading. By leveraging the
close price’s historical value, MACD can be calculated as a collection of three time-series: (i) The
MACD value series, which is the diﬀerence between the shorter period (fast) and the longer period
30

(slow) of the exponential moving average (EMA); (ii) The MACD Signal, which is the EMA of the
MACD value series, and; (iii) A divergence series, which is the diﬀerence between Items (i) and
(ii). Three parameters a, b, c are used to calculate the MACD, where a is related to the fast EMA;
b relates to slow EMA, and; c is related to EMA. To compare the proposed framework with the
MACD indicator, we used a = 12, b = 26, and c = 9, which are the commonly used values for
these parameters. The BUY/SELL signals generated based on the MACD indicator is shown in
Fig. 13. The MACD provides ﬁve diﬀerent Buy/Sell signal as shown in Fig. 13, which is much less
than the Buy/Sell signals provided by the COVID19-HPSMP framework. The cumulative return
of diﬀerent models are illustrated in Tables 5 and 6. Based on the results shown in Tables 5 and 6,
the COVID19-HPSMP framework outperforms the other two indicators in terms of the cumulative
return.
Signiﬁcance Tests: As a ﬁnal experiment, we evaluate the hypothesis that predictions made by
the COVID19-HPSMP framework are more proﬁtable than those obtained via a standalone CNN
Local/Global model (potentially illustrating beneﬁts of a hybrid design), and the Moving Average
Convergence/Divergence (MACD) method, a common trading indicator (potentially illustrating
beneﬁts in comparison to a commonly utilized indicator). In this regard, we have conducted statis-
tical signiﬁcance analysis of predictive models given their rate of return through a null hypothesis
test. In the ﬁrst test, the null hypothesis is to use the stand-alone CNN Local/Global engine for
investment, and the alternative hypothesis is to use the COVID19-HPSMP framework as a rec-
ommendation engine for investment. The price movement prediction in stock market is assumed
to be aleatory (null is not rejected) until it is proven the results of a recommendation engine (in
this case, the COVID19-HPSMP framework) has no relationship with the results of a random
trader (null is rejected). To deﬁne a conﬁdence threshold, a cut point of α=2.145 corresponding
to 95% of conﬁdence is established. The resulting t-value is equal to 3.0526, which is associated
with p-value of 0.004303 showing a signiﬁcant result as p < 0.05. This suggests that the null hy-
pothesis is not accepted, therefore, predictions made by COVID19-HPSMP are more proﬁtable.
Similarly, in a second experiment, we check if predictions of the COVID19-HPSMP framework is
more proﬁtable than those of the MACD indicator. The computed t-value is 2.8433 (i.e., p-value
of 0.00651), which means that the COVID19-HPSMP framework reaches better results compared
to the MACD, which is a common trading indicator.
31

As a ﬁnal note, we would like to mention that the variance between the actual return from a
given portfolio and the expected return over a given period of time is referred to as an “Abnormal
Return”. A positive abnormal return refers to the scenario that the actual return is higher than its
expected return. Abnormal return can be achieved in stock market, however, the volatile nature
of the market is hard to earn abnormal return using only the ﬁnancial indicators, i.e., the stock
data, as the market is dependent on a variety of social, political, and economical factors. There are
three forms of eﬃcient markets (i.e., weak, semi-strong, and strong), deﬁned based on the nature
of information utilized to determine asset prices. In the weak form, asset prices referring to all past
prices and trading volume information fully reﬂect all the market data. In the semi-strong form,
asset prices reﬂect all publicly known and available information. In the strong form, asset prices
fully reﬂect all information, including public (e.g., news) and private information. We consider
semi-strong form of eﬃciency for the markets, in which prices reﬂect the news data and ﬁnancial
indicators. The proposed COVID19-HPSMP framework incorporates eﬀects of social media trends
related to COVID-19 on stock movement prediction. The proposed framework uses information
fusion to combine COVID-19 related Twitter data with historical data to trade 5-day in-advance in
order to predict the movement of the market. Our model can predict the stock market’s ﬂuctuations
with more than 66% accuracy, which will hopefully be a metric to earn abnormal return.
5. Conclusion
Motivated by abrupt, sudden, and negative eﬀects of COVID-19 pandemic on stock markets,
ﬁrst, the paper introduced a unique COVID-19 related PRIce MOvement prediction (COVID19 PRIMO)
dataset. The constructed dataset incorporates eﬀects of social media trends related to COVID-19
on stock market price movements. Based on the constructed COVID19 PRIMO dataset, the pa-
per then proposed a novel data-driven (DNN-based) COVID-19 adopted Hybrid and Parallel deep
fusion framework for Stock price Movement Prediction (COVID19-HPSMP). The proposed frame-
work uses information fusion to combine COVID-19 related Twitter data with extended horizon
market historical data. More speciﬁcally, in contrary to the existing data-driven stock price move-
ment prediction models, where a single DNN model is used, the COVID19-HPSMP framework is
a hybrid model consisting of two parallel paths (i.e., the CNN Local/Glocal path, and; the CNN-
LSTM path) and a fusion path that combines localized features. Each of the two parallel paths is a
32

unique attention module extracting diﬀerent attention related features. The rationale behind such
a hybrid and parallel structure is the signiﬁcance of the attention network and the intuition that
extracting diﬀerent attention-related features would improve the overall performance of the model.
The proposed COVID19-HPSMP architecture can predict the stock price movements during the
pandemic crisis to forecast sudden sharp movements (fall or rise) in the stock market. Based on the
results of the COVID19-HPSMP architecture, we can predict the stock market’s ﬂuctuations with
more than 66% accuracy, which will hopefully be a metric to be more prepared for the unexpected
havocs.
