Unsupervised Learning of Neural Networks to Explain Neural Networks
(extended abstract)
Quanshi Zhanga, Yu Yangb, and Ying Nian Wub
aShanghai Jiao Tong University,
bUniversity of California, Los Angeles
Introduction
1Motivation, diagnosis of features inside CNNs: In re-
cent years, real applications usually propose new demands
for deep learning beyond the accuracy. The CNN needs to
earn trust from people for safety issues, because a high ac-
curacy on testing images cannot always ensure that the CNN
encodes correct features. Instead, the CNN sometimes uses
unreliable reasons for prediction.
Therefore, this study aim to provide a generic tool to
examine middle-layer features of a CNN to ensure the
safety in critical applications. Unlike previous visualiza-
tion (Zeiler and Fergus 2014) and diagnosis (Bau et al. 2017;
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) of CNN representations,
we focus on the following two new issues, which are of spe-
cial values in feature diagnosis.
• Disentanglement of interpretable and uninterpretable fea-
ture information is necessary for a rigorous and trustworthy
examination of CNN features. Each ﬁlter of a conv-layer
usually encodes a mixture of various semantics and noises
(see Fig. 1). As discussed in (Bau et al. 2017), ﬁlters in high
conv-layers mainly represent “object parts”2, and “material”
and “color” information in high layers is not salient enough
for trustworthy analysis. In particular, part features are usu-
ally more localized and thus is more helpful in feature diag-
nosis.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose to disentangle part
features from another signals and noises. For example, we
may quantitatively disentangle 90% information of CNN
features as object parts and interpret the rest 10% as textures
and noises.
• Semantic explanations: Given an input image, we aim
to use clear visual concepts (here, object parts) to inter-
pret chaotic CNN features. In comparisons, network visual-
ization and diagnosis mainly illustrate the appearance cor-
responding to a network output/ﬁlter, without physically
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1Quanshi Zhang is with the John Hopcroft Center and the MoE
Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. Yu Yang and Ying Nian Wu are with the Center for Vi-
sion, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy, University of California,
Los Angeles.
2(Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018) considers both semantics of “ob-
jects” and “parts” as parts.
Disentangle
interpretable
signals
Semantically
explain
Few restrictions
on structures &
losses
Not affect dis-
criminability
CNN visualization
✓
✓
Interpretable nets
✓
✓
Our research
✓
✓
✓
✓
Table 1: Comparison between our research and other stud-
ies. Note that this table can only summarize mainstreams in
different research directions considering the huge research
diversity.
modeling or quantitatively summarizing strict semantics.
As shown in Fig. 4, our method identiﬁes which parts are
learned and used for the prediction as more ﬁne-grained ex-
planations for CNN features.
Tasks, learning networks to explain networks: In this
paper, we propose a new explanation strategy to boost fea-
ture interpretability. I.e. given a pre-trained CNN, we learn
another neural network, namely a explainer network, to
translate chaotic middle-layer features of the CNN into se-
mantically meaningful object parts. More speciﬁcally, as
shown in Fig. 1, the explainer decomposes middle-layer
feature maps into elementary feature components of object
parts. Accordingly, the pre-trained CNN is termed a per-
former network.
In the scenario of this study, the performer is well pre-
trained for superior performance. We attach the explainer
onto the performer without affecting the original discrimi-
nation power of the performer.
The explainer works like an auto-encoder. The encoder
decomposes features in the performer into interpretable part
features and other uninterpretable features. The encoder
contains hundreds of speciﬁc ﬁlters, each being learned to
represent features of a certain object part. The decoder in-
verts the disentangled part features to reconstruct features of
upper layers of the performer.
As shown in Fig. 1, the feature map of each ﬁlter in
the performer usually represents a chaotic mixture of ob-
ject parts and textures, whereas the disentangled object-part
features in the explainer can be treated as a paraphrase of
performer features that provide an insightful understanding
of the performer. For example, the explainer can tell us
• How much can feature information (e.g. 90%) in the per-
former be interpreted as object parts?
arXiv:1901.07538v1  [cs.LG]  21 Jan 2019

A
… ...
Performer
Explainer
B
A
B
Filter 
1
Filter 
2
Filter 
1
Filter 
2
Unclear 
semantics
Unclear 
semantics
Head 
pattern
Torso 
pattern
Figure 1: Explainer network. We use an explainer network
(green) to disentangle the feature map of a certain conv-
layer in a pre-trained performer network (gray). The ex-
plainer network disentangles input features into object-part
feature maps (B) to explain knowledge representations in
the performer, i.e. making each ﬁlter represent a speciﬁc ob-
ject part. The explainer network can also invert the disentan-
gled object-part features to reconstruct features of the per-
former without much loss of information. We compare ordi-
nary feature maps (A) in the performer and the disentangled
feature maps (B) in the explainer on the right. The gray and
green lines indicate the information-pass route during the
inference process and that during the explanation process,
respectively.
• Information of what parts is encoded in the performer?
• For each speciﬁc prediction, which object parts activate
ﬁlters in the performer, and how much do they contribute to
the prediction?
Explaining black-box networks vs. learning inter-
pretable networks: In recent years, some researchers grad-
ually focus on the interpretability (Bau et al. 2017) of
middle-layer features of a neural network. Pioneering stud-
ies, such as the research of capsule nets (Sabour, Frosst, and
Hinton 2017) and interpretable CNNs (Zhang, Wu, and Zhu
2018), have developed new algorithms to ensure middle-
layer features of a neural network are semantic meaningful.
In comparisons, our explaining pre-trained performer is
of higher ﬂexibility and has broader applicability than learn-
ing new interpretable models. Table 1 summarizes the dif-
ference.
• Model ﬂexibility: Interpretable neural networks usually
have speciﬁc requirements for structures (Sabour, Frosst,
and Hinton 2017) or losses (Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018),
which limit the model ﬂexibility and applicability. In addi-
tion, most existing CNNs are learned in a black-box man-
ner with low interpretability. To interpret such CNNs, an ex-
plainer is required.
• Interpretability vs. discriminability: Using clear visual
concepts to explain black-box networks can overcome a
major issue with network interpretability, i.e. the dilemma
between the feature interpretability and its discrimination
power. A high interpretability is not necessarily equiva-
lent to, and sometimes conﬂicts with a high discrimination
power (Bau et al. 2017). As discussed in (Zhang, Wu, and
Zhu 2018), increasing the interpretability of a neural net-
work may affect its discrimination power. People usually
have to trade off between the network interpretability and
the performance in real applications.
In contrast, our explanation strategy does not change
feature representations in the pre-trained CNN performer,
thereby physically protecting the CNN’s discrimination
power.
Learning: We learn the explainer by distilling feature
representations from the performer to the explainer without
any additional supervision. No annotations of parts or tex-
tures are used to guide the feature disentanglement during
the learning process. We add a loss to speciﬁc ﬁlters in the
explainer (see Fig. 2). The ﬁlter loss encourages the ﬁlter to
be exclusively triggered by a certain object part of a cate-
gory. This ﬁlter is termed an interpretable ﬁlter.
Meanwhile, the disentangled object-part features are also
required to reconstruct features of upper layers of the
performer. Successful feature reconstructions guarantee to
avoid signiﬁcant information loss during the disentangle-
ment of part features.
Contributions of this study are summarized as follows.
(i) We tackle a new explanation strategy, i.e. learning an ex-
plainer network to mine and clarify potential feature com-
ponents in middle layers of a pre-trained performer net-
work. Decomposing chaotic middle-layer features into in-
terpretable concepts will shed new light on explaining black-
box models.
(ii) Another distinctive contribution of this study is that
learning an explainer for interpretation avoids the typi-
cal dilemma between a model’s discriminability and inter-
pretability. This is our essential difference to studies of di-
rectly learning the performer with disentangled/interpretable
features.
Our method protects the discrimination power of the orig-
inal network. Thus, it ensures a high ﬂexibility and broad
applicability in real applications.
(iii) Our method is able to learn the explainer without any
annotations of object parts or textures for supervision. Ex-
periments show that our approach has considerably im-
proved the feature interpretability.
Algorithm
Network structure of the explainer
As shown in Fig. 2, the explainer network has two mod-
ules, i.e. an encoder and a decoder, which transform per-
former features into interpretable object-part features and
invert object-part features back to features of the performer,
respectively. We can roughly consider that object-part fea-
tures in the explainer contain nearly the same information as
features in the performer.

Interpretable 
Track
Ordinary 
Track
p
1-p
Decoder
… ...
Performer
Explaine
r
Mask
Conv-
interp-1
ReLU
Lossf
Mask
Conv-
interp-2
ReLU
Lossf
Norm
Pool
Conv-
ordin
ReLU
Norm
Pool
Interpretable track
Ordinary track
Decoder
ReLU
fc-dec-2
fc-dec-1
Figure 2: The explainer network (left). Detailed structures within the interpretable track, the ordinary track, and the decoder are
shown on the right. People can change the number of conv-layers and FC layers within the encoder and the decoder for their
own applications.
We applied the encoder and decoder with following struc-
tures to all types of performers in all experiments. Neverthe-
less, people can change the layer number of the explainer in
their applications.
Encoder: In order to reduce the risk of over-interpreting
textures or noises as parts, we design two tracks for the en-
coder, namely an interpretable track and an ordinary track,
which models part features and other features, respectively.
Although as discussed in (Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018), a
high conv-layer mainly represents parts rather than textures,
avoiding over-interpreting is still necessary for the explainer.
The interpretable track disentangles performer features
into object parts. This track has two interpretable conv-
layers (namely conv-interp-1,conv-interp-2), each followed
by a ReLU layer and a mask layer. The interpretable layer
contains interpretable ﬁlters. Each interpretable ﬁlter is
learned based on the ﬁlter loss, which makes the ﬁlter ex-
clusively triggered by a speciﬁc object part (the learning of
interpretable ﬁlters will be introduced later). The ordinary
track contains a conv-layer (namely conv-ordin), a ReLU
layer, and a pooling layer.
We sum up output features of the interpretable track xinterp
and those of the ordinary track xordin as the ﬁnal output of the
encoder, i.e. xenc = p · xinterp + (1 −p) · xordin, where a scalar
weight p measures the quantitative contribution from the in-
terpretable track. p is parameterized as a softmax probability
p = sigmoid(wp), wp ∈θ, where θ is the set of parameters
to be learned. Our method encourages a large p so that most
information in xenc comes from the interpretable track.
In particular, if p = 0.9, we can roughly consider that
about 90% feature information from the performer can be
represented as object parts due to the use of norm-layers.
Decoder: The decoder inverts xenc to xdec, which recon-
structs performer features. The decoder has two FC layers,
which followed by two ReLU layers. We use the two FC
layers, namely fc-dec-1 and fc-dec-2, to reconstruct feature
maps of two corresponding FC layers in the performer. The
reconstruction loss will be introduced later. The better re-
construction of the FC features indicates that the explainer
loses less information during the computation of xenc.
Learning
When we distill knowledge representations from the per-
former to the explainer, we consider the following three
terms: 1) the quality of knowledge distillation, i.e. the ex-
plainer needs to well reconstruct feature maps of upper lay-
ers in the performer, thereby minimizing the information
loss; 2) the interpretability of feature maps of the inter-
pretable track, i.e. each ﬁlter in conv-interp-2 should exclu-
sively represent a certain object part; 3) the relative contribu-
tion of the interpretable track w.r.t. the ordinary track, i.e. we
hope the interpretable track to make much more contribution
to the ﬁnal CNN prediction than the ordinary track. There-
fore, we minimize the following loss for each input image to
learn the explainer.
Loss(θ)=
X
l∈L
λ(l)∥x(l)−x∗
(l)∥2−η log p+
X
f
λf ·Lossf(xf) (1)
where θ denotes the set of parameters to be learned, in-
cluding ﬁlter weights of conv-layers and FC layers in the
explainer, wp for p, and α for norm-layers. λ(l), λf and η
are scalar weights.
The ﬁrst term ∥x(l) −x∗
(l)∥2 is the reconstruction loss,
where x(l) denotes the feature of the FC layer l in the de-
coder, L = {fc −dec −1, fc −dec −2}. x∗
(l) indicates the
corresponding feature in the performer.
The second term −log p encourages the interpretable
track to make more contribution to the CNN prediction.
The third term Lossf(xf) is the loss of ﬁlter inter-
pretability. Without annotations of object parts, the ﬁlter loss
forces xf to be exclusively triggered by a speciﬁc object
part of a certain category. The ﬁlter loss was formulated in
(Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018). We can summarize the ﬁlter
loss as the minus mutual information between the distribu-
tion of feature maps and that of potential part locations.
Experiments
In experiments, we learned explainers for performer net-
works with three types of structures to demonstrate the
broad applicability of our method. Performer networks were
pre-trained using object images in two different benchmark
datasets for object classiﬁcation. We visualized feature maps
of interpretable ﬁlters in the explainer to illustrate seman-
tic meanings of these ﬁlters. Experiments showed that inter-
pretable ﬁlters in the explainer generated more semantically
meaningful feature maps than conv-layers in the performer.
We compared the object-part interpretability between fea-
ture maps of the explainer and those of the performer. To ob-
tain a convincing evaluation, we both visualized ﬁlters (see
Fig. 3) and used the objective metric of location instabil-
ity (Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018) to measure the ﬁtness be-
tween a ﬁlter f and the representation of an object part.

Feature maps of an 
interpretable filter in 
the explainer
Feature maps of an 
ordinary filter in the 
performer
Feature maps of an 
interpretable filter in 
the explainer
Feature maps of an 
ordinary filter in the 
performer
Figure 3: Visualization of interpretable ﬁlters in the ex-
plainer and ordinary ﬁlters in the performer. We compared
ﬁlters in the top conv-layer of the performer and inter-
pretable ﬁlters in the conv-interp-2 layer of the explainer.
Single-category
Multi
bird
cat
cow
dog
horse
sheep
Avg.
Avg.
AlexNet
0.153 0.131 0.141 0.128
0.145
0.140
0.140
–
Explainer 0.104 0.089 0.101 0.083
0.098
0.103
0.096
–
VGG-M
0.152 0.132 0.143 0.130
0.145
0.141
0.141
0.135
Explainer 0.106 0.088 0.101 0.088
0.097
0.101
0.097
0.097
VGG-S
0.152 0.131 0.141 0.128
0.144
0.141
0.139
0.138
Explainer 0.110 0.085 0.098 0.085
0.091
0.096
0.094
0.107
VGG-16
0.145 0.133 0.146 0.127
0.143
0.143
0.139
0.128
Explainer 0.095 0.089 0.097 0.085
0.087
0.089
0.090
0.109
Table 2: Location instability of feature maps between per-
formers and explainers that were trained using the Pascal-
Part dataset. A low location instability indicates a high ﬁlter
interpretability.
Tables 2 and 3 compare the interpretability between fea-
ture maps in the performer and feature maps in the ex-
plainer. Feature maps in our explainers were much more in-
terpretable than feature maps in performers in all compar-
isons.
Table 4 lists p values of explainers that were learned for
different performers. p measures the quantitative contribu-
tion from the interpretable track. For example, the VGG-
16 network learned using the CUB200-2011 dataset has a
p value p = 0.9579, which means that about 96% feature
information of the performer can be represented as object
parts, and only about 4% feature information comes from
textures and noises.
Conclusion and discussions
In this paper, we have proposed a theoretical solution to a
new explanation strategy, i.e. learning an explainer network
to disentangle and explain feature maps of a pre-trained
performer network. Learning an explainer besides the per-
former does not decrease the discrimination power of the
AlexNet
VGG-M
VGG-S
VGG-16
Performer
0.1502
0.1476
0.1481
0.1373
Explainer
0.0906
0.0815
0.0704
0.0490
Table 3: Location instability of feature maps in performers
and explainers that were trained using the CUB200-2011
dataset. A low location instability indicates a high ﬁlter in-
terpretability.
a head 
filter
a torso 
filter
interpretable
Ordinary
interpretable
Ordinary
58 head filters: 
contributing 12.8%
243 torso filters:
contributing 44.8%
167 neck filters:
contributing 42.2%
44 other filters:
contributing 0.2%
interpretable
Figure 4: Grad-CAM attention maps and quantitative analy-
sis. We compute grad-CAM attention maps of interpretable
feature maps in the explainer and ordinary feature maps in
the performer.
Pascal-Part dataset
CUB200
Single-class Multi-class
dataset
AlexNet
–
0.7137
0.5810
VGG-M
0.9012
0.8066
0.8611
VGG-S
0.9270
0.8996
0.9533
VGG-16
0.8593
0.8718
0.9579
Table 4: Average p values of explainers. p measures the
quantitative contribution from the interpretable track. When
we used an explainer to interpret feature maps of a VGG
network, about 80%96% activation scores came from inter-
pretable features.
performer, which ensures the broad applicability. We have
developed a simple yet effective method to learn the ex-
plainer, which guarantees the high interpretability of feature
maps without using annotations of object parts or textures
for supervision.
We divide the encoder of the explainer into an inter-
pretable track and an ordinary track to reduce the risk of
over-interpreting textures or noises as parts. Fortunately, ex-
periments have shown that about 90% of signals in the per-
former can be explained as parts.
