ANALYTICAL COST METRICS : DAYS OF FUTURE PAST
February 2018
Nirmal Prajapati and Sanjay Rajopadhye
Hristo Djidjev
Department of Computer Science
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado
LANL, Los Alamos, New Mexico
All Rights Reserved
arXiv:1802.01957v1  [cs.PF]  5 Feb 2018

Chapter 1
Introduction
As we move towards the exascale era, the new architectures must be capable of running the
massive computational problems efﬁciently. Scientists and researchers are continuously invest-
ing in tuning the performance of extreme-scale computational problems. These problems arise
in almost all areas of computing, ranging from big data analytics, artiﬁcial intelligence, search,
machine learning, virtual/augmented reality, computer vision, image/signal processing to compu-
tational science and bioinformatics.
With Moore’s law driving the evolution of hardware platforms towards exascale, the dominant
performance metric (time efﬁciency) has now expanded to also incorporate power/energy efﬁ-
ciency. Therefore the major challenge [1–5] that we face in computing systems research is: “how
to solve massive-scale computational problems in the most time/power/energy efﬁcient manner?”
The architectures are constantly evolving making the current performance optimizing strategies
less applicable and new strategies to be invented. The solution is for the new architectures, new
programming models, and applications to go forward together. Doing this is, however, extremely
hard. There are too many design choices in too many dimensions. The algorithms/applications
may have a wide range of parameters, making them either intensely bandwidth bound or heavily
compute bound, limited only by the hardware’s operational throughput. This signiﬁcantly affects
the algorithms used to obtain the best solution. At the hardware end, the target platform affects not
only the parallelization methods but also the tool-chains used. To overcome this complications,
cost models and simulators are used.
We propose the following strategy to solve the problem, i.e., “how to solve massive-scale
computational problems in the most time/power/energy efﬁcient manner?”:
1. Models Develop accurate analytical models (e.g. execution time, energy, silicon area) to
predict the cost of executing a given program.
1

2. Complete System Design Simultaneously optimize all the cost models for the programs
(computational problems) to obtain the most time/area/power/energy efﬁcient solution. Such
an optimization problem evokes the notion of codesign.
Codesign—the simultaneous design of hardware and software—has two common interpreta-
tions [1,6]. System codesign [7,8] is the problem of simultaneously designing hardware, run-time
system, compilers, and programming environments of entire computing systems, typically in the
context of large-scale, high-performance computing (HPC) systems and supercomputers. Appli-
cation codesign, also called hardware-software codesign [9–11], is the problem of systematically
and simultaneously designing a dedicated hardware platform and the software to execute a single
application (program). The proposed approach is applicable to both contexts.
Solving the problem of System codesign in its full generality is very difﬁcult [1,2,4,7] because
of the wide range of (i) computational problems, (ii) the programming languages and abstractions
used to express them, and (iii) varying target architectures, from data centers and cloud-based plat-
forms, to distributed heterogeneous mobile platforms such as phones, and even “things.” There-
fore, we suggest the following breakdown:
1. Employ Domain-Speciﬁcity Choose (i) a (small set/class) of programs, (ii) highly opti-
mized hardware accelerators, and (iii) the optimal compiler transformations.
2. Develop Cost Models Develop accurate analytical cost (Time/Power/Area/Energy) models
for performance prediction and optimization.
3. Mini Sub Prob - Specialize Solve the codesign problem for the speciﬁc domain in (1) using
the models in (2) i.e. optimize the program, compiler and hardware parameters simultane-
ously.
4. Large Prob - Generalize Repeat the above process to cover various important classes of
programs, assign a weight to each class of programs and formulate an optimization problem
for this weighted set of program parameters. Simultaneously, solve for all the parameters
and for all classes of programs.
2

1.1
Specialization
Application codesign [12] is particularly important for embedded systems. In many uses of
these systems (e.g., self-driving cars, computational ﬂuid dynamics, neural networks, medical
imaging, smart cameras, and cyber-physical systems) general purpose platforms based on standard
CPUs deliver inadequate “performance” on a combination of many cost metrics: speed/throughput,
power/energy, weight, size, and manufacturing/fabrication cost, especially in volumes that the mar-
ket can sustain. As a result, specialized hardware is essential.
Hardware platforms for embedded systems are usually heterogeneous, with (instruction-set)
programmable processors (CPUs and micro-controllers), accelerators that are either instruction-
set programmable (e.g., GPUs), or “hardware programmable” ones like FPGAs and reconﬁgurable
logic, as well as Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits (ASICs). For HPC systems, ASICs are
usually not a designer option. In either case, the platforms have specialized, highly parallel, often
ﬁne-grain, components like FPGAs, GPUs, or DSPs, called accelerators.
The challenge is exacerbated when we consider the fact that accelerators are not one single
architecture, and moreover, are constantly evolving. For example,
• Google recently developed the TPU (Tensor-ﬂow Processing Unit), an ASIC to accelerate
machine learning computations. It is completely invisible to end users, who access it via the
Tensor-Flow tool, and whose back end presumably makes direct library calls to TPUs.
• Microsoft released Catapult, an FPGA based fabric for accelerating large-scale data-center
services. It is a custom design, written in Verilog, and accessed via library calls.
• At the other end of the spectrum, Facebook is developing its large scale machine learning
applications using off-the-shelf GPUs and conventional tool chains: CUDA/OpenCL.
Mapping an application to an accelerator platform, even when the hardware is ﬁxed, is extremely
difﬁcult. Codesign seeks to simultaneously design the hardware itself, and is, therefore, an even
harder problem. Multiple cost metrics must be optimized, while still providing ﬂexibility to the
programmer and end user, and the design space is huge.
3

The key element of our approach is to exploit multiple forms of domain-speciﬁcity [1]. First,
we tackle a speciﬁc (family of) computations that are nevertheless very important in many em-
bedded systems. This class of computations, called dense stencils, includes the compute-intensive
parts of many applications such as computational ﬂuid dynamics, neural networks, medical imag-
ing, smart cameras, image processing kernels, simulation of physical systems relevant to realistic
visualization, as well as the solution of partial differential equations (PDEs) that arise in many
cyber-physical systems such as automobile control and avionics.
Second, we target NVIDIA GPUs, which are vector-parallel programmable accelerators. Such
components are now becoming de-facto standard in most embedded platforms and MPSoCs since
they provide lightweight parallelism and energy/power efﬁciency. We further argue that they will
become ubiquitous for the following reasons. Any device on the market today that has a screen
(essentially, any device, period) has to render images. GPUs are natural platforms for this process-
ing (for speed and efﬁciency). So all systems will have an accelerator, by default. If the system
now needs any additional dense stencil computations, the natural target for performing it in the
most speed/power/energy efﬁcient manner is on the accelerator.
The third element of domain speciﬁcity is that we exploit a formalism called the polyhedral
model as the tool to map dense stencil computations to GPU accelerators. Developed over the past
thirty years [13–17], it has matured into a powerful technology, now incorporated into gcc, llvm
and in commercial compilers [Rstream, IBM]. Tools targeting GPUs are also available [18,19].
Thus, we formulate the domain-speciﬁc optimization problem: simultaneously optimize com-
pilation and hardware/architectural parameters to compile stencil computations to GPUs.
Previously, we presented [20] an approach to solve the above problem as follows:
1. Develop Models
(a) Time Model [21] We show that the elements of the domain speciﬁcity can be combined
to develop simple, analytical (as well as accurate) models for the execution time of tiled
stencil codes on GPUs and that these model can be used to solve for optimal tile size
4

selection. Our model was able to predict tile sizes that achieve 30% of theoretical
machine peak on NVIDIA Maxwell GTX 980 and Titan X.
(b) Area Model [20] We develop a simple, analytical model for the silicon area of pro-
grammable accelerator architectures, and calibrate it using the NVIDIA Maxwell class
GPUs. Our model proved to be accurate to within 2% when validated.
(c) Energy Model [22] We also developed energy models, as an explicit analytic function
of a set of compiler and hardware parameters, that predict the energy consumption by
analyzing the source code. We used these energy models to obtain optimal solutions to
tile size selection problem.
2. Codesign [20] We combine the proposed execution time model [21] and the area model [20]
with a workload characterization of stencil codes to formulate a mathematical optimization
problem that minimizes a common objective function of all the hardware and compiler pa-
rameters. We propose a set of Pareto optimal designs that represent optimal combination of
the parameters that would allow up to 126% improvement in performance (GFlops/sec).
Despite domain speciﬁcity, the problem remains difﬁcult. Even when done by hand for sin-
gle target architecture and an application kernel, it is more art than science. Although smart
designers and implementers have worked for many decades on such problems for the “appli-
cation/architecture du jour,” each one was usually a point-solution [23–25]. Designers invested
blood, sweat and tears to ﬁnd the best implementation, used it to solve their problem of interest,
usually published a paper explaining the design, and moved on. Their invested effort, particularly
the trade-offs they made, and lessons they learned, are lost: future designers are left to reinvent
wheels.
The high-level objective is to optimize stencil codes while tuning the hardware accelerator
(GPUs) developing a complete ecosystem. The goal is to automatically and provably optimally,
using time and/or energy as the objective function, map stencils to the hardware accelerators.
5

The idea is to obtain provably optimal mappings through rigorous mathematical optimizations.
The proposed approach can have the following beneﬁts.
• Automation with Optimality: the most time/power/energy efﬁcient implementations can be
derived, reducing programmers’ effort. Compilation tools can be used to guide the optimal
choice of transformations which will, in turn, optimize the performance of the workloads
such as deep learning, image rendering, cyber-physical systems, autonomous vehicle sys-
tems, etc.
• Future prooﬁng: Porting applications to new GPU architectures will require less effort.
Instead of a redesign of each program, our methods can be used to develop new paralleliza-
tion strategies and transformations, reﬁne/redeﬁne objective functions and constraints, and
re-target the compiler. This one-time effort can then be amortized over many application
kernels.
• Codesign: By casting hardware/architectural parameters as variables in the mathematical
optimization framework, we can solve for their optimal values. This will enable us to sys-
tematically explore alternate GPU architectures and simultaneously tune compilation param-
eters. Such a codesign approach will help speed up the research work and the chip design
process. The cost models can be used to quickly recognize the performance sinks and help
identify the design ﬂaws in its early stages saving billions of dollars.
Generalization
Future exascale high-performance computing (HPC) systems are expected to be
increasingly heterogeneous, consisting of several multi-core CPUs and a large number of accel-
erators, special-purpose hardware that will increase the computing power of the system in a very
energy-efﬁcient way [5]. Consequently, highly specialized coprocessors will become much more
common in exascale than in the current HPC systems. Such specialized, energy-efﬁcient acceler-
ators are also an important component in many diverse systems beyond HPC: gaming machines,
general purpose workstations, tablets, phones and other media devices. In order to attain exascale
6

level performance, accelerators have to become even more energy-efﬁcient, and experts anticipate
that a large part of this must come through increased specialization [1].
Our approach can be used to solve the problem of System codesign by applying proposed
accelerator codesign techniques to all the classes of programs that optimize for all the parameters
simultaneously. We provide a proof of concept of our approach, which is a stepping stone towards
solving the larger problem of transforming the GPUs into accelerators for HPC Systems.
1.2
Breaking Abstractions
Code
Performance 
Data
Optimization 
Strategy
Performance 
Model
run/measure/profile
prediction
analyze
transform
Figure 1.1: HPC application performance improvement cycle. The layers represent different architectures.
Since a long time the HPC developers and tool builders are using certain abstractions to im-
prove the performance of applications. Figure 1.1 shows the performance improvement life cycle
of an HPC application. The layers represent a separate life cycle for every architecture (e.g. GPUs,
CPUs, FPGAs). A different Programming Language and System, each with its own Programming
Environment & Tools is used based on the underlying hardware architecture. Therefore, there are
different codes for the same application on different hardware. Usually, the scientists who develop
7

the algorithms/applications are completely isolated from the HPC performance tuning specialists.
For every application, a proﬁler is used to get performance data which is analyzed to derive a
performance model. The performance models are used to predict the performance and select an
optimization strategy. Optimal transformation strategy is applied to get code. This cycle repeats
until the satisfactory performance is obtained.
Fortran
C source
PRDG
Array 
Dataflow 
Analysis
Stencil 
DSL
DSLs
Polyhedral 
analyses
Scheduler
Parallelizer
Tiler
Memory (re) 
Allocator
Code 
Generator(s)
PQAF(s)
C+OPenMP
C+MPI
C+CUDA
PGAS
FPGA
Transformation 
Engine
Figure 1.2: Polyhedral Compilation
Polyhedral compilers (see Figure 1.2) have a Polyhedral Reduced Dependence Graph (PRDG)
as the intermediate representation of loops. Polyhedral analysis (such as scheduling, parallelizing,
memory allocation, etc.) is performed on this graph. Piecewise Quasi-Afﬁne Functions (PQAFs)
are mathematical functions that transform the PRDG using cost functions. A transformed PRDG
is used to generate codes. Notice the similarities and differences between Figures 1.1 and 1.2 and
their performance cycles. The optimization strategies in Figure 1.1 are represent the PQAFs. The
performance models are subsumed in the polyhedral analysis phase. Our work focuses on using
performance models for polyhedral analysis, in turn, breaking the cycle and reducing the time to
ﬁnd optimal solutions.
8

Novelty
1. The main novelty of our work comes out as a consequence of some of the exascale chal-
lenges [1]. For exascale system design, various architectures, programs and transformation
strategies are to be explored simultaneously in order to ﬁnd the optimal. We add performance
models to this design space and provide a uniﬁed view of the optimization space. Figure 1.3
shows this view (more details in Section 2.2).
Programs
Optimization Strategies
Architectures
Performance Models
Figure 1.3: Uniﬁed View of the Design Space.
2. The above design space, however, is very large, has too many parameters and is too com-
plicated to develop precise models. Therefore, we explore domain speciﬁcity and identify
regions where optimization across multiple axes become possible.
We show how the analytical cost models can be used to optimize the performance of domain
speciﬁc programs using transformation strategies for a given architecture in Chapter 2. The rest of
this document is organized as follows: Chapter 2 explains our proposed approach. Chapters 3, 4,
and 5 discuss the work that has been accomplished. Bottleneck Analysis is explained in details in
Chapter 6. Chapter 7 discusses the relevant literature. Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the work.
9

Chapter 2
The Landscape and Navigation
2.1
Domain Speciﬁcity
As we move to address the challenges of exascale computing, one approach that has shown
promise is domain speciﬁcity: the adaptation of application, compilation, parallelization, and opti-
mization strategies to narrower classes of domains. An important representative of such a domain
is called Stencil Computations, and includes a class of typically compute bound parts of many
applications such as partial differential equation (PDE) solvers, numerical simulations in domains
like oceanography, aerospace, climate and weather modeling, computational physics, materials
modeling, simulations of ﬂuids, and signal and image-processing algorithms. One of the thirteen
Berkeley dwarfs/motifs [26], is “structured mesh computations,” which are nothing but stencils.
Many dynamic programming algorithms also exhibit a similar dependence pattern. The importance
of stencils has been noted by a number of researchers, indicated by the recent surge of research
projects and publications on this topic, ranging from optimization methods for implementing such
computations on a range of target architectures, to Domain Speciﬁc Languages (DSLs) and com-
pilation systems for stencils [27–39]. Workshops and conferences devoted exclusively to stencil
acceleration have recently emerged.
A second aspect of domain speciﬁcity is reﬂected in the emergence of specialized architec-
tures, called accelerators, for executing compute intensive parts of many computations. They
include GPGPU, general purpose computing on graphics processing units (GPUs), and other co-
processors (Intel Xeon Phi, Knight’s Landing, etc.). Initially they were “special purpose,” limited
to highly optimized image rendering libraries occurring in graphics processing. Later, researchers
realized that these processors could be used for more general computations, and, eventually, the
emergence of tools like CUDA and OpenCL enabled general purpose parallel programming on
these platforms.
10

Exploiting the speciﬁcity of the applications and the speciﬁcity of target architectures leads
to domain-speciﬁc tools to map very high level program speciﬁcations to highly tuned and opti-
mized implementations on the target architecture. Many such tools exist, both academic research
prototypes and productions systems.
As indicated earlier, our domain speciﬁcity comes in multiple ﬂavors. First, we investigate only
stencil computations. They belong to a class of programs called uniform dependence computations,
which are themselves a proper subset of “afﬁne loop programs.” Such programs can be analyzed
and parallelized using a powerful methodology called the polyhedral model [13–17, 48–50], and
many tools are widely available, e.g., PPCG, developed by the group at ENS, Paris [51]. Second,
we tackle a speciﬁc target platform, namely a single GPU accelerator, and PPCG includes a module
that targets GPUs and incorporates a sophisticated code generator developed by Grosser et al. [18]
that employs a state-of-the-art tiling strategy called hybrid hexagonal classic tiling. An open source
compiler, implementing this strategy is also available, henceforth called the HHC compiler.
2.1.1
Comparison with Polyhedral Methods
The landscape described (in Figure 1.3) allows us to place our work in context. Although our
methods are for domain speciﬁc purposes, an extreme situation with CPUs as the architecture, and
the set of polyhedral programs allows us to compare with conventional compilation.
The optimization problem a compiler “solves” is: pick transformation parameters so as to
optimize the program property of interest, typically execution time. Since it has a single (or a small
handful of) predetermined strategies, it is a limited kind of mathematical optimization problem.
The objective function is a surrogate for execution time.
Now consider PLuTO [50], a state-of-the art polyhedral compiler based on a mathematical
representation of both programs and transformations. By considering only polyhedral programs
and transformations, the optimization problems are rigorous. By default, PLuTO targets multi-
core CPUs, and uses a transformation strategy that combines one level of tiling, loop fusion and
(loop/wavefront) parallelization of tiles. It solves a mathematical optimization problem where the
11

schedule parameters (coefﬁcients of tiling and schedule hyperplanes) are the unknown variables,
and the cost function is the number of linearly independent tiling hyperplanes, combined with a
quantitative measure of the length of the inter-tile dependences. This is again, a surrogate for
the total execution time, and leads to solutions that while reasonable, are not provably optimal.
Moreover, parameters like tile sizes, vectorization and inter-tile schedule are chosen using simple
heuristics, and are not part of the optimization.
2.1.2
Limitations of current domain-speciﬁc compilation
Consider how polyhedral compilation has recently evolved. Bondhugula et al. [52] proposed
an extension of PLuTO for periodic stencil computations, and Bandishti et al. [53] developed
another extension to allow concurrent starts. Since the objective functions in these strategies are
all surrogates for the execution time, there is no way to compare across the strategies. Authors
leave the choice of strategy to the user, via compiler ﬂags. Recently it was shown (in [54], both
quantitatively and empirically) that while concurrent start may be faster for iteration spaces with
a certain aspect ratio of the program size parameters, the best performance for the same program
with different aspect ratio is provided by the basic PLuTO algorithm.
As another example, Grosser et al. [18] proposed a novel combination of hexagonal and classic
tiling for stencil programs on GPUs. They demonstrated—only empirically—performance gains
compared to previous strategies, but did not quantitatively explore cases where HHC was better.
As a consequence, polyhedral compilation remains difﬁcult. Every time a new strategy is de-
veloped, the authors publish a paper, and empirically show that their results are better than previous
ones. They usually do not provide a quantitative, analytical comparison, thereby preventing a bet-
ter, collective understanding of how to solve the bigger, global problem. Our intention is not to
criticize the ﬁeld: the problems today are difﬁcult enough that signiﬁcant effort is needed for even
developing such “point solutions.” Our approach is a step towards addressing these limitations.
12

2.2
Design Landscape
To place our work into context, to precisely formulate the problems we address, and to describe
the approach we take to solve them, we show the design landscape of domain-speciﬁc optimization
problems. It has six dimensions, organized into three planes (Fig. 2.1 (a), (b) and (c)). Each plane
has two axes: instances, and features. The feature axis may be hierarchical, and parameterized.
Instance
Features
Parameters
Operations
Dependences
Iteration space(s)
Data Space(s)
Program Plane
Strategies
Features
Parameters
Num Levels
Tile Shape
Attributes
Schedule
Transformation Plane
(a) Programs
(b) Transformations
Instance
Features
Bandwidth
or Throughput
Latency
Capacity
# Processors
# Memories
Architecture Plane
Games
Metrics
Time
Energy
Power
Area
Memory
Performance Modeling
(c) Architectures
(d) Performance Models
Figure 2.1: The Domain-Speciﬁc Design Landscape. We tackle a narrow domain of programs (a) each
one described by a small number of features. Similarly the mappings/transformations (b) we can apply are
drawn form a small set, each one parameterized by a set of features. Architectures (c) are also drawn from a
similarly small set, and are parameterized by their features. In each plane, the features may be hierarchical.
The performance models (d) and the games that we can play.
The program plane (Fig. 2.1(a)) consists of instances of dense stencil computations, such as
Convolutional Neural Net (a machine learning kernel), Heat-3D (a stencil computation from com-
13

putational science), Clustal-3D (a dynamic programming kernel from bioinformatics). Because of
domain speciﬁcity, each program is compactly described with a small set of features, such as: (i) a
set of iteration spaces (ii) a set of data spaces, (iii) a set of dependences, (iv) a set of computational
operators (e.g., loop bodies), and (iv) one or more size parameters.
The transformation plane (Fig. 2.1(b)) deﬁnes the space of compiler transformations that can
be applied to the program. Domain speciﬁcity again allows us to consider only a few instances, e.g.,
time skewing [55, 56], diamond tiling [53], diamond prisms [36, 57], or hybrid hexagonal-classic
(HHC) tiling [18,58,59]. Transformation strategies are (potentially) hierarchical, and each level of
the hierarchy represents a partitioning.1 They are also speciﬁed by a set of features, each of which
is a mathematical function: (i) tile shape, speciﬁed by the so called “tiling hyperplanes,” (ii) tile
schedule, (iii) processor mapping specifying which (virtual/physical) processor in the hardware
hierarchy will execute a tile, and (iv) memory allocation specifying where its inputs and outputs
are stored. Note that the schedule usually also has components to specify when tile inputs are
read and when tile outputs are written. The transformation plane features are also parameterized:
mapping function coefﬁcients, tile sizes, etc., are viewed as parameters.
The architecture plane (Fig. 2.1(c)) captures the accelerator hardware. Examples of architec-
ture instances are ASICs, FPGAs/Reconﬁgurable Logic, and Instruction Set Architectures (such
as GPGPUs).2 Hardware features include (i) the number of processors at that granularity, (ii) the
memories, and (iii) the interconnects. Parameters of each such feature specify the performance of
that feature: e.g., speed in terms of throughput and latency, capacity, etc. Also included are spe-
ciﬁc access/scheduling constraints such as the need for gang scheduling in warps, the constraints
on coalescing and bank conﬂicts, etc.
We combine this six-dimensional design space with the performance modeling plane (Fig. 2.1(d))
which gives us a high level picture of various performance metrics and the games that we can play
with these performance models. This uniﬁed view of the landscape is the main novelty of our
1Partitioning denotes a generalization of a crucial transformation called tiling to also include multiple passes.
2 In our taxonomy, an accelerator that is programmable in the conventional, von Neumann sense is an ISA, and
accelerators where the “programming” is at the circuit level are FPGAs or ASICs.
14

Instance
Program Plane
Strategies
Transformation Plane
Instance
Architecture Plane
Metrics
Performance Modeling
Figure 2.2: The main novelty of our work! The Domain-Speciﬁc Design Landscape that we must navigate
is thus the cross-product of the four planes in Fig. 2.1.
work. Fig. 2.2 shows the eight dimensional navigation space to be explored. A model can be used
for performance prediction as well as performance improvement like (auto)tuning, bottleneckol-
ogy (bottleneck analysis), etc. Multiple models can contribute to multi-criteria optimization (eg.
simultaneously optimize for both, time and energy) as well as HW/SW Co-design.
2.3
Approach
We now describe our overall approach and how it can lead to the beneﬁts mentioned earlier
(i.e., automatic optimal mappings, future prooﬁng and codesign). First, we develop analytical
models for execution time and energy for a given program and a transformation strategy on a ﬁxed
architecture. We also develop silicon area models for GPU architectures and show its use in chip
15

area prediction. Second, we show how these models can be used for performance optimization.
And ﬁnally, we show how to formulate mathematical optimization problems using such cost mod-
els to solve the problem of software-hardware codesign. We show our initial results to justify our
claims, and identify remaining challenges in later chapters.
2.3.1
Models and Validation
Execution Time Model and Prediction of GPGPU Stencils
We develop an execution time model that predicts execution time of transformed stencil codes.
Our model is a simple set of analytical functions that predict the execution time of the generated
code. It is deliberately optimistic, since we are targeting modeling and parameter selections yield-
ing highly optimized codes. We experimentally validate the model on a number of 2D and 3D
stencil codes, and show that the root mean square error in the execution time is less than 10% for
the subset of the codes that achieve performance within 20% of the best.
Energy Model and Prediction of GPGPU Stencils
Like the analytical execution time model, we develop a methodology for modeling the energy
efﬁciency of tiled nested-loop codes running on a graphics processing unit (GPU) and use it for
prediction of energy consumption. We assume that a highly optimized and parameterized version
of a tiled nested-loop code—either written by an expert programmer or automatically produced by
a polyhedral compilation tool—is given to us as an input. We then model the energy consumption
as an analytical function of a set of parameters characterizing the software and the GPU hardware.
Most previous attempts at GPU energy modeling were based on low-level machine models that
were then used to model whole programs through simulations, or were analytical models that re-
quired low level details. In contrast, our approach develops analytical models based on (i) machine
and architecture parameters, (ii) program size parameters as found in the polyhedral model, and
(iii) tiling parameters. Our model therefore allows prediction of the energy consumption with re-
spect to a set of parameters of interest. We illustrate the framework on three nested-loop codes:
Smith-Waterman, and one-dimensional and two-dimensional Jacobi stencils, and analyze the ac-
16

curacy of the resulting models. With optimal choice of model parameters the RMS error is less
than 4%. Two factors allow us to attain this high accuracy. The ﬁrst is domain-speciﬁcity: we
focus only on tilable nested-loop codes. The second is that we decouple the energy model from a
model of the execution time, a known hard problem.
Area Model and Chip Area Prediction of GPUs
We also develop an analytic model for the total silicon area of a GPU accelerator. We faced
some difﬁculties in deriving an acceptable analytical model, as silicon data had to be reverse en-
gineered from extremely limited public domain resources. As a general observation, within each
GPU family, there is little diversity in the parameter conﬁgurations. For the Maxwell family of
GPUs, the GTX980 and Titan X chips were chosen as two sufﬁciently distinct points to calibrate
our analytical models. The calibration itself was performed by evaluating die photomicrographs,
publicly available information about the nVidia GTX 980 (Maxwell series) GPU, and other gen-
erally accepted memory architecture models. The model validation was done by comparing the
predictions with known data on the Maxwell series Titan X GPU. We found the model prediction
to be accurate to within, 2%, though this number is not signiﬁcant3.
Next, we develop mathematical objective functions to illustrate the use of these models in
performance optimization and later we will show the same for software-hardware codesign.
2.3.2
Compilation and its optimization subspaces
To address the limitations of current domain-speciﬁc compilation noted in Section 2.1.2, we
now describe our approach to systematically exploring well deﬁned regions of the design landscape
using exact (not surrogate) objective functions.
1. (Auto) Tuning: Let us consider a three-dimensional subspace in our landscape, of instances
of programs × transformations/strategies × execution time. At each point in this three-
dimensional space, we may deﬁne a mathematical optimization problem which has an ob-
3Although a many conﬁgurations of any family of GPUs are spaced out, they come from binning only a small
number of distinct dies. We ended up calibrating our model on one die and validating it on only another one.
17

jective function, and a feasible space. Both involve analytical functions of parameters from
all three feature dimensions, deﬁned by vectors: ⃗P for a program, ⃗S for a strategy, and ⃗A
for an architecture. The objective function for execution time is MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A). Similarly, we
have constraints deﬁning the feasible space of the optimization problem, FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A). The
mathematical optimization problems can be formulated for various performance metrics as
follows:
(a) For execution time, minimize MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A),
(b) For energy, minimize ME(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) subject to FE(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A),
(c) For power, minimize MP(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) subject to FP(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A), etc.
Each problem instance has an objective function that represents (is not just a surrogate for)
the metric which we seek to optimize: execution time(MT), power(MP), energy(ME), etc.
It is a function of all the parameters of this three-dimensional point. Other parameters, e.g.,
the number of processors, the memory capacity, etc., may deﬁne a feasible space where this
function is valid.
Our approach is based on the hypothesis that domain-speciﬁcity of both the programs and
the architecture allows us to develop such functions. Note that the objective function cannot
be a surrogate, it must be the actual cost metric of interest. Under this hypothesis, our entire
strategy can be summarized as collective solution of multiple optimization problems with
common objective function(s). We will discuss two such common objective functions, MT
for execution time and ME for energy (expressed as GOPs/sec or GOPs/joule) in details in
the following chapters.
2. (Auto) Super-Tuning: The next step will be to extend the optimization across multiple
strategies, say S1 and S2. Given two separate optimizations formulated as follows:
(a) Minimize MT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A) subject to FT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A), and
(b) Minimize MT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A) subject to FT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)
18

We can formulate the problem of optimizing across strategies in two ways: (i) Take the min-
imum of the two optimizations min(minimize MT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A), minimize MT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)), or
(ii) solve separate optimization problems, depending on the intersections and differences of
the feasible spaces of each one.
(a) Minimize min(MT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A), MT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)), subject to FT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A)∩FT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A),
(b) Minimize MT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A), subject to FT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A)∩∼FT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A), and
(c) Minimize MT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A), subject to ∼FT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A) ∩FT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)
This can be extended to a set of strategies, S = {Si}. Although the second option is not very
scalable—the number of sub-problems grows exponentially with the number of strategies—
it is reasonable for a small number of strategies, e.g., it would let us automatically choose
between time skewing, diamond tiling, diamond prisms, and HHC.
3. Multi-Metric (Auto) Tuning: The above optimizations account for only one performance
metric, which leads to a single objective function for the optimization. One might want to
optimize for more than one metric. Let us consider a multi-metric optimization such as the
energy-delay product. The optimization problem can be formulated as
Minimize (MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∗ME(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)), subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∩FE(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
Note, the feasible space consists of the intersection of the feasible space of time and energy.
The program parameters (eg. problem sizes) and the features (eg. tile sizes) of the selected
strategy (eg. Diamond tiling) are the parameters to the multi-metric objective function.
4. Multi-Metric (Auto) Super-Tuning: The above multi-metric objective function can be ex-
tended to multiple strategies, say S1 and S2. Consider, two optimization functions
(a) Minimize (MT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A)∗ME1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A)), subject to FT1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A)∩FE1(⃗P, ⃗S1, ⃗A),
and
(b) Minimize (MT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A) ∗ME2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)), subject to FT2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A) ∩FE2(⃗P, ⃗S2, ⃗A)
19

As in (Auto) Super-Tuning, we can formulate the problem of optimizing across strategies in
two ways: (i) Take the minimum of the two optimizations, or (ii) solve separate optimization
problems, depending on the intersections and differences of the feasible spaces of each one.
The methods can be extended to a set of strategies, S = {Si}.
Thus, our approach would allow us to deliver on the promise of automatic and provably optimal
compilation, for any point in the program × transformations/strategies plane for a given perfor-
mance metric.
Polyhedral compilation revisited:
As noted before, current polyhedral compilers target a
fairly broad class of programs, and make choices like tiling hyperplanes and shapes, and (inter
and intra) tile schedules. They do this by this using classic scheduling algorithms [16, 17, 50]
that use (integer) linear programming using surrogate objective functions. Tile sizes are chosen
subsequently via auto-tuning.
2.3.3
Codesign and its optimization subspaces
Codesign—the simultaneous design of hardware and software—has two common interpreta-
tions. System codesign is the problem of simultaneously designing hardware, runtime system,
compilers, and programming environments of entire computing systems, typically in the context of
large-scale, high-performance computing (HPC) systems and supercomputers. Application code-
sign, also called hardware-software codesign, is the problem of systematically and simultaneously
designing a dedicated hardware platform and the software to execute a single application (pro-
gram). The proposed approach is applicable in both contexts.
Application Codesign and its optimization subspaces
1. Application Codesign: For Application Codesign, we ﬁx a program, a strategy as well as a
micro-architecture (technology node). In addition to the program parameters and features of
the selected strategy, we now have ⃗A, the architecture parameters, as unknowns. The archi-
tecture parameters can be number of processors, number of memories, size of memories, etc.
20

Considering, execution time as the performance metric, the four-dimensional optimization
problem can be formulated as
Minimize MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A), subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
The feasible space FT is a combination of (i) all possible program parameters, (ii) all pos-
sible features of the selected strategy, (iii) all possible architecture parameters, and (iv) time
as the performance optimizing criteria. Similar objective functions can be formulated for
different performance metrics.
2. Super Application Codesign: Classic application codesign techniques consider optimiza-
tion for one strategy. Domain speciﬁcity allows us to formulate the mathematical optimiza-
tion across a set of strategies, say S = {Si}, as follows
Minimize MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A), subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
Note that the feasible space for each strategy will vary and not all architectures may be
feasible for every strategy. Such optimization allows for exploration of a larger feasible
space.
3. Multi-Metric Application Codesign: The architecture parameters may include conﬁgu-
ration options that trade off energy for performance (as in execution time). One might,
therefore, want to optimize across multiple performance metrics. A multi-metric SW-HW
Codesign optimization can be formulated as
Minimize (MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∗ME(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)), subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∩FE(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
considering energy-delay product as the performance metric. Note that this four-dimensional
feasible space consists of program parameters, strategy features and architecture parameters
as unknowns.
21

4. Multi-Metric-Super Application Codesign: Again, the multi-metric application codesign
objective function can be extended to multiple strategies, say S = {Si}. Considering energy-
delay product as the optimizing criteria, the objective function will be
Minimize (MT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∗ME(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)), subject to FT(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∩FE(⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
Note that the feasible space here consists of multiple areas in the design space based on the
strategy and performance metric.
System Codesign and its optimization subspaces
1. System Codesign: Let us now consider a set of program instances P = {Pi}, and recall that
we have common objective functions for all of them. The optimization problem
Minimize M( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) subject to F( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
seeks to optimize a common performance metric (we drop the subscript for the common
metric). The parameters to this function are a set of program instances, features of the
strategy and the architecture features.
2. Super System Codesign: Let us now consider the following optimization problem, which
we call the generalized optimization problem.
Minimize M( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) subject to F( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
This problem seeks to optimize the common performance metric for the set of programs
on the given architecture. We treat ⃗A, not as parameters, but rather as unknowns, in the
generalized optimization problem, argmin ⃗AM( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) gives us the optimal architecture for
the set of program instances. Thus we simultaneously solve for architecture and compilation,
thereby resolving the codesign problem.
22

3. Multi-Metric System Codesign: The next step would be to extend our generalized opti-
mization problem to a multi-metric optimization.
Minimize (MT( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∗ME( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)), subject to FT( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∩FE( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
This is particularly useful in large system designs, where the transformation strategy is ﬁxed
and more than one performance metric is critical for system design. Note, that we show
multi-metric optimization for two cost metrics which can be extended to more than two cost
metrics as needed.
4. Multi-Metric-Super System Codesign: The above multi-metric system codesign can be
further extended to consider multiple strategies as shown below
Minimize (MT( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∗ME( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)), subject to FT( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A) ∩FE( ⃗P, ⃗S, ⃗A)
This would be the ultimate goal for system codesign where we can optimize across all the
possible program, transformation and architecture planes for multiple performance metrics.
2.3.4
Bottleneckology
Our approach to system design seems deceptively simple, however, it is a very hard problem.
Exploiting the resources to their full capacity is one of the objectives while optimizing for per-
formance. The bottleneck analysis becomes helpful in studying the performance sinks and design
ﬂaws. There are many ways of utilizing the cost models to perform bottleneck analysis. The cost
models can be used to identify the resources that have been saturated and the ones that have slack.
We refer to this slack and saturation of the resources as Bottleneckology. We study this in three
ways: (i) investigate codesign-tradeoffs, (ii) perform overhead analysis, and (iii) explore the effect
of hyperthreading. More details are provided in Chapter 6.
In the next chapters (3, 4, 5, and 6), we discussed our work in more details.
23

Chapter 3
Models and Validation
Model predictions are used for estimating execution time, energy consumption, power con-
sumption, etc. of a program. Cost metrics either appear in the objective function as a factor to be
optimized or in the constraints. We will illustrate the use of a few of the many metrics - (i) exe-
cution time models, and (ii) energy models as cost in the optimizing functions; and (iii) memory
access models, and (iv) silicon area models as the constraints to the objective function.
3.1
Execution Time Model for GPGPU Stencils
We develop an execution time models for GPGPU stencils that guides the optimal choice of
compiler parameters(tile sizes). Our model is a simple set of analytical functions that predict the
execution time of the generated code. It is deliberately optimistic, since we are targeting modeling
and parameter selections yielding highly optimized codes. We experimentally validate the model
on a number of 2D and 3D stencil codes, and show that the root mean square error in the execution
time is less than 10% for the subset of the codes that achieve performance within 20% of the best.
We show the following.
• We develop a simple analytical model to predict the execution time of a tiled stencil program
and apply it to codes generated by the HHC compiler. The model is an analytic function of
– program, machine, and compiler parameters that are easily available statically, and
– one stencil-speciﬁc parameter that is obtained by running a handful of micro-benchmarks.
It is deliberately optimistic and also ignores the effect of some parameters.
• Although our model may not accurately predict the performance for all tile size combina-
tions, it is very accurate for the ones that matter, i.e., those that give top performance. To
show this, we generated more than than 60,000 programs for
24

– two modern target platforms (NVIDIA GTX 980, and Titan X), and
– four 2D stencil codes (Jacobi2D, Heat2D, Laplacian2D, and Gradient2D) and two 3D
stencils (Heat3D and Laplacian3D)
– over a range of ten input/problem sizes, and
– a wide range of tile sizes and thread counts (the HHC compiler inputs) for each platform-
stencil-size combination.
As we expected, the root-mean-square error (RMSE) over the entire data set was “disap-
pointingly” over 100%. However, when we restricted ourselves to the data points that have
an execution time within 20% of the best value for that particular platform-stencil-size com-
bination, the RMSE dropped to less than 10%4, which we consider very good.
Our overall methodology is applicable, with simple extensions, to more general programs, e.g.,
those that ﬁt the polyhedral model. But for achieving high GPU utilization, we need efﬁcient
GPU codes to start with, which are very hard and time consuming to produce manually, especially
in higher dimensions. The highly optimized HHC-generated codes we are using for testing and
validation have a few thousand lines of CUDA code each and we generated tens of thousands such
codes in our experimental analysis. So our methodology is not limited to the HHC compiler (in
fact we have applied it successfully to manually generated 1D stencil codes), but the use of HHC
(or similar compiler) was necessary to produce for our experiments a high number of GPU codes
that are also very efﬁcient.
3.2
Energy Model for Tiled Nested-Loop Codes
Energy efﬁciency has been recognized as one of the biggest challenges in the roadmap to
higher performance (exascale) systems for a number of reasons including cost, reliability, energy
conservation, and environmental impact. The most powerful computers today consume megawatts
4The restriction to the better performing subset was exactly our motivation. We designed the model to help
predict/explore data points that would give good performance. It is also why we made optimistic assumptions in
developing the model.
25

of power, enough to power small towns, and at cost of millions per year. And those estimations do
not include the cost of cooling, which might be almost as high as the cost of computing itself [60].
In addition, the cost of building a power provisioning facility ranges at $10-22 per deployed IT watt
[61] and every 10 ◦C temperature-increase results in a doubling of the system failure rate, thereby
reducing the reliability of HPC systems [62]. Designing accurate models for energy efﬁciency
can help better predict the power and energy requirements of an application and aid developers
optimize the parameters of their codes for better energy efﬁciency on HPC systems.
The goal of our work is to introduce a new approach for modeling the energy cost as an analyti-
cal function of tunable software parameters in a way that is both simple and accurate. Having such
a model will allow the energy efﬁciency to be optimized with respect to (a subset of) the tunable
parameters by solving the corresponding analytical optimization problem.
We target with our modeling approach tiled nested-loop code segments, which are the most
compute-intensive portions of many application codes and which also allow a high degree of par-
allelism. In order to be more speciﬁc, we focus in our analysis on a subclass of the tiled nested-loop
codes called dense stencils, which occur frequently in the numerical solution of PDEs and in many
other contexts such as high-end graphics, signal and image processing, numerical simulation, sci-
entiﬁc computing, and bioinformatics. We chose stencils for our case studies since that would
allow us to model the entire class in a hierarchical way with a single generic model representing
the whole class, while model parameters that are stencil-dependent have to be separately speciﬁed
for each stencil of interest to complete its model. (However, the approach is applicable to any
other class of nested-loop codes that allows tiling.) We completely develop and validate the de-
tailed models (including the stencil-dependent parameters) of three speciﬁc stencils. Models for
other stencils can be developed in a similar way with relatively small amount of extra work.
In order to efﬁciently optimize stencils on accelerators, we aim to represent the amount of
energy consumed as an analytic function of the software parameters. We assume that the input
codes have been analyzed and optimized with respect to parallelism and data-access efﬁciency by
appropriate skewing and tiling transformations, say by a polyhedral code generator.
26

Our speciﬁc contributions are as follows.
• Our energy model predicts energy efﬁciency by analyzing source code only, unlike other
approaches [63, 64] that rely on parameters computed by running benchmarks for each in-
dividual code. We do use micro-benchmarks, but they are used to characterize hardware,
rather than codes.
• We are not aware of any previous work combining the polyhedral method with energy mod-
eling. Our approach allows optimization of codes that are already very efﬁcient having
been signiﬁcantly improved by applying the polyhedral method and by using advanced tiling
strategies such as hexagonal and hybrid tilings [18].
• Our model is very accurate (one version with RMS error ≤17.14% and another with
RMS error ≤4%), with similar or higher precision than alternative existing models, e.g.,
GPUSimPow [65], which are simulation based.
3.3
Memory Access Model for GPGPU Stencils
We develop Memory Access models [21, 22] for GPGPU stencils and use them for execution
time models and energy models. The memory models appear in two speciﬁc contexts. Firstly, the
total number of memory accesses made by a tile is used to model the data transfer time taken by
a tile, similarly, the data movement requirement of a wavefront is modeled using the equations to
calculate the data transfer time for wavefronts. Similarly, for the energy models we use memory
access equations to determine the amount of transfer required and combine it with the energy
consumption per data transfer to calculate the total energy consumption of a tile.
Second, the memory footprint of a tile appear as constraints to the formulated objective function
for optimization. The memory requirements of a tile are not to exceed the shared memory capacity
of a GPU. This in turn constrains the tile sizes and the feasible space.
These memory models are then used for codesign optimization [20]. Again for software-
hardware codesign, the memory models appear both in the objective function as a part of time
27

model equations (i.e. to calculate the data transfer time) as well as the constraints where memory
capacity deﬁnes the feasible space.
3.4
Silicon Area Model for GPUs
We develop an analytic model for the total silicon area of a GPU accelerator. We faced some
difﬁculties in deriving an acceptable analytical model, as silicon data had to be reverse engineered
from extremely limited public domain resources. As a general observation, within each GPU fam-
ily, there is little diversity in the parameter conﬁgurations. For the Maxwell family of GPUs, the
GTX980 and Titan X chips were chosen as two sufﬁciently distinct points to calibrate our analyt-
ical models. The calibration itself was performed by evaluating die photomicrographs, publicly
available information about the nVidia GTX-980 (Maxwell series) GPU, and other generally ac-
cepted memory architecture models. The model validation was done by comparing the predictions
with known data on the Maxwell series Titan X GPU. We found the model prediction to be accurate
to within, 2%, though this number is not signiﬁcant.5
In the next chapter, we will show the use of these cost models for tile size selection.
5Although a many conﬁgurations of any family of GPUs are spaced out, they come from binning only a small
number of distinct dies. We ended up calibrating our model on one die and validating it on only another one.
28

Chapter 4
Tuning
An important element of compilation tools is a step called (auto) tuning: empirical evaluation
of the actual performance of a, hopefully small, set of code instances for a range of mapping pa-
rameters. This enables the compilation system to choose these parameters optimally for actual
“production runs” on real data/inputs. Modern architectures are extremely complicated, with so-
phisticated hardware features that interact in unpredictable manners, especially since the latency
of operations is unpredictable because of the deep memory hierarchy. It is widely believed that
because of this, autotuning is unavoidable in order to obtain good performance.
Our work challenges this. In particular, we make the case that domain speciﬁcity can have a
third important beneﬁt: it enables us to develop a good analytical model to predict the performance
of speciﬁc types of codes on speciﬁc types of target architectures. We can then use the model to
optimally choose the mapping parameters (notably tile sizes).
In order to address the challenges of exascale computing, many experts believe that a software-
hardware co-design approach—where the software and the corresponding hardware are jointly co-
developed and co-optimized—will be a “critical necessity” [66]. Since the architectures of exascale
systems are in the ﬂux, it is important to develop rigorous methods to map high level speciﬁcations
of computations to diverse target architectures, ranging from multi-core CPUs, many-core GPUs,
and accelerators over heterogeneous nodes of such CPU-GPU combinations to large distributed
systems of many such nodes. In the overwhelming majority of cases, the mismatch between data
communication patterns and hardware architecture prevents the efﬁcient exploitation of all avail-
able computing resources and peak performance is almost impossible to achieve. Worse still, it is
often not clear to the user when the point of diminishing returns is reached.
We address a key step of the optimization, namely mapping the software representation onto
the hardware, and choosing the mapping parameters to optimize an objective function representing
the performance, i.e., the execution time. In its full generality, the optimal mapping problem is
29

a discrete non-linear optimization problem, known to be NP-hard [67] and hence very difﬁcult
to solve efﬁciently. We therefore use a number of simplifying assumptions, as is common in the
literature. A number of parameters can be speciﬁed as inputs to a compiler, e.g., the tile sizes.
These parameters have a tremendous inﬂuence on the performance of the code. The problem we
tackle here is how to select these parameters optimally.
4.1
Tune for Speed
To test the predictive abilities of our execution time models, we evaluated the model over the
entire feasible space (for each platform-stencil-size combination) and obtained the tile sizes that
were within 10% of the best predicted execution time. There were less than 200 such points. We
called the HHC compiler with these tile sizes and were able to observe among this set a perfor-
mance improvement of 9% on average with maximum of 17%. Prajapati et al. [21] illustrates the
predictive power of our execution time models in detail.
We have two messages. The main one is that, contrary to widespread belief, it is possible
to construct good analytical cost functions to drive performance tuning for GPGPUs. This can
signiﬁcantly reduce the space that autotuners need to explore. The second message, is that it may
be necessary to revisit some of the “conventional wisdom,” when choosing tile size parameters.
Our model is very accurate for predicting the times of problem instances whose performance is
within 20% of the optimal and, hence, it can be used to ﬁnd values for tunable parameters that will
give near optimal performance.
We would like to note that our techniques can be easily extended to other type of stencils.
4.2
Optimize for Energy
Our proposed optimization methods can also be applied to optimize for energy. Our energy
models represents the energy consumption as an explicit analytic function of a set of software and
hardware parameters describing the speciﬁcs of the implementation and the hardware.
30

In our experiments, we observe that energy optimization has almost always had no loss of
speed, as expected in the folklore. Thus a user could use both optimizations rather than having to
choose one or the other. Finally, we use our energy model to select the optimal tile size for energy
efﬁciency and report the number of non-optimal tile size selections and hence the error in energy
due to the selection of non-optimal tile sizes. Prajapati et al. [22] describes our energy models, the
optimization methods, the results and experimental validation in details.
31

Chapter 5
Accelerator Codesign
“Design is not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.” – Steve Jobs
Software-hardware codesign is one of the proposed enabling technologies for exascale com-
puting and beyond [6]. Currently, hardware and software design are done largely separately. Hard-
ware manufacturers design and produce a high-performance computing (HPC) system with great
computing potential and deliver it to customers, who then try to adapt their application codes to
run on the new system. But because of a typically occurring mismatch between hardware and
software structure and parameters, such codes are often only able to run at a small fraction of the
total performance the new hardware can reach. Hence, optimizing both the hardware and software
parameters simultaneously during hardware design is considered as a promising way to achieve
better hardware usage efﬁciency and thereby enabling leadership-class HPC availability at a more
manageable cost and energy efﬁciency.
The design of HPC systems and supercomputers is by no means the only scenario where such
optimization problems occur. The execution platforms of typical consumer devices like smart
phones and tablets consist of very heterogeneous Multi-Processor Systems-on-Chip (MPSoCs)
and the design challenges for them are similar.
Despite the appeal of an approach to simultaneously optimize for software and hardware, its
implementation represents a formidable challenge because of the huge search space. Previous
approaches [68–70], pick a hardware model H from the hardware design space, a software model
S from the software design space, map S onto H, estimate the performance of the mapping, and
iterate until a desirable quality is achieved. But not only each of the software and hardware design
spaces can be huge, each iteration takes a long time since ﬁnding a good mapping of S onto
H and estimating the performance of the resulting implementation are themselves challenging
computational problems.
32

We propose a new approach for the software-hardware codesign problem that avoids these
pitfalls by considerably shrinking the design space and making its exploration possible by for-
mulating the optimization problem in a way that allows the use of existing powerful optimization
solvers. We apply the methodology to programmable accelerators: Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs), and for stencil codes. The key elements of our approach are to exploit multiple forms of
domain-speciﬁcity. Our main contributions are:
• We propose a new approach to software-hardware codesign that it is computationally feasible
and provides interesting insights.
• We combine our area model with a workload characterization of stencil codes, and our previ-
ously proposed execution time model [21] to formulate a mathematical optimization problem
that maximizes a common objective function of the hardware and software parameters.
• Our analysis provides interesting insights. We produce a set of Pareto optimal designs that
represent the optimal combination of hardware and compiler parameters. They allow for up
to 33% improvement in performance as measured in GFLOPs/sec.
We develop a framework for software-hardware codesign that allows the simultaneous opti-
mization of software and hardware parameters. It assumes having analytical models for perfor-
mance, for which we use execution time, and cost, for which we choose the chip area. We make
use of the execution time model from Prajapati et al [21] that predicts the execution times of a set
of stencil programs. For the chip area, we develop an analytical model that estimates the chip area
of parameterized designs from the Maxwell GPU architecture. Our model is reasonably accurate
for estimating the total die area based on individual components such as the number of SMs, the
number of vector units, the size of memories, etc.
We formulate a codesign optimization problem using the time model and our area model for
optimizing the compiler and architecture parameters simultaneously. We predict an improvement
in the performance of 2D stencils by (104% and 69%) and 3D stencils by (123% and 126%) over
existing Maxwell (GTX980 and Titan X) architectures.
33

The main focus is on the methodology; speciﬁcally, to develop a software-hardware codesign
framework and to illustrate how models built using it can be used for efﬁcient exploration of the
design space for identifying Pareto-optimal conﬁgurations and analyzing for design tradeoffs. The
same framework, possibly with some modiﬁcations, could be used for codesign on other type of
hardware platforms (instead of GPU), other type of software kernels (instead of the set of stencils
we chose, or even non-stencil kernels), and other kind of performance and cost criteria (e.g., energy
as cost). Also, with work focused on the individual elements of the framework, the execution time
and the chip area models we used could possibly be replaced by ones with better features in certain
aspects or scenarios.
The analyses from our work indicate the following accelerator design recommendations, for
the chosen performance, cost criteria, and application proﬁle:
• Remove caches completely and
• Use the area (previously devoted to caches) to add more cores on the chip.
• The more precise the workload characterization and the speciﬁc area model parameters, the
more useful the conclusions drawn from the study.
Hardware resources such as memories are often expensive and must be utilized wisely. In the
next chapter, we discuss how to use cost models to identify the resources requirements for optimal
performance via bottleneck analysis.
34

Chapter 6
Bottleneckology
We explore bottleneckology in three ways: study codesign trade-offs, perform overhead anal-
ysis, and investigate the effect of hyperthreading. Next three sections discuss these in more details.
6.1
Codesign Trade-offs
Workload Sensitivity
Table 6.1 illustrates the architectural parameters for the best performing
designs for each of the six benchmarks(2D and 3D stencils), for an area budget between 425–
450 mm2. Observe how the parameters of the best architecture are signiﬁcantly different. There
are also differences in the achieved performance for each benchmark, but that is to be expected
since the main computation in the stencil loop body has different number of operations across the
benchmarks.
Shared Memory Requirements
We can also observe that there are marked differences between
the optimal architecture conﬁgurations for 2D and 3D stencils in Table 6.1. 3D stencils seem to
require larger shared memory (≥96 kB / SM) compared to 2D stencils (≤24 kB / SM). Indeed,
for designs with lower than 48kB, the performance was nowhere near the optimal for 3D stencil
programs. Comparing the optimal conﬁgurations for Heat 2D stencil with that of Heat 3D stencil
(both have equal total die area of 447 mm2), we observe that the amount of shared memory required
Code
nSM
nV
MSM
Area
GFLOPs/S
Jacobi 2D
32
128
24
438
2059
Heat 2D
22
256
12
447
3017
Gradient 2D
28
160
24
431
4963
Laplacian 2D
28
160
12
426
2549
Heat 3D
18
288
192
447
3600
Laplacian 3D
8
896
96
446
1427
Table 6.1: Workload sensitivity. The optimal architecture conﬁguration for a single benchmark varies
signiﬁcantly.
35

Figure 6.1: Resource Allocation.
for Heat 3D stencil is 16 times more than that for Heat 2D stencil. Also note, 3D stencils require
higher number of vector units per SM for optimal performance.
Resource Allocation
Another interesting perspective is seen in Figure 6.1 which plots the Pareto-
optimal design points in blue and all other non-Pareto conﬁgurations in orange. The axes show the
relative percentages of the chip area devoted to memory, and to vector units. We notice that the
optimal designs (blue points) lie in a relative cluster. This phenomenon is even more marked for
3D stencils. At present, we do not have a clear explanation for why the points are clustered in this
manner, and we plan to mine this data to determine patterns, if any.
6.2
Overhead Analysis
As discussed before, a compiler generated code has a number of parameters, such as tile sizes,
that are then tuned via empirical exploration. Our execution time model [21] guides such a choice.
This execution time model is a simple set of analytical functions that predicts the execution time
of the HHC [18] generated code.
The execution time model uses a machine dependent parameter, called Citer, which is the ex-
ecution time of one iteration of the loop body per vector unit provided that all the necessary data
is available in shared memory. To measure Citer, one needs to generate a random set of codes for
a given stencil with different tile sizes, modify these codes to remove global memory accesses and
36

then take the average of empirically measured execution times to obtain the value of Citer. The
process is very time consuming and requires expertise in Hybrid Hexagonal Tiled code genera-
tor [18]. Also, Citer is dependent on both, the machine as well as the program. Therefore, its value
changes as machine and program parameters vary. It is, therefore, very difﬁcult to model/measure
is Citer. Also note that Citer value is used to evaluate the objective function to ﬁnd the optimal tile
size. This imposes limitations on the use of execution time model for optimal tile size selection
because the crucial model parameter Citer, is to be empirically measured.
To address this problem, we propose a closed form solution that is completely independent
of the machine and the program parameters. We are able to analytically predict the optimal tile
sizes which are portable across platforms and is valid for all Jacobi-like stencils. We modify the
objective function from Prajapati et al. [21] and develop a cost function which is independent
of Citer. For a 2D stencil, our closed form solution suggests that we maximize the size of the
hexagonal face of a tile subject to some constraints. This allows us to signiﬁcantly narrow down
the tile size design space.
The mathematical optimization problem in Prajapati et al. [21] for a given 2D stencil is formu-
lated as follows:
minimize
Talg(tS1, tS2, tT)
(6.1)
where tS1, tS2, and tT are tile sizes and Talg is the model predicted execution time of the code
given by the following formula:
Talg = NwTsync + NwTprism
 1
nSM
lw
k
m
.
(6.2)
where Nw is the number of wavefronts, Tsync is the time for synchronization for a wavefront,
Tprism is the time to execute a tile, nSM is the number of processors, w is the size of a wavefront
and k is the number of tiles that execute simultaneously. For more details, please refer Prajapati et
al. [21].
37

In addition to the time for computation, Talg includes time taken by data transfers and the
time for inter-tile and intra-tile synchronizations. We are interested in only those tile sizes that
give optimal performance. Therefore, our tiles will be compute bound. Let us consider an ideal
machine where the performance is given by the following equation:
Tideal = S1S2T
nSMnV
Citer
(6.3)
where S1, and S2 are problem sizes in space dimensions, T is the problem size in time dimen-
sion, and nV is the number of vector units. Such an ideal machine is free of all synchronization
delays and takes no additional time to do data transfers. On a real machine, we would like to obtain
the performance that is close to Tideal. However, there is always an overhead price such that
Toverhead = Talg −Tideal
(6.4)
Substituting Talg and Tideal with their respective equations and solving gives us
Toverhead = CiterS1T
1
tS1 + tT
2
(6.5)
Instead of minimizing the execution time(as in the equation 6.1), we can now minimize the
overhead. To minimize equation 6.5, we need to maximize tS1 + tT
2 . This suggests that we should
increase the size of the hexagonal face of the tile as much as possible. Notice, tS2 does not appear
in the equation 6.5.
For the above formulation, we assumed that the tiles are compute bound. We need a mechanism
to ﬁrst prune the tile size design space and restrict it to only consider compute bound tiles and then
use the above cost functions to further reduce the search space.
6.3
The effect of the hyper-threading
Our results in [21] suggest that we should revisit the “conventional wisdom” that says that
an optimal strategy of a tiling is to choose the “largest possible tile size that ﬁts” i.e., its memory
38

footprint matches the available capacity. First of all, this falls into the trap that it precludes over-
lapping of computation and communication (the “hyperthreading effect”). But this can be avoided
by explicitly accounting for hyperthreading. Indeed, our GPU platforms preclude such large size
by disallowing the data footprint of a thread block to exceed half the shared memory capacity.
Thus, the hyperthreading-adjusted “conventional wisdom” would still seek to maximize tile
volume subject to the half-capacity constraint—the best strategy is the largest tile volume for the
given footprint. Our model and experimental data suggests otherwise—an even higher hyper-
threading factor is turning out to yield the best performance. We still don’t know why, and it is
subject to investigation.
39

Chapter 7
Related Work
Our research draws upon prior work in the following distinct areas.
7.1
Stencil Computations and Code Generation
At the algorithmic level, most stencil applications are compute bound in the sense that the ratio
of the total number of operations to the total number of memory locations touched can always
be made “sufﬁciently large” because it is an asymptotically increasing value. We may expect
that such codes can be optimized to achieve very high performance relative to machine peak.
However, naive implementations turn out to be memory-bound. Therefore, many authors seek
to exploit data locality for these programs [53, 71, 72]. One successful technique is called time
tiling [53, 57, 73–78], an advanced form of loop tiling [73, 79, 80]. Time tiling ﬁrst partitions
the whole computation space into tiles extending in all dimensions, and then optionally executes
these tiles in a so called “45 degree wavefront” fashion. We assume, like most of the work in the
literature, that dense stencil programs are compute bound after time tiling. However, due to the
intricate structure of time tiled code, writing it by hand is challenging. Automatic code generation,
is an attractive solution, and has been an active research topic.
For iterative stencils a large set of optimizing code generation strategies have been proposed.
Pochoir [38] is a CPU-only code generator for stencil computations that exploits reuse along
the time dimension by recursively dividing the computation in trapezoids. Diamond tiling [81],
Hybrid-hexagonal tiling [18], and Overtile [82] are all tiling strategies that allow to exploit reuse
along the time dimension, while ensuring a balanced amount of coarse-grained parallelism through-
out the computation. While the former has only been evaluated on CPU systems, the last two tiling
schemes have been implemented to target GPUs. Overtile uses redundant computation whereas
hybrid-hexagonal tiling uses the hexagonal tiles to avoid the need for redundant computation and
the increased shared memory that would otherwise be required to store temporary values. Another
40

time tiling strategy has been proposed with 3.5D blocking by Nguyen et. al [83], who manually
implemented kernels that use two dimensional space tiling plus streaming along one space dimen-
sion with tiling along the time dimension to target both CPUs and GPUs. A slightly orthogonal
stencil optimization has been proposed by Henretty et. al, who use data-layout transformations to
avoid redundant non-aligned vector loads on CPU platforms.
7.2
Performance Modeling
All of the previously discussed frameworks either come with their own auto-tuning frame-
work or require auto tuning to derive optimal tile sizes. For stencil graphs, which are directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs) of non-iterated stencil kernels, various DSLs compilers have been pro-
posed. Halide [84] and Stella [85] are two DSLs from the context of image processing and weather
modeling that separate the speciﬁcation of the stencil computation from the execution schedule,
which allows for the speciﬁcation of platform speciﬁc execution strategies derived either by plat-
form experts or automatic tuning. Both DSLs support various hardware targets, including CPUs
and GPUs. Polymage [86] also provides a stencil graph DSL—this time for CPUs only—but pairs
it with an analytical performance model for the automatic computation of optimal tile size and
fusion choices. With MODESTO [87] an analytical performance model has been proposed that
allows to model multiple cache levels and fusion strategies for both GPUs and CPUs as they arise
in the context of Stella.
For stencil GPU code generation strategies that use redundant computations in combination
with ghost zones, an analytical performance model has been proposed [88] that allows to automat-
ically derive “optimal” code generation parameters. Yotov et. al [89] showed already more than ten
years ago that an analytical performance model for matrix multiplication kernels allows to generate
code that is performance-wise competitive to empirically tuned code generated by ATLAS [90],
but at this point no stencil computations have been considered. Shirako et al. [91] use cache mod-
els to derive lower and upper bounds on cache trafﬁc, which they use to bound the search space
of empirical tile-size tuning. Their work does not consider any GPU speciﬁc properties, such as
41

shared memory sizes and their impact on the available parallelism. In contrast to tools for tuning,
Hong and Kim [92] present a precise GPU performance model which shares many of the GPU
parameters we use. It is highly accurate, low level, and requires analyzing the PTX assembly code.
For stencil GPU code generation strategies that use redundant computations in combination with
ghost zones an analytical performance model has been proposed [88] that allows to automatically
derive “optimal” code generation parameters. Patus [93] provides an auto-tuning environment for
stencil computations which can target CPU and GPU hardware. It does not use software managed
memories and also does not consider any time tiling strategies.
Renganarayana et al. [94] identiﬁes positivity as a common property shared by the parameters
used by tile size selection methods and show that the property can be used to derive efﬁcient and
scalable tile size selection frameworks.
7.3
Chip Reverse Engineering and Area Modeling
Chip area modeling can be formally considered a branch of semiconductor reverse engineering,
which is a well researched subject area. Torrence et. al. [95] gives an overview of the various
techniques used for chip reverse engineering. The packaged chips are usually decapped and the
wafer die within is photographed layer by layer. The layers are exposed in the reverse order after
physical or chemical exfoliation. Degate [96], for example, is a well known open source software
that can help in analyzing die photographs layer by layer. The reverse engineering process can
be coarse-grained to identify just the functional macro-blocks. Sometimes, the process can be
very ﬁne-grained, in order to identify standard-cell interconnections, and hence, actual logic-gate
netlists. Degate is often used in association with catalogs of known standard cell gate layouts,
such as those compiled by Silicon Zoo [97]. Courbon et. al. [98] provides a case study of how a
modern ﬂash memory chip can be reverse engineered using targeted scanning electron microscope
imagery. For chip area modeling, one is only interested in the relatively easier task of demarcating
the interesting functional blocks within the die.
42

7.4
Energy Modeling
GPU power/energy model is a very active area: a recent survey article on the topic [99] cites al-
most 150 references. We only discuss the relevant work here. The model we present complements
Mittal and Vetter [99] by enabling us to ﬁnd the optimal parameters (i.e., tile sizes) for the energy
efﬁcient execution of stencil like programs. Hong and Kim [100] present a GPU power model
to predict the number of optimal GPU cores to achieve the peak memory bandwidth for a kernel.
An analytical model is used to predict the execution time [101] which has enabled prediction of
the power consumption statically. However, they have predicted the minimum number of cores
required for a program to achieve the peak memory bandwidth of GPU. While this approach may
work for memory bandwidth bound programs, it is unlikely to produce better results for compute-
bound programs like tiled stencil computations. Our model is much simpler, because our model
does not depend on warp and thread level parameters and number of PTX instructions.
Nagasaka et al [63] model GPU power of kernels using performance counters. Lim et al. [102],
GPUWattch [64] and GPUSimPow [103] are simulation based power models. McPAT [104] is
the basis for Lim et al [102] and GPUWattch [64] uses GPGPUSim [105] to simulate execution
time. Simulation and performance counters-based models require execution (or simulation) of
the program to predict the power consumption. Therefore, these models are not feasible solutions
when it requires to take decisions at compile time to determine optimal software parameters. We do
need to run some micro-benchmarks to ﬁnd the energy parameters that our model use. In contrast,
we run our micro-benchmarks only to determine parameters of a GPU architecture, while the power
consumption can be predicted for a given program statically without running the program.
There are studies [106,107] focused on reducing the energy for both CPU and GPU by balanc-
ing the load among CPU and GPU. Our study is only focused on modeling the energy consumption
of GPUs. There are studies [106,107] focused on reducing the energy for both CPU and GPU. The
models are used to determine how to balance the load among CPU and GPU, so that it reduces the
overall energy consumption. Our study is only focused on modeling the energy consumption of
GPUs.
43

7.5
Codesign
Application codesign is a well established discipline and has seen active research for well over
two decades [108–112]. The essential idea is to start with a program (or a program representation,
say in the form of a CFDG—Control Data Flow Graph) and then map it to an abstract hardware
description, often represented as a graph of operators and storage elements. The challenge that
makes codesign signiﬁcantly harder than compilation is that the hardware is not ﬁxed, but is also
to be synthesized. Most systems involve a search over a design space of feasible solutions, and
various techniques are used to solve this optimization problem: tabu search and simulated anneal-
ing [113,114], integer linear programming [115].
There is some recent work on accurately modeling the design space, especially for regular, or
afﬁne control programs [23–25]. However, all current approaches solve the optimization problem
for a single program at a time. To the best of our knowledge, no one has previously considered the
generalized application codesign problem, seeking a solution for a suite of programs.
There are multiple publications on codesign related to exascale computing, but they focus on
different aspects. For instance, Dosanji et al. [116] focus on methodological aspects of exploring
the design space, including architectural testbeds, choice of mini-applications to represent appli-
cations codes, and tools. The ExaSAT framework [117] was developed to automatically extract
parameterized performance models from source code using compiler analysis techniques. Perfor-
mance analysis techniques and tools targeting exascale and codesign are discussed in [6].
Kuck et al. [118,119] analyze and model program hot-spots. They develop computational ca-
pacity models and propose an approach for the HW/SW codesign of computer systems. The hard-
ware/software measurements of computational capacity (based on bandwidth usage) and power
consumption (based on hardware counters) are used to ﬁnd optimal solutions to various codesign
problems and to evaluate codesign trade-offs. Their models are theoretical and are illustrated by
numerical examples. They do not validate their models using real hardware.
44

Chapter 8
Conclusions
Our work contributes to knowledge in following ways:
The uniﬁed view of the polyhedral design landscape
We put together all the parameters to be
considered for performance optimization in a single uniﬁed landscape (Chapter 2). The landscape
(shown in Figure 2.1) considers the program, architecture, and compiler parameters and combines
them with various cost metrics. This view lets us identify the pockets of domain speciﬁcity and
allows us to study performance improvement across all cost metrics.
Analytical Models
We develop analytical cost models (Chapter 3) for execution time, energy,
memory access, and silicon area of a chip. Our models are reasonably accurate and help predict the
associated cost. We argue that these models can be used to break the HPC application performance
improvement cycle.
Mathematical Optimization Approach
We formulate mathematical optimization problems to
address some of the challenges of exascale. We show how these optimizations can be used for
performance tuning (Chapter 4) and accelerator codesign (Chapter 5). For GPGPU stencil com-
putations and polyhedral code generator, we illustrate a proof of concept [20] and present a novel
optimization approach to accelerator codesign.
8.1
Limitations of our approach
Our approach is limited to the narrow area of domain speciﬁc applications, polyhedral model
and GPU-like programmable hardware accelerators. The approach can, however, be extended to
other set of programs/architectures/transformations by identifying other domain speciﬁc regions
in the design landscape. More work is needed in order to extend our approach across different
regions of domain speciﬁcity.
45

8.2
Open Questions
Among the many different uses of the analytical cost models, they can be further explored to
answer important performance related questions. We list some of them below:
• Using analytical execution time and energy models we can ﬁnd out (i) What happens when
input parameters change? (ii) What happens when different number of processors is used?
(iii) What is the largest possible problem size on a given architecture? (iv) When does the
efﬁciency drop?
• Silicon area models can be used for the following: (i) Chip area prediction. (ii) Generate all
possible conﬁgurations for a give die area. (iii) Calculate the cost of different conﬁgurations.
(iv) Study the trade-offs. (v) System tuning.
• Performance tuning related questions such as (i) Sensitivity of problem size to tile size.
(ii) Sensitivity of optimal tile size for different codes. (iii) Reconﬁrm the folklore : whether
optimizing for time is equal to optimizing for energy? (iv) Reasons for the poor performance.
can be answered using cost models.
The answer to these questions become helpful in two situations. One, for performance porta-
bility while moving from one architecture to another. Second, obtaining interesting insights to
recognize promising areas for future research.
46
