Imminent Collision Mitigation with Reinforcement Learning and Vision
Horia Porav and Paul Newman
Abstract— This work examines the role of reinforcement
learning in reducing the severity of on-road collisions by
controlling velocity and steering in situations in which contact
is imminent. We construct a model, given camera images as
input, that is capable of learning and predicting the dynamics
of obstacles, cars and pedestrians, and train our policy using
this model. Two policies that control both braking and steering
are compared against a baseline where the only action taken is
(conventional) braking in a straight line. The two policies are
trained using two distinct reward structures, one where any
and all collisions incur a ﬁxed penalty, and a second one where
the penalty is calculated based on already established delta-v
models of injury severity. The results show that both policies
exceed the performance of the baseline, with the policy trained
using injury models having the highest performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Both in the case of human-driven vehicles and autonomous
vehicles, ensuring the safety of all trafﬁc participants is
paramount and often the prime motivator in autonomous
vehicle research. Part of this endeavour is considering what
to do if a situation arose in which some sort of collision
was inevitable. We need not here exhaustively contemplate
the many conceivable causes of such a situation - it could
be entirely due to uncontrollable third-party decision or an
“act-of-god” event. However, we ought to consider what
appropriate actions can be taken in the moments after it
becomes apparent that a collision is likely or inevitable
and before impact occurs. There is potential to reduce the
total harm and injuries sustained during a collision scenario,
especially in the case where emergency braking systems by
themselves are unable to prevent a collision [1].
Current approaches can be grouped under two major
categories:
• emergency systems that only brake, without any steering
input[2],[1]
• emergency systems that are capable of both braking and
steering, usually in the form of lane changing[3],[4]
The major drawback of braking-only systems is that they
cannot avoid collisions where the distance to the obstacle
is smaller than the total stopping distance. Brake-and-steer
systems attempt to improve this situation by triggering a
lane change or a swerve if the system detects that straight
line braking is not enough. However, to date and to the
best of our knowledge, these systems either use a simple
heuristic(with or without path planning[4]) or learn a policy
using Reinforcement Learning[1] in a simpliﬁed simulation.
In this work we build a recurrent model that predicts the
movement of obstacles, pedestrians and vehicles in a way
Authors
are
from
the
Oxford
Robotics
Institute,
Dept.
Engineering
Science,
University
of
Oxford,
UK.
{horia,

Brake only
Pedestrian 
trajectory
Fig. 1.
The imminent collision mitigation system is trained to choose the
action that leads to the least amount of injury, as measured by empirical
models which relate delta-v to measures of injury and loss. Our simulated
environment contains a mixture of pedestrians and vehicles that can take
part in an imminent collision scenario. In this particular example we show a
pedestrian that is running across the street in front of the vehicle containing
the collision mitigation system, along with incoming trafﬁc and a pedestrian
on the sidewalk.
inspired by [5] and [1]. Under the hood, our model has
the following key components: a Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) which reduces the dimensionality of the data and com-
presses incoming observations into a latent representation, an
RNN which learns to predict the next latent representation
given the current one and a controller that uses these la-
tent representations and learns to take actions using Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG)[6]. We extend the
simulation system of [7] to include both pedestrian and car
collisions, along with randomized pedestrians on sidewalks
and vehicular trafﬁc on the road around the collision site and
focus on Time to Collision (TTC) of 1.5 seconds and under
[1].
The major assumptions that we make is that other trafﬁc
participants cannot themselves actively avoid the collision
by braking or changing direction. We present our results
in V and show that training a brake-and-steer policy in a
complex simulation could reduce the amount of pedestrian
and car occupant injury compared to the baseline of braking
in a straight line, especially for time-to-collision (TTC)[9]
values between 0.5 and 1.5 seconds. In our tests, using
standard models of injury as a function of delta-v for vehicle
occupants and as a function of impact speed for pedestrians,
we see a reduction of up to 60% in the collision rate for
pedestrians and car occupants.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section we review related work and collision
mitigation and on injury risk estimation.
A. Related Work
In [2], the authors present an assessment algorithm that
determines if collisions are avoidable by taking into con-
sideration all vehicles detected and their constraints and
arXiv:1901.00898v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2019

having the emergency braking being triggered only when
collision becomes unavoidable. Similar to our work, their
approach does not rely on assumptions regarding vehicle
path or road infrastructure, but only vehicle constraints and
other detected trafﬁc participants, and their approach can be
applied to various crash scenarios, unlike other approaches
that only model rear-end collisions. In an earlier study, [3]
present a tool for determining the optimal maneuver in
collision-avoidance scenarios. A clearance curve is gener-
ated for varying speeds, along which hazard states can be
avoided only by an optimal maneuver. Their result show
that at high speeds, lane-change is more advantageous than
a full stop, this highlighting the importance of a more
diversiﬁed action space. In [8] a cruise control system is
presented, aimed at reducing collisions within a platoon
using a collision avoidance mode involving either emergency
brake or collision avoidance action whenever new data is
acquired from sensors. [9] propose a model based collision
avoidance algorithm in order to approximate a set of actions
(break, accelerate or steer) that can be taken by the driver
and determine whether immediate assistance is required.
Similar to our work, the model can be used for all trafﬁc
scenarios and all kinds of trafﬁc participants. [4] propose
a nonlinear model predictive control that aims at lowering
the risk of other hazardous situations that result from the
vehicles attempts to avoid a collision. The model takes
into account the vehicle dynamics (minimum and maximum
steering wheel angle and acceleration) by implementing a
2-level architecture: a controller that provides the path/state
which avoids the collision, and another controller that aids
the vehicle at following the proposed path.
A system capable of early detecting a pedestrians intention
of crossing the road and performing an evasive maneuver
if avoidance by braking is impossible is presented in [10].
However, they rely on the existence of a Road Side Unit
placed in dangerous road spots in order to detect pedestrian
intention and send this information to the On Board Unit
placed in the vehicle.
As opposed to most previous research, [1] propose a
model-free collision avoidance system using Deep Rein-
forcement Learning (DRL). They derive a balanced reward
function for an autonomous braking system based on DRL,
where the action space allows 4 choices: no braking, weak
braking, medium and strong. The reward function consists
of one component that penalizes the agent for braking too
early while the second one is a penalty for collision with
the pedestrian and takes into account the velocity of the
vehicle in order to reﬂect the degree of damage. Due to an
unstable learning performance (collisions rarely occuring),
the authors use memory replay[11] in order to remind the
agent of collisions, whatever the present policy. The results
show that collision rates are 0 for time-to-collision larger or
equal to 1.5 seconds. This prompts us to study TTC values
below 1.5s.
B. Injury risk literature
Various metrics are being employed in research as a
measure of crash severity, while this makes for grim reading
they do provide widely adopted quantitative, data driven
models of accident outcomes. They include the Acceleration
Severity Index (ASI), Occupant Impact Velocity (OIV) and
Delta-V. However, [12] show that the former two do not
offer signiﬁcant predictive advantage over the latter. Since
its emergence in the 1970s, Delta-V has been the traditional
metric for crash severity and is deﬁned as the absolute change
between pre-collision velocity and post-collision velocity,
with the assumption that larger differences in velocities are
correlated with more severe injuries ([13]):
∆v = |vafter −vbefore|
(1)
In [14] the fatality risk of pedestrians as given by the
vehicle’s speed on impact using the GIDAS dataset (German
In-Depth Accident Study) is studied. The dataset includes
data from 2127 pedestrians that were involved in accidents
between 1999 and 2007. They present a now widely-adopted
approximation of the fatality risk as:
P =
1
1 + e6.9−0.09|v|
(2)
where v is the velocity when impacting the pedestrian
(km/h).
The authors of [15] introduced a widely used model for
the probability of a severe injury of car occupants during
a frontal impact, which was later conﬁrmed and extended
by [16] in a larger study. Both papers analyzed crash tests
that were published by National Highway Trafﬁc Safety
Administration (USA) in order to determine how the risk
of severe injury of the front seat occupants of a passenger
car is inﬂuenced by the impact speed during a frontal crash.
They approximate the fatal injury risk to be given by
P =
∆v
71
4
(3)
where ∆v is expressed in miles/hour, and the value of P
is clamped to 1.0. Moving forward, and without prejudice,
we will be using Equations 2 and 3 as quantitative models
of accident severity. Nothing in the coming sections requires
these particular models and they could be substituted out at
the reader’s discretion. What we propose here is a framework
rather than a ﬁxed implementation or a judgment call on the
correct way to measure accident severity.
III. LEARNING TO AVOID AND MITIGATE COLLISIONS
Here we investigate the role of machine learning in man-
aging and mitigating collisions. Our goal is a lower collision
cost, especially in the cases of lower time-to-collision values.
Our “agent” is the vehicle we can execute steering and brake
control over. At runtime our agent is provided only with a
sequence of images of the road scene. Given this we need to
learn a mapping from images to a 2-channel control sequence
which improves outcomes over conventional baseline straight
line braking. In this way the system can choose as how and
when to brake and steer as a function of instantaneous speed

and time to collision. We will consider and compare two
loss/reward strategies which will be explained in Section III-
B. In the remaining subsections we assume some familiarity
with the recent reinforcement learning literature in which for
completeness we give the details of our learning procedure.
However the experiment and results in Sections IV and V
can be consumed / read as independently of this section.
A. Reinforcement learning using DDPG
We use Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)[6]
because it is off-policy, making it suitable for rapidly dis-
covering optimal policies in simulation by employing a
stochastic policy for improved exploration, while tackling the
much easier task of learning a deterministic policy. DDPG
employs two networks, a policy network (the actor) and a Q-
value estimator network (the critic). Using the current state as
as input to both networks, the actor will output actions from a
continuous action space, while the critic estimates a Q value
based on the output of the actor. The actor network weights
are then updated using deterministic policy gradient[17], and
the critic weights are updated using the gradient of the
temporal-difference signal, similar to [17].
DDPG uses experience replay[11] as a variance-reduction
technique and target networks[17] to stabilize training. As
a difference from DPG[17], rather than directly copying the
weights of the local networks θL to the target networks θT
every N steps, DDPG performs a soft update of its target
network weights θT using an update rate τ between 0 and
1:
θT = (1 −τ) ∗θT + τ ∗θL
(4)
The local critic network is updated by minimizing the loss
function:
L(θQ
L ) = 1
N
X
i

(R+γQ(si+1, ai+1|θQ
L ))−Q(si, ai|θQ
T )
2
(5)
Here, R is the reward, Q is the Q-value approximator
function, the local critic network is parametrized by θQ
L , the
target critic network is parametrized by θQ
T , γ is the time-
horizon discount factor and N is the size of the minibatch
sampled from the experience replay buffer. The current state
and action are represented by si and ai, and the future state
and action are represented by si+1 and ai+1. The local actor
network is updated using the gradient of the local critic
network with respect to the actions ai, multiplied by the
gradient of the local actor network with respect to θµ
L (chain
rule) [17]:
∇θµ
Lµ = 1
N
X
i

∇aQ(si, ai|θQ
L )∇θµµ(si|θµ
L)

(6)
Here, µ is the policy function, the local actor network
is parametrized by θµ
L and the target actor network is
parametrized by θµ
T . The parameterisation, origin, and form
of the reward R, action a, and state s will now be explained
in the following subsections.
B. Reward structure
As this research aims to be an objective comparison of the
agent’s behaviour as a result of the learning strategies, we
propose two reward structures for the reinforcement-learning
agent: one where the penalties are uniform (-1 for any type
of collision) and another one that follows the literature on
severe risk injury and pedestrian fatality risk.
While the work of [1] focuses on pedestrians only, our pro-
posed reward structures will also take into account another
category of trafﬁc participants: car-occupants. Secondly, as
injury risk has been approximated in previous research, we
hope that the second reward structure will more closely fol-
low real collision scenarios, where car-occupants are better
protected than pedestrians due to the car’s energy absorption
properties. Additionally, this empirical approach allows us
to avoid any hyper-parameters or weights in the reward
functions.
Reward Strategy 1 The ﬁrst reward function is deﬁned
as:
R1 = −(nrped + nrocc)
(7)
Here nrped represents the number of pedestrians and nrocc
represents the number of car occupants involved in the
accident. This strategy simply counts the number of people
involved in a collision.
Reward Strategy 2 The second reward function combines
the empirical models of “injury” Equations (2) and (3) and
so explicitly accounts for the degree of injury, and is deﬁned
as:
R2 = −

nrped
1
1 + e6.9−0.09|v| + nrocc
∆v ∗0.621
71
4
(8)
In the occupant injury component, 0.621 is used to convert
the speed from km/h in miles/hour to ﬁt Joksch’s[15] original
model.
Note that when it comes to comparing outcomes using
Strategy 1 or Strategy we will use, in both cases, the
empirically derived Equations 2 and 3 to numerically and
continuously represent total injury.
C. Action space
In line with previous model-based research that includes
steering and braking as collision-avoidance options, we pro-
pose an extension of [1] agent’s action space to include
both braking and steering. Additionally, we let the actions be
continuous instead of discrete in order to allow more degree
of control.
The actions at are encoded as a pair of integer values
between -1 and 1, the ﬁrst value encoding the steering angle,
the second value encoding the position of the throttle(for
positive values) or brake(for negative values). For steering,
the range −1 to 1 maps the range between the maximum
left and the maximum right steering angles. For braking, the
range −1 to 0 maps a braking force causing a decelleration
between −9.8m/s2 to 0m/s2.

D. General Simulation Architecture
Clearly in this context the use of simulation is required.
One cannot readily or ethically explore the space of ac-
cident vs. action in real life. Accordingly, our system as
presented here appears as a back-end used in conjunc-
tion with CARLA’s semantic segmentation output based on
Citiscapes[18] classes,which is fed to our system in the
shape of 64*64 1-channel images, with 13 corresponding
classes(None, Buildings, Fences, Other, Pedestrians, Poles,
RoadLines, Roads, Sidewalks, Vegetation, Vehicles, Walls,
Trafﬁc Signs) encoded as integer values between 0-12. Our
choice is based on the recent performance of real-time
semantic segmentation approaches[19],[20], and we assume
that such a system is now readily available as an input pre-
processor. Similar to [5], we develop and train our system in
multiple phases, as this allows us to use supervised learning
where possible and to test individual components. We begin
by recording observations obst and actions at produced by
an agent exploring the environment of CARLA using the
built-in waypoint based autopilot[7] with Gaussian noise
added to the controls. The observations obst that we collect
are represented by tuples of a semantically-segmented(using
Citiscapes classes) images of the environment It, as shown
in Fig. 4 and the vehicle forward velocity vt, for each time
t. The actions at are encoded as described in section III-
C. In the ﬁrst phase, a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)[21]
learns to compress the incoming observations from the envi-
ronment obst into a latent representation zt with a Gaussian
distribution. In the second phase, we train a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) to predict the next latent representation zt+1,
given the current latent representation zt and the current
action at. Finally,in the third phase, we train the agent using
DDPG by encoding the current incoming frame using the
VAE, predicting the next state using the recurrent network
and using the latent representation zt and the predicted state
zt+1 as input to our controller, giving the agent access to the
current state of the environment and to a prediction of the
future state. The agent then takes an action in the simulated
Carla environment. An overview of the architecture of the
system is shown in Fig. 3.
E. Phase 1
Following [5], in Phase 1 we train a Variational Au-
toencoder (VAE)[21] to compress incoming 2D observations
(images) obst into a 128-length latent representation zt with
a Gaussian distribution. The literature on VAEs is vast, and
the reader is invited to study, for example, [22] and [21]
for a more in-depth look at VAEs. The main reasoning
behind using a VAE is two-fold: 1)we wish to reduce the
dimensionality of our data such that it becomes easier to train
the RNN and controller and 2)we wish to only keep features
that are relevant to encoding the position and type of objects
found in the incoming semantically-segmented images.
F. Phase 2
In phase 2, we ﬁrst convert all of the recorded 2D
image observations obst into latent space representations
Fig. 2.
Images obtained by applying the VAE decoder on latent repre-
sentations. The right column represents decoded state zt−1. The middle
column represents decoded state zt. The left column represents the output
of the decoder applied to state zt+1 as predicted by the RNN using zt
and the internal state of the LSTM cell. The green blob represents a
semantically-segmented vehicle coming towards the camera, while the red
patches represent fences on the side of the road.
zt. Following this we produce training data by creating a
sequence of tuples (zt, zt+1, at) for t between 1 and N,
the total number of recorded frames in a sequence. We
then train an LSTM-RNN[23] to predict the next latent
representation zt+1 given the current latent representation
zt and the current action at using the sequence of tuples.
An example of applying the VAE decoder on the predicted
latent representations can be seen in Fig 2. The RNN layout
uses an LSTM cell with 512 hidden units. Details about the
implementation can be referenced from [5].
G. Phase 3
In phase 3, we train our agent in the CARLA environment
using DDPG, as described in III-A. For each incoming
observation obst, we transform it using the VAE into a latent
representation zt and predict a future state zt+1. The input to
both the policy and the Q-value functions is a concatenation
of zt and zt+1, giving the agent access to the current state
of the environment and to a prediction of the future state.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Generating and Simulating Collision Scenarios
To generate a diverse set of imminent collision scenarios,
we randomly sample collision parameters from the following
distributions:
• TTC ∼U(0.25, 1.5)s
• Collision velocity vc ∼U(1, 30)m/s
• Pedestrian velocity vp ∼U(1, 5)m/s
• Number of cars nc ∼[0...10]
• Number of other pedestrians np ∼[0...10]

  VAE
RNN
µ
Environment
VAE Loss
Update
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Q
ht
zt
zt
zt+1
at
obst
at+1
Fig. 3.
An overview of our architecture. The dashed rounded rectangles
encompass the components used in each phase, as described in III-D and
the following subsections.
Fig. 4.
Images from the CARLA environment. On the top we show an
RGB image depicting a street view with trafﬁc. On the bottom we show the
semantic segmentation of the top image, with cars in blue and pedestrians
in red.
• Probability of pedestrian infraction Pp ∼U(0, 1)
• Probability of car infraction Pc ∼U(0, 1)
For each scenario, if the probability of pedestrian collision
is higher than 0.5, we generate a random trajectory that
intersects the pedestrian with the car at a point that will
be reached in TTC seconds if the velocity of the car is
maintained. Similarly, if the probability of a car collision is
higher than 0.5, we spawn a vehicle that will intersect with
the car at a point that is TTC seconds away if the velocity
is kept constant.
B. Training
We train the VAE for 2 epochs on a dataset containing
200000 frames. We train the RNN for 10 epochs on 850
sequences of approximately 230 frames each, captured in
the CARLA environment at 15FPS, with a time-limit of 15
seconds for each sequence. We make use of the Adam [?]
solver for all training, with an initial learning rate of 0.0001,
and a batch size of 32. No other hyperparameters are set or
used.
C. Testing
To test the effectiveness of our policies, we create a
bank of test scenarios by sweeping through TTC, collision
speeds and trafﬁc participant setups, with ﬁxed seeds for any
randomly-generated component to allow for repeatability. We
then test the 2 policies and the baseline policy using identical
test scenarios, and record for each collision scenario, along
with the scenario setup, the following metrics:
• Whether there was a collision with a pedestrian
• Whether there was a collision with a vehicle
• Whether there was a collision with a static object
• Injury severity for each collision, for each participant
• Velocity of car at the beginning of the collision
• Whether the car has left its lane
These metrics allow us to study,for each policy type and
for each Time-To-Collision interval:
• The percentage of pedestrian collisions avoided
• The percentage of car collisions avoided
• The percentage of collisions with static obstacles (e.g.
poles, walls etc)
• The percentage of severe injuries
D. Performance
The agent network takes approximately 100 ms for images
with a resolution of 64 × 64 on an Intel I7 processor and 30
ms for the same resolution on an NVIDIA Tesla GPU.
V. RESULTS
Fig. 5 shows, on each column, in the following order:
a)Pedestrian collision rate percentage point improvement
over baseline; b)pedestrian severe injury risk percentage
point improvement over baseline; c)car collision rate percent-
age point improvement over baseline; d)car occupant severe
injury risk percentage point improvement over baseline; All
are expressed as a function of TTC and initial velocity. First
row presents results for the policy trained using Reward R1,
while the second row presents results for the policy trained
using Reward R2. We notice that both policies offer very
favourable outcomes as compared to the baseline of braking-
only.
We observe a signiﬁcant increase in the number of colli-
sions avoided as compared to baseline, especially for TTC

Fig. 5.
First row presents results for the policy trained using Reward 1. Second row presents results for the policy trained using Reward 2. Column
descriptions: a) Pedestrian collision rate percentage point reduction over baseline; b) Pedestrian severe injury risk percentage point reduction over baseline;
c) Car collision rate percentage point reduction over baseline; d) Car occupant severe injury risk percentage point reduction over baseline; The more red
an area is(i.e, the higher the numbers), the lower the rate of collision or risk of severe injury compared to a baseline of straight-line braking-only.
Policy type
TTC 0.5s
TTC 0.75s
TTC 1.0s
TTC 1.5s
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
Straight-line braking
0.886
5.40
6.08
0.263
0.360
1.650
0.015
0.064
0.828
0.0
0.0
0.0
Brake&Steer, reward 1
0.168
2.462
2.860
0.0
0.189
1.799
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Brake&Steer, reward 2
0.054
1.087
3.487
0.0
0.172
1.633
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
TABLE I
PEDESTRIAN PROBABILITY (%) OF SEVERE INJURY
Policy type
TTC 0.5s
TTC 0.75s
TTC 1.0s
TTC 1.5s
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
10
(m/s)
20
(m/s)
30
(m/s)
Straight-line braking
0.0
0.372
0.829
0.008
0.603
1.240
0.006
0.042
0.015
0.001
0.002
0.245
Brake&Steer, reward 1
0.001
0.467
0.579
0.001
0.754
0.495
0.0
0.052
0.001
0.0
0.0
0.0
Brake&Steer, reward 2
0.0
0.001
0.663
0.0
0.124
0.0
0.0
0.0158
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
TABLE II
CAR OCCUPANT PROBABILITY (%) OF SEVERE INJURY
TTC(s)
0.5
0.75
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
Col. rate % (ours)
21.8
5.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
Col. rate % [1]
NA
NA
61.29
18.85
0.74
0.0
TABLE III
PEDESTRIAN COLLISION RATE (%) COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR
RESULTS AND THOSE OF CHAE ET AL.[1].
values between 0.25s and 1.0s for pedestrians, and for
TTC values between 0.75s and 1.3s for car collisions. We
observe no overall degradation of performance as compared
to the braking-only baseline, suggesting that the controller
has learned to effectively gauge when simple braking is
enough and when steering input is needed to mitigate the
effects of a collision.
We also observe a signiﬁcant improvement in the risk of
severe injury for pedestrians, especially in the problematic[1]
area of TTC under 0.9s and speeds over 15m/s.
Table I compares the performance of the trained agent
against the braking-only baseline for pedestrian risk of severe
injuries. Both policies lead to a lower incidence of severe
injuries compared to straight-line braking, with the policy
trained using R2 showing outright improvement in all areas,
with the exception of TTC 0.75s at 30m/s.
Table II compares the performance of the trained agent
against the braking-only baseline for car occupant injuries.
We observe that the policy trained using R2 shows an
outright improvement in all areas.
Table III compares the pedestrian collision results obtained
using our R2 policy with the results published by [1]. We
show a reduction in the rate of severe injuries across the
whole TTC range between 0.9s and 1.5s, and show much
lower collision rates at TTC of 0.75s and 0.5s than the rates
reported by [1] for TTC of 0.9s.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has asked an unusual question: “what might
an autonomous vehicle do during an accident, including the
cases where a collision is inevitable?”. There is, of course,
no obviously correct answer, nor do we intend here to offer
a view on what should happen. Instead, we ask what control

behaviours are learned if we utilize existing models of injury
severity and at the same time leverage the ability of an
Autonomous Vehicle to control its complete trajectory -
thereby differentiating from conventional ADAS systems.
Our architecture makes several contributions to the topic
of investigating collision mitigation using simulation and
machine learning. The training of the VAE distills relevant
information from the CARLA simulations such that both the
RNN and the controller become much easier to train. And of
course the use of Reinforcement Learning in the controller
allows the system freedom to learn complex control proﬁles.
We compare our outcomes, which allow for steering and
braking control, to those arising from straight-line emergency
braking systems. We trained our system using two reward
constructs - one which simply counts participants in colli-
sions, and one which takes into account empirically derived
measures of severity. In all three cases (our two strategies
and the baseline) we measure the outcome using the same
empirical measures of injury, Eq.(2) and Eq.(3).
We have presented a vision-based emergency collision
mitigation system that, under simulation, reduces the total
severity of human injury. Our empirical results show that
allowing the vehicle to brake and steer yields preferable
outcomes when used with the policies we learned. In some
cases by a 60% margin.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by an Oxford-Google Deep-
Mind Graduate Scholarship and EPSRC Programme Grant
EP/M019918/1. The authors would also like to thank
Valentina Musat and Tom Bruls for their help.
