The Effects of Generative AI on Computing Students’
Help-Seeking Preferences
Irene Hou
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Sophia Mettille
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Zhuo Li
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Owen Man
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Cynthia Zastudil
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Stephen MacNeil
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, United States

ABSTRACT
Help-seeking is a critical way that students learn new concepts,
acquire new skills, and get unstuck when problem-solving in their
computing courses. The recent proliferation of generative AI tools,
such as ChatGPT, offers students a new source of help that is always
available on-demand. However, it is unclear how this new resource
compares to existing help-seeking resources along dimensions of
perceived quality, latency, and trustworthiness. In this paper, we
investigate the help-seeking preferences and experiences of com-
puting students now that generative AI tools are available to them.
We collected survey data (n=47) and conducted interviews (n=8)
with computing students. Our results suggest that although these
models are being rapidly adopted, they have not yet fully eclipsed
traditional help resources. The help-seeking resources that students
rely on continue to vary depending on the task and other factors.
Finally, we observed preliminary evidence about how help-seeking
with generative AI is a skill that needs to be developed, with dis-
proportionate benefits for those who are better able to harness the
capabilities of LLMs. We discuss potential implications for inte-
grating generative AI into computing classrooms and the future of
help-seeking in the era of generative AI.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics →Computing education.
KEYWORDS
Generative AI, ChatGPT, computing education, help-seeking
ACM Reference Format:
Irene Hou, Sophia Mettille, Zhuo Li, Owen Man, Cynthia Zastudil, and Stephen
MacNeil. 2024. The Effects of Generative AI on Computing Students’ Help-
Seeking Preferences. In Australian Computing Education Conference (ACE
2024), January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3636243.3636248
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission

ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1619-5/24/01...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3636243.3636248
1
INTRODUCTION
Not so long ago, the internet ushered in a new wave of help-seeking
resources for students [62]. Students could ask questions and receive
answers crowdsourced from experts around the world on Stack
Overflow [12, 47, 66] and find tutorials and lectures on YouTube [6].
Over the last year, a new and widely available resource has emerged
in the form of generative AI tools, such as GPT-3 and ChatGPT.
A recent study revealed GPT-3 has an ability to produce code ex-
planations that students rated higher than those crafted by their
peers [34]. This raises questions into the extent and circumstances
under which students will turn to these tools for assistance. Espe-
cially as many other use cases are rapidly emerging in computing
education contexts [3, 9, 14, 29, 35, 41, 52, 53, 58, 59, 61]. As a result,
students now have instant access to high-quality and personalized
help without needing to ask questions publicly to the entire class.
It is critical to investigate the potential impact, positive and
negative, these tools might have on the help-seeking preferences of
students in computing education classes. We hope to gain a crucial
preliminary understanding of when and why computing students
choose to seek help and what resources they prefer. In particular,
this paper aims to identify advantages and potential barriers to
Generative AI as a help-seeking resource. This timely insight into
how traditional help-seeking may have evolved with the emergence
of generative AI will guide researchers in adapting their pedagogy
to most effectively leverage this new help-seeking resource.
This paper explores computing students’ preferences regard-
ing generative AI. Through a mixed-methods study, we surveyed
47 students and conducted 8 interviews with additional students.
Our goal was to understand the factors that influence help-seeking
preferences and help resource utilization. Participants were asked
to compare their experiences and preferences with traditional re-
sources to their use of generative AI tools such as ChatGPT and
GitHub Copilot. We investigated the following research questions:
RQ 1: How does the frequency of help-seeking resource usage
vary across tasks for computing students after the advent of
Generative AI?
RQ 2: What factor(s) may have influenced computing students’
decisions in using (or not using) generative AI tools over
other existing resources?
RQ 3: How do generative AI tools compare with other resources
along perceived factors like trust, latency, and quality?
arXiv:2401.02262v1  [cs.HC]  4 Jan 2024

ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Hou, et al.
Our research uncovered varied utilization patterns and prefer-
ences concerning generative AI tools. Students highlighted support
for iteration, convenience, and the mitigation of social pressures
as primary incentives for their adoption of these tools for help-
seeking. However, the range of preferences and experiences seems
closely tied to their ability to use these tools. Students who could
assess generative model responses and integrate them into their
problem-solving process appeared to derive the most value.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Help-Seeking Behaviors and Challenges
Effective help-seeking is crucial for academic success, as it often
correlates with higher academic achievement and greater academic
self-confidence [57]. Help-seeking is a complex process and suc-
cessful students tend to demonstrate proficient metacognitive and
self-regulatory strategies [4, 28]. However, help-seeking can be
challenging for many. Students can encounter socio-emotional bar-
riers to help-seeking [16] and decision-making barriers related to
which help resources to utilize and when [1, 7].
These barriers guide whether students decide to seek help, which
resources to consume, and when they engage with these resources
such as peers, instructors, or online resources [16, 27, 48, 54, 67].
When students seek help, they often encounter socio-emotional
barriers. For example, the fear of appearing incompetent, worries
about being burdensome, and the anxiety of potential rejection
can significantly reduce their willingness to seek help [27, 32].
Other fears stem from social capital; students may fear harming
the trust and relationships they have cultivated with the peers
in their community. While knowledge exchanged through social
interactions can be invaluable, students may feel that knowledge
comes at a social cost [8].
Students also face decision-making barriers when choosing which
help resources to utilize. Students must implicitly or explicitly evalu-
ate the quality of the feedback source, determine receptivity of help
providers, and formulate effective help requests [1, 7]. Addition-
ally, help-seeking is not a static decision-making process. Students
tend to iteratively engage with the most convenient help resources
first, then move on to scarcer information resources [11, 67]. This
iterative process has been called a “recursive try-again” loop [21].
Students engage with increasingly effort-intensive resources until
their need for help has been met. This iterative process is further
supported by a study which found that students begin their help-
seeking process with informal (i.e., detached) resources like peers
or internet resources, to more formal (i.e., attached) resources like
office hours or classrooms [67]. This behavior suggests an under-
lying narrative that students are likely to prioritize help-seeking
resources based on their current stage in the learning process and
the resource’s perceived quality and availability, while minimizing
the barriers they face.
2.2
Help-Seeking in Computing Education
Undergraduate computing students are exposed to a wide variety of
academic resources, both formal and informal; this includes office
hours with TAs and instructors, peers online and offline, internet
forums such as StackOverflow, course materials, and online re-
sources [67]. When learning how to program there are a variety of
challenges that students face which can be highly demoralizing. For
example, they may struggle with exceedingly common syntactic
issues, conceptual misunderstandings which impact their mental
models of code and how it runs, and strategic knowledge about
how to develop solutions to programming tasks, amongst other
issues [55]. Another frustrating yet common sticking point for com-
puting students is learning how to identify and resolve bugs [15, 46].
Navigating when and how to seek help during debugging presents
a unique challenge for programming students. Moreover, the wide-
spread availability of internet resources and prevailing industry
values may play a role in how these student help-seeking behav-
iors differ compared to other fields. Distinctively, there is often
a focus on troubleshooting and self-directed exploration, fueled
by the abundance of digital resources and industry emphasis on
self-directed learning [45, 69].
Doebling and Kazerouni studied how computing students ac-
cessed help resources and found students start with online resources
then move on to peers and finally to instructors only if neces-
sary [11]. This shows how students prioritize self-learning and rely
on other sources as a next step, further corroborating the idea that
students may feel the need to solve problems they encounter on
their own before reaching out to other help sources. When using
online resources, student tend to ask specific technical questions
and issues that require quick solutions rather than more concep-
tual questions. Additionally, students view the use of online help
resources more like a tool to utilize continuously throughout the
coding process. More conceptual questions are reserved for when
students are requesting help from sources such as their peers and
instructors [11]. The prioritization online tools by computing stu-
dents when seeking help, coupled with the surging popularity of
generative AI, could impact which resources students favor and
when they choose to use them.
2.3
Generative AI in Computing Education
Recently, there has been significant excitement about the potential
for using generative AI in computing classrooms [33, 51, 70] with
researchers already demonstrating many remarkable capabilities
of generative AI including generating code explanations [34, 39,
42], enhancing error messages [35], identifying bugs [38], solving
multiple-choice programming problems [59, 61], solving Parsons
problems [22], and creating instructional materials and program-
ming assignments [14, 58, 65]. A study on the impacts of chatbots
on learning performance and motivation found students were moti-
vated to receive help from a chatbot because it supported self-paced
learning [68]. Recently, a study showed that LLM-generated ex-
planations of code even surpassed that of peers in a computing
classroom [34]. Another study investigating how generative AI
tools respond to student help requests have noted that GPT-3.5
in particular is helpful in identifying problematic areas of student
code [20]. LLMs have also been shown to be effective at providing
on-demand, scalable programming assistance in computing educa-
tion classes [36]. Previous studies have also identified that novice
programming students write better code when supported by LLMs
without decreasing their ability to manually modify code [29]. This
is promising for help-seekers as they can solve problems that might

Generative AI and Help-Seeking
ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
otherwise be outside of their ability without losing their agency to
adapt and revise the code themselves.
Given these capabilities ranging from personalized support to
timely feedback, generative AI tools could emerge as a robust source
of help for computing students. However, whether or not students
prefer these AI tools in comparison to other resources is a question
that has been left largely unexplored. Research is needed to under-
stand how and why students rely on these tools in the context of
other existing help resources.
3
METHODOLOGY
To evaluate our research questions, we conducted a survey and in-
terview study. All research was conducted after receiving approval
from our university’s Institutional Review Board.
3.1
Participant Recruitment
To recruit a diverse range of participants, we advertised our study
on multiple university campuses. We advertised in student and
computing-related Discord servers, Slack channels, and subreddits.
We also recruited student organization leaders and faculty to make
announcements in their clubs and courses. Participation in the
survey was uncompensated and interview participants received a
$10 gift card. All interview participants and survey responses were
collected from July-October 2023.
3.2
Survey Study
3.2.1
Participants. We collected 47 survey responses (32 male, 13
female, 2 preferred not to say) from computing students (i.e., stu-
dents who have taken at least one computing course) across mul-
tiple North American universities. Participants included 2 incom-
ing first-years, 19 first-years, 9 second-years, 12 third-years, and 4
fourth-years. 42 out of 47 participants had used ChatGPT before
but not necessarily other AI tools (e.g. Midjourney, GitHub Copilot).
Students rated the difficulty of their CS courses from Easy (1) to
Hard (5), reporting a median difficulty of 3 (𝜇= 3.0, 𝜎= 0.78).
3.2.2
Design of survey questions. To understand students’ help-
seeking preferences, we asked students to rank seven popular help-
seeking resources. These included ChatGPT and Github Copilot
which are two popular Generative AI tools used by programmers.
These also included five “traditional” help-seeking resources based
on a previous survey of computing students’ help preferences [67].
Students ranked help received from online resources (e.g., Youtube
and StackOverflow), course discussion forums, TAs, instructors,
friends, ChatGPT, and GitHub Copilot in order of preference for
common CS tasks including understanding course concepts, writing
or generating code, debugging, and developing test cases. These sce-
narios were chosen based on a study that determined what kinds of
help computing students seek in TA office hours [56] and the stages
of programming problem-solving by Loksa et al [37]. Additionally,
participants ranked each resource along the same scale for the fol-
lowing dimensions of assistance: perceived quality, trustworthiness,
and timeliness.
Participants were asked to rank their preferences for the 7 re-
sources from “Most Preferred” to “Least Preferred.” Participants
also rated how often they used help-seeking resources on a scale
from “Never” to “Hourly.”
Participants were also asked to rate the help-seeking resources
on a five-point Likert-scale for perceived convenience, quality,
anonymity, and potential for supporting follow-up questions. Lastly,
participants were asked to evaluate how comfortable they were
seeking help from each resource on a five-point Likert-scale. Partic-
ipants rated their comfort levels with highly anonymous resources
(e.g., ChatGPT or online resources) compared to direct resources
(e.g., in-class assistance or instructors).
3.2.3
Survey analysis. Survey responses were analyzed by comput-
ing the mean, median, and standard deviation for all Likert-scale
questions and visualizing rankings of the help resources. We present
these summary statistics narratively alongside quotes to contextual-
ize the findings. We also generated data visualizations to summarize
the ranked preferences.
3.3
Interview Study
3.3.1
Participants. To gain a more nuanced perspective on student
help-seeking preferences, we also carried out 8 semi-structured
interviews (1 female, 7 male) which lasted between 30-45 minutes.
All participants had used ChatGPT at least once, but not necessarily
other generative AI tools (e.g. Midjourney, GitHub Copilot). 6 out
of 8 participants were first or second-year computing students,
while the others were third-years or above. Participants were able
to schedule an interview without having completed the survey.
3.3.2
Design of interview questions. The semi-structured interview
format allowed us to deviate from our prepared interview questions,
yielding richer and more varied perspectives [43]. Like the survey,
students were asked to rank their help-seeking preferences for each
task (e.g. understanding course concepts, writing or generating
code, debugging, and developing test cases). We also asked partici-
pants to share their help-seeking process, what they valued most
and least from each resource, and to draw comparisons with their
experiences using ChatGPT. For example, if students claimed they
preferred asking ChatGPT due to anonymity, we posed follow-up
questions such as: “If the questions you ask ChatGPT could be
viewed by your peers, would you still ask the same questions? Why
or why not?” This allowed us to probe the underlying preferences
and values more deeply [17, 18].
3.3.3
Interview analysis. Interviews were conducted on Zoom,
which automatically transcribes the conversation. One researcher
parsed through the transcripts to anonymize the participant and
make corrections to the transcripts. The transcripts were then ana-
lyzed using a thematic analysis technique [5]. This technique started
with open coding [63] with the goal of enabling the emergence of
patterns and categories that might not have been anticipated. These
codes were grouped thematically. Next, the researchers looked for
connections with established theoretical frameworks such as so-
cial comparison theory [64], “recursive try-again loop” [21], and
anonymity effects [16, 50]. This approach allowed our qualitative
analysis to balance inductive findings grounded in participants
experiences and perspectives with existing knowledge about feed-
back exchange theory. Transcripts were first reviewed individually
by three researchers to generate initial codes. Researchers then
met twice to collaboratively discuss emerging quotes and themes,

ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Hou, et al.
Table 1: Frequency of Resource Usage by Students
Resource
Hourly
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Never
Online search
9
24
11
2
1
Friends
2
13
16
10
6
Class forum
2
10
14
8
13
ChatGPT
4
7
9
11
16
Instructor
1
6
14
17
9
TA
1
3
15
16
12
GitHub Copilot
1
1
3
2
40
refining their collective understanding of the data to achieve con-
vergence and minimize interpretation biases. Researchers came to
a consensus through discussion. The results from this thematic
analysis are presented in Section 4.3.
Additionally, we conducted a secondary analysis to support the
survey responses. The results for this analysis are presented in
Section 4.2. For this analysis we adopted a deductive approach that
aligned with the questions asked in the survey. We looked explicitly
for instances where participants talked about their usage of help
seeking resources including when understanding coding concepts,
debugging code, writing code, and creating test cases.
4
RESULTS
4.1
Frequency of Usage
Table 1 displays how frequently students seek help from the seven
help-seeking resources in the survey. Searching online was the
most popular choice for help seekers with over 70.2% of students
using it on either an hourly or daily basis. Students also relied to a
lesser extent on friends (31.9%), course discussion forums (25.5%),
and ChatGPT (23.4%) to meet these hourly or daily needs. The
Internet, friends, and discussion forums were used consistently on
a weekly basis by over half of the students surveyed. At least once a
week, 44.7% of students consulted instructors and 42.6% of students
consulted ChatGPT.
Students depended least on TAs, with 59.6% of students seek-
ing help monthly or even less frequently. One possible reason for
the high frequency use of instructor help could be the inclusion of
diversely-sized universities; some universities surveyed had smaller
classrooms than others, meaning fewer TAs and more dependence
on the instructor. Possible reasons for the reluctance to seek help
from TAs could include temporal and spatial limitations, as sug-
gested by previous research [67]. This aligns with what interview
participants mentioned regarding resource availability. For exam-
ple, P2 said, “For hard classes there’s too long of a line; sometimes
their [TAs and instructors’] schedules don’t fit.” Multiple students
seeking assistance from a single TA or instructor could make this
resource seem less accessible and therefore less appealing.
With regard to the frequency of use, ChatGPT appears to be a
slightly polarizing choice; 26.1% of students who have experience
with ChatGPT use it daily while 34.0% of students never use it at
all. ChatGPT’s bimodal distribution of usage could be due to a mix
of lack of awareness, lack of trust (as further explored later in the
interview), or concerns regarding academic dishonesty [33, 51, 70].
4.2
Context of Usage
While students may rely more heavily on some help-seeking re-
sources than others, we investigated if specific resources were
perceived as more useful for tasks like writing or debugging code.
Summarized in Figure 1, students’ use of various help-seeking re-
sources varied according to task. Across tasks, students ranked the
Internet as their most preferred method for seeking help. This is
consistent with our observation that students rely heavily on web
searches to meet their information needs. The quotes presented in
this section came from the interviews and helps to contextualize
how generative AI tools were used.
4.2.1
Learning new concepts. After internet search, instructors
were the next most preferred resources for learning new concepts.
However, despite ChatGPT being a relatively nascent resource,
it was comparably popular to asking friends or in the discussion
forums. The primary reasons for this preference based on our inter-
view data was the iterative nature of responses from ChatGPT and
the reduced social pressures of not needing to request help directly
from a peer. The following quote demonstrates both aspects:
“It is easier for me to ask ChatGPT because I don’t have
to worry... I feel like it is kind of rude to contin-
uously ask for more and more details, especially
when you’re approaching someone for help.” (P1)
This quote illustrates how students are at times hesitant to in-
convenience their peers. With ChatGPT students can iterate and
develop their understanding without concern for social etiquette.
Later, the same student shared their biggest pain point when search-
ing online to learn new concepts:
“The issue is with the scope of what I’m looking for...when
I try to online search, I can often get sidetracked
by all these complicated, really advanced terms or con-
cepts. So I would try to look at the instructor’s items
first.” (P1)
While internet resources were still highly ranked, P1’s comment
highlights how for computing students, the web can be an over-
whelming source of information, whereas resources like instructors
and TAs can provide more scaffolding and guidance. ChatGPT has
the potential to bridge this gap by providing more personalized help
without the social pressures associated with other help resources.
P7, who ranked ChatGPT lower than instructors, said that this
scaffolding as a ‘process’ was more important than the answer
when seeking help:
“I feel that [getting an answer instantly] kind of defeats
the purpose of me asking a question. If I’m asking a
question, I’m trying to understand what’s going on. If
you just give me the answer, then you’re not describing
the process at all. I much prefer somebody who gives
me the process. That’s what I find most valuable” (P7).
These viewpoints emphasize the value of scaffolding help-seeking
in learning. How easy it is to navigate and make sense of infor-
mation can be a reason why students choose certain help-seeking
resources over others.
4.2.2
Writing code. When students talked about writing code, a
theme emerged that students valued ChatGPT’s capacity to support

Generative AI and Help-Seeking
ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Figure 1: Students survey rankings of four common CS tasks
new ideas (P1, P3, P6, P7). One participant pointed out that it felt
more challenging to seek abstract, high-level help from a TA: “I
feel like the TA is there for technical help, not for more creative help.”
(P3). Students viewed traditional help resources like the TA as more
helpful with common pitfalls and coursework:“TAs and instructors
have experience from multiple students asking questions about the
same problems” (P4). For high-level tasks such as writing code from
scratch, P7 noted ChatGPT’s creative potential:
“If I were to ask ChatGPT a math question, it might
get it wrong. But in more creative capacities, that’s
where I feel like it excels. When I asked it pre-thinking
questions...it’ll actually give me a very reasonable list.”
While traditional academic scaffolds, such as TAs, remain invaluable
for their historical and course-related expertise, participants tended
to describe ChatGPT as being more useful when trying to think
outside the box.
4.2.3
Debugging. Students again strongly preferred internet sources
for debugging, followed by ChatGPT and TAs, then course discus-
sion forums. Across the tasks, this appeared to be the use case
where ChatGPT was mildy preferred compared to other use cases.
Similar to when learning new concepts, students that preferred
ChatGPT cited its ability to provide multiple, iterative perspectives
and direction in solving specific problems. Another factor was the
ability to articulate help requests when debugging. This difficulty
of finding relevant solutions when searching online based on an
error message was captured by P3:
“For error messages, when I copy an error message from
the terminal and paste it to the Internet, it’s not always
guaranteed to have a result or a solution.”
In the same breath, the same student highlights an emergent para-
digm in debugging scenarios:
“But if you put it [the error message] into ChatGPT, it
will come up with something. Even though it may
not be right, it will still be helpful, like a correct
direction” (P3).
It is unclear if this participant, like many students [44], struggled to
articulate their error as a search query. It is also possible that models
are better able to infer information and omit irrelevant information
(e.g.: the working directory or line numbers) from help requests.
Another participant specifically cited ChatGPT’s ability to pro-
vide varied responses as helpful:
“I usually try to give ChatGPT the same prompt a couple
times. Based off what it tells me, I’ll see what comes up
most often. Then, based off of my actual knowledge, I’ll
see which one’s the right answer” (P1).
One notable insight is that P1 appears to use frequency as a
heuristic for correctness or reliability. If a solution emerges repeat-
edly from ChatGPT, P1 considered it as more likely to be helpful.
However, prompting ChatGPT multiple times with the same prompt

ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Hou, et al.
may not be the most successful approach. It is possible that—similar
to help seeking in other contexts—it is better to reformulate help
requests than to repeatedly ask the exact same question. Similar to
P3, it is unclear if P1 was able to articulate their queries effectively.
Additionally, P1’s process of cross-checking ChatGPT’s answers
with their own knowledge underscores the importance of domain
knowledge when evaluating generative AI outputs.
When asked to draw comparisons between internet sources and
ChatGPT, one participant observed: “On Stack Overflow, if somebody
asks a question, the answer that best suits the question is voted
to the top of the list. And with ChatGPT and Copilot, you don’t
really get any of that” (P7). This again suggests that students require
support in evaluating and prioritizing generative AI responses.
When seeking help on the web, students have to carefully formulate
their search queries to find relevant results. The ability for ChatGPT
to infer some meaning from even poorly formed help requests may
become an asset when combined with other help seeking resources.
4.2.4
Developing Test Cases. While not particularly low-ranked in
the survey data, participants in the interviews did not talk much
about using ChatGPT to find corner cases or to develop test cases.
They relied most on course assignment guidelines to test their code
and ensure edge cases were covered. P1 said, “I would look at instruc-
tor materials for us to see what kind of test cases... they’re specifically
asking for.” This shift in preferences may be due to the computing
students sampled for the interview. Students at this level are of-
ten overly concerned about the requirements of the assignment,
affecting how they face challenging course materials [30].
4.3
Factors Influencing Usage
Based on the ranking data, summarized in Figure 2, participants
appeared to favor internet resources and ChatGPT over other re-
sources in terms of timeliness; however, these two help resources
were perceived as less trustworthy and lower quality than the help
received from instructors or TAs. Themes that emerged from inter-
viewed students included trade-offs between rapid feedback and
quality, social dynamics, and strategies such as iteration and refor-
mulation when help-seeking.
4.3.1
Trust and trade-offs between convenience and quality. The
perceived trade-off between receiving help that is both efficient and
accurate emerged as a critical theme from survey and interview
data. 68.1% of the students surveyed Agreed or Strongly Agreed
that generative AI tools like ChatGPT were more convenient than
alternatives. While they offer immediate and convenient feedback,
students noted that this can come at the expense of correctness.
The lack of feedback latency was considered a major benefit
by nearly every interviewee (P1, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8). On the
other hand, all but one interview participant described ChatGPT as
an unreliable source of help, and a minority of students believed
the trade-off between speed and quality was not worth it. First-
year students and self-reported novices tended to be harsher in
their judgement of ChatGPT’s reliability (P3, P4, P6, P8). As P8
candidly shared, “I personally don’t really care if [ChatGPT]
is fast, I’ll wait [for a peer or TA]...the most important thing is
getting it right.” It is worth noting that P8 also described a negative
experience with ChatGPT hallucinations: “My partner used ChatGPT
to generate a Python switch statement, which doesn’t exist. I wouldn’t
trust [ChatGPT] to do it again.” P2 echoed similar sentiments: “I
don’t have a lot of trust in ChatGPT in terms of the harder coding
classes and the harder theoretical stuff.”
Conversely, P7, who had considerable programming experience,
found the trade-off between efficiency and quality acceptable:
“I’ll take ChatGPT’s advice with a grain of salt
anyway. I will generally use whatever solutions that it
gives me...and toss out what doesn’t work.”
Similarly, P5, a further studies student, stated: “I would trust
ChatGPT more [than my peers] because you can search it. It has
so much data inside. [ChatGPT] is like many humans with
so much information that you can search through and find
conclusions from.” Another student pointed out that if ChatGPT gave
inaccurate information, they would treat it as a “third party or an
alternate input or perspective” (P4). P4 and P5’s insight emphasizes
that those who receive the most value from ChatGPT tend to view
the model as a search engine or comprehensive resource, from
which they must derive pertinent information on their own. This
mental model differs from students like P8, who prioritize an expert-
level of accuracy.
Although multiple students cited instances when peers gave
incorrect or poor quality help, 7 out of 8 students still reportedly
preferred seeking help from peers over ChatGPT. This trend aligned
with survey data where 51.1% of students disagreed that ChatGPT
provided better quality feedback than alternatives. P2 described the
conflicting process of seeking help from peers: “Sometimes they’re
not even sure about their answers, and when I get a different answer,
we’re both questioning ourselves.” P4 went more into detail on this
process: “I’ll take the response from my peers if it makes sense to me.
I’ll take it with a good amount of trust. If I apply it and it doesn’t work,
that’s OK. The whole purpose is just to get another approach...and if
that doesn’t work then it’s not a big deal.” But when he was asked to
compare this experience with ChatGPT, he said: “I definitely don’t
trust ChatGPT with the accuracy of its response, especially CS stuff.”
Students largely fell into one of two groups: expecting generative
AI tools to be comparable to experts or believing that it is their
responsibility to steer the models toward giving useful responses.
Unlike when seeking assistance from peers, some participants were
less lenient with ChatGPT and subsequently more frustrated when
they did not get help after issuing a single prompt.
4.3.2
Social Aspects. Social dynamics of help-seeking among com-
puting students involve elements of personal comfort, perceived
judgment, and the desire to maintain reciprocal peer relationships.
Table 2 indicates that most students reported asking ChatGPT for
help as Very Comfortable, while other scenarios saw a wider distri-
bution across comfort levels. 68.1% of respondents reported their
comfort levels of asking ChatGPT as Comfortable or Very Comfort-
able, compared to traditional forms of help, such as TAs/Instructors
(66.0%) and peers privately (72.3%) or anonymously (72.3%). This
comfort level dropped to 46.8% when students were asked how
they felt about publicly seeking help. Although students were most
comfortable seeking help from their peers, they still found asking
ChatGPT more comfortable than asking a TA/Instructor or asking
for help in a public setting. Overall, ChatGPT appears to provide a

Generative AI and Help-Seeking
ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Figure 2: Students’ survey rankings of perceived qualities of help seeking resources
Scenario
Very Comfortable
Comfortable
Neutral
Uncomfortable
Very Uncomfortable
Asking ChatGPT for help
24 (51.1%)
8 (17.0%)
8 (17.0%)
2 (4.3%)
5 (10.6%)
Asking a peer privately
23 (48.9%)
11 (23.4%)
7 (14.9%)
4 (8.5%)
2 (4.3%)
Asking a TA/Instructor privately
19 (40.4%)
12 (25.5%)
8 (17.0%)
8 (17.0%)
0 (0%)
Asking other students anonymously
18 (38.3%)
16 (34.0%)
4 (8.5%)
9 (19.1%)
0 (0%)
Asking in front of other students publicly
12 (25.5%)
10 (21.3%)
13 (27.7%)
9 (19.1%)
3 (6.4%)
Table 2: Comfort Level of Seeking Help in Different Scenarios
comfortable learning environment for students, free of potential
social pressures and apprehensions.
In interviews, one primary concern expressed was the reluctance
to ‘burden’ peers with frequent help requests.
“I like going to ChatGPT more because I didn’t feel like
I had to burden my peers at all,” (P7)
The desire to avoid straining relationships by over-relying on
peers was echoed by most students, such as P1: “If I ask for help
sometimes and then I keep asking 5 more times, I do feel really bad,
and I might stop asking.” P8 admitted that seeking help is challeng-
ing and that “When it comes to people that I know personally, or
that I already have messed with, I’ll ask...but I still feel judgment.”
Reciprocity considerations were also brought up by participants,
most succinctly by P1 who said he does “try to maintain at least
a 50/50-ish balance in terms of asking for help...I don’t want our re-
lationship to be this kind of strained—like they’re giving a lot more
than I’m giving.” These social dynamics and reputational barriers
highlight the continued need for safe student help-seeking spaces.
The option to tap into generative AI tools alleviates some fears
surrounding being perceived as less knowledgeable or burdensome.
The ‘always-on’ nature of AI tools can be empowering, allowing
students to progress past common programming sticking points
without expending social energy or social capital. P5 aptly puts it:
“As an introvert, personally, I think ChatGPT is a very good
way to get help because talking to people kind of takes away my
energy.”
On the other hand, the value of help-seeking in community
settings cannot be overstated. While AI tools like ChatGPT could
reduce social pressures surrounding help-seeking, students stressed
the significant value of human interaction, mutual support, and
community. P8 shared an experience that provided testament to the
power of collective learning and peer help-seeking, emphasizing
the role of mutual struggle in fostering camaraderie:
“I think the thing that got me through CS was the
entire community actively also struggling with their
work, learning something new, and having a really,
really hard time. I wasn’t the only person that was
having a hard time...We’re all in Discord, we’re all in
communication...I had no problem asking like, ‘Hey,
what did you do?’” (P8)
4.3.3
Iteration. The iterative capabilities of ChatGPT and its abil-
ity to handle follow-up questions emerged as a positive for 44.7% of
students, who Agreed or Strongly Agreed that ChatGPT was better
at supporting follow-up questions compared to its alternatives. This
potential for iteration was especially valuable for students attempt-
ing to grasp unfamiliar concepts or clarify misunderstandings. For
example, P4 shared the following process:
“If you want to ask ChatGPT a concept...I feel like you
could ask it something, read its response, and ask it to
clarify on a response...like follow-up questions...if
I don’t understand what it says, I’ll prompt it again or
I’ll ask it to specify.”
Some students valued the autonomy provided by ChatGPT’s
rapid feedback, enabling them to continuously seek clarifications
and review uncertainties at their own pace. The language that
students used to describe how they query ChatGPT centers around
repetition and continuity, implying that the process of seeking help
was not a one-and-done experience but cyclical in nature.

ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Hou, et al.
Additionally, students found value in ChatGPT’s ability to recall
past interactions within a chat session. For example, P8 said:
“ChatGPT has the feature of looking at past con-
versations in the thread. I find that very, very helpful.
I can make a dedicated thread on one topic.”
This continuity in conversation mirrors the cognitive processes
that might take place when students are still conceptualizing new
information, allowing them to return to topics and re-familiarize
themselves. This constitutes a sensemaking process, reminiscent of
organizing notes.
P1 iterated to find answers using the regenerate button:
“I can basically ask ChatGPT as many times as I
want. So that’s why I’d often regenerate responses over
and over...the answers I found through regenerating
responses can be really, really inconsistent.”
Instead of reformulating their help request, which is a key strat-
egy in help-seeking [28], this student continued asking the same
question, expecting an improved answer each time.
5
DISCUSSION
Our results suggest that while generative AI tools like ChatGPT
have become a widely used resource in a very short amount of time,
significant barriers still exist that reduce students’ use of it for most
tasks. ChatGPT usage varied slightly by task, with students using
it more for debugging and writing code. Aligning with prior work,
students largely made decisions about which help-seeking resources
to use based on the quality and availability of the help resource [54,
67]. However, students highlighted features unique to ChatGPT that
traditional resources lacked, such as its creative generative potential
and its capacity to provide iterative support in the form of follow-
up questions. Unlike internet resources like Stack Overflow or
YouTube, students also appreciated how ChatGPT actively steered
them toward solutions for rare bugs or error messages, even if it
did not always provide the exact answer.
Another theme that emerged was related to experience level
and trust. Students who were less familiar with these models or
who had early negative experiences were much less likely to want
to use them. This is partially explained by the concept of cali-
brated trust [2, 71] where early negative experiences calibrated
students to distrust the models. This is further exacerbated by the
fact that models can perform well at times, while also hallucinating
incorrect information and struggling on easy multiple choice ques-
tions [60, 61]. Less experienced students described being especially
apprehensive about receiving wrong answers and being unable to
discern between correct and incorrect responses. This skepticism
is a promising finding given the widespread fears about students
blindly relying on these tools [3, 70].
Conversely, experienced students were more lenient with the
models. Students mentioned the necessity of applying their own
domain knowledge to evaluate the correctness of the model’s re-
sponses; hence, more knowledgeable students were better equipped
to filter through incorrect responses and find the bits that were
valuable or could “guide” their next steps. Across experienced and
inexperienced students, distrust did not necessarily mean students
failed to receive value from them as we saw most students using
the models to varying extents.
Formulating effective help requests appeared to be a common
challenge for students. Even without generative AI tools, help-
seeking remains a difficult task. When asking peers or instructors
for help, students grapple with the ’epistemic paradox of having to
know what they do not know’ in order to receive assistance [31].
This problem appears to persist even with tools like ChatGPT; if
students fail to formulate their help request to the model clearly,
they do not get the most effective help.
Given this gap in abilities to use these models, more research
is needed to understand how well students are able to use gener-
ative AI tools. Instructors need to continue to create pedagogical
materials or scaffolding [10, 24–26, 40] that can guide students to
maximize the utility of these tools. Crucially, if students are unable
to formulate effective help requests, the model will not save them.
Models can not infer missing information or pose follow-up ques-
tions in the same way instructors might be able to form a theory of
mind about what the learner knows and does not know in order to
tailor explanations accordingly. Students described instances where
they prompted the model and only asked it to regenerate responses
when the initial response was not appropriate. On the other hand,
confident users described using ChatGPT as a conversation where
they needed to reformulate their help requests or provide additional
context via follow-up questions.
5.1
Limitations
This study offers a important snapshot of how students are initially
incorporating generative AI tools into their help-seeking process,
providing critical insights into this dynamic landscape. As student
usage of these tools is expected to escalate [3, 51], future updates
to this study will be essential. Despite the inherent limitations of
being one of the first explorations in this rapidly evolving field, our
findings shed light on the early stages of student adoption. Notably,
our interview study, while relatively smaller (n=8) compared to
recent works [33, 70] with 18 and 20 participants respectively, is
complemented by a medium-sized survey involving 45+ students.
However, concentrating on North American students underscores
the need for future research with larger and more diverse samples
to extend the relevance of our observations to a broader population
as the field continues to evolve. Additionally, our sample included
students from varied levels of undergraduate study with a skew
towards first-year students. Future work could examine the expe-
riences of a more homogeneous population, such as introductory
students or even compare the differences between perceptions of
introductory computing students versus more senior students and
what other help-seeking resources they may rely on.
6
CONCLUSION
In this study, we examined students’ help-seeking behaviors through
surveys and interviews. Our findings reveal diverse patterns in
the utilization and preferences for generative AI tools in varying
tasks. Students described the potential for rapid iteration, creative
ideation, and avoiding social pressures as key motivations for us-
ing these tools. Notably, the range of preferences and experiences
among participants seems closely tied to their individual mental
models of these models’ function. Students either utilized Chat-
GPT’s responses as an initial step in their problem-solving process

Generative AI and Help-Seeking
ACE 2024, January 29-February 2, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
or became discouraged after receiving an incorrect answer. Finally,
it appears that students received disproportionate benefit when
seeking help from generative AI tools. Students who were willing
and able to iterate and reformulate their feedback requests described
having more success. While these models undoubtedly offer a valu-
able new resource for help-seeking, it is crucial to acknowledge that
the quality of assistance received is intricately tied to the clarity
and precision of the initial help request. In this regard, seeking
help from generative AI mirrors the importance and difficulty of
articulating a help request to a friend [19, 27, 48] or formulating
and reformulating a search query [13, 23, 49].
