Algorithmic Fairness
DANA PESSACH∗, Department of Industrial Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Israel
EREZ SHMUELI, Department of Industrial Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Israel
An increasing number of decisions regarding the daily lives of human beings are being controlled by artificial
intelligence (AI) algorithms in spheres ranging from healthcare, transportation, and education to college
admissions, recruitment, provision of loans and many more realms. Since they now touch on many aspects of
our lives, it is crucial to develop AI algorithms that are not only accurate but also objective and fair. Recent
studies have shown that algorithmic decision-making may be inherently prone to unfairness, even when
there is no intention for it. This paper presents an overview of the main concepts of identifying, measuring
and improving algorithmic fairness when using AI algorithms. The paper begins by discussing the causes of
algorithmic bias and unfairness and the common definitions and measures for fairness. Fairness-enhancing
mechanisms are then reviewed and divided into pre-process, in-process and post-process mechanisms. A
comprehensive comparison of the mechanisms is then conducted, towards a better understanding of which
mechanisms should be used in different scenarios. The paper then describes the most commonly used fairness-
related datasets in this field. Finally, the paper ends by reviewing several emerging research sub-fields of
algorithmic fairness.
Keywords: Algorithmic Bias, Algorithmic Fairness, Fairness-Aware Machine Learning.
1
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, an increasing number of decisions are being controlled by artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms, with increased implementation of automated decision-making systems in business and
government applications. The motivation for an automated learning model is clear – we expect
algorithms to perform better than human beings for several reasons: First, algorithms may integrate
much more data than a human may grasp and take many more considerations into account. Second,
algorithms can perform complex computations much faster than human beings. Third, human
decisions are subjective, and they often include biases.
Hence, it is a common belief that using an automated algorithm makes decisions more objective
or fair. However, this is unfortunately not the case since AI algorithms are not always as objective
as we would expect. The idea that AI algorithms are free from biases is wrong since the assumption
that the data injected into the models are unbiased is wrong. More specifically, a prediction model
may actually be inherently biased since it learns and preserves historical biases [85].
Since many automated decisions (including which individuals will receive jobs, loans, medication,
bail or parole) can significantly impact people’s lives, there is great importance in assessing and
improving the ethics of the decisions made by these automated systems. Indeed, in recent years, the
concern for algorithm fairness has made headlines. One of the most common examples was in the
field of criminal justice, where recent revelations have shown that an algorithm used by the United
States criminal justice system had falsely predicted future criminality among African-Americans at
twice the rate as it predicted for white people [6, 36]. In another case of a hiring application, it was
recently exposed that Amazon discovered that their AI hiring system was discriminating against
female candidates, particularly for software development and technical positions. One suspected
reason for this is that most recorded historical data were for male software developers [40]. In a
∗Corresponding author
Authors’ addresses: Dana Pessach, Department of Industrial Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, P.O. Box 39040, 6997801,

arXiv:2001.09784v1  [cs.CY]  21 Jan 2020

2
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
different scenario in advertising, it was shown that Google’s ad-targeting algorithm had proposed
higher-paying executive jobs more for men than for women [41, 125].
These lines of evidence and concerns about algorithmic fairness have led to growing interest in
the literature on defining, evaluating and improving fairness in AI algorithms (see, for example,
[15, 37, 57, 68]). It is important to note, however, that the task of improving fairness of AI algorithms
is not trivial since there exists an inherent trade-off between accuracy and fairness. That is, as we
pursue a higher degree of fairness, we may compromise accuracy (see, for example, [85]).
In contrast to other recent surveys in this field [37, 57], our paper proposes a comprehensive and
up-to-date overview of the field, ranging from definitions and measures of fairness to state-of-the-
art fairness-enhancing mechanisms. Our survey also attempts to cover the pros and cons of the
various measures and mechanisms, and guide under which setting they should be used. Finally, a
major goal of this survey is to highlight and discuss emerging areas of research that are expected
to grow in the upcoming years. Overall, this survey provides the relevant knowledge to enable
new researchers to enter the field, inform current researchers on rapidly evolving sub-fields, and
provide practitioners the necessary tools to apply the results.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the potential causes of algorith-
mic unfairness; Section 3 presents definitions and measures of fairness and their trade-offs; Section
4 reviews fairness mechanisms and methods and a comparison of the mechanisms, focusing on
the pros and cons of each mechanism; Section 5 outlines commonly used fairness-related datasets;
Section 6 presents several emerging research sub-fields of algorithmic fairness; and Section 7
provides concluding remarks and sketches several open challenges for future research.
2
POTENTIAL CAUSES OF UNFAIRNESS
The literature has indicated several causes that may lead to unfairness in machine learning [37, 99]:
• Biases already included in the datasets used for learning, which are based on biased device
measurements, historically biased human decisions, erroneous reports or other reasons. Machine
learning algorithms are essentially designed to replicate these biases.
• Biases caused by missing data, such as missing values or sample/selection biases, which result in
datasets that are not representative of the target population.
• Biases that stem from algorithmic objectives, which aim at minimizing overall aggregated predic-
tion errors and therefore benefit majority groups over minorities.
• Biases caused by "proxy" attributes for sensitive attributes. Sensitive attributes differentiate
privileged and unprivileged groups, such as race, gender and age, and are typically not legitimate
for use in decision making. Proxy attributes are non-sensitive attributes that can be exploited to
derive sensitive attributes. In the case that the dataset contains proxy attributes, the machine
learning algorithm can implicitly make decisions based on the sensitive attributes under the
cover of using presumably legitimate attributes [11].
To illustrate the last cause mentioned above, consider the example depicted in Figure 1. The
figure illustrates a case of SAT scores for two sub-populations: a privileged one and an unprivileged
one.

Algorithmic Fairness
3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
Job Success Rate
SAT Score
Privileged
Unprivileged
Fig. 1. If the SAT scores were used for hiring, then unprivileged candidates with high potential would be
excluded, whereas lower potential candidates from the privileged group would be hired instead
In this illustration, SAT scores may be used to predict the probability of job success when
hiring candidates since the higher the SAT score is, the higher the probability of success. However,
unprivileged candidates with SAT scores of approximately 1100 perform just as well as privileged
candidates with SAT scores of 1400 since they may have encountered more challenging pathways to
achieve their scores. In other words, if the SAT scores were used for hiring, unprivileged candidates
with high potential would be excluded, whereas lower potential candidates from the privileged
group would be hired instead.
3
FAIRNESS DEFINITIONS AND MEASURES
This section presents some general legal notions for discrimination followed by a survey of the
most common measures for algorithmic fairness, and the inevitable trade-offs between them.
3.1
Definitions of Discrimination in Legal Domains
The legal domain has introduced two main definitions of discrimination: i) disparate treatment
[11, 151]: intentionally treating an individual differently based on his/her membership in a protected
class (direct discrimination); ii) disparate impact [11, 119]: negatively affecting members of a
protected class more than others even if by a seemingly neutral policy (indirect discrimination).
Put in our context, it is important to note that algorithms trained with data that do not include
sensitive attributes (i.e., attributes that explicitly identify the protected and unprotected groups)
are unlikely to produce disparate treatment, but may still induce unintentional discrimination in
the form of disparate impact [85].
3.2
Measures of Algorithmic Bias
This section presents the most prominent measures of algorithmic fairness in machine learning
classification tasks. We refer the readers to the Appendix and specifically to Table 4 for a review of
additional, less popular measures used in the literature.
(1) Disparate impact [54] – This measure was designed to mathematically represent the legal
notion of disparate impact. It requires a high ratio between the positive prediction rates of
both groups. This ensures that the proportion of the positive predictions is similar across
groups. For example, if a positive prediction represents acceptance for a job, the condition

4
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
requires the proportion of accepted applicants to be similar across groups. Formally, this
measure is computed as follows:
P[ ˆY = 1|S , 1]
P[ ˆY = 1|S = 1]
≥1 −ε
(1)
where S represents the protected attribute (e.g., race or gender), S = 1 is the privileged group,
and S , 1 is the unprivileged group. ˆY = 1 means that the prediction is positive. Let us note
that if ˆY = 1 represents acceptance (e.g., for a job), then the condition requires the acceptance
rates to be similar across groups. A higher value of this measure represents more similar rates
across groups and therefore more fairness. Note that this notion relates to the "80 percent
rule" in disparate impact law [54], which requires that the acceptance rate for any race, sex,
or ethnic group be at least 80% of the rate for the group with the highest rate.
(2) Demographic parity – This measure is similar to disparate impact, but the difference is
taken instead of the ratio [28, 44]. This measure is also commonly referred to as statistical
parity. Formally, this measure is computed as follows:
P[ ˆY = 1|S = 1] −P[ ˆY = 1|S , 1]
 ≤ε
(2)
A lower value of this measure indicates more similar acceptance rates and therefore better
fairness. Demographic parity (and disparate impact) ensure that the positive prediction is
assigned to the two groups at a similar rate.
One disadvantage of these two measures is that a fully accurate classifier may be considered
unfair, when the base rates (i.e., the proportion of actual positive outcomes) of the various
groups are significantly different. Moreover, in order to satisfy demographic parity, two
similar individuals may be treated differently since they belong to two different groups –
such treatment is prohibited by law in some cases (note that this notion also corresponds to
the practice of affirmative action [58]).
(3) Equalized odds – This measure was designed by [65] to overcome the disadvantages of
measures such as disparate impact and demographic parity. The measure computes the
difference between the false positive rates (FPR), and the difference between the true positive
rates (TPR) of the two groups. Formally, this measure is computed as follows:
P[ ˆY = 1|S = 1,Y = 0] −P[ ˆY = 1|S , 1,Y = 0]
 ≤ε
(3)
P[ ˆY = 1|S = 1,Y = 1] −P[ ˆY = 1|S , 1,Y = 1]
 ≤ε
(4)
Where the upper formula requires the absolute difference in the FPR of the two groups to
be bounded by ε, and the lower formula requires the absolute difference in the TPR of the
two groups to be bounded ε. Smaller differences between groups indicate better fairness.
In contrast to demographic parity and disparate impact measures, a fully accurate classifier
will necessarily satisfy the two equalized odds constraints. Nevertheless, since equalized odds
relies on the actual ground truth (i.e., Y), it assumes that the base rates of the two groups are
representative and were not obtained in a biased manner.
One use case that demonstrates the effectiveness of this measure investigated the COMPAS
[1] algorithm used in the United States criminal justice system. For predicting recidivism,

Algorithmic Fairness
5
although its accuracy was similar for both groups (African-Americans and Caucasians), it
was discovered that the odds were different. It was discovered that the system had falsely
predicted future criminality (FPR) among African-Americans at twice the rate predicted for
white people [6]; importantly, the algorithm also induced the opposite error, significantly
underestimating future crimes among Caucasians (FNR).
(4) Equal opportunity – This requires true positive rates (TPRs) to be similar across groups
(meaning the probability of an individual with a positive outcome to have a positive prediction)
[65]. This measure is similar to equalized odds but focuses on the true positive rates only.
This measure is mathematically formulated as follows:
P[ ˆY = 1|S , 1,Y = 1] −P[ ˆY = 1|S = 1,Y = 1]
 ≤ε
(5)
Let us note that following the equality in terms of only one type of error (e.g., true positives)
will increase the disparity in terms of the other error [112]. Moreover, according to [38], this
measure may be problematic when base rates differ between groups.
Thus far, we have mapped the most common group notions of fairness, which require parity of
some statistical measure across groups. The literature has additionally indicated individual notions
of fairness. It is alternatively possible to match other measures such as accuracy, error rates or
calibration values between groups (see the Appendix and specifically Table 4). Group definitions of
fairness, such as demographic parity, disparate impact, equalized odds and equalized opportunity,
consider fairness with respect to the whole group, as opposed to individual notions of fairness.
(5) Individual fairness – This requires that similar individuals will be treated similarly. Simi-
larity may be defined with respect to a particular task [44, 73]. Individual fairness may be
described as follows:
P( ˆY (i) = y|X (i),S(i)) −P( ˆY (j) = y|X (j),S(j))
 ≤ε; if d(i, j) ≈0
(6)
where i and j denote two individuals, S(·) refers to the individuals’ sensitive attributes and X (·)
refers to their associated features. d(i, j) is a distance metric between individuals that can be
defined depending on the domain such that similarity is measured according to an intended
task. This measure considers other individual attributes for defining fairness, rather than just
the sensitive attributes. However, note that in order to define similarity between individuals,
a similarity metric needs to be defined, which is not trivial. This measure, in addition to
assuming a similarity metric, also requires some assumptions regarding the relationship
between features and labels (see, for example, [37]).
3.3
Trade-offs
Determining the right measure to be used must take into account the proper legal, ethical, and social
context. As demonstrated above, different measures exhibit different advantages and disadvantages.
Next, we highlight the main trade-offs that exist between different notions of fairness, and the
inherent trade-off between fairness and accuracy.
Fairness measures trade-offs
Interestingly, several recent studies have shown that it is not possible to satisfy multiple notions of
fairness simultaneously [15, 36, 38, 39, 56, 85, 112]. For example, when base rates differ between

6
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
groups, it is not possible to have a classifier that equalizes both calibration and odds (except for
trivial cases such as a classifier that assigns all examples to a single class). Additionally, there is also
evidence for incompatibility between equalized accuracy and equalized odds, as in the COMPAS
criminal justice use case [6, 15].
[112] recommends that in light of the inherent incompatibility between equalized calibration
and equalized odds, practical implications requires choosing only one of these goals according to
the specific application’s requirements. We recommend that any selected measure of algorithmic
fairness be considered in the appropriate legal, social and ethical contexts.
Table 1. Measures and Definitions for Algorithmic Fairness
Measure
Paper
Description
Type
Uses Ac-
tual Out-
come
Uses
Sensitive
Attribute
Type
of
Actual
Outcome
Type
of
Sensitive
Attribute
Equivalent Notions
Disparate
Impact
[54]
High ratio between
positive
prediction
rates of both groups
Group
✗
✓
-
Binary
For ε = 0.2 relates to the
"80 percent rule" in dis-
parate impact law [54]
Demographic
Parity
[28],
[44]
Similar
positive
prediction
rates
between groups
Group
✗
✓
-
Binary
• Statistical parity [44];
• Group fairness [44];
• Equal
acceptance
rates [36, 136, 152];
• Discrimination
score
[28]
Equal
Op-
portunity
[65]
Requires that TPRs
are
similar
across
groups
Group
✓
✓
Binary
Binary
• Equal
true
positive
rate (TPR);
• Mathematically equal
TPRs
will
induce
equal false negative
rates
(FNRs)
(see
[39, 136]);
• False negative error
rate balance [36, 136];
Equalized
Odds
[65]
Requires that FPRs
(1-TNR)
and
TPRs
(1-FNR) are similar
across groups
Group
✓
✓
Binary
Binary
• Disparate
mistreat-
ment [142];
• Error
rate
balance
[36];
• Conditional
pro-
cedure
accuracy
equality [15]
Fairness
through
Awareness
[44]
Requires that similar
individuals will have
similar
classifica-
tions.
Similarity
can be defined with
respect to a specific
task
Individual
✗
✗
-
-
Individual fairness

Algorithmic Fairness
7
Fairness-accuracy trade-off
The literature extensively discusses the inherent trade-off between accuracy and fairness - as
we pursue a higher degree of fairness, we may compromise accuracy (see for example [85]). A
theoretical analysis of the trade-off between fairness and accuracy was studies in [39] and [91].
Since then, many papers have empirically supported the existence of this trade-off (for example,
[12, 57, 101]). Generally, the aspiration of a fairness-aware algorithm is to achieve a model that
allows for higher fairness without significantly compromising the accuracy or other alternative
notions of utility.
Table 1 presents a summary of the measures presented in this section. For further reading about
algorithmic fairness measures, we refer the reader to [38], [85], and [136].
4
FAIRNESS-ENHANCING MECHANISMS
Numerous recent papers have proposed mechanisms to enhance fairness in machine learning
algorithms. These mechanisms are typically categorized into three types: pre-process, in-process,
and post-process. The following three subsections review studies in each one of these categories.
The fourth subsection is devoted for comparing the three mechanism types and providing guidelines
on when each type should be used.
4.1
Pre-Process Mechanisms
Mechanisms in this category involve changing the training data before feeding it into a machine
learning algorithm. Preliminary mechanisms, such as the ones proposed by [76] and [95] proposed
changing the labels of some instances or reweighing them before training to make the classification
fairer. Typically, the labels that are changed are related to samples that are closer to the decision
boundary since these are the ones that are most likely to be discriminated. More recent mechanisms
suggest modifying feature representations, so that a subsequent classifier will be fairer [30, 54, 94,
122, 144].
For example, [54] suggest modifying the features in the dataset so that the distributions for
both privileged and unprivileged groups become similar, and therefore, making it more difficult
for the algorithm to differentiate between the two groups. A tuning parameter λ was provided for
controlling the trade-off between fairness and accuracy (λ=0 indicates no fairness considerations,
while λ=1 maximizes fairness). [8, 35] use the same notion of fair representation learning and
applies it for fair clustering, and [122] applies it for fair dimensionality reduction (PCA). For more
fair representation learning using adversarial learning, see section 6.2.
Note that this approach to achieving fairness is somewhat related to the field of data compression
[131, 144]. It is also very closely related to privacy research since both fairness and privacy can
be enhanced by removing or obfuscating the sensitive information, with the adversary goal of
minimal data distortion [47, 83].
4.2
In-Process Mechanisms
These mechanisms involve modifying the machine learning algorithms to account for fairness
during the training time [4, 12, 13, 28, 59, 79, 138, 142, 143].
For example, [79] suggest adding a regularization term to the objective function that penalizes the
mutual information between the sensitive feature and the classifier predictions. A tuning parameter
η was provided to modulate the trade-off between fairness and accuracy.
[142], [143] and [138] suggest adding constraints to the classification model that require satisfying
a proxy for equalized odds [138, 142] or disparate impact [143]. [138] also show that there exist
difficult computational challenges in learning a fair classifier based on equalized odds.

8
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
[12] and [13] suggest incorporating penalty terms into the objective function that enforce
matching proxies of FPR and FNR. [77] suggest adjusting a decision tree split criterion to maximize
information gain between the split attribute and the class label while minimizing information gain
with respect to the sensitive attribute. [144] combine fair representation learning with an in-process
model by applying a multi-objective loss function based on logistic regression, and [94] apply this
notion using a variational autoencoder.
[113] suggest using the notion of privileged learning1 for improving performance in cases where
the sensitive information is available at training time but not at testing time. They add constraints
and regularization components to the privileged learning support vector machine (SVM) model
proposed by [135]. They combine the sensitive attributes as privileged information that is known
only at training time, and they additionally use a maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) criterion
[62] to encourage the distributions to be similar across privileged and unprivileged groups.
[14] propose a convex in-process fairness mechanism for regression tasks and use three reg-
ularization terms that include variations of individual fairness, group fairness and a combined
hybrid fairness penalty term. [5] propose an in-process minimax optimization formulation for
enhancing fairness in regression tasks based on the suggested design of [4] for classification tasks.
They use two fairness metrics adjusted for regression tasks. One is an adjusted demographic parity
measure, which requires the predictor to be independent of the sensitive attribute as measured
by the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the protected group compared to the CDF of the
general population [5] using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic [90]. The second measure is the
bounded group loss (BGL), which requires that the prediction error of all groups remain below a
predefined level [5].
4.3
Post-Process Mechanisms
These mechanisms perform post-processing of the output scores of the classifier to make decisions
fairer [39, 46, 65, 101]. For example, [65] propose a technique for flipping some decisions of a
classifier to enhance equalized odds or equalized opportunity. [39] and [101] similarly suggest
selecting separate thresholds for each group separately, in a manner that maximizes accuracy and
minimizes demographic parity. [46] propose a decoupling technique to learn a different classifier
for each group. They additionally combine a transfer learning technique with their procedure to
learn from out-of-group samples (to read more about transfer learning, see [108]).
Table 2 presents a summary of the pre-process, in-process and post-process mechanisms for algo-
rithmic fairness discussed in this section. These methods were designed for the task of classification.
Fairness mechanisms for other learning tasks are discussed in section 6.
1Privileged learning is designed to improve performance by using additional information, denoted as the âĂĲprivileged
information,âĂİ which is present only in the training stage and not in the testing stage [135].

Algorithmic Fairness
9
Table 2. Pre-Process, In-Process and Post-Process Mechanisms for Algorithmic Fairness
Paper
Mechanism
Type
Base
Al-
gorithm
Optimization
Mea-
sure
Evaluation Measure
Method Name
Datasets
[79]
In-Process
Logistic re-
gression
Mutual information be-
tween prediction and
sensitive attribute
Normalized
prejudice
index
Prejudice Remover Reg-
ularizer
Adult (test only)
[54]
Pre-
Process
Any
Earth moving distance
Disparate impact
Removing
Disparate
Impact
• Adult
• German
[143]
In-Process
Decision
boundary-
based
Covariance
(between
sensitive attributes and
distance to the decision
boundary)
Disparate impact
Fairness Constraints
ProPublica
[142]
In-Process
Decision
boundary-
based
Proxy
for
equalized
odds
Equalized odds
Removing
Disparate
Mistreatment
ProPublica
[13]
In-Process
Decision
boundary-
based
Proxy
for
equalized
odds
Equalized odds
Penalizing Unfairness
• ProPublica
• Adult
• Loans
• Admissions
[77]
In-Process,
Post-
Process
In-Process
-
decision
tree; Post-
Process
-
any
algorithm
Information gain
Demographic parity
• Discrimination
Aware
Tree
Con-
struction (new split
criterion);
• Relabeling
(post-
process)
• Adult
• Communities
• Dutch census
[76]
Pre-
Process
Any score-
based
Acceptance
probabil-
ities,
distance
from
boundary
Demographic parity
• Massaging
• Reweighing
• Sampling
• Suppression
• German
• Adult
• Communities
• Dutch
[28]
In-Process,
Post-
Process
Naive
Bayes
Acceptance
probabili-
ties
Demographic parity
• Modifying
Naive
Bayes
• Two Naive Bayes
• Expectation
Maxi-
mization
Adult (test only)
[95]
Pre-
Process
Any
Conditional
statistical
parity
Conditional
statistical
parity
Discrimination Preven-
tion with KNN
• Adult
• Communities
• German
[144]
Pre-
Process
+
In-Process
Logistic re-
gression
Demographic parity
Demographic parity
Learning Fair Represen-
tations
• Adult
• German
• Heritage health
[59]
In-Process
SVM
Disparate impact, Equal
opportunity
Disparate impact
Dataset Constraints
Adult
[65]
Post-
Process
Any score-
based
Equalized odds
Equalized odds
Equality
of
Oppor-
tunity
in
Supervised
Learning
FICO scores [65]
[39]
Post-
Process
Any score-
based
• Demographic parity
• Conditional
statisti-
cal parity
• Predictive parity
• Demographic parity
• Conditional
statisti-
cal parity
• Predictive parity
Cost of Fairness
ProPublica
[138]
In-Process
+
Post-
Process
Convex lin-
ear
Equalized odds
Equalized odds
Learning
Non-
Discriminatory
Pre-
dictors
-
[113]
In-Process
SVM
Maximum
mean
dis-
crepancy (MMD)
• Equalized odds
• Overall
accuracy
equality
Recycling
Privileged
Learning and Distribu-
tion Matching
• ProPublica
• Adult
[30]
Pre-
Process
Any
• Disparate impact
• Individual fairness
Disparate impact
Optimized
Pre-
processing
for
Dis-
crimination Prevention
• ProPublica
• Adult
[46]
In-Process
+
Post-
Process
Any score-
based
• Demographic parity
• Equalized odds
• Demographic parity
• Equalized odds
Decoupled Classifiers
ImageNet [42]
[101]
Post-
Process
Any score-
based
• Demographic parity
• Equal opportunity
• Demographic parity
• Equal opportunity
Plugin Approach
-
[4]
In-Process
Any
• Demographic parity
• Equalized odds
• Demographic parity
• Equalized odds
Reductions Approach
• ProPublica
• Adult
• Dutch
• Admissions
[94]
Pre-
Process
+
In-Process
Any
Maximum
mean
dis-
crepancy (MMD)
• Demographic parity
• Mean difference
Variational Fair Autoen-
coder
• Adult
• German
• Heritage health

10
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
4.4
Which Mechanism to Use?
The different mechanism types present respective advantages and disadvantages. Pre-process
mechanisms can be advantageous since they can be used with any classification algorithm. However,
they may harm the explainability of the results. Moreover, since they are not tailored for a specific
classification algorithm, there is high uncertainty with regard to the level of accuracy obtained at
the end of the process.
Similar to pre-process mechanisms, post-process mechanisms may be used with any classification
algorithm. However, due to the relatively late stage in the learning process in which they are applied,
post-process mechanisms typically obtain inferior results [138]. In a post-process mechanism, it
may be easier to fully remove bias types such as disparate impact; however, this is not always the
desired measure, and it could be considered as discriminatory since it deliberately damages accuracy
for some individuals in order to compensate others (this is also related to the controversies in the
legal and economical field of affirmative action, see [58]). Specifically, post-process mechanisms
may treat differently two individuals who are similar across all features except for the group to
which they belong. This approach requires the decision maker at the end of the loop to possess the
information of the group to which individuals belong (this information may be unavailable due to
legal or privacy reasons).
In-process mechanisms are beneficial since they can explicitly impose the required trade-off
between accuracy and fairness in the objective function [138]. However, such mechanisms are
tightly coupled with the machine algorithm itself.
Hence, we see that the selection of method depends on the availability of the ground truth, the
availability of the sensitive attributes at test time, and on the desired definition of fairness, which
can also vary from one application to another.
Several preliminary attempts were made in order to understand which methods are best for use.
The study in [64] was a first effort in comparing several fairness mechanisms previously proposed
in the literature [28, 54, 79, 143]. The analysis focuses on binary classification with binary sensitive
attributes. The authors have demonstrated that the performances of the methods vary across
datasets, and there was no conclusively dominating method.
Another study by [116] has shown as a preliminary benchmark that in several cases, in-process
mechanisms perform better than pre-process mechanisms, and for other cases, they do not, leading
to the conclusion that there is a need for much more extensive experiments.
A recent empirical study [57] has provided a benchmark analysis of several fairness-aware
methods and compared the fairness-accuracy trade-offs obtained by these methods. The authors
have tested the performances of these methods across different measures of fairness and across
different datasets. They have concluded that there was no single method that outperformed the
others in all cases and that the results depend on the fairness measure, on the dataset, and on
changes in the train-test splits.
More research is required for developing robust fairness mechanisms and metrics or, alternatively,
for finding the adequate mechanism and metric for each scenario. For instance, the conclusions
reached when considering missing data might be very different than those reached when all
information is available [74, 99]. [74] explore the limitations of measuring fairness when the
membership in a protected group is not available in the data. [99] have tested imputation strategies
to deal with the fairness of partially missing examples in the dataset. They have shown that
rows containing missing values may be more fair than the rest and therefore suggest imputation
rather than deletion of these data. [110] find that when there is an evident selection bias in the

Algorithmic Fairness
11
data, meaning that there is an extreme under-representation of unprivileged groups, pre-process
mechanisms can outperform in-process mechanisms.
5
FAIRNESS-RELATED DATASETS
In this section, we review the most commonly used datasets in the literature of algorithmic fairness.
ProPublica risk assessment dataset
The ProPublica dataset includes data from the COMPAS risk assessment system (see [1, 6, 88]).
This dataset was previously extensively used for fairness analysis in the field of criminal justice
risk [15]. The dataset includes 6,167 individuals, and the features in the dataset include number of
previous felonies, charge degree, age, race and gender. The target variable indicates whether an
inmate recidivated (was arrested again) within two years after release from prison.
As for the sensitive variable, this dataset was previously used with two variations – the first
when race was considered as the sensitive attribute and the second when gender was considered as
the sensitive attribute [13, 30, 52, 57, 99].
Adult income dataset
The Adult dataset is a publicly available dataset in the UCI repository [43] based on 1994 US census
data. The goal of this dataset is to successfully predict whether an individual earns more or less
than 50,000$ per year based on features such as occupation, marital status, and education. The
sensitive attributes in this dataset includes age [94], gender [144] and race [57, 99, 143].
This dataset is used with several different preprocessing procedures. For example, the dataset of
[143] includes 45,222 individuals after preprocessing (48,842 before preprocessing).
German credit dataset
The German dataset is a publicly available dataset in the UCI repository [43] that includes informa-
tion of individuals from a German bank in 1994.
The goal of this dataset is to predict whether an individual should receive a good or bad credit
risk score based on features such as employment, housing, savings, and age. The sensitive attributes
in this dataset include gender [57, 94] and age [75, 144]. This dataset is significantly smaller, with
only 1,000 individuals with 20 attributes.
Ricci promotion dataset
The Ricci dataset includes the results of an exam administered to 118 individuals to determine
which of them would receive a promotion. The dataset originated from a case that was brought
to the United States Supreme Court [102, 120]. The goal of this dataset is to successfully predict
whether an individual receives a promotion based on features that were tested in the exam, as well
as the current position of each individual. The sensitive attribute in this dataset is race.
Mexican poverty dataset
The Mexican poverty dataset includes poverty estimation for determining whether to match
households with social programs. The data originated from a survey of 70,305 households in 2016
[71]. The target feature is poverty level, and there are 183 features. This dataset was studied, for
example, in [106]. The authors studied two sensitive features: young and old families; urban and
rural areas.

12
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
Diabetes dataset
The Diabetes dataset includes hospital data for the task of predicting whether a patient will be
readmitted. It is publicly available in the UCI repository [43]. The data contain approximately
100,000 instances and 235 attributes. This dataset was studied, for example, in [48], where it was
studied with race as the sensitive feature.
Heritage health dataset
The Heritage health dataset originated from a competition conducted by the United States as a
competition to improve healthcare through early prediction. It includes data of 147,473 patients
with 139 features. The goal of this dataset is to predict whether an individual will spend any days
in the hospital during the next year [23]. This dataset was studied, for example, in [144], [94] and
[132], where age was the sensitive feature.
The College Admissions dataset
The College Admissions dataset was collected by the UCLA law school [123]. It includes data of
over 20,000 records of law school students who took the bar exam. The goal of this dataset is to
predict whether a student will pass the exam based on factors such as LSAT score, undergraduate
GPA and family income.
This dataset was used, for example, by [14], where gender was studied as the sensitive feature,
and [13], where race was studied as the sensitive feature.
The Bank Marketing dataset
The Bank Marketing dataset is a publicly available dataset in the UCI repository [43, 103], and
it includes 41,188 individuals with 20 attributes. The task is to predict whether the client has
subscribed to a term deposit service based on features such as marital status and age. It was
previously investigated by [143], where age was studied as the sensitive attribute.
The Loans Default dataset
The Loans Default dataset includes 30,000 instances and 24 attributes of credit card users. It is
publicly available in the UCI repository [43, 141]. The goal is to predict whether a customer will
default on payments. The features include age, gender, marital status, past payments, credit limit
and education.
This dataset was used, for example, by [13] and [141], where gender was studied as the sensitive
feature.
The Dutch Census dataset
The Dutch Census dataset includes 189,725 instances and 13 attributes of individuals. It is publicly
available in the IPUMS repository [34]. [76] and [4] use this dataset with only the 60,420 individuals
who are not underaged. Their goal is to predict whether an individual holds a highly prestigious
occupation by using features such as gender, age, household details, location, citizenship, birth
country, education, economic status, and marital status. The sensitive feature utilized is gender.
The Communities and Crimes dataset
The Communities and Crimes dataset includes 1,994 instances and 128 attributes of communities
in the United States. It is publicly available in the UCI repository [43, 115]. The goal is to predict
the number of violent crimes per 100,000 individuals based on features such as percentage of
population by age, by marital status, by number of children, by race, and more. [76] add a new

Algorithmic Fairness
13
sensitive attribute that represents whether the percentage of the African-American population in
the community is greater than 0.06.
Table 3 presents a summary of the benchmark datasets for algorithmic fairness that were discussed
in this section.
Table 3. Common Benchmark Datasets for Algorithmic Fairness
Dataset
Name
Domain
# Records
Sensitive Attributes
Target Attributes
ProPublica
Criminal
risk assess-
ment
6,167
Race; Gender
Whether an inmate has recidi-
vated (was arrested again) in
less than two years after re-
lease from prison
Adult
Income
48,842
Age; Gender
Whether an individual earns
more or less than 50,000$ per
year
German
Credit
1,000
Gender; Age
Whether an individual should
receive a good or bad credit
risk score
Ricci
Promotion
118
Race
Whether an individual re-
ceives a promotion
Mexican
poverty
Poverty
183
Young and old families;
Urban and rural areas
Poverty level of households
Diabetes
Health
100,000
Race
Whether a patient will be
readmitted
Heritage
health
Health
147,473
Age
Whether an individual will
spend any days in the hospital
in the next year
College
Admissions
College Ad-
missions
20,000
Gender; Race
Whether a law student will
pass the bar exam
Bank
Mar-
keting
Marketing
41,188
Age
Whether the client subscribed
to a term deposit service
Loans
De-
fault
Loans
30,000
Gender
Whether a customer will de-
fault on payments
Dutch
Cen-
sus
Census
189,725
Gender
Whether an individual holds a
highly prestigious occupation
Communities
and Crimes
Crime
1,994
Percentage of African-
American population
For each community, the num-
ber of violent crimes per
100,000 individuals
6
EMERGING RESEARCH ON ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS
In this section, we review selected emerging sub-fields of algorithmic fairness.
6.1
Fair Sequential Learning
Most existing research on algorithmic fairness considers batch classification, where the complete
data are available in advance. However, many applications require investigation of online and

14
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
reinforcement learning, where the data are collected over time. In online learning, in contrast to
batch learning, the system includes feedback loops so that the decision at each step may influence
the state and future decisions. This imposes challenges in both defining and making fair algorithmic
decisions, as fairness should now be considered at each step, and short-term actions may affect
long-term results.
In these cases, there is a need to balance exploitation of existing knowledge (such as hiring an
already known population) and exploration of sub-optimal solutions to gather more data (such as
hiring populations of different backgrounds that differ from current employees).
Several studies have investigated fairness in sequential learning [66, 72, 73, 80, 133]. For example,
[72] study fairness in reinforcement learning and model the environment as a Markov decision
process. In their model, fairness is defined such that one action will never be preferred over another
if its long-term discounted reward is lower. [66] define fairness as time-dependent individual
fairness and require that algorithmic decisions be consistent over time. They propose a post-process
mechanism that imposes these time-dependent constraints such that two individuals that arrive
during the same period and are similar in their feature dimension must be assigned similar labels.
Open challenges in this domain include the limitation of any specific time-dependent fairness
definitions to the selected period of time and the effect of different discount factors. Moreover, it is
worth noting that an exploration process may be unethical on its own and impose a new type of
unfairness.
In a similar line of work, researchers have investigated scenarios where feedback loops have
the potential to cause amplification of bias. In these scenarios, the decisions based on the machine
learning models then affect the future collected data. The risk of feedback loops is that they can
introduce self-fulfilling predictions, where acting on a prediction can change the outcomes. For
example, sending more police officers to an area that was predicted to be at high risk for crime
will inevitably cause the arrest of more individuals in this area, and then, the prediction model will
eventually further increase the risk prediction for the area [53].
Note that fair sequential learning is somewhat different from another researched domain in
algorithmic fairness that concerns a selection process that consists of multiple stages, such as
screening candidates first by their resumes, then by their test scores and finally by interviews,
where more information is gained about individuals during each stage. This field is sometimes
referred to as fair pipelines [21, 45, 52, 69, 97]. In these studies, fairness is revised to be considered
in each stage, not only in the final stage.
6.2
Fair Adversarial Learning
Today, adversarial learning is highly popular in the use of generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[61]. GANs are commonly used for the generation of simulated representative samples based on a
training set. In this field of research, input data can be of various domains such as images or tabular
data. In computer vision (CV), for instance, adversarial learning is used for tasks such as image
generation (such as in [9]) or modification (such as in [7]), along with other CV tasks.
Nowadays, fair adversarial learning is attracting increasing attention with respect to both fair
classification and the generation of fair representations. In one distressing incident, a face modifying
application was exposed as racist when the app’s "image filter" that was intended to change face
images to more "attractive" made skin lighter [111].
GANs are generally constructed as a feedback loop model, starting from a generator G that
generates "fake" simulated samples and a discriminator D (the "adversary") that determines whether
the generated samples are real or fake and returns the decisions as feedback to the generator
G to improve its model. Improving G means enhancing its ability to generate samples that are
increasingly similar to real samples in a manner that "fools" the discriminator D, thus minimizing

Algorithmic Fairness
15
its ability to differentiate between real and fake samples. Typically, both G and D are multi-layer
neural networks.
To use GANs for fair learning, previous studies have developed different approaches. These
models are often constructed as minimax optimization problems that aim at maximizing the
predictor’s capability to accurately predict the outcomes while minimizing the adversary’s capability
to predict the sensitive feature.
In one approach, it was suggested to use the feedback structure to check whether a trained
classifier is fair or not and then update the model accordingly [32, 137, 145].
A different approach encourages the use of GANs to additionally learn fair representations or
embedding from the training data so that it is more difficult for a subsequent classifier to distinguish
which samples belong to a privileged group and which belong to an unprivileged group [17, 48, 96].
Another approach [3, 139] is using GANs for generating fair synthetic data from the initial input
data and then using them to train any classifier. [139], for example, use a GAN framework with one
generator and two discriminators. One discriminator is trained to distinguish whether a generated
sample is real or fake (as in conventional GANs), and the second identifies whether the sample
belongs to the privileged or unprivileged group.
Some of these methods make efforts to also preserve semantic information of the data while
learning fair representations [114, 124]. This is essential since the interpretability and transparency
of how fairness is approached in algorithmic decision-making are crucial to enhancing the under-
standing of decisions and trust in algorithms, and it is a paramount challenge that future research
should face.
Some other papers have studied fair adversarial learning. [17] investigate the effect of input
sample selection on the resulting fairness in adversarial fair learning models and show that a small
balanced dataset can be effective for achieving fair representations. [20] extend fair adversarial
learning to improve fairness in graph embedding. [16] have raised some concerns about fair adver-
sarial learning that should be further investigated. They argue that these models may sometimes
be unstable and therefore may present some risks when using them in a production environment.
Note that other closely related problems are aimed at finding equilibrium (minimax) points in
the field of game theory, and therefore, game-theoretic schemes may also be used for solutions
[4, 5, 32, 55].
From the literature on adversarial learning, we can also note that learning fairly to predict the
outcome of an unprivileged group can be thought of as learning to predict in a different domain
[48, 96], and therefore, notions from the field of domain adaptation can be adopted to enhance the
study of the field of algorithmic fairness, and vice versa.
6.3
Fair Word Embedding
Word embedding models construct representations of words and map them to vectors (also com-
monly referred to as word2vec models). Training of word embeddings is performed using raw textual
data with an extremely large number of text documents and is based on the assumption that words
that occur in the same contexts tend to have similar meanings. These models are primarily designed
such that the embedding vectors will indicate something about the meanings and relationships
between words (i.e., words with similar meanings have vectors that are close in the vector space).
As such, they are broadly used in many natural language processing (NLP) applications, such as in
search engines, machine translation, resume filtering, job recommendation systems, online reviews
and more.
However, previous studies have shown that there are inherent biases in word embeddings (for
example, [18, 24, 29, 150]). These studies showed that word embedding models have exhibited
social biases and gender stereotypes. For instance, it has been shown that the embedding of the

16
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
word "computer programmer" is closer to "male" than it is to "female". The implications of this are
disturbing since these biases may affect people’s lives and cause discrimination in social applications
such as in job recruitment or school admissions. Another example is Microsoft’s AI chat bot, named
Tay, which learned abusive language from Twitter data after only the first day of release (the bot
was eventually shelved, see [70]).
A common definition of gender bias in word embedding is the measure of cosine similarity from
a selected word to the words "he" and "she" (or any other two pronouns that indicate gender, such as
"him"/"her" or "Mr."/"Mrs."). The difference between these two similarities may indicate the extent
of bias in the embedding model. For example, consider the sentence "The CEO raised the salary of
the receptionist because he is generous." In this sentence, "he" refers to "CEO," and further similar
references in many additional sentences and texts may create a large contextual connection between
these two words or other occupational nouns [150]. Hence, even if the algorithms themselves are
not biased, historical biases and norms may be embedded into the algorithm results.
To mitigate these types of biases, several studies have developed methods for debiasing the
results. For example, [18] suggest a post-process mechanism for removing gender bias, referred to
as hard-debiasing. Their method first identifies a gender dimension, which is determined by a set of
words that indicate gender definitions (e.g., "he"/"she"). Second, it inherently defines neutral words
(such as occupations) and then negates the projection of all of these neutral words with respect to
the gender direction (so that the bias of neutral words is now zero by definition) by re-embedding
the word w:
®w := ( ®w −®
wB)/

 ®w −®
wB

(7)
where ®w is the embedding of the selected word and ®
wB is the projection of w with respect to the
gender direction.
The same paper also suggests an additional soft-debiasing mechanism that reduces bias while still
maintaining some similarity to the original embedding, thus providing a parameter that controls
the trade-off between debiasing and the need to preserve information.
[150] suggest an in-process mechanism, referred to as Gender-Neutral Global Vectors (GN-GloVe),
to reduce bias. Their method trains word embedding using GloVe [109] with an altered loss function
that constructs an embedding such that the protected attribute (e.g., gender) is represented in a
certain dimension (a sub-vector of the embedding), which can then be ignored for debiasing. This
is done by encouraging pairs of words with gender indication (e.g., "mother" and "father") to have
larger distance in their gender dimension and gender-neutral words to be orthogonal to the gender
direction.
[24] propose a pre-process mechanism for reducing bias by perturbing or removing documents
during the training stage that are traced as the origin for the word embedding bias.
One challenge of these fairness mechanisms is the need for lists of words that indicate the
sensitive attribute dimension and words that should be considered as neutral. [18], for example,
tackle this challenge by using an initial set of gender-definitional words and train a support vector
machine (SVM) to expand the list.
Let us note that the challenges of fair word embedding also affect many other downstream appli-
cations that use these word representations, for example, in coreference resolution [117, 147, 149], in
sentence encoding [100], in machine translation citepvanmassenhove2019getting,font2019equalizing,
in language models [19], and in semantic role labeling [148].
Curiously, a recent study has argued that a major concern is that some of the proposed methods
for removing biases in word embeddings are actually not able to remove biases but rather just
"hide" them [60]. They show, by a clustering illustration, that gender biases are still reflected

Algorithmic Fairness
17
in the embedding even after applying these methods. They additionally show that by using a
support vector machine (SVM) classifier, most of the gender information can be recovered from the
embedding.
Hence, it seems that existing methods as well as definitions for fair embeddings might be
insufficient, and these challenges require more extensive research.
6.4
Fair Visual Description
The study of fairness in computer vision has recently gained extensive interest since computer
vision models have been shown to produce disturbingly biased results with respect to several
tasks. For example, [25] have found that facial analysis models were negatively affected towards
discriminating results by the under-representation of female dark-skinned faces in datasets. [82]
show that image searches of occupations in Google’s engine resulted in gender-biased results.
Google’s labeling application has recklessly identified black Americans as "gorillas" [107, 126].
Furthermore, an app that classified the attractiveness of individuals from photos turned out to be
discriminative against dark skin [98].
There are several previous papers in the domain of fair image classification [25, 46, 114, 124].
However, the task becomes much more complex when a fair description of images is required, such
as in multi-label classification tasks [82, 129, 134, 148], in face attribute detection [81, 121], or in the
task of image captioning [67]. The last task is even more complicated than the others because of
the unstructured character of the problem.
Mitigating bias in these types of problems is challenging for several reasons: First, the multi-
modal nature of the task requires handling fairness at both levels of natural language processing
(NLP) models and computer vision (CV) models. As mentioned in a previous section, the chal-
lenges of fair word embedding also affect many other downstream applications that use these
word representations (see, for example image captioning in [67]). Second, the labels of the data
usually depend on annotators and are not always accurate [129, 134]. For example, [129] show that
human annotators fail to capture parts of the visual concepts in images and [134] show that the
crowdsourced descriptions of the images in the Flickr30K dataset are often based on stereotypes
and prejudices of the annotators; another challenge is that the datasets are inherently unbalanced
since in order to have balance - all possible co-occurrences must be balanced [67, 134]
[148] consider multi-label role classification, show that some tasks display severe gender bias,
and suggest a method to re-balance the resulting predictions by solving a constrained optimization
problem using Lagrange relaxation. Additional constraints require the model predictions to have
a similar distribution as the training set in terms of co-occurrences of gender indication and the
predicted target value (this is applied to the entire corpus level since the entire corpus is needed in
order to assess the frequency of occurrences).
[67] consider the problem of fair image captioning. They propose a method to reduce gender
bias by directly using a person’s appearance information in the image. The method is designed to
be more cautious when there is no gender information in the image. Moreover, it is constructed to
function even when the distributions of genders differ between training and test sets.
6.5
Fair Recommender Systems
Recommender systems are prevalent in many automated and online systems and are designed
to analyze users’ data to provide them with personalized propositions that correspond to each
user’s tastes and interests. An inherent concept in recommendations is that the best items for one
user may be different than those for another. Some examples of recommended items are movies,
news articles, products, jobs, loans, etc. These systems have the potential to facilitate activities
for both providers and consumers; however, they have also been found to exhibit fairness issues

18
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
[26, 27, 49, 50]. For instance, it was shown that Google’s ad-targeting algorithm had proposed
higher-paying executive jobs more commonly for men than for women [41, 125].
Most recommender systems employ user and item similarities and are therefore prone to result
in homogeneous selections that may not provide sufficient opportunities for minority populations.
A recent paper, [26], notes that extending the notion of fairness from general classification tasks
to recommender systems should take personalization into account. Several studies are investigating
the user’s perspective [33, 47, 49, 140], where fairness is considered as recommending items
equitably to different user groups (referred to as C-fairness), such as recommending high-paying
jobs to both men and women. Other studies refer to the provider’s perspective [50, 89], where items
from different providers should be recommended equally (referred to as P-fairness), for instance,
when trying to avoid market monopolistic domination. [26] notes that many recommender system
applications involve multiple stakeholders and may therefore give rise to fairness issues for more
than one group of participants simultaneously, as well as achieving fairness at a regulatory level or
the level of the entire system (referred to as multisided fairness).
It is interesting to note that P-fairness is somewhat related to the categorical diversity in recom-
mender systems, requiring that recommendation lists are diverse [86, 92]. For example, consider a
hiring recommender system – we may observe all male candidates as items of one provider and all
female candidates as items of another provider. We may then ensure the equal recommendation of
men and women to each of the positions. In diversity-enhancing methods, some common measures
of equality may be considered, such as the Gini coefficient that is also used in economic contexts
[86]. Moreover, note that an individual definition of P-fairness, rather than group-fairness, may be
somewhat similar to the definition of coverage in recommender systems, requiring that each item
be recommended fairly [26].
[130] propose enhancing multi-stakeholder fairness using a constraint-based integer program-
ming optimization model. The problem is computationally difficult, and hence, a following relaxation
heuristic is proposed in order to solve it. [47] suggest a post-processing mechanism that alters a
fraction of the entries in the recommendation matrix so that it would be more difficult to predict the
sensitive attributes from the matrix while preserving the high utility of the matrix. The ε-fairness
of a recommendation matrix with respect to a certain sensitive attribute is defined as the error level
when predicting the sensitive attribute using the recommendation matrix. The price of achieving
ε-fairness is measured by the distance between the two matrices – the original one obtained from
the prediction algorithm and the altered one obtained after the post-processing mechanism is
performed.
[140] and [78] suggest an in-process mechanism by including additional regularization factors in
the objective functions. [78] introduce the notion of recommendation independence to fairness-aware
recommender systems. This notion requires statistical independence between recommendation
results and the sensitive attribute. This means that the sensitive information will not affect the
results. [140] define several notions of fairness in recommender systems. Value unfairness measures
the inconsistency in the signed estimation error across user groups. Absolute unfairness is similar
to the previous measure, but with absolute estimation. Underestimation unfairness represents the
extent to which predictions underestimate the true ratings. Overestimation unfairness is similar to
the previous measure, but with overestimation. [31] and [22] use similar notions for fairness in
multiwinner voting.
One challenge in fairness-aware recommender systems is the possibility of discriminated groups
based on more than one sensitive attribute [47]. It is required to first devise a definition for fairness in
such cases in order to address the problem. In multi-stakeholder fairness optimization, the problems
are computationally difficult [130], so there is a need for more computational enhancements in
order to work with large datasets. Future work may also focus on fairness in systems where there

Algorithmic Fairness
19
are network structures that define relationships between providers and between users (such as in
[20]). Another possible research direction may be the incorporation of sequential notions of fairness
into recommender systems through the introduction of additional time-dependent constraints.
Note that the domain of recommender systems is also closely related to other common multi-
stakeholder environments [2], like resource allocation problems such as police distribution to
districts [51] or the allocation of aid in disaster response, where fairness is also a major concern.
6.6
Fair Causal Learning
Observational data collected from real world systems can mostly provide associations and correla-
tions, rather than causal structure understandings. In contrast, causal learning relies on additional
knowledge structured as a model of causes and effects.
Causal approaches may assist in enhancing fairness in several manners. For instance, by under-
standing causes and effects in the data, the model may assist in tackling the challenges of fairness
definitions by analyzing which types of discrimination should be allowed and which should not
[87, 118].
Another approach to improve fairness using causal reasoning is to provide an understanding of
how to perform imputation of missing values or how to repair a dataset that contains sample or
selection bias [10, 127].
Moreover, understanding a causal model may help with other ethical issues, such as defining lia-
bility and responsibility by understanding the sources of biases. This may increase the transparency
and explainability of the fair models, which is also crucial for trust.
[87] have suggested a measure of causal fairness called counterfactual fairness. It measures the
extent to which it is possible to build two identical predictions ˆY – one trained on the privileged
group and the second trained on the unprivileged group – using any combination of variables in
the system that are not caused by the sensitive attribute. The intuition is that, in a fair model, the
prediction would not change if only the sensitive attribute (and its affected variables) is changed.
More precisely, a causal graph satisfies counterfactual fairness when the predicted label is not
dependent on any descendant of the sensitive attribute.
Several studies have proposed alternative notions to counterfactual fairness, which relax the
rigid restriction on any descendant to less strict limitations. For example, the graph does not suffer
from proxy discrimination [84] if the predicted label is not dependent on any proxy of the sensitive
attribute (a proxy feature is a feature that can be exploited to derive the sensitive feature). Moreover,
the graph does not suffer from unresolved discrimination if the predicted label is not dependent on
any resolving variable (a resolving variable is influenced by the sensitive feature but is accepted by
practitioners as non-discriminatory).
[93] suggest categorizing causal fairness methods according to three dimensions: individual
vs. group level [84] causal effects; explicit vs. implicit [105] structural equations; and creating
fair predictors vs. explaining and quantifying discrimination [146]. For example, [93] classify
counterfactual fairness as individual, explicit and used for prediction tasks. For a broader review on
causal fairness, see [93].
It is important to note that causal fairness models can indeed help us overcome many of the
challenges encountered with respect to fair prediction tasks; however, in practice, it is difficult to
obtain the correct causal model. Moreover, removing all correlated features found through a causal
model may significantly compromise accuracy.

20
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli
7
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a comprehensive and up-to-date overview of the algorithmic fairness
research field. We started by describing the main causes of unfairness, followed by common defi-
nitions and measures of fairness, and the inevitable trade-offs between them. We then presented
fairness-enhancing mechanisms, focusing on their pros and cons, aiming at better understand-
ing which mechanisms should be used in different scenarios. Commonly used fairness-related
datasets were then reviewed. Lastly, we listed several emerging research sub-fields of algorithmic
fairness including fair sequential learning, fair adversarial learning, fair word embedding, fair visual
description, fair recommender systems and fair causal learning.
In addition to the already studied problems and the emerging ones, we identify several open
challenges that should be further investigated in future research. One major challenge stems from
biases inherent in the dataset. Such biases may arise for example, when the labeling process was
performed in an already unfair manner, or if there are under-represented populations in the dataset,
or in the case of systematic lack of data and in particular labels. Representative datasets are very
difficult to achieve, and therefore, it is crucial to devise methods to overcome these issues.
Another challenge is the proliferation of definitions and measures, fairness-related datasets,
and fairness-enhancing mechanisms. It is not clear how newly proposed mechanisms should be
evaluated, and in particular which measures should be considered? which datasets should be used?
and which mechanisms should be used for comparison? A closely related challenge is the difficulty
in determining the balance between fairness and accuracy. That is, what are the costs that should
be assigned to each of these measures for evaluation purposes. Future efforts should be invested
in generating a benchmarking framework that will allow a more unified and standard evaluation
process for fairness mechanisms.
The interpretability and transparency of how fairness is addressed by AI algorithms are another
important challenge. Such transparency is crucial to increase the understanding and trust of users
in these algorithms, and in many domains, is even required by law. This need is further supported
by several recent studies that have addressed the question of how devised mathematical notions of
fairness are perceived by users [63, 128]. It turns out that users tend to prefer the simpler notion of
demographic parity, probably due to the difficulty of grasping more complex definitions of fairness.
To conclude, since the use of algorithms is expanding to all aspects of our lives, demanding that
automated decisions be more ethical and fair is inevitable. We should aspire to not only develop
fairer algorithms, but also to design procedures to reduce biases in the data. Such procedures may
rely for example on integrating both humans and algorithms in the decision pipeline. However,
thus far, it seems that biased algorithms are easier to fix than biased humans or procedures [104].
