Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
1 
 
Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes 
with univariate algorithms 
 
Ignacio Rodríguez1 
Abstract. AI procedures joined with wearable gadgets can convey exact transient blood glucose 
level forecast models. Also, such models can learn customized glucose-insulin elements dependent 
on the sensor information gathered by observing a few parts of the physiological condition and 
every day movement of a person. Up to this point, the predominant methodology for creating 
information driven forecast models was to gather "however much information as could be 
expected" to help doctors and patients ideally change treatment. The goal of this work was to 
examine the base information assortment, volume, and speed needed to accomplish exact 
individual driven diminutive term expectation models. We built up a progression of these models 
utilizing distinctive AI time arrangement guaging strategies that are appropriate for execution 
inside a wearable processor. We completed a broad aloof patient checking concentrate in genuine 
conditions to fabricate a strong informational collection. The examination included a subset of 
type-1 diabetic subjects wearing a glimmer glucose checking framework. We directed a relative 
quantitative assessment of the presentation of the created information driven expectation 
models and comparing AI methods. Our outcomes show that precise momentary forecast can be 
accomplished by just checking interstitial glucose information over a brief timeframe and 
utilizing a low examining recurrence. The models created can anticipate glucose levels inside a 
15-minute skyline with a normal mistake as low as 15.43 mg/dL utilizing just 24 memorable 
qualities gathered inside a time of 6 hours, and by expanding the inspecting recurrence to 
incorporate 72 qualities, the normal blunder is limited to 10.15 mg/dL. Our forecast models are 
reasonable for execution inside a wearable gadget, requiring the base equipment necessities while 
simultaneously accomplishing high expectation precision. 
1. 
Introduction 
Having drafted a diagram about equipment and correspondences added to factors 
and their significance, quite possibly the main assignments to oversee DM1 is to 
envision to circumstances like hypo or hyperglycaemia. Various endeavors have been 
made to create models for anticipating blood glucose levels in individuals with diabetes. 
Today, the most all around read approach for blood glucose forecast depends on point 
by point physiological models that attempt to catch the elements of glucose-pertinent 
factors inside various frameworks in the body. All the more as of late, another 
methodology has been proposed to address this issue by applying AI procedures [1]. 
The vital idea driving this methodology is that there exist monotonous cycles in 
glucose-insulin elements, e.g., previously/after suppers, previously/after sleep time, and 
unsurprising insulin affectability changes for the duration of the day in view of 
circadian varieties in chemical levels. Striking investigations have assessed designs by 
season of day, in any event, indicating the presence of changeability as per the day of 
the week [2]. A few information driven models have been created to investigate the 
redundant idea of glucose-insulin elements, utilizing assorted procedures for time 
arrangement estimating, for example, autoregressive (AR), motivation reaction (IR), 
                                        
1 I.R: is with University of Málaga (Spain) 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
2 
 
autoregressive exogenous info (ARX), autoregressive moving normal exogenous 
information (ARMAX), and autoregressive incorporated moving normal (ARIMA). For 
instance, Estrada et al. built up an ARX model that depends on blood glucose levels 
and insulin measurements to estimate future blood glucose levels inside a 45-minute 
forecast skyline [3]. Different methodologies, as performed by Nuryani et al., 
investigated the utilization of help vector machines (SVM) to anticipate hypoglycemia 
utilizing electrocardiograms (ECG) notwithstanding blood glucose levels and insulin 
infusions [4]. Marling et al. utilized the SVM models, joining information accumulated 
from wearable movement trackers, checking pulse, galvanic skin reaction, and skin/air 
temperatures [5]. 
Another class of experimental models utilizes counterfeit neural organizations 
(ANNs) [6] to get familiar with the connection among past and future blood glucose 
levels, additionally contemplating other information sources. For instance, Pappada et 
al. built up a methodology that consolidated the fingerstick strategy to gauge blood 
glucose levels with insulin doses, dinners, and here and there way of life conditions and 
feelings [7]. Zecchin et al. built up an indicator dependent on a neural organization 
(NN) model and a first-request polynomial extrapolation calculation that joins past 
CGM sensor readings with information on sugar consumption [8]. Tragically, NN-based 
models require an enormous volume of information to appropriately ascertain the inner 
boundaries of the organizations and stay away from overfitting. Also, most of these 
examinations surveyed the exhibition of the models either utilizing reenacted datasets 
or certifiable information assortment missions of exceptionally restricted span. It is 
hence essential to ensure that information utilized for the preparation of a particularly 
experimental model is by configuration long haul and includes genuine people.  
Along these lines, we can discover numerous instances of glucose determining 
including past glucose esteems, yet additionally utilizing different highlights, for 
example, insulin routine, suppers, work out, and so on The chance of determining 
utilizing just past glucose esteems has been considered, and this could have a few 
advantages: depending just on one gadget (CGM), evading human blunder because of 
subjectivity, and streamlining the figuring cycle of the calculation. With this, we search 
for the chance of doing this errand locally, for example in a cell phone, which could be 
helpful under certain conditions (shaky web association, far off areas).Although 
demonstrating and determining glycaemia utilizing distributed computing present 
numerous favorable circumstances, we will assess on the off chance that it very well 
may be conceivable to make an interpretation of this twofold errand to an obliged 
gadget (rearranging the work by utilizing univariate approaches) to utilize the 
restricted computational force existing in little gadgets under inaccessibility of the 
cloud assets. 
The idea of creating information driven expectation models depending exclusively 
on CGM advancements has been concentrated in the past [9]. Distinctive AI methods 
have been utilized to create information driven expectation models that can be utilized 
for early hypoglycemic/hyperglycemic alerts and for shutting the glucose guideline 
circle with an insulin siphon. For instance, Sparacino et al. assessed an AR-based model 
inside a medical clinic climate including 28 DM1 patients for 48 hours [10]. Eren-Oruklu 
et al. built up a model utilizing ARIMA dependent on information gathered from 
observing 22 DM1 patients for 48 hours. Hamdi et al. checked 12 patients to build up a 
model joining support vector relapse and a differential advancement calculation [11]. 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
3 
 
Regardless, to the best of the creators' information, an appropriate and complete 
correlation between glucose forecast calculations has not been done already. Best case 
scenario, in certain works a couple of techniques were looked at, utilizing glycemia yet 
in addition (contingent upon the paper) a couple of different variables, accepting a few 
boundaries, and it is preposterous to expect to remove in general ends. Likewise, the 
root of the information was genuinely not quite the same as one examination to 
another, so building up a correlation among the strategies concentrated in various 
works turns into an undertaking just feasible in an emotional manner. 
2. 
The glycaemia forecasting task 
As we referenced, one of the principle attributes of a DM1 the executives 
structure is a guaging blood glucose model. To start with an improved issue, our 
objective was to create dependable forecast models that can gauge the future glucose 
level with high precision dependent on current and past information gathered from the 
FGM sensor. We created persistent driven models by utilizing diverse AI techniques to 
catch the properties of the blood glucose time arrangement of every individual patient 
[12]. Subsequently, for every patient, we produced a different forecast model.  
The information gave by the FGM sensor [13] were inspected with an example 
recurrence (SF) of 1 estimation like clockwork, 10 minutes or 15 minutes. In this way, 
the SF controlled the speed of the information that we are considering. The qualities 
inspected were utilized to make a past sliding window (PSW) including noteworthy 
qualities changing from 3 to 36 hours. The PSW controlled the volume of the 
information the model utilized for the expectation. Given the sliding window 
information, the model ceaselessly anticipated the glucose levels at preset forecast 
skylines (PH) at 15, 30, 45, and an hour ahead from right now [14]. Figure 1 gives a 
graphical portrayal of the fracture of the information gathered into windows that are 
utilized as contribution for the patient-driven expectation model. 
 
Figure 1. Time series analysis and cross-validation with slide-window. 
 
In more detail, at a given time t the information gathered from the FGM sensor 
over the past period T were utilized to create the preparation set of n information 
focuses {x_i }_(i=1)^n, where x_i∊ R is every individual information point got from 
the FGM sensor. We state that n portrays the volume of the informational index and 
n/T the speed of the information. Given this preparation set, the objective of the 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
4 
 
forecast model is to surmised the genuine basic planning precisely enough with the end 
goal that it can anticipate the following δ esteem, that is, the yield esteem y(t + δ) ∊ R 
for that time arrangement. We state that δ is the forecast skyline.  
The sliding window functions as follows. When another FGM esteem is gotten, 
the preparation set is revamped by eliminating the most seasoned perception (x1), 
moving all the qualities 1 situation up (i.e., xi becomes xi−1) lastly adding the new 
worth got as the freshest one (xn). Along these lines, the dataset size and requesting of 
the perceptions is constantly safeguarded.  
The strategies considered in this first methodology for glucose level forecast are 
the accompanying: 
 
Autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA). 
 
Random forest (RF). 
 
Support vector machines (SVM)[15]. 
We start by investigating the accomplished presentation in foreseeing future 
blood glucose levels when we utilize just recorded information on the blood glucose 
levels. Table 3 shows the outcomes got regarding root mean square blunder (RMSE) 
between the anticipated qualities and the noticed qualities. We initially see that for all 
the patient models created, the mistake of the expectation is more prominent as the 
forecast skyline (PH) builds, which appears to be sensible since the information 
gathered is continuously further from the forecast. Regardless, as a rule, for the three 
unique strategies used to build up the patient models, adequate forecasts are 
accomplished for PHs of 15 minutes and 30 minutes, with normal RMSEs essentially 
more modest than 20 mg/dL for ARIMA and RF, and more modest than 28 mg/dL for 
SVM. Similar approaches have been studied before successfully [16][17]. 
We proceed at Table 1 by investigating the significance of recorded information 
volume on the expectation precision of future glycemic levels. The size of the window of 
past information permits the model to catch the transient structure in the time 
arrangement. One expects that expanding the volume of recorded information will 
improve the expectation exactness. Consequently, we planned the principal tests via 
preparing the patient models utilizing distinctive past sliding window (PSW) sizes that 
contained the perceptions of the previous 3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 hours. In this 
investigation, the information speed is fixed to 1 example like clockwork and an 
expectation skyline of 15, 30, 45, and an hour.  
Investigating the volume of verifiable information expected to accomplish a 
precise forecast, as communicated by the distinctive PSW sizes utilized, the outcomes 
accomplished demonstrate that all the patient models created have a diminished RMSE 
with a window size of 6 hours.  
Exploratory proof shows that paying little mind to the strategy used to build up 
the models, and for all the forecast skylines, there is a breaking point moving in reverse 
(6 hours) with regards to considering past information to improve precision of the 
expectation. Past works have presented this significant degree, connecting the 
possibility of circadian cycles [18] and the spaces of morning/evening/night. 
 
 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
5 
 
Table 1. Root mean square error (RMSE in mg/dL) for different past sliding window sizes (PSW) and for 
different predictive horizon (PH) using a fixed sampling frequency (SF = 5 minutes) 
SF = 5 min 
 
 
 
 
RM SE (mg/dl) 
PH=15 
30 
45 
60 min 
ARIM A 
3 
11.64 
17.62 
23.21 
28.17 
PSW  (hours)= 
6 
11.53 
17.31 
22.75 
27.60 
12 
13.00 
18.64 
23.92 
28.64 
24 
13.93 
19.45 
24.55 
29.05 
36 
14.78 
20.21 
25.24 
29.68 
RF 
3 
10.59 
15.07 
19.04 
22.56 
PSW  (hours)= 
6 
10.15 
14.63 
18.60 
22.12 
12 
11.18 
15.66 
19.64 
23.17 
24 
11.65 
16.11 
20.06 
23.56 
36 
11.98 
16.43 
20.38 
23.89 
SVM  
3 
18.14 
22.55 
26.46 
29.74 
PSW  (hours)= 
6 
17.65 
20.82 
23.74 
26.36 
12 
19.73 
22.57 
25.17 
27.48 
24 
21.45 
26.73 
30.71 
22.68 
36 
23.08 
27.90 
31.30 
33.90 
 
 
Table 2. Root mean square error (RMSE in mg/dL) for different sample frequencies (SF) and for different 
predictive horizon (PH) using a fixed past sliding window size (PSW = 6 hours). 
PSW  = 6 hour 
 
 
 
 
RM SE (mg/dl) 
PH=15 
30 
45 
60 min 
ARIM A 
5 
11.53 
17.31 
22.75 
27.60 
SF (min)= 
10 
13.14 
20.13 
23.64 
29.81 
15 
15.08 
21.10 
26.32 
30.82 
RF 
5 
10.15 
14.63 
18.60 
22.12 
SF (min)= 
10 
11.65 
17.37 
19.84 
24.26 
15 
15.43 
19.41 
22.87 
25.92 
SVM  
5 
17.65 
20.82 
23.74 
26.36 
SF (min)= 
10 
19.90 
23.97 
25.73 
28.90 
15 
23.26 
26.03 
28.44 
30.57 
 
Investigating the presentation accomplished by the three distinct strategies used 
to build up the patient models, the outcomes show that RF technique is the most exact 
one, accomplishing better forecasts with all the PSWs and for all the PHs considered.  
We currently continue by investigating the impact of the speed of the information 
gathered from the GCM sensor on the expectation capacity of the patient models. In 
the past arrangement of tests, the information speed, (i.e., the SF), was set to 1 
example at regular intervals. In this arrangement of tests, we assessed the impact of 
utilizing distinctive inspecting frequencies somewhere in the range of 5 and 15 minutes 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
6 
 
on the accomplished RMSE. Table 2 portrays the outcomes got regarding RMSE 
between the anticipated qualities and the noticed qualities when the past sliding 
window is fixed to 6 hours, as this was the ideal worth distinguished in the past 
investigation. It is apparent that the higher the SF, the higher the subsequent RMSE, 
paying little heed to the PH. Nonetheless, as the PH builds, the impact of the SF is 
greater: in a PH of 15 minutes, while expanding the SF to 10 minutes, RMSE expanded 
by half; yet with a similar change in SF, in a PH of an hour, RMSE expanded 
distinctly around 10% to 12%. We presume that the choice of lessening SF relies upon 
how far we need to foresee. An intriguing point is that, just by changing SF from 5 
minutes to 10 minutes, satisfactory RMSEs are as yet accomplished. We additionally 
saw that the patient models that depend on the SVM technique arrived at an 
exceptionally high RMSE when SF is equivalent to 15 minutes. We hence reason that 
models dependent on the SVM [19] strategy should utilize a SF of 5 minutes [20].  
Similarly as with the past trial, we noticed again that the patient models created 
utilizing the arbitrary timberland strategy accomplish a superior presentation for each 
extraordinary SF considered [21]. 
3. 
Conclusions 
The proliferation of ICT solutions [22] (IoT among them[23]) represents new 
opportunities for the development of new intelligent services, contributing to more 
efficient and sustainable management of many different aspects of our society. Helping 
people in the field of health is a remarking issue to be taken into account. Being in 
these days Diabetes Mellitus reaching heights increasingly, it is critical to lead our 
efforts to apply ICT to help people with diabetes. Waves propagation also introduces 
novelties in this field that can be taken into account in future works [24][25][26]. 
Given the constant evolution of technologies and protocols that are emerging for 
the IoT [27], in the scope of this work, we have proposed the definition of an 
architectural framework that abstracts from the underlying technologies for managing 
different requirements of a person with diabetes. The proposed design enables 
connectivity between patient and caregivers, and allows the patient to take advantage 
of optimized solutions [28]. In addition, within this framework, we have introduced 
novel features to be taken into account, and improved motivation of the patient [29]. 
Another contribution of this thesis is the development of a proper data set, which 
is a novelty itself, since it engaged a quantity of subjects, for such a period of time, and 
with a completed monitoring, that makes this novel data set, to the best of the 
authors’ knowledge, as the most complete until now [30]. This data set will open the 
door to future works. 
At the end, the study of forecasting glycaemia in a simple and affordable way was 
another novelty exposed in this thesis, considering the idea of performing data modeling 
and prediction in a constrained device. For this purpose, we used simple and well-
known univariate algorithms. Experimental evidences show that such forecasting is 
possible under some circumstances. 
All in all, this work describes novel ways to continue developing paths to properly 
manage diabetes by using technologies [31] and machine learning techniques, making 
patients’ lives easier while at the same time lowering the risks associated to this illness. 

Forecasting blood sugar levels in Diabetes with univariate algorithms 
7 
 
For such purposes, in addition to the efforts that have been taken place in many 
universities and research centers in the world, we have humbly contributed with the 
results presented in this work.
