A Study on Mitigating Hard Boundaries of Decision-Tree-based 
Uncertainty Estimates for AI Models 
Pascal Gerber, Lisa Jöckel, Michael Kläs 
Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental Software Engineering IESE, 
Fraunhofer Platz 1, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 

 
 
 
Abstract 
Outcomes of data-driven AI models cannot be assumed to be 
always correct. To estimate the uncertainty in these out-
comes, the uncertainty wrapper framework has been pro-
posed, which considers uncertainties related to model fit, in-
put quality, and scope compliance. Uncertainty wrappers use 
a decision tree approach to cluster input quality related un-
certainties, assigning inputs strictly to distinct uncertainty 
clusters. Hence, a slight variation in only one feature may 
lead to a cluster assignment with a significantly different un-
certainty. Our objective is to replace this with an approach 
that mitigates hard decision boundaries of these assignments 
while preserving interpretability, runtime complexity, and 
prediction performance. Five approaches were selected as 
candidates and integrated into the uncertainty wrapper frame-
work. For the evaluation based on the Brier score, datasets 
for a pedestrian detection use case were generated using the 
CARLA simulator and YOLOv3. All integrated approaches 
achieved a softening, i.e., smoothing, of uncertainty estima-
tion. Yet, compared to decision trees, they are not so easy to 
interpret and have higher runtime complexity. Moreover, 
some components of the Brier score impaired while others 
improved. Most promising regarding the Brier score were 
random forests. In conclusion, softening hard decision tree 
boundaries appears to be a trade-off decision. 
 1. Introduction  
An increasing number of software and software-intensive 
systems contain data-driven components, i.e., components 
that implement functionality using data-driven models 
(DDMs) as provided, e.g., by Machine Learning (ML) and 
other AI methods. However, due to their nature of being em-
pirically defined on data, DDMs will not provide correct re-
sults in any application situation (Kläs 2018). Therefore, un-
certainty is an inherence concept of data-driven compo-
nents, which needs to be considered to make informed deci-
sions. Specifically, this means uncertainty needs to be quan-
tified and either dealt with on the system level or appropri-
ately provisioned to decision makers who use the system. 
From a design perspective, two options exist for provid-
ing situation-aware uncertainty estimates: (a) The DDMs it-
self is made responsible for providing not only its primary 
                                                 
Copyright © 2022 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Crea-
tive Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0). 
outcome, but also an estimate on the uncertainty in its out-
come, or (b) there is an independent instance that estimates 
the uncertainty in the DDM outcome (Jöckel and Kläs 
2021). In the first case, which is the more deeply researched 
setting, we talk about in-model uncertainty estimation; in the 
second case, which realizes ‘separation of concerns’ as a de-
sign principle, we talk about outside-model uncertainty esti-
mation. Uncertainty wrappers (UWs), as an outside-model 
approach, have recently shown to provide advantages com-
pared to state-of-the-art in-model approaches, such as a 
higher degree of interpretability and statistically sound un-
certainty estimates (Jöckel and Kläs 2021).  
Research Problem – In order to achieve high interpreta-
bility, UWs rely on learning a decision tree structure consid-
ering semantic – i.e., human-interpretable – factors influenc-
ing the uncertainty (Jöckel and Kläs 2021) (Kläs and Jöckel, 
2020) (Kläs et al. 2021). Although this simple structure with 
clear decision boundaries supports interpretability, it also 
causes situations in which a minor change in just one factor 
can result in a significant change in the estimated uncer-
tainty (cf. Fig. 1). While this behavior does not invalidate 
the results from a statistical point of view, it can be unintui-
tive in some cases. 
For example, in the case of camera-based pedestrian de-
tection, the distance between the camera and the pedestrian 
could be one such factor, where a lack of smooth transitions 
in uncertainty is a rather undesirable property of decision 
trees, as it is for other factors with linear rather than discon-
tinuous effects (Molnar, 2019).   
 
 
Fig. 1. Example of how a minor change in one input factor (X1)  
may affect the uncertainty estimate (u). 
node #0
X1<4.5
u = 0.2
Factor X1
node #2
X2>2
u = 0.4
node #1
u = 0.1
node #3
u = 0.3
node #4
u = 0.6
Uncertainty u
A
X1 = 4.49
X2 = 3.18
False
True
True
False
A‘
X1 = 4.52
X2 = 3.18
0.6
0.1
A A‘
u(A) = 0.1
Decision Tree
small change in X1
u(A‘) = 0.6

Intuitively, uncertainty does not change significantly as 
distance only changes marginally (e.g., increases from 
14.9m to 15.1m). Instead, it is expected to increase gradu-
ally with rising distance, which also improves robustness 
against noisy inputs. 
Research Goals – To address this undesired property of 
decision-tree-based uncertainty estimates, we identified and 
studied a selection of promising approaches to softening the 
transitions between different uncertainty levels. Our selec-
tion and evaluation, which we present in this paper, was 
guided by the goals of (G1) making the transitions between 
different levels of uncertainty smoother while (G2) reducing 
interpretability as little as possible, (G3) not increasing 
runtime complexity too much, and (G4) not negatively af-
fecting the uncertainty estimation performance. 
 Outline – Section 2 gives an overview of related work on 
uncertainty estimation including UWs and possible ap-
proaches to softening decision boundaries. Section 3 intro-
duces the investigated approaches and discusses implica-
tions on G1 to G3. Section 4 outlines the design and execu-
tion of a study to investigate the approaches. Section 5 pre-
sents the study results. Section 6 discusses the achievement 
of the research goals and Section 7 concludes the paper. 
2. Related Work 
Uncertainty Estimation. Uncertainty is an active research 
topic in the field of ML (Hüllermeier and Waegemann 2019). 
Getting a better understanding of the sources of uncertainty 
and providing dependable uncertainty estimations regarding 
how much we can rely on a specific DDM-based outcome 
contributes to enabling quality assurance of ML-based sys-
tems, especially in contexts with high dependability de-
mands. Uncertainty predictions can also be used to address 
the fulfillment of system-level performance constraints, 
such as safety constraints, when using DDMs for some of 
the system functionality (Kläs et al. 2021). 
A classification for potential sources of uncertainty is 
proposed by the onion shell model (Kläs and Vollmer, 
2018), which allows mathematically separating uncertainty 
due to model fit, input quality, and scope compliance (Kläs 
and Sembach 2019). Model-fit-related uncertainty is caused 
by limitations in the DDM itself and can be reduced by im-
proving the model regarding typical performance metrics 
(e.g., mean absolute error or true positive rate). Input-qual-
ity-related uncertainty is concerned with the influence of the 
quality of the DDM inputs on the quality of the DDM out-
comes. Scope-compliance-related uncertainty is caused by 
possible application of the model outside its application 
scope and can be tackled by monitoring its compliance. 
Uncertainty predictions can be obtained by different 
means. Some DDMs already implicitly provide uncertainty 
predictions, e.g., decision trees (Breiman et al. 2017). Other 
ML approaches have been extended accordingly; for exam-
ple, for deep neural networks Bayesian neural networks 
(Arnez et al. 2020) and deep ensembles (Arnez et al. 2020) 
(Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) are com-
monly proposed. Both approaches are, however, computa-
tionally expensive and are generally not dependable in the 
sense that their predictions have no statistical guarantees. 
Uncertainty Wrapper. An alternative to uncertainty pre-
dictions provided by the DDM itself is the UW framework, 
which addresses the uncertainty sources of the onion shell 
model following the separation-of-concerns principle (Kläs 
and Jöckel, 2020). UWs are model-agnostic and encapsulate 
the DDM as a black box (cf. Fig. 2).  
 
 
Fig. 2. Uncertainty wrapper pattern (Bandyszak et al. 2021). 
Jöckel and Kläs (2021) benchmarked the performance of 
UWs to uncertainty predictions provided by deep ensembles 
and examined the usefulness of each approach under differ-
ent non-ideal conditions with which DDMs are confronted 
in real settings, such as a limited training data, concluding 
that UWs are beneficial especially in such situations.  
 Model-fit-related uncertainty can be determined by using 
model testing approaches and appropriate performance met-
rics. In order to determine the likelihood of not being in the 
target application scope (TAS), i.e., suffering from scope 
incompliance, the UW contains a scope model and a scope 
compliance model. In the context of traffic sign recognition, 
the scope model might consider the GPS coordinates of the 
vehicle as a scope factor that is checked for compliance with 
a specific input to boundaries defined as the TAS. Similarly, 
input-quality-related uncertainty is estimated using a quality 
model and a quality impact model. For the quality model, 
quality factors are considered that might occur within the 
TAS, like obstructed vision due to rain or a dirty camera 
lens. The quality model determines the presence of each 
quality factor based on one or more measures, e.g., a rain 
sensor or a convolutional neural network trained to detect 
rain (cf. Fig. 2). This information is then used as independ-
ent variables together with the correctness of the DDM out-
come as a dependent variable in a decision-tree-based qual-
ity impact model to find clusters that decompose the TAS 
into areas with similar uncertainties. An example of such a 
Dependable Data-Driven Component : 
Traffic Sign Recognition (TSR) Component
Uncertainty Wrapper for TSR
Data-Driven Model :
Convolutional Neural
Network based TSR
Confidence
e.g., 0.9999
GPS
Image
Rain Senor
Outcome
(a,b,c)
Speed limit
50 detected
Dependable
Uncertainty
(a) <100.0%
(b) <    0.3% 
(c) <    2.1% 
Combination
Quality
Model
Scope
Model
Scope Compliance
Model
Quality-Impact
Model
Data-Driven Component Input
(a)
∉TAS
0 mm/h
40.71272
-74.00604
(b)
∈TAS
0 mm/h
49.48958
8.46725
(c)
∈TAS
~7 mm/h
49.48958
8.46725
TAS: Target 
Application
Scope

decision tree together with the associated uncertainties de-
termined for the identified clusters based on the number of 
correct and wrong DDM outcomes can be seen in Fig.3. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Decision tree as part of a simplified quality impact model. 
The uncertainty estimates for the clusters, i.e., the tree 
nodes, are calibrated using a dataset that has to be repre-
sentative for the TAS and not previously used to learn the 
decision tree structure. The UW combines the uncertainty 
estimates from the scope compliance model and the quality 
impact model to provide a situation-aware uncertainty esti-
mate for the current input. As uncertainty in the context of 
UWs is defined as the likelihood that the model outcome is 
incorrect, a dependable uncertainty estimate is a justified 
upper boundary for a given confidence level CL (Kläs and 
Sembach 2019). Hence, the UW includes the additional 
functionality of considering a requested CL in the estimates. 
Approaches to Softening Decision Boundaries 
To identify and select approaches that comply with the goals 
defined in Research Goals, we first searched on Google 
Scholar (Scholar 2020). Goals G1 and G2 provided an initial 
basis for creating the search criterion. For 'softening', which 
is intended by G1, we included the search terms 'soft', 
'smooth', or 'fuzzy'. For G2, addressing interpretability, we 
added the term 'interpret'. No search term was defined for 
the runtime complexity requirement defined in G3; instead, 
the identified approaches were examined in this regard after 
the search. This resulted in the following search criterion: 
 
 
('decision tree' OR 'breiman') AND  
('soft' OR 'smooth' OR 'fuzzy') AND ('interpret') 
 
 
 
It should be noted that in the first block of the search crite-
rion, we included the name of the approach as well as the 
name of the author who presented the CART algorithm for 
it (Breiman et al. 1984). With this, we intended to find pub-
lications describing approaches that aim to mitigate the 
problem of hard decision boundaries. 
The first approach we identified was the Fuzzy Random 
Forest (Fuzzy RF) (Marcelloni, Matteis, and Segatori 2015), 
which is an ensemble of several Fuzzy Decision Trees 
(Fuzzy DTs). As a second approach, the Bagged Soft Deci-
sion Trees (Bagged Soft DTs) (Alpaydin, Irsoy, and Yildiz 
2016), an ensemble of Soft Decision Trees (Soft DTs) 
(Alpaydin, Irsoy, and Yildiz 2012), was identified. In addi-
tion to this search, we also examined approaches that exist 
in scikit-learn (Blondel et al. 2012). Here, the Random For-
est (RF), an ensemble consisting of DTs, was identified. 
Boosting approaches, e.g., AdaBoost or Gradient Tree 
Boosting, which are mentioned in (Scikit 2020a), were ex-
cluded. In these approaches, a model is built iteratively from 
several base models whose uncertainty estimates are then 
weighted for the final uncertainty estimate. We anticipated 
that interpretation (G2) would be difficult to fulfill due to 
the different weighting of the base models. 
3. Studied Approaches 
This section describes the selected approaches, i.e., Random 
Forest (RFs), Fuzzy DTs, Fuzzy RFs, Soft DTs, and Bagged 
Soft DTs, and discusses their compliance in terms of soften-
ing uncertainty estimates (G1), interpretability (G2) and 
runtime complexity (G3). 
Random Forests. An RF can be considered as a collec-
tion of n DTs that are trained and applied independently and 
whose individual results are aggregated (e.g., by averaging). 
In order to obtain an ensemble of sufficiently uncorrelated 
DTs, the DTs in an RF are commonly trained on datasets 
generated by randomly drawing datapoint samples with re-
placement from a single dataset, i.e., bootstrapped datasets. 
Additionally, in contrast to a regular DT, the split feature of 
a DT node in an RF is determined from a subset rather than 
from all data point features (Breiman 2001) (Scikit 2020b). 
Goal compliance. Regarding (G1), it is expected that by 
aggregating, some degree of softening of hard decision 
boundaries can be achieved. Since DTs are interpretable 
(G2), RFs can also be interpreted. However, all 𝑛𝑛 DTs of an 
RF need to be considered, resulting in higher effort than for 
a single DT. Analogously, runtime complexity (G3) for 
providing uncertainty estimates increases linearly with the 
number of DTs used. For application in UWs, this complex-
ity seems still acceptable. 
 Fuzzification of Decision Trees and Random Forests. 
In DTs, each node contains a split criterion, which is used to 
strictly assign a data point to the left or the right child node. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3, these criteria are recursively evalu-
ated with specific feature values of a data point in order to 
finally assign the data point to a leaf with an associated un-
certainty. Contrary to the strict assignments in DTs, there 
are Fuzzy DTs and Fuzzy RFs (Marcelloni, Matteis, and 
Segatori 2015) that perform fuzzy assignments of data 
points to nodes on the basis of fuzzy logic or fuzzy set theory 
(Zadeh 1965). Here, fuzzy partitioning is used to determine 
a numerical membership degree of a data point to the child 
nodes of a parent node. 
uncertainty = 0.06
incorrect, correct cases
total number of cases
split criterion
distance > 15.486
→ uncertainty = 0.46
distance > 15.486 &
semantic_vis. > 0.245
distance <= 15.486 
→ uncertainty = 0.13
distance <= 11.45
distance
> 11.45
distance > 15.486 &
semantic_vis. <= 0.245
Input 𝑿 with
distance = 13.5
uncertainty = 0.21
uncertainty = 0.74
uncertainty = 0.39

In Fig. 4, an example Fuzzy DT and the fuzzy partitioning 
of its root node, i.e., node 0, are depicted. Here, the mem-
bership degree of a data point in the child nodes of the root 
is derived by the feature ‘distance’ and the three fuzzy set 
membership functions, which are uniquely defined by the 
three values listed below the feature. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Application of a Fuzzy DT on a data point. 
The fuzzy set membership value of a data point with a value 
of 8.76 for the feature ‘distance’ in node 1 and node 4 is 0.5 
and in node 8 it is 0, which means that the data point is fur-
ther propagated to the left and middle sub-tree with a weight 
of 0.5 each. This is done recursively towards the leaves of 
the tree. In order to determine an uncertainty estimate, a 
weighted sum is built by the uncertainties associated with 
each leaf, which is weighted by the propagated fuzzy set 
membership values on the path towards the leaf. Analo-
gously, for a Fuzzy RF, the mean of all uncertainty estimates 
of the contained Fuzzy DTs is calculated as the final uncer-
tainty estimate. 
Using features of a continuous data type as split criterion, 
fuzzy partitioning is based on three fuzzy sets as illustrated 
for node 0 in Fig. 4. For categorical features, Marcelloni, 
Matteis, and Segatori (2015) proposed using crisp sets for 
each category. But this creates as many child nodes as there 
are categories of the feature used for splitting, this makes 
global interpretability of the model more difficult because 
some of the categories might not be meaningful differentia-
tors between uncertainty clusters. To avoid this, we use one-
hot encoding for the categorical features, i.e., each category 
of the feature is considered as a binary stand-alone feature, 
leading to a split into two mutually exclusive child nodes, 
with one being assigned weight 1 and the other weight 0. 
A Fuzzy DT is created similarly to the CART algorithm 
for DTs, but taking into account fuzzy membership parti-
tioning. Starting from the root node, each feature is consid-
ered as a splitting criterion in order to determine a partition-
ing. In doing so, the partitioning is intended to reduce the 
impurity of the data point labels and can be quantified by the 
fuzzy information gain based on (fuzzy) entropies for the 
node to be partitioned and its child nodes. Both of these 
numbers are depicted in the nodes of Fig. 4 as ‘entropy’. For 
categorical features, the splitting is done similarly to DTs, 
as we have only two child nodes. For continuous features, 
on the other hand, a fuzzy partitioning that is defined by 
three ascending floating-point numbers (cf. Fig. 4) is cre-
ated. The first and last number are defined by the minimum 
and maximum of the occurring feature values. The second 
number is chosen in between with respect to the fuzzy infor-
mation gain for all remaining feature values. In order to re-
duce computational effort, we modified the original ap-
proach in our implementation to use equal-width binning on 
the feature values and only computed the partitioning for 
one representative of each bin. 
Goal compliance. Given that the membership degree of a 
data point to nodes in Fuzzy DTs and Fuzzy RFs is deter-
mined by linear membership functions, the resulting 
weighting of leaves is not significantly affected by small 
changes of the feature values. A softening of the uncertainty 
estimates (G1) is thereby achieved. 
With regard to interpretability (G2), a Fuzzy DT can be 
interpreted on a global level in a similar way as a traditional 
DT, as the feature and the respective feature values that de-
fine the partitioning can be examined (as depicted by the 
values in brackets in Fig. 4). However, as one data point in 
a Fuzzy DT is usually a member of two child nodes during 
partitioning, in the worst case 2ℎ leaves have to be consid-
ered for a Fuzzy DT of height ℎ in order to interpret the un-
certainty estimate for a concrete input. This is significantly 
more than in the case of a DT, but interpretability is still 
feasible assuming a height roughly between 5 and 8. Analo-
gously to RFs, the 𝑛𝑛 contained Fuzzy DTs must also be in-
terpreted additionally in order to interpret Fuzzy RFs. 
Similar to interpretability, the runtime complexity (G3) 
for providing uncertainty estimates increases exponentially 
with the height of a Fuzzy DT. For Fuzzy RFs, the number 
of Fuzzy DTs used has an additional linear influence. This 
may limit the applicability of Fuzzy DTs in certain settings 
with high Fuzzy DT height and tight runtime requirements. 
(Bagged) Soft Decision Trees. Alpaydin, Irsoy, and 
Yildiz introduced Soft DTs (2012) and Bagged Soft DTs, an 
ensemble of Soft DTs (2016). Similarly to Fuzzy DTs, a data 
point is propagated from a node to its child nodes with dif-
ferent weights. Whereas for Fuzzy DTs, the weights are de-
rived from membership functions of a fuzzy partitioning, the 
weights in Soft DTs are determined by soft decisions. For a 
node 𝑚𝑚, these are based on a sigmoid function 𝑔𝑔𝑚𝑚, which is 
parameterized by 𝑤𝑤𝑚𝑚, as depicted in Fig. 5. 
To determine an uncertainty estimate for a data point, the 
weighting in each node is determined based on the sigmoid 
function, and the data point is propagated throughout the 
tree considering the weights (i.e., similarly to Fuzzy DTs). 
The resulting uncertainty estimate associated with an in-
put is, as in the case of Fuzzy DTs, determined by a 
weighted average over the leaves considering the multiplied 
weights along each path towards the leaf and the uncertainty 
associated with the leaf. Analogously, for a Bagged Soft DT,  
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.5
0.0
…
in-/correct cases
weighted number of
cases in this node
split criterion feature
feature values defining
the fuzzy partitioning
fuzzy membership values for 
X based on fuzzy partitioning 
for node #0
2.37
15.14
24.42
1.0
8.76
0.5
membership
→ uncertainty 𝑋= 0.0 ȉ 0.93 + 0.5 ȉ 0.38 + 0.25 ȉ 0.08 + 0.25 ȉ 0.24 + 0.0 ȉ 0.57 = 0.27
True
False
Input 𝑿 with
distance = 8.76 and
pedestriantype = 11
uncertainty = 0.93
weight 𝑋= 0.0
uncertainty = 0.38
weight 𝑋= 0.5
uncertainty = 0.08
weight 𝑋= 0.25
uncertainty = 0.24
weight 𝑋= 0.25
uncertainty = 0.57
weight 𝑋= 0.0

the mean of all uncertainty estimates of the contained Soft 
DTs is calculated as the final uncertainty estimate. 
Unlike in the case of Fuzzy DTs, all features of a data 
point are used to determine the weighting. However, as this 
strongly impedes interpretability, we modified our imple-
mentation to only use the feature that contributes most to the 
split in terms of entropy, while the others are ignored as split 
criterion for this node; i.e., we use a univariate split as for 
Fuzzy DTs and DTs. Invariant to the approach as described 
by Alpaydin, Irsoy, and Yildiz (2012), the parameter 𝑤𝑤𝑚𝑚 of 
the sigmoid function in a node 𝑚𝑚 is determined for this fea-
ture using the gradient descent method. In Fig. 5, the respec-
tive feature is depicted in the second row of each inner node. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Application of a soft decision tree on a data point. 
Goal compliance. Softening of uncertainty estimates 
(G1) in Soft DTs and Bagged Soft DTs mainly depends on 
the parameter 𝑤𝑤𝑚𝑚, which drives the steepness of the contin-
uous sigmoid function in a tree node. For a very steep sig-
moid function, this softening behavior converges to that of 
a regular DT. Else, small changes of the sigmoid function 
argument do not result in significant changes of the resulting 
weighting, which enables achieving our goal of softening. 
The considerations regarding interpretability (G2) are 
similar to Fuzzy DTs, i.e., the feature used as split criterion 
is defined for each node based on one feature, and an idea 
of what the weighting looks like over the feature range is 
provided by the list of the three feature values in the tree 
visualization. For a concrete input, the weights can also be 
tracked while traversing the tree, similarly to Fuzzy DTs. 
Once again, the effort increases exponentially with the 
height of a Soft DT, as in the worst case, all paths to the 
leaves need to be considered. For Bagged Soft DTs, all in-
dividual trees need to be evaluated. 
Analogously, the runtime complexity (G3) increases ex-
ponentially with the height of a Soft DT; for Bagged Soft 
DTs, it also depends linearly on the number of Soft DTs. 
4. Study Planning and Execution 
In this section, we concretize research goal G4 with the spe-
cific research question that we addressed in the study, and 
present the derived study design and its execution. 
Research Question. The main research question is how 
the use of softening approaches affects the performance of 
uncertainty estimation. For this purpose, we wanted to eval-
uate the decision-tree-based approach that has been used so 
far in the UW, as well as Random Forests (RFs), Fuzzy DTs, 
Fuzzy RFs, Soft DTs, and Bagged Soft DTs. 
 
Research Question: How does the uncertainty estimation 
performance of the UW differ when softening approaches 
are used instead of a decision-tree-based approach? 
  
Task and Target Application Scope. In order to inves-
tigate our research question, we considered the use case of 
pedestrian detection. In this context, the task of a DDM is to 
correctly detect pedestrians who are present in given camera 
images. As the target application scope, we defined a vehi-
cle traveling at various points in time in an urban environ-
ment located in Germany. Additionally, we considered situ-
ations of pedestrians located up to a maximum distance of 
25 meters from the vehicle under a wide variety of weather 
conditions. Our intention was to provide several factors that 
influence the input data quality of the images and thus pos-
sibly the correctness of the DDM outcomes. 
Study Data. In the study, we used three datasets: a train-
ing dataset to create quality impact models based on the tra-
ditional DT and the softening approaches; a calibration da-
taset, and an evaluation dataset representative for the TAS 
to calibrate, respectively evaluate, the uncertainty estimates 
of the quality impact models. 
 Study Execution. Next, we outline the study execution 
describing the key activities and decisions in the seven steps 
introduced by the study execution plan (cf. Fig. 6). 
(1) Generate raw data. The datasets were generated us-
ing the open-source simulator CARLA (Codevilla et al. 
2017), that allows visually and physically realistic simula-
tion of vehicles, pedestrians, and environmental conditions. 
For the recording, a vehicle was automatically navigated 
through a town with other traffic participants like vehicles, 
trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, and pedestrians. The images 
of pedestrians crossing the road in the driving direction were 
recorded, along with measures related to their respective re-
gion in the image, the distance, the level of occlusion, and 
the type of pedestrian. Also, the weather parameters simu-
lated for a sequence of images, such as sun position, cloud-
iness, precipitation, fog/wind intensity, and road wetness 
were recorded. While weather parameters were uniformly 
varied for the recordings related to the training dataset, the 
ones related to the calibration/evaluation datasets were in-
tended to be representative for the target application scope. 
g0,left(𝑋) =  0.1
𝐮𝐧𝐜𝐞𝐫𝐭𝐚𝐢𝐧𝐭𝐲= 𝟎. 𝟎𝟔
weight 𝑋= 0.005
incorrect, correct cases
weighted number of cases in this node
feature used as split criterion
Input 𝑿 with distance = 16.56 
and semantic_visibility = 0.23
g0,right(𝑋) = 0.9
g1,left(𝑋) =  0.05
g4,left(𝑋) = 0.9
g4,right(𝑋) = 0.1
g1,right(𝑋) = 0.95
feature values associated with
the left child weights [0.9, 0.5, 0.1]
0.9
0.1
0.5
weights gm(𝑋) based on sigmoid function
𝐮𝐧𝐜𝐞𝐫𝐭𝐚𝐢𝐧𝐭𝐲= 𝟎. 𝟏𝟕
weight 𝑋= 0.095
𝐮𝐧𝐜𝐞𝐫𝐭𝐚𝐢𝐧𝐭𝐲= 𝟎. 𝟔𝟑
weight 𝑋= 0.81
𝐮𝐧𝐜𝐞𝐫𝐭𝐚𝐢𝐧𝐭𝐲= 𝟎. 𝟑𝟔
weight 𝑋= 0.09
→ uncertainty 𝑋= 0.005 ȉ 0.06 + 0.095 ȉ 0.17 + 0.81 ȉ 0.63 + 0.09 ȉ 0.36 = 0.55915

Hence, weather observations from CDC (2020) over a pe-
riod of ten years were randomly sampled and weather pa-
rameters were derived for the CARLA simulator. As indi-
cated in Fig. 6, we saved the respective raw data in two da-
tasets. Fig. 7 provides some samples of the different weather 
conditions and locations that were simulated in CARLA. 
 
 
Fig. 7. An excerpt of the CARLA simulator's weather conditions. 
 (2) Apply DDM. To obtain the pedestrian detection out-
comes for the images saved in the two datasets, we used the 
YOLOv3 implementation (YOLO 2020) as the encapsulated 
DDM. For this, pretrained network weights exist that have 
been learned on the COCO (2020) dataset, that contains a 
class for persons. Prior to creating the outcomes, the object 
confidence threshold ("conf thres") was set to 0.5 and the 
non-maximum suppression threshold ("nms thres") was set 
to 0.4. Next, outcomes defining enclosing rectangles for 
each object detected were obtained for each image. On this 
basis, YOLOv3 created bounding boxes with a class label as 
an outcome for each object detected in an image. Since we 
investigated the performance of the uncertainty wrapper and 
not of the DDM, we did not apply a sophisticated hyperpa-
rameter search or other efforts to optimize the DDM. 
(3) Determine correctness of DDM outcomes. The next 
step was to determine whether the pedestrians in the image 
were correctly detected by YOLOv3. To decide this, the in-
tersection over union metric (Gwak et al. 2019), also re-
ferred to as Jaccard index, was first used to quantify how 
well a bounding box detection matches the recorded ground 
truth bounding box of a pedestrian. Edge cases in which the 
ground truth bounding boxes of pedestrians were less than 
50% visible within the image were filtered out. We defined 
that outcomes resulting in intersection over union values of 
at least 0.25 were considered to be correct and lower values 
were considered to be incorrect. As a result, the correctness 
of the YOLOv3 outcome was determined and added to each 
recorded image of both raw datasets. 
(4) Build datasets. Based on both datasets, we built train-
ing, calibration, and evaluation datasets, each consisting of 
the quality model inputs (e.g., weather conditions) and the 
correctness of the DDM outcomes. The training dataset was 
based on the uniform data, whereas the calibration and eval-
uation datasets were based on the representative data. Aim-
ing to assure that no data points of the same recorded simu-
lation sequence were present in the calibration and the eval-
uation datasets, we performed a randomized split on the se-
quences. Thus, the training, calibration, and evaluation da-
tasets consisted of 1,204,119, 402,040, and 400,884 data 
points, respectively. 
(5) Build UWs. Using the training dataset, the different 
quality impact model approaches were trained. Here, we 
manually searched for suitable hyperparameter ranges for 
each approach, which were then instantiated for training. 
(6) Calibrate uncertainty estimates. After the training, 
several quality impact models were obtained for each ap-
proach. Aiming to make the quality impact models' uncer-
tainty estimates reliable for the target application scope, cal-
ibration was carried out on the calibration dataset consider-
ing a confidence level of 99.99%. 
(7) Evaluate uncertainty estimates. Estimating uncer-
tainty, defined as the probability that a specific DDM out-
come is incorrect, can be seen as a binary probabilistic clas-
sification task. Therefore, strictly proper scoring rules such 
CARLA
Simulator
YOLOv3-
based
pedestrian
detection
(2) Apply DDM
(3) Determine Correctness of
DDM Outcomes
DDM 
Correctness
(1) Generate Raw Data
(5) Build UWs Based
on Different Quality 
Impact Models
(6) Calibrate Uncertainty
Estimates
Eval
Brier score
Variance
Uncspecificity
Unrelaibility
Overconfidence
(7) Evaluate Uncertainty Estimates
Represen-
tative data
Uniform data
(4) Build
Datasets
Evaluation
Calibration
Training
Calibration
Evaluation
Training
DDM predictions
Images
Ground truth bounding
boxes of pedestrians
Input for UW (e.g. weather conditions)
Decision Tree (DT)
Random Forest (RF)
Fuzzy DT
Fuzzy RF
Soft DT
Bagged Soft DT
Test Metrics:
402,040 data points
400,884 data points
1,204,119 data points
Fig. 6. Summarized study execution plan with execution steps. 

as the Brier score (Brier 1950), can be applied for their eval-
uation. The Brier score measures the mean squared differ-
ence between the predicted probability of a DDM outcome 
and the actual outcome. Besides the overall Brier score (𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏), 
we also measured the three additive components into which 
it can be decomposed (Murphy 1973), namely variance 
(𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣), resolution (𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟), and unreliability (𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢): 
 
𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏=  𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟+ 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 
 
𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 describes the overall variation in the correctness of 
the DDM outcomes, which is only dependent on the overall 
uncertainty of the DDM outcomes and thus not influenced 
by the uncertainty estimation approach used. For 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟, the 
difference between the case-specific uncertainty estimates 
and the overall uncertainty is considered. As higher 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 val-
ues are better and 𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 is the upper bound, we used 𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−
𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 as unspecificity (𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢), where smaller values mean that 
the resolution of the estimator is able to detail more of the 
variance in the uncertainty of the DDM outcomes. 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 
measures the degree of calibration of the estimator to the 
observed correctness of the DDM, such that better calibra-
tion leads to a smaller 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 value. Furthermore, we used the 
part of the 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 value that is attributed to underestimating the 
observed error rate of the DDM as a metric of overconfi-
dence (𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜), as this part of unreliability is especially rel-
evant in the context of safety-related functions. 
For the evaluation of the DT and the five candidate ap-
proaches, we selected the best quality impact model for each 
approach subject to the 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏. If there were quality impact 
models that resulted in approximately equal 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 values, the 
𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 values were also considered and the quality impact 
model with the lowest 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 value was selected. The idea was 
that a low 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 value implies high reliability of the quality 
impact model's uncertainty estimates. 
5. Study Results 
In this section, we will answer the research question on the 
basis of our study results. To answer how the performance 
of uncertainty estimation differs when using alternative sof-
tening approaches instead of the previous DT-based quality 
impact model, we present the evaluation results in Table 1. 
Table 1. Evaluation results per quality impact model approach. 
Approach 
𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 
𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 
𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 
𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 
DT 
.12176 .20284 
.12109 
.00066 7.4e-07 
RF 
.11908 .20284 
.00646 
.11261 .05918 
Fuzzy DT 
.13568 .20284 
.01252 
.12316 .07617 
Fuzzy RF 
.13799 .20284 
.00407 
.13393 .08611 
Soft DT 
.16239 .20284 
.00001 
.16238 .10664 
Bagged Soft DT .16279 .20284 
.00001 
.16277 .10751 
 
Considering the overall performance measured by the Brier 
score (𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏), RF performed best, while DT performed slightly 
worse. This was followed by the fuzzy approaches, where 
Fuzzy RF performed slightly worse than Fuzzy DT. Soft DT 
and Bagged Soft DT, which had approximately the same 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏, 
represent the worst results. 
 For DT, the 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 term has a very low value, and the value 
of 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 is essentially constituted by the 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 term. For RF, this 
is reversed, i.e., 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 is primarily constituted by the 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 term. 
Similar results can be seen with Fuzzy RF and Fuzzy DT, 
with the latter scoring even higher 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢. Soft DT and Bagged 
Soft DT show minor differences in terms of 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 and  𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢. 
Here, the high values of 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 are mainly caused by the 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 
term. In addition, compared to DT, all approaches show an 
increased 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 and even a bias toward overconfident un-
certainty estimates. 
6. Discussion 
Compared to DTs, we were able to achieve a softening of 
uncertainty estimates (G1) with all other approaches. As an 
example, we illustrate this in Fig. 8 by means of the uncer-
tainty estimates for an example data point, which we variate 
in a single quality factor. To provide a better visual over-
view, the uncertainty estimates of Fuzzy DT and Soft DT 
are not displayed, as they demonstrated similar characteris-
tics as those of the respective ensemble approaches for this 
combination of feature values. While the uncertainty esti-
mates of DTs vary considerably at the decision boundaries, 
the uncertainty estimates of RF vary less. Both the Fuzzy 
and Soft approaches show even softer boundaries. 
 
 
Fig. 8. Estimated uncertainties of a sample data point. 
The interpretability (G2) of the models and of the concrete 
uncertainty estimates for data points is feasible for all ap-
proaches, which is why we assessed the effort required for 
this. For DTs, the effort was the lowest, since the split crite-
ria ensure that there is always only one path to a leaf. For 
RFs, this effort increased with the number of DTs used, 
which also applied to the other ensemble approaches. For 
Fuzzy and Soft approaches, there are usually several paths 
to leaves that are weighted differently, which increases the 
effort for interpretation exponentially with the tree height.

 Analogously to the effort for interpreting, the runtime 
complexity (G3) can be assessed. For DTs, the tree height 
has a linear influence. In the case of RF, the number of DTs 
contained has an additional linear influence. In contrast, for 
the Fuzzy and Soft approaches, the depth of a tree has a sig-
nificant influence on this complexity, so the applicability of 
these approaches may be limited in some settings with high 
tree height and tight runtime requirements. 
The use of softening approaches results in a significantly 
lower unspecificity because of their higher resolution com-
pared to DTs. However, unreliability increases in exchange, 
with the result that the overall uncertainty estimation perfor-
mance (G4) is worse for most of the investigated approaches 
in comparison to that of DTs. Although RF slightly outper-
form DTs in overall uncertainty scores, their significantly 
worse unreliability and overconfidence scores make them 
less attractive to use in many cases. A summary of the extent 
to which the approaches achieve our goals is given in Table 
2. There, for each goal an assessment is made on a scale 
ranging from ‘--’ to ‘++’, where the former represents poor 
and the latter very good achievement of the goal. 
Table 2. Goal fruition rating per quality impact model approach. 
Approach 
G1 
Soft. 
G2 Inter- 
pret. 
G3 Run. 
complex. 
G4 Est.  
perform. 
DT 
-- 
++ 
++ 
++ 
RF 
o 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Fuzzy DT 
++ 
+ 
o 
o 
Fuzzy RF 
++ 
o 
- 
o 
Soft DT 
++ 
+ 
o 
- 
Bagged Soft DT 
++ 
o 
- 
- 
7. Conclusion 
We investigated alternative approaches to decision trees that 
allow softening of uncertainty estimates while preserving 
reasonable interpretability, runtime complexity, and uncer-
tainty estimation performance. In an empirical study, we 
compared the uncertainty estimation performance of these 
approaches using the example task of pedestrian detection 
and the Brier score with its subcomponents as a metric. 
The results do not allow providing a general recommen-
dation for the use of a particular approach; rather, the selec-
tion of an approach has proved to be a trade-off decision (cf. 
Table 2), which should be made considering the planned ap-
plication. Random forests, closely followed by decision 
trees, showed the best results considering their overall un-
certainty estimation performance but at the cost of signifi-
cantly higher unreliability as decision trees. Fuzzy decision 
trees and fuzzy random forests as well as soft decision trees 
and bagged soft decision trees showed excellent perfor-
mance in softening the decision boundaries but reduced un-
certainty estimation performance. In general, all investi-
gated softening approaches showed a lower but still accepta-
ble level of interpretability and runtime performance com-
pared to decision trees as our baseline. However, in specific 
settings with tight runtime requirements or high demands on 
interpretability, the application of certain approaches may 
be limited. 
 For features with known or expected discontinuities, 
the use of hard decision boundaries rather than soft transi-
tions may seem more appropriate. Therefore, it should be 
noted that all approaches allow features of categorical and 
continuous data type, where the softening is only carried out 
for the continuous features. This means that all features for 
which hard decision boundaries are more appropriate should 
be designed as categorical data in a preprocessing step. 
Based on the study results, we see two main directions for 
further work on softening the boundaries of decision-tree-
based uncertainty estimation. First, specific recommenda-
tions should be developed that guide practitioners in decid-
ing in which settings they should make use of which of the 
investigated approaches. Second, the investigated ap-
proaches could be further modified to address the observed 
limitations regarding uncertainty estimation performance, 
specifically addressing unreliability and overconfidence.
