International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
DOI: 10.5121/ijans.2022.12403                                                                                                                     35 
 
SENSOR SIGNAL PROCESSING USING HIGH-LEVEL 
SYNTHESIS AND INTERNET OF THINGS WITH A 
LAYERED ARCHITECTURE 
 
CS Reddy1 and Krishna Anand2 
 
1Department of Mathematics, CIT - NC, VTU University, Bangalore, India  
2Department of Computer Engineering, Anurag University, Hyderabad, India 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Sensor routers play a crucial role in the sector of Internet of Things applications, in which the capacity for 
transmission of the network signal is limited from cloud systems to sensors and its reversal process. It 
describes a robust recognized framework with various architected layers to process data at high level 
synthesis. It is designed to sense the nodes instinctually with the help of Internet of Things where the 
applications arise in cloud systems. In this paper embedded PEs with four layer new design framework 
architecture is proposed to sense the devises of IOT applications with the support of high-level synthesis 
DBMF (database management function) tool. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Network Protocols, Wireless Network, Mobile Network, Internet of Things, Reconfigurable dynamic 
processor, Sensor signal processing. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Sensor routers play a crucial role in the sector of Internet of Things (IOT) applications, in which 
the capacity for transmission of the network signal is limited from cloud systems to sensors and 
its reversal process. Consequence to this volume of the data reduction is obligatory to combat 
device computing functions between sensor nodes and transmitter to exchange the sufficient data 
with the available networks [1-3]. Hence, low power consumption and small footprints are 
commanded among sensor nodes to process information. One of the replacements for 
microcontroller units is field programmable gate arrays to optimize the footprints size, so that it is 
to be observed keenly the routing with configurable logic blocks and switches of look-up tables 
which causes placement inefficiency [4, 7]. To fabricate Field Programmable Gate Arrays 
(FPGA) it is wise to use High-level synthesis which will enable global optimization and 
recompense the limitation of Routing and Placement [5, 6]. 
 
In this paper embedded PEs with four layer new design framework architecture is proposed to 
sense the devises of IOT applications with the support of high-level synthesis DBMF (database 
management function) tool [8, 17, 19]. It exploits the repetitive high level synthesis process. 
Macro blocks synthesized through high-level behavioural synthesis are registered in a database 
before the system level synthesis, and the information in the database is used for the optimization 
of resource consumption through the system level synthesis [10]. In this work authors tried to 
investigate the dependencies of resource consumption on the granularity of coarse grained 
function definitions using the extended database management function of Cyber Work Bench. 
The evaluation results show that small footprint was achieved especially with dynamically 
reconfigurable technique [9, 15]. 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
36 
Dynamically reconfigurable processors using high-level synthesis were proposed to improve the 
efficiency, whereas the inefficiency of fixed mesh pointed out in still remains [11-14]. Fixed bit 
widths of data paths, elementary blocks, and switch matrices aiming at mass production of the 
devices were one example of the inefficiency. Sensors used in IOT applications have various data 
interfaces, such as 8, 12, 14, or 16 bits [ 17, 19]. Predefined data path between arrays of 
arithmetic logic units prevents behavioural synthesis tools from the optimization of layout size 
and the reduction in power consumption. Therefore, optimized Arithmetic Logic Units (ALU) 
and flexible data paths are required to embed processors in sensor units [13, 15-17]. 
 
2. HIGH-LEVEL SYNTHESIS TOOLS  
 
High-level synthesis is increasingly popular for the design of high-performance and energy-
efficient heterogeneous systems, shortening time-to-market and addressing today’s system 
complexity [18, 20, 25]. Early academic work extracted scheduling, allocation, and binding as the 
basic steps for high-level-synthesis [22, 24, 32]. Scheduling partitions in the algorithm to control 
steps that are used in the model are defined the states in the finite-state machine [21, 33].  
 
First generation behavioural synthesis was introduced by Synopsys in 1994 as behavioural 
Compiler and used Verilog or VHDL as input languages.  10 years later, in 2004, there emerged a 
number of next generation commercial high-level synthesis products which provided synthesis of 
circuits specified at C level to a register transfer level specification [23, 25, 26]. It was primarily 
adopted in Japan and Europe in the early years. As of late 2008, there was an emerging adoption 
in the United States. High-level synthesis (HLS) allows designers to work at a higher level of 
abstraction by using a software program to specify the hardware functionality [28, 29]. 
Additionally, HLS is particularly interesting for designing field-programmable gate array circuits, 
where hardware implementations can be easily refined and replaced in the target device [27, 30-
32]. Recent years have seen much activity in the HLS research community, with a plethora of 
HLS tool offerings, from both industry and academia. 
 
 
 
Fig.1. Classification of High-Level Synthesis Input Language. 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
37 
HLS tools start from a software programmable high-level language to automatically produce a 
circuit specification in HDL that performs the same function. The most common source inputs for 
high-level synthesis are based on standard languages such as ANSI C/C++, System C and 
MATLAB. HLS has also been recently applied to a variety of applications (e.g., medical 
imaging, convolutional neural networks, and machine learning), with significant benefits in terms 
of performance and energy consumption. 
 
These HLS tools can leverage dedicated optimizations or micro architectural solutions for the 
specific domain. However, the algorithm designer, who is usually a software engineer, has to 
understand how to properly update the code. This approach is usually time-consuming and error 
prone. For this reason, some HLS tools offer complete support for a standard HLL, such as C, 
giving complete freedom to the algorithm designer. High level languages mainly classified into 
two types that are shown in Fig. 1. One is Domain specific languages and other one is Generic 
languages. In Domain specific languages it consist new languages and C- extended languages, 
whereas, in Generic languages it consist Procedural and Object Oriented languages. HLS tool 
select specific language for specific applications. 
 
2.1. Five Key Challenges 
 
In this section the important crucial challenges that arise in the process of signal synthesis in the 
layered architecture.  
 
 Hardware in inherently concurrent, whereas software representations are sequential. HLS 
must map the sequential algorithm onto concurrent hardware. 
 Timing is implicit in software in the sequence of instructions used. Synchronous hardware 
must deal with timing constraints, with controlling and synchronizing operations at the clock 
cycle level. 
 In software, the word length is fixed (8, 16, 32 or 64bits), but in hardware, it is usually 
optimized for the task being performed. 
 The software model of memory is as a single block with a monolithic address space, with 
almost all data items stored in memory. On an FPGA, local variables are stored in registers, 
with multiple distributed memory blocks, each with their own independent address space. In 
such an environment, pointers have little meaning, and dynamic memory allocation is very 
difficult. Communication in software is usually through shared memory, whereas on an 
FPGA it relies on constructing appropriate hardware, from implicit (within stream 
processing), to simple token passing, to using dedicated FIFOs to manage flow control. 
 
3. DATA LAYER INTERACTION ARCHITECTURE 
 
 
Traditionally, the word architecture is concerned with the art or science of building, where it 
relates to structural concepts and to styles of design. Here the authors will use it in the sense of 
structured deceptions of a system from a number of compatible and complementary viewpoints 
which, taken together, cover functional, design, fabrication and performance issues. The term 
layer is used to refer to a particular descriptive viewpoint. Within a layer, descriptions will 
generally be hierarchic to allow the containment of complexity or the exposure of detail by 
suitable aggregation or decomposition techniques. Architecture(s) may be singular or plural 
depending on whether it will be addressed as an individual layer or the complete set of 
descriptions across all layers. It is clear from this definition that the architecture of a system is not 
just confined to some sort of functional partitioning at the front end of a development, but 
essentially embraces descriptions generated during all phases and stages of the development 
process. 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
38 
The Data Interaction Architecture is a prime example of a layered architecture. It contains four 
layers, each of which can be regarded as a model of the system from a particular viewpoint. 
Fig.2. shows some small representational fragments for each of the four layers. The layers consist 
of I/O circuitry, fine grained layer, coarse grained function definition layer, and bypass 
connection layer, where they are listed from the bottom layer to the top layer, respectively. Well 
defined notations and technical conventions exist for each of these layers and are closely 
modelled on those of MASCOT, Modular Approach to Software Construction Operation and 
Test. Where relevant the notations include composite structures to support hierarchical 
representations over multiple levels within a layer. The motivation behind the layered 
architecture method is to provide the means of moving from a functional model of a system to an 
execution model. 
 
 
 
Fig.2. Data Interaction Architecture 
 
The emphasis on the identification of well-defined interactions in the functional model, and the 
preservation of these speck tied interaction properties through the subsequent layers, provides the 
structural conformance by which traceability is achieved. It follows that the functional model is 
binding on subsequent development. Developers are not free to reverse engineer the functional 
model to allow an alternative development path in which traceability would be lost. Of course the 
functional model may need to be changed, either because system requirements have changed, or 
because detail design has shown that an alternative functional model would be better. Whatever 
the reason for change, consistency across the model set must be preserved. 
 
The main distinguishing feature of Data Interaction Architecture (DIA) is the explicit 
representation of shared information and shared data. Here i will concentrate on the sharing 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
39 
implicit in the bilateral interactions between processes, leaving discussion of the more general 
information retention element. A summary description of the model in each layer shows how 
bilateral interaction properties are tracked. 
 
4. ARCHITECTURE OF PROCESSING ELEMENTS 
 
In this paper authors proposed to establish a new design framework to solve issues described in 
the preceding section by exploiting the binding process of high-level/behavioural synthesis. 
 
4.1. Layered Architecture 
 
The purpose of the conventional high-level synthesis tools is to generate finite state machines 
with data paths. Here File System Meta-Data (FSMD) referred as fine grained layer. It is 
expanded with the scope of high-level synthesis to coarse grained layer to exploit the functional 
representations of circuitries. ALUs in coarse grained layer are defined by the functional 
representations of high-level programming languages. Switches are added as bypass connection 
layer for the scope of high-level synthesis intentionally. Implicit as-built meshes of switches put 
constraints on high-level synthesis. In the processes are allowed as unprejudiced bypass switches 
to remove the meshes. Communications between the PEs are limited between adjacent PEs, 
whereas it is found no limitations for sensor applications with the limited communication paths. 
 
The following explains these layers I/O circuitry is implemented with random logic gates and 
mixed signal I/O circuitries. They are connected to the fine grained blocks in the above layer. The 
fine grained layer mainly consists of finite state machines and data paths. They are replaceable to 
follow the context described by high-level languages. The coarse grained function definition 
layer is located on the fine grained layer. Optimized ALUs for a certain application are defined in 
this layer. An operation primitive defined in the layer corresponds to an operation code (op code) 
of a conventional multipoint control unit (MCU), whereas it does not have to be standardized for 
over many applications. As for the topmost bypass connection layer, simple bypass switch 
images can be specified over coarse grained blocks. The connections between inputs and outputs 
of PEs are configurable with the bypass switches. 
 
4.2. Design Flow 
 
The following six steps compose the design flow of the design framework to design a PE through 
layered scheme. 
 
Step 1: Describe a system in high-level language. 
Step 2: Define coarse grained operations. Typical dedicated functions for sensor signals are 
signal compensation, feature point identification for image recognition, and image 
compression in addition to basic arithmetic operations. The defined coarse grained 
operations are exploited in high-level synthesis and behavioural synthesis process. 
Step 3: Generate source codes written in hardware description language through behavioural 
synthesis. The hard macros defined and implemented in the step 2 are exploited for 
generating circuitries by the functions of CWB. 
Step 4: This step is identical to conventional logic synthesis. 
Step 5: This step is identical to conventional layout design. 
Step 6: The verification and validation step include back annotation based on the result of delay 
analysis. 
 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
40 
In the work authors used a data base management function of CWB to exploit the definitions of 
operations in the coarse grained layer during the behavioural synthesis to treat a function as an 
operator. The operations can be implemented as hard macros by using custom ASIC design tools 
and/or LUTs of FPGAs. The operator definitions were exploited on the step 3 as macro blocks. 
Once macro blocks are registered in a database, CWB can use the macro blocks during the 
binding process of high-level synthesis automatically to reduce layout area size. The binding 
process of high-level synthesis is regarded as nondeterministic polynomial (NP) hard and 
heuristic approach was often employed. The design flow enables the automation of binding 
process instead of the heuristic approach. 
 
4.3. Typical Design of Processing Element 
 
Two types of context were identified with reference to semantics or lambda calculus of functional 
representations to define ALUs in coarse grained function definition layer. One is a configurable 
static context often mentioned as stored information in a file, and the other is a dynamic context 
as stored information in heap registers as shown in Fig. 3. The static contexts of an application 
are expressed with finite state machines and data paths implemented by n sets of hard- ware 
circuitry of PEs. The dynamic contexts of an application are specified as m sets of registers and 
instructions. The instruction sets are optimized for an application, and each optimized instruction 
set can be shared among some dynamic contexts. 
 
 
 
Fig.3. Modified High-Level Synthesis Process. 
 
The program code is implemented with a specific C-language comment description /* Cyber func 
= operator */ for defining dynamic and static contexts, which are the sets of pairs of registers and 
optimized instruction sets. The pair of a register set and an instruction set can be shared among 
dynamic contexts using another specific C-language comment description as /* Cyber share name 
= NAME */. NAME is an arbitrary designation. The binding process of high-level behavioural 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
41 
synthesis can be controlled by these descriptions to exploit the functional representations defined 
in a high-level programming language. 
 
5. RESULTS   
 
Experiments are carried out to evaluate the design framework using convolution operations; those 
are often used for sensor applications, with following three conditions. The matrix functions of 
the filters are similar and the difference is the parameters of 3×3 matrices. It is observed one can 
evaluate the layout area size reduction results by using an FPGA, Xilinx XC7A200T FPGA, 
although the design framework was established aiming at improving ASIC design at first. 
 
 Defining a convolution function as one operator. 
 Implementing ALUs with basic operations, i.e., plus, minus, multiply, divide, and 
comparison operations, using dynamically reconfiguration technique designated as 
flexible reliability reconfigurable array (FRRA). 
 Elaborating whole design with FPGA libraries without operator definitions and a 
function definition database. 
 
 
 
Fig.4. Comparison of LUT utilizations According to Operator Definitions 
 
Derived LUT counts for each evaluation case are shown in Fig.4. The LUT counts of basic 
operations were excluded for comparison. The larger the granularity of an operation was, the less 
counts of LUTs were consumed. Remarkable difference of LUT counts was shown for cascaded 
operations. The LUT counts of cascaded operations using FPGA library was more than double 
compared to single operation. The results show that exploiting granularity in behavioural 
synthesis was carried out by CWB automatically without specifying the reuse of macro blocks 
explicitly. The difference between one operation and cascaded operations using FRRAs with 
dynamically reconfiguration technique was 22% less than the difference using the operator 
definition on convolution operations. 
 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
 
A novel model is developed to design a framework to reduce the footprints of programmable 
functions of sensing devices for IOT applications. The design framework consists of four layered 
structure of PE architecture and the extended database management function of a high-level 
synthesis tool to exploit functional representations in high-level programming languages. 

International Journal on AdHoc Networking Systems (IJANS) Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2022 
42 
The layout size reduction is useful to embed a PE into a sensing device and to provide device 
computing capabilities with a sensing device. The experimental results report the power 
consumption reduction by adopting the design framework on a Nano Bridge FPGA.
