arXiv:1105.1749v2  [cs.AI]  21 May 2011
A Real-Time Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Architecture for Robot Control
Todd Hester, Michael Quinlan, Peter Stone
The University of Texas at Austin
1616 Guadalupe, Suite 2.408
Austin, TX 78701

Abstract— Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a method for
learning decision-making tasks that could enable robots to learn
and adapt to their situation on-line. For an RL algorithm to
be practical for robotic control tasks, it must learn in very
few actions, while continually taking those actions in real-
time. Existing model-based RL methods learn in relatively few
actions, but typically take too much time between each action
for practical on-line learning. In this paper, we present a novel
parallel architecture for model-based RL that runs in real-time
by 1) taking advantage of sample-based approximate planning
methods and 2) parallelizing the acting, model learning, and
planning processes such that the acting process is sufﬁciently
fast for typical robot control cycles. We demonstrate that
algorithms using this architecture perform nearly as well as
methods using the typical sequential architecture when both are
given unlimited time, and greatly out-perform these methods
on tasks that require real-time actions such as controlling an
autonomous vehicle.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robots have the potential to solve many problems in soci-
ety by working in dangerous places or performing jobs that
no one wants. One barrier to their widespread deployment is
the need to hand-program behaviors for every situation they
may encounter. For robots to meet their potential, we need
methods for them to learn and adapt to novel situations.
Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is a method for learning
sequential decision making processes that could solve the
problems of learning and adaptation on robots. An RL agent
seeks to maximize long-term rewards through experience
in its environment. The decision making tasks in these
environments are usually formulated as Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs).
RL has been applied to a few carefully chosen robotic
tasks that are achievable with limited training and infrequent
action selections (e.g. [2]), or allow for an off-line learning
phase (e.g. [3]). However, none of these methods allow for
continual learning on the robot running in its environment.
For RL to be practical on tasks requiring lifelong continual
control of a robot, such as low-level control tasks, it must
meet at least the following two requirements:
1) It must learn in very few actions (be sample efﬁcient).
2) it must take actions continually in real-time (even while
learning).
Model-based methods such as R-MAX [4] are a class of
RL algorithms that meet the ﬁrst requirement by learning
a model of the domain from their experiences, and then
planning a policy on that model. By updating their policy
using their model rather than by taking actions in the real
world, they limit the number of real world actions needed to
learn.
However, most existing model-based methods fail to meet
the second requirement because they take signiﬁcant periods
of (wall-clock) time to update their model and plan between
each action. These action times are acceptable when learning
in simulation or planning off-line, but for on-line robot con-
trol learning, actions must be given at a ﬁxed, fast frequency.
Some model-based methods that do take actions at this fast
frequency have been applied to robots in the past (e.g. [3],
[5]), but they perform learning off-line during pauses where
they stop controlling the robot entirely. DYNA [6], which
does run in real-time, uses a simplistic model and is not
very sample efﬁcient. Model-free methods also learn in real-
time, but often take thousands of potentially expensive or
dangerous real-world actions to learn: they meet our second
requirement, but not the ﬁrst.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel RL architec-
ture, called Real-Time Model Based Architecture (RTMBA),
that is the ﬁrst to exhibit both sample efﬁcient and real-
time learning, meeting both of our requirements. It does
so by leveraging recent sample-based approximate plan-
ning methods, and most uniquely, by parallelizing model-
based methods to run in real-time. With RTMBA, the crucial
computations needed to make model-based methods sample
efﬁcient are still performed, but threaded such that actions
are not delayed. We compare RTMBA with other methods
in simulation when they are all given unlimited time for
computation between actions. We then demonstrate that it
is the only algorithm among them that successfully learns
to control an autonomous vehicle, both in simulation and on
the robot.
II. BACKGROUND
We adopt the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP)
formalism of RL [1]. An MDP consists of a set of states S, a
set of actions A, a reward function R(s, a), and a transition
function P(s′|s, a). In each state s ∈S, the agent takes an
action a ∈A. Upon taking this action, the agent receives a

Fig. 1: A diagram of how model learning and planning are typically
interleaved in a model-based agent.
reward R(s, a) and reaches a new state s′, determined from
the probability distribution P(s′|s, a).
The value Q∗(s, a) of a state-action (s, a) is an estimate
of the expected long-term rewards that can be obtained from
(s, a) and is determined by solving the Bellman equation:
Q∗(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
P(s′|s, a) max
a′
Q∗(s′, a′)
(1)
where 0 < γ < 1 is the discount factor. The agent’s goal is to
ﬁnd the policy π mapping states to actions that maximizes the
expected discounted total reward over the agent’s lifetime.
The optimal policy π is then:
π(s) = argmaxaQ∗(s, a)
(2)
Model-based RL methods learn a model of the domain
by approximating R(s, a) and P(s′|s, a). The agent then
computes a policy by planning on this model with a method
such as value iteration [1]. RL algorithms can also work
without a model, updating action-values only when taking
them in the real task. Generally model-based methods are
more sample efﬁcient than model-free methods; their sample
efﬁciency is only constrained by how many actions it takes
to learn a good model.
Figure 1 shows the typical architecture for a model-based
algorithm. When the agent gets its new state, s′, and reward,
r, it updates its model with the new transition ⟨s, a, s′, r⟩.
Once the model has been updated, it computes a new policy
by re-planning on its model. The agent then returns the action
for its current state determined by its policy. Each of these
computations is performed sequentially and both the model
learning and planning can take signiﬁcant time.
The DYNA framework [6] presents an alternative to this
approach. It incorporates some of the beneﬁts of model-
based methods while still running in real-time. DYNA saves
its experiences, and then performs k Bellman updates on
randomly selected experiences between each action. Instead
of performing full value iteration between each action as
above, its planning is broken up into a few updates between
each action. However, it uses a very simplistic model (saved
experiences) and thus does not have very good sample
efﬁciency. In the next section, we introduce a novel parallel
architecture to allow more sophisticated model-based algo-
rithms to run in real-time regardless of how long the model
learning or planning may take.
III. THE ARCHITECTURE
We make two main modiﬁcations to the standard model-
based paradigm that, together, allow it to run in real-time.
Fig. 2: A diagram of the proposed parallel architecture for real-time
model-based RL.
First, we limit planning time by using approximate instead
of exact planning. Second, we parallelize the model learning,
planning, and acting such that the computation-intensive
processes (model learning and planning) are spread out over
time. Actions are produced as quickly as dictated by the
robot control loop, while still being based on the most recent
models and plans available.
First, instead of planning exactly with value iteration (like
methods such as R-MAX), our method follows the approach
of Silver et al. [7] (among others) in using a sample-
based planning algorithm from the Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) family (such as Sparse Sampling [8] or UCT [9]) to
plan approximately. These sample-based planners perform
rollouts from the agent’s current state, sampling ahead to
update the values of the sampled actions. The agent performs
as many rollouts as it can in the given time, with its value
estimate improving with more rollouts. These methods can
be more efﬁcient than dynamic programming approaches in
large domains because they focus their updates on states the
agent is likely to visit soon rather than iterating over the
entire statespace.
Second, since both the model learning and planning can
take signiﬁcant computation (and thus also wall-clock time),
we place both of those processes in their own parallel threads
in the background, shown in Figure 2. A third thread interacts
with the environment, receiving the agent’s new state and
reward and returning the action given by the agent’s current
policy. By de-coupling this action thread from the time-
consuming model-learning and planning processes, RTMBA
releases the algorithm from the need to complete the model
update and planning between actions. Now, it can return
an action immediately whenever one is requested by the
environment.
For the three threads to operate properly, they must
share information while avoiding race conditions and data
inconsistencies. The model learning thread must know which
new transitions to add to its model, the planning thread must

access the model being learned, the planner must know what
state the agent is currently at, and the action thread must
access the policy being planned. RTMBA uses mutex locks
to control access to these variables, as summarized in Table I.
The action thread receives the agent’s new state and
reward, and adds the new transition experience, ⟨s, a, s′, r⟩,
to a list to be updated into the model. It then sets the agent’s
current state for use by the planner and returns the action
determined by the agent’s policy. The update list and current
state are both protected by mutex locks, and the agent’s
policy is protected by individual mutex locks for each state.
The model learning thread checks if there are any expe-
riences in the update list to be added to its model. If there
are, it makes a copy of its model, updates it with the new
experiences, and replaces the original model with the copy.
The other threads can continue accessing the original model
while the copy is being updated. Only the swapping of the
models requires locking the model mutex. After updating the
model, the model learning thread repeats, checking for new
experiences to add to the model.
The model learning thread can incorporate any type of
model learning algorithm, such as a tabular model [4],
random forests [10] (as used in this paper), or Gaussian
Process regression [5]. Depending on how long the model
update takes and how fast the agent is acting, the agent can
add tens or hundreds of new experiences to its model at a
time, or it can wait for long periods for a new experience.
When adding many experiences at a time, full model updates
are not performed between each individual action. In this
case, the algorithm’s sample efﬁciency is likely to suffer
compared to that of sequential methods, but in exchange,
it continues to act in real time.
The planning thread uses any MCTS planning algorithm to
plan approximately (we use a variant of UCT). It retrieves the
agent’s current state and its sample-based planner performs
a rollout from that state. The thread repeats, continually
performing rollouts from the agent’s current state. With more
rollouts, the algorithm’s estimates of action values improve,
resulting in more accurate policies. Even if very few rollouts
are performed from the current state before the algorithm
returns an action, many of the rollouts performed from the
previous state should have gone through the current state (if
the model is accurate), giving the algorithm a good estimate
of its true value.
The action thread returns actions in real-time. When an
Variable
Threads
Use
Update List
Action
Store experiences to
Model Learning
be updated into model
Current State
Action
Set current state
Planning
to plan from
Policy (by state)
Action
Update policy used
(Value Function)
Planning
to select actions
Model
Model Learning
Latest model
Planning
to plan on
TABLE I: This table shows all the variables that are protected under
mutex locks in the proposed architecture, along with their purpose
and which threads use them.
action is requested, the action thread only has to add an
experience to the update list, set the agent’s current state,
and access the agent’s policy to return an action. All of these
items are under mutex locks, but the update list is only used
by the model learning thread between model updates, the
agent’s current state is only accessed by the planning thread
between each rollout, and the policy is under individual locks
for each state. Thus, any given state is freely accessible most
of the time. When the planner does happen to be using the
same state the action thread wants, it releases it immediately
after updating the values for that state. In addition to enabling
real-time action, this architecture enables the agent to take
full advantage of multi-core processors by running each
thread on a separate core.1
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the effectiveness of this architecture, we
performed experiments on two problems. Our ﬁrst experi-
ments measure the cost of parallelization in terms of en-
vironmental reward compared to a traditional sequential
architecture. We use the standard toy domain of mountain
car, in which the simulated environment can wait as long as
necessary for the agent to return an action (or it can execute
actions as fast as the algorithm returns them). Our second
set of experiments measure the performance gains due to
parallelization on an autonomous vehicle, where real-time
actions are absolutely necessary. We perform experiments,
both in simulation and on the robot, that show that existing
sequential approaches are not a viable option on this type of
problem.
A. Mountain Car
Fig. 3: Mountain Car
Our ﬁrst experiments were
performed in the Mountain Car
domain [1], shown in Figure 3.
Mountain Car is a continuous
task, where the agent controls
an under-powered car that does
not have enough power to drive
directly up the hill to the goal.
Instead, it must go up the left-
ward slope to gain momentum ﬁrst. The agent has three
actions, accelerating it leftward, rightward, or not at all. The
agent’s state is made up of two features: its POSITION and
its VELOCITY. The agent receives a reward of −1 each time
step until it reaches the goal, when the episode terminates
with a reward of 0. We discretized both state features into
100 values each, and ran the algorithms on the discretized
version of the domain. Following the evaluation methodology
of Hester and Stone [10], each algorithm was initialized with
one experience (⟨s, a, s′, r⟩tuple) of the car reaching the goal
to jump start learning.
We ran experiments with a typical model-free RL method
(Q-LEARNING [11]),
DYNA, two sequential model-based
methods, and RTMBA. DYNA performed updates on 1,000
1Source
code
for
the
architecture
is
available
at:
http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl-texplore-ros-pkg.

-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
 0
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
Average Reward
Episode Number
Mountain Car
Fig. 4: Average reward per episode on Mountain Car, averaged over
30 trials. Results are averaged over a 4 episode sliding window.
experiences between each action. The sequential methods
varied in their planning; one used value iteration for exact
planning and one used MCTS for approximate planning. We
modiﬁed MCTS to use UCT action selection [9], eligibility
traces, and to generalize values across depths in the search
tree. Between each action, the two sequential methods per-
formed a full model update, then planned on their model
by running value iteration to convergence or running MCTS
for 0.1 seconds. We compared these algorithms with RTMBA
using the same version of MCTS, running at three different
action rates: 10 Hz, 25 Hz, and 100 Hz. All of the algorithms
used random forests to model the domain, similar to the
approach taken by Hester and Stone [10]. We ran 30 trials
of each algorithm learning for 1,000 episodes in the domain.
Each trial was run on a single core of a machine with 2.4 -
2.66 GHz Intel Xeon processors and 4 GB of memory.
Our aim was to compare the real-time algorithms with the
sequential methods when they were given the time needed to
fully complete their computation between each step. Thus we
can examine the performance lost by the real-time algorithms
due to acting quickly. In contrast, the model-free methods
could act as fast as they wanted, resulting in learning that
took little wall clock time but many more actions. To perform
these experiments, the environment waited for each algorithm
to return its action. This is only possible in simulation,
whereas on a real robot, the action rate is deﬁned by the
robot rather than the algorithm.
Figure 4 shows the average reward per episode for each al-
gorithm over the ﬁrst 50 episodes in the domain and Figure 5
shows the reward plotted against clock time in seconds (note
the log scale on the x axis). The ﬁrst plot shows that the two
sequential methods perform better than RTMBA in sample
efﬁciency, in particular, receiving signiﬁcantly more reward
per episode than RTMBA running at 25 and 100 Hz over the
ﬁrst 5 episodes (p < 0.05). RTMBA running at 10 Hz did not
perform signiﬁcantly worse than the sequential method using
MCTS. However, Figure 5 shows that better performance of
the sequential methods came at the cost of more computation
time. For the sequential methods, switching from exact to
approximate planning reduces the time to complete the ﬁrst
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
 0
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
Average Reward
Time (s)
Mountain Car
Q-Learning
Dyna
Sequential VI
Sequential MCTS
RTMBA 10 Hz
RTMBA 25 Hz
RTMBA 100 Hz
Fig. 5: Average reward versus clock time on Mountain Car, averaged
over 30 trials. Results are averaged over a 4 episode sliding window.
Note that the x-axis is in log scale.
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
Reward
Episode Number
Mountain Car: Multiple vs. Single Core
RTMBA - Multiple Cores
RTMBA - Single Core
Sequential MCTS - Multiple Cores
Fig. 6: Comparisons of the methods using a multiple core machine.
Each method is averaged over 30 trials on Mountain Car.
episode from 1541 to 142 seconds, but the MCTS method
is still restricted by the need to perform complete model
updates between actions. This restriction is removed with
RTMBA, and all three versions using it complete the ﬁrst
episode within 20 seconds. In fact, all three RTMBA methods
start performing well after 120 seconds, likely because they
all took this much time to learn an accurate model of the
domain. Compared with the sequential methods, RTMBA is
only slightly worse in sample efﬁciency, and is able to act
much faster, meeting our second requirement of continual
real-time action selection.
The two model-free approaches, Q-LEARNING and DYNA,
select actions extremely quickly and converge to the optimal
policy in less wall clock time than any version of RTMBA.
However, Figure 4 shows that they are not as sample efﬁcient.
While RTMBA converges to the optimal policy within tens
of episodes, DYNA takes approximately 650 episodes to
converge, and Q-LEARNING takes approximately 22,000.
These methods learn in less wall clock time simply because
they are able to take many more actions than RTMBA in
a given amount of time. On an actual robot, it will not
be possible to take actions faster than the robot’s control
frequency, and the poor sample efﬁciency of these methods

will result in longer wall clock learning times as well. In
comparison, RTMBA learns in fewer actions, meeting our
ﬁrst requirement of sample efﬁciency even while running
at reasonable robot control rates between 10 and 100 Hz.
In addition to enabling real-time learning, another beneﬁt
of RTMBA is its ability to take advantage of multi-core
processors. We ran experiments comparing the performance
of RTMBA when running on one versus multiple cores. These
experiments were performed on a machine with four 2.6 GHz
AMD Opteron processors. Figure 6 shows the average reward
per episode for these experiments, running at 25 Hz. For
comparison, we ran the sequential method using MCTS as
a planner on the multi-core machine. It had unlimited time
for model updates and then planned for 0.04 seconds (the
same time given to RTMBA for both computations). Since the
sequential architecture only has a single thread, it only used
a single core even on the multi-core machine. Meanwhile,
RTMBA utilized three processors with each thread running
on its own core. Using the extra processors allowed the
parallel version to perform more model updates and planning
rollouts between actions than the single core version. Due
to these advantages, the multi-core version performs better
than the single core version, receiving signiﬁcantly more
rewards on every episode (p < 0.005). In addition, it even
performs better than the sequential method on episodes 3 to
14 (p < 0.01), even though the sequential method is given
unlimited time for model updates.
These results demonstrate that the algorithms using our
real-time architecture are able to accomplish both require-
ments set forth in the introduction (sample efﬁciency and
real-time action selection), while existing model-free and
model-based methods are each only able to accomplish one
of the two requirements. We have demonstrated that while
using approximate planning reduces the time required by
model-based methods, they do not reach real-time perfor-
mance without our parallel architecture. While agents using
RTMBA do not learn as much as the sequential methods per
action due to the limited time between actions, they still took
no more than 5 extra episodes to learn the task. In addition,
they were able to learn the task much faster in wall clock
time than the sequential algorithms and perform better when
run on multiple cores. Next, we look at how the algorithms
compare on a task that requires real-time actions, where the
world will not wait while the agent decides what to do.
B. Autonomous Vehicle
Our next task was to control an autonomous vehicle. Here,
actions must be taken in real-time, as the car cannot wait for
an action while a car is stopping in front of it or it approaches
a turn in the road. This task was the main motivator for the
creation of RTMBA. To the best of our knowledge, no prior
RL algorithm is able to learn in this domain in real time: with
no prior data-gathering phase for training a model. These
experiments take place on the Austin Robot Technology
autonomous vehicle [12], and on its simulation in ROS
stage [13]. The vehicle is an Isuzu VehiCross (Figure 7) that
Fig. 7: The autonomous vehicle operated by Austin Robot Tech-
nology and The University of Texas at Austin.
has been upgraded to run autonomously by adding shift-by-
wire, steering, and braking actuators to the vehicle.
Our experiments were to learn to drive the vehicle at
a desired velocity by controlling the pedals. For learning
this task, the RL agent’s state was the desired velocity of
the vehicle, the current velocity, and the current position
of the brake and accelerator pedals. Desired velocity was
discretized into 0.5 m/s increments, current velocity into
0.1 m/s increments, and the pedal positions into tenths of
maximum position. The agent’s reward at each step was −10
times the error in velocity in m/s. Each episode was run at 20
Hz (the frequency that the vehicle receives new sensations)
for 10 seconds. The agent had 5 actions: one did nothing
(no-op), two increased or decreased the brake position by
0.1 while setting the accelerator to 0, and two increased or
decreased the accelerator position by 0.1 while setting the
brake position to 0.
The autonomous vehicle software uses ROS [13] as the
underlying middleware. We created an RL Interface node
that wraps sensor values into states, translates actions into
actuator commands, and generates reward. This node uses a
standard set of messages to communicate with the learning
algorithm2, similar to the messages used by RL-GLUE [14].
At each time step, it computes the current state and reward
and publishes them as a message to the RL agent. The
RL agent can then process this information and publish an
action message, which the interface will convert into actuator
commands. Whereas the RL agents using RTMBA respond
with an action message immediately after receiving the state
and reward message, the sequential methods may have a
long delay to complete model updates and planning before
sending back an action message. In this case, the vehicle
continues with all the actuators in their current positions until
it receives a new action message.
We ran the ﬁrst experiment in the ROS stage simulation
with the vehicle starting at 2 m/s with a target velocity of 7
m/s. Figure 8 shows the average rewards per episode for this
task. Again the model-free methods are not able to learn
the task within the given number of episodes. As before,
2These messages are deﬁned at: http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl_msgs

-20000
-15000
-10000
-5000
 0
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
Average Reward
Episode Number
Simulated Vehicle Velocity Control from 2 to 7 m/s
Q-Learning
Dyna
RTMBA
Sequential VI
Sequential MCTS
Fig. 8: Average rewards of the algorithms controlling the au-
tonomous vehicle in simulation from 2 to 7 m/s. Results are
averaged over a 4 episode sliding window.
-7000
-6000
-5000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
 0
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 1400
Average Reward
Episode Number
Simulated Vehicle Control between Random Velocities
Learned Policy
PID Controller
Fig. 9: Average rewards of the algorithms controlling the au-
tonomous vehicle in simulation from between random velocities.
Results are averaged over a 50 episode sliding window.
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 5
 5.5
 6
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
Velocity (m/s)
Time (s)
Autonomous Vehicle Learning Trials
Episode 17
Episode 10
Episode 1
Episode 0
Target Velocity
Fig. 10: Control proﬁles of learning trials performed on the physical
vehicle.
planning approximately with MCTS is better than perform-
ing exact planning, but using RTMBA is better than either.
The varying time taken between actions by the sequential
methods results in a more difﬁcult learning problem, as the
vehicle will have accelerated/decelerated by varying amounts
between each action. In only a few minutes, RTMBA learns
to quickly accelerate to and maintain a velocity of 7 m/s.
Next, we evaluated RTMBA on the full velocity control
problem, with starting and target velocities selected randomly
from between 0 and 11 m/s. Figure 9 shows the reward
accrued by the RL agent on each episode in the simulator
while learning this task. For comparison, we show the
reward that would be received by the PID controller that
was previously used for controlling the car’s velocity. The
previous controller was hand-tuned for performance on the
actual car. The learned controller received more reward than
the PID controller after episode 350, which equates to about
1 hour of driving. It was signiﬁcantly better than the PID
controller (p < 0.005) after episode 750.
After testing in simulation, we ran learning experiments in
real-time on the physical vehicle, learning to drive at 5 m/s
from a start of 2 m/s. The velocity curves for a few of the 20
episodes are shown in Figure 10. Similar to the simulation
results for 2 to 7 m/s, the algorithm learned quickly and
was able to accurately track the velocity after 18 episodes (3
minutes of driving).
V. RELATED WORK
Batch methods such as experience replay [15], ﬁtted Q-
iteration [16], and LSPI [17] improve the sample efﬁciency of
model-free methods by saving experiences and re-using them
in periodic batch updates. However, these methods typically
run one policy for a number of episodes, stop to perform
their batch update, and then repeat. Our architecture will
also update the model with batches of experience at a time
when the agent is acting faster than it can update the model.
However, RTMBA continues taking actions in real-time even
while these updates are occurring.
DYNA [6] takes a similar approach to these methods,
performing small batch updates between each action. The
DYNA-2 framework [7] extends DYNA to use UCT as its
planning algorithm, combined with permanent and transient
memories using linear function approximation. This im-
proves the planning performance of the algorithm, but the
sample efﬁciency of these methods still does not meet the
requirements for on-line learning laid out in the introduction.
Deisenroth and Rasmussen [5] develop a sample efﬁcient
model-based algorithm that uses Gaussian Process regression
to compute the model and the policy. It runs in batches, col-
lecting experiences with the current policy before stopping
to update its model and plan. The algorithm learns to control
a physical cart-pole device with few samples, but pauses for
10 minutes of computation after every 2.5 seconds of action.
RTMBA similarly does batch-type updates to its model, but
its parallel architecture allows it to act continually in the
domain while performing these updates.

In summary, while there is related work on making model-
free methods more sample-efﬁcient and making model-based
methods more reactive, they all have drawbacks. They either
have long pauses in learning to perform batch updates, or
require complete model update or planning steps between
actions. None of these methods accomplish both goals of
being sample efﬁcient and acting continually in real-time,
while RTMBA accomplishes both.
VI. CONCLUSION
For RL to be practical for continual, on-line learning on
a broad range of robotic tasks, it must both (1) be sample-
efﬁcient and (2) learn while taking actions continually in
real-time. This paper introduces a novel parallel architecture
for model-based RL that is the ﬁrst to enable an agent to
act in real-time while maintaining the sample efﬁciency of
model-based RL. It uses sample-based approximate planning
and performs model learning and planning in parallel threads,
while a third thread returns actions at a rate dictated by
the task. In addition, RTMBA enables RL algorithms to take
advantage of the multi-core processors available on many
robotic platforms. Our experiments, in simulation and on a
real robot, demonstrate that this architecture is necessary for
learning on robots that require fast real-time actions. Our
ongoing research agenda includes testing RTMBA on other
robotic platforms, as well as testing other model learning
and MCTS planning algorithms within the framework.
CODE
Source
code
for
the
real-time
architecture,
algorithms,
and
experiments
described
in
this
paper
are available as part of a ROS repository available at:
http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl-texplore-ros-pkg
The
architecture
and
the
TEXPLORE
algorithm
used
for
model
learning
are
available
in
that
repository
in
the
RL AGENT
package
available
at:
http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl_agent
In
addition,
the
mountain
car
task
and
a
simpliﬁed
version
of
the autonomous vehicle velocity control task are also
available
in
the
repository
in
the
RL ENV
package
available
at:
http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl_env
Finally, the deﬁnitions of the ROS messages used to
communicate between agent and environment are available
in the repository in the RL MSGS package available at:
http://www.ros.org/wiki/rl_msgs
The experimental results presented in this paper can
be reproduced easily. For example, to run
TEXPLORE
controlling the simulated vehicle from 2 to 7 m/s, with
the
RL EXPERIMENT
package
installed,
type:
rosrun
rl experiment experiment --agent texplore
--env car2to7 --actrate 20
