A Preliminary Approach for Learning Relational Policies for the Management of
Critically Ill Children
Michael A. Skinner,1,2 Lakshmi Raman, 2 Neel Shah, 2 Abdelaziz Farhat, 2Sriraam Natarajan, 1
1University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas TX
2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas TX
Abstract
The increased use of electronic health records has made pos-
sible the automated extraction of medical policies from pa-
tient records to aid in the development of clinical decision
support systems. We adapted a boosted Statistical Relational
Learning (SRL) framework to learn probabilistic rules from
clinical hospital records for the management of physiologic
parameters of children with severe cardiac or respiratory fail-
ure who were managed with extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation. In this preliminary study, the results were promis-
ing. In particular, the algorithm returned logic rules for med-
ical actions that are consistent with medical reasoning.
Introduction
The ability to automatically learn physician actions from
electronic health records (EHR) could contribute to im-
proved health care in a number of ways. For example, we
could automatically discover optimal policies 1 for manag-
ing particular diseases. Moreover, an optimal policy, once
discovered, could be compared to a patient’s actual clinical
course; if there is a deviation, physicians could be provided
with suggestions for care. Finally, the ability to extract med-
ical polices from EHRs would enable predictions of patient
prognosis and outcomes.
In this work-in-progress, we investigate use of a boosted
SRL framework to elicit weighted ﬁrst-order logic clauses
mapping the values of a set of physiologic parameters to
physician actions in critically ill patients with respiratory or
cardiac failure. We extracted the information from clinical
trajectories documented in the EHR. The goal of this work
is to explore the use of such frameworks in this challenging
medical task. 2
The clinical challenge – discovering a medical policy
Unwanted variation in medical care, recognized for over
forty years, remains a challenge to health care providers
in nearly every specialty (Westert et al. 2018; Karimi et
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1We follow the conventional reinforcement learning deﬁnition
of a policy as a mapping from states to actions
2This work was presented in part at the 2019 Probabilistic Logic
Programming Workshop, Las Cruces NM.
al. 2017; Lilot et al. 2015). Differences in care are typi-
cally observed between geographic regions, and the partic-
ular practice in an area often correlates with available re-
sources. For example in one study, investigators found a high
correlation between the availability of cardiac catheteriza-
tion within a locality and use of angioplasty for managing
cardiac disease (Brownlee 2010). It is surprising that these
challenges persist, even as there has been a multiplication
of published expert guideline documents for many medi-
cal conditions whose recommendations are based on well-
performed prospective clinical trials (Weisz et al. 2007).
To decrease variability of care, and to converge medical
management around policies conforming to expert guide-
lines, clinical decision support systems (CDS) have been
devised to render advice to clinicians as they care for pa-
tients (Osheroff et al. 2007). Such systems were initially
very limited, highly dependent on manual curation, and their
scope was limited to a very few medical conditions (Middle-
ton, Sittig, and Wright 2016). However, the increased use of
EHRs has stimulated the development of automated CDS
systems holding promise for providing advice to health care
providers in real time.
Required in an automated CDS system is the ability to
monitor some aspects of the patient’s clinical state, as well as
the physician actions (Middleton, Sittig, and Wright 2016).
Moreover, the system must possess some notion of optimal
care; when clinicians deviate from the preferred manage-
ment, or if unexpected events occur warranting a change
in care, alerts or reminders are provided from the system.
Whereas early systems used hard-coded rules to encode clin-
icians’ knowledge about the optimal policy, there is growing
interest in automatically extracting optimal care patterns by
mining the EHR (Ohno-Machado 2016).
Reinforcement learning (RL) is the most commonly re-
ported technique to extract clinical policies from medical
records (Komorowski et al. 2018; Raghu et al. 2017). Some-
what surprisingly, to our knowledge, other policy learning
schemes such as imitation learning have not been reported in
the medical realm. Most of the reported RL models use deep
neural networks, requiring many patient records for training
and a propositionalization/embedding technique that could
lead to loss of information. Moreover, these models may be
arXiv:2001.04432v1  [cs.AI]  13 Jan 2020

difﬁcult to interpret, complicating the identiﬁcation of best
medical actions for a given patient state.
A key issue when learning medical policies is that it
is non-trivial to construct a vector-based representation for
EHR information. There can be multiple measurements per-
formed over varying time-scales, multiple treatments of dif-
ferent conditions at the same time-step and differing num-
bers of observations per subject. Thus, if standard machine
learning methods are used to represent these complicated
data, critical information may be lost.
A more natural representation that allows for modeling
relational medical data is to use ﬁrst-order logic. Hence,
motivated by the fact that physicians generally make treat-
ment decisions based on physical, laboratory and radiologic
ﬁndings in a systematic manner through a series of (of-
ten implicit) ”if-then” decisions, we investigated the use-
fulness of learning medical polices as sets of probabilis-
tic clauses learned in a statistical relational learning frame-
work (De Raedt and Kersting 2008; Raedt et al. 2016).
Problem Description - ECMO patients
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a method
of supporting patients with severe respiratory or cardiac fail-
ure. The technique requires placement of large cannulas in
the neck or in the heart, and externally circulating the pa-
tient’s blood through a system that oxygenates the blood
and removes carbon dioxide. Reserved for the most critically
ill of patients, mortality can be very high and even among
survivors there are frequent treatment complications (Lin
2017).
This study used de-identiﬁed medical data abstracted
from EHRs for 140 children treated at the Children’s Med-
ical Center of Dallas who survived their period of ECMO.
The study was performed in accordance with an exemp-
tion granted by the University of Texas Southwestern Insti-
tutional Review Board (IRB). The time on ECMO ranged
from 6 to 985 hours, averaging 174 hours. For each hour
of ECMO bypass, and for from 1 to 24 hours prior to can-
nulation (15 hours, on average), 40 physiologic and labo-
ratory parameters were recorded. Not every parameter was
measured each hour; for example, those exclusively associ-
ated with ongoing bypass (such as pump ﬂow) were only
recorded while the child was actually undergoing ECMO
support.
We chose seven physiologic parameters thought to be the
most useful for managing the respiratory and hemodynamic
status of patients. These are tabulated, with the units of mea-
surement, in Table 1. Parameter values were each discretized
into ﬁve bins; the demarcations were based on meaning-
ful physiologic categories. Thus, for example, the range of
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) values was 50,60,70,80,80.1
(mm Hg.). If the MAP ≤50, then the bin was labeled
50, if MAP > 80, then the assigned bin was 80.1, and if
50 < MAP ≤60, the bin assignment was 60, and so forth.
Of course, the bin values and/or units are different for each
parameter.
Table 1: Study parameters.
Parameter
Units
Mean arterial pressure
mm Hg.
Heart rate
beats/min
Respiratory rate
breaths/min
pH
none
pO2
mm Hg.
Pressure volume sensor
cm H2O
Measured ﬂow
ml/kg-min
Table 2: Policy actions.
Action
Increase mean arterial pressure
Increase/decrease respiratory rate
Decrease heart rate
Increase/decrease pH
Increase/decease pO2
Increase/decrease pressure volume sensor
Increase/decrease measured ﬂow
Statistical relational logic models for learning
medical policies in ECMO patients
Formally, given EHR data from a set of patients and the set
of actions listed in Table 2, we seek to learn (parameterized)
policies for specifying the appropriate medical actions to
alter physiologic parameters. In other words, our aim is to
learn from the data when physicians should initiate therapy
to alter the parameters listed in Table 1.
We are inspired by prior work on learning policies using
SRL models (Natarajan et al. 2011) where (parameterized
weighted logical) clauses were learned from observed trajec-
tories. Broadly known as ”imitation learning”, the key idea
is to learn a distribution over actions such that the policies
are as close to the observed user policy as possible. This
particular setting is quite useful in cases where the reward
function is difﬁcult to specify in advance. Imitation learning
algorithms directly optimize the learned policy from trajec-
tories instead of the expected cumulative discounted reward
(as in reinforcement learning); in many cases this is easier,
since when we have observed trajectories, we can avoid ex-
ploration. We consider learning from observations and learn
a relational policy from data.
Our SRL learning method is based on learning a set of
logical regression (TILDE) trees (Blockeel and De Raedt
1998) in a stage-wise manner. This learning method
uses an underlying Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
learner (Muggleton 1992) to induce a set of logical clauses
and then ﬁts the weights (parameters) of these clauses. We
employ the machinery of gradient-boosting (Natarajan et al.
2015) where differences between observed and predicted
probabilities are computed as gradients for the training ex-
amples and TILDE trees are learned at each step to ﬁt
these gradients. For more details, we refer to our previous
work (Natarajan et al. 2015).
Recall that an ILP algorithm accepts a set of facts, sets
of positive and negative examples of the concepts to learn,

returning logic programs deﬁning the learned concepts. To
learn the concepts listed in Table 2, we include as facts the
values of each parameter for each subject for each hour;
for instance, ”map(subj1,100,70)” represents that subject1
at time step 100 hours had a mean arterial blood pressure
between 60-70 mmHg. As noted earlier, not every param-
eter was measured each hour. The examples were derived
from these facts. If on the consideration of two consecutive
measurements, there was a signiﬁcant change in the param-
eter value (deﬁned as a change of at least two bins in the
discretized values), then we generated a positive example.
For example, if in addition to the fact listed above, there was
”map(subj1,101,80.1)”, indicating a signiﬁcant increase in
blood pressure after hour 100, the positive example ”map-
incr(subj1,100)” would be generated. Otherwise, we synthe-
sized a (false) negative example.
Results
In this preliminary experiment, we set the parameters of the
boosted learning algorithm so that each concept was approx-
imated by a set of 20 relational regression trees. In these
trees, each node consists of a logic clause whose possible
truth values are represented by the edges. Leaves of the
tree are labelled with the weight (and the value subjected to
the sigmoid function in parentheses, where sigmoid(x) =
1/1 + e−x) corresponding to logic rules constructed by fol-
lowing from the root to the leaf. A representative probabilis-
tic logic tree is presented in Figure 1.
We extracted weighted ﬁrst-order logic rules from this
tree; the generated clauses are listed in Table 3.
Owing to the fact that a probabilistic target concept is rep-
resented by a sum of the 20 weighted trees, it is difﬁcult to
directly interpret the rules generated by our model. How-
ever, by comparing some of the weighted rules within a tree,
we can elicit ﬁndings consistent with known clinical prac-
tice. When we look at Rule 1, we see that the weight of the
action to increase the mean arterial blood pressure (map) is
0.112 when the map is not between 60-70 mm hg. (which is
roughly the normal range). However, comparing to Rule 2,
we see that the weight increases to 0.532 when the mean ar-
terial pressure (map) is in the normal range, and if the pump
ﬂow is relatively low (20-50 ml/kg-min), and when the pump
preload pressure is relatively high (> 10 cm H2O). The in-
creased weight on this clause, compared to Rule 1, suggests
that in circumstances where the map is normal, but if the
pump ﬂow is low, physicians may elect to initiate treatment
to raise the blood pressure. This is a reasonable treatment
maneuver.
We see another example when comparing Rules 5 and 6.
The difference between these rules is in the conjunction of
the last two clauses:
heart rate(A, B, > 130) ∧
[∃C | B = C + 1 ∧resp ratedecr(A, C)]
This clause is present in Rule 5 but negated in Rule 6. The
markedly elevated heart rate (> 130 beats/minute) and a
recent decrease in respiratory rate are clinical signs of dis-
ease severity. The higher weight on Rule 5 (when these ﬁnd-
ings are present) indicates that the presence of these ﬁndings
will result in a higher probability of the physician moving to
increase the map, which is clinically very reasonable.
As we add clauses to the rules or negate them, moving
down the tree, it is generally true that the changing weights
make clinical sense. That is, a physician is able to explain
why the rule was created. However, it is also appears that
some clauses seem peripheral to the task of deciding whether
to increase the arterial pressure, and would not necessarily
be used in the clinical setting. Without question, our auto-
matic system is able to generate longer, more complicated
probabilistic logic rules and use more (perhaps obscure,
and perhaps important) clinical facts than would a human.
Whether such rules will be clinically relevant and useful in
a functioning clinical decision support system is a question
requiring further research.
Discussion
We used a statistical relational logic framework to elicit
policies for medical management of children undergoing
ECMO. Our preliminary results provide some hope that the
method can be used to provide interpretable strategies to
physicians managing complicated patients that might be use-
ful in automatic clinical decision support systems. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study using EHR
data to learn probabilistic rules governing the management
of patients in the hospital. It can be observed from the rules
presented that we include existential variables (observations
recognized previously); simple encodings into a proposi-
tional framework will not sufﬁce for such problems. In-
stead, a relational framework is necessary. Also, note the
weights/regression values on the leaves, demonstrating the
need for a “soft” framework and supports our choice of SRL
as a natural choice for such modeling tasks.
There are at least a few shortcomings to our study from
a clinical perspective. First, it must be acknowledged that
we did not have direct access to the physician actions, and
rather derived them from the measured physiologic param-
eters. This complicates our analysis, owing to the fact that
we are unable to distinguish when altered physiologic ﬁnd-
ings are related to medical care or to the course of the un-
derlying disease. It is reasonable to surmise that when we
have available the actual physician orders, we will have a
cleaner, less noisy, set of data, perhaps allowing greater suc-
cess in eliciting the medical policies. A second shortcom-
ing is that in this study we selected only a small subset of
the recorded parameters- ones thought to be most physi-
ologically signiﬁcant in the medical decision-making pro-
cess. We might obtain better results if we broaden the set
of parameters. Moreover, in our SRL experiment, we dis-
covered policies encoded in multiple regression trees; with-
out question, one could question whether the trees learned
in the boosting algorithm are readily interpretable to physi-
cians managing patients. This is a broader issue; if weighted
logic models such as MLNs/PSL etc., are interepretable,
then so are these boosted rules. However, we acknowledge
that weighted logic may not be as interpretable to domain
experts, and there is a need to explore models that are more
explainable and interpretable.

Table 3: Weighted ﬁrst-order logic rules for mean arterial pressure increase generated from a representative boosted tree.
Variable A represents the subject. Variables B and C represent the time.
No.
Wt.
Logic rule
1
0.112
mapincr(A, B) ⇐¬map(A, B, 60 −70)
2
0.532
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)
3
0.095
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
4
0.651
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)
∧resp rateincr(A, B)
5
0.821
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)
∧¬resp rateincr(A, B)∧heart rate(A, B, > 130)
∧[∃C | B = C + 1 ∧resp ratedecr(A, C)]
6
0.069
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)
∧¬resp rateincr(A, B)∧¬[heart rate(A, B, > 130)
∧[∃C | B = C + 1 ∧resp ratedecr(A, C)]]
7
-0.074
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)]
∧resp rate(A, B, > 40)∧heart rate(A, B, > 130)
8
0.072
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)]
∧¬[resp rate(A, B, > 40)∧heart rate(A, B, > 130)]
∧resp rate(A, B, 20 −30)∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, 0 −10)
9
0.417
mapincr(A, B) ⇐map(A, B, 60 −70) ∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 20 −50)
∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, > 10)] ∧¬measured flow(A, B, 100 −150)
∧¬[measured flow(A, B, 50 −100) ∧resp rate(A, B, ≤15)]
∧¬[resp rate(A, B, > 40)∧heart rate(A, B, > 130)]
∧¬[resp rate(A, B, 20 −30)∧pressure volume sensor(A, B, 0 −10)]

Figure 1: Representative probabilistic logic tree for the action to increase mean arterial pressure (map incr). The
prevrrdecr(A,B) refers to a decrease in the respiratory rate in the previous hour, expressed by the logic rule
∃C | B = C + 1 ∧resp ratedecr(A, C).
Finally, our technique may provide new insight into which
physician actions contribute to variation in clinical outcome
for children undergoing ECMO support. For example, the
most common risks of ECMO include bleeding (related to
the necessary anticoagulation of the patient) and neurologic
injury- either an intracranial hemorrhage or an ischemic
event. What is not known is whether neurologic injury risk
can be altered by different management schemes. We sur-
mise that when we evaluate policies for patients partitioned
by outcome class (that is, with or without neurologic event),
aspects of the policies may be elicited that increase com-
plication risk. We leave this to future work. But if such a
ﬁnding were conﬁrmed in a clinical study, ECMO outcomes
could be improved.
