Bayesian Inference in Monte-Carlo Tree Search
Gerald Tesauro, VT Rajan, and Richard Segal
IBM TJ Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
Abstract
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) meth-
ods are drawing great interest after yield-
ing breakthrough results in computer Go.
This paper proposes a Bayesian approach
to MCTS that is inspired by distribution-
free approaches such as UCT [13], yet sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀers in important respects. The
Bayesian framework allows potentially much
more accurate (Bayes-optimal) estimation of
node values and node uncertainties from a
limited number of simulation trials. We fur-
ther propose propagating inference in the
tree via fast analytic Gaussian approxima-
tion methods: this can make the overhead
of Bayesian inference manageable in domains
such as Go, while preserving high accuracy of
expected-value estimates. We ﬁnd substan-
tial empirical outperformance of UCT in an
idealized bandit-tree test environment, where
we can obtain valuable insights by compar-
ing with known ground truth. Additionally
we rigorously prove on-policy and oﬀ-policy
convergence of the proposed methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods provide a
means of on-the-ﬂy planning in complex sequential de-
cision problems. MCTS couples traditional tree search
techniques with node evaluations that are based on
stochastic simulations, i.e., “playouts.”
The use of
MCTS has led to spectacular results in the domain of
computer Go: within a few years, the best programs
have gone from weak intermediate play to grandmas-
ter level in 9 × 9 Go, and expert level in 19 × 19
Go. MCTS also soundly defeated traditional alpha-
beta search programming in the recent 2008 General
Game-Playing competition held at AAAI [10]. As a
result, there is now intense interest in further develop-
ment of MCTS methods, and using them in numerous
other planning and gaming applications [6, 14, 16].
MCTS algorithms were ﬁrst developed speciﬁcally for
computer Go [4, 9]. More recently, a number of general
and theoretically principled algorithms have been de-
veloped, including UCT [13], BAST [8] and HOO [5].
These algorithms build upon seminal work on the
UCB1 bandit sampling algorithm [2], and focus on pro-
viding strong worst-case distribution-free convergence
guarantees and bounds on the cumulative regret. They
also have the further merit of very low computational
complexity. The great results obtained using UCT in
the French program MoGo [11] and several other Go
programs are probably most reponsible for the current
excitement about MCTS methods.
In contrast to the above-mentioned distribution-free
algorithms, we propose in this paper a fundamentally
diﬀerent approach based on Bayesian inference. The
basic premise of our work is that, in practical ap-
plications of MCTS to MDPs or games, developers
will usually know detailed characteristics of the re-
ward distributions in the domain. In fact, we note that
current applications of MCTS envision trials that are
performed exclusively in simulation; an accurate re-
ward model is thus a prerequisite to performing faith-
ful simulated MCTS trials.
Algorithms making use
of such reward models could potentially outperform
distribution-free methods that assume no knowledge
of the reward distributions.
In our proposed Bayesian MCTS approach, stochastic
trial results at leaf nodes are combined with prior re-
ward information to yield posterior distributions; these
then propagate upward according to the appropriate
inference model to determine interior node distribu-
tions. In MDPs a parent’s distribution is obtained by
applying a distributional MAX operator to its child
node distributions (as we detail in section 3), while in
two-player zero-sum games, parent nodes use MAX or
MIN operators according to odd/even node depths. If
the leaf node priors and inference models are correct,

this methodology can enable Bayes-optimal estimation
of interior node values. As we show in section 5, such
estimates can be much more accurate for a limited
number of trials than the analogous UCT estimates,
which are based on a simple average-value backup. As
noted in [9], average-value estimates are “very ineﬃ-
cient,” and often signiﬁcantly underestimate the true
expected-max value of parent nodes. This problem be-
comes especially pronounced in trees with non-uniform
tree width, and we ﬁnd that Bayesian MCTS can very
substantially outperform UCT (by more than an order
of magnitude) in this case.
We do recognize that Bayesian inference entails greater
computational cost than existing MCTS methods, and
therefore does not automatically provide a net win
in terms of quality of solution for a given amount
of simulation CPU time. However, as we discuss in
section 4.1, recent advances in fast analytic Gaus-
sian approximation of MIN/MAX distributions reduce
Bayesian MCTS compute times to within an order
of magnitude of UCT. This suggests that Bayesian
MCTS can be eﬀective in applications where the cost
of executing the simulation steps greatly exceeds the
time needed to compute the MCTS sampling decisions.
There are many examples of such compute-intensive
simulation domains, e.g., in routing and scheduling in
large-scale networks, drug design, and computational
physics.
The game of Go also has this property –
MCTS trials in 19 × 19 Go typically descend the tree
via bandit sampling for ∼O(10) steps to reach a leaf
node, which is then evaluated by executing a few hun-
dred steps of a stochastic “playout policy” until a ter-
minal state is reached.
In addition, we expect that
further signiﬁcant speedups can be obtained by de-
veloping incremental versions of these approximation
methods; this is a topic of our ongoing and future work.
A ﬁnal potential advantage of Bayesian MCTS is that
it can allow more robust convergence under a wide
range of sampling policies. The convergence of UCT
relies on focusing the vast majority of trials on the
optimal path. By contrast, it is intuitively clear that
Bayesian MCTS will converge to correct minimax val-
ues even with uniform random sampling. In section 3.1
we provide sketches of rigorous proofs of both on-
policy and oﬀ-policy convergence of our Bayesian ver-
sion of UCT. We expect that oﬀ-policy convergence
will enable more robust convergence in massively par-
allel implementations of MCTS where it would be dif-
ﬁcult to achieve UCB1’s focusing eﬀect.
While probabilistic inference has been previously stud-
ied in game-tree contexts [15, 3], ours is the ﬁrst study
to treat uncertainties arising from stochastic sampling.
Moreover, despite the title of [3], we believe our work
is the ﬁrst truly “Bayesian” approach to minimax trees
in the strict sense of combining prior distributions with
sample evidence to compute posterior distributions.
2
UCB/UCT BACKGROUND
Algorithm UCB1 [2] elegantly solves the exploration-
exploitation dilemma in the multi-armed bandit prob-
lem. It maintains counts {ni} of the number of trials
of each arm, along with the average rewards {¯ri} ob-
tained in those trials, where rewards are scaled to lie
in [0, 1]. It then computes at each time step an upper
conﬁdence bound Bi for each arm i according to:
Bi = ¯ri +
p
2 ln N/ni
(1)
where N = P ni is the total trials of all arms. The
arm with maximum bound Bi is then selected for the
next trial. (Any nodes with ni = 0 are considered to
have an inﬁnite bound and thus would be preferred
to nodes that have already been tried at least once.)
UCB1 is proven to converge to selecting the optimal
arm with probability 1 as N →∞, while continuing
to sample inferior arms at a logarithmic rate. Also, its
cumulative regret achieves optimal scaling ∼ln N.
UCT [13] employs UCB1 in the context of multi-stage
decision problems, where a generative model is avail-
able to simulate the problem.
The algorithm is in-
tended to apply to a variety of problems, including
games with strict tree structures, as well as more
general MDPs allowing trajectories containing loops.
Consequently, [13] does not give a precise speciﬁcation
regarding state space representation, or how nodes are
added to the tree/state space over time.
The only
characteristics that are precisely speciﬁed are: (1) a
number of simulated trials are launched from a com-
mon start state/node, and average reward statistics
are maintained for all states/nodes in the representa-
tion that are encountered during the trials; (2) the de-
cision at every step is made by maximizing the UCB1
bound formula of equation 1.
A common implementation of UCT in two-player
games such as Go makes use of the UCB1 policy plus
an additional “playout policy.”
Trials begin at the
root node, and descend through the tree according to
UCB1, until a node is encountered where there are
some child moves not yet represented in the tree nodes.
At that point, a new a leaf node is created, and play
continues using the playout policy until a terminal
game state is reached.
The trial result is added to
the average reward statistics for every tree node in the
path of the trial, and the next trial starts again at the
root node. Due to the selective eﬀect of UCB1, trials
gradually focus on the minimax optimal line of play,
with the result that the average reward values eventu-
ally converge to the correct game-theoretic values.

We note that the exploration term in UCB1 is anal-
ogous to algorithms such as Interval Estimation [12]
which are explicitly based on estimating the uncer-
tainty in the value of a given state. By that analogy,
the 1/√ni factor in UCB1 exploration may be viewed
as a crude (under)estimate of the uncertainty in a UCT
node value. A much more informed uncertainty esti-
mate could be obtained based on the number of child
nodes, and their associated values and uncertainties.
3
BAYESIAN MCTS FORMALISM
We now present our Bayesian reformulation of MCTS,
comprising mechanisms for computing leaf node poste-
rior distributions, propagating inference up the tree to
compute interior node distributions, and then comput-
ing distribution-based upper conﬁdence estimates as a
basis for choosing where to sample next. Our formal
description here is limited to the case of uncorrelated
payoﬀs at leaf nodes, although the Gaussian approxi-
mation framework of section 4.1 does permit usage of
general correlation matrices ρij between pairs of sib-
ling node distributions.
We further assume a static
set of leaf nodes where prior/posterior calculations are
performed. We additionally assume a strict tree struc-
ture with no loops or duplicate nodes, as our initial
formulation does not include loopy belief propagation.
Each node i in the tree maintains a probability dis-
tribution Pi(x) over its true expected reward value.
Inference of interior node probability distributions be-
gins at the leaves and propagates up to the root node.
Before any trials have been performed, leaf nodes are
initialized to conjugate prior distributions that are ap-
propriate to the leaf node reward distributions. For
example, for 0/1 payoﬀs at the leaf nodes, we may use
beta function priors xα−1(1 −x)β−1/B(α, β) where α
and β are eﬀectively the number of prior wins and
losses. When trials at leaf nodes are performed, the
results are combined with priors in the standard way
to compute posterior distributions. Again in the 0/1
case, after W sample wins and L sample losses, we
can obtain the posterior by adding W to α and L to
β in the above expression. To propagate posteriors up
the tree, we represent them either numerically, or by a
Gaussian with matching mean and standard deviation,
as detailed in section 4.1.
The distributions of leaf nodes propagate upward to
parent, grandparent, etc., nodes. Each interior node
computes an extremum distribution over its child node
distributions, depending on its MAX or MIN type.
The extremum distribution of a set of independent ran-
dom variables {x1, x2, . . . , xK} is a well-known concept
in statistics. The MAX distribution is given by
Pmax(X) =
X
i
Pi(X)
Y
j̸=i
Cj(X)
(2)
where Cj
is the CDF of Pj.
A more conve-
nient calculation is to ﬁrst compute the parent CDF
Cmax(X) =
R
Pmax(X)dX as the product of child
CDFs:
Cmax(X) = Q
i Ci(X) and then diﬀerenti-
ate Cmax to obtain Pmax. (For MIN nodes we com-
pute Q
i(1 −Ci(X)) = 1 −Cmin(X).)
The parent
MAX/MIN distributions are computed either by sim-
ple numeric integration, or by analytic Gaussian ap-
proximation as described below.
Having computed distributions for the interior nodes,
we now consider distributional analogs of existing
distribution-free sampling formulae.
For our ini-
tial studies we have focused speciﬁcally on Bayesian
analogs of UCT, due to its simplicity and practical suc-
cess in applications such as Go. (However, Bayesian
analogs of BAST etc. can also be easily devised.) We
propose two modiﬁed versions of UCB1 (the sampling
formula in UCT) to descend the tree and choose where
to sample next. The ﬁrst version (Bayes-UCT1) sim-
ply replaces the average reward ¯ri of child node i by
µi, the mean of Pi:
Bayes-UCT1: maximize Bi = µi +
p
2 ln N/ni
(3)
We strongly believe that equation 3 constitutes a strict
improvement over UCT if the independence assump-
tion and leaf node priors are correct, since the pos-
terior mean µi provides a more accurate estimator of
true node value than the average reward ¯ri.
Our second sampling formula (Bayes-UCT2) addition-
ally replaces the 1/√ni factor in the exploration term
by σi, the square root of the variance of Pi:
Bayes-UCT2: maximize Bi = µi +
√
2 ln Nσi
(4)
Equation 4 is motivated by the central limit theorem
result σ2
i ∼1/ni in the simple bandit case, and by
the compelling intuitive notion from Interval Estima-
tion that sampling according to expected value plus
expected uncertainty provides eﬀective tradeoﬀof ex-
ploration vs.
exploitation.
Other uncertainty mea-
sures such as the credible interval may be even more
eﬀective, but using σ provides the simplest approach
to begin investigations of uncertainty-based sampling
using distributional information. We provide sketches
of rigorous convergence proof for equation 4 as well as
more general oﬀ-policy convergence below.
3.1
CONVERGENCE PROOFS
We provide only proof sketches here; full proofs will
be presented elsewhere.
Lemma 1: Consider a bandit arm leaf node which gen-
erates 0/1 payoﬀs at a true win rate of µ∗such that
0 < µ∗< 1.
Assume a prior probability distribu-
tion Pprior(p) which is strictly positive on (0, 1) and

which has bounded derivatives. Then as the number
of samples n →∞, the posterior distribution Ppost(p)
converges to δ(p −µ∗) with probability 1.
Proof sketch: Write the posterior by Bayes’ theorem,
and diﬀerentiate log(Ppost) to show that it has a peak
at µ∗plus a correction term ∼O(1/√n). The second
derivative is −n/(µ∗(1 −µ∗)) + O(√n) so that the
posterior approaches a Gaussian with mean µ∗and
variance µ∗(1 −µ∗)/n as n →∞.
Theorem 1: (Oﬀ-policy convergence) Consider a ﬁxed
ﬁnite-sized bandit tree with binary reward leaf nodes
and priors as per Lemma 1.
Assume no two sib-
ling nodes have exactly identical minimax payoﬀrates.
Then for any sampling policy Π (e.g., uniform ran-
dom sampling) that samples all leaf nodes an un-
bounded number of times as the total number of sam-
ples N →∞, all interior node posterior distributions
converge with probability 1 to delta functions at the
minimax optimal values.
Proof Sketch: Show that if a parent’s child nodes all
converge to delta functions at correct minimax values,
then the parent’s distribution converges to the distri-
bution of the best child according to MIN or MAX,
due to ﬁnite separation of child values.
By induc-
tion from leaf node convergence of Lemma 1, all in-
terior nodes converge.
(This also applies under our
Gaussian MIN/MAX approximation framework of sec-
tion 4.1 since the approximation error vanishes as the
child variances →0.)
Theorem 2: (On-policy convergence) For the sampling
policy speciﬁed in equation 4, all interior nodes con-
verge with probability 1 to correct minimax optimal
point values.
Proof Sketch:
First show that ﬁnitely sampled leaf
nodes have ﬁnite non-vanishing variance, and then
show that a parent’s variance is non-vanishing if its
child node distributions have non-vanishing variance.
By induction, all ﬁnitely sampled interior nodes have
ﬁnite variance. Now suppose an interior node remains
unsampled while its parent and all of its siblings re-
ceive inﬁnite samples. In this case, the node’s explo-
ration term in equation 4 will grow without bound,
while the bounds of the siblings all converge to their
true means; hence the node must eventually receive
more samples. By induction, all leaf nodes receive un-
bounded samples, so that Theorem 1 applies. (This
also applies under Gaussian approximation since the
approximated variance is strictly positive given non-
vanishing child distribution variances.)
4
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
4.1
GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION
Our primary approach to representing probability dis-
tributions is to approximate them with Gaussians, us-
ing recent advances in fast analytic computation of
max/min of Gaussians to propagate inference in the
tree. There are two potential major advantages of this
approach: it may run orders of magnitude faster than
numeric methods, plus it can also take correlations be-
tween Gaussians into account. Speciﬁcally, if a corre-
lation model ρij is available between K sibling nodes,
we can estimate the correlation between the max/min
distribution of any pair of siblings, and any third sib-
ling. While we do not make use of this property in our
test domain, it is likely to play an important role in
further development of Bayesian MCTS methods.
The potential disadvantage of Gaussian approximation
is that approximation errors could arise due to two
sources. First, the leaf node distributions may have
very few trials and may have certain priors (such as a
uniform prior) that are poorly approximated by Gaus-
sians. Secondly, it is known that the Gaussian family
is not closed under the max operation, and making
such an approximation may introduce further error.
We address this issue below. In the uncorrelated case,
the largest approximation errors occur when the input
Gaussians have very similar means but very diﬀerent
widths. Fortunately, bandit sampling algorithms act
to prevent this from happening (at least for the dom-
inant Gaussians contributing most to the max distri-
bution) as we explain later in section 5.2.
Closed-form analytic expressions for the mean µ and
variance σ2 of the maximum distribution of two Gaus-
sian random variables were ﬁrst calculated by Clarke
in [7]. Let µ1, µ2 denote means and σ1, σ2 denote the
standard deviations of two input Gaussians with corre-
lation coeﬃcient ρ. Expanding the moment generating
function yields the following expressions:
µ
=
µ1Φ(α) + µ2Φ(−α) + φ(α)σm
σ2
=
 µ2
1 + σ2
1

Φ(α) + (µ2
2 + σ2
2)Φ(−α) +
(µ1 + µ2)σmφ(α) −µ2
where σm = σ2
1 −2ρσ1σ2 + σ2
2, α = (µ1 −µ2)/σm, φ()
denotes a standard Gaussian PDF with zero mean and
unit variance, and Φ() denotes the CDF of φ().
We reduce the computation time by restructuring the
equations above to yield:
µ = µ2+σmF1(α); σ2 = σ2
2+(σ2
1 −σ2
2)Φ(α)+σ2
mF2(α)
where F1(α) = αΦ(α)+φ(α), and F2(α) = α2Φ(α)(1−
Φ(α)) + (1−2Φ(α))αφ(α) −φ(α)2. We implement 1-d

lookup tables for F1(), F2() and Φ(), thereby reducing
the computation of µ and σ2 to about a dozen ﬂoating
point operations.
Extending Clarke’s work, Sinha et al. [17] recently
studied the error of approximating max/min of a set of
K input Gaussians by iterative pairwise combination:
two of the input Gaussians are combined and approx-
imated by a Gaussian, which is then combined with a
third Gaussian, and so on, until all input Gaussians
have been combined. The error of the overall result
may depend signiﬁcantly on the order of combination.
Sinha et al. propose a stagewise minimum-error com-
bining scheme using a 3-d error lookup table which
estimates the error Eij of combining any input pair
(i, j) based on three independent quantities ρij, σi/σj
and αij as deﬁned above. At each stage, all pairwise
errors Eij are evaluated and the pair with minimum
error is combined.
We have implemented the above min-error combining
scheme by computing the errors of combining each of
the K choose 2 pairs and storing them in a heap. We
then combine the pair with minimum error, update
the combining errors, and iterate until done. This al-
gorithm was found in [17] to give favorable approxi-
mation errors, but takes O(K2logK) operations and
O(K2) space to store the heap. We have also imple-
mented a much simpler O(K) random-order combin-
ing scheme which appears to perform just as well as
min-error combining in our bandit-tree domain, while
running much faster. It appears that bandit-style sam-
pling may generally avoid the worst-case Gaussian ap-
proximation error scenarios, and we discuss evidence
for this in section 5.
We compare our Gaussian framework with an alter-
native numeric representation scheme in which distri-
butions are represented exactly (to within grid point
resolution) and inference propagates by numeric in-
tegration. Speciﬁcally, we use G = 1000 grid points
to represent PDFs, and we compute CDFs by nu-
meric integration using the trapezoid rule, with error
∼O(1/G2). This provides a reference point of essen-
tially exact inference for our Gaussian approximation
method, but is too slow to be practically feasible.
4.2
EMPIRICAL TESTBED
The testbed for our initial studies of Bayes-UCT is an
idealized bandit-tree simulator that constructs a min-
max tree of depth D starting from a root node, in
which the leaf nodes are ordinary bandit arms that
give binary 0/1 payoﬀs at ﬁxed probabilities {pi} of
arm i returning 1.
We assign independent random
values {pi} over the unit interval, so that the arms are
uncorrelated. We choose either uniform random val-
ues, or Gaussian distributed values with mean 0.5 and
standard deviation 0.1. This provides an interesting
test as we run Bayes-UCT using a uniform prior: in
the former case, the prior is correct, while in the lat-
ter case, the assumed prior diﬀers substantially from
the correct prior. (Note that the uniform prior can be
represented by a beta distribution with α = β = 1 and
can be easily combined with sample results to estimate
posterior beta distributions, as explained previously.)
Each interior node in the tree typically has a com-
mon width W, although we have also run experiments
where a node’s width is set by uniform random choice
between a minimum and maximum width. We assume
that the tree topology in the UCT and Bayes-UCT
searches is static, i.e., all tree nodes are already con-
tained in the UCT representation, having been added
either by sampling or by prior modeling, and no node
additions occur during the searches.
5
RESULTS
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
avg. decision error
numTrials
5x5 bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
avg. decision error
numTrials
15x15 bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
Figure 1: Average greedy decision error in 2-ply bandit
tree. (a) width W = 5. (b) W = 15.
Figure 1(a) compares UCT with our Bayes-UCT1 and
Bayes-UCT2 algorithms in a simple 2-ply minimax
bandit tree topology containing a root MAX node with
ﬁve MIN children, each of which has ﬁve children that
are simple bandit arms. We assigned uniform random
leaf node payoﬀrates so that the Bayes-UCT uniform
prior is correct. As a function of number of simula-
tor trials, we plot the average “greedy” decision error,
i.e., the true loss of the top-level move with highest
estimated mean value. The plot averages results over
3000 such bandit trees, with a single run performed for

each tree. We duplicate the 3000 random trees for each
algorithm, so that pairwise comparisons of algorithms
have much higher signiﬁcance than using independent
random trees for each algorithm. We see in ﬁgure 1(a)
that our Bayes-UCT1n and Bayes-UCT1g algorithms
(“n” denotes numeric and “g” denotes Gaussian repre-
sentation) initially perform slightly worse than UCT,
but achieve clearly lower errors after approximately 50
trials. The Bayes-UCT2 algorithms outperform their
Bayes-UCT1 counterparts, both initially and asymp-
totically, with Bayes-UCT2g achieving clearly the low-
est error among all algorithms.
Figure 1(a) conﬁrms our intuition that Bayes-UCT1
should outperform UCT by virtue of having more ac-
curate node value estimates. (However, we don’t have
a clear understanding of why Bayes-UCT1 appears
to underperform UCT initially.) It also conﬁrms the
expected improvement in Bayes-UCT2 from using a
more accurate estimate of node uncertainty in the ex-
ploration term. However, given the potential errrors
in Gaussian approximation, we were quite surprised
that the Gaussians methods outperform their numeric
counterparts! (Possible explanations are given below.)
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
avg. decision error
numTrials
5x5x5 bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
avg. decision error
numTrials
5x5x5x5 bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
Figure 2: Average greedy decision error in width W =
5 bandit trees. (a) depth D = 3. (b) D = 4.
We also expected that UCT value estimates would
be progressively less accurate relative to the Bayes-
optimal estimates as the tree increases in either width
or depth, and thus Bayes-UCT should obtain greater
outperformance over UCT as either increases.
This
intuition turned out to be correct, as we see in ﬁg-
ure 1(b), which shows results of similar experiments
in 15x15 bandit trees.
The gap between UCT and
our methods has widened, and these plots conﬁrm
that: (a) Bayes-UCT1 slightly underperforms UCT
very early in the simulation; (b) Bayes-UCT2 outper-
forms Bayes-UCT1; (c) Gaussian outperforms numeric
representation.
Likewise, ﬁgures 2(a),(b) show widening outperfor-
mance of UCT as tree depth increases from D = 2 to
D = 3 and D = 4. We still see that Bayes-UCT2 out-
performs Bayes-UCT1.
However, the Gaussian per-
formance appears to weaken with increasing depth, so
that at D = 4 Gaussian approximation now underper-
forms exact numeric representation.
We present further quantitative evidence comparing
the number of simulated trials needed for UCT and
Bayes-UCT2g to achieve an expected error level of
0.01.
We have also included runs employing Gaus-
sian distributed payoﬀrates, so that the uniform prior
used in our Bayes-UCT implementation is incorrect.
Results are shown in table 1. With a correct prior,
there is strong evidence of scaling of Bayes-UCT2g ad-
vantage with both depth and width. Even with the
incorrect prior, there is less compelling but still clear
scaling.
We also inadvertently discovered that with
uniform payoﬀs, UCT is unable to converge in any
feasible simulation time at (D = 5, W = 5), whereas
Bayes-UCT exhibits no signs of unusual convergence
diﬃculty.
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
avg. decision error
numTrials
random width (mean 5)x(mean 5) bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
numTrials
random width (mean 5)x(mean 5) bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT1g
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
Figure 3: Average greedy decision error in 2-ply bandit
tree, random width, mean=5. (a) Uniform payoﬀrates
(correct prior). (b) Gaussian payoﬀrates (incorrect
prior).

uniform
payoﬀs
Gaussian
payoﬀs
Depth
Width
UCT
Bayes-UCT2g
Ratio
UCT
Bayes-UCT2g
Ratio
5
5
> 106
8330
> 100
78890
33900
2.33
4
5
7330
2670
2.74
25170
11720
2.15
3
5
2050
780
2.63
7550
3890
1.94
2
5
480
290
1.66
1990
1240
1.60
2
10
2390
830
2.88
10650
4310
2.47
2
15
6440
1700
3.79
26240
8700
3.02
2
20
13390
3090
4.33
49210
15650
3.14
Table 1: Number of trials to achieve 0.01 average error rate in various bandit tree topologies. The ratio of UCT
trials to Bayes-UCT2g trials increases with both width and depth of the bandit tree.
The ﬁnal hypothesis which we have investigated is
that UCT should have particular trouble in trees with
non-uniform width, due to neglecting width either in
the expected node values or in the exploration term.
To study this, we modiﬁed the simulator to generate
random-width trees, where each node is assigned a uni-
form random number of child nodes between a min and
max number of allowable children. We then ran an
experiment using two-ply random-width bandit trees
with mean width around 5 at each level. (The bottom-
level widths ranged between 1 and 10; top level width
ranged between 2 and 10 so that the top level always
had a nontrivial decision problem.) These experiments
yielded our most striking results, shown in ﬁgure 3.
Bayes-UCT massively outperforms UCT, particularly
when it has a correct prior, but there is still very sub-
stantial improvement over UCT even using an incor-
rect prior.
5.1
SIMULATION SPEED
Table 2 gives measures of UCT and Bayes-UCT simu-
lation speed in a few representative experiments. Since
our stochastic “playouts” have negligible cost, Bayes-
UCT obviously runs much slower (although within an
order of magnitude) than UCT. To model expected
behavior in an application like Go with heavyweight
playouts, we have computed adjusted ﬁgures assum-
ing a playout simulation time of 0.1 msec per trial1.
In such scenarios the Bayes-UCT speed is within a fac-
tor of two of UCT and may be more than compensated
by reduction in required number of trials.
5.2
BANDIT TREE INSIGHTS
Herein we provide insights we have gleaned in devel-
oping an understanding of how Bayes-UCT can per-
form so well compared to UCT. One key factor seems
1In competitive 19 × 19 Go programs, playout simula-
tion times of 0.5-1 msec are common, which would make
our results look even more favorable.
We chose a more
conservative ﬁgure of 0.1 msec, corresponding to typical
playout simulation time in 9 × 9 Go.
to be that Bayes-UCT calculates much more accurate
node value estimates (given a correct prior, these are in
fact Bayes-optimal estimates). We have veriﬁed in the
5x5 bandit tree experiment of ﬁgure 1(a) that Bayes-
UCT’s node estimates are much more accurate than
the simple UCT estimates. This can be seen in ﬁg-
ure 4(a), where we plot the average absolute error of
all top-level node value estimates as a function of how
many times they have been sampled.
Every time a
top-level node is sampled, we recompute the proba-
bility distribution and mean, note the absolute diﬀer-
ence between mean and true value, and bin the data
point according to total trials performed by the top-
level node. The graph shows that we improve top-level
node value accuracy over UCT by a factor of ∼3 −5.
However, estimation accuracy is not the entire story, as
we see from a further experiment shown in ﬁgure 4(b).
In this experiment we devised a hybrid algorithm in
which top-level preferences were computed based on
Bayesian estimates, but actual sampling decisions were
performed using UCT. The performance was substan-
tially worse than full Bayes-UCT, showing that Bayes-
UCT derives signiﬁcant beneﬁt from better sampling
decisions in addition to having more accurate value
estimates.
The remaining major puzzle for us was how the Gaus-
sian approximation could do so well relative to exact
numeric distributions. It turns out that the estimated
ﬁrst moments using Gaussians lie extremely close to
the essentially exact estimates obtained from numeric
integration. In all instances that we have observed, the
diﬀerence between numeric mean and Gaussian mean
is always ∼0.01 or less. Moreover, there is no loss
of accuracy in predicting the node’s true value, as we
see comparing Gaussian vs. numeric accuracy in ﬁg-
ure 4(a). Our takeaways from these observations are:
(a) Gaussian approximation is a lot better than we re-
alized at estimating the mean of an extremum distri-
bution (as opposed to its exact shape, which can have
quite large errors); (b) due to the nature of bandit-
based sampling, we tend not to encounter the large-

Depth
Width
UCT-raw
UCT-adj
Bayes-UCT2g-raw
Bayes-UCT2-adj
5
5
122.0
9.24
14.71
5.95
2
5
188.1
9.50
27.12
7.31
2
20
59.6
8.56
7.30
4.22
Table 2: Simulation speed (thousands of trials/sec); “raw” assumes zero-cost playouts and “adj” assumes 0.1
msec playouts.
error cases, which occur when the input Gaussians
have nearly equal means and very diﬀerent sigmas. If
this ever were to happen, UCB-type sampling algo-
rithms would devote many more samples to the wider
input and shrink it to match the narrower input.
We have similarly scrutinized the diﬀerences between
numeric and analytic estimates of sigma values.
It
turns out the analytic estimates are very close to the
numeric values, except in one particular case where the
mean is close to 0 or 1, and the distribution is highly
skewed. In this case the analytic sigmas are systemat-
ically much higher than the correct values. We argue
that this “error” is actually of beneﬁt to our Gaussian
method! By setting sigma too high, the Gaussian is
capturing more of the tail mass of the distribution due
to higher-order moments. With so-called “fat tailed”
distributions it is desirable to explore more than dic-
tated by the true second moment of the distribution.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
avg. absolute error
numTrials
5x5 bandit tree: Avg. top-level mean estimation error
UCT
Bayes-UCT1n
Bayes-UCT2n
Bayes-UCT2g
 0.01
 0.1
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
numTrials
5x5 bandit tree: greedy decision error
UCT
Hybrid
Bayes-UCT2g
Figure 4: (a) Average error in estimated mean of top-
level nodes. (b) Performance of Bayesian selection of
top-level moves in a “Hybrid” algorithm where sam-
ples are guided by normal UCT.
6
RELATED WORK
Several extensions of UCT are known in the literature;
most use the core UCT search strategy but provide
alternative upper-bound functions to guide node se-
lection. In many ways Bayes-UCT is most similar to
Flat-UCB1 [8]. Flat-UCB1 uses the standard UCB1
bound function at terminal nodes, but the bounds for
interior nodes are computed as the maximum value of
all the bounds for the node’s children. Bayes-UCT ex-
tends this approach by both using distributions and
by including an exploration term for interior nodes.
BAST and HOO are extensions of UCT that provide
better asymptotic regret for smooth trees [8, 5]. BAST
and HOO use an alternative bound function that com-
bines UCB1-PAC(b) with a smoothing term δd that
represents the smoothness of the local tree. HOO uses
the same principles as BAST but its bound function
is adapted to solve continuous optimization problems.
The applicability of BAST to Go and similar prob-
lems is questionable as Go does not exhibit the local
smoothness BAST is designed to exploit. That is, δd
does not vary with depth but instead has the constant
value δd = 1 for all nodes for which the game is not
already decided.
UCB1-NORMAL [2] is similar to Bayes-UCT2 in that
both formulas replace the 1/√n factor of UCB1 with
the sample variance. The same paper proposes UCB1-
TUNED which includes (without explicit justiﬁcation)
a separate exploration term on the variance. The au-
thors demonstrate that UCB1-TUNED outperforms
UCB1 for simple bandit problems, but the eﬀective-
ness of UCB1-NORMAL is not evaluated. Our results
showing advantages of Bayes-UCT2 over Bayes-UCT1
suggest that similar advantages might be obtained by
UCB1-NORMAL over standard UCT.
Our work is a natural evolution of probabilistic mini-
max search [15, 3] in applying it to MCTS search where
a static evaluation function is not needed. This is im-
portant for computer Go where the design of eﬀective
evaluation functions has been elusive.
7
CONCLUSIONS
We presented an original Bayesian formulation of
Monte-Carlo Tree Search, appropriate for independent

tree nodes, oﬀering a number of theoretical advan-
tages, including on-policy as well as more robust oﬀ-
policy convergence guarantees.
Empirically, we ob-
tained some interesting and surprising insights by test-
ing our methods in an idealized bandit-tree domain.
We were encouraged to ﬁnd signiﬁcant and scalable
improvements over UCT, even using an incorrect prior,
and especially in the case of non-uniform tree widths.
We were also surprised that our Gaussian approxima-
tion framework turned out to be more accurate and
worked much better than we originally anticipated.
One immediate next step in our future work will be to
compare BAST with its Bayesian counterparts, much
as we have done here for UCT. BAST already incor-
porates simple min/max operations in its bound com-
putations, and is designed to scale better with depth
that UCT, so it will be interesting to see whether
Bayes-BAST can obtain the same magnitude of im-
provements that we saw over UCT. We are also in-
terested in further explorations of issues arising from
non-uniform tree width. In this regard, it will be in-
teresting to compare Bayes-UCT with PAC-UCB [1],
an extension of UCB which does include the number
of bandit arms in estimating upper conﬁdence bounds.
A third important direction for practical implementa-
tions is to develop incremental versions of the Gaus-
sian combining schemes studied here; this could yield
an order of magnitude speedup and eliminate most of
the speed advantage that UCT has over Bayes-UCT.
However, the most important direction for future prac-
tical use of Bayesian MCTS is to develop methods for
automatically modeling the correlation of sibling nodes
in a given domain. The Gaussian min/max approxi-
mation framework does allow correlated input Gaus-
sians, but we are unaware of any methods that can au-
tomatically estimate the appropriate correlation to use
in a given MDP/game state. This appears to be the
main challenge in applying Bayes-UCT to computer
Go, as the use of crude correlation models (e.g., a sin-
gle global correlation coeﬃcient) has not shown an ad-
vantage over UCT. We are currently investigating sev-
eral possible machine learning approaches to modeling
correlations in Go and other challenging single-agent
planning problems.
