538 
WEAVER& TAO 
UAI2001 
The Optimal Reward Baseline for Gradient·Based Reinforcement Learning 
Lex Weaver 
Department of Computer Science 
Australian National University 
ACT AUSTRALIA 0200 

Abstract 
There exist a number of reinforcement learning 
algorithms which learn by climbing the gradient 
of expected reward. Their long-run convergence 
has been proved, even in partiaiJy observable en­
vironments with non-deterministic actions, and 
without the need for a system model. 
How­
ever, the variance of the gradient estimator has 
been found to be a significant practical problem. 
Recent approaches have discounted future re­
wards, introducing a bias-variance trade-off into 
the gradient estimate. We incorporate a reward 
baseline into the learning system, and show that 
it affects variance without introducing further 
bias. 
In particular, as we approach the zero­
bias, high-variance parameterization, the optimal 
(or variance minimizing) constant reward base­
line is equal to the long-term average expected 
reward. Modified policy-gradient algorithms are 
presented, and a number of experiments demon­
strate their improvement over previous work. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
There exist a number of reinforcement learning algorithms 
which learn by climbing the gradient of expected reward, 
and are thus categorized as policy-gradient methods. The 
earliest of these was REINFORCE, which solved the immedi­
ate reward learning problem, and in delayed reward prob­
lems it provided gradient estimates whenever the system 
entered an identified recurrent state (Williams, 1992). A 
number of similar algorithms followed, including those in 
(Glynn, 1986; Cao and Chen, 1997; Cao and Wan, 1998; 
Fu and Hu, 1994; Jaakkola et al., 1995). The technique 
of discounting future rewards was introduced in (Kimura 
et al., 1995; Kimura et al., 1997), and its effect on reducing 
variance was noted in (Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 1998). The 
GPOMDP and 0LPOMDP algorithms in (Baxter and Bartlett, 
1999; Baxter et al., 1999) are the most recent, and remove 
Nigel Tao 
Department of Computer Science 
Australian National University 
ACT AUSTRALIA 0200 

the reliance on both a system model and a need to identify a 
specific recurrent state, and operate in partially observable 
environments with non-deterministic actions (POMDPs). 
However, the variance of the gradient estimator remains 
a significant practical problem for policy-gradient applica­
tions, although discounting is an effective technique. Dis­
counting future rewards introduces a bias-variance trade­
off: variance in the gradient estimates can be reduced by 
heavily discounting future rewards, but the estimates will 
be biased; the bias can be reduced by not discounting so 
heavily, but the variance will be higher. Our work comple­
ments the discounting technique by introducing a reward 
baseline1 which is designed to reduce variance, especially 
as we approach the zero-bias, high-variance discount fac­
tor. 
The use of a reward baseline has been considered a num­
ber of times before, but we are not aware of any analysis of 
its effect on variance in the context of the recent policy­
gradient algorithms. 
(Sutton, 1984) empirically investi­
gated the inclusion of a reinforcement comparison term 
in several stochastic learning equations, and argued that it 
should result in faster learning for unbalanced reinforce­
ment tasks. He proposed (and it is widely believed, though 
without proof) that the average reward would be an intu­
itive and good value for the comparison term, but he did not 
provide an analytical reason for it. Williams subsequently 
demonstrated further algorithms that benefitted from this 
approach (Williams, 1988), and proved that a baseline did 
not introduce any bias. 
Dayan's work (Dayan, 1990) is 
more closely related to what we present here, in that he 
explicitly considered the effect of the baseline on variance, 
although he limits himself to '2-armed bandits', or binary 
immediate reward problems. His result is summarized in 
section 2.1. 
In the context of the more recent policy-gradient algo­
rithms; (Williams, 1992) focuses on the immediate re­
ward problem, and whilst noting that the different reward 
baselines did not introduce bias, he found "no basis for 
1 Also called reinforcement comparison and reference reward. 

UA12001 
WEAVER& TAO 
539 
choosing among various choices of reinforcement base­
line." (Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 1998) employ a differential 
reward, which is the expectation of the sum of the differ­
ences between the rewards received and the average reward 
(i.e. they use an average reward baseline) over the sequence 
of states between the current and the next occurrence of the 
identified recurrent state. The use of the average reward f 
as the baseline b has some nice mathematical properties, 
such as the differential reward of the recurrent state be­
comes zero, and that the value function E[E:,t' (Rt -b)] 
is well defined. They note that the choice of an alternative 
baseline introduces a bias which is linear in the difference 
(b- r). However, they fail to notice that the linearity co­
efficient is a sum of terms of the form E[E v:-i ], which 
., 
is shown in the next section to be zero. The recent results 
of Baxter et. al. do not consider a reward baseline in their 
analysis or algorithms (Baxter and Bartlett, 1999; Baxter 
et al., 1999). 
2 
BACKGROUND 
2.1 
THE IMMEDIATE REWARD PROBLEM 
Consider a scenario where a connectionist network maps an 
input vector x to an output vector a, which then determines 
the reward r. The input-output mapping is stochastic, and 
let JL(alx, 8) denote the probability of the output vector be­
ing a, given that the input vector is x, and some parameter 
()(e.g. link weights for a neural network). 
The learning task is to find a() which maximizes the ex­
pected reward 'F := E[riOJ, and gradient ascent in 0-space 
is appropriate, provided that 'Vf can be accurately esti­
mated. (Williams, 1992) introduced the REINFORCE al­
gorithm, and showed that, for an arbitrary constant b 
E[(r- b).'V(logJL)] = 'V'F 
Note that ('V log JL)(a) = :l(i)'. and that 
E[b. 'VJL] = b. LJL(a). ('Va) 
= b. L('VJL)(a) 
IL 
a 
JL 
a 
which is zero, since IL is a probability mass function, so 
La JL(a) = 1, and therefore E 'V JL = 'V E JL = 'Vl = 0. 
Thus, the choice of b, known as the reward baseline, does 
not bias the gradient estimate (r- b) .'V(logJL) . However, 
it does have an effect on the variance of the estimate. The 
optimal reward baseline b* is the one which minimizes this 
variance. (Dayan, 1990) considered the problem of deter­
mining b* for a binary (2-output) system, and found that 
b* = JL(ao).E[rlai] + JL(al).E[rlao] 
(1) 
where ao, a1 are the two possible outputs. His experiments 
showed that this baseline was better than the more intuitive 
r = E[r] = JL(ao).E[rlao] + JL(al).E[rlal] proposed by 
(Sutton, 1984). 
2.2 
THE DELAYED REWARD PROBLEM 
A more general reinforcement learning problem is that of a 
Markov Decision Process (MOP), in which an agent's out­
put (or action) affects not only the next reward, but also 
subsequent rewards. In our notation, there is a state space 
X, and an action space A. An agent reacts to the system 
state X1, X2,Xa, . . . with actions A1, A2,A3, . .. accord­
ing to its policy function JL (with parameter 0): 
JL(alx, 9) := Prob [ At =a I Xt = x] 
There is also a reward function p, such that the reward 
process R1, R2, R3, . .. is given by Rt = p(Xt+l), which 
reflects the value of choosing action At. An agent attempts 
to learn the (} which maximizes the expected long-term av­
erage reward 
We base our work on the GPOMDP algorithm of (Baxter and 
Bartlett, 1999; Baxter et al., 1999). They present a gradi­
ent estimator, which we denote Gt. based on the sequence 
X1,Al,R1, X2,A2,R2, ... , Xt,At,Rt. and a discount 
factoq E [0, 1). In essence, the GPOMDP algorithm main­
tains an eligibility trace vector Zt, and performs the follow­
ing updates: 
(2) 
(3) 
where (t is a random variable given by (t := .J....:.JW'T'd':.:.;;.:.. 
We then have the following two identities: 
(4) 
s=l 
(5) 
Baxter and Bartlett show that lim-y-+1 limt-+oo Gt 
= 
'Vf w.p. 1, and that the variance of Gt increases with 'Y· 
3 
THE OPTIMAL BASELINE 
It is straightforward to include a constant baseline b into the 
GPOMDP algorithm, in that the update rule (3) is simply 
replaced by Gt+l = Gt + tdI .((Rt+l - b).Zt+l - Gt) 
and note that, similar to the immediate reward case, the 
inclusion of a baseline does not affect E[Gt], since E[(t] = 
E[E[(tiXt]] = 0, as before, so that E[Zt] = 0. 

540 
WEAVER & TAO 
UAI2001 
The remainder of this section confirms Dayan's '2-armed 
bandit' result and also motivates the following theorem2: 
Theorem 1. 
The constant baseline, b*, which mini­
mizes the variance of the gradient estimate, Gt. satisfies 
limt---+oo lim'Y-+1 b* == F. 
3.1 
MOTIVATION OF THEOREM 1 
With a constant baseline b, equation (5) becomes Gt 
f· I:!=t (Rs 
, b).Z8• Rewriting this with equation (4) 
yields that t.Gt 
(R1- b).')'0.(t + 
(R2- b).f'1.(t + (R2- b).f'0.(2 + 
(Ra- b).f'2.(t + (Ra- b).f'1.(2 + (R3- b).')'0.(3 + 
where Q. is the sum of column i: 
t 
Qs 
= 
(s· l)R;- b).i-s 
which gives us that 
and recall that E[(.] = 0, so we have that 
dE[Q.] = E [dQ•] 
= -E['] 1- 'Yt-s+t 
= 0 
(7) 
4 
4 
w · 
1-')' 
We will now show that under the limits 'Y --+ 1 and t --+ oo, 
the variance of Q. is minimized at b* 
= F. The proof 
of theorem 1 (regarding variance minimization of Gt = 
I:!=t Q.) is more complicated, due to covariance terms 
C ov ( Q i, Q i), and is not covered here. The full result can 
be found in (Weaver and Tao, 2001). 
3.1.1 
Minimizing the Variance in Q 8 
Now, Var[·] 
= E[·2]- E[-]2, and so the b* which mini­
mizes the variance of Q s satisfies 
2This theorem is subject to the same regularity conditions as 
imposed in (Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 1998; Baxter and Bartlett, 
1999). 
by equation (7). Our optimality criterion is therefore 0 = 
akE[Q;] 
= E [ak(Q;)] 
= E[2.Q •. Ă]. Substituting 
equation (6) and canceling out the constant terms gives 
0 = E [ (;. ( t.(b*- R,).-yi-s) l 
(8) 
3.1.2 Binary Immediate Reward Problems 
For an immediate reward problem we have 'Y = 0 and 
t 
= 1. 
In this case, equation (8) simplifies to 0 
= 
E [(f.(b*- R1)]. Now, for a binary system (with exactly 
two possible actions a0 and at), we have that f.L(a0) + 
H(a ) 
= 1 and that '(a ) 
= (VI')(ai) 
= 
-(VJ')(aa). 
.-
1 
• 
'> 
1 
J.<(a1) 
1-l'{ao) 
Rewriting E[·] as I:a f.L(a).E[ ·I At 
= a] and some 
straightforward algebraic calculations reduce the optimal­
ity criterion to equation (1), which is Dayan's basic result. 
3.1.3 
The Optimal Baseline as 'Y--+ 1 
We can rewrite equation (8) with Vt := Rt - f, and then 
solve for b* - f, taking the limit t --+ oo, which gives 
b• 
-
Ùr 
= 
E ((;.I::. V;.-yi-•J 
E [(;.I::. 1.-yi-•] 
E [(; .(1 - -y). I::s \li.-yi-s] 
E [(;] 
Let tr; be the distribution of xi' and let* be the steady state 
distribution, which we assume to be unique. We then have 
E(R;] = L:x tr;(x).p(x), and f == L:x i(x).p(x), where 
the sums are over all x E X. Now, regardless of the initial 
conditions, the probability distribution of the system state 
X; tends towards the steady state distribution as i --+ oo. 
We then have limi---+oo tr;(x) = i(x). Consequently, 
lim E[R;]-f =lim 2: ((tri(x),i(x)).p(x) = L:o.p(x) 
t-+00 
t---+00 
X 
X 
so that limi-+oo E[IViiJ 
= 0, and so \If > 0. 3N. i Ĕ 
N =? E(IVil] 
= 0(1;). Since we assume (to be bounded, 
we also have E[(; ./Vi/] = O(c). 
We can then bound b* - F by 
Now, we have assumed that ( and V are bounded, so the 
first term is bounded by (1 - -y).O(N), which goes to 0 

UAI2001 
WEAVER & TAO 
541 
as 1 -t 1. The second term is equal to O(E), regardless 
of I· Thus, as 1 -t 1, the difference between the optimal 
baseline and the average reward (b* - r), can be bounded 
by an arbitrarily small number. Thus, in the limit, b* = i'. 
4 
ALGORITHMS 
Theorem 1 tells us that as we increase 1 (thus reducing bias 
in our gradient estimate), the optimal variance minimizing 
constant baseline approaches f. 
In general, we may not 
be able to analytically determine f' for the POMDPs we are 
working with. However, we can estimate it from simulation 
by maintaining an adaptive estimate, Bt, off', such that 
Bt = t Lc=l Ri. 
The GARB algorithm presented in Figure 1 is a variation 
on the GPOMDP algorithm in (Baxter and Bartlett, 1999), 
which has been modified to use this online estimate of the 
average reward as a baseline. The intuition is that as t -t 
oo, Var [Bt] -t 0. Hence, as t grows large, Bt behaves as 
a constant, and by definition will approach the value i'. 
The OLPOMDP algorithm, also presented in (Baxter and 
Bartlett, 1999), is an online learning version of GPOMDP 
that does not explicitly store a gradient estimate, but in­
stead updates the policy parameters B directly at every time 
step. It was proven to converge to a local maximum for 
f' in (Bartlett and Baxter, 2000). Applying the modifica­
tion mentioned above to OLPOMDP yields the OLGARB al­
gorithm, shown in Figure 2. 
5 
EXPERIMENTS 
5.1 
THE 3-STATE SYSTEM 
In (Baxter et al., 1999), a simple three-state system is 
used to demonstrate that the gradient estimates produced by 
GPOMDP converge with respect to the true gradient. Their 
experiments also illustrate the bias-variance trade-off that 
is introduced with the use of a discount factor.3 
5.1.1 
Variance Reduction 
We have experimented with the same three-state system to 
compare the gradient estimates generated by GPOMDP and 
GARB. The two graphs on the left of Figure 3 show that 
for a mid-range discount factor of 0.4, the relative error in 
the estimates produced by both algorithms is comparable. 
The variance in the GARB estimates appears to be slightly 
lower, but a more interesting point to observe is that de­
spite Theorem 1 only holding in the limit as 1 --t 1, i.e. 
for !»0.4, GARB has not performed worse than GPOMDP. 
Note that we do not make a claim for this relationship in 
general, but merely observe that for some systems GARB is 
3s· 
· 
ed b 
1 · 
· 
IIG,-V'rll 
1as 1s measur 
y re alive error, 1.e. 
IIV'rll 
. 
GARB: GPOMDP with an Average Re­
ward Baseline. 
Given: 
• A POMDP with observations Xo, X1, X2, .... 
• A 
controller 
with 
policy 
function J.l 
Prob[AIX, OJ 
Algorithm parameters: 
• t: the number of iterations to run for. 
• ,: the discount factor. 
• B': a specific policy parameterization. 
Variables (all initialized to zero): 
• B: the baseline (estimated average reward). 
• Z: the eligibility trace vector. 
• G: the gradient estimate vector. 
1. For s from I tot do: 
(a) Receive observation X8• 
(b) Choose action A8 according to J.l(·IX., 0'). 
(c) Apply action A •. 
(d) Receive reward R8• 
(e) Update variables according to: 
B:=B +(R8-B)/s 
z ·-"' z + 'il•Y(A IX 0') 
.-
I 
• 
1J 
8 
8' 
G := G + ((R8- B).Z- G)/s 
2. Return G 
Figure 1: The GARB algorithm for estimating the gradi­
ent of the long term expected average reward, with repsect 
to policy parameters 0, for a Partially Observable Markov 
Decision Process (POMDP). The gradient estimate is for a 
particular point B' in 0-space. 

542 
WEAVER& TAO 
UAI2001 
0LGARB: On-Line GARB. 
Given: 
• A POMDP with observations Xo, X1, X2, .... 
• A controller with policy function 
p, 
Prob[AIX,O] 
Algorithm parameters: 
• t: the number of iterations to run for. 
• 1: the discount factor. 
• o:: the step size factor. 
Global variables: 
• 0': a specific policy parameterization. 
Local variables (all initialized to zero): 
• B: the baseline (estimated average reward). 
• Z: the eligibility trace vector. 
1. For s from 1 tot do: 
(a) Receive observation X8• 
(b) Choose action As according top,( ·I X 8, 0'). 
(c) Apply action A8• 
(d) Receive reward R8• 
(e) Update variables according to: 
B:=B +{R8-B)js 
-
-
Y..!.E. ( 
I 
O') 
Z := r·Z + ; As Xs_: 
0' := 0' + o:.(Rs- B).Z 
Figure 2: The OLGARB algorithm for updating the specific 
policy parameters, 0', in the estimated gradient direction. 
0' is a global variable which is modified during the course 
of this algorithm. 
competitive with GPOMDP for r«l. Of more significance 
are the two graphs on the right of the figure. With a dis­
count rate of 0.99, the variance exhibited by GPOMDP has a 
serious detrimental impact on the gradient estimates. The 
estimates from GARB suffer a noticeable, but nowhere near 
as detrimental, increase in variance. This accords well with 
Theorem 1, in that using the average reward as a baseline 
should yield reduced variance in comparison to a zero base­
line (for discount factors approaching 1). 
5.1.2 
Demonstrating Theorem 1 
For our second experiment we replaced the adaptive es­
timate of f in GARB, with constants4 from the interval· 
(0, 1.4f), and for each constant and discount factor pairing, 
we generated 300 gradient estimates (each after 100 itera­
tions of the system) and calculated their relative errors with 
respect to the true gradient. After calculating the means 
and standard deviations of these groups of 300 errors, we 
could determine which constant reward baseline minimizes 
the mean error and the variance for a given discount factor. 
Figure 4 shows the results for four values of 'Y· The opti­
mal baseline moves with 'Y· from about 0.6f for 1 = 0.4, to 
very near f for 1 = 0.99. This is an explicit demonstration 
of Theorem 1, showing that the variance minimizing con­
stant reward baseline approaches f as the discount factor 
approaches 1. 
These results strongly suggest that GARB will be useful 
for POMDPs where large discount factors are necessary, 
due to smaller discount factors introducing an unacceptable 
level of bias to the gradient estimates. 
5.2 
PUCKWORLD 
In (Baxter et al., 1999) the GPOMDP algorithm is success­
fully demonstrated on the Puckworld system - a continu­
ous task in which the controller has to navigate a puck over 
a plane surface to a target point. The puck is controlled 
by applying a 5 unit force in either the positive or nega­
tive x direction, and also in either the positive or negative 
y direction, for a total of four distinct controls. The con­
troller receives a reward at each decision point (every 0.1 
seconds) of -d (the distance between the puck and the tar­
get). Periodically, both the puck and the target point are 
transported to new randomly determined locations. The 
controller is trained by CONJPOMDP, which uses GPOMDP 
to generate gradient estimates and GSEARCH to find a local 
maximum in the gradient direction. 
Initial experimentation for (Baxter et a]., 1999) found that 
this system was best trained with a discount factor close 
to 1, indicating significant bias in gradient estimates for 
lower valued discount factors. Hence, we would now ex-
4r can be analytically determined for this system, but for illus­
trative purposes we express the baselines as multiples off. 

UAI2001 
WEAVER&TAO 
543 
-ģ 
. 
v I' 
1/ 
' 
1\ 
' 
•, 
" 
-
-
·-
·-
·-
Figure 3: The relative error (bias) in the gradient estimate with respect to the true gradient, graphed against t, the number 
of iterations. Means and standard deviations calculated for 300 independent runs. Note that the improvement of GARB over 
GPOMDP is more prominent for the higher discount factor 'Y = 0.99 . 
. 
-·o.• 
' 
mnn 
' 
rmm 
u 
u 
.. 
u 
·. 
Figure 4: The relative error (bias) in the gradient estimate after 100 iterations with respect to the true gradient, graphed 
against bjr, the constant baseline as a proportion of long-term expected average reward. Note that as 'Y --7 1, the optimal b 
approaches 'f. 
pect the use of GARB to result in more consistent learning. 
Consequently, we have repeated the previous experiment 
with CONJPOMDP using each of GPOMDP and GARB to sup­
ply gradient estimates, and with a discount factor of 0.95 
(as used in (Baxter et al., 1999)). Figures 5 and 6 show 
the average rewards experienced by controllers trained by 
CONJPOMDP, with GPOMDP and GARB each supplying the 
gradient estimates. 
It is clear from the figures that us­
ing GARB yields more consistent learning, both during the 
initial performance improvement phase, and after the con­
trollers have converged to a good policy. In particular, Fig­
ure 7 shows the advantage of GARB in the early stages of 
training, with there being a statistically significant separa­
tion between the means of the GARB and GPOMDP groups. 
5.3 
ACROBOT 
In order to demonstrate the OLGARB algorithm, we applied 
it to the acrobat problem, which is analogous to a gym­
nast swinging on a high bar. It involves simulating a two­
link underactuated robot, with torque applied only at the 
second joint . Our implementation is based upon the de­
scription given in (Sutton and Barto, 1998), with the minor 
modifications mentioned in (Weaver and Baxter, 1999). 
Actions are chosen every 0.1 simulated seconds, though 
motion is simulated at a much finer granularity. The sys­
tem is run continuously with reward given after simu­
lating the effect of each action; the reward being sim­
ply the height of the acrobat's tip above its lowest pos­
sible position. 
Since both links are 1 metre in length, 

544 
WEAVER& TAO 
UAI2001 
-10 
-20 
J 
s -30 
j 
lterarions 
Figure 5: Puckworld controllers trained using GPOMDP. 
ĈOL_----ĉ------ĊċČčĎďĐđĒ==ē 
0 
21+07 
4e+07 
6t+07 
8....01 
1 e.oe 
rr:eradons 
Figure 6: Puckworld controllers trained using GARB. 
the reward for each step is between 0 and 4. 
The 
controller chooses actions probabilistically according to 
(A ) 
exp:L;i 8;.</>;(X•+liX.,A•) 
h 
A-. 
• 
h 
I' 
J1 
s 
= 
L: 
!:· 6. ¢·(a) , w ere '+' IS t e 1eature 
a€Aexp 
" 
t' 
t 
vector [¢I, ¢2, ¢3, ¢4f = [lwd, lw1l, lw2l, lw2I]T. 
Figures 8 and 9 show the average rewards experienced by 
100 controllers whose () vectors were updated by OLPOMDP 
and OLGARB respectively. Elements of () were initialised 
randomly to values in [-0.5,0.5], the step size (a) was a 
0.01, and the discount factor(/) was 0.99. It can readily 
be seen in the figures that with the exception of a few bad 
runs, the controllers trained with OLGARB converge well to 
policies returning an average reward just over 1.2, which 
is equal to the best hand-coded controller we have devel­
oped. In contrast, controllers trained by OLPOMDP converge 
far less reliably to these good policies. Figure 10 further 
demonstrates this, showing a comparison of the means and 
standard deviations of the average rewards experienced by 
the two groups, with the lower variance of the OLGARB con­
trollers clearly evident. 
ltetlltion.S 
Figure 7: Puckworld: a comparison of CONJPOMDP using 
GPOMDP and GARB. Error bars are one standard deviation. 
6 
CONCLUSION 
Several researchers have previously shown that the use of 
a reward baseline does not bias the gradient estimate, but 
motivation for using the long-term average expected re­
ward as a baseline has mainly been based on qualitative 
arguments and empirical success. In section 3.1.2 we show 
how Dayan's result for binary immediate reward problems 
(important as a counter example to the intuition mentioned 
above) is related to, and is thus not inconsistent with, our 
theorem. 
The theorem we have presented provides guidance in 
choosing a baseline for discount factors approaching 1, by 
justifying f as a variance minimizer. We have demonstrated 
this using the three-state system, by comparing GARB with 
a baseline off to GPOMDP (section 5.1), and also by illus­
trating that the variance minimizing baseline approaches f 
as the discount factor increases (Figure 4). 
We have derived variations on existing algorithms which 
take advantage of theorem I, and demonstrated the ad­
vantage given by the variance reduction these algorithms 
exhibit. Our demonstrations include calculating and com­
paring gradient estimates for three-state system, and online 
policy improvement with the continuous state-space aero­
bot system. In particular, we have demonstrated, using the 
Puckworld system, that our result can be of benefit when 
working with POMDPs that require large discount factors 
to avoid unacceptable levels of bias.
