Real Time Object Detection in Occluded Environment with Background Cluttering Effects Using Deep Learning 
 
 
The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
1
 
Abstract. Detection of small, undetermined moving 
objects or objects in an occluded environment with a 
cluttered background is the main problem of 
computer vision. This greatly affects the detection 
accuracy of deep learning models. To overcome these 
problems, we concentrate on deep learning models 
for real-time detection of cars and tanks in an 
occluded environment with a cluttered background 
employing SSD and YOLO algorithms and improved 
precision of detection and reduce problem facing by 
these models. The developed method makes the 
custom dataset and employs a preprocessing 
technique to clean the noisy dataset. For training the 
developed model we apply the data augmentation 
technique to balance and diversify the data. We 
fine-tuned, trained, and evaluated these models on 
the established dataset by applying these techniques 
and highlight the results we get more accurately than 
without applying these techniques. The accuracy and 
frame per second of the SSD-Mobilenet v2 model are 
higher than YOLO V3 and YOLO V4. Furthermore, 
to employ various techniques like data enhancement, 
noise reduction, parameter optimization, and model 
fusion we improve the effectiveness of detection and 
recognition. We further added counting algorithm, 
target attributes experimental comparison, and make 
a graphical user interface system for the developed 
model with features of object counting, alerts, status, 
resolution and frame per second. Subsequently, to 
justify the importance of the developed method 
analysis of YOLO V3, V4 and SSD were 
incorporated. 
Which 
resulted 
in 
the 
overall 
completion of the proposed method.  
Keywords: Object Detection and Recognition; Data 
Augmentation; YOLO (You only look once); 
Mobilenet-SSD V2; Graphical User Interface. 
1.   INTRODUCTION  
The techniques employed for identification and locate 
the object in an image are known as the object detection 
tasks. Image understanding is a fundamental area of 
computer vision. Image classification is not enough for 
understanding images. Object detection is one of the key  
 
aspects of image processing and image understanding 
Precise estimation of the concept and location of the 
object in an image is called image detection. Object 
detection and object recognition are two terms that are 
used interchangeably in computer vision. Object 
detection is a key research area of computer vision. It 
attracted many industries such as augmented reality [1] 
self-driving cars and UAVs, remote sensing [2, 3], 
ecology investigation [4], and medical science [5]. 
Datasets that are publicly available and commonly used 
for object detection training and evaluations include 
PASCAL VOC, ImageNet, and Microsoft COCO 
datasets. Many object detectors emerged, and some 
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance. The key focus 
of the developed study is deep learning-based object 
detection. After careful literature review [6] we could 
broadly divide deep learning-based object detection 
frameworks into three types which are region proposals 
(based on region selection) includes R-CNN, Fast 
R-CNN, and Faster R-CNN, YOLO (You Only Look 
Once), and SSD (Single Shot MutiBox Detector). 
R-CNN, Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN work in two 
steps. In the first step they extract the features based on 
region selection and in the next step, it computes the 
convolutional neural network and gives the final 
detection results. Whereas YOLO (You Only Look 
Once) and SSD (Single Shot Multibox Detector) [7] are 
single-step models, and they take the input image and 
compute the convolutional neural network directly in a 
single step and gives the final detection results. The 
single-step models like YOLO and SSD are very fast but 
their accuracy lags when compared to the two-step 
models like R-CNN, Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN. 
These models give very good accuracy for detection but 
with less frame per second. Hence, we could not use 
these models for real-time detection separately. YOLO 
and SSD work better in real-time detection. 
The main findings of this manuscript are as under:   
 
To categorize the different frameworks in 
various ways for determining the developed 
improvements. 
 
We immense study various hurdles while facing 
the exact detection of moving objects in an 
occluded environment.  
 
Syed Muhammad Aamir*1, Hongbin Ma *2, Malak Abid Ali Khan*3 and Muhammad Aaqib*4 
 
*1,2,3 School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China 

*4Department of Mechatronics Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology Peshawar, Pakistan 

 
Real-Time Object Detection in Occluded Environment 
with Background Cluttering Effects Using Deep Learning 

The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
2 
 
We built a graphical user interface to show the 
live detection of cars and add different features 
to the system.  
 
This manuscript is organized as follows, section 2 
shows the related work followed by the proposed 
methodology in section 3. Experimentation and results 
are presented in section 4 and 5, and finally, section 6 
conclude this manuscript.        
2.   RELATED WORKS  
Before Deep Learning, the task of object detection 
would be done through various steps, beginning with 
edge detection and extraction of features from images. 
Templates were created from these features and then new 
images were matched with these object templates, 
usually at multi-scale levels, for the detection of the 
objects and then localizing these objects present in the 
image. Histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) [8] is one 
of the widely used feature extractor techniques in 
computer vision and image processing applications. The 
primary concept behind working of the (HOG) descriptor 
is that the target object's appearance and shape inside an 
image could be represented by the distribution of 
intensity gradients and the direction of edges. One of the 
preliminary neural networks-based object detection 
algorithms is the sliding window algorithm [9]. In the 
object detection algorithm, not only want to know 
whether the object is in the image but also want to know 
where the object is in the image. The sliding window is 
one of the earliest object detection algorithms which 
could detect and locate an object in the image with great 
accuracy. Algorithms like sliding windows have great 
detection accuracy but they are slow in the detection of 
the object. Many applications need real-time object 
detection,[10] for which the sliding window algorithm is 
not appropriate. Therefore, a new algorithm called 
YOLO [11] was introduced in 2016. YOLO (You Only 
Look Once) is much faster than a sliding window 
algorithm because YOLO allows the image through the 
convolutional neural network only once as its name 
suggests. YOLO V2 [12] is an upgraded version of 
YOLO V1. YOLO V1 had some limitations, which 
YOLO V2 tried to improve. The convolutional neural 
architecture used for feature extraction in YOLO V2 is 
darknet-19, which is a custom architecture. It uses an 
additional 11 layers for object detection. First, YOLO V1 
could only predict two bounding boxes for each grid cell 
however, if there are more than two objects whose center 
lies in the same grid cell, then YOLO will only be able to 
predict bounding boxes for two objects. YOLO also 
struggles to detect small bounding boxes in the image as 
it’s a very deep convolutional neural network and can’t 
keep information of small objects because of the 
max-pooling layers in the network which reduces the 
receptive field of the network.  
Some of the object detectors [13] which take less 
memory of processing power can’t be used in UAVs 
because their detection accuracy is low and they also fail 
to detect smaller objects. For this purpose, a new network 
called Slim-YOLO V3[14] was proposed. It is a variant 
of YOLO V3. It performs two steps over YOLO V3 to 
make it lighter and faster. First, it does L1 regularization 
on the layers to decrease sparsity in the channel. 
Secondly, it does prunes of less informative feature 
channels which makes the network lighter and reduces 
the number of parameters, and also decreases the number 
of trainable parameters and floating-point operations in 
the network as compared to the YOLO V3 network. This 
results in a much lighter network and two times faster 
than the YOLO V3 [15] network, with a slight decrease 
in inaccuracy. A single-shot multi-box object detector 
(SSD) [16] is one of the earliest single shot detectors. 
Single-shot detection means that the objects were 
detected and localized on one forward pass. SSD works 
in two steps. First, it uses a VGG neural network for 
feature extraction. This creates feature maps for the 
objects. 
After 
creating 
feature 
maps, 
it 
does 
convolutional filtering on the feature maps for object 
detection. A Multi-box detector is a regression technique 
for creating bounding boxes. SSD is much similar to 
YOLO algorithms. The difference comes when both 
predict the bounding box information. YOLO and SSD 
have different methods of predicting the bounding boxes. 
Retina-net [17] is one of the most reliable one-step object 
detection models that operate well with small, dense 
objects. For this purpose, it has become a popular object 
detection model for use with aerial and satellite images. 
 The framework was formed by two developments in 
existing models of single-stage object detection: 
characteristic pyramid networks (FPN) and focal loss. 
Traditionally, in machine vision, custom image pyramids 
have been used to detect targets at various scales in the 
image. The pyramid images shown are pyramids of 
objects built on top of pyramid images. This means that 
we take the image and divide it into images with lower 
and lower resolution (thus forming a pyramid). Yilmaz et 
al. [18] review multiple frameworks for object detection 
and tracking through a series of videos to classify in 
various groups. The author recommends multiple 
problems which are challenging for tracking. The hurdles 
are sudden motion of the object, object to point camera 
motion, and occlusion. They also describe the models 
and features of the best image for object detection. 
 Zarka et al. [19] developed a method to track the 
real-time system of human detection and analysis of 
motion. They suggest a robust framework to track, detect 
and identify that could be involved with clear effects and 
occlusion of objects.  The author used subtraction of 
background to achieve the foreground pixels and then the 
model was applied for object detection and motion 
analysis.  
 
3. PROPOSED METHOD  
A method is presented for real-time detection of cars 
and tanks in an occluded environment with a cluttered 
background employing SSD and YOLO techniques. The 

Real Time Object Detection in Occluded Environment with Background Cluttering Effects Using Deep Learning 
 
 
The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
3
proposed method is fully automatic, real-time and makes 
incorporates various techniques to achieve the objective 
of this research. The method performs data construction, 
the input is then pre-processed and augment data to 
increase the samples of training. Lastly, we trained 
YOLO V3 and YOLO V4 [18] models for real-time 
object detection. The following figure 1 shows the 
overall process of the proposed system. 
                  
 
 
Fig. 1 Block Diagram of Proposed System 
3.1. Dataset Construction  
Dataset construction is the most challenging part of 
computer vision. Therefore, to construct a formal dataset, 
we set a camera far away from the road at an angle that 
the objects look small, occluded, and with a cluttering 
effect of the background. We take frames of the video 
and collect around 60000 images of cars and tanks from 
those frames. As the camera was fixed at one position 
and angle and far away from the targeted objects so there 
was not enough diversity in the dataset. Because all the 
images are taken from the same angle and without any 
disturbance. Data preprocessing has a very important and 
significant influence on the performance of a supervised 
learning model. To get proper data we employed a 
technique to remove the noise and enhanced it for model 
training.  
3.2. Dataset 
We had 2 two types of objects in our image data-set. 
One type of data set had cars in the images and the other 
had tanks in the images. These images are the frames 
extracted from the video sequences. Car’s video is taken 
from the side angle of a traffic signal. Cars in the video 
are small as the video is recorded from some distance. 
Similarly, all the cars shown in the images are from the 
side angle. Therefore, all the training on the cars is done 
from the side angle. The tank video is taken in an open 
field. There is only one tank in the video which is 
roaming around. As the images are taken from the video 
and mostly they have the same type of cars and tanks. 
Therefore, in the case of the tank dataset, we have low 
diversity and had the bounding box information for the 
objects saved in text file format. For each image, its 
bounding box information is saved in a separate text file 
with the same name as the image. Similarly, the 
bounding box information includes the center point of 
the height and width of the bounding box then the 
information is normalized by the height and width of the 
image. Bounding box normalization is done so that there 
is not a very big difference in the loss of small and large 
bounding boxes. The class label for the bounding box 
was also given in the text file. 
The main task for machine learning is labeling the 
data, therefore, we used a labeling tool to annotate the 
required objects in the images. After labeling the data we 
would employ the step of preprocessing i.e., cleaning the 
data, and then applying data augmentation to increase the 
dataset and as a result, the model would be trained to 
achieve better results.   
4. EXPERIMENTATION    
The experimentation phase for object detection in an 
occluded environment was trained on deep learning 
models. Due to high accuracy, the SSD-Mobile Net V2 
model was chosen for experimentation purposes. In this 
research work, the model has first fine-tuned three 
versions of object detection algorithm YOLO V2, YOLO 
V3, and Slim-YOLO V3 without data augmentation and 
data preprocessing. During training, the proposed model 
achieved unsatisfactory results however,  the model 
properly detects, tracks, and recognize the objects in 
images and videos. The accuracy of YOLO V2, YOLO 
V3 and Slim-YOLO V3 was 25%, 60.4% and 9.1% 
respectively. These three object detection frameworks 
are one of the best object detection algorithms however, 
it gives unsatisfactory results on the custom dataset due 
to without employing of data augmentation and 
preprocessing techniques. While employed the data 
preprocessing method the proposed model achieved 
pretty results for the algorithm of YOLO V3, YOLO V4, 
and SSD-MobileNetv2. At the stages of training, the 
proposed algorithm passed the images through CNN 
convolutional neural network and the neural network 
tries to predict the bounding box information of the 
images and their loss is calculated with the ground-truth 
bounding box information. 
The following Fig.2 has some samples of images which 
collect for our custom dataset and annotate these images 
on labeling software. The objects in our custom dataset 
are occluded with background cluttering effects. To 
trained the model for the developed method these custom 
datasets would be employed.  

The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
4 
 
Fig. 2 Custom Dataset Sample 
5. RESULTS  
A series of experimentation were employed in an 
occluded environments of object detection with 
background cluttering effects. In order to exhibit the 
generalization, this study was implemented employing 
python with anaconda-based TensorFlow.  
The custom dataset was used which was achieved from 
a video by taking its frames and provided labels to 
objects is the requirement of the model and then 
fine-tuned three object detection frameworks and trained 
them on the custom dataset for two classes i.e., tanks and 
cars. As the dataset has not enough diversity and the 
objects were occluded with background cluttering effects 
in an uncontrolled outdoor environment therefore, some 
pre-processing and data augmentation steps were done 
for better results. We used the transfer learning method 
for SSD-Mobilenetv2 and fine-tuning method for 
training the different versions of YOLO. These versions 
of YOLO and SSD are among the best object detection 
algorithms. Then trained   YOLO V2, YOLO V3, and 
Slim-YOLO V3 models on the custom dataset without 
preprocessing and data augmentation but without 
applying these techniques we achieved unsatisfactory 
results. In this work, we evaluated and compared the 
results of these two versions of YOLO and SSD- 
Mobilenet-v2 on the dataset and detect cars and tanks in 
real-time in an occluded environment with background 
cluttering effects. 
 
5.1.  Implementing YOLO V3  
We utilized the darknet implementation for fine-tuning 
YOLO V3 on the custom dataset. The algorithm can 
detects objects in images at three stages to detect small, 
medium, and large objects. Then modified the 
configuration file of YOLO V3 to detect two classes,  set 
the learning rate to 0.001 for the stability of losses and 
keep the batch size of 8 so that batch will have enough 
examples to get different features of the images. 
Similarly, tested the model for detections after every 100 
epochs and saved the best model. The following fig.3 has 
the detection, evaluation, and graphical results of YOLO 
V3 trained on the custom dataset. 
        As presented in Fig.3 the error training loss and 
evaluation graph of YOLO V3 and the number of 
training epochs was kept at 20k with an initial learning 
rate (LR)  of 0.001. The LR has been approaching 0.1 
times of initial LR at 16k and 18k epochs respectively.  
 
Fig. 3 Training Graph of YOLO V3 
The following Fig.4 are the real-time detection 
results of the model YOLO V3 in an occluded 
environment with background cluttering effect which 
trained on the custom dataset. For training the model we 
employ preprocessing to clean the dataset and then data 
augmentation to produce diversity in the dataset and after 
that fine-tune the model according to respective classes 
and get pretty results while testing the data. To test the 
capabilities of the proposed model the mean average 
precision (mAP) of 82.6% was achieved.  
 
Fig. 4 Real-Time Detection in Occluded Scenario and Cluttered 
Background  
  
In order to justify the effectiveness of the proposed 
experimentation a comparative analysis was taken into 
account without employing preprocessing and data 
augmentation and it represents the mAp of YOLO V2, 
YOLO V3, and Slim-YOLO V3 results in fig.5. 

Real Time Object Detection in Occluded Environment with Background Cluttering Effects Using Deep Learning 
 
 
The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
5
Similarly, the experimentation was done with the help of 
preprocessing to remove the unwanted data and data 
augmentation for generating diversity in the dataset. 
Subsequently, the proposed model was again trained on 
YOLO and SSD-Mobilenet-V2 and achieved more 
accurate and better results than the models applied 
without 
preprocessing 
and 
data 
augmentation 
techniques.  
 
  Fig. 5 Map of YOLO Without Preprocessing and Augmentation  
 
During training, the model of YOLO V2 on a custom 
dataset without employing preprocessing could see that 
some of the cars are detected with a low score while 
some cars are detected with good scores. Therefore, for 
real-time detection, the overall results are not satisfactory 
as depicted in Fig.6. Here as shown in the following 
figure that the black car is occluded and some portion of 
the car is covered by the tree which is in front of it but 
still it is detected by the model with a pretty score but the 
cars which are in white are not detected with good score.  
 
Fig. 6 Detection Results of YOLO V2 Without Preprocessing and 
Augmentation 
Similarly, in Fig.7 the detection results of the YOLO 
V3 model in which black car is occluded and some part 
of the car is covered by the white car and some part is 
covered by the tree and wall and it’s not detected 
successfully but the white car is detected with a low 
score. While in the condition of the tank, it is also 
detected but the detection rate is low which is not 
acceptable in the case of real-time detection.  
 
 
During training on a custom dataset, only one car was 
detected employing Slim-YOLO V3 algorithm as 
depicted in Fig.8. The results of Slim-YOLO V3 are 
unsatisfactory for real-time detection. Here the following 
image black car is occluded however, it’s not identified 
by the Slim-YOLO V3 model. The developed method 
concluded from the results that the model was employed 
and fined tuned and trained on the dataset to get average 
results.   
 
     
Fig. 8 Detection Results of SLIM YOLO V3 Without 
Preprocessing and Augmentation 
5.2.  YOLO V4 Results 
 We employed the YOLO V4 model and trained with 
the same learning rate. However, network response was 
different because of its core structures are different. We 
used CSPDarknet53 as a backbone, SPP, and PAN 
models as neck and YOLO-v3 as ahead. LR has been 
reduced to .1 times at 16k and 18k. After 18k iterations, 
the model accuracy is not improving further. 
Fig.9 shows that the tanks are classified by the model 
with a good score. As the tanks have the same 
augmentation can detect the tanks even if it has 
Fig. 7 YOLOV3 Detection Results Without Preprocessing       
and Augmentation 

The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
6 
background cluttering effect color with the background 
and it’s very difficult for a model to detect objects in such 
scenario but the model which we fine-tuned and trained 
on our custom dataset after preprocessing and data 
augmentation get satisfactory results.  
 
 
Fig. 9 Real-Time Detection of Tanks with Background Cluttering 
Effects  
If two objects have the same color and merged or close 
to each other then it’s more difficult for a model to detect 
and recognized the objects in such a condition therefore, 
the proposed model would detect and classify the data 
with good scores in an occluded environment. It is 
depicted in fig. 10 that some cars are very closed with 
each other and a lot of factors have been seemed in front 
of the car and covered some portion of the car but still, it 
detected and classified the car accurately.  
 
 
 
Fig. 10 Real-Time Detection of Cars in Occluded Environment  
Further computations were performed to get the values 
from the confusion matrix and the threshold value of 0.25 
true positive is 1734 and false negative is 201, the 
average intersection over union is 67.21%. Similarly, the 
intersection over the union threshold is 75% used under 
the curve for each unique recall. Mean average precision 

of the SSD-Mobilenet v2 model, the proposed technique 
achieved 73.92% average precision of cars at a value of 
50 for intersection over union threshold and 100% 
average precision for tanks at a threshold value of 50 
IOU. The mean average precision we get at 0.5 IOU 
(intersection over union) is 0.866121 which is equal to 
86.6%. After evaluation of the model, the classification 
loss and localization loss were 0.79 and 0.39 
respectively.   
Here in the following fig. 11 are the detection results of 
our model which we trained on our custom dataset of cars 
and tanks after preprocessing and data augmentation for 
better detection results Here we could notice the cars are 
parked very near with each other and even on the naked 
eye we can’t see the full image of every car, as some 
parts of the cars can be seen but still the model detects the 
cars more efficiently with better accuracy rate. The cars 
are merged and even some cars have the same white 
color and the tank has the same color with the 
background which is yellow and the model can detect 
cars and tanks in such environments.  
 
 
Fig. 11 Detection Result of SSD-MOBILE NET-V2 in Occluded        
Environment  
It is noticed that the real-time detection results of 
unchanged existing techniques have low scores and not 
classified the data correctly, even they are not fully or 
partially occluded. While the detection results of 
improved models can successfully detect objects in an 
occluded environment in real-time. So it is depicted in 
fig.11 that some part of the white car is covered by the 
black car which is known as occluded but still the 
algorithm is efficient to detect all the vehicles 
successfully. We get these results after applying to 
preprocess and data augmentation techniques. We test 
our models with both custom and standard datasets. After 
applying data augmentation and preprocessing we 

Real Time Object Detection in Occluded Environment with Background Cluttering Effects Using Deep Learning 
 
 
The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
7
fine-tune the algorithm and set the best parameters for 
training the model and also the addition of extra features 
to the algorithm like counting, class id, recording, 
database, and status. The cars in the following figure are 
mostly covered by trees, traffic light poles, walls, and 
some parts of cars are covered by the same color cars 
which are known as occluded vehicles. Hence the 
proposed algorithm detects each vehicle successfully and 
it proves that the model was efficient in real-time with 
good prediction scores. 
  
 
 
Fig. 12 Results of Improved Algorithm 
A summary of multiple models is shown in the 
following table. Different networks and frameworks 
were utilized to get better rates of performance. SSD, 
YOLO V4, and YOLO V3 have 86%, 82% and 78% 
mAp respectively.  
Table 1 Different models result from summary 
Network 
Map 
FPS 
Network 
SSD– 
Mobile net 
V2 
86.6% 
104 
SSD – Mobile net V2 
YOLO V4 
82.2 
58 
YOLO V4 
YOLO V3 
78 
63 
YOLO V3 
5.3. GUI RESULTS  
It is depicted in Fig. 13, that the graphical user interface 
shows the live detection of cars because of adding 
different functionalities and features to the system such 
as it shows the frame per second of the video as well as 
the resolution and give us the counting results which is 
one of the best parts of experimentation. It also 
represents the states where it's tracking or not and gives 
us the alert based on counting. It has different controls 
like start, stop, start recording, and stop recording. 
 
Fig. 13 Live Detection Results on GUI 
 
The detection results of tanks on the graphical user 
interface are shown in Fig. 14. There is only one tank that 
exists in the video so the count status is 1. As for the 
current video, the frame per second is 34 and it depends 
upon the system architecture that the model employed. If 
we use a good system with a good GPU for testing the 
model, then it will be greater in number. As it can be used 
in the military sector for the detection, recognition, 
tracking, and counting of tanks in the war field as well in 
the army bases. 
 
 
Fig. 14 Detection Result of Tank on GUI 
 
It could also be used in the transportation sector like 
parking slots, parking buildings in the airports and 
different kinds of the bus stand as well as entering points 
of any place where we need counting and want to know 
the number of cars or tanks inside that place.  
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 This study involved multiple algorithms and hence 
fine-tuned YOLO V2, YOLO V3, and Slim-YOLO V3 

The 7th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics (IWACIII2021) 
Beijing, China, Oct.31-Nov.3, 2021 
 
8 
on a custom dataset without employing the technique of 
data preprocessing and data augmentation and achieved 
unsatisfactory results. Similarly, performing of data 
augmentation 
and 
preprocessing 
techniques 
and 
fine-tune YOLO V3, YOLO V4 models, additionally 
used the method of transfer learning for Mobilenet-SSD 
and trained these models on custom dataset to achieved 
good accuracy with satisfactory frame per seconds for 
real-time detection. We diversify the dataset for better 
training to get good accuracy of detection while the 
objects are small, occluded, and also with background 
cluttering effect. After applying the proposed model, we 
get 78% mAp with 58 FPS on the YOLO V3 model, 82.3 
% mAp with 63 FPS on the YOLO V4 model, and 86.6% 
mAp with 104 FPS on SSD-Mobilenet V2. Therefore, 
the developed SSD-Mobilenet v2 is more accurate and 
robust in this sceniorio. The training was performed on 
different configurations of YOLO and was tested on the 
test split of the data, then the results were compared with 
the proposed and already established method. Among 
these models, SSD-Mobilenet v2 gives better accuracy 
with more robustness, which is 86.6 mAp with 104 
frames per second. For real time detection and tracking  
we build graphical user interface system which shows 
different functionalities and features like real-time 
detection, real-time tracking and recognition, car count, 
tanks count, alerts, frame per second, resolution, status 
and record.  
In the future, we would focus on developing the  
developed algorithm for faster, accurate, and robust 
detection. We would be able to change the base of the 
model to develop a new model according to our need and 
could add more features to the graphical user interface 
system which would be used in more applications to 
solve real-world problems. 
 
REFERENCES: 
           
[1]        Shahrokni, L. Vacchetti, V. Lepetit, P. Fua. Polyhedral Object 
Detection and Pose Estimation for Augmented Reality 
Applications. In Proceedings of the Computer Animation 2002, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 21–21 June 2002; pp. 65–69.    
[2]               J. Han, D. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, J. Ren. Object Detection in 
Optical Remote Sensing Images Based on Weakly Supervised 
Learning and High-Level Feature Learning. IEEE Transaction 
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 53, no.6, pp. 
3325-337, June 2015. 
[3]/ / /      Tang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, H. Zou, L. Lei. Vehicle Detection in 
Aerial Images Based on Region Convolutional Neural 
Networks and Hard Negative Example Mining. Sensors 2017, 
17, 336. 
[4] /////        A. Takeki, T. T. Trinh, R. Yoshihashi, R. Kawakami, M. Iida, T. 
Naemura. Combining deep features for object detection at 
various scales: finding small birds in landscape images. IPSJ 
Transaction on Computer Vision and Applications 8, 5 (2016). 
[5]      B. Solaiman, B. Burdsall, C. Roux. Hough Transform and 
Uncertainty Handling. Application to Circular Object Detection 
in Ultrasound Medical Images. In Proceedings of the 1998 
International Conference on Image Processing, Chicago, IL, 
USA, 7–7 October 1998; pp. 828–831. 
[6]/////    /X. Chen, K. Kundu, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun. 
Monocular 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Driving. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; 
pp. 2147–2156. 
[7]             Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, A. C. Berg. 
SSD: Single Shot Multi box Detector. In Proceedings of the 
European Conference on Computer Vision, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands, 11–14 October 2016; pp. 21–37. 
[8]/////     N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histogram of Oriented Gradients for 
Human 
Detection. 
In 
Computer 
Vision and 
Pattern 
Recognition, 2005. CVRP 2005. IEEE Computer Society 
Conference 2005: 886-893. 
[9]/////        Zhang, Y. Zhong, and X Li. Slim-YOLO V3: Narrower, Faster 
and Better for Real-Time UAV Applications. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 
Workshops (ICCVW), Seoul, Korea (South), 2019, pp. 37-45. 
[10]          M. Li, B. Kim, A. Mourikis. Real-Time Motion Tracking on a 
Cellphone Using Inertial Sensing and a Rolling-Shutter 
Camera. Proceedings-IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation. 4712-4719. 
[11]/////      J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi. You Only Look 
Once: Unified, Real- Time Object Detection. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 779–
788. 
[12]////     / J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi. YOLO9000: better, faster, stronger. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, 2017 pp. 7263-7271. 
[13]        S. Belongie, J. Malik, and J. Puzicha. Shape Context: A new 
descriptor for shape matching and object recognition. In 
Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 
831-837. 2001. 
[14]             J. Han, D. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, J. Ren. Object Detection in 
Optical Remote Sensing Images Based on Weakly Supervised 
Learning and High-Level Feature Learning. IEEE Transaction 
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 53, no.6, pp. 
3325-337, June 2015. 
[15]///   J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi. YOLO V3: An incremental 
improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767 (2018). 
[16]/ / /    Tang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, H. Zou, L. Lei. Vehicle Detection in 
Aerial Images Based on Region Convolutional Neural 
Networks and Hard Negative Example Mining. Sensors 2017, 
17, 336 
[17]////    Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 
"Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural 
networks." Advances 
in 
neural 
information 
processing 
systems 25 (2012): 1097-1105. 
[18]           Bochkovskiy, C. Y. Wang, H. Y. M. Liao. YOLO V4: Optimal 
Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection. arXiv:2004.10934v1 
[cs.CV] 23 Apr 2020. 
[19]           Nizar Zarka, Ziad Alhalah, and Rada Deeb, “Real-Time Human  
                 Motion Detection and Tracking”, International conference on  
                 Information and communication Technologies, pp 1-6, 2008.
