Paranom: A Parallel Anomaly Dataset Generator
Justin Gottschlich
Intel Labs
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present Paranom, a parallel anomaly dataset gen-
erator. We discuss its design and provide brief experimental results
demonstrating its usefulness in improving the classification correct-
ness of LSTM-AD, a state-of-the-art anomaly detection model.
1
INTRODUCTION
A dataset, a collection of data usually manipulated as a single unit,
is necessary for many machine learning (ML) techniques [11]. In the
context of deep learning, it has been shown that the larger and richer
the dataset, the greater the potential accuracy of the model that can
be built from it [7]. Because of this, possessing a large, high-quality
dataset is usually a first step in building an ML model.
Contrarily, the practical development of ML models usually re-
quires various sizes of data, beginning with a few items for initial
model construction and up to billions of items for model deployment.
In early development, small, yet rich, datasets can be useful because
they enable rapid model tuning and topological changes without
suffering significant performance penalties (e.g., days or weeks in
training time). In practice, this means many ML models are gener-
ated iteratively by training and re-training on a growing dataset. If
such manipulation is performed manually, it increases engineering
overhead and the potential for data manipulation errors.
Anomaly detection, the process of identifying outliers in a specific
domain [2, 6], adds even more complexity to the dataset problem for
at least two reasons. First, anomalies by definition are infrequent and
therefore building an accurate anomaly detection model can be chal-
lenging due to the scarcity of anomalous data [6]. Second, anomalies
tend to be continuous events, which means data presented for them
must usually be in a periodic, or time-series, ordered form [4, 9].
For these reasons, and the growing importance of streaming systems,
building large, rich, and meaningful datasets for anomaly detection
is an open and increasingly important problem [4, 12].
In this paper, we present Paranom, a parallel anomaly dataset
generator. We make the following technical contributions:
(1) A brief overview of Paranom’s technical design.
(2) An illustration of how Paranom’s synthetic data can be used
with LSTM-AD [10], a state-of-the-art anomaly detection
model, improving its accuracy over using only real data.
2
PARANOM’S DESIGN
In this section we discuss Paranom’s data uniqueness, data genera-
tion, data stochasticism, and parallel run-time execution model.
2.1
Data Uniqueness
In synthetic data generation, data uniqueness cannot always be guar-
anteed. To illustrate this, consider an example where a user requests
unique anomalous data, providing two possible discrete values: 0
XXXXXX, XXXXXXX, XXXXXXX
2018. ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06...$XXXX
https://doi.org/10.475/123_4
Figure 1: Paranom’s run-time execution model.
and 1. Once both entries have been generated, it is impossible for
any system to fulfill a third unique anomalous data point request.
To help manage this, Paranom provides two uniqueness controls
for data generation: hard and soft. We define hard uniqueness as a
data property that must be met. If hard uniqueness is requested, and,
if after a user-specified number of tries Paranom has unsuccessfully
generated a unique datum, Paranom will terminate execution. We
define soft uniqueness as a data property that might be met, but, if
after a user-specified number of tries, it has not been met, Paranom
will continue execution using its last generated datum entry.
Because anomalous data may be scarce, duplication of any of
its already small number of data points may result in model over-
fitting [5]. To address this, Paranom provides two data uniqueness
controls: one for normal data and one for anomalous data. This
enables a user to generate soft unique non-anomalous data and hard
unique anomalous data, or vice-versa, as needed.
2.2
Data Generation
Paranom supports the following two ways of data generation. 1
Stochastic Variables. These variables support controlled random-
ization, where developers define them with a specified range of
stochasticism for both the anomalous and non-anomalous values
they will generate. Paranom then handles all value generation.
Callback Variables. If a developer requires full control over value
generation, she can define a callback variable, which requires the
construction of two callback functions for each variable, one for
anomalous data generation and one for non-anomalous. At run-
time, the appropriate callback function will be invoked for value
generation for each variable at each unique discrete timestamp.
1Due to limited space, we have omitted code examples.
arXiv:1801.03164v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2018

XXXXXX, XXXXXXX, XXXXXXX
J. Gottschlich
Figure 2: Visualization of original LSTM-AD space shuttle
training, testing and prediction data (red ovals are anomalies).
2.3
Data Stochasticism
Paranom provides seedable randomization, which (if needed) can
ensure repeatable stochasticism in dataset generation. This can be
useful for iterative ML training from small to large datasets, where
the previously seen data is guaranteed to remain unchanged as the
dataset grows in size. Paranom also provides controls for the anoma-
lous and non-anomalous data that will be randomly present in a
dataset. In addition to providing controls for the absolute number
of data points, Paranom also provides controls for the stochastic
frequency of anomalous and non-anomalous data.
2.4
Parallel Run-Time Execution
To ameliorate the performance overhead of possibly generating bil-
lions of entries for a dataset, Paranom was designed with the goal
of being perfectly parallel, where there is no multithreaded syn-
chronization used in the generation of its data (see Figure 1) [8].
Although Paranom’s data generation is perfectly parallel, user level
synchronization can be used, if needed, within the user-defined call-
back variables. This can be useful in generating unique data and
sequentially dependent time-series data, among other things.
3
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we describe how we used Paranom to improve the
accuracy of LSTM-AD, a state-of-the-art anomaly detection ML
model by Malhotra et al., compared to using only real data for a
space shuttle valve sensor anomaly [10]. 2
Experimental Setup. We trained two LSTM-AD models in Ten-
sorFlow [1]. One used only real space shuttle data. The other used
portions of the real non-anomalous data in conjunction with anoma-
lous data solely generated by Paranomas described below.
Similarities. Both models were constrained to the same training data
size (i.e., 10,000 data points) and tested against the same real test
data. All aspects of the LSTM-AD model (e.g., topology, activations,
etc.), as well as the training iterations, were identical in both settings.
2We have used Paranom to generate data for over a dozen different anomalous scenarios.
However, due to limited space, we include only one example from Malhotra et al.’s
LSTM-AD paper [10]. Paranom can also be used to generate only non-anomalous data
which can be useful for zero-positive learning [3].
Figure 3: Visualization of Paranom LSTM-AD space shuttle
training, testing and prediction data (red ovals are anomalies).
Differences. The model trained using Paranom’s generated train-
ing data did not use any of the real-world anomalous training data.
Instead, we created a Paranom callback variable that would gen-
erate anomalous data uniquely different from the real-world non-
anomalous data with a stochastically chosen value range. We then
had Paranom inject synthetic anomalies with a 1% frequency and a
variable anomaly duration range similar to its real anomalous events.
Results. The differences between the original training data and our
Paranom generated data can be seen in Figures 2 and 3, respec-
tively. Figure 2 shows the original data used to train LSTM-AD,
including six real anomalies (denoted by red ovals). It also shows
the LSTM-AD predictions against the test data after being trained
against the original data. Figure 3 shows our Paranom generated
training data, which includes Paranom’s synthetically generated sto-
chastic anomalies. Once trained against the real training data and
Paranom’s training data, we tested both LSTM-AD models against
the original testing data. The original model identified two of the six
anomalies. The Paranom model identified five of the six anomalies.
As can be seen in Figure 4, the Paranom LSTM-AD model had
improved accuracy, recall, F1, and F0.1 score when compared to the
model trained against only real data. The only LSTM-AD result
that was not improved was precision. This is because the Paranom
LSTM-AD model introduced some false positives.
Figure 4: The performance results of LSTM-AD when using its
original training data versus using Paranom’s training data.
4
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we briefly presented Paranom’s design and parallel
execution model. We provided an empirical illustration showing the
benefit of using Paranom’s synthetically created data to improve the
robustness of LSTM-AD, a state-of-the-art anomaly detection ML
model, by an order of magnitude for recall and F1 using Paranom’s
data over using only real data.

Paranom: A Parallel Anomaly Dataset Generator
XXXXXX, XXXXXXX, XXXXXXX
