arXiv:1006.0274v1  [cs.AI]  2 Jun 2010
Learning Probabilistic Hierarchical Task Networks to
Capture User Preferences
Nan Li
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15218 USA
William Cushing, Subbarao Kambhampati, and Sungwook Yoon
Department of Computer Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA
Abstract
We propose automatically learning probabilistic Hierarchical Task Networks (pH-
TNs) in order to capture a user’s preferences on plans, by observing only the
user’s behavior. HTNs are a common choice of representation for a variety of
purposes in planning, including work on learning in planning. Our contributions
are (a) learning structure and (b) representing preferences. In contrast, prior work
employing HTNs considers learning method preconditions (instead of structure)
and representing domain physics or search control knowledge (rather than pref-
erences). Initially we will assume that the observed distribution of plans is an
accurate representation of user preference, and then generalize to the situation
where feasibility constraints frequently prevent the execution of preferred plans.
In order to learn a distribution on plans we adapt an Expectation-Maximization
(EM) technique from the discipline of (probabilistic) grammar induction, taking
the perspective of task reductions as productions in a context-free grammar over
primitive actions. To account for the difference between the distributions of possi-
ble and preferred plans we subsequently modify this core EM technique, in short,
by rescaling its input.

and Sungwook Yoon )
Preprint submitted to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
November 8, 2018

Figure 1: Hierarchical task networks in a travel domain.
1. Introduction
Application of learning techniques to planning is an area of long standing re-
search interest. Most work in this area to-date has, however, only considered
learning domain physics or search control. The relatively neglected alternative,
and the focus of this work, is learning preferences. It has long been understood
that users may have complex preferences on plans (c.f. [1]). An effective repre-
sentation for preferences (among other possible purposes) is a Hierarchical Task
Network (HTN). In addition to domain physics (in terms of primitive actions and
their preconditions and effects), the planner is provided with a set of tasks (non-
primitives) and methods (schemas) for reducing each into a combination of prim-
itives and sub-tasks (which must then be reduced in turn). A plan (sequence of
primitive actions) is considered valid if and only if it (a) is executable and achieves
every speciﬁed goal, and (b) can be produced by recursively reducing a speciﬁed
task (the top-level task).
For the example in Figure 1 the top level task is to travel (and the goal is to
arrive at some particular destination); acceptable methods reduce the travel task
to either Gobytrain or Gobybus. In contrast, the plan of hitch-hiking (modeled as
a single action), while executable and goal achieving, is not considered valid —
the user in question loathes that mode of travel. In this way we can separately
model physics and (boolean) preferences; to accommodate degree of preference
(i.e., more than just accept/loathe) we attach probabilities to the methods reducing
tasks (and equate probable with preferred), arriving at probabilistic Hierarchical
Task Networks (pHTNs).
While pHTNs can effectively model preferences, manual construction (i.e.,
2

preference elicitation) is complex, error prone, and costly. In this paper, we focus
on automatically learning, i.e. by observing only user behavior, pHTNs capturing
user preferences. Our approach takes off from the view of task networks as gram-
mars [2, 3]. First, as mentioned, we generalize by considering pHTNs rather than
HTNs (to accommodate degree of preference).1 So each task is associated with
a distribution over its possible reduction schemas, and probable plans are inter-
preted as preferred plans. Then we exploit the connection between task reduction
schemas and production rules (in grammars) by adapting the considerable work on
grammar induction [4, 5, 6]. Speciﬁcally, we view plans as sentences (primitive
actions are seen as words) generated by a target grammar, adapt an expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithm for learning that grammar (given a set of example
plans/sentences), and interpret the result as a pHTN modeling user preference.
Note that in the foregoing we have assumed that the distribution of example
plans directly reﬂects user preference. Certainly preferred plans will be executed
more often than non-preferred plans, but with equal certainty, reality often forces
compromise.
For example, a (poor) graduate student may very well prefer, in
general, to travel by car, but will nonetheless be far more frequently observed
traveling by foot. In other words, by observing the plans executed by the user we
can relatively easily learn what the user usually does,2 and so can predict their
behavior as long as feasibility constraints remain the same. It is a much trickier
matter to infer what the user truly prefers to do, and it is this piece of knowledge
that would allow predicting what the user will do in a novel (and improved) sit-
uation. Towards this end, in the second part of the paper, we describe a novel,
but intuitive, extension of the core EM learning technique that rescales the input
distribution in order to undo possible ﬁltering due to feasibility constraints. The
idea is to automatically generate (presumably less preferred) alternatives (e.g. by
an automated planner) to the user’s observed behavior and use this additional in-
formation to appropriately reweight the distribution on observed plans.
In the following sections, we start by formally stating the problem of learning
probabilistic hierarchical task networks (pHTNs). Next, we discuss the relations
between probabilistic grammar induction and pHTN learning, and present an al-
gorithm that acquires pHTNs from example plan traces. The algorithm works
in two phases. The ﬁrst phase hypothesizes a set of schemas that can cover the
1Of course pHTNs can be trivially converted to HTNs if desired, by simply ignoring the learned
weights (and if desired, to prevent overﬁtting perhaps, removing particularly unlikely reductions
by setting some threshold).
2A useful piece of knowledge in the plan recognition scenario [2].
3

training examples, and the second is an expectation maximization phase that re-
ﬁnes the probabilities associated with the schemas. We then evaluate our approach
against models of users, by comparing the distributions of observed and predicted
plans. Subsequently we consider possible obfuscation from feasibility constraints
and describe our rescaling technique in detail. We go on to demonstrate its effec-
tiveness against randomized models of feasibility constraints. Finally we discuss
related work and summarize our contributions.
2. Probabilistic Hierarchical Task Networks
Deﬁnitions. A pHTN domain H is a 3-tuple, H = ⟨A, T , M⟩, where A is a set
of primitive actions, T is a set of tasks (non-primitives), and M is a set of meth-
ods (reduction schemas). A pHTN problem R is a 3-tuple, R = ⟨I, G, T⟩, with
I the initial state, G the goal, and T ∈T the top level task to be reduced. Each
method m ∈M is a (k + 2)-tuple, ⟨Z, θ, m1, m2, . . . , mk⟩, where each mi is a
task or primitive and θ is the probability of reducing Z by m: let M(Z) denote
all methods that can reduce Z, then P
m∈M(Z) θ(m) = 1. Without loss of gen-
erality,3 we restrict our attention to Chomsky normal form: each method decom-
poses a task into either two tasks or one primitive. So for any method m, either
m = ⟨Z, θ, X, Y ⟩(also written Z →XY, θ), with X, Y ∈T , or m = ⟨Z, θ, a⟩
(also written Z →a, θ) with a ∈A. Table 1 provides an example of a pHTN do-
main in Chomsky normal form modeling the Travel domain (see Figure 1), in the
hypothesis space of our learner (hence the meaningless task names). According
to the table, the user prefers traveling by train (80%) to traveling by bus (20%).
For primitives, we follow STRIPS semantics: Each primitive action deﬁnes
a transition function on states, and from an initial state I executing some se-
quence a1, a2, . . . , ak of primitives produces a sequence of states s0 = I, s1 =
a1(s0), s2 = a2(s1), . . . , sk = ak(sk−1), provided each ai has its preconditions
satisﬁed in si−1. Such a sequence is goal-achieving if the goal G is satisﬁed in the
ﬁnal state, sk (goals take the same form as preconditions).
Concerning tasks, a primitive sequence φ is a preferred solution if there exists
a parse of φ by the methods of H with root T (preferred), and φ is executable
from I and achieves G (solution). A parse X of φ by M with root T is a tree,
more speciﬁcally a rooted almost-binary directed ordered labeled tree, with (a)
3Any CFG can be put in Chomsky normal form by introducing sufﬁciently many auxiliary
non-primitives. This remains true for probabilistic context-free grammars.
4

root labeled by T, (b) leaves labeled by φ (in order), and (c) each internal vertex
is decomposed into its children (in order) by some m ∈M. For such internal
vertices, say v, let T(v), m(v), and θ(v) be the associated task, reducing method,
and prior probability of that reduction. The prior probability of an entire parse
tree is the product of θ(v) over every internal vertex v. Given a ﬁxed root, the
prior probability of a primitive sequence is the sum of prior probabilities of every
parse of that sequence with the ﬁxed root:
P(φ | H, T) =
X
parse X
P(X | T, H)
(1)
=
X
parse X
Y
internal v
θ(v);
(2)
note that the prior probability of a primitive sequence has nothing to do with
whether or not the sequence is goal-achieving or even executable. Enumerating
all parses could, however, become expensive, so in the remainder we approximate
by considering only the most probable parse of φ — deﬁne:
X ∗(φ) = argmaxparse X of φ
Y
internal v
θ(v).
(3)
Learning pHTNs. We can now state the pHTN learning problem formally. Fix
the total number of task symbols, k, and ﬁx the ﬁrst task symbol as the top level
task T. Given a set Φ of observed training plans (so each is executable and (pre-
sumably) goal-achieving), ﬁnd the most likely pHTN domain, H∗. We assume a
uniform prior distribution on domains with k task symbols, so it is equivalent to
maximizing the likelihood of the observation:
H∗= argmaxH P(H | Φ, T)
(4)
= argmaxH P(Φ | H, T) · P(H | T)
P(Φ | T)
= argmaxH P(Φ | H, T)
P(H | T)
P(Φ | T) = uniform prior
constant

= argmaxH
Y
φ∈Φ
P(φ | H, T).
(5)
Remark. The preceding incorporates several simplifying assumptions, most im-
portantly we are making the connection to context-free grammars as strong as
5

Table 1: A probabilistic Hierarchical Task Network in Chomsky normal form.
Primitives: Buyticket, Getin, Getout, Hitchhike;
Tasks: Travel, A1, A2, A3, B1, B2;
Travel →A2 B1, 0.2
Travel →A1 B2, 0.8
B1 →A1 A3, 1.0
B2 →A2 A3, 1.0
A1 →Buyticket, 1.0
A2 →Getin, 1.0
A3 →Getout, 1.0
possible. In particular our deﬁnitions do not permit conditions in the statement
of methods, so preferences such as “If in Europe, prefer trains to planes.” are not
directly expressible (and so not learnable) in general. Our deﬁnitions nominally
permit parameterized actions, tasks, and methods, but, there is no mechanism for
conditioning on parameters (e.g., varying the probability of a reduction based on
the value of a parameter), so it would seem that even indirectly modeling condi-
tional preference is impossible. This is both true and false; if one is willing to
entertain somewhat large values of k, then the learning problem can work with a
ground representation of a parameterized domain, thereby gaining the ability to
learn subtly different — or wildly different — sub-grammars for distinct ground-
ings of a parameterized task. Of course, the difﬁculty of the learning task depends
very strongly on k: in the following we map terms such as “(buy ?customer ?ven-
dor ?object ?location ?amount ?currency)” to symbols by truncation (“buy”) rather
than grounding (“buy mike joe bat walmart 3 dollars”) for just this reason. Fu-
ture work should consider parameters, and contextual dependencies in general, in
greater depth — perhaps by taking the perspective of feature selection (truncation
and grounding can be seen as extremes of feature selection) [7, 8].
3. Learning pHTNs from User Generated Plans
Our formalization of Hierarchical Task Networks is isomorphic, not just anal-
ogous, to formal deﬁnitions of Context Free Grammars (tasks ↔non-primitives,
actions ↔words, methods/schemas ↔production rules); this comes at a price,
but, the advantage is that grammar induction techniques are more or less directly
applicable. The technique of choice for learning probabilistic grammars, and so
the choice we adapt to learning pHTNs, is Expectation-Maximization [6].
Despite formal equivalence, casting the problem as learning pHTNs (rather
than pCFGs) does make a difference in what assumptions are appropriate. For
example, we do not allow annotations on the primitives of input sequences giving
6

hints concerning non-primitives; for language learning it is reasonable to assume
that such annotations are available, because the non-primitives involved are agreed
upon by multiple users (or there is no communication). In particular informa-
tion sources such as dictionaries and informal grammars can be mined relatively
cheaply. In the case of preference learning for plans, the non-primitives of interest
are user-speciﬁc mental constructs (preferences), and so it is far less reasonable to
assume that appropriate annotations could be obtained cheaply. So, unlike learn-
ing pCFGs, our system must invent all of its own non-primitive symbols without
any hints.
Our learner operates in two phases. First a structure hypothesizer (SH) invents
non-primitive symbols and associated reduction schemas (tasks and methods), as
needed, in a greedy fashion, to cover all the training examples. In the second
phase, the probabilities of the reduction schemas are iteratively improved by an
Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach. The result is a local optima in the
space of pHTN domains (instead of H∗= argmaxH P(H | Φ, T), the global
maximum).
3.1. Structure Hypothesizer (SH)
We develop a (greedy) structure hypothesizer (SH) in order to generate a set
of methods that can, at least, parse all plan examples, but more than that, parse
all the plan examples without resorting to various kinds of trivial grammars (for
example, parsing each plan example with a disjoint set of methods). The basic idea
is to iteratively factor out frequent common subsequences, in particular frequent
common pairs since we work in Chomsky normal form. We describe the details
in the following; Algorithm 1 summarizes in pseudocode.
SH learns reduction schemas in a bottom-up fashion. It starts by initializing H
with a separate reduction for each primitive (from distinct non-primitives); this is
a minor technical requirement of Chomsky normal form.4 Then all plan examples
are rewritten using this initial set of rules: so far not much of import has occurred.
Next the algorithm enters its main loop: hypothesizing additional schemas
until all plan examples can be parsed to an instance of the top level task, T.5
In short, SH hypothesizes a schema, rewrites the plan examples using the new
4It is not necessary to use a distinct non-primitive for each reduction to a primitive, but it
does not really hurt either, as synonymous primitives can be identiﬁed one level higher up in the
grammar at a small cost in number of rules.
5The implementation in fact allows the single rule T →Z instead of the set in line 1, but for
the sake of notation (elsewhere) we assume a strict representation here.
7

Algorithm 1: SH(plan examples Φ) returns pHTN H
H := {Za →a | a ∈A} ;
// primitive action schemas
1
rewrite-plans(Φ, H);
2
while not empty(Φ) do
3
case |φ := shortest-plan(Φ)| ≤2
4
if |φ| = 2 then H := H + (T →φ);
5
else H := H ∪{T →α | Z →α ∈H}
// φ = Z for some Z
6
case (⟨Z, X, d⟩:= best-simple-recursion(Φ)) is good enough
7
if d = left then H := H + (Z →Z X);
8
if d = right then H := H + (Z →X Z);
9
case otherwise
10
(X, Y ) := most-frequent-pair(Φ);
11
H := H + (ZXY →X Y );
// ZXY
is a new task
12
rewrite-plans(Φ, H);
// Plans rewritten to T are removed
13
end
14
initialize-probabilities(H);
15
return H
16
schema as much as possible and repeats until done. At that point probabilities
are initialized randomly, that is, by assigning uniformly distributed numbers to
each schema and normalizing by task (so that P
m∈M(Z) θ(m) becomes 1 for each
task Z) — the EM phase is responsible for ﬁtting the probabilities to the observed
distribution of plans.
In order to hypothesize a schema, SH ﬁrst searches for evidence of a recursive
schema: subsequences of symbols in the form {sz, ssz, sssz} or {zs, zss, zsss}
(simple repetitions). Certainly patterns such as zababab have recursive structure,
but these are identiﬁed at a later stage of the iteration. The frequency of such
simple repetitions in the entire plan set is measured, as is their average length. If
both meet minimum thresholds, then the appropriate recursive schema is added
to H. The thresholds themselves are functions of the average length and total
number of (rewritten, remaining) plan examples in Φ.
If not (i.e., one or both thresholds are not met), then the frequency count of
every pair of symbols is computed, and the maximum pair is added as a reduc-
tion from a distinct (i.e., new) non-primitive. In the prior example of a symbol
sequence zababab, eventually ab might win the frequency count, and be replaced
with some symbol, say s. After rewriting the example sequence then becomes
zsss, lending evidence in future iterations, of the kind SH recognizes, to the ex-
8

Figure 2: A trace of the Structure Hypothesizer on a variant of the Travel domain.
istence of a recursive schema (of the form z →zs); if such a recursive schema is
added, then eventually the sequence gets rewritten to just z.
Example. Consider a variant of the Travel domain (Figure 1) allowing the traveler
to purchase a day pass (instead of a single-trip ticket) for the train. Two training
plans are shown in Figure 2. First SH builds the primitive action schemas: A1 →
Buyticket, A2 →Getin, and A3 →Getout; the updated plan examples are shown
as level 2 in the Figure. Next, since A2A3 is the most frequent pair in the plans
(and there is insufﬁciently obvious evidence of recursion), SH constructs a rule
S1 →A2A3. After updating the plans with the new rule, the plans become A1S1
and A1S1S1S1, depicted as level 3 in the Figure. At this point SH realizes the
recursive structure (the simple repetition A1S1S1S1), and so adds the rule A1 →
A1S1. After rewriting all plans are parsable to the symbol A1 (let T = A1), so SH
is done: the ﬁnal set of schemas is at the bottom left of Figure 2.
3.2. Reﬁning Schema Probabilities: EM Phase
We take an Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach in order to learn appro-
priate parameters for the set of schemas returned by SH. EM is a gradient-ascent
method with two phases to each iteration: ﬁrst the current model is used to com-
pute expected values for the hidden variables (E-step: induces a well-behaved
lower bound on the true gradient), and then the model is updated to maximize
the likelihood of those particular values (M-step: ascends to the maximum of the
lower bound). Doing so will normally change the expected values of the hidden
variables, so the process is repeated until convergence, and convergence does in
fact occur [9]. For our problem, standard (soft-assignment) EM would compute
an entire distribution over all possible parses (of each plan, at each iteration); as
the grammars are automatically generated, there may very well be a huge number
of such parses. So instead we focus on computing just the parse considered most
9

likely by the current parameters, that is, we are employing the hard-assignment
variation of EM. One beneﬁcial side-effect is that this introduces bias in favor
of less ambiguous grammars — for in-depth analysis of the tradeoffs involved
in choosing between hard and soft assignment see [10, 11]. In the following we
describe the details of our specialization of (hard-assignment) EM.
In the E-step, the current model Hℓis used to compute the most probable
parse tree, X ∗
ℓ(φ), of each example φ (from the ﬁxed start symbol T): X ∗
ℓ(φ) =
argmaxparse X P(X | φ, T, Hℓ). This computation can be implemented reasonably
efﬁciently in a bottom-up fashion since any subtree of a most probable parse is also
a most probable parse (of the subsequence it covers, given its root, etc.). The ﬁrst
level is particularly simple since we associated every primitive, a, with a distinct
non-primitive, Za (so its most probable, indeed only, parse is just Za →a). The
remainder of the parsing computes:
P(ai, . . . , aj | Z, Hℓ) =
max
k;Z→XY,θ∈Hℓθ · P(ai, . . . , ak | X, Hℓ) · P(ak+1, . . . , aj | Y, Hℓ),
(6)
for all indices i < j ∈[n] and tasks (non-terminals) Z (so the parsing com-
putes O(n2m) maximizations, each in O(nr/m) steps, for a worst-case runtime of
O(n3r) on a plan of length n with m tasks and r rules in the pHTN). Conceviably
one of the reduction schemas might exist with 0 probability: the implementation
prunes such schemas rather than waste computation. By recording the rule and
midpoint (k) winning each maximization, the most probable parse of φ, X ∗
ℓ(φ),
can be easily extracted (beginning at P(a1, . . . , an | T, Hℓ)).
After getting the most probable parse trees for all plan examples, the learner
moves on to the M-step. In this step, the probabilities associated with each re-
duction schema are updated by maximizing the likelihood of generating those
particular parse trees; let X = {X ∗
ℓ(φ) | φ ∈Φ} and let M[event] count how
many times the speciﬁed event happens in X (for example, M[Z], for some task
Z, is the total number of times Z appears in the parses X). Then:
Hℓ+1 = argmaxH′
Y
X ∗∈X
P(X ∗| T, H′),
= argmaxH′
Y
X ∗∈X
Y
Z→XY ∈X ∗
P(Z →XY | H′),
= argmaxH′
Y
Z
Y
Z→XY,θZXY ∈H′
θM[Z→XY ]
ZXY
,
(7)
10

where the maximization is only over different parameterizations (not over all pH-
TNs). Each task Z enjoys independent parameters, and from above the likelihood
expression is a multinomial in those parameters (θZXY = P(Z →XY | H′)),
and so can be maximized simply by setting:
P(Z →XY | Hℓ+1) := M[Z →XY ]
M[Z]
.
(8)
That is, the E-step completes the input data Φ by computing the parses of Φ
expected by Hℓ; subsequently the M-step treats those parses as ground truth, and
sets the new reduction probabilities to the ‘observed’ frequency of such reductions
in the completed data. This improves the likelihood of the model, and the process
is repeated until convergence.
Discussion: Although the EM phase of learning does not introduce new reduc-
tion schemas, it does participate in structure learning in the sense that it effectively
deletes reduction schemas by assigning zero probability to them. For this reason
SH does not attempt to ﬁnd a completely minimal grammar before running EM.
Nonetheless it is important that SH generates small grammars, as otherwise over-
ﬁtting could become a serious problem. Worst choices of a hypothetical structure
learner would include the trivial grammar that produces all and only the training
plans; if this occurs the EM algorithm above would happily drive the probabil-
ity of all other rules to 0 as the included trivial grammar would allow the perfect
reproduction of training data.
3.3. Evaluation
To evaluate our pHTN learning approach, we designed and carried out experi-
ments in both synthetic and benchmark domains. All the experiments were run on
a 2.13 GHz Windows PC with 1.98GB of RAM. Although we focus on accuracy
(rather than CPU time), we should clarify up-front that the runtime for learning is
quite reasonable — between (almost) 0ms to 44ms per training plan. We take an
oracle-based experimental strategy, that is, we generate an oracle pHTN H∗(to
represent a possible user) and then subsequently use it to generate behavior Φ (a
set of preferred plans). Our learner then induces a pHTN H from only Φ; so then
we can assess the effectiveness of the learning in terms of the differences between
the original and learned models. In some settings (e.g., knowledge discovery) it is
very interesting to directly compare the syntax of learned models against ground
truth, but for our purposes such comparisons are much less interesting: we can be
certain that, syntactically, H will look nothing like a real user’s preferences (as
11

expressed in pHTN form) for the trivial reason (among others) that H will be in
Chomsky normal form. For our purposes it is enough for H to generate an approx-
imately correct distribution on plans. So the ideal evaluation is some measure of
the distance between distributions (on plans), for example Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence:
DKL(PH∗|| PH) =
X
φ
PH∗(φ) · log PH∗(φ)
PH(φ) ,
(9)
where PH and PH∗are the distributions of plans generated by H and H∗respec-
tively. This measure is 0 for equal distributions, and otherwise goes to inﬁnity.
However, as given the summation is over the inﬁnite set of all plans, so instead
we approximate by sampling, but this exacerbates a deeper problem: the measure
is trivially inﬁnite if PH gives 0 probability to any plan (that PH∗does not). So
in the following we take measurements by sampling X plans from H∗and H,
obtaining sample distributions ˆPH∗and ˆPH, and then we prune any plans not in
ˆPH∗∩ˆPH, renormalize, obtaining ˆP′
H∗(say P1) and ˆP′
H (say P2), and ﬁnally
compute:
ˆD(H∗|| H) = DKL(P1 || P2) =
X
φ
P1(φ) · log P1(φ)
P2(φ).
(10)
This is not a good approach if the intersection is small, but in our experiments
| ˆPH∗∩ˆPH|/| ˆPH∗∪ˆPH| is close to 1. This modiﬁcation also imposes an upper
bound on the measure, of about O(log X).
3.4. Experiments in Randomly Generated Domains
In these experiments, we randomly generate the oracle pHTN H∗, by ran-
domly generating a set of recursive and non-recursive schemas on n non-primitives.
In non-recursive domains, the randomly generated schemas form a binary and-or
tree with the goal as the root. The probabilities are also assigned randomly. Gen-
erating recursive domains is similar with the only difference being that 10% of the
schemas generated are recursive. For measuring overrall performance we provide
10n training plans and take 100n samples for testing; for any given n we repeat
the experiment 100 times and plot the mean. The results are shown in Figure 3(a).
We also discuss two additional, more specialized, evaluations.
Rate of Learning: In order to test the learning speed, we ﬁrst measured KL di-
vergence values with 15 non-primitives given different numbers of training plans.
12

15
30
45
60
75
90
105 120 135 150
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Number of Training Plans
KL Divergence
 
 
Non−recursive Schemas
Recursive Schemas
(a)
10
20
30
40
50
5
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Number of Non−primitive Actions
The Ratio of Number of Actions
 
 
Non−recursive Schemas
Recursive Schemas
(b)
Figure 3: Experimental results in synthetic domains (a) KL Divergence values with different num-
ber of training plans. (b) Measuring conciseness in terms of the ratio between the number of
actions in the learned and original schemas.
The results are shown in Figure 3(a). We can see that even with a relatively small
number of training examples, our learning mechanism can still construct pHTN
schemas with divergence no more than 0.2; as expected the learning performance
further improves given many training examples. As brieﬂy discussed in the setup
our measure is not interesting unless the learned pHTN can reproduce most test-
ing plans with non-zero probability, since any 0 probability plans are ignored in
the measurement — so we do not report results given only a very small number
of training examples (the value would be artiﬁcially close to 0). Here ‘very small’
means too small to give at least one example of every/most reductions in the ora-
cle schema; without at least one example the structure hypothesizer will (rightly)
prevent the generation of plans with such structure.
Effectiveness of the EM Phase: To examine the effect of the EM phase, we car-
ried out experiments comparing the divergence (to the oracle) before and after
running the EM phase. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) plot results in the non-recursive and
recursive cases respectively. Overall the EM phase is quite effective, for example,
with 50 non-primitives in the non-recursive setting the EM phase is able to im-
prove the divergence from 0.818 (the divergence of the model produced by SH) to
the much smaller divergence of 0.066.
Conciseness: The conciseness of the learned model is also an important factor
measuring the quality of the approach (despite being a syntactic rather than se-
mantic notion), since allowing huge pHTNs will overﬁt (with enough available
symbols the learner could, in theory, just memorize the training data). A simple
13

10
20
30
40
50
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of Non−primitive Actions
KL Divergence
 
 
Greedy Schemas
Learned Schemas After EM
(a)
10
20
30
40
50
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of Non−primitive Actions
KL Divergence
 
 
Greedy Schemas
Learned Schemas After EM
(b)
Figure 4: Experimental results in synthetic domains (a) KL Divergence between plans generated
by original and learned schemas in non-recursive domains. (b) KL Divergence between plans
generated by original and learned schemas in recursive domains.
measure of conciseness, the one we employ, is the ratio of non-primitives in the
learned model to non-primitives in the oracle (n) — the learner is not told how
many symbols were used to generate the training data. Figure 3(b) plots results.
For small domains (around n = 10) the learner uses between 10 and 20% more
non-primitives, a fairly positive result. However, for larger domains this result
degrades to 60% more non-primitives, a somewhat negative result. Albeit the di-
vergence measure improves — on the hidden test set — so while there is some
evidence of possible overﬁtting the result is not alarming. Future work in struc-
ture learning should nonetheless examine this issue (conciseness and overﬁtting)
in greater depth.
Note: Divergence in the recursive case is consistently larger than in the non-
recursive case across all experiments: this is expected. In the recursive case the
plan space is actually inﬁnite; in the non-recursive case there are only ﬁnitely
many plans that can be generated. So, for example, in the non-recursive case, it is
actually possible for a ﬁnite sample set to perfectly represent the true distribution
(simply memorizing the training data will produce 0 divergence eventually).
3.5. Benchmark Domains
In addition to the experiments with synthetic domains, we also picked two of
the well known benchmark planning domains and simulated possible users (in the
form of hand-constructed pHTNs).
Logistics Planning: The domain we used in the ﬁrst experiment is a variant of
14

Table 2: Learned schemas in Logistics
Primitives: load, ﬂy, drive, unload;
Tasks: movePackage, S0, S1, S2, S3, S4, S5;
movePackage →movePackage movePackage, 0.17
movePackage →S0 S5, 0.25
S5 →S3 S2, 1.0
movePackage →S0 S4, 0.58
S4 →S1 S2, 1.0
S0 →load, 1.0
S1 →ﬂy, 1.0
S2 →unload, 1.0
S3 →drive, 1.0
the Logistics Planning domain, inside which both planes and trucks are available
to move packages, and every location is reachable from every other. There are 4
primitives in the domain: load, ﬂy, drive and unload; we use 11 tasks to express,
in the form of an oracle pHTN H∗(in Chomsky normal form, hence 11 tasks), our
preferences concerning logistics planning. We presented 100 training plans to the
learning system; these demonstrate our preference for moving packages by planes
rather than trucks and for using overall fewer vehicles.
The divergence of the learned model is 0.04 (against a hidden test set, on a
single run). While we are generally unconcerned with the syntax of the learned
model, it is interesting to consider in this case: Table 2 shows the learned model.
With some effort one can verify that the learned schemas do capture our prefer-
ences: the second and third schemas for ‘movePackage’ encode delivering a pack-
age by truck and by plane respectively (and delivering by plane has signiﬁcantly
higher probability), and the ﬁrst schema permits repeatedly moving packages,
but with relatively low probability. That is, it is possible to recursively expand
‘movePackage’ so that one package ends up transferring vehicles, but, the plan
that uses only one instance of the ﬁrst schema per package is signiﬁcantly more
probable (by 0.17−k for k transfers between vehicles).
Gold Miner: The second domain we used is Gold Miner, introduced in the learn-
ing track of the 2008 International Planning Competition. The setup is a (futuris-
tic) robot tasked with retrieving gold (blocked by rocks) within a mine; the robot
can employ bombs and/or a laser cannon. The laser cannon can destroy both hard
and soft rocks, while bombs only destroy soft rocks, however, the laser cannon
will also destroy any gold immediately behind its target. The desired strategy,
which we encode in pHTN form using 12 tasks (H∗), for this domain is: 1) get
the laser cannon, 2) shoot the rock until reaching the cell next to the gold, 3) get
15

Table 3: Learned schemas in Gold Miner
Primitives: move, getLaserGun, shoot, getBomb, getGold;
Tasks: goal, S0, S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, S6;
goal →S0 goal, 0.78
goal →S1 S6, 0.22
S0 →move, 1.0
S5 →S2 S0, 1.0
S1 →getLaserGun, 0.22
S1 →S1 S5, 0.78
S2 →shoot, 1.0
S6 →S3 S4, 1.0
S3 →getBomb, 0.29
S3 →S3 S0, 0.71
S4 →getGold, 1.0
a bomb, 4) use the bomb to get gold.
We gave the system 100 training plans of various lengths (generated by H∗);
the learner achieved a divergence of 0.52. This is a signiﬁcantly larger divergence
than in the case of Logistics above, which can be explained by the signiﬁcantly
greater use of recursion (one can think of Logistics as less recursive and Gold
Miner as more recursive, and as noted in the random experiments, recursive do-
mains are much more challenging). Nonetheless the learner did succeed in quali-
tatively capturing our preferences, which can be seen by inspection of the learned
model in Table 3. Speciﬁcally, the learned model only permits plans in the order
given above: get the laser cannon, shoot, get and then use the bomb, and ﬁnally
get the gold.
4. Preferences Constrained by Feasibility
In general, users will not be so all-powerful that behavior and desire coincide.
Instead a user must settle for one (presumably the most desirable) of the feasi-
ble possibilities. Supposing those possibilities remain constant then there is little
point in distinguishing desire and behavior; indeed, the philosophy of behaviorism
deﬁnes preference by considering such controlled experiments. Supposing instead
that feasible possibilties vary over time, then the distinction becomes very impor-
tant. One example we have already considered is that of a poor grad student: in the
rare situation that such a student’s travel is funded, then it would be desirable to
realize the preference for planes over cars. In addition to that example, consider
the requirement to go to work on weekdays (so the constraint does not hold on
weekends). Clearly the weekend activities are the preferred activities. However,
the learning approach developed so far would be biased — by a factor of 5
2 — in
16

favor of the weekday activities. In the following we consider how to account for
this effect: the effect of feasibility constraints upon learning preferences.
Recall that we assume that we can directly observe a user’s behavior, for exam-
ple by building upon the work in plan recognition. In this section we additionally
assume that we have access to the set of feasible alternatives to the observed be-
havior — for example by assuming access to the planning problem the user faced
and building upon the work in automated planning [12].6 For our purposes it is
not a large sacriﬁce to exclude any number of feasible alternatives that have never
been chosen by the user (in some other situation), in particular we are not con-
cerned about the potentially enormous number of feasible alternatives (because
we can restrict our attention to a subset on the order of the number of observed
plans).7 So, in this section, the input to the learning problem becomes:
Input.
The ith observation, (φi, Fi) ∈Φ, consists of a set of feasible possi-
bilities, Fi, along with the chosen solution: φi ∈Fi.
In the rest of the section we consider how to exploit this additional training
information (and how to appropriately deﬁne the new learning task). The main
idea is to rescale the input (i.e., attach weights to the observed plans φi) so that rare
situations are not penalized with respect to common situations. We approach this
from the perspective that preferences should be transitively closed, and as a side-
effect we might end up with disjoint sets of incomparable plans. Subsequently we
apply the base learner to each, rescaled, component of comparable plans to obtain
a set of pHTNs capturing user preferences. Note that the result of the system can
now be ‘unknown’ in response to ‘is A preferred to B?’, in the case that A and
B are not simultaneously parsable by any of the learned pHTNs. This additional
capability somewhat complicates evaluation (as the base system can only answer
’yes’ or ’no’ to such queries).
6Since we already assume plan recognition, it is not a signﬁcant stretch to assume knowledge
of the planning problem itself. Indeed, planning problems are often recast as a broken plan on two
dummy actions (initial and terminal), and solutions as insertions that ﬁx the problem-as-plan. In
particular recognizing plans subsumes, in general, recognizing problems.
7Work in diverse planning [13, 14] is, then, quite relevant (to picking a subset of feasible
alternatives of manageable size).
17

4.1. Analysis
Previously we assumed the training data (observed plans) Φ was sampled
(i.i.d.) directly from the user’s true preference distribution (say U):
P(Φ | U) =
Y
φ∈Φ
P(φ | U).
But now we assume that varying feasibility constraints intervene. For the sake
of notation, imagine that such variation is in the form of a distribution, say F,
over planning problems (but all that is actually required is that the variation is
independent of preferences, as assumed below). Note that a planning problem is
logically equivalent to its solution set. Then we can write P(F | F) to denote
the prior probability of any particular set of solutions F. Since the user chooses
among such solutions, we have that chosen plans are sampled from the posterior,
over solutions, of the preference distribution:
P(Φ | U, F) =
Y
(φ,F )∈Φ
P(φ | U, F) · P(F | F).
We assume that preferences and feasibility constraints are mutually independent:
what is possible does not depend upon desire, and desire does not depend upon
what is possible. One can certainly imagine either dependence — respectively
Murphy’s Law (or its complement) and the fox in Aesop’s fable of Sour Grapes
(or envy) — but it seems to us more reasonable to assume independence. Then
we can rewrite the posterior of the preference distribution:
P(Φ | U, F) =
Y
(φ,F )∈Φ
P(φ | U)
P
φ′∈F P(φ′ | U) · P(F | F)
(by assumption).
Anyways assuming independence is important, because it makes the preference
learning problem attackable. In particular, the posteriors preserve relative prefer-
ences — for all φ, φ′ ∈F, the odds of selecting φ over φ′ are:
O(φ, φ′) := P(φ | U, F)
P(φ′ | U, F),
=
P(φ | U)
P
φ′′∈F P(φ′′ | U) ÷
P(φ′ | U)
P
φ′′∈F P(φ′′ | U),
= P(φ | U)
P(φ′ | U).
18

Therefore we can, given sufﬁciently many of the posteriors, reconstruct the prior
by transitive closure; consider φ, φ′, φ′′ with φ, φ′ ∈F and φ′, φ′′ ∈F ′:
O(φ, φ′′) = O(φ, φ′) · O(φ′, φ′′),
= P(φ | U, F)
P(φ′ | U, F) · P(φ′ | U, F ′)
P(φ′′ | U, F ′).
So then the prior can be had by normalization:
P(φ | U) =
1
1 + P
φ′̸=φ O(φ′, φ).
Of course none of the above distributions are accessible; the learning problem is
only given Φ. Let MF[φ] = |{i | (φ, F) = (φi, Fi) ∈Φ}|, MF = P
φ MF[φ], and
M = P
F MF = |Φ|. Then Φ deﬁnes a sampling distribution:
ˆP(φ, F | Φ) = MF[φ]
M
,
so,
ˆP(φ | F, Φ) = MF[φ]
MF
,
≈P(φ | U, F)
(in the limit),
in particular:
ˆOF(φ, φ′) := MF[φ]
MF[φ′] ≈P(φ | U)
P(φ′ | U)
(in the limit)
(11)
for any F — but for anything less than an enormous amount of data one expects
ˆOF and ˆOF ′ to differ considerably for F ̸= F ′, therein lying one of the subtle
aspects of the following rescaling algorithm. The intuition is, however, simple
enough: pick some base plan φ and set its weight to an appropriately large value
w, and then set every other weight, for example that of φ′, to w · ˆO(φ′, φ) (where
ˆO is some kind of aggregation of the differing estimates ˆOF); ﬁnally give the
weighted set of observed plans to the base learner. From the preceding analysis,
in the limit of inﬁnite data, this setup will learn the (closest approximation, within
the base learner’s hypothesis space, to the) prior distribution on preferences.
To address the issue that different situations will give different estimates (due
to sampling error) for the relative preference of one plan to another ( ˆOF and ˆOF ′
will differ) we employ a merging process on such overlapping situations. Consider
19

two weighted sets of plans, c and d, and interpret8 the weight of a plan as the
number of times it ‘occurs’, e.g., wc(φ) = Mc[φ]. In the simple case that there is
only a single plan in the intersection, {α} = c ∩d, there is only one way to take a
transitive closure — for all φ in c and φ′ ∈d \ c:
ˆOcd(φ, φ′) = ˆOc(φ, α) · ˆOd(α, φ′),
= Mc[φ]
Mc[α] · Md[α]
Md[φ′],
=
Mc[φ]
s · Md[φ′],
with s = Mc[α]
Md[α],
so in particular we can merge d into c by ﬁrst rescaling d:
Mcd[φ] =
(
Mc[φ]
if φ ∈c
s · Md[φ]
otherwise .
In general let scd
α
=
Mc[α]
Md[α] for any α ∈c ∩d be the scale factor of c and d
w.r.t. α. Then in the case that there are multiple plans in the intersection we are
faced with multiple ways of performing a transitive closure, i.e., a set of scale
factors. These will normally be different from one another, but, in the limit of
data, assuming preferences and feasibility constraints are actually independent of
one another, every scale factor between two clusters will be equal. So, then, we
take the average:
scd :=
1
|c ∩d| ·
X
α∈c∩d
scd
α ,
and,
(12)
Mcd[φ] :=
(
Mc[φ]
if φ ∈c
scd · Md[φ]
otherwise .
(13)
In short, if all the assumptions are met, and enough data is given, the described
process will reproduce the correct prior distribution on preferences. Algorithm 2
provides the remaining details in pseudocode, and in the following we discuss
these details and the result of the rescaling process operating in the Travel domain.
8The scaling calculations could produce non-integer weights.
20

4.2. Rescaling
Output.
The result of rescaling is a set of clusters of weighted plans, C =
{c1, c2, . . . , cn}. Each cluster, c ∈C, consists of a set of plans with associated
weights; we write p ∈c for membership and wc(p) for the associated weight.
Clustering. First we collapse all of the input records from the same or similar sit-
uations into single weighted clusters, with one count going towards each instance
of an observed plan participating in the collapse. For example, suppose we ob-
serve 3 instances of Gobyplane chosen in preference to Gobytrain and 1 instance
of the reverse in similar or identical situations. Then we will end up with a cluster
with weights 3 and 1 for Gobyplane and Gobytrain respectively. In other words
wc(p) is the number of times p was chosen by the user in the set of situations col-
lapsing to c (or ǫ if p was never chosen). This happens in lines 2–2 of Algorithm 2,
which also deﬁnes ‘similar’ (as set inclusion). Future work should consider more
sophisticated clustering methods.
Transitive Closure. Next we make indirect inferences between clusters; this hap-
pens by iteratively merging clusters with non-empty intersections. Consider two
clusters, c and d, in the Travel domain. Say d contains Gobyplane and Gobytrain
with counts 3 and 1 respectively, and c contains Gobytrain and Gobybike with
counts 5 and 1 respectively. From this we infer that Gobyplane would be executed
15 times more frequently than Gobybike in a situation where all 3 plans (Goby-
plane, Gobytrain, and Gobybike) are possible, since it is executed 3 times more
frequently than Gobytrain which is in turn executed 5 times more frequently than
Gobybike. We represent this inference by scaling one of the clusters so that the
shared plan has the same weight, and then take the union. In the example, suppos-
ing we merge d into c, then we scale d so that c ∩d = {Gobytrain} has the same
weight in both c and d, i.e. we scale d by 5 = wc(Gobytrain)
wd(Gobytrain). For pairs of clusters
with more than one shared plan we scale d\c by the average of wc(·)
wd(·) for each plan
in the intersection, but we leave the weights of c ∩d as in c (one could consider
several alternative strategies for plans in the intersection). Computing the scaling
factor happens in lines 2–2 and the entire merging process happens in lines 2–2 of
Algorithm 2.
4.3. Learning
We learn a set of pHTNs for C by applying the base learner (with the obvious
generalization to weighted input) to each c ∈C:
H = {Hc = EM(SH(c)) | c ∈C}.
(14)
21

Algorithm 2: Rescaling
Input: Training records Φ.
Output: Clusters C.
initialize C to empty
1
forall (φ, F) ∈Φ do
2
if ∃c ∈C such that F ⊆c or F ⊇c then
3
forall p ∈F \ c do
4
add p to c with wc(p) := ǫ
5
end
6
if wc(φ) ≥1 then
7
increment wc(φ)
8
else
9
wc(φ) := 1
10
end
11
else
12
initialize c to empty
13
add c to C
14
forall p ∈F do
15
add p to c with wc(p) := ǫ
16
end
17
wc(φ) := 1
18
end
19
end
20
while ∃c, d ∈C such that c ∩d ̸= ∅do
21
sum ratios := 0
22
forall p ∈c ∩d do
23
sum ratios += wc(p)
wd(p)
24
end
25
scale := sum ratios
|c ∩d|
26
forall p ∈d \ c do
27
add p to c with wc(p) := wd(p) · scale
28
end
29
remove d from C
30
end
31
return C
32
22

1
2
3
4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
log (Number of Training Records / 5)
Average Score
 
 
OA
EA
(a)
5
10
15
20
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of Nonprimitives
Average Score
 
 
OA−NR
EA−NR
OA−R
EA−R
(b)
Figure 5: Experimental results for random H∗. “EA” is learning with rescaling and “OA” is
learning without rescaling. (a) Learning rate. (b) Size dependence: “R” for recursive H∗and
“NR” for non-recursive H∗.
While the input clusters will be disjoint, the base learner may very well generalize
its input such that various pairs of plans become comparable in multiple pHTNs
within H. Any disagreement is resolved by voting; recall that, given a pHTN H
and a plan p, we can efﬁciently compute the most probable parse of p by H and
its (a priori) likelihood, say ℓH(p). Given two plans p and q we let ≺H order p and
q by ℓH(·), i.e., p ≺H q ⇐⇒ℓH(p) < ℓH(q); if either is not parsable (or tied)
then they are incomparable by H. Given a set of pHTNs H = {H1, H2, . . .}, we
take a simple majority vote to decide p ≺H q (ties are incomparable):
p ≺H q ⇐⇒|{H ∈H | q ≺H p}| < |{H ∈H | p ≺H q}|.
(15)
So, each pHTN votes, based on likelihood, for p ≺q (meaning p is preferred
to q), or q ≺p (q is preferred to p), or abstains (the preference is unknown).
Summarizing, the input Φ is 1) clustered and 2) transitively closed, producing
clusters C, 3) each of which is given to the base learner, resulting in a set of
pHTNs H modeling the user’s preferences via the relation ≺H.
4.4. Evaluation
In this part we are primarily interested in evaluating the rescaling extension of
the learning technique, i.e., the ability to learn preferences despite feasibility con-
straints. We design a simple experiment to demonstrate that learning purely from
observations is easily confounded by constraints placed in the way of user pref-
23

erences, and that our rescaling technique is able to recover preference knowledge
despite obfuscation.
4.4.1. Setup
Performance. We again take an oracle-based experimental strategy, that is,
we imagine a user with a particular ideal pHTN, H∗, representing that user’s pref-
erences, and then test the efﬁcacy of the learner at recovering knowledge of pref-
erences based on observations of the imaginary user. More speciﬁcally we test the
learner’s performance in the following game. After training the learner produces
Hr; to evaluate the effectiveness of Hr we pick random plan pairs and ask both
H∗and Hr to pick the preferred plan. There are three possibilities: Hr agrees
with H∗(+1 point), Hr disagrees with H∗(-1 point), and Hr declines to choose
(0 points)9.
The distribution on testing plans is not uniform and will be described below.
The number of plan pairs used for testing is scaled by the size of H∗; 100t pairs
are generated, where t is the number of non-primitives. The ﬁnal performance for
one instance of the game is the average number of points earned per testing pair.
Pure guessing, then, would get (in the long-term) 0 performance.
User. As in the prior evaluation we evaluate on 1) randomly generated pHTNs
modeling possible users, and on 2) hand-crafted pHTNs modeling our preferences
in Logistics and Gold Miner.
Training Data. For both randomly generated and hand-crafted users we use the
same framework for generating training data. We generate random problems by
generating random solution sets in a particular fashion, that is, we model feasibility
constraints using a particular random distribution on solution sets. We describe
this process in detail below, but note that the details are unimportant (we did not try
any alternatives to the choices given); what matters is whether or not the process
is a reasonable model of the effect of feasibility constraints (insofar as they affect
the learning problem).
We begin by constructing a list of plans, P, from 100t samples of H∗, remov-
ing duplicates (so |P| ≤100t). Due to duplicate removal, less preferred plans
occur later than more preferred plans (on average). We reverse that order, and
associate P with (a discrete approximation to) a power-law distribution. Both
training and test plans are drawn from this distribution. Then, for each training
9This gives rescaling a potentially signiﬁcant advantage, as learning alone always chooses. We
also tested scoring “no choice” at -1 point; the results did not (signiﬁcantly) differ.
24

record (φi, Fi), we take a random number10 of samples from P as Fi. We sample
the observed plan, φi, from Fi by ℓ, that is, the probability of a particular choice
φi = p is
ℓ(p)
P
q∈F ℓ(q).
Note, then, that the random solution sets model the “worst case” of feasibility
constraints, in the sense that it is the least preferred plans that are most often
feasible — much of the time the hypothetical user will be forced to pick the least
evil rather than the greatest good.
Baseline. The baseline for our experiments will be the original approach: the base
learner without rescaling. That is, we take a single cluster, where the weight of
each plan is the number of times it is observed w(φ) = |{i | φ = φi}|, and apply
the base learner, obtaining a single pHTN, Hb = {H}, and score it in the same
manner that the extended approach is scored by.
4.4.2. Results: Random H∗
Rate of Learning.
Figure 5(a) presents the results of a learning-rate experi-
ment against randomly selected H∗. For these experiments the number of non-
primitives is ﬁxed at 5 while the amount of training data is varied; we plot the
average performance, over 100 samples of H∗, at each training set size.
We can see that with a large number of training records, rescaling before learn-
ing is able to capture nearly full user preferences, whereas learning alone performs
slightly worse than random chance. This is expected since without rescaling the
learning is attempting to reproduce its input distribution, which was the distribu-
tion on observed plans — and “feasibility” is inversely related to preference by
construction. That is, given the question “Is A preferred to B?” the learning alone
approach instead answers the question “Is A executed more often than B?”.
Size Dependence. We also tested the performance of the two approaches un-
der varying number of non-primitives (using 50t training records); the results are
shown in Figure 5(b). For technical reasons, the base learner is much more effec-
tive at recovering user preferences when these take the form of recursive schemas,
so there is less room for improvement. Nonetheless the rescaling approach im-
proves upon learning alone in both experiments.
10The number of samples taken is selected from |P| · |N(′, ∞)|/2, subject to minimum 2 and
maximum |P|, where N(.) is the normal distribution. Larger solution sets model ‘easier’ planning
problems.
25

4.4.3. Results: Hand-crafted H∗
We re-use the same pHTNs encoding our preferences in Logistics and Gold
Miner from the ﬁrst set of evaluations. As mentioned we use the same setup as
in the random experiments, so it continues to be the case that the distribution on
random ‘solutions’ is biased against the encoded preferences. Moreover, due to
the level of abstraction used (truncating to action names), as well as the nature of
the pHTNs and domains in question, the randomly generated sets of alternatives,
Fi, are in fact sets of solutions to some problem expressed in the normal fashion
(i.e., as an initial state and goal).
Logistics. After training with 550 training records (50t, for 11 non-primitives)
the baseline system scored only 0.342 (0 is the performance of random guessing)
whereas rescaling before learning performed signiﬁcantly better with a score of
0.847 (0.153 away from perfect performance).
Gold Miner: After training with 600 examples (50t for 12 non-primitives) learn-
ing alone scored a respectable 0.605, still, rescaling before learning performed
better with a score of 0.706. Note that the greater recursion in Gold Miner, as com-
pared to Logistics, is both hurting and helping. On the one hand the full approach
scores worse (0.706 vs. 0.847), on the other hand, the baseline’s performance is
hugely improved (0.605 vs. 0.342). As discussed previously, the presence of re-
cursion in the preference model makes the learning problem much harder (since
the space of acceptable plans is then actually inﬁnite), which continues to be a
reasonable explanation of the ﬁrst effect (degrading performance).
The latter effect is more subtle. The experimental setup, roughly speaking,
inverts the probability of selecting a plan, so that using a recursive method many
times in an observed plan is more likely than using the same method only a few
times. Then the baseline approach is attempting to learn a distribution skewed to-
wards greater use of recursion overall, and in particular, a distribution that prefers
more recursion to less recursion all else being equal. However, there is no pHTN
that prefers more recursion to less recursion all else being equal; fewer uses of a
recursive method always increases the probability of a plan. So the baseline will
ﬁt an inappropriately large probability to any recursive method, but, it will still
make the correct decision between two plans differing only in the depth of their
recursion over that method. Naive Bayes Classiﬁers exhibit a similar effect [9,
Box 17.A].
26

5. Discussion and Related Work
In the planning community, HTN planning has for a long time been given two
distinct and sometimes conﬂicting interpretations (c.f. [3]): it can be interpreted
either in terms of domain abstraction11 or in terms of expressing complex (not
ﬁrst order Markov) constraints on plans12. The original HTN planners were moti-
vated by the former view (improving efﬁciency via abstraction). In this view, only
top-down HTN planning makes sense as the HTN is supposed to express effective
search control. Paradoxically, w.r.t. that motivation, the complexity of HTN plan-
ning is substantially worse than planning with just primitive actions [15]. The lat-
ter view explains the seeming paradox easily — ﬁnding a solution should be eas-
ier, in general, than ﬁnding one that also satisﬁes additional complex constraints.
From this perspective both top-down and bottom-up approaches to HTN planning
are appropriate (the former if one is pessimistic concerning the satisﬁability of the
complex constraints, and the latter if one is optimistic). Indeed, this perspective
lead to the development of bottom-up approaches [16].
Despite this dichotomy, most prior work on learning HTN models (e.g. [17,
18, 19, 20]) has focused only on the domain abstraction angle. Typical approaches
here require the structure of the reduction schemas to be given as input, and fo-
cus on learning applicability conditions for the non-primitives. In contrast, our
work focuses on learning HTNs as a way to capture user preferences, given only
successful plan traces. The difference in focus also explains the difference in
evaluation techniques. While most previous HTN learning efforts are evaluated in
terms of how close the learned schemas and applicability conditions are, syntac-
tically, to the actual model, we evaluate in terms of how close the distribution of
plans generated by the learned model is to the distribution generated by the actual
model.
An intriguing question is whether pHTNs learned to capture user preferences
can, in the long run, be over-loaded with domain semantics. In particular, it
would be interesting to combine the two HTN learning strands by sending our
learned pHTNs as input to the method applicability condition learners. Presum-
ing the user’s preferences are amenable, the applicability conditions thus learned
might then allow efﬁcient top-down interpretation (of course, the user’s prefer-
ences could, in light of the complexity results for HTN planning, be so antithetical
to the nature of the domain that efﬁcient top-down interpretation is impossible).
11Non-primitives are seen as abstract actions, mediating access to the concrete actions.
12Non-primitives are seen as standing for complex preferences (or even physical constraints).
27

As discussed in [1] there are other representations for expressing user prefer-
ences, such as trajectory constraints expressed in linear temporal logic. It will be
interesting to explore methods for learning preferences in those representations
too, and to see to what extent typical user preferences are naturally expressible in
(p)HTNs or such alternatives.
6. Conclusion
Despite signiﬁcant interest in learning in the context of planning, most prior
work focused only on learning domain physics or search control. In this paper, we
expanded this scope by learning user preferences concerning plans. We developed
a framework for learning probabilistic HTNs from a set of example plans, draw-
ing from the literature on probabilistic grammar induction. Assuming the input
distribution is in fact sampled from a pHTN, we demonstrated that the approach
ﬁnds a pHTN generating a similar distribution. It is, however, a stretch to imagine
that we can sample directly from such a distribution — chieﬂy because observed
behavior arises from a complex interaction between preferences and physics.
We demonstrate a technique overcoming the effect of such feasibility con-
straints, by reasoning about the available alternatives to the observed user be-
havior. The technique is to rescale the distribution to ﬁt the assumptions of the
baseline pHTN learner. We evaluate the approach, and demonstrate both that the
original learner is easily confounded by constraints placed upon the preference
distribution, and that rescaling is effective at reversing this effect. We discuss
several remaining important directions for future work to address. Of these, the
most directly relevant technical pursuit is learning parameterized pHTNs, or more
generally, learning conditional preferences. Fully integrating an automated plan-
ner with the learner, thereby using the learned knowledge, and running (costly...)
user studies are also very important pursuits. In the end, we describe an effective
approach to automatically learning a model of a user’s preferences from observa-
tions of only their behavior.
Acknowledgments: Kambhampati’s research is supported in part by ONR grants
N00014-09-1-0017 and N00014-07-1-1049, and the DARPA Integrated Learning
Program (through a sub-contract from Lockheed Martin).
