arXiv:1002.3023v1  [cs.AI]  16 Feb 2010
Rewriting Constraint Models with Metamodels
Rapha¨el Chenouard1 and Laurent Granvilliers1 and Ricardo Soto1,2
1Universit´e de Nantes, LINA, CNRS UMR 6241, France
2Escuela de Ingenier´ıa Inform´atica
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´olica de Valpara´ıso, Chile

Abstract
An important challenge in constraint programming is to
rewrite constraint models into executable programs calculat-
ing the solutions. This phase of constraint processing may
require translations between constraint programming lan-
guages, transformations of constraint representations, model
optimizations, and tuning of solving strategies. In this paper,
we introduce a pivot metamodel describing the common fea-
tures of constraint models including different kinds of con-
straints, statements like conditionals and loops, and other
ﬁrst-class elements like object classes and predicates. This
metamodel is general enough to cope with the constructions
of many languages, from object-oriented modeling languages
to logic languages, but it is independent from them.
The
rewriting operations manipulate metamodel instances apart
from languages. As a consequence, the rewriting operations
apply whatever languages are selected and they are able to
manage model semantic information.
A bridge is created
between the metamodel space and languages using parsing
techniques. Tools from the software engineering world can
be useful to implement this framework.
Introduction
In constraint programming (CP), users describe properties
of problems as constraints involving variables. The com-
puter system calls constraint solvers to calculate the solu-
tions. The automatic mapping from constraint models to
solvers is the key issue of this paper. The goal is to de-
velop middle software tools that are able to reformulate and
rewrite models according to solving requirements.
Modeling
real-world
problems
requires
high-level
languages with many constructions such as constraint deﬁ-
nitions, programming statements, and modularity features.
In the recent past, a variety of languages has been designed
for a variety of users and problem categories.
On one
hand, there are many modeling languages for combinatorial
problems
such
as
OPL
(Van Hentenryck et al. 1999),
Essence
(Frisch et al. 2007),
and
MiniZ-
inc
(Nethercote et al. 2007)
or
numerical
con-
straint
and
optimization
problems
such
as
Numer-
ica
(Van Hentenryck, Michel, and Deville 1997)
and
Realpaver (Granvilliers and Benhamou 2006).
On the
Copyright c⃝2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
other hand, constraint solving libraries have been plugged
in computer programming languages, for instance ILOG
Solver (Puget 1994), Gecode (Schulte and Tack 2006), and
ECLiPSe (Apt and Wallace 2007).
In the following, we
will only consider modeling languages as input constraint
models. However, computer programming languages can
be chosen as targets of the mapping process. Our aim is
therefore to provide a many-to-many mapping tool that is
able to cope with a variety of languages.
Many constructions are shared among the different lan-
guages, in particular the deﬁnitions of constraints. Other
constructions are speciﬁc such as classes in object-oriented
languages or predicates in logic languages.
We propose
to embed this collection of concepts in a so-called meta-
model, that is a model of constraint models.
This pivot
metamodel describes the relations between concepts and
it encodes in an abstract manner the rules for constraint
modeling. This is a considerable improvement of our pre-
vious work (Chenouard, Granvilliers, and Soto 2008) which
was restricted to a one-to-many mapping approach from
a particular modeling language.
Moreover, the transla-
tions to obtain Flat s-COMMA models were hand-coded
and model structures are always ﬂattened like for FlatZinc
models (Nethercote et al. 2007). Previous model transfor-
mations were also speciﬁc to Flat s-COMMA and its struc-
ture (e.g. there is no object and no loop to manage). Our
pivot metamodel is independent of modeling languages and
our approach offers more ﬂexibility in getting efﬁcient exe-
cutable models.
The rewriting process can be seen as a three-steps pro-
cedure. During the ﬁrst step, the user constraint model is
parsed and a metamodel instance is created. During the last
step, the resulting program is generated from a metamodel
instance. These two steps constitute a bridge between lan-
guages — the grammar space — and models — the model
space. The middle step may implement rewriting operations
over metamodel instances, for instance to transform con-
straint representations from an integer model to a boolean
model. The main interest is to manipulate concepts rather
than syntactic constructions. As a consequence, the rewrit-
ing operations can be expressed with clarity and they apply
whatever languages are chosen.
An interesting work is about the rule-based program-
ming language Cadmium (Duck, Stuckey, and Brand 2006)

combining constraint handling rules (Fr¨uhwirth 2009) and
term rewriting to transform constraint models.
The
rewriting algorithm matches rules against terms in or-
der to derive some term normal forms.
This approach
provides a very clear semantics to the mapping pro-
cedure and it addresses conﬂuence and termination is-
sues.
Considering metamodels allows one to reuse
metamodeling tools from software engineering.
For in-
stance, ATL (Kurtev, van den Berg, and Jouault 2007) is a
general rule-based transformation language mixing model
pattern matching and imperative programs, which can
be contrasted with term matching in Cadmium.
Ker-
meta (Muller, Fleurey, and J´ez´equel 2005) is a transforma-
tion framework allowing to handle model elements using
object-oriented programs. A beneﬁt of the model-driven ap-
proach is to directly manage typed model concepts using the
metamodel abstract description.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents the general model-driven transformation
framework underlying this work. A motivating example us-
ing known CP languages is described in Section 3. The pivot
metamodel and rewriting operations are presented in Section
4. Section 5 investigates some transformation experiments
on well-known CP models. Finally, Section 6 concludes the
paper and details some future work.
Model Engineering Framework
A constraint model is a representation of a problem, writ-
ten in a language, and having a structure. Our purpose is
to transform solver-independent models to solver-dependent
models. That may lead
• to change the representation of input models, namely the
intrinsic constraint deﬁnitions, in order to improve the
solving strategy,
• to translate languages, from high-level modeling lan-
guages to low-level solver languages or computer pro-
gramming languages, and
• to modify model structures according to the capabilities of
solvers, for instance to make a shift from object-oriented
models to logic models based on predicates.
Managing representations supposes to specify constraint
transformation rules such as the equivalence of constraint
formulations or constraint relaxations.
Translating lan-
guages requires to map concrete syntactic elements. Manip-
ulating structures deals with abstract modeling concepts like
objects or predicates. An important motivation is to separate
these different concerns. In particular, the equivalence of
constraint formulations is independent from the languages.
This argues in favour of a model technical space (MDE TS)
gathering modeling concepts and transformation rules and a
grammar technical space (Grammar TS) addressing the lan-
guage issues, as shown in Figure 1.
In the grammar space, models are written in languages
given by grammars. In the model space, they are deﬁned
as relations between elements that conform to metamodels.
The elements are instances of concepts described in meta-
models, for example a constraint x + y = z deriving from
Figure 1: Constraint model transformation process.
some algebraic constraint concept. The relations deﬁne links
between concepts such as composition and inheritance. That
allows one to deﬁne complex elements, such as constraint
systems composed of collections of constraints.
The shift from languages to models can be implemented
by parsing techniques.
Model A is created from the
source user model A. This model must conform to the
user language metamodel, as is required in the model
space.
As a consequence, metamodels of languages —
modeling languages, constraint programming languages,
solver languages— must be deﬁned. The output B is gen-
erated from model B. This model must conform to the meta-
model of the solver language.
Model transformations are deﬁned in the model space.
The goal is to transform model A reﬂecting the user con-
straint model to model B associated to the solver. As pre-
viously mentioned, that requires to change model represen-
tations and structures. This process can be done by rewrit-
ing operations manipulating concepts from A to B. In order
to share common concepts, we propose to introduce the so-
called pivot metamodel. The transformation chain is then
a three-steps procedure: a shift from model A to the pivot
model, the application of rewriting operations over the pivot
model, and a shift from the pivot model to model B.
In the following (Section 4), we will present the pivot
metamodels and model transformation operations.
How-
ever, we will present ﬁrst a motivating example (next sec-
tion) and discuss the requirements for handling constraint
models.
A Motivating Example
Let us illustrate the transformation process on the social
golfers problem. The user model is written in the object-
oriented modeling language s-COMMA. The output is a com-
puter program written in the constraint logic programming
language ECLiPSe.
This problem considers a group of
n = g ×s golfers that wish to play golf each week, arranged
into g groups of s golfers. The problem is to ﬁnd a playing
schedule for w weeks such that no two golfers play together
more than once. Figure 2 and 3 show the s-COMMA model

and the ECLiPSe model for this problem, respectively.
The s-COMMA model is divided in a data ﬁle and a model
ﬁle. The data ﬁle is composed by an enumeration holding
the golfer names, and three constants to deﬁne the problem
dimensions (size of groups, number of weeks, and groups
per week).
The model ﬁle is divided into three classes.
One to model the groups, one to model the weeks and one
to arrange the schedule of the social golfers. The Group
class owns the players attribute corresponding to a set of
golfers playing together, each golfer being identiﬁed by a
name given in the enumeration from the data ﬁle. In this
class, the code block called groupSize (lines 14 to 16) is
a constraint zone (constraint zones are used to group state-
ments such as loops, conditionals and constraints under a
given name). The groupSize constraint zone restricts the
size of the golfers group. The Week class has an array of
Group objects and the constraint zone playOncePerWeek
ensures that each golfer takes part of a unique group per
week. Finally, the SocialGolfers class has an array of
Week objects and the constraint zone differentGroups
states that each golfer never plays two times with the same
golfer throughout the considered weeks.
//Data file
1. enum Name := {a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i};
2. int s := 3; //size of groups
3. int w := 4; //number of weeks
4. int g := 3; //groups per week
//Model file
1. main class SocialGolfers {
2.
Week weekSched[w];
3.
constraint differentGroups {
4.
forall(w1 in 1..w)
5.
forall(w2 in w1+1..w)
6.
forall(g1 in 1..g)
7.
forall(g2 in 1..g) {
8.
card(weekSched[w1].groupSched[g1].players intersect
weekSched[w2].groupSched[g2].players) <= 1;
9.
}
10.
}
11. }
12. class Group {
13.
Name set players;
14.
constraint groupSize {
15.
card(players) = s;
16.
}
17. }
18.
19. class Week {
20.
Group groupSched[g];
21.
constraint playOncePerWeek {
22.
forall(g1 in 1..g)
23.
forall(g2 in g1+1..g) {
24.
card(groupSched[g1].players
intersect groupSched[g2].players) = 0;
25.
}
26.
}
27. }
Figure 2: An s-COMMA model of the social golfers problem.
The generated ECLiPSe model is depicted in Figure 3,
which has been built as a single predicate whose body is a
sequence of atoms. The sequence is made of the problem
dimensions (lines 2 to 4), the list of integer sets L (lines 6
to 7), and three nested loop blocks resulting from the trans-
formation of the three s-COMMA classes (lines 9 to 36). It
turns out that parts of both models are similar. This is due
to the sharing of concepts in the underlying metamodels, for
instance constants, forall statements, or constraints. How-
ever, the syntaxes are different and speciﬁc processing may
be required. For instance, the for statement of ECLiPSe
needs the param keyword to declare parameters deﬁned out-
side the current scope, e.g. the number of groups G.
1. socialGolfers(L):-
2.
S $= 3,
3.
W $= 4,
4.
G $= 3,
5.
6.
intsets(WEEKSCHED_GROUPSCHED_PLAYERS,12,1,9),
7.
L = WEEKSCHED_GROUPSCHED_PLAYERS,
8.
9.
(for(W1,1,W),param(L,W,G) do
10.
(for(W2,W1+1,W),param(L,G,W1) do
11.
(for(G1,1,G),param(L,G,W1,W2) do
12.
(for(G2,1,G),param(L,G,W1,W2,G1) do
13.
V1 is G*(W1-1)+G1,nth(V2,V1,L),
14.
V3 is G*(W2-1)+G2,nth(V4,V3,L),
15.
#(V2 /\ V4, V5),V5 $=< 1
16.
)
17.
)
18.
)
19. ),
20.
21. (for(I1,1,W),param(L,S,W,G) do
22.
(for(I2,1,G),param(L,S,W,G,I1) do
23.
V6 is G*(I1-1)+I2,nth(V7,V6,L),
24.
#(V7, V8), V8 $= S
25.
)
26. ),
27.
28. (for(I1,1,W),param(L,G) do
29.
(for(G1,1,G),param(L,G,I1) do
30.
(for(G2,G1+1,G),param(L,G,I1,G1) do
31.
V9 is G*(I1-1)+G1,nth(V10,V9,L),
32.
V11 is G*(I1-1)+G2,nth(V12,V11,L),
33.
#(V10 /\ V12, 0)
34.
)
35.
)
36. ),
37.
38. label_sets(L).
Figure 3: The social golfers problem expressed in ECLiPSe.
The treatment of objects is more subtle since they must
not participate to ECLiPSe models. Many mapping strate-
gies may be devised, for instance mapping objects to pred-
icates (Soto and Granvilliers 2007). Another mapping strat-
egy is used here, which consists of removing the object-
based problem structure. Flattening the problem requires
visiting the many classes through their inheritance and com-
position relations. A few problems to be handled are de-
scribed as follows. Important impacts on the attributes may
happen. For example, the weekSched array of Week objects
deﬁned at line 2 of the model ﬁle in Figure 2 is refactored
and transformed to the WEEKSCHED GROUPSCHED PLAYERS
ﬂat list stated at line 6 in Figure 3. It may be possible to
insert new loops in order to traverse arrays of objects and to
post the whole set of constraints. For instance, the last block
of for loops in the ECLiPSe model (lines 28 to 36) has been
built from the playOncePerWeek constraint zone of the s-
COMMA model, but there is an additional for loop (line 28)
since the Week instances are contained in the weekSched
array. Another issue is related to lists that cannot be ac-
cessed in the same way as arrays in s-COMMA. Thus, local
variables (Vi) and the well-known nth Prolog predicate are
introduced in the ECLiPSe model.
Pivot Model Handling
Our pivot metamodel has been deﬁned to catch most mod-
eling needs that occur in constraint modeling languages.

Then, pivot models are managed with several reﬁning trans-
formations, where each transformation identiﬁes a clear re-
ﬁning process, namely structure modiﬁcations (e.g. removal
of object variables) or model optimization.
Pivot Metamodel
Figure 4 depicts an extract of our pivot structure metamodel
in a simpliﬁed UML Class diagram formalism. Italic font is
used to denote abstract concepts. The root concept is Model
which contains all entities. Three abstract concepts inherit
from the abstract class ModelElement:
• Classifier represents all types than can be used to de-
ﬁne variables or constants:
– DataType corresponds to common primitive data
types used in CP, namely Boolean, Integer and Real.
– Enumeration is used to deﬁne symbolic types, i.e. a
set of symbolic values deﬁned as EnumLiteral (not
deﬁned here to keep the ﬁgure readable), e.g. enum
Name:={a,b,. . .}, line 1 of data ﬁle in Figure 2.
– Class
is
similar
to
the
object-oriented
con-
cept
of
class,
but
deﬁned
in
a
CP
context
(Soto and Granvilliers 2007),
i.e.
a class deﬁni-
tion is composed of variable or constant deﬁnitions
and also constraints and other statements.
Thus,
a Class has a set of features being instances of
ModelFeature.
• ModelFeature corresponds to the instance concepts de-
ﬁned within a model. It is also divided in three concepts:
– Record relates to non-typed instances being composed
of a collection of elements, such as tuples. To cover a
broader range of record deﬁnitions, we deﬁne a com-
position of ModelFeature instances.
– TypedElement is an abstract concept corresponding
to typed constraint model elements. Thus, it has a ref-
erence to a classiﬁer. The concept of array variable is
not distinguished from variable, but array can be repre-
sented using a sequence of sizes, corresponding to each
dimension of an array (more than two dimensions are
allowed). Theses sizes are expressed as Expression
instances.
∗Variable has an optional Domain deﬁnition (not
shown here) restricting values belonging to the asso-
ciated type. Three concepts of Domain are taken into
account: intervals, sets and domains deﬁned as an ex-
pression.
∗Constant concept is for constants having a type and
a ﬁxed value.
– Statement is used to represent all the other features
that may occur in a Model or a Class:
∗Constraint is the abstract constraint concept having
two sub-concepts. ExpressionConstraint stands
for constraints built inductively from terms and rela-
tions. GlobalCtr handles global constraints deﬁned
by a name and a list of parameters.
∗ForAll deﬁnes a loop mechanism over constraints
and other statements.
It has an iterating variable
which is local to the loop.
∗If obviously deﬁnes a conditional statement. It is
composed of an Expression corresponding to the
boolean test and two sets of statements correspond-
ing to the statements to take into account according
to the test evaluation. The second set of statements is
optional if no alternative to the true evaluation of the
test is deﬁned.
• ParameterizedElement deﬁnes concepts having a list
of parameters and not being a classiﬁer neither an instance
of a ModelFeature:
– Predicate represents logical predicates in a model as
in ECLiPSe. Predicates have parameters and a body
composed of a sequence of ModelFeature, such as
variable deﬁnitions or constraint statements.
– Function represents user-deﬁned functions stated in
a model. It contains also a body, but it is based on a
statement used to compute a result.
The notion of expression is ubiquitous in CP. The related
concepts of our metamodel are detailed in Figure 5. They
represent all the entities occurring in ﬁrst-order formulas
made from variables, terms, relations, and connectives. The
concept Expression is abstract and is used as super class
for all kinds of expressions:
• FunctionCall is used to refer to an already deﬁned
Function and contains a list of parameters deﬁned as
Expression.
• VarOccurrence is used to refer to already deﬁned in-
stances: records, variables or constants. It is only com-
posed of a reference to the corresponding instance dec-
laration and to a list of optional indexes to handle ar-
rays. It is specialized in ObjectOccurrence in order
to express the navigation path to an object attribute (e.g.
groupSched[g1].players, line 8 in Figure 2). Vari-
able occurrences are not classiﬁed according to their dec-
laration type in one of the three expression types inherit-
ing from Expression in order to avoid multiple declara-
tion of the same concept, while requiring type inference
mechanism.
• BooleanExpression is used to specify boolean con-
cepts occurring in expressions:
– BoolValue represents the terms true and False.
– PredicateCall corresponds to the call of a predicate
with its list of parameters. Thus, it is composed of a
reference to a Predicate with a list of parameters de-
ﬁned as Expression in order to allow at the same time
VarOccurrence and evaluable expressions, such as 1,
x or x + 1.
– BoolOperator is an abstract concept having a name
representing the symbol of well-known operators. It is
specialized in the two common types of operators:
∗BoolUnaryOp corresponds to the negation operator
and has an operand corresponding to an Expression,
since it can be a boolean expression, but also a vari-
able. In the following, operands of all operators will
be deﬁned as a composition of Expression.

Figure 4: Representation of variables and problem structures in the pivot metamodel.
Figure 5: Representation of expressions used to deﬁne constraint expression in the pivot metamodel.

∗BoolBinaryOp corresponds to the several common
binary operators returning a boolean value, such as:
⇔, →, and, or, =, ̸=, ≤, ≥, <, >.
• SetExpression deﬁnes the main constructs available to
deal with sets within expressions:
– SetValue corresponds to a set of value occurrences,
such as {1, 2, 3}. To tackle various contents as set el-
ements (e.g. {1, x + 1}), it is composed of a list of
elements conformed to Expression.
– SetFunction corresponds to the call of known func-
tions over sets, such as the cardinality function.
– SetOperator is specialized only in SetBinaryOp
since no unary operator is commonly used on sets. For
instance, intersection, union and difference are avail-
able.
• AlgebraicExpression deﬁnes the numerical expres-
sions:
– AlgValue
is
abstract
and
represents
the
three
main concepts of values in numerical expressions:
IntValue for integer values, RealValue for real
number values and IntervalValue for interval val-
ues such as [−1, 1].
– AlgFunction corresponds to the call of a well-known
function over numbers, such as trigonometric func-
tions.
– AlgOperator refers to the common operators used
in algebraic expressions:
AlgUnaryOp(−, +) and
AlgBinaryOp (+, −, ∗, / and ˆ).
Our pivot metamodel has been deﬁned to ﬁt with most
modeling needs in CP, but also to ﬁt with the metamodel of
CP languages. Thus, some simpliﬁcations have been done to
ease transformations such as the VarOccurrence concept
which directly inherits from Expression. Indeed, variable
occurrences can be typed in expressions (i.e. boolean, set or
algebraic), but we deﬁne only one to avoid redundancies.
Pivot model refactoring
Model transformations are implemented as rewriting opera-
tions over pivot models.
For sake of clarity, we will present a few operations us-
ing an imperative pseudo-code style, while speciﬁc trans-
formation languages are used in practice. The main inter-
est given by the concept hierarchy is to provide navigation
mechanisms through models. For instance, it is immediate
to iterate over the set of variables of a constraint, since this
information is gathered in the corresponding abstract con-
straint concept (see e.g. Algorithm 2). It is therefore possi-
ble to manipulate models globally, which is very powerful.
Object ﬂattening
This refactoring step replaces object in-
stances, namely variables whose type is a class, by all el-
ements deﬁned in the class deﬁnition (variable, constants,
constraints and other statements). In order to prevent name
conﬂicts, named elements are preﬁxed with the name of ob-
ject instances.
This refactoring transformation can be expressed in terms
of a brief pseudo-code algorithm as shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Transforming and removing object variables
and class deﬁnitions
objectRemoval(m : Model)
: Model
1: let res : Model
2: for all o in m.elements do
3:
if is var(o) and is class(o.type) then
4:
res.insert(ﬂatten(o,o.type.features))
5:
else if not is class(o) then
6:
res.elements.insert(o)
7:
end if
8: end for
9: return res
ﬂatten(o : Variable, features : Set of ModelFeature)
: Set of ModelFeature
1: let res : Set of ModelFeature = ∅
2: for all f in features do
3:
if is var(f) and not is class(f.type) then
4:
let v : Variable
5:
v ←duplicate(f)
6:
v.name = o.name + ’ ’ + v.name
7:
res.insert(v)
8:
else
9:
...
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return res
The ObjectRemoval function processes a source model by
iterating on all its elements (line 2).
If object instances
are detected (line 3), then the function flatten is called
and its result is added to the output model elements (line
4). Instances not being a Class deﬁnition are duplicated
in the output model (line 5,6), while Class deﬁnitions are
removed.
In the flatten function every feature given
as parameter is cloned and added to the resulting set of
ModelFeature. In the case of a variable (and also con-
stants), its name is concatenated to the object variable name
(line 6). Figure 6 depicts the result of the transformation on
the social golfers example previously presented.
class SocialGolfers { Week weekSched[w];.. .}
class Week { Group groupSched[g];.. .}
class Group { Name set players;. . .}
⇒Name set weekSched groupSched players[g*w];
Figure 6: Applying the object ﬂattening transformation on
the social golfers example using s-COMMA syntax.
Arrays of objects and expressions refactoring are not pre-
sented here to keep the algorithm simple. As mentioned at
the end of Section 3, in the case of object arrays, we must
transfer their size to their attributes and a loop statement has
to be introduced to iterate on their Statement instances.
Within expressions, instances of VarOccurrence may just
be updated with the declaration of the new ﬂat variables.

Alldifferent removal
Since global constraints are not han-
dled by every solver, there is a motivation to reformulate
them or to generate relaxations. We consider here, the well-
known global constraint alldifferent(x1, ..., xn). We as-
sume that the domain of each xi varies from 1 to n to ease
the deﬁnition of the two last algorithms. We propose three
possible transformations:
• Generating a set of disequalities as shown in Algorithm 2.
For all variable combinations (line 2,3), a constraint is
generated and added to the result (line 6).
Algorithm 2 Transforming alldifferent to a set of disequali-
ties
AllDiffToDisequalities(c : GlobalConstraint)
: Set of Constraint
1: let res : Set of Constraint = ∅
2: for all i in 1..c.parameters.size() do
3:
for all j in i + 1..c.parameters.size() do
4:
let x : Variable = c.parameter[i]
5:
let y : Variable = c.parameter[j]
6:
res.insert(new Constraint(x ̸= y))
7:
end for
8: end for
9: return res
• Generating a relaxation as shown on Algorithm 3. Only
one constraint is created (line 3) assessing that the sum of
all variable values is equal to n(n + 1)/2.
Algorithm 3 Generating alldifferent relaxations
AllDiffToRelaxation(c : GlobalConstraint)
: Constraint
1: let n : Integer = c.parameters.size()
2: let sum : Expression = Pn
i=1 c.parameters[i]
3: return new Constraint(sum = n(n+1)/2)
• Generating a boolean version as shown on Algorithm 4.
In this case, we deﬁne a new matrix of boolean variables
(line 2,3,4), where b[i, j] being true means xi has value j.
Line 7 checks that only one value per variable is deﬁned.
Line 10 ensures that two variables have different values.
Experiments
The
presented
architecture
has
been
im-
plemented
with
three
tools
and
languages:
KM3 (Jouault and B´ezivin 2006) is a metamodel lan-
guage, ATL (Kurtev, van den Berg, and Jouault 2007) is a
declarative rule language to describe model transformations
and TCS (Jouault, B´ezivin, and Kurtev 2006) is a declara-
tive language based on templates to deﬁne the text to model
and model to text transitions. These MDE tools allow us
to choose the refactoring steps to apply on pivot models in
order to keep supported structures of the target metamodel.
We have carried out a set of tests in order to analyze
the performance of our approach. We used ﬁve CP prob-
lems: Social Golfers, Engine Design, Send+More=Money,
Algorithm 4 Reformulating alldifferent into a boolean
model
AllDiffToBoolean(c : GlobalConstraint)
: Set of ModelFeature
1: let res : Set of Constraint = ∅
2: let n : Integer = c.parameters.size()
3: let m : Integer = card(c.parameters.domain)
4: let b[n,m] : Boolean
5: res.insert(b)
6: for i in 1..n do
7:
res.insert(new Constraint(Pm
j=1 b[i,j] = 1))
8: end for
9: for j in 1..m do
10:
res.insert(new Constraint(Pn
i=1 b[i,j] = 1))
11: end for
Stable Marriage and N-Queens. The ﬁrst experiment eval-
uates the performance in terms of translation time, and the
second one was done to show that the automatic generation
of solver ﬁles does not lead to a loss of performance in terms
of solving time. The benchmarking study was performed on
a 2.66Ghz computer with 2GB RAM running Ubuntu.
Problems
sC
s-to-P
Object
Enum
P-to-E
Total
Ecl
Lines
(s)
(s)
(s)
(s)
(s)
Lines
Golfers
31
0.276
0.340
0.080
0.075
0.771
37
Engine
112
0.292
0.641
0.146
0.087
1.166
78
Send
16
0.289
0.273
-
0.089
0.651
21
Marriage
46
0.330
0.469
0.085
0.067
0.951
26
10-Q
14
0.279
0.252
-
0.033
0.564
12
Table 1: Times for complete transformation chains of sev-
eral classical problems.
In the ﬁrst experiment we test the s-COMMA (sC) to
ECLiPSe (Ecl) translation. Table 1 depicts the results. The
ﬁrst column gives the problem names. The second column
shows the number of lines of the s-COMMA source ﬁles.
The following columns correspond to the time of atomic
steps involved in the transformation (in seconds): transfor-
mations from s-COMMA to Pivot (s-to-P) (corresponds to
Source Text A to Model Pivot in Figure 1), object ﬂatten-
ing (Object), enumeration removal (Enum), and transforma-
tions from Pivot to ECLiPSe (P-to-E) (corresponds to Model
Pivot to Target Text B in Figure 1). The next column de-
tails the total time of the complete transformation, and the
last column depicts the number of lines of the generated
ECLiPSe ﬁles.
The results show that the text processing phases (s-to-
P and P-to-E) are fast, but we may remark that the given
problems are concisely stated (maximum of 112 lines). The
transformation s-COMMA to pivot is slower than the trans-
formation pivot to ECLiPSe. This is explained by the refac-
toring phases performed on the pivot that reduce the number
of elements to handle the pivot to ECLiPSe step. The com-
position ﬂattening is the more expensive phase. In particu-
lar, the Engine problem exhibits the slowest running time,

Native
Generated
Generated (Flat)
Problems
solve(s)
Lines
solve(s)
Lines
solve(s)
Lines
Golfers
0.21
28
0.21
31
0.22
276
Marriage
0.01
42
0.01
46
0.01
226
20-Q
4.63
11
4.65
12
5.02
1162
28-Q
80.73
11
80.78
12
87.73
2284
Table 2: Solving times and model sizes of native and gener-
ated ﬁles
since it contains several object compositions. In summary,
considering the whole set of phases involved, we believe the
results show reasonable translation times.
In the second experiment we compare the ECLiPSe
ﬁles automatically generated by the framework with native
ECLiPSe ﬁles written by hand (see Table 2). We consider
the solving time and the lines of each problem ﬁle. The data
of the native models is ﬁrst given. We then introduce gener-
ated ﬁles where the loops have not been unrolled (avoiding
this phase the size of generated solver ﬁles is closer to the
native ones). In this case, the solving times of both types of
ﬁles are almost equivalent. At the end, we consider problems
including the loop unrolling phase (Flat). This process leads
to a considerable increase of model sizes. Only the solving
time of the ﬂat 20-Queens and 28-Queens problems are im-
pacted (about 0.4 and 7 seconds). This may be explained
by the incremental propagation algorithm commonly imple-
mented in CLP languages. We may suppose that a propaga-
tion happens each time a constraint is added to the constraint
store. If a for statement is not interleaved with propagation,
i.e. it is considered as one block, then only one propagation
step is required. This is not the case if loops are unrolled,
leading to one propagation for each individual constraint. It
results in a slow-down. This negative impact in terms of
solving time demonstrates the need for keeping the structure
of target models (e.g. not unrolling loops) instead of build-
ing a ﬂat model.
Related Work
Model transformation is a recent research topic in CP. Just
a few CP model transformation approaches have been pro-
posed. The solver-independent architecture is likely to be
the nearest framework to our approach, for instance, MiniZ-
inc (and Zinc), Essence and s-COMMA.
MiniZinc is a high-level constraint modeling language
allowing transformations to ECLiPSe and Gecode mod-
els. These mappings are implemented by means of Cad-
mium.
The translation process involves an intermediate
model where several MiniZinc constructs are replaced by
simpliﬁed or solver-supported constructs. This facilitates
the translation to get a solver model.
Essence is another language involving model trans-
formations.
Its solver-independent platform that al-
lows to map Essence models into ECLiPSe and Min-
ion (Gent, Jefferson, and Miguel 2006).
A model trans-
formation system called Conjure (Frisch et al. 2005) is in-
cluded in the framework, which takes as input an Essence
speciﬁcation and reﬁnes it to an intermediate language
called Essence’. The translation from Essence’ to solver
code is currently performed by java translators using the tool
Tailor.
s-COMMA is an object-oriented language, supported
by a solver-independent platform where solvers can be
mapped to ECLiPSe, Gecode/J, RealPaver, and GNU Pro-
log (Diaz and Codognet 2000). The language also involves
an intermediate model called Flat s-COMMA to facilitate the
translation. Hand-written translators and MDE-translators
have been developed to translate a Flat s-COMMA model in
the target solver model.
Our approach can be seen as a natural evolution of this
solver-independent architecture.
Two major advantages
arise. (1) In the aforementioned approaches just one model-
ing language can be used as the source of the transformation,
in our framework many modeling language can be plugged
as the source. We believe this enables ﬂexibility and pro-
vides freedom to the modelers. (2) In the s-COMMA, MiniZ-
inc, and Essence transformation processes, the refactoring
steps (e.g. enumeration removal, loop and set unrolling) are
always applied. This makes the structure of the solver ﬁle
completely different from the original model. In our frame-
work we focus on generating optimized models while trying
to maintain as much as possible the original structure of the
source model. We believe that keeping the source modeling
structures into target models, then improve their readability
and understanding.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a new framework for con-
straint model transformations. This framework is supported
by an MDE approach and a pivot metamodel that pro-
vides independence and ﬂexibility to cope with different
languages. The transformation chain involves three main
steps: from the source to the pivot model, reﬁning of the
pivot model and from the pivot model to the target. Among
others, an important feature of this chain is the modularity
of mode transformations and that the hard transformation
work (refactoring/optimization) is always performed over
the pivot. This makes the transformations from/to pivot sim-
pler, and as a consequence the integration of new languages
to the architecture requires less effort.
In a near future, we intend to increase the number of CP
languages our approach supports. We also want to deﬁne
more pivot refactoring transformations to optimize and re-
formulate models. Another major outline for future work is
to improve the management of complex CP models transfor-
mation chains, which is not investigated in this paper. The
order in which refactoring steps are applied and which refac-
toring step to apply can be automated. However, we may
investigate how to qualify models and transformations ac-
cording to the pivot and target metamodels.
