Applying Word Embeddings to Measure Valence in
Information Operations Targeting Journalists in
Brazil
David A. Broniatowski
Department of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering
The George Washington University
Washington, DC, USA

Abstract—Among the goals of information operations are to
change the overall information environment vis-`a-vis speciﬁc
actors. For example, “trolling campaigns” seek to undermine the
credibility of speciﬁc public ﬁgures, leading others to distrust
them and intimidating these ﬁgures into silence. To accomplish
these aims, information operations frequently make use of
“trolls” – malicious online actors who target verbal abuse at these
ﬁgures. In Brazil, in particular, allies of Brazil’s current president
have been accused of operating a “hate cabinet” – a trolling
operation that targets journalists who have alleged corruption
by this politician and other members of his regime. Leading
approaches to detecting harmful speech, such as Google’s Per-
spective API, seek to identify speciﬁc messages with harmful
content. While this approach is helpful in identifying content
to downrank, ﬂag, or remove, it is known to be brittle, and
may miss attempts to introduce more subtle biases into the
discourse. Here, we aim to develop a measure that might be
used to assess how targeted information operations seek to change
the overall valence, or appraisal, of speciﬁc actors. Preliminary
results suggest known campaigns target female journalists more
so than male journalists, and that these campaigns may leave
detectable traces in overall Twitter discourse.
Index Terms—word embeddings, hate speech, information
operations
I. INTRODUCTION
Online harassment and “trolling” campaigns often have
political objectives. Among these are attempts to shape public
opinion and promote discord, as when the Russian Internet
Research Agency attempted to inﬂuence the 2016 United
States presidential elections [1]. Other campaigns seek to
intimidate silence individuals and organizations with expertise
or perspectives that could be threatening to a rival political
regime, such as when journalists are targeted with hateful
rhetoric and threats of harm by political extremists [2].
A. The Brazilian “Hate Cabinet”
In a series of media reports1 Brazilian President Jair Bol-
sonaro has been accused of of operating a “Hate Cabinet”
– a large network of online “trolls” that are charged with
This work was generously supported by the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
1https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/folha-topicos/gabinete-do-odio/
harassing journalists who report negatively on the Bolsonaro
regime. Although Bolsonaro has denied these claims, several
journalists have reported being the target of these attacks2 with
women and members of underrepresented minorities especially
likely to have been targeted.3 These campaigns and other
inﬂuence operations intend to induce changes in public opin-
ion regarding controversial issues, while silencing dissenting
voices, such as those of journalists, who promote narratives
that are perceived as hostile to the interests of the regime.
In order to know how best to respond to these organized
campaigns, we must ﬁrst measure their efﬁcacy. Therefore, we
seek to develop a novel natural language processing tool that
might be used to detect these online harassment campaigns.
Speciﬁcally, we draw upon automated techniques that are
designed to measure bias and valence – proxies for broad
associations with public opinion – in online corpora.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Our analysis is based upon the popular Word2Vec model [3]
– an algorithim that has been widely used to generate “word
embeddings” semantic spaces in which words with similar
meanings are collocated in a high-dimensional vector space.
Importantly for our application, Word2Vec also captures dif-
ferences in these semantics that are interpretable. For example,
in a classic example, the vector representing the word “queen”
is close to the vector obtained from the following expression:
queen ≈king–man + woman
(1)
Similar results are obtained when examining the relationships
between nations and their capitol cities; for example,
Berlin ≈Paris–France + Germany
(2)
In prior work [4], we found that similar word embedding
models could be used to characterize information operations
that were targeted at presidential candidates during the US
presidential elections of 2016. Speciﬁcally, a known “trolling
2https://latamjournalismreview.org/articles/women-journalists-receive-
more-than-twice-as-many-insults-on-twitter-than-male-colleagues/
3https://rsf.org/en/news/brazil-quarterly-analysis-president-bolsonaros-
systematic-attempts-reduce-media-silence
arXiv:2201.02257v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jan 2022

campaign” supporting candidate Donald Trump, and opposing
candidate Hilary Clinton was run by the Russian Internet
Research Agency (IRA). Using tweets from this campaign,
we found that words referencing candidate Trump were more
closely related to words indexing trust whereas words refer-
encing candidate Clinton were more closely related to words
indexing distrust [4]. Similarly, early during the outbreak of
the COVID-19 pandemic, we found that tweets containing
anti-Chinese hashtags signiﬁcantly associated Russia with
words indicating calm and pleasantness [4]. This approach is
unique because its unit of analysis is the overall corpus, not
just the individual tweet. Thus, we aim to use this technique to
determine if a corpus of tweets expresses an aggregate position
regarding a speciﬁc target in an information operation.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Synchronic Analysis: Validation Study
1) Dataset: Using the Social Feed Manager software [5],
we collected data from Twitter’s streaming API containing
the hashtag #GloboLixo between June 2 and September 4,
2021. This query returned 355,068 tweets. We used this
hashtag, which roughly translates as “Globo is Trash” because
it expresses disgust with the Brazilian media company Globo
News, a prominent Brazilian news source that has criticized
the government, and the journalists who work for it. In
particular, this hashtag is widely used by Twitter accounts
supporting Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro, which have
allegedly been used to attack journalists who report on alleged
corruption by the Bolsonaro regime.
2) Choice of Algorithm: Given this dataset, our next steps
was to project the corresponding corpus into a word embed-
ding space. To do so, we relied upon pretrained language
models. Speciﬁcally, since the tweets in our dataset were writ-
ten in Brazilian Portuguese, we downloaded several pretrained
Brazilian Portuguese corpora [6], including those trained us-
ing two different variations of the Word2Vec algorithm: a)
Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW), and b) Skip-Gram with
Negative Sampling (SGNS), and GloVe [7]. All corpora used
300 dimensions.
3) Choice of Constructs: We ﬁne-tuned these pre-trained
corpora
using
the
Word2Vec
algorithm
trained
on
the
#GloboLixo dataset, using both the CBOW and SGNS meth-
ods. We also experimented with ﬁxing the locations of the
word vectors corresponding All Word2Vec models were imple-
mented using the Gensim python package with default settings
[8]. Since these algorithms are stochastic in nature, we ﬁt 10
Word2Vec models for each combination of algorithm and pre-
trained corpus. After having trained these language models,
we used a variant of the Word Embedding Association Test
(WEAT; [9]) to generate scores reﬂecting the valence and
trustworthiness of a set of journalists that were identiﬁed
by domain experts (in order to protect journalists’ identities,
this available upon request from the author for legitimate
research purposes). The WEAT operates on two sets of target
words (e.g., words representing male journalists and words
representing female journalists) and two sets of polar attributes
(e.g., words representing pleasantness and words representing
unpleasantness) and computes an effect size (Cohen’s d) to
measure the bias associations between the target sets and polar
attribute sets. Our variation of the WEAT returns a value for
a speciﬁc journalist given a set of polar attributes. Follow [9],
let X and Y be two target word sets of equal size and a be
the Twitter handle of a journalist. The score for that journalist
given those target words is given by the following formula:
s(X, Y, a) =
1
m(P
⃗x∈X cos(⃗a, X) −P
⃗y∈Y cos(⃗a, Y ))
σ ⃗w∈X∪Y cos(⃗a, w)
(3)
where σ denotes standard deviation and similarity between
two vectors in a word embedding space is calculated using
cosine similarity. We calculated these scores for 58 journalists
whose Twitter handles appeared in the #GloboLixo dataset.
Following Toney et al. [10], we used words corresponding to
positive and negative valence. In addition, since these attacks
may be associated with undermining trust in speciﬁc jour-
nalists’ professional integrity, we used words associated with
trust and distrust [9]. Finally, since we observed that several
tweets targeting journalists expressed moral opprobrium, and
especially disgust, we calculated a “purity” score for each
journalist using a similar technique. The speciﬁc words used
to calculate purity were derived from the Brazilian Portuguese
Moral Foundations Dictionary for Fake News classiﬁcation
[11]. We retained all words from this dictionary if they were
present in our pretrained Brazilian Portuguese corpora [6]. In
each case, words were selected based upon their presence in
these word lists, with words only excluded if they did not
appear in our pretrained corpus or the corresponding tweets.
When such words were not present, we ensured balance
between positive and negative word lists by selecting a subset
of words from each list uniformly at random. We found
that our scores were robust to speciﬁc word selection (for
any given model, Cronbach’s α values were >0.95 for 10
different random word selections). Finally, for comparison
purposes, we also included a “null” list of words selected
uniformly at random from the Brazilian Portuguese corpus
and a “saturated” set of the top eight words from the union
of each lists that were visually most- and least- similar to
a set of Globo journalists who were known to be targeted
in a TSNE plot containing these journalists, all words in the
preceding word lists, and a list of abusive words selected by
domain experts from the #GloboLixo corpus (see Appendix
A). The intent in including the null and saturated wordlists
was to compare the valence, trust, and purity lists to underﬁt
and overﬁt models, respectively. The speciﬁc words used in
each attribute set were:
1) Negative valence vs. positive valence [10]:
a) Negative valence: assalto, assassinato, acidente,
agonia, cadeia, cancro, colis˜ao, desastre, div´orcio,
enfermidade, falha, fedor, feio, ferido, horr´ıvel,
horroroso, imund´ıcie, malvado, matar, mau, maus-
tratos, morte, ´odio, pobreza, podre, poluir, pris˜ao,
terr´ıvel, trag´edia, tristeza, veneno, vˆomito

b) Positive
valence:
alegria,
alegrar,
amanhecer,
amigo, amor, arco-´ıris, car´ıcia, c´eu, diamante,
diploma, fam´ılia, feliz, f´erias, gentil, glorioso, hon-
esto, honra, leal, liberdade, maravilhoso, milagre,
para´ıso, paz, prazer, prenda, riso, sa´ude, sortudo
2) Distrust vs. trust [9]:
a) Distrust: desleal, desonesto, duvidoso, ego´ısta, frio,
insens´ıvel, mesquinho, traic¸oeiro, traidor
b) Trust: acolhedor, amig´avel, amigo, apoiador, bom,
conﬁ´avel, gentil, sincero
3) Impurity vs. purity [11]:
a) Impurity:
contagiosa,
contagioso,
corrompe,
corrompendo,
corromper,
corromperam,
corrompeu, depravada, depravados, desgrac¸ados,
desgrac¸adamente,
doenc¸as,
doentes,
doentia,
doentio, imundice, imund´ıcie, imundo, imundos,
miser´aveis, nojentas, nojentos, pecado, piranha,
pr´odigo, prom´ıscua, puta
b) Purity: abstinˆencia, decˆencia, decente, decentes,
igreja, igrejas, incorrupt´ıvel, inocente, inocentes,
integridade,
limpa,
limpando,
limpar,
limpas,
limpeza,
limpo,
limpos,
piedade,
pura,
puro,
sagrada, sagrado, santa, santana, santo, santos,
virgem
4) “Saturated” words:
a) Positive: acolhedor, bom, conﬁ´avel, decente, feliz,
gentil, honesto, sortudo
b) Negative: corromper, desgrac¸ados, imundos, matar,
miser´aveis, nojentas, nojentos, puta
4) Assessing the Validity of Our Measures: Using the
pre-trained Brazilian Corpus, we ﬁt four models trained as
follows:4
1) A model pretrained using SGNS, with ﬁxed vectors, and
ﬁne-tuned using CBOW
2) A model pretrained using SGNS, with ﬁxed vectors, and
ﬁne-tuned using SGNS
3) A model pretrained using CBOW, with adjustable vec-
tors, and ﬁne-tuned using SGNS
4) A model pretrained using GloVe, with ﬁxed vectors, and
ﬁne-tuned using SGNS
In order to evaluate the reliability of a given model ﬁt, we
ﬁt each model 10 times and calculated Cronbach’s alpha
between model ﬁts. For each replication of each model, we
also computed ﬁve traits: trust, purity, valence, null, and
saturated scores for each of the 58 journalists in our dataset,
averaging across these model ﬁts. These multiple replications
allowed us to construct a multi-trait multi-method matrix
(MTMM; [12]) – a classic tool used to evaluate the construct
validity of psychometric measures (see Appendix B). This
MTMM indicated signiﬁcant correlations between common
traits using Word2Vec embeddings, and between different,
but related, traits, using the same embeddings. In particular,
4Although other models are feasible, we did not test them in this work due
to time constraints; however, future work may evaluate these
as expected, we found that measures of trust, valence, and
purity were all signiﬁcantly correlated with each other, but
not correlated with randomly selected words, thus suggesting
that these measures possess convergent-discriminant validity.
Finally, the MTMM shows that a pre-trained Word2Vec model
using SGNS with ﬁxed vectors, and then ﬁne-tuned on Twitter
data using CBOW, yielded the largest reliability. We therefore
used this model moving forward. Using this model, we next
compared the average valence, trust, and purity scores for each
of the 58 journalists in the #GloboLixo dataset. Speciﬁcally,
we hypothesized that female journalists in this dataset would
have signiﬁcantly lower trust, purity, and valence scores than
male journalists.
B. Diachronic Analysis: Tracking Evolving Information Oper-
ations
1) Dataset: To examine whether we were able to detect
these attacks on Twitter, we obtained a list of 204 journalists
and their corresponding Twitter handles. We next extracted

6/2/2021 and 11/19/2021, yielding roughly 25 million tweets.
We next split this dataset into several corpora, each containing
all tweets within a given week (e.g., 6/2/2021-6/9/2021; each
such corpus contained roughly 1 million tweets). Finally, we
ﬁt separate Word2Vec models to each week and calculated the
trust, purity, and valence scores for each journalist’s Twitter
handle. We next examined whether these measures might be
usable to detect evolving information operations. To do so,
we obtained a list of public statements attacking journalists
that were made by politicians associated with the Bolsonaro
regime. This list, compiled by Brazilian investigate journalists
on October 15, 2021, documented 85 such attacks. Of the
204 journalists in our sample, 7 (3.4%) had been attacked at
least once between June and September 2021. We therefore
examined how the valence, purity, and trust scores for these
journalists changed over time, and especially in the weeks
adjacent to the documented attacks. As before, we analyzed
female and male journalists separately.
IV. RESULTS
A. Synchronic study
We found that the 37 female journalists in this dataset were
framed as signiﬁcantly less pleasant, t(56)=2.65, p=0.01, less
trustworthy, t(56)=2.26, p=0.03, and less pure, t(56)=2.41,
p=0.02, than the corresponding 21 male journalists (Figure
1).
These results are consistent with a hypothesized gendered
nature of these attacks. Furthermore, these results lend an ele-
ment of predictive validity to our measures. A visualization of
our measures using T-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (TSNE
[13]; Figure 2) shows that journalists who were targeted in
this campaign ﬁt into two rough clusters associated either with
words indicating unpleasantness or impurity.
B. Diachronic study
Of the seven journalists that had been attacked between June
and September 2021, four were female and three were male.

Fig. 1. Boxplots for valence (top), trust (middle), and purity (bottom) scores
for female vs. male journalists in the #GloboLixo corpus
1) Journalist F1: On June 27, 2021, journalist F1 published
an interview with a prominent actress who used crude lan-
guage to accuse the Bolsonaro government of incompetence.
Two days later, on June 29, Carlos Bolsonaro, the son of the
Brazilian president, posted a tweet linking to this article also
using crude language and accusing Journalist F1 of ﬁnancial
corruption. Figure 3 shows that these events correspond to a
drop in Journalist F1’s trust score.
2) Journalist F2: Journalist F2 was targeted on two sepa-
rate occasions: May 27, 2021, and July 14, 2021. In the ﬁrst
attack, Eduardo Bolsonaro, another son of Brazil’s president,
wrote a series of Twitter posts criticizing the press, which
triggered attacks on the social networks of journalist F2.
Fig. 2.
TSNE plot showing clustering of journalist Twitter handles with
attribute words.
Fig. 3.
Journalist F1’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey)
scores over time. The red arrow corresponds to the June 29 tweet by Carlos
Bolsonaro.
In the second attack, one of President Bolsonaro’s advisors
accused journalist F2 of a Freudian slip when she referred to
President Bolsonaro as “ex-President” when reporting upon
his evaluation for surgery after the president suffered 10 days
of hiccups due to a bowel obstruction. Figure 4 shows that
the ﬁrst attack correspond to a low point in Journalist F2’s
purity score and the second attack corresponds to a reduced
trust score.
Fig. 4. Journalist F2’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrows corresponds to the May 27 and July 14 tweets by
Eduardo Bolsonaro and President Bolsonaro’s advisor, respectively.

3) Journalist F3: On June 30, 2021, journalist F3 posted a
tweet objecting to President Bolsonaro’s religious rhetoric and
emphasizing that the Brazilian state is secular. One July 13,
Eduardo Bolsonaro responded by calling for “spiritual war”
and accusing journalist F3 of being a “leftist militant”. Figure
5 shows that journalist F3’s trust score declined precipitously
following following the Twitter post on June 30th, but that
this trust score was increasing preceding Eduardo Bolsonaro’s
tweet. However, in the week immediately following the tweet,
journalist F3’s trust score declined once again.
Fig. 5. Journalist F3’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrow corresponds to the June 30 tweet by Eduardo
Bolsonaro.
4) Journalist F4: On July 22, 2021, Eduardo Bolsonaro
accused journalist F4 of corruption because her company
allegedly received a contract from the federal government that
was brokered by her ex-husband, a Brazilian senator. Although
these events seemed to correspond to a slight decrease in jour-
nalist F4’s trust score, this decrease was small in magnitude,
perhaps due to counterspeech for journalist F4’s supporters
(Figure 6).
Fig. 6. Journalist F4’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrow corresponds to the July 22 tweet by Eduardo
Bolsonaro.
5) Journalist M1: On June 12, 2021, the Special Advisor
to the President attacked journalist M1 on Twitter, accusing
him of having fabricated the “hate cabinet” concept. This
attack occurred in the middle of the week, and overlapped
with a slight reduction in journalist M1’s purity score, but
was followed by a decline in his trust score in the following
week (Figure 7).
6) Journalist M2: Journalist M2 was attacked four times on
Twiter – twice by Eduardo Bolsonaro (on July 22 and August
20, 2021), and twice by Carolos Bolsonaro (On August 21 and
September 21, 2021). Despite the frequency of these attacks,
there does not appear to be a consistent relationship between
the dates of these attacks at journalist M2’s scores.
Fig. 7. Journalist M1’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrow corresponds to the July 22 tweet by the Special
Advisor to the President.
Fig. 8. Journalist M2’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrows correspond to tweets by the Bolsonaro brothers.
7) Journalist M3: On September 24, 2021, journalist M3
criticized the government for inadequate COVID-19 precau-
tions, including limited mask wearing, limited social distanc-
ing, and COVID denialism. Carlos Bolsonaro responded the
next day (September 25), with a tweet crude tweet containing
sexual innuendo. Journalist M3’s purity score declined in the
following week (Figure 9).
Fig. 9. Journalist M3’s purity (blue), valence (orange), and trust (grey) scores
over time. The red arrows correspond to tweets by Carlos Bolsonaro.
V. DISCUSSION
Our method replicates the success of prior work [4] demon-
strating that information operations leave traces that may be
detected using techniques designed to evaluate the overall
biases in large corpora [9]. Beyond this prior work, our
analysis demonstrates the gendered nature of attacks targeting
journalists in Brazil. Although reported in the popular press,
we are the ﬁrst to provide a systematic account of these
attacks and the speciﬁc ways in which they appear designed
to undermine speciﬁc journalists’ reputation. In particular,

women are framed as both less pleasant, less trustworthy, and
less “pure” – i.e., more disgusting and immoral – than male
journalists. To our knowledge, this work is also the ﬁrst to use
psychometric methods, and especially the MTMM, to evaluate
the construct validity of our tools. Using this technique, we
were able to demonstrate the convergent-discriminant validity
of valence, trust, and purity scores. As expected, these three
quantities are all signiﬁcantly correlated with one another, but
not correlated with random words. Notably, this technique also
allows us to assess the performance of speciﬁc word embed-
ding algorithms against others. In particular, we found the
best performance (i.e., highest reliability and best convergent-
discriminant validity) when using a model pre-trained using
Word2Vec with the SGNS algorithm, but ﬁne-tuned using the
CBOW algorithm. We do not claim that this combination of
algorithms is the best in all cases – rather, we demosntrate a
technique that future work could use to assess several different
algorithms.
Althought we did not have a large enough sample of attacks
against speciﬁc journalists by political ﬁgures to conduct a
statistically signiﬁcant analysis, our diachronic analyses pro-
vides several qualitative insights into how trolling campaigns
might the affect overall discourse surrounding a particular
journalist. In two out of four cases, speciﬁc attacks targeting
these journalists corresponded to visible decreases in their
trust scores; however, different attacks appeared to correspond
to different dynamics. For example, Journalist F3’s attack
appeared to happen after, rather than before, a decline in her
trust score indicating that, in some cases, the speciﬁc mention
by a political ﬁgure may be signal the culmination, rather
that the commencement, of an attack. Whereas politicians may
lead the crowd in some cases, they may sense the direction
of the crowd and jump in front in others. Furthermore, our
inability to detect even a visual difference for Journalist F4
indicates that our technique may require reﬁnement and, in
particular, may be sensitive to counterspeech. Finally, we note
that male journalists appear to trigger different dynamics than
female journalists, with reductions in trust, purity, and valence
scores occurring in a delayed manner if at all in the cases of
journalists M1, M2 and M3.
In general, our results seem to indicate that reductions in
trust, valence, and purity scores do not seem to last longer than
1-2 weeks after an attack, but longer-term, longitudinal data
can analyze these trends to see if consistent waves of attacks
might leave lasting traces. Future work can therefore use our
measures in a quasi-experimental setting.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to acknowledge of Jo˜ao Guilherme Bastos
dos Santos for his invaluable assistance.
