CROSS-MODAL ASR POST-PROCESSING SYSTEM FOR ERROR CORRECTION AND
UTTERANCE REJECTION
Jing Du, Shiliang Pu, Qinbo Dong, Chao Jin, Xin Qi, Dian Gu, Ru Wu, Hongwei Zhou
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
ABSTRACT
Although modern automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems can
achieve high performance, they may produce errors that weaken
readers’ experience and do harm to downstream tasks. To improve
the accuracy and reliability of ASR hypotheses, we propose a cross-
modal post-processing system for speech recognizers, which 1) fuses
acoustic features and textual features from different modalities, 2)
joints a conﬁdence estimator and an error corrector in multi-task
learning fashion and 3) uniﬁes error correction and utterance rejec-
tion modules. Compared with single-modal or single-task models,
our proposed system is proved to be more effective and efﬁcient.
Experiment result shows that our post-processing system leads to
more than 10% relative reduction of character error rate (CER) for
both single-speaker and multi-speaker speech on our industrial ASR
system, with about 1.7ms latency for each token, which ensures
that extra latency introduced by post-processing is acceptable in
streaming speech recognition.
Index Terms— ASR post-processing, conﬁdence estimation,
error correction, utterance rejection.
1. INTRODUCTION
Modern Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems can achieve
high performance in terms of recognition accuracy, but they are far
from perfect. The performance of ASR may degrade dramatically
in mismatched domain, and errors introduced by speaker, environ-
ment and the recognizer itself will be propagated to downstream
tasks. A proper post-processing system plays a complementary role
for ASR system in such situation. Previous related works mainly
cover ﬁve tasks, i.e. automatic error correction [1], utterance ver-
iﬁcation or rejection [2], inverse text normalization [3], automatic
punctuation restoration [4], and disﬂuency detection [5]. The former
two tasks focus on improving the accuracy and reliability of ASR
transcriptions, and the latter three tasks aim to achieve better read-
ability. Since the latter three tasks and natural language understand-
ing (NLU) tasks are all based on the result of the former two stages,
error correction and utterance rejection are deﬁnitely important to
avoiding error propagation in a post-processing system.
Automatic error correction is introduced into post-processing
to reduce errors in ASR hypotheses, and it can be modeled in se-
quence tagging or sequence generation manner. Sequence tagging
based methods tag each token with an editing operation, then cor-
rected sequences are obtained by modiﬁcation with these operation
tags [6]. These models may suffer from a limited set of output la-
bels because it is difﬁcult to cover all combinations of operations and
tokens with reasonable coverage rates. Sequence generation based
methods convert erroneous hypotheses to an error-free version like
a machine translator [7]. In order to tackle variable length between
source sentence and target sentence, some sequence generation mod-
els work in an inefﬁcient auto-regressive way [8, 9], and some others
use a length predictor to adjust the length of hypotheses [10]. Neural
correction models typically only use text as input [11]. Some cor-
rection models also take acoustic features [8, 12] and visual features
[13] into account, and others even infuse additional information from
downstream tasks [1, 9]. For text-based correction task, pre-trained
language model such as BERT [14] is frequently used as backbone
and shows its powerfulness and effectiveness [15].
On noise corrupted speech or overlapped speech, an ASR may
perform poorly, and a neural correction model also fails because of
noisy context. In such cases, the cost of discarding these noisy tran-
scriptions is much cheaper than building a high-performance rec-
ognizer, so conﬁdence score based utterance rejection is introduced
into post-processing to reject unreliable hypotheses and avoid mis-
leading downstream tasks. Conﬁdence score can be estimated by
computing word posterior probability with lattice [16] or confusion
network [17] in conventional HMM-based ASR system, and it also
can be approximated as softmax value of a token among all can-
didates [18] for end-to-end ASR system. By such means the scores
have been found over-estimated because probabilities are normalized
over limited size of lattices or candidate paths. Improved estimation
can be obtained by using model-based approaches, including condi-
tional random ﬁelds (CRF) [19], multi-layer perception (MLP) [20],
recurrent neural networks (RNN) [21, 22, 23], and attention-based
sequence-to-sequence models [24, 25]. Various features are com-
bined in conﬁdence estimation. According to prior works, these fea-
tures can be classiﬁed into three major categories: acoustic features
(pitch, ﬁlter-bank energy, etc.), textual features (word embedding,
parts of speech, etc.), and other features generated by ASR decoder
(word posterior probabilities, word duration, etc.) [26, 27].
In previous works, punctuation prediction and disﬂuency detec-
tion are modeled with multi-task learning [28]. But to the best of
our knowledge, none has ever tried to joint error correction and ut-
terance rejection and explore the impact of conﬁdence scores on
correction task. In neural correction models, even if some works
make progress in fusing acoustic and textual features [8, 12], they
use an extra speech encoder to extract acoustic representation, which
is computationally expensive.
In this paper, we train our neural correction model with a conﬁ-
dence estimator and a token length predictor jointly, and we ﬁnd out
both error corrector and conﬁdence estimator beneﬁt from multi-task
learning. Conﬁdence scores are used to reject unreliable hypotheses
and assist neural correction model to correct erroneous tokens, which
shows that conﬁdence scores are not only critical for utterance rejec-
tion but also helpful for error correction task. Compared with single-
modal model, the cross-modal model is proved to achieve higher
performance even with much less parameters. The evaluation results
on both single-speaker and multi-speaker speech verify the effective-
ness of our proposed system.
arXiv:2201.03313v1  [eess.AS]  10 Jan 2022

2. THE POST-PROCESSING SYSTEM
Figure 1 illustrates the framework of our proposed system, and it
also gives an example of error correction and utterance rejection.
Fig. 1. The post-processing system framework (a) and an example
(b). Original ASR hypotheses are “A B C D E”. The length predictor
adjusts them to “A B D E E E E”. The estimator outputs conﬁdence
scores (Esti Out) and the corrector outputs a sequence “a b d e f g
h” (Corr Out). Tokens with high conﬁdence scores are recovered,
so we get corrected sequence “A b D E f g h”. According to conﬁ-
dence scores, overlap probabilities (Ovlp Prob), and sofmax values
of the corrector output (Corr Prob), we reserve the token “b” (al-
though its conﬁdence score is only 0.3, it may be corrected because
the corrector gives a high softmax value 0.9), and we reject “g” and
“h”.
2.1. Cross-modal features
As prior post-processing models, we use ASR one-best hypotheses
as pre-requisite input. We also introduce some features from WFST-
based decoder, such as word probabilities and duration in lattice.
Characters in ASR output text are mapped into continuous space rep-
resentation by an embedding layer. Word probabilities and duration
from ASR decoder are converted into character-level then concate-
nated to text embedding, by which means we get our textual-modal
features.
Furthermore, we fetch hidden states of acoustic model (AM)
in ASR system as our acoustic-modal features, because the hidden
states of AM can be seen as a bottleneck feature representing high-
level speech embedding. Compared with using raw speech or ﬁlter-
bank energies, using hidden states of AM eliminates an extra speech
encoder for extracting acoustic representation.
2.2. Multi-task learning
We use a multi-task loss function to train our model. Since we joint
three tasks, our loss tuple contains three task-speciﬁc cross entropy
(CE) loss elements, i.e. length predictor loss Lleng, conﬁdence esti-
mator loss Lesti, and error corrector loss Lcorr. In our experiments,
we verify that language model distillation loss Ldist and conﬁdence
scores based regularization loss Lconf are helpful for our decoder.
The total loss is given by
Ltotal = Lleng + Lesti + Lcorr + Ldist + Lconf.
(1)
The Ldist can be obtained by calculating mean square error
(MSE) between the output of our decoder and a pre-trained lan-
guage model, and the Lconf is deﬁned as
Lconf = (1 −c)/(1 −¯c) KLDiv (ocorr, y) ,
(2)
where c represents the conﬁdence scores output by the estimator in
a mini-batch, ¯c is the mean conﬁdence score of the mini-batch, and
KLDiv (ocorr, y) is Kullback-Leibler divergence between the output
of our corrector and the ground truth. The item (1 −c)/(1 −¯c) can
be seen as a weight for per token, the larger the conﬁdence score,
the smaller the weight. By such regularization, unreliable tokens
and sequences in a mini-batch are given larger penalties, so that the
corrector can learn the difﬁcult samples sufﬁciently.
2.3. Error correction
In correction module, original hypotheses are ﬁrst adjusted with the
prediction of token length (Leng Out). We adopt a similar method as
FastCorrect [29]: a token should be removed if its length prediction
value is 0, and if its length x is more than 1, it should be duplicated
by (x −1) times, otherwise the token should remain unchanged.
The conﬁdence estimator is a binary classiﬁer and it outputs the
conﬁdence score of a token (Esti Out). The corrector produces many
candidates for each token, and we simply choose the token with max-
imum softmax value as its output (Corr Out). If the conﬁdence score
of a token is lower than a speciﬁc threshold, this token is substituted
by the corrector’s output, on the contrary, if its conﬁdence score is
high enough, the corrector’s output of this token will be neglected.
We call this approach as “conﬁdence scores ﬁltering”, with which
we can avoid modifying original correct tokens by mistake.
2.4. Utterance rejection
To reject hypotheses transcribed from overlapped speech, we train a
three-class voice activity detection (VAD) model called “overlap de-
tection” to detect whether a frame of speech lies in overlapped part
or not. The overlap detection model may output 0, 1, 2, representing
silence/noise, single-speaker speech, and overlapped speech, respec-
tively. We convert probabilities of the third class (labelled with 2)
from frame-level to character-level to represent overlap probabilities
(Ovlp Prob) of each character in hypotheses.
In rejection module, each token is judged by a three-element tu-
ple containing conﬁdence score, overlap probability, and maximum
softmax value of the corrector’s output (called corrector probability,
Corr Prob). Tokens with low conﬁdence scores, high overlap prob-
abilities, and low corrector probabilities are removed, because they
are either unreliable, or in overlapped speech, and the corrector are
not conﬁdent to correct these tokens. The rejection can be performed
in different levels, such as token level, segment level, and sequence
level. To achieve better performance, conﬁdence scores may be pre-
processed by some smoothing algorithms before rejection.

3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Baseline model
Our ASR system is based on feedforward sequential memory net-
works (FSMN) [30].
We train an acoustic model with 24k-hour
Mandarin speech data in CE criteria followed with MMI training
[31]. The acoustic features are 80-dimensional log-mel ﬁlter-bank
energies computed on 25ms window with 10ms shift, which are
down-sampled by 3 times for low-frame-rate training and decoding.
And our 4-gram language model is trained with about 800G corpus.
This ASR system yields 3.3% CER in Aishell-1 test set [32].
We ﬁne-tune a pre-trained BERT model known as bert-base-
chinese1 to perform conﬁdence estimation and error correction. The
BERT output layer is followed with two parallel linear layers, which
are used as conﬁdence estimator (output size is 2) and error corrector
(output size is 5200). This baseline model only uses ASR transcrip-
tion as input.
3.2. Post-processing model
We train our post-processing model with ESPnet toolkit [33]. Our
model is based on standard transformer blocks. The dimension of
token embedding, hidden state and the feedforward layers are 256,
256 and 2048, respectively, and the attention head size is 4. Because
we use a deep layer of AM to export acoustic embedding, we can
minimize the post-processing model’s acoustic encoder with just one
linear layer to convert the dimension of acoustic embedding from
512 to the decoder’s hidden state size.
The length predictor consists of 2 transformer blocks followed
with a linear layer. In consideration of that too many consecutive
deletion tokens are difﬁcult to recover, we set the linear output size of
the length predictor as 5, which means maximum consecutive num-
ber of deletion errors we can model is 3. The decoder consists of 6
transformer blocks, followed with two parallel linear layers: one act
as conﬁdence estimator and the other as error corrector.
In order to avoid the conﬁdence estimator becoming over conﬁ-
dent on ASR training data, we choose about 1/4 of total ASR training
data, whose recognition accuracy is comparatively lower than aver-
age, to train our post-processing models.
3.3. Evaluation settings
3.3.1. Evaluation data
The single-speaker test sets include a 180-hour in-domain close-talk
(IDCT) dataset that consists of 18 subsets, a 10-hour out-of-domain
close-talk (ODCT) dataset whose context involves lyric, poetry,
chitchat and so on, and a 20-hour out-of-domain far-ﬁeld (ODFF)
dataset.
The multi-speaker test sets contain two 5-hour subsets.
One is simulated by mixing 2 single-speaker audio with speciﬁc
proportions of duration and volume (SMS), and the other is collected
from real world (CMS). It is worth noting that the overlapped part of
multi-speaker test audio is not transcribed, so if the ASR hypotheses
lie in overlapped speech, they will be treated as insertion errors. We
want to evaluate how many insertion errors our utterance rejection
module can remove correctly for overlapped speech.
3.3.2. Evaluation metric
We use areas under the curve (AUC) and normalized cross entropy
(NCE) [34] to measure conﬁdence scores. Receiver operating curve
1https://huggingface.co/bert-base-chinese
(ROC) is used to illustrate the operating characteristic in our evalu-
ation, which is a curve of false positive rate (FPR) against true pos-
itive rate (TPR) in a range of threshold values. Since different con-
ﬁdence score distributions may have the same AUC value, we need
NCE to evaluate the conﬁdence estimator. For a given test set, let
s = [s1, s2, . . . , sN] and ℓ= [l1, l2, . . . , lN] represent conﬁdence
scores and labels for total N tokens, respectively, where s ∈[0, 1]
and ℓ∈{0, 1} . We use H(ℓ) as entropy of target label sequence
and H(s | ℓ) as the cross-entropy between distributions of conﬁ-
dence scores and labels. The NCE is given by
NCE = H(ℓ) −H(s | ℓ)
H(ℓ)
.
(3)
The performance of estimator is better when NCE value is larger.
If the conﬁdence scores perfectly match the token labels, the NCE
value would equal to 1.
We use CER to measure the performance of our error correction
and utterance rejection modules. For rejection task, CER reduction
represents positive net rejection, which means total numbers of true
rejections is more than false rejections. This is the reason why we
use CER instead of false rejection rate to evaluate our utterance re-
jection module.
3.4. Evaluation results
We ﬁrst evaluate the performance of our conﬁdence estimator. The
result is showed in Table 1. As we can see, NCE values of lattice-
based conﬁdence scores given by ASR system are all negative, which
reﬂects that using word probability in lattice as conﬁdence score is
unreliable. Pre-trained BERT offers a competitive baseline after ﬁne-
tuning, and our estimator gives obviously better scores than BERT
on all test sets. For multi-speaker speech, tokens may be transcribed
correctly and have high conﬁdence scores even if they lie in over-
lapped speech, but they are labelled with “0” actually. This is the
reason why both BERT and our estimator perform poorly on multi-
speaker test sets.
Table 1 also shows the effect of our error correction and utter-
ance rejection modules. For single-speaker speech, BERT baseline
results in about 6% relative character error rate reduction (CERR).
Our error correction module outperforms BERT with 13% relative
CERR on IDCT, and more than 8% relative CERR on ODCT and
ODFF, which proves the effectiveness and robustness of our correc-
tor. After we reject some extremely unreliable tokens, the CER de-
creases further. On multi-speaker sets, both BERT and our corrector
fails because most of errors are insertion errors in overlapped speech.
With our rejection module, we can delete these inserted tokens. Re-
sult shows that our rejection module leads to more than 12% relative
CERR on SMS and CMS. It’s worth noting that because nearly half of
the audio is overlapped in multi-speaker test sets, even if we reject
some inserted tokens, the CER is still high. An example of over-
lapped speech transcription rejection is given by Figure 2, which
proves that even though we don’t recognize overlapped speech cor-
rectly, we can improve the reliability of the transcription by our re-
jection module.
4. ANALYSIS
4.1. Cross-modal model works
To explore the impact of different features, we fuse 4 types of fea-
tures in stages. The result is showed in Table 2. As we can see,
text-based BERT is powerful and performs much better than our

Table 1. Comparison of conﬁdence measurement and CER among ASR , BERT baseline and our system on different test sets
IDCT
ODCT
ODFF
SMS
CMS
AUC
NCE CER(%) AUC
NCE CER(%) AUC
NCE CER(%) AUC
NCE CER(%) AUC
NCE CER(%)
ASR
0.856 -0.28
11.53
0.834 -0.34
12.41
0.827 -0.43
17.21
0.775 -1.93
41.4
0.76
-2.19
45.22
BERT baseline 0.887 0.248
10.75
0.859 0.235
11.73
0.85
0.223
16.35
0.783 0.102
41.3
0.779
0.8
45.06
our estimator
0.912 0.316
-
0.882 0.307
-
0.879 0.302
-
0.791 0.116
-
0.783 0.103
-
+correction
-
-
10.00
-
-
11.39
-
-
15.55
-
-
41.26
-
-
44.98
+rejection
-
-
9.89
-
-
11.34
-
-
15.46
-
-
35.13
-
-
39.37
Fig. 2. An example of the utterance rejection result. Text in blue and
green are from different speakers. ASR outputs some incorrect and
confusing words in overlapped speech with red color. After rejec-
tion, more reliable and readable context is left.
text-only model. To our surprise, after fusing acoustic embedding
with textual feature, our model beats BERT on conﬁdence estima-
tion task, and achieves nearly the same CER on error correction task
with 8.2 times inference acceleration and just 1.7ms latency for each
token, which proves the importance of cross-modal features in these
tasks. By adding more features from our WFST-based decoder, the
performance improves further.
Table 2.
Performance of different backbones with different fea-
tures on IDCT: text, acou, prob, and dur represent ASR hypotheses,
acoustic embedding from AM’s hidden states, lattice-based word
probabilities and duration for each token, respectively.
Backbones
Features
AUC
NCE
CER(%) Inference
Speed
BERT
text
0.887 0.248
10.75
×1
Joint model
text
0.859 0.106
11.34
×13.1
+acou
0.892 0.276
10.77
×8.2
+prob
0.903 0.288
10.67
×8.2
+dur 0.906 0.292
10.6
×8.2
4.2. Multi-task learning matters
In Table 3, we explicitly compare our joint model with separate con-
ﬁdence estimator and error corrector. Two single models and our
joint model use the same structure and model size. By multi-task
training, the performance improves in both tasks, and total model
parameters is halved, which improves the efﬁciency too. The result
proves that the conﬁdence estimation task and error correction task
illuminate each other. The estimator acts like an error detector to
guide our corrector in multi-task training, and the corrector also help
the estimator to discovery erroneous tokens.
There is another comparison between with and without “conﬁ-
dence ﬁltering”. The term “with conﬁdence ﬁltering” means that our
Table 3. Comparison between single estimator/corrector and our
joint model, and results of other ablation studies on IDCT.
AUC
NCE
CER(%)
Size(MB)
Estimator only
0.894
0.26
-
46.8
Corrector only
-
-
10.91
46.8
+conﬁdence ﬁltering
-
-
10.7
46.8×2
Joint model
0.906
0.292
10.6
46.8
+conﬁdence ﬁltering
0.906
0.292
10.55
46.8
+length adjustment
0.907
0.293
10.35
62.4
+regularization
0.909
0.302
10.2
62.4
+distillation
0.912
0.316
10.0
62.4
corrector only modiﬁes tokens whose conﬁdence scores are under a
speciﬁc threshold. The result shows that if we use corrector with
conﬁdence scores ﬁltering, the single corrector gains 0.21 CERR,
but our joint model only gains 0.05 CERR. This result reﬂects the
impact of conﬁdence score on correction task. Since the corrector
of joint model has already been inﬂuenced by the estimator implic-
itly in multi-task training, the explicit conﬁdence ﬁltering is nearly
useless.
4.3. Other ablation studies
In this section, we introduce some of our optimizing techniques in
model training. The result is showed in Table 3. As the result show-
ing, CER decreases by 0.2 when we use our length predictor to adjust
the length, which proves the effectiveness of the length predictor in
error correction task. According to the statistics of different error
types, we ﬁnd out that the length predictor mainly contributes to re-
duction of insertion errors. After we use an additional regularization
loss based on conﬁdence scores explained in section 2.2, both the
estimator and the corrector are enhanced, which implies the difﬁcult
training examples may be learnt more sufﬁciently with our regular-
ization loss. We also use pre-trained bert-base-chinese as a language
model to distill our decoder, by which means we believe external
knowledge is introduced into our decoder. The result also veriﬁes
our guess. The performance of both estimator and corrector improve
after distilled by a language model.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a cross-modal ASR post-processing system unifying
error correction and utterance rejection is built with multi-task learn-
ing, and experiments prove its high performance and high computa-
tional efﬁciency. With such system, we can correct erroneous tokens

and ﬁlter out unreliable tokens, so that more accurate and reliable
results are conveyed to human readers and downstream applications.
In the future, we will focus on modeling utterance rejection with
neural networks instead of using logical judgment, to make the post-
processing system more convenient and robust.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Y. Weng, S. S. Miryala, C. Khatri, R. Wang, and G. Tur, “Joint
contextual modeling for asr correction and language under-
standing,” in ICASSP, 2020.
[2] Y. Zhang,
“Utterance veriﬁcation/rejection for speaker-
dependent and speaker-independent speech recognition,”
in
The Proceedings of the ICSLP, 2000.
[3] E. Pusateri, B. R. Ambati, E B rooks, O. Platek, and V. Nage-
sha, “A mostly data-driven approach to inverse text normaliza-
tion,” in Interspeech, 2017.
[4] D. Soboleva, O. Skopek, M. Sajgalik, V. Carbune, and B. Mik-
los,
“Replacing human audio with synthetic audio for on-
device unspoken punctuation prediction,” in ICASSP, 2021.
[5] S. Wang, W. Che, Q. Liu, P. Qin, and W. Y. Wang, “Multi-task
self-supervised learning for disﬂuency detection,” Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 34, no.
5, pp. 9193–9200, 2020.
[6] D. Wang, Y. Song, J. Li, J. Han, and H. Zhang, “A hybrid
approach to automatic corpus generation for chinese spelling
check,” in EMNLP, 2018.
[7] A. Mani, S. Palaskar, N. V. Meripo, S. Konam, and F. Metze,
“Asr error correction and domain adaptation using machine
translation,” in ICASSP, 2020.
[8] T. Tanaka, R. Masumura, M. Ihori, A. Takashima, T. Moriya,
T. Ashihara, S. Orihashi, and N. Makishima,
“Cross-
modal transformer-based neural correction models for auto-
matic speech recognition,” in Interspeech, 2021.
[9] H. Y. Wang, S. Y. Dong, Y. Liu, J. Logan, and Y. Liu, “Asr error
correction with augmented transformer for entity retrieval,” in
Interspeech, 2020.
[10] Y. Higuchi, H. Inaguma, S. Watanabe, T. Ogawa, and
T. Kobayashi, “Improved mask-ctc for non-autoregressive end-
to-end asr,” in ICASSP, 2021.
[11] J. Guo, Tara N Sainath, and Ron J Weiss, “A spelling correction
model for end-to-end speech recognition,” in ICASSP, 2019.
[12] S. Zhang, J. Y Yi, Z. K. Tian, Y. Bai, J. H Tao, X. F. Liu,
and Z. Q. Wen, “End-to-end spelling correction conditioned
on acoustic feature for code-switching speech recognition,” in
Interspeech, 2021.
[13] H. D. Xu, Z. Li, Q. Zhou, C. Li, and X. L. Mao, “Read, lis-
ten, and see: Leveraging multimodal information helps chinese
spell checking,” in Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, 2021.
[14] J. Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transform-
ers for language understanding,” in NAACL, 2019.
[15] S. H. Zhang, H. R. Huang, J. C. Liu, and H. Li, “Spelling error
correction with soft-masked bert,” in ACL, 2020.
[16] G. Evermann and P. C. Woodland, “Large vocabulary decoding
and conﬁdence estimation using word posterior probabilities,”
in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 2000.
[17] W. Jeon, M. Jordan, and M. Krishnamoorthy, “On modeling
asr word conﬁdence,” in ICASSP, 2020.
[18] O. Dan, A. Caranica, A. Stan, and H. Cucu, “An evaluation
of word-level conﬁdence estimation for end-to-end automatic
speech recognition,” 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology
Workshop (SLT), pp. 258–265, 2021.

[19] M. S. Seigel and P. C. Woodland,
“Combining information
sources for conﬁdence estimation with crf models,” in Inter-
speech, Conference of the International Speech Communica-
tion Association, Florence, Italy, August, 2011.
[20] P. S. Huang, K. Kumar, C. Liu, Y. Gong, and D. Li, “Predicting
speech recognition conﬁdence using deep learning with word
identity and score features,” in ICASSP, 2013.
[21] M. A. Del-Agua, A. Gimenez, A. Sanchis, J. Civera, and
A. Juan,
“Speaker-adapted conﬁdence measures for asr us-
ing deep bidirectional recurrent neural networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol.
PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2018.
[22] Q. Li, P. M. Ness, A. Ragni, and Mjf Gales, “Bi-directional
lattice recurrent neural networks for conﬁdence estimation,” in
ICASSP, 2019.
[23] A. Kastanos, A. Ragni, and Mjf Gales, “Conﬁdence estima-
tion for black box automatic speech recognition systems using
lattice recurrent neural networks,” in ICASSP, 2020.
[24] Q. Li, D. Qiu, Y. Zhang, B. Li, and T. Strohman, “Conﬁdence
estimation for attention-based sequence-to-sequence models
for speech recognition,” in ICASSP, 2021.
[25] D. Qiu, Q. Li, Y. He, Y. Zhang, B. Li, L. Cao, R. Prabhavalkar,
D. Bhatia, W. Li, and K. Hu, “Learning word-level conﬁdence
for subword end-to-end asr,” ICASSP, pp. 6393–6397, 2021.
[26] A Re, A Aeh, B Th, and A Ho, “System-independent asr error
detection and classiﬁcation using recurrent neural network,”
Computer Speech & Language, vol. 55, pp. 187–199, 2019.
[27] P. Swarup, R. Maas, S. Garimella, S. H. Mallidi, and
B. Hoffmeister,
“Improving asr conﬁdence scores for alexa
using acoustic and hypothesis embeddings,” in Interspeech,
2019.
[28] Q. Chen, M. Z. Chen, B. Li, and W. Wang, “Controllable time-
delay transformer for real-time punctuation prediction and dis-
ﬂuency detection,” ICASSP, pp. 8069–8073, 2020.
[29] Y. C. Leng, X. Tan, L. C. Zhu, J. Xu, R. Q. Luo, L. Q. Liu,
T. Qin, X. Y. Li, E. Lin, and T. Y. Liu, “Fastcorrect: Fast error
correction with edit alignment for automatic speech recogni-
tion,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2105.03842, 2021.
[30] S. Zhang, M. Lei, Z. J. Yan, and L. R. Dai, “Deep-fsmn for
large vocabulary continuous speech recognition,” ICASSP, pp.
5869–5873, 2018.
[31] Karel Vesel´y, A. Ghoshal, L. Burget, and Daniel Povey,
“Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural networks,” in
Interspeech, 2013.
[32] H. Bu, J. Du, X. Na, B. Wu, and H. Zheng, “Aishell-1: An
open-source mandarin speech corpus and a speech recognition
baseline,”
in Conference of the Oriental Chapter of the In-
ternational Coordinating Committee on Speech Databases &
Speech I/o Systems & Assessment, 2017.
[33] S. Watanabe, T. Hori, S. Karita, T. Hayashi, J. Nishitoba,
Y. Unno, N. Yalta, J. Heymann, M. Wiesner, N. Chen, A. Ren-
duchintala, and T. Ochiai, “Espnet: End-to-end speech pro-
cessing toolkit,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1804.00015, 2018.
[34] M. H. Siu, H. Gish, and F. Richardson, “Improved estimation,
evaluation and applications of conﬁdence measures for speech
recognition,” in Fifth European Conference on Speech Com-
munication and Technology, EUROSPEECH 1997, Rhodes,
Greece, September 22-25, 1997, 1997.
