AdaEnsemble: Learning Adaptively Sparse Structured Ensemble
Network for Click-Through Rate Prediction
Yachen Yan

Credit Karma
San Francisco, California, USA
Liubo Li

Credit Karma
San Francisco, California, USA
ABSTRACT
Learning feature interactions is crucial to success for large-scale
CTR prediction in recommender systems and Ads ranking. Re-
searchers and practitioners extensively proposed various neural
network architectures for searching and modeling feature interac-
tions. However, we observe that different datasets favor different
neural network architectures and feature interaction types, sug-
gesting that different feature interaction learning methods may
have their own unique advantages. Inspired by this observation,
we propose AdaEnsemble: a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts
(SparseMoE) architecture that can leverage the strengths of het-
erogeneous feature interaction experts and adaptively learns the
routing to a sparse combination of experts for each example, al-
lowing us to build a dynamic hierarchy of the feature interactions
of different types and orders. To further improve the prediction
accuracy and inference efficiency, we incorporate the dynamic
early exiting mechanism for feature interaction depth selection.
The AdaEnsemble can adaptively choose the feature interaction
depth and find the corresponding SparseMoE stacking layer to exit
and compute prediction from. Therefore, our proposed architecture
inherits the advantages of the exponential combinations of sparsely
gated experts within SparseMoE layers and further dynamically se-
lects the optimal feature interaction depth without executing deeper
layers. We implement the proposed AdaEnsemble and evaluate its
performance on real-world datasets. Extensive experiment results
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of AdaEnsemble over
state-of-the-art models.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies; • Machine learning; • Machine
learning approaches; • Neural networks;
KEYWORDS
CTR prediction, Recommendation System, Feature Interaction, Mix-
ture of Experts, Dynamic Inference, Early Exiting, AutoML, Deep
Neural Network
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Reference Format:
Yachen Yan and Liubo Li. 2022. AdaEnsemble: Learning Adaptively Sparse
Structured Ensemble Network for Click-Through Rate Prediction. In Pro-
ceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction model [25] is an essential com-
ponent for the large-scale search ranking, online advertising and
recommendation system [4, 9, 20, 37].
Many deep learning-based models have been proposed for CTR
prediction problems in the industry. They have become dominant
in learning the useful feature interactions of the mixed-type input
in an end-to-end fashion[37]. Although most of the existing meth-
ods can effectively capture higher-order feature interactions, we
observe that their performance varies for different datasets. We
believe this is due to their inductive bias: different methods learn
different types of feature interactions and favor different datasets.
While every existing method focuses on automatically model-
ing different types of feature interactions, there have been few
attempts to model different types of interactions jointly and dy-
namically. We believe that ensembling different interaction mod-
ules to create heterogeneous feature interactions can complement
the non-overlapping knowledge that each interaction learning ap-
proach learned, as opposed to the homogeneous interaction model-
ing method, which restricts the types of feature interactions to be
learned. For utilizing various interaction modules to learn different
types of feature interactions, we use Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-
Experts (SpasrseMoE) architecture to enrich the model capacity
while achieving computational efficiency through conditional com-
putation.
We propose AdaEnsemble: a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts
(SparseMoE) hierarchical architecture to ensemble different inter-
action learning modules and dynamically select optimal feature
interaction depth. Within each SparseMoE layer of AdaEnsemble,
there is a collection of interaction learning experts, and a trainable
gating network determines a sparse combination of these experts
to use for each example. Within the Depth Selecting Controller, a
trainable gating network will choose the feature interaction depth
for each example and recursively propagate feature interaction rep-
resentations through SparseMoE layers to the corresponding depth
for computing the prediction. Through these conditional compu-
tation mechanisms, we enlarged the model capacity exponentially
without increasing inference cost. The main contributions of this
paper can be summarized as follows:
• We designed a novel model architecture called AdaEnsemble to
ensemble various types of feature interaction learning modules
arXiv:2301.08353v1  [cs.IR]  6 Jan 2023

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Yachen and Liubo
by Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts (SparsseMoE). Through
utilizing MoE layers recursively with residual connections and
normalization, AdaEnsemble can model different types of inter-
actions jointly and dynamically.
• We designed an efficient and effective Depth Selecting Con-
troller to adaptively choose the optimal feature interaction depth.
Through utilizing this controller, AdaEnsemble can dynamically
determine the layer for early exiting to improve prediction accu-
racy and inference efficiency.
• We designed a bi-level optimization algorithm for iteratively
training the modeling network and gating network.
• We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets and
study the learning patterns of AdaEnsemble.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Feature Interaction Modeling
Learning the feature interactions is the key topic in CTR predic-
tion problems and has been widely discussed in literature. Various
hybrid network architectures [4, 8, 16, 22, 23, 31, 32] utilize the feed-
forward neural network with non-linear activation function as its
core component, to learn implicit interactions. The complement of
the implicit interaction modeling improves the performance of the
network that only models the explicit interactions [3].
Another group of models focuses on exploring bit-wise/vector-
wise feature interactions. Deep & Cross Network (DCN) [31] and
its improved version DCN V2 [32] explores the feature interactions
at the bit-wise level explicitly in a recursive fashion. Deep Factor-
ization Machine (DeepFM) [8] utilizes factorization machine layer
to model the pairwise vector-wise interactions. Product Neural Net-
work (PNN) [22, 23] introduces the inner product layer and the outer
product layer to learn vector-wise interactions and bit-wise inter-
actions, respectively. xDeepFM [16] learns the explicit vector-wise
interaction using Compressed Interaction Network (CIN), which has
an RNN-like architecture and learns vector-wise interactions using
Hadamard product. FiBiNET [11] utilizes Squeeze-and-Excitation
network to dynamically learn the importance of features and model
the feature interactions via bilinear function. AutoInt [28] leverages
the Transformer [30] architecture to learn different orders of feature
combinations of input features. xDeepInt [35] introduces polyno-
mial interaction layer to recursively learn higher-order vector-wise
and bit-wise interactions jointly with controlled degree, dispensing
with jointly-trained DNN and nonlinear activation functions.
2.2
Sparse Mixture-of-Experts Network
The Sparsely-Gated MoE model [2, 27] combines multiple experts
and a trainable gating network that selects a subset of experts
for each example. This network architecture can be viewed as a
dynamic sparsity structure that maintains all weights but intro-
duces sparsity into the model through conditional computation.
The SparseMoE is widely used in natural language processing re-
search area. Most of the discussions focus on improving the rout-
ing mechanism for the experts. Switch Transformer [7] simplifies
the top-1 routing algorithm. GShard [14] uses group-level top-2
routing. Both are trained with load balancing losses and improve
language models with reduced communication and computational
costs. BASE Layers [15] treated routing as a linear assignment
Embedding Layer
Categorical 
Feature
Bucktized
 Numeric Feature
1st Sparse MoE Layer
2nd Sparse MoE Layer
l-th Sparse MoE Layer
Input Feature Map
Add & Normalize
Add & Normalize
Add & Normalize
---
Depth Selecting 
Network
1st 
Estimator
2nd 
Estimator
l-th 
Estimator
Figure 1: The Architecture of AdaEnsemble
In this example, the depth selecting network selects the 2nd layer to exit
and compute the final prediction, therefore the deeper layers was not
activated and plotted translucent in the figure.
problem and removed the need for load balancing auxiliary losses.
M6-T [36] splits experts into different groups and applies k top-
1 routing procedures. Some literature explore the training of the
Sparsely-Gated MoE. EvoMoE [21] decouples the training of ex-
perts and the sparse gate by training all experts at first and then
gradually and adaptively becomes sparser while routes to fewer
experts for learning the sparse gate. ST-MoE [40] further studies the
training instabilities and uncertain quality issue of the MoE model.
X-MoE [5] proposed a dimension reduction and L2 normalization
to solve the representation collapse in the training of MoE model.
2.3
Early-Exiting Network
The idea of early-exiting for the neural network was firstly pro-
posed by BranchyNet [29] for computer vision. This technique
is also applied to NLP tasks, DeeBERT [33], FastBERT [18], and
PABEE [39] was later introduced for improving inference efficiency
of Transformer-Based BERT models.
For the early-exiting mechanism, BranchyNet [29], DeeBERT [33],
FastBERT [18] and SDN [12] use the entropy-based or confidence-
based criteria. While using entropy-based or confidence-based cri-
teria is straightforward and effective, it takes advantage of the fact
that the model’s output is a probability distribution in multi-class
classification tasks. This technique generally cannot be applied
to binary classification and regression tasks. On the other hand,
BERxiT [34] and Epnet [6] use learned modules for early-exiting.

Research Track Paper
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
3
PROPOSED MODEL: ADAENSEMBLE
In this section, we give an overview of the architectures of AdaEnsem-
ble. First, we introduce the feature processing and embedding layer,
which maps continuous features and high-dimensional categorical
features onto a dense embedding vector. Second, we introduce the
feature interaction experts we considered for jointly learning the
hierarchy of the deep feature representations. Third, we present the
sparse mixture-of-experts (SparseMoE) layer, which ensemble mul-
tiple interaction experts dynamically, and the estimator associated
with each SparseMoE Layer. Fourth, we discuss how to automat-
ically and dynamically select the feature interaction depth based
on the Depth Selecting Controller. Finally, a bi-level optimization
algorithm will be provided for the training.
3.1
Embedding Layer
In large-scale CTR prediction tasks, inputs include both continuous
and categorical features. Categorical features are often directly
encoded by one-hot encoding, which results in an excessively high-
dimensional and sparse feature space.
Suppose we have 𝐹fields. In our feature processing step, we
bucketize all the continuous features to equal frequency bins, then
embed the bucketized continuous features and categorical features
embed each feature onto a dense embedding vector 𝑒𝑖of the same
dimension 𝐷.
e𝑖= x𝑖V𝑖,
where 𝑒𝑖∈𝑅𝐷, V𝑖is an embedding matrix for the 𝑖-th field, and
x𝑖is the corresponding one-hot vector. Lastly, we concatenate 𝐹
embedding vectors and denote the output of embedding layer 𝑋0 ∈
𝑅𝐹×𝐷as the input feature map:
𝑋0 = [𝑒1,𝑒2, · · · ,𝑒𝐹]⊺.
(1)
3.2
Feature Interaction Experts
We considered several types of feature interaction experts in our
model: Dense Layer, Convolution Layer, Multi-Head Self-Attention
Layer, Polynomial Interaction Layer, and Cross Layer. Essentially,
any feature interaction learning layer can be included in our frame-
work, and the residual connection and normalization will be applied
to their ensembles. Now we introduce these feature interaction ex-
perts included in our framework. Note that our proposed framework
is general and can use arbitrary feature interaction modules. The
potential feature interaction experts can be used are not limited to
the following.
3.2.1
Dense Layer. Dense Layer is also known as fully connected
layer and is the most widely used module for modeling implicit
feature interactions. In this paper, we use the dense layer with
non-linear activation function for learning the deep feature rep-
resentations. Given an input of embedding 𝑋𝑙−1, the output of
embedding 𝑋𝑙is obtained from:
𝑋𝑙= 𝜎(𝑊𝑙· 𝑋𝑙−1)
(2)
where 𝜎denotes activation function and𝑊𝑙denotes the weights
of the 𝑙-th dense layer.
3.2.2
Convolution Layer. Convolution layers are widely used for
computer vision problems. In this paper, we applied 1D convolution
as one of the interaction experts. Here we utilize a dense layer ahead
of the convolution layer for fusing the inputs embeddings first, as
the convolution layer is locally connected. Given the embedding
𝑋𝑙−1 as input, the output of embedding 𝑋𝑙is obtained from:
𝑋𝑙= Dense(Pooling(Conv1D(Reshape(𝑋𝑙−1))))
(3)
Here we first reshape the input embedding and then apply 1D
convolution followed by a pooling layer. Finally, we use a dense
layer to project the output to the desired dimension.
3.2.3
Multi-Head Self-Attention Layer. Multi-Head Self-Attention
Layer [30] is widely used in transformer networks for its superior
performance in natural language processing and has started to be
popular in the computer vision research area. We consider utiliz-
ing Multi-Head Self-Attention Layer for modeling the dependency
between features and forming meaningful higher-order features.
Given an input of embedding 𝑋𝑙−1, the output of embedding 𝑋𝑙is
obtained from:
𝑋𝑙= Dense(MultiHeadSelfAttention(Reshape(𝑋𝑙−1))
(4)
Here we first reshape the input embedding and then apply Multi-
Head Self-Attention Layer followed by a dense layer to project the
output to the desired dimension.
3.2.4
Polynomial Interaction Layer. Polynomial Interaction Net-
work [35] is designed to capture bounded degree feature interac-
tions explicitly. In this paper, we adopt the PIN layer as one of our
feature interaction learning experts. Given an input of embedding
𝑋𝑙−1, the mathematical representation of the 𝑙-th PIN layer’s output
is given by:
𝑋𝑙= 𝑋𝑙−1 ◦(𝑊𝑙· 𝑋0)
(5)
where ◦denotes the Hadamard product and𝑊denotes the kernel
weights of the PIN layer. We omit the residual connection from the
original paper in the above equation as the residual connection will
be used across the MoE layers.
3.2.5
Cross Layer. Deep Cross Network [32] is later proposed to
explore the feature interactions in a recursive fashion. Given an
input of embedding 𝑋𝑙−1, the output of embedding 𝑋𝑙is obtained
from:
𝑋𝑙= 𝑋0 ◦(𝑊𝑙· 𝑋𝑙−1) + 𝑏𝑙
(6)
Where 𝑊and 𝑏denote the weight matrix and bias vector in the
𝑙-th DCN layer. We also omit the residual connection of the original
implementation in the above equation, as we will use the residual
connection across the MoE layers.
3.3
Sparse Mixture-of-Experts Layer
The Sparse Mixture-of-Experts layer ensembles aforementioned
heterogeneous feature interaction experts and consists of several
other essential parts to make the overall model can be stably trained.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Yachen and Liubo
Sparse MoE Layer
Expert 1
Expert 2
Expert 3
Expert n-1
Expert n
Input 
Embedding
Output 
Embedding
Gating 
Network
Sparse 
Dispatcher
non-zero index
non-zero value
....
Figure 2: The architecture of Sparse Mixture-of-Experts
Layer
Input 
Embedding
Feed-Forward Network
e1
e2
e3
e4
Expert 
Embedding
Cosine 
Similarity
Learnable Temperature 
Re-Scaling
Top-K
L2 Normalization
L2 Normalization
Routing Score
Softmax
Noise Injection
Figure 3: The Noisy Gating Network within Sparse Mixture-
of-Experts Layer
3.3.1
Noisy Gating Network. The gating network essentially com-
putes the gating value for selecting and weighting the output em-
bedding of each expert.
For the input embedding of gating network 𝑋0, it firstly pro-
cessed by the gating network: a two-layer feed-forward network,
i.e. a dimension reduction layer with reduction ratio 𝑟[10], a non-
linear activation function and then a dense layer projecting to
hidden state ℎ∈𝑅𝑑. Additionally, we applied multiplicative jitter
noise for introducing exploration and promoting load balancing
between different experts.
ℎ= FFN(𝑋0 ◦RandomUniform(1.0 −eps, 1.0 + eps))
(7)
After projecting the input embedding to hidden state ℎ∈𝑅𝑑,
we apply the 𝐿2 normalization to both hidden state ℎ∈𝑅𝑑and
learnable expert embeddings 𝑒𝑗∈𝑅𝑑, where 𝑗is the index of
expert. Then, we compute the cosine similarity between the hidden
state and expert embedding as the initial routing score. Here we
encourage the uniformity of representations to avoid dominated
experts issue.
𝑠𝑗=
ℎ· 𝑒𝑗
∥ℎ∥∥𝑒𝑗∥
(8)
Finally, we use a learnable temperature scalar 𝜏to re-scale the
routing scores to the range [−1, +1].
𝑔𝑗= 𝑠𝑗/𝜏
(9)
For the computed routing score 𝑔, we only keep the top k values
and set the rest to −∞, resulting in the corresponding softmax
gating values equal 0. The 𝑖-th element of the output of the gating
network is
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝐺(𝑥)𝑖=
exp

TopK(𝑔,𝑘)𝑖

Í𝑁
𝑗=1 exp

TopK(𝑔,𝑘)𝑗
 ,
(10)
where
TopK(𝑔,𝑘)𝑗=
(
𝑔𝑗
if 𝑔𝑗is in the top 𝑘elements of 𝑔
−∞
otherwise.
(11)
These gating values will be used by the sparse dispatcher for
routing examples to different experts. This is the essential step for
achieving sparsity of our Sparse Mixture-of-Experts layer. Note
that the 𝐺(𝑥) is differentiable regardless the value of 𝑘[7].
3.3.2
Annealing Top-K Gating. We also introduce annealing mech-
anism to the Top-K operation. We starts with 𝑘value equal to the
number of experts, which means that we starts as a fully dense gate
that routes examples to all experts. Then we gradually decrease
the 𝑘and route examples to fewer experts, to adaptively make
the structure sparser and continuously improving the computation
efficiency.
By annealing of the 𝑘value, we start to train our architecture
with a dense structure which allows us to thoroughly learn all ex-
perts and adjust the gating network in the correct direction at the
beginning. Therefore, we can control the sparsity of our architec-
ture while training to not only accelerate the convergence of the
gating network but also benefit the experts’ specialty for learning
particular types of feature interactions.
3.3.3
Sparse Dispatcher. The sparse dispatcher takes the examples
gating values and experts as input. It firstly dispatches the examples
to the experts corresponding to the non-zero gating values, and lets
experts generate the output embeddings. The output𝑦of the Sparse
Mixture-of-Experts layer is the linearly weighted combination of
expert output embeddings by the non-zero gating values.

Research Track Paper
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
𝑦=
∑︁
𝑗∈𝜙
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝐺𝑗(𝑥)𝐸𝑗(𝑥)
(12)
Where 𝜙denotes the selected non-zero indices. We save com-
putation based on the sparsity of 𝐺(𝑥). Wherever 𝐺(𝑥)𝑗= 0, we
don’t pass the expert to the corresponding expert and do not need
to compute expert embedding 𝐸𝑗(𝑥).
3.3.4
Load Distribution Regularization. As stated in the previous
research [5, 7, 27, 40], the gating network tends to select only a
few experts if no regularization is applied, especially when certain
experts are easier to train than other experts. This phenomenon
is self-reinforcing, since the selected experts are trained more and
will be selected more frequently by the gating network. Therefore,
the load balancing loss is applied to enforce the uniform expert
routing.
𝐿balance = 𝜆· 𝑁·
𝑁
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑓𝑗· 𝑃𝑗
(13)
where 𝑁is the number of experts, 𝑓𝑗is the fraction of examples
dispatched to expert j, 𝑃𝑗is the average of the router probability
allocated for expert j, and 𝜆is the coefficient for the regularization
term.
𝑓𝑗= 1
𝐵
∑︁
𝑥∈B
1{argmax 𝑝(𝑥) = 𝑗}
(14)
𝑃𝑗= 1
𝐵
∑︁
𝑥∈B
𝑝𝑗(𝑥)
(15)
While the default load balancing loss is applicable and effective
when experts are of the same type, AdaEnsemble is using hetero-
geneous feature interaction experts, and the optimal load for each
expert is not uniform. Therefore, we apply the below load distribu-
tion regularization to encourage the expected load distribution of
heterogeneous experts.
𝐿distribution = 𝜆·
𝑁
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑓𝑗· 𝑃𝑗
𝑤𝑗
(16)
where 𝑤𝑗is the expected load fraction of examples dispatched
to expert j, and naturally Í𝑁
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑗= 1. In practice, the 𝜆should
be sufficiently large to prevent expert selection self-reinforcing
phenomenon at the initial training stage while not overwhelming
the primary LogLoss objective.
3.4
Estimator Layer
The output of the Sparse Mixture-of-Experts layer is a feature map
that consists of feature interactions of different degrees and types,
including raw input feature map reserved by residual connections
and higher-order feature interactions jointly learned by experts.
For the final prediction, we merely use the formula as follows:
ˆ𝑦= 𝜎(𝑊𝑙𝑋𝑙+ 𝑏𝑙)
(17)
where 𝜎is the sigmoid function, 𝑊𝑙∈𝑅1×𝐹is a feature map aggre-
gation vector that linearly combines all the learned feature interac-
tions in the feature map, 𝑏∈𝑅is the bias.
3.5
Depth Selecting Controller
3.5.1
Depth Selecting Network. The Depth Selecting Network is
essentially the same configuration as the aforementioned Noisy Gat-
ing Network for SparseMoE layer. We denote it by 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝐺(𝑥). The
outputs of 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ𝐺(𝑥) are [𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
1
,𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
2
, · · · ,𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝐿
], indicating
each example’s optimal forward propagation depth. The 𝑙-th unit
denotes the probability of selecting the 𝑙-th MoE layer to exit. The
optimal depth is automatically selected as the one corresponding
to the largest probability. In contrast to the expert selection, when
choosing the optimal depth of each example for the dynamic infer-
ence, we only keep the top-1 depth index from the output units of
the Depth Selecting Network. Note that we can also apply the load
distribution regularization to encourage the examples’ propagation
depth distribution.
3.5.2
Dynamic Propagation Mechanism. With the depth gates𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝑙
∈
[0, 1] computed by Depth Selecting Network, we obtain the opti-
mal depth for each example. If 𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝑙
= 0, we recursively forward
propagate examples through MoE layers and compute deeper repre-
sentation until 𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝑙
= 1 or reaching the final layer. If 𝑔𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝑙
= 1,
the forward propagation will be stopped and the corresponding
𝑙-th estimator will compute the prediction. To efficiently process a
batch of examples with different optimal propagation depths, we
utilize algorithm 1 for dynamic forward propagation.
Algorithm 1 Dynamic Propagation
1: DepthGates ←DepthSelectingNetwork(x)
2: b𝑦←DynamicPropagation(x, DepthGates, depth=0)
3: return b𝑦
4:
5: function DynamicPropagation(Inputs, Gates, Depth)
6:
Outputs = MoE(Inputs)
7:
Depth += 1
8:
if Depth == Number of Layer then
9:
b𝑦= Estimator(Outputs)
10:
else
11:
g = Gates[:, Depth]
12:
Outputskeep, Outputsexit = Dispatch(Outputs, g)
13:
Gateskeep, _ = Dispatch(Gates, g)
14:
15:
b𝑦keep = DynamicPropagation(Outputskeep, Gateskeep, Depth)
16:
b𝑦exit = Estimator(Outputsexit)
17:
b𝑦= Combine(b𝑦keep, b𝑦exit)
18:
end if
19:
return b𝑦
20: end function
3.6
Training
3.6.1
Training Objective. The loss function we use a linearly weighted
combination of the Log Loss and the auxiliary load distribution
regularization,
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠= 𝐿LogLoss + 𝜆1𝐿expert
distribution + 𝜆2𝐿depth
distribution
(18)
where 𝜆1 and 𝜆2 are the coefficients for weighting the load distri-
bution regularization.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Yachen and Liubo
3.6.2
Bi-Level Optimization. The optimization task for training the
AdaEnsemble is to jointly optimize the parameters𝑊, which stands
for the expert layers and estimator layers, and 𝛼, which represents
the expert gating network and depth selecting network. Inspired
by the DARTS [17], we apply bi-level optimization algorithm for
training our model, where 𝛼is the upper-level parameters and 𝑊
is the lower-level parameters. We apply algorithm 2 to optimize 𝑊
and 𝛼alternatively and iteratively.
Algorithm 2 Bi-Level Optimization for AdaEnsemble
Input: training examples with corresponding labels, step size 𝑡
Output: well-learned parameters W∗and 𝛼∗
1: while not converged do
2:
Sample a mini-batch of validation data
3:
Updating 𝛼by descending ∇𝛼L𝑣𝑎𝑙
 W −𝜉∇WL𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛(W, 𝛼), 𝛼
4:
(𝜉= 0 for first-order approximation)
5:
for 𝑖←1,𝑡do
6:
Sample a mini-batch of training data
7:
Update W by descending ∇WL𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛(W, 𝛼)
8:
end for
9: end while
3.7
Discussion on AdaEnsemble
The combination of sparse experts routing at each SparseMoE layer
and the depth selecting controller brings two merits to the proposed
model. On one hand, the stacked sparseMoE layers allow the pro-
posed model to leverage the exponential combinations of sparsely
gated experts, which brings in more predicting power. On the other
hand, the depth selecting controller enables the proposed model
to learn the instance-ware model depth. It improves the efficiency
during model serving. In the next section, we will illustrate the
effectiveness of the proposed model through some experimental
studies.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we focus on evaluating the effectiveness of our
proposed models and seeking answers to the following research
questions::
• Q1: How does our proposed AdaEnsemble perform compared to
each baseline in the CTR prediction problem?
• Q2: How does the SparseMoE layer perform compared to Dense-
MoE, which utilizes all feature interaction experts? Does the
cascade of SparseMoE layers effectively capture different types
of feature interactions?
• Q3: How does the depth selecting controller perform compared
to a full-depth network? Does the early exiting mechanism
achieve both effectiveness and efficiency?
• Q4: How do different hyper-parameter settings influence the
performance of AdaEnsemble?
4.1
Experiment Setup
4.1.1
Datasets. We evaluate our proposed model on three public
real-world datasets widely used for research.
1. Criteo.1 Criteo dataset is from Kaggle competition in 2014.
Criteo AI Lab officially released this dataset after, for academic
use. This dataset contains 13 numerical features and 26 categor-
ical features. We discretize all the numerical features to integers
by transformation function ⌊𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑉2⌋and treat them as categor-
ical features, which is conducted by the winning team of Criteo
competition.
2. Avazu.2 Avazu dataset is from Kaggle competition in 2015.
Avazu provided 10 days of click-through data. We use 21 features
in total for modeling. All the features in this dataset are categorical
features.
3. iPinYou.3 iPinYou dataset is from iPinYou Global RTB(Real-
Time Bidding) Bidding Algorithm Competition in 2013. We follow
the data processing steps of [38] and consider all 16 categorical
features.
For all the datasets, we randomly split the examples into three
parts: 70% is for training, 10% is for validation, and 20% is for test-
ing. We also remove each categorical features’ infrequent levels
appearing less than 20 times to reduce sparsity issue. Note that
we want to compare the effectiveness and efficiency on learning
higher-order feature interactions automatically, so we do not do any
feature engineering but only feature transformation, e.g., numerical
feature bucketing and categorical feature frequency thresholding.
4.1.2
Evaluation Metrics. We use AUC and LogLoss to evaluate
the performance of the models.
LogLoss LogLoss is both our loss function and evaluation metric.
It measures the average distance between predicted probability and
true label of all the examples.
AUC Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) measures the probabil-
ity that a randomly chosen positive example ranked higher by the
model than a randomly chosen negative example. AUC only con-
siders the relative order between positive and negative examples.
A higher AUC indicates better ranking performance.
4.1.3
Competing Models. We compare AdaEnsemble with follow-
ing models: LR (Logistic Regression) [19, 20], FM (Factorization Ma-
chine) [24], DNN (Multilayer Perceptron), Wide & Deep [4], Deep-
Crossing [26], DCN (Deep & Cross Network) [31], PNN (with both
inner product layer and outer product layer) [22, 23], DeepFM [8],
xDeepFM [16], AutoInt [28], FiBiNET [11], xDeepInt[35] and DCN
V2 [32]. Some of the models are state-of-the-art models for CTR
prediction problem and are widely used in the industry.
4.1.4
Reproducibility. We implement all the models using Tensor-
flow [1]. The mini-batch size is 4096, and the embedding dimension
is 16 for all the features. For optimization, we employ Adam [13]
with learning rate is tuned from 10−4 to 10−3 for all the neural
network models, and we apply FTRL [19, 20] with learning rate
tuned from 10−2 to 10−1 for both LR and FM. For regularization, we
choose L2 regularization with 𝜆ranging from 10−4 to 10−3 for dense
layer. Grid-search for each competing model’s hyper-parameters
is conducted on the validation dataset. The number of dense or
interaction layers is from 1 to 4. The number of neurons ranges
1https://www.kaggle.com/c/criteo-display-ad-challenge
2https://www.kaggle.com/c/avazu-ctr-prediction
3http://contest.ipinyou.com/

Research Track Paper
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
from 128 to 1024. All the models are trained with early stopping
and are evaluated every 2000 training steps.
The setup is as follows for the hyper-parameters search of AdaEnsem-
ble: The number of recursive feature interaction layers 𝑙is searched
from 1 to 4. For the number of selected experts 𝑘per SparseMoE
layer, the searched values are from 1 to 3. For the reduction ratio
for both the expert gating network and depth selecting network,
we search from 4 to 16. We use G-FTRL optimizer for embedding
table and Adam for the model weights. For AdaEnsemble, as the
performance will be generally better when using more experts or
layers, we only report the one with fewer experts or layers used if
its AUC difference is within 0.02% compared to the ones using one
more expert or layer.
4.2
Model Performance Comparison (Q1)
Table 1: Performance Comparison of Different Algorithms
on Criteo, Avazu and iPinYou Dataset.
Criteo
Avazu
iPinYou
Model
AUC
LogLoss
AUC
LogLoss
AUC
LogLoss
LR
0.7924
0.4577
0.7533
0.3952
0.7692
0.005605
FM
0.8030
0.4487
0.7652
0.3889
0.7737
0.005576
DNN
0.8051
0.4461
0.7627
0.3895
0.7732
0.005749
Wide&Deep
0.8062
0.4451
0.7637
0.3889
0.7763
0.005589
DeepFM
0.8069
0.4445
0.7665
0.3879
0.7749
0.005609
DeepCrossing
0.8068
0.4456
0.7628
0.3891
0.7706
0.005657
DCN
0.8056
0.4457
0.7661
0.3880
0.7758
0.005682
PNN
0.8083
0.4433
0.7663
0.3882
0.7783
0.005584
xDeepFM
0.8077
0.4439
0.7668
0.3878
0.7772
0.005664
AutoInt
0.8053
0.4462
0.7650
0.3883
0.7732
0.005758
FiBiNET
0.8082
0.4439
0.7652
0.3886
0.7756
0.005679
xDeepInt
0.8111
0.4408
0.7672
0.3876
0.7790
0.005567
DCN V2
0.8086
0.4433
0.7662
0.3882
0.7765
0.005593
AdaEnsemble
0.8132
0.4394
0.7687
0.3865
0.7807
0.005550
The overall performance of different model architectures is listed
in Table 1. We have the following observations in terms of model
effectiveness:
• FM brings the most significant relative boost in performance
while we increase model complexity compared to LR baseline.
This reveals the importance of learning feature interactions.
• Models with more than two feature interaction modules gen-
erally perform better than models with only a single feature
interaction module, indicating the importance of jointly learned
feature interaction representation.
• The optimal feature interaction depth varies by feature inter-
action module type and when combined with different module
types, indicating the necessity for dynamically combining differ-
ent feature interactions on different interaction depths.
• AdaEnsemble achieves the best prediction performance among
all models. Our model’s superior performance could be attrib-
uted to the fact that AdaEnsemble jointly model various types
of feature interactions by adaptively selecting the feature inter-
action experts combination and determining the optimal feature
interaction depth by the controller.
4.3
Feature Interaction Expert Selection
Analysis (Q2)
We compare the model performance and FLOPs between the Dense-
MoE and SparseMoE layers in AdaEnsemble architecture. We also
include the performance of different multi-layer single expert mod-
els and their ensemble. All the performance of above methods are
listed in Table 2. We also draw the alluvial diagram Figure 4 to illus-
trate the dependency of each SparseMoE layer’s expert selection.
The color of the flow is clustered by the frequency of the expert com-
bination. Based on the above observations, we developed following
understandings:
• Utilizing different feature interaction experts result in better per-
formance than single expert models in general. SparseMoE layer
achieves a better tradeoff between accuracy and computation
efficiency.
• Only utilizing one expert per SparseMoE layer generally hurts
the model performance as the model cannot ensemble different
types of feature interactions.
• When utilizing more than one expert per SparseMoE layer, even
though only a subset of feature interaction experts are selected,
SparseMoE can still effectively capture the most significant fea-
ture interactions of different depths and maintain similar perfor-
mance as the DenseMoE layer, while including more experts can
also result in more computational cost.
• Figure 4 shows that the SparseMoE layers dynamically utilize a
different combination of experts across different layers to capture
the complex feature interactions effectively. That also explains
why fusing different feature interactions is crucial for prediction
accuracy.
Table 2: Performance Comparison of SparseMoE and Dense-
MoE on Criteo Dataset.
AUC
LogLoss
FLOPs
SparseMoE(k=1)
0.8096
0.4423
2.26M
SparseMoE(k=2)
0.8121
0.4400
4.14M
SparseMoE(k=3)
0.8132
0.4394
6.02M
SparseMoE(k=4)
0.8133
0.4393
7.09M
DenseMoE
0.8133
0.4392
9.78M
Ensemble
0.8120
0.4401
12.15M
Dense Expert Only
0.8050
0.4463
3.71M
Cross Expert Only
0.8086
0.4433
3.36M
Polynomial Expert Only
0.8111
0.4408
3.32M
CNN Expert Only
0.8022
0.4501
1.11M
MHSA Expert Only
0.8051
0.4465
2.17M
4.4
Depth Selection Analysis (Q3)
We compare the model performance between the AdaEnsemble
with and without depth selecting controller to investigate whether
the model achieves the harmony between prediction accuracy and
inference efficiency with respect to depth selection. The perfor-
mance of the different types of MoE layers and ensemble result is
listed in Table 3.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Yachen and Liubo
CNN
Cross
Dense
MHSA
Poly
CNN
Cross
Dense
MHSA
Poly
CNN
Cross
Dense
MHSA
Poly
CNN
Cross
Dense
MHSA
Poly
Layer1
Layer2
Layer3
Layer4
Figure 4: The Alluvial diagram for illustrating the depen-
dency of each SparseMoE layer’s expert selection
Each vertical axis represents a SparseMoE layer and the proportion of an
expert being used. The horizontal flows indicate the dependency and
relation of each SparseMoE layer’s expert selection. The proportion of the
expert combination was represented by the width of the flows and further
clustered to different colors.
With the incorporation of the depth selecting controller, we can
observe that our model can significantly improve training complex-
ity and inference efficiency (measured in FLOPs) while achieving
slightly better performance than the full-depth model. We think
the full-depth model is easier to overfit compared to AdaEnsem-
ble, thus resulting in slightly worse accuracy performance. The
AdaEnsemble with depth selecting controller adaptively selects
feature interaction depth per example basis, thus achieving better
trade-offs between prediction accuracy and inference efficiency.
The distribution of per example forward propagation depth is listed
in Table 4.
Table 3: Performance Comparison of AdaEnsemble with and
without controller on Criteo Dataset.
AUC
LogLoss
FLOPs
w/ controller
0.8132
0.4394
6.02M
w/o controller
0.8128
0.4396
8.58M
Table 4: AdaEnsemble Propagation Depth on Criteo Dataset.
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
Fraction
6.53%
19.36%
66.43%
7.68%
4.5
Hyper-Parameter Study (4)
In order to have deeper insights into the proposed model, we con-
duct experiments on the Criteo dataset and compare model perfor-
mance on different hyper-parameter settings. This section evaluates
the model performance change with respect to hyper-parameters
that include: 1) depth of SparseMoE layers; 2) number of selected
experts in SparseMoE layers;
0.440
0.441
0.442
1
2
3
4
5
LogLoss
0.810
0.811
0.812
0.813
1
2
3
4
5
Depth
AUC
(a) Layer Depth
0.440
0.441
0.442
1
2
3
4
LogLoss
0.810
0.811
0.812
0.813
1
2
3
4
Number of Experts
AUC
(b) Number of Experts
Figure 5: Logloss and AUC v.s. feature interaction depth and
number of experts.
4.5.1
Depth. The depth of SparsMoE layers 𝑙determines the max-
imum order of feature interactions learned. In this experiment, we
set the number of selected experts 𝑘as 3, which is generally a good
choice for the Criteo dataset.
Figure 5a shows the performance v.s. the depth𝑙of the AdaEnsem-
ble on Criteo dataset. We observe that the performance keeps in-
creasing until we increase the depth up to 4. This aligns with our
understanding of the performance v.s. model complexity. Note that
we still let the controller determine the interaction depth per ex-
ample; the depth here is to control the maximum depth and model
complexity.
4.5.2
Number of Experts. The number of selected experts of SparsMoE
layers 𝑘determines the number of selected feature interactions ex-
perts per SparseMoE layer. In this experiment, we set the depth of
AdaEnsemble 𝑙as 4, which is best for the Criteo dataset.
Figure 5b shows the performance v.s. the number of experts 𝑘for
AdaEnsemble on Criteo dataset. We observe that the performance
keeps increasing until𝑘equals 3. This indicates that the incremental
gain diminishes while we increase the number of experts selected
in SparseMoE layers.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new CTR model which ensembles
the different interaction learning experts using the Sparse-Gated
Mixture-of-Experts (SparseMoE) hierarchical architecture. We also
introduce the Depth Selecting Controller for selecting the optimal
depth for each example. Based on these two conditional computa-
tion mechanisms, our model will select a subset of experts and an
optimal depth for each example. It enlarged the model capacity ex-
ponentially without increasing inference cost. Our comprehensive
experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency of
our method.
In further work, We would like to study how to effectively ex-
tend our approach to user behavior sequence. While learning the
sparse ensemble of different models, we expect our approach can
dynamically select the optimal expert for different behaviors in the
user behavior sequence data.

Research Track Paper
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
