Graph-level Protein Representation Learning by Structure Knowledge Refinement
Ge Wang, Zelin Zang, Jiangbin Zheng, Jun Xia, Stan Z. Li
Abstract
This paper focuses on learning representation on
the whole graph level in an unsupervised manner.
Learning graph-level representation plays an im-
portant role in a variety of real-world issues such
as molecule property prediction, protein structure
feature extraction and social network analysis. The
mainstream method is utilizing contrastive learn-
ing to facilitate graph feature extraction, known as
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL). GCL, although
effective, suffers from some complications in con-
trastive learning, such as the effect of false neg-
ative pairs. Moreover, augmentation strategies in
GCL are weakly adaptive to diverse graph datasets.
Motivated by these problems, we propose a novel
framework called Structure Knowledge Refinement
(SKR) which uses data structure to determine the
probability of whether a pair is positive or neg-
ative.
Meanwhile, we propose an augmentation
strategy that naturally preserves the semantic mean-
ing of original data and is compatible with our SKR
framework. Furthermore, we illustrate the effec-
tiveness of our SKR framework through intuition
and experiments. And the experimental results on
the tasks of graph-level classification demonstrate
that our SKR framework is superior to most state-
of-the-art baselines.
1
Introduction
Graph is a powerful tool to represent diverse types of data in-
cluding small molecules Huber et al. [2007], protein-protein
interaction Bu et al. [2003] and social networks Newman and
Girvan [2004]. Unlike Euclidean data such as image data,
graph data whose underlying structure is a non-Euclidean
space describes coupling relationships between individual
units in a large framework through assigning properties to the
nodes and the edges connecting them. Recently, With the de-
velopment of graph convolutional network Kipf and Welling
[2016], people pay increasingly attention to extending deep
learning approaches for graph data. Due to the expensiveness
of handcrafted annotation, self-supervised learning is emerg-
ing as a new paradigm for extracting informative knowledge
from graph data.
Augmentation
Strategy
Example
Prior Knowledge
Feature-based
augmentation
Attribute masking
Attribute shuffling
Attribute change does
not alter semantic.
Structure-based
augmentation
Edge perturbation
Node Insertion
Structure change does
not alter semantic
Sampling-based
augmentation
Random walk sampling
Uniform sampling
Local structure can
hint the full semantic.
Table 1: Overview of graph augmentation strategies.
As a mainstream method in graph self-supervised learn-
ing, Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) uses augmentation
strategies to generate multi-views of instances and use the in-
formation of differences and sameness between those views
to learn the intrinsic representations. Specifically, two views
generated from the same instance are treated as a positive
pair, while two views generated from different instances are
treated as a negative pair.
The main idea of constructing
pretext task for GCL to learn representation is to maximize
the agreement of positive pairs and minimize the agreement
of negative pairs. Wu et al. [2021] However, under such
paradigm, there are two issues:
(1) Harmful effect of false negative pairs. Without ac-
cess to labels, treating views from different instances as nega-
tive pairs implicitly accepts that views in a negative pair may,
in reality, actually have the same semantic (i.e.same label).
We call such pair as false negative pair. Thus we can de-
compose negative pairs into two parts: true negative pairs
and false negative pairs Robinson et al. [2020]; Chuang et
al. [2020]. Views in each true negative pair have different se-
mantic, and views in each false negative pair has same seman-
tic. By minimizing agreement of true negative pairs do en-
courage representation learning, however minimizing agree-
ment of false negative pairs will enforce model to push repre-
sentation with same semantic away and lead to convergence
difficulties Huynh et al. [2022].
(2) Weak adaptability of graph augmentation strategy.
Due to the inherent non-Euclidean property of graph data, it
is difficult to directly apply the image augmentation strate-
gies to graph data. In different levels, augmentation strategies
of graph can be approximately summarized into three cate-
gories: feature-based augmentation, structure-based augmen-
tation and sampling-based augmentation (Tab. 1). Because
arXiv:2401.02713v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2024

graph datasets are abstracted from diverse fields, there may
not be universally appropriate data augmentation as those for
image. Thus some graph augmentation strategies may be only
suitable for certain datasets, and they may alter the seman-
tic when augment some other datasets. In other words, the
graph augmentation strategies rely on certain prior knowl-
edge You et al. [2020], and are weakly adaptive to diverse
graph datasets.
Motivated by these problems, we borrow the main idea of
GCL and propose a novel method called Structure Knowl-
edge Refinement (SKR). Instead of treating pair either as pos-
itive or negative, we use probability to describe the relation-
ship of views in a pair. Thus the sign of a pair is a fuzzy vari-
able, and we can use fuzzy cross-entropy Luukka [2011] as
objective of our SKR method. Under such setting, our SKR
model can automatically appeal views with same semantic
and repeal views with different semantic, thus achieves the
purpose of refining data structure. Additionally, by analyz-
ing conventional method of deriving graph-level representa-
tion from node-level representation, we propose a graph-level
representation augmentation strategy with no need of prior
knowledge, thus further improves refining data structure.
We summarize out contributions as follows:
• We propose a framework for graph-level representation
learning called Structure Knowledge Refinement (SKR),
which can automatically appeal views with same seman-
tic and repeal views with different semantic.
• We propose a generalizable graph-level representation
called Dirichlet Pooling, which can naturally preserve
the semantic and is strongly adaptive to various graph
datasets.
• We illustrate the effectiveness of our method through ex-
periment. The experimental results show that SKR out-
performs current state-of-the-art graph-level representa-
tion learning method.
2
Related Work
The field of graph representation learning has grown at an
incredible pace over the past decades. It derives graph em-
bedding through various methods, and we separate them into
three parts:
Kernel based Graph Embedding. Graph kernel is a ker-
nel function that computes an inner product on graphs. It can
be intuitively understood as a function measuring the simi-
larity of pairs of graphs. Current Popular graph kernels are
graphlets Prˇzulj [2007]; Shervashidze et al. [2009], random
walk and shortest path kernels Borgwardt and Kriegel [2005],
and the Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree kernel Shervashidze et
al. [2011]. Furthermore, deep graph kernels Yanardag and
Vishwanathan [2015] and multiscale Laplacian graph ker-
nels Kondor and Pan [2016] have been proposed with the
goal to redefine kernel functions to appropriately capture sub-
structural similarity at different levels.
Skip-gram Based Graph Embedding. skip-gram model
for graph are central many popular word-embedding meth-
ods Mnih and Kavukcuoglu [2013]; Mikolov et al. [2013b].
Word2vec Mikolov et al. [2013a] is an unsupervised algo-
rithm which obtains word representations by using the repre-
sentations to predict context words (the words that surround
it). Doc2vec Le and Mikolov [2014] is an extension of the
continuous Skip-gram model that predicts representations of
words from that of a document containing them.
Contrastive Learning Based Graph Embedding. Graph
contrastive learning is a mainstream method in unsupervised
graph representation. The pretext task of GCL is to maximize
the agreement of positive pairs and minimize the agreement
of negative pair. More specially, representations of pairs are
treats as random variables and mutual information is used to
describe the relationship of them. InfoGraph Sun et al. [2019]
extends deep InfoMax Hjelm et al. [2018] and contrasts graph
and nodes in the graph to gain graph-level representations.
GraphCL You et al. [2020] applies a series of graph aug-
mentations randomly selected from node dropping, edge per-
turbation, attribute masking and subgraph sampling to gen-
erate an augmented graph then contrasts original graph and
augmented graph to gain graph-level representations. AD-
GCL Suresh et al. [2021] optimizes adversarial graph aug-
mentation strategies used in GCL to enables GNNs to avoid
capturing redundant information during the training. In GCL,
another importance part is the selection strategies for negative
samples. Conventional strategies uniformly select negative
samples, which causes harmful effect of false negative pairs.
To solve this, HCL Robinson et al. [2020] and DCL Chuang
et al. [2020] use rejection sampling to estimate the distribu-
tion of hard negative samples. Our method solve these issue
by using probability to judge whether a pair is positive or neg-
ative then using fuzzy cross entropy Luukka [2011] as objec-
tive to automatically attract views in positive pairs and repel
views in negative pairs to gain graph-level representation.
3
Framework
To better illustrate our SKR framework, we use origin space,
semantic space, and embedding space to present the space
on which original graph data, semantic graph-level represen-
tation, and embedding graph-level representation lies respec-
tively. The semantic graph-level feature is derived from origi-
nal graph data passing through graph neural network, and em-
bedding graph-level feature is obtained from semantic graph-
level by using simple MLP structure (Fig. 1). Then, we will
from three aspects to introduce our framework:
3.1
Architecture of SKR
Our model architecture is similar to conventional GCL mod-
els (Fig. 2), so compared with those models, we don’t need
to learning extra training parameters. However, instead of
basing on mutual infomation maximization principle, we use
an intermediate semantic space to derive the probability of
whether a pair is positive or negative, (i.e. if the distance
of two samples are relatively close in semantic space, they
are more likely to be a positive pair, and if the distance are
quite far, they are more likely to be a negative pair), and those
probabilities can well describe the structure of data in seman-
tic space, thus we call them structure knowledge in seman-
tic space. Because the distance metric needs to base on Eu-
clidean space, we use graph isomorphism network (GIN) Xu
et al. [2018] to map non-euclidean updated node-level feature
into semantic space. Then we use the structure knowledge

GIN
MLPs
Semantic Space
Original Space
Embedding Space
Structure Knowledge
Extractor
Aug.
Fuzzy Cross-entropy
Knowledge Passing
Structure Knowledge
Extractor
Figure 1: The framework of Structure Knowledge Refinement (SKR). Graph-level representations in semantic space are derived from graph
data in original space by Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN), and augmented graph-level representations are generated by our semantic
preserving augmentation strategy. Then semantic-space structure knowledge is obtained by structure knowledge extractor, and fuzzy cross-
entropy is used to refine data structure in embedding space to derive better representations by passing semantic-space structure knowledge
into embedding space.
from semantic space to help us obtain graph-level represen-
tation in embedding space by using cross-space loss. In this
procedure, we also use augmentation in semantic space to fur-
ther refine the data structure in embedding space.
3.2
Augmentation Strategy of SKR
In our framework, we use a novel augmentation strategy to
enrich and refine structure knowledge in semantic space to
enhance the feature extraction ability in embedding space.
Unlike traditional augmentation strategy (e.g.
node drop-
ping, edge perturbation, attribute masking, sub-graph) requir-
ing certain prior knowledge and generating data in original
space (show in Table. 1), our augmentation strategy gener-
ates augmented data in semantic space using the concept of
combination mix-up and Dirichlet distribution . To further
demonstrate our idea, let f S
Gi ∈Rhs denote the represen-
tation of graph Gi in semantic space; f S
vj ∈RhS denote
the representation of node vj in graph Gi; for graph Gi, it
contains |Gi| nodes {v1, v2, · · · , v|Gi|}. For graph-level rep-
resentation learning, ones always use global add pooling or
global mean pooling of node-level representation to express
graph-level representation. In other words, for graph Gi, the
graph-level representation can be written as
f S
Gi =
|Gi|
X
j=1
1
|Gi|f S
vj
(1)
The main idea of our augmentation strategy is slightly per-
turbing the weight of each node-level representation
1
|Gi|, in
order to fulfill this idea, we can use Dirichlet distribution to
randomly generate weights
(ω1, ω2, · · · , ω|Gi|) ∼Dirichlet(α, α, · · · , α
|
{z
}
|Gi|
)
(2)
Thus, augmented graph-level representation can be written as
˜f S
Gi =
|Gi|
X
j=1
ωjf S
vj
(3)
According to the property of Dirichlet distribution
|Gi|
X
i=1
ωi = 1 (ωi ≥0)
E[ω1] = E[ω2] = · · · = E[ω|Gi|] =
1
|Gi|
var(ω1) = · · · = var(ω|Gi|) =
α(α|Gi| −α)
α2|Gi|2(|Gi|α + 1)
(4)
We can tuning the extent of perturbation by change hyper-
parameter α.
if α →∞, (w1, w2, · · · , w|Gi|) →(
1
|Gi|,
1
|Gi|, · · · ,
1
|Gi|),
the augmented graph-level representation in semantic space is
exactly same as naive graph-level representation in semantic
space.
if α →0, (w1, w2, · · · , w|Gi|) will approach to one-hot
vector which means one entry’s value is 1 meanwhile the
other entry’s value is 0, in this case, the augmented graph-
level representation in semantic space will degenerate into a
node-level representation belong to corresponding graph in
semantic space.
From analysis above, we can see by using this augmenta-
tion strategy, the augmented graph-level representation cer-
tainly lies in the region composed by corresponding graph’s
node-level representation, thus through use Dirichlet distri-
bution our augmentation strategy can naturally preserve the
semantic without any prior knowledge. Our augmentation
strategy combines the properties of Dirichlet distribution and
mean pooling, thus we name it Dirichlet pooling.
3.3
Objective function of SKR
Another key element in our framework is the cross-space loss
which helps us to get the graph-level representations in em-
bedding space through structure knowledge of augmented se-
mantic graph-level representations. It can be separated into
two steps: structure knowledge extractor and structure knowl-
edge passing.
For structure knowledge extractor part, graph-level rep-
resentations in semantic space are entered into the struc-
ture knowledge extractor to calculate the pairwise distance

matrix, then we derive the probability matrix by mapping
distance into probability.
To be more clear, let ˜S denote
the pairwise distance matrix of all graph-level representa-
tions (including augmented and original) in semantic space
˜Sij = ||f S
Gi −f S
Gj||2, then the pairwise probability matrix S
in semantic space is calculated by mapping distance into t2
distribution (a map from [0, ∞) to [0, 1]) (Eq. 5).
S = Cv(1 +
˜S
ν )−(ν+1)
(5)
Cv is the normalization factor of t2 distribution, ν is the de-
gree of freedom in t2 distribution. In our framework we set ν
to a quite large value, so it is equivalent to use normal distri-
bution to map distance into probability. For the element Sij
in probability matrix S, it means the probability that i-th sam-
ple and j-th sample have same semantic (i.e. the probability
that they form a positive pair in semantic space). By mapping
distance to t2 distribution, we can describe the data structure
more easily due to introducing non-linearity. And because
the probability matrix S can describe the data structure in se-
mantic space, we call the probability matrix S as structure
knowledge in semantic space.
For the structure knowledge passing part, the fuzzy
cross-entropy loss build the bridge between graph-level rep-
resentation in semantic space and embedding space. And it
is applied to make representation in embedding space include
more useful information with the help of augmented structure
knowledge in semantic space. Our objective function based
on fuzzy cross-entropy is defined as
L = −
X
i̸=j
[Sij log Eij + (1 −Sij) log (1 −Eij)]
(6)
Where Sij is the augmented structure knowledge in semantic
space, Eij is the structure knowledge that needs to be refined
in embedding space.
We will explain intuitively how this loss works, if graph-
level representation i and graph-level representation j in se-
mantic space are close to each other, Sij will be close to 1
then first term will play a more importance role in loss, as
result the corresponding representation in embedding space
will attract each other and become closer and closer. In con-
trary, if two representations are far away from each other, the
corresponding representation in embedding space will repel
each other and become further and further. Consequently, the
representations with same semantic in embedding space will
become closer and closer, the representation with different
semantic will going further and further. Thus, using fuzzy
cross-entropy loss achieves the purpose of refining structure
knowledge in embedding space through passing augmented
structure knowledge in semantic space.
3.4
Comparison of SKR and GCL
As shown in Fig. 2, our model are very similar to conven-
tional GCL framework. Although SKR and GCL have same
network architecture, they are based on different principle.
For GCL, its output in embedding space is next to the origi-
nal space, the role of MLPs is estimating mutual information,
Ours
GCL
GNN
GNN
MLPs
MLPs
Original Space
Embedding Space
For MI Estimate
Original Space
Semantic Space
Embedding Space
Figure 2: Comparison of SKR and GCL.
and the objective function of GCL is maximizing mutual in-
formation of positive pairs and minimizing mutual informa-
tion of negative pairs.
For SKR, its output in embedding space is derived from
an intermediate semantic space, the role of MLPs is refining
data structure in embedding space to get better representa-
tions in embedding space, and the objective function of SKR
is fuzzy cross-entropy which plays the role of passing aug-
mented structure knowledge in semantic space into embed-
ding space to refine the data structure in embedding space.
And another key difference compared with GCL is that SKR
use probability to judge whether a pair is positive or negative.
4
Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our SKR with a number of ex-
periments. We first show the implementation of our SKR by
pseudocode, then describe datasets and other settings (base-
line and hyper-parameters). Next, we present the experimen-
tal results on graph classification. Last, we analyze our model
via ablation study and sensitivity analysis.
Algorithm 1 Structure Knowledge refinement (SKR)
Input: Graph data G = {G1, ..., G|G|}; GINs gθ, MLPs
hϕ, mean pooling P(·), Dirichlet pooling PD(·|α); training
Epoch T, parameter of Dirichlet distribution α, learning rate
η
Output: graph-level representations f E
G = {f E
G1, ..., f E
G|G|}
1: Let t = 0.
2: Initialize final representations f E
G = hϕ(P(gθ(G)))
3: while t < T; t + + do
4:
Calculate structure knowledge of f E
G →E (5)
5:
Calculate semantic representations f S
G = P(gθ(G))
6:
Do augmentation in semantic space ˜f S
G = PD(f S
G |α)
7:
Calculate structure knowledge of f S
G and ˜f S
G →S (5)
8:
Calculate fuzzy cross entropy L (6)
9:
Refine structure knowledge E according to semantic
structure knowledge S to get better representations f E
G
f E
G = hϕ−η∇ϕL(P(gθ−η∇θL(G)))
10: end while
11: return solution

Domain
Social network
Small molecules
Bioinformatics
Dataset
IMDB-B
IMDB-M
REDDIT-B
REDDIT-M5K
COLLAB
MUTAG
PTCMR
NCI1
DD
PROTEINS
Graphs
1000
1500
2000
4999
5000
188
344
4110
1178
1113
Avg. Nodes
19.77
13.00
429.63
508.52
74.49
17.93
14.29
29.87
284.32
39.06
Avg. Edges
96.53
65.94
497.75
594.87
2457.78
19.79
14.69
32.30
715.66
78.82
Classes
2
3
2
5
3
2
2
2
2
2
Table 2: Summary of small molecules, bioinformatics and social networks from TU Benchmark Dataset Morris et al. [2020] used for
unsupervised learning experiments. The evaluation metric for all these datasets is Accuracy.
Methods
COLLAB
IMDB-B
IMDB-M
REDDIT-B
REDDOT-M5K
MUTAG
PTCMR
NCI1
DD
PROTEINS
SP
-
55.6±0.2
38.0±0.3
64.1±0.1
39.6±0.2
85.2±2.4
58.2±2.4
79.3±0.4
74.5±0.2
75.9±0.4
WL
74.8±0.2
72.3±3.4
47.0±0.5
68.8±0.4
46.5±0.2
80.7±3.0
58.0±0.5
80.0±0.5
77.5±0.6
72.9±0.6
DGK
73.1±0.3
67.0±0.6
44.6±0.5
78.0±0.4
41.3±0.2
87.4±2.7
60.1±2.6
80.3±0.5
71.0±0.2
73.3±0.8
node2vec
-
-
-
-
-
72.6±10.2
58.6±8.0
54.9±1.6
-
57.5±3.6
sub2vec
-
55.3±1.5
36.7±0.8
71.5±0.4
36.7±0.4
61.1±15.8
60.0±6.4
52.8±1.6
-
53.0±5.6
graph2vec
-
71.1±0.5
50.4±0.9
75.8±1.0
47.9±0.3
83.2±9.3
60.2±6.9
73.2±1.8
-
73.3±2.1
InfoGraph
70.7±1.1
73.0±0.9
49.7±0.5
82.5±1.4
53.5±1.0
89.0±1.1
61.7±1.4
76.2±1.1
72.9±1.8
74.4±0.3
GraphCL
71.3±0.6
70.8±0.8
49.2±0.6
82.6±1.0
53.1±0.4
88.3±1.3
61.3±2.2
68.5±0.6
74.7±0.7
72.9±1.0
AD-GCL
73.3±0.6
72.3±0.6
49.9±0.7
85.5±0.8
54.9±0.4
89.7±1.0
56.0±3.6
69.7±0.5
75.1±0.4
73.8±0.5
SKR(ours)
76.3±0.6
74.9±1.0
50.9±0.4
91.3±0.8
55.6±0.7
90.5±0.5
63.5±1.3
80.4±0.4
78.4±0.7
71.7±0.4
Table 3: Unsupervised learning performance for small molecules, bioinformatics and social network classification in TU datasets Morris et
al. [2020] (Averaged accuracy(%) ± std.(%) over 5 runs).
4.1
Datasets and Settings
We use graph classification benchmark datasets that are
widely used in the existing graph representation learning ap-
proaches. we conduct experiments on 10 well-known bench-
mark datasets: MUTAG, PTC-MR, NCI1, DD, PROTEINS,
IMDB-B, IMDB-M, REDDIT-B and REDDIT-M. The detail
is shown in Tab. 2.
We closely follow the evaluation protocol of previous state-
of-the-art graph contrastive learning approaches. For graph
classification, we report the mean 10-fold cross validation
accuracy after 5 runs followed by a linear SVM. The linear
SVM is trained by applying cross validation on training data
folds and the best mean accuracy is reported, the parame-
ter C of SVM was selected from {10−3, 10−2, ..., 102, 103}.
To make comparison fair, we adopt the basic setting of Info-
Graph for graph classification and use the well known GNN
architecture GIN. Specifically, we fix the number of GIN lay-
ers to 4 and training epochs to 10, and the initial learning
rate is choosen from {1 × 10−2, 5 × 10−3, 1 × 10−3}, di-
mension of output representations is set to 128. The hyper-
parameter α in our augmentation strategy is selected from
{1, 10, 50, 100, 500}.
We compare our SKR method with 9 unsupervised/self-
supervised learning baselines for graph-level tasks, which
include kernel based methods: SP Borgwardt and Kriegel
[2005], WL Shervashidze et al. [2011], DGK Yanardag
and Vishwanathan [2015]; contextual based methods (skip-
gram): node2vec Grover and Leskovec [2016], sub2vec Ad-
hikari et al. [2018], graph2vec Narayanan et al. [2017]; con-
trastive learning based methods: InfoGraph Sun et al. [2019],
GraphCL Hafidi et al. [2020], AD-GCL Suresh et al. [2021]
4.2
Results and Observations
The experimental results are summarized in Tab. 3. Overall,
from the table, we can see that our SKR model shows strong
performance across almost all datasets. We make other ob-
servations as follows.
SKR achieves considerable improvement over another
competitive methods on social network datasets. The results
demonstrate that SKR achieves highly competitive perfor-
mance with up to 5.8% relative improvement in accuracy on
social network classification. Due to the property of social
network datasets, the nodes of the data have no attribute, but
the data has complicated structure. Thus results imply that
SKR is a powerful method to extract topological information
from graph with complicated structure.
The performance of traditional contrastive learning meth-
ods like GraphCL is inferior to the graph kernel methods
that compute inner products between graphs on NCI1 dataset
(12% lower than graph kernel), which suggests that mutual
information measurement may not suitable for processing
NCI1 dataset comparing with inner product measurement.
Because NCI1 dataset has a very sparse node feature (over
70% parts are 0 for each node attribute), thus it implies that
our SKR method by using structure knowledge are capable of
mining representation from graph with sparse node feature.
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis and Ablation Study
We perform sensitivity analysis on critical hyperparameter α
in our augmentation strategy as well as ablation studies on our
augmentation strategy and objective function. Results show
that our method is stable to perturbation of these parameters
and verify the necessity of fuzzy cross-entropy and our aug-
mentation strategy. Details are shown in following.

Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis on hyperparameter α in Dirichlet distribution on different datasets
Figure 4: Ablation study on Dirichlet pooling on different datasets (with Dirichlet pooling vs without Dirichlet pooling)
Figure 5: Ablation study on fuzzy cross-entropy on REDDIT-B
dataset (Fuzzy cross-entropy vs Normal cross-entropy)
Sensitivity analysis on hyperparameter α in Dirichlet
distribution. In this experiment, we fix other hyperparame-
ters and only change α, we run 5 times for each α value over
differnt random seed, and the accuracies is derived by settings
above, then we take mean accuracy by averaging on random
seeds. The results are shown in Fig. 3, we use 4 datasets from
3 different domains. It showns that accuracies is insensitive
to the change of α (the fluctuations of accuracies are no more
than 3%). According to Eq. 4, we know that small α indicates
large perturbation on semantic graph-level representation and
large α indicates small perturbation. From Fig. 3 we see that
even under a large perturbation (α = 1) the accuracies of
these 4 datasets still show strong performances. And when
the perturbation is small (α = 500), the accuracies decrease
a little bit, it is consistent with our analysis of Dirichlet pool,
because large α means tiny perturbation on semantic graph-
level representation, thus the augmented representations has
no difference with original semantic representations which
means there is no augmentation in semantic space.
Ablation study on our augmentation strategy. In this
experiment, we perform ablation study on two schemes for
graph-level representation learning, with Dirichlet pooling
and without Dirichlet pooling. We fix other conditions and
only tuning the existence of Dirichlet pooling, then plot the
figure of accuracy during training process. The results are
shown in Fig. 4, we use 4 datasets from 3 different domains.
The results show that Dirichlet pooling is important in our
SKR method, and confirm that Dirichlet pooling refine the
embedding structure knowledge to get better embedding rep-
resentations by using augment the semantic structure knowl-
edge.
Ablation study on our objective function. In this exper-
iment, we perform ablation study on two schemes for graph-
level representation learning, using fuzzy cross-entropy and
using normal cross-entropy. We fix other conditions and only
change the form of loss, then show the 2D visualization by us-
ing TSNE. The results are shown in Fig. 5, we use REDDIT-
BINARY dataset. The results show that fuzzy cross-entropy
is important in our SKR method and indicate that using fuzzy
cross-entropy can make the output more discriminative com-
pared with normal cross-entropy. The results can be explain
by the reason that fuzzy cross-entropy not only can attract
samples with same semantic but also repel samples with dif-
ferent semantic, however the normal cross-entropy only at-
tract samples with same semantic, thus the repel force is neg-
ligible for normal cross-entropy, so the output samples de-
rived from normal cross-entropy are tightly entangled.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose Structure Knowledge Refinement
(SKR) to learn unsupervised graph-level representations. The
objective function of SKR is fuzzy cross-entropy which can
automatically attract samples with same semantic and repel
samples with different semantic.
The augmentation strat-
egy in SKR is Dirichlet pooling which can naturally pre-
serve semantic. Both fuzzy cross-entropy and Dirichlet pool-
ing play the important role in refining embedding structure
Knowledge to get better embedding representations. We con-
duct experiments on graph classification tasks to evaluate our
method. Experimental results show that SKR is competitive
with state-of-the-art methods. There are many research works
on semi-supervised learning on image data, but few of them
focus on semi-supervised learning for graph structured data.
In the future, we aim to explore semi-supervised frameworks
designed specifically for graphs and apply our SKR method
to node-level representation learning.
