arXiv:1801.04016v1  [cs.LG]  11 Jan 2018
Theoretical Impediments to Machine Learning
With Seven Sparks from the Causal Revolution
Judea Pearl
University of California, Los Angeles
Computer Science Department
Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1596, USA

January 15, 2018
Abstract
Current machine learning systems operate, almost exclusively, in a statistical, or model-free mode,
which entails severe theoretical limits on their power and performance. Such systems cannot reason about
interventions and retrospection and, therefore, cannot serve as the basis for strong AI. To achieve human
level intelligence, learning machines need the guidance of a model of reality, similar to the ones used in
causal inference tasks. To demonstrate the essential role of such models, I will present a summary of seven
tasks which are beyond reach of current machine learning systems and which have been accomplished
using the tools of causal modeling.
Scientiﬁc Background
If we examine the information that drives machine learning today, we ﬁnd that it is almost entirely
statistical. In other words, learning machines improve their performance by optimizing parameters over a
stream of sensory inputs received from the environment. It is a slow process, analogous in many respects
to the natural selection process that drives Darwinian evolution. It explains how species like eagles
and snakes have developed superb vision systems over millions of years. It cannot explain however the
super-evolutionary process that enabled humans to build eyeglasses and telescopes over barely one thousand
years. What humans possessed that other species lacked was a mental representation, a blue-print of
their environment which they could manipulate at will to imagine alternative hypothetical environments
for planning and learning. Anthropologists like N. Harari, and S. Mithen are in general agreement that
the decisive ingredient that gave our Homo sapiens ancestors the ability to achieve global dominion,
about 40,000 years ago, was their ability to choreograph a mental representation of their environment,
interrogate that representation, distort it by mental acts of imagination and ﬁnally answer “What if?” kind
of questions. Examples are interventional questions: “What if I act?” and retrospective or explanatory
questions: “What if I had acted diﬀerently?” No learning machine in operation today can answer such
questions about interventions not encountered before, say, “What if we ban cigarettes.” Moreover, most
learning machines today do not provide a representation from which the answers to such questions can be
derived.
I postulate that the major impediment to achieving accelerated learning speeds as well as human level
performance should be overcome by removing these barriers and equipping learning machines with causal
reasoning tools. This postulate would have been speculative twenty years ago, prior to the mathematization
of counterfactuals. Not so today.
Advances in graphical and structural models have made counterfactuals computationally manageable
and thus rendered model-driven reasoning a more promising direction on which to base strong AI. In the
next section, I will describe the impediments facing machine learning systems using a three-level hierarchy
that governs inferences in causal reasoning. The ﬁnal section summarizes how these impediments were
circumvented using modern tools of causal inference.
1

The Three Layer Causal Hierarchy
Level
Typical
Typical Questions
Examples
(Symbol)
Activity
1. Association
P(y|x)
Seeing
What is?
How would seeing X
change my belief inY ?
What does a symptom tell me
about a disease?
What does a survey tell us
about the election results?
2. Intervention
P(y|do(x), z)
Doing
Intervening
What if?
What if I do X?
What if I take aspirin, will my
headache be cured?
What if we ban cigarettes?
3. Counterfactuals
P(yx|x′, y′)
Imagining,
Retrospection
Why?
Was it X that caused Y ?
What if I had acted
diﬀerently?
Was
it
the
aspirin
that
stopped my headache?
Would Kennedy be alive had
Oswald not shot him?
What if I had not been smok-
ing the past 2 years?
Figure 1: The Causal Hierarchy. Questions at level i can only be answered if information from level i or
higher is available.
An extremely useful insight unveiled by the logic of causal reasoning is the existence of a sharp
classiﬁcation of causal information, in terms of the kind of questions that each class is capable of answering.
The classiﬁcation forms a 3-level hierarchy in the sense that questions at level i (i = 1, 2, 3) can only be
answered if information from level j (j ≥i) is available.
Figure 1 shows the 3-level hierarchy, together with the characteristic questions that can be answered
at each level. The levels are titled 1. Association, 2. Intervention, and 3. Counterfactual. The names of
these layers were chosen to emphasize their usage. We call the ﬁrst level Association, because it invokes
purely statistical relationships, deﬁned by the naked data.1 For instance, observing a customer who buys
toothpaste makes it more likely that he/she buys ﬂoss; such association can be inferred directly from
the observed data using conditional expectation. Questions at this layer, because they require no causal
information, are placed at the bottom level on the hierarchy. The second level, Intervention, ranks higher
than Association because it involves not just seeing what is, but changing what we see. A typical question
at this level would be: What happens if we double the price? Such questions cannot be answered from sales
data alone, because they involve a change in customers behavior, in reaction to the new pricing. These
choices may diﬀer substantially from those taken in previous price-raising situations. (Unless we replicate
precisely the market conditions that existed when the price reached double its current value.) Finally, the
top level is called Counterfactuals, a term that goes back to the philosophers David Hume and John Stewart
Mill, and which has been given computer-friendly semantics in the past two decades. A typical question in
the counterfactual category is “What if I had acted diﬀerently,” thus necessitating retrospective reasoning.
Counterfactuals are placed at the top of the hierarchy because they subsume interventional and
associational questions. If we have a model that can answer counterfactual queries, we can also answer
questions about interventions and observations. For example, the interventional question, What will
happen if we double the price? can be answered by asking the counterfactual question: What would
happen had the price been twice its current value? Likewise, associational questions can be answered once
we can answer interventional questions; we simply ignore the action part and let observations take over.
The translation does not work in the opposite direction. Interventional questions cannot be answered from
purely observational information (i.e., from statistical data alone). No counterfactual question involving
retrospection can be answered from purely interventional information, such as that acquired from controlled
experiments; we cannot re-run an experiment on subjects who were treated with a drug and see how they
behave had they not given the drug. The hierarchy is therefore directional, with the top level being the
most powerful one.
1Other names used for inferences at this layer are: “model-free,” “model-blind,” “black-box,” or “data-centric.” Darwiche
(2017) used “function-ﬁtting,” for it amounts to ﬁtting data by a complex function deﬁned by the neural network architecture.
2

Counterfactuals are the building blocks of scientiﬁc thinking as well as legal and moral reasoning. In
civil court, for example, the defendant is considered to be the culprit of an injury if, but for the defendant’s
action, it is more likely than not that the injury would not have occurred. The computational meaning of
but for calls for comparing the real world to an alternative world in which the defendant action did not take
place.
Each layer in the hierarchy has a syntactic signature that characterizes the the sentences admitted into
that layer. For example, the association layer is characterized by conditional probability sentences, e.g.,
P(y|x) = p stating that: the probability of event Y = y given that we observed event X = x is equal to p.
In large systems, such evidential sentences can be computed eﬃciently using Bayesian Networks, or any of
the neural networks that support deep-learning systems.
At the interventional layer we ﬁnd sentences of the type P(y|do(x),
z), which denotes “The probability of event Y = y given that we intervene and set the value of X to x and
subsequently observe event Z = z. Such expressions can be estimated experimentally from randomized
trials or analytically using Causal Bayesian Networks (Pearl, 2000, Chapter 3). A child learns the eﬀects of
interventions through playful manipulation of the environment (usually in a deterministic playground), and
AI planners obtain interventional knowledge by exercising their designated sets of actions. Interventional
expressions cannot be inferred from passive observations alone, regardless of how big the data.
Finally, at the counterfactual level, we have expressions of the type P(yx|x′, y′) which stand for “The
probability that event Y = y would be observed had X been x, given that we actually observed X to be x′
and and Y to be y′. For example, the probability that Joe’s salary would be y had he ﬁnished college, given
that his actual salary is y′ and that he had only two years of college.” Such sentences can be computed
only when we possess functional or Structural Equation models, or properties of such models (Pearl, 2000,
Chapter 7).
This hierarchy, and the formal restrictions it entails, explains why statistics-based machine learning
systems are prevented from reasoning about actions, experiments and explanations. It also informs us what
extra-statistical information is needed, and in what format, in order to support those modes of reasoning.
Researchers are often surprised that the hierarchy denegrades the impressive achievements of deep
learning to the level of Association, side by side with textbook curve-ﬁtting exercises. A popular stance
against this comparison argues that, whereas the objective of curve-ﬁtting is to maximize “ﬁt,” in deep
learning we try to minimize “over ﬁt.” Unfortunately, the theoretical barriers that separate the three layers
in the hierarchy tell us that the nature of our objective function does not matter. As long as our system
optimizes some property of the observed data, however noble or sophisticated, while making no reference to
the world outside the data, we are back to level-1 of the hierarchy with all the limitations that this level
entails.
The Seven Pillars of the Causal Revolution (or What you can do with a causal
model that you could not do without?)
Consider the following ﬁve questions:
• How eﬀective is a given treatment in preventing a disease?
• Was it the new tax break that caused our sales to go up?
• What is the annual health-care costs attributed to obesity?
• Can hiring records prove an employer guilty of sex discrimination?
• I am about to quit my gob, but should I?
The common feature of these questions is that they are concerned with cause-and-eﬀect relationships.
We can recognize them through words such as “preventing,” “cause,” “attributed to,” “discrimination,”
and “should I.” Such words are common in everyday language, and our society constantly demands answers
to such questions. Yet, until very recently science gave us no means even to articulate them, let alone
answer them. Unlike the rules of geometry, mechanics, optics or probabilities, the rules of cause and eﬀect
have been denied the beneﬁts of mathematical analysis.
3

To appreciate the extent of this denial, readers would be stunned to know that only a few decades ago
scientists were unable to write down a mathematical equation for the obvious fact that “mud does not
cause rain.” Even today, only the top echelon of the scientiﬁc community can write such an equation and
formally distinguish “mud causes rain” from “rain causes mud.” And you would probably be even more
surprised to discover that your favorite college professor is not among them.
Things have changed dramatically in the past three decades, A mathematical language has been
developed for managing causes and eﬀects, accompanied by a set of tools that turn causal analysis into a
mathematical game, not unlike solving algebraic equations, or ﬁnding proofs in high-school geometry. These
tools permit us to express causal questions formally codify our existing knowledge in both diagrammatic
and algebraic forms, and then leverage our data to estimate the answers. Moreover, the theory warns us
when the state of existing knowledge or the available data are insuﬃcient to answer our questions; and then
suggests additional sources of knowledge or data to make the questions answerable.
Harvard professor Garry King gave this transformation a historical perspective: “More has been learned
about causal inference in the last few decades than the sum total of everything that had been learned
about it in all prior recorded history” (Morgan and Winship, 2015). I call this transformation “The Causal
Revolution,” (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018) and the mathematical framework that led to it I call “Structural
Causal Models (SCM).”
The SCM deploys three parts
1. Graphical models,
2. Structural equations, and
3. Counterfactual and interventional logic
Graphical models serve as a language for representing what we know about the world, counterfactuals help
us to articulate what we want to know, while structural equations serve to tie the two together in a solid
semantics.
ES
ES
F
Assumptions
(Graphical model)
Data
Fit Indices
Estimate
(Answer to query)
Query
answering the query)
(Recipe for
Estimand
Inputs
Outputs
 
Figure 2: How the SCM “inference engine” combines data with causal model (or assumptions) to produce
answers to queries of interest.
Figure 2 illustrates the operation of SCM in the form of an inference engine. The engine accepts three
inputs: Assumptions, Queries, and Data, and produces three outputs: Estimand, Estimate and Fit indices.
The Estimand (ES) is a mathematical formula that, based on the Assumptions, provides a recipe for
answering the Query from any hypothetical data, whenever they are available. After receiving the Data,
the engine uses the Estimand to produce an actual Estimate ( ˆES) for the answer, along with statistical
estimates of the conﬁdence in that answer (To reﬂect the limited size of the data set, as well as possible
measurement errors or missing data.) Finally, the engine produces a list of “ﬁt indices” which measure how
compatible the data are with the Assumptions conveyed by the model.
To exemplify these operations, let us assume that our Query stands for the causal eﬀect of X on Y ,
written Q = P(Y |do(X)), where X and Y are two variables of interest. Let the modeling assumptions
4

X
Y
Z
be encoded in the graph below, where Z is a third variable aﬀecting both X and Y . Finally, let the data
be sampled at random from a joint distribution P(X, Y, Z). The Estimand (ES) calculated by the engine
will be the formula ES = P
z P(Y |X, Z)P(Z). It deﬁnes a property of P(X,Y,Z) that, if estimated, would
provide a correct answer to our Query. The answer itself, the Estimate ˆES, can be produced by any
number of techniques that produce a consistent estimate of ES from ﬁnite samples of P(X, Y, Z). For
example, the sample average (of Y ) over all cases satisfying the speciﬁed X and Z conditions, would be a
consistent estimate. But more eﬃcient estimation techniques can be devised to overcome data sparsity
(Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). This is where deep learning excels and where most work in machine
learning has been focused, albeit with no guidance of a model-based estimand. Finally, the Fit Index in
our example will be NULL. In other words, after examining the structure of the graph, the engine should
conclude that the assumptions encoded do not have any testable implications. Therefore, the veracity
of resultant estimate must lean entirely on the assumptions encoded in the graph – no refutation nor
corroboration can be obtained from the data.2
The same procedure applies to more sophisticated queries, for example, the counterfactual query
Q = P(yx|x′, y′) discussed before. We may also permit some of the data to arrive from controlled
experiments, which would take the form P(V |do(W)), in case W is the controlled variable. The role of the
Estimand would remain that of converting the Query into the syntactic format of the available data and,
then, guiding the choice of the estimation technique to ensure unbiased estimates. Needless to state, the
conversion task is not always feasible, in which case the Query will be declared “non-identiﬁable” and the
engine should exit with FAILURE. Fortunately, eﬃcient and complete algorithms have been developed to
decide identiﬁability and to produce estimands for a variety of counterfactual queries and a variety of data
types (Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016).
Next we provide a bird’s eye view of seven accomplishments of the SCM framework and discuss the
unique contribution that each pillar brings to the art of automated reasoning.
Pillar 1: Encoding Causal Assumptions – Transparency and
Testability
The task of encoding assumptions in a compact and usable form, is not a trivial matter once we take
seriously the requirement of transparency and testability.3 Transparency enables analysts to discern
whether the assumptions encoded are plausible (on scientiﬁc grounds), or whether additional assumptions
are warranted. Testability permits us (be it an analyst or a machine) to determine whether the assumptions
encoded are compatible with the available data and, if not, identify those that need repair.
Advances in graphical models have made compact encoding feasible. Their transparency stems naturally
from the fact that all assumptions are encoded graphically, mirroring the way researchers perceive of
cause-eﬀect relationship in the domain; judgments of counterfactual or statistical dependencies are not
required, since these can be read oﬀthe structure of the graph. Testability is facilitated through a graphical
criterion called d-separation, which provides the fundamental connection between causes and probabilities.
It tells us, for any given pattern of paths in the model, what pattern of dependencies we should expect to
ﬁnd in the data (Pearl, 1988).
2The assumptions encoded in the graph are conveyed by its missing arrows. For example, Y does not inﬂuence X or Z,
X does not inﬂuence Z and, most importantly, Z is the only variable aﬀecting both X and Y . That these assumptions lack
testable implications can be concluded from the fact that the graph is complete, i.e., no edges are missing.
3Economists, for example, having chosen algebraic over graphical representations, are deprived of elementary testability-
detecting features (Pearl, 2015b).
5

Pillar 2: Do-calculus and the control of confounding
Confounding, or the presence of unobserved causes of two or more variables, has long been consider
the the major obstacle to drawing causal inference from data, This obstacle had been demystiﬁed and
“deconfounded” through a graphical criterion called “back-door.” In particular, the task of selecting an
appropriate set of covariates to control for confounding has been reduced to a simple “roadblocks” puzzle
manageable by a simple algorithm (Pearl, 1993).
For models where the “back-door” criterion does not hold, a symbolic engine is available, called
do-calculus, which predicts the eﬀect of policy interventions whenever feasible, and exits with failure
whenever predictions cannot be ascertained with the speciﬁed assumptions (Pearl, 1995; Tian and Pearl,
2002; Shpitser and Pearl, 2008).
Pillar 3: The Algorithmization of Counterfactuals
Counterfactual analysis deals with behavior of speciﬁc individuals, identiﬁed by a distinct set of
characteristics, For example, given that Joe’s salary is Y = y, and that he went X = x years to college,
what would Joe’s salary be had he had one more year of education.
One of the crown achievements of the Causal Revolution has been to formalize counterfactual reasoning
within the graphical representation, the very representation researchers use to encode scientiﬁc knowledge.
Every structural equation model determines the truth value of every counterfactual sentence. Therefore, we
can determine analytically if the probability of the sentence is estimable from experimental or observational
studies, or combination thereof [Balke and Pearl, 1994; Pearl, 2000, Chapter 7].
Of special interest in causal discourse are counterfactual questions concerning “causes of eﬀects,” as
opposed to “eﬀects of causes.” For example, how likely it is that Joe’s swimming exercise was a necessary
(or suﬃcient) cause of Joe’s death (Pearl, 2015a; Halpern and Pearl, 2005).
Pillar 4: Mediation Analysis and the Assessment of Direct and
Indirect Eﬀects
Mediation analysis concerns the mechanisms that transmit changes from a cause to its eﬀects. The
identiﬁcation of such intermediate mechanism is essential for generating explanations and counterfactual
analysis must be invoked to facilitate this identiﬁcation. The graphical representation of counterfactuals
enables us to deﬁne direct and indirect eﬀects and to decide when these eﬀects are estimable from data, or
experiments (Robins and Greenland, 1992; Pearl, 2001; VanderWeele, 2015). Typical queries answerable by
this analysis are: What fraction of the eﬀect of X on Y is mediated by variable Z.
Pillar 5: External Validity and Sample Selection Bias
The validity of every experimental study is challenged by disparities between the experimental and
implementational setups. A machine trained in one environment cannot be expected to perform well
when environmental conditions change, unless the changes are localized and identiﬁed. This problem,
and its various manifestations are well recognized by machine-learning researchers, and enterprises such
as “domain adaptation,” “transfer learning,” “life-long learning,” and “explainable AI,” are just some of
the subtasks identiﬁed by researchers and funding agencies in an attempt to alleviate the general problem
of robustness. Unfortunately, the problem of robustness requires a causal model of the environment, and
cannot be handled at the level of Association, in which most remedies were tried. Associations are not
suﬃcient for identifying the mechanisms aﬀected by changes that occurred. The do-calculus discussed
above now oﬀers a complete methodology for overcoming bias due to environmental changes. It can be used
both for re-adjusting learned policies to circumvent environmental changes and for controlling bias due to
non-representative samples (Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016).
6

Pillar 6: Missing Data
Problems of missing data plague every branch of experimental science. Respondents do not answer every
item on a questionnaire, sensors fade as environmental conditions change, and patients often drop from
a clinical study for unknown reasons. The rich literature on this problem is wedded to a model-blind
paradigm of statistical analysis and, accordingly, it is severely limited to situations where missingness
occurs at random, that is, independent of values taken by other variables in the model. Using causal
models of the missingness process we can now formalize the conditions under which causal and probabilistic
relationships can be recovered from incomplete data and, whenever the conditions are satisﬁed, produce a
consistent estimate of the desired relationship (Mohan and Pearl, 2017).
Pillar 7: Causal Discovery
The d-separation criterion described above enables us to detect and enumerate the testable implications of
a given causal model. This opens the possibility of inferring, with mild assumptions, the set of models that
are compatible with the data, and to represent this set compactly. Systematic searches have been developed
which, in certain circumstances, can prune the set of compatible models signiﬁcantly to the point where
causal queries can be estimated directly from that set (Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2000; Peters et al., 2017).
Conclusions
The philosopher Stephen Toulmin (1961) identiﬁes model-based vs. model-blind dichotomy as the key
to understanding the ancient rivalry between Babylonian and Greek science. According to Toulmin, the
Babylonians astronomers were masters of black-box prediction, far surpassing their Greek rivals in accuracy
and consistency (Toulmin, 1961, pp. 27–30). Yet Science favored the creative-speculative strategy of the
Greek astronomers which was wild with metaphysical imagery: circular tubes full of ﬁre, small holes
through which celestial ﬁre was visible as stars, and hemispherical earth riding on turtle backs. Yet it was
this wild modeling strategy, not Babylonian rigidity, that jolted Eratosthenes (276-194 BC) to perform one
of the most creative experiments in the ancient world and measure the radius of the earth. This would
never have occurred to a Babylonian curve-ﬁtter.
Coming back to strong AI, we have seen that model-blind approaches have intrinsic limitations on the
cognitive tasks that they can perform. We have described some of these tasks and demonstrated how they
can be accomplished in the SCM framework, and why a model-based approach is essential for performing
these tasks. Our general conclusion is that human-level AI cannot emerge solely from model-blind learning
machines; it requires the symbiotic collaboration of data and models.
Data science is only as much of a science as it facilitates the interpretation of data – a two-body
problem, connecting data to reality. Data alone are hardly a science, regardless how big they get and how
skillfully they are manipulated.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported in parts by grants from Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
[#W911NF-16-057], National Science Foundation [#IIS-1302448, #IIS-1527490, and #IIS-1704932], and
Oﬃce of Naval Research [#N00014-17-S-B001].
