arXiv:2301.02764v3  [cs.NE]  1 Feb 2023
Mathematical Models and Reinforcement Learning based
Evolutionary Algorithm Framework for Satellite Scheduling
Problem
Yanjie Song1
Abstract
For complex combinatorial optimization problems, models and algorithms are at the heart
of the solution. The complexity of many types of satellite mission planning problems is
NP-hard and places high demands on the solution. In this paper, two types of satellite
scheduling problem models are introduced and a reinforcement learning based evolutionary
algorithm framework based is proposed.
Keywords:
reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithm framework, scheduling,
evolutionary algorithm, framework
1. Model for Electromagnetic Detection Satellite Scheduling Problem(EDDSP)
1.1. Problem Description
The EDSSP problem is to designate a time-ordered task execution sequence for electro-
magnetic detection satellites [1]. The goal is to maximize the detection sequence proﬁt while
satisfying various satellite constraints. For a satellite to successfully perform any mission,
it needs to determine the on/oﬀtime of the receiver i.e. the start time and the end time of
the mission. A series of parameter settings such as detection mode, frequency, bandwidth,
and polarization mode must also be followed.
The time range from the beginning to the end of the signal beam coverage of the elec-
tromagnetic satellite is called the visible time window. Since the electromagnetic satellite
antenna can eﬀectively detect a wide range of ground signals, to reduce noise and improve
the detection accuracy, the angle between the signal source and the pointing direction of the
satellite antenna needs to be within a certain range.
The detection quality is aﬀected by two factors. On the one hand, the signal gain is af-
fected by the angular relationship between the satellite antenna and the signal source. When
the center of the satellite antenna passes directly above the signal source, the maximum sig-
nal gain can be obtained, and the signal gain is directly linked to the detection proﬁt. Signal

1College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China,
410073
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
February 2, 2023

gain is inversely related to the angle between the antenna and the signal source. In other
words, when the centerline of the signal source beam coincides with the extension line of the
satellite antenna pointing direction, the detection eﬀect is the best. On the other hand, the
detection accuracy will also aﬀect the detection proﬁt. The detection accuracy is limited by
the inherent capability of the receiver, and the number of frequency points will also have a
direct impact on the detection accuracy. There is a positive correlation between the band-
width and the number of frequency points, and the amount of data obtained by detection
varies signiﬁcantly depending on settings. The limited satellite storage capacity means that
only a fraction of tasks can be set to the highest bandwidth, while many tasks need to be
set to a smaller bandwidth.
1.2. Symbols and Variables
T : Set of tasks, a total of |T| tasks. For task taskj, the following attributes are deﬁned:
estj: The earliest available start time of the task.
letj: The latest available end time of the task.
durj: Duration of the task.
θmax
j
: Maximum allowable detection angle of the task.
degreej : Task importance level.
mj: The amount of data for the task.
Gj: The signal gain can be obtained from the task.
S: Set of satellites, a total of |S| satellites. For satellite si, the following attributes are
deﬁned:
D: Satellite antenna diameter.
η : Antenna eﬃciency.
Oi: Set of Orbits, a total of |Oi| orbits belonging to satellite si.
β : Satellite detection unit data volume.
M: Satellite storage capacity.
Γpol : Satellite polarization transition time.
Γmode : Satellite detection mode transition time.
Γband: Satellite bandwidth setting transition time.
Γfre: Satellite frequency band transition time.
∆: Satellite load on/oﬀtime.
TW : Set of time windows, with a total of |TW| time windows. For the time window
twijok, the following attributes are deﬁned:
EV Tijok : The earliest visible time of the task j in the time window k on orbit o for
satellite i.
LV Tijok : The latest visible time of the task j in the time window k on orbit o for satellite
i.
θt
ijok : Detection angle of the satellite i at the time t in the time window k of the task j
on the orbit o.
I: A big integer.
Decision variables:
2

xijok : Whether the satellite i is in the time window k on the orbit o whether the task j
is executed, if the task is executed, xijok = 1; otherwise, xijok = 0.
stijo : Start time of the satellite i on the orbit o to execute the task j.
1.3. Mathematical Model
Assumptions:
• All electromagnetic detection satellites have the same receivers and storage devices;
• The detection process will not be aﬀected by external factors;
• The detection task is deﬁnite, and there will be no temporary changes or cancellations;
• The satellite has suﬃcient energy during orbit;
• Each task can be completed after one detection, without repeated detection.
The calculation formula of the detection proﬁt that can be obtained by a single detection
task is:
Gj = G0 ·
J1 (u)
2u
+ 36J3 (u)
u3
2
(dBi)
(1)
G0 = ηπ2D2
λ2
(dBi)
(2)
where u = 2.07123 sin (θ) / sin (θ3dB), J1 (u) and J3 (u) are the 1st and 3rd order Bessel
functions of the ﬁrst kind, respectively. θ is the angle between the satellite antenna and the
center of the signal source, θ3dB is the angle at which the antenna gain is attenuated by 3dB
relative to the center of the beam, and the calculation formula as follows.
θ3dB = 70λ/D
(3)
where λ represents the wavelength, and D indicates the diameter of the antenna.
In this paper, the bandwidth used by satellites to perform detection tasks is dynamically
matched according to the priority of detection tasks. The importance of the task is high,
and the bandwidth used is large so that the detection eﬀect will be better. However, due to
the limitation of satellite storage, the detection bandwidth needs to be scientiﬁcally set. The
formula for setting the bandwidth according to the degree of importance degreej is shown
below.
ϕ (degreej) =







bandwidth1
degreej > 75
bandwidth2
50 < degreej ≤75
bandwidth3
25 < degreej ≤50
bandwidth4
0 < degreej ≤25
(4)
The bandwidth setting can also aﬀect the detection proﬁt, and the signal gain can be
measured by the function Ω[ϕ (degreej)].
When the bandwidth of the detection task j
3

is set according to ϕ (degreej), the amount of data generated per second is β · ϕ (degreej).
Combined with the task detection time durj, the total data amount of task j can be obtained
by:
mj = β · ϕ (degreej) · durj
(5)
The main parameters of the electromagnetic detection task include frequency, band-
width, polarization, and detection mode. The parameters of satellite si for task taskj are
set as (freij, bandij, polij, modeij). Where freij denotes the detection frequency, bandij de-
notes the bandwidth, polij denotes the polarization mode, and modeij denotes the detection
mode. The electromagnetic detection satellite needs to adjust the parameters of the onboard
equipment when performing diﬀerent tasks. The transition time between tasks is composed
of four parts. The ﬁrst part is the time required for the change of the polarization mode.
The second part is the time required for the change of the detection mode. The third part
is the time required for the change of the frequency, and the fourth part is the time required
for the change of the bandwidth. In addition, it also takes a certain amount of time for
each onboard equipment to be turned on and oﬀ, and this time interval δ must be satisﬁed
between every two tasks. To simplify the constraint judgment, we introduce a new variable
tranijj′, which represents the total transition time. The transition time of the two tasks j
and j′ is as follows.
tranijj′ = max {Γfre (freij, freij′) , 0, ∆Γband (bandij, bandij′) , Γpol (polij, polij′)
Γmode (modeij, modeij′)}
(6)
where Γpol is the satellite polarization transition time, Γmode is the satellite detection
mode transition time, Γband is the satellite bandwidth setting transition time, Γfre is the
satellite frequency transition time, ∆is the satellite load on/oﬀtime.
The scheduling goal of the EDSSP problem is to obtain the highest detection proﬁt. The
objective function is represented as follows.
Objective function:
max
X
i∈S
X
j∈T
X
o∈Oi
X
k∈TW
Gj · Ω[ϕ (degreej)] · xijok
(7)
where Gj is signal gain can be obtained from the task, Ω[ϕ (degreej)] is the gain due
to the bandwidth setting, the product of Gj and Ω[ϕ (degreej)] represents the proﬁt of the
task.
Constraints:
stijo ≥estj · xijok, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(8)
(stijo + durj) · xijok ≤letj, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(9)
θt
ijok ≤θmax
j
, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW, t ∈[stijo, stijo + durj]
(10)
stijo ≥EV Tijok · xijok, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(11)
(stijo + durj) · xijok ≤LV Tijok, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(12)
4

P
i∈S
P
j∈T\{j′}
P
k∈TW
mj · xijok + mj′ · xij′ok′ ≤M, ∀i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(13)
(stijo + durj) · xijok + tranijj′ ≤stij′o + I · (1 −xij′ok′), j ̸= j′, i ∈S, j ∈T, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(14)
X
i∈S
X
o∈Oi
X
k∈TW
xijok ≤1, ∀i ∈S, o ∈Oi, k ∈TW
(15)
xijok ∈{0, 1}
(16)
Constraints 1-2 indicate that the start time and end time of the task must be within
the time range required. Constraint 3 indicates that the detection angle cannot exceed the
task maximum angle requirement. Constraints 4-5 indicate that the start time and end time
are within the visible time window. Constraint 6 indicates that the satellite cannot exceed
the upper limit of the satellite storage capacity in each orbit. Constraint 7 indicates that
the satellite must meet various transition time requirements to perform every two tasks.
Constraint 8 indicates that each task can be executed at most once. Constraint 9 indicates
the value range of the decision variable.
2. Model for Multi-satellite Joint Observation Planning Problem(MSJOPP)
Considering Task Splitting
Refer to [2], this section describes the MSJOPP problem in text and mathematical model
form . Firstly, the problem description and variables involved in the model are given.
2.1. Symbols and Variables
Symbols and variables in the multi-satellite joint observation planning model are de-
scribed as follows.
SAT: Set of satellites, with a total of |SAT| satellites;
T: Set of satellite observation tasks, with a total of
T
 tasks;
T: Set of inseparable observation tasks, with a total of |T| tasks;
ˆT: Set of separable observation tasks, with a total of
 ˆT
 tasks;
tj: An inseparable observation task;
ˆtl: A separable observation task, which can be split into Nˆtl sub-tasks;
TW: Set of time windows, with a total of |TW| visible time windows;
estj: Earliest allowable start time for observation task j;
letj: Latest allowable end time for observation task j;
durj: Required observation time for observation task j;
ai,j: Actual observation time of satellite i for observation task j ;
pj: Observation proﬁt for task j ;
evti,k: Earliest visible time of satellite i for time window k;
lvti,k: Latest visible time of satellite i for time window k;
ˆai,l,m: Sub-task m actual observation time of satellite i for observation task l ;
γ: Minimum interval time between two observation tasks.
Decision variables:
5

The multi-satellite joint observation model needs to decide whether to execute insepara-
ble observation tasks, separable observation tasks, and the speciﬁc execution time of each
task/sub-task. Decision variables are described as follows.
xi,j,k: Observation task j of satellite i is arranged in time window k. When the task is
successfully arranged xi,j,k = 1, otherwise, xi,j,k = 0;
ˆxi,l,m,k: Sub-task m of the separable observation task l of satellite i is arranged in time
window k. When the sub-task is successfully arranged ˆxi,l,m,k = 1, otherwise, ˆxi,l,m,k = 0;
si,j: Start time of satellite i for observation task j;
ˆsi,l,m: Start time of satellite i for separable observation task l’s m-th sub-task.
2.2. Problem Description
The multi-satellite joint observation planning problem needs to schedule a series of sep-
arable observation tasks and a series of inseparable observation tasks for multi-satellite
resources. Before describing the problem in detail, the meaning of some terms involved in
the problem is given ﬁrst.
Deﬁnition 1 (Separable observation task) Separable observation task means that when
the required observation time of a task exceeds the length of each time window, this task
can be split into multiple sub-tasks to be completed separately.
Deﬁnition 2 (Inseparable observation task) Inseparable observation task means that
an observation task must be completed by a single satellite in one observation process and
cannot be divided into several sub-tasks.
Deﬁnition 3 (Sub-task) Sub-task refers to a series of tasks obtained by splitting sep-
arable observation tasks through the task splitting method, and these sub-tasks together
constitute the original observation task.
Here, a general description of the MSJOPP problem is given. Faced with a series of
observation tasks, MSJOPP is to determine the best observation sequence. Determining
the observation sequence requires the completion of the following two aspects, one is which
satellite to complete each task, and the other is the speciﬁc time of the satellite to perform the
task. For separable tasks, the algorithm also needs to determine the execution time of each
subtask. Determining the execution time needs to meet a series of constraints, and whether
the task can be observed is an important factor limiting the satellite’s task execution. Since
each satellite has its orbit, the payload on the satellite has a observation range, so the satellite
can only observe a certain area near the orbit. The time range over which the satellite can
observe the target area is called the satellite-to-earth visible time window. If the satellite
wants to execute the observation task, it must be within one visible time window. If the
task execution exceeds the visible time window, it cannot be completed. In addition to
this constraint, other constraints are mainly related to the tasks submitted by users. These
tasks have a series of time-related attributes. Attributes eﬀectively limit the time range
and duration of task execution. Tasks generally have timeliness requirements, which limit
the earliest possible start and latest end times of the task, and the task execution needs to
be within this time range. Meanwhile, the required observation time length also imposes
restrictions on the time length of the task execution. No matter what kind of observation task
it is, only when the actual observation time length is equal to the required observation time
6

length can be counted as successful execution. Speciﬁcally, the split observation task requires
that the accumulated value of the actual observation time length of multiple subtasks is equal
to the required observation time length. A task can specify a start and end time when task
requirements and time window constraints can be met. When a task is successfully observed,
the proﬁt can also obtain.
In MSJOPP, an observation task can be represented by six tuple attribute [estj, letj, durj, ai,j, pj, si,j].
The start time si,j, ˆsi,l,m of the separable/inseparable observation task tj, ˆtl needs to be in
the range of the earliest allowable start time of task estj and the latest allowable end time
letj. Correspondingly, the task start time si,j, ˆsi,l,m must also be in the range of the earliest
visible time in one time window evti,k and the latest visible time lvti,k. In order to obtain
observation proﬁt pj of an inseparable task, the actual observation time ai,j must equal to
the required observation time durj. And accumulated sub-task observation time ˆai,l,m of one
separable observation task must equal to the original required observation time durj .
Multi-satellite joint observation planning problem belongs to a category of satellite ob-
servation planning problems. The complexity of this problem is NP-hard [3], so the optimal
solution cannot be found in polynomial time. If an accurate algorithm is used for this type
of planning problem, it is easy to fall into an exponential explosion. It is also diﬃcult to
ﬁnd a feasible solution in a limited time. Numerous constraints and limited visual time
windows increase the diﬃculty of solving the problem. Designing eﬃcient and outstanding
algorithms is the key to solving the problem.
In order to intuitively describe the multi-satellite joint observation planning problem,
the following assumptions are made:
(1) Types of separable observation tasks and inseparable observation tasks have been
speciﬁed in advance before planning and will not change during the planning process;
(2) Interval time between diﬀerent tasks is a ﬁxed value;
(3) Satellite in an abnormal working state is not considered due to satellite hardware
equipment problems, and the task will not fail to execute;
(4) Each task can only be executed once at most, and the task will not be repeated
periodically;
(5) There will be no temporary addition of new observation tasks or cancellation due to
various factors in the planning process;
(6) Splitting will not add other additional task constraints for sub-tasks;
(7) Separable observation tasks and inseparable observation tasks do not have a diﬀerence
in proﬁts.
According to the description of this problem and the above assumptions, a mathematical
model for multi-satellite joint observation planning can be constructed now. The mathe-
matical model considers both the separable observation task and the inseparable observation
task are given in the following part. Symbols and Variables in the model are given ﬁrst.
2.3. Mathematical Model
In the multi-satellite joint observation model, there are two types of tasks, one is an
inseparable observation task T and the other is a separable observation task ˆT. Among
them, the set of separable observation tasks ˆT can obtain two task sets according to the
7

task splitting algorithm, one is the sub-task set after splitting ˆT1, and the other is the task
set without splitting ˆT2. The following relationships are satisﬁed between sets:
T = T ∪ˆT
(17)
ˆT = ˆT1 ∪ˆT2
(18)
Refer to the research of [4] , we construct a mixed-integer programming model (MIP) to
describe the MOJSPP problem. The objective function of the multi-satellite joint observa-
tion planning problem is to maximize the proﬁts of tasks. For this problem, there are two
types of proﬁts, including separable observation tasks and inseparable observation tasks.
The completion of the inseparable observation task can be described by the scheduling of
the original task. And for separable observation tasks, we need to consider the arrangement
of each sub-task. Only when each sub-task is successfully scheduled the original task can be
considered to be successfully executed. The objective functions of the multi-satellite joint
observation planning problem are as follows:
max f = f1 + f2
(19)
f1 =
X
i∈SAT
X
j∈T
X
k∈TW
xi,j,k · pj
(20)
f2 =
X
i∈SAT
X
l∈ˆT
X
k∈TW
min (ˆxi,l,1,k, ..., ˆxi,l,m,k) · pl
(21)
xi,j,k, ˆxi,l,m,k ∈{0, 1}
(22)
Among them, f1 represents the proﬁt of inseparable observation task sequence, f2 rep-
resents the proﬁt of separable observation task sequence. min (ˆxi,l,1,k, ..., ˆxi,l,m,k) describes
that original task . When it is is successfully planned, namely:
min (ˆxi,l,1,k, ..., ˆxi,l,m,k) = 1
(23)
Factors that aﬀect the execution of the observation task come from the requirement
of tasks and the ability of satellites.
Constraints of the multi-satellite joint observation
planning model are as follows.
Constraints:
1. Actual start time of an observation task must be later than the earliest allowable start
time:
estj · xi,j,k ≤si,j, tj ∈T
(24)
8

2. Actual end time of an observation task must be earlier than the latest allowable end
time:
(si,j + ai,j) · xi,j,k ≤letj, tj ∈T
(25)
3. Actual start time of a sub-task must be later than the earliest allowable start time of
the separable task:
estl · ˆxi,l,m,k ≤ˆsi,l,m, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(26)
4. Actual end time of a sub-task must be earlier than the latest allowable execution time
of the separable task:
(ˆsi,l,m + ˆai,l,m) · ˆxi,l,m,k ≤letl, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(27)
5. Task must start within the visible time window of the observation target:
evti,k · xi,j,k ≤si,j, tj ∈T, twk ∈TW
(28)
6. Task must complete within the visible time window of the observation target:
(si,j + ai,j) · xi,j,k ≤lvti,k, tj ∈T, twj ∈TW
(29)
7. Sub-task of a separable observation task must start within the visible time window of
the observation target:
evti,k · ˆxi,l,m,k ≤ˆsi,l,m, ˆti,l,m ∈ˆT, twk ∈TW
(30)
8.
Sub-tasks of a separable observation task must complete within the visible time
window of the observation target:
(ˆsi,l,m + ˆai,l,m) · ˆxi,l,m,k ≤lvti,k, ˆtl ∈ˆT, twk ∈TW
(31)
9. Actual observation time of a task must be equal to the required observation time:
ai,j = durj, tj ∈T
(32)
10. Total actual observation time of each sub-task of a separable observation task must
be equal to the required observation time of the separable observation task:
X
i∈SAT
X
m∈ˆtl
ˆai,l,m = durl, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(33)
11. Any two observation tasks must meet the minimum interval time requirements:
si,j+1 −(si,j + ai,j) ≥γ, tj, tj+1 ∈T
(34)
9

12. Any two sub-tasks must meet the minimum interval time requirements:
ˆsi,l,m+1 −(ˆsi,l,m + ˆai,l,m) ≥γ, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(35)
13. Any sub-task of an inseparable observation task and a separable observation task
must meet the minimum interval time requirement:
|ˆsi,l,m −(si,j + ai,j)| ≥γ, tj ∈T, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(36)
|si,j −(ˆsi,l,m + ˆai,l,m)| ≥γ, tj ∈T, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(37)
[si,j −(ˆsi,l,m + ˆai,l,m)] × (si,j + ai,j −ˆsi,l,m) ≥0, tj ∈T, ˆtl ∈ˆT
(38)
14. Each observation task can execute at most once:
X
k∈TW
xi,j,k ≤1i, tj ∈T
(39)
15. Each sub-task of a separable observation task can execute at most once:
X
m∈ˆtl
X
k∈TW
ˆxi,l,m,k ≤1, ˆtl ∈ˆT, twk ∈TW
(40)
Constraints 1-4 describe that execution must meet the time requirements. Constraints
5-8 describe that execution must ensure that the target is visible. Tasks must start and
complete within the visible time window. Constraints 9-10 describe the relationship between
actual observation time with the required observation time.
Constraints 11-13 describe
the minimum time interval limit of tasks. Constraints 14-15 describe the limit on times
of executions.
The multi-satellite joint observation task planning problem is similar to
the parallel machine scheduling problem and the VRPTW problem. Similarities between
MSJOPP and parallel machine scheduling or VRPTW are that they both need to arrange
and determine the start time of each task.
These two problems are also deterministic
problems, and the mixed-integer programming model can be used for model solving. The
obvious diﬀerence between the problem studied in this paper and similar domains is that each
satellite can only have time windows for some of the tasks, which increases the complexity
obviously. This is similar to some speciﬁc processes that must be completed by speciﬁc
machines, but the time limit makes the MSJOPP problem more complicated.
It is not diﬃcult to see that numerous constraints impose strict restrictions on the plan-
ning of an observation task. It is a feasible solution to solve the separable observation task
and the inseparable observation task planning problem separately in terms of the diﬃculty
of ﬁnding a solution and optimization eﬀect.
10

Algorithm 1: RL-EA
Input: population P, population size Np, Fitness F, Reward matrix R, learning
rate α, discount factor γ, Q-table Q, ε, control parameter T, Operators O
Output: Solution
1 Initialize algorithm parameters;
2 Initialize the population;
3 Set t=1;
4 while termination criterion is not met do
5
At ←Use Q-Learning to choose the appropriate action (Qt, ε, T, O);
6
individual ←Select Individual (Pt−1, Ft−1);
7
Pt ←Population Evolution(Pt−1, At, individual);
8
Ft ←Fitness Evaluation (Pt) ;
9
Rt ←Compute Reward(Ft, Ft−1);
10
Qt+1 ←Compute Q-values(St, At, Rt, α, γ);
11
t ←t + 1;
3. Reinforcement Learning Based Evolutionary Algorithm Framework(RL-EA)
Evolutionary algorithms simulate the evolution process of biological populations and
ﬁnd high-quality solutions to problems in the form of population evolution.
Population
search brings a strong global search capability to evolutionary algorithms, which ensures its
performance in solving large-scale complex problems.
The obvious disadvantage of evolutionary algorithms is that the search results are ex-
tremely sensitive to the parameter conﬁguration in the algorithm. Parameter-sensitive fea-
tures make many evolutionary algorithms have certain dependencies on problems and sce-
narios. When problems or scenarios change, parameters need to be adjusted or reset. The
parameter setting process is likely to be time-consuming. To enhance the versatility of evo-
lutionary algorithms in diﬀerent scenarios, the workload of setting algorithm parameters is
reduced. We use the Q-learning method to drive the algorithm to update autonomously and
let the evolutionary algorithm select an appropriate search strategy based on the search per-
formance to drive the population evolution. Without loss of generality, we present a general
evolutionary algorithm framework based on reinforcement learning. The algorithm frame-
work can be ﬂexibly adjusted according to diﬀerent evolutionary algorithms in actual use.
The pseudo-code of the evolutionary algorithm framework based on reinforcement learning
is shown in Algorithm Table 1.
The evolutionary algorithm framework based on reinforcement learning selects the ap-
propriate action according to the state in the iterative search process of the population,
chooses one action to obtain a new generation of the population, evaluates the performance
of the population and the income after adopting the action, and updates the state for a new
round of population evolution. Population evolution and state update are continuous in the
process of population search, and there exists frequent information exchange between them.
As a general framework, population evolution can be ﬂexibly set according to the speciﬁc
11

evolutionary algorithm used and the problems to be solved. Input parameters, operators,
control parameters, and other strategies in the algorithm may also be diﬀerent according
to the speciﬁc algorithm used. For example, the genetic algorithm uses control parameters
to limit crossover and mutation, while the ant colony algorithm uses control parameters to
limit pheromone update.
