Topic Segmentation Model Focusing on Local Context
Jeonghwan Lee, Jiyeong Han, Sunghoon Baek, Min Song*
Yonsei University

Abstract
Topic segmentation is important in understanding scientiﬁc
documents since it can not only provide better readability but
also facilitate downstream tasks such as information retrieval
and question answering by creating appropriate sections or
paragraphs. In the topic segmentation task, topic coherence is
critical in predicting segmentation boundaries. Most of the
existing models have tried to exploit as many contexts as
possible to extract useful topic-related information. However,
additional context does not always bring promising results,
because the local context between sentences becomes inco-
herent despite more sentences being supplemented. To allevi-
ate this issue, we propose siamese sentence embedding lay-
ers which process two input sentences independently to get
appropriate amount of information without being hampered
by excessive information. Also, we adopt multi-task learn-
ing techniques including Same Topic Prediction (STP), Topic
Classiﬁcation (TC) and Next Sentence Prediction (NSP).
When these three classiﬁcation layers are combined in a
multi-task manner, they can make up for each other’s limi-
tations, improving performance in all three tasks. We exper-
iment different combinations of the three layers and report
how each layer affects other layers in the same combination
as well as the overall segmentation performance. The model
we proposed achieves the state-of-the-art result in the Wiki-
Section dataset.
Introduction
Nowadays, we can easily access vast amounts of scientiﬁc
documents such as PubMed and Wikipedia. A lot of re-
searchers are studying ways to effectively use these docu-
ments in areas like information retrieval (IR), question an-
swering (QA) and search engine. However, applying previ-
ous IR models (or QA models) directly on these documents
is impossible because most of them assume an input size of
at most a paragraph while these documents consist of multi-
ple paragraphs. Furthermore, extracting crucial parts of each
document does not necessarily require the whole document
to be used. For example, to search for similar papers on a
topic of interest we can simplify the problem by calculating
cosine similarity between sections of each document rather
than full text to save resources.
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Which topic?
Which topic?
Which topic?
Which topic?
Which topic?
Sentence 1
Sentence 2
Sentence 3
Sentence n
Sentence n-1
.
.
.
Same topic?
&
Consecutive?
Same topic?
&
Consecutive?
Same topic?
&
Consecutive?
Figure 1: A window with a size of 1 slides through the entire
sentence, predicting the topic of each sentence. At the same
time, the model determines whether the two sentences are in
the same topic and whether the two sentences are consecu-
tive.
These are where topic segmentation can be used. Topic
segmentation divides a document into segments with respect
to the topic coherence of each segment. A well-divided doc-
ument according to the topics provides better readability,
making it easier for the readers to ﬁnd the desired infor-
mation in the document. Most importantly, it can facilitate
downstream-tasks such as IR and QA.
Although most of the existing topic segmentation models
take topic coherence into consideration when dividing a doc-
ument, they don’t undergo the process of classifying topic
labels for each sentence, even when these topic labels are
useful for inferring topic coherence. Most importantly, in-
spired by Neural Text Segmentation Model (Koshorek et al.
2018), these models are designed to take block of text as in-
put, which possibly hinders understanding local context of
the input text (Xing et al. 2020).
We try to tackle the above issues by adopting a siamese
network to encode two input sentences independently and
putting them through a multi-task learning algorithm that in-
cludes topic classiﬁcation and other auxiliary tasks. First,
in order to deal with two input sentences independently,
we construct our model in a siamese network with sen-
tence embeddings from a Sentence Transformer (Reimers
arXiv:2301.01935v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2023

and Gurevych 2019). This method allows our model to pre-
serve local context between the two input sentences without
being overwhelmed by excessive information.
We consider topic segmentation as a Same Topic Predic-
tion (STP) between two input sentences, following Aumiller
et al. (2021). However, because our model processes only
one sentence at a time to preserve its unique information, the
model cannot observe context information across sentences.
To alleviate this issue, we add two auxiliary tasks to cap-
ture local context information. One of them is Topic Classi-
ﬁcation(TC) which predicts the exact topic of the input sen-
tences through a topic classiﬁcation layer to assist STP with
a detailed topic information. The other is a Next Sentence
Prediction (NSP) layer (Devlin et al. 2019), which supports
the model in understanding the relationship between con-
secutive sentences. Figure 1 simply shows how our model
works.
To sum up, our model deals with two input sentences in-
dependently via the siamese sentence embedding layer that
preserves local context of input sentences. Also, we show
that connecting tasks that utilize same input sentences to ex-
tract different features in the sentence in a multi-task manner
improves topic segmentation performance. Consequently,
our model achieves state-of-the-art in the topic segmentation
task using the WikiSection dataset.
Related Work
Topic Segmentation
Koshorek et al. (2018) solved topic segmentation task as a
supervised neural network model. Block of text that consists
of several sentences is fed into the model and the model pre-
dicts whether each sentence should be a segmentation point.
Badjatiya et al. (2018) introduced k-sized left and right
supporting sentences, where neighboring k number of sen-
tences support injecting context into input sentence. How-
ever, Xing et al. (2020) pointed out that ”local context” was
more important than ”global context” in topic segmentation
task, implying that excessive context might decrease the per-
formance. The information from various sentences can hin-
der predicting label of a single sentence due to deterioration
in the model’s understanding of local context.
Arnold et al. (2019) proposed Sector which includes a
topic embedding layer in their architecture. This topic em-
bedding layer is implemented for topic classiﬁcation and the
result of topic classiﬁcation is then used for segmentation.
Aumiller et al. (2021) treated topic segmentation as a
Same Topic Prediction(STP) between two input paragraphs.
STP determines whether two input paragraphs refer to the
same topic. They also experimented diverse sampling meth-
ods, and among these methods we adopt consecutive sam-
pling. Details about consecutive sampling will be explained
at section .
Sentence Embedding
Sentence embedding is a method of capturing the seman-
tic relationships among words in a sentence (Conneau et al.
2017). Quality of sentence embedding is critical especially
in the topic segmentation task, because the task inevitably
has to capture as much information as possible from long
sentences as well as short ones. Koshorek et al. (2018) uti-
lized Bi-LSTM to generate sentence embedding where word
embedding vectors are extracted from Word2Vec with each
word in a sentence as input, fed into the Bi-LSTM layer one
by one, and the ﬁnal sequence representation was made by
max-pooling over the output of the LSTM.
After the introduction of BERT, Reimers and Gurevych
(2019) proposed Sentence BERT specialized in creating
sentence embeddings. Sentence BERT is a ﬁne-tuned ver-
sion of BERT trained on NLI(Natural Language Inference)
and STS(Semantic Textual Similarity) task. To handle input
sentences effectively, the authors adopted siamese network
which encodes each sentence independently and concate-
nates the encoded sentences to be fed into a classiﬁcation
layer. Consequently, Sentence BERT has better capability of
dealing with long sentences, because the model understands
high-level context of these sentences.
As another branch of Sentence BERT, SimCSE was pro-
posed (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021). The authors applied con-
trastive learning to forming sentence embeddings. They tried
unsupervised method and showed that dropout could work
as data augmentation and this prevented representation col-
lapse. They also empirically and theoretically proved that
contrastive learning objective was suitable for regularizing
anisotropic space of a language model’s embedding to be
more uniform and it aligned positive pairs better in a super-
vised setting as a result.
Lukasik et al. (2020) proposed Cross-segment BERT.
They used pre-trained BERT in which left and right context
were separated via [SEP] token and encoded the sequence of
word-piece tokens into sentence representations. Aumiller
et al. (2021) used Sentence BERT for a sentence encoder
which is known to have substantial capability of understand-
ing high-level context.
Proposed Approach
Architecture
Our model follows the typical architecture of text segmen-
tation models: a sentence embedding layer followed by a
segment classiﬁer, which is replaced by a Same Topic Pre-
diction layer in our model.
However, our model takes two input sentences. To handle
them independently, our model composes sentence embed-
ding layer in siamese network form, so that the model re-
ceives an appropriate amount of information to predict the
label. The encoded sentences are then fed into the topic
classiﬁcation layer one by one. By passing each sentence
through the layer, the model acquires topic-related informa-
tion of the sentence. Also, we adopt NSP layer to capture
semantic relationship between the two sentences. Finally,
STP layer predicts whether the sentences belong to the same
topic.
We have k documents D1, ...Dk that D consist of n num-
ber sentences s1, ..., sn, and the sentences are paired con-
secutively; [(s1, s2), (s2, s3), ..., (sn−2, sn−1), (sn−1, sn)].
Each si(i ≤n) is assigned a topic label ti which describes
topic label of ith sentence.

Models
STP Loss
TC Loss
NSP Loss
STP+TC
4
1
-
STP+NSP
1
-
1
STP+TC+NSP
4
1
4
Table 1: Designated loss weights for each layer in case of
multi-task learning
The sentence embedding layer encodes each input sen-
tences si and si+1 and the encoded sentences are repre-
sented as u and v, respectively. Figure 2 shows the overview
of our model.
Siamese Sentence Embedding Layers from Sentence
Transformer
We propose siamese sentence embedding
layer. In our model, Sentence Transformer encodes each sen-
tence from two input sentences independently at the entry
level. Then, the encoded sentences are concatenated before
being fed into the STP layer. This method aims to preserve
each sentence’s unique information while acquiring local
context between the two sentences.
Multi Task Learning
Our model has a total of three clas-
siﬁcation layers and we train them in a multi-task manner.
Topic classiﬁcation layer: Topic classiﬁcation layer is
designed to capture exact topic information of a sentence.
Topic classiﬁcation is a multi-class classiﬁcation that pre-
dicts the topic of an input sentence out of 30 labels for
en city and 27 labels for en disease dataset (Arnold et al.
2019) . This layer takes u and v one by one and predicts
each topic label ti and ti+1.
NSP layer: NSP layer is fed with u; v; |u −v| (Reimers
and Gurevych 2019) and the layer predicts NSP label. This
layer aims to supplement STP layer’s limitation where STP
layer can only determine whether the two input sentences are
in the same topic and cannot determine if the sentences are
actually consecutive. By adding NSP, the model can capture
the semantic relationship between the two sentences, so the
model can ﬁgure out whether the sentences are consecutive.
NSP layer must go with consecutive sampling which will be
explained below.
STP layer: STP layer is provided with u; v; |u −v| again
and ﬁnally predicts segmentation label that is used to draw
segmentation points in places where the two sentences be-
long to different topics.
Multi task learning: When the three layers are combined
in a multi-task manner, they can make up each other’s limi-
tations. Since STP is based on binary classiﬁcation, its task
is much simpler than Topic Classiﬁcation that is based on
multi-class classiﬁcation. However, since STP cannot cap-
ture the exact topic label of input sentences, Topic classi-
ﬁcation provides this information to the STP layer to help
determine segmentation boundaries. The effect of NSP is ex-
plained above.
Loss weight: Because the losses from each layer are
all different, there is a need to adjust the weights among
the losses for improved model performance. We decide the
weights for each loss by running numerous manual experi-
ments and calculate the total loss using a weighted sum of
en city
en disease
Docs
19,539
3,590
Topics
30
27
Table 2: The number of documents and topics for en city
and en disease
the three losses from each classiﬁcation layer. Table 1 sum-
marizes how each loss is weighted.
Consecutive Sampling
To make the model more robust, we add negative samples
to the dataset by adopting consecutive sampling (Aumiller
et al. 2021). In consecutive sampling, all samples come from
the same document.
We have a document Da and a sentence sti
i ∈Da where
the superscript ti
refers to topic label of si. We pick one
positive sample and two negative samples. The positive sam-
ple sti+1=ti
i+1
∈Da is consecutive to si
and the ﬁrst nega-
tive sample stk=ti
k̸=i+1 is from the same topic as si, but not con-
secutive to si . Finally, the second negative sample stl̸=ti
l
is from different topics, which is naturally considered not
consecutive to si .
Experiment
Dataset
We use WikiSection (Arnold et al. 2019) for training and
evaluating our model. WikiSection covers two distinct do-
mains: city and disease. Each domain has 19,539 and 3,590
documents, respectively, with various topics in each docu-
ment. In total, there are 30 and 27 topics for each domain.
The dataset is divided into 70% training, 10% validation and
20% test sets. Table 2 gives statistics of the dataset.
Experimental Setup
We use nltk sentence tokenizer1 to split the documents into
sentence units and apply consecutive sampling only on the
training dataset. Table 3 gives the data statistics after ap-
plying sentence split and consecutive sampling. We imple-
ment all-MiniLM-L12-v2 and from Sentence-Transformers2
for our sentence encoder. We set the maximum epoch size to
14 but save the model only when the validation Pk scores
best. Batch size is 48, learning rate is 1e−6 and LinearLR
scheduler is applied with the default parameters setting.
Metric
For
a
comprehensive
evaluation,
we
used
Pk,
WindowDiff and micro F1 score to evaluate our models.
We use Pk score for making comparisons between our
models and all other baseline models, and WindowDiff
is used to evaluate ours and Cross-segment BERT that we
implemented. F1 score is used for the purpose of ablation
study on our models.
1NLTK :: Natural Language Toolkit
2Pretrained Models — Sentence-Transformers documentation
(sbert.net)

𝑠!
𝑠!"#
Pooling
Pooling
𝑢
𝑣
Softmax Classifier
(NSP)
𝑢; 𝑣; |𝑢−𝑣|
0 or 1
Sentence Transformer
Sentence Transformer
𝑡!
𝑡!"#
Softmax Classifier
(Topic Classification)
Softmax Classifier
(STP)
0 or 1
Figure 2: The overview of our model. Two input sentences which are considered consecutive are fed into Sentence Transformer
independently and encodes each input sentence. Each max-pooled encoded sentence, represented by u and v respectively, is fed
into Topic classiﬁcation layer. Before being fed into NSP layer and STP layer, we make concatenated feature u; v; |u−v|. Using
u; v; |u −v|, NSP layer predicts if the two sentences are consecutive and STP layer ﬁnally determines whether they belong to
same topic.
79.5
95.1
95.3
95.4
95.8
72.7
73.2
73.3
85.7
86.5
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
TC only
STP only
STP+TC
STP+NSP
STP+TC+NSP
F1
Micro F1 Scores of STP, TC and NSP
(en_city) 
STP
TC
NSP
54.8
87.6
88
88.3
88.4
45.8
45.9
46.2
64
64.5
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
TC only
STP only
STP+TC
STP+NSP
STP+TC+NSP
F1
Micro F1 Scores of STP, TC and NSP
(en_disease) 
STP
TC
NSP
Figure 3: Figure of F1 scores with combination of different task layers. In case of TC-only model, STP output is 1 if the results
of topic classiﬁcation on each sentence refer to the same topic otherwise 0.
en city
en disease
Train
1,690,103
336,459
Valid
85,072
16,285
Test
168,924
31,110
Table 3: The number of rows after applying nltk sentence
tokenizer and consecutive sampling. Consecutive sampling
is applied only on the trainset.
Pk
Pk (Beeferman, Berger, and Lafferty 1999) is a proba-
bility that a segmentation model performs an incorrect seg-
mentation. While a sliding window of size k passing over
the sentences, the status (0 or 1) is determined by whether
the two ends of the window are in the same segment or in
different segments. Pk is calculated by counting unmatched
cases between the ground truths and predicted values. As in
many previous studies, we set the window size k to half the
average segment length of the ground truths.

Dataset
en city
en disease
Metric
Pk
WinDiff
Pk
WinDiff
SEC>T+emb
15.5
-
26.3
-
Transformer2
BERT
8.2
-
18.8
-
BiLSTM + BERT
9.3
-
28.0
-
Cross-segment BERT n context = 2
15.4
27.4
33.9
59.0
Cross-segment BERT n context = 4
18.3
32.2
34.8
60.3
Cross-segment BERT n context = 6
45.1
50.0
34.0
57.1
TC-only
15.0
17.8
41.5
45.4
STP-only
5.1
5.8
14.8
15.8
STP + TC
5.0
5.7
14.0
15.0
STP + NSP
4.9
5.6
14.1
15.1
STP + TC + NSP
4.6
5.2
13.7
14.7
Table 4: Test Pk and WindowDiff scores of baseline models and our models. Note that the WinDiff metric is used only
in our models and the Cross-segment BERT models. We reimplement Cross-segment BERT ourselves following their ofﬁcial
codes.
WindowDiff
WindowDiff
(Pevzner
and
Hearst
2002) is an improved metric from Pk in that it alleviates
the impact of false negative penalty and segment size
distribution.
Similar to Pk, WindowDiff score also uses sliding win-
dow and compares the ground truths with the predicted val-
ues. However, this metric also takes the number of bound-
aries into consideration. It is closer to the ground truth when
the models get a lower score in both Pk and WindowDiff.
Baseline Models
We compare our model with competitive neural text seg-
mentation baselines 1) SEC>T+emb (Arnold et al. 2019),
2) Transformer2
BERT (Lo et al. 2021), a framework based
on two transformers, where one is a pre-trained transformer
for encoding sentences and the other is a transformer for seg-
mentation, 3) Bi-LSTM + BERT (Xing et al. 2020), that is
based on a hierarchical attention Bi-LSTM network, and 4)
Cross-segment BERT (Lukasik et al. 2020), which handles
left and right context simultaneously using a BERT encoder.
We adopt the results of SEC>T+emb from Arnold
et al. (2019), Transformer2
BERT and Bi-LSTM + BERT
from Xing et al. (2020). We implement Cross-segment
BERT ourselves following their ofﬁcial code while apply-
ing diverse size of context.
Results and Analysis
We report evaluation results on Figure 3 and Table 4. Fig-
ure 3 summarizes how combination of each classiﬁcation
layer affects their F1 scores. Table 4 shows performance
comparison between our model and other baseline models
in Pk and WindowDiff, respectively. Our proposed mod-
els, except for TC-only model, outperform all the baseline
models by a large margin.
Effect of MTL
Figure 3 shows F1 scores derived from
combinations of tasks mentioned above. We can see that
MTL is effective in improving the performance, which ap-
plies to not only the performance of STP that is responsible
segmentation but also the performances of TC and NSP. This
is believed to be because, as we pointed out in the section ,
the layers make up for each other’s limitations by extract-
ing different features from same input sentences that assist
understanding semantic information.
STP-only vs TC-only
In order to verify the effectiveness
of STP layer, we also experiment TC-only model, which is
close to Sector in that segmentation is performed only using
topic labels.
Pk and WindowDiff of TC-only model are much
higher than those of STP-only model. Poor classiﬁcation
performance of Topic classiﬁcation directly causes this phe-
nomenon. Figure 3 indicates that F1 scores of TC-only
model are signiﬁcantly lower than those of STP-only. Be-
cause topic classiﬁcation layer is based on multi-class classi-
ﬁcation, which is more difﬁcult than the binary classiﬁcation
of STP-only.
STP vs NSP
Although STP and NSP have the same ar-
chitecture, STP’s F1 scores are always higher than NSP’s in
both datasets. We assume that this difference is derived from
the difference in the information that STP and NSP focus on.
STP-only determines whether the two sentences belong to
the same topic, so it only pays attention to topic differences
between two sentences. In other words, due to the nature of
the task, STP does not consider the relationship between two
input sentences. However, in the NSP task, the layer faces
difﬁculties as two sentences may not be consecutive even
if they belong to the same topic because of our consecutive
sampling. Thus, NSP must ﬁnd the semantic relationship be-
tween the two sentences as well as topic coherence, which
makes the task tricky.
How the number of contexts affects the performance
To show the importance of local context, we implement
Cross-segment BERT (Lukasik et al. 2020) by applying di-
verse size of context on the model. Table 4 shows that raising
context size rather deteriorates the performance. We conjec-
ture that this is because the more sentences there are, the
more likely for different topics to be mingled, which likely
interferes the model from understanding local context with

Left context
𝑠!
𝑠!"#
𝑠!$#
𝑠!$%
𝑠!$&
𝑠!"%
𝑠!"&
𝑠!"'
n_context = 1
𝑠!
𝑠!"#
𝑠!$#
𝑠!$%
𝑠!$&
𝑠!"%
𝑠!"&
𝑠!"'
n_context = 4
𝑠!
𝑠!"#
𝑠!$#
𝑠!$%
𝑠!$&
𝑠!"%
𝑠!"&
𝑠!"'
n_context = 2
𝑠!
𝑠!"#
𝑠!$#
𝑠!$%
𝑠!$&
𝑠!"%
𝑠!"&
𝑠!"'
n_context = 3
Right context
Left context
Right context
Left context
Right context
Left context
Right context
Figure 4: Effect of context size on prediction. The color of the box represents the topic of the sentence and the red line represents
supporting context. The vertical dotted line represents a segmentation point between si and si+1 while the dotted box describes
that the two sentences are not segmented. si
and si+1
should be divided, since they belong to different topics, but are not
segmented in cases of n context = 3 and n context = 4 .
overﬂow of noise. Because processing multiple sentences si-
multaneously using a left and right context structure rather
adds noise to the contexts, we choose to encode the two in-
put sentences independently.
Figure 4 explains this local context capturing error. The
models in Figure 4 are all expected to create a segmentation
point between si and si+1 , but models with larger con-
text sizes fail to split the two sentences, because segmenta-
tion only takes into account the overall context of each side.
As the context size increases, the model suffers from gener-
alization and interprets left and right contexts as similar even
when the two speciﬁc sentences refer to different topics and
hence should be segmented.
Also, Cross-segment BERT encodes left and right context
simultaneously. Because Cross-encoder inevitably makes
context of one input sentence inﬂuence the other (Humeau
et al. 2019), the unique information of each context can
change unexpectedly. Therefore, we process each sentence
independently via siamese sentence embedding in order to
preserve the original local context.
Dealing with Scientiﬁc Documents
We can also ﬁnd that
the scores for en disease are underperforming compared to
that for en city. We assume that this result due to the fact
that en disease is more science domain speciﬁc (i.e. biol-
ogy) while en city covers relatively general topics. Arnold
et al. (2019) commented that documents in en disease are
described in a precise language, but on the other hand those
in en city are described in a common language. Consider-
ing that our backbone, miniLM was pre-trained on general
documents like Wikipedia, the result seems natural.
To improve the performance on en disease, we implement
SPECTER (Cohan et al. 2020) which was trained on scien-
tiﬁc papers using Sci-BERT as the backbone model.
As shown in table 5, Pk and WinDiff improved by 1.6
and 1.8 respectively in en disease compared to the miniLM
based model. We attribute the improvement to SPECTER’s
understanding of scientiﬁc documents. We expect the scores
Pk
WinDiff
en city
4.6
5.2
en disease
12.1
12.9
Table 5: Test Pk and WindowDiff scores of SPECTER
based Topic Segmentation Model with STP+TC+NSP
for en disease to be improved if we use more biology do-
main speciﬁc model like BioBERT as the backbone.
Interestingly, although the number of parameters of
SPECTER was twice as large as that of miniLM (i.e. 768
vs 384), there was no improvement in the performance in
en city. From this result, we can again conﬁrm that domain
knowledge is critical to the performance.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose our topic segmentation model
which consists of siamese sentence embedding layer from
Sentence Transformer and three classiﬁcation layers. With
several different experiments, we show that our proposed
model outperforms all the existing models. We also ﬁnd that
combining Same Topic Prediction, Topic Classiﬁcation and
Next Sentence Prediction in a multi-task manner increases
segmentation performance.
Moreover, we empirically show the importance of local
context in topic segmentation task. Contrary to the popu-
lar belief, increasing the number of context can rather de-
grade the performance due to generalization of local context.
Our experiment indicates that narrowing context through our
siamese sentence embedding layer can be effective in pre-
serving local context.
Future work can highlight on the theoretical approach to
local context. Although we empirically showed the inﬂuence
of context size to the model performance in this paper, we
did not concentrate on how we can determine which input
sentences can provide substantial information in performing
segmentation tasks. If we can infer each sentence’s signiﬁ-

cance in prediction, we expect the model to capture the im-
portant sentences autonomously, consequently making the
model agnostic to the context size.
