The Human Factor in AI Safety 
Morteza Saberi 
School of Computer Science, University of Technology, Sydney, NSW, Australia 

 
 
Abstract  
AI-based systems have been used widely across various in-
dustries for different decisions ranging from operational de-
cisions to tactical and strategic ones in low- and high-stakes 
contexts. Gradually the weaknesses and issues of these sys-
tems have been publicly reported including, ethical issues, bi-
ased decisions, unsafe outcomes, and unfair decisions, to 
name a few. Research has tended to optimize AI less has fo-
cused on its risk and unexpected negative consequences. Ac-
knowledging this serious potential risks and scarcity of re-
search I focus on unsafe outcomes of AI. Specifically, I ex-
plore this issue from a Human-AI interaction lens during AI 
deployment. It will be discussed how the interaction of indi-
viduals and AI during its deployment brings new concerns, 
which need a solid and holistic mitigation plan. It will be dis-
cussed that only AI algorithms' safety is not enough to make 
its operation safe. The AI-based systems' end-users and their 
decision-making archetypes during collaboration with these 
systems should be considered during the AI risk manage-
ment. Using some real-world scenarios, it will be highlighted 
that decision-making archetypes of users should be consid-
ered a design principle in AI-based systems. 
Introduction (Section 1) 
AI and its backbone technologies are advancing on an un-
precedented scale (Schiffet. al.  2020). This fast develop-
ment of AI models leads to the emerging of various AI-pow-
ered products and services. Top tech companies, including 
Google, Amazon, and Apple, develop and use these prod-
ucts to provide better services to their customers, gaining 
significant publicity. This publicity reinforces the role of AI 
in fast development for other companies including, small-
medium enterprises across various sectors (Hansen, & Bøgh 
2021).  
At the same time, there are serious discussions and debates 
on AI misconducts or shortcomings such as unfair out-
comes, gender discrimination, biased decisions, dangerous 
actions (Turchin, & Denkenberger 2021). Since this backlash 
primarily targeted the AI community, various new research 
directions and domains have emerged as a response includ-
ing, AI fairness, Explainable AI, Human-AI interaction, 
Ethical AI, and AI safety (Foulds et al. 2020, Mathews 2019., 
Amershi et al. 2019). However to have the robust, fair, safe, 
and responsible AI a collective effort is needed among its 
stakeholders.   
Figure 1 depicts an exemplar AI-powered product's main 
two stages or lifecycle. The first part is their development 
stage, which may involve the specific dataset of the com-
pany. For simplicity, the team that developed the AI-pow-
ered product is named the "service provider," and it has been 
assumed they are sitting outside the company. The service 
provider either produces the product on an (i) large scale or 
develops an (ii) customized one. Referring to those two 
stages, the main focus of AI safety literature is the "devel-
opment stage," and there is not much work on the second 
part, the "deployment stage." Thereby the devised safety 
mechanism in the development stage is only half of the so-
lution and safety guard.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. AI-powered product lifecycle 
AI design-
ers 
AI based 
system 
Enterprise 
data 
Service pro-
vider 
Development stage 
Enterprise 
users 
Skeptics 
Interactors 
Delegators 
Deployment stage 
AI 
Safet

 
 
Some of the main AI safety challenges during the “deploy-
ment stage” from the human interaction lens will be dis-
cussed in this work. This is due to the AI safety literature 
gap in considering the safety issues related to end-users per-
spectives, needs, interactions, and roles. AI will be more ro-
bust and safe when the AI developers consider its lifecycle 
challenges. AI-Powered products’ end users are naturally di-
verse, ranging from the organization’s top managers, middle 
managers, knowledge workers to their customers. They also 
have diverse attitudes towards AI-Powered products and 
different experiences and expertise. Among the heterogene-
ous end-users, we have cohorts with (i) No technical back-
ground of AI, (ii) general understanding of AI models, (iii) 
being skeptical about AI and its power, (IV) believing in AI 
as an ultimate solution, to name a few. Unfortunately, there 
is not much work, tools, or methods that can support top 
managers in choosing the right AI-Powered product accord-
ing to their organization’s need and culture. That’s why 
looking at AI as a service enabler that leads to the product 
or service is essential in those newly emerged fields of AI 
and AI safety. 
Specifically, the impact of knowledge workers with differ-
ent decision-making archetypes on AI safety will be dis-
cussed. To this end, three types of knowledge workers' atti-
tudes towards AI-powered products will be considered as 
depicted in Figure 1, namely, "Skeptics," "Interactors, "and 
"Delegators." Section 2 is devoted to describing these deci-
sion-making archetypes with two toy examples that high-
light their possible threads towards AI safety. In Section 3, 
classification models will be used as a reference. It will be 
discussed how changing the classifier metric from "preci-
sion" to "recall" makes a given AI-Powered product safer 
for some cases and riskier for other scenarios. The possible 
consequences of these risks in not considering the 
knowledge workers' decision-making archetypes have been 
presented in Section 4 regarding the confusion matrix. A ho-
listic risk map for each decision-making archetypes will be 
presented in Section 5 when we have an automatic AI prod-
uct in place. The paper will be concluded with a short dis-
cussion on the mitigating strategy during the "deployment 
stage," considering the type of involved knowledge workers.    
Three decision-making archetypes in enter-
prises: From AI Safety Perspective (Section 2) 
The AI-based systems assist the organizations in their oper-
ations, categorized in two main modes: (i) decision augmen-
tation and (i) automatic decision-making (Leyer, & Schneider 
2021). While in the first one, the amount of knowledge work-
ers' involvement and authority is higher than the second 
mode, the involvement of knowledge workers in the second 
one is essential. Thus, for both modes, the human element 
should be considered for any AI safety plan. I am using the 
taxonomy which Meissner and Keding proposed in their pa-
per by classifying the AI users into three categories, namely, 
skeptics, interactors, and delegators:  
a. 
"Skeptics do not follow the AI-based recommenda-
tions." 
b. 
"Interactors are open to the use of AI but do not rely on 
it entirely."  
c. 
"Delegators largely transfer their decision-making au-
thority to AI." 
Figure 2 depicts how a given knowledge worker with the 
above decision-making archetypes interacts with an AI-
based system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Three decision-making archetypes and their interaction 
with AI based systems 
If the knowledge workers keep ignoring AI decisions, even 
the safest AI models can be part of accident reasons within 
a company. On the other hand, if the knowledge workers 
blindly believe in AI decisions, they may see them as a con-
crete action plan rather than a recommendation, which needs 
their final approval. Let's have a simple example of an AI-
powered product safety issue by having the involvement of 
a skeptic knowledge worker: 
Example 1.  
“John is an experienced engineer who is working for a mining 
company. Recently the company launched an AI-based alert sys-
tem for the evacuation. John believes most of the system's alert 
is false and keeps ignoring them. This ultimately led to the injury 
of some of the mineworkers and put John in the spot”  
The second example shows how a wrong misconception of 
a given delegator knowledge worker about AI power and 
accuracy leads to an unsafe outcome:  
Example 2.  
“Jess is a new graduate who is a fan of AI with a general under-
standing. Jess has recently joined an insurance company. The 
company uses a customized AI-based system, filtering scam 

attack, which led to a severe company financial data leaking, 
and she had to change her organization at the end.”  
The following section will reinforce the importance of con-
sidering the deployment stage during the AI product devel-
opment to make AI-powered products safe from the Human 
Skeptics 
Interactors 
Delegators 
Not involving AI 
in decision making 
Fruitful collaboration with 
AI for decision-making 
Blindly follow-
ing AI decisions 

 
 
involvement lens (Meissner, & Keding 2021). It shows how 
simply changing a classification performance metric to an-
other one makes a given AI-based product safer for a given 
user who is skeptical/delegator towards an AI-powered 
product.  
The importance of decision-making archetype 
consideration in classifier performance meas-
urement (Section 3) 
AI-based classification is one of the main tasks of AI models 
which have been reached to good maturity and accuracy. 
Two main accuracy metrics look at the accuracy from dif-
ferent angles, namely, “recall” and “precision” (Davis, J., & 
Goadrich 2006). This section will discuss how consideration 
of knowledge worker attitude toward AI during the accuracy 
metric setting may alleviate part of the AI safety risks. Two 
examples have shown the trade-off between “recall” and 
“precision” from an AI safety perspective. To this end, a bi-
nary classifier has been used as an example, assuming it is 
operating in the “augmentation mode”:   
 
Example 3: The second example has been used as a reference 
in Example 3, which will figure out for a “delegator” person-
ality which accuracy metric is safer.  
 
Example 4: In this example, the same type of user has been 
considered, a delegator. However, due to the new setting of 
the classifier model, its safe accuracy metric is different from 
the one in Example 3 
  
Example 3.  

sion matrixes:  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Confusion matrixes of Example 3 
 
Model B is much safer for Jess, delegator, considering it 
has the less False Negative error rate. Since she may blindly 

may deceive her easily. To this end, if the “recall” is the ba-
sis of model selection, part of the safety issue will be re-
solved.  
 
Example 4.  
Elizabeth is a mother of a nine years old girl and is currently 
working part-time as a teacher. She is a fan of YouTube primar-
ily because of its powerful movie recommender system. Eliza-
beth just realized that her girl, Emma, sometimes likes to watch 

and leave Emma alone to watch the rest of the film. 
 
 
Figure 4. Confusion matrixes of Example 4 
Let's see which metric suits Elizabeth's movie recommender 
system. For simplicity, assume there is a total of 260 free 
movies available on YouTube which 60 of them are suitable 
for kids. There are two AI models, which identify the "suit-
able for kids" movie with the below confusion matrixes:  
 
Since she may blindly follow AI, she accepts any AI rec-
ommender system recommendations. Thus a confident rec-
ommender system, higher precision, should be used by 
Elizabeth. Therefore Model A is much safer for Elizabeth, 
delegator.  
 
Note. Per these two examples, It is evident that the preferred 
performance metric is different for the same decision-mak-
ing archetype. The reason is that for Example 3, the AI sys-
tem is picking a high-risk entity, while in the second one, it 
is recommending a safe entity. Thus, just the structure of the 
classifier is also of importance in using the correct perfor-
mance measurement metric.  
 
How decision-making archetype change the 
consequence of AI based decision? : Confu-
sion matrix perspective (Section 4) 
 
Now it is clear that organizations should identify the AI-
powered product safety issues and proactively mitigate 
them. To this end, they need a holistic risk assessment plan, 
which ultimately makes those risks more visible and easier 

 
 
to be dealt with. The risk matrix is a well-known method 
that has been widely used in academic and industry entities, 
and its taxonomy will be used in this section (Garvey, & 
Lansdowne 1998). This assists us in measuring the risk con-
sequence of AI-based system decisions for “Skeptic” and 
“Delegator” knowledge workers. Those consequences can 
be one of the following ones, namely, insignificant, minor, 
moderate, major, and catastrophic. The confusion matrix 
shows how different outcomes of a given classifier lead to 
an unsafe situation.  Example 1, Insurance Company, is used 
for this mapping and presented the risk consequences.  
 
Table 1. The consequence of AI based decision for skeptic 
and delegator decision-making archetypes 
 
Skeptic 
Delegator 
False Positive 
NA 
The range of insignif-
icant to major 
True Positive 
The range of 
minor to cat-
astrophic 
NA 
True Negative 
NA 
NA 
False Negative 
NA 
Moderate to Cata-
strophic 
 
Lets explore some of these consequences:  
 
Skeptic Knowledge worker: Since the Skeptic 
knowledge worker ignores the AI-based system 
recommendation, just the consequence of such in-
teraction has been reported in Table 1. If the organ-
ization is unaware of such an attitude, while the AI 

knowledge worker may expose the organization to 
this risk. There is a range of consequences  out of 
this attitude:  
o 
First scenario/ Minor to moderate: The 
Skeptic knowledge worker is referring the 

teractor” or “ delegator” and acting per AI 
system recommendation.   
o 
Second scenario/ Major and cata-
strophic: The Skeptic knowledge worker 

ganization to severe risk.  
 
Delegator 
Knowledge 
worker: 
when 
the 
knowledge worker blindly accepts AI system rec-
ommendations, the AI errors directly expose the 

o 

it may expose the organization to a differ-
ent range of consequences. For example, 
if it was related to the payment, ignoring 
it may lead to some fees penalties, losings 
its credit, customers disappointment, to 
name a few. These can be placed as mod-
erate to major consequences. The conse-
quence can also be insignificant or minor 
when the Delegator Knowledge worker 
refers it to her interactor Knowledge 
worker, who again checks the AI system's 
recommendation. 
o 
False-negative: The consequence of this 
error generally is higher than the “false 
positive” 
error. 
If 
the 
Delegator 
Knowledge worker responds to this 

from the range of Major to catastrophic 
based on the harmful level of the Scam 

her interactor Knowledge worker, the 
consequence can be less severe if the for-
mer identifies its malicious intention.  
 
The discussed the consequences of AI system safety issues 
could 
be 
severe 
for 
the 
organization 
when                      
“Delegator”/“Skeptic” knowledge workers are in place. 
Thus, those organizations should plan to align their 
knowledge workers with the AI system before deployment. 
Otherwise, we should expect a couple of failures even with 
a robust and accurate AI-based system due to the misalign-
ment, specifically in the high stake context.   
 
Note. It should be noted the three types of end-user’s atti-
tude towards are the main one while we have some subhier-
archy under each of them. For example, the person may 
show herself be the Interactors while actually she is some 
between “Interactors” and “Delegators”. For example Ste-
venson and Doleac studied how judges are interacting with 
an algorithmic risk assessments which have been adopted as 
an aid to judicial discretion in felony sentencing. They found 
that “ judges' decisions are influenced by the risk score, 
leading to longer sentences for defendants with higher 
scores and shorter sentences for those with lower scores”. 
Those judges can be categorized as end users which are in-
teracting by AI model but at the same time transfer part of 
their authority to the algorithmic risk assessment model.  
Automatic decision-making based AI systems: 
The role of decision-making archetype from 
AI Safety perspective (Section 5) 
In Section 4, the consequences of AI safety have been dis-
cussed for the “augmenting mode” having “Delega-
tor”/“Skeptic” knowledge workers in place. Those conse-
quences will be studied for the “automatic mode” in this sec-
tion. As a general rule, the safety check should be much 

 
 
more demanding when the AI system is used in the auto-
matic mode. Studying the consequences of these systems 
safety issues in the automatic mode is the first step for a rig-
orous safety check. The outcome of such investigation can 
be a “binary decision”: “changing the operation mode 
from “automatic to the augmentation mode.”  While Au-
tomatic AI systems themselves may raise many safety issues 
and accidents, considering their post-deployment stage may 
add other types of accidents. The consequences of these ac-
cidents for the kinds of attitudes towards AI systems are dis-
cussed in this section.  
 
Figure 5. The consequences of AI base system risk’s accidents 
during interaction with “interactors” 
Firstly, the consequences of AI base system risk accidents 
in the automatic mode during interaction with “interactors” 
is discussed. Figure 1 depicts the consequences of such de-
ployment under different scenarios.  It starts with the as-
sumption that whether using the AI system in such a mode 
is the “right decision” or not. It is evident that the conse-
quence of AI base system risk accidents, when used in the 
wrong mode of automation, is much higher than when its 
operation in the automatic mode is correct. Another factor 
that changes those consequences is the authority power of 
the knowledge worker. The interactor knowledge worker 
with the “override” authority can mitigate some accidents 
on the spot; otherwise, the consequences of accidents are 
much severe.  If the knowledge worker decides to fight with 
the decision and stop using AI or prevent its operation, the 
risk should be much lower compared with the time when the 
individual cannot stop it. Thus, in summary:  
 
The upper part of the figure lists the possible con-
sequences of AI system when is deployed for the 
correct application in the automatic mode consid-
ering an individual with “interactor” type. 
 
The lower part shows the consequences when the 
AI system is deploying wrongly in the automatic 
mode. 
The consequence of the AI system is automatic when we 
have knowledge workers with "skeptics" or "delegators" 
personalities pretty similar since both of them naturally do 
not interact with the AI system, figures 6 & 7. 
 
 
Figure 6. The consequences of AI base system risk’s accidents 
during interaction with “Skeptics” 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The consequences of AI base system risk’s accidents 
during interaction with “Delegators” 
 
Note. The listed consequences of Automatic AI base system 
risk’s accidents during interaction with “Delegators”, “ In-
teractors,” and “ Skeptics” are the high-level ones. Each or-
ganization should expand such a matrix with a more fine-
grained approach by going down to sub-tasks of those AI 
base systems considering the type of knowledge workers in-
teracting with the AI system sub-tasks. 
 
Conclusion 
By now, it is clear that the human factor itself may make the 
AI-based decision unsafe, as explored in Section 4 and Sec-
tion 5. It has been discussed how each decision-making ar-
chetype may create a hazardous outcome for two general 
types of decision making, namely, (i) augmented decision 
(Section 4) and (ii) automatic decision (Section 5). The or-
ganizations can develop a customized risk matrix using the 
ones presented in Table 1 and figures 6-8 for the specific AI-
based system and a given decision. They can identify the 
knowledge worker who interacts with the system and pro-
pose a mitigation strategy based on their decision-making 
Skeptics
Right decision  
Minor to major 
risk
Wrong 
Decision 
Major to 
Catastrophic 
risk
Delegators
Right decision  
Minor to 
moderate risk
Wrong 
Decision 
Major to 
Catastrophic 
risk

 
 
archetype. One effective strategy is revising the job alloca-
tion using the matrix risk inputs. This may lead to assigning 
knowledge workers whose decision-making archetypes 
align with the AI-based system’s operation within the organ-
ization. Another strategy is implementing a proactive over-
sitting mechanism to mitigate detected risks. In some cases, 
the organization may change its process to be aligned with 
its human resources and capacity of the AI-based system.
