Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
1 
PERSONALIZED EXPLANATION FOR MACHINE 
LEARNING: A CONCEPTUALIZATION 
 
Research paper 
 
Schneider, Johannes, University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein, 

Handali, Joshua Peter, University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein, 

Abstract 
Explanation in machine learning and related fields such as artificial intelligence aims at making 
machine learning models and their decisions understandable to humans. Existing work suggests that 
personalizing explanations might help to improve understandability. In this work, we derive a 
conceptualization of personalized explanation by defining and structuring the problem based on prior 
work on machine learning explanation, personalization (in machine learning) and concepts and 
techniques from other domains such as privacy and knowledge elicitation. We perform a categorization 
of explainee data used in the process of personalization as well as describing means to collect this data. 
We also identify three key explanation properties that are amendable to personalization: complexity, 
decision information and presentation. We also enhance existing work on explanation by introducing 
additional desiderata and measures to quantify the quality of personalized explanations. 
 
Keywords: Explainable artificial intelligence, Interpretable machine learning, Personalization, 
Customization, Interactive machine learning 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
2 
1 
Introduction 
Techniques to extract knowledge from data, such as machine learning (ML) and related fields such as 
artificial intelligence, have been growing rapidly in importance over the last years. Automatic decision-
making utilizing techniques from these areas increasingly support, or even replace, human decision 
making in many areas such as computer vision, speech recognition and natural language processing 
(Goodfellow et al., 2016). This is partially grounded in the emergence and improvement of complex 
techniques such as deep learning, which has pushed the state-of-the-art for multiple problems 
(Goodfellow et al., 2016). Unfortunately, complex techniques are often hard to understand for humans, 
earning them the title “black boxes”. As a consequence, research is often driven by empirical evaluation 
comparing performance metrics without a thorough qualitative understanding. Furthermore, systems 
involving such techniques are often deemed non-trustworthy since they are susceptible to surprising 
errors, ie. they can be fooled in ways humans cannot (Nguyen et al., 2015). These facts underpin the 
need for explanations enabling a deeper understanding. Interest in explanation has also grown due to 
legislation, ie. the European parliament introduced the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in 
2018. It grants individuals the right for “meaningful explanations of the logic involved” for outcomes 
involving automated decision making.  
To obtain meaningful and easy to understand explanations, the literature on ML has already expressed 
the need to focus on humans rather than just on technical aspects of ML (Adadi and Berrada, 2018; 
Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Došilović et al., 2018; Kirsch, 2017; Ras et al., 2018). The need for 
explanations that are tailored to individuals (personalized explanations) has also been emphasized. The 
person (or group of persons) for whom explanations are intended (explainee), must provide data on 
herself (explainee data). To get meaningful information on explainees from raw data, sophisticated 
knowledge extraction and preference elicitation might be needed. Explainee data together with data used 
for non-personalized explanation of ML models serves as input to personalized explanation methods. 
A personalized explanation method might analyze internals of a ML model, its decision (eg. predicted 
class label) as well as training (and test) data in combination with explainee data and derived information 
thereof. It might attempt to extract a model of the explainee’s decision process and align it with the ML 
model, eg. by identifying and comparing features found in both models.  
The existing literature, however, has almost exclusively adopted the idea of personalized explanation, 
when personalization was part of the task performed by the ML model. For example, in recommendation 
systems that utilizes information on individuals such as submitted product reviews to derive predictions, 
the idea of personalized explanations has been expressed (Zhang et al., 2014). Thus, the idea to first 
collect data from the explainee, and then utilize it to improve explanations has been largely absent in 
the existing literature. This work attempts to close this gap by discussing both steps. We provide an 
overview of the current state of personalization in explanation of ML. We provide a framework covering 
desiderata of personalized explanations, dimensions that can be personalized, what and how information 
can be obtained from individuals and how this information can be utilized to customize explanations. 
Finally, we also discuss on how to evaluate personalized explanation methods. We do so by surveying 
and synthesizing existing literature on “explanation in machine learning”, “personalization in machine 
learning” and from other domains. The structure of the paper is as follows: After laying out the 
methodology (Section 2), providing background information (Section 3) and conceptualizing 
personalized explanation (Section 4), we elaborate on explainee data in Section 5, discuss personalized 
explanation methods in Section 6 and, finally, present means for evaluation in Section 7.   
2 
Methodology 
To develop a conceptualization, we utilized and adapted concepts, methods and ideas synthesized to a 
large extend in systematic literature reviews conducted by fellow researchers in ML (Explanation, 
Personalization and Fairness), Personalization, Privacy and Knowledge Elicitation.  
Since personalized explanation in ML is an emerging field relying on many other areas, it seems suitable 
to a qualitative review approach such as a narrative literature review (King and He, 2005). For 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
3 
reproducibility a more structured approach is preferable. We adjusted the method of Webster and 
Watson (2002). That is, we performed forward and backward searches, derived a concept matrix, but 
deviated in the process of literature selection. We utilized established online databases from computer 
science as well as information systems such as IEEE Xplore and the AIS and ACM libraries. The 
development in ML is very rapid with seemingly well-renowned authors publishing their articles on the 
“arxiv.org” platform year or more before conference proceedings are available. Many articles are not 
published in journals at all. Thus, to give the reader the most up-to-date view, we included conference 
articles as well as articles from “arxiv.org” after careful consideration. As keywords we utilized the 
above listed area names (eg. personalization, explanation in ML). We limited the scope by appending 
“survey” and “review”. For the results, we expanded the search using forward and backward search. We 
read titles and abstracts to filter relevant work. Our focus was not to provide a historical overview in all 
related areas of “Personalized explanation in ML” but to derive a conceptualization including recent 
developments. In particular, with respect to explanation methods in ML, which is under very rapid 
development, we were limited to choosing the most prominent techniques based on citations, references 
in surveys and suitability for personalization based on our derived concepts. Still, we point to surveys 
for a more detailed overview. This narrowing of articles is a limitation of our work.  
3 
Background 
Personalization has been studied in multiple areas (Fan and Poole, 2006) such as e-commerce, 
computer science and cognitive sciences. Our work covers aspects from cognitive science during user 
modelling, ie. we make “assumptions about users’ goals, interests, preferences and knowledge based on 
an observation of behaviour [or other sources of information]”, but also from computer science, when 
it comes to implementing user models into an IT system, ie. we provide a platform that “supports 
individualized information inflow and outflow” (Fan and Poole, 2006). To personalize, information such 
as preferences or task knowledge must be obtained. Special elicitation techniques might be required, in 
particular to extract tacit knowledge, which is hard to express verbally or in writing (Dieste and Juristo, 
2011). 
Personalization in ML occurs in two ways: ML has been used as a means for personalization, but it 
has also been subject to personalization itself. Examples of the former include ML algorithms for 
recommender systems (Cheng et al., 2016), web personalization and search (Chen and Chau, 2004). 
Personalization of ML includes works on interactive ML (Amershi et al., 2014; Kulesza et al., 2015), 
where one seeks to improve an ML model using an iterative design process involving potentially domain 
experts with little ML knowledge. In contrast, personalizing explanation refers to personalizing the 
explanations themselves.  
To “explain” means “to make known, to make plain or understandable” (“explain”, 2018). The related 
term “interpret” can be defined as “to explain or tell the meaning of” (“interpret”, 2018). Explanation 
seeks to answer questions such as: what, why, why not, what if, and how to (Lim et al., 2009). Gregor 
and Benbasat (1999) proposed the following explanation types: i) trace or line of reasoning, ii) 
justification or support, iii) control or strategic, and iv) terminological. The literature is not concise on 
using the terms. We prefer the term “explain”, since we are less interested in the meaning of ML 
outcomes than in understanding those outcomes. 
Earlier studies on explanation in ML such as by Huysmans et al. (2011) often investigated models 
deemed easily explainable such as decision trees. For more complex ML models, a large amount of 
techniques has been developed recently (Guidotti et al., 2018; Ras et al., 2018).  
4 
Personalized explanation in machine learning 
Personalized explanations in ML refers to deriving explanations of ML models and decisions targeted 
to individuals as described in the introduction. To deepen the understanding, we outline desiderata of 
personalized explanation, introduce key concepts based on work on personalization and explanation. 
Then, we test the concepts for soundness and completeness by using them to characterize existing work 
on personalized explanation. 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
4 
4.1 
Desiderata of Personalized Explanation 
Existing desiderata for explanation methods apply also to personalized explanation. Additional aspects 
such as privacy as well as effort for obtaining information of an explainee are also relevant: 
 Fidelity – degree to which the explanation matches the input-output mapping of the model (Guidotti 
et al., 2018; Ras et al., 2018) 
 Generalizability – range of models to which the explanation method can be applied (Ras et al., 2018) 
 Explanatory Power – scope of questions that the explanation can answer (Ras et al., 2018) 
 Interpretability – degree to which the explanation is human understandable (Guidotti et al., 2018). 
Fürnkranz et al. (2018) further distinguish an objective measure of the explanation’s capability to aid 
the explainee in performing a task (comprehensibility) and a subjective measure of the explainee’s 
acceptance of the explanation (plausibility). 
 Effort – effort that an individual needs to undertake to provide additional data needed for 
personalization as well as the effort needed for interpretation of an explanation. The latter depends, 
for instance, on the complexity of the explanation. Effort for data collection only refers to data that 
is collected with the sole purpose of obtaining personalized explanations. Thus, if data on the 
explainee is already available, eg. as part of the training data for the ML model to be explained, the 
effort is zero. The effort for the explainee might range from answering a few simple questions to 
repeatedly providing feedback on proposed explanations based on careful analysis. 
 Privacy – degree to which data on the explainee is collected, stored and used. Privacy is a key concern 
if information could become available to “adversaries”, ie. malicious parties. In such a case, privacy 
might be violated even if only anonymous data is compromised (de Montjoye et al., 2015). 
Information on the explainee could be highly sensitive such as IQ allowing to determine a user’s 
cognitive abilities or rather insensitive such as obtaining a user’s preferred explanation method.  
 Fairness – degree to which explanations are egalitarian (Binns, 2017; Kusner et al, 2017). While the 
notion of fairness is multi-faceted, a possible goal is to provide explanations of the same quality 
(fidelity, generalizability, interpretability, effort) for each individual 
4.2 
Conceptualization 
We introduce five concepts: explanation methods, personalizable explanation properties, data and 
information collection, personalization granularity, and personalization automation. The first two 
concepts are based on ML explanation and the other three are on personalization. We extend Fan and 
Poole’s (2006) categories (“What, to whom and who personalizes?”) by adding a fourth dimension 
“How?” that describes different methods for personalized explanation.  
Personalizable explanation properties are characteristics of an explanation that can be customizable, 
ie. adjusted based on explainee data. We identified three key explanation properties below.  
 
Complexity – refers to the size or number of elements of an explanation, eg. rule length or decision 
tree depth, and amount of relationships between features presented in an explanation, eg. correlation 
(Paulheim, 2012) or conjunction (Fürnkranz et al., 2018). 
 Prioritization of decision information – refers to selection of information to present in an explanation. 
This include the choice of features, their relationships or examples. It is applicable on the feature 
space and input space. The former prioritizes by constructing an explanation using a subset of 
features or feature relationships. The latter refers to the subset of examples used to generate 
explanations. For example, a hypothetical disease diagnosis method with thousands of exemplary 
diagnoses of patients. To explain the diagnosis of a specific patient case to a pediatrician, a 
personalized explanation that uses examples might choose patient cases of children over adults. 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
5 
 Presentation – refers to an explanation’s presentation form, eg. the choice between numbers and 
colors to depict intensity or between natural language or logical expression to present decision rules. 
The explanation methods can be classified according to their result (Molnar, 2018). The result of an 
explanation method influences how personalization may be done due to their diversity of explanation 
strategies and representations. The following four methods are adapted from the literature (eg. Adadi 
and Berrada, 2018; Lipton, 2017; Molnar, 2018; Ras et al., 2018): 
 Feature attribution – pointing out how each feature affects the decision, eg. features importance. 
Feature attribution can explain the relationships between a model’s intermediate components, eg. 
between two layers of a neural network. An attribution method points out how each contributor 
affects the attribution target.  
 Example-based – returning data instances as examples to explain the model’s behavior. They can be 
chosen from the dataset (eg. a specific target instance or representative instances) or newly created 
(eg. perturbed in order to serve as counterfactuals). 
 Model internals – returning the model’s internal representations, eg. structure of a decision tree, 
regression model, or feature visualization of a neural network. 
 Surrogate model – returning an intrinsically interpretable, transparent model which approximates the 
target black-box model, eg. LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016). This model is in turn interpreted using other 
explanation methods, ie. feature attribution, example-based, or model internals. 
Data and information collection indicates how data and information from the user, in our case the 
explainee, is obtained. Information can refer to knowledge, eg. how a user solves the task, or to user 
preferences, eg. preferred colors in displays. Implicit information collection refers to information which 
is obtained regardless of whether explanations are needed or not. This means, the information is part of 
the training data of the ML model, for example in recommender systems (Zhang and Chen, 2018). In 
contrast, explicit information collection, information is acquired using a process that might be separate 
from training data collection. 
Personalization granularity focuses on “to whom to personalize”, ie. a category of individuals or a 
specific individual.  Findings on social identity indicate (Fan and Poole, 2006) that people might behave 
more according to values and concerns associated with a social group in certain situations. 
Categorization might be a crude form of personalization, eg. we might simply categorize users into 
experts or non-experts, instead of assessing different dimensions related to expertise and customizing 
along each dimension.  
Personalization automation focuses on “who does the personalization” (Fan and Poole, 2006), ie. 
manual personalization done by the explainee or automatic personalization by the system providing 
explanations. Manual personalization corresponds to an explainee actively setting the explanation 
parameters, eg. choosing the number of features to visualize. 
We acknowledge that there are alternatives to our conceptualization. For instance, there are multiple 
options for classifying explanation methods in recent work aside from (Molnar, 2018), eg.  (Adadi and 
Berrada, 2018; Lipton, 2017; Ras et al., 2018). One might also add a concept for “types of explanations” 
containing among others counterfactual and contrastive explanations (Miller, 2018). Other properties 
such as local and global interpretability (Guidotti et al., 2018) and explanation purpose (Ras et al., 2018) 
might be added. However, they might also be treated as given, ie. they might be implicit based on the 
task and, thus, not be subject to personalization.  Furthermore, “types of explanations” can be 
personalized using our framework. For example, “prioritization of decision information” supports 
personalized counterfactual explanations by choosing counterfacts relevant to the explainee, while 
explanation methods such as example-based supports implementing counterfactual explanations.  
4.3 
Categorization of existing work  
We assess existing work with respect to the concepts in Section 4.2. A summary is shown in Table 1. 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
6 
 
Personalizable 
Explanation 
Properties 
Explanation 
Methods 
Data and 
Information 
Collection 
Personaliz. 
Granularity 
Personaliz. 
Automation 
Reference 
Complexity 
Prio. Features 
Presentation 
Feat. attribution 
Example-based 
Model Internals 
Surr. Model 
Implicit 
Explicit 
Individual 
Category 
Automatic 
Manual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Lage et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wang et al., 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Ribeiro et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Narayanan et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Fürnkranz et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Ross et al., 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Li et al., 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Wu et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chen et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chang et al., 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhang et al., 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Olah et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Ribeiro et al., 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lim et al., 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
() 
 
 
Dhurandhar et al., 2018 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sokol and Flach, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhang et al., 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quijano-Sanchez et al., 
2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lundberg and Lee, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koh and Liang, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Montavon et al., 2018 
Table 1. 
 Prior work categorized using concepts for personalization in ML. The   symbol 
indicates that a concept applies. () indicates that a paper only addresses one 
member of a categorization. 
With respect to personalizable explanation properties, two operationalisations are observed for 
complexity, namely size and interaction between features (Fürnkranz et al., 2018; Narayanan et al., 
2018). The former refers to measures such as rule length or tree depth, while the latter refers to 
interactions such as disjunctions or conjunctions. Adjustments on prioritized features are mainly done 
on explanations for recommender systems, except for the work presented in (Ross et al., 2017). As for 
adjustments on presentation, prior work compared explanation presentations such as textual with 
graphical (Chen et al., 2018; Quijano-Sanchez et al., 2017) and word tags with natural language texts 
(Chang et al., 2016). 
We only listed a subset of prominent explanation methods, for a more detailed and comprehensive 
treatment we refer to surveys from Adadi and Berrada (2018), Guidotti et al. (2018), Ras et al. (2018) 
and Zhang and Chen (2018). In terms of explanation methods, the majority of methods use feature 
attribution as explanations through saliency methods (eg. Chen et al., 2016; Montavon et al., 2018; 
Zhang et al., 2018) as well as feature importance values (Lundberg and Lee, 2017). Example-based 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
7 
explanations generate their examples differently, eg. as class prototypes (Li et al., 2017) or most 
influential training data (Koh and Liang, 2017). Explanations of model internals include, for example, 
presenting decision rules from decision trees (Lim et al., 2009) or visualizing neurons of a neural 
network (Olah et al., 2018). Surrogate models from methods such as LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) can be 
explained using other explanation methods, ie. feature attribution, example-based, and model internals. 
For example, given a decision tree is chosen as surrogate model, it can be explained by feature 
attribution.  
Implicit information collection is common in recommender systems (Chang et al., 2016; Chen et al., 
2018; Quijano-Sanchez et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2014). On the other hand, interactive explanation 
interfaces (Olah et al., 2018; Sokol and Flach, 2018) incorporate manual adjustments by the explainee, 
which may be seen as explicit information collection. Other works in ML explanations used feedback 
from human subjects to improve explanation interpretability. For example, using explanations from 
experts as an additional model constraint (Ross et al., 2017). Lage et al. (2018) asked a user to evaluate 
multiple models for explanations. Users were supposed to learn to solve the task, ie. image classification 
based on the explanations provided. The model giving the explanations that resulted in highest 
prediction accuracy by users was chosen. 
Multiple works mention some form of personalization. Group personalization is mostly done for only 
one member of a category, for example, evaluating the method on non-experts on ML (Ribeiro et al., 
2016) or domain experts (Wu et al., 2018). In contrast, Lim et al. (2009) differentiates explainees by 
their prior knowledge on the explanation method, while Quijano-Sanchez et al. (2017) use personality 
as one of their explainee categories. As for those which addressed individual personalization, they are 
either: i) allowing only manual personalization or ii) they are recommender systems explanations. 
Manual personalization is enabled either via explanation interfaces (Olah et al., 2018a; Sokol and Flach, 
2018) or allowing the incorporation of Bayesian priors (Wang et al., 2016). Explanations for 
recommender systems are often personalized due to the nature of the task (and the training data). For 
example, reviews from individuals (Zhang et al., 2014) or browsing activities (Chang et al., 2016) serves 
as training data for the ML model as well as explainee data used for explanations.  
To summarize, a systematic treatment of personalized explanations on a conceptual level is absent. 
Furthermore, existing methods do not cover the entire design space of existing explanation methods, eg. 
automatic personalization techniques using explicit information collection have not been developed for 
ML in general for both individuals and categories. This is despite the acknowledgement that an 
explanation’s interpretability may vary considerably between explainees (Kirsch, 2017; Ras et al., 2018; 
Tomsett et al., 2018). 
5 
Explainee Data and Information 
We describe what data and information can be collected on an explainee and how to obtain it. 
5.1 
Kinds of Explainee Information 
Our synthesis of work on personalization and explanation in ML yielded four categories of explainee 
data: i) prior knowledge – what an explainee knows, ii) decision information – what information an 
explainee uses for decision making, iii) preferences – what an explainee likes and prefers, and iv) 
purpose – what the explanation is used for. 
Prior knowledge is partitioned into ML knowledge and task domain knowledge: 
Machine Learning Knowledge refers to the explainee’s expertise regarding the ML method to be 
explained. One might distinguish based on explainee roles such as ML engineers or end users, implying 
a certain level of knowledge (Ras et al., 2018). For example, different levels of deep neural network 
(DNN) knowledge are described in (Ras et al., 2018): i) Knowledge about detailed mathematical theories 
and DNNs principles, ii) knowledge to train and integrate DNN models into a final application, and iii) 
no DNN knowledge, ie. neither theories nor implementation. 
Task Domain Knowledge refers to the users’ domain knowledge on the task at hand, eg. a doctor or a 
patient using a disease recognition system (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017). The nature of the user’s 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
8 
expertise inﬂuences what level of sophistication they expect in their explanations. For example, domain 
experts may prefer a somewhat larger and sophisticated model—which conﬁrms facts they know—over 
a smaller, more opaque one (Lavrač, 1999). 
Decision information refers to the information utilized by an explainee when she performs the ML task. 
The information might be rooted in domain knowledge but it might also stem from ML or general 
knowledge or experiences. It is one of the most important criteria for interpretability of explanations 
(Miller, 2018), namely coherence with prior beliefs. For example, for an image recognition task decision 
information could be which parts of the image the user would have used to classify that image.  
Decision information might be gathered at different levels, ie. training data and feature level. One might 
ask an explainee what data samples justify his explanations the most. For example, two doctors might 
have been exposed to the same patient information during their training, but they might assign different 
relevance to patient cases. Extracted features from the data by an individual (and their importance) for 
decision making also constitutes decision information. For instance, a person might deem colors of 
objects more important than shapes in image recognition. 
Decision information might be collected before any explanation have been made or afterwards, eg. using 
feedback or answers to questions on the computed presentations might be used in an iterative manner to 
improve explanations (Fails and Olsen Jr, 2003). As the explanation better represents the user’s prior 
beliefs, it may become less faithful to the model, ie. fidelity might decrease. Still, there might be multiple 
possible explanations which are further filtered by individuals (Miller, 2018) and might lead to similar 
fidelity. 
Preferences refer to a subjective prioritization of options of an explainee that are not necessarily 
relevant for any objective measure of the explanation quality such as objective interpretability. But they 
might strongly impact a person’s feeling towards an explanation or her acceptance (plausibility). 
Preferences include, for example, information such as user’s importance rating or constraints with 
respect to the desiderata of the model (eg. level of privacy a user wishes to maintain), the desired level 
of detail of the explanation, the time or effort a user wants to invest to obtain in understanding the 
explanation, presentation form and employed line of reasoning (eg. explaining based on prototypes or 
using general rules).  
Purpose refers to the intended use of an explanation. Prior work on explanation has derived purpose 
based on functional roles (Ras et al., 2018; Tomsett et al., 2018), eg. end user, developer or data subject. 
Lipton (2017) lists reasons why ML interpretability is desired, namely trust, causality, transferability, 
informativeness, and fair and ethical decision making. The purpose might also be seen as obtaining an 
answer to explanatory questions, ie. what, how and why (Miller, 2018). Explainable artificial 
intelligence presented in (Adadi and Berrada, 2018) mentions justify, control, improve and discover. 
With respect to personalization, we add the goal of persuasion, which aims at changing someone’s 
beliefs through reasoning and argument. Persuasion is a common theme in recommender systems 
(Cremonesi et al., 2012). 
Further information that can be found in the literature on personalization such as “prior experience 
with the system” might also be utilized. 
5.2 
Obtaining Explainee Data and Information 
Preferences can be elucidated using multiple techniques ranging from traditional means to computer 
aided methods (Chen and Pu, 2004). Extracting ML and task domain knowledge as well as decision 
information can be done using knowledge extraction methods (Hoffman et al., 1995; Liou, 1992). The 
techniques differ strongly based on whether the required information is tacit or explicit. A person might 
find it difficult to express tacit knowledge, eg. to identify what she utilizes in her decision process. But 
it might be relatively easy for a person to judge whether she is an expert on a topic or not (explicit 
knowledge) or state the purpose of the explanation.  Elicitation techniques empirically analyzed in 
(Dieste and Juristo, 2011) are classified based on (Hoffman et al., 1995) into three categories as follows: 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
9 
 
Analysis of familiar tasks – investigating what explainees do when performing tasks under their 
usual condition, eg. protocol analysis, unobtrusive observation, or simulated task 
 
Interviews – asking explainees directly, eg. using unstructured or structured interviews 
 
Contrived techniques – investigating what explainees do when performing modified tasks, eg. 
scaling, sorting, or hierarchical structuring. An exemplary technique is the repertory grid 
(McGeorge and Rugg, 1992). It can be applied to ML problems such as classification. The goal is 
to elucidate information on how people classify elements by first selecting a group of elements 
representing a relevant aspect of the domain. Significant constructs are identified by presenting three 
elements and asking how two are similar and thus different from the third.  
Interviews are suitable to elicit explicit knowledge. Eliciting tacit knowledge of an explainee can be 
done with ML techniques (Webb et al., 2001). In this case, analysing familiar tasks and contrived 
techniques can be used to classify these ML techniques as shown in Table 2. 
Category 
Exemplary Works 
Analysis of 
familiar tasks 
Usage log, eg. from web (Geng and Tian, 2015), browsers (Chang et al., 2016) based on 
mouse cursor traces (Schneider et al, 2017) or executed commands (Damevski et al, 2017) 
Protocol analysis, eg. sharpening important parts of an image (Das et al., 2017) 
Contrived 
techniques 
Sorting, eg. assigning document relevance (Maddalena et al, 2016), annotating video (Prest 
et al, 2012) or ML expl. (Ross et al., 2017), selecting images of a concept (Kim et al., 2018) 
Table 2. 
Exemplary ML techniques to elicit tacit knowledge 
Hoffman et al. (1995) put a strong emphasis on knowledge elicitation from experts. Other (overlapping) 
categorizations have been derived for related tasks. For instance, to learn user profiles (Montaner et al., 
2003) distinguish three categories in the context of recommender systems: i) manual – the explainee 
explicitly states the required information, ii) stereotyping – collecting explainee data based on group 
memberships, and iii) training set – collecting explainee’s logs of tasks relevant to the explained ML 
model. 
Collecting, processing and storing explainee data raises privacy concerns. They must comply to data 
protection regulations, eg. the European parliament’s GDPR. It is crucial to acknowledge and handle 
the diversity of explainees’ perceived personalization and privacy trade-offs (Xu et al., 2011, Awad and 
Krishnan, 2006; Toch et al., 2012). A survey by Awad and Krishnan (2006), for example, shows a 
paradox where consumers who are less willing to provide personal information value information 
transparency the most. Toch et al. (2012) proposed a framework that depicts this trade-off regarding the 
degree of users’ privacy control. 
6 
Personalized Explanation Methods 
Personalized explanations can be created using a two-step process, namely: i) customizing explanation 
properties and ii) generating the personalized explanation. 
6.1 
Customizing explanation properties 
A personalized explanation is obtained by adjusting explanation properties making use of explainee data 
and taking into account the explanation method as illustrated in Table 3. We first discuss how explainee 
data affects each explanation property. Then, we elaborate on how to adjust to the explanation method. 
Explainee data relevant to personalize an explanation’s complexity are ML knowledge, task domain 
knowledge, cognitive ability and effort willing to spend on explanation. More complex explanations 
may suit more knowledgeable explainees willing to spend more time on explanations. 
Prioritization of decision information can be done, eg. according to the explainee’s task domain 
knowledge. Using a disease recognition task as an example, doctors might understand more medical 
terms than patients leading to different terms used in the explanation, but even two doctors might use 
different symptoms to diagnose. A more visual example is given by the saliency map in Figure 1. An 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
10 
attribution technique might highlight certain areas contributing most strongly to the decision, ie. the 
body of the bird. A personalized method for users focusing on heads might emphasize more the head 
detailed characteristics of it such as eyes or beak as shown in Figure 1. The visible differences 
between the two explanations raise the question, whether the input and output behaviour of the ML 
model and the explainee are aligned (fidelity). If the ML model would not arrive at the same decision 
using the prioritization of features based on explainee data, ie. primarily relying on the bird’s head, the 
personalized explanation might be inappropriate due to its lack of fidelity. 
 
      
 
Figure 1. 
Saliency maps for explanation with personalization focusing on heads (right, own 
figures) 
Explainee data on ML knowledge and purpose are relevant to personalize the presentation of an 
explanation. For example, using an image saliency map highlighting relevant parts for the decision might 
be enough to convince non-experts of the model’s accountability. For ML experts who want to improve 
the model, however, adding feature visualization might be useful. 
 
 
Attribution 
Example-based 
Model Internals 
Surrogate Model 
Comp-
lexity 
Number of features 
and/or classes 
Selection of 
contributor and target, 
eg. feature-feature or 
input-output 
Number of examples 
Complexity of 
examples 
 
Size, eg. depth or 
length 
Feature relationships 
Type of 
representation, eg. 
feature visualization 
Type of surrogate 
model, eg. decision 
tree, decision rules, 
or linear regression. 
Explanation method 
of surrogate model 
Prioritized 
Decision 
Information 
Features to present 
Examples to present 
Features most char-
acterizing examples 
Features and their 
relationships to 
present 
Features and their 
relationships to use 
and present 
Presentation 
Choice of visualizat- 
ion technique 
Structuring of  
examples 
Choice of visualizat- 
ion technique 
Choice of visualiz- 
ation technique 
Table 3. 
Exemplary use of explainee data for different explanation methods and properties 
Complexity of attribution methods can be personalized by adjusting the number of presented 
contributors, eg. length of a feature list (sorted by importance), and number of attribution targets, eg. the 
number of classes to analyze. The relationships between contributors, ie. inputs or lower level features, 
and attribution target, ie. outputs and higher level features, can also contribute to complexity. For 
example, it might be difficult to understand relations between features hidden in model internals, as the 
features extracted by the model might differ to the ones used by the explainee. In contrast, an explainee 
might be more familiar with inputs and outputs. Moreover, personalization can be done by using relevant 
features to an explainee in prioritizing decision information, eg. selecting explainee’s relevant features 
in the case of ties on features importance as shown in Figure 1. Presentation is personalized via the 
selection of visualization technique, eg. highlighting words in sentences or a word list. 
An example-based explanation may show examples from one or more categories. Categories might be 
pre-defined such as classes of the input data or based on other information, ie. predicted class 
probabilities grouped into “low, medium, high”. Complexity is personalized by adjusting the number 
and complexity of examples, eg. their level of detail. To prioritize decision information, ie. to select 
examples, examples might be taken that best cover features relevant to the explainee. With regards to 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
11 
presentation, examples can be shown with or without structure. An example for a structured presentation 
is to lay out the examples on a grid based on their similarities as shown in Figure 2, where a feature 
reduction method, t-SNE (van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008), is used to map the Olivetti face dataset to 
a two-dimensional grid. Applying such feature reduction methods to features extracted from a ML 
model, eg. a neural network, allows an explainee to understand better what samples the model considers 
as similar and dissimilar. 
 
Figure 2. 
t-SNE visualization for faces adapted from van der Maaten and Hinton (2008) 
Personalization of model internals depends on its representation. Complexity is personalized by 
adjusting a model’s size, eg. sparseness of a linear model, and features relations, eg. presence of 
conjunctions in a decision rule, to match the explainee’s expertise. The type of representations also 
contributes to complexity, eg. explaining a neural network by feature visualization or its decision tree 
approximation. Explainee’s relevant features can be prioritized by selecting model internals which 
involves those features. For example, selecting a decision tree which includes explainee’s relevant 
features or providing visualizations of neurons which corresponds to those features. Another example is 
to select decision rules which are close to the explainee’s decision making rules. Presentation is 
personalized through selecting appropriate visualization techniques and forms. For example, an 
explainee may prefer decision rules to be presented in natural language or using imagery as illustrated 
in Figure 3 (Chen et al., 2018). It is essential to strike a balance between the listed desiderata of 
personalized explanations such as fidelity and interpretability. Explanations relying primarily on 
features, which are relevant for an explainee, might lead to high interpretability, but low fidelity. 
 
Figure 3. 
Examples of textual and visual explanations adapted from Chen et al. (2018) 
There are multiple surrogate models and, thus, the first step in personalization is to choose an 
appropriate model, eg. for LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) the choice is between sparse linear models and 
decision trees. The selection might depend on the explainee’s familiarity with models as well as 
complexity constraints. Personalization might alter the way a surrogate model is built and, also, how it 
is explained. For illustration, when a decision tree is chosen as surrogate model, a subset of features, 
which is used to train the decision tree, can be selected as part of personalization. After the decision tree 
has been trained, again a subset of features can be selected, which is then presented to the explainee. 
The choice of the explanation method, ie. attribution, example-based, or model internals, of the surrogate 
model itself, is also part of personalization. 
6.2 
Post-hoc and intrinsic methods 
There are two approaches from interpretable ML, namely, post-hoc and intrinsic explanation, illustrated 
in Figures 4 and 5, respectively. Both methods might be iterative. That is, an explainee might provide 
feedback on the provided explanation, which in turn yields an improved explanation. 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
12 
 
 
Figure 4. 
In- and outputs of intrinsic personalized explanation methods 
Intrinsic personalization seeks to find and train ML models that optimize two goals at the same time, 
ie. solving the decision task and providing explanation of the decisions (Figure 4). An intrinsic 
personalized model learns, eg. features relevant to the explainee and of complexity defined by the 
explainee. Ross et al (2017) use a neural network’s explanation as a training constraint. Expert annotated 
images are used as the ‘right reasons’ for classifying an image. The differences between the experts’ 
and model’s explanations are then minimized. This approach can be personalized by using for each 
model a separate annotation source.  Wu et al. (2018) regularized a neural network by the depth of its 
decision tree approximations. Apart from constraining features used and degree of complexity, another 
approach is personalizing the training data. For instance, the ML model might be trained using only data 
with which an explainee is familiar with. This may cause the ML model to mimic the explainee’s 
decision making process, eg. as in an explainable recommender system (Zhang et al., 2014). 
 
 
Figure 5. 
In- and outputs of a ML model (top) and a post-hoc personalized explanation method 
(bottom) 
Post-hoc personalization seeks to personalize explanations from trained (non-personalized) ML 
models. It provides explanations without altering the ML model trained on the original task. It might 
have access to explainee data that is not used by the ML model solving the task. This approach is 
applicable to personalize all three explanation aspects, ie. complexity, prioritization of decision 
information and presentation. For example, in an interface to explain a convolutional neural network 
(Olah et al., 2018), the explanation methods, eg. feature visualizations or saliency maps, can be adjusted 
directly by the explainee. Another example relates to decision rules, that is, a decision rule is selected 
as an explanation among multiple valid decision rules based on its precision (Ribeiro et al., 2018). In 
terms of personalization, this selection can be based, eg. on the presence of explainee’s relevant features 
in the rule. Another example is presented in (Chen et al., 2018), here an item recommendation is visually 
explained by marking certain parts on the item’s image. They personalized the visual explanations by 
marking item features which are relevant to the explainee, ie. different explainee with the same 
recommended item might get different visual explanations. 
7 
Evaluation of personalized explanation methods 
Evaluation of desiderata of explanation methods in general is discussed in (Adebayo et al., 2018; 
Guidotti et al., 2018; Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Ras et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2016, 2018). Though 
existing work captures useful concepts for evaluation. Overall they are fairly sparse, ie. Adadi and 
Berrada (2018) found in their review that only 5% of all papers deal with evaluating and quantifying 
explainability methods. The operationalization of these concepts in terms of mathematical ways of 
measuring is also underexplored. Here we focus on modifications of existing concepts towards 
personalization as well as on criteria that only apply for personalization. 
Fidelity can be evaluated by measuring how well the explanation represent the black-box model’s 
behaviour. For example, when using a transparent model as an explanation, fidelity can be evaluated by 
measuring the agreement between the transparent model’s and black-box model’s predictions (Guidotti 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
13 
et al., 2018; Lakkaraju et al., 2017). Evaluating fidelity of a non-personalized and personalized 
explanations for a particular explainee is identical. Additionally, a comparison between fidelity and 
interpretability measurements of a non-personalized and personalized explanations helps to evaluate the 
trade-off in choosing one explanation over the other. 
An important aspect of generalizability is the range of explainee data a personalization method can 
incorporate, eg. whether it can include both user’s ML knowledge and task domain expertise or not.  
As for evaluating interpretability, two kinds of measures are formulated in (Fürnkranz et al., 2018): i) 
an objective measure of the explanation’s capability to aid the explainee in performing a task 
(comprehensibility) and ii) a subjective measure of the explainee’s acceptance of the explanation 
(plausibility). The objective part can be evaluated through measuring explainee performance, eg. the 
response time and accuracy in simulating a model’s decision (Lage et al., 2018; Narayanan et al., 2018; 
Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2018). Another objective measure would be measuring 
the explainee’s understanding about the explained model. For example, whether explainees can identify 
incorrect predictions of a model (Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2018). Whereas the subjective measure is 
often evaluated through explainee rating on aspects such as plausibility, usefulness, surprisingness, non-
triviality, trustworthiness, or overall satisfaction (Fürnkranz et al., 2018; Narayanan et al., 2018; 
Paulheim, 2012). Explainee’s acceptance can also be evaluated indirectly. In Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. 
(2018) trust is evaluated by measuring the differences between the model’s and explainee’s predictions. 
Another approach is to use the proportion of predictions made by explainees after receiving the 
explanations, ie. if they were confident enough to make a prediction or not (Ribeiro et al., 2018). A 
taxonomy of interpretability evaluation proposed in Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017) consists of 
application-grounded, human-grounded and functionally-grounded evaluation. 
Effort can be quantified using time the explainee requires to provide the information and to make sense 
of an explanation. Cognitive load of the explainee to provide information might also be assessed, eg. 
using eye-tracking systems (Buettner, 2013) or using mental effort ratings and performance scores (Paas 
and van Merriënboer, 1993). 
Privacy can be measured using a variety of measures often formulated in terms of what an adversary 
targeting to obtain confidential information can actually achieve (Wagner and Eckhoff, 2018). It 
depends on the adversarial model, eg. whether an adversary has access only to information stored 
permanently (eg. on disc) or to temporary information (eg. in main memory) or whether she can only 
listen to communication (eg. Internet traffic) or listen to all keystrokes and mouse movements of a user 
(Goodrich and Tamassia, 2011). Suitable output measures in our context might be information gain, ie. 
how much an adversary learns about the explainee, or uncertainty, ie. the size of the crowd from which 
an individual cannot be distinguished from. 
Fairness can be assessed by computing the distribution of the prior metrics (fidelity, generalizability 
etc.) across explainees. Larger spread of the distribution is an indicator for low fairness. More complex 
methods from fairness in machine learning (Kusner et al, 2017) might also be adapted. 
8 
Conclusion 
Developing explainee-centric methods for explaining ML models might enhance interpretability. Better 
explanations are not just relevant due to legislation or to improve existing ML models, but also to create 
new possibilities for emerging fields such as “machine teaching”, ie. machines teaching humans.  
Despite efforts towards this goal, our review has indicated significant gaps. We discovered that explicit 
information collection from explainee is rarely done. Furthermore, our conceptualization revealed that 
personalized explanation methods differ from conventional explanation methods in aspects such as 
taking into account an explainee’s privacy and effort for collecting data from explainees. 
 

Schneider and Handali/Personalized Explanation for Machine Learning: A Conceptualization 
Twenty-Seventh European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2019), Stockholm-Uppsala, Sweden. 
14
