arXiv:2201.02874v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2022
Assessing Policy, Loss and Planning Combinations
in Reinforcement Learning using a New Modular
Architecture
Tiago Gaspar Oliveira
INESC-ID / Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Lisbon, Portugal

Arlindo L. Oliveira
INESC-ID / Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Lisbon, Portugal

Abstract—The model-based reinforcement learning paradigm,
which uses planning algorithms and neural network models, has
recently achieved unprecedented results in diverse applications,
leading to what is now known as deep reinforcement learning.
These agents are quite complex and involve multiple compo-
nents, factors that can create challenges for research. In this
work, we propose a new modular software architecture suited
for these types of agents, and a set of building blocks that can
be easily reused and assembled to construct new model-based
reinforcement learning agents. These building blocks include
planning algorithms, policies, and loss functions 1.
We illustrate the use of this architecture by combining several
of these building blocks to implement and test agents that
are optimized to three different test environments: Cartpole,
Minigrid, and Tictactoe. One particular planning algorithm,
made available in our implementation and not previously used
in reinforcement learning, which we called averaged minimax,
achieved good results in the three tested environments.
Experiments performed with this architecture have shown
that the best combination of planning algorithm, policy, and
loss function is heavily problem dependent. This result provides
evidence that the proposed architecture, which is modular and
reusable, is useful for reinforcement learning researchers who
want to study new environments and techniques.
Keywords: Deep Reinforcement Learning, Model-Based Rein-
forcement Learning, Neural Networks, Architecture, Implemen-
tation.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 2016, a program called AlphaGo [17] beat a Go world
champion for the ﬁrst time. Go was seen as the new milestone
of artiﬁcial intelligence since the former world chess cham-
pion, Gary Kasparov, lost to DeepBlue in 1997 [6]. Go was
ﬁnally mastered using reinforcement learning (RL), neural
networks and a search algorithm. Following this achievement,
an even more powerful program called AlphaGo Zero [19]
was created, learning exclusively from playing against itself,
indicating the strong potential of deep reinforcement learning
(DRL).
It is not that any of those elements brought anything
completely new to the ﬁeld, but it was the ﬁrst time they
were assembled together and achieved outstanding results.
The search component allowed deep reinforcement learning
to reach a completely new level. Following this line of
algorithms, two other very successful agents were created:
AlphaZero, a generalized version of AlphaGo Zero, that
became the best player in chess, shogi and Go; and MuZero,
1A modeular Python3 implementation
is available
at the location
https://github.com/GaspTO/Modular MBRL
a program that achieved the same outstanding results, but was
not given even the rules of the game, which were learned as
it played. Learning without being given the structure of the
state space is, of course, very important since most of real-
world problem dynamics do not have a clear set of rules that
can be explained to a computer beforehand.
Despite all of this, there remains an overwhelming barrier
concerning the more extensive use of these algorithms in
a wider range of problems. The computational resources
used to train these models were much higher than what is
usually available to researchers (AlphaZero used more than
5000 ﬁrst-generation Tensor Processing Units [18]). It is
only normal that, after their success, the research on these
algorithms has been increasing, trying to make them more
practical to use [4, 8, 10, 12, 22].
State of the art reinforcement learning algorithms, espe-
cially these new model-based algorithms that use search, are
complex and involve multiple interacting parts. Implementing
these algorithms can be very time consuming, one of the
reasons being deep learning’s proclivity to fail silently due
to its adaptable nature, which often leads to a large amount
of time spent debugging and verifying code. It is not simply
practical to refactor and heavily recode the implementation
every time one wants to try and study different ideas. And,
even though there has been a recent effort to publish open
source implementations, these do not usually take their pos-
sible extensions into account and are hard to addapt. Our
work attempts to help with these problems by introducing a
modular software architecture for model-based reinforcement
learning (MBRL). Its objective is to separate the agent into
distinctive components and facilitate the implementation of
new strategies (the algorithms in each one of them), that can
be added without having to modify the other components.
The architecture should enable us to construct multiple agents
easily by choosing different strategy combinations.
We provide several different instantiations of the modules
of this architecture, using some common solutions for plan-
ning, policies and loss functions. One of the instances made
available, namely a new simple planning algorithm called
averaged minimax, performed well in the three environments
tested and may be competitive in other environments. We
also present a comparative study of the agents created by
combining different modules and show that the best agent
depends heavily on the nature of the speciﬁc problem being
addressed.

II. BACKGROUND
II-A. Reinforcement Learning
In reinforcement learning, an agent interacts with an en-
vironment, that is usually described as a Markov decision
process (MDP). At each time step t, the agent will decide
the next action, at, to take. The environment will receive
this action and transition its state, st, to the next one, st+1,
returning an associated reward rt. The agent continues to
interact with the environment until the episode reaches a
terminal state, originating a sequence of transitions, called
trajectory, s0, a0, r0, s1, a1, r1, s2...
These environments have the Markov property, meaning
that the result (next state and reward) after an action has been
taken depends solely on the current state and not on the prior
history of the current episode. In an MDP, there is a state
space S, an action space A, a probability function p(s′|s, a)
that calculates the likelihood of the agent ending in state s′ if
action a is chosen in state s, and a reward function r(s, a, s′)
that gives the reward associated with this transitions. These
two functions describe the dynamics of the environment, for
all s′, s ∈S and a ∈A.
There are also certain environments that have the Markov
property but where states are not completely visible to the
agent. These environments are formulated as a partially
observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). In these,
an agent has to act under the uncertainty of its current state,
only having access to an observation. MDPs are just special
cases of POMDPs.
II-B. Muzero
Muzero is a model based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
agent. It uses Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [9] to augment
the capacity of its state evaluation by looking ahead in the
state-space. In each iteration, the search will descend the
tree looking for a leaf node to expand, using a best-ﬁrst
formula that mediates between exploitation and exploration.
When expanding, it estimates a value for the leaf node’s state,
which inﬂuences and estimates a policy distribution for the
successors. The value estimated is added to the total value
of each node in the path descended and the average of these
values makes up the improved state value of that node, V (s).
The search repeats for a certain number of iterations and, in
the end, when it is time to choose an action to use in the real
environment, the successors of the root node deﬁne a policy
function, π, using their visit distribution:
π(a|s) =
N(s, a)1/τ
P
b N(s, b)1/τ ,
(1)
where N(s, a) is the number of visits associated with the
transition (s, a) and τ is a temperature parameter, inﬂuencing
the exploration/exploitation trade-off. The lower it is, the
greedier the policy becomes.
Muzero learns the environment by interacting with it,
and the states learned do not have speciﬁc semantics. The
environment is learned through a representation function,
hθ, that converts a real observation to a hidden state and
a dynamics function, gθ, that receives a hidden state and an
action and returns the next state and reward associated. The
policy and value are estimated by a prediction function, fθ,
which receives a hidden state as argument. An observation
from a played episode is sampled and is unrolled by applying
the representation function, converting it to an hidden state,
followed by applying the next k actions used in the episode
to the successive hidden states, using the dynamics function.
Then, the prediction function is used in each of these hidden
states, returning the policy and value estimations. To learn
these functions, the rewards obtained are updated to match
the observed ones. The policy is updated based on the
visit distribution given by the root node of the respective
observation and the value function is improved based on a
Monte Carlo value or by bootstrapping from an improved
state value.
III. ARCHITECTURE
AlphaGo Zero, AlphaZero, Muzero and other variations of
these algorithms [1, 8, 12] share a common structure and
behavior that we generalize into an architecture. This archi-
tecture has the objective of facilitating the process of making
changes and extensions in each key component, limiting the
complexity by using modularity. The reasoning behind it is
to identify key parts in these agents and implement each
of these parts as independently as possible, delegating the
responsibility to the user to assemble each block consistently,
according to the intended agent. We propose an architecture
with six different parts, which are called modules: Environ-
ment, Loss, Model, Planning, Policy and Data. We consider
every one of these components, except the Environment itself,
to correspond to the concept of an agent. The Loss, Model,
Planning and Policy modules determine how the agent acts
and learns, while the Data module concerns itself with the
storage of data to be used by the other four modules. The
purpose of each is to have alternative algorithms that can be
chosen to accomplish the module’s objective. The architecture
was conceived to make it easy to add a new algorithm to each
module, without having to refactor or recode anything else. A
simple scheme summarizing the structure of the architecture
is given in ﬁgure 1, where the arrows show dependencies
between modules.
Fig. 1. Basic architecture overview.
The agent interacts with an environment through a policy.
In each step of the episode, the policy will call a planning
algorithm to look ahead into the simulated state-space. After
the planning algorithm is done, it returns the root node (that
coincides with the current state) back to the policy. Based on
the attributes of this root node, the policy decides the next
action to take, advancing to the next state. The policy saves
the nodes and the data returned by its interactions with the

environment using the Data module. Then, this stored data
can be passed to a loss algorithm that calculates a loss value in
order to update the model. Lastly, the architecture establishes
the relationship between these blocks, but the user is the one
who has to assemble them. It has to instantiate all the speciﬁc
algorithms and then create the agent’s logic, which deﬁnes
when to call the policy is to receive data and when to call
the loss to update the model.
III-A. Environment
A RL agent interacts with a problem, which we call envi-
ronment. The agent needs to know how to interact with the
environment’s interface, but not vice-versa. We assume they
are implemented as POMDPs.
III-B. Model
This module’s function is to model not only the environment,
but also all the other functions required by the Planning mod-
ule. Different search algorithms might need new functions,
so it is important for this component’s implementation to
be efﬁcient and easily extendable. In this module, for the
functions we want to learn, we assume them to be computed
using neural networks, but do not make assumptions about
their internal structure. The architecture should support both
MBRL agents that learn the environment’s model and those
that receive a perfect one. In case this module is queried for
the next state after an action, if it knows the environment’s
dynamics, it can return the true next state. If it does not, it
returns an estimation.
III-C. Data
The function of the Data module is to store and transport
information between modules. We divide it into two sub-
modules. The ﬁrst is the Node submodule. A node coincides
conceptually with an environment state and it is created
by the planning algorithm to form the search graph/tree.
The particular node class used is dependent on each search
algorithm.
The second is the Game submodule and it stores all the
data seen during the episode, both by the environment (e.g.
observations) and the search trees returned by the planning.
III-D. Planning
We consider state-space planning algorithms. In these, actions
mediate transitions between two states. In traditional DRL
algorithms the agent estimates, at each step, the quality
of the possible actions available using a neural network.
The objective of the Planning module is to provide enough
information about each action, in a given step of the episode,
so the policy can choose the best possible action. However, it
does this differently from traditional DRL algorithms. Instead
of using a neural network alone to estimate the quality of
each action, it uses a search algorithm in conjunction with
the functions available in the model passed. The reasoning
behind using a search algorithm is to look ahead into the
future of the space of (hypothetical) states in order to provide
more accurate quality estimations about each action. This
module does not come up with a plan to use during the actual
interaction with the environment. In fact, it should not even
be aware of the existence of an episode. It simply makes
estimations just like a normal neural model would in a typical
DRL agent. The root node, which represents the current state
of the environment, and has attached to it the rest of the
tree, will be returned to the policy. Lastly, as mentioned,
the planning class should receive a model. How the model
works internally is irrelevant, as long as it can calculate all
the required functions.
III-E. Policy
The Policy module has two responsibilities. It decides the
action to take in every step of the episode, and it stores
the relevant data coming from the environment and plan-
ning in the Data module. The policy iterates through the
whole environment episode, balancing between exploration
and exploitation. In every step, it calls a search algorithm
receiving the root node corresponding to the current state.
Then chooses which action to take. It is also responsible
for storing the whole episode in an object of the Game
submodule. In the end, after completing an episode, it will
save in an object of the Game Module all the information
returned by the environment (observations, rewards...) and
the nodes returned by the planning.
Each policy should receive the instance of the planning
class to use. As long as the node returned by it has the
interface needed by the policy, every planning algorithm
should work. For instance, if the policy wants to use the
number of times an action has been chosen during search (as
in AlphaZero), then any search algorithm that returns a node
with this information (which is usually associated with best-
ﬁrst algorithms) should work. The user should call the policy
when it wants to acquire more data (in the form of Game
instances).
III-F. Loss
After interacting with the environment, the model should be
updated to be more accurate and insightful. This is done
by using the experience previously returned by the policy,
which is passed to a loss algorithm, returning a loss value,
a computational graph, that can then be used to update the
neural functions. Each speciﬁc loss algorithm is dependent
on the particular characteristics of the problem, so it does
not need to work for every node and game class. It is
the responsibility of the user to instantiate a policy (and,
as a consequence, a planning class) that returns compatible
data classes for the loss algorithm intended to be used. For
example, if we want to update a policy function using the
number of times a node has been visited during search (like
AlphaZero), we should use a planning algorithm that returns
a node class with the number of visits stored in each node,
which is usually associated with best-ﬁrst search algorithms.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe several environments and sev-
eral module instances available in the proposed architecture
and describe some examples of RL implementations using
different combinations.
IV-A. Environment
The environment is modeled as a POMDP and the interface
is similar to the openAI Gym environment [5]. In each step
of an episode, the agent executes an action, observing the
next state and reward. Unlike the Gym environments, ours
allows for multiple agents. Traditional problems where only
one agent acts upon are conceptualized as a single agent
problem. Another difference is the existence of illegal actions.
The Gym environments have a ﬁxed set of them in every

state. The way they handle the actions chosen that do not
make sense is by remaining in the same state and, often,
returning a negative reward to disencourage these actions.
The problem starts when we have more than one player. In
Tictactoe, for example, players play in an alternating order;
if the ﬁrst player chooses a non-empty position on the board,
under this solution, the player would still be the same in the
next turn, which would break the consistency between player
turns. The speciﬁc environments implemented are Tictactoe,
Cartpole [2] and Minigrid [7].
Cartpole. In Cartpole, the agent has to balance a pole,
which has one extremity ﬁxated on a moving cart, by applying
forces to the left and right of it. The environment has these
two actions and only one agent. The episode ends when the
pole is more than 12 degrees from its original position or the
cart is further than 2.4 units from the center. Optionally, we
can limit the maximum number of steps. The observation is
an array with four values: cart position, velocity, pole angle
and angular velocity.
Minigrid. This environment is a NxN grid. The agent
starts in one of the squares and the objective is to reach
a square goal. It has a direction and a position. The goal
square is ﬁxed, but we can optionally decide where the
agent starts or choose for it to start in a random square
every time the episode restarts. This environment is partially
observable, being able to observe a grid of 7x7 in each step.
The observations are given in 7x7x3 arrays. The rewards are
1 if the goal is reached and 0 otherwise. There are three
actions: turn left, right and move forward. All the actions are
always legal and when the agent tries to continue past a wall,
it simply does not move. Upon initializing this environment,
we can limit the number of steps.
Tictactoe. It is a game played by two agents in a 3x3
grid. The two take turns ﬁlling an empty position in the grid.
The ﬁrst to ﬁll three spaces in a row (horizontally, vertically
or diagonally) wins. The observation is an array composed
by two 3x3 arrays. The ﬁrst has 1 in the positions where
the current player has played and 0 otherwise, while the
second has 1 in the positions the adversary has played and 0
otherwise. When initializing the environment, we can decide
whether we want to play against an expert agent or we want
to do self-play, in which case the agents choose the actions
for both players. The expert agent has three levels. The level
0 plays randomly. The next will play like the previous except
if it sees moves that will block the third opponent piece in a
row. In level 2, it also recognizes immediate winning moves.
In self-play mode, the reward is always 0, except for a play
that leads to victory, which is 1. In single agent mode it
receives 1 if the action led to a victory, -1 to a defeat and 0
otherwise.
IV-B. Base Agent
Just like in the environment module, we implement alternative
algorithms in the agent’s modules, which will allow us to
compose different agents. However, there is a base idea
behind all of these. To simplify, we call this common base
the base agent.
Our base agent learns the model of the environment as it
interacts with it and, similarly to MuZero, the hidden states
learned do not have a speciﬁc semantics. It will learn how
to estimate the value of each state and the reward associated
with each transition. The idea introduced, however, is to learn
to predict the legal actions directly, so that it avoids exploring
and conducting updates based on illegal parts of the tree
during planning. MuZero avoids doing this using a policy
function which sets the exploration of those nodes to 0, but
this is unsuitable for algorithms that are non-best ﬁrst or for
those that are but estimate the value of the successors of the
leaf expanded, instead of the leaf itself. By predicting the
legal actions directly, our agent is much more compatible
with different planning strategies.
IV-C. Model
This module should be easy to extend in order to accom-
modate any new functions needed by new search algorithms.
The model should be used in the most efﬁcient way possible,
since deep learning computations can be time consuming.
The efﬁciency, however, is dependent on the internal structure
(the neural architectures used) and this needs to be easy to
change. For instance, AlphaZero shares the same initial layers
to calculate both the policy and value functions, which should
not be calculated twice, but reused, in case we need both of
them. To handle this, our implementation of the models has a
query method per type of input. For example, functions that
receive a state share the same query method between them,
but not with the functions that receive a state and an action
as arguments. Each function has an attribute key associated
with it that is passed to the respective query method when it
needs to be calculated. In this way, if we want to calculate
multiple functions (with the same input type), we make only
one call to a query method, pass all the keys accordingly
and the model decides internally how to calculate each one
of the requested functions, reusing the necessary calculations
for the highest efﬁciency. In practice, this is implemented
using a hierarchical class structure that allows the Planning
and Loss module to easily verify if the model passed to them
supports every needed functions.
There are ﬁve relevant functions used by our base agent.
The ﬁrst, representation function, hθ, receives an observation
and returns an encoded hidden state. The next two, state value
function, vθ, and mask function, mθ receive an encoded state
and return, respectively, the estimated value for that state
and a predicted mask vector for its successors. Each index
in the mask value represents whether the agent estimates
the action to be legal or illegal, respectively giving values
closer to 1 or to 0. The last two, reward, rθ, and next state,
gθ, functions receive an encoded state and an action and
return, respectively, the predicted reward associated with that
transition and the next predicted state.
We implement one speciﬁc model (disjoint multilayer per-
ceptron) that supports the previously described ﬁve functions.
Each one of them, internally, is computed by an independent
multi-layer perceptron.
IV-D. Data
Game submodule. We implemented only one class that
stores the information given by the environment during the
episode: observations, actions, rewards, legal actions and
players, and the data (nodes) returned by the planning al-
gorithm.
Node submodule. Different types of search strategies
might need different types of nodes. We implement three.
The ﬁrst one stores: a hidden state s; an improved state value
V (s); each successor’s hidden state, S(s, a), and their validity

value M(s, a), according to an action mask; the state’s player,
Pl(s); and the reward per transition, R(s, a). The second
node implemented is an extension of the ﬁrst. It is supposed
to be used by best ﬁrst algorithms and it stores, additionally,
the number of visits in the tree, N(s). Finally, the third node
is an extension of the second one and it is designed to be
used only by a Monte Carlo tree search. It stores a sum of
state value estimations, T (s), and it redeﬁnes the calculation
of the improved state value to be the average of them:
V (s) = T (s)
N(s).
(2)
IV-E. Planning
A search algorithm will receive the current observation,
player and action mask. After the search is done, it will
return a (root) node associated with the current state of
the environment. A tree structure resulting from the search
algorithm is attached to this node, recursively through node
successors. We will use interchangeably the term node and
state (since the properties stored in the node refer to its state).
We implemented four search algorithms. They all use the
ﬁve functions discussed before. An encoded state and a mask
vector are predicted for every state in the tree. We deﬁne the
action-value as
Q(sk, a) =

R(sk, a) + V (sk+1)
if Pl(sk) = Pl(sk+1)
R(sk, a) −V (sk+1)
otherwise
,
(3)
where sk+1 = S(sk, a). When relevant, we use a superscript
k to denote that the state sk was created looking ahead
k steps. We can think of it as depth of the state in a
hypothetical trajectory. The action-value can be seen as a
1-step bootstrapped value. We will also deﬁne the notion of
masked action-value,
QM(s, a) = M(s, a) · Q(s, a) +

1 −M(s, a)

· cpenalty
(4)
For a perfect mask, we see that if the state is valid then
the masked action-value is equal to the simple action-value.
Otherwise, it is equal to the penalty constant, cpenalty, which
penalizes state invalidity. Without the penalty, an invalid
successor will have the value of zero, which might still be
better than the alternative valid successors. An invalid state
should never be chosen so, in theory, the constant cpenalty
should be minus inﬁnity. However, in practice, the predicted
masks are not perfect so we have to choose a milder value,
such as a lower bound of the environment’s reward function.
The penalty term should only be used to choose an action,
not to estimate the value of a state.
The four algorithms implemented start in the same way.
They begin by creating the root node and the ﬁrst encoded
state using the representation function, hθ, based on the
observation passed as argument. If the environment has two
players, then its children nodes will be instantiated with
the opposite player. After this ﬁrst part, the algorithms start
differing.
Breadth First. There are two breadth ﬁrst algorithms:
minimax and a variation of our own that we call averaged
minimax. Both incrementally build a tree until depth d. In
each iteration, they gather all the current leaf states and
expand them until reaching the maximum depth, one depth
level at a time (in a breadth ﬁrst manner). During a node’s ex-
pansion, the expanded state’s mask, the successor’s encoded
state and the respective transition reward are predicted. If
the successor is at maximum depth, their state value is also
predicted. After the whole tree has been generated, the values
of the leaf states are propagated backwards until the root.
These two algorithms differ in the backup rule. For some
state s, the update rule in the averaged minimax is given by
V (s) ←
P
a∈A M(s, a) · Q(s, a)
P
a∈A M(s, a)
.
(5)
For a perfect mask, we can see that the value of each
state becomes the average of all the legal successor values.
On the other hand, in minimax, the best successor is the
one that maximizes the masked successor value, but, when
updating the actual state value, we assume the successor to
be completely valid:
V (s) ←Q(s, arg max
a
QM(s, a)).
(6)
Best First. The other two implemented algorithms are of
type best ﬁrst: Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) and best
ﬁrst minimax (BFMMS), both using a variation of the UCB
formula (used in the UCT algorithm [14]) to take into account
the mask, resulting in what we call masked upper conﬁdence
bound (MUCB). In each step of a best ﬁrst iteration, the next
action to be selected in a state, s, is given by
arg max
a

QM(s, a)+cmucb ·
s
log(N(s))
N(S(s, a)) + 1 ·M(s, a)

, (7)
where cmucb is a constant that mediates the intensity of the
exploration.
In an iteration, when expanding a leaf node, the states of its
successors and their state values are estimated. The rewards
and mask associated with these transitions are also predicted.
The difference between MCTS and BFMMS is also in the
backpropagation part. In BFMMS, the update rule is the same
as in minimax (equation 6). In MCTS, the backpropagation
will add, to each node, a path value, G, estimated after
expanding the leaf node. The value added to the leaf after
its expansion at depth d is the masked average of its newly
created successors
Gd =
P
a∈A M(sd, a) · Q(sd, a)
P
a∈A M(sd, a)
.
(8)
For every node in shallower depths after that, the added
quantity is recursively given by
Gk =

R(sk, ak) + Gk+1
if Pl(sk) = Pl(sk+1)
R(sk, ak) −Gk+1
otherwise
,
(9)
where 0 ≤k < d. In simpler words, G accumulates the
rewards as it backtracks. This path value is added to each
node and their improved state value is given by the average
of all of them
V (sk) ←
PN(sk)
i=0
Gk
i
N(sk)
.
(10)
IV-F. Policy
In each step, the policy will use the planning algorithm to
choose the next action. It will iterate with the environment
until the episode is over, saving the planning and environ-
ment’s data using the Game submodule. We implemented
three policies. The ﬁrst is an ǫ-value greedy. After calling
the planning algorithm and receiving the root node, it will
choose with 1-ǫ probability the action corresponding to the
highest action-value and choose a random one otherwise. The

second and third policies are only applicable to best ﬁrst
algorithms since they base their choice on the number of
visits. The second policy is ǫ-visit greedy, which does the
same as the ﬁrst policy, but, instead of the action-value, it
chooses based on the visits of each successor node. The third
policy, visit count, is given by a visit count distribution just
like in MuZero (equation 1).
IV-G. Loss
A loss class will receive a set of nodes and calculate a loss
value as tensor that can be used to update the model. Each
node has access to its game, which means it also has access
to all the actions, observations and nodes of its episode. We
implemented three loss algorithms. All of them use the same
unrolling process as MuZero and Value Prediction Networks
to update the reward and mask functions: The state of the
respective node is unrolled for k steps (the next k states are
predicted using the actions taken during the real episode).
The three losses differ in what target value to use to update
the model.
• Monte Carlo loss. In this loss algorithm the target value,
for a speciﬁc state, is the (discounted) sum of rewards
from that state until the end of the trajectory.
• Ofﬂine Temporal Difference. This is the one used in
Muzero, where the target value is bootstrapped from the
state n steps away from the current ones, which is stored
in the respective root node.
• Online Temporal Difference. If the agent uses a replay
buffer and reuses the same nodes for a long time,
the value stored in them can easily become outdated.
This loss is similar to the previous, but, instead of
using the improved state value, V (st+n), it applies the
representation function to the observation n steps after
the current one, st+n = hθ(ot+n), and uses the value
function to get a new value to bootstrap from, vθ(st+n).
If the unrolled states surpass the trajectory’s size, they are
modeled as absorbing states and the target value used with
them is 0.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we assess our implementation by creating
different agents for the three environments implemented.
For each environment, we look for the best combination of
planning, loss and policy options, in this order. In the ﬁrst
step we compare planning algorithms and select the most
promising one; in the second step we use the best planning
method selected and compare different losses; ﬁnally, in the
third step we keep the selected planning and loss options and
compare policies. In the end, we should ﬁnd a good agent
for each environment, although no warranties exist that it is
the optimum choice. For each experiment, the agent plays
a full episode, stores it and then conducts 10 updates, each
with a batch size of 128 nodes. The results are shown as a
function of training steps (the number of updates). In each
experiment, the criterion to select the best algorithm is to
choose the one with the highest mean score in the last step. As
default, the loss used is the Monte Carlo one and the policy
used is ǫ-value greedy, whose parameters can be seen in each
environment’s second and third experiment, respectively.
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE FINAL RESULTS OF THE AGENTS TESTED FOR
CARTPOLE.
Results for Cartpole
Planning
Loss
Policy
Max
Min
Mean
Avg. Minimax
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
463.0
188.6
377.4
Avg. Minimax
ON TD
ǫ-value greedy
393.3
255.5
334.4
Avg. Minimax
OFF TD
ǫ-value greedy
476.5
318.7
429.6
BFMMS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
450.7
119.5
231.6
Minimax
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
401.6
258.0
331.1
MCTS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
473.1
142.6
311.5
V-A. Cartpole
For Cartpole, we limit each episode to a maximum of 500
transitions and report, for each training step, the results as
the mean of the last 100 episodes. The Disjoint MLP has one
layer, each with 80 neurons, for every function. The encoded
state used has size 12. We use a uniform replay buffer with
a maximum capacity of 105 transitions. The masked penalty
is 0 as default. We repeated every experiment 10 times, each
for 104 training steps. The ﬁnal results for every experiment
for Cartpole can be seen in table I and ﬁgure 2.
Fig. 2. Results for Cartpole. From left to right: the experiences with Planning
and Loss.
1) Planning. The best ﬁrst algorithms use 16 iterations
and the breadth ﬁrst ones explore a maximum depth
of 4. The best algorithm was the averaged minimax,
which is used in the next experiments.
2) Loss. The loss algorithms use 10 unroll steps and a
gamma discount of 0.95. For the temporal difference
losses, the bootstrapping step is 10. The best loss was
the ofﬂine temporal difference.
3) Policy. There is only one policy that is compatible with
breadth ﬁrst algorithms. So, the averaged minimax with
ofﬂine temporal difference and ǫ-value greedy is the
best algorithm combination.
V-B. Minigrid
We use a 6x6 Minigrid environment. Each episode starts
at a random position and is limited to a maximum of 15
transitions. The Disjoint MLP has one layer of 100 neurons
per function and the hidden state has size 15. We use a
prioritized replay buffer with a maximum capacity of 25000
transitions. The masked penalty used is 0. We repeated every
experiment 10 times, each for 20000 training steps. The
results are given, per training step, as the mean score of the
last 100 episodes. The ﬁnal results for every experiment for
Minigrid can be seen in table II and ﬁgure 3.

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE FINAL RESULTS OF THE AGENTS TESTED FOR
MINIGRID.
Results for Minigrid
Planning
Loss
Policy
Max
Min
Mean
Avg. Minimax
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.90
0.60
0.76
BFMMS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.63
0.41
0.54
MINIMAX
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.91
0.71
0.79
MCTS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.99
0.76
0.87
MCTS
MC loss
ǫ-visit greedy
0.87
0.00
0.62
MCTS
MC loss
Visit dist.
0.33
0.22
0.26
MCTS
OFF TD
ǫ-value greedy
0.91
0.63
0.73
MCTS
ON TD
ǫ-value greedy
0.86
0.52
0.73
Fig. 3.
Results for Minigrid. From left to right: the experiences with
Planning, Loss for averaged Minimax, Loss for MCTS and Policy.
1) Planning. The number of iterations used by the best
ﬁrst algorithms is 27 and the breadth ﬁrst ones use a
depth of 3. MCTS was the best planning algorithm.
2) Loss. We use 7 unroll steps and a gamma discount
of 0.99 in every loss algorithm. For the temporal
difference losses, we use a bootstrapping step of 1. The
best loss was the Monte Carlo loss.
3) Policy. We use 5% exploration for the ǫ-greedy strate-
gies and a temperature of 1 for the visit distribution
policy. The best agent found was MCTS with Monte
Carlo loss and ǫ-value greedy.
V-C. Tictactoe
The agents are trained in this environment by doing self-
play. Every 5000 training steps, we play 100 games against
an expert agent (level 1 in our implementation) and report
the mean score. When playing against the expert we remove
exploration from the policy. The Disjoint MLP has one layer
of 100 neurons in every function, except in the next state
function, which has 200. The hidden state has a size of
32. We use a prioritized replay buffer with a maximum
capacity of 25000 transitions. The masked penalty is −1.
Each experiment is ran for 105 training steps and repeated
5 times. The ﬁnal results for every experiment for Tictactoe
can be seen in table III and ﬁgure 4.
1) Planning. The number of iterations used by the best
ﬁrst algorithms is 25 and the breadth ﬁrst ones use a
depth of 2. The best algorithm was the BFMMS.
2) Loss. We use 5 unroll steps and a gamma discount
of 0.99. For the temporal difference losses, we use a
bootstrapping step of 1. The ofﬂine temporal difference
was the best loss.
3) Policy. The policies use 5% exploration for the ǫ-
greedy strategies and a temperature of 1 for the visit
distribution policy, when training, and choose always
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF THE FINAL RESULTS OF THE AGENTS TESTED FOR
TICTACTOE
Results for Tictactoe
Planning
Loss
Policy
Max
Min
Mean
Avg. Minimax
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.28
0.01
0.14
BFMMS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.48
-0.02
0.29
BFMMS
OFF TD
ǫ-value greedy
0.54
0.39
0.48
BFMMS
OFF TD
ǫ-visit greedy
0.41
0.14
0.30
BFMMS
OFF TD
Visit dist.
0.53
0.45
0.48
BFMMS
ON TD
ǫ-value greedy
0.38
0.23
0.29
Minimax
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.21
0.12
0.14
MCTS
MC loss
ǫ-value greedy
0.35
0.02
0.25
Fig. 4.
Results for Tictactoe. From left to right: the experiences with
Planning, Loss for averaged Minimax, Loss for MCTS and Policy.
the best action when testing against the expert. There
is a tie between two agents, which use BFMMS and of-
ﬂine temporal difference, but differ in policy. One uses
the ǫ-value greedy and the other the visit distribution.
The combination that uses visit distribution as policy,
however, is, throughout the experiment, consistently
better than the one with ǫ-value greedy (ﬁg. 4)
V-D. Discussion
Every problem is different and the results captured for these
do not automatically guarantee the same for any other.
However, these have distinctive characteristics of their own,
making them good testbeds to see if our implementation
works. Cartpole has a strong reward signal, but is very long;
as opposed to Minigrid, which has a sparse reward signal but
short episodes. These last two do not have illegal actions,
which make them suitable to see if our implementation works
in common environments. Tictactoe, on the other hand, can
be seen as the ﬁnal challenge since it requires a good use of
the mask learned and it uses self-play used during training, a
technique known to be challenging in reinforcement learning.
In all of these, the best agents found achieved very good
results, reaching almost the maximum score in Cartpole and
Minigrid. For Tictactoe, the expert is good at defending
against obvious plays and it is not good at attacking, so it
is expected that a very good agent will win frequently when
it starts and tie when the opponent does, leading to a score
near 0.5. Our best agent gets very close to this value. The idea
of predicting a mask directly and the algorithm adaptations
described in this work seem to function well.
The most surprising result is the best planning algorithm
in Cartpole being the averaged minimax. This algorithm was
created by us in this work based on the very naive idea
of averaging over all successors in each node. Out of all
four algorithms, it is the only one that does not theoretically

converge to the minimax function. Still, it was better than all
the others in Cartpole; achieved a better result than BFMMS
in Minigrid and had the same result as minimax in Tictactoe.
Regarding the new loss, the online temporal difference, it
was not particularly better than the other two, but it was still
fairly consistent, achieving better results than Monte Carlo
loss in Cartpole and the same in Minigrid.
The most important observation, however, is that, for each
component, different algorithms were better according to
the environment. For example, the BFMMS, that was the
worst in Cartpole and Minigrid, was the best in Tictactoe.
Similarly, the visit distribution policy that got poor results
in the initial two, achieved the maximum mean score in
the third environment. This motivates the existence of ﬂexi-
ble, modular, architectures that facilitate the assessement of
different choices for policy, loss and planning approaches.
The existence of architectures that make such assessements
easier suggests the possibility of improving state of the
art MBRL agents, like Muzero, in certain environments,
by modifying their components and ﬁnding more suitable
algorithm combinations.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we presented a modular architecture that iden-
tiﬁes separate relevant components for MBRL agents that
use planning algorithms. Then we provided our own speciﬁc
implementation of this architecture, capable of searching in
domains with a variable set of actions in each state, by
learning an action mask directly. We implemented several
search algorithms, adapting them to the mask. One of them,
called averaged minimax, was proposed in this work and
yield surprisingly good results. Different loss methods, poli-
cies and environments were also implemented. Lastly, we
experimented this implementation by creating different agents
and demonstrated that it works and achieves good results
for the environments implemented. The experimentation done
seemed to indicate that the best algorithm combination in an
agent is problem dependent, motivating the need for tools that
facilitate the implementation and variation of the different
parts of an agent, like the ones introduced in this work.
VI-A. Future Work
This work was motivated by the need for tools that allow
extension, so it is only natural that we have some suggestions
about how to extend it. The most obvious suggestion is to
implement AlphaZero and MuZero and study if, by varying
some of their parts, it may be possible to bring the hardware
requirements down. If the hardware resources allow it, a
comparison, using more challenging environments, between
these agents and our implementation might be interesting.
Some other ideas are, for instance, teaching the model to
predict the observations perfectly; using every node in the
search tree as data [21]; add loss methods based on the TD(λ)
algorithm [20]; implement our base agent for the case of
non-deterministic environments (which is also a suggestion
described in the paper of Muzero [16]); add search algorithms
like A* [13], K-BFS [11], IDA* [15], B* [3], among other.
We do not expect our work to accommodate all possible
MBRL algorithms, as that would be too ambitious, but it
should be able to enable researchers to implement a very
diverse range of ideas that are common in reinforcement
learning research.
