Abstract—ECG Feature Extraction plays a significant role in 
diagnosing most of the cardiac diseases. One cardiac cycle in an 
ECG signal consists of the P-QRS-T waves. This feature 
extraction scheme determines the amplitudes and intervals in the 
ECG signal for subsequent analysis. The amplitudes and 
intervals value of P-QRS-T segment determines the functioning 
of heart of every human. Recently, numerous research and 
techniques have been developed for analyzing the ECG signal. 
The proposed schemes were mostly based on Fuzzy Logic 
Methods, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Genetic Algorithm 
(GA), Support Vector Machines (SVM), and other Signal 
Analysis techniques. All these techniques and algorithms have 
their advantages and limitations. This proposed paper discusses 
various techniques and transformations proposed earlier in 
literature for extracting feature from an ECG signal. In addition 
this paper also provides a comparative study of various methods 
proposed by researchers in extracting the feature from ECG 
signal. 
 
Keywords—Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Cardiac Cycle, 
ECG signal, Feature Extraction, Fuzzy Logic, Genetic Algorithm 
(GA), and Support Vector Machines (SVM). 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The investigation of the ECG has been extensively used for 
diagnosing many cardiac diseases. The ECG is a realistic 
record of the direction and magnitude of the electrical 
commotion that is generated by depolarization and re-
polarization of the atria and ventricles. One cardiac cycle in an 
ECG signal consists of the P-QRS-T waves. Figure 1 shows a 
sample ECG signal. The majority of the clinically useful 
information in the ECG is originated in the intervals and 
amplitudes defined by its features (characteristic wave peaks 
and time durations). The improvement of precise and rapid 
methods for automatic ECG feature extraction is of chief 
importance, particularly for the examination of long 
recordings [1]. 
The ECG feature extraction system provides fundamental 
features (amplitudes and intervals) to be used in subsequent 
automatic analysis. In recent times, a number of techniques 
have been proposed to detect these features [2] [3] [4]. The 
previously proposed method of ECG signal analysis was based 
on time domain method. But this is not always adequate to 
study all the features of ECG signals. Therefore the frequency 
representation of a signal is required. The deviations in the 
normal electrical patterns indicate various cardiac disorders. 
Cardiac cells, in the normal state are electrically polarized [5]. 
 
ECG is essentially responsible for patient monitoring and 
diagnosis. The extracted feature from the ECG signal plays a 
vital in diagnosing the cardiac disease. The development of 
accurate and quick methods for automatic ECG feature 
extraction is of major importance. Therefore it is necessary 
that the feature extraction system performs accurately. The 
purpose of feature extraction is to find as few properties as 
possible within ECG signal that would allow successful 
abnormality detection and efficient prognosis.  
 
 
Figure.1 A Sample ECG Signal showing P-QRS-T Wave 
 
In recent year, several research and algorithm have been 
developed for the exertion of analyzing and classifying the 
ECG signal. The classifying method which have been 
proposed during the last decade and under evaluation includes 
digital signal analysis, Fuzzy Logic methods, Artificial Neural 
Network, Hidden Markov Model, Genetic Algorithm, Support 
Vector Machines, Self-Organizing Map, Bayesian and other 
method with each approach exhibiting its own advantages and 
disadvantages. This paper provides an over view on various 
techniques and transformations used for extracting the feature 
from ECG signal. In addition the future enhancement gives a 
general idea for improvement and development of the feature 
extraction techniques.  
 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 
2 discusses the related work that was earlier proposed in 
literature for ECG feature extraction. Section 3 gives a general 
idea of further improvements of the earlier approaches in ECG 
ECG Feature Extraction Techniques - A Survey 
Approach 
   S.Karpagachelvi, 
 
       Dr.M.Arthanari, Prof. & Head, 
 
      M.Sivakumar, 
   Doctoral Research Scholar, 
        Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering,             Doctoral Research Scholar, 
   Mother Teresa Women's University,    Tejaa Shakthi Institute of Technology for Women,    Anna University – Coimbatore,            
   Kodaikanal, Tamilnadu, India.  
        Coimbatore- 641 659, Tamilnadu, India.                    Tamilnadu, India 

 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 8, No. 1, April 2010 
76
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

feature detection, and Section 4 concludes the paper with 
fewer discussions.  
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
ECG feature extraction has been studied from early time and 
lots of advanced techniques as well as transformations have 
been proposed for accurate and fast ECG feature extraction. 
This section of the paper discusses various techniques and 
transformations proposed earlier in literature for extracting 
feature from ECG. 
 
Zhao et al. [6] proposed a feature extraction method using 
wavelet transform and support vector machines. The paper 
presented a new approach to the feature extraction for reliable 
heart 
rhythm 
recognition. 
The 
proposed 
system 
of 
classification is comprised of three components including data 
preprocessing, feature extraction and classification of ECG 
signals. Two diverse feature extraction methods are applied 
together to achieve the feature vector of ECG data. The 
wavelet transform is used to extract the coefficients of the 
transform as the features of each ECG segment. Concurrently, 
autoregressive modeling (AR) is also applied to get hold of the 
temporal structures of ECG waveforms. Then at last the 
support vector machine (SVM) with Gaussian kernel is used to 
classify different ECG heart rhythm. The results of computer 
simulations provided to determine the performance of the 
proposed approach reached the overall accuracy of 99.68%. 
 
A novel  approach for ECG feature extraction was put forth 
by Castro et al. in [7]. Their proposed paper present an 
algorithm, based on the wavelet transform, for feature 
extraction from an electrocardiograph (ECG) signal and 
recognition of abnormal heartbeats. Since wavelet transforms 
can be localized both in the frequency and time domains. They 
developed a method for choosing an optimal mother wavelet 
from a set of orthogonal and bi-orthogonal wavelet filter bank 
by means of the best correlation with the ECG signal. The 
foremost step of their approach is to denoise (remove noise) 
the ECG signal by a soft or hard threshold with limitation of 
99.99 reconstructs ability and then each PQRST cycle is 
decomposed into a coefficients vector by the optimal wavelet 
function. The coefficients, approximations of the last scale 
level and the details of the all levels, are used for the ECG 
analyzed. They divided the coefficients of each cycle into 
three segments that are related to P-wave, QRS complex, and 
T-wave. The summation of the values from these segments 
provided the feature vectors of single cycles.  
 
Mahmoodabadi et al. in [1] described an approach for ECG 
feature extraction which utilizes Daubechies Wavelets 
transform. 
They 
had 
developed 
and 
evaluated 
an 
electrocardiogram (ECG) feature extraction system based on 
the multi-resolution wavelet transform. The ECG signals from 
Modified Lead II (MLII) were chosen for processing. The 
wavelet filter with scaling function further intimately similar 
to the shape of the ECG signal achieved better detection. The 
foremost step of their approach was to de-noise the ECG 
signal by removing the equivalent wavelet coefficients at 
higher scales. Then, QRS complexes are detected and each 
one complex is used to trace the peaks of the individual 
waves, including onsets and offsets of the P and T waves 
which are present in one cardiac cycle. Their experimental 
results revealed that their proposed approach for ECG feature 
extraction achieved sensitivity of 99.18% and a positive 
predictivity of 98%. 
 
A Mathematical morphology for ECG feature extraction 
was proposed by Tadejko and Rakowski in [8]. The primary 
focus of their work is to evaluate the classification 
performance 
of 
an 
automatic 
classifier 
of 
the 
electrocardiogram (ECG) for the detection abnormal beats 
with new concept of feature extraction stage. The obtained 
feature sets were based on ECG morphology and RR-intervals. 
Configuration adopted a well known Kohonen self-organizing 
maps (SOM) for examination of signal features and clustering. 
A classifier was developed with SOM and learning vector 
quantization (LVQ) algorithms using the data from the records 
recommended by ANSI/AAMI EC57 standard. In addition 
their work compares two strategies for classification of 
annotated 
QRS 
complexes: 
based 
on 
original 
ECG 
morphology features and proposed new approach - based on 
preprocessed ECG morphology features. The mathematical 
morphology filtering is used for the preprocessing of ECG 
signal. 
 
Sufi et al. in [9] formulated a new ECG obfuscation method 
for feature extraction and corruption detection. They present a 
new ECG obfuscation method, which uses cross correlation 
based template matching approach to distinguish all ECG 
features followed by corruption of those features with added 
noises. It is extremely difficult to reconstruct the obfuscated 
features without the knowledge of the templates used for 
feature matching and the noise. Therefore, they considered 
three templates and three noises for P wave, QRS Complex 
and T wave comprise the key, which is only 0.4%-0.9% of the 
original ECG file size. The key distribution among the 
authorized doctors is efficient and fast because of its small 
size. To conclude, the experiments carried on with 
unimaginably high number of noise combinations the security 
strength of the presented method was very high. 
 
Saxena et al in [10] described an approach for effective 
feature extraction form ECG signals. Their paper deals with an 
competent composite method which has been developed for 
data compression, signal retrieval and feature extraction of 
ECG signals. After signal retrieval from the compressed data, 
it has been found that the network not only compresses the 
data, but also improves the quality of retrieved ECG signal 
with respect to elimination of high-frequency interference 
present in the original signal. With the implementation of 
artificial neural network (ANN) the compression ratio 
increases as the number of ECG cycle increases. Moreover the 
features extracted by amplitude, slope and duration criteria 
from the retrieved signal match with the features of the 
original signal. Their experimental results at every stage are 
steady and consistent and prove beyond doubt that the 
composite method can be used for efficient data management 
and feature extraction of ECG signals in many real-time 
applications.  
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 8, No. 1, April 2010 
77
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

 
A feature extraction method using Discrete Wavelet 
Transform (DWT) was proposed by Emran et al. in [11]. They 
used a discrete wavelet transform (DWT) to extract the 
relevant information from the ECG input data in order to 
perform the classification task. Their proposed work includes 
the following modules data acquisition, pre-processing beat 
detection, feature extraction and classification. In the feature 
extraction module the Wavelet Transform (DWT) is designed 
to address the problem of non-stationary ECG signals. It was 
derived from a single generating function called the mother 
wavelet by translation and dilation operations. Using DWT in 
feature extraction may lead to an optimal frequency resolution 
in all frequency ranges as it has a varying window size, broad 
at lower frequencies, and narrow at higher frequencies. The 
DWT characterization will deliver the stable features to the 
morphology variations of the ECG waveforms. 
 
Tayel and Bouridy together in [12] put forth a technique for 
ECG image classification by extracting their feature using 
wavelet transformation and neural networks. Features are 
extracted from wavelet decomposition of the ECG images 
intensity. The obtained ECG features are then further 
processed using artificial neural networks. The features are: 
mean, 
median, 
maximum, 
minimum, 
range, 
standard 
deviation, variance, and mean absolute deviation. The 
introduced ANN was trained by the main features of the 63 
ECG images of different diseases. The test results showed that 
the classification accuracy of the introduced classifier was up 
to 92%. The extracted features of the ECG signal using 
wavelet decomposition was effectively utilized by ANN in 
producing the classification accuracy of 92%. 
 
Alan and Nikola in [13] proposed chaos theory that can be 
successfully applied to ECG feature extraction. They also 
discussed numerous chaos methods, including phase space and 
attractors, correlation dimension, spatial filling index, central 
tendency measure and approximate entropy. They created a 
new feature extraction environment called ECG chaos 
extractor to apply the above mentioned chaos methods. A new 
semi-automatic program for ECG feature extraction has been 
implemented and is presented in this article. Graphical 
interface is used to specify ECG files employed in the 
extraction procedure as well as for method selection and 
results saving. The program extracts features from ECG files. 
 
An algorithm was presented by Chouhan and Mehta in [14] 
for detection of QRS complexities. The recognition of QRS-
complexes forms the origin for more or less all automated 
ECG analysis algorithms. The presented algorithm utilizes a 
modified definition of slope, of ECG signal, as the feature for 
detection of QRS. A succession of transformations of the 
filtered and baseline drift corrected ECG signal is used for 
mining of a new modified slope-feature. In the presented 
algorithm, filtering procedure based on moving averages [15] 
provides smooth spike-free ECG signal, which is appropriate 
for slope feature extraction. The foremost step is to extort 
slope feature from the filtered and drift corrected ECG signal, 
by processing and transforming it, in such a way that the 
extracted feature signal is significantly enhanced in QRS 
region and suppressed in non-QRS region. The proposed 
method has detection rate and positive predictivity of 98.56% 
and 99.18% respectively. 
 
Xu et al. in [16] described an algorithm using Slope Vector 
Waveform (SVW) for ECG QRS complex detection and RR 
interval evaluation. In their proposed method variable stage 
differentiation is used to achieve the desired slope vectors for 
feature extraction, and the non-linear amplification is used to 
get better of the signal-to-noise ratio. The method allows for a 
fast and accurate search of the R location, QRS complex 
duration, and RR interval and yields excellent ECG feature 
extraction results. In order to get QRS durations, the feature 
extraction rules are needed.  
 
A method for automatic extraction of both time interval and 
morphological features, from the Electrocardiogram (ECG) to 
classify ECGs into normal and arrhythmic was described by 
Alexakis et al. in [17]. The method utilized the combination of 
artificial neural networks (ANN) and Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) techniques for feature extraction. Five ECG 
features namely RR, RTc, T wave amplitude, T wave skew 
ness, and T wave kurtosis were used in their method. These 
features are obtained with the assistance of automatic 
algorithms. The onset and end of the T wave were detected 
using the tangent method. The three feature combinations used 
had very analogous performance when considering the 
average performance metrics.  
 
A modified combined wavelet transforms technique was 
developed by Saxena et al. in [18]. The technique has been 
developed to analyze multi lead electrocardiogram signals for 
cardiac disease diagnostics. Two wavelets have been used, i.e. 
a quadratic spline wavelet (QSWT) for QRS detection and the 
Daubechies six coefficient (DU6) wavelet for P and T 
detection. 
A 
procedure 
has 
been 
evolved 
using 
electrocardiogram parameters with a point scoring system for 
diagnosis of various cardiac diseases. The consistency and 
reliability of the identified and measured parameters were 
confirmed when both the diagnostic criteria gave the same 
results. Table 1 shows the comparison of different ECG signal 
feature extraction techniques. 
 
A robust ECG feature extraction scheme was put forth by 
Olvera in [19]. The proposed method utilizes a matched filter 
to detect different signal features on a human heart 
electrocardiogram signal. The detection of the ST segment, 
which is a precursor of possible cardiac problems, was more 
difficult to extract using the matched filter due to noise and 
amplitude variability. By improving on the methods used; 
using a different form of the matched filter and better 
threshold detection, the matched filter ECG feature extraction 
could be made more successful. The detection of different 
features in the ECG waveform was much harder than 
anticipated but it was not due to the implementation of the 
matched filter. The more complex part was creating the 
revealing method to remove the feature of interest in each 
ECG signal. 
 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 8, No. 1, April 2010 
78
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

Jen et al. in [20] formulated an approach using neural 
networks for determining the features of ECG signal. They 
presented an integrated system for ECG diagnosis. The 
integrated system comprised of cepstrum coefficient method 
for feature extraction from long-term ECG signals and 
artificial neural network (ANN) models for the classification. 
Utilizing the proposed method, one can identify the 
characteristics hiding inside an ECG signal and then classify 
the signal as well as diagnose the abnormalities. To explore 
the performance of the proposed method various types of ECG 
data from the MIT/BIH database were used for verification. 
The experimental results showed that the accuracy of 
diagnosing cardiac disease was above 97.5%. In addition the 
proposed method successfully extracted the corresponding 
feature vectors, distinguished the difference and classified 
ECG signals. 
 
Correlation analysis for abnormal ECG signal feature 
extraction was explained by Ramli and Ahmad in [21]. Their 
proposed work investigated the technique to extract the 
important 
features 
from 
the 
12 
lead 
system 
(electrocardiogram) ECG signals. They chose II for their 
entire analysis due to its representative characteristics for 
identifying the common heart diseases. The analysis technique 
chosen is the cross-correlation analysis. Cross-correlation 
analysis measures the similarity between the two signals and 
extracts the information present in the signals. Their test 
results suggested that the proposed technique could effectively 
extract features, which differentiate between the types of heart 
diseases analyzed and also for normal heart signal.  
 
Ubeyli et al. in [22] described an approach for feature 
extraction from ECG signal. They developed an automated 
diagnostic systems employing dissimilar and amalgamated 
features for electrocardiogram (ECG) signals were analyzed 
and their accuracies were determined. The classification 
accuracies of mixture of experts (ME) trained on composite 
features and modified mixture of experts (MME) trained on 
diverse features were also compared in their work. The inputs 
of these automated diagnostic systems were composed of 
diverse or composite features and these were chosen based on 
the network structures. The achieved accuracy rates of their 
proposed approach were higher than that of the ME trained on 
composite features. 
 
Fatemian et al. [25] proposed an approach for ECG feature 
extraction. They suggested a new wavelet based framework 
for automatic analysis of single lead electrocardiogram (ECG) 
for application in human recognition. Their system utilized a 
robust preprocessing stage, which enables it to handle noise 
and outliers. This facilitates it to be directly applied on the raw 
ECG signal. In addition the proposed system is capable of 
managing ECGs regardless of the heart rate (HR) which 
renders making presumptions on the individual's stress level 
unnecessary. The substantial reduction of the template gallery 
size decreases the storage requirements of the system 
appreciably. Additionally, the categorization process is 
speeded up by eliminating the need for dimensionality 
reduction techniques such as PCA or LDA. Their experimental 
results revealed the fact that the proposed technique out 
performed other conventional methods of ECG feature 
extraction.  
III. FUTURE ENHANCEMENT 
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a noninvasive and the record 
of variation of the bio-potential signal of the human 
heartbeats. The ECG detection which shows the information 
of the heart and cardiovascular condition is essential to 
enhance the patient living quality and appropriate treatment. 
The ECG features can be extracted in time domain [23] or in 
frequency domain [24]. The extracted feature from the ECG 
signal plays a vital in diagnosing the cardiac disease. The 
development of accurate and quick methods for automatic 
ECG feature extraction is of major importance. Some of the 
features extraction methods implemented in previous research 
includes Discrete Wavelet Transform, Karhunen-Loeve 
Transform, Hermitian Basis and other methods. Every method 
has its own advantages and limitations. The future work 
primarily focus on feature extraction from an ECG signal 
using more statistical data. In addition the future enhancement 
eye on utilizing different transformation technique that 
provides higher accuracy in feature extraction. The parameters 
that must be considered while developing an algorithm for 
feature extraction of an ECG signal are simplicity of the 
algorithm and the accuracy of the algorithm in providing the 
best results in feature extraction.  
 
Table I. Comparison of Different Feature Extraction Techniques from an ECG 
Signal where H, M, L denotes High, Medium and Low respectively 
 
Approach 
Simplicity 
Accuracy 
Predictivity 
Zhao et al. 
H 
H 
H 
Mahmoodabadi 
et al. 
M 
H 
H 
Tadejko and 
Rakowski 
L 
M 
M 
Tayel and 
Bouridy 
M 
M 
H 
Jen et al. 
 
H 
H 
H 
Alexakis et al. 
 
H 
M 
M 
Ramli and 
Ahmad 
M 
M 
M 
Xu et al. 
 
M 
H 
H 
Olvera 
 
H 
M 
M 
Emran et al 
 
H 
M 
L 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The examination of the ECG has been comprehensively 
used for diagnosing many cardiac diseases. Various 
techniques and transformations have been proposed earlier in 
literature for extracting feature from ECG. This proposed 
paper provides an over view of various ECG feature extraction 
techniques and algorithms proposed in literature. The feature 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 8, No. 1, April 2010 
79
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

extraction technique or algorithm developed for ECG must be 
highly accurate and should ensure fast extraction of features 
from the ECG signal. This proposed paper also revealed a 
comparative table evaluating the performance of different 
algorithms that were proposed earlier for ECG signal feature 
extraction. The future 
work 
mainly concentrates 
on 
developing an algorithm for accurate and fast feature 
extraction. Moreover additional statistical data will be utilized 
for evaluating the performance of an algorithm in ECG signal 
feature detection. Improving the accuracy of diagnosing the 
cardiac disease at the earliest is necessary in the case of patient 
monitoring system. Therefore our future work also has an eye 
on improvement in diagnosing the cardiac disease.
