Improving Sepsis Treatment Strategies by Combining
Deep and Kernel-Based Reinforcement Learning
Xuefeng Peng, MSc.1, Yi Ding, MSc.2, David Wihl, A.L.B.1, Omer Gottesman, PhD1,
Matthieu Komorowski, MD3, Li-wei H. Lehman, PhD4, Andrew Ross, MSE1,
Aldo Faisal, PhD3, Finale Doshi-Velez, PhD1
1Harvard University, Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA
2Harvard University, T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Cambridge, MA
3 Imperial College London, London, UK
4MIT, Institute for Medical Engineering & Science, Cambridge, MA
Abstract
Sepsis is the leading cause of mortality in the ICU. It is challenging to manage because individual patients respond
differently to treatment. Thus, tailoring treatment to the individual patient is essential for the best outcomes. In this
paper, we take steps toward this goal by applying a mixture-of-experts framework to personalize sepsis treatment. The
mixture model selectively alternates between neighbor-based (kernel) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) experts
depending on patient’s current history. On a large retrospective cohort, this mixture-based approach outperforms
physician, kernel only, and DRL-only experts.
Introduction
Sepsis is a medical emergency requiring rapid treatment.1 It is the cause of 6.0% of hospital admissions but 15.0%
of hospital mortality.2 It is also costly: in 2011 alone, the US spent $20.3 billion dollars on hospital care for patients
with sepsis.3 Managing sepsis remains challenging, in part because there exists large variation in patient response to
existing sepsis management strategies.4
In this work, we focus on two interventions in the context of sepsis management: intravenous (IV) ﬂuid (adjusted for
ﬂuid tonicity) and vasopressors (VP). These two drugs are respectively used to correct the hypovolemia and counteract
sepsis-induced vasodilation. While hypovolemia and vasodilation are common among patients with sepsis, there
exists little clinical consensus about when and how these should be treated.5 However, these choices can have large
implications for patient mortality:4 vasopressors are known to have harmful effects in certain patients, and recent
studies have also demonstrated the association between ﬂuid-overload and negative outcomes in the ICUs.6
Thus, it is essential to identify ways to personalize treatment. The availability of large observational critical care data
sets7 has made it possible to hypothesize improved sepsis management strategies, and prior studies8,9 have used this
resource to suggest optimal treatment strategies for patients with sepsis. As with those earlier works, we personalize
strategies by using reinforcement learning (RL), a technique for optimizing sequences of decisions given patient con-
text. However, we use a mixture-of-experts approach to combine two very different RL techniques with very different
strengths—a model-free deep RL approach (DRL) and a model-based kernel RL approach (KRL)—to improve the
quality of the recommended treatment policy. Speciﬁcally, our work extends prior efforts in three important ways:
1. Recurrent encoding of the patient’s history. To date, work in this domain has assumed that the patient’s current
measurements are sufﬁcient to summarize their history. To retain potentially decision-relevant information from
the patient’s past, we use a recurrent autoencoder to represent the patient’s entire history.
2. Safe-guards on the Deep RL. DRL-based approaches can be particularly poor at extrapolating, and even in areas
of dense data, they can suggest non-sensical actions. We explicitly restrict the DRL to only suggest actions
commonly taken by clinicians, moving us toward more clinically-credible policies.
3. Combining DRL with Kernel RL. Finally, we use a mixture-of-experts (MoE) to combine the restricted DRL
approach with a kernel RL approach selectively based on the context. DRL is more ﬂexible but can be prone to
various pathologies; KRL is guaranteed to stay close to the data but as a result can extrapolate poorly. The MoE
combines their strengths.
arXiv:1901.04670v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2019

Related Work
Reinforcement Learning has been applied to a number of applications in healthcare, ranging from emergency decision
support,10 treating malaria,11 and managing HIV.12 Prasad et al.13 use RL to identify when to the wean patients from
mechanical ventilation in ICUs.
With respect to ﬂuid and vaospressor use in sepsis management, Komorowski et al.9 model a discrete Markov decision
process from data and then utilize it to learn a treatment strategy. Raghu et al.8 extend this work by considering a
much more expressive continuous representation of patient state. They use a traditional, non-recurrent autoencoder to
ﬁrst compress measurements from each time step into a continuous state representation, and then they learn a mapping
from the state representation to an appropriate treatment via a Dueling Double-Deep Q Network (Dueling DDQN).
Our work uses an even more expressive state representation that represents the patient’s entire history, and we also add
safe-guards against inappropriate actions and develop richer policies through our mixture of experts.
The mixture of experts aspect of our work builds from ideas developed by Parbhoo et al.14 in the context of HIV
management. In their case, they switch between a kernel-based policy and a discrete Bayesian Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (POMDP). We follow the idea of combining experts, but use the DDQN as an expert rather
than a discrete POMDP, as Raghu et al.8 have already demonstrated that a continuous expressive state representation is
valuable for the sepsis management task. Because we use a recurrent encoding to summarize the entire patient history,
our state can be thought of as a sufﬁcient statistic, much like the POMDP belief state in Parbhoo et al.14
Background
The reinforcement learning framework models a sequence of decisions as an agent interacting with an environment
over time. At each time step t, the RL agent observes a state s from the state space S and selects an action a from
the action space A based on some policy π(s, a), which assigns a probability to action in each state. Upon taking the
action, the agent receives some reward r and transitions to a new state s′. The agent’s goal is to maximize their expected
longterm discounted return E[P
t γtrt]. The optimal value function is deﬁned as V ∗(s) = maxπ E[P
t γtrt]|s0 =
s, π], and the optimal state-action value function Q∗(s, a) = maxπ E[P
t γtrt|s0 = s, a0 = a, π]. The latter satisﬁes
the Bellman equation Q∗(s, a) = r(s, a)+γ maxa′ E[Q∗(s
′, a
′)], where γ is the discount factor determines the trade-
off between immediate and future rewards. Q-learning methods aim to learn an optimal policy by minimizing the
temporal difference (TD) error, deﬁned as r(s, a) + γQ∗(s
′, a
′) −Q∗(s, a).
Cohort and Data Processing
Cohort. We used the same patient set as in Raghu et al.8 which applied the Sepsis-3 criteria to the Multi-parameter
Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care (MIMIC-III v1.4) database.7 Our cohort consisted of 15,415 adults (age range
of 18 to 91), summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Comparison of cohort statistics for subjects that fulﬁlled the Sepsis-3 criteria
% Female
Mean Age
Total Population
Survivors
44.1%
63.9
13,535
Non-survivors
44.3%
67.4
1,880
Cleaning and Preprocessing. As in Raghu et al.8, patient histories were partitioned into 4-hour windows each contain-
ing ﬁfty attributes, ranging from vitals (e.g. heart rate, mean blood pressure) to clinician assessments of the patient’s
conditions (e.g. sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score). Patients with missing values were excluded. The
observations, which range from demographics, lab values and vital signs, all have different scales. Following Raghu
et al.,8 we performed log transformations of observations with large values and standardized the remaining values.
After the standardization and log transformation, all values were rescaled into [0 −1]. The details of attributes and
preprocessing is shown in Table 2.The data set was split into a ﬁxed 75% training and validation set and a 25% test
set.

Table 2: Physiological attributes, treatments and corresponding preprocessing methods
Preprocessing
Attributes
Standardization
age,Weight kg,GCS,HR,SysBP,MeanBP,DiaBP,RR,Temp C,FiO2 1,
Potassium,Sodium,Chloride,Glucose,Magnesium,Calcium,Hb,
WBC count,Platelets count,PTT,PT,Arterial pH,paO2,paCO2,
Arterial BE,HCO3,Arterial lactate,SOFA,SIRS,Shock Index,PaO2 FiO2,
cumulated balance tev, Elixhauser, Albumin, CO2 mEqL, Ionised Ca
Log transformation
max dose vaso,SpO2,BUN,Creatinine,SGOT,SGPT,Total bili,
INR,input total tev,input 4hourly tev,output total,output 4hourly
Treatment Discretization. In this work, we focus on administrating two drugs: intravenous (IV) ﬂuid and vasopressor
(VP). In the cohort, the usage of IV and VP for each patient are recorded at each 4-hour window. Following Raghu et
al.8, the dosages for each drug are discretized into 5 bins, resulting in a 5 × 5 action space indexed from 0 to 24. Note
that the ﬁrst action (a = 0) means “no action”—neither IV nor VP are prescribed.
Method Overview
Applying RL to the sepsis management problem involves several pieces. The ﬁrst is deﬁning our inputs and treatments
(sections above). Next we describe how we compress patient histories into a state via a recurrent autoencoder, how we
attribute rewards to each state, and also how we determine the quality of some policy given observational data. With
these pieces in place, we ﬁnally describe how to derive treatment policies that optimize for our rewards, including our
mixture-of-experts (MoE) approach.
Compressing Patient Histories
Prior efforts8,9 assumed that the patient’s current measures were sufﬁcient to summarize their history; however, past
and trend patient information is often valuable to deciding the appropriate course of action. To capture more of this
temporal information, we encoded patient states recurrently using an LSTM autoencoder representing the cumulative
history for each patient. The LSTM had a single layer of 128 hidden units for both encoder and decoder—resulting
in a state s that consisted of 128 real-valued vector. The autoencoder was trained to minimize the reconstruction loss
(MSE) between the original measurements and the decoded measurements. We trained the model with mini-batches
of 128 and the Adam optimizer for 50 epochs until its convergence.
Reward Formulation
Broadly, we are interested in reducing mortality among patients with sepsis. However, mortality is a challenging
objective to optimize for because it is only observed after a long sequence of decisions; it can be hard to ascertain
which action was responsible for a good or bad outcome. Thus, for the purposes of our training, we introduce an
intermediate reward that can give a preliminary signal for whether our sequence of treatment decisions is likely to
reduce mortality.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst train a regressor that predicts the probability of mortality given a patient’s current observations
(implications of this choice in Discussion). Next, we deﬁne the reward as the change in the negative mortality log-
odds of mortality between the current observations and the next observations. (Log-odds were used because the
probabilities of mortality actually vary over a relatively small range.) Let f(o) be the probability of mortality given
current observations o. Then we deﬁne the reward r(o, a, o′) as
r(o, a, o′) = −log
f(o′)
1 −f(o′)f(o′) + log
f(o)
1 −f(o)
(1)
For a sense of scale, among those over 186K patient state transitions from both training and testing sets, the rewards
are in the interval [−3, 3].
The mortality predictor f(o) itself was a two-layer neural network with 64 and 32 units for each layer and L1-

regularized gradients (see Ross et al.15 for details). The L1 regularization encourages sparse local linear approxi-
mations, and thus makes its behaviors more interpretable. We resampled balanced batches (between survivors and
non-survivors) during training with batch sizes of 128 observations for 50 epochs, and our predictor f(o) achieved a
test accuracy of 73.1%. Figure 1 shows the log-odds distributions for each class.
Figure 1: Mortality log-odds distribution for mortality and survivor classes.
Off-Policy Evaluation via the WDR Estimator
The natural question is how to evaluate the quality of a proposed policy πe given only retrospective data collected
according to a clinician policy πb. The weighted doubly robust (WDR) estimator16 is widely used for off-policy
evaluation in RL. It uses estimated value ˆV and action-value ˆQ functions as control variates to reduce the variance of
the off-policy estimation. In the following, we used the value function of the DRL policy as our control variate; we
also explored using the value of the clinician policy, estimated as the mean, instead of the max, of the DRL Q-values
over action space.
WDR(D) :=
I
X
i=1
T
X
t=0
γtwt
irHi
t
−
I
X
i=1
T
X
t=0
γt(wi
t ˆQπe(SHi
t , AHi
t ) −wi
t−1 ˆV πe(SHi
t ))
(2)
Here, I is the number of patients, t is the time step, and Hi refers to the ith patient’s ICU-stay state trajectory. The im-
portance weight of the state of the patient i at time step t is deﬁned as wi
t =
ρi
t
PI
j=1 ρj
t , where ρi
t = Qt
t′=0
πe(A
Hi
t′ |S
Hi
t′ )
πb(A
Hi
t′ |S
Hi
t′ ).
The reward r, value function ˆV , and action-value function ˆQ are as deﬁned above. Finally, we estimate the clinician
policy πb as the empirical distribution over actions of the 300 neighbors in the training set with states closest to s, as
research shows that clinicians typically make decisions based on their experience treating similar patients17.
Deriving Policies
With a means of representing patient history, rewards, and a metric for evaluating policies, we can now start optimizing
treatment strategies. Below we describe each expert—the DRL and the KRL—and how we combine them.
Kernel Policy. One simple way to derive a treatment decision rule is to look at the nearest neighbors to the current
state s, identify the survivors, and choose actions that correspond to the distribution of treatments performed on these
nearby survivors (see cartoon in Figure 2). Speciﬁcally, we
1. Get the encoding s from the patient’s history h up to time t via the LSTM autoencoder.
2. Search k nearest neighbors in the training set in this encoded representation space using Euclidean distance.
3. The kernel policy πk is the distribution of actions taken over the surviving nearest neighbors.

We cross-validated the k values ranging from 200 to 500 using WDR, and proceeded with k = 300.
Figure 2: The circle in the left shows an example of the neighborhoods of a new state s, red and green marks the
mortality and surviving states respectively, and each of these states is associated with a physician action Ai.
DQN Policy. Double DQN (DDQN) with dueling structure18, which is a variant of DQN, has been applied to derive a
policy that outperforms the physician policy8. The structure of dueling DDQN is particularly suitable for sepsis treat-
ment strategy learning, as it differentiates the value function V into the value of the patient’s underlying physiological
condition, called the Value stream, and the value of the treatment given, called the Advantage stream.
We train the dueling DDQN for 200,000 steps with batch size = 30 to minimize the TD-error. At each given state,
the agent is trained to take an action with the highest Q-value, in order to achieve the ultimate goal of improving the
overall survival rate. To stabilize the training process and improve the performance, we applied regularization term λ
to the Q-network loss to penalize output Q-values which exceeded the maximum observed rewards rmax = 3
and used prioritized experience replay19 to balance the training sets with high-value and high-error states.
Ł(θ) = E[(Qdouble−target −Q(s, a; θ))2] + λ max(|Q(s, a; θ) −rmax|, 0)
(3)
where
Qdouble−target = r + γQ(s, arg max
a′
Q(s, a′; θ′))
(4)
and θ, θ′ are parameters of the DQN networks.
Finally, given a set of action-values Q(s, a), we must still deﬁne a policy πd. Typically, these actions are chosen by
the max Q-value, but this ignores the fact that two actions may have very similar values—and given the limitations
of our learning, it may not be possible which is actually the best. We deﬁne the DRL policy πd as the softmax of the
action-value or Advantage stream, giving higher probability to actions with higher values but not forcing us to take
(what might be a brittle) best value.
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)
The two approaches above—KRL and DRL—have different strengths. For patient states which are atypical, i.e. farther
Euclidean distance away from any neighbors, the kernel policy may end up relying on neighbors that are not really
that similar to the patient. In contrast, DQN, in trying to ﬁt a value function to the whole state space at once, may still
underﬁt in regions with plentiful data. Our mixture-of-experts (MoE) uses properties of the patient’s current state, and
the relationship between the patient’s current state and states observed during training, to switch between the kernel
and DQN policies (see Figure 3 for a cartoon).

Figure 3: The architecture of MoE, it produces a mixed policy via combining kernel.
Action Restriction. The DDQN, as a complex function approximator, comes with relatively few guarantees. Some-
times, it can place high value on actions that were rarely or never performed by clinicians. To safe guard against
these rare (and likely dangerous) actions, we restricted the DDQN to actions only taken more than 1% of the time by
the physicians among its 300 nearest neighbors. Speciﬁcally, let πd(s, a) be the DDQN policy, and πb(s, a) be the
physician policy. If πb(s, a) < 0.01, then we set πd(s, a) ←0 and then normalize πd(s, a) to be a valid probability
distribution. (We note that the kernel policy, which is derived directly from clinician actions, cannot deviate in this
way; once we restrict the DDQN actions, the MoE will also never take rare actions.)
Choice of Gating Function. We examined several medical sources20–22 to determine which features might be most
useful for selecting between experts. Our ﬁnal set of features were: age, Elixhauser, SOFA, FiO2, BUN, GCS,
Albumin, trajectory length, and max distance from neighbors. For our MoE gating function we combined these
features x linearly via weights w, along with a bias term b, and passed them through a logit to get the probability of
choosing each policy:
pk = sigmoid(w · x + b)
and
pd = 1 −pk
(5)
where pk and pd denote the assigned probability for choosing the kernel and DQN policy respectively.
Optimizing the Gating Function. Of course, the core question is how to choose the gating parameters so as to maximize
long-term rewards. Given a set of weights w and bias b, the MoE policy πm is deﬁned as πm(s, a) = pkπk(s, a) +
pdπd(s, a). We can estimate the expected discounted return of the policy πm WDR from above; we again perform
gradient descent on the gating parameters (with a minibatch of 256 samples). Due to the nonconvexity of the WDR-
based objective, we take the best of 1000 random restarts.
Results
The estimates of the discounted expected return for each policy are presented in Table 3. We provide two columns
for the mixture of experts policy because it is challenging to derive accurate value estimates ˆV and ˆQ for the WDR
estimator in this case. Thus, we consider two sensible options: using the value estimates ˆV and ˆQ from the clinician
policy, and using the estimates from the DDQN policy.
Regardless of the choice of evaluation covariate, both kernel and DQN policy improve over the physician policy, and
the MoE policy projects a further improvement. Using a recurrent state representation that compresses the entire
history results in a further improvement for all RL policies (we used a sparse autoencoder23 for the non-recurrent
encoding). The Figure 4 includes boostrap intervals for these values24.
On average, the WDR estimator predicts the MoE policy to outperform all other proposed policies. We note, how-
ever, that for some bootstraped datasets the difference is negative. This is to be expected, as Gottesman et al. [24]
demonstrate that high variability of IS based estimators is common in healthcare-data. Gottesman et al. [24] further
demonstrate that IS based estimators can have a high selection bias when evaluating policies which are signiﬁcantly
different from the behavior policy.

Figure 4: The distribution of the WDR estimator difference between MoE and three other policies based on 1000
bootstrapped test datasets. The red vertical lines indicate the difference calculated for the original test dataset.
Table 3: Estimate of the discounted expected return for policies over test set, γ = 0.99. Vd indicates approximating
the MoE V by DQN V function, Vb indicates approximating the MoE V by behavioral policy, namely, physician V
function
Physician
Kernel
DQN
MoEVd,Qd
MoEVb,Qb
non-recurrent encoded
3.76
3.73
4.06
3.93
4.31
recurrent encoded
3.76
4.46
4.23
5.03
5.72
Analysis of discovered policies. Figure 5a shows the action distributions for the KRL, DRL, clinician, and MoE
policies over the test set. The no treatment a = 0 action dominates policies. Actions which are favored by physicians,
such as IV but no vasopressor are also (as expected) favored by the kernel policy. That said, the kernel policy tends to
be more conservative than the clinicians as it suggests nonaction at approximately twice the clinicians’ frequency—
perhaps reﬂecting a bias toward the fact that those patients who were not treated were somehow healthier and thus
survived. Perhaps in a similar vein, the kernel expert prescribes more ﬂuid alone than the clinicians: while both
suggest high ﬂuids and no vasopressor almost in the same frequency, the kernel expert very rarely suggests actions
with vasopressor.
The DRL policy, like clinician and the kernel policies, favors giving actions a range of ﬂuid values. But, over the test
set, DQN expert prescribes more extreme values than clinicians. Clinicians frequently prescribe high ﬂuids and low
vasopressor; however, the DQN policy also tends to give more high vasopressor dosage actions in addition to ﬂuids.
Over the test set, the MoE policy is closer to the kernel policy. But inﬂuenced by the DQN policy, MoE prescribes
more high dosage actions.Table 4 shows how actions suggested by the experts overlap; the rate is high for the kernel
and MoE policies again reﬂecting the fact that most of the time, patients can ﬁnd similar neighbors. In 4.4% of
circumstances, the gating results in a MoE policy follows neither that of kernel nor that of DQN policy.
Table 4: Percent similarity of different policies over test set patient states
kernel
DQN
MoE
physician
0.305
0.151
0.296
kernel
-
0.182
0.871
DQN
-
-
0.258
Evaluation Quality Assessment. The WDR estimator of policy quality relies on having a large enough collection
of patient histories in the evaluation set having non-zero weight wi
t. For the MoE policy, 90% of the importance
sampling weights are non-zero and 86% ﬁnal weights in the sequences are non-zero. These high numbers of non-zero
importance weights indicates that nearly all of our data was used in the evaluation of the policy. We plot the full
distribution of weights in Figure 5b. A signiﬁcant number of weights lie in the range of [10−4, 10−3] and only very
few observations have weights signiﬁcantly larger than that range (the samples with signiﬁcantly smaller weights are
unlikely to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the estimate). However, the few observations with weights on the order of
10−1 could potentially have large inﬂuence (see Figure 4 for variances computed via boostrap).

(a) Action Distributions for physician and experts over test set
(b) WDR importance weights distribution
Figure 5: The left heatmap shows action distribution of each expert. Action assignment starts at bottom left corner
(action 0) in the grid and increases from left to right, with action 24 (max level of ﬂuid and vasopressor) corresponding
to the top right corner. The MoE is much akin to the conservative kernel expert, suggesting most of the patients can ﬁnd
similar neighbors. The right chart plots the full distribution of importance weights. A signiﬁcant number of weights
lie in the range of [10−4, 10−3] and only very few observations have weights signiﬁcantly larger than that range.
Running Time. Besides the quality of policy, the ability to make recommendations quickly is also important in the
ICU (note that it is less important for the initial training time to be fast). We measured the computational time for
all components in our framework on a dual-core Intel Core i5 processor. The 2-layer NN for the reward function
f(o) took 56.8s to train by 128-sized mini-batch for 50 epochs on dataset with 39856 × 45 dimension. The recurrent
autoencoder for the state space took 491s for 50 epochs with 128 patients per mini-batch.
The kernel policy required 909s to identify policies for the 150720 samples in the training set. Training DQN by
sampling 30 transitions for 200, 000 times required 5.15 × 104s. Finally, MoE gating function took 62s to train by a
256-sized mini-batch, for 1 epoch using 1e −4 learning rate, on dataset with 150720 × 9 dimension; however, since
MoE cannot guarantee global maxima, we conducted 1000 random restarts over the initial parameters, and trained
each for 50 epochs.
Most importantly, with regard to prediction at test time, for a patient with 10 timesteps in the ICU, it took only 0.162s
to encode all the observations, compute the kernel and DRL policies, and compute the gating function for the ﬁnal
MoE policy.
Discussion
Overall, the DQN policy recommended a treatment strategy with more aggressive use of both vasopressors and ﬂuids.
In comparison to the physician policy, DQN recommended 70% more actions involving medium-to-high ﬂuid volume
and vasopressor dosage (actions 18,19,23, and 24). Most notably, frequency for the DQN action corresponding to
maximum levels of both ﬂuid and vasopressor (action 24) increased by 3.8 fold from the physician policy. These
results suggest that despite the recent advances in deep reinforcement learning, further investigations are required, and
careful clinical judgment should be exercised to guard against potentially high-risk actions introduced from pathologies
in non-linear function approximation.
The proposed kernel policy displayed a different kind of bias. It recommended far fewer actions involving vasopressors
in comparison to both the physician policy and DQN, perhaps because amongst a patient’s neighbors, the survivors
were relatively healthier and thus treated less aggressively. By focusing on survivors the kernel policy also focuses
on patients who did not just receive a good treatment or were potentially healthier now, but also patients that received

good treatments and remained healthy in the future. If healthier patients are easier to treat in general, then we might
expect a bias toward less aggressive treatment from the kernel policy as well.
More broadly, while it appears that our MoE policy signiﬁcantly outperforms the clinician policy (as well as each
individual expert), and we have ensured that the actions it suggests are at least sensible (that is, often taken by clini-
cians), there still exist a number of limitations. When encoding the patient clinical course in a recurrent representation,
in spite of our high prediction accuracy, we cannot be certain with only these 50 measures that there are no hidden
confounding factors; aside from pre-ICU ﬂuid balance, we have no information from prior to their ICU stay. The
choice of representation also inﬂuences the quality of our off-policy evaluation, as the WDR estimator assumes that
the system in Markov in the state. More generally, the WDR estimator requires either the behavior policy estimate πb
to be accurate or the control variate estimates ˆV and ˆQ to be accurate to be unbiased; something that we could not
guarantee. That said, we do demonstrate that our results were at least insenstive to different choices of ˆV and ˆQ.
Our work also focused on a very speciﬁc reward structure. To apply off-policy evaluation (WDR) in a statistically
credible way, we considered the accumulation of low mortality risk as the objective, rather than mortality itself (as
using the latter, the policies could not be evaluated reliably). To maximize the interpretability of the reward to clini-
cians, this risk was calculated only from the current observations and not the patient’s entire history. Creating reward
functions that can both be checked by human experts and accurately convey clinical goals is a direction for future
work.
Finally, with respect to sepsis management, there also exist many other interventions, such as antibiotics use and
mechanical ventilation, that also affect patient outcomes. Future work remains to investigate policies that incorporated
a broader scope of patient history as well as a larger variety of interventions.
Conclusion
We presented a MoE framework to learn improved ﬂuid and vasopressor administration strategies for sepsis patients in
ICUs using observational data. We demonstrated that the proposed mixture model approach can automatically adapt
to patient states at each time step, and dynamically switch between a conservative kernel policy and a more aggressive
deep-RL policy to achieve, under our reward measure, better expected outcomes than clinician, kernel policy, and deep-
RL policy. While much further investigation is required to truly validate the efﬁcacy of derived policies, the proposed
MoE framework represents a novel approach to take advantage of the strengths of different treatment policies.
