MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)
Preprint 3 August 2021
Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0
Evaluation of probabilistic photometric redshift estimation
approaches for The Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of
Space and Time (LSST)
S.J. Schmidt1∗, A.I. Malz2,3,4†, J.Y.H. Soo5,6, I.A. Almosallam7,8, M. Brescia9, S. Cavuoti9,10,
J. Cohen-Tanugi11, A.J. Connolly12, J. DeRose13,14,15,16,17, P.E. Freeman18, M.L. Graham12,
K.G. Iyer19,20, M.J. Jarvis21,22, J.B. Kalmbach12, E. Kovacs23, A.B. Lee18, G. Longo10,
C.B. Morrison12, J.A. Newman24, E. Nourbakhsh1, E. Nuss11, T. Pospisil18, H. Tranin11,
R.H. Wechsler25,16,26, R. Zhou15,24, R. Izbicki27,28
(LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration)
(Aﬃliations are listed at the end of the paper)
3 August 2021
ABSTRACT
Many scientiﬁc investigations of photometric galaxy surveys require redshift es-
timates, whose uncertainty properties are best encapsulated by photometric redshift
(photo-z) posterior probability density functions (PDFs). A plethora of photo-z PDF
estimation methodologies abound, producing discrepant results with no consensus on
a preferred approach. We present the results of a comprehensive experiment comparing
twelve photo-z algorithms applied to mock data produced for The Rubin Observa-
tory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) Dark Energy Science Collaboration
(DESC). By supplying perfect prior information, in the form of the complete template
library and a representative training set as inputs to each code, we demonstrate the
impact of the assumptions underlying each technique on the output photo-z PDFs.
In the absence of a notion of true, unbiased photo-z PDFs, we evaluate and interpret
multiple metrics of the ensemble properties of the derived photo-z PDFs as well as
traditional reductions to photo-z point estimates. We report systematic biases and
overall over/under-breadth of the photo-z PDFs of many popular codes, which may
indicate avenues for improvement in the algorithms or implementations. Furthermore,
we raise attention to the limitations of established metrics for assessing photo-z PDF
accuracy; though we identify the conditional density estimate (CDE) loss as a promis-
ing metric of photo-z PDF performance in the case where true redshifts are available
but true photo-z PDFs are not, we emphasize the need for science-speciﬁc performance
metrics.
Key words: galaxies: distances and redshifts – galaxies: statistics – methods: statis-
tical
1
INTRODUCTION
The current and next generations of large-scale galaxy sur-
veys, including the Dark Energy Survey (DES, Abbott et al.
2005), the Kilo-Degree Survey (KiDS, de Jong et al. 2013),

Hyper Suprime-Cam Survey (HSC, Aihara et al. 2018a,b),
The Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST, Abell et al. 2009), Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011), and
Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST, Green
et al. 2012), represent a paradigm shift to reliance on photo-
metric, rather than solely spectroscopic, galaxy catalogues
of substantially larger size at a cost of lacking complete spec-
troscopically conﬁrmed redshifts (z). Eﬀective astrophysical
© 0000 The Authors
arXiv:2001.03621v2  [astro-ph.CO]  31 Jul 2021

2
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
inference using the catalogues resulting from these ongoing
and upcoming missions, however, necessitates accurate and
precise photometric redshift (photo-z) estimation method-
ologies.
As an example, in order for photo-z systematics to not
dominate the statistical noise ﬂoor of LSST’s main cos-
mological sample of several 109 galaxies, the LSST Sci-
ence Requirements Document (SRD)1 speciﬁes that indi-
vidual galaxy photo-zs must have root-mean-square error
σz < 0.02(1 + z), 3σ catastrophic outlier rate below 10 per
cent, and bias below 0.003. Speciﬁc science cases may have
their own requirements on photo-z performance that exceed
those of the survey as a whole. In that vein, the LSST Dark
Energy Science Collaboration (LSST-DESC) developed a
separate SRD (The LSST Dark Energy Science Collabora-
tion et al. 2018) that conservatively forecasts the constrain-
ing power of ﬁve cosmological probes, leading to even more
stringent requirements on photo-z performance, including
those deﬁned in terms of tomographically binned subsample
populations2 rather than individual galaxies.
Though the standard has long been for each galaxy in
a photometric catalogue to have a photo-z point estimate
and Gaussian error bar, even early applications of photo-
zs in precision cosmology indicate the inadequacy of point
estimates (Mandelbaum et al. 2008) to encapsulate the de-
generacies resulting from the nontrivial mapping between
broad band ﬂuxes and redshift. Far from a hypothetical sit-
uation, such degeneracies are real consequences of the same
deep imaging that enables larger galaxy catalogue sizes. The
lower luminosity and higher redshift populations captured
by deeper imaging introduce major physical systematics to
photo-zs, among them the Lyman break/Balmer break de-
generacy, that did not aﬀect shallower large area surveys
like the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS, York et al. 2000)
and Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS, Skrutskie et al.
2006).
To
fully
characterize
such
physical
degeneracies,
subsequent photometric galaxy catalogue data releases,
(e. g. Sheldon et al. 2012; Erben et al. 2013; de Jong et al.
2017), provide a more informative photo-z data product,
the photo-z probability density function (PDF), that de-
scribes the redshift probability, commonly denoted as p(z),
as a function of a galaxy’s redshift, conditioned on the ob-
served photometry. Early template-based methods such as
Fern´andez-Soto et al. (1999) approximated the likelihood
of photometry conditioned on redshift with the relative χ2
values of template spectra. Not long after, Bayesian adapta-
tions of template-based approaches such as Ben´ıtez (2000)
combined the estimated likelihoods with a prior to yield a
posterior PDF of redshift conditioned on photometry. While
the ﬁrst data-driven photo-z algorithms yielded a point es-
timate, Firth et al. (2003) estimated a photo-z PDF using
a neural net with realizations scattered within the photo-
metric errors. Several years later Wolf (2009) used a data
1 available
at
https://docushare.lsstcorp.org/docushare/
dsweb/Get/LPM-17
2 While tomographic samples will play a prominent role in some
science cases, estimation of tomographic distributions is a distinct
problem with distinct solutions. In this paper we focus solely on
individual galaxy redshift estimates.
driven χ2 approach to estimate redshift PDFs, and specif-
ically noted an intrinsic ﬂoor in redshift uncertainties even
under ideal conditions can arise due to the intrinsic spread
of redshifts within the training set even in well localized
regions of parameter space.
There are numerous techniques for deriving photo-z
PDFs, yet no one method has been established as clearly su-
perior. Consistent experimental conditions enable the quan-
tiﬁcation if not isolation of their diﬀerences, which can
be interpreted as a sort of implicit prior imparted by the
method itself. Comprehensive comparisons of photo-z meth-
ods have been made before; the Photo-z Accuracy And Test-
ing (PHAT, Hildebrandt et al. 2010) eﬀort focused on photo-
z point estimates derived from many photometric bands.
Rau et al. (2015) introduced a new method for improving
photo-z PDFs using an ordinal classiﬁcation algorithm. DES
compared several codes for photo-z point estimates and a
subset with photo-z PDF information (S´anchez et al. 2014)
and examined summary statistics of photo-z PDFs for tomo-
graphically binned galaxy subsamples (Bonnett et al. 2016).
In currently available spectroscopic training sets sys-
tematic incompleteness, particularly at faint magnitudes,
and incorrectly assigned redshifts are a harrowing problem.
Certain subpopulations can potentially fail to yield secure
redshifts, given limited wavelength coverage. Alternately,
redshifts may be incorrectly assigned for certain populations
due to misidentiﬁcation of spectral features. These missing
or misidentiﬁed populations would yield training sets that
are not representative of the true underlying galaxy popula-
tion, which can bias redshift estimates well beyond the levels
required for upcoming analyses. Characterizing and mitigat-
ing these problems will be a major undertaking which we
will cover in future papers, as discussed brieﬂy in §6.2. Be-
fore taking on this very complex issue, however, we must
ﬁrst investigate a more fundamental one: how do current
methods perform in the presence of representative data?
This paper is distinguished from other comparisons of
photo-z methods by its focus on the evaluation criteria for
photo-z PDFs and interpretation thereof. In the absence of
simulated data drawn from known redshift distributions, the
very concept of a “true PDF” for an individual galaxy is un-
available, and we must instead rely on measures of ensemble
behaviour to characterize PDF quality (see § 4 for further
discussion). We aim to perform a comprehensive sensitiv-
ity analysis of the dependence of photo-z PDFs on the code
used to produce them in order to ultimately select those that
will become part of the LSST-DESC pipelines, described in
the Science Roadmap (SRM)3. In this initial study, we fo-
cus on evaluating the performance of photo-z PDF codes
using PDF-speciﬁc performance metrics in a formally con-
trolled experiment with complete and representative prior
information (template libraries and training sets) to set a
baseline for subsequent investigations. This approach probes
how each code considered exploits the information content
of the data versus prior information from template libraries
and training sets.
The outline of the paper is as follows: in § 2 we present
the simulated data set; in § 3 we describe the current genera-
3 Available at: https://lsstdesc.org/assets/pdf/docs/DESC_
SRM_latest.pdf
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
3
tion codes employed in the paper; in § 4 we discuss the inter-
pretation of photo-z PDFs in terms of metrics of accuracy;
in § 5 we show our results and compare the performance of
the codes; in § 6 we oﬀer our conclusions and discuss future
extensions of this work.
2
DATA
In order to test the current generation of photo-z PDF codes,
we employ an existing simulated galaxy catalogue, described
in detail in Section 2.1. The experimental conditions shared
among all codes are motivated by the LSST SRD require-
ments and implemented for machine learning and template-
based photo-z PDF codes according to the procedures of
Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 respectively.
2.1
The Buzzard-v1.0 simulation
Our mock catalogue is derived from the Buzzard-highres-
v1.0 catalogue (DeRose et al., in prep). Buzzard is built on
the Chinchilla-400 (Mao et al. 2015) dark matter-only N-
body simulation consisting of 20483 particles in a 400 Mpc
h−1 box. The lightcone was constructed from smoothing and
interpolation between a set of time snapshots. Dark matter
halos were identiﬁed using the Rockstar software package
(Behroozi et al. 2013) and then populated with galaxies with
stellar masses and absolute r-band magnitudes in the SDSS
system determined using a sub-halo abundance matching
model constrained to match both projected two-point galaxy
clustering statistics and an observed conditional stellar mass
function (Reddick et al. 2013).
To assign a spectrum to each galaxy, the Adding Den-
sity Dependent Spectral Energy Distributions (SEDs) pro-
cedure (ADDSEDS, DeRose et al. 2019, Wechsler et al., in
prep,) was used. ADDSEDS uses a sample of ∼5 × 105 galax-
ies from the magnitude-limited SDSS Data Release 6 Value
Added Galaxy Catalogue (NYU-VAGC, Blanton et al. 2005)
to train an empirical relation between absolute r-band mag-
nitude, local galaxy density, and SED. Each SDSS spectrum
is parameterized by ﬁve weights corresponding to a weighted
sum of ﬁve basis SED components using the k-correct soft-
ware package4 (Blanton & Roweis 2007).
Correlations between SED and galaxy environment
were included so as to preserve the colour-density relation of
galaxy environments. The distance to the spatially projected
ﬁfth-nearest neighbour was used as a proxy for local density
in the SDSS training sample. For each simulated galaxy,
a galaxy with similar absolute r-band magnitude and local
galaxy density was chosen from the training set, and that
training galaxy’s SED was assigned to the simulated galaxy.
2.1.1
Caveats
By necessity, Buzzard does not contain all of the compli-
cating factors present in real data, and here we discuss the
most pertinent ways that these limitations aﬀect our exper-
iment. Buzzard includes only galaxies, not stars nor AGN.
4 http://kcorrect.org
The catalogue-based construction excludes image-level ef-
fects, such as deblending errors, photometric measurement
issues, contamination from sky background (Zodiacal light,
scattered light, etc.), lensing magniﬁcation, and Galactic
reddening.
The Buzzard SEDs are drawn from a set of ∼5 × 105
SEDs, which themselves are derived from a ﬁve-component
linear combination ﬁt to ∼5 × 105 SDSS galaxies; thus the
sample contains only galaxies that resemble linear combina-
tions of those for which SDSS obtained spectra, and there
are necessarily duplicates. The linear combination SEDs also
restrict the properties of the galaxy population to linear
combinations of the properties corresponding to ﬁve basis
templates, precluding the modeling of non-linear features
such as the full range of emission line ﬂuxes relative to the
continuum. The only form of intrinsic dust reddening comes
from what is already present in the ﬁve basis SEDs via the
training set used to create the basis templates, and linear
combinations thereof do not span the full range of realistic
dust extinction observed in galaxy populations.
While these idealized conditions limit the realism of our
mock data, they are irrelevant to the controlled experimental
conditions of this study, if anything assuring that diﬀerenti-
ation in the performance of the photo-z PDF codes is due to
the inferential techniques rather than nuances in the data.
2.2
LSST-like mock observations
Given the SED, absolute r-band magnitude, and true red-
shift of each simulated galaxy, we computed apparent magni-
tudes in the six LSST ﬁlter passbands, ugrizy. We assigned
magnitude errors in the six bands using the simple model of
Ivezi´c et al. (2008), assuming achievement of the full 10-year
depth, with a modiﬁcation of ﬁducial LSST total numbers
of 30-second visits for photometric error generation: we as-
sume 60 visits in u-band, 80 visits in g-band, 180 visits in
r-band, 180 visits in i-band, 160 visits in z-band, and 160
visits in y-band.
As a consequence of adding Gaussian-distributed photo-
metric errors, 2.0 per cent of our galaxies exhibit a negative
ﬂux in one or more bands, the vast majority of which are
in the u-band. We deem such negative ﬂuxes non-detections
and assign a placholder magnitude of 99.0 in the catalogue to
indicate to the photo-z PDF codes that such galaxies would
be “looked at but not seen” in multi-band forced photome-
try.
The full dataset thus covers 400 square degrees and con-
tains 238 million galaxies of redshift 0 < z ≤8.7 down to
r = 29.
However, a problem with the k-correction calcu-
lation led to incorrect colors at z > 2, which necessitated
limiting the redshift range to 0 < z ≤2.0.
To obtain a
catalogue matching the LSST Gold Sample, we imposed a
cut of i < 25.3, which gives a signal-to-noise ratio ≳30 for
most galaxies. In order for statistical errors to be subdom-
inant to the systematic errors we aim to probe, we further
reduced the sample size to < 107 galaxies by isolating ∼16.8
square degrees selected from ﬁve separate spatial regions of
the simulation. We refer to this ﬁnal set of galaxies as DC1,
for the ﬁrst LSST-DESC Data Challenge.
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

4
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
2.3
Shared prior information
For the purpose of performing a controlled experiment that
compares photo-z PDF codes on equal footing as a base-
line for a future sensitivity analysis, we take care to provide
each with optimal prior information. Redshift estimation ap-
proaches built upon physical modeling and machine learning
alike have a notion of prior information considered beyond
the photometry of the data for which redshift is to be con-
strained: that information is derived from a template library
for a model-based code and a training set for a data-driven
code. In this initial study, we seek to set a baseline for a
later comparison of the performance of photo-z PDF codes
under incomplete and non-representative prior information
that will propagate diﬀerently in the space of data-driven
and model-based algorithms. However, for the baseline case
of perfect prior information, physical modeling and machine
learning codes can indeed be put on truly equal footing. We
outline the equivalent ways of providing all codes perfect
prior information below.
2.3.1
Training and test set division
Following the ﬁndings of Bernstein & Huterer (2010), New-
man et al. (2015), and Masters et al. (2015) that , in the
idealized case of representative training data, only ∼104
spectra are necessary to calibrate photo-zs to Stage IV re-
quirements, we aimed to set aside a randomly selected train-
ing set of 3 −5 × 104 galaxies, ∼10 per cent of the full sam-
ple. After all cuts described above, we designated the DC1
training set of 44 404 galaxies for which observed photome-
try, true SEDs, and true redshifts would be provided to all
codes and the blinded DC1 test set of 399 356 galaxies for
which photometry alone would be provided to all codes and
photo-z PDFs would be requested. The exact form of LSST
photometric ﬁlter transmission curves were also considered
public information that could be used by any code.
2.3.2
Template library construction
We aimed to provide template-ﬁtting codes with complete
yet manageable library of templates spanning the space of
SEDs of the DC1 galaxies. We constructed K = 100 repre-
sentative templates from the ∼5 × 105 SEDs of the SDSS
DR6 NYU-VAGC by using the ﬁve-dimensional vectors of
SED weight coeﬃcients described above. After regularizing
the SED weight coeﬃcients ∈[0, 1], we ran a simple K-means
clustering algorithm on the ﬁve-dimensional space of regu-
larized SED weight coeﬃcients of the SDSS galaxy sample.
The resulting clusters were used to deﬁne Voronoi cells in
the space of weight coeﬃcients, with centre positions cor-
responding to weights for the k-correct SED components,
yielding the 100 SEDs that comprise the DC1 template set
provided to all template-based codes. We did not, however,
exclude from consideration template-based codes that made
modiﬁcations in their use of these templates due to archi-
tecture limitations (as opposed to knowledge of the exper-
imental conditions that could artiﬁcially boost the code’s
apparent performance), with deviations noted in Section 3.
3
METHODS
Here we summarize the twelve photo-z PDF codes compared
in this study, listed in Table 1, which include both estab-
lished and emerging approaches in template ﬁtting and ma-
chine learning. Though not exhaustive, this sample repre-
sents codes for which there was suﬃcient expertise within
the LSST-DESC Photometric Redshifts Working Group.
Some aspects of data treatment were left to the individual
code runners, for example, whether/how to split the avail-
able data with known redshifts into separate training and
validation sets.
We describe the algorithms and implementations of the
model-based and data-driven codes in Sections 3.1 and 3.2
respectively, with a straw-person approach included in Sec-
tion 3.3.
3.1
Template-based Approaches
We test three publicly available and commonly used
template-based codes that share the standard physically mo-
tivated approach of calculating model ﬂuxes for a set of tem-
plate SEDs on a grid of redshift values and evaluating a χ2
merit function using the observed and model ﬂuxes:
χ2(z, T, A) =
Nfilt
X
i
 
F i
obs −A F i
pred(T, z)
σi
obs
!2
(1)
where A is a normalization factor, F i
pred(T, z) is the ﬂux pre-
dicted for a template T at redshift z, F i
obs is the observed
ﬂux in a given band i, σi
obs is the observed ﬂux error, and
Nfilt is the total number of ﬁlters, in our case the six ugrizy
LSST ﬁlters.
All three template-based codes replace per-
band non-detections with an estimate of the 1σ magnitude
limit as estimated from the photometric error model. Spe-
ciﬁc implementation details of each code, e. g. prior form
and implementation, are described below.
3.1.1
BPZ
Bayesian Photometric Redshift (BPZ, Ben´ıtez 2000) deter-
mines the likelihood p(C|z, T) of a galaxy’s observed colours
C for a set of SED templates T at redshifts z. The BPZ
likelihood is related to the χ2 likelihood by p(C|z, T) ∝
exp[−χ2/2]. Given a Bayesian prior p(z, T|m0) over ap-
parent magnitude m0 and type T, and assuming that
the SED templates are spanning and exclusive, BPZ con-
structs the redshift posterior p(z|C, m0) by marginaliz-
ing over all SED templates with the form p(z|C, m0) ∝
P
T p(C|z, T) p(z, T|m0) (Eq. 3 from Ben´ıtez 2000), corre-
sponding to setting the parameter PROBS LITE=TRUE in the
BPZ parameter ﬁle. The BPZ prior is the product of an SED
template proportion that varies with apparent magnitude
p(T|m0) and a prior p(z|T, m0) over the expected redshift as
a function of apparent magnitude and SED template. We an-
ticipate BPZ to outperform other template-based approaches
due to the prior that both comprehensively accounts for SED
type and is calibrated to the training set.
Here we test BPZ-v 1.99.3 (Ben´ıtez 2000) with the DC1
template set of Section 2.3.2. To keep the number of free pa-
rameters manageable, the DC1 template set is pre-sorted by
the rest-frame u−g colour and split into three broad classes
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
5
Table 1. List of photo-z PDF codes featured in this study
Published code
Type
Public source code
BPZ (Ben´ıtez 2000)
template ﬁtting
http://www.stsci.edu/~dcoe/BPZ/
EAZY (Brammer et al. 2008)
template ﬁtting
https://github.com/gbrammer/eazy-photoz
LePhare (Arnouts et al. 1999)
template ﬁtting
http://www.cfht.hawaii.edu/~arnouts/lephare.html
ANNz2 (Sadeh et al. 2016)
machine learning
https://github.com/IftachSadeh/ANNZ
CMNN (Graham et al. 2018)
machine learning
https://github.com/dirac-institute/CMNN_Photoz_Estimator
Delight (Leistedt & Hogg 2017)
hybrid
https://github.com/ixkael/Delight
FlexZBoost (Izbicki & Lee 2017)
machine learning
https://github.com/tpospisi/flexcode; https://github.com/rizbicki/FlexCoDE
GPz (Almosallam et al. 2016b)
machine learning
https://github.com/OxfordML/GPz
METAPhoR (Cavuoti et al. 2017)
machine learning
http://dame.dsf.unina.it
SkyNet (Graﬀet al. 2014)
machine learning
http://ccpforge.cse.rl.ac.uk/gf/project/skynet/
TPZ (Carrasco Kind & Brunner 2013)
machine learning
https://github.com/mgckind/MLZ
trainZ
–
See Section 3.3
of SED template, equivalent to the E, Sp and Im/SB types.
The Bayesian prior term p(T|m0) was derived directly from
the DC1 training set, and the other term p(z|T, m0) was
chosen to be the best ﬁt for the eleven free parameters from
the functional form of Ben´ıtez (2000). We use template in-
terpolation, creating two linearly interpolated templates be-
tween each basis SED (sorted by rest-frame u−g colour) by
setting the parameter INTERP=2. Prior to running the code,
the non-detection placeholder magnitude was replaced with
an estimate of the 1-σ detection limit for the undetected
band as a proxy for a value close to the estimated sky noise
threshold.
3.1.2
EAZY
Easy and Accurate Photometric Redshifts from Yale (EAZY,
Brammer et al. 2008) extends the basic χ2 ﬁt procedure that
deﬁnes template-ﬁtting approaches. The algorithm models
the observed photometry with a linear combination of tem-
plate SEDs at each redshift. The best-ﬁt SED at each red-
shift is found by simultaneously ﬁtting one, two, or all of
the templates via χ2 minimization, which is distinct from
marginalizing across all templates. The minimized χ2 like-
lihood at each redshift is then combined with an apparent
magnitude prior to obtain the redshift posterior PDF. We
note that the utilization of the best-ﬁt SED conditioned on
redshift rather than a proper marginalization does not lead
to the correct posterior distribution, an implementation is-
sue that has now been identiﬁed and will be addressed by
the developers in the future.
In contrast with BPZ, EAZY’s apparent magnitude prior is
independent of SED, though it was derived empirically from
the DC1 training set. The EAZY architecture cannot accept
a template set other than the same ﬁve basis templates em-
ployed by k-correct when constructing the DC1 catalogue,
but, for consistency with the experimental scope of perfect
prior information, EAZY’s ﬂexible all-templates mode was
used to ﬁt the photometric data with a linear combination
of the ﬁve basis templates. Though EAZY can account for
uncertainty in the template set by adding in quadrature to
the ﬂux errors an empirically derived template error as a
function of redshift, we set the template error to zero since
the same templates were in fact used to produce the DC1
photometry.
3.1.3
LePhare
Photometric Analysis for Redshift Estimate (LePhare,
Arnouts et al. 1999; Ilbert et al. 2006) uses the χ2 of Equa-
tion 1 to match observed colours with those predicted from
a template set. The template set can be semi-empirical or
entirely synthetic. The reported photo-z PDF is an arbitrary
normalization of the likelihood evaluated on the output red-
shift grid.
Here we use LePhare-v 2.2 with the DC1 template set
of Section 2.3.2. Unlike both BPZ and EAZY, LePhare uses
generic, SED-independent priors that are not tuned to the
DC1 data set. The choice to use the generic prior form could
lead to a degradation in code performance, given the slight
mismatch between the galaxy distributions in the studied
dataset and that parameterized in the LePhare prior.
3.2
Machine Learning-based Approaches
We compared nine data-driven photo-z estimation ap-
proaches, eight of which are described in this section and one
of which is discussed in Section 3.3. Because the algorithms
diﬀer more from one another and the techniques are rela-
tive newcomers to the astronomical literature, we provide
somewhat more detail about the implementations below. A
key diﬀerence between the codes is the treatment of non-
detections in one or more bands: some codes ignore per-band
non-detections, while others replace the value with either an
estimate for the detection limit, the mean of other values in
the training set, or another default value. There are varying
conventions among machine learning-based codes for treat-
ment of non-detections, and no one prescription dominates
in the photo-z literature. However, we remind the reader
that only 2.0 per cent of our sample has non-detections,
almost exclusively in the u-band, and thus should not dom-
inate the code performance diﬀerences.
3.2.1
ANNz2
ANNz2 (Sadeh et al. 2016) supports several machine learn-
ing algorithms, including artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN),
boosted decision tree, and k-nearest neighbour (KNN) re-
gression. In addition to accounting for errors on the input
photometry, ANNz2 uses the KNN-uncertainty estimate of
Oyaizu et al. (2008) to quantify uncertainty in the choice of
method over multiple runs. Using the Toolkit for Multivari-
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

6
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
ate Data Analysis with ROOT5, ANNz2 can return the results
of running a single machine learning algorithm, a “best”
choice of the results from simultaneously running multiple
algorithms (based on evaluation the cumulative distribution
functions of validation set objects), or a combination of the
results of multiple algorithms weighted by their method un-
certainties averaged over multiple runs.
In this study, we use ANNz2-v.2.0.4.
Several combina-
tions of the ANN, BDT, and kNN machine learning algo-
rithms were tested during the training/validation stage. For
this particular dataset, the optimal and most stable results
came from a setup consisting solely of ANNs. We present
results for this case and do not include results from a mix-
ture of multiple algorithms.
Photo-z PDFs were produced
by running an ensemble of 5 ANNs with a 6 : 12 : 12 : 1
architecture corresponding to the 6 ugrizy inputs, 2 hidden
layers with 12 nodes each, and 1 output of redshift. Each of
the ﬁve ANNs was trained with diﬀerent random seeds for
the initialization of input parameters, reserving half of the
training set for validation to prevent overﬁtting.
Galaxies
not detected in the u-band were excluded from the train-
ing set, and per-band non-detections in the test set were
replaced with the mean magnitude
of the test set in that
band.
3.2.2
Colour-Matched Nearest-Neighbours
The colour-matched nearest-neighbours photometric red-
shift estimator (CMNN, Graham et al. 2018) uses a training
set of galaxies with known redshifts that has equivalent or
better photometry than the test set in terms of quality and
ﬁlter coverage. For each galaxy in the test set, CMNN identiﬁes
a colour-matched subset of training galaxies using a thresh-
old in the Mahalanobis distance DM = PNcolours
j
(cj,train −
cj,test)2/δc2
j,test in the space of available colours c, with colour
measurement errors δctest and Ncolours = 5 colours j deﬁned
by the ugrizy ﬁlters, which deﬁnes the set of colour-matched
neighbours based on a value of the percent point function
(PPF). As an example, for Nﬁlt = 5 with PPF= 0.95, 95 per
cent of all training galaxies consistent with the test galaxy
will have DM < 11.07.
Bands in which the galaxy is not
detected are dropped, thereby reducing the eﬀective Nﬁlt for
that galaxy. The photo-z PDF of a given test set galaxy is
the normalized distribution of redshifts of its colour-matched
subset of training set galaxies.
Here, we make two modiﬁcations to the implementation
of Graham et al. (2018) to comply with the controlled exper-
imental conditions. First, we do not impose non-detections
on galaxies fainter than the expected LSST 10-year limit-
ing magnitude nor galaxies bright enough to saturate with
LSST’s CCDs, instead using all of the photometry for the
DC1 test and training sets. Second, we apply the initial
colour cut to the training set before calculating the Maha-
lanobis distance in order to accelerate processing and use a
magnitude pseudo-prior as in Graham et al. (2018), but for
both we use cut-oﬀvalues corresponding to the DC1 training
set galaxies’ colours and magnitudes.
We make an additional adaptation to enable the CMNN
algorithm to yield accurate photo-z PDFs for all galaxies,
5 http://tmva.sourceforge.net/
as the original Graham et al. (2018) algorithm is optimized
for photo-z point estimates and is susceptible to less ac-
curate photo-z PDFs for bright galaxies or those with few
matches in colour-space. We use PPF= 0.95 rather than
PPF= 0.68 to generate the subset of colour-matched train-
ing galaxies, whose redshifts are weighted by their inverse
Mahalanobis distances when composing the photo-z PDF
rather than weighting all colour-matched training galaxies
equally. Additionally, when the number of colour-matched
training set galaxies is less than 20, the nearest 20 neigh-
bours in colour-space are used instead, and the output
photo-z PDF is convolved with a Gaussian kernel of vari-
ance σ2
train(PPF20/0.95)2 −1 to account for the correspond-
ing growth of the eﬀective PPF to include 20 neighbours.
3.2.3
Delight
Delight (Leistedt & Hogg 2017) is a hybrid technique that
infers photo-zs with a data-driven model of latent SEDs and
a physical model of photometric ﬂuxes as a function of red-
shift. Generally, machine learning methods rely on represen-
tative training data with shared photometric ﬁlters, while
template-based methods rely on a complete library of tem-
plates based on physical models constructed. Delight aims
to take the best aspects of both approaches by construct-
ing a large collection of latent SED templates (or physical
ﬂux-redshift models) from training data, with a template
SED library as a guide to the learning of the model, thereby
circumventing the machine learning prerequisite of represen-
tative training data in the same photometric bands and the
template ﬁtting requirement of detailed galaxy SED models.
It models noisy observed ﬂux ˆF = F+Fb as a sum of a noise-
less ﬂux plus a Gaussian processes Fb ∼GP
 µF , kF 
with
zero mean function µF and a physically motivated kernel kF
that induces realistic correlations in ﬂux-redshift space.
From a template-ﬁtting perspective, each test set galaxy
has a posterior p(z|ˆF) ≈P
i p(ˆF|z, Ti)p(z|Ti)p(Ti) of red-
shift z conditioned on noisy ﬂux ˆF, where p(z|Ti)p(Ti) cap-
tures prior information about the redshift distributions and
abundances of the galaxy templates Ti. As in traditional
template ﬁtting, each likelihood p(ˆF|F) relates the noisy ﬂux
ˆF with the noiseless ﬂux F predicted by the model of a linear
combination of templates, carefully constructed to account
for model uncertainties and diﬀerent normalization of the
same SED, plus the Gaussian process term.
The machine learning approach appears in the inclu-
sion of a pairwise comparison term p(F|z, zj, ˆFj) for the
prediction of model ﬂux F at a model redshift z with re-
spect to training set galaxy j with redshift zj and ob-
served ﬂux ˆFj. Thus the photo-z posterior p(ˆF|z, Ti) =
R
p(ˆF|F)p(F|z, zj, ˆFj)dF may be interpreted as the proba-
bility that the training and the target galaxies have the same
SED at diﬀerent redshifts. The ﬂux prediction p(F|z, zj, ˆFj)
of the training galaxy at redshift z is modeled via the Gaus-
sian process described above; more detail is provided in
Leistedt & Hogg (2017).
In this study, the default settings of Delight were used,
with the exception that the PDF bins were set to be linearly
spaced rather than logarithmically. The Gaussian process
was trained using the full DC1 training set. We used the
full DC1 template set with a ﬂat prior in magnitude and
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
7
SED type. Photometric uncertainties from the inputs are
propagated into the code, while non-detections for each band
are set to the mean of the respective bands.
3.2.4
FlexZBoost
FlexZBoost (Izbicki & Lee 2017; Dalmasso et al. 2019) is
built on FlexCode, a general-purpose methodology for con-
verting any conditional mean point estimator of z to a condi-
tional density estimator p(z|x) ≡f(z|x), where x here rep-
resents our photometric covariates and errors. FlexZBoost
expands the unknown function f(z|x) = P
i βi(x)φi(z) us-
ing an orthonormal basis {φi(z)}i. By the orthogonality
property, the expansion coeﬃcients βi(x) = E [φi(z)|x] ≡
R
f(z|x)φi(z)dz are thus conditional means. The expecta-
tion value E [φi(z)|x] of the expansion coeﬃcients condi-
tioned on the data is equivalent to the regression of the
space of possible redshifts on the space of possible photom-
etry. Thus the expansion coeﬃcients βi(x) can be estimated
from the data via regression to yield the conditional density
estimate bf(z|x).
In this paper, we used xgboost (Chen & Guestrin
2016) for the regression; it should, however, be noted that
FlexCode-RF6, based on Random Forests, generally per-
forms better on smaller datasets. As our basis φi(z), we
choose a standard Fourier basis. The two tuning parame-
ters in our photo-z PDF estimate are the number I of terms
in the series expansion and an exponent α that we use to
sharpen the computed density estimates ef(z|x) ∝bf(z|x)α.
Both I and α were chosen in an automated way by mini-
mizing the weighted L2-loss function (Eq. 5 in Izbicki & Lee
2017) on a validation set comprised of a randomly selected
15 per cent of the DC1 training set. While FlexCode’s loss-
less native encoding stores each photo-z PDF using the basis
coeﬃcients βi(x), we discretized the ﬁnal estimates into 200
linearly spaced redshift bins 0 < z < 2 to match the consis-
tent output format of the experimental conditions.
3.2.5
GPz
GPz (Almosallam et al. 2016a,b) is a sparse Gaussian
process-based code, a scalable approximation of full Gaus-
sian Processes (Rasmussen & Williams 2006), that produces
input-dependent variance estimates corresponding to het-
eroscedastic noise. The model assumes a Gaussian poste-
rior probability p(z|x) = N
 z|µ(x), σ(x)2
of the output
redshift z given the input photometry x. The mean µ(x)
and the variance σ(x)2 are modeled as functions f(x) =
Pm
i=1 wiφi(x) that are linear combinations of m basis func-
tions {φi(x)}m
i=1 with associated weights {wi}m
i=1. The de-
tails on how to learn the parameters of the model and the
hyper-parameters of the basis functions are described in Al-
mosallam et al. (2016b). GPz’s variance estimate is composed
of a model uncertainty term corresponding to sparsity of the
training set photometry and a noise uncertainty term en-
compassing noisy photometric observations, enabling quan-
tiﬁcation of any need for more representative or more pre-
cise training samples. GPz may also weight training set sam-
6 https://github.com/tpospisi/flexcode;
https://github.com/rizbicki/FlexCoDE
ples by importance according to |zspec −zphot|/(1+zspec) to
minimize the normalized photo-z point estimate error. How-
ever, this function may be adapted to photo-z PDFs, adding
weight to test set galaxies that are not well-represented in
the training set.
To smooth the long tail in the distribution of magni-
tude errors, we use the logarithm of the magnitude errors,
improving numerical stability and eliminating the need for
constraints on the optimization process. Unobserved mag-
nitudes xu = µu + ΣuoΣ−1
oo (xo −µo) were imputed from
observed magnitudes xo and the training set mean µ and
covariance Σ using a linear model. This is the optimal ex-
pected value of the unobserved variables given the observed
ones under the assumption that the distribution is jointly
Gaussian; note that this reduces to a simple average if the
covariates are independent with Σuo = 0. We reserved for
validation 20 per cent of the training set and used the Vari-
able Covariance option in GPz with 200 basis functions (see
Almosallam et al. (2016b) for details), and did not apply
cost-sensitive learning options.
3.2.6
METAPhoR
Machine-learning Estimation Tool for Accurate Photomet-
ric Redshifts (METAPhoR, Cavuoti et al. 2017) is based on
the Multi Layer Perceptron with Quasi Newton Algorithm
(MLPQNA) with the least square error model and Tikhonov
L2-norm regularization (Hofmann & Math´e 2018). Photo-z
PDFs are generated by running N trainings on the same
training set, or M trainings on M diﬀerent random sam-
plings of the training set. Upon regression of the test set,
the photometry mij of each test set galaxy j in ﬁlter i is
perturbed according to m′
ij = mij + αiFijϵ in terms of
the standard normal random variable ϵ ∼N(0, 1), a mul-
tiplicative constant αi permitting accommodation of multi-
survey photometry, and a bimodal function Fij composed of
a polynomial ﬁt of the mean magnitude errors on the binned
bands plus a constant term representing the threshold be-
low which the polynomial’s noise contribution is negligible
(Brescia et al. 2018).
In this work, we used a hierarchical KNN to replace
non-detections with values based on their neighbours. The
usual cross-validation of redshift estimates and PDFs was
also omitted for this study.
3.2.7
SkyNet
SkyNet (Graﬀet al. 2014) employs a neural network based on
a second-order conjugate gradient optimization scheme (see
Graﬀet al. 2014, for further details). The neural network
is conﬁgured as a standard multilayer perceptron with three
hidden layers and one input layer with 12 nodes correspond-
ing to the 6 photometric magnitudes and their measurement
errors.
SkyNet’s classiﬁer mode uses a cross-entropy error func-
tion with a 20:40:40 node (all rectiﬁed linear units) architec-
ture for each hidden layer and an output layer of 200 nodes
corresponding to 200 bins for the PDF, with a softmax acti-
vation function to enforce the normalization condition that
the probabilities sum to unity. While previous implementa-
tions of the code (see Appendix C.3 of S´anchez et al. 2014;
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

8
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
Bonnett 2015) implement a sliding bin smoothing, no such
procedure was used in this study.
We pre-whitened the data by pegging the magnitudes
to (45,45,40,35,42,42) and errors to (20,20,10,5,15,15) for
ugrizy ﬁlters, respectively. To avoid over-ﬁtting, 30 per cent
of the training set was reserved for validation, and training
was halted as soon as the error rate began to increase on the
validation set. The weights were randomly initialized based
on normal sampling.
3.2.8
TPZ
Trees for Photo-z (TPZ, Carrasco Kind & Brunner 2013; Car-
rasco Kind & Brunner 2014) uses prediction trees and ran-
dom forest techniques to estimate photo-z PDFs. TPZ re-
cursively splits the training set into branch pairs based on
maximizing information gain among a random subsample of
features, to minimize correlation between the trees, termi-
nating only when a newly created leaf meets a criterion, such
as a leaf size minimum or a variance threshold. The regions
in each terminal leaf node correspond to a subsample of the
training set with similar properties. Bootstrap samples from
the training set photometry and errors are used to build a
set of prediction trees.
To run TPZ, we replaced non-detections with an approx-
imation of the 1σ detection threshold based on the signal-
to-noise-based error forecast of the 10-year LSST data,
i. e. dm = 2.5 log(1 + N/S) where dm ∼0.7526 magnitudes
for N/S = 1 (where N and S are the noise and signal). We
calibrated TPZ with the Out-of-Bag cross-validation tech-
nique (Breiman et al. 1984; Carrasco Kind & Brunner 2013)
to evaluate its predictive validity and determine the relative
importance of the diﬀerent input attributes. We grew 100
trees to a minimum leaf size of 5 using the ugri magnitudes,
all u −g, g −r, r −i, i −z, z −y colours, and the associated
errors, as the z and y magnitudes did not show signiﬁcant
correlation with the redshift in our cross-validation. We par-
titioned our redshift space into 200 bins and smoothed each
individual PDF with a smoothing scale of twice the bin size.
3.3
trainZ: a pathological photo-z PDF estimator
We also consider a pathological photo-z PDF estimation
method, dubbed trainZ, which assigns each test set galaxy
a photo-z PDF equal to the normalized redshift distribution
N(z) of the training set, according to
p(z|{zj}) ≡
1
Ntrain
Ntrain
X
i=1
(
1
if zk ≤zi < zk+1
0
otherwise
.
(2)
Unlike the other methods, the trainZ estimator is indepen-
dent of the photometric data, eﬀectively performing a KNN
procedure with k = Ntrain, a limiting case of a photo-z PDF
estimator dominated by the shared prior information of the
training set. In this way, trainZ serves as an experimental
control that is not a competitive photo-z PDF method that
would be used by any real survey.
Though trainZ is strongly vulnerable to a nonreprese-
native training set, it should optimize performance metrics
probing the ensemble properties of the galaxy sample, mod-
ulo Poisson error due to small sample size, as the training set
and test set are drawn from the same underlying population.
We will demonstrate its performance under the metrics of
Section 4 and discuss it as an illustrative experimental con-
trol case in Section 6.1 to highlight the limitations of our
evaluation criteria for photo-z PDFs.
4
ANALYSIS
The goal of this study is to evaluate the degree to which
photo-z PDFs of each method can be trusted for a generic
analysis. The overloaded “p(z)” is a widespread abuse of
notation that obfuscates this goal, so we dedicate attention
to dismantling it here.
Galaxies have redshifts z and photometric data d drawn
from a joint probability space p(z, d) in nature, and each
observed galaxy i has a true posterior photo-z PDF p(z|di).
There are a number of metrics that can be used to test
the accuracy of a photo-z posterior as an estimator of a
true photo-z posterior if the true photo-z PDF is known.
However, the true photo-z PDF of the observed data is
not accessible, as existing mock catalogues produce redshift-
photometry pairs (z, d) by a deterministic algorithm that
does not correspond to a joint probability density from
which one can take samples. In these cases there is no “true
PDF” for an individual object 7, and most measures of PDF
ﬁdelity will necessarily be restricted to probing the quality
of the ensemble of photo-z PDFs. (See §,6.2 for a discussion
of how one might circumvent this limitation.)
Before describing the metrics appropriate to the DC1
data set, we outline the philosophy behind our choices. A
photo-z PDF estimator derived by method H must be un-
derstood as a posterior probability distribution
ˆpH
i (z) ≡p(z|di, ID, IH),
(3)
conditioned not only on the photometric data di for that
galaxy but also on parameters encompassing prior informa-
tion ID shared, in our experiment, among all photo-z PDF
codes and IH that will diﬀer depending on the method H
used to produce it. To be concrete, ID takes the form of a
training set for the machine learning codes and a template
library for the model ﬁtting codes.
The interpretation of the information IH is more sub-
tle. This investigation is built upon the knowledge that two
codes taking the same approach, among choices of model ﬁt-
ting or machine learning, are nonetheless expected to yield
diﬀerent results even if they take the same external prior
information ID. IH represents the projection of the code’s
architecture onto the estimated posteriors over redshift, spe-
ciﬁc to each code, and even the tunable parameters or ran-
dom seeds of a speciﬁc run of a code with a random compo-
nent. We refer to IH as the implicit prior, in contrast with
the training set or template library provided to a given code
explicitly by the researcher. In simple terms, the implicit
7
While a discrete approximation to the true p(z, d) is possible
by sampling the local neighbourhood of parameter space in large
datasets with methods like a nearest neighbor or conditional den-
sity estimate, we do not make an explicit computation of such an
approximate distribution. Rather, we note that the CMNN and
FlexZBoost algorithms are speciﬁc implementations of such algo-
rithms which can be used as examples of such approximations in
the absence of knowledge of the true p(z, d).
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
9
prior is the collection of the many diﬀerent assumptions,
coding choices, algorithm selections, and other implementa-
tion details that are speciﬁc to each code, the ensemble of
which results in diﬀering estimates of redshift when com-
bined with the data and prior information in common to all
codes.
The presence of the implicit prior in some sense makes
a direct comparison of photo-z PDFs produced by diﬀerent
methods impossible; even if they share the same external
prior information ID, by deﬁnition they cannot be condi-
tioned on the same assumptions IH, otherwise they would
not be distinct methods at all. In this study, we isolate the
eﬀect of diﬀerences in prior information IH speciﬁc to each
method by using a single training set IML
D
for all machine
learning-based codes and a single template library IT
D for all
template-based codes. These sets of prior information are
carefully constructed to be representative and complete, so
we have ID ≡IML
D
≡IT
D for every method H. Under this
assumption, a ratio of posteriors of codes is in eﬀect a ra-
tio of the implicit posteriors p(z|di, IH′) since the external
prior information ID is present in the numerator and denom-
inator. Thus comparisons of ˆpH
i (z) isolate the eﬀect of the
method used to obtain the estimator, which should enable
interpretation of the diﬀerences between estimated PDFs in
terms of the speciﬁcs of the method implementations.
The exact implementation of the metrics theoretically
depends on the parametrization of the photo-z PDFs, which
may diﬀer across codes and can aﬀect the precision of the
estimator (Malz et al. 2018). Even considering a single
method under the same parametrization, such as the 200-bin
0 < z < 2 piecewise constant function used here, the exact
bin deﬁnitions must aﬀect the result. The piecewise constant
format is chosen because of its established presence in the
literature, and the choice of 200 bins was motivated by the
approximate number of columns expected to be available for
storage of photo-z PDFs for the ﬁnal LSST Project tables.8
We will discuss the choice of photo-z PDF parameterization
further in Section 6.
This analysis is conducted using the qp9 software pack-
age (Malz & Marshall 2018) for manipulating and calcu-
lating metrics of univariate PDFs. We present the metrics
of photo-z PDFs that address our goals in the sections be-
low. Section 4.1 outlines aggregate metrics of a catalogue
of photo-z PDFs, and Section 4.2 presents a metric of indi-
vidual photo-z PDFs in the absence of true photo-z PDFs.
Those seeking a connection to previous comparison stud-
ies will ﬁnd metrics of redshift point estimate reductions
of photo-z PDFs in Appendix B and metrics of a science-
speciﬁc summary statistic heuristically derived from photo-z
PDFs in Appendix A.
4.1
Metrics of photo-z PDF ensembles
Because LSST’s photo-z PDFs will be used for many sci-
entiﬁc applications, some of which require each individual
catalogue entry to be accurate, we consider several metrics
that probe the population-level performance of the photo-z
8 See, e. g. the LSST Data Products Deﬁnition Document, avail-
able at: https://ls.st/dpdd
9 http://github.com/aimalz/qp/
PDFs. As we have the true redshifts but not true photo-z
PDFs for comparison, we remind the reader of the Cumula-
tive Distribution Function (CDF)
CDF[f, q] ≡
Z q
−∞
f(z)dz,
(4)
of a generic univariate PDF f(z), which is used as the basis
for several of our metrics. We describe metrics based on
the CDF in Section 4.1.1 and metrics of summary statistics
thereof in Section 4.1.2.
4.1.1
CDF-based metrics
A quantile of a distribution is the value q at which the CDF
of the distribution is equal to Q; percentiles and quartiles are
familiar examples of linearly spaced sets of 100 and 4 quan-
tiles, respectively. The quantile-quantile (QQ) plot serves as
a graphical visualization for comparing two distributions,
where the quantiles of one distribution are plotted against
the quantiles of the other distribution, providing an intu-
itive way to qualitatively assess the consistency between an
estimated distribution and a true distribution. The closer
the QQ plot is to diagonal, the closer the match between
the distributions.
The probability integral transform (PIT)
PIT ≡CDF[ˆp, ztrue]
(5)
is the CDF of a photo-z PDF evaluated at its true redshift,
and the distribution of PIT values probes the average accu-
racy of the photo-z PDFs of an ensemble of galaxies. The
distribution of PIT values is eﬀectively the derivative of the
QQ plot. A catalogue of accurate photo-z PDFs should have
a PIT distribution that is uniform U(0, 1), and deviations
from ﬂatness are interpretable: overly broad photo-z PDFs
induce underrepresentation of the lowest and highest PIT
values, whereas overly narrow photo-z PDFs induce over-
representation of the lowest and highest PIT values. Catas-
trophic outliers with a true redshift outside the support of
its photo-z PDF have PIT ≈0 or PIT ≈1.
The PIT distribution has been used to quantify the per-
formance of photo-z PDF methods in the past (e. g. Bor-
doloi et al. 2010; Polsterer et al. 2016; Tanaka et al. 2018).
Tanaka et al. (2018) use the histogram of PIT values as a
diagnostic indicator of overall code performance, while Free-
man et al. (2017) independently deﬁne the PIT and demon-
strate how its individual values may be used both to perform
hypothesis testing (via, e. g. the KS, CvM, and AD tests;
see below) and to construct QQ plots. Following Kodra &
Newman (in prep.) we deﬁne the PIT-based catastrophic
outlier rate as the fraction of galaxies with PIT < 0.0001 or
PIT > 0.9999, which should total 0.0002 for an ideal uniform
distribution.
4.1.2
Summary statistics of CDF-based metrics
We evaluate a number of quantitative metrics derived from
the visually interpretable QQ plot and PIT histogram, built
on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic
KS ≡max
z
CDF[ ˆf, z] −CDF[ ˜f, z]


,
(6)
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

10
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
interpretable as the maximum diﬀerence between the CDFs
of the empirical distribution of PIT values for the test
sample ˆf(z) and a reference distribution ˜f(z), in this case
U(0, 1), for the ideal distribution of PIT values. We also
consider two variants of the KS statistic. A cousin of the KS
statistic, the Cramer-von Mises (CvM) statistic
CvM2 ≡
Z +∞
−∞
 CDF[ ˆf, z] −CDF[ ˜f, z]
2dCDF[ ˜f, z]
(7)
is the mean-squared diﬀerence between the CDFs of an
approximate and true PDF. The Anderson-Darling (AD)
statistic
AD2 ≡Ntot
Z +∞
−∞
 CDF[ ˆf, z] −CDF[ ˜f, z]
2
CDF[ ˜f, z](1 −CDF[ ˜f, z])
dCDF[ ˜f, z] (8)
is a weighted mean-squared diﬀerence featuring enhanced
sensitivity to discrepancies in the tails of the distribution.
In anticipation of a substantial fraction of galaxies having
PIT of 0 or 1, a consequence of catastrophic outliers, we
evaluate the AD statistic with modiﬁed bounds of integra-
tion (0.01, 0.99) to exclude those extremes in the name of
numerical stability.
4.2
Conditional Density Estimate (CDE) Loss: a
metric of individual photo-z PDFs
The Buzzard simulation process precludes testing the de-
gree to which samples from our photo-z posteriors recon-
struct the space of p(z, data). To the knowledge of the au-
thors, there is only one metric that can be used to evaluate
the performance of individual photo-z PDF estimators in the
absence of true photo-z posteriors. The conditional density
estimation (CDE) loss is an analogue to the familiar root-
mean-square-error used in conventional regression, deﬁned
as
L(f, bf) ≡
Z Z
(f(z|x) −bf(z|x))2dzdP(x),
(9)
where f(z|x) is the true photo-z PDF that we do not have
and bf(z|x) is an estimate thereof, in terms of the photom-
etry x. (See Section 3.2.4 for a review of the notation.) We
estimate the CDE loss via
ˆL(f, bf) = EX
Z
bf(z | X)2dz

−2EX,Z
h
bf(Z | X)
i
+ Kf,
(10)
where the ﬁrst term is the expectation value of the photo-z
posterior with respect to the marginal distribution of the
photometric covariates X, the second term is the expecta-
tion value with respect to the joint distribution of X and the
space Z of all possible redshifts, and the third term Kf is a
constant depending only upon the true conditional densities
f(z|x) (Eq. 7 in Izbicki et al. 2017). One of the most power-
ful features of the CDE loss is the ability to estimate the loss
function up to a constant even in the absence of knowledge
of the true underlying distribution (see Eq. 7 and accompa-
nying discussion in Izbicki & Lee (2017) for more details).
This feature enables a quantitative comparison of our es-
timation methods with our current dataset where we lack
access to the true f(z|x).
5
RESULTS
We begin with a demonstrative visual inspection of the
photo-z PDFs produced by each code for individual galaxies.
Figure 1 shows the photo-z PDFs for four galaxies chosen
as examples of photo-z PDF archetypes: a narrow unimodal
PDF, a broad unimodal PDF, a bimodal PDF, and a mul-
timodal PDF. We reiterate that under our idealized experi-
mental conditions, diﬀerences between the resulting photo-z
PDFs are the isolated signature of the implicit prior due to
the method by which the photo-z PDFs were derived.
The most striking diﬀerences between codes are the
small-scale features induced by the interaction between the
shared piecewise constant parameterization of 200 bins for
0 < z < 2 of Section 4 and the smoothing conditions or lack
thereof in each algorithm. The dz = 0.01 redshift resolu-
tion is suﬃcient to capture the broad peaks of faint galax-
ies’ photo-z PDFs with large photometric errors but is too
broad to resolve the narrow peaks for bright galaxies’ photo-
z PDFs with small photometric errors. This observation is
consistent with the ﬁndings of Malz et al. (2018) that the
piecewise constant form underperforms other parameteriza-
tions in the presence of small-scale structures.
However, the shared small-scale features of ANNz2,
METAPhoR, CMNN, and SkyNet are a result of various weighted
sums of the limited number of training set galaxies with
colours similar to those of the test set galaxy in question,
with behavior closer to classiﬁcation than regression in the
case of ANNz2. The settings used on GPz in this work forced
broadening of the single Gaussian to cover the multimodal
redshift solutions of the other codes.
5.1
Performance on photo-z PDF ensembles
The histogram of PIT values, QQ plot, and QQ diﬀerence
plot relative to the ideal diagonal are provided in Figure 2,
showcasing the biases and trends in the average accuracy
of the photo-z PDFs for each code. The high QQ values
(i. e. more high than low PIT values) of BPZ, CMNN, Delight,
EAZY, and GPz indicate photo-z PDFs biased low, and the low
QQ values (more low than high PIT values) of SkyNet and
TPZ indicate photo-z PDFs biased high. All three template-
based codes use a parameterized functional form for the
prior, and deviations from this form in the test set could
account for some of the biases seen. In addition, the EAZY
and LePhare codes both seem to contain an error in how
the marginalize over likelihoods, which likely contributes to
their observed biases. For machine learning codes, Delight
employed a uniform prior in both apparent magnitude and
SED type, which could have biased the resultant PDFs, and
GPz parameterized all PDFs as a single Gaussian, which may
not have been a ﬂexible enough parameterization to capture
the full complexity of the posteriors. In other cases, an ob-
vious source for bias was not discovered, though we note in
the particular instance of TPZ the results showed a trade-
oﬀin bias versus smoothing width during validation, and a
smoothing value that balanced the two eﬀects was chosen.
The gray shaded band marks the 2σ variance in PIT
values found using the trainZ algorithm with a bootstrap
resampling of the training set and a sample size of 44,000
galaxies, representing a conservative estimate of the
ex-
pected errors due to the training sample size, and thus an
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
11
Figure 1. The individual photo-z PDFs (blue) distributions produced by the twelve codes (small panels) on four exemplary galaxies’
photometry (large panels) with diﬀerent true redshifts (red). All photo-z PDFs have been scaled to the same peak value. The photo-z
PDFs of all codes share some features for the example galaxies due to physical colour degeneracies and photometric errors: tight unimodal
p(z) (upper left), broad unimodal p(z) (upper right), bimodal p(z) (lower right), and complex/multimodal p(z) (lower left). The diverse
algorithms and implementations induce diﬀerences in small-scale structure and sensitivity to physical systematics.
approximate minimal error signiﬁcance compared to ideal
performance. The existence of deviations in the PIT his-
tograms outside of this gray shaded uncertainty range show
that signiﬁcant biases are present for some codes.
The PIT histograms of Delight, CMNN, SkyNet, and TPZ
feature an underrepresentation of extreme values, indicative
of overly broad photo-z PDFs, while the overrepresenta-
tion of extreme values for METAPhoR indicates overly nar-
row photo-z PDFs. These ﬁve codes in particular have a
free parameter for bandwidth, which may be responsible for
this vulnerability, in spite of the opportunity for ﬁne-tuning
with perfect prior information.
In many cases this band-
width parameter can be thought of as tuning the size of the
neighbourhood of inﬂuence in the parameter space of the
training data. Choosing too small of a bandwidth can lead
to overﬁtting and overconﬁdence, leading to narrow PDFs,
while choosing too large of a neighbourhood can oversmooth
and lead to overly broad PDFs. FlexZBoost’s “sharpening”
parameter (described in Section 3.2.4) played a key role in
diagonalizing the QQ plot, indicating a common avenue for
improvement in the approaches that share this type of pa-
rameter. On the other hand, the three purely template-based
codes, BPZ, EAZY, and LePhare, do not exhibit much sys-
tematic broadening or narrowing, which may indicate that
complete template coverage eﬀectively defends from these
eﬀects.
Close inspection of the extremes at PIT values of 0 and 1
reveal spikes in the ﬁrst and last bin of the PIT histogram for
some codes in Figure 2, corresponding to catastrophic out-
liers where the true redshift lies outside of the support of the
p(z). The catastrophic outlier rates are provided in Table 2.
As expected, trainZ achieves precisely the 0.0002 value ex-
pected of an ideal PIT distribution. ANNz2, FlexZBoost,
LePhare, and METAPhoR have notably high catastrophic out-
lier rates > 0.02, exceeding 100 times the ideal PIT rate,
meriting further investigation elsewhere.
Figure 3 highlights the relative values of the KS, CvM,
and AD test statistics calculated by comparing the PIT dis-
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

12
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
Figure 2. The QQ plot (red) and PIT histogram (blue) of the photo-z PDF codes (panels) along with the ideal QQ (black dashed
diagonal) and ideal PIT (gray horizontal) curves, as well as a diﬀerence plot for the QQ diﬀerence from the ideal diagonal (lower inset).
The gray shaded region indicates the 2σ range from a bootstrap resampling of the training set with a size of
44,000 galaxies using
trainZ. The twelve codes exhibit varying degrees of four deviations from perfection: an overabundance of PIT values at the centre of the
distribution indicate a catalogue of overly broad photo-z PDFs, an excess of PIT values at the extrema indicates a catalogue of overly
narrow photo-z PDFs, catastrophic outliers manifest as overabundances at PIT values of 0 and 1, and asymmetry indicates systematic
bias, a form of model misspeciﬁcation. Values in excess of the 2σ shaded region show that for some codes these errors will be signiﬁcant
given expected training sample sizes.
tribution and a uniform distribution U(0, 1). METAPhoR and
LePhare perform well under the AD but poorly under the KS
and CvM due to their high catastrophic outlier rates. ANNz2
and FlexZBoost are the top scorers under these metrics of
the PIT distribution. ANNz2’s strong performance can be at-
tributed to an aspect of the training process in which train-
ing set galaxies with PIT values that more closely match
the percentiles of the DC1 training set’s redshift distribu-
tion are upweighted; in eﬀect, these quantile-based metrics
were part of the algorithm itself that may or may not serve
it well under more realistic experimental conditions. Similar
to what was done for the PIT histograms in Figure 2, we
create bootstrap training samples of 44,000 galaxies for use
with trainZ in order to estimate a conservative statistical
ﬂoor that we would expect in real data. No code reaches this
idealized ﬂoor, indicating that all codes suﬀer some degra-
dation from the ideal when employing their implicit priors,
though ANNz2, FlexZBoost, and GPz are within
roughly a
factor of two.
5.2
Performance on individual photo-z PDFs
The values of the CDE loss statistic of individual photo-z
PDF accuracy are provided in Table 3. Even in the absence
of knowledge of the true underlying distribution the CDE
loss can be determined up to a constant, thus the relative
values provide a quantitative measure of code performance.
It is worth noting that strong performance on the CDE loss,
corresponding to lower values of the metric, should imply
strong performance on the other metrics, though the inverse
is not necessarily true. Thus the CDE loss is the most eﬀec-
tive metric for generic science cases.
Of the metrics we were able to consider in this exper-
iment, the CDE Loss is the only metric that can appropri-
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
13
Figure 3. A visualization of the Kolmogorov-Smirnoﬀ(KS, blue diamond), Cramer-von Mises (CvM, black star), and Anderson-Darling
(AD, red asterisk) statistics for the PIT distributions. There is generally good agreement between these statistics, with diﬀerences
corresponding to the codes with outstanding catastrophic outlier rates, a reﬂection of the diﬀerences in how each statistic weights the
tails of the distribution. Horizontal lines indicate the level of uncertainty found by bootstrapping a training set sample of 44,000 galaxies
using trainZ; none of the codes reach this conservative ideal ﬂoor in expected uncertainty.
Table 2. The catastrophic outlier rate as deﬁned by extreme PIT
values. We expect a value of 0.0002 for a proper Uniform distri-
bution. An excess over this small value indicates true redshifts
that fall outside the non-zero support of the p(z).
Photo-z Code fraction PIT< 10−4 or >0.9999
ANNz2
0.0265
BPZ
0.0192
Delight
0.0006
EAZY
0.0154
FlexZBoost
0.0202
GPz
0.0058
LePhare
0.0486
METAPhoR
0.0229
CMNN
0.0034
SkyNet
0.0001
TPZ
0.0130
trainZ
0.0002
ately penalize the pathological trainZ. Additionally, it favors
CMNN and FlexZBoost, the latter of which is optimized for
this metric.
6
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
In contrast with other photo-z PDF comparison papers that
have aimed to identify the “best” code for a given survey, we
have focused on the somewhat more philosophical questions
of how to assess photo-z PDF methods and how to interpret
diﬀerences between codes in terms of photo-z PDF perfor-
mance. In Section 6.1, we reframe the strong performance of
our pathological photo-z PDF technique, trainZ, as a cau-
tionary tale about the importance of choosing appropriate
Table 3. CDE loss statistic of the individual photo-z PDFs for
each code. A lower value of the CDE loss indicates more accurate
individual photo-z PDFs, with CMNN and FlexZBoost performing
best under this metric.
Photo-z Code
CDE Loss
ANNz2
−6.88
BPZ
−7.82
Delight
−8.33
EAZY
−7.07
FlexZBoost
−10.60
GPz
−9.93
LePhare
−1.66
METAPhoR
−6.28
CMNN
−10.43
SkyNet
−7.89
TPZ
−9.55
trainZ
−0.83
comparison metrics. In Section 6.2, we outline the experi-
ments we intend to build upon this study. In Section 6.3, we
discuss the enhancements of the mock data set that will be
necessary to enable the future experiments.
6.1
Interpretation of metrics
We remind the reader that codes utilized in this study were
given a goal of obtaining accurate photo-z PDFs, not an
accurate stacked estimator of the redshift distribution, so
we do not expect the same codes to necessarily perform well
for both classes of metrics. Indeed, the codes were optimized
for their interpretation of our request for “accurate photo-
z PDFs,” and we expect that the implementations would
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

14
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration
have been adjusted had we requested optimization of the
traditional metrics of Appendices A and B.
Furthermore, our metrics are not necessarily able to as-
sess the ﬁdelity of individual photo-z PDFs relative to true
posteriors: in the absence of a “true PDF” from which red-
shifts are drawn, it is diﬃcult to construct metrics to mea-
sure performance for individual galaxies rather than ensem-
bles. (The CDE Loss metric of section 4.2 is an exception
to this rule.) A lack of appropriate metrics more sophisti-
cated than the CDE Loss remains an open issue for sci-
ence cases requiring accurate individual galaxy PDFs. The
metric-speciﬁc performance demonstrated in this paper im-
plies that we may need multiple photo-z PDF approaches
tuned to each metric in order to maximize returns over all
science cases in large upcoming surveys.
The trainZ estimator of Section 3.3, which assigns ev-
ery galaxy a photo-z PDF equal to N(z) of the training
set, is introduced as an experimental control or null test
to demonstrate this point via reductio ad absurdum. Be-
cause our training set is perfectly representative of the test
set, N(z) should be identical for both sets down to statis-
tical noise. We make the alarming observation that trainZ,
the absurd experimental control, outperforms all codes on
the CDF-based metrics, and all but one code on the N(z)
based statistics. The PIT and other CDF-based metrics upon
which modern photo-z PDF comparisons are built (Bordoloi
et al. 2010; Polsterer et al. 2016; Tanaka et al. 2018) can be
gamed by a trivial estimator that yields only an aﬃrmation
of prior knowledge uninformed by the data.
The extreme
case of trainZ also exempliﬁes the fact that characteristics
of the training data are imprinted on the ensemble distribu-
tions via the prior, and any imperfections and biases in the
training sample will be propagated to the measured photo-
z PDFs. In other words, such ensemble metrics are insuﬃ-
cient for the task of selecting photo-z PDF codes for analysis
pipelines10.
The CDE loss and point estimate metrics appropri-
ately penalize trainZ’s naivete. As shown in Appendix B,
trainZ has identical ZPEAK and ZWEIGHT values for
every galaxy, and thus the photo-z point estimates are con-
stant as a function of true redshift, i.e. a horizontal line at
the mode and mean of the training set distribution respec-
tively. The explicit dependence on the individual posteriors
in the calculation of the CDE loss, described in Section 5.2,
distinguishes this metric from those of the photo-z PDF en-
semble and stacked estimator of the redshift distribution,
despite their prevalence in the photo-z literature.
In summary, context is crucial to defend against decep-
tively strong performers such as trainZ; the best photo-z
PDF method is the one that most eﬀectively achieves the
science goals of a particular study, not the one that per-
10 That being said, we note that close relatives of trainZ have
been employed by weak lensing surveys of the past and present
(Lima et al. 2008; Hildebrandt et al. 2017; Hoyle et al. 2018)
to estimate N(z) by assigning each test set galaxy the redshift
distribution of a subset of the training set, where the subset is
deﬁned as similar to the test set galaxy in the space of photo-
metric data. The speciﬁc science goal naturally guides the choice
of metric to focus on N(z) rather than individual photo-z PDFs,
and on the basis of that metric such improvements upon trainZ
are guaranteed to be more robust to training set imbalance.
forms best on a metric that does not reﬂect those goals. In
the absence of a single scientiﬁc motivation or the informa-
tion necessary for a principled metric deﬁnition, we must
consider many metrics and be critical of the information
transmitted by each.
6.2
Extensions to the experimental design
The work presented in this paper is only a ﬁrst step in as-
sessing photo-z PDF approaches and moving toward a pho-
tometric redshift estimator that will be employed for LSST
analyses. Extensions of the experimental design will require
further rounds of analyses, and the authors welcome interest
from those outside LSST-DESC to have their codes assessed
in these future investigations.
This initial paper explores photo-z PDF code perfor-
mance in idealized conditions with perfect catalogue-based
photometry and representative training data, but the re-
silience of each code to realistic imperfections in prior in-
formation has not yet been evaluated. A top priority for a
follow-up study is to test realistic forms of incomplete, erro-
neous, and non-representative template libraries and train-
ing sets as well as the impact of other forms of external
priors that must be ingested by the codes, major concerns
in Newman et al. (2015); Masters et al. (2017). Outright red-
shift failures due to emission line misidentiﬁcation or noise
spikes may be modeled by the inclusion of a small number
of high-conﬁdence yet false redshifts. We plan to perform a
full sensitivity analysis on a realistically incomplete training
set of spectroscopic galaxies, modeling the performance of
spectrographs, emission-line properties, and expected signal-
to-noise to determine which potential training set galaxies
are most likely not to yield a secure redshift.
Appendix A only addresses the stacked estimator of the
redshift distribution of the entire galaxy catalogue rather
than subsets in bins, tomographic or otherwise. The eﬀects
of tomographic binning schemes will be explored in a dedi-
cated future paper, including propagation of redshift uncer-
tainties in a set of ﬁducial tomographic redshift bins in order
to estimate impact on cosmological parameter estimation.
Sequels to this study will also address some shortcom-
ings of our experimental procedure. The ﬁxed redshift grid
shared between the codes may have unfairly penalized codes
with a diﬀerent native parameterization, as precision is lost
when converting between formats. Performance on the (ad-
mittedly small) population of sharply peaked photo-z PDFs
may have been suppressed across all codes due to the insuﬃ-
cient resolution of the redshift grid. In light of the results of
Malz et al. (2018), in future analyses we plan to switch from
a ﬁxed grid to the quantile parameterization or to permit
each code to use its native storage format under a shared
number of parameters.
Section 4 discussed the diﬃculty in evaluating PDF ac-
curacy for individual objects with known (z, d) information
but without a known p(z, d). In a follow-up study, we will
generate mock data probabilistically, yielding true PDFs in
addition to true redshifts and photometric data. This future
data set will enable tests of PDF accuracy for individual
galaxies rather than solely ensembles.
MNRAS 000, 000–000 (0000)

Photo-z estimation approaches for LSST
15
6.3
Realistic mock data
To make optimal use of the LSST data for cosmological and
other astrophysical analyses of the LSST-DESC SRM, fu-
ture investigations that build upon this one will require a
more sophisticated set of galaxy photometry and redshifts.
This initial paper explored a data set that was constructed
at the catalogue level, with no inclusion of the complica-
tions that arise from photometric measurements of imaging
data. Future data challenges will move to catalogues con-
structed from mock images, including the complications of
deblending, sensor ineﬃciencies, and heterogeneous observ-
ing conditions, all anticipated to aﬀect the measured colours
of LSST’s galaxy sample (Dawson et al. 2016).
The DC1 galaxy SEDs were linear combinations of just
ﬁve basis SED templates, and the next generation of data for
photo-z PDF investigations must include a broader range of
physical properties. Though we only considered z < 2 here,
LSST 10-year data will contain z > 2 galaxies, plagued by
fainter apparent magnitudes and anomalous colours due to
stellar evolution. A subsequent study must also have a data
set that includes low-level active galactic nuclei (AGN) fea-
tures in the SEDs, which perturb colours and other host
galaxy properties. An observational degeneracy between the
Lyman break of a z ∼2 −3 galaxy from the Balmer break
of a z ∼0.2 −0.3 galaxy is a known source of catastrophic
outliers (Massarotti et al. 2001) that was not eﬀectively in-
cluded in this study. To gauge the sensitivity of photo-z
PDF estimators to catastrophic outliers, our data set must
include realistic high-redshift galaxy populations.
7
CONCLUSION
This paper compares twelve photo-z PDF codes under con-
trolled experimental conditions of representative and com-
plete prior information to set a baseline for an upcoming
sensitivity analysis. This work isolates the impact on met-
rics of photo-z PDF accuracy due to the estimation tech-
nique as opposed to the complications of realistic physical
systematics of the photometry. Though the mock data set
of this investigation did not include true photo-z posteriors
for comparison, we interpret deviations from perfect results
given perfect prior information as the imprint of the implicit
assumptions underlying the estimation approach.
We evaluate the twelve codes under science-agnostic
metrics both established and emerging to stress-test the
ensemble properties of photo-z PDF catalogues derived by
each method. In appendices, we also present metrics of point
estimates and a prevalent summary statistic of photo-z PDF
catalogues used in cosmological analyses to enable the reader
to relate this work to studies of similar scope. We observe
that no one code dominates in all metrics, and that the stan-
dard metrics of photo-z PDFs and the stacked estimator of
the redshift distribution can be gamed by a very simplistic
procedure that asserts the prior over the data. We emphasize
to the photo-z community that metrics used to vet photo-z
PDF methods must be scrutinized to ensure they correspond
to the quantities that matter to our science.
