Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
Jihun Hamm

Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Mikhail Belkin

Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
In this paper we propose a non-metric ranking-
based representation of semantic similarity that
allows natural aggregation of semantic informa-
tion from multiple heterogeneous sources. We
apply the ranking-based representation to zero-
shot learning problems, and present deterministic
and probabilistic zero-shot classiﬁers which can
be built from pre-trained classiﬁers without re-
training. We demonstrate their the advantages on
two large real-world image datasets. In particu-
lar, we show that aggregating different sources of
semantic information, including crowd-sourcing,
leads to more accurate classiﬁcation.
1. Introduction
In standard multiclass classiﬁcation settings, classes are
treated as a categorical set without any extra structure.
When we have side-information on the structure of classes,
such as semantic relatedness, we can use this information
to improve the classiﬁcation itself, or transfer any knowl-
edge learned from the training domain to solve problems in
a new domain.
Consider a classiﬁcation problem of the following 10 visual
objects: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog, frog,
horse, ship, and truck. There are many sources from which
semantic information for those objects can be obtained.
WordNet is a knowledge-base of semantic hierarchies de-
veloped manually by linguistic experts (Miller, 1995). In
WordNet, objects form a hierarchical tree (Figure 1, Left),
where a child object is ‘a kind of’ its parent object. Sev-
eral similarity metrics can be deﬁned from the hierarchy
1, one of which is shown in Figure 1 (Middle) as a two-
dimensional classical multidimensional scaling (MDS) em-
bedding. Semantic relatedness can also be mined automat-
ically from existing corpora, such as Wikipedia, Google N-
1http://maraca.d.umn.edu/similarity/
measures.html
Gram corpus, or using search engines, where cosine an-
gles of co-occurrence vectors can be used as a similarity of
two words. More recently, elaborate methods for learning
vectorial representations of words have also been proposed
(Huang et al., 2012; Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al.,
2014). Figure 1 (Right) is an example MDS embedding
from the representation from (Huang et al., 2012). As can
be seen from the ﬁgure, similarity of the same objects can
look very different depending on which semantic source
and measure is used.
Non-metric representation of similarity.
Multiple
sources of semantic information have the potential to com-
plement each other for an improved classiﬁcation result.
Still, how to best aggregate similarity from inhomogeneous
sources remains an open problem.
Similarity measures
from different corpora or methods are not directly compa-
rable, and therefore a simple averaging of the measures will
not be optimal. The ﬁrst key idea of our paper is that we
use non-metric, ranking-based representation of semantic
similarity, instead of numerical representation.
To illustrate our approach, consider the problem of distin-
guishing cat and truck. In Figure 1 (Middle), cat is closer
to dog than automobile:
d(cat, dog) < d(cat, automobile),
and truck is closer to automobile than to dog:
d(truck, automobile) < d(truck, dog)).
In other words, we may be able to distinguish cat and truck
from their closeness to other reference objects without us-
ing any numerical similarity. As a special case, we can use
the similarity of all the other objects to cat to form a seman-
tic ranking of cat. For example, cat has a semantic ranking
πcat = [horse, deer, · · · , automobile, airplane],
(1)
and truck has a semantic ranking
πtruck = [automobile, ship, · · · , deer, horse],
(2)
arXiv:1502.08039v1  [cs.LG]  27 Feb 2015

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
WordNet hierarchy
cat
truck
airplane
car
bird
deer
dog
frog
horse
ship
vehicle
whole
craftwheeled vehicle
vertebrate
placental
carnivore ungulate
conveyance
object
chordate
mammal
instrumentality
physical entity
animal
artifact
entity
organism
living thing
Similarity − Wu & Palmer (1994)
airplane
automobile
deer
dog
ship
cat
truck
Similarity − Huang et al (2012)
airplane
automobile
bird
dog
frog
horse
ship
cat
truck
Figure 1. Representations of semantic relatedness of 10 objects. Left: hierarchical tree from WordNet. Middle: MDS embedding using
Wu & Palmer metric. Right: MDS embedding from (Huang et al., 2012). Note that the two embeddings from different similarity
measures look very different (Middle vs Right). Some labels are hidden to avoid clutter.
according to the distance in Figure 1 (Middle). Not only the
ordinal similarity may be sufﬁcient for distinguishing cat
and truck, but it also seems a more natural representation,
since the ordinal similarity is invariant under scaling and
monotonic transformation of numerical values and there-
fore has a better chance of being consistent across different
heterogeneous sources. Moreover, ordinal information can
be obtained directly from non-numerical comparisons. In
particular, when we ask human subjects to judge similar-
ity of objects, it is easier for subjects to rank objects rather
than to assign numerical scores of similarity.
Zero-shot classiﬁcation without retraining. In this pa-
per, we apply non-metric rankings-based representations
of semantic similarity to zero-shot classiﬁcation prob-
lems (Palatucci et al., 2009; Lampert et al., 2009; Rohrbach
et al., 2010; 2011; Qi et al., 2011; Mensink et al., 2012;
Frome et al., 2013; Socher et al., 2013). In zero-shot learn-
ing we have samples {(xi, yi)} from the domain X × Y
(e.g., Y is the set of 8 objects), but no samples from the test
domain X × Z (e.g., Z = {cat, truck}). The goal is to
construct a classiﬁer X →Z using the only training data
{(xi, yi)} and semantic knowledge of the two domains Y
and Z.
A standard approach to classifying C classes is to use bi-
nary classiﬁcations in one-vs-rest or one-vs-one setting,
or to use multiclass losses directly.
If we already have
pre-trained classiﬁers of the training domain classes Y us-
ing one of those settings, can we use those classiﬁers ‘for
free’ to distinguish unseen classes cat and truck without re-
training with training domain samples? Figure 2 provides
an intuition on the problem. Consider multiple decision hy-
perplanes learned from the one-vs-one setting (others will
be discussed in Section 2.) The C(C−1)
2
hyperplanes par-
tition the feature space into ‘cells’, each of which assigns
a ranking of C objects to points inside its interior. To see
this, note that all pairs of objects are compared in each cell
(either i ≺j or j ≺i), and transitivity (see Section 2)
follows the metric triangle inequality. The ranking of an
unseen test sample assigned by pre-trained classiﬁers can
be compared with the semantic rankings of cat or truck
for zero-shot classiﬁcation, assuming feature and semantic
similarities are strongly correlated (see (Deselaers & Fer-
rari, 2011) for a discussion).
One−vs−one
airplane
automobile
cat
deer
dog
ship
cat
truck
Figure 2. Decision hyperplanes for classifying 8 objects partition
the feature space into cells that correspond to rankings (see text).
The lines are 8·7
2 separating hyperplanes from the one-vs-one bi-
nary classiﬁcation setting.
Building on this idea, we present novel zero-shot classiﬁ-
cation methods that are free of re-training and can aggre-
gate semantic information from multiple sources. We start
by proposing a simple deterministic ranking-based method,
and further improve the method by introducing probabil-
ity models of rankings. In the probabilistic approach, real-
valued classiﬁcation scores are mapped to posterior prob-
abilities of rankings, and combined with prior probabil-
ity of rankings learned from (multiple) semantic sources.
The advantage of using probabilistic approach will be ex-
plained more in the method and the experiment sections.
For both the posterior and the prior probabilities of rank-
ings, we use classic probabilistic models of ranking includ-
ing the Plackett-Luce, the Mallows, and the Babington-
Smith models.

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
To summarize the contributions of this paper, we present
1. non-metric ranking-based representation of a seman-
tic structure, alternative to numerical similarity repre-
sentation
2. methods of aggregating multiple semantic sources us-
ing probability models of rankings
3. deterministic and probabilistic zero-shot classiﬁers
built from pre-trained classiﬁers without retraining.
In the experiment section we demonstrate the advantages
of our approach over a numerically-based approach and
a deterministic approach using two well-known image
databases Animals-with-attributes (Lampert et al., 2009)
and CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky, 2009). In particular, we
demonstrate that aggregating different semantic sources,
including crowd-sourcing, leads to more accurate zero-shot
classiﬁcation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec-
tion 2, we present deterministic and probabilistic ranking-
based algorithms for zero-shot classiﬁcation. In Section 3,
we relate our work to others in the literature. In Section 4,
we test our methods with real-world image databases, and
conclude the paper in Section 5.
2. Zero-shot learning with rankings
Notations.
Let R denote the set of all rankings on C
items/classes, and π = [π(1), ..., π(C)] ∈R denote a rank-
ing: π(i) is the position of item i and π-1(j) is the item
number whose position is j. We write i ≺j (‘i precedes
j’) when π(i) < π(j) (‘item i is ranked higher than item
j’.) A top-K ranking is a straightforward generalization
of a ranking, in which the order of only the ﬁrst K items
π-1(1), ..., π-1(K) matter and the order of the remaining
C −K items are ignored. With an abuse of notation, we
use π and R as a top-K ranking and the as the set of all top-
K rankings as well, since a full ranking is a special case
(K = C.) A partial order is a further generalization of a
ranking and a top-K ranking. In a (full) ranking, a pair of
items (i, j), i ̸= j has to satisfy either i ≺j or j ≺i,
whereas it can be neither in a partial order. In addition, a
partial order has to satisfy the transitivity: for any triple
(i, j, k), i ≺j and j ≺k implies i ≺k. Item positions
π(·) are in general undeﬁned for a partial order.
2.1. Deterministic approach
A simple deterministic approach to zero-shot learning us-
ing semantic rankings was already outlined in Introduction.
In one-vs-one setting, C(C−1)
2
pre-trained classiﬁers assign
a ranking π(x). In one-vs-rest, C binary classiﬁers assign
C real-valued scores to a test point according to the point’s
distances to C decision hyperplanes. The scores can be
sorted to provide a ranking π(x). Given this ranking π(x)
of a test sample x, and prior knowledge of semantic rank-
ings {πz | z ∈Z} of test-domain classes Z, we predict
z(x) = arg min
z∈Z d(π(x), πz),
(3)
where d(·, ·) is a distance between two rankings.
For
example, let Z
= {cat,
dog} whose semantic rank-
ings are (1) and (2), respectively.
If an unseen im-
age x has classiﬁcation scores in the order π(x)
=
[dog, deer, · · · , ship, airplane], so that d(π(x), πcat) <
d(π(x), πtruck) for some d(·, ·), then we classify x as a cat
rather than a truck. We use the Kendall’s ranking distance
which is the number of mismatching orders:
d(π1, π2) = |{(i, j) | π1(i) > π1(j) ∧π2(i) < π2(j)}|.
(4)
Sometimes it may make more sense to compare only the
closest items than to compare all the items. The top-K ver-
sion of the Kendall’s distance was proposed in (Critchlow,
1985), which can be computed as follows. Let A, B, and
D be the sets
A
=
{i ∈1, ..., C | π1(i) ≤K, π2(i) ≤K}
B
=
{i ∈1, ..., C | π1(i) ≤K, π2(i) > K}
D
=
{i ∈1, ..., C | π1(i) > K, π2(i) > K}.
Then the Kendall’s top-K distance can be computed by
dK(π1, π2)
=
|{(i, j) ∈A × A|π1(i)<π1(j), π2(i)>π2(j)}|
+
|B|(C+K−|B|−1
2
)−
X
i∈B
π1(i)−
X
i∈D
π2(i).(5)
Zero-shot classiﬁcation using the rule (3) will be called de-
terministic ranking-based (DR) method.
2.2. Probabilistic approach
We can further reﬁne ranking-based algorithms by consid-
ering a probabilistic approach. There are several causes of
uncertainty in ranking-based representation. First, classi-
ﬁer outputs for a test-domain sample x can have low conﬁ-
dence, since the classiﬁers are trained only with training-
domain samples.
Second, prior knowledge of semantic
rankings from multiple semantic sources may not be unan-
imous. Third, feature and semantic similarities do not al-
ways coincide. For these reasons, we consider probabil-
ity models of (top-K) rankings. We discuss three models:
the Mallows (Mallows, 1957), the Plackett-Luce (Plack-
ett, 1975; Luce, 1959; Marden, 1995), and the Babington-
Smith (Joe & Verducci, 1993; Smith, 1950), which we will
introduce where they are needed (see (Critchlow, 1985;
Critchlow et al., 1991; Marden, 1995) for more reviews.)
In our probabilistic zero-shot learning approach, we as-
sume the following dependence:
x
/ π
/ z
(6)

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
that is, the label z of a sample x is dependent only on the
predicted ranking π, which in turn is dependent only on the
sample x. The probability of a test-domain label given the
sample P(z|x) is obtained by marginalizing out the latent
ranking variable π:
P(z|x) =
X
π∈R
P(π|x)P(z|π) =
X
π∈R
P(π|x)
P(z)P(π|z)
P
z P(z)P(π|z),
(7)
and the ﬁnal prediction of the label z for a test sample is
made by arg maxz P(z|x).
There are two terms in (7): a probabilistic ranker P(π|x)
and a prior for semantic ranking P(π|z). First, we describe
the prior for semantic ranking P(π|z) learned from one or
more semantic sources (e.g. different corpora or crowd-
sourcing) in Section 2.3. Second, we describe probabilistic
rankers P(π|x) based on standard classiﬁers trained with
training-domain data in Section 2.4. The ﬁnal zero-shot
classiﬁer for unseen samples bringing these two learned
components is described in Section 2.5.
2.3. Prior for semantic ranking
We encode the semantic similarity between training- and
test-domain classes by probabilistic ranking models of
training-domain classes P(π|z) for each test-domain class
z. To learn P(π|z), we use multiple instances of rankings
for each test-domain class. These rankings can come from
multiple linguistic corpora or by human-rated rankings di-
rectly. Below we outline three popular models of rankings
– the Plackett-Luce, the Mallows, and the Babington-Smith
models.
Plackett-Luce. The Plackett-Luce model for the probabil-
ity of observing a top-K ranking π is
P(π; v) =
K
Y
i=1
vπ-1(i)
PC
j=i vπ-1(j)
.
(8)
The non-negative parameters v1, ..., vC indicate the rela-
tive chances of being ranked higher than the rest of the
items, and are invariant under constant scaling of v’s. One
interpretation of the generative procedure of the Plackett-
Luce model is the Vase interpretation from (Silberberg,
1980). Suppose there is a vase with inﬁnite number of balls
marked 1 to C, whose numbers are proportional to v’s. At
the ﬁrst stage, a ball is drawn and is recorded as π-1(1). At
the second stage, another ball is drawn and is recorded as
π-1(2) unless the ball is already selected before (π-1(1)),
in which case the drawing is tried again. The procedure
is continued until K distinct balls are drawn and recorded.
This generative probability is captured by (8).
Given
N
samples
(=semantic
sources)
of
rankings
π1, ..., πN for a class, the parameters can be estimated by
MLE. The log-likelihood of (8) is
L(v) =
N
X
n=1
[
K
X
i=1
log(vπ-1
n(i)) −log(
C
X
j=i
vπ-1
n(j))],
(9)
with possibly an additional regularization term η P v2
i .
Hunter (Hunter, 2004) proposed an iterative method of es-
timation using the Minorization-Maximization procedure
which generalizes the Expectation-Maximization proce-
dure and converges to a global maximum solution under
a certain condition on the data. From our experience, sim-
ple gradient-based or Newton-Raphson methods seem to
work well with an appropriate choice of the regularization
parameter.
Mallows. The Mallows model (Mallows, 1957) for full
rankings is deﬁned as P(π; π0, λ) ∝e−λ d(π,π0), where
π0 is the mode, λ is the spread parameter, and d(·, ·)
is the Kendall’s distance between two rankings. It may
be viewed as a discrete analog of the Gaussian distribu-
tion for ranking. The distance can further be written as
d(π, π0) = d(ππ-1
0 , e) = PC−1
j=1 Vj(ππ-1
0 ), where e is the
identity ranking and the Vj’s are deﬁned as
Vj(σ) =
X
i>j
I[σ-1(i) < σ-1(j)].
(10)
Fligner et al. (Fligner & Verducci, 1986) proposed the Mal-
lows model for top-K lists by marginalizing the Mallows
model:
P(π; π0, λ) =
1
φ(λ)e−λ PK
j=1 Vj(ππ-1
0 ),
(11)
where the Vj’s are deﬁned in (10) and φ is the normal-
ization constant which can be computed in closed form:
φ(λ) = QK
j=1(1 −e−(C−j+1)λ)/(1 −e−λ).
Given N samples of rankings π1, π2, ..., πN, the parame-
ters of the Mallows model for total rankings can also be
found by MLE (Feigin & Cohen, 1978). When the mode
π0 is known, the MLE of the spread parameter λ can be
found by convex optimization, owing to the fact that the
log-likelihood is a concave function of λ. The MLE of the
centroid π0 is the maximum of P
i log P(πi; π0, λ) and is
equivalent to
arg min
π0
X
i
d(πi, π0).
(12)
The minimization (12) is also known as the Kemeny op-
timal consensus or aggregation problem (Kemeny, 1959)
and is known to be NP-hard (Bartholdi et al., 1989). How-
ever, there are known heuristic methods such as sequential
transposition of adjacent items (Critchlow, 1985) or other
admissible heuristics (Meila et al., 2007). We use the for-
mer method. Starting from the average ranking as the ini-
tial value of π0, and we search adjacent items π-1(i) and

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
π-1(i + 1) whose swapping lowers the sum of distances
the most. We stop if there is no such item or if the max-
imum number of iteration (1000 in our case) is exceeded.
The MLE with (11) can be solved by using PK
j=1 Vj(π) in
place of d.
Babington-Smith.
The Babington-Smith model (Joe &
Verducci, 1993; Smith, 1950) is another probabilistic rank-
ing model based on pairwise comparisons. Given two items
i and j, let αij be the probability that item i is ranked higher
than item j. Given these preferences {αij}, the probability
of a ranking π is
P(π; α) ∝Q
i<j αI[π(i)<π(j)]
ij
(1 −αij)1−I[π(i)<π(j)]. Af-
ter introducing new parameters vij = αij/αji (Joe & Ver-
ducci, 1993), the probability of a top-K ranking can be writ-
ten as 2
P(π; v) =
1
ψ(v)
K
Y
i=1
C
Y
j=i+1
vπ-1(i)π-1(j)
(13)
The Babington-Smith model is similar to the Plackett-Luce
model in that the probability is the product of v’s. The
larger vij is, the more likely it is that item i is ranked higher
than item j. However, unlike the Plackett-Luce model, the
normalizing constant ψ(v) does not have a known closed
form. We do not use it for modeling the semantic prior, but
use it for probabilistic ranker in the next section.
2.4. Probabilistic ranker from classiﬁers
The probabilistic ranker P(π|x) takes a sample x as input
and probabilistically ranks the similarity of x to training-
domain classes Y. We propose to build rankers from stan-
dard settings of multiclass classiﬁers: one-vs-rest, one-vs-
one, or multiclass-loss as in (Crammer & Singer, 2002).
Any classiﬁer that output a real-valued conﬁdence or score
can be used for this purpose.
One-vs-rest binary classiﬁers. In this setting, there will be
C such scores f1(x), ...., fC(x) for each training-domain
class. We relate the real-valued scores {fi} and the non-
negative parameters {vi} of the Plackett-Luce model (8)
by setting vi = efi(x), to get
P(π|x) =
K
Y
i=1
efπ-1(i)(x)
PC
j=i efπ-1(j)(x) .
(14)
Instead of producing a single ranking π as in the deter-
ministic approach (3), this ranker evaluates the probability
of any ranking given x taking into account the conﬁdence
({fi(x)}) of C one-vs-rest classiﬁers.
One-vs-one binary classiﬁers. In this setting, there will
be C(C −1)/2 scores f1,2(x), ...., fC−1,C(x) for each
2We presents a slightly modiﬁed form.
pair of training-domain classes. We related these scores to
the C(C −1)/2 parameters {vij} of the Babington-Smith
model (13) by vij = efij(x), to get
P(π|x) ∝
K
Y
i=1
C
Y
j=i+1
efπ-1(i),π-1(j)(x).
(15)
Similar to (14),
this ranker evaluates the probabil-
ity of any ranking π given x taking into account
the
conﬁdence
({fij(x)})
of
C(C −1)/2
one-vs-
one classiﬁers.
Note that if the pre-trained classi-
ﬁers are linear, that is, fij(x)
=
w′
ijx, then this
ranker is quite similar to (14),
since P(π|x)
∝
QK
i=1
QC
j=i+1 ewπ-1(i),π-1(j)(x)
=
QK
i=1 e ˆ
w′
π-1(i)x,
with
ˆwπ-1(i) deﬁned as PC
j=i+1 wπ-1(i),π-1(j). However, it has
a different normalization term from (14).
Multiclass-loss classiﬁers. Other types of classiﬁers can
be accommodated.
When the pre-trained classiﬁers are
multinomial logistic regression (=softmax) or SVMs with a
multiclass loss (Crammer & Singer, 2002), we again have
C scores f1(x), ...., fC(x) computed from C parameter
vectors w1, ..., wC. Similar to the one-vs-rest case, we can
use the relation vi = efi(x) = ew′
ix with the Plackett-Luce
model which gives us the same ranker as (14). Note that if
the original classiﬁer is a multinomial logistic regression,
the (14) is in fact a direct generalization of logistic regres-
sion for K = 1, which is also observed in (Cheng et al.,
2010). In this case, the trained parameters {wi} coincide
with the optimal maximum likelihood parameters for (14)
trained with top-1 rankings which are ground truth labels
of the training domain.
To summarize, there exist natural interpretations of the
Plackett-Luce and the Babington-Smith models that allow
us to relate classiﬁcation scores to their parameters and use
them to produce posterior probability P(π|x) of rankings
without any further training3.
2.5. Zero-shot prediction
The probabilistic rankers P(π|x) constructed from pre-
trained classiﬁers and the priors for semantic rankings
P(π|z) learned from semantic sources are plugged into (7)
P(z|x) =
X
π∈R
P(π|x)P(z|π) =
X
π∈R
P(π|x)
P(z)P(π|z)
P
z P(z)P(π|z),
and the ﬁnal prediction of the label z for a test sample
x is made by arg maxz
P(z|x).
The sum over (top-
K) rankings P
π∈R cannot be computed analytically for
either of the Plackett-Luce and the Mallows models and
requires approximations, e.g., by Markov chain Monte
3It is not immediately clear whether the Mallows model can
be adapted in this setting and is left for future work.

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
Carlo (MCMC) sampling. Alternatively, we use P(π|z) =
I[π = πz
0] and a uniform prior P(z), somewhat similar to
(Rohrbach et al., 2010). In our preliminary experiments,
MCMC-based summation showed inferior results to this
simple version and therefore will be omitted from the re-
port. The ﬁnal zero-shot classiﬁer is the MAP classiﬁer
arg max
z
K
Y
i=1
e
f(πz
0 )-1(i)(x)
PC
j=i e
f(πz
0 )-1(j)(x) ,
(16)
for pre-trained one-vs-rest/multiclass-loss classiﬁers,
and
arg max
z
K
Y
i=1
C
Y
j=i+1
e
f(πz
0 )-1(i),(πz
0 )-1(j)(x),
(17)
for pre-trained one-vs-one classiﬁers. We summarize the
overall training and testing procedures below.
Training Step 1. Obtain pre-trained classiﬁers
• Input:
training-domain
sample
and
label
pairs
{(x1, y1), ..., (xN, yN)}, regularization hyperparam-
eter
• Output: score functions f1, ..., fC or f1,2, ..., fC−1,C
• Method: one-vs-rest/one-vs-one/multiclass with any
classiﬁer
Training Step 2. Learn priors for semantic rankings
• Input:
ranking
and
test-domain
label
pairs
{(π1, z1), ..., (πM, zM)}
collected
from
corpora
or crowdsourcing
• Output: consensus rankings πz
0 for each test-domain
class z = 1, ..., L from either the Plackett-Luce model
(8) or the Mallows (11)
• Method: MLE of (9) by BFGS or MLE of (12) by
sequential transposition
Testing. Zero-shot classiﬁcation
• Input: data x, parameter K for top-K list size
• Output: prediction of test-domain label z
• Method: MAP estimation (16) or (17), using f(x)’s
from Training Step 1 and πz
0’s from Training Step 2
3. Related work
There are two major approaches to zero-shot learning ex-
plored in the literature:
attribute-based and similarity-
based.
In attribute-based knowledge transfer (e.g.,
(Palatucci et al., 2009; Lampert et al., 2009; Akata et al.,
2013)), the classes from training and test domains are as-
sumed to be distinguishable by a common list of attributes.
Attribute-based approaches often show excellent empirical
performance (Palatucci et al., 2009; Rohrbach et al., 2010).
However, designing the attributes that are discriminative,
common to multiple classes, and correlated with the origi-
nal feature at the same time, can be a non-trivial task that
typically requires human supervision. Similar arguments
can be found in (Rohrbach et al., 2010) or (Mensink et al.,
2014).
By contrast, similarity-based zero-shot approaches use se-
mantic similarity between training-domain classes Y and
test-domain classes Z directly. The advantage of this ap-
proach is that similarity information can be mined auto-
matically from the web, linguistic corpora or other sources.
Similarity information has been used to build a proba-
bilistic zero-shot classiﬁer called direct similarity-based
method (DS) (Rohrbach et al., 2010; 2011), which par-
allels the attribute-based approach from (Lampert et al.,
2009). Direct similarity-based method also uses classiﬁ-
cation scores and probabilistic inference as ours, but it uses
numerical similarity instead of non-metric ranking presen-
tation in our method. More recently, similarity-based ap-
proaches using semantic embedding have been proposed
(Frome et al., 2013; Socher et al., 2013). In these algo-
rithms, training and test domain objects are simultaneously
embedded into a semantic space using multilayer neural
networks. While these two methods produce interesting
results, they use speciﬁc metric similarity models and re-
quire retraining when the semantic model changes, unlike
our method. Mensink et al. use a linear combination of
pre-trained classiﬁers for classifying unseen data (Mensink
et al., 2014). They use co-occurrence statistics as seman-
tic information, whereas we do not assume a speciﬁc type
of similarity information. Lastly, our method provides a
means to aggregate multiple semantic sources that has not
been addressed in the literature.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
We use two datasets 1) Animals with Attributes dataset
(Lampert et al., 2009) and 2) CIFAR-100/10 (Torralba
et al., 2008) collected by (Krizhevsky, 2009).
Seman-
tic similarity is obtained from WordNet distance, web
searches (Rohrbach et al., 2010), word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013), GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014), and from Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics
of the datasets and the types of available semantic informa-
tion used in the experiments. More details on data process-
ing are provided in Appendix.
4.2. Methods
We perform comprehensive tests of the probabilistic
ranking-based (PR) zero-shot model under 1) three learn-
ing settings (one-vs-rest, one-vs-one, multiclass), 2) two
types of semantic sources (linguistic, crowd-sourcing),
and 3) different prior models for semantic rankings (the
Plackett-Luce and the Mallows models).
We compare
probabilistic ranking-based method (PR, Sec. 2.5) to de-

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
Table 1. Datasets used in the experiments.
Animals
CIFAR
Feature dimension
8941
4000
Number of training/validation/test samples
21847 / 2448 / 6180
50000 / 50000 / 10000
Number of training/test classes
40 / 10
100 / 10
Linguistic sources
WordNet, Wikipedia, Yahoo, YahooIm-
age, Flicker
WordNet, word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013), GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014)
Number of surveys from crowd-sourcing
500
500
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
a
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
b
−0.2
0
0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
c
Figure 3. Multidimensional scaling of similarity data for Animals,
using Euclidean distance (a), Euclidean distance with normaliza-
tion, and Kendall’s distance (c)(K = 2). The 10 test-domain
classes are plotted with different symbols and colors.
terministic ranking-based method (DR, Sec. 2.1)and di-
rect similarity-based method (DS, (Rohrbach et al., 2010))
which is the closest state-of-the-art to our methods that uses
classiﬁer scores. We also refer to other results in the litera-
ture for comparison.
Regularization parameters for classiﬁers are determined
from the validation set and partially manually to avoid ex-
haustive cross-validation. We test with different hyperame-
ters K (in top-K list) and report the results with K = 4. For
one-vs-rest and one-vs-one, we trained SVMs followed by
Platt’s probabilistic scaling (Platt, 1999). For multiclass,
we used multinomial logistic regression.
4.3. Result 1 – Discriminability of semantic rankings
We ﬁrst compare the discriminability of classes with rank-
ing vs numerical representations of similarity without us-
ing image data. Using all ﬁve linguistic sources for An-
imals, we compute pairwise distances of 5×10=50 simi-
larity vectors. Two types of distances are computed – the
Euclidean distance of numerical similarity, with or with-
out l1 normalization, and the Hausdorff distance for top-K
lists using the Kendall’s ranking distance (5). Note that
the rankings are obtained by sorting the numerically sim-
ilarity. For these different representations, the average ac-
curacy of leave-one-out 1-Nearest Neighbor classiﬁcation
was 0.44 (Euclidean), 0.62 (Euclidean with normalization),
0.72 (Kendall’s, K=2), 0.70 (Kendall’s, K=5), and 0.64
(Kendall’s, K=10), which shows that the ranking distances
are better than the Euclidean distances for discriminating
test-domain classes when there are multiple heterogeneous
sources. Figure 3 shows the embeddings from classical
Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) using these distances. It
shows qualitative differences of numerical similarity (a and
b) and ranking (c). The embedding of rankings has better
between-class separation and within-class clustering than
the embeddings of numerical similarity, suggesting that the
non-metric order information is more consistent than nu-
merical similarity across different sources.
We also compute leave-one-out accuracy of Bayesian clas-
siﬁcation with the rankings collected directly from crowd-
sourcing for Animals and CIFAR datasets.
Out of 500
rankings, one ranking is held out and the 499 remaining
rankings are used to build 10 semantic ranking probabilities
P(π|z) using both the Mallows and the Plackett-Luce mod-
els. Prediction of the class of the held-out rankings is made
by the maximum of P(π|z) over all 10 classes. For Ani-
mals, the average accuracy was 0.91/0.99/0.99 (K=2/5/10)
using the Mallows model, and 0.79/0.84/0.96 (K=2/5/10)
using the Plackett-Luce model. For CIFAR, the average ac-
curacy was 0.73/0.79/0.84 (K=2/5/10) using the Mallows
model, and 0.72/0.77/0.74 (K=2/5/10) using the Plackett-
Luce model. These numbers show that the rankings ob-
tained from crowd-sourcing have information to discrimi-
nate the test-domain classes with up to 0.8 ∼1.0 accuracy.
4.4. Result 2 - Comparison of PR, DR, and DS
We compare probabilistic ranking (PR), deterministic rank-
ing (DR) and direct similarity (DS) methods for zero-shot
classiﬁcation accuracy. All three methods share the same
image features and the same linguistic sources of seman-
tic information (except for the crowd-sourcing for PR), but
use them in different ways. PR uses probabilistic models
to combine multiple sources of semantic similarity. DR
and DS inherently use a single source of semantic simi-
larity, and therefore the multiple sources have to be com-
bined heuristically. We ﬁrst normalize individual similar-
ity sources to be in the range from 0 to 1, and then com-
pute arithmetic and geometric means over multiple sources.
Note that the main difference between DR and DS, is that
DR uses rankings whereas DS uses numeric values.
DS vs DR. The results are shown in Table 2. For both
DR and DS, using averaged semantic similarity (“Arithm”

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
Table 2. Zero-shot classiﬁcation accuracy of Direct Similarity (DS), Deterministic Ranking (DR), and Probabilistic Ranking-based (RP).
Each method is tested with different semantic source and classiﬁer types. Indiv: averaged accuracy using individual semantic similarities,
Arithm: accuracy using arithmetic mean of similarities, Geom: accuracy using geometric mean of similarities. The best result for each
method is highlighted in boldface.
Animals dataset
Direct Similarity (DS)
Deterministic Ranking (DR)
Probabilistic Ranking (PR)
Linguistic sources
Linguistic sources
Linguistic sources
Crowd-source
Indiv
Arithm
Geom
Indiv
Arithm
Geom
P.-L
Mallows
P.-L
Mallows
one-vs-rest
0.320
0.334
0.354
0.329
0.330
0.347
0.320
0.312
0.351
0.351
one-vs-one
n/a
0.341
0.343
0.359
0.358
0.320
0.374
0.374
multiclass
n/a
0.331
0.345
0.355
0.370
0.345
0.395
0.392
CIFAR dataset
Direct Similarity (DS)
Deterministic Ranking (DR)
Probabilistic Ranking (PR)
Linguistic sources
Linguistic sources
Linguistic sources
Crowd-source
Indiv
Arithm
Geom
Indiv
Arithm
Geom
P.-L
Mallows
P.-L
Mallows
one-vs-rest
0.273
0.300
0.316
0.224
0.258
0.260
0.314
0.288
0.258
0.282
one-vs-one
n/a
0.244
0.281
0.278
0.335
0.297
0.244
0.261
multiclass
n/a
0.251
0.272
0.276
0.339
0.320
0.260
0.292
and “Geom”) is better than using individual similarity (“In-
div”), for both Animals and CIFAR datasets. A plausi-
ble interpretation is that the aggregate similarity is more
reliable than individual similarities despite using heuristic
methods of aggregation. The highest accuracy from DS is
0.354 (for Animals) and 0.316 (for CIFAR), whereas the
hight accuracy from DR is 0.359 (for Animals) and 0.281
(for CIFAR). DR performs slightly better than DS in Ani-
mals, but worse in CIFAR. Within DR, accuracy is not af-
fected much by the pre-trained classiﬁer type (one-vs-rest,
one-vs-one, multiclass).
PR vs others. Using the same linguistic sources, the high-
est accuracy from PR is 0.370 (for Animals) and 0.339
(for CIFAR) which are much higher than DS and DR re-
gardless of whether a single (Indiv) or multiple (Arithm
and Geom) sources are used. This suggests the advantage
of using probabilistic models to aggregate multiple seman-
tic sources. Within PR results, one-vs-rest and one-vs-one
classiﬁers perform comparably, and multiclass logistic re-
gression performs the best. PR performs even better with
crowd-sourced semantic information (0.395) than with lin-
guistic sources (0.370) in Animals, but the opposite is true
in CIFAR, probably due to the less reliability of human sub-
ject ratings with CIFAR (sorting 100 categories correctly
compared to 40 in Animals).
In the literature, the accuracy of attributes-based methods
with Animals ranges from 0.36 to 0.44 (Tables 3 and 4,
(Akata et al., 2013)), compared to 0.395 from our method
which do not use attributes. We remind the reader that ﬁnd-
ing ‘good’ attributes is itself a non-trivial task. When both
similarity and attributes are mined automatically from cor-
pora, similarity-based methods perform much better than
attributed-based methods (individual average of 0.22 from
cat−dog
plane−auto
auto−deer
deer−ship
cat−truck
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
 
Probabilistic Ranking
Direct Similarity
Embedding−based [Socher’13]
Figure 4. Zero-shot classiﬁcation accuracy for CIFAR.
Table 1, (Rohrbach et al., 2010)).
Lastly, Figure 4 shows two-class classiﬁcation accuracy of
PR (PL+linguistic sources), DS, and an embedding-based
method on select pairs of classes from CIFAR (Figure 3,
(Socher et al., 2013)). Although the numbers may not be
directly comparable due to different settings4, PR performs
noticeably better than the two state-of-the-arts. In fact, we
can distinguish auto vs deer, deer vs ship, or cat vs truck
with ∼95% accuracy, without a single training image of
these categories.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose ranking-based representation of
semantic similarity, as an alternative to metric representa-
tion of similarity. Using rankings, semantic information
from multiple sources can be aggregated naturally to pro-
duce a better representation than individual sources. Using
this representation and probability models of rankings, we
present new zero-shot classiﬁers which can be constructed
4Socher et al. used the rest of classes from CIFAR-10 instead
of CIFAR-100 for training, and also used different semantic in-
formation

Probabilistic Zero-shot Classiﬁcation with Semantic Rankings
from pretrained classiﬁers without retraining, and demon-
strate their potential for exploiting semantic structures of
real-world visual objects.
