Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Marco Kemmerling 1
Abstract
Feedback connections play a prominent role in
the human brain but have not received much
attention in artiﬁcial neural network research.
Here, a biologically inspired feedback mecha-
nism which gates rectiﬁed linear units is pro-
posed. On the MNIST dataset, autoencoders with
feedback show faster convergence, better perfor-
mance, and more robustness to noise compared
to their counterparts without feedback.
Some
beneﬁts, although less pronounced and less con-
sistent, can be observed when networks with
feedback are applied on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
1. Introduction
The brain has served as inspiration for artiﬁcial neural net-
works (ANNs) for decades. While these models are usually
heavily simpliﬁed compared to the brain, they have seen
signiﬁcant successes in areas such as image recognition
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al.,
2012), and machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014) in
recent times.
Despite successes, it is clear that the average human brain
is vastly more powerful and versatile than any model used
in practice today, and as such it may be useful to investigate
how and where exactly the brain and ANNs differ.
One such discrepancy between ANNs and the brain is the
existence of feedback, or top-down connections.
While
there is clear evidence of prominent feedback connections
in the brain, ANNs have overwhelmingly been designed
based on the feedforward paradigm, although networks that
do not work solely on the feedforward principle exist and
are called recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Most RNNs
used in practice today focus on recurrent connections from
one layer to itself (e.g.
LSTM networks (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997)), which, while recurrent, arguably do
not constitute top-down connections. These networks are
1University
of
Maastricht,
Maastricht,
The
Nether-
lands.
Correspondence
to:
Marco
Kemmerling

typically applied on problems where the input consists of
sequence data, where the recurrence allows for memory of
previously seen elements of the sequence.
However, the usefulness of recurrent connections or feed-
back is not necessarily restricted to sequence data. If the
input is image data, a ﬁrst look, or pass, at an image could
be used to construct a rough idea of what the image con-
tains, as well as to identify areas of interest, which can then
be further examined on a second pass.
While the network architectures considered in this paper
feature real top-down connections, the focus is not on the
network topology itself, but on how these top-down con-
nections inﬂuence the behaviour of single neurons, i.e. a
mechanism for incorporating feedback.
This feedback mechanism is derived from neuroscience lit-
erature and examined from two broad angles: (1) Whether
the feedback mechanism can in any way improve on stan-
dard methods. Relevant metrics include convergence speed
and performance quality of the trained network. (2) If ex-
amining the feedback’s properties and how it behaves un-
der certain conditions (e.g. noisy signals) can offer any in-
sights into what role the feedback might fulﬁl in the brain.
Needless to say, care has to be taken when trying to infer
functionality of mechanisms in the brain from simpliﬁed
artiﬁcial networks. Nevertheless, experimentation on arti-
ﬁcial models offers an intriguing opportunity, as they are
naturally easier to investigate and manipulate than the real
brain.
In the remainder of this paper, some neuroscientiﬁc back-
ground is explored in section 2 to serve as context for the
feedback mechanism, followed by a description of the feed-
back mechanism itself as it occurs in the brain (section 2.1).
In section 3 the mechanism is adapted for use in ANNs and
some practical considerations on its use are given in sec-
tion 3.1. The following sections describe a range of experi-
ments with the intention to provide answers to the research
questions posed above.
2. Neuroscientiﬁc Background
The neocortex, part of the cerebral cortex, is a part of the
brain that evolved in mammals comparatively recently. It
comprises around 80% of the human brain (Markram et al.,
arXiv:2301.02610v1  [cs.NE]  6 Jan 2023

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
2004) and is therefore often speculated to be responsible
for the emergence of higher intelligence.
The most abundant type of neuron in the neocortex is the
pyramidal neuron, constituting between 70-85% of cells.
In contrast to the remaining neurons in the neocortex, so
called interneurons, which are mostly inhibitory, pyramidal
neurons are excitatory (DeFelipe & Fari˜nas, 1992).
As the name suggests, pyramidal neurons have a cell body
roughly shaped like a pyramid, with a base at the bottom
and an apex at the top. Pyramidal neurons have two types
of dendrites: basal dendrites, originating at the base, and
one apical dendrite, originating at the apex. This apical
dendrite terminates in what is called the apical tuft, where
heavy branching of the apical dendrite occurs. (DeFelipe
& Fari˜nas, 1992).
These apical and basal dendrites are not just differently lo-
cated, but also serve different functions. Basal dendrites
receive regular feedforward input, while the apical tuft den-
drites receive feedback input (Larkum, 2013).
The neocortex appears to have a distinct structure which
is characterised by its organisation into layers as well as
columns. The columnar organisation is based on the ob-
servation that neurons stacked on top of each other tend to
be connected and have similar response properties, while
only few connections exist between columns. Columns are
hence hypothesised to be a basic functional unit in the cor-
tex, although this is somewhat debated in the neuroscience
community (Goodhill & Carreira-Perpi˜n´an, 2002).
The further organisation into six layers was proposed by
Brodman in 1909 (Brodmann, 1909). Layers 1 and 6 are
of particular interest here. Layer 1 consists of almost no
cell bodies, but mostly connections between axons and the
apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons (Shipp, 2007), i.e. it
serves as a connection hub for feedback signals. Layer 6
sends signals to neurons in the thalamus which then in turn
sends signals to layer 1 neurons in the same column (Shipp,
2007), i.e. layers 1 and 6 create a loop where feedback is
sent from layer 6 and received by layer 1.
2.1. Distal Input to Pyramidal Neurons
As described above, apical tuft dendrites receive feedback
input, which appears to modulate the gain of the corre-
sponding neuron (Larkum, 2004). It is hypothesised that
this is a way for the cortex to combine an internal repre-
sentation of the world with external input, i.e. feedback
to a neuron may predict whether this particular neuron
should be ﬁring, and even small feedforward input may
lead the neuron to ﬁre as long as the feedback signal is
strong (Larkum, 2013).
Taking both feedforward and feedback input into account,
the ﬁring rate of a neuron can be modelled as follows
(Larkum, 2004):
f = g(µS + αµD + σ + fβ(µD) −θ)
(1)
where f is the ﬁring rate of the neuron, g the gain, µS the
average somatic current (i.e. feedforward input), µD the
average distal current (i.e. feedback input), α is an atten-
uation factor, σ represents ﬂuctuations in the current, θ is
the ﬁring threshold, and β(µD) is an increasing function of
the dendritic mean current which saturates for values above
some current threshold.
3. Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
The model described in the previous section serves as a
basis to derive an activation function which can replace
the common rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) (Nair & Hinton,
2010), i.e. f(x) = max(0, x).
To arrive at a more practical activation function, g and θ are
dropped from equation 1, since the threshold is modelled
through the bias unit and the gain (i.e. slope) of a ReLU is
by deﬁnition 1 and can thus be safely dropped. Dropping
the summands αµD and σ is less justiﬁable, but since they
do not contribute to the core property of gain increase, they
will be disregarded here, arriving at the following simpli-
ﬁed relationship:
f = µS + fβ(µD)
(2)
Removing f from the right hand side:
f =
1
1 −β(µD)µS
(3)
What remains is an exact deﬁnition of β(µD), which, ac-
cording to (Larkum, 2004), is “an increasing function of the
dendritic mean current µ which saturates for values above
1000pA“. In other words, the function is bounded, i.e. the
gain cannot be increased to arbitrarily high values. Accord-
ingly, some maximum value βmax the function can produce
and a threshold value η which describes when this maxi-
mum is reached need to be deﬁned. Assuming a piecewise
linear model, β(µD) is thus deﬁned as follows:
β(µD) = min
βmax
η
µD, βmax

(4)
As there are no obvious values to assign to βmax and η,
they are treated as hyperparameters. Since setting βmax to
1 results in a division by 0 and a value of βmax > 1 causes
a negative slope, βmax should be smaller than 1.

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Plugging equation 4 into equation 3 yields:
f =
1
1 −min( βmax
η
µD, βmax)
µS
(5)
Since negative values for µS are not taken into account in
the above equations, µS is replaced with max(0, µS), i.e.
the classic ReLU function:
f =
max(0, µS)
1 −min( βmax
η
µD, βmax)
(6)
3.1. Feedback-Gated ReLUs in Practice
The feedback path attempts to mimic the top-down path in
the brain. As such, the origin of feedback terminating in a
layer should be a layer that is higher in the (feedforward)
hierarchy.
Since feedback from higher layers can only be computed
if these higher layers have priorly received feedforward in-
put, at least two time steps are needed to incorporate the
modiﬁed ReLUs into a network. Concretely, some data,
e.g. an image is fed into the network twice, where the ﬁrst
pass enables the computation of feedback which can then
be utilised in the second pass. Although more than two
timesteps are not required, it is possible to use an arbitrary
number of timesteps, which is examined in section 4.1.1.
Any layer that receives feedback requires an additional set
of weights to compute µD. Speciﬁcally, each layer hi with
size n receiving feedback from layer hj with size m intro-
duces n × m additional parameters.
The resulting networks can then be unrolled to create a
feedforward network, so that for t timesteps, each layer oc-
curs t times, while using the same weights at each timestep
(see ﬁgure 1). Since the unrolled network is purely feedfor-
ward, the standard backpropagation is a suitable learning
rule.
In convolutional neural networks (LeCun, 1989), feedback
is implemented on a ﬁlter-wise basis, i.e. each neuron does
not receive its own unique feedback signal, but rather ev-
ery ﬁlter receives a unique feedback signal that is shared
between all units belonging to that ﬁlter.
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) should be used by drop-
ping out the same units in all passes. Otherwise, if e.g.
dropout is only applied on the last pass, the remaining units
will still receive signals from dropped out units in previous
passes, which defeats the purpose of dropout.
4. Experimental Results
The preceding sections describe a feedback mechanism and
how it can be implemented in practice. Here, a range of ex-
Figure 1. Left: autoencoder with (partial) feedback. Right: Un-
rolled autoencoder.
periments is performed to observe how this feedback mech-
anism changes the behaviour of ANNs. Several networks
are applied on two datasets, MNIST (LeCun et al., 2010)
and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2014). Speciﬁcally, the
experiments are designed to answer the research questions
posed in the introduction: (1) whether feedback can im-
prove the performance of ANNs, (2) whether observing
how the feedback works in artiﬁcial models can reveal any
clues on what function feedback has in the brain. Sections
4.1.3, 4.1.4, and 4.2.2 serve to answer the latter question,
where section 4.1.3 is more of a general analysis of feed-
back, while sections 4.1.4 and 4.2.2 test whether feedback
might increase the networks robustness to noise. The re-
maining sections are concerned primarily with question (1)
in that they test convergence speed and performance quality
in various conﬁgurations.
4.1. MNIST
The MNIST dataset is composed of 28 × 28 pixel binary
images of handwritten digits, split into 60000 training and
10000 test instances (LeCun et al., 2010). Each image is
associated with one of ten classes representing the digits
between 0 and 9.
The models used in the following experiments are based
on a (non-convolutional) autoencoder with two encoding
and two decoding layers. The input layer has dimension
(1 × 784), the ﬁrst encoding layer (E1) outputs data of di-
mension (1×392), the second (E2) of dimension (1×196),
the ﬁrst decoding layer (D1) of dimension (1 × 392) and
the second decoding layer (D2) restores the data back to its
original dimension. Except for the ﬁnal layer, each layer is
followed by a ReLU activation. The ﬁnal layer makes use
of a sigmoid activation function.
First experiments were performed with only a single feed-
back connection between the ﬁrst decoder and the ﬁrst en-
coder (see ﬁgure 1).

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Figure 2. Test set loss of autoencoders with and without feedback.
The dimension of the second encoding layer is 196.
Figure 3. Test set loss of autoencoders with and without feedback.
The dimension of the second encoding layer is 10.
Optimal values for η and βmax were determined by a grid
search (βmax = 0.95, η = 5).
Figure 2 shows the loss curves for the autoencoder with
and without feedback. While the autoencoder with feed-
back converges noticeably faster, the difference is relatively
small. It is conceivable that feedback might have a greater
effect if the difﬁculty of the task is increased. While difﬁ-
culty is not a well deﬁned term, reducing the dimension of
the second encoding layer (i.e. the bottleneck) can arguably
be seen as an increase in difﬁculty.
The dimension of the second encoding layer is thus reduced
to 10 (this modiﬁcation will persist in all subsequent ex-
periments) and the experiment is repeated. Indeed, ﬁgure
3 shows a much larger gap between the autoencoder with
feedback and the one without it, supporting the hypothe-
sis that feedback may be more beneﬁcial on more difﬁcult
tasks.
Figure 4. Autoencoder performance with varying numbers of
timesteps. Each conﬁguration was trained and evaluated 10 times.
The curves shown are the averaged losses on the test set.
4.1.1. MORE THAN TWO TIMESTEPS
While at least two timesteps are required to incorporate
feedback, it is not clear whether exactly two timesteps
should be used or whether > 2 timesteps can be beneﬁ-
cial. To examine this, autoencoders with 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8
timesteps are trained.
The results, depicted in ﬁgure 4, show that more than two
timesteps yield no or negligible improvement. This may
of course be data and/or task dependent. Since MNIST is
a fairly simple dataset (binary images, clear separation of
background and foreground, etc.), it is not inconceivable
that tasks on other datasets may beneﬁt from more than two
timesteps.
4.1.2. COMPREHENSIVE FEEDBACK
In the previous experiments, feedback is only sent from
one decoding layer to one encoding layer. Naturally, there
are many more possible conﬁgurations that incorporate fur-
ther feedback connections. In the following experiment,
each layer receives feedback from every layer above it, i.e.
every possible top-down connection is present in the net-
work. This will be referred to as comprehensive feedback,
whereas the previous approach will be referred to as partial
feedback.
As shown in ﬁgure 5, the conﬁguration explained above
does not only converge faster than a standard autoencoder,
but also settles to a smaller loss value, which was not the
case when only partial feedback was applied.
4.1.3. FEEDBACK VS CONSTANT GAIN
In an effort to gain some understanding on how exactly
feedback helps to improve performance, the frequency of
different feedback values is examined.
A distinction is
made between feedback and gain, where feedback refers

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Figure 5. Loss on the test set of autoencoders without feedback,
partial feedback, and comprehensive feedback. Note that the hori-
zontal axis is different from previous ﬁgures, i.e. the training time
is longer.
to µD and gain refers to
1
1−min( βmax
η
(µD),βmax).
Figure 6 shows the data as collected in a network with a
single feedback connection.
While there are some smaller gain values, the overwhelm-
ing majority of values are the maximum gain the network
can produce. This raises the question whether there is much
beneﬁt to learning feedback or whether it might be simi-
larly beneﬁcial to simply multiply all activation values by
a constant.
This is easily tested by setting the gain of every ReLU in
the affected layer to a constant value of 10.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 7, this does lead to a steeper loss
curve than the standard autoencoder, although not quite as
steep as that of the autoencoder with actual learned feed-
back. Further, the performance after training is completed
is worse than that of the standard autoencoder.
Repeating this same experiment for more than one feed-
back connection, i.e. for an autoencoder with comprehen-
sive feedback, yields results as illustrated in ﬁgure 8.
In this setup, the simple multiplication by a constant ini-
tially converges even faster than the autoencoder with
learned feedback. While it does not achieve the same per-
formance as the feedback autoencoder in later stages of
training, it is on par with the standard autoencoder’s per-
formance.
Clearly, the effects of feedback cannot be fully explained
by this constant gain, but the idea of a constant gain seems
to have some merit.
Figure 6. Distribution of feedback (top) and gain (bottom) values
collected in a network with partial feedback over the complete
MNIST test set.
Figure 7. Comparison of a standard autoencoder, an autoencoder
with partial feedback, and an autoencoder with partial constant
gain (the gain of all units in the second encoding layer is set to
10)

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Figure 8. Comparison of a standard autoencoder, an autoencoder
with comprehensive feedback, and an autoencoder with compre-
hensive gain (the gain of all layers is set to 10).
4.1.4. NOISY ACTIVATIONS
While noisy signals are usually not an issue in artiﬁcial net-
works, noise in the brain is very prevalent (Faisal et al.,
2008). To see whether feedback makes the model more
robust to noise, gaussian noise with zero mean and vari-
ous standard deviations is added to the (pre-)activations of
both the network with feedback and the one without it. The
networks are only evaluated with added noise, training is
performed without noise. Note that in the network with
feedback, noise is added to the activations in both passes.
h = f(W T x + b + N(0, σ2) )
(7)
As ﬁgure 9 shows, the use of feedback signiﬁcantly in-
creases the network’s robustness to noise. While this is not
especially useful for machine learning models, it may be
part of the reason why the feedback path exists in the brain.
Figure 9. Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard deviation
σ = 2.0 is added to networks with and without feedback. The
top row shows input instances to the network, the middle and bot-
tom row show reconstructions of the network without and with
feedback (respectively).
4.2. CIFAR-10
The CIFAR-10 dataset is composed of 32×32 pixel colour
images of various objects, split into 50000 training and
10000 test instances. Each image belongs to one of the fol-
Figure 10. Gaussian noise with zero mean and varying standard
deviations (horizontal) is added to networks with and without
feedback. The quality of the reconstruction, as measured by the
loss function (vertical axis), with respect to the magnitude of the
standard deviation is shown for both networks.
lowing classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog,
frog, horse, ship, truck (Krizhevsky et al., 2014).
4.2.1. AUTOENCODER
Similarly to the MNIST experiments, an autoencoder is
trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Again, the architecture
consists of two encoding and two decoding layers. Con-
trary to MNIST, the encoding/decoding layers used here
are convolutional/transposed convolutional layers with 16
5 × 5 ﬁlters.
As ﬁgure 11 shows, the autoencoder with feedback clearly
performs better than the one without it, although the differ-
ence between the two is not as pronounced as it is in the
MNIST experiments.
Curiously, if batch normalisation (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
is used after the activation functions, feedback cannot im-
prove on the performance of the standard autoencoder. This
may suggest that somehow feedback and batch normalisa-
tion are interacting in such a way that the feedback is ren-
dered ineffective.
4.2.2. NOISY ACTIVATIONS
The experiment from section 4.1.4 is repeated on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. The network employed is the autoen-
coder without batch normalisation from the previous ex-
periment.
Since feedback increased the robustness to noise in the
MNIST autoencoder, the same behaviour would be ex-
pected here. However, as apparent in ﬁgure 13, the net-
work with feedback is much more sensitive to (even small
amounts of) noise than the one without feedback.
This may be an indication that the feedback learned by

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Figure 11. Test set loss of autoencoders with and without feed-
back on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Neither model makes use of batch
normalisation.
Figure 12. Test set loss of autoencoders with and without feed-
back on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Both models make use of batch
normalisation.
Figure 13. Gaussian noise with zero mean and varying standard
deviations is added to the CIFAR-10 autoencoders with and with-
out feedback. Although this is not apparent due to the scale of the
plot, the data for the network without feedback follows a similar
shape to the one with feedback.
the network is fundamentally different from the feedback
learned in the MNIST experiments, such that it has a com-
pounding effect on noise, rather than a rectifying one.
4.2.3. CLASSIFICATION
Classiﬁcation on the CIFAR-10 dataset is performed using
a convolutional neural network. The network consists of
two convolutional layers with 64 ﬁlters of size 5 × 5, each
followed by a max pooling (Zhou & Chellappa, 1988) layer
with a 2×2 window and a stride of 2. The convolution and
pooling layers are followed by a fully connected layer (200
units) and a softmax (Bridle, 1990) layer. Batch normali-
sation is applied after the pooling layers and dropout with
a rate of 0.5 is applied after the pooling and the fully con-
nected layers.
To test whether feedback can improve classiﬁcation per-
formance, the network is trained with (comprehensive) and
without feedback. Figure 14 shows only a marginal per-
formance difference between the two networks, with the
feedback network being slightly better. At the end of train-
ing, the classiﬁcation accuracy over the complete test set is
about 0.7% higher for the network with feedback.
Note that the network employed here makes use of batch
normalisation, which, as shown in the previous sec-
tion, may be problematic in combination with feedback.
Whether this is the case here is not clear, since this particu-
lar network does not converge when batch normalisation is
disabled (be it with or without feedback).
5. Conclusion
The feedback mechanism presented here is able to im-
prove performance of conventional networks both in terms

Feedback-Gated Rectiﬁed Linear Units
Figure 14. Classiﬁcation loss on the CIFAR-10 test set. The train-
ing time of 200000 batches corresponds to 512 epochs.
of convergence speed and performance of the trained net-
work when applied on the MNIST dataset. The beneﬁts
of feedback are less clear, however, when applied on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. In principle, an autoencoder with feed-
back can outperform a corresponding autoencoder without
feedback to a small degree, but this positive effect of feed-
back is negated when batch normalisation is utilised in the
autoencoders. Understanding this unfavourable interaction
between feedback and batch normalisation may be an op-
portunity to gain a deeper understanding on how feedback
works and what role it fulﬁls.
Feedback appears to have some positive effect when per-
forming classiﬁcation on CIFAR-10, although this effect
is so small that drawing any ﬁrm conclusions seems ill-
advised.
When investigating the networks robustness to noise, an
even larger divide between performance on MNIST and
CIFAR-10 can be observed. On CIFAR-10, feedback is not
only not beneﬁcial, it actually heavily increases the net-
work’s sensitivity to noise, while the MNIST autoencoder
becomes more robust when feedback is present.
A possible explanation for this difference across datasets
could be that the effectiveness of the feedback mechanism
is data-dependent, i.e. it may be leveraging the highly regu-
lar structure of the MNIST dataset and is thus not as useful
on the less regularly structured CIFAR-10 dataset.
A further general difference between the experiments on
the two different datasets is the use of convolutional lay-
ers, which were used in all of the CIFAR-10 experiments,
but not in any of the MNIST experiments. It may be that
providing feedback on a ﬁlter-wise basis is too simplistic,
or that some other aspect related to convolution is not con-
ducive to the feedback mechanism. Further research on the
combination of feedback and convolutional networks may
lead to some conﬁguration that allows for more clear bene-
ﬁts of feedback.
Naturally, it might also be the case that the results on
MNIST are merely an outlier, which somehow deﬁes a
more fundamental problem with the usage of feedback in
current ANNs, e.g. it may be that backpropagation is not
an ideal learning algorithm for feedback, or that feedback
relies on more realistic models such as spiking neural net-
works (Ghosh-Dastidar & Adeli, 2009).
Should clear evidence arise that feedback is useful beyond
MNIST, an interesting avenue of future research would be
the creation of feedback based multi-modal models, where
sensory inputs from multiple different sources are com-
bined to perform e.g. a classiﬁcation task. For instance,
if a network receives both visual and auditory input, the
barking of a dog may result (mediated by feedback) in a
higher expectation to observe a dog in the visual input.
