JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
1
Abstract— Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) and 
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) are commonly used by 
type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients to measure glucose concentrations. 
The proposed adaptive basal-bolus algorithm (ABBA) supports 
inputs from either SMBG or CGM devices to provide 
personalised suggestions for the daily basal rate and prandial 
insulin doses on the basis of the patients’ glucose level on the 
previous day. The ABBA is based on reinforcement learning 
(RL), a type of artificial intelligence, and was validated in silico 
with an FDA-accepted population of 100 adults under different 
realistic scenarios lasting three simulated months. The scenarios 
involve three main meals and one bedtime snack per day, along 
with different variabilities and uncertainties for insulin 
sensitivity, 
mealtime, 
carbohydrate 
amount, 
and 
glucose 
measurement time. The results indicate that the proposed 
approach achieves comparable performance with CGM or 
SMBG as input signals, without influencing the total daily insulin 
dose. The results are a promising indication that AI algorithmic 
approaches 
can 
provide 
personalised 
adaptive 
insulin 
optimisation and achieve glucose control - independently of the 
type of glucose monitoring technology. 
 
Index Terms— Diabetes, insulin treatment personalisation, 
reinforcement learning, artificial intelligence, adaptive system 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
OST cases of diabetes can be broadly classified as type      
1, where no insulin is secreted due to destruction of the 
                                                                                     
Manuscript received August 30, 2018 
This research was carried out within the framework of the MyTreat 
research and development project, supported by the Swiss Commission of 
Technology and Innovation (CTI) under Grant 18172.1 PFLS-LS. 
Q. Sun is with the with the ARTORG Center for Biomedical Engineering 
Research, 
University 
of 
Bern, 
3008 
Bern, 
Switzerland 

M. Jankovic is with the ARTORG Center for Biomedical Engineering 
Research, University of Bern, 3008 Bern, Switzerland, and the Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Bern University Hospital “Inselspital”, 3010 Bern, 

J. Budzinski is with the Debiotech S.A., 1004 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-

B. Moore is with the St. Mary's University, School of Science, 
Engineering, and Technology, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America 

P. Diem is with the Insel Gruppe AG, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010 Bern, 

C. Stettler is with the Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, Clinical 
Nutrition and Metabolism, Bern University Hospital “Inselspital”, 3010 Bern, 

S. Mougiakakou* is with the ARTORG Center for Biomedical Engineering 
Research, University of Bern, 3008 Bern Switzerland, and the Division of 
Diabetes, Endocrinology, Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, Bern University 

pancreatic beta cells, or type 2, where either the pancreas does 
not produce enough insulin or the body does not effectively 
use the insulin produced. 
The main goal of diabetes management is to maintain 
glucose levels within a healthy range, and this objective may 
require glucose monitoring and insulin therapy via pumps or 
injections. Diabetes patients may use two different approaches 
for insulin management: devices for the self-monitoring of 
blood glucose (SMBG), which measure glucose with one drop 
of finger blood several times during the day, or continuous 
glucose 
monitoring 
(CGM) 
systems, 
which 
use 
a 
subcutaneous miniaturised sensor to measure glucose levels 
every few minutes. In the case of adults with diabetes type 1 
using SMBG, it is recommended to test glucose levels at least 
four times a day, i.e. before each meal and before going to bed 
[1]. Relatively few diabetic patients use CGMs [2], although 
this is expected to increase worldwide in the near future. 
Insulin pumps deliver basal and bolus insulin. Basal insulin 
maintains glucose concentration at consistent levels during 
periods of fasting, while bolus insulin compensates for the 
effects of meal intake. Basal insulin is usually adjusted by the 
attending physician after reviewing the patient’s glucose 
records, while the bolus dose is calculated using a bolus 
advisor. Bolus advisors use simple algorithms to estimate the 
insulin dose on the basis of the carbohydrate (CHO) content of 
the meal, the current blood glucose concentration (usually 
driven by an SMBG device), the patient’s personal settings 
(e.g. correction factor, insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio - CIR), 
and the insulin on board [3].  
As insulin sensitivity changes during the day, CIR and basal 
rate (BR) should be updated over time. Since the daily 
activities of diabetic patients tend to be repetitive, e.g. with 
respect to meal timing, meal amount etc., Owen et al. [4] 
incorporated a Run-to-Run (R2R) algorithm into a controller, 
which led to a more advanced bolus advisor. The advisor 
updated the bolus daily, using two postprandial SMBG 
measurements at 60 min and 90 min after the start of the 
respective meal. The advisor was clinically evaluated and gave 
promising results [5]. It has been proposed that bolus insulin 
could be estimated from CGM data, as supported by case-
based reasoning (CBR) and R2R [6], [7]. The clinical safety of 
the algorithm has been presented in a single-arm pilot study 
[8]. The method has been extended to adjust the BR [9]. The 
in silico results indicated that this approach is of potential 
value.  
The adaptation of BR was initially investigated by Palerm et 
A dual mode adaptive basal-bolus advisor based 
on reinforcement learning 
Qingnan Sun, Marko V. Jankovic, João Budzinski, Brett Moore, Peter Diem, Christoph Stettler,  
Stavroula G. Mougiakakou, Member IEEE  
M 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
2
 
Fig. 2. Main meals and the corresponding CIRs. 
al. [5], using an R2R approach similar to the one presented in 
[4] and including five properly timed SMBG measurements. 
More recently, Toffanin et al. [10] adjusted the daily basal 
therapy using a number of well-established clinical indices, 
e.g. as derived from CGM data, and an R2R algorithm. The 
algorithm performed well in an in silico diabetic population.  
The adaptation of BR and/or CIR has also been proposed 
within the framework of an artificial pancreas (AP). The AP 
provides an autonomous option for controlled insulin 
treatment - by combining an insulin pump, a CGM, and a 
control algorithm. Proportional–integral–derivative controllers 
(PIDs), model predictive controllers (MPCs), and fuzzy logic 
(FL) methods have been traditionally employed for clinically 
validated APs [11]. The MPC algorithm may, for example, be 
tuned by employing an R2R approach. This adapts the BR 
during the night and the CIR during the day [10], [12]. An 
R2R approach, together with CBR, was used within a closed-
loop controller to adapt the CIR [13]. The in silico results 
were promising, but a clinical trial is needed for confirmation.  
To address the challenges related to the inter- and intra-
patient variabilities and achieve personalisation of the insulin 
treatment, reinforcement learning (RL) has been introduced 
[14]. RL is a branch of machine learning (ML) that allows 
systems to develop self-learning abilities and thus to interact 
within uncertain environments. Moore et al. [15] introduced 
RL for optimal control of propofol-induced hypnosis. In a 
subsequent study in healthy human volunteers, the RL agent 
demonstrated clinically appropriate performance [16], [17]. In 
[18], a model-free 
RL-based control algorithm 
was 
implemented and validated in silico for its ability to deal with 
inter- 
and 
intra-patient 
variability 
and 
environmental 
uncertainties. The diabetic population in this study wore CGM 
and was treated with an insulin pump. The algorithm updated 
the BR and CIR each day on the basis of the patients’ glucose 
level the day before. The algorithm’s tuning was personalised 
and automatically based on the transfer entropy (TE) from 
insulin to glucose signals [19]. 
The research presented here is a continuation of our 
previous studies [14], [18] and targets the entire insulin pump 
population of adults with diabetes Type 1, independently of 
the technology used for glucose monitoring. The algorithm 
allows daily adjustment of the insulin infusion profile to 
compensate for fluctuation in the patient’s glucose level. 
Information from SMBG or CGM provides input to the 
algorithm, which outputs the daily BR and three CIRs per day 
– one value for each of the three main meals. The self-learning 
approach is adaptable and personalises the daily insulin values 
to ensure glucose control, despite the inter- and intra-patient 
variabilities. The approach is data-driven, real-time and of low 
computational cost. To validate the newly introduced 
algorithm, an FDA-approved diabetes simulator was used. 
II. METHODOLOGY 
The structure of the proposed dual mode adaptive basal-
bolus advisor (ABBA) - along with its inputs and outputs - is 
illustrated in Fig. 1. Each day, ABBA provides one constant 
BR and three CIRs. Laimer et al. [20] analysed the BR 
profiles of 3118 female and 2427 male patients, and concluded 
that BR profiles with higher variability are associated with an 
increased frequency of acute complications in adults with 
diabetes Type 1. The study considered the dawn phenomenon 
as a factor influencing intra-day variability in insulin 
sensitivity, while the effect of intensive physical exercises was 
not taken into account. Furthermore, Bouchonville et al. [21] 
found that - for patients with insulin pumps - changing the 
basal rate in the early morning could not reduce the influence 
of the dawn phenomenon, but increased the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. Thus, in this study, the BR was considered as 
constant within a single day. To address the intra-day variation 
in insulin sensitivity (SI) during different meal timings, three 
different CIRs for breakfast, lunch and dinner were considered 
(Fig. 2). 
ABBA employs the Actor-Critic (AC) method, a branch of 
RL, for updating BR and CIRs. The parameters of the actor-
only method are directly estimated by simulation, and are 
updated in the direction of improvement. Critic-only methods 
rely exclusively on approximation of value function and aim 
to learn an approximate solution to the Bellman equation, 
which will then hopefully prescribe a near-optimal policy [22]. 
The AC method was selected because it combines the strong 
points of the actor-only and critic-only methods. In 
comparison 
with 
the 
critic-only 
method, 
for 
which 
convergence is guaranteed in limited settings, the AC method 
may converge in wider settings. On the other hand, it can 
achieve more rapid convergence than actor-only methods. In 
the next section, we will give a brief introduction to the AC 
method. 
 
Fig. 1. Structure of ABBA with inputs and outputs. 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
3
A. Actor-Critic (AC) method 
The critic uses an approximation architecture and simulation 
to learn a value function, which is then used to update the 
actor's policy parameters in the direction of performance 
improvement [22]. The AC method was introduced to 
minimise the average cost function 𝛼̅ as defined by: 
 
𝛼̅(𝜃)  = ∑
𝑐(𝑥, 𝑢)𝜂𝜃(𝑥, 𝑢)
𝑥∈𝑋,𝑢∈𝑈
, 
 (1)  
 
where 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑢) is local cost, 𝜂𝜃(𝑥, 𝑢) is the stationary 
probability of the Markov chain {𝑋𝑘, 𝑈𝑘}, 𝑥 is the state, and 𝑢 
is control action. 
The critic agent evaluates the current control policy through 
the approximation of the long-term expected cost. The critic 
provides temporal difference (TD) error to the Actor for policy 
optimisation. The value function is defined by 
 
𝑉𝜃(𝑥) = 𝐸[∑
𝛾𝑘𝑐(𝑥𝑘, 𝑢𝑘)|𝑥0 = 𝑥
∞
𝑘=0
], 
 (2)  
 
which can be formalised as: 
 
𝑉𝜃(𝑥) = 𝑐(𝑥𝑘, 𝑢𝑘) + 𝛾𝑉𝜃(𝑦), 
 (3)  
 
where 𝛾 is a discount factor in the range 𝛾∈(0,1), 𝑦 is the 
next state 𝑦= 𝑥𝑘+1. 
Linear approximation was used for the parameterised 
function: 
 
𝑉̃𝜃
𝑤(𝑥) = ∑
𝑤𝑖𝑔𝜃
𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑤𝑇𝑔𝜃(𝑥)
𝑘
𝑖=1
, 
 (4)  
 
where 𝑤𝑇 is the transpose of the parameter vector 𝑤 and 
𝑔𝜃(𝑥) is a vector of basis function. The estimation of TD error 
𝑑 can then be defined as: 
 
𝑑= 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑢) + 𝛾𝑉̃𝜃
𝑤(𝑦) −𝑉̃𝜃
𝑤(𝑥). 
 (5)  
 
The parameter vector 𝑤 is updated with the TD error: 
 
𝑤𝑘+1 = 𝑤𝑘+ 𝑎𝑘𝑑𝑘𝑧𝑘, 
 (6)  
 
where 𝑎𝑘 is a positive non-increasing learning rate sequence 
and 𝑧𝑘 is the eligibility vector updated according to: 
 
𝑧𝑘+1 = 𝜆𝑧𝑘+ 𝑔𝜃(𝑥𝑘+1). 
 (7)  
 
The update for approximation of the action-value function 
follows a similar approach. 
The actor agent aims to optimise the control policy in order 
to achieve the final goal of the AC method, i.e. to minimise 
the average cost function 𝛼̅ shown in equation (1). The policy 
gradient method is employed for this purpose: 
 
𝜃𝑘+1 = 𝜃𝑘−𝛽𝑘∇𝜃𝛼̅(𝜃), 
 (8)  
 
where 𝛽𝑘is learning rate and ∇𝜃𝛼̅(𝜃) the gradient of 𝛼̅(𝜃) with 
respect to the policy parameter vector 𝜃, as calculated by: 
 
∇𝜃𝛼̅(𝜃) = ∑
𝜂𝜃(𝑥, 𝑢)𝑑𝑡𝜓𝜃(𝑥, 𝑢)
𝑥,𝑢
, 
 (9)  
 
where 𝑑𝑡 is the TD error at time t and 𝜓𝜃(𝑥, 𝑢) is the basis 
function for the action-value function.  
B. SMBG version of ABBA 
1) SMBG measurements as system inputs 
The SMBG version of ABBA (ABBASMBG) was designed to 
determine the “system status” (features) using four blood 
glucose measurements: before breakfast, lunch, dinner, and 
bedtime. This feature vector was used to update the control 
policy.  
Specifically, a day’s glycaemic profile was described by two 
types of features, Fhyper and Fhypo, which were related to the 
system’s 
hyperglycaemic 
and 
hypoglycaemic 
status, 
respectively. For calculation of these two features, we used the 
lower and upper border of tight target range, i.e. GL=90 mg/dL 
and GH=150 mg/dL, as thresholds: 
 
𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐵𝑅
 =
1
𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟∑(𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝐺𝐻) 
 (10) 
𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐵𝑅
 =
1
𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜∑(𝐺𝐿−𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜), 
 (11)  
 
where 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐵𝑅
and 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐵𝑅
 are the features in the k-th day for 
the updated BR for the next day, 𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟and 𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜 are the 
SMBG values that are above 𝐺𝐻 and below 𝐺𝐿, respectively. 
𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟 and 𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜 are the numbers of 𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟 and 
𝑀𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜 in the k-th day. If 𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟 or 𝑛𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜 is 0, the 
corresponding feature will have the value 0. 
The feature calculation of 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
 and 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
 for the three 
CIRs follow a similar approach as for BR. The i in the 
superscript enumerates the corresponding CIRs (1: breakfast, 
2: lunch or 3: dinner). Using different features for BR and 
CIRs, it is possible to update the BR and CIRs in a relatively 
independent manner. In previous work [18], the same features 
were used for both BR and CIR, and the basal and bolus 
insulin always changed simultaneously in the same direction, 
i.e. the algorithm always offers increased basal insulin along 
with increased bolus insulin and vice versa. In order to 
overcome this limitation, we introduced three CIRs with 
different features and different update rules for BR and CIRs, 
as explained in the next section. 
Both for BR and CIRs, the features were normalised into the 
range [0, 1], and the normalised feature could be presented in 
vector format: 
 
𝐹𝑘 = (𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟 , 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜)𝑇. 
 (12)  
 
With these features, a local cost c could be defined as: 
 
𝑐𝑘= 𝑎ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟+ 𝑎ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜, 
 (13) 
 
where 𝑎ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟= 1 and 𝑎ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜= 10 are the scale parameters for 
weighting the hyperglycemic and hypoglycemic features. The 
critic part of ABBA could be updated as described in [18]. 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
4
2) Update process 
The update of BR and CIR from day k-1 to day k considers 
the values of day k-1: 
 
𝐵𝑅𝑘= 𝐵𝑅𝑘−1 + 𝑃𝑘
𝐵𝑅𝐵𝑅𝑘−1 
 (14) 
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖𝑘= 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖𝑘−1 + 𝑃𝑖𝑘
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖𝑘−1, 
 (15) 
 
where 𝑃𝑘
𝐵𝑅 and 𝑃𝑖𝑘
𝐶𝐼𝑅 are the control actions for update BR and 
for CIRs in the k-th day. The subscript i in (15) defines the 
type of the meal for which the CIR is applied (1 for breakfast, 
2 for lunch and 3 for dinner). 
To simplify the description of the equations, we introduced a 
new variable 𝐴𝑃 to represent 𝐵𝑅𝑘 and 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖𝑘 from equations 
(14) and (15), and named the final control action as 𝑃𝑒 to 
replace both 𝑃𝑘
𝐵𝑅and 𝑃𝑖𝑘
𝐶𝐼𝑅. Thus, equations (14) and (15) can 
be summarised as: 
 
𝐴𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑤= 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑+ 𝑃𝑒𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑, 
 (16) 
 
where 𝐴𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑤 is the value of BR and CIRs on day k, 
while 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑 is the value on day k-1. In order to achieve a 
smooth update of BR and CIRs, we introduced a fusion value 
of 𝐴𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑤 and 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑: 
  
𝐴𝑃𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛= 𝑚𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑+ (1 −𝑚)𝐴𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑤. 
 (17) 
 
The value of 𝑚 was experimentally chosen to be 0.5. 
According to equations (16) and (17), the fused AP was 
defined as: 
 
𝐴𝑃𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛= 0.5 ∙𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑+ (1 −0.5)(𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑+ 𝑃𝑒𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑)   
             = 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑+ 0.5 ∙𝑃𝑒𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑.   
 (18) 
 
For the BR update, the final BR was identical to the fused 
BR value: 
 
𝐵𝑅𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙= 𝐵𝑅𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 . 
 (19) 
 
In order to avoid simultaneous increase/decrease of basal 
insulin and bolus insulin, an additional rule was established 
for updating CIRs: 
 
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙= 𝑙𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑜𝑙𝑑+ (1 −𝑙)𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛, 
 (20) 
 
where l is a switch parameter (0 or 1) that specifies whether 
the final CIR should be the same as the fused value or the 
previous value. The l parameter is defined by the following 
equations: 
 
𝑙= {
1   𝑖𝑓 𝐵𝑅𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙> 𝐵𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛< 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑜𝑙𝑑
     𝑜𝑟 𝐵𝑅𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙< 𝐵𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛> 𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖_𝑜𝑙𝑑
0                               𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠                                               
  (21) 
 
A further constraint was considered to limit the maximum 
change from 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑑 to 𝐴𝑃𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 within 5%.  
As in [14], the 𝑃𝑒 in this work consists of three parts: the 
linear deterministic control action 𝑃𝑎, the supervisory control 
action 𝑃𝑠, and the exploratory part N(0, σ), which could be 
presented as Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard 
deviation σ. σ is calculated as follows: 
 
𝜎= 𝑐𝜎‖𝐹𝑘‖2, 
 (22) 
 
where the coefficient 𝑐𝜎 has value 0.05. The value of σ 
depends on the performance of the controller in the previous 
iteration. If ABBA achieves an optimised policy, i.e. the 
feature 𝐹𝑘→0, the exploration for next iteration is reduced 
correspondingly.  
The calculation of 𝑃𝑒 can be described as: 
 
𝑃𝑒= ℎ𝑃𝑎+ (1 −ℎ)𝑃𝑠+ 𝑁(0, 𝜎), 
 (23) 
 
where h = 0.5 and is a weighting factor to balance the 
contribution of Pa and Ps to the final control action Pe. The 
sum of the first two terms in equation (23) could be named as 
Pd: 
 
𝑃𝑑= ℎ𝑃𝑎+ (1 −ℎ)𝑃𝑠 
 (24) 
 
Both Pa and Ps are calculated on the basis of the features 𝐹𝑘. 
The linear deterministic control action Pa is defined as the 
linear combination of the features and policy parameter 
vector 𝜃: 
 
𝑃𝑎 = 𝐹𝑘
𝑇∙𝜃𝑘 
 (25)  
 
In this work, the calculation of Ps for CIR is similar to that 
described in [18], i.e.  
 
𝑃𝑠_𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖=
{
 0                       𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
= 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
= 0     
−0.02 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
      𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
> 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
= 0
+0.02𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜 
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
       𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
> 0                                  
 
(26) 
 
where i indicates the i-th CIR. 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
and 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜
𝐶𝐼𝑅𝑖
 are the 
hyperglycaemic and hypoglycaemic features, respectively. 
The calculation of Ps for BR was modified by evaluating the 
values of the measurements in different glucose level ranges: 
 
𝑃𝑠_𝐵𝑅=
{
 
 
−𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜/8     𝑖𝑓 𝐻𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟> 0 
𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟30
⁄
   𝑖𝑓 𝑁1 ≤1 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑁2 ≥2
−𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜30 
⁄
𝑖𝑓 𝑁1 ≥2 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑁2 ≤1
          0                  𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠                                 
, 
 (27) 
 
where Hyponumber is the number of measurements which are 
below 70 mg/dL. 𝑁1 is the number of measurements below 80 
mg/dL, while 𝑁2 is the number of measurements above 130 
mg/dL. The variables Hyponumber, N1 and N2 represent an 
overall trend of glucose level of the previous day.  
Finally, the policy parameter update was defined as: 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
5
 
Fig. 3. Illustration of in silico evaluation settings.  
 
𝜃𝑘+1 = 𝜃𝑘−𝛽𝑑𝑘
𝑃𝑒−𝑃𝑑
𝜎2
∇𝜃𝑃𝑑, 
 (28) 
 
where 𝛽 is the actor learning rate values 0.5, and 𝑑𝑘 is the TD 
error. 
A one week initialisation phase was applied before the 
normal control phase of ABBA. During the initialisation 
phase, the patients used their regular treatment. A CGM 
device was used for collecting blood glucose measurements 
for initialisation.  With the seven-day measurements, the 
control policy parameter is initialised with the TE method, as 
described in [19]. 
C. CGM version of ABBA 
The CGM version of ABBA (ABBACGM) follows a similar 
approach to that of the SMBG version for “system status” 
calculation and update of BR and CIRs. The calculation of Ps 
was modified as below: 
 
𝑃𝑠= {
0               𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜= 0                       
∓0.1𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜    𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜> 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟= 0
∓0.05𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜  𝑖𝑓 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜> 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐹𝑘_ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟> 0
 
 (29)  
 
The upper sign in (29) refers to the calculation for BR and 
the lower sign to CIR. Like the SMBG version of ABBA, a 
one week initialisation phase with the TE method was applied 
before the control phase. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL 
A. Simulation Environment 
The two versions of ABBA were evaluated using the FDA-
accepted adult population (100 virtual subjects) with the 
UVA/Padova T1DM simulator [23][24]. The simulator’s 
default pump was selected for both CGM and SMBG versions 
of ABBA. As regards the glucose monitoring devices, 
ABBACGM used Dexcom50 CGM with a sampling time of 5 
minutes. This CGM was also used during the initialisation of 
both versions of ABBA, while ABBASMBG used the default 
SMBG device during the operational period. 
In the in silico environment, the system defines the type of 
meal based on the meal time. In fact, the user announces the 
meal by providing the CHO content of the upcoming meal. In 
our experiment, no bolus insulin was considered for bedtime 
snacks. 
B. Experimental Protocol 
The proposed approach was tested in silico on 100 
simulated adults of the FDA accepted UVa/Padova Simulator 
using a number of scenarios emulating equivalent number of 
in silico clinical trials. Each trial lasted for 98 days (3 months 
and 1 week), excluding day 1 (no insulin on board is 
considered for day 1). Each patent’s data from day 2 (D2) to 
D8 was used to initialise the control policy parameters. An 
initialisation period of seven days was chosen to include the 
weekly cycle of insulin sensitivity change, since the patient 
may have different behaviours over weekdays and weekends. 
During the initialisation period, the BR and CIR provided by 
the simulator were used to simulate standard treatment (ST). 
From D9 to D98, a period of 3 months, the ABBA was active. 
Dawn phenomenon and inter-day SI variability were 
considered until D90, while fixed SI was employed during the 
last 8 days (D91-D98). The last two weeks (D84-D90: Week 
13 (W13) and D92-D98: W14) were used to evaluate the 
performance of ABBA against the OL period (D2-D8: W1). 
The D91 was excluded from evaluation since it was the 
transition day from with SI variability to without SI variability. 
The experimental protocol is illustrated in Fig. 3. 
1) Inter-day Variability of Insulin Sensitivity and Dawn 
Phenomenon  
The inter-day variability of SI was simulated with a 
uniformly distributed variability of ±25%. The intraday 
variability usually caused by the dawn phenomenon was also 
considered. Dawn phenomenon, originally described in [25], 
refers to periodic episodes of hyperglycaemia occurring in the 
early morning hours before and after breakfast [26]. In that 
work, SI dropped every day between 04:00 and 08:00 to 50% 
of its nominal value, and SI ramped up or down within a time-
frame of 30 minutes.  
2) Meal Protocol 
Four meals of specific CHO content were considered for 
each day during the in silico trials: breakfast at 07:00 (50 g), 
lunch at 12:00 (60 g), dinner at 18:30 (80 g) and bedtime 
snack at 23:00 (15 g). Meal variability was introduced by 
considering a meal size variability of ±10 g for main meals 
and ±5 g for the bedtime snack and a meal-time variability of 
±15 minutes. Furthermore, an uncertainty of ±50% in the 
CHO estimation was introduced. Both variabilities and 
uncertainties followed uniform distributions. Furthermore, the 
random skip of two main meals per week was considered (the 
corresponding insulin bolus was also skipped). 
3) Glucose measurements 
In the case of ABBASMBG, the four glucose measurements of 
the previous day were used to update the BR and CIRs. The 
three pre-meal measurements were considered 20 minutes 
before the main meals, while the bedtime measurement took 
place at 23:00h. No pre- and postprandial measurements were 
taken for snacks and no bolus insulin infusion for bedtime 
snacks was required. All the measurements were used to 
estimate the “system status” (features) for BR, while for the 
case of CIRs only the measurements corresponding to the 
respective time window, i.e. the measurements till the next 
CHO announcement of main meal, were taken into 
consideration.  

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
6
TABLE I 
GLUCOSE LEVELS (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION)  
 
D02-D08: Week 1 (standard treatment) 
D84-D90: Week 13 (with SI variability) 
D92-D98: Week 14 (without SI 
variability) 
 
% in 
target 
range 
% in 
Hypo 
% in 
Severe 
Hypo 
% in 
Hyper 
% in 
Severe  
Hyper 
% in 
target 
range 
% in 
Hypo 
% in 
Severe 
Hypo 
% in 
Hyper 
% in 
Severe  
Hyper 
% in 
target 
range 
% in 
Hypo 
% in 
Severe 
Hypo 
% in 
Hyper 
% in 
Severe  
Hyper 
S1 
89.9±8.7 2.5±3.0 1.5±3.3 6.1±8.2 0.0±0.1 
85.9±12.9 1.0±1.0 0.3±0.8 12.8±12.1 
0.0±0.0 
89.8±7.9 0.3±0.9 0.1±0.5 
9.8±7.5 
0±0.1 
S2 
84.2±12.8 0.5±0.8 0.2±0.6 15.2±12.4 
0.0±0.0 
88.5±8.8 0.2±0.6 0.1±0.4 11.2±8.4 0.1±0.4 
S3 
84.8±12.6 0.4±0.7 0.1±0.4 14.7±12.3 
0.0±0.0 
88.7±8.7 0.2±0.7 0.1±0.4 11.0±8.5 0.1±0.4 
S4 
- 
78.4±15.2 0.1±0.3 0.0±0.1 21.5±15.0 
0.1±0.5 
88.7±9.3 0.3±0.7 0.1±0.3 11.0±9.1 0.0±0.2 
 
Fig. 5. Weekly LBGI and HBGI trends in 98-day trial. 
In the case of ABBACGM, all the CGM measurements of the 
previous day were used to estimate the “system status” and 
update the BR, while for the new CIRi, all the CGM 
measurements for CIRi of the previous day, i.e. between 
previous day’s CHO announcement for CIRi and its next CHO 
announcement, were considered. 
Whenever the last measurement of the day was available 
(announced by the patient in the case of ABBASMBG or at 
midnight in the case of ABBACGM), the new flat BR was 
estimated and activated to be used for the entire day. For the 
intraday CIRs, whenever a new meal was announced, the 
current CIR was deactivated and the CIR for the upcoming 
meal was estimated and activated. The update process was 
visualised in Fig. 4. 
4) Scenarios 
Four in silico scenarios were considered: 
 
Scenario 1 (S1): Combined use of CGM,  ABBACGM and 
insulin pump; 
 
Scenario 2 (S2): CGM for initialisation phase, SMBG,  
ABBASMBG and insulin pump; 
 
Scenario 3 (S3): Identical to S2 + uncertainty on SMBG 
measurement time; 
 
Scenario 4 (S4): Identical to S3 + skip of main meals. 
In order to mimic real life situations, an uncertainty of ±10 
min on standard glucose measurement time was considered in 
Scenarios 3 and 4.  
5) Evaluation metrics 
To evaluate and comparatively assess the performance of 
each approach, the following widely used metrics were 
implemented: percentage time in glucose target range 
[70,180] mg/dl; percentage time in hypoglycaemia [50 70) 
mg/dl; percentage time in severe hypoglycaemia <50 mg/dl; 
percentage time in hyperglycaemia (180, 300] mg/dl; and 
percentage time in severe hyperglycaemia >300 mg/dl. In 
addition, the low blood glycaemic index (i.e. risk of 
hypoglycaemia; LBGI), high blood glycaemic index (i.e. risk 
of hyperglycaemia; HBGI), the mean amplitude of glycaemic 
excursion (MAGE), and the total daily insulin intake (TDI) in 
units of insulin were estimated. 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table I presents the in silico results observed in the tested 
scenarios. The ABBASMBG versions (S2 and S3) achieved 
comparable performance to ABBACGM (S1), although only few 
SMBG measurements per day were available. In S2 and S3, 
the number of hypoglycaemic events was further reduced. The 
percentages in target range were slightly decreased, mainly 
due to the increase in hyperglycaemic events. This increase 
was anticipated, since ABBA was designed to give high 
 
Fig. 4. Update process of BR and CIRs for one day. 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
7
priority to hypoglycaemia, the more dangerous metabolic 
state. Furthermore, as expected, the percentages in hyper-and 
hypoglycaemic ranges during W14 (evaluation phase without 
SI variability) were lower than during W13 (evaluation phase 
with SI variability).  
The comparison of W1 (standard treatment) to W13 
indicates that both ABBACGM and ABBASMBG significantly 
decreased the percentage of time in hypo- and severe 
hypoglycaemic ranges (Wilcoxon tests, p <0.05), while the 
respective percentages for hyperglycaemia were increased. 
The weekly LBGI and HBGI [27] are illustrated in Fig. 5. In 
all scenarios, the LBGI value was decreased from low range 
(1.1 - 2.5) in W1 to minimal range   (< 1.1) in W13, while 
HBGI remained in minimal range (<5). After W3 (2nd week of 
ABBA), both LBGI and HBGI converged. During this two-
week transition phase, ABBA progressively decreases the 
value of LBGI, and keeps HBGI within minimal range. The 
fact that HBGI was not increased over the trial period shows 
that the increase in the hyperglycaemias in all scenarios 
remained within the acceptable range. Furthermore, LBGI in 
the case of ABBASMBG was lower than in the case of 
ABBACGM, while the opposite was observed for HBGI. 
Fig. 6 presents the weekly mean value of mean amplitude of 
glycaemic excursions (MAGE) among the 100 subjects. The 
MAGE value indicates diabetic instability; a small MAGE 
value indicates more stable blood glucose concentration [28]. 
In comparison to S1, both S2 and S3 slightly decreased the 
MAGE value. The MAGE value of S4 shows that blood 
glucose regulation in this scenario is not as stable as in the 
other scenarios, since two meals per week were randomly 
skipped. The box plot in Fig. 7 shows the distribution of 
weekly mean total daily insulin (TDI) of the 100 subjects 
during the 98-day trial. In each week, both S2 and S3 of 
ABBASMBG had similar median values and distributions to 
ABBACGM (S1). As for S4, since two meals per week along 
with the corresponding bolus insulin were randomly skipped, 
the TDI was clearly lower than in the other scenarios. 
V. IMPLEMENTATION  
Both versions of ABBA are easily applied to diabetic 
patients treated with insulin pumps. During the first seven 
operation days, ABBA provides the patient’s standard 
treatment and, in parallel, collects the CGM and insulin pump 
data. For the case of SMBG users, the CGM can be provided 
by the attending physician. At the end of this period, the 
algorithm automatically estimates the TE and initialises the 
policy parameters, and is then ready to provide personalised 
insulin treatment with daily adaptation of BR and three CIRs 
based on either CGM or SMBG data. The patient can decide 
whether to accept or reject the suggested change. If the patient 
believes the ABBA suggested change exceeds his own 
estimation and decides to reject the value, he can choose to 
use the previous value or manually enter a new value for BR 
or CIRs. 
ABBACGM and ABBASMBG are implemented in an Android 
platform. On this Android Platform, Debiotech’s JewelPUMP 
application allows the patient to monitor and control the 
insulin pump. A communication protocol between ABBA and 
the JewelPUMP applications was defined and implemented, 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
standard 
Android 
Inter-Process 
Communication (IPC) mechanisms that allows communication 
between activities, as depicted in Fig. 8. In particular, the 
communication mechanism allows JewelPUMP to send 
messages to ABBA when a) there are basal profile changes, b) 
or bolus infusion or c) SMBG measurements are performed. 
The communication mechanism also enables ABBA to inform 
JewelPUMP about BR or bolus updates. When the patient 
announces a meal or the last BG measurement of the day, data 
synchronisation is performed, in order to ensure that all 
messages were properly sent from JewelPUMP to ABBA, and 
to send any that were not. 
The implemented communication mechanism: 
 
Implements Inter-Process Communication (IPC) between 
JewelPUMP and ABBA. 
 
Allows JewelPUMP to send messages to ABBA. 
 
Ensures these messages are properly received by ABBA. 
Fig. 6. Weekly mean amplitude of glycaemic excursion (MAGE) of the 100 
subjects 
Fig. 7. Weekly mean total daily insulin (TDI) of the 100 subjects. 

JBHI-00967-2018.R1 
8
 
Enables History Synchronisation. 
 
Allows 
synchronised 
bidirectional 
communication 
between JewelPUMP and ABBA. 
With this communication protocol in place, the JewelPUMP 
Application is able to send and receive information to and 
from the ABBA application, in order to propose these 
personalised CIR values and basal rates to the patient, and 
subsequently to apply these values when controlling the 
infusion through the insulin patch pump. 
The aforementioned implementation was conducted and 
tested on JewelCOM, an Android 4.4.4 based mobile platform. 
However, the ABBA application could be installed on 
smartphones with other Android version as well. In that case, 
compatibility issues need to be considered. 
 
 
VI.  CONCLUSIONS 
An RL-based adaptive basal-bolus advisor, ABBA, is 
proposed. The advisor aims to minimise the risk of 
hypoglycaemia by providing personalised suggestions on daily 
BR and bolus dose on the basis of glucose measurements from 
either CGM or SMBG devices. The proposed approach was 
evaluated in silico on 100 adults from the FDA-accepted 
UVa/Padova Simulator under a number of challenging 
scenarios. A wide variety of different scenarios have been 
published, with different meal schemes and variability in 
insulin sensitivity. These are often combined with disparate 
variabilities 
and 
uncertainties. 
Therefore, 
it 
is 
not 
straightforward to compare performance in the present study 
with other publications. To this end, we considered four 
scenarios to evaluate both ABBASMBG and ABBACGM, which 
were more challenging than those included in our previous 
research in the field. These scenarios consisted of complex 
meal protocols, including uncertainties about the size of the 
announced CHO and variabilities in meal announcement 
times, inter- and intra-day variabilities in insulin sensitivity 
and dawn phenomenon, as well as uncertainties about the time 
of SMBG glucose measurements. The performance of 
ABBASMBG and ABBACGM converged after two weeks of 
operation, while, during the transition phase, both versions of 
ABBA progressively achieved better glucose control in terms 
of LBGI. The results indicate that - independent of the 
technology used for glucose measurement - the proposed RL 
approach is able to i) learn the patient’s characteristics and ii) 
provide personalised suggestions on insulin treatment. The 
insulin suggestions virtually eliminated hypoglycaemias and 
maintained glucose in the target range most of the studied 
time, even in the case of extreme scenarios with uncertainties, 
variabilities, and skipped main meals.   
Furthermore, the proposed approach relies on the standard 
medical treatment as starting point, is easily applied, and the 
SMBG version implements the NICE guidelines with respect 
to the minimum number of fasting glucose measurements per 
day. The two versions have already been integrated on 
Android smartphones that are able to communicate wirelessly 
with a patch pump. 
The next step is to conduct a feasibility study within the 
framework of a pilot clinical trial to confirm the in silico 
results.
