Show, Attend and Interact: Perceivable Human-Robot Social
Interaction through Neural Attention Q-Network
Ahmed Hussain Qureshi, Yutaka Nakamura, Yuichiro Yoshikawa and Hiroshi Ishiguro
Abstract— For a safe, natural and effective human-robot
social interaction, it is essential to develop a system that allows
a robot to demonstrate the perceivable responsive behaviors to
complex human behaviors. We introduce the Multimodal Deep
Attention Recurrent Q-Network using which the robot exhibits
human-like social interaction skills after 14 days of interacting
with people in an uncontrolled real world. Each and every
day during the 14 days, the system gathered robot interaction
experiences with people through a hit-and-trial method and
then trained the MDARQN on these experiences using end-to-
end reinforcement learning approach. The results of interaction
based learning indicate that the robot has learned to respond
to complex human behaviors in a perceivable and socially
acceptable manner.
I. INTRODUCTION
Human-robot social interaction (HRSI) is an emerging
ﬁeld with an aim of bringing robots into our social world
as our companions. For robots to coexist with humans, it
is crucial for them to predict human intentions in order to
respond to each and every one of the countless and complex
human behaviors with utmost propriety [1].
Human intention prediction is a challenging task [2] as it
depends on many intention depicting factors such as human
walking trajectory, face expression, gaze direction, body
movement or any ongoing activity. Therefore, programming
a robot which can interpret and respond to complex human
behaviors based on their intentions is notoriously hard. To
solve this challenge we believe that it is essential to augment
robots with a self-learning architecture [3] which enables
them to learn social interaction skills from high-dimensional
interaction experiences automatically.
Recent advancements in machine learning has combined
deep learning with reinforcement learning and has led to the
development of Deep Q-Network (DQN) [4]. DQN utilizes
deep convolutional neural network [5] for the approximation
of Q-learning’s action-value function. DQN has demon-
strated its ability to play arcade video games at human and
superhuman level by learning, through hit and trial method,
from high dimensional visual data. However, the applicability
of DQN to real world human-robot interaction problem was
not explored until we, recently, proposed the multimodal
deep Q network (MDQN) [6] for HRSI.
A. H. Qureshi, Y. Nakamura, Y. Yoshikawa and H. Ishiguro are
with
Department of
System Innovation,
Graduate
School of Engi-
neering
Science,
Osaka
University,
1-3
Machikaneyama,
Toyonaka,
Osaka, Japan. {qureshi.ahmed, nakamura, yoshikawa,

A. H. Qureshi, Y. Yoshikawa and H. Ishiguro are also with JST ERATO
ISHIGURO Symbiotic Human-Robot Interaction Project.
Fig. 1: Robot learning social interaction skills from people.
MDQN uses dual stream convolutional neural networks
for action-value function approximation. The dual stream
structure processes the grayscale and depth images indepen-
dently, and the Q-values from both streams are fused together
for choosing the best possible action in the given scenario.
By using MDQN the robot learned to greet people after 14
days of hit and trial method based interaction with people at
different public places such as a cafeteria, common rooms,
department entrance, etc (as shown in ﬁgure 1). The robot
could perform only one of the four actions for an interaction
and the action were waiting, looking towards human, waving
hand and handshaking. Results showed that the robot aug-
mented with MDQN learned to choose appropriate actions in
the diverse real world scenarios. However, in [6], the robot
actions lacked perceivability as the robot could not indicate
its attention. The research in [7] highlights that humans show
more willingness to interact with a robot that can indicate
its attention than with a robot that cannot. Therefore, in this
paper we propose a Multimodal Deep Attention Recurrent
Q-Network (MDARQN) which adds perceivability to robot
actions through a recurrent attention model (RAM) [8].
RAM enables the Q-network to focus on certain parts of
the input image instead of processing it entirely at a ﬁne
scale. This region selection reduces the number of training
parameters as well as the computational operations. Beside
computational beneﬁts, RAM provides information about
where MDARQN is looking at, while taking any decision.
In the proposed work, we utilize this visual attention infor-
mation by RAM for realizing perceivable HRSI.
II. RELATED WORK
The challenge of modeling responsive robot behaviors for
a wide diversity of complex human behaviors has gained
interest of many researchers. Recently, work by Lee et al.
[9], Amor et al. [10] [11] and Wang et al. [2] addresses
the said challenge. The proposed work in [9] [10] [11]
arXiv:1702.08626v1  [cs.RO]  28 Feb 2017

uses a motion capture system for recording the interaction
between two persons and the responsive robot behavior is
learned from the recorded data by imitating the behavior
of human interaction partners. We believe that the motion
capture system does not yield natural interaction behaviors as
the participants are required to wear special skin-tight dress
together with the track-able makers. In [2], the authors pro-
posed a probabilistic graphical model using which the human
intentions are inferred from the observed body movements.
However, as mentioned earlier, intention prediction relies on
various intention depicting factors, thus, inferring intention
from body movements alone is not sufﬁcient. Furthermore,
aforestated prior art considers only one human interaction
partner for the robot at any time but in proposed research the
robot operates in natural uncontrolled environment where it
can be approached by any number of people. The quest of an
efﬁcient intention predictor has also led to the deep learning
based method [12]. In [12], the authors used video data for
training an intention predictor. However, in our work, the
interactive behavior perception is crucial because the robot
is an active agent in the environment and hence, it can alter
the human intention by taking any action. Therefore, the
robot needs to interpret the human behavior and its own
existence under the human social norms before making any
decision. Recently, we proposed MDQN [6] for interactive
behavior perception. The robot augmented with MDQN does
not perform perceivable interaction with people because of
no attention mechanism. In our proposed work we utilize
recurrent attention models (RAM) for perceivable robot
actions. So far, recurrent attention models (RAM) have been
applied successfully to various tasks such as object tracking
[13], image classiﬁcation [13], machine translation [14], and
image captioning [15] . The research in [8], integrate RAM
into DQN and surpasses the previous performance of DQN
on some of the Atari games. RAM provides insight into the
behavior of the Q-network and in our proposed work, we
utilize this insight for driving the robot attention onto the
regions of an input scene where the Q-network is focusing
on while making any decision. To the best of our knowledge,
the applicability of RAM for the perceivable HRSI has not
been explored yet.
III. BACKGROUND
In this work, the human-robot interaction problem is for-
malized as standard reinforcement Q-learning task in which
the agent interacts with an environment E through an action
a ∈A and gets a scalar reward r, where A = {1, · · · , K}
is the set of all legal actions.
The Q-learning agent learns an action-value function
which maps an input state s to an action a under a
policy π i.e., Qπ(s, a)
=
E[Rt|st
=
s, at
=
a, π].
The objective of a Q-agent is to maximize the expected
total return Rt = PT
t′=t γt′−trt′, where γ : [0, 1] is a
discount factor, r is an immediate reward and T is the
terminal step. The maximum achievable expected total re-
turn under policy π is determined by an optimal action-
value function Q∗(s, a) = maxQπ(s, a), and this function
Fig. 2: Multimodal Deep Attention Recurrent Q-Network
obeys a fundamental Bellman relation Q∗(s, a) = E[r +
γmaxat+1Q∗(st+1, at+1)|st, at]. The Bellman relation can
be interpreted as: for a sequence st+1 at next time-step
if the action-value function Q∗(st+1, at+1) is deterministic
for all possible actions A then the optimal policy is to
choose an action at+1 which maximizes the expected value
of r + γQ∗(st+1, at+1).
In practical Q-learning, the action-value function is ap-
proximated by a function estimator such as neural networks
i.e., Q(s, a) ≈Q(s, a, θ) and the parameters of an estimator
are adjusted iteratively towards the Bellman target. Recently,
a Deep Q-Network (DQN) is introduced which uses a
deep convolutional neural networks (convnets) as a function
approximator and the parameters of convnets are trained by
minimizing the following loss function:
Lt(θ) = E
"
r + γmaxat+1Q(st+1, at+1; θ−) −Q(s, a; θ)
2#
(1)
The DQN network uses two Q-networks for minimizing
the loss function (Eq 1) i.e., the Bellman target Bt = r +
γQ∗(st+1, at+1; θ−) is computed by a target Q-network with
old parameters θ−while the training Q-network maintains
the recently updated parameters θ. The old parameters θ−
are updated to current parameters after every C steps. The
gradient of loss function (Eq 1) with respect to parameters
θ takes the following form:
▽Lt(θ) = E
"
 Bt −Q(s, a; θ)

▽θ Q(s, a; θ)
#
(2)
In addition to maintaining two Q-networks, DQN also
uses experience replay [16] for training Q-networks. Finally,
DQN follows an ϵ-greedy strategy for interacting with Atari
emulator i.e., with probability 1 −ϵ the agent takes greedy
action by exploiting the Q-network while with probability ϵ
the agent randomly picked an action a ∈A for exploration.
IV. THE PROPOSED MDARQN
In this section, we describe our proposed neural model
i.e., MDARQN using which the robot learns to do perceiv-
able HRSI. The MDARQN architecture comprises of two
streams of identically structured neural Q-networks, one for
processing the grayscale frames while other for processing
the depth frames. Each of these neural Q-network streams

is trained independently of each other. Since two Q-network
streams are identical, and trained independently, therefore,
for simplicity; we only discuss the structure of a single
stream of the dual stream Q-network. Each stream consists
of three neural models: 1) Convnets; 2) Long Short-term
Memory (LSTM) network; and 3) Attention network (G).
The rest of the section explains these three neural models
and the ﬂow of information between them (as also shown in
ﬁgure 2).
1) Convnets:
The convnets take pre-processed visual
frame as an input at each time-step and transform it into
L feature vectors, each of which provides D-dimensional
representation of a part of an input image i.e, at
=
{a1
t, · · · , aL
t }, al
t ∈RD. This feature vector is taken as an
input by the attention network for generating the annotation
vector z ∈RD.
2) LSTM: We employ the following implementation of
LSTM network:




it
ft
ot
gt



=




σ
σ
σ
tanh



M
ht−1
zt

(3)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙gt
(4)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
(5)
where it, ft, ot, ct, and ht correspond to the input, forget,
output, memory and hidden state of the LSTM, respectively.
Let d be the dimensionality of all LSTM states and matrix
M : Ra →Rb, in equation 3, is an afﬁne transformation
of trainable parameters with dimension a = d + D and
b = 4d. As shown in equation 3-5, the LSTM network takes
the annotation vector zt ∈RD, previous hidden state ht−1,
and the previous memory state ct−1 as an input in order to
produce the next hidden state ht. This hidden state ht is
given to the attention network G and to the linear output
layer for generating the annotation vector zt+1 at next time
step and for providing the output Q-value for each of the
legal actions, respectively.
3) Attention network: The attention network generates the
dynamic representation, called annotation vector zt, of the
corresponding parts of an input image at time t. The attention
mechanism φ, a multilayer perceptron, takes a D-dimensional
L feature vectors at and a previous hidden state ht−1 of
the LSTM network as an input for computing the positive
weights βl
t for each location l. The weights βl
t are computed
as follow:
βl
t =
exp(αl
t)
PL
k=1 exp(αk
t )
; where αl
t = φ(al
t, ht−1)
(6)
The annotation vector zt is computed as zt = PL
l=1 βl
tal
t.
This annotation vector is used by LSTM for computing next
hidden state.
There are two type of attention network [15] in the literature:
the soft and hard attention network. The attention network
used in MDARQN is the soft attention network and unlike
hard attention network, it fully differentiable and determin-
istic.
Since each of the streams of the MDARQN model is fully
differentiable, therefore, each network stream is trained by
minimizing the general loss function (Equation 1) through a
standard back-propagation method. Finally, output from the
two streams are fused together for taking a greedy action as
shown in the ﬁgure 2. For the fusion, the output Q-values
from each Q-network stream are ﬁrst normalized and then
these normalized Q-values from each stream are averaged
together to generate output Q-values of MDARQN. The
greedy action is then taken by picking the action which has
a highest Q-value from these fused Q-values.
V. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
This section outlines the implementation details of the
proposed project. The MDARQN code was built on the
baseline [4] [8] and is implemented in torch/lua1. The robot
side programming is done in python. The system used for
training MDARQN has 3.40GHz×8 Intel Core i7 processor
with 32 GB RAM and GeForce GTX 980 GPU. The rest of
the section explains various modules of the project.
A. Robotic system
A Pepper robot2 was used for the proposed project. Out
of many built-in sensors of the Pepper, we only use a 2-D
camera located on robot’s forehead and an ASUS Xtion 3-D
sensor located behind robot eyes for the grayscale and depth
images, respectively. The 2-D camera and the 3-D sensor
were operated at 10 fps with 320×240 resolution. In addition
to visual sensors, we also equip Pepper’s right hand with FSR
touch sensor which detects if the handshake has happened
or not and this handshake detection forms the basis for our
reward function (as discussed later). For aesthetic reasons we
also hide the touch sensor under the woolen gloves as can
be seen in ﬁgure 1.
B. Robot actions with attention
In order to ensure perceivable HRSI, we utilize the an-
notation vector z given by attention network G for attention
steering of the robot. This attention steering is done as follow.
Attention steering for greedy actions: The images used
by the MDARQN has dimensions 198 × 198. We divide
horizontal and vertical axis of the input image into ﬁve
sub-regions based on the author’s deﬁned thresholds. The
horizontal axis is divided into the left most, left, center,
right, right most regions while the vertical axis is divided into
top most, top, center, bottom and bottom most regions. The
indicators Ix ∈{−2, −1, 0, 1, 2} and Iy ∈{−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}
indicate these sub-regions of horizontal and vertical axis,
respectively, starting from -2 which corresponds to the
left/top most region. The robot attention mechanism uses
annotation vector zt to extract the pixel location on the
input image, we call it attention mark, where the MDARQN
pays the maximum attention. The attention mark and author’s
1http://torch.ch/
2//www.aldebaran.com/en/cool-robots/pepper/ﬁnd-out-more-about-pepper

deﬁned thresholds are then used to determine the indicator
values I = {Ix, Iy}. The indicator I and robot’s actual
position indicator Ia = {Ia
x, Ia
y} is then used to compute the
next attention location. The value of robot’s actual position
indicator at the given time-step is computed relative to the
actual location at previous time-step and it is calculated as
follow:
Ia
t =
(
0, if I + Ia
t−1 > 2 or I + Ia
t−1 < −2
I + Ia
t−1, otherwise
(7)
The robot actual position is initialized to its central location
i.e., Ia
0
= 0. The motion of the robot in a real world
is determined by ω = {ωx, ωy} where ωx controls the
rotation of the robot body while ωy controls the robot’s head
projection. The ω is computed as follow:
{ωx, ωy} = {sθ1, sθ2} where s = Ia
t −Ia
t−1
(8)
The value of θ1 and θ2 are π/6 and π/9, respectively. It
should be noted that it is important to bind the robot motion
to predeﬁned regions. As in the proposed work we utilized
embedded visual sensors in the robot which have limited
ﬁeld of view and are mobile due to the robot motion. Hence,
restricted motion allows a safe localization of robot in public
environments.
Attention steering for non-greedy actions: Since during
non-greedy robot’s behavior, the system randomly picks
an action from the set of legal actions, therefore, it is
necessary to equip the robot with another attention system
that facilitates it’s interaction with humans. This function
instills the awareness into the robot and makes it sensitive to
the stimulus coming from the real world. The stimuli used are
the sound and the movement detection. In case robot senses
any stimulus, it looks for human at the stimulus origin. If
there is not any human, the robot returns to its previous
orientation but otherwise it tracks the human with its head
in order to engage them for an interaction.
After attending, the robot executes a chosen action. The
rest of this section describes the implementation details
of these four legal actions, i.e., waiting, looking towards
humans, waving its hand and hand shaking with a human.
Wait: For this action, during a greedy policy, the robot
does nothing other than attending to the attention location.
However, in case of non-greedy policy, the robot randomly
moves its head within allowable range of head pitch and head
yaw.
Look towards human: During this action, if there is human,
the robot tracks the person with its head. If this action
is being performed under a greedy policy then the robot
tracks the human within a narrow ﬁeld in order to avoid
any desynchronization with the greedy attention mechanism.
Wave hand: During this, the robot waves its hand and says
Hello.
Handshake: For performing a handshake, the robot lifts
its right hand up to a certain height and then waits for a
few seconds. If FSR touch sensor detects the touch then the
robot grabs the person’s hand otherwise robot brings its hand
down to the default position.
C. Reward function
Handshake detection through touch sensor forms the base-
line of our reward function. The robot gets the reward of
1 and -0.1 on the successful and unsuccessful handshake,
respectively. Furthermore, the reward of value 0 is given on
actions other than handshake. The handshake is successful if
the human and robot actually shake each others hand while
it is unsuccessful when robot attempts to do a handshake but
the handshake does not happen.
D. Model Architecture
This section provides the architecture details of MDARQN
model. The MDARQN consist of two streams: the Y-channel
and the Depth-channel stream for processing the grayscale
and depth images, respectively. Since, the structure of both
streams are identical, therefore, we only discuss one of the
streams.
The convolutional neural network consists of four convolu-
tion layers each of which is followed by a non-linear rectiﬁer
function. The input dimension to the CNN is 1 × 198 × 198.
The convolution layer 1, 2, 3 and 4 convolves 16 ﬁlters of
9 × 9, 32 ﬁlters of 8 × 8, 64 ﬁlters of 7 × 7 and 256 ﬁlter of
6×6, respectively. The stride of convolution 1, 2, 3 and 4 are
3, 2, 2 and 1 respectively. The CNN outputs 256 feature maps
of dimension 7 × 7. The output feature maps from CNN are
given to the attention network which takes 49 vectors each of
size 256. To be consistent with attention network, the LSTM
network also has 256 units. To generate Q-values for the four
set of actions, the output of the LSTM is transformed to four
units through a linear layer preceded by non-linear rectiﬁer
unit.
E.
Training dataset, data augmentation and pre-processing
We double the training dataset through two data augmen-
tation techniques: 1) Random cropping of the input image
of size 320 × 240 to the size suitable for the model i.e.,
198 × 198; 2) Mirroring the input image and then cropping
it randomly to the size 198 × 198. The total training data
collected during 14 days of experiment comprise of 111,504
grayscale and depth frames. After data augmentation, the
number of grayscale and depth frames grows to 223,008. To
prepare an input for the MDARQN, the eight most recent
depth and grayscale frames, of each time step, are stacked
together to form an input for the Y-channel and the Depth-
channel of the MDARQN, respectively.
F. Training procedure
We present a training procedure which comprise of two
phases, the data generation phase and learning phase.
1) Data generation phase: In this phase the agent inter-
acts with an environment for generating interaction experi-
ences e. At time t, the environment provides an observation
state st, the agent after observing a state st takes an action
at using ϵ-greedy policy, the environment in return provides
the scalar reward rt and the next state st+1. The interaction
experience et = {st, at, rt, st+1} is then stored into a replay
buffer M for experience replay during the learning phase.

This cycle of generating data keeps on repeating until the
terminal state T is achieved. The replay buffer stores N most
recent interaction experiences.
2) Learning phase: During this phase, the agent feeds on
the replay memory M for training the MDARQN Q(s, a; θ)
by minimizing loss function (Equation 1). Like DQN train-
ing, we also maintain two MDARQN i.e., the target network
and current network with old parameters θ−and new θ
parameters, respectively.
In the propose work, the MDARQN agent was trained
for 14 days. Every day, the robot interacted with people
for some time period T in order to generate a data (data-
generation phase). After T time period, the robot went to
rest position and the learning phase began. It should be
noted that the proposed training method is different from
the DQN training procedure [4]. In DQN training, after
ﬁlling a memory buffer with n experiences, the Q-network
is trained on a minibatch after collecting each and every
interaction experience e. This training of Q-network after
every single interaction experience adds a delay between the
agent’s interaction with an environment at time t and at time
t + 1. In [4], the environment for the DQN is an Atari
emulator which is somehow controllable. From the word
controllable we mean that during the DQN training, the Atari
environment halts and it waits for the DQN-agent to execute
its next action. In our proposed work, the environment is real,
uncontrollable and it requires the MDARQN agent to interact
with people. Therefore any signiﬁcant delay while robot is
in the ﬁeld for interaction with the people is unacceptable.
Hence, we divided the training procedure into two phases.
G. Experiment details and hyper-parameters
We conducted the experiment for 14 days. Every day
the data-generation phase was executed for around 4 hours
followed by the learning phase. The number of interaction
steps the robot could perform during 4 hours data-generation
phase depended on the internet speed3 as we used the
wireless media for a communication between Pepper and the
computer system running MDARQN. For each interaction
step, the robot provides eight most recent depth and grayscale
frames i.e., m = 8. The replay buffer stored up to 3750
most recent interaction experiences. During learning phase,
a mini buffer of size 2000 samples was randomly sampled
from the replay buffer M. This mini buffer was then used
for mini-batch training of the Q-network using RMSProp
algorithm. This mini-batch training was repeated 10 times
during the learning phase and the size of a mini-batch was
25 samples. As suggested in [8], the initial LSTM hidden
and memory state were zeroed for each new mini-batch.
The target network parameters were updated every day after
training and the learning rate was kept constant at 0.00025.
The exploration parameter ϵ was annealed linearly from 1 to
0.1 over the 28000 interaction steps, however, during 14 days
of experiment the robot could perform only 13938 interaction
steps due to variations in internet speed at different locations.
3With upstream speed of 37 Mbps and downstream speed of 23 Mbps,
the robot could execute 2010 interaction steps i.e., T = 2010.
Trained Model
MDARQN(Aug)
MDARQN
MDQN
Hand-shake ratio
0.74
-
0.48
Accuracy (%)
95.2
91.3
95.3
True positive rate (%)
90.5
82.7
90.7
False positive rate (%)
3.15
5.77
3.09
TABLE I: Performance measures of trained Q-networks.
H. Evaluation Procedure
In order to evaluate the MDARQN decisions and the
impact of attention model on the human-robot interaction,
we carried out two kinds of evaluations:
1) Evaluating MDARQN decisions on a test dataset:
Since for each given scenario there can be more than one
feasible action, therefore, to evaluate either agent decision
is right or wrong, we use the following evaluation method.
The MDARQN decisions on a test dataset, not seen by the
MDARQN during training, were evaluated by three volun-
teers. The test dataset has 4480 grayscale and depth frames.
Each volunteer observes the sequence of eight grayscale
frames depicting the scenario followed by the MDARQN
decision. The volunteer then decides if the decision is right
or wrong. If the decision is marked wrong by the majority
of volunteer then the volunteers were asked to pick up the
most suitable action for the depicted scenario.
2) Evaluating the impact of attention mechanism: We
placed the robot in public but this time, the robot interacted
with people under our trained Q-networks’ policy. The
performance of the MDARQN was compared with MDQN
through a ratio of number successful handshakes over total
number of handshake attempts. The results of the evaluations
are presented in the results section.
I. Source code and data availability
In order to facilitate the implementation of the proposed
MDARQN, we release the source code of our complete
project together with the depth dataset collected during 14
days of experiment4. Although the dataset used for training
comprised of both grayscle and depth images but due to
privacy concerns, only the depth dataset is made publicly
available.
VI. RESULTS
This section presents the results of the proposed neural
Q-networks. Table 1 compares the performance of three
models i.e., MDARQN(Aug), MDARQN and MDQN. The
MDARQN(Aug) was trained on an augmented training
dataset while MDARQN and MDQN were trained on an
unaugmented training dataset. The description of nomencla-
ture used in table 1 is as follow. The handshake ratio, as
discussed earlier, measures how often the robot augmented
with a certain Q-network can attract people for handshaking
in an uncontrolled public environment. Accuracy is a mea-
sure of how often the Q-network’s predictions were correct.
True positive rate corresponds to the percentage of predicting
4https://sites.google.com/a/irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp/member/home/ahmed-
qureshi/deephri

(a) W=0.27 L=0.24 H=0.25 S=0.24 (b) W=0.26 L=0.24 H=0.25 S=0.25 (c) W=0.26 L= 0.25 H=0.25 S=.24 (d) W=0.23 L=0.27 H=0.25 S=0.24
(e) W=0.22 L=0.25 H=0.28 S=0.26 (f) W=0.23 L=0.27 H=0.25 S=0.24 (g) W=0.22 L=0.23 H=0.26 S=0.30 (h) W=0.23 L=0.24 H=0.25 S=0.28
Fig. 3: Successful cases of agents decision.
positive targets as positive. False positive rate measures how
often the negative examples were classiﬁed as positive. The
ﬁrst row of table 1 indicates that the handshake ratios for
a robot augmented with MDAQRN(Aug) and MDQN are
0.74 and 0.48, respectively. Furthermore, it can be seen in
the last three rows of table 1 that MDARQN(Aug) and
MDQN demonstrate similar performance while MDARQN
has relatively inferior performance on the test dataset. In
addition, we have also noticed that the performance of
individual streams of MDQN and MDARQN(Aug) were
also similar with a true positive rate of around 70%. This
indicates that in order to provide similar performance to the
neural network without attention, the attention driven neural
networks require more training data.
From now onward all results presented correspond to
our proposed MDARQN(Aug). Figures 3 and 4 show the
successful and unsuccessful cases of MDARQN(Aug) deci-
sions, respectively, in the depicted scenarios. The actions:
wait, look towards human, wave hand and handshake are
abbreviated as W, L, H, and S respectively in these ﬁgures.
In ﬁgure 3, in each sub-ﬁgure, the top two frames (starting
from left) show the ﬁrst and the last frame out of eight most
recent frames for any situation while the bottom two images
indicates the region of attention on these frames. An action
with maximum Q-value is highlighted in blue to indicate the
agent’s decision for the particular scenario. The discussion
on the MDARQN correct decisions is presented in discussion
section. In ﬁgure 4, the action highlighted in red is the agent’s
decision while the action highlighted in green is the decision
considered right by the evaluators.
VII. DISCUSSION
This section provides a brief discussion on the intention
prediction ability of MDARQN, impact of attention steering
and reward function deﬁnition on HRSI.
A. Intentions depicting factors
As discussed earlier, human intention prediction is crucial
for HRSI and human intentions can be predicted from various
intention depicting factors. Results in ﬁgure 3 indicate that
our proposed model has learned to infer intention from those
factors. In ﬁgure 3(b), an activity is in progress i.e., a person
is taking a picture and the agent decides to wait. This action
of MDARQN is also in accordance with human social norms
as we humans usually do not intervene when someone is
taking a picture. Figure 3(c) and 3(d), highlights the ability
of our model to interpret human walking trajectory as in
the former a person is walking away and agent waits while
in the latter, the person is walking towards the robot and
the agent decides to look towards the person. Furthermore,
our model has also learned to determine the level of human
engagement with the robot during an interaction. The sce-
narios in ﬁgures 3(e)-3(h) are arranged in increasing order
of human involvement with the robot during the interaction.
The scene in ﬁgure 3(e) indicates least humans involvement
because people are at distance and are not looking towards
the robot, the agent takes wave hand action to gain people’s
attention. The scene in ﬁgure 3(f) shows relatively higher
people involvement so agent chooses look towards human
action which is a softer way of gaining human attention as
compared to wave hand. In the scenarios in ﬁgures 3(g)-3(h),
people are fully engaged so agent decided to handshake.
This level of human engagement with a robot is indicated
by person’s body orientation and distance from the robot.
Hence, the results indicate that the MDARQN has learned
to predict human intentions from intention indicating factors.
B. Impact of attention steering on human-robot interaction
The higher handshake ratio of MDARQN(Aug) as com-
pared to MDQN indicates that people show more willingness
to interact with a robot that exhibits it’s attention and is
responsive to human stimuli compared to a robot that is not.
This result is in accordance with the ﬁndings of [7] and
hence, attentioning is important for a successful HRSI. De-
spite higher handshake ratio of MDARQN(Aug) with respect
to MDQN, the handshake ratio for both models is actually
low. One of the reasons for this low ratio is robot’s repeated
attempts to perform a handshake with a person who is fully
engaged (as can also be seen in the accompanying video) but
we, humans, avoid multiple handshakes. Therefore, in our
future plan, we hope to add memory to the model so that
the robot can determine with whom it has already interacted.

(a) W=0.23 L=0.24 H=0.25 S=0.26 (b) W=0.24 L=0.23 H=0.24 S=0.29
(c) Attention error
(d) W=0.24 L=0.27 H=0.25 S=0.24
Fig. 4: Unsuccessful cases of agents decision.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
20
40
60
80
100
Penalty on unsuccessful handshake
True Positive rate (%)
Fig. 5: Effect of reward function on the robot’s behavior.
In addition to willingness, the attention is also important to
determine with whom the robot is intending to interact out
of many other people in the scene. As in ﬁgures 3(g) and
3(h), the attention network highlights the person on right side
and the person at the center, respectively in order to perform
handshake with them. It should be noted that this precise
attentioning can not be possible with the attention steering
method for non-greedy actions.
C. Reward function and robot’s behavior
Reward function deﬁnition determines the robot behavior;
the results presented so far were based on the reward function
discussed earlier. In this section, we evaluate the effect of
different reward functions on the robot’s behavior. High
penalty on unsuccessful handshake inculcates rude behavior
into the robot as robot become reluctant to handshake while
low penalty e.g., 0 inculcates amiable behavior as robot
repeatedly attempts to do a handshake. In order to test
which robot behavior is acceptable, we trained ﬁve models
and the penalties on unsuccessful handshake for these ﬁve
models were 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1 while rest of the reward
function deﬁnitions were kept same as discussed earlier. The
performance of these models was evaluated on test dataset
following the agent decision evaluation procedure (discussed
earlier). The graph in ﬁgure 5 shows that model with penalty
of 0.1 on unsuccessful handshake generates more socially
acceptable decisions as compared to other models.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In order to ensure successful HRSI, it is essential for
a robot to interpret complex human behavior and respond
to these behaviors in a perceivable way. We propose a
Multimodal Deep Attention Q-Network (MDARQN) which
was trained through a 14 days of hit and trial method
based robot interaction with people in real unconstrained
public environments. The results of training indicate that our
proposed MDARQN enabled the robot to respond to complex
human behavior by ﬁrst interpreting them and then executing
a responsive action with attention indication. The results also
show i) that the robot has learned to infer intention from
intention depicting factors such as human body language,
walking trajectory or any ongoing activity; ii) that the atten-
tion indication adds perceivability to robot actions and thus
people show more willingness for interaction with a robot;
iii) the diverse interaction scenarios which were deﬁnitely
hard to envision and yet the MDARQN learned to choose
appropriate decisions in these diverse scenarios.
In our future plan, we plan to i) explore the impact of dif-
ferent fusion strategies on multimodal learning; ii) augment
the proposed network with differentiable working memories
in order to realize long-term HRI.
