Automated Dissipation Control for Turbulence
Simulation with Shell Models
Ann-Kathrin Dombrowskia, Klaus-Robert M¨ullera,b,c,d,∗, Wolf Christian
M¨ullere,∗
aMachine Learning Group, TU-Berlin, Germany
bDepartment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
cMax Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
dBIFOLD - Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, TU-Berlin,
Germany
ePlasma Astrophysics, TU-Berlin, Germany
Abstract
The application of machine learning (ML) techniques, especially neural net-
works, has seen tremendous success at processing images and language. This
is because we often lack formal models to understand visual and audio input,
so here neural networks can unfold their abilities as they can model solely from
data. In the ﬁeld of physics we typically have models that describe natural pro-
cesses reasonably well on a formal level. Nonetheless, in recent years, ML has
also proven useful in these realms, be it by speeding up numerical simulations or
by improving accuracy. One important and so far unsolved problem in classical
physics is understanding turbulent ﬂuid motion. In this work we construct a
strongly simpliﬁed representation of turbulence by using the Gledzer-Ohkitani-
Yamada (GOY) shell model.
With this system we intend to investigate the
potential of ML-supported and physics-constrained small-scale turbulence mod-
elling. Instead of standard supervised learning we propose an approach that
aims to reconstruct statistical properties of turbulence such as the self-similar
inertial-range scaling, where we could achieve encouraging experimental results.
Furthermore we discuss pitfalls when combining machine learning with diﬀer-
∗Corresponding author.

Preprint submitted to Journal
January 10, 2022
arXiv:2201.02485v1  [cs.CE]  7 Jan 2022

ential equations.
1. Introduction
Turbulence is irregular, unsteady and seemingly chaotic ﬂuid motion. Op-
portunities to witness turbulence are plentiful: the water in a fast streaming
river or waterfall, the smoke of a ﬁre, the air behind a ﬂying plane or the plume
formed by a rocket motor are all examples of turbulent ﬂows. For many tech-
nical applications it is important to understand, predict and control turbulent
motion, so history of research and progress on analyzing turbulence is vast and
rich [1–8]. Nonetheless a complete understanding of its spatio-temporal non-
linear behaviour remains a great challenge in physics (see e.g. [8] for a detailed
description of the fundamentals of turbulent ﬂows). In the following, we will
refer to three-dimensional hydrodynamic Navier-Stokes turbulence. Tradition-
ally, strongly subsonic gas- and hydrodynamic turbulence is studied using the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −∇p + Re−1∆u + f
(1)
∇· u = 0,
(2)
given here in dimensionless form with the velocity u, the pressure p, and the
Reynolds number Re = L0U0/ν that is deﬁned by a characteristic length, L0,
velocity, U0, and the kinematic viscosity ν. The vector f denotes a force-ﬁeld
that drives the turbulent ﬂow on large spatial scales. The Reynolds number
roughly determines the ratio of the largest spatial scale of turbulence, L0, and
the smallest one, η. The Kolmogorov length η estimates the scale where the
nonlinear spectral ﬂux due to the energy cascade becomes comparable to the
dissipative losses.
As atmospheric and oceanic ﬂows easily reach Re ≳108,
a fully resolved and spatially discretized representation of realistic turbulence
requires an enormous spectral bandwidth, L0/η ∼Re3/4 [9].
2

In most cases a solution to the Navier-Stokes equations cannot be derived an-
alytically and is thus computed using numerical methods. For the reason given
above, Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) [8] at realistic Reynolds numbers
are computationally not feasible without further approximation. In these cases
Large-Eddy Simulations (LES) [8, 10] can be useful. The LES equations are
obtained by applying a linear operator that acts as a low pass ﬁlter to the
Navier-Stokes equations (2). Written in component notation and employing the
Einstein summation convention we then get:
∂¯ui
∂t + ∂(uiuj)
∂xj
= −∂¯p
∂xi
+ ν ∂2¯ui
∂xj∂xj
+ ¯fi,
(3)
∂¯uj
∂xj
= 0
(4)
where ¯• denotes a ﬁltered quantity. These diﬀerential equations describe the
dynamics of a spatially ﬁltered velocity ﬁeld, i.e. the large-scale ﬂow. Thus
the numeric calculations can be performed on a coarser grid. Due to the non-
linear nature of the advection term ∂(uiuj)
∂xj
, its ﬁltered version ∂(uiuj)
∂xj
is still
dependent on the original velocity ﬁeld. This is the consequence of the fact
that nonlinear interactions do not exclusively occur among ﬁltered ﬂuctuations
which are resolved on the coarser grid but also between ﬁltered ﬂuctuations
and unresolved components of the velocity ﬁeld that have been eliminated by
the ﬁlter operation. Those latter interactions give rise to a subgrid-scale stress
τij = uiuj −uiuj that can only be determined with the unﬁltered velocity ﬁeld:
∂¯ui
∂t + ∂(¯ui¯uj)
∂xj
= −∂¯p
∂xi
+ ν ∂2¯ui
∂xj∂xj
+ ¯fi −
∂τij
∂xj
|{z}
subgrid stess tensor
(5)
In LES small scales are not explicitly resolved. Any scales that are smaller
than the ﬁlter width are referred to as sub-grid-scales (SGS). Thus the SGS
term has to be modeled. As in three-dimensional Navier-Stokes turbulence the
nonlinear interactions of turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations to leading order give rise
to a spectral ﬂux of energy towards smaller scales, the main purpose of a SGS-
3

model in such a system is to generate the right amount of energy dissipation with
a spatial stress distribution that is consistent with the one due to the original
velocity ﬁeld. As the original velocity ﬁeld is unknown to the SGS-model, this
closure problem can only be fulﬁlled up to a certain level of approximation that
is dependent on particular physical focus and goals of the LES modeler. Thus,
many sub-grid models of diﬀering complexity and physical background have
been proposed, see e.g. [11–14] and references therein.
1.1. Related Work
In recent years eﬀort to apply machine learning to the ﬁeld of ﬂuid dynamics
has been made [15–17]. As it is often intractable to resolve ﬁne grained features
of the solution, many approaches incorporate machine learning tools to facili-
tate computation of the coarse grained representation. To achieve this, many
approaches use high resolution data from DNS as ground truth that is then
downsampled. To incorporate physical constraints, the ML model is usually
restricted to reconstructing only a part of the unknown solution while other
parts are described using the exact dynamics or more traditional approxima-
tions [18]. In the case of turbulence, most approaches focus on learning the SGS
closure end to end by estimating the diﬀerence between downsampled DNS and
LES data using an artiﬁcial neural network [19–25]. While the trained networks
are initially dissipative when applied in a new setting they can lack long-term
stability as high frequency errors accumulate. To counteract these drawbacks
eﬀort has been made to incorporate physical principles into the machine learning
models [26–29].
In the present paper, we follow an alternative strategy where the model is
non-linearly adapting to the ﬂow that develops under its inﬂuence. This means
that, unlike previous work, we formulate our objective without referring to the
underlying ‘velocities’ as targets but instead aim to tune the parameters to
reproduce statistical characteristics of the system.
Our work is most closely related to recent work on incorporating machine
learning models into diﬀerential equations.
Speciﬁcally the approach to ap-
4

proximate not the quantity of interest itself but its derivative with a machine
learning model. This diﬀerential equation can then be solved using standard
numerical methods. To optimize the model’s parameters θ a loss function L
needs to be deﬁned. This loss is usually a scalar quantity that either directly
compares the calculated solution of the diﬀerential equation with ground truth
data, or minimizes some other quantity that is dependent on the solution. In
order to update the model’s parameters so that they may minimize the loss one
needs to calculate the derivative of the loss with respect to the parameters dL
dθ .
In standard machine learning procedures this is usually done using automatic
diﬀerentiation. In the present case this approach can become very memory in-
eﬃcient as one needs to diﬀerentiate through the steps made by the numerical
solver. Thus the gradient dL
dθ is approximated by solving an additional diﬀeren-
tial equation, the adjoint, backwards in time. This idea was popularized recently
by [30], although previously discussed in [31] and [32]. We recap this approach
brieﬂy in Section 2.2.
The present paper focuses on the basic properties of the problem and the
potential pitfalls that our learning-by-evolution approach entails. We therefore
attempt to reduce mathematical complexity by replacing the full Navier-Stokes
equations by a much simpler shell model.
1.2. GOY model
The Gledzer-Ohkitani-Yamada (GOY) model [33, 34] is a diﬀerential equa-
tion given by
d
dtui = −
Di
|{z}
viscous dissipation
+
Fi
|{z}
forcing
+
ıCi
|{z}
quadratic interactions
(6)
Di = νk2
i ui
(7)
Fi = fδi,j
(8)
Ci = kiu∗
i+1u∗
i+2 −ϵki−1u∗
i−1u∗
i+1 + (ϵ −1)ki−2u∗
i−1u∗
i−2
(9)
5

2D real velocity
2D complex velocity
1D complex velocity
insigni-
ﬁcant 
nodes
energy-containing
range and inertial
subrange
dissipation range
Figure 1: Graphical intuition for the GOY model. Left: computational grid for 2D velocity
components in real space [37], center: solution domain in wavenumber/Fourier space [8], right:
exponentially spaced wavenumbers with scalar complex scalar velocities
where u is the complex velocity, u∗denotes the complex conjugate, ı is the
imaginary unit, ν, k0, λ, ϵ are real parameters, and f is a complex parameter.
The so called shell numbers are denoted by ki = k0λi, i = 1, 2, ..., N.
A basic source of inspiration for this model are the Navier Stokes equations
in Fourier space
∂
∂tF{ui} = −ν|κ|2F{ui} + F{fi} −ıκmF{uium} + ıκi
κlκm
|κ|2 F{ulum}
(10)
where instead of having a real valued velocity that depends on spacial coor-
dinates we have a complex valued velocity depending on wavevectors κ. The
operator F denotes the Fourier-transformation. Large scales, ℓ, of turbulent
motion correspond to Fourier modes with small wavenumber κ = |κ|. The sim-
pliﬁcation of the GOY model then lies in reducing all velocity vectors of equal
wavenumber |κ| to a scalar complex velocity ui, that depends on the scalar
wavevector ki (an intuition is given in Figure 1). The ki’s are also called shell
numbers and are usually chosen to be geometrically spaced to cover a wide
range of turbulent scales. Shell models, like the GOY model, have been studied
extensively as they can model the statistical scaling properties of turbulence at
high Reynolds numbers while keeping computational cost low [35, 36].
6

Throughout this work we use standard parameters
ϵ = 0.5
λ = 2
ν = 10−8
k0 = 2−4
Fi = fδi,4 =



5 × 10−3(1 + ı)
for i = 4
0.0
else
u(0)
i
=



1 × 10−5(1 + ı)
for i ∈{3, 5}
0.0
else
N = 22
We show an example of a simulation of 1500 time steps (around 23 large
eddy turnover times) with the above parameters in Figure 2. The left graph
shows total kinetic energy Ekin = PN
i=1
1
2|ui|2 and the right graph shows the
dissipation rate ϵ = PN
i=1 νk2|ui|2
We plot the quantities over turnover times of the largest ﬂuctuation τ0 =
⟨k1|u1|⟩−1, where ⟨•⟩denotes the average over time. The nonlinear turnover
time estimates how long it takes for a ﬂuctuation to be reduced to Kolmogorov
scale. Averaging over at least 10 large eddy turnover times is relevant for sta-
tistical quantities.
1.3. Statistical quantities
In turbulent ﬂows we can observe the non-linear interaction dynamics of
turbulent ﬂuctuations on a broad range of spatial and temporal scales of mo-
tion. This gives rise to eﬃcient mixing of quantities advected by the ﬂow and
the roughly self-similar destruction and emergence of structural coherence on
spatial scales of diﬀerent size (break-up or merging). Although the structural
dynamics appears to be random, it results on average in directed and conser-
vative spectral transport of ideal invariants, such as energy or helicity, termed
7

Figure 2: After an initial period where energy accumulates in the system, interactions between
neighbouring components eventually transport energy to larger shells, where it is dissipated,
on average at the rate of which new energy is introduced into the system via forcing. Left:
total kinetic energy in the system. Right: dissipation rate
inertial subrange
dissipation
range
energy
containing
range
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                             energy cascade
Figure 3: Energy cascade involving the transfer of energy from large scales to small scales of
motion.
cascade. The cascade direction, either towards larger or smaller wavenumbers,
is dependent on the type of quantity, the underlying physics, the dimensionality
and the general conﬁguration of the system under consideration.
Stationar-
ity of turbulence is thus only possible if appropriate sources and sinks of the
cascading quantities are present at largest and smallest scales of the ﬂow. Three-
dimensional hydrodynamic Navier-Stokes turbulence exhibits a direct cascade
of kinetic energy per unit mass. The cascade generates an energy ﬂux from large
scales (small wavenumbers) where kinetic energy is injected by some physical
process to small scales (large wavenumbers) where kinetic energy is removed by
dissipation, see Figure 3.
Although the GOY model is a very simpliﬁed version of the Navier-Stokes
8

Figure 4: Left: energy cascade with characteristic −5
3 slope within inertial range, Right: non
linear energy ﬂux within the inertial range
equations it produces statistical similarity properties that are comparable to
those of real world turbulence. These statistical characteristics are found in
the inertial subrange of spatial scales, where neither external forcing, nor dis-
sipation dominates and where energy transfer happens entirely by spectrally
local, nonlinear interactions between ﬂuctuations at diﬀerent but similar scales
of motion.
The energy density distribution over the shells
Ei = 1
2
|ui|2
ki
(11)
approximates the characteristic slope of the Kolmogorov −5
3 spectrum [2, 38]
in the inertial range 22 ≤ki ≤214, see Figure 4.
Another statistical quantity of interest is the non-linear energy ﬂux (see
Figure 4) which is determined by the non-linear interactions between the shells
described by equation (9):
Πi = −ℑ{uiui+1(kiui+2 + (1 −ϵ)ki−1ui−1)}
(12)
where ℑ{•} denotes the imaginary part of the argument. In the case of Kol-
mogorov scaling of the energy spectrum, the energy ﬂux in the inertial range is
roughly constant as energy is transported conservatively from lower to higher
shell numbers.
9

1.4. Our Modiﬁcation
To create a learning task we drop the term describing the dissipation and
aim to relearn this term. We use the original GOY equations (6) for reference
to the ground truth. Our modiﬁed GOY equation is then
d
dtui =
Fi
|{z}
forcing
+
ıCi
|{z}
quadratic interactions
−
Mi
|{z}
machine learning model
.
(13)
The term Mi can be dependent on u, t and parameters θ. We deﬁne our
model as
Mi = θk2
i ui
(14)
with learnable parameter θ. This simple model mimics a diﬀusive Laplacian
dissipation term with θ as the adjustable dissipation coeﬃcient.
2. Theoretical considerations
In this paper, the optimal solution is characterized by a target value of a
certain physical characteristic of the velocity ﬁeld, i.e.
the asymptotic self-
similar scaling exponent of the energy spectrum which is a statistical two-point
correlator. This quantity acts as a statistical sensor providing information on
the model’s performance.
The proposed learning-by-evolution technique is conceptually closer to com-
mon strategies to understand physical behaviour than the classical ML perspec-
tive that regards a physical system as a set of typically sparse but correlated
data. Our approach is able to straightforwardly include physical, in particu-
lar statistical properties of the system under consideration which constrain the
ML-algorithm. While the region determining spatial statistics in homogeneous
turbulence is by deﬁnition unbounded, this is generally not the case for tempo-
ral statistics of a system regulated by some feedback control mechanism. The
combination of an SGS-model and the attached ML-algorithm which evaluates
the reaction of the system on the model via a statistical sensor is fundamentally
constrained by three timescales: i) the propagation timescale τp characterizing
10

the time required to communicate a change of state of the model throughout
the parts of the system that determine the state of the statistical sensor, ii)
the relaxation timescale τr on which the statistical sensor converges within a
deﬁned variation δm towards a new stationary state after a modiﬁcation of the
SGS-model has been communicated to the relevant parts of the system, and iii)
the timescale of backwards-stationarity, τb, which determines the time-horizon
up to which the ML-algorithm can inspect the past evolution of the system to
optimize the model’s parameters. Evidently, for the interval τ∆between model
modiﬁcations, we have to require τ∆≥τp + τr. It is important to note that the
above relation represents a fundamental physical constraint, since propagation
and relaxation timescales are generally independent of the speciﬁc technicalities
of the model or the ML-implementation. Changes to the model that occur faster
than (τ∆)−1 cannot be distinguished by the statistical sensor and do not allow
to control the model in a well-deﬁned manner. While the propagation timescale
represents a strict lower bound on τ∆, the relaxation time of the sensor is mainly
determined by the required level of statistical convergence and the tolerable de-
viation from forward-stationarity, i.e. statistical stationarity reached after a
modiﬁcation of the model. Therefore, τr should be signiﬁcantly longer than the
longest auto-correlation timescale of ﬂuctuations determining the sensor state.
Both timescales can be estimated by physical considerations: a relevant change
of state of the SGS-model will lead to a diﬀerent total dissipation rate of en-
ergy, ε. For decaying turbulence, ε = −d/dtE(t). For driven turbulence that
has attained a statistically stationary state this rate has to be equal to the rate
of energy injection by the driving mechanism which is usually known in nu-
merical experiments. Since the turbulent energy cascade towards small-scale is
conservative any statistically signiﬁcant variation of ε will backpropagate from
the smallest towards the largest scales of the ﬂow on the order of a large-eddy
turnover time τ0. The auto-correlation timescale characterizing the relaxation
interval of the sensor is roughly estimated to be of the order of τ0 as well since in
turbulence DNS or LES scale separation of inertial range and large-scale driving
is often severely limited by ﬁnite numerical resources. Consequently, the tempo-
11

ral evolution of the system as observed by the ML-algorithm has a granularity
of the order of τ0 ∼τp + τr.
Another important aspect that depends on physical properties of the tur-
bulent ﬂow is the maximum time-horizon limiting the extent to which the ML
machinery can use data from the past to optimize the present model conﬁgura-
tion. This introduces a third timescale, τb, on which statistical measurements
of the current state of the ﬂow are permissible, i.e.
on which the system’s
state can be assumed as statistically stationary.
Causes for deviations from
backwards-stationarity, i.e. statistical stationarity before a model modiﬁcation,
are for example a secular drift of physical parameters or, more importantly,
a preceding modiﬁcation of the model by the ML-algorithm.
The points in
time characterizing such changes of the system are strictly speaking boundaries
between statistically non-equivalent states that should not be combined to eval-
uate the model’s performance. In summary, rather basic considerations require
a ﬁnite minimum interval, τ∆between subsequent model modiﬁcations as well
as a ﬁnite time horizon for inferring the model’s performance from the preceding
evolution of the system.
This reasoning, however, does not necessarily lead to an eﬃcient optimiza-
tion of the model if the required path of model modiﬁcations allows states of
the system for which the evolution is diﬃcult or even impossible to compute.
This is the case in the present work where we intend to ﬁnd a model for a
diﬀusive dissipation term, ν∆u. The exponential behaviour associated with it
can give rise to growing unstable solutions for ν < 0 or exponentially fast de-
cay. A choice of ν that is either positive, but too large, or negative leads to
numerical stiﬀness or even complete loss of a stationary solution. As a conse-
quence, the ML-algorithm has to react to its own modiﬁcations of the model on
much shorter timescales than estimated above to avoid being deadlocked in a
state of the system that prevents further numerical evolution and improvement.
We deﬁne the nonlinear turnover time on spatial scale ℓas τNL = ℓ/uℓwith
a characteristic root-mean-square velocity ﬂuctuation uℓon that scale. For a
spectral energy scaling E(k) ∼k−γ with k ∼ℓ−1 and u2 ∼kE(k), we obtain
12

τNL ∼(k3E(k))−1/2 ∼k(γ−3)/2. Thus, the turnover time in the inertial range of
Kolmogorov turbulence decreases with scale as a power-law and the system, in
particular the numerically permissible timestep, responds much faster to mod-
iﬁcations of the model than assumed above. Consequently, in order to prevent
a numerically problematic evolution, a sub-optimal choice of model parameters
has to be detected on the shortest timescales related to the statistical sensor. In
the present work the model has to be re-adjusted almost every timestep which
is determined by the turnover time on the scale of the numerical grid.
2.1. Optimization Problem
To train the model we need to deﬁne an objective function that is being
minimized by retrospective analysis of the systems’s immediate past. We want
the scaling exponent of the energy shell spectrum to resemble the slope given
by Kolmogorov’s theory [2]. For that we take the mean squared error of the
logarithmic slope at every shell and the constant −5
3. The loss is then given by
L = 1/N
X
i
log(Ei+1) −log(Ei)
log(ki+1) −log(ki) −5
3
2
(15)
where Ei denotes the energy density from equation (11) at shell number ki.
2.2. Adjoint method
Our ML model is part of the diﬀerential equation. When we solve the dif-
ferential equation to get the velocity value at t1, we integrate the diﬀerential
equation using a numerical solver like the Runge-Kutta Order 4 method with
adaptive step width. The problem can be formally expressed as:
u(t1) = u(t0) +
Z t1
t0
du(t)
dt dt
(16)
= u(t0) +
Z t1
t0
F + ıC(u) −M(u, t, θ)dt
(17)
To update the parameters θ of the model we need the gradient of the loss
function, given by equation (15), with respect to our parameters dL(u(t))
dθ
. In
13

traditional ML problems this gradient is calculated with standard backpropa-
gation using automatic diﬀerentiation [39, 40]. For that, intermediate results
in the forward pass are usually saved. In the case at hand we would have to
backpropagate through all the solver steps that were taken in the forward pass,
which can be very memory ineﬃcient. An eﬃcient method to calculate gradients
is the ﬁnite diﬀerence method that only requires access to the loss itself L(u(t))
but this can become unfeasible if our model has many parameters since we need
to calculate a complete forward pass per parameter. However there is another
method to calculate the gradients approximately: the adjoint sensitivity or ad-
joint state method. It has many applications in physics and more recently in
neural networks [30]. The idea is to approximate the desired derivative of the
loss with respect to the parameters dL
dθ by solving an integral numerically:
dL
dθ = −
Z t0
t1
λ(t)T ∂f
∂θ
(18)
where f = du
dt . To this end the so called adjoint is introduced as the deriva-
tive of the loss with respect to a speciﬁc state
λ(t) =
∂L
∂u(t)
(19)
The adjoint is the solution to the initial value problem
˙λ(t) = −λT ∂f
∂u
subject to
λ(t1) =
∂L
∂u(t1)
(20)
The two integrals are solved backwards in time. The forward pass, that is
the integration forward in time to solve for velocity u(t1), can be treated as a
black box. We only need to know how our diﬀerential f = du
dt depends on u
and parameters θ and how our loss depends on the ﬁnal state
∂L
∂u(t1). For more
details see Appendix A.
14

2.3. Technical requirements
Handling of complex numbers and implementation of adjoint methods and
numerical solvers are rarely required for standard ML tasks, thus the most com-
mon Python-based libraries for machine learning, like PyTorch or Tensorﬂow,
currently lack the proper tools for our problem. This is why we chose Julia-
based libraries for implementation.
They oﬀer a vast selection of numerical
solvers, implementations of adjoint gradients, and have good support for com-
plex numbers. For the learning algorithm we use Adam [41] as an optimizer as
it performs well on problems with noisy gradients [42]. The learning rate, α,
scales the updates to the parameters θ during retrospective training, and essen-
tially sets the pace at which the ML-algorithm is moving in parameter space.
As the adjusted model parameter has a direct impact on the maximum timestep
allowed for numerical integration, the learning rate should be suﬃciently small
to allow for automated corrections if model performance becomes worse. As
the loss is technically an average of shell energies, two physical timescales are
relevant in this respect: i) the nonlinear turnover time τNL(ki) characterizing
nonlinear spectral energy transfer, and ii) the model timescale τM(ki) which for
the diﬀusive model (14) is estimated at wavenumber ki as τM = (2k2
i θ)−1. For
i = 22 the latter relation links the largest, numerically permissible timestep,
∆t, with the model parameter θ as θ∆t ∼10−11. Thus, for the given GOY-
parameters a reasonable choice for the learning rate amounts to ∆θ = 1 · 10−9,
while all other hyperparameters of the optimization algorithm are set to stan-
dard values. The Adam algorithm eﬀectively restricts the absolute values of the
updates to the learning rate; |∆θ| ⪅α. Large values for α can thus lead to
problems with unstable solutions and stiﬀness of the diﬀerential equation (see
Section 4).
15

Figure 5: Simulation results without dissipation term. Left: accumulation of total kinetic
energy; Middle:
energy scaling deviates from characteristic −5
3 value; Right:
non linear
energy ﬂux
3. Experiments
3.1. Setting the dissipation to zero
We already showed simulation results for a GOY system with standard pa-
rameters in Figure 2 and 4. For the modiﬁed equations we have replaced the
dissipation term with a learnable model. If we set this model to zero, and repeat
the simulation, energy ﬂux and energy spectrum divert from the Kolmogorov
behaviour.
Due to the direct energy cascade towards small-scales generated
by the GOY model and the lack of small-scale dissipation, energy piles up at
smallest scales. Figure 5 shows simulation results when the dissipation term
is removed and no alternative model is introduced. Energy accumulates in the
system, the energy spectrum looses its characteristic inertial-range slope of −5
3
and the non-linear energy ﬂux is no longer even roughly constant in the scaling
range.
3.2. Learning ν
We substitute our diﬀusive model (14) into the diﬀerential equation (13),
which we integrate in the forward pass for 0.1t. We then use the estimated
velocity values ui to calculate the energy density given by equation (11) and
subsequently the loss given by equation (15). As the energy density and conse-
quently the loss is a statistical quantity we average over the last 1000 velocity
vectors before calculating the derivative dL
dθ and updating the parameter θ. So
we are attempting to learn a parameter for the viscosity ν so that the energy
16

Figure 6: Simulation results when learning θ in Mi = θk2
i ui. Clockwise starting with the left
upper graph: total kinetic energy, dissipation, energy ﬂux, energy cascade
spectrum has the desired slope in the scaling range. We start from a simu-
lation with standard parameters at t = 500 and set the initial value for θ to
0.0. Repeating this process for 1000
τ0
normalized time steps leads to recovery of
the desired slope of the energy cascade as well as the energy ﬂux. This means
that the learning algorithm learns on a window of 100
τ0
normalized time steps
into the immediate past of the system. The data window co-moves with the
current simulation time and allows the learning algorithm to react and adapt
to adverse back-reactions of the system to parameter changes. It is physically
reasonable to set the window size to the characteristic time of the largest ﬂuctu-
ations which yields an estimate of the period of time required to communicate
changes of small-scale dissipation throughout the whole spectral range. The
average large-eddy turn over time for a simulation with ν = 10−8 is given by
τ0 ≈66.0. Our time window, including 1000 velocity vectors spaced at 0.1 time
steps, thus covers 100t ≈1.5τ0. Simulation results are shown in Figure 6.
In Figure 7 we show the evolution of our loss L from Equation (15) and
parameter θ during training. We do not start from a high loss since we continue
17

Figure 7: Loss L (left) and parameter θ (right) during optimization
a simulation with standard parameters for which the energy cascade already has
the desired slope, so initially many of the 1000 velocity vectors over which we
average stem from a simulation with a reasonable viscosity. However after 1000
update steps (or 100 time steps) the velocity vectors come entirely from solving
the modiﬁed equations with the ML model. The parameter θ oscillates within
one order of magnitude, but manages to reproduce the characteristic quantities
that we observed in Section 1.3.
4. Failure modes
The success of the optimization described in Section 3.2 is highly susceptible
to the chosen learning rate as the order of magnitude of parameter θ is essen-
tial to reproduce the desired statistical quantities. Looking at the diﬀerential
equation (13) two diﬃculties become apparent when deﬁning −Mi = −θk2
i ui.
The term is of the form ˙y = −cy, for which the solution is of exponential form.
For θ < 0 the true solution can become unstable since it grows exponentially.
This eﬀect can be especially strong since the larger shells do have large ki. If we
choose the learning rate too high and do a step so that θ becomes negative the
numerical solver might not be able to calculate u(t+1). So the optimizer cannot
correct the mistake. On the other hand if θ is positive but large (≥1 × 10−6)
the equation becomes increasingly stiﬀ. To keep the accuracy high the numer-
ical solver has to decrease the stepsize.
Since it takes a few steps until the
eﬀect becomes noticeable in the velocities and ﬁnally the loss, the stiﬀness can
18

increase and might cause the solver to fail because it reaches the maximum
number of steps. Especially the stiﬀness problem is caused by the delayed sig-
nal of the increasing loss and is not commonly found when using pre-computed
velocity vectors as ground truth. The machine learning method is thus physi-
cally constrained in two aspects: i) the minimum size of the data window used
to establish the proper gradient of the loss function, i.e. the next adjustment of
the parameter θ and, ii) the possible range of the value of θ which is bounded by
stiﬀness (time-step) considerations from above, as for θ ≥10−6 the solver steps
required for integrating over 0.1 time steps can exceed the default threshold
of 105, and which is bounded from below by zero since negative values would
thwart the physically-motivated function of the learned term as an adaptable
energy sink. We show additional results when optimizing for longer time periods
within the above mentioned bounds in Appendix B.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we consider a modiﬁed version of the closure problem on a
simpliﬁed model for turbulence. We include a machine learning term in the
diﬀerential equation, which inﬂuences the numerical integration. The desired
statistical quantities of turbulence serve as an objective. To calculate gradients
in order to update our parameters we use the adjoint method. With our work
we present a diﬀerent approach towards closure modeling with machine learning
methods: Instead of ﬁnding the closure term using high ﬁdelity DNS for super-
vised learning we require our model to reliably reproduce statistical properties of
turbulence when incorporated into the diﬀerential equation. This problem for-
mulation uncovers some pitfalls, unusual for machine learning tasks and which
require the additional inclusion of (simple) physical principles to constrain the
ML algorithm. We regard the resulting scheme for the modelling of subgrid-scale
NS turbulence as a proof-of-concept for a ﬂexible physics-constrained ML tech-
nique that allows a generalization of methods like the dynamic procedure [43, 44]
and variations of it as well as self-similar extrapolation methods such as the ap-
19

proach discussed in [12]. The main advantage of the present approach is the
increased level of ﬂexibility within unavoidable physical constraints. This addi-
tional freedom permits increased ﬂexibility with regard to the adaptive model
term, e.g. its functional form and support (stencil) and with regard to the ﬂow’s
statistical or any other properties that could be deemed to be important for SGS
turbulence modelling.
