arXiv:1103.5044v1  [cs.IR]  25 Mar 2011
Mining User Comment Activity for Detecting Forum
Spammers in YouTube
Ashish Sureka
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi (IIIT-D)
New Delhi, India

ABSTRACT
Research shows that comment spamming (comments which
are unsolicited, unrelated, abusive, hateful, commercial ad-
vertisements etc) in online discussion forums has become a
common phenomenon in Web 2.0 applications and there is a
strong need to counter or combat comment spamming. We
present a method to automatically detect comment spammer
in YouTube (largest and a popular video sharing website)
forums. The proposed technique is based on mining com-
ment activity log of a user and extracting patterns (such
as time interval between subsequent comments, presence of
exactly same comment across multiple unrelated videos) in-
dicating spam behavior. We perform empirical analysis on
data crawled from YouTube and demonstrate that the pro-
posed method is eﬀective for the task of comment spammer
detection.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: [Information
ﬁltering]
General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement
Keywords
Spam detection, comment spam identiﬁcation, YouTube, us-
age data analysis, pattern recognition, user behavioral anal-
ysis, online discussion forums
1.
RESEARCH MOTIVATION AND AIM

cial networking websites, online discussion forums, wikis and
video sharing websites is prevalent and naturally has sev-
eral negative impacts such as undesirable consumption of
computing resources, lowering the reputation or value of the
targeted legitimate web application, impacting search engine
rankings, overwhelming moderators and administrators, and
obstructs and misleads genuine usage of legitimate users and
community [1][7][8][9]. Previous studies show that comment
spam in online discussion forums (the focus of this paper)
is prevalent and techniques to counter such type of spam
have attracted several researchers’ attention [3][4][5][10][11].
Several content-based methods have been proposed to auto-
matically identify spam comments. Content-based methods
analyze the text of the post or message (such as checking
the presence of pre-deﬁned terms or links) in a forum and
infer the likelihood of a message being spam or legitimate.
While content-based methods have shown encouraging re-
Figure 1: High-Level system architecture and pro-
cessing pipeline for identifying comment spammers
in YouTube. ATDC: Average Time Diﬀerence be-
tween Comments, PCHF: Percentage of comments
having hasSpamHint ﬂag,
CRAV: Comment re-
peatability across videos, CRR: Comment repetition
and redundancy.
sults, they are not perfect and there is a strong need to aug-
ment or complement the capabilities of existing anti-spam
content-based methods to counter the spam problem. Based
on our analysis of related body of work and literature, the re-
search area of analyzing the commenting behavior or activity
of a user to identify spammers (a user classiﬁcation task and

 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
% spam  = (hasSpamHint/num comments)
Number of Comments
Figure 2: Plot of users in the evaluation dataset across
two dimensions: spam percentage and number of com-
ments.
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
% spam  = (hasSpamHint/num comments)
Comment overlap factor
(A) 35
(B) 118
(C) 36
(D) 30
Figure 3: Plot of users in the evaluation dataset across
two dimensions: spam percentage and comment repe-
tition and redundancy (CRR).
not a post or message classiﬁcation task) is an area which is
relatively unexplored in contrast to content-based methods.
We hypothesize and believe that examining the commenting
activity (usage analysis and characterization) of a user can
play a role in identifying spammers. The broad research ob-
jective of the work presented in this paper is to investigate
the application of usage-based features derived from a user’s
comment activity (by analyzing a log of recent comments
with associated metadata) to identify comment spammers.
The speciﬁc research aim of the work presented in this paper
is to investigate techniques for mining usage-based discrimi-
natory patterns and markers to identify comment spammers
in YouTube forums (a very popular and largest video sharing
website on Internet).
2.
RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS
Heymann et al. present a survey of approaches for ﬁghting
spam on social websites [9]. Hayati presents an evaluation
and analysis of Web 2.0 anti-spam methods [7]. Benevenuto
et al. provide a general overview of pollution in video shar-
ing systems (evidence of pollution, types of pollution, aﬀect
on the system and control strategies) such as YouTube [1].
Yo-Sub Han et al. present an algorithm to evaluate the rep-
utation of a user in YouTube by mining the user’s social ac-
tivity and interactions (such as subscriptions and uploaded
contents) [6]. Benevenuto et al. introduce a technique to
detect video spammers in YouTube [2]. The similarity be-
tween the study by Yo-Sub Han et al. and Benevenuto et al.
(closely related work) and this paper is that the aim of the
work is to perform a user classiﬁcation (particularly auto-
matic user reputation determination, video spammer identi-
ﬁcation, and comment spammer detection) task in YouTube.
The main diﬀerence is that in this paper we explore certain
commenting activity and attributes (novel in context to cur-
rent solutions) of a user to detect the likelihood of the user
as forum spammer. In context to closely related work, this
paper makes the following novel and unique contributions.
This paper presents the ﬁrst study (on YouTube) of mining
the recent activity log of a user to extract usage-based fea-
tures (particularly prevalence of high comment repeatability,
presence of exactly same comment across videos, presence
of ultra low time diﬀerence between comments, presence of
a large number of spam tags by the community or modera-
tors) to identify spammers. This paper presents an empirical
study on dataset crawled from YouTube and demonstrates
that the proposed usage-based and behavioral features can
be used or exploited as markers for the task of automatically
detecting comment spammers in YouTube forums. The pa-
per oﬀers fresh perspective and insights on the characteris-
tics and properties of comment spammers on YouTube.
3.
SOLUTION APPROACH
Figure 1 presents a high level solution framework and key
components of the proposed systems. YouTube discussion
forums (threaded discussions in response to an uploaded
video) have a feature in which comments are marked as
hasSpamHint. We carefully observed (based on manual and
visual inspection) several forums of several videos across var-
ious categories and notice many comments correctly tagged
as hasSpamHint (wherein the comments are still visible).
However, we also notice many (signiﬁcant percentage) spam
comments which are not tagged as hasSpamHint (perhaps
due to practical infeasibility of manually analyzing very large
volumes of comments by administrators). Furthermore, the
tagging of hasSpamHint is performed at the comment-level
and not at the user-level.
The proposed approach consists of ﬁrst retrieving com-
ments marked with hasSpamHint for a given video.
We
then extract userids behind the spam comments. YouTube
APIs1 provide functions to retrieve the recent commenting
activity (a log of comments and the associated metadata) of
a given user. As shown in Figure 1, we extract several com-
ment attributes from the discussion-forum usage-log: text of
the comment, timestamp, VideoID of video commented-on
and the value of the binary variable hasSpamHint. The next
step consists of computing the values of variables indicating
the spam intention of user (as spammer). We deﬁne four in-
dicators and describe our intuition (and design justiﬁcation)
behind the proposed indicators. The value of the following
four indicators (heuristics) is then used to score a give user
as comment spammer.
3.1
ATDC
Average Time Diﬀerence between Comments (ATDC): We
1http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html

extract all the recent comments (the number of comments
that can retrieved is limited by YouTube API) by a user
and compute the time diﬀerences between all the comments
(comparing each comment with every other comment in the
log). We compute the average time diﬀerence and record
the value. We hypothesize that a low value of ATDC signals
spam.
Our conjuncture is based on the observation that
spammers often employ automated scripts or spam robots
for posting comment as a result of which the time diﬀerence
between subsequent comments is so low that it is not manu-
ally feasible. We conﬁrm the presence of the phenomenon (in
the evaluation dataset and also based on our manual inspec-
tion of several YouTube forums) wherein the time interval
between sequences of comment is less than few seconds.
3.2
PCHF
Percentage of Comments with hasSpamHint Flag (PCHF):
We compute the percentage of comments marked as hasS-
pamHint. We hypothesize that a signiﬁcant percentage of
comments by a user marked as hasSpamHint can be used as
a signal for classifying the user as spammer. We conﬁrm the
prevalence of this phenomenon in YouTube user comment
logs. We notice several users who are spammers (validated
based on manual inspection) exhibit a high PCHF value.
3.3
CRAV
Comment Repeatability Across Videos (CRAV): We ob-
serve a phenomenon (which is exploited as an attribute and
heuristic for spammer categorization task) wherein a user
posts exactly same comment across discussion forum accom-
panying several diﬀerent videos. A visual inspection of this
phenomenon clearly shows that users posting same message
across several videos is a case of content promotion and is a
reliable comment activity marker for identifying spammers.
A high variability in terms of videoids and a high similarity
of comments posted by a user is employed as an indicator
in the proposed solution.
3.4
CRR
Comment Repetition and Redundancy (CRR): We ob-
serve the presence of a pattern wherein a user simply re-
peats and posts the same message on the same video (some-
times within a small time interval and sometimes reasonable
spread across the time dimension but still the same mes-
sage).
We hypothesize that a high value of CRR signals
spam. We compare the text of every comment with the text
of all other comments in the log of recent comments posted
by a user (1 for an exact match and 0 for a non-match) and
compute the average CRR value.
4.
EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
We extract comment activity log of 240 unique users con-
sisting of 13000 comments from some of the top rated and
most viewed videos on YouTube. Figures 2,3,4,5 and 6 plot
119 users (for which the number of comments was greater
than 5) across multiple dimensions and attributes. Figure 2
reveals that there are several users with more than 20 com-
ments having more than 50% of the comments tagged with
hasSpamHint ﬂag.
We observe several users with more than 60 comments and
more than 70% of them were marked as hasSpamHint. Fig-
ure 3 provides a diﬀerent perspective that plots each user on
watch?v=JNVeTR9MhAo?
Check out my channel
Please watch my vids at airborn2048
CAT almost BIT ME A FINGER OFF))))) view on my
channel ))))
password please !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!1
watch?v=DGHC-AgB8Us?
TV4500Channels.blogspot.com
If you have any immense black ops videos please could you

This would give you publicity and increase your rep. For
your videos to be posted on the top 5 amazing kills Thanks
PLZ SUBSCRIBE AND COMMENT TO MY CHANNEL
PLZ GIVE ME A CHANCE AND HEAR MA SONGS
CHECK OUT MY VIDS AND COMMENT
CHECK OUT OUR CHANNEL! IT IS SO FUNNY!
PLEASE SUBSCRIBE!
chek out nikkayx26
Make sure to check out my page for the Exclusive Dance
Battle of the Week!!!
Table 1: An illustrative list of comments of some of
the users identiﬁed as spammers in the experimental
dataset
the attribute of percentage spam and CRR (comment rep-
etition and redundancy). Figure 3 clearly shows that users
A, B, C and D have posted more than 30 comments (A 35,
B 118, C 36 and D 30), have a CRR value of more than 0.7
(which means posting same comment multiple times) and
have 80% of the comments marked as spam by the modera-
tor. Users on top right corner of Figures 2 and 3 are potential
spammers. We perform a manual inspection of such users
and conﬁrm the hypothesis to be true. Table 1 shows an
illustrative list of comments of some the users identiﬁed as
spammers according to the proposed approach.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80  100  120  140  160 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
Time
Number of comments
Spam percentage
Time
Figure 6:
Plot of users in the evaluation dataset
across three dimensions: log of average time diﬀer-
ence between comments (ATDC), number of com-
ments and spam percentage.
Figure 4 reveals users having high comment overlap and
low video overlap (means several similar comment posting
but in a single or small set of videos) as well as users hav-
ing high comment overlap and high video overlap (a phe-
nomenon wherein a user posts exactly same comments across
multiple videos). Figure 5 reveals users posting a large num-

 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Video overlap
Comment overlap
Figure 4: Plot of users in the evaluation dataset across
two dimensions: video overlap and comment repetition
and redundancy (CRR).
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
Log (Time Diff Factor)
Number of Comments
Figure 5: Plot of users in the evaluation dataset across
two dimensions: log of average time diﬀerence between
comments (ATDC) and number of comments.
ber of comments in a small time interval (y-axis is log of
the metric average time diﬀerence between comments in sec-
onds). Users in the bottom right corner (below 3 in y value
and above 20 in x value) of Figure 5 are potential spam-
mers. Figure 6 is a plot of several users across 3 dimensions.
Based on our manual inspection of the data, we derive the
following rule to automatically classify a vector representing
a YouTube user behavior across four dimensions (PCHF,
ATDC, COMOVP and VIDOVP). All the users (number of
comments > 5 as minimum threshold) satisfying the follow-
ing rules were manually annotated as spammers.
SPAMMER = (PCHF > 70) OR (ATDC < 150)
OR (COMOVP > 0.60) OR (VIDOVP > 0.60)
A manual inspection of user proﬁles and comments demon-
strate that comment spammers are prevalent in YouTube
forums and the proposed heuristics (based on testing the
presence of pre-deﬁned spam indicators or markers in a users
comment activity log) is reliable in spammer detection (refer
to Table 1: a manual inspection of the comments posted by
identiﬁed users clearly indicates spam).
5.
CONCLUSIONS
We describe a method (rule-based system) to automat-
ically identify comment spammers in YouTube forums by
mining comment activity log of users.
Applying the pro-
posed method on a sample dataset reveals that the technique
is eﬀective in identifying spammers. We hypothesize certain
characteristics of comment spammers and perform an em-
pirical study to test the proposed hypothesis. Our ﬁndings
indicate that attributes such as presence of large number of
exactly same comment in a single or across multiple videos,
very small time intervals between subsequent comments and
a large percentage of comments having spam hint ﬂag are re-
liable indicators for categorizing YouTube forum spammers.
6.
