CHALET: Cornell House Agent Learning
Environment
Claudia Yan♥♦
Dipendra Misra♦
Andrew Bennett♦
Aaron Walsman♣
Yonatan Bisk♣
Yoav Artzi♦
♦Cornell University
♥City College of New York
♣University of Washington

https://github.com/lil-lab/chalet
Abstract—We present CHALET, a 3D house simulator with
support for navigation and manipulation. CHALET includes 58
rooms and 10 house conﬁguration, and allows to easily create
new house and room layouts. CHALET supports a range of
common household activities, including moving objects, toggling
appliances, and placing objects inside closeable containers. The
environment and actions available are designed to create a
challenging domain to train and evaluate autonomous agents,
including for tasks that combine language, vision, and planning
in a dynamic environment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Training autonomous agents poses challenges that go be-
yond the common use of annotated data in supervised learn-
ing. The large set of states an agent may observe and the
importance of agent behavior in identifying states for learning
require interactive training environments, where the agent
observes the outcome of its behavior and receives feedback.
While physical environments easily satisfy these requirements,
they are costly, difﬁcult to replicate, hard to scale, and require
complex robotic agents. These challenges are further exacer-
bated by the increased focus on neural network policies for
agent behavior, which require signiﬁcant amounts of training
data [15, 17]. Recently, these challenges are addressed with
simulated environments [15, 13, 2, 22, 12, 4, 11, 20, 18, 1, 5].
In this report, we introduce the Cornell House Agent Learning
EnvironmenT (CHALET), an interactive house environment.
CHALET supports navigation and manipulation of both ob-
jects and the environment. It is implemented using the Unity
game development engine, and can be deployed on various
platforms, including web environments for crowdsourcing.
II. ENVIRONMENT
CHALET includes 58 rooms organized into 10 houses.
Figure 1 shows a sample of the rooms. The environment
contains 150 object types (e.g., fridge, sofa, plate). 71 types
of objects can be manipulated: 60 picked and placed (e.g.,
plates and towels), 6 opened and closed (e.g., dishwashers and
cabinets), and 5 change their state (e.g., opening or closing
a faucet). Object types are used with different textures to
generate 330 different objects. On average, each room includes
30 objects. Rooms often contain multiple objects of the same
kind. For example, kitchens contain many plates and glasses,
and bathrooms contain multiple towels. Objects that can be
opened and closed are container objects, and can contain other
objects. For example, opening a dishwasher exposes a set of
racks, and pulling a rack out allows the agent access to the
objects on that rack. The agent can also put an object on
the rack, close the dishwasher, and open it later to retrieve
the object. Figure 2 shows example object manipulations.
The environment supports simple physics, including collision-
detection and gravity.
The agent in CHALET observes the environment from a
ﬁrst-person perspective. At any given time, the agent observes
only what is in front of it. The agent position is parameterized
by two coordinates for its location and two coordinates for the
orientation of its view. Changing the agent location is done
in the direction of its orientation (i.e., ﬁrst-person coordinate
system). Whether the agent looks up or down does not
inﬂuence location changes. All agent actions are continuous,
but can be discretized to pre-deﬁned precision by specifying
the quantities of change for each step. Table I describes the
agent actions.
CHALET provides a rich testbed for language, exploration,
planning, and modeling challenges. We design rooms to of-
ten include many objects of the same types. Instructions or
questions that refer to a speciﬁc objet must then use spatial
relations and object properties to identify the exact instance.
For example, to pick up a speciﬁc towel in a bathroom, the
agent is likely to be given an instruction such as pick up the
yellow towel left of the sink. In contrast, in an environment
with a single object of each type, it would have been sufﬁcient
to ask to pick up the towel. The ability to open and close
containers also creates several interesting challenges. Given
an instruction, such as put the glass from the cupboard on the
table, it is insufﬁcient for an agent to simply align the word
glass to an observed object. Instead, it must resolve the noun
phrase the cupboard and the relation from to understand it must
look for a glass in a speciﬁc location. Simply resolving the
target object (glass) is insufﬁcient. If multiple cupboards are
available, the agent must also explore the different cupboards
to ﬁnd the one containing a glass. This requires both deciding
arXiv:1801.07357v2  [cs.AI]  16 Sep 2019

Fig. 1.
Screenshots of various rooms from CHALET. Each house includes 4-7 rooms of various kinds, including bathrooms, bedrooms, and kitchens.
on an exploration policy, and planning a complex sequence
of actions. Finally, the agent perspective requires models that
support access to previous observations or a representation
of them (i.e., memory) to overcome the partial observability
challenge.
III. EVALUATION IN CHALET
Evaluating agent performance in CHALET is done by
comparing the agent behavior to an annotated demonstra-
tion. A demonstration is a sequence of states and actions
τ = ⟨s0, a1, s1, a2, · · · am, sm⟩, where si is state and ai is the
action taken at that state. The start state of the demonstration
is s0 and the ﬁnal state is sm. A state si contains information
about the position, the orientation, and the interaction state
of every object in the house, including the agent. We use
two metrics for evaluating navigation errors and manipulation
accurcy. Navigation error is the sum of euclidean distances in
each room the agent must travel to reach the goal. For the room
the agent is currently located in, we take the euclidean distance
between the agent and the door to the next room. For each
intermediate room, we take the euclidean distance between
the door where the agent enters and the door to the following
room. For the room containing the goal (i.e., the agent position
in sm), we measure the distance between the entry door to the
goal. In each room, the distance measured is a straight line.
We compute manipulation accuracy by extracting an ordered
list of interaction actions from the annotated demonstration
τ. An interaction action may be picking an object, placing
an object at a speciﬁc location, and changing the interaction
state of an object (e.g., opening a drawer). All objects are
uniquely identiﬁed. The manipulation accuracy is the F1-score
computed for the list of actions extracted from the agent
execution against the reference list of actions extracted from
τ. We consider placing an object within a radius of 1.0m of
the speciﬁed position in the same room as equivalent.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
CHALET is implemented in Unity 3D,1 a professional game
development engine.2 The environment logic is written in
the C# scripting language, which supports high-level object-
oriented programming constructs and is tightly integrated with
1https://unity3d.com/
2The community version of Unity, which was used to develop CHALET is
publicly for education purposes.

Action
Description
move-forward
Change the agent location in the direction of its current orientation
move-back
Change the agent location in the direction opposite to its current orientation
strafe-right
Change the agent location in the direction of 90◦to its current orientation
strafe-left
Change the agent location in the direction of 270◦to its current orientation
look-left
Change the agent orientation to left
look-right
Change the agent orientation to right
look-up
Change the agent orientation up (when engaged with a container, change container towards closure)
look-down
Change the agent orientation down (when engaged with a container, change container towards open)
interact
Engage the container at the current orientation, pick the object at the current orientation, drop the object currently held,
toggle state of object at current orientation (e.g., toggle TV power)
TABLE I
THE ACTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE AGENT IN CHALET.
Fig. 2.
Sampled observations from three sequences of object manipulation, from top to bottom: loading the dishwasher, placing a food item in the freezer,
and placing a pie in the oven.
the Unity engine. Using Unity provides several advantages.
CHALET can be easily compiled for different platforms, in-
cluding Linux, MacOS, Windows, Android, iOS, and WebGL.
Unity also provides a built in physics engine, and supports
integration with augmented- and virtual-reality devices. Ex-
tending CHALET with new objects from the Unity Asset
Store3 is trivial.
CHALET supports three modes of operation:
3https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/
• standalone: actions are provided using keyboard and
mouse input. The generated trajectory is saved to a ﬁle.
This model is used for crowdsourcing using a WebGL
build.
• simulator: actions are read from a saved ﬁle and exe-
cuted in sequence. This mode allows replaying previously
recorded trajectories, for example during crowdsourcing.
• client: a separate process provides actions, and the
framework returns the agent observations and information
about the environment as required. Communication is

done over sockets. This mode enables interaction with
machine learning frameworks.
The framework provides a simple API to compute reward
and feedback signals, as required for learning, and provide
information about the environment, including the position
and state of objects. CHALET also provides programmatic
generation of rich scenarios by adding, removing, and re-
placing objects during runtime without the use of Unity or re-
loading the simulator. To enable this, each room is annotated
with a set of surface locations where items may be placed.
Placing an objects requires specifying its type and orientation,
and the target surface and coordinates.
V. RELATED ENVIRONMENTS
Table II compares CHALET to existing simulators. Savva
et al. [18], Wu et al. [20], and Beattie et al. [2] provide
similar observations to CHALET in navigation-only envi-
ronments. In contrast, CHALET emphasizes manipulation of
both objects and the environment to support complex tasks.
Anderson et al. [1] use real images with a discrete state
space for navigation. While CHALET includes 3D rendered
environments, it provides a continuous environment with a
variety of actions. The most related environments to ours are
HoME [5] and AI2-Thor [7], both provide 3D rendered houses
with object manipulation. Unlike HoME, which only supports
moving objects, CHALET enables toggling the state of objects
and changing the environment by modifying containers. In
contrast to Thor, CHALET supports moving between rooms
in complete houses, while the current version of Thor supports
a single room.
There is also signiﬁcant work on using simulators for other
domains. Atari [15], OpenAI Gym [4], Project Malmo [11],
Minecraft [16], Gazebo [21], Viz Doom [12] are commonly
used for testing reinforcement learning algorithms. Simulators
have also been used to evaluate natural language instruction
following [14, 3, 13, 9, 8] and question answering [7, 6,
10, 19]. The manipulation features and partial observability
challenges of CHALET provide a more realistic testbed for
studying language, including for instruction following, visual
reasoning, and question answering.
