Robot gains Social Intelligence through Multimodal Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Ahmed Hussain Qureshi, Yutaka Nakamura, Yuichiro Yoshikawa and Hiroshi Ishiguro
Abstract— For robots to coexist with humans in a social
world like ours, it is crucial that they possess human-like social
interaction skills. Programming a robot to possess such skills
is a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a Multimodal
Deep Q-Network (MDQN) to enable a robot to learn human-like
interaction skills through a trial and error method. This paper
aims to develop a robot that gathers data during its interaction
with a human, and learns human interaction behavior from
the high dimensional sensory information using end-to-end
reinforcement learning. This paper demonstrates that the robot
was able to learn basic interaction skills successfully, after 14
days of interacting with people.
I. INTRODUCTION
Human-robot interaction (HRI) is an emerging ﬁeld of
research with the aim to integrate robots into human social
environments. One of the biggest challenges in the develop-
ment of social robots is to understand human social norms
[1]. It is therefore essential for social robots to possess deep
models of social cognition, and be able to learn and adapt
in accordance with their shared experiences with human
partners. Most of the social robots to date are either pre-
programmed, or are controlled by teleoperation or semi-
autonomous teleoperation [2], and do not possess the ability
to learn and update themselves.
Designing an adaptable and autonomous sociable robot
is particularly challenging, as the robot needs to correctly
interpret human behaviors as well as respond appropriately
to them. This is necessary to ensure safe, natural and
effective human-robot interaction. Arguably, most of the so-
called social robots have limited social interaction skills.
One of the main reasons for this limited capability is the
diversity in human behavior [3]. Social interaction between
humans relies on intention inference such as inferring the
intention from walking trajectories, direction of eye gaze,
facial expressions, body language and activity in progress.
Programming a robot to recognize human intention from
the aforementioned factors and respond to diverse human
behaviors is notoriously difﬁcult, as it is hard to envision
each and every one of the countless possible interaction sce-
narios. Therefore, it is necessary for a social robot to possess
a self-learning paradigm [4] which enables it to learn deep
* This work is partly supported by JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Young
Scientists (B) 14444719.
A. H. Qureshi, Y. Nakamura, Y. Yoshikawa and H. Ishiguro are
with
Department of
System Innovation,
Graduate
School of Engi-
neering
Science,
Osaka
University,
1-3
Machikaneyama,
Toyonaka,
Osaka, Japan. {qureshi.ahmed, nakamura, yoshikawa,

A. H. Qureshi, Y. Yoshikawa and H. Ishiguro are also with JST ERATO
ISHIGURO Symbiotic Human-Robot Interaction Project.
Fig. 1: Robot learning social interaction skills from people.
models of human social cognition from features extracted
automatically from high-dimensional sensory information.
Recently, the ﬁeld of deep learning, also known as rep-
resentation learning, has emerged and it has achieved many
breakthroughs on various tasks of computer vision [5] [6]
[7] and speech recognition [8] [9]. Deep learning methods
take raw sensory information as input and process it to
learn multiple levels of representation automatically, where
each level of representation corresponds to a slightly higher
level of abstraction [5] [6]. Further advancements in ma-
chine learning have merged deep learning with reinforcement
learning (RL) which has led to the development of the deep
Q-network (DQN) [10] . DQN utilizes an automatic feature
extractor called deep convolutional neural network (Con-
vnets) to approximate the action-value function of Q-learning
method [10]. DQN has demonstrated its ability to learn from
high-dimensional visual input to play arcade video games at
human and superhuman level. However, the applicability of
DQN to real world human-robot interaction problems has not
been explored yet. In this research, we augment our robot
with a multimodal deep Q-network (MDQN) which enables
the robot to learn social interaction skills through interaction
with humans in public places.
The proposed MDQN uses two streams of convolutional
neural networks for action-value function estimation. The
dual stream convnets process the depth and grayscale images
independently. We consider a scenario in which the robot
learns to greet people using a set of four legal actions, i.e.,
waiting, looking towards human, waving hand and handshak-
ing. The objective of the robot is to learn which action to
perform in each situation. We conducted the experiment at
different locations such as a cafeteria, department reception,
various common rooms, etc., as shown in ﬁgure 1. After
14 days of interacting with people, the robot exhibited a
remarkable level of basic social intelligence. The robot social
arXiv:1702.07492v1  [cs.RO]  24 Feb 2017

interaction skills were also evaluated on test data not seen
by the system during training.
With this paper we release the source code and the
depth dataset1 collected during the experiment. During the
experiment, we collected both grayscale and depth frames
but due to privacy concerns we are only releasing the depth
dataset.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides discussion on the related work, section III provides
a brief background of reinforcement learning and the DQN
architecture, section IV explains the proposed multimodal
deep Q-learner architecture while section V describes the
experimental setup. Section VI and VII give the results
of the experiment and the discussion on what the robot
has learned through interaction with humans, respectively.
Finally, section VIII concludes the paper and also suggests
some future areas of research in this particular domain.
II. RELATED WORK
The proposed work utilizes deep Q-learning to enable a
robot to learn social interaction skills from experience inter-
acting with people. This section describes related research
from the ﬁelds of human-robot interaction, deep learning and
deep reinforcement learning.
The most relevant prior work in HRI includes the work
by Amor et al. [11] [12], Lee et al. [13], and Wang et
al. [14]. The proposed methods in [11] [12] [13] learn
responsive robot behavior by imitating human interaction
partners. The movements of two persons, action-reaction
pairs, are recorded during the human-human interaction with
a motion capture system. An interaction model is learned
from the data, which enables a robot to compute the best
response to a human interaction partner’s current behavior.
However, the motion capture system used for data recording
is not user-friendly and it does not yield natural human
behavior, as the participants have to wear track-able mark-
ers. In [14], the authors present a probabilistic graphical
model with intentions represented as latent states, where
the mapping from observations to latent states is approxi-
mated by a Gaussian Process. The proposed model allows
intention inference from observed movements. However, we
believe that, in the case of HRI, intention inference is not
dependent on body movements only but also on eye gaze,
body language, walking trajectories, activity in progress etc.
Therefore, limiting intention inference to body movements
alone does not seem promising. Furthermore, the prior art
stated above considers only one human interaction partner for
the robot in the scene. In this paper, more complex scenarios
are considered where the robot can be approached by a group
of people willing or not willing to interact with it.
So far, the deep learning and deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) research has been applied to areas, though include
robotics, which have little to do with the domain of human-
robot interaction. Also, most of these applications are limited
1To
get
the
source
code
and
the
dataset
please
visit
https://sites.google.com/a/irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp/member/home/ahmed-
qureshi/deephri
to simulated environments. Predicting human intention from
video data has only recently been addressed in deep learning
literature [15]. Our work differs from aforementioned work
because, in our case, the robot is acting in a real, uncontrolled
environment; by taking an action the robot may affect
the human intention. Therefore, the robot has to perceive
human behavior, as well as, its own actions according to
human social norms. From the domain of DRL, the idea of
deep Q-learning has recently been extended to the robotics
ﬁeld to solve twenty continuous control problems; such as
legged locomotion, car driving, cartpole swing-up etc.[16].
However, these methods have not yet been extended to the
domain of human-robot interaction or in real world envi-
ronments. To the best knowledge of the authors there does
not exist any work that utilizes deep learning coupled with
reinforcement learning for realization of physical human-
robot social interaction.
III. BACKGROUND
We consider a standard reinforcement learning formulation
in which an agent interacts sequentially with an environment
E with an aim of maximizing cumulative reward. At each
time-step, the agent observes a state st, takes an action at
from the set of legal actions A = {1, · · · , K} and receives
a scalar reward rt from the environment.
An agent’s behavior is formalized by a policy π, which
maps states to actions. The goal of a RL agent is to learn
a policy π that maximizes the expected total return. The
expected total return is the sum of rewards discounted by
factor γ
: [0, 1] at each time-step (γ
= 0.99 for the
proposed work) i.e., Rt = PT
t′=t γt′−trt′, where T is the
step at which the agent’s interaction with the environment
terminates. Furthermore, the action-value function Qπ(s, a)
is the expected return when taking the action a in state s
under the policy π, Qπ(s, a) = E[Rt|st = s, at = a, π]. The
maximum expected return that can be achieved by following
any policy is given by the optimal action-value function
Q∗(s, a) = maxQπ(s, a). The optimal action-value function
obeys a fundamental recursive relationship known as the
Bellman equation: Q∗(s, a) = E[r + γmax′
aQ∗(s′, a′)|s, a].
The intuition behind it is that: given that the optimal action-
value function Q∗(s′, a′) of the sequence s′ at next time-step
is deterministic for all possible actions a′, the optimal policy
is to select an action a′ that maximizes the expected value
of r + γQ∗(s′, a′).
One of the practices in RL, especially Q-learning, is to
estimate the action-value function by using a function esti-
mator such as neural networks i.e., Q(s, a) ≈Q(s, a, θ). The
parameters θ of the neural Q-network are adjusted iteratively
towards the Bellman target. Recently, a new approach to
approximate action-value function, called deep Q-networks
(DQN), has been introduced which is much more stable
than previous techniques. In DQN, the action-value function
is approximated by a deep convolutional neural network.
The DQN technique for function approximation differs from
previous methods in two ways: 1) It uses experience re-
play [17] i.e., it stores the agent’s interaction experience,

et = (st, at, rt, st+1), with the environment into the replay
memory, M = e1, · · · , et, at each time-step; 2) It maintains
two Q-networks: the Bellman target is computed by the
target network with old parameters i.e., Q(s, a; θ−), while
the learning network Q(s, a; θ) keeps the current parameters
which may get updated several times at each time-step. The
old parameters θ−are updated to current parameters θ after
every C iterations.
In DQN, the parameters of the Q-network are adjusted
iteratively towards the Bellman target by minimizing the
following loss function:
Li(θi) = E
"
r + γmax′
aQ(s′, a′; θ−
i ) −Q(s, a; θi)
2#
(1)
For each update, i, a mini-batch is sampled from the replay
memory. The current parameters θ are updated by stochastic
gradient descent in the direction of the gradient of the loss
function with respect to the parameters i.e.,
▽Li(θi) = E
h r + γmax′
aQ(s′, a′; θ−
i ) −Q(s, a; θi)

▽θi Q(s, a; θ)
i
(2)
Finally, the agent’s behavior at each time-step is selected by
an ϵ-greedy policy where the greedy strategy is adopted with
probability 1 −ϵ while the random strategy with probability
ϵ.
IV. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The proposed algorithm consists of two streams that work
independently: one for processing the grayscale frames,
and another for the depth frames. Algorithm 1 outlines the
proposed method. Since the model is dual stream, therefore,
the parameters θ and θ−consist of parameters of both
networks. Unlike DQN [10], we separate the data generation
and training phase. Each day of experiment corresponds to
an episode during which the algorithm executes both the
data generation phase and the training phase. Following is
a brief description of both phases.
Data
generation
phase:
During
the
data
generation
phase, the system interacts with the environment using
Q-network Q(s, a; θ). The system observes the current
scene, which comprises of grayscale and depth frames, and
takes an action using the ϵ-greedy strategy. The environment
in return provides the scalar reward (please refer to section
5(2) for the deﬁnition of reward function). The interaction
experience e = (si, ai, ri, si+1) is stored in the replay
memory M. The replay memory M keeps the N most
recent experiences which are later used by the training
phase for updating the network parameters.
Training phase: During the training phase, the system
utilizes the collected data, stored in replay memory M, for
training the networks. The hyperparameter n denotes the
number of experience replay. For each experience replay,
a mini buffer B of size 2000 interaction experiences is
randomly sampled from the ﬁnite sized replay memory M.
The model is trained on the mini batches sampled from
buffer B and the network parameters are updated iteratively
in the direction of the bellman targets. The random sampling
from the replay memory breaks the correlation among the
samples since the standard reinforcement learning methods
assume the samples are independently and identically
distributed. The reason for dividing the algorithm into two
Algorithm 1: Mutlimodal Deep Q-learner.
1 Initialize replay memory M to size N
2 Initialize training Q-network Q(s, a; θ) with parameters
θ
3 Initialize target Q-network ˆQ(s, a; θ−) with weights
θ−= θ
4 for episode = 1, M do
5
Data generation phase:
6
Initialize the start state to s1
7
for i = 1, T do
8
With probability ϵ select a random action at
otherwise select at = maxaQ(st, a; θ)
9
st+1, rt ←ExecuteAction(at)
10
Store the transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in M
11
Training phase:
12
Randomize a memory M for experience replay
13
for i = 1, n do
14
Sample random minibuffer B from M
15
while B do
16
Sample minibatch m of transitions
(sk, ak, rk, sk+1) from B without
replacement
yk =
(
rk, if step k+1 is terminal
rk + γmaxa ˆQ(sk+1, a; θ−), otherwise
Perform gradient descent on loss
(yk −Q(sk, ak; θ))2 w.r.t the network
parameters θ
17
After every C-episodes sync θ−with θ.
phases is to avoid the delay that would be caused if the
network were trained during the interaction period. The
DQN agent [16] works in a cycle in which it ﬁrst interacts
with the environment and stores the transition into the replay
memory, then it samples the mini batch from the replay
memory and trains the network on this mini batch. This
cycle is repeated until termination occurs. The sequential
process of interaction and training can be acceptable only in
ﬁelds other than HRI. In HRI, the agent has to interact with
people based on social norms, so, any pause or delay while
the robot is on the ﬁeld is unacceptable. Therefore, we
divide the algorithm into two stages: in the ﬁrst stage, the
robot gathers data through interaction for some ﬁnite period
of time, in the second stage, it goes to its rest position.
During the resting period, the training phase gets activated
to train the multimodal deep Q-network (MDQN).
V. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
This section formally describes implementation details
of the research. The MDQN agent was implemented

Fig. 2: Dual stream convolutional neural network
in torch/lua2, while robot actions were implemented us-
ing python. The entire experiment was performed using
3.40GHz×8 Intel Core i7 processor with 32 GB ram and
GeForce GTX 980 graphic processing unit. The rest of the
section explains the robotic system, MDQN model architec-
ture, visual information pre-processing details, experimental
details and evaluation procedure.
A. Robotic system
Aldebaran’s Pepper robot 3 was used for the proposed
research. Pepper has two built-in 2D cameras and one 3D
sensor. Although Pepper has two 2D cameras, only the
top camera, located on Pepper’s forehead, was used in this
research. The ASUS Xtion 3D sensor situated behind the
robot eyes was utilized for depth images. Both the top 2D
camera and the 3D sensor returned images with resolution
320 × 240 at 10 frames per second. Moreover, the robot’s
right hand was equipped with an external FSR touch sensor
which was hidden under soft woolen gloves for aesthetic
reasons. In addition, the robot was augmented with 1) four set
of actions through which it can interact with the people; 2) a
reward function with which the robot can evaluate how well
it is performing. Following subsections formally describe the
robot actions and the reward function.
1) Robot actions: This paragraph provides the actions
deﬁnition and their implementation details. The action set
comprised of four legal actions, i.e., waiting, looking towards
humans, waving its hand and hand shaking with a human.
The description of the actions is as follows:
Wait: For waiting, the robot randomly picks the head
orientation from the allowable range of head pitch and head
yaw. During this action, no attempt to engage the human into
the interaction is made.
Look towards human: This action makes the robot sen-
sitive to the stimuli coming from the environment. If robot
senses any stimulus, it looks at the stimulus origin and checks
if there is any human there or not. In the case of human
presence, the robot tracks the person with its head in order
to engage him/her for the interaction otherwise, the robot
returns to its previous orientation. The stimuli used to instill
awareness into the robot are the sound detection and the
movement detection.
2http://torch.ch/
3//www.aldebaran.com/en/cool-robots/pepper/ﬁnd-out-more-about-pepper
(a) Successful handshake.
(b) Unsuccessful handshake.
Fig. 3: Instances of successful and unsuccesful handshakes.
Wave hand: This is a simple hand waving gesture. During
its execution, the robot says Hello or Hi, and attempts to
gain peoples’ attention by tracking them with its head.
Handshake: In handshaking action, the robot raises its
hand to a certain height and waits at this position for a few
seconds. If the external touch sensor, on the robot’s hand,
signals the touch, then the robot grabs the person’s hand and
says Nice to meet you, otherwise, the robot’s hand goes back
to its previous position. Moreover, while performing this
action, the robot adjusts its body rotation and head position
in order to track the target person from whom it may get the
handshake.
2) Reward function: The external touch sensor on the
robot’s right hand detects if a handshake has happened or
not. This forms the basis for the reward function. The robot
gets a reward of 1 on the successful handshake, -0.1 on an
unsuccessful handshake and 0 for the rest of the three actions.
Figures 3(a) and 3(b) depict example scenarios of successful
and unsuccessful handshakes respectively. In the scenario
shown in ﬁgure 3(a), the handshake happens successfully
therefore the agent gets the reward value 1, whereas in the
situation shown in ﬁgure 3(b), the person is taking the robot’s
picture while the robot is attempting to shake their hand;
since this is an in appropriate social reaction, the agent will
be rewarded with -0.1.
B. Model Architecture
The proposed model comprises of two streams, one for
the gray-scale information, and another for the depth infor-
mation. The structure of the two streams is identical and
each stream comprises of eight layers (excluding the input
layer). The overall model architecture is schematically shown
in ﬁgure 2. The inputs to the y-channel and the depth channel
of the multimodal Q-network are grayscale (198 × 198 × 8)
and depth images (198 × 198 × 8), respectively. Since each
stream takes eight frames as an input, therefore, the last eight
frames from the corresponding camera are pre-processed and
stacked together to form the input for each stream of the
network. Since the two streams are identical so we only
discuss the structure of one of the streams. The 198×198×8
input images are given to ﬁrst convolutional layer (C1) which
convolves 16 ﬁlters of 9×9 with stride 3, followed by rectiﬁer
linear unit function (ReLU) and results into 16 feature maps

output from C1 is fed into sub-sampling layer S1 which
applies 2×2 max-pooling with the stride of 2×2. The second
(C2) and third (C3) convolutional layer convolve 32 and 64
ﬁlters, respectively, of size 5 × 5 with stride 1. The output

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
20
40
60
80
100
Episode
True positive rate (%)
Fig. 4: MDQN performance on test dataset over the series
of episodes.
from C2 and C3 passes through the non-linear ReLU function
and is fed into sub-sampling layers S2 and S3, respectively
. The ﬁnal hidden layer is fully connected with 256 rectiﬁer
units. The output layer is fully-connected linear layer with 4
units, one unit for each legal action.
C. Pre-processing
The pre-process function prepares the input appropriately
for the model architecture. The robotic system provides the
grayscale and the depth images of size 320 × 240 at the
frame rate of 10 fps. The pre-process function rescales the
grayscale and the depth frame to 198 × 198. This pre-
processing is executed on the eight most recent grayscale
and depth frames, which are then stacked together to form
the input for each stream of the dual stream Q-network.
D. Experiment details
The proposed method is divided into two phases, i.e.,
the data generation phase and the training phase. For every
episode, the algorithm passes through these two phases.
During the data generation phase, the robot interacts with
the environment for around 4 hours (we call it the interaction
period). During the interaction period, the number of steps
i (see Algorithm 1) executed by the robot depended on the
internet speed4 since the communication between Pepper and
the computer system on which the MDQN was implemented
occured over the wireless internet. The behavior strategy
during this phase is ϵ-greedy, where ϵ anneals linearly from 1
to 0.1 over 28,000 steps and then remains at 0.1 for the rest of
the steps. For taking the greedy action the outputs from each
stream of the dual stream Q-network were fused together
and the action with the highest Q-value was selected. For
the fusion of outputs from each stream of the Q-network, the
algorithm ﬁrst normalizes the Q-values from each stream and
then takes an average of these normalized Q-values. After
the interaction period is over, the robot goes to sleep and the
training phase begins.
The training procedure presented here is the variant of
[10]. The network parameters are trained on mini batches
m, each of size 25 samples, using the RMSProp algorithm.
It should be noted that both network streams, grayscale
and depth, were trained independently without any fusion
of Q-values, however, the Q-values from each stream were
fused during the data generation phase for taking the greedy
4With approximately ↓37/↑23 Mbps internet speed the robot could gather
i =2010 interaction experiences e = (si, ai, ri, si+1) in 4 hours. During
14 days of the interaction period, the robot executed 13938 steps in total.
Trained Model
MDQN
y-channel
depth-channel
Accuracy (%)
95.3
85.9
82.6
True positive rate (%)
90.7
71.8
66.2
False positive rate (%)
3.09
9.4
11.3
Misclassiﬁcation rate (%)
4.6
14.9
16.9
TABLE I: Performance measures of trained Q-networks.
action. In this presented work, the model was trained over
111,504 grayscale and depth frames, and for each episode,
the algorithm performed ten experience replays i.e., n = 10.
The parameters of target Q-network θ−were updated after
every episode i.e., C = 1.
E. Evaluation
For testing the model performance, a separate test dataset,
comprising 4480 grayscale and depth frames not seen by
the system during learning was collected. Since, for every
scenario there can be more than one action that can be chosen
with utmost propriety, therefore, the agent’s decision was
evaluated by three volunteers. A sequence of eight frames
depicting the scenario and the agent’s decision were shown
to the volunteers. Each volunteer was asked to judge if the
agent’s decision was right or not. If the agent’s decision
was considered wrong by the majority then the evaluators
were asked to consent on the most appropriate action for
that particular scenario.
VI. RESULTS
This section summarizes the results of the trained Q-
network (agent) on the test dataset. We evaluated the
trained y-channel Q-network, depth-channel Q-network and
the MDQN on the test dataset; table 1 summarizes the
performance measures of these trained Q-networks. In table
1, accuracy corresponds to how often the predictions by the
Q-networks were correct. The true positive rate corresponds
to the percentage of predicting positive targets as positive
and the false positive rate is the percentage of negative
instances that were classiﬁed as positive. Misclassiﬁcation
rate denotes how often network predictions were wrong.
In table 1, it can be seen that the multimodal deep Q-
network (Fused) achieved maximum accuracy of 95.3 %,
whereas the y-channel and the depth-channel of Q-networks
achieved 85.9% and 82.6% accuracy, respectively. Hence,
the results in table 1 validate that fusion of two streams
improves the social cognitive ability of the agent. Figure 4
shows the performance of MDQN on the test dataset over
the series of episodes. The episode 0 on ﬁgure 4 corresponds
to the Q-network with randomly initialized parameters. The
plot indicates that the performance of MQDN agent on test
dataset is continuously improving as the agent gets more
and more interaction experience with humans. Rest of the
section provides the visual evidences of the proposition
that the robot gained human-like social intelligence through
interaction with humans.
In ﬁgures 5-7, the actions wait, look towards human,
wave hand, and shake-hand are denoted as W, L, H, and
S respectively. For ﬁgures 5 and 7, each sub-ﬁgure shows

(a) W=0.12 L= 0.26 H=0.14 S=.49 (b) W=0.44 L=0.22 H=0.19 S=0.14 (c) W=0.33 L=0.22 H=0.25 S=0.20 (d) W=0.29 L=0.25 H=0.23 S=0.24
(e) W=0.30 L=0.23 H=0.27 S=0.20 (f) W=0.17 L=0.26 H=0.32 S=0.24 (g) W=0.22 L=0.26 H=0.34 S=0.19 (h) W=0.26 L=0.28 H=0.21 S=0.24
Fig. 5: Successful cases of agents decision.
the start (S) and the end (E) frame out of the total eight
most recent frames for any situation.
Figures 5 and 6 indicate the instances of successful pre-
dictions by the MQDN based agent. The action highlighted
in blue shows the action with maximum Q-value, hence
indicates the agent’s decision for that particular scenario.
In ﬁgure 5(a), the person is standing right in front of the
robot, therefore, the agent chooses the handshake action. For
scenarios depicted in ﬁgures 5(b)-5(e) the agent decides to
wait. This is because, in the scenario shown in ﬁgure 5(b),
there is no human in the scene; in case of ﬁgure 5(c), the
person is working on their laptop; in case of ﬁgure 5(d),
the person is carrying some things and their hands are not
free; and in case of ﬁgure 5(e), the group of people are
walking away from the robot. Figures 5(f) and 5(g) represent
the situation in which the agent chooses the wave-hand
action, and looking towards the human action, respectively.
Finally, ﬁgure 5(h) shows the situation in which the person is
standing in front of the robot, but taking the robot’s picture
therefore the agent decided to look towards him instead of
shaking-hand.
Figure 6 shows the events (A-E) that happened sequen-
tially. For each event, only the last frame is presented. In
the event A, there is no human for the interaction hence
the agent decides to wait. In event B, two people appeared
in the scene and the agent switched to the looking towards
human action. Following event B, to further get the humans
attention, the agent chose the wave-hand action in event C.
Event D indicates that the agent has successfully gained the
attention of the human as it led to the successful handshake.
Finally, in event E, the person’s head orientation is not
towards the robot so the agent chooses the look towards
human action in order to gain their attention again. Figure 7
represents some of the wrong decisions taken by the agent.
The action highlighted in red indicates the agent decision
while the action highlighted in green represent the decision
considered appropriate by the evaluators.
VII. DISCUSSION
This section provides brief discussion on i) some of the
exciting features that the agent (Q-network) has learned
through the experiment; and ii) the effect of the reward
Fig. 6: Series of events(A to E) happened in a sequence.
(a) W=0.21 L=0.30 H=0.26 S=0.23 (b) W=0.24 L=0.26 H=0.27 S=0.23
(c) W=0.22 L=0.22 H=0.27 S=0.29 (d) W=0.26 L=0.25 H=0.25 S=0.23
Fig. 7: Unsuccessful cases of agents decision.
function on the robot’s behavior. Sections A-C highlight that
the agent has gained understanding of some of the factors
that form the basis for intention inference such as activity in
progress, walking trajectories and head orientations. Section
E provides a discussion on the effect of the reward function
on the robot’s social interaction skills.
A. Activity in progress
The scenarios shown in ﬁgures 5(c), 5(d) and 5(h) show
a person working on a laptop, a person carrying some
things and a person taking a picture respectively. The agent’s
decision, during these activities, indicates that it has learned
to recognize the activity in progress and has also learned that
any interaction during these activities would not lead to the
successful handshake, hence agent decides to wait.
B. Walking trajectory
The agent’s decision in situations shown in ﬁgures 5(e)
and 5(f) shows that it has gained insight about the walking

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
20
40
60
80
100
Penalty on unsuccessful handshake
True positive rate (%)
Fig. 8: Effect of reward function on the robot’s behavior.
trajectories. In the ﬁgure 5(e) people walked away from the
robot and in the ﬁgure 5(f) a person is coming downstairs
and is getting closer to the robot. In the former, MDQN-
agent decides to wait as it is quite less probable to get the
handshake in that situation, whereas in the latter it decides
to wave-hand as there is a chance to get the handshake by
gaining the attention of the oncoming person.
C. Head orientation
In ﬁgure 6, event D and event E show two different
scenarios; one in which the person’s head orientation is
towards the robot; and other in which it is not towards the
robot. For event D, the agent decides to shake-hand while
for event E it decides to gain human attention by looking
towards them. Hence, this gives an indication that the agent
has also learned implications of head orientation on social
human-robot interaction.
D. Effect of reward function on the robot’s behavior
All the results presented so far are based on the reward
function discussed earlier. This section formalizes the effect
of the reward function on the agent’s behavior. Varying the
penalty on unsuccessful handshake from 0 to -1 changes the
robot behavior from amiable to rude as when the penalty
is 0 the robot always tries to handshake and when it is -
1, the robot is reluctant to handshake. To understand which
behavior is acceptable by humans, we trained ﬁve networks
with ﬁve different reward functions and these ﬁve networks
were evaluated following the evaluation procedure mentioned
earlier. For each reward function the agent gets 0 reward on
actions other than handshake, +1 on successful handshake
and 0,-0.1,-0.2,-0.5 or -1 on unsuccessful handshake. Figure
8 represents the plot of the true positive rate of each
model on test dataset versus corresponding penalty given on
unsuccessful handshake. The result shows that the reward
function with -0.1 penalty achieved maximum accuracy on
the test dataset.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In social physical human-robot interaction, it is very difﬁ-
cult to envisage all the possible interaction scenarios which
the robot can face in the real-world, hence programming a
social robot is notoriously hard. To tackle this challenge,
we presented a multi-model deep Q-network (MDQN) with
which the robot learns the social interaction skills through
trial and error method. The results show the diversity of
interaction scenarios, which were deﬁnitely hard to imagine,
and yet the robot was able to learn which action to choose
at each time-step in these diverse scenarios. Furthermore,
the results also insinuate that the MDQN-agent has learned
to give importance to walking trajectories, head orientation,
body language and the activity in progress in order to decide
its best action.
In our future work, we plan to i) increase the action space
instead of limiting it to just four actions; ii) use recurrent
attention model so that the robot can indicate its attention; iii)
evaluate the inﬂuence of three actions, other than handshake,
on the human behavior.
