Accepted in Information Retrieval Journal.
Publisher link: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10791-018-9340-3
Beyond Word Embeddings: Learning Entity and Concept
Representations from Large Scale Knowledge Bases
Walid Shalaby · Wlodek Zadrozny · Hongxia Jin.
Received: 30 January 2018 / Accepted: 2 August 2018
Abstract Text representations using neural word embeddings have proven eﬀective in many NLP
applications. Recent researches adapt the traditional word embedding models to learn vectors of
multiword expressions (concepts/entities). However, these methods are limited to textual knowledge
bases (e.g., Wikipedia). In this paper, we propose a novel and simple technique for integrating the
knowledge about concepts from two large scale knowledge bases of diﬀerent structure (Wikipedia,
and Probase) in order to learn concept representations. We adapt the eﬃcient skip-gram model to
seamlessly learn from the knowledge in Wikipedia text and Probase concept graph. We evaluate
our concept embedding models on two tasks: 1) analogical reasoning, where we achieve a state-
of-the-art performance of 91% on semantic analogies, 2) concept categorization, where we achieve
a state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark datasets achieving categorization accuracy of
100% on one and 98% on the other. Additionally, we present a case study to evaluate our model
on unsupervised argument type identiﬁcation for neural semantic parsing. We demonstrate the
competitive accuracy of our unsupervised method and its ability to better generalize to out of
vocabulary entity mentions compared to the tedious and error prone methods which depend on
gazetteers and regular expressions.
In this paper, we use the terms ”concept” and ”entity” interchangeably.
Walid Shalaby
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA

Wlodek Zadrozny
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA

Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America
665 Clyde Avenue, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA

arXiv:1801.00388v2  [cs.CL]  30 Aug 2018

2
Walid Shalaby et al.
Fig. 1 Integrating knowledge from Wikipedia text (left) and Probase concept graph (right). Local concept-concept,
concept-word, and word-word contexts are generated from both KBs and used for training the skip-gram model.
Keywords Entity & Concept Embeddings · Entity Identiﬁcation · Concept Categorization ·
Skip-gram · Probase · Knowledge Graph Representations
1 Introduction
Vector-based semantic representation models are used to represent textual structures (words, phrases
and documents) as multidimensional vectors. Typically, these models utilize textual corpora and/or
Knowledge Bases (KBs) in order to extract and model real-world knowledge. Once acquired, any
given text structure is represented as a real-valued vector in the semantic space. The goal is thus
to accurately place semantically similar structures close to each other in that semantic space, while
placing dissimilar structures far apart.
Recent neural-based methods for learning word vectors (embeddings) have even succeeded in
capturing both syntactic and semantic regularities using simple vector arithmetic (Mikolov et al
(2013a,b); Pennington et al (2014)). For example, inferring analogical relationships between words:
vec(king)-vec(man)+vec(woman)=vec(queen). This indicates that the learned vector dimensions
encode meaningful multi-clustering for each word.
Word vectors suﬀer signiﬁcant limitations. First, each word is assumed to have a single meaning
regardless of its context and thus is represented by a single vector in the semantic space (e.g.,
charlotte (city) vs. charlotte (given name)). Second, the space contains vectors of single words
only. Vectors of multiword expressions (MWEs) are typically obtained by averaging the vectors of
individual words. However, this would often produce inaccurate representations especially if the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
3
meaning of the MWE is diﬀerent from the composition of meanings of its individual words (e.g.,
vec(north carolina) vs. vec(north)+vec(carolina). Additionally, mentions that are used to refer to
the same concept would have diﬀerent embeddings (e.g., u.s., america, usa), and the model might
not be able to place those individual vectors in the same sub-cluster, especially the rare surface
forms.
To address these limitations, a lot of research interest has been focusing on learning distributed
representations of concepts and entities which are lexical expressions (single or multiword) that
denote an idea, event, or an object and have a set of properties. Typically each concept has an
entry in a KB (e.g., an article in Wikipedia or a node in knowledge graph). Such entity embeddings
models utilize text KBs (e.g., Wikipedia) or a triple-based KBs (e.g., DBpedia and Freebase) in
order to learn entity vectors. Broadly speaking, existing methods can be divided into two categories.
First, methods that learn embeddings of KB concepts only (Hu et al (2015); Zwicklbauer et al (2016);
Li et al (2016); Ristoski and Paulheim (2016)). Second, methods that jointly learn embeddings of
words and concepts in the same semantic space (Wang et al (2014); Fang et al (2016); Yamada et al
(2016); Camacho-Collados et al (2016); Fang et al (2016); Cao et al (2017); Shalaby and Zadrozny
(2017); Phan et al (2017)).
In this paper, we introduce an eﬀective approach for jointly learning word and concept vectors
from two large scale KBs of diﬀerent modalities: a text KB (Wikipedia) and a graph-based concept
KB (Microsoft concept graph1 (aka Probase)). We adapt skip-gram, the popular local context
window method Mikolov et al (2013b), to integrate the knowledge from both KBs. As shown in
Figure 1, three key properties diﬀerentiate our approach from existing methods. First, we generate
word and concept contexts from their raw mentions in the Wikipedia text. This makes our model
extensible to other text corpora with annotated concept mentions. Second, we model Probase as a
weighted undirected KB graph, exploiting the co-occurrence counts between pairs of concepts. This
allows us to generate more concept-concept contexts during training, and subsequently learn better
concept vectors for rare and infrequent concepts in Wikipedia. Third, to our knowledge, this work
is the ﬁrst to combine knowledge from two KBs of diﬀerent modalities (Wikipedia and Probase)
into a uniﬁed representation.
We evaluate the generated concept vectors intrinsically on two tasks: 1) analogical reasoning
where we achieve a state-of-the-art accuracy of 91% on semantic analogies, 2) concept categorization
on two datasets, where we achieve 100% accuracy on one dataset and 98% accuracy on the other. We
also present a case study to analyze the impact of using our concept vectors for unsupervised argu-
ment type identiﬁcation with semantic parsing as an end-to-end task. The results show competitive
performance of our unsupervised method compared to the tedious and error prone argument type
identiﬁcation methods which depend on gazetteers and regular expressions. The analysis also shows
superior generalization performance on utterances containing out of vocabulary (OOV) mentions.
We make our concept vectors and source code publicly available2 for the research community
for further experimentation and replication.
1 https://concept.research.microsoft.com
2 https://sites.google.com/site/conceptembeddings/

4
Walid Shalaby et al.
2 Learning Concept Embeddings
2.1 Skip-gram
We learn continuous vectors of words and entities by building upon the skip-gram model of Mikolov
et al (2013b). In the conventional skip-gram model, a set of contexts are generated by sliding a
context window of predeﬁned size over sentences of a given text corpus. The vector representation
of a target word is learned with the objective to maximize the ability of predicting surrounding
words of that target word.
Formally, given a training corpus of V words w1, w2, ..., wV . The skip-gram model aims to
maximize the average log likelihood probability:
1
V
V
X
i=1
X
−s≤j≤s,j̸=0
log p(wi+j|wi)
(1)
where s is the context window size, wi is the target word, and wi+j is a surrounding context word.
The softmax function is used to estimate the probability p(wO|wI) as follows:
p(wO|wI) =
exp(v⊺
wOuwI)
PV
w=1 exp(v⊺
wuwI)
(2)
where uw and vw are the input and output vectors respectively, and V is the vocabulary size.
Mikolov et al (2013b) proposed hierarchical softmax and negative sampling as eﬃcient alternatives
to approximate the softmax function (which becomes computationally intractable when V becomes
huge).
2.2 Learning from Text
Our approach genuinely learns distributed concept representations by generating concept contexts
from mentions of those concepts in large encyclopedic text KBs such as Wikipedia. Utilizing such
annotated KBs eliminates the need to manually annotate concept mentions and thus comes at no
cost.
Here we propose learning the embeddings of both words and concepts jointly. First, all concept
mentions are identiﬁed in the given corpus. Second, contexts are generated for both words and
concepts from other surrounding words and other surrounding concepts as well. After generating
all the contexts, we use the skip-gram model to jointly learn embeddings of words and concepts.
Formally, given a training corpus of V words w1, w2, ..., wV . We iterate over the corpus identifying
words and concept mentions and thus generating a sequence of T tokens t1, t2, ...tT where T < V
(as multiword concepts will be counted as one token). Afterwards we train the a skip-gram model
aiming to maximize:
Lt = 1
T
T
X
i=1
X
−s≤j≤s,j̸=0
log p(ti+j|ti)
(3)
where as in the conventional skip-gram model, s is the context window size. Here, ti is the target
token which would be either a word or a concept mention, and ti+j is a surrounding context word
or concept mention.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
5
2.3 Learning from Concept Graph
We employ Microsoft concept graph (Probase), a large scale probabilistic KB of millions of concepts
and their relationships (basically is-a hierarchy). Probase was created by mining billions of Web
pages and search logs of Microsoft’s Bing3 repository using syntactic patterns. The concept KB was
then leveraged for text conceptualization to support text understanding tasks such as clustering
of Twitter messages and News titles (Song et al (2011, 2015)), search query understanding (Wang
et al (2015b)), short text segmentation (Hua et al (2015)), and term similarity (Kim et al (2013)).
Probase has a diﬀerent structure (or modality) than Wikipedia because the knowledge is orga-
nized as a graph whose nodes are concepts and edges represent a weighted is-a relationship between
pairs of concepts. Formally, we model Probase as a 4-tuple graph G = (C, E, TC, TE) such that:
– C is a set of vertices representing concepts.
– E is a set of edges (arcs) connecting pairs of concepts.
– TC is a ﬁnite set of tuples representing global statistics of each concept (i.e. its total occurrences).
– TE is a ﬁnite set of tuples representing co-statistics of each edge connecting pairs of concepts
(i.e. their co-occurrence count).
Under this representation, location information is lost. Therefore the context of each concept can
be deﬁned by the set of its neighbors in the graph. Formally, the skip-gram optimization function
would be maximizing:
Lp =
1
|C|
|C|
X
i=1
X
(ci,cj)∈E
log p(cj|ci)
(4)
Note that, while maximizing Lp, the number of training examples generated from (ci, cj) ∈E, is
equal to their co-occurrence count nci,cj. The incorporation of the concept-concept co-occurrence
counts in Probase will result in a dynamic adjustment to the overall likelihood Lp depending on the
counts between pairs of concepts. For example, for highly related concepts the co-occurrence count
will be high, and so will be their contribution to Lp and vice versa. Thus Probase provides another
source of conceptual knowledge to generate more concept-concept contexts, and subsequently learn
better concept representations.
2.4 Data and Model Training
2.4.1 Wikipedia
We utilized the Wikipedia dump of August 20164, which had ∼7 million articles. We extracted
articles plain text discarding images and tables. We also discarded References and External links
sections (if any). We pruned articles not under the main namespace5. Eventually, our corpus con-
tained ∼5 million articles in total. We preprocessed each article replacing all its references to other
Wikipedia articles with the their corresponding article IDs. In case any of the references is a title of
a redirect page, we used the page ID of the original page to ensure that all concept mentions were
normalized to their article IDs.
3 https://www.bing.com/
4 http://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/
5 Articles which are preﬁxed with a string then colon before the title name

6
Walid Shalaby et al.
2.4.2 Microsoft Concept Graph (Probase)
We used Probase data repository6 which contained ∼5 million unique concepts, ∼12 million unique
instances, and ∼85 million is-a relationships. We followed a simple exact string matching between
Wikipedia article titles and Probase concept names in order to align the concepts in both KBs and
generate the ﬁnal concepts set.
2.4.3 Training
We call our model Concept Multimodal Embedding (CME). During training, we jointly train our
model to maximize L = Lt + Lp, which as mentioned before is estimated using the softmax
function. Although it is possible to use weighted sum of Lt and Lp, we opted using unweighted
sum as it is simpler to train, and will not to introduce an extra hyperparameter to the learning
model. Thus, we let the model learn the best combination between Lt and Lp based on the global
words/concepts counts and local co-occurrences between pairs of them.
Following Mikolov et al (2013b), we utilize negative sampling to eﬃciently approximate the
softmax function by replacing every log p(wO|wI) term in the softmax function (equation 2) with:
log σ(v⊺
wOuwI) +
k
X
g=1
Ews∼Pn(w)[log σ(−v⊺
wguwI)]
(5)
where k is the number of negative samples drawn for each term, and σ(x) is the sigmoid function
(
1
1+e−x ).
We consider global word and concept statistics when generating the negative samples for train-
ing. As in Mikolov et al (2013b), we implement the downsampling trick where words with normalized
frequency (>10-3) are downsampled. For each training sample, we sample 5 noisy words/concepts
as negatives from the uniform distribution raised to 3/4rd power.
For text learning, we use a context window of size 9. We set the vector size to 500 dimensions
and train the model for 10 iterations using 12 cores machine with 64GB of RAM. Our model takes
∼15 hours to train. The total vocabulary size is ∼12.7 million including words and concepts.
3 Evaluation
3.1 Analogical Reasoning
Mikolov et al (2013c) introduced this intrinsic evaluation scheme to assess the capacity of the
embedding model to learn a vector space with meaningful substructure. Typically, analogies take
the form ”a to b is same as c to
?” where a, b, and c are elements of the vocabulary V . Using vector
arithmetic, this can be answered by identifying d such that: d = arg maxd Sim(vec(d), vec(b) −
vec(a)+vec(c)), ∀d ∈V −{a, b, c}, where Sim is a similarity function7. A good performance on this
task indicates the model’s ability to learn semantic and syntactic patterns as linear relationships
between vectors in the embedding space (Pennington et al (2014)).
6 https://concept.research.microsoft.com/Home/Download
7 Cosine similarity or dot product if vectors are normalized.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
7
Dataset/Questions
Semantic
Syntactic
All
Method
(8,869)
(10,675)
(19,544)
Word2Vecsg
58
61
59.5
Word2Vecsg b
78.1
62.8
69.8
Glove
80.8
61.5
70.3
Gloveb
69.5
32.1
49.1
MPME
71.6
54.6
63.1
CME
91.4
61.7
75.2
Table 1 Results of analogical reasoning, given as percent accuracy (bold indicates best obtained accuracy). Our
CME model gives the best result on semantic analogies and higher overall accuracy than all other models.
3.1.1 Dataset
We use the word analogies dataset of Mikolov et al (2013a). The dataset contains 19,544 questions
divided into semantic analogies (8,869), and syntactic analogies (10,675). The semantic analogies
are questions about country capitals, state cities, country currencies...etc. For example, ”cairo to
egypt is same as paris to france”. The syntactic analogies are questions about verb tenses, opposites,
and adjective forms. For example, ”big to biggest is same as great to greatest”. In order to leverage
the concept vectors, we ﬁrst identify the corresponding entity of each analogy word and use its
vector. If the word has no corresponding entity or corresponds to a disambiguation page under
Wikipedia we use its word vector instead.
3.1.2 Compared Systems
We compare our model to various word and entity embedding methods including:
1. Word embeddings: a) Word2Vecsg, word embedding model trained on Wikipedia using skip-
gram Mikolov et al (2013a), b) Word2Vecsg b, a baseline model we created by training the
skip-gram model on the same Wikipedia dump we used for our CME model, c) GloVe, word em-
bedding model proposed by Pennington et al (2014), and d) GloVeb, same model by Pennington
et al (2014), but trained on the same Wikipedia version used by CME without preprocessing,
for fair comparison. We use recommended hyperparameter values in Pennington et al (2014).
2. Entity mention embeddings: MPME, a recent model proposed by Cao et al (2017). The
model jointly learn embeddings of words and entity mentions by training the skip-gram on
Wikipedia, and utilizing anchor texts to generate multi-prototype entity mention embeddings.
3.1.3 Results
We report the accuracy scores of analogical reasoning in Table 1. As we see, our CME model outper-
forms all other models by signiﬁcant percentages on the semantic analogies. The closest performing
model (Glove) is ∼10% less accurate. Performance on syntactic analogies is still very competitive
to Word2Vecsg b and GloVe. Overall, our model is ∼5% better than the closest performing model.
3.1.4 Error Analysis
Local context window models like ours generally perform better on semantic analogies than syn-
tactic ones. This indicates that syntactic regularities in most textual corpora are more diﬃcult

8
Walid Shalaby et al.
to capture, using embeddings, than semantic regularities. A possible reason could be the more
morphological variations of verbs and adjectives than nouns. Our model training is even more bi-
ased toward capturing semantic relationships between concepts by incorporating knowledge from
Probase concept graph. This bias caused our model to produce some semantic predictions on the
syntactic analogies compared to the Word2Vecsg b baseline, returning a semantically related word
to the answer. For instance, our model predicted ”fast” rather than ”slows” 9 times compared
to 2 times by Word2Vecsg b. And ”large” rather than ”smaller” 14 times compared to 1 time by
Word2Vecsg b, Another set of errors were predicting the correct word but with wrong ending espe-
cially ”ing”. For instance, ”implementing” rather than ”implements” 27 times compared to 19 time
by Word2Vecsg b. We argue that, despite this bias, our CME model still produces very competitive
performance compared to other models on syntactic analogies. And more importantly, emphasizing
the semantic relatedness between concepts during training contributes to the signiﬁcant accuracy
gains on the semantic analogies.
Algorithm 1: Classiﬁcation + Bootstrapping
Input: U={(l1, ul1), ..., (ln, uln)}: labels + embeddings
D={(d1, vd1), ..., (dm, vdm)}: instances + embeddings
N: number of bootstrap instances
Result: L={..., (di, lj), ...}: label assignment for each instance
1 repeat
2
candidates ←{l1 : φ, ..., ln : φ}
3
foreach (d, vd) ∈D do
4
dmax sim = 0
5
dmax label = null
6
foreach (l, ul) ∈U do
7
siml = Sim(vd, ul)
8
if siml > dmax sim then
9
dmax sim = siml
10
dmax lebel = l
11
end
12
end
13
add (d, dmax sim) to candidates[l]
14
end
15
foreach (l, candidatesl) ∈candidates.items do
16
repeat
17
scoremax = 0
18
dmax = null
19
foreach (d, scored) ∈candidatesl do
20
if scored > scoremax then
21
scoremax = scored
22
dmax = d
▷most similar instance so far
23
end
24
end
25
add (dmax, l) to L
▷assign class label
26
ul ←ul + vd
▷bootstrap label embedding
27
remove d from candidatesl
28
remove d from D
29
until N highest scored instances added
30
end
31 until D = φ
▷no more instances to classify

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
9
3.2 Concept Learning
Concept learning is a cognitive process which involves classifying a given concept/entity to one or
more candidate categories (e.g., ”milk” as beverage, dairy product, liquid...etc). This process is also
known as concept categorization8 Li et al (2016).
Automated concept categorization can be viewed through both intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation.
Intrinsic because a ”good” embedding model would generate clusters of concepts belonging to the
same category, and optimally place the category vector at the center of its instances cluster. And
extrinsic as the embedding model could be leveraged in many knowledge modeling tasks such
as KB construction (creating new concepts), KB completion (inferring new relationships between
concepts), and KB curation (removing noisy or assessing weak relationships).
Similar to Li et al (2016), we assign a given concept to a target category using Rocchio classiﬁ-
cation (Rocchio (1971)), where the centroid of each category is set to the category’s corresponding
embedding vector. Formally, given a set of n candidate concept categories G = {g1, ..., gn}, an in-
stance concept c, an embedding function f, and a similarity function Sim, then c is assigned to the
ith category gi such that gi = arg maxi Sim(f(gi), f(c)). Under our CME model, the embedding
function f would always map the given concept to its vector.
3.2.1 Bootstrapping
We leverage bootstrapping in order to improve the categorization accuracy without the need for
labeled data. In the context of concept learning, we start with the vectors of target category
concepts as a prototype view upon which categorization assignments are made (e.g., vec(bird),
vec(mammal)...etc). We leverage bootstrapping by iteratively updating this prototype view with
the vectors of concept instances we are most conﬁdent. For example, if ”deer” is closest to ”mammal”
than any other instance in the dataset, then we update the deﬁnition of ”mammal” by perform-
ing vec(mammal)+=vec(deer), normalize it, and repeat the same operation for other categories as
well. This way, we adapt the initial prototype view to better match the speciﬁcs of the given data.
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for performing concept categorization with bootstrapping. In
our implementation, we bootstrap the category vector with vectors of the most similar N instances
at a time. Another implementation option might be deﬁning a threshold and bootstrapping using
vectors of N instances if their similarity scores exceed that threshold.
3.2.2 Datasets
As in Li et al (2016), we utilize two benchmark datasets: 1) Battig test (Baroni and Lenci (2010)),
which contains 83 single word concepts (e.g., cat, tuna, spoon..etc) belonging to 10 categories (e.g.,
mammal, ﬁsh, kitchenware..etc), and 2) DOTA, which was created by Li et al (2016) from Wikipedia
article titles (entities) and category names (categories). DOTA contains 300 single-word concepts
(DOTA-single) (e.g., coﬀee, football, semantics..etc), and (150) multiword concepts (DOTA-mult)
(e.g., masala chai, table tennis, noun phrase..etc). Both belong to 15 categories (e.g., beverage,
sport, linguistics...etc). Performance is measured in terms of the ability of the system to assign
concept instances to their correct categories.
8 In this paper, we use concept learning and concept categorization interchangeably

10
Walid Shalaby et al.
Dataset/Instances
Battig
DOTA-single
DOTA-mult
DOTA-all
Method
(83)
(300)
(150)
(450)
WESenna
44
52
32
45
WEMikolov
74
72
67
72
TransE1
66
72
69
71
TransE2
75
80
77
79
TransE3
46
55
52
54
CE
79
89
85
88
HCE
87
93
91
92
WEb
77
93
86
91
+bootstrap
88
97
86
90
Wiki-ccb
72
90
80
87
+bootstrap
81
91
86
87
Probase-ccb
73
65
70
67
+bootstrap
95
78
81
83
CME
94
91
88
90
+bootstrap
100
99
95
98
Table 2 Results of the concept categorization task, given as percent accuracy (bold indicates best obtained accu-
racy). Our CME model with bootstrapping gives the best results outperforming all other models and baselines.
3.2.3 Compared Systems
We compare our model to various word, entity and category embedding methods including:
1. Word embeddings: Collobert et al (2011) model (WESenna) trained on Wikipedia. Here
vectors of multiword concepts are obtained by averaging their individual word vectors.
2. MWEs embeddings: Mikolov et al (2013b) model (WEMikolov) trained on Wikipedia. This
model jointly learns single and multiword embeddings where MWEs are identiﬁed using corpus
statistics.
3. Entity-category embeddings: which include Bordes et al (2013) embedding model (TransE).
This model utilizes relational data between entities in a KB as triplets in the form (entity,
relation, entity) to generate representations of both entities and relationships. Li et al (2016)
implemented three variants of this model (TransE1, TransE2, TransE3) to generate represen-
tations for entities and categories jointly. Two other models introduced by Li et al (2016) are
CE and HCE. CE generates embeddings for concepts and categories using category information
of Wikipedia articles. HCE extends CE by incorporating Wikipedia’s category hierarchy while
training the model to generate concept and category vectors.
4. Other baselines: we created three baselines: a) WEb, has word embeddings only and was
obtained by training the skip-gram model on the same Wikipedia dump we used for our CME
model (cf. equation 1), b) Wiki-ccb, has concept embeddings only and was obtained by ﬁrst
preprocessing Wikipedia to remove all non-concept tokens, and then training the skip-gram
model on concept-concept contexts (cf. equation 3 where each token t is a concept mention),
and c) Probase-ccb, has concept embeddings only and was obtained by training the adapted
skip-gram model on Probase concept graph (cf. equation 4).
These baselines are meant to quantify and analyze the contribution of each type of information
individually. Speciﬁcally, entity-entity in Wikipedia conceptual contexts, entity-entity in Probase
knowledge graph, and word-word in Wikipedia raw contexts.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
11
No
Utterance
Logical form
1
where is new orleans
( lambda $0 e ( loc:t new orleans:ci $0 ) )
where is ci0
( lambda $0 e ( loc:t ci0 $0 ) )
2
what states border the mississippi river
( lambda $0 e ( and ( state:t $0 )
( next to:t $0 mississippi river:r ) ) )
how many states border ri0
( count $0 ( and ( state:t $0 ) ( next to:t $0 ri0 ) ) )
3
list ﬂights from philadelphia to san francisco via dallas
( lambda $0 e ( and ( ﬂight $0 )
( from $0 philadelphia:ci ) ( to $0 san francisco:ci )
( stop $0 dallas:ci ) ) )
list ﬂight from ci0 to ci1 via ci2
( lambda $0 e ( and ( ﬂight $0 ) ( from $0 ci0 )
( to $0 ci1 ) ( stop $0 ci2 ) ) )
4
ﬂights from jfk or la guardia to cleveland
( lambda $0 e ( and ( ﬂight $0 ) ( or ( from $0 jfk:ap )
( from $0 lga:ap ) ) ( to $0 cleveland:ci ) ) )
ﬂight from ap0 or ap1 to ci0
( lambda $0 e ( and ( ﬂight $0 ) ( or ( from $0 ap0 )
( from $0 ap1 ) ) ( to $0 ci0 ) ) )
Table 3 Example utterances and their corresponding logical forms from the geography and ﬂights domains. Left,
utterances before and after argument type identiﬁcation. Right, logical forms before and after argument type iden-
tiﬁcation. City is mapped to ci, Airport to ap, and River to ri.
3.2.4 Results
We report the accuracy scores of concept categorization9 in Table 2. Accuracy is calculated by
dividing the number of correctly classiﬁed concepts by the total number of concepts in the given
dataset. Scores of all non-baseline methods are obtained from Li et al (2016). As we can see in Table
2, our CME+bootstrap model outperforms all other models and baselines by signiﬁcant percentages.
It even achieves 100% accuracy on the Battig dataset. With single word concepts, CME achieves
the best performance on Battig and competitive performance to WEb on DOTA-single. When it
comes to multiword concepts, our CME model comes second after HCE. In general, baselines which
depend only on pure concept-concept contexts (Wiki-ccb and Probase-ccb) perform worse than the
word-word contexts baseline (WEb). This indicates the signiﬁcance of the full concept contextual
information obtained when including both other nearby words and other nearby concepts while
learning target concept representation.
3.2.5 Analysis
Is bootstrapping a magic bullet? A ﬁrst look at the results of CME+bootstrap vs. CME might
indicate that if bootstrapping is applied to HCE or WEb which perform better than CME on
some datasets, their performance would still be superior. However, the results of WEb+bootstrap
show that the margin of performance gains of bootstrapping is not necessarily proportional to
the performance of the model without it. For example, WEb+bootstrap performs worse than
CMEb+bootstrap on DOTA-single, though WEb was initially better than CME. This means that
bootstrapping other better performing models such as HCE might not be as beneﬁcial as it is to
CME. The bottom line here is: the model should learn a semantic space with optimal substruc-
tures which cluster instances of the same category together, and keep them far from instances of
other categories. This is clearly the case with our CME model which ends up having (near-)optimal
category vectors with bootstrapping.
9 From a multi-class classiﬁcation perspective, the accuracy scores would be equivalent to the clustering purity
score as reported in Li et al (2016).

12
Walid Shalaby et al.
3.3 Argument Type Identiﬁcation: A Case Study
In this section, we present a case study to analyze the impact of using our concept vectors for un-
supervised argument type identiﬁcation with semantic parsing as an end-to-end task. In a nutshell,
semantic parsing is concerned with mapping natural language utterances into executable logical
forms Wang et al (2015a). The logical form is subsequently executed on a knowledge base to answer
the user question. Table 3 shows some example utterances and their corresponding logical forms
from the geography and ﬂights domains.
3.3.1 Argument Identiﬁcation
As we can notice from the examples in Table 3, user utterances usually contain mentions of entities of
various types (e.g., city, state, and airport names). These mentions are typically parsed as arguments
in the resulting logical form. Some of these mentions could be rare or even missing in the training
data. As noted by Dong and Lapata (2016), this problem reduces the model’s capacity to learn
reliable parameters for such mentions.
One possible solution is to preprocess the training data, replacing all entity mentions with their
type names (e.g., san francisco to city, california to state...etc). This step allows the model to see
more identical input/output patterns during training, and thus better learn the parameters of such
patterns. The model would also generalize better to out of vocabulary mentions because the same
preprocessing could be done at test time.
Dong and Lapata (2016) proposed using gazetteers and regular expressions for argument identiﬁ-
cation. The authors also demonstrated increased accuracy when employing such approach. However,
using regular expressions is error prone as the same utterance could be paraphrased in many dif-
ferent ways. In addition, gazetteers usually have low recall, and will not cover many surface forms
of the same entity mention.
In this paper, we embrace argument type identiﬁcation in a totally unsupervised fashion. The
idea is to build upon the promising performance we achieved in concept categorization and apply
the same scheme to map entity mentions to their corresponding type names. Our unsupervised
argument type identiﬁcation is a four step process: 1) we predeﬁne target entity types and retrieve
their corresponding vectors from our CME model, 2) we identify entity mentions in user utterances
(e.g., mississippi river), 3) we lookup the mention vector in our CME model, and 4) we compute the
similarity between the mention vector and each of the predeﬁned target entity types and choose the
most similar type if it exceeds a predeﬁned threshold. This scheme is eﬃcient and doesn’t require
any manually crafted rules or heuristics. The only needed parameter is the similarity threshold
which we ﬁx to 0.5 during experiments.
Note that standard oﬀ-the-shelf entity recognition systems could help in identifying the entity
mentions but not their type names. In domains like ﬂights, we are interested in non standard
types such as airports and airlines. It is also important to distinguish between city, state, and
country mentions in the geography domain and not classifying all instances of these categories as
the standard location type.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
13
Dataset
GEO
ATIS
w/o Identiﬁcation
68.6
73.2
w/ Identiﬁcation
77.1
83.7
Table 4 Results of semantic parsing before and after argument type identiﬁcation, given as percent accuracy. Using
CME to identify argument types resulted in improved accuracy on both datasets.
3.3.2 Datasets
We analyze our unsupervised scheme on two datasets10 : 1) GEO which contains a total of 880
utterances about U.S. geography Zettlemoyer and Collins (2012). The dataset is split into 680
training instances and 200 test instances. Here we target identifying ﬁve entity types: city, state,
river, mountain, and country, and 2) ATIS which contains 5,410 utterances about ﬂight bookings
split into 4,480 training instances, 480 development instances, and 450 test instances. Here we target
identifying six entity types: city, state, airline, airport, day name, and month.
3.3.3 Model & Training
We assess the performance of argument type identiﬁcation by training Dong and Lapata (2016)
neural semantic parsing model11. The model utilizes sequence-to-sequence learning with neural
attention (see Dong and Lapata (2016) for more details). We use the Seq2Seq variant of the model
and do not perform any parameter tuning as our purpose is to analyze the performance before and
after argument type identiﬁcation, and not to get a state-of-the-art performance on these datasets.
3.3.4 Results
We report the parsing accuracy in Table 4. Accuracy is deﬁned as the proportion of the input
utterances whose logical form is identical to the gold standard. As we can see, our argument type
identiﬁcation scheme resulted in signiﬁcant accuracy improvements of ∼10% on both datasets.
We present this experiment as a case study for the utility of our embedding model in an end-
to-end task. We don’t claim superiority over other embedding techniques here, rather we show that
the application of our embedding space to infer is-a relationships can be extended successfully to
other application areas including but not limited to: 1) unsupervised argument type identiﬁcation,
and 2) inferring is-a relationship of other categories (city, state, airline, airport, day name...etc)
than those categories in the concept learning datasets (DOTA and Battig).
3.3.5 Error Analysis
Training the Seq2Seq semantic parsing model on preprocessed data is clearly beneﬁcial as the results
in Table 4 show. Without argument identiﬁcation, the model is prone to the out of vocabulary
problem. For example, on GEO we spotted 24 test instances with entities not mentioned in the
training data (e.g., new jersey, chattahoochee river). The same on ATIS with 23 instances. Another
source of errors was due to rare mentions. For example, ”portland” appeared once in GEO training
data.
10 We obtained the raw dataset ﬁles by contacting the authors of Dong and Lapata (2016)
11 https://github.com/donglixp/lang2logic

14
Walid Shalaby et al.
Our scheme demonstrated good ability to capture most entity mentions and map them to their
correct type names. However, there was some subtle failure cases. For example, in ”what length is
the mississippi”, our scheme mapped ”mississippi” to the state, while it was mapped to the river
in the gold standard logical form. Another example was mapping ”new york” to the city in ”what
is the density of the new york”, while it was mapped to the state in the gold standard.
Overall, the results show competitive performance of our unsupervised method compared to
the tedious and error prone argument type identiﬁcation methods. The analysis also shows supe-
rior generalization performance when using unsupervised argument identiﬁcation with utterances
containing out of vocabulary and rare mentions.
4 Related Work
Neural embedding models have been proposed to learn distributed representations of concepts and
entities. Song and Roth (2015) proposed using the popular Word2Vec model of Mikolov et al (2013a)
to obtain the embeddings of each concept by averaging the vectors of the concept’s individual words.
For example, the embeddings of ”Microsoft Oﬃce” would be obtained by averaging the embeddings
of ”Microsoft” and ”Oﬃce” obtained from the Word2Vec model. Clearly, this scheme fails when
the semantics of multiword concepts is diﬀerent from the compositional meaning of their individual
words.
More robust entity embeddings can be learned from the entity’s corresponding article and/or
from the structure of the employed KB (e.g., its link graph) as in Hu et al (2015); Li et al (2016);
Yamada et al (2016); and Shalaby and Zadrozny (2017) who all utilize the skip-gram model, but
diﬀer in how they deﬁne the context of the target concept. However, all these methods utilize one
KB only (Wikipedia) to learn entity representations. Our approach, on the other hand, learns better
entity representations by exploiting the conceptual knowledge in a weighted KB graph (Probase)
and not only from Wikipedia.
Unlike Hu et al (2015) and Li et al (2016) who learn entity embeddings only, our proposed
CME model maps both words and concepts into the same semantic space. In addition, compared to
Yamada et al (2016) model which also learns words and entity embeddings jointly, we better model
the local contextual information of entities and words in Wikipedia viewed as a textual KB. During
training, we generate word-word, word-concept, concept-word, and concept-concept contexts (cf.
equation 3). In Yamada et al (2016) model, concept-concept contexts are generated from Wikipedia
link graph, and not from their raw mentions in Wikipedia text.
Exploiting all concept tokens surrounding a target concept allows us, given another corpus with
annotated concept mentions, to easily harness concept-concept contexts even if the corpus has no
link structure (e.g., news stories, scientiﬁc publications, medical guidelines...etc).
Our model is computationally less costly than those of Hu et al (2015) and Yamada et al (2016)
as it requires a few hours rather than days to train using similar computing resources.
Although the learning of the embeddings might seem straightforward, as it uses the standard
skip-gram model, we see this as an advantage. On one hand, it allows our training to scale eﬃciently
to huge vocabulary of words and concepts without the need for a lot of preprocessing (e.g., removing
low frequent words and phrases as in Wang et al (2014); Fang et al (2016)). On the other hand,
to learn from the knowledge graph contexts, we propose simple adaption to the skip-gram model
(cf. equation 4), which allows us to use the same dot product scoring function when optimizing for
both Lt and Lp. This is a simpler and more computationally eﬃcient function than the scoring

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
15
function proposed by previous approaches which learn from knowledge graphs (cf. Fang et al (2016)’s
equation 1).
5 Conclusion & Discussion
Concepts are lexical expressions (single or multiword) that denote an idea, event or an object and
typically have a set of properties associated with it. In this paper, we introduced a neural-based
approach for learning embeddings of explicit concepts using the skip-gram model. Our approach
learns concept representations from mentions in free text corpora with annotated concept men-
tions. These mentions even if not available could be obtained through state-of-the-art entity linking
systems. We also proposed an eﬀective and seamless addition to the skip-gram learning scheme to
learn concept vectors from two large scale knowledge bases of diﬀerent modalities (Wikipedia, and
Probase).
We evaluated of the learned concept embeddings intrinsically and extrinsically. Our performance
on the analogical reasoning task produced a new state-of-the-art performance of 91% on semantic
analogies.
Empirical results on two datasets for performing concept categorization show superior perfor-
mance of our approach over other word and entity embedding models.
We also presented a case study to analyze the feasibility of using the learned vectors for argument
identiﬁcation with neural semantic parsing. The analysis shows signiﬁcant performance gains using
our unsupervised argument type identiﬁcation scheme and better handling of out of vocabulary
entity mentions.
To our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to combine knowledge from both Wikipedia and Probase
into a uniﬁed representation. Our concept space contains all Wikipedia article titles (∼5 million). We
use Probase as another source of conceptual knowledge to generate more concept-concept contexts,
and subsequently learn better concept vectors. In this spirit, we ﬁrst ﬁlter Probase graph keeping
only edges whose both vertices are Wikipedia concepts. Using string matching, ∼1 million unique
Probase concepts were mapped to Wikipedia articles. Note that we still use the contexts generated
from the 5 million Wikipedia concepts, and add to them contexts obtained from the ﬁltered Probase
graph. Out of the ∼12.7 million vectors in our model, we have ∼5 million concept vectors and ∼7.7
million word vectors.
One important future improvement is to better match entities from both Wikipedia and Probase.
For example, using string edits to increase recall or graph matching techniques to increase precision.
Despite using a simple string matching, the performance of our method is superior to other methods
utilizing Wikipedia only. It is expected that string matching might produce incorrect mappings.
However, it is important to mention that our string matching exploits the redirect pages titles as
well as the canonical titles of Wikipedia articles. This increases the recall. For example, in Probase,
nyc, city of new york, new york city are all matched with same Wikipedia article New York City.
Our initial qualitative analysis shows that it is common to match single-sense Wikipedia concepts
(ss-Wiki) with multi-sense Probase concepts (ms-Pro). However, in many of these cases, the ms-Pro
is dominated by the ss-Wiki. For example, the Wikipedia page for Tiger describes the animal. In
Probase, Tiger is-a Animal and Tiger is-a Big cat has more co-occurrences (917 & 315 respectively)
compared to Tiger is-a Dance (1 co-occurrence). Same for Rose which is described in Wikipedia as
ﬂowering plant. In Probase, Rose is-a Flower has (906) and Rose is-a Plant has (487) co-occurrences
compared to Rose is-a Garden (10) and Rose is-a Odor (5) co-occurrences. We believe this would

16
Walid Shalaby et al.
help generating more consistent contexts from Wikipedia and Probase. On the other hand, such
multiple sense concepts in Probase could be leveraged for tasks like sense disambiguation and multi-
prototype embeddings, along the lines of Camacho-Collados et al (2016), Iacobacci et al (2015), and
Mancini et al (2016).
One important aspect of our CME model is its ability to better represent the long tail entities
with few mentions. Existing approaches that utilize Wikipedia’s link graph treat Wikipedia as
unweighted directed KB graph. During training, a context is generated for entities e1 and e2 if e1 has
incoming/outgoing link from/to e2. This mechanism poorly represents rare/infrequent Wikipedia
concepts which have few incoming links (i.e. few mentions). We, alternatively, exploit Probase link
structure modeling it as a weighted undirected KB graph. We also utilize the co-occurrence counts
between pairs of concepts (cf. Figure 1). Therefore, we generate more concept-concept contexts,
resulting in better representations of the long-tail concepts. Consider for example Nightstand which
has in Wikipedia 17 incoming links. In Probase, Nightstand is-a Furniture, is-a Casegoods, and is-a
Bedroom furniture with co-occurrences 47, 47, and 32 respectively. This is a 100+ more contexts
than we can generate from Wikipedia. Even for frequent Wikipedia concepts, by exploiting the
co-occurrence counts, our model will reinforce concept-concept relatedness from the many contexts
obtained from Probase.
Our aim in this work was to combine the knowledge from both Wikipedia and Probase in a
seamless and simple way which is scalable (computationally cheap) and eﬀective. The integration
learning scheme and the results show that we can achieve these two goals with high degree of success.
It principle, it is possible to perform such integration between Wikipedia and Probase contexts in
other ways, which may for example distinguish between syntactic and semantic information in
these contexts. However, such approaches will require extra preprocessing in order to prepare such
contexts. For instance, Levy and Goldberg (2014) explored learning word embeddings from contexts
generated from a dependency parser. We still claim an advantage over such approaches, because
they require costly preprocessing in terms of scalability and eﬀectiveness. As demonstrated by the
results, our CME model advances the state-of-the-art on both the analogical reasoning and the
concept learning tasks, without the need to do expensive preprocessing or training to learn concept
representations.
Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number
1624035. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation. The authors would like to
thank Avik Ray and Yilin Shen from Samsung Research America for their constructive feedback and discussions
while developing the case study on the argument type identiﬁcation task. The authors also appreciate the reviewers
valuable and profound comments.
