Optimal Categorical Attribute Transformation for 
Granularity Change in Relational Databases for 
Binary Decision Problems in Educational Data 
Mining 
Paulo J.L. Adeodato 
Centro de Informática 
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco 
Recife-PE, Brazil 

Fábio C. Pereira 
Faculdade de Odontologia 
Universidade de Pernambuco 
Camaragibe-PE, Brazil 
Rosalvo F. Oliveira Neto 
Engenharia da Computação 
Universidade Federal do Vale do São Francisco 
Juazeiro-BA, Brazil 

 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an approach for transforming 
data granularity in hierarchical databases for binary decision 
problems by applying regression to categorical attributes at the 
lower grain levels. Attributes from a lower hierarchy entity in the 
relational database have their information content optimized 
through regression on the categories´ histogram trained on a small 
exclusive labelled sample, instead of the usual mode category of 
the distribution. The paper validates the approach on a binary 
decision task for assessing the quality of secondary schools 
focusing on how logistic regression transforms the students´ and 
teachers´ attributes into school attributes. Experiments were 
carried out on Brazilian schools´ public datasets via 10-fold cross-
validation comparison of the ranking score produced also by 
logistic regression. The proposed approach achieved higher 
performance than the usual distribution mode transformation and 
equal to the expert weighing approach measured by the maximum 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance and the area under the ROC curve 
at 0.01 significance level. 
Keywords—Granularity transformation; Categorical attributes; 
Educational data mining; Relational databases; Distribution mode; 
Regression 
ACM-Classification 
I.2 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
H.2.8 Database Applications, J.1 ADMINISTRATIVE DATA 
PROCESSING-Education; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the most important aspects in decision support 
systems (DSS) is to explore all data and information for 
improving their performance while preserving the domain 
semantics on the attributes. A difficulty arises when the 
databases contain information in several granularities different 
from that of the decision level. This occurs in relational 
databases where there are 1:n relationships among the entities 
defined by their tables in various hierarchical levels. 
Relational Data Mining (RDM) [1] is a research area in the 
borderline between databases and artificial intelligence that 
handles 
information 
in 
different 
granularities. 
Its 
"proposicionalization" approach produces a denormalized table 
in the decision grain [1], as required by most knowledge 
extraction algorithms. That forces the summarization of lower 
level attributes´ distributions in one or few indicators/features on 
the decision level. 
Fig. 1 presents the scenario for a domain such as education, 
with schools being assessed by their own and their students´ and 
their teachers´ features in a hierarchical structure. "How to 
assign the students´ father education level attribute as a school 
attribute based on the distribution of its students?" is an example 
of question that illustrates the point. 
 
Fig. 1. Schema database representation of schools 
A further constraint to the granularity concept adopted here 
is that all lower level grains do not contain objects that form a 
series or have any type of order relation. That is different from 
the sequences of events along the temporal dimension 
considered in RFM analysis (Recency, Frequency and Monetary 
value analysis) applied in behavior scoring for credit risk 
analysis [2]. 

 In such context, this paper proposes a granularity 
transformation that uses regression techniques to optimize the 
information content of single categorical attributes. The 
transformation maximizes the information gain towards the 
target variable in binary decision problems, preserving the 
conceptual value of the attribute in the original lower grain. It 
represents an improvement of a previous approach, which does 
a similar transformation based on human expert´s knowledge if 
that is available [3]. The proposal is tested on the school quality 
assessment problem based on their teachers and students’ data. 
This paper is organized in 5 more sections. Section II 
presents an overview the topic on related fields and discusses 
how they deal with the granularity change problem. Section III 
presents the proposed optimization approach. Section IV 
describes the experimental project to validate the proposed 
approach detailing each step from database selection to the 
performance assessment metrics. Section V presents the results 
and discusses its impacts. Section VI concludes the paper 
summarizing the main contributions of the proposed approach, 
analyzing its limitations and suggesting potential ways for 
expanding it to other types of attributes and supervised 
problems. 
II. 
RELATED FIELDS OF RESEARCH 
Granularity change has been an important topic in several 
research areas such as Relational Data Mining (RDM) [1], 
Granular Computing (GrC) [4] and Function Concept Analysis 
(FCA) [5] with different approaches, but partial overlap on their 
objectives towards how to preserve the relevant concepts in the 
transformation. These areas all deal with high complexity data 
mining problems in the borderline between databases and 
artificial intelligence. 
A key aspect in many high complexity data mining problems 
is the proper understanding and transformation of the 
relationships among the entities defined by the tables of 
relational databases. Several areas have proposed different 
approaches for dealing with the matter from different 
perspectives and levels of formal background. 
The database structure associated with the decision-making 
process workflow defined by the project goals determine the so 
called grains of information of the problem to be solved. In 
statistics, the lowest hierarchical level of the database structure 
(finest granularity) stores the so-called microdata statistics [7]. 
A. Relational Data Mining (RDM) 
Relational Data Mining (RDM) [1] refers to hierarchies, 
entities, granularities in relational databases for knowledge 
extraction. For the present context, in most cases, the approaches 
are focused on aggregation for clustering or discovery of 
association rules applications [1] which are based on the non-
supervised learning paradigm. Guo and Viktor [6] have 
proposed an improvement for constructing artificial neural 
networks classifiers starting with an aggregation stage as well. 
In general, the RDM approach aims at forming higher level 
hierarchical concepts by collecting lower level attributes related 
to 
them 
[1,6]. 
These 
approaches 
propose 
automatic 
transformations directly from a database without taking into 
account application other domain characteristics, different from 
the transformations to capture temporal relations in credit risk 
analysis [2]. 
Aggregation can be seen as an operation that summarizes a 
set of values related to variables; a distribution. In the case of 
numerical variables, descriptive statistics can be used, such as 
the minimum value, the mean, the median, the maximum value 
are the first recommendation. For categorical variables, the 
typical option is the distribution mode (the most frequent value) 
[7]. 
The typical way to represent a distribution by a single or few 
concepts in the decision grain is done by the taking the lowest 
order momenta of the probability distributions. That idea is 
present in the moment invariant approaches used for feature 
extraction in image processing [8], for example. With the 
exception of anomaly detection such as fraud detection [9], 
cancer diagnosis [10] or pulmonary embolism diagnosis [11] 
which uses the distributions´ extreme values, most applications 
use the central tendency of the distribution as decision level 
feature. 
B. Granular Computing (GrC) 
Granular Computing (GrC) [4] is another area of research 
which also deals with the change of granularity in relational 
databases. It forms higher level hierarchical concepts by 
collecting lower level attributes focusing either on clustering or 
discovery of association rules applications [4] thus based on 
non-supervised learning. However granular computing applies 
mainly rough set theory and fuzzy logic as tools for achieving 
its goals. It must be emphasized that it differs from the approach 
proposed here in two main aspects: no supervised optimization 
and no embedding of concept from a single lower level attribute. 
In general terms, granular computing can be considered as a 
field of multidisciplinary study, dealing with theories, 
methodologies, techniques and tools that make use of granules 
in the process of problem solving [12].  
C. Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) 
Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) [5] is an approach of very 
high level of abstraction that, if properly instantiated to very 
specific conditions, could lead to structures similar to RDM and 
GrC. It is a branch of applied mathematics and provides a 
framework called lattice of concepts (based on partial ordering) 
that presents the relations between objects and values of 
attributes in diagrammatic format. These structures can be used 
in data mining tasks [13,14] and make explicit the search space 
in classification methods. However, the benefits of using 
conceptual 
cross-linking 
are 
accompanied 
by 
costly 
construction and manipulation [15] in a grid that grows 
exponentially in relation to the formal context that is composed 
of objects, attributes, attribute values, and incidence 
relationships. Furthermore, it is a very broad approach and does 
not give clear paths on how to optimize the concepts in a 
univariate supervised learning process. 
D. Weighted Granularity Transform (WGT) 
Recently, a new approach has been proposed for granularity 
change inspired by and tested on education problems. It is an 
approach based on human expert´s knowledge to make the 
granularity transformation [3] that this paper will refer to as the 
Weighted Granularity Transform (WGT).  The human expert 

sets weights for each category of the attribute to express its 
propensity towards the binary target in a way to produce a 
monotonic propensity mapping. 
For example, for the faculty education distribution of the 
school, the weights were arbitrarily set as w(PhD)=4, 
w(MSc)=3, w(MBA)=2 and w(BSc)=1, just preserving an order 
relation according to the expert’s domain knowledge. The 
attribute transformation was the weighted sum of the relative 
frequencies of the lower level categories in a single continuous 
scalar indicator. 
That produced a statistically significant improvement in 
performance compared to the typical distribution mode 
transformation. 
Despite that improvement, that approach presents some 
drawbacks this paper attempts to solve: 
1. It can only be applied when there is semantics on the 
attribute´s categories, 
2. It depends on human expert´s capacity to capture that 
semantics as knowledge 
3. This knowledge has to be expressed at least as an order 
relation among the attribute´s categories, usually by 
setting arbitrary linear weights, and 
4. This human knowledge is not always confirmed on the 
data. 
III. 
PROPOSED ALGORITHM – REGRESSION GRANULARITY 
TRANSFORM (RGT) 
As stated in the Introduction, this paper focuses on 
transforming relational databases, that represent systems 
composed of subsystems in various hierarchical levels and the 
example of school quality assessment will be used to illustrate 
the ideas put forward here. The concept of "data granularity" (or 
"information granularity") is embodied in so-called "grain" that 
represent the relationship-entity levels for the desired data 
mining solution. 
In this work, the main aspects of understanding the 
granularity relations in a data mining project are: 
1. Allow the modeler to identify subsystems and their 
individual and collective features to enable the 
generation of subsets of data with statistical 
independence, 
2. Allow the modeler together with the domain human 
expert identify transformations of high added value for 
information granularity change and 
3. Allow the modeler to embed statistical knowledge from 
the data on the transformations for granularity change. 
All these aspects are taken into account in a Domain-Driven 
Data Mining (D3M) approach [16] for problem solving. 
Different from the approaches presented in Related Fields of 
Research, the proposed approach is focused on binary decision 
problems and attempts to optimize the attribute information 
content towards the target class. 
 
Fig. 2. Proposed approach for granularity transformation. 
The optimization is achieved by regression on the 
categorical attribute distribution having its histogram with the 
categories relative frequencies as input and the decision level 
target as output, as depicted in Fig. 2. 
The histogram is built on an independent data sample 
extracted from the modelling dataset used for this sole purpose 
and discarded afterwards to prevent optimistic bias because of 
the use of a posteriori information. 
Any type of regression can do the job but logistic regression 
[17] is recommended for its non-linear mapping capacity, ease 
of interpretation and for its low data consumption compared to 
other good techniques such as neural networks. 
The algorithm can be summarized as follows: 
1. Select the categorical attributes with more than 2 
categories; 
2. Extract a data sample stratified by the target class on the 
decision grain from the modelling data set; 
3. Build the attribute histogram for each example on the 
decision grain; 
4. Run the regression algorithm for parameter estimation 
(learning); 
5. Discard this data sample; 
6. Apply the transformation learned through regression to 
the remaining modelling data sample. 
The granularity transformation produces a continuous 
indicator of the categorical attribute optimized to the target 
variable on the decision grain still preserving the concept of the 
original lower grain attribute. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROJECT 
The experiments were carried out on the binary problem of 
assessing the quality of Brazilian private secondary schools 
[3,18], using logistic regression as classifier and using the Area 
Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and 
the Maximum Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) distance as 
performance metrics. The goal was to compare if the proposed 
algorithm would improve the overall classification performance 
against the previous weighted score algorithm and the usual 
School
Grain
Student
Grain
)
,
,
,
(
1
d
c
b
a
x
Var
Teacher
Grain
)
(
1
a
a f
x
Var
)
(
1
b
b f
x
Var
)
(
1
c
c f
x
Var
)
(
1
d
d f
x
Var
e
b +
=
'
X
y

mode for granularity transformation of the lower level 
categorical attributes. To verify significant differences, two 
tailed paired t-test was applied in a stratified 10-fold cross 
validation procedure at 0.01 significance level [19]. 
The database consisted of 4,400 schools with microdata 
from the National Secondary School Exam 2012 (ENEM 2012) 
and the School Census 2012 [18] with the target class defined as 
the schools having their students´ average score on the top 
quartile, as described in Adeodato´s paper [3]. 
Only the categorical attributes in the lower level grain were 
considered in the school model. The modelling process was 
further constrained to the attributes where human expertise 
could clearly contribute to define the weights. So the only 
attributes used in the experiments were the Father Education 
Level and Mother Education Level for the students’ database 
and Teacher Education Level for the teachers’ database. 
Logistic regressions [17] was the regression technique used 
both in the categorical attribute transformation and in the global 
binary classifier for its properties previously mentioned such as 
non-linear mapping capacity, ease of interpretation, ease of use, 
low data consumption and continuous output and also for its 
implementations freely available. 
Considering the comparison assesses the difference in the 
discriminant power of the ranking score from all the algorithms, 
their performances are measured on each data fold by an area 
metric and a single point metric. The Area Under the Curve of 
the Receiver Operating Characteristics (AUC_ROC) [20] was 
calculated by just adding 0.5 to the Area Under the Curve of the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov distribution [21]. The point metric was 
the Maximum Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance between the 
cumulative 
distribution 
functions 
of 
the 
target 
and 
complementary classes (Max_KS2) [22]. Both metrics used are 
invariant to score range and scale. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION 
The results on Table I show that for both performance 
metrics the proposed approach (RGT) and the human expert 
weighted approach (WGT) are systematically better than the 
mode approach in all folds. However, RGT and WGT have 
similar performance in all folds. 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE BINARY CLASSIFIER FOR ALL 
APPROACHES MEASURED BY THE AUC_ROC AND MAX_KS2 ON EACH FOLD. 
TABLE II.  
CLASSIFIER PERFORMANCE DIFFERENCES PAIRED T-TESTS 
BETWEEN ALL 3 APPROACHES FOR AUC_ROC AND MAX_KS2 METRICS AT 
0.01 SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL. 
 
The hypothesis tests (Table II, in boldface figures) show that 
both approaches that combine the influence of all categories in 
the attribute (histogram) are significantly different from the 
mode for granularity change in the binary classification problem 
presented. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has presented a systematic approach for 
producing granularity transformations of categorical attributes 
in binary decision problems. The concepts in the lower levels 
are summarized in a single continuous indicator learned from 
the attributes´ distribution histograms via regression on an 
independent sample, as a feature. It preserves the concept of the 
attribute in the original lower grain adding collective meaning to 
it, independent of any human knowledge about the application 
domain. 
Thorough experimental procedure proved that the proposed 
granularity transformation produced statistically significant 
improvement in performance in the quality assessment of 
Brazilian secondary schools compared to the typical and simple 
distribution mode approach. It also showed that in the few cases 
where human knowledge is available, the proposed approach is 
equivalent to the existing WGT approach with human defined 
weights. Therefore, in the general case of having no assumption 
of human knowledge availability, the proposed approach 
presents a superior performance in binary decision problems. 
Further experiments will be carried out on an even more 
realistic fashion by learning the distributions weights and 
developing the model from data from the previous education 
year and assessing the performance on the following year. There 
are several binary problems yet to be addressed in education at 
several stages of the process. There are also other domains with 
characteristics that suit the application of the proposed approach 
such as breast cancer diagnosis.
