Teach Me What You Want to Play: Learning
Variants of Connect Four through Human-Robot
Interaction
Ali Ayub and Alan R. Wagner
The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, 16802, USA

Abstract. This paper investigates the use of game theoretic represen-
tations to represent and learn how to play interactive games such as
Connect Four. We combine aspects of learning by demonstration, active
learning, and game theory allowing a robot to leverage its developing
representation of the game to conduct question/answer sessions with a
person, thus ﬁlling in gaps in its knowledge. The paper demonstrates a
method for teaching a robot the win conditions of the game Connect
Four and its variants using a single demonstration and a few trial ex-
amples with a question and answer session led by the robot. Our results
show that the robot can learn arbitrary win conditions for the game
with little prior knowledge of the win conditions and then play the game
with a human utilizing the learned win conditions. Our experiments also
show that some questions are more important for learning the game’s
win conditions. We believe that this method could be broadly applied to
a variety of interactive learning scenarios.1
1
Introduction
The objective of our larger research program is to develop the computational
underpinnings and algorithms that will allow a robot to learn how to play an
interactive game such as Uno, Monopoly, or Connect Four by interacting with
a child. We are motivated by potential applications in hospitals and long-term
care facilities for children. Moreover, playing interactive games such as these has
been shown to contribute to social development [8]. Our intent is to create the
underlying theory and algorithms that will allow a child to teach a robot to play
the games that the child wishes to play. These games may contain nuanced and
individualized rules that change and vary each time the game is played or with
each child, yet maintain the same underlying basic structure.
We borrow computational representations from game theory to address this
problem. Game theory has been used to formally represent and reason about a
number of interactive games such as Snakes and Ladders, Tic-Tac-Toe, and ver-
sions of Chess [7]. Game theory oﬀers a collection of mathematical tools and rep-
resentations that typically examine questions of strategy during an interaction
1 The
ﬁnal
authenticated
publication
is
available
online
at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62056-1 42
arXiv:2001.01004v4  [cs.RO]  13 Jan 2021

2
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
or series of interactions. The term game is used to describe the computational
representation of an interaction or series of interactions. Game theory provides
a variety of diﬀerent representations, but the two most common representations
are the normal-form game and the extended-form game (described in greater
detail below). We use the term ”interactive game” to indicate a series of inter-
actions that happen through a board, cards, or play style which has predeﬁned
rules, actions, winners and losers. Given this terminology, game theory provides
computational representations (games) that can be used to represent interactive
games.
Using representations from game theory has advantages and disadvantages.
On the positive side, game theoretic representations have been designed to cap-
ture the information needed to formally represent an interaction. Moreover, rep-
resenting interactions as game-theoretic games allows one to apply the tools and
results from game theory as needed [11]. For example, calculating Nash equilib-
rium to inﬂuence one’s play. On the other hand, game-theoretic representations
are not easily learned solely from data [9].
This paper focuses on developing the computational underpinnings necessary
for a robot to play the game Connect Four and its variants. In our prior work
[2], we made some initial progress towards this goal by showing a robot that can
learn the four win conditions of Connect Four. This paper focuses on developing
formal underpinnings necessary for the robot to not only learn the four win
conditions of Connect Four but also its variants. We further analyze our approach
in this paper and quantitatively evaluate the importance of diﬀerent question
types for learning the variants of Connect Four. We believe that the methods
developed in this paper will also work for other games and hope to show the
general applicability of these techniques in future work.
We seek to develop a system that learns how to play the game by asking
people questions about the game. We assume that the robot knows what the
game pieces are and how to use them. The focus of this paper is thus on the
robot learning the win conditions for the game (i.e. how to win). Our approach
leverages the robot’s developing representation of the game to guide active learn-
ing. Speciﬁcally, an evolving game tree indicates to the robot the questions that
it must ask in order to gain enough knowledge about the structure of the game
to be able play it. Often when one person teaches another person how to play a
game they begin by explaining how one wins. Our goal is to develop the com-
putational underpinnings that will allow the robot to learn the win conditions
well enough to begin playing, even if the full structure of the game has not been
learned2. The main contributions of this paper are:
1. A novel approach that utilizes the evolving game-tree representation to ask
questions from a user to learn the game’s win conditions.
2. An approach that can be used to learn diﬀerent win conditions patterns on
the Connect Four board in addition to the four win conditions of Connect
Four (column, row, diagonal, anti-diagonal).
2 A preliminary version of this paper was accepted at [5].

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
3
3. An experimental analysis that quantiﬁes the importance of diﬀerent ques-
tions for learning various win conditions on the Connect Four board.
2
Related Work
The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has a long history of developing systems that can
play and learn games [12]. Recently, signiﬁcant progress has been made develop-
ing systems capable of mastering games such as Chess, Poker and Go using deep
reinforcement learning techniques [14]. While deep reinforcement learning clearly
provides a method for learning how to strategically play a game, this approach
requires large amounts of training data and is fundamentally non-interactive
[15]. Interpersonal game learning, on the other hand, is an interactive process
involving limited data and examples, and play must begin before the structure
of the game is fully known in order to maintain the other person’s attention and
interest. Moreover, with children in particular, rules change dynamically in order
to make play more favorable and exciting for the child. Data-driven retraining
may not be possible or desirable in this situation.
Deep learning-based meta-learning has been proposed as a means for man-
aging the problem of large training time and massive data sets [15]. Although
these approaches can learn how to do a task by just watching a single or few
demonstrations, the new task has to be very similar to the task that the robot
was originally trained on i.e. a robot trained on picking objects will not be able
to learn how to place an object. Moreover, the initial meta-learning phase to
train the robot on the same task still requires a large amount of data and time.
Hence, the problem of using guided interaction with a human to teach the robot
a new concept remains unsolved. Although, researchers have investigated using
meta-learning on goal-oriented tasks such as visual navigation in novel scenes
[13], to the best of our knowledge, no meta-learning approach exists for learning
interactive games by watching just a single demonstration.
Active learning describes the general approach of allowing a machine learner
to actively seek information from a human about a particular piece of data in
order to improve performance with less training [10,3,6,4]. Typically active learn-
ing is framed around a supervised learning task involving labeled and unlabeled
data. There are a number of diﬀerent active learning strategies, the membership
query strategy being most related to our work [1]. For this active learning strat-
egy the learner generates queries for a human focused on speciﬁc instances of
data. One contribution of this paper (further discussed below) is that we leverage
the robot’s developing game-theoretic representation to assist with the genera-
tion of queries directed at the human. In other words, we use the game theory
representation to inform the generation of our queries and to contextualize the
resulting answers.

4
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
Fig. 1. A demonstration of column win condition in column 5 for Connect Four seen
from the robot’s perspective is shown on the left. The corresponding extensive-form
representation is shown on the right. The numbers along with the arrows show the
action numbers chosen by the players (5 by the human and ? by the robot since robot’s
actions are not shown by the human in the demonstration). Best viewed in color.
3
Using Game Theory to Represent Interactive Games
An interactive game in which players take alternative turns (like Connect Four)
can be represented using extensive-form game format [2]. In Connect Four, play-
ers are required to place round game chips into a 7x6 vertical board. This a
perfect information game because at each stage both players have complete in-
formation about the state of the game, actions taken by the other player and
the actions available to the other player in the next stage. At each turn, both
players choose a column to place their respective colored chips, hence in each
turn a player has a maximum of seven actions available.
In order to enable play on a robot, images of a Connect Four game (Fig. 1
left) can be directly translated into a matrix format (Fig. 1 middle) indicating
which player has pieces occupying speciﬁc positions in the matrix. The matrix
format simply encodes the piece positions of the players in the Connect Four
board. This matrix can be used to generate an extensive-form game tree (Fig.
1 right). The extensive-form representation can also be translated back into the
matrix format and used to generate images of what a game should look like if
for an extensive-form representation. The generation of these hypothetical game
images aﬀord a method for the robot to communicate with person about possible
win conditions (or, more generally, states of the game).

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
5
4
Learning Win Conditions
A win condition is a terminal game state in which all players either win, lose
or draw. We focus on learning these conditions because doing so is necessary
for being able to play the game with purpose. For Connect Four, the rules state
that selecting actions that create a pattern of four of the same colored chips
in either a row, column, diagonal or anti-diagonal pattern for either player is a
win. Players can also draw by ﬁlling up the game board without winning. A win
condition is represented as a terminal node (a leaf) in the game tree, where one
of the players wins the game. All games have some ﬁnite set of terminal nodes.
The ways to win, lose or draw a game create partitions in the set of terminal
nodes based on the game’s rules. The purpose of our approach is to learn these
general rules through game-theoretic representation of the Connect Four game.
4.1
Pre-win Condition Learning Tasks
Prior to learning a game’s win conditions, the robot ﬁrst needs to capture some
basic information about the game structure. In our approach, the robot ﬁrst
asks two questions that allow it to generate a skeleton game structure. The two
questions are: ”How many players can play this game?” and ”Is this a type of
game in which players take alternative turns?” The answers to these questions
allow the robot to create a generic game tree that simply iterates among the
diﬀerent players. We believe that these questions will be necessary to learn any
game. For Connect Four answers to the two questions are ”two” and ”yes”,
respectively.
The robot also needs to know about the components of the game such as
the look of the game board, the game chips and their associated colors, and
how to physically perform the actions related to the game. We currently as-
sume that this information is pre-programmed and can be loaded once the robot
knows the name of the game. We modiﬁed the code available at: https://sdk.
rethinkrobotics.com/wiki/Connect_Four_Demo for Connect Four which in-
cludes the tools for creating the requisite robot behaviors and identifying the
game pieces. This pre-programmed information includes:
• How to physically perform all of the possible actions

a0, a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6
	
• How to convert a game image into the matrix format of the game state
(Figure 1).
4.2
From Game Tree to Active Learning
From the initial information described above, the robot has as generic game tree
structure of the game. The only thing missing from the structure are the win
conditions. To learn the win conditions of Connect Four and its variants, we use
ideas from learning from demonstration and active learning. As a ﬁrst step the
robot asks for a demonstration of a win condition from the human teacher by
stating, ”Can you please show me a way to win?” It then waits for the person to

6
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
Function Name
Meaning
Translate(Tree,p,l)
Change all actions of player p in the Tree by an
oﬀset l such that the new actions are between
(0-6).
AddAction(x,p)
Add an action x for player p
RemoveAction(x,p)
Remove an action x for player p
Table 1. List of functions available to the robot to manipulate the game-theoretic
representation of a demonstrated win condition
state, ”I am done.” The robot converts the image of the board into an extended-
form game. For example, Figure 1 depicts the extensive-form representation of
a column win in column 5. Note that this demonstration is not the actual game
state as it does not depict the red player’s moves. However, the robot knows that
play iterates between the two players, from the extensive-form representation of
Connect Four, so it marks the moves of the red player as unknown.
The initial game tree that exists after the demonstration (Figure 1 right)
is clearly missing information. Moreover, the initial tree assumes that player 1
(P1) makes the ﬁrst move. The demonstration also only depicts a single column
win, yet a column win can be achieved in any other column. The demonstration
by the human provides only a single game tree branch that leads to a terminal
node where P1 wins. Yet there are a large number of other game tree branches
that can also lead to terminal nodes. Asking the person to demonstrate each
game tree branch that is a win condition is not feasible. The robot thus relies on
the extensive-form representation of the game to deduce the information missing
from the given demonstration. It then focuses its questions to the human on this
missing information, ultimately learning all of the tree branches that could lead
to a win condition (terminal node) based on the demonstration.
From any given demonstration of a win condition (for example Figure 1), the
following information elements are available:
• Given Information: Winning player’s actions. In Figure 1, these actions
are {5,5,5,5}
• Missing Information: The other player’s actions and any actions that do
not eﬀect the win condition. In Figure 1, these actions are missing.
• Assumptions: The robot assumes that P1 takes the ﬁrst action in the game.
Based on the information elements available from the game tree, the robot
needs to learn the missing information from the demonstration, conﬁrm the
assumptions and learn general rules underlying the given information. These
information elements are related to the type of actions that a winning player
(P1) and the losing player (P2) can take such that the tree branch leads to a
win for P1. Table 2 shows the diﬀerent questions that the robot needs to ask
about both players’ actions to learn about the additional information elements
about the demonstrated win condition. The questions are pre-programmed in
the robot’s base knowledge, however when and which questions to ask is guided
by the state of the game-tree. Instead of asking the questions verbally (which

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
7
Question
Type
Example Questions
P1 actions
Conﬁrm the total number of actions needed by P1 to win the
game; Conﬁrm if the actions for P1 can be translated into the
game tree. (Deﬁnition of Translate in Table 1)
P2 actions
What actions can be taken by P2 such that P1 still achieves the
win conditions shown in the demonstration?
Either player’s
actions
What other possible actions can be taken by either player on the
game board such that P1 achieves the win condition shown in the
demonstration?
Table 2. The robot asks questions about the winning player’s (P1) actions, the losing
player’s (P2) actions and any other actions taken by the players to learn all the possible
win branches that lead to the demonstrated win condition. All these questions are
guided by the information elements available from the win condition demonstration
and the limited preprogrammed knowledge about the game structure.
require a complete dialogue manager), here we present a way for the robot to
leverage its ability to convert back and forth between the game state and the
game tree. In separate work, we present a dialogue manager than allows the
robot to communicate with a human using verbal and visual questions to learn
the win conditions [16,17].
To ask about a speciﬁc information element, the robot manipulates the game
tree representation of the demonstrated win condition to generate an example
situation related to the information that the robot needs to conﬁrm. The robot
then converts the manipulated game tree into the game state image and shows
it to the human accompanied by a simple yes/no question to conﬁrm whether
the example game situation is a win. The simplicity of the question ensures
that most people, even older children are capable of providing the robot with an
answer. Table 1 shows a list of functions available to the robot to manipulate
the game tree. These functions are also pre-programmed into the robot’s base
knowledge.
Since the robot only asks yes/no questions, it can take multiple example
situations for the robot to conﬁrm a single information element. For example,
related to the demonstration shown in Figure 1, to conﬁrm the types of actions
P2 can take such that P1 still wins, the robot starts with a general question e.g.
can P2 take any actions in the game tree? The answer to that is of course No
because if P2 takes action 5 (choose column 5) in its ﬁrst turn P1 will not achieve
a column win in column 5. Hence, the robot asks further clarifying questions to
conﬁrm that P2 can take all the actions except the ones that are the same as
P1’s actions (i.e. action 5) for P1 to achieve a column win. This leads to a
hierarchical set of questions asked by the robot, starting with a general to more
speciﬁc questions. With each more speciﬁc question, the robot keeps updating
the game-tree representation which guides the next question to be asked. These
questions are asked in a visual manner as described above.

8
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
Fig. 2. (a) The hypothesized game tree generated after changing one action of player
1 in the game tree of Fig. 1 (left). (b) The hypothesized game tree generated after
changing all the actions of player 1 to column 6 in the game tree of Fig. 1 (left). For
both (a) and (b) the matrix format is from the robot’s perspective but the game state
image is for the human’s perspective. The associated game state image is shown on the
right. (Best viewed in color)
The overall ﬂow of our approach for learning the game’s win conditions is as
follows: The robot starts with a demonstration and continues to ask questions
from the human until it conﬁrms all the information elements (Table 2) needed
to learn the demonstrated win condition. This process can also be terminated
early if the robot reaches a pre-deﬁned number of questions limit (we set it at
15 questions per win condition for the experiments in this paper).
Example Questions: To show how the robot asks questions from a human, we
show an example session related to one of the questions speciﬁc to P1’s actions
(Conﬁrm if actions for P1 can be translated in the game tree (Table 2)). For
this example, we consider the column win demonstration shown in Figure 1. To
learn this information from the human, the robot ﬁrst conﬁrms if the numerical
relationship among all the P1 actions matter i.e. all the P1 actions have to
be 5. Since translate operation (in Table 1) is used to change all the actions
by a particular oﬀset, a question about translation of all the actions will not be
needed if any action can be taken by a player for a win. To conﬁrm this, the robot
creates the hypothetical game tree by calling functions RemoveAction(5,1) and
AddAction(3,1) in a sequence to change one of the P1’s actions and then converts
the manipulated game-theoretic structure to the game-state image (Figure 2 (a)).
For the given demonstration, the answer to the accompanied question will be
No. Hence, the robot conﬁrms that all the actions of P1 have to be 5. This leads
to an update in the game-tree representation as well. Next, using the game-
theoretic structure of Connect Four the robot infers that the the siblings of
action 5 (columns 0-6 except 5) can also lead to a similar win i.e. P1’s actions
can be translated in the tree by an oﬀset. To conﬁrm this inference, the robot
calls the function RemoveAction(5,1) four times to remove all the actions for P1
and then calls the function AddAction(6,1) four times to add four actions for P1

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
9
in column 6. The manipulated game-theoretic structure is then converted to the
game-state image (Figure 2(b)). The answer to the accompanied question with
this example will be Yes for the given demonstration. Hence, the robot conﬁrms
an information element about P1’s actions in two example situations. Similarly,
the robot conﬁrms the other question types from Table 2.
It should be noted that for board games like Connect Four, the game state
can sometimes provide a better representation of a win condition than the
game-theoretic structure but the game-state representation is dependent upon
a particular game, whereas the game-theoretic structure is completely general.
Furthermore, it is easier to reason from the game-theoretic structure than the
game-state. Because of this inherent generality of the game-theoretic format to
represent any interactive game, our learning algorithm only relies on this repre-
sentation of interactive games for asking questions and learning about the win
conditions. We have shown in related work that the same approach can be used
to learn other more complex board games such as Gobblet and Quarto [16].
5
Experiments
To evaluate this system, we used the Baxter robot manufactured by Rethink
robotics. Google’s text-to-speech API was used to communicate questions in
natural language to the person. The person answered the questions by typing
inputs into a computer to avoid errors generated by the speech-to-text conversion
process. The experimenter served as the robot’s interactive partner for all of the
experiments, unless stated otherwise.
5.1
Learning the Four Win Conditions of Connect Four
We hypothesized that the process described in the previous sections would allow
the robot to learn the four Connect Four win conditions (four games pieces
in a row, column, or diagonal). We tested the process by providing the robot
with a single correct demonstration of one type of win condition (e.g. a column
win) and a human then correctly answered the robot’s questions about the self-
generated game situations (“Is this a win for yellow?”). We repeated this process
for the other types of win conditions (row, diagonal and anti-diagonal). Next,
the robot’s ability to use the win conditions to play the game was tested in a real
game against a human opponent. We veriﬁed that the robot could correctly use
the win conditions it had learned by playing 10 games against the experimenter.
The robot used a depth-2 minimax strategy to play all 10 games. Out of the 10
games, the robot won 7 times, lost 1 and drew 2 times. We believe the reason it
lost a game was because it used a depth-2 minimax strategy which only provides
the best move for the next stage of the game, not the overall optimal move. Out
of the 7 wins, the robot won twice using a diagonal win, 3 times using anti-
diagonal and twice using column win. The robot was defeated by a diagonal win
in the one game it lost. For all these games, the robot correctly applied the win
conditions and demonstrated its ability to correctly identify if it or the person

10
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
Fig. 3. Fifty diﬀerent patterns that were learned by the robot as win conditions on
the Connect Four board. Only the yellow chips in the patterns are parts of the win
conditions, the red chips are simply to create an oﬀset just like in case of diagonal and
anti-diagonal win conditions. Best viewed in color.
had won the game. These experiments verify that the robot could learn the win
conditions from a single demonstration and by using questions and answers to
present the person with diﬀerent game situations, ultimately arriving at a set of
extensive-form games constituting a win.
5.2
Learning Variants of Connect Four
To verify that our method is not simply limited to the four win conditions pre-
scribed by the Connect Four game (patterns of four in a row, column, diagonal
or anti-diagonal) the robot’s ability to learn diﬀerent patterns representing dif-
ferent ways to win was tested. We hypothesized that our system could learn an
arbitrary pattern as a win condition and use this pattern to play a modiﬁed
version of the game. To test this hypothesis, ﬁfty diﬀerent randomly gener-
ated patterns were demonstrated to the robot as win conditions on the Connect
Four game board (Figure 3). The experimenter then answered the correspond-
ing questions for each of the demonstrated win conditions. Once these questions
were answered, the robot’s ability to use the learned win conditions to play 10
games (for each rule, a total of 500 games) was tested. In these games, both the
robot and the experimenter took random actions and all the games ended in an
average of 20 turns. Since the experimenter and the robot both took random
actions, instead of checking the robot’s ability to play and win using the learned
win conditions we simply checked the robot’s ability to successfully recognize
the learned win condition when it was reached by either the experimenter or the
robot. In game-theoretic terms the robot recognizes that a terminal node has
been reached. If the robot recognizes a terminal node and ends the game, this
implies that the robot has learned the corresponding win condition. Among the
500 games, there were some games (55 games) when the learned win condition
was never achieved by the experimenter or the robot and the game ended in a

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
11
Question Type
Row
Column Diagonal
Anti-
diagonal
Min. number of actions for a
win
0%
0%
0%
0%
Translation of P1 actions
0%
0%
0%
0%
Eﬀect of P2 actions
13.34%
16.67%
10%
10%
Either Player’s Actions
26.67%
90%
20%
16.67%
Table 3. Detection accuracy (%) of the robot after removing diﬀerent question types
(from Table 2) for the four win conditions of Connect Four
draw. In all 500 games that did not end in a draw, the robot was able to recog-
nize the learned win condition which shows that the robot successfully learned
each diﬀerent win condition on the Connect Four board. We have already shown
in the previous experiment if the robot learns a win condition successfully, it
can use the minimax strategy to play against a human user. Future user studies
will evaluate how well the robot can use the win conditions it has learned to
play. This experiment veriﬁed the generic ability of our approach to learn vari-
ous home-made win conditions for a game as long as the structure of the game
(board, game pieces, actions available to players in a turn etc.) is known.
5.3
Importance of Diﬀerent Question Types
For the three question types in Table 1, the robot asks a maximum of 11 questions
to learn any win condition pattern on the Connect Four board. Among these 11
questions, a maximum of 4 questions are asked speciﬁcally about P2’s actions, a
maximum of 4 questions are asked about P1’s actions (2 for conﬁrming minimum
number of actions required for a win and 2 for conﬁrming the translation of P1
actions in the tree) and a maximum of 3 questions are asked about other actions
taken by either player in the game. We conducted a ﬁnal experiment to evaluate
the importance of each question type for learning the four win conditions of
Connect Four.
Hypothesis: All three question types are required to learn all the win con-
ditions of Connect Four.
Experimental Setup: The robot learned the four win conditions of Con-
nect Four with one of the question types removed during each interaction. The
question type was removed to test the eﬀect of that question type on learning
the win conditions. For the questions speciﬁc to P1’s actions, we further divided
them into two groups: to conﬁrm minimum number of actions required for a win
and translation of P1’s actions. Hence, the robot was taught each win condition
in four diﬀerent interactions and in each interaction one of the question types
was not conﬁrmed by the robot (a total of 4*4=16 interactions). After learning
each win condition in an interaction, the robot played a total of 30 games with
a simulated opponent (total 4×4×30 = 480 games). Both the robot and the
opponent took random actions in their turns.

12
Ayub, A. and Wagner, A. R.
Evaluation: Since both players took random actions, for each of the games
the robot’s ability to detect the correct win condition was tested. Table 3 shows
the robot’s ability to detect each win condition after removing diﬀerent question
types from the interaction. It is clear that the most important questions are
related to P1’s actions for all the win conditions. The eﬀect of P2’s actions on
the win condition learning is also quite drastic. For other actions taken by either
player, the column win is least aﬀected (probably because of its simplicity) but
all the other win conditions are aﬀected by a signiﬁcant margin. These results
conﬁrm our hypothesis i.e. all question types are necessary for the robot to learn
all the win conditions on the Connect Four board but questions speciﬁc to P1’s
actions are the most important.
6
Conclusion
This paper we has demonstrated a method for using game-theoretic represen-
tations as a means to structure active learning and incorporate demonstrations
in order to learn the win conditions of interactive games. We have presented a
preliminary method for using a game tree to generate images of hypothetical
game situations that are then presented to a person in order to learn about the
game. Our experiments show that a single demonstration accompanied with a
few directed questions and answers can be used to learn arbitrary win conditions
for the game Connect Four.
We believe, and related work [16] indicates that, the proposed approach can
also be used to learn other, more complex games and, perhaps, as a general
means for representing interactions between a human and a robot. Ultimately,
we believe that this avenue of research may oﬀer a means for a robot to structure
its interactions with a person, allowing the robot to bootstrap an interactive
exchange by using similar experiences represented as an extended-form game as
a model for other upcoming interactions. This paper contributes an important
step towards that goal.
The problem of learning games by interactions with humans is far from solved
and the current approach has some limitations. We have assumed that the person
demonstrates a valid win condition and that they correctly answer the questions
posed by the robot. Further, we did not perform experiments with human partic-
ipants and only the experimenter interacted with the robots. Future work with
human participants will shed more light on the applicability of our approach in
real-world scenarios.
This paper suggests several interesting avenues for novel research. Perhaps
the most obvious is to extend this work to verbal dialog between a human and
the robot. It may be possible to use the game tree to ground open ended answers
by the human. This work could also be extended to more completely learn the
other aspects of playing a game such as how to perform game actions or use
the game components (board, tokens). Ultimately, we believe that the proposed
techniques take us a step closer to robots that can learn to interact across a wide
variety of situations.

Learning Variants of Connect Four through HRI
13
