Machine learning and AI-based approaches for bioactive ligand
discovery and GPCR-ligand recognition
Sebastian Raschkaa, Benjamin Kaufmanb
aUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Statistics
bUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
molecular representations
GPCR ligands
drug discovery
deep learning
machine learning
graph convolutional neural networks
A B S T R A C T
In the last decade, machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence applications have received a sig-
niﬁcant boost in performance and attention in both academic research and industry. The success
behind most of the recent state-of-the-art methods can be attributed to the latest developments in
deep learning. When applied to various scientiﬁc domains that are concerned with the process-
ing of non-tabular data, for example, image or text, deep learning has been shown to outperform
not only conventional machine learning but also highly specialized tools developed by domain
experts. This review aims to summarize AI-based research for GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
with a particular focus on the most recent achievements and research trends. To make this article
accessible to a broad audience of computational scientists, we provide instructive explanations
of the underlying methodology, including overviews of the most commonly used deep learning
architectures and feature representations of molecular data. We highlight the latest AI-based
research that has led to the successful discovery of GPCR bioactive ligands. However, an equal
focus of this review is on the discussion of machine learning-based technology that has been
applied to ligand discovery in general and has the potential to pave the way for successful GPCR
bioactive ligand discovery in the future. This review concludes with a brief outlook highlighting
the recent research trends in deep learning, such as active learning and semi-supervised learning,
which have great potential for advancing bioactive ligand discovery.
∗Corresponding author

http://pages.stat.wisc.edu/~sraschka/ (S. Raschka)
ORCID(s): 0000-0001-6989-4493 (S. Raschka)
1Medical Science Center, 1300 University Ave, Madison, 53706 WI
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 33
arXiv:2001.06545v3  [q-bio.BM]  6 Jun 2020

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Abbreviations
AI Artiﬁcial intelligence
CNN Convolutional neural network
DNN Deep neural network
ECFP Extended connectivity ﬁngerprint
GNN Graph neural network
GPCR G protein-coupled receptor
GPU Graphics processing unit
GRU Gated recurrent unit
MLP Multilayer perceptron
NN Neural network
QSAR Quantitative structure-activity relationship
RNN Recurrent neural network
SVM Support vector machine
VAE Variational autoencoder
VS Virtual screening
1. Introduction
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are one of the most prominent families of integral membrane proteins and
are among the most widely studied targets in drug discovery and development. According to [1], 34 percent of all
drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Agency target GPCRs. While the exact size of the GPCR family remains
to be determined, genome analyses suggest that the GPCR family is represented by approximately 800-1,000 genes
in humans [2, 3]. More than 150 GPCRs are characterized as orphan receptors, which means that the receptors’
endogenous ligands are still unknown [4]. However, it remains unclear whether endogenous ligands exist for all orphan
GPCRs [5].
Since GPCRs are involved in many diﬀerent cellular and biological processes, make excellent drug targets, and
remain orphaned to a relatively large extent, the prediction and consequent identiﬁcation of GPCR ligands is an active
area of research and interest [6]. Recent studies suggest that drugs target only approximately 10% of known GPCRs [7].
The high cost of clinical trials coupled with a relatively low success rate (approximated to be below 6.2% [8, 9]),
motivates the development and application of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence-based methods for ligand
discovery, to lower costs as well as to identify candidates that would otherwise be missed using conventional methods.
1.1. GPCRs and drug discovery
Many common human diseases involve GPCR signaling, including schizophrenia, glaucoma, depression, and hy-
pertension [2]. Despite the increasing popularity of biologics, which includes gene therapy, recombinant therapeutic
proteins, antibody-drug conjugates, and tissues [10], experts see the discovery of small-molecule ligands being crucial
for the future of molecular medicine and the treatment of human diseases [11, 12].
GPCR ligands exhibit a wide range of characteristics and are very diverse in their physiochemical properties,
shape, and size [7]. Furthermore, GPCR ligands include lipids, peptides, proteins, steroids, and other small organic
molecules. Depending on their mechanism of action, GPCR ligands can be described as full or partial agonists, an-
tagonists, or inverse agonists. This diversity among GPCR ligands poses challenges for standardized binding assays
used in experimental bioactivity screening. Thus, wet-lab techniques such as high throughput screening have risen
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Known active
Molecule database
Drug-like properties
Toxicity
Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion
Pan-assay interference
Prioritization
Scoring and filtering
based on by comparisons
to known active 
(similarity, functional groups, ...)
Selection based on docking 
scores or free energy of binding
prediction
Experimental assays
and
Filtering
Ligand-based 
Virtual Screening
Identify binding pocket
and dock molecule
Structure-based 
Virtual Screening
Figure 1: Conceptual overview of ligand-based and structure-based virtual screening depicting 3kPZS (known active), which
is a pheromone compound involved GPCR signaling, and a homology structure of its receptor, the SLOR1 GPCR [24].
in popularity. However, high throughput screening can still be cost-prohibitive and labor-intensive. Another down-
side of high throughput screening is the limitation of available ligand libraries in terms of size and diversity. With
drug discovery being an expensive and labor-intensive process, with estimated costs ranging between 0.5-2.6 billion
US dollars, and a timeline ranging between 10-20 years, researchers have begun to favor computational methods for
identifying candidate molecules for more elaborate bioactivity assays [13, 14].
When it comes to the identiﬁcation of protein targets of small-molecule ligands and assessing potential oﬀ-target ac-
tivity, chemical proteomics are considered the gold standard [12, 15–17]. However, similar to the challenges of binding
assays for small molecule screening, chemical proteomics experiments are laborious and challenging to streamline [18].
Hence, many researchers are increasingly favoring computational alternatives [12] or augmenting the experimental dis-
covery pipeline with artiﬁcial intelligence [19, 20].
1.2. Computer-aided ligand discovery
Modern computational databases feature hundreds of millions of molecules and are available free of charge [21–
23], which makes computer-aided ligand discovery a particularly compelling alternative to high throughput screening
and other experimental approaches during the early stages of ligand discovery. The two major approaches for computer-
aided ligand discovery, also known as virtual screening (VS), are ligand-based VS and structure-based VS Figure 1.
1.2.1. Ligand-based VS
Ligand-based VS approaches focus on the structure and physicochemical properties of ligands in the absence of
the receptor structure. Broadly, ligand-based VS can be described as a set of techniques for ligand-based similarity
search or property prediction. Ligand-based VS approaches for identifying bioactive molecules are often based on a
known bioactive molecule given the hypothesis that similar molecules are likely to bind the target receptor and exhibit
a certain level of bioactivity, which has to be determined experimentally. As traditional ligand-based VS depends
on pair-wise similarity measures between database molecules and the known active, researchers have to choose a
meaningful similarity or distance measure. The choice of an appropriate similarity measure, in turn, depends on the
molecular representation, which we discuss in more detail in Section 2.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
To provide an illustrative example of the use of ligand-based VS in GPCR bioactive ligand discovery, we consider
the recent discovery of a potent inhibitor of a GPCR-mediated pheromone signaling pathway in sea lamprey [24]. Based
on volumetric and physicochemical overlays between 3D conformers of database molecules and the cognate ligand,
researchers were able to identify a small molecule capable of blocking a GPCR-mediated signaling response. How-
ever, when the researchers assayed the activity of the 299 top-scoring molecules, they found no correlation between
molecular activity and the 3D overlay-based similarity scores. Additionally, the researchers found that changing only
a single chemical group (for instance, keto to hydroxyl), which may only have a small impact on the overall similarity
score, can completely suppress GPCR-mediated signaling in the pheromone pathway. This ﬁnding provides supportive
evidence that general similarity measures are useful but not suﬃcient means for active molecule discovery. However,
the virtual screening data combined with the activity measurements collected via experimental assay data oﬀer ex-
cellent opportunities to utilize machine learning for developing custom activity classiﬁers and conducting quantitative
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analyses. For instance, in a follow-up study, the researchers described how ma-
chine learning techniques were used to identify the chemical features that correlated with bioactivity [25]. To facilitate
this analysis, the researchers converted functional group matches between database compounds and the known active
into binary feature vectors. For example, if the keto-group of the known active was within 1.3 Å of a query molecule’s
keto-group (in the in the 3D overlay), it was counted as a functional group match (1) and as a non-match (0), other-
wise. After tabulating the functional group matches as binary feature vectors, the researchers ﬁt logistic regression
and random forest classiﬁcation models and quantiﬁed feature importance of the functional and chemical groups. The
importance of certain chemical groups was then used to inform subsequent rounds of virtual screening, to identify
database molecules that were previously dismissed in early stages of the ligand-based VS pipepline.
1.2.2. Receptor structure-based VS
In contrast to ligand-based VS, receptor structure-based VS assumes knowledge of the receptor structure with
molecular docking being one of the most prominent structure-based VS techniques. While molecular docking has led
to many successful discoveries, one of its limitations for GPCR ligand discovery is the small number of high-resolution
GPCR structures that are currently available. Recent years brought many signiﬁcant improvements for protein X-ray
crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy; however, high-resolution structures still only cover four out of the six
diﬀerent classes of GPCR: classes A, B, C, and F, of which the rhodopsin-like receptors from class A form the most
signiﬁcant portion [26]. Furthermore, another limitation for structure-based approaches for bioactive ligand discovery
is the breadth and diversity of GPCR structures that are currently available: only 44 of the 205 GPCR structures
correspond to unique GPCRs [1].
All GPCRs consist of seven transmembrane helices, which are relatively conserved across the diﬀerent classes
of GPCRs (A-F). However, GPCRs may diﬀer more noticeably in the intracellular and extracellular loop domains.
The extracellular loops play an essential role in many GPCR structures, since they often form the orthosteric ligand
binding site or provide access to binding sites that are located within the transmembrane bundle [27]. The diversity
of GPCR ligands and GPCR ligand binding sites are a direct consequence of the structural variety of the extracellu-
lar loops, which makes employing structure-based approaches extremely challenging in the absence of high-quality
structural information. In those cases, ligand-based strategies may represent the only viable alternative [24]. In recent
years, both traditional structure-based and ligand-based VS have been augmented or replaced by machine learning
techniques. Furthermore, machine learning has also been used for predicting bioactivity from other types of data such
as a bioactivity matrix (a targets-by-compounds matrix of functional interactions) [28]. Today, machine learning is
widely recognized as an essential method in the chemical biology toolbox for researching ligand binding [12].
Morevover, besides binding mode prediction and scoring, there are various other aspects of structure-based ap-
proaches that can beneﬁt from machine learning. For instance, in a recent study, researchers combined X-ray crystal
structural analysis with machine learning to identify key features distinguishing active from inactive states of class A
GPCRs that were induced by bioactive ligands [29]. The researchers started with rigidity analysis [30] to obtain rigid-
ity information for a set of ligand-bound and ligand-free GPCR crystal structures in active and inactive states. Next,
the researchers partitioned the helical regions of the receptors into 29 segments, where each segment was subdivided
into 3 blocks. The 87 blocks where then used to construct feature vectors as input to a machine learning classiﬁer.
In particular, each GPCR was represented by a continuous feature vector containing 87 values, each value being a
rigidity index (measured on a scale ranging from 0 to 100) for that block. After assembling this tabular dataset, the
researchers trained a k-nearest neighbor classiﬁer that was able to predict active and inactive states with high (96%)
accuracy. In addition, the researchers gained further insights, namely the identiﬁcation of six key ﬂexibility transi-
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
tion regions, which are involved in activating (or inactivating) the GPCR upon ligand binding. We hypothesize that if
protein-ligand interactions are known or can be reliably predicted then this type of analysis can aid virtual screening
of bioactive GPCR ligand as well as GPCR ligand design.
1.3. Augmenting ligand discovery with artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is traditionally considered a subﬁeld of computer science that focuses on tasks that
humans are naturally good at, such as image recognition and natural language processing. Furthermore, AI can be
categorized into artiﬁcial general intelligence, i.e., human-level intelligence on a breadth of diﬀerent tasks, and "nar-
row" AI, which focuses on solving a single task well. Examples of narrow AI include tasks such as classifying objects
from images, language translation, playing chess, or predicting the bioactivity of small molecules. Currently, the most
popular approach for implementing and programming narrow AI is machine learning. Machine learning is a ﬁeld that
focuses on the development of algorithms that allow computers to learn from representative datasets, as opposed to
having domain experts developing rules manually.
The three major subcategories of machine learning are supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforce-
ment learning. In supervised learning, the goal is to predict a category label (classiﬁcation) or score (regression
analysis) by learning from a large collection of such labeled examples. In other words, supervised learning is con-
cerned with learning a mapping function between the so-called input features or observations (for example, ﬁngerprint
representations of small molecules) and a discrete or continuous target variable, for example, an active/inactive label or
the binding aﬃnity in the context of a speciﬁc receptor. After learning to predict the desired scores or labels from the
labeled training dataset, an independent test dataset, consisting of labeled examples that were unseen during training,
is used to evaluate the performance of the predictive model.
To illustrate these supervised learning concepts in the context of GPCR bioactive ligand discovery, we revisit
the SLOR1 receptor signaling inhibitor projects [24, 25] introduced in Section 1.2. Suppose the goal is to train a
classiﬁcation model to predict whether a (new) candidate molecule is active against SLOR1. To train such a classiﬁer,
we require a labeled dataset, which contains the target variable we want to predict. The target variable, in this case, is a
binary variable with two possible values, active and non-active. Ideally, the target labels are obtained from experimental
assays, for instance, by assaying a set of candidate molecules from a molecular database for bioactivity against the target
receptor. (Note that it is also possible to model this prediction problem as a regression task, where the target variable
is a continuous activity value; however, in our experience, classiﬁcation models are less sensitive to noise, easier to ﬁt,
and more robust overall.) Next, we have to decide about the feature representation of the molecules that are presented
to the machine classiﬁer along with the target labels. For example, we may use the functional group matching vectors
based on 3D volumetric overlays with a known active as described in Section 1.2 and [25]. Before we start training
the classiﬁer, we divide the dataset into a separate training and test set, where the training set is used to ﬁt the model.
After model ﬁtting, the test set can be used to evaluate the classiﬁer’s performance using molecules that it has not
seen during training. During the evaluation, the model is only presented with the feature vector representation of the
molecules. The predicted activity labels are then compared to the experimentally measured activity levels to quantify
predictive performance. Since model evaluation is an important aspect of machine learning, which we cannot cover
in detail here, we recommend consulting the article "Model evaluation, model selection, and algorithm selection in
machine learning" [31] to learn more about the best practices. If the model has achieved satisfactory performance,
we may use it on a new database of molecules to predict whether they are likely to be active or not. This process is
summarized in Figure 2.
Unsupervised learning is used for tasks that do not involve target labels. A typical example of unsupervised learning
is clustering, for instance, grouping small molecules based on a user-speciﬁed similarity measure.
Reinforcement learning, a third major category of machine learning, focuses on decision making in complex envi-
ronments, which requires learning an optimal series of actions in response to environmental information as opposed
to a target output as in supervised learning. A classic example is the development of a chess program.
In the presence of labeled high-quality data, machine learning provides opportunities for automating the devel-
opment of customized solutions that are optimized for a speciﬁc type of receptor, binding site, or small molecule –
as opposed to more general scoring functions such as DrugScore [32] or AutoDock Vina [33]. Machine learning has
already shown to be successful in various stages throughout typical ligand and drug discovery, including the discovery
of novel drug targets and ligands [34, 35], bioactivity prediction [36], predicting new binding sites in GPCRs [37, 38],
analyzing the association between the drug targets and diseases [39], studying binding pathways (for example, the bind-
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Database 
Molecules
Volumetric Overlay
Functional Group Matching
Feature Vector Construction
Molecule
3-keto
12-keto
Sulfate-
ester
...
Candidate 1
0
1
1
...
... 
...
...
...
...
Feature Extraction
Experimental Activity Data
Machine Learning 
Algorithm
Training Dataset
Model Training
Test 
Dataset 
Molecules
New 
Molecules
Experimental Assay
Experimental Activity Data 
(from Test Dataset)
Machine Learning 
Model
Predicted Activity
Data
Model Validation
Inference
1
2
3
Feature Extraction
Figure 2: Illustration of a supervised learning workﬂow for bioactive ligand discovery summarizing the GPCR inhibitor
discovery described in [24] and [25]. Step 1: After extracting feature vectors for each candidate molecule, the training
dataset consisting of bioactivity measurements and the feature vectors is used to train the machine learning model. Step 2:
The model is evaluated on the test dataset, which contains molecules (and their experimental bioactivity measurements)
to validate the model. Step 3: If the model yielded satisfactory validation performance, it could be used to predict the
activity of new molecules and prioritize candidates for experimental assays.
ing pathways of opiates to 푚푢-opioid receptors [40]), optimizing lead compounds [41], molecular de novo design [42],
modifying molecular properties [43], and developing biomarkers to assess the eﬃcacy of drugs [44].
1.4. Deep learning–representation learning with deep neural networks
In the last decade, deep learning research has seen a substantial increase in attention, since it has allowed researchers
to develop state-of-the-art solutions for computer vision, natural language processing, and computational biology [45].
Deep learning is a subﬁeld of machine learning that focuses on artiﬁcial neural networks with many layers that can
learn multiple levels of abstractions of data that are useful for supervised and unsupervised learning tasks. Modern
deep learning architectures consist of hundreds of millions of parameters [46], the so-called model weights, which are
learned from a training dataset using the backpropagation algorithm [47]. An overview of the most commonly used
deep learning architectures is provided in Section 1.7.
The predictive performance of traditional machine learning methods – this includes logistic regression, random
forests, support vector machines (SVMs), k-nearest neighbors, and many others – heavily depends on the design of
the feature engineering pipeline. For instance, the aforementioned conventional machine learning methods generally
do not operate well on high dimensional datasets and are unable to extract knowledge from raw data (such as text or
images) [45]. Hence, the training data has to be converted into a tabular format via manual feature engineering, where
manual means that the feature extraction is not implicitly realized by the model but has to be carried out beforehand
via an additional procedure. For example, in a virtual screening context, the two- or three-dimensional graph repre-
sentations of a molecule represent raw data, whereas simpliﬁed molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) string or
ﬁngerprint representations of a molecule are the outcomes of manual feature extraction. Diﬀerent types of molecular
representations will be covered in more detail in Section 2.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Careful feature engineering requires substantial domain expertise, and useful information contained in the data can
be lost by feature engineering. Deep learning, on the other hand, relies on general-purpose algorithms that include
the automatic extraction of salient information from raw data as part of the modeling architecture and optimization
objective. In this respect, deep learning can be characterized as a feature or representation learning method. However,
one downside of deep learning is that it is relatively data-hungry, and datasets for supervised learning require large
amounts of labeled examples – dataset sizes ranging between 50 thousand and 15 million training examples are not
unusual [48, 49].
1.5. Open source software and datasets
Over the past decade, there has been a remarkable increase in the development of open source software for en-
abling data science and machine learning [50]. Many general-purpose scientiﬁc computing libraries with permissive
open source licenses are now widely used in academia as well as in industry, including NumPy and SciPy [51], Mat-
plotlib [52], and Pandas [53]. Furthermore, general-purpose libraries have been developed for the analysis of biological
and structural data that lower the barrier of entry to computational biology, for example, BioPython [54] and BioPan-
das [55].
Under similar open source licensing terms, the Scikit-learn machine learning library [56] has been widely adopted
for predictive modeling with traditional machine learning (for example, generalized linear models, SVMs, and tree-
based methods such as random forests and gradient boosting). In recent years, computationally eﬃcient and GPU-
enabled libraries such as TensorFlow [57] and PyTorch [58] made deep learning accessible to the broad scientiﬁc
communities similar to how Scikit-learn contributed to popularizing machine learning.
While the use of machine learning and deep learning has seen widespread adoption throughout various research
areas, a bottleneck for applications to computational biology was the lack of large, annotated, high-quality datasets.
However, recent years brought both improvements of experimental techniques and the "data and code sharing" culture
in academia, which led to the increase of publicly available molecular activity and biomedical datasets. For instance,
in drug discovery, recent eﬀorts focused on developing an open, annotated dataset that can be utilized for therapeutic
target validation [59]. MoleculeNet is a large benchmark dataset consisting of more than 700,000 molecules and their
property annotations [60]. The ChEMBL large-scale bioactivity database contains more than 5.4 million bioactivity
measurements for 5,200 protein targets and more than 1 million ligands [61]. While the aforementioned databases are
general-purpose datasets that are usually used for general algorithm development and benchmarking, they can also be
used as a starting point for pre-training deep learning models that can then be ﬁne-tuned to smaller datasets for speciﬁc
targets. This technique is called transfer learning and is discussed in greater detail in Section 6.
1.6. Interpretability and repeatability of machine learning
Machine learning models can learn to identify salient patterns in high-dimensional and complex datasets that are not
obvious to a human researcher. However, machine learning and particularly deep learning models are often criticized
for their black box aspect and lack of interpretability [9]. We agree that machine-learning-based methods, except
for the most fundamental decision tree models and rule-based classiﬁers, are less interpretable than pure "if/then"
rules. However, many methods exist that allow scientists to obtain insights into which features a model learns for
making particular predictions. For example, in the SLOR1 context discussed in Sections 1.2 and 1.3, the researchers
were able to identify a potent inhibitor of GPCR pheromone receptor signaling using a machine learning-aided virtual
screening approach that provided structure-activity information [24]. Furthermore, by combining machine learning
with feature selection algorithms, the researchers were able to identify sulfate groups on the tail end of the candidate
ligands that are crucial for bioactivity in SLOR-1 GPCR signaling [25]. While the methods described in [25] were
applied to summarize structure-activity relationships of 3D-structural overlays of small molecules that were prioritized
for experimental bioassays, the same techniques can be used for diﬀerent types of data, such as hydrogen bonding
patterns [62] or ligand-receptor docking poses [63].
Other commonly used methods for understanding model predictions are general-purpose methods such as LIME [64]
or SHAP [65]. Neural network-speciﬁc methods include guided backpropagation [66], class activation mapping [67],
gradient-weighted class activation mapping [68], and learning important features through propagating activation diﬀer-
ences (DeepLIFT) [69]. All of these methods can be used to study how changes in the inputs aﬀect the model’s output
(predictions). Hu et al. [70] demonstrated how a simple variant of this concept could be applied to identify binding sites
from 1D sequence data. Assuming that 3D structures are unavailable or too costly to obtain, the researchers trained
deep neural networks on 1D representations of proteins (1-letter amino acid codes) and ligands (SMILES strings) to
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Amino acid sequence: 
RPQGAT...EEQLLFLY
Convolutional 
neural network
Convolutional 
neural network
Output: 
§
Binding/non-binding 
(classification)
§
Binding affinity 
(regression)
Protein receptor path
Small molecule / ligand candidate path
0
1199 (max. length)
0
199 (max. length)
0
0
0
...
0
0
1
0
...
0
...
...
...
...
...
0
0
1
...
0
0
1
0
...
0
0
0
0
...
1
0
19
0
0
1
...
0
0
0
0
...
0
1
0
0
...
0
0
0
0
...
1
0
1
0
...
0
0
63
...
...
...
...
...
SMILES string:

Amino acid 1-letter 
code index
SMILES character index
Concatenated
feature vector
Fully connected layers
One-hot encoding matrix. Each column 
corresponds to an amino acid position, and 
each row corresponds to one out of 20 
amino acid types. E.g., 0: A, 1: R, 2: N, ..., 19:V. 
“Interpretability” mask: set 
all values in this
region to 0.
Figure 3: Illustration of a convolutional neural network trained on 1D representations of protein receptors and ligand can-
didates. The column vectors in the one-hot encoded matrix are sparse, consisting of one "1" (indicating the type of amino
acid or SMILES character at a given position), and the remaining values are "0"’s. After training, an "interpretability"
mask, which sets all values in the masked region to 0, can be used to observe how blocking out subsequences aﬀects the
binding prediction. (The crystal structure corresponds to the ligand-bound glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor extracellular
domain [71], PDB code: 3C5T.)
predict binding information. In particular, the researchers trained convolutional neural networks (see Section 1.7.2)
for binary classiﬁcation (binding vs. non-binding) and regression (binding aﬃnity) on one-hot encoded versions of the
1D sequences as illustrated in Figure 3. After model training and evaluation, parts of a protein sequence were masked
to analyze how their removal impacted the prediction score. If the masking of a subsequence had a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the predicted output, one could hypothesize that the subsequence was important for binding.
Another point of criticism against the use of deep neural networks is the lack of repeatability [9]. In this con-
text, repeatability refers to the ability to produce the exact same results upon repeating an experiment under identical
conditions; in contrast, reproducibility refers to the ability to obtain similar results in diﬀerent environments or condi-
tions, for example, if a diﬀerent research lab conducts similar experiments. According to [9], the issue of repeatability
"arises because [machine learning] outputs are highly dependent on the initial values or weights of the network pa-
rameters or even the order in which training examples are presented to the network, as all of them are typically chosen
at random." We want to highlight that these repeatability issues can easily be circumvented by specifying the seeds of
pseudo-random number generators and setting the behavior of machine learning and deep learning software libraries
to deterministic. In practice, however, issues with reproducibility and repeatability arise when researchers share insuf-
ﬁcient details about the software versions that were used to conduct the experiments. Reproducibility and repeatability
require best code sharing practices, which include not only sharing the exact code but also the experimental settings
and software version numbers. Fortunately, sharing data and code has become a recommended practice in the ﬁeld
of machine learning [72], and we hope that computational biology journals will adopt similar best practices such that
repeatability and reproducibility issues that plagued the ﬁeld in previous years can be avoided in the future.
1.7. Commonly used deep learning architectures
This section summarizes the main concepts behind machine learning with a focus on the fundamental deep learning
concepts that are relevant for the remainder of this article. For an introduction and overview of general machine learning
methods, we recommend [50, 73]. For a more comprehensive introduction to deep learning, we recommend [45, 50,
74].
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
1.7.1. Multilayer perceptrons
Multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) are fully connected artiﬁcial neural networks (NNs) that consist of an input layer,
an output layer, and at least one hidden layer between the two (Figure 4 A). While there is no precise deﬁnition of what
constitutes a deep neural network (DNN), an NN that has more than one hidden layer is commonly referred to as a
DNN. The hidden units in the hidden layer manipulate the input information (observations or features) in a non-linear
fashion so that, in the case of supervised classiﬁcation, the training examples from diﬀerent classes become linearly
separable by the last layer. In DNNs, the early layers can be considered representation learning layers that distort the
data in such a way that it can be classiﬁed by an output layer that has a similar structure to a generalized linear model.
In other words, NN architectures with one or more hidden layers can learn highly complex relationships between the
input features and the target label.
An MLP with only one (suﬃciently large) hidden layer can already be considered a universal function approxima-
tor [75–77]. However, a DNN with many hidden layers can achieve the same expressiveness with fewer parameters
than an NN with only one hidden layer. Furthermore, constructing an architecture with multiple layers provides some
form of regularization: later layers are constrained by the behavior of earlier layers. Unfortunately, a common prob-
lem with deep architectures is that increasing the number of layers exacerbates the vanishing and exploding gradient
problems that arise from repeated multiplications via the chain rule in backpropagation, making it hard to parameterize
very deep models. A particular focus in the deep learning ﬁeld has been on developing methods that help with training
very deep architectures successfully, as discussed in Section 1.7.2 and Section 1.7.3.
While the early MLP architecture was ﬁrst proposed in the early 1960s [78–80], eﬃcient ways for training such
multilayer neural networks using the backpropagation procedure were formulated by several researchers independently
between 1970 and 1986 [47, 81, 82]. Although the backpropagation procedure is still the main learning algorithm in
deep learning, the training of DNNs has only become broadly feasible in recent years due to several advances towards
making the general training more eﬃcient and eﬀective. These improvements include implementing machine learning
models and training DNNs on GPUs [83–86], which are extremely well-suited for performing linear algebra operations
such as matrix multiplications eﬃciently and on a large scale.
In addition to developing software libraries that allow researchers to develop and implement DNNs more easily
(see Section 1.5), countless algorithmic advances towards training DNNs more eﬃciently and robustly have been made
in recent years. For example, new activation functions have been proposed, such as the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU;
Figure 4 C) [87], which has become a popular default choice since it can help with vanishing gradient eﬀects and gen-
erally allows for training DNNs faster and with better predictive performance. New stochastic gradient descent-based
optimization algorithms such as Adam [88] can accelerate the model training and make it easier to ﬁnd a proper learn-
ing rate setting compared to conventional stochastic gradient descent. Regularization methods such as Dropout [89]
help reduce the eﬀect of overﬁtting by dropping nodes randomly during training and thus make the model less reliant
on particular inputs and connectivity patterns. Batch normalization is a method for scaling layer inputs [90], which
can speed up learning further by allowing learning with larger batch sizes and converging to local minima on the loss
surface in fewer iterations over the training set. While not all of these improvements exist in all modern architectures,
they have been fundamental to allowing experts as well as non-experts to train DNNs successfully on a wide range of
diﬀerent datasets.
Koutsoukas et al. [91] applied a multilayer perceptron model for diverse bioactivity prediction (푝퐾푖and 푝IC50)
against 7 diﬀerent targets, including two GPCRs, dopamine receptor D4 and cannabinoid receptor 1 based on molecular
ﬁngerprint representation of the molecules (similar to the illustration in Figure 4 A). The researchers also found that the
MLP outperformed traditional machine learning approaches on large datasets. However, they noted that deep learning
models require much more extensive hyperparameter tuning to achieve good predictive performance [91]. An approach
like this can be used for ligand-based discovery, when information about the binding interface is not available.
MLPs can also be utilized for structure-based VS or QSAR studies as described [92]. Similar to [91], the researchers
found that MLPs generally outperformed traditional machine learning methods like random forests and SVMs. This is a
remarkable result because, in this case, the model the researchers referred to as a DNN was a simple MLP with only one
hidden layer. The descriptors used in this study are a union of atom pair and donor-acceptor pair descriptors, including
information about atom types and binding interface information. Additional details about the diﬀerent molecular data
input representations will be provided in Section 2.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Hidden layer
Output layer
Input layer
Neuron
Input feature
Weight (connection)
...
bias unit
1
f(z)
x2
x3
xm
x1
z =
m
X
i=1
wixi + b
w1
w2
w3
w4
Neuron in detail
a = f(z)
Activation 
value
Non-linear 
activation 
function
Net input 
(weighted input)
Predicted pKi
ReLU function
2
6666666666666664
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
1
3
7777777777777775
4...
4...
Molecular fingerprint
representation
-6
-4
-2
2
4
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
f(z)
z
A
B
C
Figure 4: (A) A fully connected neural network (multilayer perceptron; MLP) with one hidden layer. The input layer
represents the input features from the dataset, for instance, a molecular ﬁngerprint representing a small molecule (here:
Dopamine D4 receptor antagonist Nemonapride). The input layer is "fully connected" to the hidden layer via weight
connections. In this example, the output layer consists of a single neuron that outputs a continuous value, the predicted
푝퐾푖. (B) Depiction of a hidden layer neuron in greater detail. The neuron computes the weighted sum of all input features
(plus a bias or threshold value) to calculate the so-called net input. This weighted input is then passed to a non-linear
activation function, such as the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) depicted in (B).
1.7.2. Convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are feedforward neural networks that utilize the discrete convolution op-
eration as a ﬁltering operation on multi-dimensional arrays (Figure 5 A). Depending on the architectural design and
discrete convolution operation, CNNs can handle various data modalities, including 1D (sequences and signals in vec-
tor form), 2D (pictures and audio spectrograms), and 3D arrays (such as videos or images with depth dimension like
3D computerized tomography scans).
Today, CNNs are the most widely used deep learning architectures. They are widely recognized for their state-
of-the-art performance for image-related tasks such as object classiﬁcation, detection, and segmentation. The ﬁrst
successful demonstration of CNNs for image classiﬁcation was the design of the LeNet architecture for handwritten
digit and document recognition in the 1990s [94, 95]. While CNNs have shown exceptional performance on various
image recognition tasks, including the segmentation of biological images [45, 96], the rise of CNNs to mainstream
success can be attributed to 2012 ImageNet competition, where CNNs were able to outperform traditional computer
vision methods by doubling the object classiﬁcation accuracy on a database consisting of millions of images [97].
Similar to MLP architectures, CNNs are feedforward neural networks. However, in contrast to MLPs, CNNs rely
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
B
Hidden layers (feature maps)
Output layer
Fully connected
hidden layers
Channels
Input layer
Filter
Input layer
=
80x80 grayscale image
2D drawing
Convolutional network
B
Molecular property prediction
C
New pixel value
Receptive field
Filter
1 ⇥(−1) + 0 ⇥2 + 2 ⇥0 + 1 ⇥(−3) + 1 ⇥4 + 2 ⇥1 + 0 ⇥1 + 0 ⇥2 + 1 ⇥3 = 5
A
Figure 5: (A) Illustration of a single step in a 2D convolution on an 8x8 pixel input image, using a ﬁlter of size 3x3. At
each stage, the convolution operation performs a pairwise multiplication of the values in the receptive ﬁeld and ﬁlter. The
pairwise multiplication results are then summed to obtain the output pixel. For the next step, the receptive ﬁeld is moved
to the next position (not shown), to compute the next output pixel. This process is repeated until all output pixels are
computed. (B) Depiction of a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture for image recognition, which consists of
multiple feature maps that are connected via convolutional layers. Each unit in a feature map is connected with a local
patch of the previous layer’s feature map through a set of ﬁlters. Traditionally, pooling layers have been inserted between
every other feature map but are not necessary [66]. The fully connected hidden layers and output layer resemble an MLP
architecture. (C) Application of a CNN for molecular property prediction as described in [93].
on convolutional rather than fully connected layers at the core of the architecture. The main concepts behind CNNs
that distinguish this architecture from MLPs are sparse connectivity and parameter sharing. Here, sparse connectivity
refers to the fact that each unit in the hidden layer is only connected to a small number of units in the previous layer
(Figure 5 B). The connection occurs through a ﬁlter (Figure 5 A), which is a parameter matrix that is commonly
interpreted as a feature extractor. Via the ﬁlter, information between neighboring pixels is combined to compute the
activation of a unit in the next hidden layer. This allows CNNs to compose hierarchies of local features to recognize
complex shapes in later layers. For instance, in an image classiﬁcation task, a multi-layer CNN may learn to detect
simple geometric shapes like edges and curves in the earlier layers, and in later layers, it can identify more sophisticated
features such as cars or buildings based on the underlying geometric shapes. These feature detectors typically only
cover a small portion of the input image or feature map, and in the process of the convolution operation, they can be
thought of as a sliding window over the image. Hence, the weights for the diﬀerent patches of the input image or feature
maps are shared within a given layer, which is inspired by the fact that a feature detector that works well in one region
may also work well in another part. The advantage of weight sharing is that it reduces the number of parameters that
need to be learned, which improves computational eﬃciency and can reduce overﬁtting, compared to fully connected
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
networks.
In traditional CNN architectures, feature maps were followed by pooling layers [94, 95]. These pooling layers
combine similar features from neighboring regions in the previous feature map into a single feature, which is supposed
to help neural networks to learn more complex relationships or geometrical shapes. However, it has been shown that
pooling layers are not a requirement in modern CNN architectures [66].
Deep learning is a fast-moving ﬁeld, and even revolutionary architectures such as AlexNet, which outperformed
state-of-the-art computer vision methods at the ImageNet competition in 2012 [97], have long since been succeeded by
other reference architectures. For example, the VGG architecture has achieved notable performance by shrinking the
receptive ﬁeld and stacking many more layers than AlexNet [98]. The ResNet architecture introduced residual connec-
tions, which are shortcut connections between layers that help with vanishing gradient problems and thus improve the
training of very deep neural networks [99]. Inception networks improved the extraction aspect of both local and global
features by using multiple ﬁlter modules in parallel [100]. While the design of CNN architectures still remains an ac-
tive area of research, recent eﬀorts have been targeted towards improving eﬃciency, for example, MobileNet [101] and
EﬃcientNet [102]. In a benchmark study, Canziani et al. compare both the predictive and computational performance
of these models for further reference [46].
Goh et al. described a simple application of 2D convolutional networks for molecular property prediction. [93].
Here, the researchers trained a convolutional network, called Chemception, to predict HIV activity and toxicity (as
binary classiﬁcation tasks, "active" or "inactive"), and solvation (regression) from 2D molecule drawings (Figure 5).
To prepare the input data for the Chemception model, the researchers converted 2D drawings of molecules into 80×80
pixel grayscale images. In this representation, atoms were represented as dots with diﬀerent shades of gray to encode
atom type information. Similarly, bonds were encoded in two diﬀerent shades of gray to distinguish between single and
double bonds. The images were randomly rotated during training to make the network robust towards diﬀerent ways to
orient a molecule. The authors noted that Chemception slightly outperforms molecular ﬁngerprint-based approaches
in activity and solvation prediction but slightly underperforms in toxicity prediction. State-of-the-art convolutional
network approaches, including 3D voxelation, are discussed in Section 2.3.
1.7.3. Recurrent neural networks
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were originally designed for tasks that involve sequence data, for example,
textual data and audio signals such as speech. While traditional RNNs consist of fully connected layers similar to
MLPs, RNNs have recurrent connections through time. This recurrence property allows RNNs to maintain an internal
history of sequence elements that it processed previously (Figure 6).
While RNNs can model arbitrary long sequences, the recurrent edges make this architecture particularly prone
to vanishing and exploding gradient problems [103]. One solution to this problem is the so-called long short-term
memory mechanism (LSTM) by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [104], which is a memory cell that replaces the hidden
layer of conventional RNNs. A mechanism similar to LSTM, although slightly more computationally eﬃcient, is the
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [105].
Merk et al. [106] described an RNN model for designing new drug-like molecules with desired properties. The
RNN was ﬁrst trained on a large dataset consisting of SMILES strings of known bioactive molecules. Then, the
researchers used transfer learning Section 6 to ﬁne-tune the model on retinoid X and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor agonists to generate target-speciﬁc ligands. The general workﬂow is summarized in Figure 6 C-E.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, we discuss one of the common challenges with applying
machine learning to bioactive ligand discovery, namely choosing an appropriate feature representation for the ligand
structure, and highlight recently developed deep learning methods that use these representations. Next, we discuss
the latest trends for ligand-based analysis, from molecular property prediction to similarity-based virtual screening.
While the ligand-based approaches assume that a high-quality receptor structure is not available, the next section
reviews the recent developments for receptor structure-based bioactive ligand discovery. We then explore advances in
de novo small-molecule design. Finally, this review concludes by motivating the use of transfer learning, which allow
researchers to make better use of publicly available data in machine learning and AI-based bioactive ligand discovery.
2. Molecular feature representations
Machine learning methods excel at prediction tasks across multiple disciplines but require careful data preparation
as most methods are designed to operate on tabular datasets. The standard data input format is the so-called design ma-
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Input layer
x
Output layer
o
Hidden layer
h
Standard feedforward
neural network
(multilayer perceptron; MLP)
Recurrent 
neural network
(RNN)
Recurrent 
edge
Unfold
Input layer
x(t)
Output layer
o(t)
Hidden layer
h(t)
Input layer
x(t –1)
Output layer
o(t –1)
Hidden layer
h(t –1)
Input layer
x(t)
Output layer
o(t)
Hidden layer
h(t)
Input layer
x(t+1)
Output layer
o(t+1)
Hidden layer
h(t+1)
Recurrent  neural network
(RNN)
A
B
C
<START>CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(O)=O<END>
<START>
C
C
=O
...
...
P(C)
P(C)
P((=O))
P(<END>)
<START>
O
C
1
...
...
O
C
(=O)
<END>
D
E
Tokenize
Probability of the 
next token
Input token
Training
Sampling
<START>OC(=O)c1ccccc1<END>
Input molecule
...
Synthesized molecule
Figure 6: Subpanels (A) and (B) depict an MLP with 1 hidden layer and an RNN with 1 hidden layer side by side for
comparison. Here, the input layer 푥containing the input features, the hidden layer ℎ, and the output layer 표represent
vectors with multiple units. Subpanel (C) depicts the RNN in its unfolded representation. In contrast to an MLP, the
hidden layer of an RNN receives its inputs from both the input layer and the hidden layer of the previous time step, 푡−1.
(D) Illustration of the RNN training process. Input molecules are converted into a sequence representation (here: SMILES
string), which is divided into tokens. At each time step, the RNN receives one token and returns a probability distribution
over all possible token types. The RNN is trained such that the probability corresponding to the next token in the sequence
is maximized. (E) To synthesize new molecules after training, a token is randomly sampled from the probability distribution
at each time step (tokens with a higher probability are more likely to be drawn). The sampled token is then provided as
input at the next time step. When the network outputs an <END> token, the sampling is terminated. The generated
SMILES string can then be used as a template for synthesizing the new molecule.
trix, where each row represents a new training example, and the columns correspond to the diﬀerent feature variables,
as illustrated in the example in Figure 2. A common challenge in conventional machine learning is how to prepare
datasets as input to machine learning algorithms – in practice, machine learning practitioners have to ﬁnd a sweet spot
between reducing the dimensionality and retaining salient information that the model can learn from. In contrast to
conventional machine learning, deep learning excels at learning from raw data, such as images and text, directly, as
previously discussed in Section 1.7. However, molecular data, such as conformations of small molecules and recep-
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
tors, can be challenging to represent in a standard format that most machine learning and deep learning methods have
been designed for. Even if the same information can be extracted from two diﬀerent data representations, an algorithm
may be more eﬀective at extracting that information from one over the other. There is no clear best representation of
molecules for machine learning methods and indeed certain representations may be better for certain tasks. The follow-
ing section provides a brief overview of commonly used molecular representations as well as some recent applications
of them using AI-based methods.
2.1. Property-based feature vectors
A molecular descriptor is the transformation of chemical information into a numeric value [107]. Dragon [108]
and Mordred descriptors [109] are examples of sets of molecular descriptors. As an alternative to molecular descrip-
tors, molecular ﬁngerprints encode molecular structure in a vector format, a so-called bit vector consisting of 1’s and
0’s. When used as input for machine learning models, both molecular ﬁngerprints and descriptors have historically
produced state-of-the-art results on chemical machine learning tasks such as chemical odor prediction and bioactiv-
ity [41, 110].
The extended connectivity ﬁngerprint (ECFP) is among the most widely-used 2D ﬁngerprint methods [111], and
we use its generation procedure as an example of the general process for generating traditional molecular ﬁngerprints.
A ﬁngerprint is generated by a multistep process in which each atom is associated with a series of integers. In this
series the 푘th integer encodes information about the atom it is associated with as well as information about the atoms
and bonds within 푘bonds of that atom – that is, the substructure of the compound that is within 푘bonds of the atom.
Next, the integers associated with each atom are concatenated into an array format, which is then processed via a
hashing algorithm to generate a bit vector of a desired length (typically 1024 or 2048 elements). This method captures
information about all identiﬁed substructures in a compound, resulting in a ﬁxed-length vector regardless of the input
compound’s size. ECFPs do not explicitly encode the 3D spatial information of a compound; however, specialized
ﬁngerprint methods have recently been developed that incorporate 3D-strucutral information [112]. Lastly, there are
also ﬁngerprints that can encode protein-ligand interactions [113].
2.2. SMILES
Simpliﬁed molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) strings are ASCII string representations of compounds
(Figure 7 A), which are generated according to a procedure that guarantees a unique mapping from a SMILES string
to a compound structure (though not the inverse) [114]. One beneﬁt of SMILES strings over 2D molecular ﬁngerprints
like ECFP is that they encode stereochemistry explicitly. One downside for machine learning is that SMILES do not
have a ﬁxed-length; however, certain deep learning architectures designed for processing text documents, like RNNs
or 1D CNNs, can handle variable-length inputs.
Recently, Hirohara et al. [115] proposed a novel molecular representation scheme by converting SMILES strings
into "SMILES feature matrices," which were used as inputs into a 1D CNN [115]. A SMILES feature matrix was
constructed by mapping a SMILES string of length 푁to a 푁× 42 matrix, where the 푘th row represents the 푘th
character (corresponding to either atom or connectivity information) of the string, and the 42 columns correspond to
properties of that character. To address the problem of varying-length input strings, the feature matrix was padded with
rows of zeros such that all feature matrices had their number of rows set to the length of the longest SMILE string. The
predictive performance of the resulting CNN model was comparable with other deep learning methods on the Tox 21
dataset, which contains 8,000 compounds labeled as active or inactive for 12 proteins [116]. More interestingly though,
this novel feature representation method enabled the extraction of a 64-dimensional vector from a convolutional layer
referred to as the SMILES convolution ﬁngerprint, which can be mapped back to the model input SMILES, providing
an interpretable data-driven ﬁngerprint.
Another notable recent development is the SMILES2vec method, which combines components from both recurrent
and convolutional neural networks [117]. Here, the model input is a SMILES string converted into a one-hot encoding
of characters present in the SMILES in the training dataset. The one-hot encoding then serves as an input to a 1D
convolutional layer, which is followed by two GRUs before the fully-connected output layer that returns the target
value. This architecture achieved equivalent performance to the state-of-the-art at the time on the ESOL solubility
dataset [118].
2.3. 3D voxels
Molecular structures can be considered as 3D objects, and modeling them as such would encode their structural
properties eﬀectively. The conventional way for encoding 3D objects is by voxelization, which, in this case, takes a
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
3D space and discretizes it into a 3D grid. Each unit cube of the 3D grid represents a voxel (Figure 7 C), which can be
considered as the equivalent of a 2D pixel in a 3D space. Instead of merely labeling each voxel via a binary membership
indicator based on what part of the compound occupies the voxel, a feature vector with discrete or continuous-valued
attributes can be assigned to each voxel, which can provide further information about the atom type or charge, for
example. This adds an additional dimension to the representation. Since this representation is typically associated
with a large number of input features, depending on the resolution of the voxel space as well as the size of the vector
representation at each voxel position, deep learning approaches used with this type of input representation typically
rely on 3D convolutions. This is equivalent to using 2D convolutions, which are commonly used for image analysis
(Section 1.7.2), in the 3D voxel space. Unfortunately, these convolutions can still be prohibitively slow, even at rela-
tively low voxel resolutions, which can result in a coarse representation of the compounds properties. Since each cube
represents a unit of measurement, and compounds can vary in size, this representation needs to be padded so that it
can accommodate for the largest compound in the dataset, which exacerbates the computational eﬃciency challenges
of this method. Likely owed to being computationally very intensive and ineﬃcient, this method is not a common
choice for ligand-based virtual screening. However, this representation has shown to be successful for structure-based
VS where binding pocket size is consistent regardless of the interacting ligand, and capturing the 3D structure of the
protein-ligand complex is important for the task.
We examine the 3D voxelization process from Ragoza et al. as a concrete example [119]. In this publication the
authors create 3D voxel representations of high-scoring docking poses of protein-ligand complexes for use in a 3D
CNN that computes binding aﬃnities. This representation voxelizes a 24 Å cube centered on the docked ligand into
.5 Å voxels. Each voxel has channels for Smina atom types in the ligand and separately for Smina atom types in the
protein [120]. The value contributed to a channel by an atom of the type that is associated with that channel is based
on a function of two values: First, the distance between the center of the voxel and the center of that atom, and second,
the atom’s van der Waals radius." This function is a continuous piece-wise combination of a Gaussian and a quadratic
based on these two values.
2.4. Graph representation
Molecules are commonly visualized as undirected graphs. In this representation, atoms represent the graph’s nodes,
and the bonds are the graph’s edges. A naive approach that utilizes such graphical information is to consider pictures
of molecular graphs as inputs to a DNN. This has been tried in the literature [93] using 2D CNN architectures that
have been eﬀective for image classiﬁcation [93, 121]. However, these models do not outperform MLP and random
forest trained on ECFPs. Two issues with this approach are that atomic properties and spatial relationships must be
inferred implicitly and that the representation is sparse, with lots of white space that provides little chemically relevant
information to the CNNs. Both these issues can be addressed with graph neural networks (GNNs) [122, 123].
NNs operate directly on a molecular graph (Figure 7 D). Similar to images, graphs can encode local structure, but
the local structural information is based on the graph structure rather than Euclidean distance. Like CNNs, GNNs
utilize sparse connectivity and parameter sharing, but the connectivity is based on the graph’s structure. For a detailed
explanation of graph convolutional operators, we refer to [123]. On a high-level, graph convolutions are based on
message passing frameworks for GNNs. At each node of the graph, the following steps are performed: a message
function is applied to each of a nodes’ neighbors individually, and the outputs are then added. An update function is
then applied to the summed message functions and the current node with the output being the updated value for the
current node. After graph convolutions are performed, the information in the graph can be aggregated by a readout
function, which produces the networks’ prediction output.
After choosing an input representation, the training process and evaluation procedure of machine learning models
tend to follow a general workﬂow similar to the illustration in Figure 2. While many state-of-the-art machine learning
methods are introduced in the context of general molecular benchmark datasets, most applications of these models can
be mapped to this general workﬂow and adopted for GPCR bioactive ligand discovery. For many machine learning
methods discussed in the following sections, and especially for DNNs, there are numerous training parameters to tune
and many approaches for doing so. We do not focus on these approaches but refer to the respective publications that
discuss them further. Similarly, there are many approaches to evaluating models that are beyond the scope of this
review. Instead, the focus of this article is on the diﬀerent workﬂows enabling bioactive ligand discovery and advances
in GPCR machine learning models to help internalize the high-level approach to research in this ﬁeld.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(=O)O
0 0 0 1 . . . 0 0 1
3D voxelization
SMILES string
Molecular fingerprint
Graph encoding
+
+
=
A
B
C
D
O
C
O
Figure 7: Summary of commonly used molecular representation methods based on the example of Aspirin (shown in the
center). (A) A molecular ﬁngerprint encodes structural motifs into a sparse bit vector. (B) A SMILES string encoding
structural information of the molecule as well as its stereochemistry. (C) A visualization of the 3D voxelization concept.
Note that information about which atoms occupy which voxels would be encoded in a 4th dimension which is omitted in
this visualization. (D) Illustration of how information is passed to an atom in a simple graph neural network. Note that
the graph-structural information will be passed from more distant atoms when the summation is repeated (not shown).
3. Ligand-based methods
Ligand-based VS methods are traditionally deﬁned as methods that only rely on physicochemical and structural
information about the ligand and sometimes measurements of ligand-receptor interactions. No other information about
the target, like the receptor structure, is utilized. The use of ligand-based methods is particularly appealing when
working with GPCRs for which only a small set of high-quality structures exist.
In the following subsection, we review notable advances in predicting molecular properties, which are applicable
to GPCR bioactive molecule VS.
3.1. Molecular property prediction
In the following subsection, we explore recent work done in predicting molecular properties that has been applied
to GPCR-related properties, and explore advances in the space that have been or could be applied to GPCRs.
3.1.1. Predicting bioactivity from conventional ﬁngerprint representations
Researchers applied a variety of standard machine learning algorithms to the task of classifying compounds as
active or inactive with two GPCRs, cannabinoid receptor 1 and cannabinoid receptor 2 [124]. In addition to the activity
prediction for cannabinoid receptor 1, the researchers also predicted if compounds acted in an allosteric or orthosteric
fashion. The datasets used in this study were constructed from multiple chemical databases. Orthosteric ligands were
selected from ChEMBL [61] based on an inhibitory constant (퐾푖) cutoﬀ. Allosteric ligands were selected from the
Allosteric Database [125]. The ZINC database [21], a collection of commercially available chemical compounds,
was used to add additional inactives. The authors generated three diﬀerent vector representations of this ligand data:
ECFP ﬁngerprints, MACCS ﬁngerprints, and a set of handpicked molecular descriptors. Stratiﬁed subsampling was
used to create the training and test datasets; stratiﬁed subsampling is a procedure that maintains the ratio of active
to inactive, or orthosteric to allosteric, compounds across sets. The data was then used to train and compare the
performance of a set of machine learning classiﬁers on each task with each of the three data representations. The set
of machine learning classiﬁers consisted of an SVM, MLPs with 1-5 hidden layers, a random forest, a naïve Bayes
classiﬁer, and a logistic regression classiﬁer. There was no clear top-performing model across data representations
when the models were evaluated with a variety of performance metrics. However, for individual data representations,
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
an MLP with only one hidden layer performed best overall with the MACCS featurization, while logistic regression
performed best in combination with the ECFP featurization. This all serves as an example of the standard machine
learning workﬂow being utilized in GPCR research (Figure 2). In addition to evaluating the predictive performance
of the diﬀerent models, the researchers also evaluated the importance of the features in each representation. This was
done by recursively removing the features of least importance to a model and retraining models until a user-speciﬁed
number of features was reached. The researchers then examined how important features diﬀered among ligands with
diﬀerent properties. For example, with MACCS features, which represent molecular substructures, it was found that
around 10% of the allosteric ligands had an amide group attached to an aromatic substructure, while this was only the
case for 1% of orthosteric ligands. This type of analysis could be applied to other GPCRs, to elucidate further what
ligand components are important for certain interactions.
3.1.2. Learning ﬁngerprint representations
The previous example uses standard machine learning models that take a vector representation of a ligand as input.
This allows feature importance to be assessed in ways that would not be readily possible with DNNs that operate on
other types of input representations, such as images or graphs. However, most models that achieve state-of-the-art
performance in molecular property prediction incorporate deep learning along with novel ligand representations. One
such model is WDL-RF, an innovative architecture for predicting molecular properties that was trained and tested on
a suite of GPCR ligand datasets to predict ligand bioactivity [126]. The novel architecture of the WDL-RF model
consists of a DNN that takes a graph representation as input (Section 2.4) followed by a random forest regressor that
takes the DNN output as input. The NN is trained to produce an embedding vector the authors refer to as a "data-driven
molecular ﬁngerprint." More speciﬁcally, this DNN is a GNN (Section 2.4) that shares weights in the network based
on the number of bonds attached to each atom node. Each atom’s initial feature vector includes a one-hot encoding
of its element, the total number of atoms connected to it, the number of attached hydrogen atoms, its implicit valence,
and an aromaticity indicator. After a series of graph convolutions, the GNN aggregates the graph embedding into a
vector, the data-driven molecular ﬁngerprint, which is used as input for the random forest that is trained to predict the
molecular property of interest.
The performance of WDL-RF was evaluated on twenty-six GPCRs from families A, B, C, and F. For each GPCR,
at least two hundred known ligands were collected from the Uniprot and GLASS databases [127, 128]. The bioactivity
data was obtained from ChEMBL [61]. In addition, the authors also included known GPCR ligands from ChEMBL
that do not interact with the 26 GPCRs evaluated in this study to improve the model’s robustness. This aspect of
their workﬂow is worth highlighting because when applying machine learning to GPCRs in general, data quantity is
often a limiting factor for using more powerful methods. After splitting the dataset into training and test datasets for
each GPCR, the WDL-RF was trained in two steps. First, a GNN was trained to predict ligand bioactivity. Secondly,
the ﬁngerprint embedding produced by the GNN was used to train a random forest regressor to predict bioactivity.
The second step was necessary to allow fair comparisons between WDL’s data-driven ﬁngerprint representation and
other popular molecular ﬁngerprints since random forests operate on feature vectors rather than graphs. The WDL-
RF model, evaluated via the root mean squared error between predicted and actual bioactivity measures, signiﬁcantly
outperformed hand-crafted molecular ﬁngerprints like ECFP and MACCS on the majority of GPCRs. Additionally,
WDL-RF consistently outperformed other neural network-based ﬁngerprints [122]. Notably, the few cases where a
traditional molecular ﬁngerprint outperformed WDL-RF corresponded to GPCRs for which only a small number of
active ligands were available, close to the minimum 200 required for inclusion, which suggests that the datasets were
too small to train DNNs eﬀectively.
3.1.3. Predicting molecular properties beyond bioactivity
GNNs have also found success in predicting other molecular properties beyond bioactivity. For instance, they
have achieved state-of-the-art performance in odor descriptor prediction [129]. Odor perception involves 300 to 4000
diﬀerent types of olfactory receptors, which are rhodopsin-like (class A) GPCRs [130]. The odor prediction GNN used
atom-node vectors based on atom type, charge, etc. One unique aspect of this model was that it was trained to predict
138 odor descriptors (fruity, stinky, etc.) for each molecule simultaneously, as the authors found that the correlation
structure between certain descriptors helped model performance. A similar simultaneous prediction approach could
be taken with other molecular properties that are relevant to GPCRs if they are believed to have correlation structure.
Similar to WDL-RF, when an embedding within the GNN was used to train a random forest model it was found to
outperform traditional ﬁngerprints and molecular descriptors.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
The above result suggests that diﬀerent compound representations capture chemical information in ways that are
utilized more or less eﬀectively by various machine learning algorithms. If a model takes multiple representations
as input, the ensemble may have better performance. The model CheMixNet followed this approach and used both a
SMILES and ﬁngerprint representation of a molecule as input [131]. The authors considered four subnetworks, three
of which received a one-hot SMILES string as input and one that was trained on a MACCS ﬁngerprint representation.
Each of the three SMILES subnetworks consisted of GRU cells, 1D convolutional layers, and a combination of 1D
convolutional layers and GRU cells; the ﬁngerprint subnetwork was an MLP. The researchers trained models with
combinations of these subnetworks, where the outputs of each subnetwork were concatenated and passed through
additional fully connected layers before a linear or softmax layer to predict the property. The model was trained
and tested multiple times to predict a variety of molecular properties. In all cases, certain subnetwork permutations
outperformed or matched other state-of-the-art methods at the time. Interestingly, the best subnetwork ensemble for
each dataset was not consistent, suggesting that diﬀerent representations may be better at predicting diﬀerent chemical
properties.
3.1.4. Leveraging unsupervised data for ﬁngerprint learning
One issue with the data-driven ﬁngerprints discussed thus far is that they are generated with labeled training data,
which restricts the amount of data that can be used to construct a robust ﬁngerprint. The Seq2Seq model attempted
to address this issue by learning a ﬁngerprint from SMILES in an unsupervised manner [132]. This model was an
autoencoder that used a GRU-based RNN to encode SMILES into a ﬁxed-length embedding vector and then recover
the original SMILES from the embedding. After the model was trained, the embedding vectors for ligands in a labeled
dataset were generated to use as data-driven ﬁngerprints in other machine learning models. Experiments showed that
random forest, gradient boosting, and SVMs that were trained on the Seq2Seq ﬁngerprints outperformed the same
models trained on ECFP and the original neural ﬁngerprint produced by Duvenaud et al. [122]. One additional beneﬁt
of ﬁngerprints generated by Seq2Seq is that they are invertible, so it is easy to recover the original SMILES string if
given the ﬁngerprint.
Shortly after the publication of the Seq2Seq, researchers developed a variational autoencoder (VAE) for encoding
SMILES into a continuous representation in the latent space [133]. This method also produces invertible ﬁngerprints,
and a regression model can be trained on these embeddings to predict various molecular properties. The use of a VAE
is the game-changer here, as molecules with similar properties are encouraged to be closely together in latent space.
As a result, slightly perturbing the embedding of a ligand and inverting it will tend to give a diﬀerent but similar ligand.
This property is of interest in de novo synthesis which is discussed in Section 5.
3.2. Similarity-based virtual screening
Similarity-based screening methods are based on the hypothesis that active compounds share similar proper-
ties [134]. However, there is no trivial deﬁnition of compound similarity as computational methods work with approx-
imate representations. For this reason, similarity-based methods heavily depend on and are deﬁned by the molecular
representations they operate on. Most machine learning-based methods for ligand-based VS are clustering algorithms,
and recent advances in this research are focused on developing new data representation methods and similarity mea-
sures. Several examples of GPCR-speciﬁc VS in the literature [135, 136]. However, recent methods were not speciﬁ-
cally on GPCRs but rather evaluated on common benchmark datasets that include several GPCR targets. Nonetheless,
their general nature could allow researchers to utilize these methods in GPCR-speciﬁc contexts in future research
endeavors.
3.2.1. 2D similarity measures
Tanimoto similarity is commonly used when comparing molecular ﬁngerprint vectors (Figure 8 B), as it compares
favorably to other similarity metrics on molecular ﬁngerprints, which has been conﬁrmed in analyses based on the sum
of ranking diﬀerences and ANOVA analysis [137]. Fingerprint similarity-based VS is not a new methodology [138].
While there are more complex 3D approaches, these methods are still used to query large databases due to their compu-
tational eﬃciency. Furthermore, the eﬃciency of ﬁngerprint comparison allows for more complex clustering protocols
to be tractable.
A recent example of this is the Tanimoto-based ﬁngerprint similarity method MuSSeL [139]. MuSSeL generates
an ensemble of diﬀerent ﬁngerprints for a database of compounds which were labeled with a receptor as their target
class and their binding aﬃnity for the corresponding receptor. Given a query compound’s ﬁngerprint ensemble, a
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
0 1 0 0 . . . 0 0 1
1 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 1
Molecule B
Molecule A
Molecule B:
Molecule A:
𝑎= number of 1!𝑠in A
𝑏= number of 1!s in B
𝑐= numer of 1!𝑠shared by A and B
𝑠𝑖𝑚𝐴, 𝐵=
𝑐
𝑎+ 𝑏−𝑐
2D SIMILARITY
3D SIMILARITY
Molecule A
Molecule B
Highest-scoring Overlay
A
B
C
Figure 8: Illustration of molecular similarity between two molecules (A), 3- keto-petromyzonol sulfate (molecule A) and
a benzenesulfonamide (molecule B, ZINC ID ZINC38899649).
(B) 2D similarity computed by comparing ﬁngerprint
representation of the molecules and computing the Tanimoto coeﬃcient as a similarity measure between the two. (C)
3D volumetric overlay, which can be created by software such as ROCS [141], for which the Tanimoto similarity can be
computed from the shapes based on positional densities.
molecule is considered a candidate for a given target receptor class only if it meets a minimum Tanimoto similarity
cutoﬀwith at least 푁1 ﬁngerprints in the set of known actives. If this requirement is met, the compound must also
pass the following criterion for 푁2 ﬁngerprints – where 푁2 is a number that has to be speciﬁed by the user, similar to
choosing 푁1. First, the compound must have at least 푘nearest neighbors above a new user-speciﬁed Tanimoto cutoﬀ,
and second, the maximum diﬀerence between two of the 푘neighbors’ binding aﬃnities must be below a user-speciﬁed
threshold. The maximum diﬀerence threshold is included to help avoid activity cliﬀs [140]. For each ﬁngerprint
that meets these conditions, the 푘neighbors’ binding aﬃnities are averaged. Finally, for each query compound, the
푘-neighbor averages are averaged for all the ﬁngerprints in the ensemble that passed the second ﬁlter to predict the
binding aﬃnity of the query compound. The algorithm had good performance on a calibration set and correctly labeled
compounds in a number of case studies with GPCR targets such as adenosine 퐴2퐴receptor and dopamine receptor D4.
This method could be applied to any GPCR of interest to search for new actives, provided there are enough ligands
that have measured activity with said GPCR.
3.2.2. Comparing 3D representations
While many similarity-based methods that utilize them are computationally eﬃcient, one of the issues with com-
mon ﬁngerprints like ECFP and MACCS is that they do not explicitly capture 3D information about the compounds.
This is problematic in situations where a molecule’s 3D structure is valuable for assessing a property, such as the
steric ﬁt of a predicted pose docked into the receptor’s binding site, so methods for comparing 3D representations of
compounds are of practical use.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
One approach for comparing 3D representations of molecules could be to ﬁnd an overlay with maximum shape
overlap (Figure 8 C). Raschka et al. recently showed that 3D overlay-based VS can be made computationally feasible
on large databases if hypotheses based on prior information about the ligand-receptor interactions can be used as
ﬁltering criteria [24]. Using this hypothesis-driven approach, combined with machine learning-based molecular feature
importance assessments, the researchers discovered a potent GPCR signaling inhibitor by screening more than ten
million commercially available molecules [24, 25].
One weakness of using just maximum shape overlap to determine molecular similarity is that it does not utilize
electrostatic information. There are multiple analyses that show that electrostatics play an important role in GPCR
binding sites, so 3D methods should incorporate them in some capacity [142, 143]. Thus, similarity scores utilized in
this space are generally based on a combination of structural overlap and the overlap of groups with like properties.
Methods like ROCS [141] and WEGA [144] represent molecules as overlapping Gaussian spheres with each atom
sphere containing information about its location, atom type, and charge. The maximum scoring overlay is then based
on both the structural and chemical overlap. ESim is a recent method that computes overlay similarity in a diﬀerent
way [145]. The model uses a set of "observer points" in 3D space that are a ﬁxed distance from one target molecule.
At each observer point spatial, angular and electrostatic values are computed that capture properties of the target and
query molecule from that observer point’s perspective. The closer the values for each molecule are when summed over
all observer points, the higher the similarity score is.
To evaluate the abovementioned eSim method, the authors used the DUD-E dataset [146]. DUD-E is a standard
benchmark set for evaluating molecular conformations and docking predictions that includes 102 targets, ﬁve of which
are GPCR, as well as 22,886 active compounds and their aﬃnities against the targets. Additionally, each active has ﬁfty
decoys, molecules that have similar physio-chemical properties but diﬀerent topologies than the active. An eﬃcient
virtual screening algorithm should be able to select actives while avoiding decoys eﬀectively. The performance was
evaluated by choosing an active for a target then computing eSim scores for other molecules in DUD-E in relation to
that active. From there, a ROC-Curve could be constructed to assess how robustly the model can distinguish between
actives and inactives. Statistical analysis of the AUC-ROC scores showed that eSim signiﬁcantly outperformed other
3D similarity methods, including mainstays like ROCS and WEGA, on many of the DUD-E targets and was only rarely
signiﬁcantly outperformed by another method. For the ﬁve GPCR in the dataset, the eSim had higher AUC-ROC in
all cases, with signiﬁcantly better AUC-ROC performance for three of the ﬁve receptors.
3.2.3. Hybrid methods and neural network embeddings
Methods that rely on 2D ﬁngerprints or 3D overlays for ligand-based VS utilize diﬀerent information about the
molecular structures – each method has individual strengths and weaknesses [147]. The HybridSim-VS method com-
bines both 2D ﬁngerprint and 3D-structural information [148], and the proposed similarity metric is a combination of
the Tanimoto similarity of the 3D shape overlay of a pair of molecules and of its 2D ﬁngerprint. This hybrid metric
outperformed MACCS, a 2D ﬁngerprint, and WEGA, a 3D representation, when tested on the DUD-E benchmark
dataset [146].
Section 3.1 summarized diﬀerent neural network embeddings that can be used as inputs to machine learning mod-
els to predict various molecular properties. The same embeddings can be used for clustering-based similarity search.
One example of this in practice is a clustering-based SPiDER search [149]. SPiDER uses self-organizing maps, a spe-
cial type of artiﬁcial neural network approach for unsupervised learning, to create low-dimensional embeddings of the
molecule space based on the CATS topological pharmacophores models and physiochemical small molecule descrip-
tors [150]. Recently SPiDER was used in tandem with a binding aﬃnity prediction via DEcRyPT to discover celastrol,
a cannabinoid receptor 1 and 2 agonist [151, 152]. DEcRyPT is based on random forest models for regression analy-
sis, which have been trained to predict binding aﬃnities from topological pharmacophore features. In this study, the
researchers ﬁrst used SPiDER to select potential cannabinoid receptor agonists via clustering. The selected molecules
were then analyzed using DEcRyPT, which was trained on experimental binding aﬃnity values for selected targets, as
a predictive model that was applied to the most conﬁdent predictions from SPiDER to obtain binding aﬃnity scores
(-log10 values). The agonist celastrol was identiﬁed by this approach, and the ligand was experimentally validated by
biochemical assays including radiological displacement assays, followed by dynamic light scattering measurements to
rule out false-positive readouts. The authors emphasized that common similarity-based searches using conventional
ECFP4 Morgan-ﬁngerprints would have disqualiﬁed celastrol as a GPCR ligand.
4. Receptor structure-based methods
As seen in the previous section, many methods can be eﬀectively utilized to identify bioactive GPCR ligands with-
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
out explicitly including the receptor structure. Ligand-based methods are the only option when no receptor structure is
available, as is the case for many human GPCRs [153]. However, the structure is informative if it is available and opens
the door to new tasks that can be approached with machine learning. We explore applications of machine learning for
two such tasks: binding site prediction and protein-ligand docking.
4.1. Binding site prediction
One of the most notable achievements in binding site prediction for identifying new targets was Nayal and Honig’s
random forest model, which was trained on 408 features representing structural, geometric, and physicochemical prop-
erties [154]. Their method was able to identify 1,347 cavities on the surface of 99 diverse proteins, and in 100% of the
cases, a drug has been experimentally found to bind at least one of these surface cavities.
A more recent method for discovering binding sites in GPCRs is implemented in the COACH-D server [37, 38],
which optionally allows users to provide a ligand structure that is then docked into the predicted binding site of the
target protein structure to reﬁne the ligand binding site predictions. The prediction in COACH-D is based on the
COACH algorithm, which aggregates binding site predictions from both sequence and structure data based on ﬁve
other methods and then uses a linear SVM classiﬁer for the ﬁnal prediction [155].
Challenges for applying deep learning-based models to binding site identiﬁcation are two-fold. First, the dataset of
available GPCR structures is relatively small. However, this problem can potentially be addressed by transfer learning,
which is discussed in Section 6. Second, deep learning excels when the models can learn to extract patterns from
the raw input data rather than hand-engineered feature descriptors as described in Section 3.1. While deep learning
models based on 3D voxelization methods [156, 157] and graph convolutions [122, 123, 158] have been successful
in predicting binding aﬃnities and molecular properties from small molecule structures, representing large molecules
such as membrane receptors is more computationally prohibitive.
A recently developed deep learning method addresses the computational challenges of working with membrane
receptors by splitting larger proteins into multiple parts [159]. The model BiteNet is a 3D convolutional network that
takes 64 Å cubes voxelized into 1 Å units as input. Each voxel has a set of eleven channels for eleven atom types,
and each channel’s value is the output of an atomic density function applied to the channel’s atom type. The output
of BiteNet is an 8x8x8x4 tensor, where the ﬁrst three dimensions correspond to the coordinates of voxel cells in the
original 64 Å grid–the coordinates of 8 Å cubes within the 64 Å cube input. The last dimension’s four channels
correspond to a probability that the associated 8 Å cube contains a binding site and the cartesian coordinates of the
most likely binding site. If a protein is larger than 64 Å in any dimension, then it is broken into overlapping 64 Å
grids, which are considered separate data points. BiteNet was trained on the frames of molecular dynamic simulation
trajectories of a curated set of protein-ligand complexes from PDB [160]. In a case study on the GPCR A2A, the model
was able to correctly identify its known binding sites.
4.2. Protein-ligand docking
Structure-based virtual screening for GPCRs is limited by the number of high-resolution GPCR structures that are
available. However, advancements in techniques like Cryo-EM have increased the rate at which these structures are
solved, such that many general AI-based methods for protein-ligand docking can be applied to modeling GPCR-ligand
recognition in the future.
Structure-based VS methods need to be able to score protein-ligand complexes to identify favorable candidates.
Scoring functions can be grouped into four classes: force ﬁeld, empirical, knowledge-based, and machine learning-
based [161]. Popular docking programs typically use scoring from the ﬁrst three classes [33, 162, 163]. Functions
from these three classes are sometimes referred to as classical scoring functions. Classical scoring functions are based
on linear combinations of features, which restricts the ways they can utilize structural and interaction data [164].
Scoring functions based on machine learning are not restricted in this way. One of the ﬁrst machine learning scoring
functions to outperform classical methods was RF-score, which has been updated multiple times to further improve its
performance [41, 165, 166]. All iterations of RF-score use the same algorithm for random forest regression. However,
the researchers experimented with diﬀerent ways of encoding the molecular information in the training dataset to
improve the performance of RF-score, which underlines the importance of choosing a good input representation as
previously discussed in Section 2. The feature representation of the protein-ligand complex used in the latest version
of the RF-score (v3) [166] consists of counts of interacting protein-ligand atom pairs. Two atoms are considered
interacting if they are within 10 Å in the structure. For example, a carbon in the protein that is 7 Å away from a
nitrogen in the ligand in a binding pose would increment the count. These features are not symmetric; The feature
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
for an atom of type 퐴in the protein and an atom of type 퐵in the ligand is a diﬀerent feature than the one for an
atom of type 퐵in the protein and an atom of type 퐴in the ligand. Additionally, RF-score v3 uses features produced
by AutoDock Vina [33]. When trained and tested to model a VS setting, RF-score outperformed classical scoring
functions in various evaluation metrics [167].
Initial attempts at developing NN-based scoring functions in this space struggled with overﬁtting issues and were
outperformed by methods that utilize conventional machine learning algorithms, like RF-score [168]. Recently, how-
ever, a set of new NN-based scoring functions have shown state-of-the-art performance [156, 157, 169, 170]. All
these networks use novel input representations to capture the structural and chemical information of the protein-ligand
complex.
For models in this space, PDBbind is a relevant database that was used to train all of the NN-scoring functions we
review. As of writing, it contains 17,679 protein-ligand complexes along with their experimentally-measured binding
aﬃnity data [171]. While not consisting of exclusively GPCRs, models trained on this set could easily be applied to
scoring GPCR-ligand poses even if the following methods do not address them speciﬁcally.
A number of NN-based scoring functions voxelize the 3D representation of the protein-ligand complex (Section 2.3)
and use functions that capture structural and chemical information to compute the channels of each voxel [156, 157,
170]. All of these methods are based on 3D CNNs, which can be computationally demanding due to their large number
of trainable model parameters. Furthermore, the large number of parameters increases the number of training exam-
ples required to eﬀectively train the networks without overﬁtting, which has been identiﬁed as an issue for DNNs in
this space [119]. However, more recent methods aim to address the overﬁtting issue by using more modern CNN
architectures. For instance, DeepAtom [157] was recently designed based on ShuﬄeNet v2 [172], and the recent
퐾DEEP [156] method is based on SqueezeNet [173]. These architectures were designed to achieve good computa-
tional performance while keeping the number of trainable parameters relatively small, which helps with minimizing
overﬁtting when deeper architectures are being trained on smaller datasets. Both DeepAtom and 퐾DEEP achieved
state-of-the-art binding aﬃnity predictions on the PDBbind v. 2016 core dataset [171]. The success of these networks
suggests that advances in other subﬁelds of deep learning could be eﬀective in VS as well and could be a fruitful area
of future research.
Other NN-based scoring functions achieved state-of-the-art performance by including more information in the
input representations. OnionNet uses atom pair counts similar to RF-score, but generates them for multiple cutoﬀs and
makes each pair exclusive to the ﬁrst cutoﬀit appears in [169]. These values are then converted into a 푛× 푚matrix,
where 푛is the cutoﬀvalue and 푚is the atom pair, and this matrix is used as input for a 2D CNN. The use of a 2D
CNN reduces the parameter burden of this model so the area of the protein that can be encoded increases substantially.
The previously mentioned 3D CNN models, DeepAtom and 퐾DEEP, can only capture molecular information in a 20 Å
cube, while OnionNet counts at least all atom pairs within a 61 Å cube. Long-range electrostatic interactions extend
beyond 20 Å and are known to be important in protein-ligand binding. Hence, OnionNet may be more eﬀective for
VS targets where these long-range interactions are important for activity prediction [174]. In practice, its performance
on the PDBbind v. 2016 core was comparable to the 3D CNNs mentioned above, though there was no performance
comparison conducted on individual targets where this information could be useful.
5. De novo small-molecule design
De novo molecule design is closely aligned with the goals of VS. While VS attempts to answer questions such
as "Does this molecule activate this target?", de novo design attempts to answer "Can we generate a molecule that
can activate this target?". Answering the second question in the aﬃrmative implies that we understand what makes
a molecule active against a given target. De novo molecule design can be tied to the idea of inverse QSAR/QSPR,
deriving the structures of all molecules that are active with a target or have a certain property. This is a challenging
problem, but despite its diﬃculty, de novo synthesis has recently become an active area of research, which is likely
due to the recent advances in the development of deep generative models and reinforcement learning.
5.1. Generating molecules with variational autoencoders
Autoencoders refer to architectures that were traditionally used for dimensionality reduction and trained in an
unsupervised manner [175]. The main idea behind autoencoders is that they learn to preserve the essential part of the
data and remove the non-essential ones (Figure 9 A).
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 22 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
An autoencoder consists of two neural networks: an encoder that transforms a training example into a lower-
dimensional representation, and a decoder that reconstructs the original training example from its lower-dimensional
representation. For example, if both the encoder and decoder submodules of the autoencoder are fully-connected
NNs with linear activation functions, the latent feature embedding produced by the encoder is equivalent to features
transformed via principal component analysis except for the feature orthogonality constraint.
It shall be noted that regular autoencoders are deterministic models that can be used for data compression or to
modify existing data given a user-speciﬁed objective [176–179]. A related model is the variational autoencoder, which
can be considered a generative model as it is capable of synthesizing entirely new, realistic data records mimicking the
data contained in the training dataset [180, 181].
In essence, a VAE learns to reconstruct high-dimensional inputs from a low-dimensional continuous latent space. In
contrast to a conventional autoencoder, points closely together in the latent space are encouraged to have reconstructions
with similar properties. A high-level diagram of a molecular VAE is displayed in Figure 9 B. These models take a
molecular representation, like a SMILE string [133, 182] or a graph [183, 184], as input. The molecular representations
are then passed into an encoder network that outputs a mean vector and a standard deviation vector. These vectors
are used as parameters for a multivariate normal distribution, which is sampled from to produce a low-dimensional
embedding. The embedding is then passed through a decoder network to get a molecular representation as output.
Thus the embedding can be viewed as a lower-dimensional representation of the molecule that is output by the decoder
network.
The dimensional space that the embedding vector occupies is commonly referred to as the latent space. If the goal
of an autoencoder is to reproduce its data input, it may seem strange that the encoder network generates parameters
to sample data points in latent space instead of generating the data instances directly. However, this particular design
ensures that points close in latent space result in reconstructions with similar properties. Without getting into the details,
the parameter vectors, which are output by the encoder network, are used as a regularization term for reconstruction
loss of the molecule input into the VAE. This term is minimized when the latent embeddings are sampled from a
standard normal distribution. However, if all latent embeddings are sampled from a standard normal distribution, the
reconstruction loss will be high. This encourages the model to group the latent vectors of similar molecules closely
together in the embedding space. While this minimizes the regularization term, it also reduces the risk of incurring a
high reconstruction loss, because the reconstruction loss for similar molecules will be less than that for diﬀerent ones.
This concept is also conveyed in Figure 9 B – the molecule generated by the model diﬀers from the input molecule,
but they share a relatively large degree of structural similarity and are close in the latent space. This property of the
latent space can be utilized to generate novel molecules with similar properties to selected input molecules by taking
the input’s latent representation and perturbing it in a controlled manner [133, 185]. One of the challenges with using
VAE-based models in this space is that with current architectures, the VAE has no notion of what constitutes a valid
molecule [183]. Since these models are trained on large numbers of valid compounds, certain models were still able
to achieve reasonable results despite producing some invalid structures [133, 182].
Jin et al. introduced a novel VAE design that only allowed valid molecules as outputs, called a junction tree
VAE [183]. This model uses a GNN to encode a molecule’s graph and also a junction tree of valid molecular fragments
in the graph. The decoder network ﬁrst decodes a junction tree from the latent space. Then, it decodes a molecule
that satisﬁes that junction tree. Since all the molecular fragments the junction tree can encode are valid, a valid
molecule can always be derived from the junction tree.[186]. In addition to always producing valid molecules, the
model outperformed other VAEs on a Bayesian optimization task, where the goal was to ﬁnd a molecule that maximized
octanol-water partition coeﬃcients (logP).
One shortcoming of regular VAEs is that the molecular similarity in the latent spaces does not directly translate
to the similarity of a molecular property of interest. As a general example, consider the latent representation of a
ligand with a thiol group that induces a positive activity response in a given target receptor. Perturbation of the latent
representation of that molecule may result in similar molecules that share the thiol group feature but are not active
against the target. As a consequence, the performance for VAEs in this space is usually assessed on simple chemical
properties [182, 183, 185]. For this reason, while there is still plenty to be investigated about VAEs for de novo
synthesis, research that has focused on the de novo generation of compounds for speciﬁc targets has largely utilized
reinforcement learning, which will be discussed in the next section.
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 23 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Latent space:
(MLP, RNN,
CNN, or GNN)
Mean
vector
Std. dev.
vector
Sample 
from
CC(=O)O
C(C(=O)O)O
Molecular 
graph:
SMILES string:
Or
ENCODER
DECODER
(MLP, RNN,
CNN, or GNN)
𝜇
𝜎
𝑧
Vector 
embedded in 
latent space
N(µ, σ)
Minimize difference between input and output during training
Hidden layer
Input layer
Output layer
x
z
x^
Encoder
Decoder
z = f(x)
x = g(z)
^
A
B
Figure 9: (A) Fully connected autoencoder consists of two submodules: an encoder followed by a decoder. The encoder
submodule compresses an input representation 푥into a lower-dimensional representation 푧. The decoder converts the
lower-dimensional representation to ̂푥, such that reconstruction resembles the original input, ̂푥≈푥. (B) Illustration of a
variational autoencoder architecture and how it can be applied to molecules. Given a molecular representation as input
(acetic acid), an encoder network outputs both a mean vector and a standard deviation vector. These vectors are used
as parameters of a normal distribution to sample a vector embedded in the latent space (푧). This latent vector is used
as input for a decoder network, which outputs a molecular representation (glycolic acid). The loss function for variational
autoencoder training consists of two components: the ﬁrst component is the reconstruction loss ensuring that the original
input resembles the generated output; the second component encourages similar molecules to cluster together in the latent
space. In this case the structurally similar glycolic acid and oxalic acid are close in latent space, while the less similar
gamma-butyrolactone is farther away. After training, the encoder portion can be discarded, and new molecules can be
sampled by sampling diﬀerent 푧vectors from a standard normal distribution.
5.2. Reinforcement learning-based molecular design
Reinforcement learning seeks to teach an agent to perform actions that will maximize a cumulative reward over
a series of iterations. In this paradigm, the deﬁnition of the reward is very ﬂexible, which makes it possible to more
directly optimize for speciﬁc traits compared to using generative models such as VAEs. As illustrated in Figure 10,
at each iteration, the agent is given a state by the environment as well as the reward from the previous iteration. The
agent then selects an action based on this information. This selected action is fed into the environment, which then
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 24 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
Agent
Environment
Action
At
Reward:
Rt
Rt+1
St+1
State:
St
1
3
2
CH3
CH3
Figure 10: Representation of the basic reinforcement learning paradigm with a simple molecular example. (1) Given a
benzene ring (state 푆푡at iteration 푡) and some reward value 푅푡at iteration 푡, (2) the agent selects an action 퐴푡that adds
a methyl group to the benzene ring. (3) The environment considers this information for producing the next state (푆푡+1)
and reward (푅푡+1). This cycle repeats until the episode is terminated.
outputs a new state and reward. This cycle continues until the series of iterations, called an episode, is terminated,
at which point the agent’s behavior is updated based on the information provided by its trajectory, the ordered list of
states, actions, and rewards associated with each iteration in the episode. While this high-level overview will suﬃce
to understand how reinforcement learning is utilized for de novo design, the reader is referred to [50, 187], which we
recommend as resources with more in-depth explanations.
Several examples exist in which reinforcement learning models have been optimized to generate GPCR bioactive
molecules. One such example is the REINVENT model [42]. In REINVENT, the agent is an RNN that generates one
SMILES string token at a time over the course of multiple iterations. After a batch of 128 SMILES strings are produced,
the RNN agent is updated with a modiﬁed form of REINFORCE, an algorithm that updates the agent network based
on the trajectories of the episodes in the current batch [188]. In one experiment, REINVENT was trained to generate
compounds that are active with the GPCR Dopamine receptor 퐷2 (DRD2). In this experiment, the reward function
was based on the output of an SVM trained to predict a compound’s DRD2 activity. After training, the agent was able
to produce compounds that the SVM labeled as active against DRD2 96% of the time. The reinforcement learning
model generated both novel, chemically valid compounds and, impressively, compounds that are known to be active
with DRD2 even though these were not included in the training set.
DrugEx is another deep reinforcement model that was directly optimized for generating molecules with GPCR
activity [189]. Here, the researchers focused on adenosine 퐴2퐴receptor, which has been targeted to treat cardiovascular
and inﬂammatory diseases [190]. Similar to REINVENT, the DrugEx model also produces SMILES strings over
the course of an episode. However, DrugEx adds a stochastic component during training. Before being used in the
reinforcement learning training, the RNN agent network was individually trained with a large set of molecule SMILES
from ZINC [21]. Two copies of this pre-trained network were then created, with one referred to as the exploration
network and the other as the exploitation network. Only the exploitation network was updated during the reinforcement
learning training process; however, with a speciﬁed probability at each iteration, the exploration network would be
queried for the next token instead. The purpose of this procedure was to explore a wider chemical space during
training – afterwards, the exploration network was discarded, and only the exploitation network was used to generate
new molecules. This method successfully rediscovered some known actives for adenosine 퐴2퐴receptor. The authors
also suggested the RNN agent was able to produce molecules with a large diversity, by showing the actives generated
by the model covered all clusters generated by ﬁngerprint-based clustering on known adenosine 퐴2퐴receptor actives.
Other reinforcement learning-based models for de novo synthesis described in the literature were not speciﬁcally
focused on GPCRs’ bioactive molecule design but could be adopted for such tasks in the future [191, 192]. One
such example is Zhou et al.’s Molecule Deep Q-Networks (MOLDQN) approach, which modiﬁes deep Q-networks for
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 25 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
molecule generation [191, 193]. This model’s agent network takes the current molecular graph’s Morgan ﬁngerprint
as input and selects an action to modify the molecular graph. The actions include adding an atom, adding a bond, or
increasing a bond’s order. Additionally, the actions that are allowed at a given iteration are restricted if they are invalid
so the system will always produce valid molecules. Similar to DrugEx, the model encourages exploration by selecting
a random valid action at a given iteration with some probability 휖. The model achieved state-of-the-art performance
when producing molecules that maximized for logP and quantitative estimates of drug likeness separately [194].
While many publications in this area demonstrate the ability to optimize for molecular properties, they unfortu-
nately lack experimental follow-up procedures for further model evaluation. As a notable counter-example, we want to
highlight GENTRL, which was used to discover novel inhibitors of discodin domain receptor 1, a tyrosine kinase [14].
The inhibitors were generated computationally and then synthesized and experimentally validated. The experiments
in silico and in vitro were completed in approximately 46 days at a fraction of the cost of a high throughput screening
approach.
6. Transfer learning
Machine learning, and deep learning in particular, requires large training datasets. It’s not atypical for modern deep
neural networks to have millions of trainable parameters, which require suﬃcient data for successful parameterization.
Transfer learning refers to the process of adapting models that have been trained on one task to another, typically similar
task [195]. The most common form of transfer learning is to take a DNN that was trained on a large general-purpose
dataset and ﬁne-tune it to a smaller dataset of interest. As an example, suppose there is only a limited number of ligands
with bioactivity data for a certain class A GPCR of interest. However, a larger bioactivity dataset exists for a second
GPCR from the same subfamily that has a similar binding site. In this scenario, one could apply transfer learning by
training a DNN to predict bioactive ligands for the second GPCR and then ﬁne-tune the model weights on the smaller
dataset of the GPCR of interest. Typically, the more similar the initial dataset is to the dataset for the target task, the
more successful transfer learning can be. In our example, if the ligands in the larger dataset are physio-chemically
similar to those in the smaller one, one could expect transfer learning to be more successful.
One example of transfer learning being applied to improve the performance of models with limited available data
is in a recent structure-based method that sought to train a 3D CNN to classify molecule activity from high-scoring
docking poses [196]. When the network was trained on targets in a DUD-E based training set and then ﬁne-tuned
on a smaller, protein family-speciﬁc dataset, the model performed better on test set targets in that protein family than
the same network that was trained only on the family-speciﬁc set [146]. Family-speciﬁc models typically outperform
general models, but data availability may limit their performance [197]. This work shows that transfer learning can
help to address this issue. While it has not yet been applied further in bioactivity predictions, transfer learning has
been successful in improving the performance of models that predict standard molecular properties like solvency as
well as in models that predict quantum mechanical approximations [198, 199].
7. Future directions
Currently, one of the most neglected areas of machine learning in bioactive ligand discovery is active learning,
which aims to combine artiﬁcial and human intelligence. Active learning is a branch of machine learning that focuses
on selecting labeled data for supervised learning to improve non-conﬁdent predictions and ﬁll the knowledge gaps of
the model [200]. Knowledge gaps can be ﬁlled through human interaction, by sampling optimal unlabeled training
examples for annotations by humans. We think that utilizing domain knowledge from experts is crucial in a highly
specialized ﬁeld such as GPCR bioactive ligand discovery, and we believe that it is highly advantageous to develop
machine learning systems that include human feedback loops.
Another avenue that remains largely unexplored for computational ligand discovery is a combination of active
learning and transfer learning (Section 6), called active transfer learning. Here, a separate model is trained on an
existing validation set to predict whether a given model is able to make correct predictions or not on a given unlabeled
dataset, which then can highlight problematic cases for human review [200].
Another recent development and promising research trend in deep learning is semi-supervised learning, which is
particularly useful if pre-trained models for transfer learning are not available for the target domain or are infeasible
to obtain. Semi-supervised learning is the process of deriving and utilizing label information directly from the data
itself rather than having humans annotating it. In a language model, for example, semi-supervised learning can be
Raschka and Kaufman: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 26 of 33

AI-based GPCR bioactive ligand discovery
utilized by training a model to predict the next word in a sequence [201] or, in the context of computer vision, this
could be the composition of an image into a jigsaw puzzle that the DNN learns to assemble [202]. The main idea of
this approach is to choose a task that requires an understanding of the underlying data in order to be solved. This stage
of self-supervised training can be regarded as pre-training, and the model can then be adopted and ﬁne-tuned to solve
the target task downstream similar to conventional transfer learning.
In addition to applications of new machine learning paradigms to VS for GPCRs it is also worth considering
how machine learning could be used to assist other areas of GPCR research. One potential application for machine
learning that could push GPCR research forward is to assist in deorphanization. While this intersection is largely
unexplored there is one recent method where researchers used an SVM trained on peptide-descriptor vectors for GPCR
neuropeptide ligands to predict if a set of orphaned neuropeptides from C. elegans interacted with any putative GPCRs
in the organism [203]. After predicting 22 putative neuropeptide-GPCR pairs, the authors experimentally validated
11 of them with cell-based signaling assays to provide evidence for nine new receptors. A similar approach could be
applied to general chemical ligands by modifying the data representation. Such an approach could also be eﬀective in
other organisms or with more advanced machine learning models.
Binding site modeling is another area that modern machine learning methods could drive forward. As mentioned
throughout the paper, one challenge when working with GPCRs is that no high-resolution structures are available.
Accurate computational approaches for predicting the structure of a binding site could have an immensely beneﬁcial
impact on guiding chemical screening. It is worth mentioning the recently published deep learning model AlphaFold
obtained state-of-the-art performance on the protein folding problem, far surpassing traditional approaches to it [204].
While a prediction of binding site structure would ideally require higher resolutions than this model provides, it is a
step in the right direction.
8. Conclusions
The conﬂuence of the meteoric rise of deep learning methods, the increase in large chemical datasets, and the further
ease of access to high powered computing resources have spurred the ﬁeld of chemical machine learning forward at
a rapid pace. The many representations of chemical data allow a variety of methods used in other ﬁelds to be put
to task on chemical quandaries and have encouraged the development of new machine learning models. As we have
discussed, many of these models have been or could be applied to VS on GPCRs, though the types of GPCR data
currently available may limit the general applicability of certain models. However, as the amount of bioactivity data
available continues to increase, so will the performance of these models. One area in which the space is currently
lacking is the experimental validation of the computational method development.
Hopefully, by providing an overview of deep learning methods and detailed explanations of new approaches in the
space, we can encourage the more experimentally-minded to utilize methods in this space, or at least to collaborate
more conﬁdently. In the other direction, it is important to convey to the methodologically-inclined that while it is great
to develop a new method that performs well on a benchmark, experimental validation is the gold standard, so it is
beneﬁcial to seek out experimental collaboration when possible. This will lead to more actionable results and push the
development of machine learning VS methods even faster in the future.
9. Acknowledgements
Support for this work was provided by the Oﬃce of the Vice Chancellor for Research and Graduate Education
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison with funding from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation. In addi-
tion, we are thankful for the support provided by the NLM Biomedical Informatics Training Program (grant number
5T15LM007359). Also, we would like to thank Kylie Moynihan for helpful feedback on the manuscript.
