Using AI/ML to Find and Remediate Enterprise Secrets in Code &
Document Sharing Platforms
Gregor Kerr
JPMorgan Chase

David Algorry
JPMorgan Chase

Senad Ibraimoski
JPMorgan Chase

Peter Maciver
JPMorgan Chase

Sean Moran
JPMorgan Chase

ABSTRACT
We introduce a new challenge to the software development commu-
nity: 1) leveraging AI to accurately detect and flag up secrets in code
and on popular document sharing platforms that frequently used by
developers, such as Confluence and 2) automatically remediating
the detections (e.g. by suggesting password vault functionality).
This is a challenging, and mostly unaddressed task. Existing meth-
ods leverage heuristics and regular expressions, that can be very
noisy, and therefore increase toil on developers. The next step -
modifying code itself - to automatically remediate a detection, is
a complex task. We introduce two baseline AI models that have
good detection performance and propose an automatic mechanism
for remediating secrets found in code, opening up the study of this
task to the wider community.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing →Enterprise architecture modeling.
KEYWORDS
artificial intelligence, software engineering, cybersecurity
ACM Reference Format:
Gregor Kerr, David Algorry, Senad Ibraimoski, Peter Maciver, and Sean
Moran. 2024. Using AI/ML to Find and Remediate Enterprise Secrets in
Code & Document Sharing Platforms . In Proceedings of ACM Conference
(Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Preventing accidental leakage of password credentials, API tokens
and private keys within code and on document sharing platforms,
such as Confluence, is a critical effort in many organisations. A
previous study [6] discovered more than 100,000 GitHub reposito-
ries with secrets present within source code. Similar types of leaks
have resulted in several large scale breaches [3, 8, 11]. Existing tools
developed to prevent such breaches leverage heuristic approaches
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2024 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
such as regex-based approaches[4, 5, 10]. Although these tools pro-
vide a great basis for detecting secrets in many environments, due
to the nature of these heuristic approaches, substantial noise is
generated, leaving users to deal with a large proportion of false
positive detections. These false positives are due to the nature of
these heuristic approaches as one study [2] suggests the false posi-
tives are due to the excessive and faulty regular expressions. There
has been some exploration into machine learning approaches [9]
to reduce these false positives created from these noisy regular
expressions.
We introduce a new challenge to the software development com-
munity: firstly, the development of an effective AI/ML model that
can accurately identify secrets in code. Secondly, auto-remediate
those detections with code that is integrated directly in to replace
the detected secret. Finally, we suggest an extension to the de-
tection to free text within collaborative document sharing plat-
forms (DSPs). We describe some baseline AI/ML models, and how a
human-in-the-loop learning setup was critical to achieving suitable
performance. We suggest two different baseline models for code
and natural language. For code we develop a language agnostic ma-
chine learning model to predict potential secrets using annotated
labels from SMEs. For a DSP we develop an AI/ML model that uses
outputs of a heuristic tool to provide weak labels which are then
re-annotated to internal gold labels based on the input of SMEs.
For auto-remediation of secrets detected in code, we describe an
effective openrewrite rules-based solution1.
2
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY
For both secrets in code and DSP we leverage the detect-secrets
library [5]. Yelp detect-secrets is an opensource library for de-
tecting secrets within a codebase 2. More specifically, it uses a wide
range of plugins each with their own custom heuristics to detect
a potential secret. These plugins range from detecting AWS keys,
private keys, artifactory credentials to keyword secrets. The result
of performing a detect-secrets scan is a baseline file containing
secrets found within a given codebase. Due to the nature of some
heuristics, the detections can be noisy, introducing a lot of false
positive detections that the developer needs to remediate. For this
remediation process we leverage OpenRewrite which enables de-
velopers to successfully automate code maintenance tasks through
refactoring of software. Developers are able to remediate potential
threats, such as secrets, through accepting generated software that
1https://docs.openrewrite.org/
2https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets
arXiv:2401.01754v1  [cs.SE]  3 Jan 2024

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Kerr and Algorry, et al.
remediates these threats, and consequently merge into their appli-
cation. It is important that the accepted software is in alignment
with the approved set of secure communication patterns within its
configuration - resulting in compliant code which can be trusted
by developers.
2.1
Secrets in Code
Approach for Code: The first baseline we construct leverages
detect-secrets for finding potential secrets within a codebase. How-
ever, due to the nature of this heuristic approach, we find a large
amount of false positives within the existing approach - in partic-
ular arising from the keyword plugin. The keyword plugin uses
a wide range of complex regex’s to find patterns (e.g. password =
somestring or password : somestring) with a vast range of operators
to separate the left hand-side variable name to the right hand-side
value assignment. However, due to the wide range of regex’s used,
this is the most noisy plugin when it comes to code. We therefore
focus our attention for secrets in code towards the most noisy plu-
gin in yelp detect-secrets - keyword. To evaluate the model, we
curate a dataset of 10,206 lines of code that detect-secrets had
labelled as secrets. We then re-annotate these lines to use as gold
labels for model evaluation. Featurization for Code: For input to
the model we consider 3 main features : the potential secret itself,
the extension (py, java, ini etc.) of the file the secret originated from
and we calculate the strength of the potential secret by using the
entropy of the string. We leverage CountVectorizer [7] to convert
the collection of potential secrets to a matrix of token counts. We
use a Logistic Regression [7] model for detection. Our choice to use
a logistic regression model was due to the speed in training and ease
of deployment. This model also lends itself to easy explainability of
a detection. We employ a 70/10/20 split for training,validation and
test set on the 10,206 datapoints (7,622 non-secrets, 2,584 secrets).
We optimize for recall when tuning the classifier threshold.
Performance for Code: To test the effectiveness of our model we
perform validation on a sample test set size of 1,020 data points
containing 261 secrets and 759 non-secrets.
Technique
Precision
Recall
F1
Yelp Detect-secrets
0.26
1
0.41
Secret Detection Model
0.41
0.99
0.58
Table 1: Secrets Detection in Code
In Table 1 we minimally reduce recall by missing one secret,
and we gain significantly in other metrics. By reducing false posi-
tives, we alleviate the need for developers to remediate 383 false
positives out of a possible 759 false detections that were reported
by detect-secrets. Remediation for Code: By using a recipe
generation/templating tool such as OpenRewrite we can remediate
these secrets by consistently generating compliant software for
the developer to accept. Our current approach requires a catalog
of recipes (a collection of operations to accomplish some higher-
level task [1]) for very specific internal use cases for the resolution
of these secrets. Although the overall goal of remediating secrets
across the software estate through automation is achievable, it re-
quires a significant amount of effort to create a comprehensive set
of recipes, given the pattern matching nature of the mechanism. To
do this at scale we need a more efficient approach for the identifica-
tion of patterns and generation of associated recipes. In particular,
we look to leverage GenerativeAI to create these recipes for us.
2.2
Secrets in Confluence
Approach for Document Sharing Platforms (DSPs): For our
selected DSP (Confluence), there was no existing solution in place
for identifying secrets. Therefore, there was no ground truth on
whether a given detection on DSP is a secret or not. Given the
scale of the number of pages in the DSP (millions), we opted for
a weak labelling approach to train the model. The output of Yelp
detect-secrets when applied to a subset of the pages was cor-
rected by introducing a re-labelling effort from SMEs in the loop.
Our initial dataset spanned over 700,000 pages. Featurisation for
DSP: We masked technical words that refer to the same concept,
removed special characters that do not contribute to meaningful
information, applied lemmatization and stop word removal. The
proportion of the original training data was 1 secret per 100,000
rows of data. To address this imbalance, we created synthetic data
based on the most typical values that appear in the secrets, as well
as a string created with the exrex library. Using this technique,
we added 1,300 new secrets to the training data. We employ Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) to vectorize the
text and transform it into numerical vectors. We chose XGBoost
for our machine learning model due to its simplicity, efficiency
and ability to handle imbalanced data. Performance for DSP: To
test the effectiveness of the XGBoost model, we selected 50,000
web pages. From these pages, we obtained near two million rows,
with 67 secrets and nearly 2 million non-secrets, giving a highly
imbalanced learning task.
Technique
Recall
Precision
F1
Yelp Detect-secrets
0.15
0.45
0.22
Secret Detection Model
0.97
0.36
0.53
Table 2: Secrets Detection in Confluence
In Table 2, the precision score is lower with XGBoost, but the
recall score is significantly higher. This leads to a considerably
lower number of false negatives. By reducing the number of false
negatives to only 2 rows, we enable the developers to have greater
confidence in detecting almost all secrets in the Confluence pages,
without significantly increasing the number of false positives.
3
CONCLUSION
We introduce the task of AI detection and auto-remediation of se-
crets in code and on collaborative document sharing platforms. We
present two baseline AI detection models, describing their imple-
mentation. We also demonstrate how OpenRewrite can be leveraged
to make code compliant automatically. We believe there is a sig-
nificant opportunity for positively impacting this task with large
language models (LLMs), particularly in making more larger-scale
and diverse changes to code to enforce compliance.

Using AI/ML to Find and Remediate Enterprise Secrets in Code & Document Sharing Platforms
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
4
DISCLAIMER
The described work is a prototype and is not a production deployed
system.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Kerr and Algorry, et al.
