DCR-CONSISTENCY: DIVIDE-CONQUER-REASONING
FOR CONSISTENCY EVALUATION AND IMPROVEMENT
OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Wendi Cui1,
Jiaxin Zhang1,2∗,
Zhuohang Li3,
Damien Lopez1,
Kamalika Das1,2,
Bradley Malin3,4,
Sricharan Kumar1,2
1Intuit
2Intuit AI Research
3Vanderbilt University
4Vanderbilt University Medical Center

ABSTRACT
Evaluating the quality and variability of text generated by Large Language Models
(LLMs) poses a significant, yet unresolved research challenge. Traditional evalua-
tion methods, such as ROUGE and BERTScore, which measure token similarity,
often fail to capture the holistic semantic equivalence. This results in a low cor-
relation with human judgments and intuition, which is especially problematic in
high-stakes applications like healthcare and finance where reliability, safety, and
robust decision-making are highly critical. This work proposes DCR, an automated
framework for evaluating and improving the consistency of LLM-generated texts
using a divide-conquer-reasoning approach. Unlike existing LLM-based evaluators
that operate at the paragraph level, our method employs a divide-and-conquer
evaluator (DCE) that breaks down the paragraph-to-paragraph comparison between
two generated responses into individual sentence-to-paragraph comparisons, each
evaluated based on predefined criteria. To facilitate this approach, we introduce
an automatic metric converter (AMC) that translates the output from DCE into an
interpretable numeric score. Beyond the consistency evaluation, we further present
a reason-assisted improver (RAI) that leverages the analytical reasons with ex-
planations identified by DCE to generate new responses aimed at reducing these
inconsistencies. Through comprehensive and systematic empirical analysis, we
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin
(e.g., +19.3% and +24.3% on the SummEval dataset) in evaluating the consistency
of LLM generation across multiple benchmarks in semantic, factual, and summa-
rization consistency tasks. Our approach also substantially reduces nearly 90%
output inconsistencies, showing promise for effective hallucination mitigation.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 and PaLM 2 (Yang et al., 2023; Bubeck et al.,
2023) have demonstrated impressive performance on a variety of natural language generation (NLG)
tasks, including summarization (Tam et al., 2022), open-book question-answering (QA) (Kamalloo
et al., 2023), and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023a). The
evaluation of generated response quality often involves the assessment of the semantic equivalence
between two pieces of text, e.g., between the generated response and the original text in summarization
tasks or between two candidate responses in open-book QA tasks. However, conventional evaluation
methods, such as BARTScore (Yuan et al., 2021) and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), which
rely on token-level comparison, are inadequate for accurately and reliably measuring the quality
of generated content, particularly in complex scenarios with long paragraphs (Liu et al., 2023b;
Hanna & Bojar, 2021). To address this issue, LLM-based evaluators such as G-Eval (Liu et al.,
2023b) and GPTScore (Jinlan et al., 2023) have proposed a new framework that evaluates texts via
paragraph-level comparison. While these evaluators show promise for certain tasks, their scores
often fail to achieve high concordance with human judgments of semantic equivalence. Furthermore,
∗Corresponding Author. Our code is available at https://github.com/intuit-ai-research/
DCR-consistency.
1
arXiv:2401.02132v1  [cs.CL]  4 Jan 2024

as only numeric scores are provided with no explanation, it can be challenging for humans to trust
or reason about these scores, particularly when using LLMs that are known to hallucinate (Li et al.,
2023; Ji et al., 2023; Rawte et al., 2023).
Assessing the consistency of LLMs is more broadly connected to AI safety and has become a critical
step in improving the reliability of these systems by preventing the generation of misinformation
and harmful content. Wang et al. (2022) demonstrates that consistency checking can significantly
enhance the chain of thought reasoning in LLMs. Similarly, Kuhn et al. (2023) leverages semantic
consistency for uncertainty estimation in NLG. Recent studies employ consistency checking to
detect hallucinations based on pre-trained LLMs (Manakul et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a) and
instruction-tuned LLMs (Mündler et al., 2023). Although these methods exhibit promising results on
several specific tasks, including mathematical reasoning and factual assessment, the potential failures
(Chen et al., 2023) of self-consistency are often overlooked. This is essentially due to a lack of a
generic, automatic, and reliable strategy that assesses the consistency of two responses, let alone
remediating such inconsistency after identifying them.
Divide-Conquer
Evaluator (DCE)
LLM Agent
Auto-Metric
Converter (AMC)
LLM Agent
Reason-Assisted
Improver (RAI)
LLM Agent
Input paragraph
Reference
Candidate 
Sentence-level
consistency
•
Decision
•
Reasons
Numeric score
Improved candidate
(sentences)
Re-evaluation
Consistency
improvement
Consistency
Evaluation
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: (a) Overview of the proposed DCR framework. The first two components (DCE-AMC) aim at
providing a better strategy for evaluating and quantifying semantic consistency to best match human
judgments. Building on this, a third component RAI further utilizes analytical reasoning to iteratively
improve the consistency of LLM-generated content w.r.t. the reference by minimizing hallucinations.
(b) The combination of DCE and AMC (DCE-AMC-4) significantly outperforms the baseline methods
in terms of correlations with human ratings. (c) RAI substantially reduces output inconsistencies by
∼90% through a single improvement iteration on SummEval and QAGS benchmarks.
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework, called Divide-Conquer-Reasoning (abbre-
viated as DCR hereafter), for developing an automatic and reliable consistency evaluation method.
Our approach capitalizes on the intuition that human evaluators typically assess consistency by
comparing the semantic meaning of the generated text to the reference text sentence by sentence and
then combining the analysis to make a holistic judgment of the complete concept. Unlike existing
metrics that rely on either token-level or paragraph-level checks, our approach breaks down the
paragraph-to-paragraph comparison of the two pieces of text into a series of sentence-to-paragraph
comparisons. This approach avoids confusing LLM by either providing too much information at once
or zooming in too narrowly. Additionally, our approach does not rely on LLMs to directly output
verbal scores, which have been shown to be prone to hallucination. We note that our AMC method is
a reference-free method, which does not rely on a golden reference written by the human expert. For
example in a summary task, our DCR method does not need a sample summary and can compare
directly between the target summary and the original paragraphs.
The DCR framework is composed of three components, each executed by an LLM agent, as shown in
Fig. 1. Given the reference and candidate, the Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) realizes the notion of
divide-conquer to determine whether the candidate is semantically equivalent to the reference at a
sentence level. DCE automatically partitions the candidate paragraph into sentences (divide), evaluates
each sentence against the reference paragraph based on pre-defined semantic-level consistency criteria
(conquer), and generates a list of reasons that explain why each sentence is or is not consistent with
the reference paragraph. Next, the Auto-Metric Converter (AMC) which builds upon DCE, converts
the reasons (with explanations) into a numeric score that is more aligned with human intuition and
provides better interpretation. The numeric score can be used to evaluate consistency in various tasks,
such as summarization, factual assessment, and hallucination detection.
2

··· ··· ···
“The sky is blue. ···
The sea is green.···”
“The sea is red. ···
And the sky is blue.···”
Reference (paragraph)
Candidate (paragraph)
Let’s examine the candidate,
sentence by sentence
Divide-Conquer Evaluator
“And the sky is blue.”
“The sea is red.”
“··· ··· ···”
Not consistent
Consistent
{ “is_consistent”: False
“reasons”: [
“Not consistent, the sea is green.”
“Consistent, the sky is blue.”
“··· ··· ···” ] }
Let’s analyze reasons
and assign scores
Auto-Metric Converter
Compared with
the reference?
-1
+1
···
Let me examine reasons
and improve
Reason-Assisted Improver
{
“Improved”: [
“The sea is green.”
“And the sky is blue.”
“··· ··· ···”
]
}
Re-generate new
candidate
“reasons”: “Not consistent, the sea is green.”
“sentences”: “The sea is red.”
··· ··· ···
Iterative multi-round
Improvement?
{
“score”: [-1,1]
“final score”: 0.5
}
Figure 2: An example of evaluating and improving the consistency of generated text via DCR.
Our DCR framework not only evaluates consistency but also enhances it through the Reason-Assisted
Improver (RAI), a third LLM agent that utilizes the outputs of DCE to generate new candidate sen-
tences. By incorporating the explanations provided by DCE with the original context, RAI produces
sentences that mitigate inconsistencies (hallucinations). This improvement process can be iteratively
applied by utilizing the re-evaluation produced by DCE to ultimately achieve a candidate response
that is fully aligned with the reference text.
We conducted an evaluation of our approach on three different NLG tasks, including semantic,
summarization, and factual consistency evaluations. Our results demonstrate that DCR significantly
outperforms all existing baseline methods as a consistency evaluator, with improvements of up
to 19.3% and 24.3% compared to G-Eval on the SummEval dataset. Additionally, our approach
achieved high correlations with human judgment on all three benchmarks. Notably, we observed
highly promising results in consistency improvement rate (from 86.71% to 91.11%) at a substantially
lower effort and cost due to its multi-thread parallel implementation.
2
PRELIMINARIES
Limitation of Existing Methods.
The conventional metrics, such as BERTscore and BARTscore,
rely on a token-level comparison using n-gram or contextual embedding to calculate cosine similarity.
However, this approach fails to capture the overall semantic meaning as it directly aggregates token-
level similarities. To address this issue, leveraging the power of LLMs for self-evaluation has
been proposed. G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b) and GPT-Eval (Jiang et al., 2023) evaluate consistency
at a paragraph level by prompting LLMs to compare two candidates as a whole. However, these
approaches have a major drawback as the generated verbal scores by LLMs are prone to hallucinations,
resulting in abnormally higher ratings for LLM-generated content that diverge from human judgment
(Liu et al., 2023b). Such methods also generate no actionable insight to justify the score or mitigate
inconsistencies after identifying them.
Problem Formulation.
Given a user query Q and LLM model M, let C refer to the candidate
response drawn from C = M(Q). LLM-generated responses are commonly evaluated using some
reference texts, denoted by R, for instance, human writing samples for generation tasks and original
content for summarization tasks. The objective of consistency evaluation is to build a function f that
quantitatively measures the semantic equivalence S between the generated candidates C and reference
R as S = f(R, C|Q, M) where S could be binary decision, such as “Yes” or “No”, “Consistent” or
“Not Consistent”, or numeric score, e.g., [-1, +1]. However, it is worth noting that our evaluation can
be generally used to check consistency between two candidates where both are generated by LLMs.
In that scenario, we only need to assume one candidate as the reference for self-check consistency.
Note that our proposed method employs the same setting as G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b), which does
not rely on a golden reference written by the human expert or ground truth labels. Our objective is
to offer a generic way to assess the consistency between two text sequences. For instance, in the
summarization task, one text sequence may be the original document, while the other might be the
generated text summarization by LLMs. To distinguish between the two text sequences, we referred
to one of the text sequences as “reference” and the other as “candidate”.
3

3
DIVIDE-CONQUER-REASONING
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we propose to evaluate and improve the consistency of
LLM output via a Divide-Conquer-Reasoning approach, referred to as DCR. The approach comprises
three key components, as illustrated in Fig. 1: (1) DCE, which disassembles the candidate paragraph
and scrutinizes semantic inconsistencies sentence-by-sentence, (2) AMC, which converts sentence-
level inconsistency/consistency reasons into numeric scores for quantitative interpretation, and (3)
RAI, which conducts analytical reasoning to improve consistency through candidate regeneration.
Essentially, our approach involves a combination of sentence-level analysis, semantic consistency
checking, and causal analysis, making it an ideal evaluation metric for a diverse range of NLG tasks
that require comparison to reference texts, such as summarization, open-book question-answering
(QA), and retrieval-augmented generation.
Moreover, DCR not only evaluates but also improves the consistency of generated text through
analysis and reasoning, which aligns with human intuition. Fig.2 provides an example of how DCR
can evaluate and enhance the consistency of candidate text. In the following sections, we will discuss
each component in detail.
3.1
DIVIDE-CONQUER EVALUATOR (DCE)
The Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) is an LLM Agent designed to perform semantic consistency
checks between the reference and the candidate using a sentence-by-sentence strategy. This agent
accepts a reference paragraph and a candidate paragraph as inputs, and employs a divide-conquer
strategy to break down the entire paragraph into multiple individual sentences (divide) and then
assess each sentence against the reference (conquer). More specifically, given the input reference
R = ⟨sr
1, ..., sr
l ⟩and candidate C = ⟨sc
1, ..., sc
k⟩, we build a DCE agent LDCE using the LLM model
M (e.g., GPT-3.5/4) with an instructed prompt PDCE as:
{γ1, γ2, ..., γk} = LDCE(⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩, R | M, PDCE).
(1)
Eq.1 generates reasons, denoted as Γ = {γ1, γ2, ..., γk}, which is a list of reasons explaining why
each sentence sc
i(i = 1, 2, ..., k) is or is not consistent against the entire reference paragraph R. It’s
important to note that the reasons γi might comprise a short paragraph containing multiple explanation
sentences. We can tailor instruction prompts by defining task-specific criteria to accommodate
different tasks. Table 1 provides an example of a prompt example with pre-defined criteria for the
summarization consistency task.
Table 1: Summarization Consistency Divide-Conquer Evaluator Prompt
Your task is to evaluate whether the summary is consistent with the article. You will evaluate it by
going through each sentence of the summary and check against the following procedures:
• Understands all the aspects of the sentence, and compare if each aspect exists in the article
• If it does, compare if the information in this sentence is consistent with what is in the article
• Compare if all the information in this sentence can be directly inferred or entailed from what is
in the article. It is OK that not all information from the article exists in this summary
We note that the sentence-level comparison used in DCE is not to compare each sentence in the
candidate text sequence to each sentence from the reference text sequence but to compare each
sentence in the candidate text sequence to the entire reference text sequence. This design reduces
the number of comparison operations and ensures semantic consistency. For instance, in the sum-
marization task, DCE is to check if the candidate summaries are consistent with the source article.
This is achieved by checking if each sentence in the candidate summaries is consistent with the entire
original articles, rather than a sentence-by-sentence matching. Thus, our method does not rely on
any sentence-matching techniques, such that there is no issue with the varying number of sentences
(Amplayo et al., 2022).
3.2
AUTO-METRIC CONVERTER (AMC)
The Auto-Metric Converter (AMC) is an LLM Agent that aims to quantitatively measure the consis-
tency evaluation derived from the Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) by converting the reasons from
4

DCE into a numeric score system. This is accomplished by introducing an LLM agent, denoted as
LAMC, which takes reasons ⟨γ1, γ2, ..., γk⟩with an instructed prompt PAMC as inputs:
{z1, z2, ..., zk} = LAMC({γ1, γ2, ..., γk} | M, PAMC).
(2)
The LLM Agent LAMC functions as a binary sentiment classifier that classifies the reasons
⟨γ1, γ2, ..., γk⟩to be either positive (marked by “+1" if the sentence is consistent), or negative (marked
by “-1” otherwise). As a result, AMC outputs an array of scores {z1, z2, ..., zk}, zi ∈{−1, +1} for
each sentence ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩in the candidate C. We then utilize this score array to calculate a
comprehensive score Z to evaluate how consistent the candidate (paragraph) is against the reference
(paragraph):
Z =
 k
X
i=1
zi + α
!
/(k + β),
ˆZ = (Z + 1)/2,
ˆZ ∈[0, 1]
(3)
where k is the length of the score array, i.e., the number of sentences in the candidate paragraph.
Depending on the prompt, the reasons output by DCE may not all be on the sentence level. To ensure
that the score calculated is solely generated by sentence-level reasons, we introduce α and β in Eq. 3,
as explained in detail in Appendix A.4. Finally, we rescale Z to obtain the final score ˆZ that is
typically between 0 (completely inconsistent) and 1 (completely consistent). The closer this score ˆZ
is to 0, the more inconsistent the candidate C is against the reference R.
The AMC component serves as a binary sentiment classifier that classifies the reasons to be either
positive (marked by “+1" if the sentence is consistent), or negative (marked by “-1” otherwise) for
each sentence, then utilizes this score array to calculate a comprehensive score to evaluate consistency
in a regression manner. Such a numerical score calculated by AMC is more stable than the verbal
score directly output by LLMs, as is verified by our experiments. This design deliberately excludes
the use of LLM in crucial steps associated with generating numerical evaluation scores. Instead, it
harnesses the capabilities of LLMs for tasks in which they have demonstrated excellence, specifically
in reasoning.
3.3
REASON-ASSISTED IMPROVER (RAI)
The Reason-Assisted Improver (RAI) is an LLM Agent that focuses on improving the consistency
of candidate sentences by reasoning through the inconsistent explanations generated by the Divide-
Conquer Evaluator (DCE). To achieve this goal, we propose an LLM agent LRAI to generate new
candidate sentences ⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩based on the collected reasons {γ1, γ2, ..., γk} and original sen-
tences ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩:
⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩= LRAI({γ1, γ2, ..., γk}, ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩, R | M, PRAI).
(4)
The core task of LRAI is to rewrite the original sentence sc
i if sc
i is inconsistent with the reference
R and return a new generated ˆsc
i (ˆsc
i ̸= sc
i), otherwise retain sc
i. The newly generated responses
ˆC = ⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩can be considered as the consistency-improved candidate, which can be re-
evaluated by DCE to check if ˆC mitigates inconsistencies against the reference R.
The improved candidate ˆC in Eq.4 can be directly fed to the DCE agent in Eq.1 after the first-round
DCR , i.e., DCE→AMC→RAI. A straightforward extension is multi-round consistency improvement,
where the consistency is iteratively improved until reaching the maximum number of rounds m.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the workflow of the DCR framework, which consists of three core components:
DCE, AMC, and RAI.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
BENCHMARKS AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We utilize GPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-turbo) and GPT-4 (gpt-4) as our LLM agents, and the evaluations
are carried out using the Azure OpenAI API. We set the temperature to 0.0 to generate responses via
the greedy algorithm. The specific prompts used for each LLM agent are detailed in the Appendix
(from Table 7 to Table 12). All experiments are conducted on our local machine (Macbook-Pro with
M1 chip) without the need for GPU resources. In our experimental setup, we set both α and β in
5

Algorithm 1 Proposed Divide-Conquer-Reasoning (DCR) framework
Requirements: Candidate C, Reference R, LLM model M, LLM agents LDCE, LAMC, LRAI with instructed
prompts PDCE, PAMC and PRAI, and the maximum number of rounds m
for rounds r = 1, ..., m do
Disassemble candidate C into sentences ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩, evaluate sentence-level consistency against
reference R, and return the reasons {γ1, γ2, ..., γk} ←LDCE(⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩, R | M, PDCE) in Eq. 1
Transform reasons into numeric scores {z1, z2, ..., zk} ←LAMC({γ1, γ2, ..., γk} | M, PAMC) in Eq. 2
Calculate the final consistency evaluation score ˆ
Z based on {z1, z2, ..., zk} using Eq. 3
Generate improved candidate ⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩←LRAI({γ1, γ2, ..., γk}, ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩, R | M, PRAI)
Update the candidate ⟨sc
1, sc
2, ..., sc
k⟩←⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩and return Step 2
return ˆ
Z, ⟨ˆsc
1, ˆsc
2, ..., ˆsc
k⟩
Eq. 3 to 0. We employ four datasets to evaluate DCR where QQP and PAWS are binary datasets, as
well as SummEval and QAGS have numeric scores representing human judgments.
• QQP and PAWS: Quora Question Pair corpus (Iyer et al., 2017) and the Paraphrase Adversaries
from Word Scrambling dataset (amd Jason Baldridge & He, 2019) contain pairs of sentences
labeled to indicate whether they are paraphrases or not, while PAWS specifically focuses on the
adversarial paraphrases. Following the guidance of BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), we are using
the PAWS development set and the first 5000 from the training set of QQP.
• SummEval (Fabbri et al., 2021) is a standard dataset that assesses various summarization evaluation
techniques. It gathers human ratings in various aspects and is built on the CNN/DailyMail dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015). In this study, we mainly focus on the consistency evaluation.
• QAGS (Wang et al., 2020) serves as a benchmark for assessing hallucinations in summariza-
tion tasks. Its objective is to evaluate the consistency aspect of summaries across two distinct
summarization datasets: QGS-CNN and QAGA-XSUM.
Here we provide a detailed explanation of the “reference” used in our experiments. For Paraphrase
detection tasks, such as the QQP dataset, each question pair is annotated with a binary value indicating
whether the two questions are paraphrases of each other. We consider “question1” as the “reference”
and “question2” as the “candidate”, and our task is to evaluate if the candidate is consistent with
the reference in semantic meaning. For Summarization tasks, SummEval datasets include original
source articles, machine summaries, and human summaries. Our “reference” in this task is the
original source article, and our “candidate” is the machine summaries. Our task is to check the factual
consistency between them without relying on any additional golden reference or ground truth.
4.2
BASELINE METHODS
We evaluate DCR against a variety of evaluation metrics and LLM-based evaluators that have achieved
state-of-the-art performance.
• ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is widely used evaluation metric with three different variants ROUGE-1,
ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L. We are using ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L as comparisons in our study.
• BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) calculates the similarities between two pieces of text using the
contextualized embedding derived from the BERT model(Devlin et al., 2019). It operates as a
similarity-based assessment tool, which has been widely used for various applications.
• MoverScore (Zhao et al., 2019) enhances BERTScore by incorporating soft alignments and
introducing new aggregation techniques to provide a more robust similarity assessment.
• BARTScore (Yuan et al., 2021) is a comprehensive evaluator that uses the average likelihood of
the model’s output as its measurement criteria.
• UniEval (Zhong et al., 2022) is a consolidated evaluator capable of assessing various elements of
text generation as QA tasks. It manages diverse evaluation tasks by modifying the question format.
• GPTScore (Jinlan et al., 2023) is an LLM-based evaluator that assesses texts using pre-training
models, e.g., GPT-3, and is designed to provide a higher likelihood to high-quality generated text.
• G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b) is another LLM evaluator that utilizes LLMs with a chain-of-thoughts
(CoT) approach with a form-filling paradigm to evaluate the quality of NLG outputs.
6

4.3
MAIN RESULTS ON CONSISTENCY EVALUATION (DCE-AMC)
Semantic Consistency Evaluation.
Table 2 shows the Area Under the ROC curve (AUROC) for
automatic baseline metrics and our method, following the practice of BERTScore (Zhang et al.,
2020). We note that while most metrics from BERTScore perform acceptably on QQP, they exhibit a
significant performance drop on PAWS. This suggests that these baseline metrics struggle to detect the
challenging adversarial examples from a semantic consistency perspective. In contrast, our method,
whether implemented with GPT-3.5 or GPT-4, outperforms all the baseline metrics on both QQP
and PAWS, without a significant drop. Notably, DCE-AMC-4 demonstrates superior robustness in
adversarial paraphrase classification (semantic consistency) achieving a relatively large improvement
(+4.6% in QQP and +9.9% in PAWS) compared to BERTScore.
Table 2: AUROC results on QQP and PAWS
Metrics
QQP
PAWS
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002a)
0.707
0.527
METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005)
0.755
0.532
ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004)
0.740
0.536
CHRF++ (Popovi´c, 2015)
0.577
0.608
BEER (Stanojevi´c & Sima’an, 2014)
0.741
0.564
EED (Stanchev et al., 2019)
0.743
0.611
CharacTER (Wang et al., 2016)
0.698
0.650
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020)
0.777
0.693
DCE-AMC-3.5 (our method)
0.788
0.770
DCE-AMC-4 (our method)
0.823
0.792
Factual Consistency Evaluation.
While ad-
vanced NLG models are capable of generating
high-quality responses, LLMs are known to oc-
casionally produce non-factual statements or
hallucinate facts, which can undermine trust in
their output. Recent work (Manakul et al., 2023)
has been conducted to identify such inconsisten-
cies in terms of factuality. To verify the effec-
tiveness of our method in evaluating hallucina-
tion, we test it on the QAGS benchmark, which
includes two summarization datasets: QAGS-
CNN and QAGS-XSUM. Table 4 provides a
comprehensive comparison of various metrics
based on Pearson, Spearman, and Kendall-Tau
correlations. We observe that BARTScore performs competitively on the extractive subset (QAGS-
CNN) but fails to demonstrate a high correlation on the abstractive subset (QAGS-XSUM). UniEval
exhibits a better correlation than G-Eval-3.5 but is comparable to G-Eval-4. Our proposed DCE-
AMC-4 outperforms all the baseline methods on both subsets, particularly by a significant margin on
QAGS-XSUM. Unlike the G-Eval method, which shows a larger gap between GPT-3.5 and GPT-4,
our DCE-AMC method remains relatively stable when switching between LLMs.
It’s crucial to note that QAGS-XSUM is an abstractive dataset, and its summaries are typically one
sentence long. This contrasts with the extractive database of QAGS-CNN, where summaries are
composed of multiple sentences. Consequently, our method operates at a sentence level for QAGS-
XSUM, and our final score is always either 0 or 1. Furthermore, the binary label in QAGS-XSUM
implies that we achieve the same correlation score using different correlation methods.
Table 3: Correlation (ρ and τ) results of different
metrics on SummEval benchmark.
Metrics
SummEval-Consistency
Spearman (ρ)
Kendall-Tau (τ)
ROUGE-2
0.187
0.155
ROUGE-L
0.115
0.092
BARTScore
0.382
0.315
BERTScore
0.110
0.090
MoverScore
0.152
0.127
UniEval
0.446
0.371
GPT-Score
0.449
-
G-Eval-3.5
0.386
0.318
G-Eval-4
0.507
0.425
DCE-AMC-3.5
0.592
0.563
DCE-AMC-4
0.700 (+19.3%)
0.668 (+24.3%)
Summarization
Consistency
Evaluation.
We follow the setting of previous work (Zhong
et al., 2022) to evaluate different summarization
consistency using summary-level Spearman
(ρ) and Kendall-Tau (τ) correlation. As shown
in Table 3, baseline metrics using semantic
similarity, such as ROUGE and BERTScore,
perform poorly on consistency evaluations.
While LLM-based evaluators like GPT-Score
and G-Eval exhibit higher correlations, they
still underperformed compared to our proposed
method.
DCE-AMC-4 achieves much higher
human correspondence compared to DCE-
AMC-3.5 on both Spearman and Kendall-Tau
correlation, which indicates that the larger size
of GPT-4 model is beneficial for sentence-level
consistency checking in summarization tasks.
DCE-AMC-4 with stronger correlations of
ρ = 0.7 and τ = 0.668, substantially improves upon the G-Eval-4 baseline by a large margin
(+19.3% and +24.3% respectively).
7

Table 4: Pearson (r), Spearman (ρ), and Kendall-Tau (τ) correlations of different baseline metrics on
QAGS-CNN and QAGS-XSUM benchmark.
Metrics
QAGS-CNN
QAGS-XSUM
Pearson (r)
Spearman (ρ)
Kendall-Tau (τ)
Pearson (r)
Spearman (ρ)
Kendall-Tau (τ)
ROUGE-2
0.459
0.418
0.333
0.097
0.083
0.068
ROUGE-L
0.357
0.324
0.254
0.024
-0.011
-0.009
BARTScore
0.735
0.680
0.557
0.184
0.159
0.130
BERTScore
0.576
0.505
0.399
0.024
0.008
0.006
MoverScore
0.414
0.347
0.271
0.054
0.044
0.036
UniEval
0.682
0.662
0.532
0.461
0.488
0.399
G-Eval-3.5
0.477
0.516
0.410
0.211
0.406
0.343
G-Eval-4
0.631
0.685
0.591
0.558
0.537
0.472
DCE-AMC-3.5
0.699
0.648
0.596
0.573
0.573
0.573
DCE-AMC-4
0.782
0.760
0.706
0.602
0.602
0.602
4.4
RESULTS FOR CONSISTENCY IMPROVEMENT (RAI)
After implementing DCE and AMC, we can quantitatively determine whether each candidate is
consistent (score = 1) to the reference or not (score <1). Table 5 offers a statistical analysis of the
number of inconsistent data after evaluations (DCE-AMC), revealing 286, 111, and 86 inconsistent
candidates for the SummEval, QAGS-CNN, and QAGS-XSUM benchmarks respectively. Identifying
these inconsistent candidates is valuable but the more critical objective is how to improve these
responses to align with the references. To achieve this goal, we re-generate a new response by
implementing RAI based on the reasons provided by DCE, and then use DCE to re-evaluate these
improved responses. We observe a significant improvement, with most inconsistencies corrected,
specifically 84 out of 86 examples on the QAGS-XSUM benchmark. The rate of consistency
improvement is 86.71%, 88.29%, and 97.67% on SummEval, QAGS-CNN, and QAGS-XSUM
respectively. These impressive results demonstrate that our reasoning approach RAI not only
provides better consistency evaluation metrics that align more closely with human judgments, but
also sheds light on improving consistency beyond evaluation. This finding is particularly crucial for
mitigating hallucination once we detect non-factual statements via consistency checks. It’s worth
noting that our reasoning method RAI is a generic component that can also be applied directly at the
paragraph level, and the improvement in this context is significant as well, as illustrated in Table 5.
Table 5: Performance of consistency improvement with RAI on three benchmark datasets.
Dataset (size)
SummEval (1600)
QAGS-CNN (236)
QAGS-XSUM (239)
Sentence
Paragraph
Sentence
Paragraph
Sentence
Paragraph
Inconsistent data
286
209
111
68
86
90
Corrected data with RAI
248
198
89
64
84
82
Consistency improvement rate
86.71%
94.73%
88.29%
94.11%
97.67%
91.11%
4.5
ANALYSIS
Why DCR Prefers Sentence-level Evaluation?
To further assess the potential advantage of the
sentence-level approach in consistency checking, we employed the same logic of outputting decisions
and reasons as used in DCE and developed an evaluator at the paragraph level, with prompts provided
in Appendix (Table 11). The comparative results between paragraph level and sentence level can
be viewed in Fig. 3. While the recall of paragraph-level evaluation is higher on SummEval and
QAGS-CNN benchmarks, its overall performance in terms of the F1 score and precision is lower
than that of sentence-level evaluations, particularly on the QAGS benchmark. This combination of
higher recall and lower precision implies that more candidates are incorrectly marked as consistent.
In the task of consistency checking, a metric with low recall and high precision (sentence level) is
preferable as it contributes to higher safety compared to a metric with high recall and low precision
(paragraph level), erring on the side of caution.
8

Figure 3: F1 score, precision, and recall performance of our method on sentence-level and paragraph-
level evaluations. We also verify the effectiveness of the auto-metric converter.
In addition to superior accuracy, sentence-level evaluations can facilitate more thorough inconsistency
remediation when integrating with RAI. We compared the performance improvement between our
sentence level DCE and paragraph level, as indicated in Table 5. Despite the higher recall of the
paragraph-level approach, fewer items are flagged as inconsistent, resulting in fewer candidates being
corrected, even though the improvement rate is higher. In fact sentence level DCE leads to 25.25% and
39.05% more corrections compared to the paragraph-level approach in SummEval and QAGS-CNN
respectively. Therefore, our sentence-level approach not only outperforms in terms of F1 score and
precision during consistency checks, but also facilitates comprehensive improvements through RAI.
Is Auto-metric Converter Necessary?
We present a comparison of our method, both with and
without AMC, as shown in Fig. 3. We observe that our method with only the DCE (red bar) performs
marginally better on the SummEval dataset but underperforms DCE-AMC (orange bar) on all other
benchmarks. Although DCE plays a key role in our method, the AMC component is still desirable
and highly necessary not only because it shows better performance, but also because it facilitates
the conversion of reasons outputted by DCE to a numeric system. This conversion is both user-
friendly and practical, making it easy for humans to understand and apply. Furthermore, it provides a
straightforward means of evaluating the effectiveness of the DCE component.
0
1
2
Number of RAI Rounds
0.6
0.8
1.0
Consistency Rate
SummEval
QAGS-CNN
QAGS-XSUM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Consistency Score
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency
Round 0
Round 1
Round 2
Figure 4: Multi-round consistency improvement
14 8
16
32
64
Number of Threads
101
102
103
Computational cost (s)
QAGS-CNN
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
Figure 5: Computational cost.
Multi-round Consistency Improvement.
Table 5 showcases encouraging results on consistency
improvement via RAI. This naturally leads to the question: can we further enhance the consistency
through multiple rounds of RAI? Fig. 4 shows our investigation on multi-round consistency improve-
ment by iteratively applying RAI. It is noteworthy that the convergence of consistency improvement
is remarkably swift, achieving nearly 100% in just two rounds. The convergence rate on the QAGS
datasets is highly consistent across both subsets, slightly surpassing SummEval due to its high
initial rate after the first round of RAI. This is also corroborated by the frequency distribution of the
consistency score (Fig. 4 (right)). As the number of rounds increases, the lower consistency scores
(<1) gradually decrease, and more inconsistent candidates tend to be consistent, where the score is 1.
The Effect of LLM models.
We evaluated the performance of our method using different LLMs
across all three benchmarks. It is noteworthy that DCE-AMC-4 generally outperforms DCE-AMC-3.5
across most datasets. The performance gap between the two LLM models is relatively minor in terms
of semantic consistency (QQP and PAWS in Table 2), and the abstractive subset (QAGS-XSUM in
Table 4) in factual consistency, but a significant difference is observed in summarization consistency
in Table 3. This suggests that GPT-4 can further enhance performance, especially for more complex
evaluation tasks. As such, we applied RAI with GPT-4 directly to verify its superior capability
in consistency improvement. Nonetheless, the benefits of GPT-3.5, such as higher computational
efficiency and lower API costs, should not be overlooked.
9

Computational Cost.
We assessed the computational cost of our method based on wall-clock time,
which is primarily consumed by LLMs inference. However, the divide-conquer strategy we employed
is scalable and easily implemented in parallel. Fig. 5 illustrates the computational cost of GPT-3.5
and GPT-4 with varying numbers of threads on the QAGS-CNN benchmark. A clear reduction in
computational cost is observed as the number of threads increases. It’s important to note that the
decrease in time is more significant when transitioning from a single thread to four threads, but tends
to plateau as more threads are utilized. While GPT-3.5, being the smaller LLM, is a more efficient
option, GPT-4 often delivers better performance.
5
RELATED WORK
LLM-based Evaluations.
Unlike conventional evaluating metrics leveraging token-level or similar-
ity embeddings, such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002b), ROUGE (Lin, 2004), or BERTScore (Zhang
et al., 2020), recent proposed LLM-based evaluators (Wang et al., 2023), such as GPTScore (Jinlan
et al., 2023) and G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b), have demonstrated competitive performance on multiple
NLG tasks. Their idea is to utilize the LLMs to score the candidate output under the assumption that
the LLMs have learned to assign higher probabilities to fluent and high-quality contexts. However,
these LLM evaluators often exhibit lower correlations with human judgments, and their reliability,
robustness, and validity remain under-explored (Liu et al., 2023b). Specifically, LLM evaluators
may pose potential risks of producing hallucinated or overconfidence scores if the LLM model is not
well calibrated for complex tasks (Kadavath et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023). This results in limited
confidence in using LLM evaluators to directly evaluate paragraph-level responses. Our proposed
DCR framework addresses these challenges through a divide-conquer strategy (DCE) coupled with a
numeric score system (AMC). Our method quantitatively evaluates paragraphs sentence-by-sentence
and does not rely on LLMs to directly output numeric scores, thus providing a more accurate and
comprehensive score that better aligns with human feedback.
Consistency Evaluations.
Consistency checking plays an essential role in a wide range of NLG
tasks, including question-answering (Durmus et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), factual knowledge
extraction (Elazar et al., 2021), summarization (Durmus et al., 2020) and hallucination detection
(Manakul et al., 2023). However, due to various limitations of existing methods, such as reliance on
additional pre-trained models or question sets (Durmus et al., 2020), it is highly desirable to develop
a unified and automatic consistency metric (Wang et al., 2022). Our proposed framework successfully
fills this gap and demonstrates superior performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines (Jinlan
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023). More importantly, our proposed RAI enables
consistency improvement where the re-generated candidate response significantly helps mitigate LLM
hallucinations (Dhuliawala et al., 2023; Mündler et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b) in summarization,
and open-book QA tasks (Li et al., 2023).
6
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
We proposed a general evaluation framework based on a divide-and-conquer strategy for assessing
the consistency between the LLM-generated output and the reference texts across various NLG
tasks. Moreover, the proposed method can leverage analytical reasoning to generate revised text
with improved consistency. Through comprehensive and systematic empirical study across multiple
benchmarks in semantic, factual, and summarization consistency tasks, we demonstrated that our
approach significantly outperforms existing methods in evaluating and enhancing the consistency of
LLM-generated content. Despite these advancements, we acknowledge several potential limitations
of our proposed method:
Not a Silver Bullet. While our sentence-level approach (DCE-AMC) excels in evaluating consistency
and detecting hallucination, it may not be universally effective for all dimensions of text evaluation,
even with updated criteria in prompts. For instance, dimensions such as coherence, which pertains to
the collective quality of all generated sentences, or relevance, which involves selecting important
information and eliminating redundant content from the reference text, require a holistic focus on the
entire candidate. These dimensions may not be ideally suited for our DCE-AMC approach. However, if
a different evaluator that outputs reasons for action is used, our AMC and RAI could still be employed
to quantify and improve performance on such dimensions.
10

Garbage in, Garbage Out. The DCR framework requires two inputs: a reference paragraph and a
candidate paragraph. As we use the reference paragraph as the target for consistency and hallucination
checks, any non-factual statements present in the reference paragraph would not be detected by our
method. Therefore, for tasks such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), the accuracy of our
method is inherently limited by the correctness of the input paragraphs.
Meta-prompting. Our DCR framework requires hand-craft prompts for specific tasks, and acknowl-
edges that this is a general hurdle shared by all works relying on LLMs, which include G-Eval (Liu
et al., 2023b), GPTScore (Jinlan et al., 2023), and Self-refine (Madaan et al., 2023). Specifically, in
G-Eval, different prompts will need to be composed for different aspects: consistency, coherence,
etc. Self-refine defines multiple customized prompts to perform their INIT - FEEDBACK – REFINE
components. Our current solution is to structure our prompts in a modularized manner so task-specific
content can be updated easily. However, an automated prompt-tuning procedure is beyond the focus
of our study but we leave this for future work.
