Attention Actor-Critic algorithm for
Multi-Agent Constrained Co-operative
Reinforcement Learning
P. Parnika∗,1, Raghuram Bharadwaj Diddigi∗,2, Sai Koti Reddy Danda∗,3 and
Shalabh Bhatnagar2
1 Mindtree Ltd.
2 Department of Computer Science and Automation, IISc Bangalore, India.
3 IBM Research, Bangalore, India

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of computing optimal actions for Reinforcement Learning
(RL) agents in a co-operative setting, where the objective is to optimize a common goal. However, in
many real-life applications, in addition to optimizing the goal, the agents are required to satisfy certain
constraints speciﬁed on their actions. Under this setting, the objective of the agents is to not only
learn the actions that optimize the common objective but also meet the speciﬁed constraints. In recent
times, the Actor-Critic algorithm with an attention mechanism has been successfully applied to obtain
optimal actions for RL agents in multi-agent environments. In this work, we extend this algorithm
to the constrained multi-agent RL setting. The idea here is that optimizing the common goal and
satisfying the constraints may require different modes of attention. By incorporating different attention
modes, the agents can select useful information required for optimizing the objective and satisfying the
constraints separately, thereby yielding better actions. Through experiments on benchmark multi-agent
environments, we show the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.
Equal contribution by the ﬁrst three authors. A version of this paper has been accepted for publication as an extended abstract
in the Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2021).
arXiv:2101.02349v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2021

I. INTRODUCTION
In a multi-agent co-operative RL setting [11], multiple agents are working towards a common
goal in a common environment. All the agents receive the same cost (or reward) depending
on the actions of all the agents and the objective is to minimize (or maximize) the expected
total discounted cost (or reward) [30]. However in many practical situations, one often encounters
constraints that restrict the choice of actions that can be taken by these agents. In the constrained
RL setting [3], these constraints can also be speciﬁed via certain expected total discounted costs.
In such scenarios, the agents have to learn actions that not only minimize the expected total
discounted cost but also respect the constraints.
One approach to satisfy the constraints is to construct a modiﬁed cost as a linear combination
of the original cost and the constraint costs. However, the weights to be associated with the costs
are not known upfront and need to be learned in a trial-and-error fashion. This problem becomes
compounded when multiple constraints are speciﬁed. We alleviate this problem by considering
the Lagrangian formulation of the problem and training dual Lagrange parameters that act as
weights for the constraint costs.
