Key Phrase Extraction & Applause Prediction  
*Auto ML tool for performing ML techniques on json files of medium online article dataset 
 
1st Krishna Yadav 
Computer Science Department (IIITD) 
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology 
(AICTE) 
Delhi, India 

2nd Lakshya Choudhary 
Computer Science Department (IIITD) 
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology 
(AICTE) 
Delhi, India 

 
Abstract – With increase in content 
availability over the internet it is very difficult 
to get noticed. It has become an upmost 
priority of the blog writers to get some 
feedback over their creations to be confident 
about the impact of their article. We are 
training a machine learning model to learn 
popular article styles, in the form of vector 
space representations using various word 
embeddings, and their popularity based on 
claps and tags. 
 
1. Problem Statement and Motivation 
Today’s world is full of online content and lot 
more is producing each day. With increase in 
content availability over the internet it is very 
difficult to get noticed. 
Medium is one of the top platforms for spreading 
information and knowledge about almost any 
domain in the society. It is abundantly used to 
publish content, articles on computer science 
domain such as ML, AI, Data Engineering, etc. 
 
2. Introduction 
Writing articles that can get high popularity is a 
difficult task. The problem comes for the new 
authors who don’t have much idea about how to 
get popularity. We have developed intuition into 
making an interesting and interesting Medium 
article. Instead of purely relying on a guess theory, 
we wanted to test our theory using data science and 
machine learning. As a Data Scientist, we have 
always been curious about creativity and 
automation Also, believe that our article and hard 
work on this model combines both faces of science 
to predict the best Medium article. We introduce 
our work and further work Platforms like Medium 
have their own metrics to evaluate the content by 
allowing 
readers 
to 
clap 
to 
show 
their 
appreciation. Also, these platforms offer provision 
to add few Key-Phrases that best provides the 
subject of the content.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 Medium Article Statistics 
Now, it becomes a necessity of the writer to get 
some assistance for best possible key-phrases to 
get the articles ranked up and tentative popularity 
of the new article. Our aim in this project will be 
to train a model on the Medium. 
 
Figure 2 Word Cloud: Extracting tags from articles 
 
3. Literature Survey 
Key phrase extraction is a big field and a lot of 
people have worked on it already. We have many 
pre-trained models like Bert and pke rake etc. that 
helps to extract the key phrases. Although we 
have 
many 
advancements 
in 
the 
text 

classification, this whole problem of article 
performance problem is explored by only a 
smaller group of researchers. pke is an open 
source python-based key 
phrase 
extraction 
toolkit. It provides an end-to-end key phrase 
extraction pipeline in which each component can 
be easily modified or extended to develop new 
models. pke also allows for easy benchmarking of 
state-of-the-art key phrase extraction models, and 
ships with supervised models trained on 
the SemEval-2010 dataset. [1], [2]. Sahrawat et al. 
[8] have used neural network models such as bert 
and bi-lstm to extract key phrases from scholarly 
articles as a sequence labelling task solved using 
a BiLSTM-CRF, where the words in the input 
text are represented using deep contextualized 
embeddings. 
 
4. Dataset Used 
The dataset that we used for this project is being 
scrapped using selenium in the form of Json strings 
from the official Medium website. So far, we have 
over 2574 articles of diverse popularity. We are 
collecting more data but since the annotation 
verification takes time so will conclude this in final 
presentation. For pre-processing we removed all the 
Non_ASCII characters and the white-spaces or 
special characters. then we converted the digits into 
their English equivalent. followed by spell 
correction and lemmatization. 
 
 
Our data had a lot of new articles having zero claps 
so we removed those to avoid misdirection. and 
finally took doc2vec embeddings to get a numerical 
document vector. 
5. Data Scrapping 
Web 
Scrapping 
also 
called 
“Crawling” 
or 
“Spidering” is the technique to gather data 
automatically from an online source usually from a 
website. While Web Scrapping is an easy way to get 
a large volume of data in a relatively short time 
frame, it adds stress to the server where the source 
is hosted. We scrapped the data from medium using 
selanium. Data mining or gathering data is a very 
primitive step in the data science life cycle. As per 
business requirements, one may have to gather data 
from sources like SAP servers, logs, Databases, 
APIs, online repositories, or web. Tools for web 
scraping like Selenium can scrape a large volume of 
data such as text and images in a relatively short 
time. 
Selenium is an open-source web-based automation 
tool. Selenium primarily used for testing in the 
industry but It can also be used for web scraping. 
We’ll use the Chrome browser but you can try on 
any browser, It’s almost the same. [5] We scrapped 
the by following steps: 
• Search URLs of articles with the given set of tags 
to capture domain related articles only. 
• Scrapping the useful data from each webpage. 
• Saving the scraped article data in json object. 
 
6. Pre-processing 
The steps for natural language pre-processing are 
taken up to convert each sentence into equivalent 
processed word representation [1], [2], [7], [8]. 
The techniques used to process each word are: 
i. 
Punctuation Removal:  

ii. Whitespaces Removal: \n \t \a 
iii. Non-Ascii Characters: 
non-keyboard, emoji 
iv. Tokenization:  
 
‘hello’, ‘world’ 
v. Number conversion:   
1 to ‘one’ 
vi. Stop-word removal:   
the, are, is 
vii. Spelling correction:   
thro, teling, forgt 
viii. Word segmentation:   
haveto, whynot 
ix. Lemmatization:    
mice to mouse 
x. Expanding abbreviations: I’ve, can’t 
xi. Scaling:  [1, 90,99] to [0.1, 0.9, 0.99] 
Text data is not suitable to feed into ML models, so 
we used Glove and doc2vec combined with 
sequences obtained by the text_to_sequence method 
from Keras’ tokenizer. 

 
Figure 3 Data Distribution in 2D Space 
 
7. Feature Extraction 
After generalizing the length of the questions, we 
are left with long vectors with a lot of relevant 
information (be it more or less). Since the length is 
directly proportional to the vocab size, as mention 
in Zip’s law [10], [11], it is crucial to extract 
interesting features only. We tried PCA and LDA 
feature extraction[12]. Word embeddings also 
helped and finally got 23 top features to apply ML 
algorithms. More or fewer features than 23 lead us 
to the reduced performance of our model. That’s 
why we are only capturing the most relevant 
information with this set of features only. 
Dimensionality reduction also helps to visualize the 
top data components for better understanding, as 
shown in Figure 3. 
8. Proposed Model 
We tried several approaches and combinations to 
reach to the final set of conclusions. However, the 
pre-processing steps for all remain the same. Pre-
processing differs for regression task and keyword 
prediction task. 
i. 
Baseline Models 
We have used Liner Regression for regression over 
the claps and we also proposed the use of KNN to 
find the closest similar data points to our test 
document in vector space. Regression gives MSE 
i.e. we calculated the deviation of the predicted 
results from actual ground truth results. This is to 
get the factor of claps at each document. 
ii. 
Deep Learning Models 
Deep Learning has been proven to solve many hard 
problems. We have planned to use deeply learned 
models like RoBERTa to get optimised results for our 
model final prediction for the article being popular or 
not. We are planning to use BIO-Tagging to represent 
each document for key phrase extraction. It is a common 
format the similar kind of NLP tasks such as NER. And 
later using deep neural network to predict those BIO 
tags as labels. 
 
 
9. Performance Improvement 
What Improved our Performance, and why? 
i. 
Glove: performs better than doc2vec as it 
captures sublinear relationships. 
ii. Stop-words: In our case, stop words are 
worthless 
as 
simply 
misdirect 
the 
classification as they occur very often in every 
document. 
iii. Dimension Reduction works: our vector 
representation has a lot of features and feeding 
that to a model increases time and hides 
essential information. 
iv. Adding features: Selected word embeddings 
give us 23 sufficient features. Adding or 
removing features reduces the performance as 
the relevant information gets compromised. 
What didn’t work, and why? 
i. 
Spelling Correction: Most of the questions 
didn’t have any spelling mistakes. It is 
assumed that the user is aware of the 
language. 
ii. Scaling: Vector representation of questions is 
already scaled. Further scaling doesn’t help 
anymore. 
iii. All embeddings: Embeddings usually capture 
most of the information. Combining genism 
embeddings doesn’t solve the purpose. 

iv. Adding features: Selected word embeddings 
give us 23 sufficient features. Adding or 
removing features reduces the performance as 
the relevant information gets compromised. 
v. Reducing Vector size: It improves the training 
time but at the cost reduced performance. 
 
10. Baseline Results 
For regression task we used linear regression to 
draw a linear decision boundary and estimate the 
claps of new articles. Also, we propose the use of 
knn in terms of document similarity to find k nearest 
documents to the new document in multi-dimension 
vector space and take average of those document 
claps. Tuning the hyperparameters showed a lot of 
improvement. We are planning task specific fine 
tuning for both of these tasks. 
Model 
MSE 
LR + Doc2Vec(Embedding Size 100) 
12431 
LR + Doc2Vec(Embedding Size 200) 
6131 
KNN + Doc2Vec(Embedding 200, k=19) 
3054 
Table 1 Applause Prediction: Baseline Models 
 
For Key-Phrase Extraction task, we initialized 
Topic-Rank key phrase extraction model and 
carried the preprocessing using spacy. The key 
phrase candidate selection happens as sequences of 
nouns and adjectives (i.e. `(Noun|Adj)*`). Then 
candidate weighting happens using a random walk 
algorithm. And finally, N-best key phrases i.e. 
highest scored candidates are extracted 
as 
(keyphrase, score) tuples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 Predicted Key Phrases 
 
Table 3 Actual Key Phrases 
 
11. Future Work Conclusion 
We proposed KNN to predict number of claps. 
Further we plan to incorporate other features with 
more weightage i.e. date of publish, author name 
etc. We will use deep learning and models like Bert 
to improve the performance of key phrase extraction 
task. We are planning to use high, medium, low to 
measures to count the claps and then perform 
classification using clap and the old features as 
parameters. We expect a drastic performance 
increase. Increasing data corpus size. 
12. Authors’ Contributions 
i. 
Krishna Yadav (MT19039) 
a. Data cleaning and Pre-processing 
b. Data Annotation 
c. Data Analysis and visualization 
d. Key Phrase Extraction 
e. Baseline Results 
 
ii. 
Lakshya Choudhary (MT19067) 
a. Data Crawler 
b. Data Annotation 
c. Feature selection 
d. LR, KNN | Parameter Tuning 
e. Baseline Results 
13. References 
[1] 
https://github.com/boudinfl/pke. 
[2] 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805. 
[3] 
Z. Liu, X. Lv, K. Liu, and S. Shi, “Study on SVM compared 
with the other text classification methods,” in 2nd International 
Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science, 
ETCS 
2010, 
2010, 
vol. 
1, 
pp. 
219–222, 
doi: 
10.1109/ETCS.2010.248. 
[4] 
https://monkeylearn.com/keyword-extraction/. 
[5] 
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/08/web-scraping-
selenium-with-python/. 
[6] 
M. S. Phyu and K. T. Nwet, “A Study on a Joint Deep Learning 
Model for Myanmar Text Classification,” in 2020 IEEE 
Conference on Computer Applications, ICCA 2020, Feb. 2020, 
doi: 10.1109/ICCA49400.2020.9022809. 
[7] 
T. Bi, P. Liang, A. Tang, and C. Yang, “A systematic mapping 
study on text analysis techniques in software architecture,” J. 
Syst. Softw., vol. 144, no. August, pp. 533–558, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.jss.2018.07.055. 
[8] 
Sahrawat D. et al. (2020) Keyphrase Extraction as Sequence 
Labeling Using Contextualized Embeddings. In: Jose J. et al. 
(eds) Advances in Information Retrieval. ECIR 2020. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12036. Springer, 
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45442-5_41. 
[9] 
https://towardsdatascience.com/extracting-keyphrases-from-
text-rake-and-gensim-in-python-eefd0fad582f. 
[10] 
S. T. Piantadosi, “Zipf’s word frequency law in natural 
language: A critical review and future directions,” Psychon. 
Bull. Rev., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1112–1130, Oct. 2014, doi: 
10.3758/s13423-014-0585-6. 
[11] 
L. Adamic, B. H.- Glottometrics, and  undefined 2002, “Zipf’s 
law and the Internet.” Accessed: May 13, 2020. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.ram-verlag.de. 
[12] 
X. Yan, J. Guo, Y. Lan, and X. Cheng, “A biterm topic model 
for short texts,” WWW 2013 - Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. World Wide 
Web, pp. 1445–1455, 2013, doi: 10.1145/2488388.2488514.
