#MeToo on Campus: Studying College Sexual Assault at Scale
using Data Reported on Social Media
Viet Duong, Phu Pham, Ritwik Bose, Jiebo Luo
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester

Abstract
Recently, the emergence of the #MeToo trend on so-
cial media has empowered thousands of people to share
their own sexual harassment experiences. This viral
trend, in conjunction with the massive personal infor-
mation and content available on Twitter, presents a
promising opportunity to extract data-driven insights
to complement the ongoing survey-based studies about
sexual harassment in college. In this paper, we analyze
the inﬂuence of the #MeToo trend on a pool of col-
lege followers. The results show that the majority of
topics embedded in those #MeToo tweets detail sexual
harassment stories, and there exists a signiﬁcant cor-
relation between the prevalence of this trend and ofﬁ-
cial reports on several major geographical regions. Fur-
thermore, we discover the outstanding sentiments of the
#MeToo tweets using deep semantic meaning represen-
tations and their implications on the affected users expe-
riencing different types of sexual harassment. We hope
this study can raise further awareness regarding sexual
misconduct in academia.
Introduction
Sexual harassment is deﬁned as ”bullying or coercion of a
sexual nature, or the unwelcome or inappropriate promise of
rewards in exchange for sexual favors.” 1 In fact, it is an on-
going problem in the U.S., especially within the higher ed-
ucation community. According to the National Sexual Vio-
lence Resource Center (NSRVC), one in ﬁve women and one
in sixteen men are sexually assaulted while they are attend-
ing college. 2 In addition to the prevalence of campus sexual
harassment, it has been shown to have detrimental effects on
student’s well-being, including health-related disorders and
psychological distress (McDermut, Haaga, and Kirk 2000;
Huerta et al. 2006). However, these studies on college sex-
ual misconduct usually collect data based on questionnaires
from a small sample of the college population, which might
not be sufﬁciently substantial to capture the big picture of
sexual harassment risk of the entire student body.
Alternatively, social media opens up new opportunities to
gather a larger and more comprehensive amount of data and
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexual Harassement
2https://goo.gl/rgvYH2
mitigate the risk of false or inaccurate narratives from the
studied subjects. On October 15 of 2017, prominent Hol-
lywood actress Alyssa Milano, by accusing Oscar-winning
ﬁlm producer, Harvey Weinstein, for multiple sexual impro-
priety attempts on herself and many other women in the ﬁlm
industry, ignited the ”MeToo” trend on social media that
called for women and men to share their own sexual harass-
ment experience. According to CNN, over 1.7 million users
had used the hash-tag in 85 countries. 3 Beneﬁting from the
tremendous amount of data supplied by this trend and the
existing state-of-the-art semantic parser and generative sta-
tistical models, we propose a new approach to characterizing
sexual harassment by mining the tweets from college users
with the hash-tag #metoo on Twitter.
Our main contributions are several folds. We investigate
campus sexual harassment using a big-data approach by col-
lecting data from Twitter. We employ traditional topic mod-
eling and linear regression methods on a new dataset to high-
light patterns of the ongoing troubling social behaviors at
both institutional and individual levels. We propose a novel
approach to combining domain-general deep semantic pars-
ing and sentiment analysis to dissect personal narratives.
Related Work
Previous works for sexual misconduct in academia and
workplace dated back to last few decades, when researchers
studied the existence, as well as psychometric and demo-
graphic insights regarding this social issue, based on survey
and ofﬁcial data (Fitzgerald et al. 1988; Fitzgerald, Gelfand,
and Drasgow 1995; Timothy et al. 1982). However, these
methods of gathering data are limited in scale and might be
inﬂuenced by the psychological and cognitive tendencies of
respondents not to provide faithful answers (Brutus, Agui-
nis, and Wassmer 2013).
The ubiquity of social media has motivated various re-
search on widely-debated social topics such as gang vio-
lence, hate code, or presidential election using Twitter data
(Blandfort et al. 2019; ElSherief et al. 2018; Magu, Joshi,
and Luo 2017; Wang et al. 2016). Recently, researchers have
taken the earliest steps to understand sexual harassment us-
ing textual data on Twitter. Using machine learning tech-
3http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/30/health/metoo-
legacy/index.html
arXiv:2001.05970v1  [cs.SI]  16 Jan 2020

niques, Modrek and Chakalov (2019) built predictive mod-
els for the identiﬁcation and categorization of lexical items
pertaining to sexual abuse, while analysis on semantic con-
tents remains untouched (Modrek and Chakalov 2019). De-
spite the absence of Twitter data, Field et al. (2019) did a
study more related to ours as they approach to the subject
geared more towards linguistics tasks such as event, entity
and sentiment analysis (Field, Bhat, and Tsvetkov 2019).
Their work on event-entity extraction and contextual senti-
ment analysis has provided many useful insights, which en-
able us to tap into the potential of our Twitter dataset.
There are several novelties in our approach to the #MeToo
problem. Our target population is restricted to college fol-
lowers on Twitter, with the goal to explore people’s senti-
ment towards the sexual harassment they experienced and
its implication on the society’s awareness and perception of
the issue. Moreover, the focus on the sexual harassment re-
ality in colleges calls for an analysis on the metadata of this
demographics to reveal meaningful knowledge of their dis-
tinctive characteristics (He, Murphy, and Luo 2016).
Dataset
Data Collection
In this study, we limit the sample size to the followers identi-
ﬁed as English speakers in the U.S. News Top 200 National
Universities. We utilize the Jefferson-Henrique4 script, a
web scraper designed for Twitter to retrieve a total of over
300,000 #MeToo tweets from October 15th, when Alyssa
Milano posted the inceptive #MeToo tweet, to November
15th of 2017 to cover a period of a month when the trend
was on the rise and attracting mass concerns. Since the lists
of the followers of the studied colleges might overlap and
many Twitter users tend to reiterate other’s tweets, simply
putting all the data collected together could create a major
redundancy problem. We extract unique users and tweets
from the combined result set to generate a dataset of about
60,000 unique tweets, pertaining to 51,104 unique users.
Text Preprocessing
We pre-process the Twitter textual data to ensure that its lex-
ical items are to a high degree lexically comparable to those
of natural language. This is done by performing sentiment-
aware tokenization, spell correction, word normalization,
segmentation (for splitting hashtags) and annotation. The
implemented tokenizer with SentiWordnet corpus (Esuli and
Sebastiani 2006) is able to avoid splitting expressions or
words that should be kept intact (as one token), and iden-
tify most emoticons, emojis, expressions such as dates, cur-
rencies, acronyms, censored words (e.g. s**t), etc. In addi-
tion, we perform modiﬁcations on the extracted tokens. For
spelling correction, we compose a dictionary for the most
commonly seen abbreviations, censored words and elon-
gated words (for emphasis, e.g. ”reallyyy”). The Viterbi al-
gorithm is used for word segmentation, with word statistics
(unigrams and bigrams) computed from the NLTK English
Corpus to obtain the most probable segmentation posteri-
ors from the unigrams and bigrams probabilities. Moreover,
4https://git.io/JvUnQ

usernames are replaced with common designated tags so that
they would not need to be annotated by the semantic parser.
College Metadata
The meta-statistics on the college demographics regarding
enrollment, geographical location, private/public categoriza-
tion and male-to-female ratio are obtained. Furthermore, we
acquire the Campus Safety and Security Survey dataset from
the ofﬁcial U.S. Department of Education website and use
rape-related cases statistic as an attribute to complete the
data for our linear regression model. The number of such re-
ported cases by these 200 colleges in 2015 amounts to 2,939.
Methodology
Regression Analysis
We examine other features regarding the characteristics of
the studied colleges, which might be signiﬁcant factors of
sexual harassment. Four factual attributes pertaining to the
200 colleges are extracted from the U.S. News Statistics,
which consists of Undergraduate Enrollment, Male/Female
Ratio, Private/Public, and Region (Northeast, South, West,
and Midwest). We also use the normalized rape-related cases
count (number of cases reported per student enrolled) from
the stated government resource as another attribute to ex-
amine the proximity of our dataset to the ofﬁcial one. This
feature vector is then ﬁtted in a linear regression to predict
the normalized #metoo users count (number of unique users
who posted #MeToo tweets per student enrolled) for each
individual college.
Labeling Sexual Harassment
Per our topic modeling results, we decide to look deeper into
the narratives of #MeToo users who reveal their personal sto-
ries. We examine 6,760 tweets from the most relevant topic
of our LDA model, and categorize them based on the fol-
lowing metrics: harassment types (verbal, physical, and vi-
sual abuse) and context (peer-to-peer, school employee or
work employer, and third-parties). These labels are based on
deﬁnitions by the U.S. Dept. of Education (Cantu 2020).
Topic Modeling on #MeToo Tweets
In order to understand the latent topics of those #MeToo
tweets for college followers, we ﬁrst utilize Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) to label universal topics demonstrated
by the users. We determine the optimal topic number by se-
lecting the one with the highest coherence score. Since cer-
tain words frequently appear in those #MeToo tweets (e.g.,
sexual harassment, men, women, story, etc.), we transform
our corpus using TF-IDF, a term-weighting scheme that dis-
counts the inﬂuence of common terms.
Semantic Parsing with TRIPS
Learning deep meaning representations, which enables the
preservation of rich semantic content of entities, meaning
ambiguity resolution and partial relational understanding of
texts, is one of the challenges that the TRIPS parser (Allen

and Teng 2018) is tasked to tackle. This kind of mean-
ing is represented by TRIPS Logical Form (LF), which is
a graph-based representation that serves as the interface be-
tween structural analysis of text (i.e., parse) and the subse-
quent use of the information to produce knowledge. The LF
graphs are obtained by using the semantic types, roles and
rule-based relations deﬁned by the TRIPS Ontology (Allen
and Teng 2018) at its core in combination with various lin-
guistic techniques such as Dialogue Act Identiﬁcation, De-
pendency Parsing, Named Entity Recognition, and Crowd-
sourced Lexicon (Wordnet).
Figure 1: The meaning representation of the example sen-
tence ”He harassed me.” in TRIPS LF, the Ontology types of
the words are indicated by ”:*” and the role-argument rela-
tions between them are denoted by named arcs.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the TRIPS LF graph
depicting the meaning of the sentence ”He harassed me,”
where the event described though the speech act TELL (i.e.
telling a story) is the verb predicate HARASS, which is
caused by the agent HE and inﬂuences the affected (also
called ”theme” in traditional literature) ME. As seen from
the previously discussed example, the action-agent-affected
relational structure is applicable to even the simplest sen-
tences used for storytelling, and it is in fact very common for
humans to encounter in both spoken and written languages.
This makes it well suited for event extraction from short
texts, useful for analyzing tweets with Twitter’s 280 char-
acter limit. Therefore, our implementation of TRIPS parser
is particularly tailored for identifying the verb predicates
in tweets and their corresponding agent-affected arguments
(with 82.4% F1 score), so that we can have a solid ground
for further analysis.
Connotation Frames and Sentiment Analysis
In order to develop an interpretable analysis that focuses on
sentiment scores pertaining to the entities and events men-
tioned in the narratives, as well as the perceptions of readers
on such events, we draw from existing literature on conno-
tation frames: a set of verbs annotated according to what
they imply about semantically dependent entities. Connota-
tion frames, ﬁrst introduced by Rashkin, Singh, and Choi
(2016), provides a framework for analyzing nuanced dimen-
sions in text by combining polarity annotations with frame
semantics (Fillmore 1982). More speciﬁcally, verbs are an-
notated across various dimensions and perspectives so that
a verb might elicit a positive sentiment for its subject (i.e.
sympathy) but imply a negative effect for its object. We tar-
get the sentiments towards the entities and verb predicates
through a pre-collected set of 950 verbs that have been an-
notated for these traits, which can be more clearly demon-
strated through the example ”He harassed me.”:
• Sentiment(verb)−: something negative happened to the
writer.
• Sentiment(affected)−: the writer (affected) most likely
feels negative about the event.
• Perspective(affected →agent)−: the writer most likely
has negative feelings towards the agent as a result of the
event.
• Perspective(reader
→
affected)−: the reader most
likely view the agent as the antagonist.
• Perspective(affected →affected)+: the reader most
likely feels sympathetic towards the writer.
In addition to extracting sentiment scores from the pre-
annotated corpus, we also need to predict sentiment scores
of unknown verbs. To achieve this task, we rely on the 200-
dimensional GloVe word embeddings (Pennington, Socher,
and Manning 2014), pretrained on their Twitter dataset, to
compute the scores of the nearest neighboring synonyms
contained in the annotated verb set and normalize their
weighted sum to get the resulting sentiment (Equation 1).
S(w) = IS(w)+(1−I) 1
n
X
e∈γ(w)∩A
Pr(w →e)S(e) (1)
where I = 1w∈A is the indicator function for whether verb
predicate w is in the annotation set A, γ(w) is the set of near-
est neighbors e’s of verb w. Because our predictive model
computes event-entity sentiment scores and generates verb
predicate knowledge simultaneously, it is sensitive to data
initialization. Therefore, we train the model iteratively on a
number of random initialization to achieve the best results.
Experimental Results
Topical Themes of #MeToo Tweets
The results of LDA on #MeToo tweets of college users (Ta-
ble 1) fall into the same pattern as the research of Mod-
rek and Chakalov (2019), which suggests that a large por-
tion of #MeToo tweets on Twitter focuses on sharing per-
sonal traumatic stories about sexual harassment (Modrek
and Chakalov 2019). In fact, in our top 5 topics, Topics 1
and 5 mainly depict gruesome stories and childhood or col-
lege time experience. This ﬁnding seems to support the va-
lidity of the Twitter sample of Modrek and Chakalov (2019),
where 11% discloses personal sexual harassment memo-
ries and 5.8% of them was in formative years (Modrek and
Chakalov 2019). These users also shows multiple emotions
toward this movement, such as compassion (topic 2), deter-
mination (topic 3), and hope (topic 4). We will further ex-
amine the emotion features in the latter results.

Topic Topic Label
Keywords
1
Recalling the
experience
times, old, man, got, called, girl,
wrong, asked, home, done, scared,
tried, room
2
Showing
sympathy,
sharing news
sexually,
harassed,
assaulted,
women,
experiences,
magnitude,
sense, problem, fear, men, status,
getting, heartbreaking
3
Calling
for
actions
story, normal, denial, please, for-
ward,
tell,
shame,
shared,
wish,
women, daughters, worse, glad
4
Showing op-
timism
instant, take, right, ﬁght, past, action,
self, write, hey, loved, spoke, sisters,
body, former, front, claims, stronger
5
Detailing
early
life
experience
call, issue, hashtag, child, awareness,
guy, telling, trauma, number, party,
teacher, sexual, raise, sometimes
Table 1: Top 5 topics from all #MeToo Tweets from 51,104
college followers.
Regression Result
Feature
Coefﬁcient
Std. Err.
t-stat
p-value
M/F Ratio
3.613e-04
6.690e-03
0.054
0.9570
Enrollment
1.075e-06
1.639e-06
0.656
0.5128
Private
2.858e-03
3.676e-02
0.078
0.9381
Northeast
7.840e-02
3.734e-02
2.100
0.0370
West
8.909e-02
4.032e-02
2.210
0.0283
South
7.529e-02
3.763e-02
2.001
0.0468
Normalized
cases count
9.098e+01
1.176e+01
7.735
5.7e-13
constant
-7.943e-02
4.990e-02
-1.592
0.1131
Table 2: Linear regression results.
Observing the results of the linear regression in Table 2,
we ﬁnd the normalized governmental reported cases count
and regional feature to be statistically signiﬁcant on the sex-
ual harassment rate in the Twitter data (p −value < 0.05).
Speciﬁcally, the change in the number of reported cases con-
stitutes a considerable change in the number of #MeToo
users on Twitter as p-value is extremely small at 5.7e −13.
This corresponds to the research by Napolitano (2014) re-
garding the ”Yes means yes” movement in higher education
institutes in recent years, as even with some limitations and
inconsistency, the sexual assault reporting system is grad-
ually becoming more rigorous (Napolitano 2014). Mean-
while, attending colleges in the Northeast, West and South
regions increases the possibility of posting about sexual ha-
rassment (positive coefﬁcients), over the Midwest region.
This ﬁnding is interesting and warrants further scrutiny.
Event-Entity Sentiment Analysis
We discover that approximately half of users who detailed
their sexual harassment experiences with the #MeToo hash-
tag suffered from physical aggression. Also, more than half
of them claimed to encounter the perpetrators outside the
college and work environment. The sentimental score for the
affected entities and the verb of cases pertaining to faculty
are strictly negative, suggesting that academic personnel’s
actions might be described as more damaging to the stu-
dents’ mental health. This ﬁnding resonates a recent research
by Cantapulo et al. regarding the potential hazard of sex-
ual harassment conducts by university faculties using data
from federal investigation and relevant social science liter-
ature (Cantalupo and Kidder 2018). Furthermore, many in
this group tend to mention their respective age, typically be-
tween 5 and 20 (24% of the studied subset). This observa-
tion reveals an alarming number of child and teenager sex-
ual abuse, indicating that although college students are not
as prone to sexual harassment from their peers and teachers,
they might still be traumatized by their childhood experi-
ences.
In addition, although verbal abuse experiences accounts
for a large proportion of the tweets, it is challenging to
gain sentiment insights into them, as the majority of them
contains insinuations and sarcasms regarding sexual harass-
ment. This explains why the sentiment scores of the events
and entities are very close to neutral.
Harassment Participant
Event-
Sentiment
Affected-
Sentiment
Percentage
Physical
3rd-Party
-0.0429
-0.0479
23.63%
Physical
Faculty
-0.1999
-0.2308
11.39%
Physical
Peer
-0.0136
-0.1018
16.03%
Verbal
3rd-Party
0.1385
0.0077
25.32%
Verbal
Faculty
0.1454
0.0051
5.91%
Verbal
Peer
0.0819
-0.0024
5.91%
Visual
3rd-Party
0.1015
-0.0407
6.33%
Visual
Faculty
0.1333
0.0500
0.42%
Visual
Peer
-0.3946
0.0000
0.84%
Table 3: Semantic sentiment results.
Limitations and Ethical Implications
Our dataset is taken from only a sample of a speciﬁc set of
colleges, and different samples might yield different results.
Our method of identifying college students is simple, and
might not reﬂect the whole student population. Furthermore,
the majority of posts on Twitter are short texts (under 50
words). This factor, according to previous research, might
hamper the performance of the LDA results, despite the use
of the TF-IDF scheme (Tang et al. 2014).
Furthermore, while the main goal of this paper is to shed
lights to the ongoing problems in the academia and con-
tribute to the future sociological study using big data analy-
sis, our dataset might be misused for detrimental purposes.
Also, data regarding sexual harassment is sensitive in nature,
and might have unanticipated effects on those addressed
users.

Conclusion
In this study, we discover a novel correlation between the
number of college users who participate in the #MeToo
movement and the number of ofﬁcial reported cases from
the government data. This is a positive sign suggesting that
the higher education system is moving into a right direc-
tion to effectively utilize Title IV, a portion of the Education
Amendments Act of 1972, 5 which requests colleges to sub-
mit their sexual misconduct reports to the ofﬁcials and pro-
tect the victims. In addition, we capture several geographic
and behavioral characteristics of the #MeToo users related
to sexual assault such as region, reaction and narrative con-
tent following the trend, as well as sentiment and social in-
teractions, some of which are supported by various literature
on sexual harassment. Importantly, our semantic analysis re-
veals interesting patterns of the assaulting cases. We believe
our methodologies on deﬁning these #MeToo users and their
features will be applicable to further studies on this and other
alarming social issues.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the social media-driven ap-
proach is highly useful in facilitating crime-related sociol-
ogy research on a large scale and spectrum. Moreover, since
social networks appeal to a broad audience, especially those
outside academia, studies using these resources are highly
useful for raising awareness in the community on concur-
rent social problems.
Last but not least, many other aspects of the text data from
social media, which could provide many interesting insights
on sexual harassment, remain largely untouched. In the fu-
ture, we intend to explore more sophisticated language fea-
tures and implement more supervised models with advanced
neural network parsing and classiﬁcation. We believe that
with our current dataset, an extension to take advantage of
cutting-edge linguistic techniques will be the next step to
address the previously unanswered questions and uncover
deeper meanings of the tweets on sexual harassment.
