Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
Karlis Freivalds 1 Renars Liepins 1
Abstract
Algorithm learning is a core problem in artiﬁcial
intelligence with signiﬁcant implications on au-
tomation level that can be achieved by machines.
Recently deep learning methods are emerging for
synthesizing an algorithm from its input-output
examples, the most successful being the Neu-
ral GPU, capable of learning multiplication. We
present several improvements to the Neural GPU
that substantially reduces training time and im-
proves generalization. We introduce a new tech-
nique - hard nonlinearities with saturation costs
- that has general applicability. We also intro-
duce a technique of diagonal gates that can be
applied to active-memory models. The proposed
architecture is the ﬁrst capable of learning deci-
mal multiplication end-to-end.
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have achieved state-of-the-art re-
sults in a wide range of tasks, notably in computer vi-
sion (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), speech recognition (Amodei
et al., 2015), and natural language processing (Bahdanau
et al., 2014) and extensive work is performed to broaden
its scope of application. A particularly interesting area is
algorithm learning i.e. synthesizing an algorithm from its
input-output examples. It is a long-standing open problem
with theoretical results dating back to (Gold, 1967; Angluin
& Smith, 1983) but still, the results are far from reaching
an industry scale.
With the emergence of powerful deep learning methods,
research on algorithm learning has acquired a new dimen-
sion. Several architectures have appeared that are capa-
ble of learning algorithms of moderate complexity, such as
sorting, addition or multiplication. The ultimate goal, of
course, is to learn algorithms for tasks with unknown solu-
tions. That is not viable yet; nevertheless, the techniques
developed for algorithm learning may yield to progress in
1Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science University of
Latvia, Raina bulvaris 29, Riga, LV-1459, LATVIA. Correspon-

practical ﬁelds relevant now. For example, the Neural GPU
architecture, which was designed primarily for algorithm
learning, was recently extended to perform machine trans-
lation (Kaiser & Bengio, 2016).
Neural GPU (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015) is the most
promising among the proposed architectures for algorithm
learning because it is the only one capable of learning mul-
tiplication that generalizing to inputs much longer than the
training examples. However, it is fragile since only a tiny
fraction of the trained models generalize well.
In this paper, we study ways to improve the Neural GPU
to obtain faster training and better generalization. The pro-
posed improvements allow us to achieve substantial gains:
the model can learn binary multiplication in 800 steps ver-
sus 30000 steps that are needed for the original Neural
GPU, and, most importantly all the trained models gener-
alize to 100 times longer inputs with less than 1% error.
The model can also learn a wider range of problems with
similar generalization performance, e.g. the decimal mul-
tiplication, which is the ﬁrst time it has been learned end-
to-end. To learn decimal multiplication we use a different
representation where each decimal digit is encoded in bi-
nary.
The improvements that achieve these goals are removal of
the parameter sharing relaxation, introduction of nonlinear-
ities with saturation cost, introduction of a diagonal gat-
ing mechanism.
We also improve the training schedule
by training on all input lengths simultaneously and use a
larger learning rate with AdaMax optimizer (Kingma & Ba,
2014). We integrate gradient clipping into AdaMax.
We analyze the impact of each improvement separately and
show that all of them are relevant to the achieved perfor-
mance. We ﬁnd that using hard nonlinearities with satura-
tion cost is the key factor to achieve good generalization.
2. Related Work
There are two primary approaches to algorithm learning −
recurrent networks and reinforcement learning. In the rein-
forcement learning approach, the algorithmic device called
controller is decoupled from the environment where the
program executes. The device operates in steps which con-
sist of observing the current state of the environment and is-
arXiv:1702.08727v2  [cs.NE]  4 Jul 2018

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
suing commands which change the next state of it. Such ap-
proach (at least theoretically) scales well in time and mem-
ory domain, but elaborate techniques of training are nec-
essary since the overall structure cannot be differentiated.
Simple algorithms such as sequence copying and rever-
sal can be learned with the current reinforcement learning
techniques (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2015; Zaremba et al.,
2016).
Recurrent networks have a simple computation cell that is
unrolled in time according to the length of an input se-
quence. Such approach is employed by LSTM(Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRU (Cho et al., 2014) net-
works for sequence classiﬁcation. Thy scale with sequence
length but each cell has a constant amount of memory that
essentially limits the learnable problems to regular lan-
guages.
There are several more elaborate architectures proposed for
algorithm learning. (Graves et al., 2014) developed a Neu-
ral Turing Machine capable of learning and executing sim-
ple programs such as repeat copying, simple priority sort-
ing, and associative recall. They use complicated memory
addressing to make the model differentiable.
(Joulin & Mikolov, 2015) introduce differentiable stack
and double linked list data structures. Pointer Networks
(Vinyals et al., 2015) use soft attention and generalize to
a variable-sized output space depending on the input se-
quence length. This model was shown to be effective for
combinatorial optimization problems such as the traveling
salesman and Delaunay triangulation.
Neural Random-
Access Machines (Kurach et al., 2016) introduce a mem-
ory addressing scheme potentially allowing constant time
access due to discretization. (Grefenstette et al., 2015) in-
troduce more neural data structures and evaluate them on
several sequence processing tasks. A hierarchical mem-
ory layout with logarithmic access time is introduced in
(Andrychowicz & Kurach, 2016) with both differentiable
and reinforcement learning versions being presented.
Grid LSTM (Kalchbrenner et al., 2015) allow explicit un-
rolling along time and memory dimension and are able to
learn such tasks as addition and memorization.
A different setting of algorithm learning is explored in
(Reed & De Freitas, 2015) where a model is trained on ex-
ecution traces instead of input and output pairs; this richer
supervision allows to induce higher level programs.
Neural GPU (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015) is the current state
of the art in deep algorithm learning. It can learn fairly
complicated algorithms such as addition and binary mul-
tiplication, but only a small fraction of the trained models
generalize well. The authors train 729 models to ﬁnd one
that generalizes well. They have no success for training
decimal multiplication. (Price et al., 2016) is able to train
Neural GPU on decimal multiplication by using curriculum
learning when the same model is trained at ﬁrst for binary
multiplication then for base-4 and only then for decimal.
The basic idea of Neural GPU architecture is promising,
and in this paper, we will we work on making it more pow-
erful.
3. The Model
Neural GPU was introduced by (Kaiser & Sutskever,
2015). It is a recurrent network with a multi-dimensional
state where a Convolution Gated Recurrent Unit (CGRU) is
applied to the state at every time-step. CGRU is a combi-
nation of convolution operation and GRU(Cho et al., 2014)
which computes the state st at time t from the state at time
t −1 according to the following rules:
ut = σ(U ′ ∗st−1 + B′)
rt = σ(U ′′ ∗st−1 + B′′)
ct = tanh(U ∗(rt ⊙st−1) + B)
st = ut ⊙st−1 + (1 −ut) ⊙ct
In the above equations, U, U ′, U ′′ are convolution kernel
banks, B, B′, B′′ are bias vectors; these are the parameters
that will be learned. U ∗s denotes a convolution of a kernel
bank U with a state s; u ⊙s denotes element-wise vector
multiplication and σ is the sigmoid function.
Given an input of length n, it is embedded into the ﬁrst
state, each symbol independently, producing a state with
its ﬁrst dimension equal to n, then CGRU is applied to it
several times, and output is read from the last state by using
a softmax loss for each symbol.
While keeping this general architecture, we introduce some
changes that include both simpliﬁcations and enhance-
ments. So we will give more details immediately regarding
our new architecture while mentioning the points where it
deviates from the original.
3.1. Simpliﬁcations
The original architecture by Kaiser and Sutskever uses a
3-dimensional state with its third dimension being of ﬁxed
size equal to 4. This extra dimension is not essential for the
network’s performance. We use a simpler 2-dimensional
state of shape [n,m] where n is the length of input and m
is the number of maps. To match the 2-dimensional state,
our convolution kernel banks are of shape [3,m,m]. We ﬁx
the ﬁlter length to 3. We conﬁrmed experimentally that this
is the optimal setting for all considered tasks.
We use n applications of the convolutional unit, all with
the same set of parameters. Original implementation uses
2n applications with two sets of parameters. Hence our
network is less deep and contains fewer parameters to be
2

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
Figure 1. Multiplication execution trace. A typical image from
each of the parts s1(left), s2(middle), s3(right) is shown.
learned.
We do not use parameter sharing relaxation (6 parameter
sets that were slowly pulled together during training). With
enhancements described below, our model does not need
this feature and the learning schedule becomes simpler.
3.2. Diagonal gates
The gating mechanism incorporated in the CGRU facili-
tates data copying to the same cell in the next time-step.
This is essential for bringing together features separated in
time during training. However, for most tasks, it is also
required to bring together features from both ends of the
input. Therefore, we introduce gates that copy data to a
neighboring cell in the next time-step. We call these di-
agonal gates.
We split all maps of a state into 3 parts
st = (s1
t, s2
t, s3
t). The ﬁrst part has a gate from the same
cell in the previous time-step as in a CGRU, the second part
uses gate from the left neighbor cell, and the third part uses
gate from the right neighbor cell.
To implement the diagonal gates, we need to shift the parts
s2
t−1 and s3
t−1 to the right and left respectively and then
apply a CGRU to the result. Shifting can be conveniently
expressed as a convolution. Right shift corresponds to con-
volution with ﬁlter [1,0,0], left shift to convolution with
[0,0,1] and no shift to convolution with [0,1,0]. We deﬁne
the Diagonal Convolutional Gated Recurrent Unit (DC-
GRU), which we will use instead of CGRU, as follows:
st = ut ⊙˜st + (1 −ut) ⊙ct
˜st = (˜s1
t, ˜s2
t, ˜s3
t)
˜s1
t = s1
t−1 ∗[0, 1, 0]
˜s2
t = s2
t−1 ∗[1, 0, 0]
˜s3
t = s3
t−1 ∗[0, 0, 1]
Deﬁnitions of ut and ct are the same as for CGRU. The
division of maps into 3 parts is only conceptual; an imple-
mentation uses a depthwise convolution operating directly
on st−1 convolving each map with the required convolution
ﬁlter independently.
To see that diagonal gates have impact, we can inspect ex-
Figure 2. Sorting execution trace. A typical image from each of
the parts s1(left), s2(middle), s3(right) is shown.
ecution trace of a trained model on some input. An ex-
ecution trace is a collection of state values arising in the
computation over all time steps. It is visualized as an im-
age for each map where the input is given at the top, and the
result is read from the bottom row of the image. In Fig 1
we can see three maps of an execution trace performing bi-
nary multiplication on two 50 digit random numbers where
each image is taken from each of the parts with a differ-
ent gate direction. We can notice computing patterns that
are aligned with the gate direction. The full set of maps
is given in Appendix 1. Fig 2 shows maps from execution
trace of a sorting task where 100 numbers in range 0 to 5
are sorted. These images look different than multiplication
images, but patterns aligned with the gate direction are ev-
ident as well(see also Appendix 2 for the full set of maps).
Using gates that operate in different directions is not a
novel idea. A similar mechanism is used in Grid LSTM
(Kalchbrenner et al., 2015) where different units perform
gating along different dimensions of the grid. But intro-
duction such gates in a convolutional architecture is new.
3.3. Hard non-linearities
(Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015) have found that introducing
gate cutoff improves performance. We go further and use
hard tanh and hard sigmoid functions for all nonlinearities
in the DCGRU. They are piecewise linear approximations
of tanh and σ, namely
hard tanh(x) = max(−1, min(1, x))
hard σ(x) = max(0, min(1, (x + 1)/2))1
Hard nonlinearities train faster since their gradient does not
approach zero. A drawback is the dying neuron problem
that was observed for ReLU units where some neurons sat-
urate for essentially all inputs. In the case of hard tanh and
hard σ units, this problem is even more pronounced since
the range of the unit is bounded on both sides. Also, we
use a relatively high learning rate that ampliﬁes the prob-
lem. Therefore, we add an extra cost to the loss function
1Other literature may contain slightly different deﬁnition, but
the following one is preferable in our case since we can use the
same saturation cost for both functions.
3

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
to keep the units out of deadly saturation. For one unit we
deﬁne
saturation cost(x) = min(0, |x| −s limit)
with a parameter s limit slightly less than 1 to keep the
unit in its linear range. A value s limit = 0.9 works well
in our case. We calculate the saturation cost for each ap-
plication of hard tanh(x) and hard σ(x), sum all of them
together and add to the loss function with an appropriately
small weight. We choose the weight such that the total sat-
uration cost is 100 times smaller than the error loss.
Application of saturation cost increases the training time
slightly, but training becomes more robust. The experimen-
tal analysis presented later in this paper shows that hard
nonlinearities are essential to obtain good generalization
and saturation cost allows to use larger learning rate safely.
Note that we cannot use techniques like leaky ReLU (Maas
et al., 2013), parametric ReLU (He et al., 2015) or expo-
nential linear unit(Clevert et al., 2015) since they contain
negative parts and the deﬁnition of GRU relies on values
contained in their deﬁned ranges. In particular, gate values
have to be in the range [0,1] for gates to function properly.
This technique of hard nonlinearities together with satura-
tion cost can be applied to ordinary LSTM and GRU net-
works potentially yielding to improved performance. Also,
it can be applied to ReLU networks, although it is not yet
analyzed if it gives an advantage to the mentioned alterna-
tives.
3.4. Training
We train the model on inputs of all lengths simultaneously.
As in the original architecture, we instantiate several bins of
different lengths and place each training example into the
smallest bin it ﬁts and pad the remaining length. However,
instead of training each bin separately, we sum their losses
together and use one optimizer for the total loss. In this
way, we avoid scheduling of bins and obtain faster conver-
gence since, typically, several bins contribute to progress at
each training step.
We use a larger learning rate, i.e., lr = 0.005 for a network
with 96 maps; that is about 5 times larger than typically
used. Training is not only faster but also more robust since
the process can jump out of poor local minima. To keep
learning converging, we use AdaMax optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2014). It has a strong guarantee that each parameter
value will change by no more than lr at each step. With
more maps, we have to use a proportionally smaller learn-
ing rate since the sum over all maps contributes to each
particular value in the next time step, and with more maps,
the total contribution gets larger. We decrease the learning
rate if no progress is made for 600 steps.
We integrate gradient clipping into AdaMax optimizer. We
clip the gradient of each variable separately to the range
proportional to its decayed maximum that is used internally
by the optimizer. In this way, we do not need to set some
predetermined clipping threshold. Gradient clipping is not
strictly required for convergence since AdaMax optimizer
is able to limit the step size even with high peaks in gra-
dient. However, such high gradient sets a large decayed
maximum and slows down further training. Clipping limits
the growth of the decayed maximum and speeds up train-
ing.
We use gradient noise of magnitude proportional to the
learning rate. It was shown to give positive impact (Nee-
lakantan et al., 2015).
3.5. Dropout
Dropout improves training and generalization of the Neu-
ral GPU. To limit memory loss (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015)
had to use dropout probability inversely proportional to the
sequence length.
We apply dropout only to the update vector ct of the CGRU
as proposed in (Semeniuta et al., 2016). That helps to avoid
memory loss over many time steps. We chose a small con-
stant dropout probability around 0.1. Practical experiments
given in the next section conﬁrms this choice as the best
one.
4. Evaluation
We have implemented the proposed architecture in tensor-
ﬂow. The code is available on GitHub2. In this section, we
compare the proposed architecture (denoted by DNGPU)
with the original architecture (denoted NGPU) by (Kaiser
& Sutskever, 2015) as well as evaluate individual improve-
ments of DNGPU proposed in this paper.
We choose the binary multiplication task as the basis for
the evaluation. It is the most complex task which can be
learned by NGPU; more complex (of the studied tasks)
being only decimal multiplication. Sorting, addition and
other considered tasks can be learned more easily.
We use NGPU implementation provided by the authors
with settings proposed in the paper (Kaiser & Sutskever,
2015). We set the number of maps nmaps = 24, dropout
probability = 0.09. Other parameters we leave to default
values used in the provided code.
For DNGPU we use the number of maps m = 96 to match
the data amount carried in one state of NGPU (which use
24 maps in 4 rows). We use learning rate lr = 0.05, and
dropout probability = 0.1.
We use essentially the same training set as in the (Kaiser
2 https://github.com/LUMII-Syslab/DNGPU
4

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
Figure 3. Accuracy on test set length 401 vs. step on binary mul-
tiplication.
& Sutskever, 2015) consisting of 10000 examples of ev-
ery length up to 41 (two 20 bit numbers are multiplied).
We trained 5 models with a random initialization and mea-
sured their accuracy on a test set containing random inputs
of length 401 (two 200 bit numbers are multiplied). In this
way, we can show both training speed and generalization in
one graph. We used a computer with Intel Xeon E312 2.4
GHz processor, 64GB RAM and a Tesla K40 GPU card for
testing.
4.1. Performance and generalization
To compare DNGPU with NGPU, we plot the accuracy of
both models on the test for each step of training, see Fig 3.
The solid lines show the average of all runs and the shaded
area shows the scatter among different runs. Accuracy is
deﬁned as the percentage of correctly predicted output bits
over all examples. We can see that the DNGPU converges
much faster and achieves near 100% accuracy in all runs.
It requires only about 800 steps to reach 99% accuracy.
For a fair comparison, we have to take time per step into ac-
count. It is larger for our implementation since we evaluate
gradient on all bins instead of one. Fig 4 shows the same
data plot depending on the training time. DNGPU still has
a signiﬁcant advantage. Both implementations were run on
the same hardware, and we excluded the time spent for ac-
curacy evaluation.
To explore generalization beyond length 401, see Fig 5
which shows the accuracy of both architectures depending
on input length. We see that DNGPU generalizes much
better. All trained DNGPU models exceeded 90% accu-
racy, and two out of ﬁve exceeded 99% accuracy on length
4001.
Although the accuracy achieved by DNGPU would be per-
fectly acceptable in other domain, demands for algorithm
learning are higher. To speak that we have truly inferred
an algorithm, it should generalize to arbitrary input length
Figure 4. Accuracy on test set length 401 vs. training time on
binary multiplication.
without a single error.
This is not yet achieved.
Fig 6
shows the number of incorrectly predicted outputs (max-
imum value 1024) of the same trained models where we
consider the output to be correct only if all its bits are cor-
rect. We can see that many of the longer examples contain
errors (although the errors are few, the accuracy to be high).
Moreover, most models have a few errors even in short ex-
amples, sometimes even on examples present in the train-
ing set. We do not know the exact causes for this, but some
thoughts are given in (Price et al., 2016). Good news is
that one model out of 5 gave only 19 outputs containing er-
rors on length 4001, so by training more models it could be
possible to ﬁnd one which generalizes perfectly.
To summarize, our architecture outperforms the original by
a wide margin both in terms of training speed and of gen-
eralization. Our implementation consistently reaches 99%
accuracy on the test set of length 401 inputs in less than 15
minutes. The original NGPU trains slower and achieves
90% accuracy only on some runs.
Our ﬁndings about
NGPU are consistent with a much more massive evaluation
in (Neelakantan et al., 2015) Table 6 which shows that only
a small fraction of its trained instances generalize well to
Figure 5. Accuracy on inputs of different lengths. The vertical
dashed line shows the training length.
5

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
Figure 6. The number of test outputs containing at least one error.
length 401. Note that generalization of both models can be
improved by increasing dropout probability together with
the number of maps.
4.2. Improvement impact analysis
We tried to understand how much each of the proposed
enhancements contributes to the improved performance.
Fig 7 shows how the model performs when one of the
proposed features is turned off. A model trained without
hard nonlinearities leads to especially poor performance.
A closer look reveals that these models managed to ﬁt the
training set easily but generalized poorly to length 401. So,
the key factor for achieving generalization is using hard
nonlinearities. The same ﬁgure shows that hard nonlineari-
ties without saturation cost also perform poorly. Training is
unstable and does not converge to 100% accuracy. Contin-
uing training beyond 6000 steps slowly degrades the per-
formance of the model. We can also see that without the
diagonal gates the training becomes slower and more un-
stable.
Figure 7. Impact of the proposed features.
The magenta line
shows the effect of using traditional soft tanh and sigmoid in-
stead of hard ones. The yellow line shows performance with hard
nonlinearities but without saturation cost. The red line shows per-
formance without diagonal gates. The blue line is the suggested
architecture.
In Fig 8 we analyze different dropout options. We can see
Figure 8. Performance of different dropout options. The blue line
shows DNGPU performance which uses dropout by (Semeni-
uta et al., 2016), the yellow line shows NGPU dropout that was
used in the code by Kaiser and Sutskever, the red line is without
dropout.
that dropout suggested by (Semeniuta et al., 2016) per-
forms better than the one employed in NGPU. Training
without dropout is the worst option.
4.3. Decimal multiplication
Our model can learn base-4 multiplication with consis-
tently good generalization if we increase the number of
maps to 192. However, like our predecessors, we did not
succeed on the decimal multiplication task in its originally
proposed form. But our architecture can learn decimal mul-
tiplication if we encode each decimal digit in binary. We
use 4 bits per digit and mark the start of each digit with a
different encoding of its ﬁrst bit. Such encoding produces
4 times longer inputs and outputs. We implemented this
encoding in input/output data generation part, but equiva-
lently it can be implemented inside the Neural GPU itself
by appropriate adjustment of its input and output layers.
For evaluation, we increased the number of maps m to 192
and performed training on examples of length 41 (multipli-
cation of two 5 digit decimal numbers) and tested on exam-
ples of length 401 (multiplication of two 50 digit decimal
numbers) as before. Fig 9 shows the results.
We were surprised to see that it generalized so well despite
training only on very short examples containing two 5 digit
numbers. Additionally, two models out of 5 generalized to
length 401 with less than 1% error. Of course, for better
generalization we have to train on longer inputs.
The binary encoding allows easier training. However, it
comes with a signiﬁcant overhead, i.e., a 4x increase in the
input length which leads to a 16x increase in the unrolled
model and a proportional increase training time and mem-
ory requirements.
6

Improving the Neural GPU Architecture for Algorithm Learning
Figure 9. Accuracy on test set length 401 vs. step on decimal mul-
tiplication.
5. Conclusions
We have presented several improvements to the Neural
GPU architecture that substantially decrease training time
and improve generalization. The main improvements are
hard nonlinearities with saturation cost and a diagonal gat-
ing mechanism. We have shown that the hard nonlinearities
with saturation cost contribute the most to obtaining better
generalization. They may ﬁnd further applications also in
ordinary reccurent networks such as LSTM and GRU.
A larger learning rate together with AdaMax optimizer also
helps the training performance, but the introduced satura-
tion cost is essential to keep the learning convergent.
The improved architecture can easily learn a variety of
tasks including the binary multiplication on which other ar-
chitectures struggle. If we increase the number of maps to
192, we can also learn base-4 multiplication with consis-
tently good generalization. Furthermore, if we encode the
decimal input/output digits in binary, the architecture can
also learn decimal multiplication end-to-end.
The improved architecture is considerably simpler than the
original NeuralGPU, enabling an easier extension to han-
dle harder problems. One such possible extension could
be scaling the model to solve tasks requiring more than n
slots of memory or more than n time steps. Simply enlarg-
ing the size of the model did not work well. So we leave
the question of proper scaling of the model for future work.
The correct generalization of the learned models to arbi-
trary large inputs is still an open problem, and it is not even
clear why some models generalize, and others do not. With
the proposed simpler model and faster training, it will be
possible to address this question more effectively.
