Comparing Simulation Output Accuracy of Discrete Event and Agent Based 
Models: A Quantitative Approach 
 
 
 
Mazlina Abdul Majid 
School of Computer Science 
University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK 
+44 (0)115 8465526 

Uwe Aickelin 
School of Computer Science 
University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK 
+44 (0)115 9514215 

Peer-Olaf Siebers School of 
Computer Science 
University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK 
+44 (0)115 8465526 

 
 
Keywords: Discrete Event Simulation, Agent Based 
Simulation, Output Analysis, Human Reactive Behaviour 
 
Abstract 
In our research we investigate the output accuracy of 
discrete event simulation models and agent based simulation 
models when studying human centric complex systems. In 
this paper we focus on human reactive behaviour as it is 
possible in both modelling approaches to implement human 
reactive behaviour in the model by using standard methods. 
As a case study we have chosen the retail sector, and here in 
particular the operations of the fitting room in the women 
wear department of a large UK department store. In our case 
study we looked at ways of determining the efficiency of 
implementing new management policies for the fitting room 
operation through modelling the reactive behaviour of staff 
and customers of the department. First, we have carried out 
a validation experiment in which we compared the results 
from our models to the performance of the real system. This 
experiment also allowed us to establish differences in output 
accuracy between the two modelling methods. In a second 
step a multi-scenario experiment was carried out to study 
the behaviour of the models when they are used for the 
purpose of operational improvement. Overall we have found 
that for our case study example both, discrete event 
simulation and agent based simulation have the same 
potential to support the investigation into the efficiency of 
implementing new management policies. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Simulation has become a preferred tool in Operation 
Research for modelling complex systems. Studies in human 
behaviour modelling have received increased focus and 
attention from  simulation research in  the  UK  [Robinson 
2004]. The research in human behaviour modelling has been 
applied to various application areas such as manufacturing 
(e.g.  [Siebers  2004]),  healthcare  (e.g.  [Brailsford  et  al. 
2006]), military operations (e.g. [Wray and Laird 2003]) 
crowd   behaviour   (e.g.   [Loftin   et   al.   2005])   retail 
management  (e.g.  [Siebers  et  al.  2008])  and  consumer 
behaviour (e.g. [Schenk et al. 2007]). As found in the 
literature, some 
researchers 
choose Discrete 
Event 
Simulation (DES) as a means to investigate their human 
behaviour problems; others choose Agent Based Simulation 
(ABS) for this purpose. The choice of  which simulation 
method to use relies on the individual judgment of the 
modeller and their experienced with the modelling method. 
The  issue  here  will  be  how  accurate and  difference the 
simulation output will be when we model human behaviour 
using  both  DES  and  ABS  model.  The  representation of 
human behaviour contains complexity and variability; 
therefore when investigating such systems it is very 
important to choose a suitable technique. Consequently, we 
have done some quantitative experiments and our findings 
will be discussed in this paper. 
In this research we aim to provide an empirical study in 
order to find out more about the differences in output 
accuracy by comparing traditional DES and ABS. The main 
difference between traditional DES and ABS is that in 
traditional DES the modelling focus is on the process flow 
while in the ABS the modelling focus is on the individual 
entities in the system and their interactions. To achieve our 
aim we will compare the simulation output accuracy of DES 
and ABS models when modelling human reactive behaviour 
in a department store. In this context human reactive 
behaviour means responding to a request. For example, a 
sales staff member provides help when needed. Statistical 
tests will be used to establish if the differences in output 
accuracy of the different modelling methods are significant. 
The remaining content of this paper is as follows: In 
Section 2 we explore the theory and characteristics of the 
three  major  OR  simulation  methods  -  DES,  ABS,  and 
System Dynamics (SD). Here we also discuss comparisons 
between the different simulation methods we have found in 
the literature. Section 3 describes our case study planning, 
field work and our model design. In Section 4 we describe 
our experimental setup and then analyse and discuss our 
results.  We  have  conducted  a  validation  and  a  multi- 
scenario experiment to  test  our models’ behaviour under 
real world conditions. Finally, in Section 5 we draw some 
conclusions and summarise the current progress. 

 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
At present, several tools and techniques can be used to 
model a system. Over the last three decades, simulation has 
become a frequently used modelling tool in Operation 
Research (OR) [Kelton 2007]. Its ability to support studies 
of  complex  systems  has  made  simulation  the  preferred 
choice of academics and practitioners in comparison to 
analytical approaches. The simulation modelling paradigms 
used in OR can be classified in three groups: (traditional) 
discrete event modelling, system dynamics modelling, and 
agent based modelling. 
DES models represent a system based on chronological 
sequences of events where each event changes the system 
state in discrete time. SD models represent real world 
phenomena using stock and flow diagrams, causal loop 
diagrams  and  differential  equations.  In  contrast,  ABS 
models comprise of a number of autonomous, responsive 
and proactive agents which interact with each other to 
achieve their objectives. 
When looking for existing comparisons between DES, 
SD and ABS models we found some papers about this topic 
in the literature; however none of them was focusing on 
modelling human behaviour. Some of the relevant papers 
comparing simulation technique with regards to model 
characteristics are listed in Table 1. 
A review of existing comparisons between SD and DES 
is presented by [Tako and Robinson 2006]. They have 
reviewed 65 journal articles from 1996-2006 that compare 
model building, philosophies and model use of SD and DES 
models. They concluded that in most areas (manufacturing, 
supply chain management, etc.) SD has been used for the 
strategic planning while DES for the operational planning. 
Existing comparison of DES and ABS is presented by 
[Pugh 2006] and [Yu et al. 2007]. Pugh states by looking 
into the model characteristics that DES and ABS models 
both represent M/M/1 queuing systems well but he found 
that ABS models are much more difficult to construct 
compared to DES models. [Yu et al. 2007] have conducted a 
quantitative comparison between DES and ABS model 
characteristics in the field of transportation. They found that 
DES model appears to have greater value in the simulation 
software internal properties such as by building DES models 
in their simulation software required more model blocks 
where as ABS models required less classes. This shows that 
even  though DES  and  ABS  can  both  model the  system 
under investigation, but their approach are different [Becker 
2006]. 
We found just one literature that looked at all three 
modelling techniques [Owen et al. 2008]. They looked into 
establishing a framework for comparing the different 
modelling techniques, stating that a framework is essential 
in assisting the supply chain practitioners by matching their 
modelling problem with a suitable modelling paradigm. 
Table 1: Existing study in comparing simulation technique 
regarding model characteristics. 
Techniques
Researchers; Area
Findings
 
SD and ABS 
Wakeland et al. 2004; 
Biomedical 
Found that the understanding of the 
aggregate behaviour in SD model and 
state changes in individual entities in 
ABS model is relevant in the study. 
 
SD and DES 
Morecroft and 
Robinsion 2006; 
Fisheries 
Found that SD and DES are 
implementing different approaches for 
modelling but both are suitable for 
modelling systems over time.
DES and ABS
Becker et al. 2006; 
Transportation 
Found that DES is less flexible than 
ABS; it is difficult to model different 
behaviours of shippers in DES.
 
As conclusion to findings presented here, we can say 
that all of them agree that choosing the right modelling 
technique is essential in ensuring a good representation of 
the selected problem in the different areas. 
We found a disparity in the quantity of work comparing 
SD and ABS or SD and DES to that comparing DES and 
ABS (which was very little) and we have found no work on 
comparing the accuracy of DES and ABS results for the 
study of human centric systems. We have chosen to fill this 
gap  and  focus  our  efforts on  comparing DES  and  ABS 
models  of  human  centric  systems  with  regards  to  their 
output accuracy compared to the real system modelled. 
To study the differences between ABS and DES models 
we will look at management practices and their influences 
on staff performance and customer behaviour in the retail 
business. Related research has mainly focused on consumer 
behaviour (e.g. [Schenk et al. 2007]). However, research in 
management practices has started to evolve as described by 
[Siebers 2007; 2008]. As we discussed above, much work 
has been done in comparing simulation techniques in the 
field of transportation and supply chain management and 
researchers have focused on model characteristics. 
 
3. CASE STUDY FIELDSWORK 
In order to achieve our aim we have used a case study 
approach. The research has focused on the operation of the 
main fitting room in the womenswear department of one of 
the top ten retailers in the UK (see Figure 1). For a client the 
goal of such a simulation study could be to identify the 
potential impact for fitting room performance when having 
different numbers of sales staff permanently present in the 
fitting room. 
We have studied reactive staff behaviour which relates 
to staff responding to the customer when being available 
and requested. Based on our case study observations we 
have developed some conceptual models. Our DES 
conceptual model (see Figure 2) is represented by a flow 
chart diagram as in DES we focus on process flow. Our 
ABS conceptual models (see Figure 3, 4 and 5) are state 

 
 
Figure 1: An illustration of the main fitting room operation 
 
chart diagrams for the different types of agents we have to 
represent (in our case customers, staff and fitting room) as 
in  ABS  we  focus  on  the  individual ‘actors’ and  their 
interactions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Flow chart for DES model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: State chart for ABS model (customer) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: State chart for ABS model (staff) 
In the fitting room operation, the staff have to do 
three distinct jobs: (1) counting the number of garments 
and handing out the fitting room’s card (contains number 
of clothes and room number) when the customer enters 
the fitting room area, (2) providing help while customers 
are in the fitting room, and (3) taking back the fitting 
room’s card and any unwanted garments when the 
customer is leaving the fitting room area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: State chart for ABS model (fitting room) 
 
4. EXPERIMENTATION 
Two similar simulation models were developed from 
the conceptual models presented in Section 3 using the 
multi-paradigm simulation software AnyLogic™ [XJ 
Technologies] one implemented as a DES model and one 
implemented as an ABS model. Both models were 
constructed  as  conventional  M/M/1  queuing  systems. 
They  consist  of  an  arrival  process  (customers),  three 
single queues (customer entry queue, customer return 
queue, customer help queue), and resource (sales staff). 
 
The arrival process we observed in the real system over 
the cycle of a typical day is shown in Figure 6. In our 
simulation models we have modelled the arrival process 
using an exponential distribution with an annual changing 
arrival rate in accordance with the arrival rates shown in 
Figure 6. 
Both simulation models use the same model inputs. 
Therefore, if we see any differences in the model outputs 
they will be due to the differences between the two 
modelling techniques. The simulation models terminate 
after a business day (8 hours), mimicking the operation of 

Number of Customers Arrived 
9-10 am 
10-11am 
11-12 am 
12-1 pm 
1-2 pm 
2-3 pm 
3-4 pm 
4-5 pm 
the real department store. We conducted 100 replications 
for each set of parameters. 
 
 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
 
 
 
Observation Time (by hour) 
 
Figure 6: Distribution of customer arrival in the real 
system on a typical day 
. 
4.1.  Model Validation 
For our validation experiment we have used black 
box validation where we compared the simulation outputs 
from DES and ABS with the real system output in terms 
of quantities. We have one member of staff that does all 
three jobs mentioned above, job 1 (counting garments on 
entry),  job  2  (providing  help)  and  job  3  (counting 
garments on exit). 
We have defined some hypotheses we wanted to test 
during  our  validation  experiment.  Here  we  have  only 
stated the null hypotheses, assuming that the alternative 
hypotheses are always the opposite of null hypothesis. 
The two main hypotheses for the validation experiment 
are: 
 
HoA = Our DES model is a good representation 
of the real system 
 
HoB = Our ABS model is a good representation 
of the real system 
As   our   comparative   measure   for   judging   the 
goodness of our representation we have chosen the mean 
waiting time from the three queues. This was the only 
performance data we were able to collect from the real 
system.  For  testing  if  the  collected  data  is  normally 
distributed (which is important for choosing the correct 
statistical analysis method) we used an informal approach, 
comparing a histogram of the residuals of the collected 
data to a normal probability curve. The comparison 
indicated that our data is probably not normally 
distributed, so we need to use non-parametric tests when 
analysing our data based on this performance measure. 
 
4.1.1.   Comparing Medians Using a Non 
Parametric Test 
If data is normally distributed the measures of central 
tendency (e.g.  mean,  median and  mode) are  the  same 
since the normal distribution is symmetric. However, as 
our data is not normally distributed, the mean and median 
will have  different values and  to  compare the  median 
values we have chosen the non parametric Mann-Whitney 
statistical  test,  to  confirm or  disconfirm the  following 
hypotheses: 
 
Hoc = Average customer waiting times resulting 
from our DES model are not significantly 
different to the ones observed in the real system. 
 
HoD = Average customer waiting times resulting 
from our ABS model are not significantly 
different to the ones observed in the real system. 
For performing the Mann-Whitney test we have used 
the open source statistical software package R [The R 
Foundation for Statistic Computing]. The median of the 
waiting times from DES and ABS models and the real 
system were calculated for this test. We have chosen 0.05 
as our significance level. A test result (p-value) higher 
than 0.05 will allow us to accept a null hypothesis, 
otherwise we have to reject it. Testing our DES model 
results against the real system measures reveals a p-value 
of 0.3269. Testing our ABS model results against the real 
system measures reveals a p-value of 0.2958. Since both 
p-values are above our chosen level of significance (0.05) 
we fail to reject our two hypotheses HoC  and HoD. In 
addition, the fact that the p-value for our ABS model is 
slightly  smaller  compared  to  the  p-value  of  our  DES 
model conforms to our findings from Section 4.1.1. 
From our statistical test results of the measures of 
central   tendency  we   can   confirm   that   the   average 
customer waiting times resulting from both  simulation 
models (DES and ABS) are not significantly different to 
the ones observed in the real system. Next we look at the 
variability of our performance measure (waiting time) to 
see if the variability we get from our simulation models 
matches the variability we can observe in the real system. 
 
4.1.2.   Comparing Output Variability 
In this test, we compare the variability of the results 
from the simulation runs with the performance variability 
occurring in the real system. This is done in two steps. 
First,  we  look  at  frequency plots  of  customer  waiting 
times  for  a  single  day  (which  equates  to  a  single 
simulation run). Here we use the results of a single day 
and single simulation run as we only have the complete 
real system observation data for a single day. In a second 
step, we calculate the variance (a measure of dispersion) 
of customer waiting times. This allows us to study the 
spread of the residuals from the mean values of our 
performance measure (customer waiting time) for the 
simulation models and the real system and therefore to 
compare the variability of the output data on a statistical 
basis. The two hypotheses we are testing are as follows: 
 
HoE = Average customer waiting times resulting 
from our DES model show similar variability 
compared to those observed in the real system 

Models 
Mean waiting 
time 
(minutes) 
Standard 
deviation 
Variance 
Real system
1.68
1.73 
3.01
DES
1.69
1.59 
1.96
ABS
1.61
1.70 
2.89
Frequency of occurance 
 
HoF = Average customer waiting times resulting 
from our ABS model show similar variability 
compared to those observed in the real system 
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for validation experiment 
(including variance) 
 
 
 
160 
 
140 
 
120 
 
100 
 
80 
 
60 
 
40 
 
20 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9 
 
Cus tom e r Waiting Tim e (m inute s ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REAL 
DES 
A BS 
 
 
 
Looking at Table 2 we can see that the variance of 
ABS compared to the real system is similar (4% 
difference) while variance of DES to the real system 
significantly different (35%). This gives us a  different 
result of what we have observed in our first test where we 
failed to reject our hypotheses looking just at the mean 
value and the standard deviation (see Section 4.1.1). The 
reason for the differences in variance between DES and 
ABS is probably due to queuing discipline inherited in 
DES models where the system is ‘over’ organised, 
compared to ABS models where organisational structures 
Figure 7 : Frequency distributions for customer waiting 
times 
 
The  frequency distribution histogram for  the  DES 
and ABS models and the real system is shown in Figure 7. 
They show the typical shape of exponential distributions. 
We can see that in the real system people are queuing 
slightly more frequently (customer waiting time > 0) 
compared to DES and ABS results. It can be observed 
that the gradient for the real world distribution is lower 
compared to the DES/ABS distributions. This holds up to 
a customer waiting time of 4 minutes. After this, there is a 
big change in the real system distribution which is not 
present in the DES/ABS distributions. This seems to be 
some natural or artificial boundary in the real system that 
is  not  reflected  in  our  simulation  models  (maybe  it 
reflects the maximum time that people are willing to wait 
in a queue). 
In Section 4.1.1, we found that the mean customer 
waiting time appearing in the real system and the 
simulation results 
are 
not 
significantly different. 
However, mean values do not tell the whole story about 
the system. One also has to consider variability to get a 
complete picture about differences between the results. 
One way to do this is to calculate the variance. Measuring 
the variability (e.g. variance) of the model output is also 
useful to validate the models we use. Variability exists in 
the simulation output due to the randomness in the 
simulation input such as probability distributions. We can 
measure the variability is by estimating the variance. The 
variance shows how close the simulation outputs i.e. 
waiting time, in the distribution are to the middle of the 
distribution. It defines as the average squared difference 
of the outputs from the mean. [Lane 2003]. 
are more related to the real world (perfectly organised 
queues are artificial construct). For this test then we fail to 
reject our hypothesis HoE  which states that the average 
customer waiting times resulting from our ABS model 
show similar variability compared to those observed in 
the real system, but we have to reject our hypothesis HoF 
which states the dissimilarity for our DES model. 
 
4.1.3.   Validation Experiments Conclusions 
In conclusion, we can say that we have found no 
significant statistical differences regarding the output 
accuracy of DES models and ABS models when 
simulating reactive behaviour. The same holds when 
comparing our  simulation model outputs with  the  real 
system performance. This is what we would have 
expected, as the real system we have modelled is a typical 
queuing system and we have not added any features that 
would be unique to one of the simulation methods. The 
only difference we found was that the level of variance in 
a DES model was significantly lower compared to ABS 
and real system variance. We need to keep this in mind if 
we employ DES to simulate the behaviour of human 
centric systems. 
However, overall we conclude that both simulation 
models (independent from the simulation method used) 
are  a  good  representation  of  the  real  system,  when 
focusing  on  reactive  behaviour.  Therefore,  we  fail  to 
reject our hypotheses HoA  and HoB. What needs to be 
tested in the future is if we fail to reject the hypotheses 
HoA and HoB as well when we model proactive behaviour. 
 
4.2.   Comparing Multi-Scenarios 
In  this  section,  we  look  at  different  management 
policy scenarios regarding the staffing levels of the fitting 
room. These kinds of scenarios could be used to study 

how one could improve the performance of the fitting 
room operation that we have modelled in our validation 
experiment. We will use the results of our validation 
experiment as Scenario 1 and will measure the 
improvement in system performance against it. The 
purpose of this experiment is to see how both simulation 
methods behave when testing different scenarios. Also, 
we will keep an eye on the actual performance predicted 
by the simulation models. We have formulated the 
following two hypotheses: 
 
HoG = Both simulation methods produce similar 
results 
when 
used 
in 
a 
multi-scenarios 
investigation 
 
HoH  = When allocating more staff to the fitting 
room our simulation model shows a reduction in 
customer waiting times, and time spend in the 
system. 
Table 3 : Model Scenarios 
Reactive Behaviour 
Scenario 
Job 1 
Job 2 
Job 3
 
(Count 
garments
; give 
 
(Provide help) 
(Take unwanted 
garments; take card)
1 
Staff 1 
Staff 1 
Staff 1
2 
Staff 1 
Staff 2 
Staff 1
3 
Staff 1 
Staff 2 
Staff 3
 
Overall, we have tested the efficiency of three 
different management policies with varying number of 
sales staff. The specific setup for these scenarios can be 
found in Table 3. In addition to the simulation setup, only 
10% of the arriving customers will request help and all 
others will only return the fitting room’s card before 
leaving. The simulation model outputs and their statistics 
are shown in Table 4. 
For analysing the multi-scenario output of our 
experiments   a   paired-t   CI   test   together   with   the 
Bonferroni inequality procedures were used. The paired-t 
CI test helps to test the statistical significance of 
differences between the output of two scenarios by 
comparing their CIs. The Bonferroni inequality procedure 
is an extended paired-t confidence method for comparing 
more than two scenarios. 
A more detailed discussion about both methods can 
be found in [Clark and Yang 1986]. Instead of comparing 
CIs, there are other statistical methods such as the ranking 
and  selection  method  [Law  2007]  and  many  other 
statistical procedures for finding the best scenario (see 
[Goldsman and Nelson 2001] for a list). We have chosen 
a paired-t CI test together with the Bonferroni inequality 
procedure because these are complementary to each other 
and excellent tools for selecting the best scenarios 
[Swisher et al. 2003]. 
For  our  experimental analysis, we  have  chosen to 
compare   the   means   of   customer   waiting   time   and 
customer time in system. The results from the simulation 
model  setup  used  for  the  validation experiments  have 
been chosen as the reference point for the analysis. We 
have selected 0.05 as our significance level. The 
Bonferroni inequality procedure states that if we want to 
make c confidence interval statements (c = s - 1, where s 
is the number of scenarios) with an overall significance 
level of α, the individual confidence interval should be 
formed with a significance level of α / c. Therefore, in our 
case the scenario significance level is 0.05 / 2 = 0.025. 
We have conducted 100 replications (for the DES and the 
ABS model, respectively) for each scenario. 
To look into the relationship of the test result, we 
have followed the paired-t CI rules as discussed in 
[Robinson 2004] and shown in Figure 8 below. Based on 
these rules, we  have produced our comparison results. 
These are shown in Table 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: The relationship of the result in a paired-t CI 
The results show that there is no significant statistical 
difference between Scenario 1 (S1) and Scenario 2 (S2) 
outputs between the DES and the ABS model. We believe 
this is because the difference in the number of customers 
who request help from the sale staff is very small (only 
10% of customers). For the comparison of S1 with 
Scenario 3 (S3) the case is different. For both simulation 
methods and both output measures, the analysis shows a 
significant   statistical   difference   between   the   output 
values. This can be explained by the division of work 
between staff. In S1 one staff member does all three jobs 
meanwhile in S3 there are three members of staff each 
doing one job. 
 
Table 4: Simulation outputs for Scenarios in DES and ABS models 
 
Scenario 
 
Performance 
measure (minutes) 
DES model
ABS model 
 
Mean
SD 
95% CI
Mean
SD 
95% CI 
Lower
limit
Upper
limit
Lower 
limit 
Upper 
limit 
1 
Waiting time 
1.69
1.59
1.37
2.00
1.61
1.70
1.27 
1.94 
Time in system 
8.79
0.98
8.60
8.99
8.48
1.64
8.14 
8.80 
2 
Waiting time 
1.52
1.01
1.32
1.72
1.45
1.61
1.13 
1.77 
Time in system 
8.58
0.67
8.45
8.71
8.37
1.87
8.00 
8.74 
3 
Waiting time 
0.89
0.70
0.75
1.03
0.80
1.08
0.59 
1.01 
Time in system 
8.10
0.34
8.03
8.17
7.48
1.94
7.10 
7.87 

Table 5: Results from the paired-t CI test and Bonferroni 
inequality procedure. 
 
 
Model 
Performance 
measure 
Scenario 
compariso
97.5% CI for 
differences 
Conclusion
 
DES 
Waiting time 
Scenario 1 to 2 
0.33 
No difference
Scenario 1 to 3 
0.42 +1.17 
S1> S3
Time in system 
Scenario 1 to 2 
0.43 
No difference
Scenario 1 to 3 
0.47 + 0.93 
S1> S3
 
ABS 
Waiting time 
Scenario 1 to 2 
0.33 
No difference
Scenario 1 to 3 
0.33 + 1.29 
S1> S3
Time in system 
Scenario 1 to 2 
0.21 
No difference
Scenario 1 to 3 
0.41 + 1.58 
S1> S3
 
When we consider the results presented in Table 4 
and Table 5 together we can make the following 
recommendations. When looking at the  mean value of 
customer waiting times (Table 4), S3 has the smallest 
customer waiting times in the fitting room operation (for 
both simulation methods) and the paired-t CI in 
conjunction with the Bonferroni inequality procedure 
confirms that S3 is the best solution (Table 5). However, 
if some constraints exist, e.g.  the  costs  for  employing 
more staff, S1 would be the best solution as there is no 
significant difference between the performance of S1 and 
S2; S1 still produces small waiting times with an average 
of less than 2 minutes. 
In conclusion, for this experiment we fail to reject 
both  our  hypotheses. Therefore,  we  can  say  that  both 
simulation methods (DES and ABS) produced similar 
results when used in a multi-scenarios investigation. 
Furthermore, we found that when allocating more staff to 
the  fitting  room  our  simulation  model  will  show  a 
reduction in customer waiting times, and time spends in 
the system. 
 
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have investigated which simulation 
method  (DES  or  ABS)  is  suited  to  create  a  good 
representation of the human centric system when 
considering only human reactive behaviour. In this 
instance  ‘good’  means that  the  simulation mod  model 
output matches the performance observed in the real 
system. This does not only include the measures of central 
tendency, but also measures of dispersion. 
For our test, we have conducted a case study where 
we have analysed the fitting room operation of a 
womenswear department. Once 
we had 
a good 
understanding of the operation of the system, we were 
able to build some simulation models using different 
modelling   techniques   (DES   and   ABS).   Then   we 
conducted two experiments to compare the behaviour and 
outputs of our simulation models to those observed and 
measured in the real system. The first experiment was a 
validation experiment while our second experiment was a 
multi-scenario comparison. 
In our experiments, we were able to demonstrate that 
DES and ABS models are equally good representations of 
the  real  system  when  we  are  interested  in  modelling 
human reactive behaviour. This only holds when we look 
at measures of central tendency. When looking at 
variability, DES does not reflect the true variability 
comprised in the real system in an appropriate way. 
However, the big advantage of DES is that it is more 
commonly used, and it is much more used, in particular in 
industry. Moreover, model design seems to be easier. 
Another  advantage  is  the  DES  can  be  more  easily 
validated than ABS, as you model individual entities in 
ABS only and not the macro behaviour often a validation 
on the macro level is not possible. Once this limitation of 
DES is known one can consider it when drawing 
conclusions from the simulation study results. 
A  problem  we  had  with  our  current  study is  our 
choice of  our  performance measure. Customer waiting 
time is not a very robust measure of system performance, 
as it turned out that customers in the department store that 
we used for our case study did not have to queue very 
often. To make our investigation more robust we plan to 
repeat the experiments using a second performance 
measure; staff utilisation. However, before we can do that 
we will have to get access again to the case study 
department to collect the data from the real system. In 
addition, we plan to investigate more scenarios such as 
staff doing multiple jobs and staff changing the serving 
order. 
So far, we have looked at scenario that we assumed 
you could model by using any of the two modelling 
techniques and you would get very similar results. In the 
future we want to look at aspects of human behaviour you 
would   typically   only   model   in   ABS,   for   example 
proactive behaviour. Here the research question we want 
to answer would be: Is it worthwhile to put additional 
effort in to model these kinds of features in an OR 
simulation study, or do they not have a big impact on the 
conclusions you can draw from your simulation study? 
 
6. REFERENCES 
Baines,  T.S  et  al,  2005,  “Towards  a  theoretical 
framework of human performance modelling within 
manufacturing systems design.” Simulation Modelling 
Practice and Theory, 13, no.6, (January): 486-504. 
Becker, M. 2006. “Agent-based and Discrete Event 
Simulation of Autonomous Logistic Processes.”In the 
Proceedings of  20th European Conference on Modelling 
and Simulation, Borutzky, W. Orsoni, A. Zobel, R., eds., 
566-571. 
Brailsford,  S.C., 
S.Jennifer,  and  R.H.Paul,  2006, 
“Incorporating 
Human 
Behaviour 
in 
Healthcare 
Simulation Models.” In Proceedings of the 2006 Winter 
Simulation Conference, L.F.Perrone, F.P.Wieland, J.Liu, 

B.G.Lawson,  D.M.Nicol,  and  R.M.Fujimoto,eds,  466- 
472. 
Clark, G.M., and W.N.Yang. 1986. “A Bonferroni 
Selection Procedure When Using Common Random 
Numbers with Unknown Variances.” In Proceedings of 
the 1986 Winter Simulation Conference, J.Wilson, 
J.Henriksen, S.Roberts, eds, 313-315. 
Goldsman,  D.,  and  B.L.Nelson.  2001.  “Statistical 
Selection of the Best System.”In Proceedings of the 2001 
Winter  Simulation  Conference,  B.A.Peters,  J.S.Smith, 
D.J.Medeiros, and M.W.Rohrer,eds. 139-146. 
Kelton, W.D., Randall, P.S., and David, T.S., 2007. 
Simulation with ARENA: Fourth Edition. McGraw-Hill, 
New York, USA. 
Lane,  D.  2003.  “Measures  of  Variability: Version 
2.3.” The Connexions Project, Jul 7. 
Law, A.M. 2007. Simulation Modeling & Analysis: 
Fourth Edition. McGraw-Hill, New York, USA. 
Loftin, R.B et al, 2005. “Modeling Crowd Behaviour 
for Military Simulation Applications.”Organizational 
Simulation, R.William B et al. 
Morecroft, J., and S.Robinson. 2006. “Comparing 
Discrete-Event Simulation 
and 
System Dynamics: 
Modelling a Fishery.” In the Proceedings of the 2006 OR 
Society Simulation Workshop, S.Robinson, S. Taylor, 
S.Brailsford and J.Garnett, eds. 
Owen, C., D.Love, and P.Albores. 2008. “Selection 
of Simulation Tools for Improving Supply Chain 
Performance,” In the Proceedings of the 2008 OR Society 
Simulation Workshop, 199-207. 
Pugh,   G.A.   2006.   “Agent-Based   Simulation   of 
Discrete-Event  Systems.”In  Proceedings  of  the  2006 
Illinois-Indiana and 
North 
Central 
Joint Section 
Conferences,(Mar 31-Apr 1). 
Robinson,  S.  2004.  Simulation:  The  Practice  of 
Model Development and Use. John Wiley & Sons Inc 
England, UK. 
Robinson, S. 2004. “Discrete-event simulation: from 
the pioneers to  the present, what next? Journal of the 
Operational Research Society.” The Journal of the 
Operational  Research  Society,  56,  no.6,  (September): 
619–629. 
Schenk, T.A., G.Loffler, and J.Rauh, 2007, “Agent- 
based simulation of consumer behavior in grocery 
shopping on a regional level.” Journal of Business 
Research, 60 (February) :894–903. 
Siebers, P.O. 2004. “The Impact of Human 
Performance Variation on the Accuracy of Manufacturing 
System Simulation Models.” PhD thesis, Cranfield 
University, UK. 
Siebers, P.O. et al. 2007. “Using Intelligent Agents to 
Understand 
Management 
Practices 
and 
Retail 
Productivity.” In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation 
Conference,  (Dec  9-12  2007).Washington  DC,  USA, 
2212-2220. 
Siebers,   P.O.   et   al,   2008.   “An   Agent-Based 
Simulation 
of 
In-Store 
Customer 
Experiences.”In 
Proceedings of  the  2008 Operational Research Society 
Simulation Workshop, , (April 1-2 ). Worcestershire, UK, 
25-41. 
Swisher, J.R. et al. 2003. “Discrete Event Simulation 
Optimization Using Ranking,Selection, and Multiple 
Comparison Procedures: A Survey.” ACM Transactions 
on Modeling and Computer Simulation, 13, no.2, 
(April):134-154. 
Tako, A.A., and  Robinson S.  2006. “Towards An 
Empirical Comparison of Discrete-Event Simulation and 
System Dynamics in the Supply Chain Context.” In the 
Proceedings of the 2006 OR Society Simulation 
Workshop, S. Robinson, S. Taylor, S. Brailsford and 
J.Garnett, eds. 
The R Foundation for Statistic Computing. Available 
via <http://www.r-project.org/> [accessed Feb 2, 2009] 
Wakeland, W. et al. 2004. “Comparison of System 
Dynamic and Agent-Based Simulation Applied to the 
Study of Cellular Receptor Dynamics.” In Proceedings of 
the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. 
Wray,   R.E,   and   J.E.Laird,  2003,   “Varibility  in 
Human Behaviour Modeling for Military Simulations,” In 
Proceeding of the Behaviour Representation in Modeling 
& Simulation Conference, BRIMS 2003,(May). 
Yu, T.T, J.P.Scanlan., and G.B.Wills. 2007. “Agent- 
Based and Discrete-Event Modelling: A quantitative 
approach.” In Proceedings of the 7th AIAA Aviation 
Technology,   Integration   and   Operation   Conference, 
ATIO, (Sept 18-20), Belfast, Northern Ireland. 
 
AUTHORS BIOGRAPHIES 
 
MAZLINA ABDUL MAJID is a  PhD student in the 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham. 
Her  interest  is  in  discrete  event  simulation  and  agent 

 
UWE AICKELIN is a Professor in the School of 
Computer   Science,   University   of   Nottingham.   His 
interests include agent based simulation, heuristics 

 
PEER –OLAF SIEBERS is a Research Fellow in the 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham. 
His  main interest includes agent  based simulation and 
human 
complex adaptive 
system. 
His 

is
