A Taxonomy of Deep Convolutional Neural Nets for Computer Vision ∗
Suraj Srinivas, Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla, Konda Reddy Mopuri,
Nikita Prabhu, Srinivas S S Kruthiventi and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
http://val.serc.iisc.ernet.in/
Abstract
Traditional architectures for solving computer vision problems and the degree of success they enjoyed have
been heavily reliant on hand-crafted features. However, of late, deep learning techniques have oﬀered a compelling
alternative – that of automatically learning problem-speciﬁc features. With this new paradigm, every problem in
computer vision is now being re-examined from a deep learning perspective. Therefore, it has become important
to understand what kind of deep networks are suitable for a given problem. Although general surveys of this
fast-moving paradigm (i.e. deep-networks) exist, a survey speciﬁc to computer vision is missing. We speciﬁcally
consider one form of deep networks widely used in computer vision - convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We
start with “AlexNet” as our base CNN and then examine the broad variations proposed over time to suit diﬀerent
applications. We hope that our recipe-style survey will serve as a guide, particularly for novice practitioners
intending to use deep-learning techniques for computer vision.
1
Introduction
Computer vision problems like image classiﬁcation and object detection have traditionally been approached using
hand-engineered features like SIFT by [Lowe, 2004] and HoG by [Dalal and Triggs, 2005]. Representations based on
the Bag-of-visual-words descriptor (see [Yang et al., 2007]), in particular, enjoyed success in image classiﬁcation. These
were usually followed by learning algorithms like Support Vector Machines (SVMs). As a result, the performance
of these algorithms relied crucially on the features used. This meant that progress in computer vision was based
on hand-engineering better sets of features. With time, these features started becoming more and more complex -
resulting in a diﬃculty with coming up better, more complex features. From the perspective of the computer vision
practitioner, there were two steps to be followed: feature design and learning algorithm design, both of which were
largely independent.
Meanwhile, some researchers in the machine learning community had been working on learning models which
incorporated learning of features from raw images. These models typically consisted of multiple layers of non-linearity.
This property was considered to be very important - and this lead to the development of the ﬁrst deep learning models.
Early examples like Restricted Boltzmann Machines ([Hinton, 2002]) , Deep Belief Networks ([Hinton et al., 2006]) and
Stacked Autoencoders ([Vincent et al., 2010]) showed promise on small datasets. The primary idea behind these works
was to leverage the vast amount of unlabelled data to train models. This was called the ‘unsupervised pre-training’
stage. It was believed that these ‘pre-trained’ models would serve as a good initialization for further supervised tasks
such as image classiﬁcation. Eﬀorts to scale these algorithms on larger datasets culminated in 2012 during the ILSVRC
competition (see [Russakovsky et al., 2015]), which involved, among other things - the task of classifying an image
into one of thousand categories. For the ﬁrst time, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based deep learnt model
by [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] brought down the error rate on that task by half, beating traditional hand-engineered
approaches. Surprisingly, this could be achieved by performing end-to-end supervised training, without the need
for unsupervised pre-training. Over the next couple of years, ‘Imagenet classiﬁcation using deep neural networks’
by [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] became one of the most inﬂuential papers in computer vision. Convolutional Neural
Networks, a particular form of deep learning models, have since been widely adopted by the vision community. In
particular, the network trained by Alex Krizhevsky, popularly called “AlexNet” has been used and modiﬁed for
various vision problems. Hence, in this article, we primarily discuss CNNs, as they are more relevant to the vision
community. With the plethora of deep convolutional networks that exist for solving diﬀerent tasks, we feel the time
is right to summarize CNNs for a survey. This article can also serve as a guide for beginning practitioners in deep
learning/computer vision.
∗This article has been published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI. Please refer to http://goo.gl/6691Bm for the original article.
1
arXiv:1601.06615v1  [cs.CV]  25 Jan 2016

Figure 1: An illustration of the weights in the AlexNet model. Note that after every layer, there is an implicit ReLU
non-linearity. The number inside curly braces represents the number of ﬁlters with dimensions mentioned above it.
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst develop the general principles behind CNNs (Section 2), and then
discuss various modiﬁcations to suit diﬀerent problems (Section 3). Finally, we discuss some open problems (Section
4) and directions for further research.
2
Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks
The idea of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is not new. This model had been shown to work well for
hand-written digit recognition by [LeCun et al., 1998]. However, due to the inability of these networks to scale to
much larger images, they slowly fell out of favour. This was largely due to memory and hardware constraints, and the
unavailability of large amounts of training data. With increase in computational power thanks to wide availability of
GPUs, and the introduction of large scale datasets like the ImageNet (see [Russakovsky et al., 2015]) and the MIT
Places dataset (see [Zhou et al., 2014]), it was possible to train larger, more complex models. This was ﬁrst shown
by the popular AlexNet model which was discussed earlier. This largely kick-started the usage of deep networks in
computer vision.
2.1
Building Blocks of CNNs
In this section, we shall look at the basic building blocks of CNNs in general. This assumes that the reader is
familiar with traditional neural networks, which we shall call “fully connected layers” in this article. Figure 1 shows a
representation of the weights in the AlexNet model. While the ﬁrst ﬁve layers are convolutional, the last three are
fully connected layers.
2.1.1
Why convolutions?
Using traditional neural networks for real-world image classiﬁcation is impractical for the following reason: Consider
a 2D image of size 200 × 200 for which we would have have 40, 000 input nodes. If the hidden layer has 20, 000
nodes, the size of the matrix of input weights would be 40, 000 × 20, 000 = 800 Million. This is just for the ﬁrst
layer – as we increase the number of layers, this number increases even more rapidly. Besides, vectorizing an image
completely ignores the complex 2D spatial structure of the image. How do we build a system that overcomes both
these disadvantages?
One way is to use 2D convolutions instead of matrix multiplications. Learning a set of convolutional ﬁlters (each of
11 × 11, say) is much more tractable than learning a large matrix (40000 × 20000). 2D convolutions also naturally take
the 2D structure of images into account. Alternately, convolutions can also be thought of as regular neural networks
with two constraints (See [Bishop, 2006]):
• Local connectivity: This comes from the fact that we use a convolutional ﬁlter with dimensions much smaller
than the image it operates on. This contrasts with the global connectivity paradigm typically relevant to
vectorized images.
2

• Weight sharing: This comes from the fact that we perform convolutions, i.e. we apply the same ﬁlter across
the image. This means that we use the same local ﬁlters on many locations in the image. In other words, the
weights between all these ﬁlters are shared.
There is also evidence from visual neuroscience for similar computations within the human brain. [Hubel and Wiesel, 1962]
found two types of cells in the primary visual cortex - the simple cells and the complex cells. The simple cell responded
primarily to oriented edges and gratings - which are reminiscent of Gabor ﬁlters, a special class of convolutional ﬁlters.
The complex cells were also sensitive to these egdes and grating. However, they exhibited spatial invariance as well.
This motivated the Neocognitron model by [Fukushima, 1980], which proposed the learning of convolutional ﬁlters in
an artiﬁcial neural network. This model is said to have inspired convolutional networks, which are analogous to the
simple cells mentioned above.
In practical CNNs however, the convolution operations are not applied in the traditional sense wherein the ﬁlter
shifts one position to the right after each multiplication. Instead, it is common to use larger shifts (commonly referred
to as stride). This is equivalent to performing image down-sampling after regular convolution.
If we wish to train these networks on RGB images, one would need to learn multiple multi-channel ﬁlters. In the
representation in Figure 1, the numbers 11 × 11 × 3, along with {96} below C1 indicates that there are 96 ﬁlters in
the ﬁrst layers, each of spatial dimension of 11 × 11, with one for each of the 3 RGB channels.
We note that this paradigm of convolution like operations (location independent feature-detectors) is not entirely
suitable for registered images. As an example, images of faces require diﬀerent feature-detectors at diﬀerent spatial
locations. To account for this, [Taigman et al., 2014] consider only locally-connected networks with no weight-sharing.
Thus, the choice of layer connectivity depends on the underlying type of problem.
2.1.2
Max-Pooling
The Neocognitron model inspired the modelling of simple cells as convolutions. Continuing in the same vein, the
complex cells can be modelled as a max-pooling operation. This operation can be thought of as a max ﬁlter, where
each n × n region is replaced with it’s max value. This operation serves two purposes:
1. It picks out the highest activation in a local region, thereby providing a small degree of spatial invariance. This
is analogous to the operation of complex cells.
2. It reduces the size of the activation for the next layer by a factor of n2. With a smaller activation size, we need
a smaller number of parameters to be learnt in the later layers.
2.1.3
Non-linearity
Deep networks usually consist of convolutions followed by a non-linear operation after each layer. This is necessary
because cascading linear systems (like convolutions) is another linear system. Non-linearities between layers ensure
that the model is more expressive than a linear model.
In theory, no non-linearity has more expressive power than any other, as long as they are continuous, bounded
and monotonically increasing (see [Hornik, 1991]). Traditional feedforward neural networks used the sigmoid (σ(x) =
1
1+e−x ) or the tanh (tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x ) non-linearities. However, modern convolutional networks use the ReLU
(ReLU(x) = max(0, x)) non-linearity. CNNs with this non-linearity have been found to train faster, as shown by
[Nair and Hinton, 2010].
Recently, [Maas et al., 2013] introduced a new kind of non-linearity, called the leaky-ReLU. It was deﬁned as
Leaky-ReLU(x) = max(0, x) + αmin(0, x), where α is a pre-determined parameter. [He et al., 2015] improved on this
by suggesting that the α parameter also be learnt, leading to a much richer model.
2.2
Depth
The Universal Approximation theorem by [Hornik, 1991] states that a neural network with a single hidden layer is
suﬃcient to model any continuous function. However, [Bengio, 2009] showed that such networks need an exponentially
large number of neurons when compared to a neural network with many hidden layers. Recently, [Romero et al., 2014],
and [Ba and Caruana, 2014] explicitly showed that a deeper neural network can be trained to perform much better
than a comparatively shallow network.
Although the motivation for creating deeper networks was clear, for a long time researchers did not have an
algorithm that could eﬃciently train neural networks with more than 3 layers. With the introduction of greedy
layerwise pre-training by [Hinton et al., 2006], researchers were able to train much deeper networks. This played a
major role in bringing the so-called Deep Learning systems into mainstream machine learning. Modern deep networks
such as AlexNet have 7 layers. More recent networks like VGGnet by [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014b] and GoogleNet
by [Szegedy et al., 2014] have 19 and 22 layers respectively were shown to perform much better than AlexNet.
3

2.3
Learning algorithm
A powerful, expressive model is of no use without an algorithm to learn the model’s parameters eﬃciently. The greedy
layerwise pre-training approaches in the pre-AlexNet era attempted to create such an eﬃcient algorithm. However, for
computer vision tasks, it turned out that a simpler supervised training procedure was enough to learn a powerful
model.
Learning is generally performed by minimization of certain loss functions. Tasks based on classiﬁcation use the
softmax loss function or the sigmoid cross entropy function, while those involving regression use the euclidean error
function. In the example of Figure 1, the output of the FC8 layer is trained to represent one of thousand classes of the
dataset.
2.3.1
Gradient-based optimization
Neural networks are generally trained using the backpropogation algorithm (see [Rumelhart et al., 1988]), which uses
the chain rule to speed up the computation of the gradient for the gradient descent (GD) algorithm. However, for
datasets with thousands (or more) of data points, using GD is impractical. In such cases, an approximation called
the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is used. It has been found that training using SGD generalizes much better
than training using GD. However, one disadvantage is that SGD is very slow to converge. To counteract this, SGD is
typically used with a mini-batch, where the mini-batch typically contains a small number of data-points (∼100).
Momentum (see [Polyak, 1964]) belongs to a family of methods that aim to speed the convergence of SGD. This is
largely used in practice to train deep networks, and is often considered as an essential component. Other extensions
like Adagrad by [Duchi et al., 2011], Nesterov’s accelerated GD by [Nesterov, 1983] , Adadelta by [Zeiler, 2012] and
Adam by [Kingma and Ba, 2014] are known to work equally well, if not better than vanilla momentum in certain
cases. For detailed discussion on how these methods work, the reader is encouraged to read [Sutskever et al., 2013].
2.3.2
Dropout
When training a network with a large number of parameters, an eﬀective regularization mechanism is essential to
combat overﬁtting. Usual approaches such as ℓ1 or ℓ2 regularization on the weights of the neural net have been found
to be insuﬃcient in this aspect. Dropout is a powerful regularization method introduced by [Hinton et al., 2012] which
has been shown to work well for large neural nets.
To use dropout, we randomly drop neurons with a probability
p during training. As a result, only a random subset of neurons are trained in a single iteration of SGD. At test
time, we use all neurons, however we simply multiply the activation of each neuron with p to account for the scaling.
[Hinton et al., 2012] showed that this procedure was equivalent to training a large ensemble of neural nets with shared
parameters, and then using their geometric mean to obtain a single prediction.
Many extensions to dropout like DropConnect by [Wan et al., 2013] and Fast Dropout by [Wang and Manning, 2013]
have been shown to work better in certain cases. Maxout by [Goodfellow et al., 2013] is a non-linearity that improves
performance of a network which uses dropout.
2.4
Tricks to increase performance
While the techniques and components described above are theoretically well-grounded, certain tricks are crucial to
obtaining state-of-the-art performance.
It is well known that machine learning models perform better in the presence of more data. Data augmentation is
a process by which some geometric transforms are applied to training data to increase their number. Some examples
of commonly used geometric transforms include random cropping, RGB jittering, image ﬂipping and small rotations.
It has been found that using augmented data typically boosts performance by about 3% (see [Chatﬁeld et al., 2014]).
Also well-known is the fact that an ensemble of models perform better than one. Hence, it is the commonplace to
train several CNNs and average their predictions at test time. Using ensembles has been found to typically boost
accuracy by 1-2% (see [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014b] and [Szegedy et al., 2014]) .
2.5
Putting it all together: AlexNet
The building blocks discussed above largely describe AlexNet as a whole. As shown in Figure 1, only layers 1,2 and 5
contain max-pooling, while dropout is only applied to the last two fully connected layers as they contain the most
number of parameters. Layers 1 and 2 also contain Local Response Normalization, which has not been discussed as
[Chatﬁeld et al., 2014] showed that its absence does not impact performance.
This network was trained on the ILSVRC 2012 training data, which contained 1.2 million training images belonging
to 1000 classes. This was trained on 2 GPUs over the course of one month. The same network can be trained today in
little under a week using more powerful GPUs (see [Chatﬁeld et al., 2014]). The hyper-parameters of the learning
algorithms like learning rate, momentum, dropout and weight decay were hand tuned.
It is also interesting to
4

note the trends in the nature of features learnt at diﬀerent layers. The earlier layers tend to learn gabor-like oriented
edges and blob-like features, followed by layers that seem to learn more higher order features like shapes. The very
last layers seem to learn semantic attributes such as eyes or wheels, which are crucial parts in several categories. A
method to visualize these was provided by [Zeiler and Fergus, 2014].
2.6
Using Pre-trained CNNs
One of the main reasons for the success of the AlexNet model was that it was possible to directly use the pre-trained
model to do various other tasks which it was not originally intended for. It became remarkably easy to download a
learnt model, and then tweak it slightly to suit the application at hand. We describe two such ways to use models in
this manner.
2.6.1
Fine-tuning
Given a model trained for image classiﬁcation, how does one modify it to perform a diﬀerent (but related) task? The
answer is to just use the trained weights as an initialization and run SGD again for this new task. Typically, one uses
a learning rate much lower than what was used for learning the original net. If the new task is very similar to the task
of image classiﬁcation (with similar categories), then one need not re-learn a lot of layers. The earlier layers can be
ﬁxed and only the later, more semantic layers need to be re-learnt. However, if the new task is very diﬀerent, one
ought to either re-learn all layers, or learn everything from scratch. The number of layers to re-learn also depends on
the number of data points available for training the new task. The more the data, the higher is the number of layers
that can be re-learnt. The reader is urged to refer to [Yosinski et al., 2014] for more thorough guidelines.
2.6.2
CNN activations as features
As remarked earlier, the later layers in AlexNet seem to learn visually semantic attributes. These intermediate
representations are crucial in performing 1000-way classiﬁcation. Since these represent a wide variety of classes, one
can use the FC7 activation of an image as a generic feature descriptor. These features have been found to be better
than hand-crafted features like SIFT or HoG for various computer vision tasks.
[Donahue et al., 2013] ﬁrst introduced the idea of using CNN activations as features and performed tests to
determine their suitability for various tasks. [Babenko et al., 2014] proposed to use the activations of fully-connected
layers for image retrieval, which they dubbed “Neural Codes”. [Razavian et al., 2014] used these activations for
various tasks and concluded that oﬀ-the-shelf CNN features can serve as a hard-to-beat baseline for many tasks.
[Hariharan et al., 2014] used activations across layers as a feature. Speciﬁcally, they look at the activations produced
by a single image pixels across the network and pool them together. They were found to be useful for ﬁne-grained
tasks such as keypoint localization.
2.7
Improving AlexNet
The performance of AlexNet motivated a number of CNN-based approaches, all aimed at a performance improvement
over and above that of AlexNet’s. Just as AlexNet was the winner for ILSVRC challenge in 2012, a CNN-based net
Overfeat by [Sermanet et al., 2013a] was the top-performer at ILSVRC-2013. Their key insight was that training
a convolutional network to simultaneously classify, locate and detect objects in images can boost the classiﬁcation
accuracy and the detection and localization accuracy of all tasks. Given its multi-task learning paradigm, we discuss
Overfeat when we discuss hybrid CNNs and multi-task learning in Section 3.5.
GoogleNet by [Szegedy et al., 2014], the top-performer at ILSVRC-2014, established that very deep networks can
translate to signiﬁcant gains in classiﬁcation performance. Since naively increasing the number of layers results in a
large number of parameters, the authors employ a number of “design tricks”. One such trick is to have a trivial 1 × 1
convolutional layer after a regular convolutional layer. This has the net eﬀect of not only reducing the number of
parameters, but also results in CNNs with more expressive power. This design trick is laid out in better detail in the
work of [Szegedy et al., 2014] where the authors show that having one or more 1 × 1 convolutional layers is akin to
having a multi-layer perceptron network processing the outputs of the convolutional layer that precedes it. Another
trick that the authors utilize is to involve inner layers of the network in the computation of the objective function
instead of the typical ﬁnal softmax layer (as in AlexNet). The authors attribute scale invariance as the reason behind
this design decision.
VGG-19 and its variants by [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014b] is another example of a high-performing CNN where
the deeper-is-better philosophy is applied in the net design. An interesting feature of VGG design is that it forgoes
larger sized convolutional ﬁlters for stacks of smaller sized ﬁlters. These smaller sized ﬁlters tend to be chosen so that
they contain approximately the same number of parameters as the larger ﬁlters they supposedly replace. The net
eﬀect of this design decision is eﬃciency and regularization-like eﬀect on parameters due to the smaller size of the
ﬁlters involved.
5

Figure 2: Object detection system of [Girshick et al., 2014] using deep features extracted from image regions
3
CNN Flavours
3.1
Region-based CNNs
Most CNNs trained for image recognition are trained using a dataset of images containing a single object. At test
time, even in case of multiple objects, the CNN may still predict a single class. This inherent problem with the
design of the CNNs is not restricted to image classiﬁcation alone. For example, the problem of object detection and
localization requires not only classifying the image but also estimating the class and precise location of the object(s)
present in the image. Object detection is challenging since we potentially want to detect multiple objects with varying
sizes within a single image. It generally requires processing the image patch-wise, looking for the presence of objects.
Neural nets have been employed in this way for detecting speciﬁc objects like faces in [Vaillant et al., 1994] and
[Rowley et al., 1998] and for pedestrians by [Sermanet et al., 2013c].
Meanwhile, detecting a set of object-like regions in a given image - also called region proposals or object proposals
- has gained a lot of attention (see [Uijlings et al., 2013]). These region proposals are class agnostic and reduce the
overhead incurred by the traditional exhaustive sliding window approach. These region proposal algorithms operate at
low level and output hundreds of object like image patches at multiple scales. In order to employ a classiﬁcation net
towards the task of object localization, image patches of diﬀerent scales have to be searched one at a time.
Recent work by [Girshick et al., 2014] attempt to solve the object localization problem using a set of region
proposals. During test time, the method generates around 2000 category independent region proposals using selective
search by [Uijlings et al., 2013] from the test image. They employ a simple aﬃne image warping to feed each of these
proposals to a CNN trained for classiﬁcation. The CNN then describes each of these regions with a ﬁxed size high
level semantic feature. Finally, a set of category speciﬁc linear SVMs classify each region, as shown in Figure 2. This
method achieved the best detection results on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset. As this method uses image regions
followed by a CNN, it is dubbed R-CNN (Region-based CNN).
A series of works adapted the R-CNN approach to extract richer set of features at patch or region level to solve a
wide range of target applications in vision. However, CNN representations lack robustness to geometric transformations
restricting their usage. [Gong et al., 2014a] show empirical evidence that the global CNN features are sensitive to
general transformations such as translation, rotation and scaling. In their experiments, they report that this inability
of global CNN features translates directly into a loss in the classiﬁcation accuracy. They proposed a simple technique to
pool the CNN activations extracted from the local image patches. The method extracts image patches in an exhaustive
sliding-window manner at diﬀerent scales and describes each of them using a CNN. The resulting dense CNN features
are pooled using VLAD (see [Jegou et al., 2012]) in order to result in a representation which incorporates spatial as
well as semantic information.
Instead of considering the image patches at exhaustive scales and image locations, [Mopuri and Babu, 2015] utilize
the objectness prior to automatically extract the image patches at diﬀerent scales. They build a more robust image
representation by aggregating the individual CNN features from the patches for an image search application.
[Wei et al., 2014] extended the capability of a CNN that is trained to output a single label into predicting multiple
labels. They consider an arbitrary number of region proposals in an image and share a common CNN across all of
them in order to obtain individual predictions. Finally, they employ a simple pooling technique to produce the ﬁnal
multi-label prediction.
3.2
Fully Convolutional Networks
The success of Convolutional Neural Networks in the tasks of image classiﬁcation
(see [Krizhevsky et al., 2012,
Szegedy et al., 2014]) and object detection (see [Girshick et al., 2014]) has inspired researchers to use deep networks
for more challenging recognition problems like semantic object segmentation and scene parsing.
Unlike image
classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation and scene parsing are problems of structured prediction where every pixel in the
image grid needs to be assigned a label of the class to which it belongs (e.g., road, sofa, table etc.). This problem of
per-pixel classiﬁcation has been traditionally approached by generating region-level (e.g. superpixel) hand crafted
6

Figure 3: Fully Convolutional Net: AlexNet modiﬁed to be fully convolutional for performing semantic object
segmentation on PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset with 21 classes
features and classifying them using a Support Vector Machine (SVM) into one of the possible classes.
Doing away with these engineered features, [Farabet et al., 2013a] used hierarchical learned features from a
convolutional neural net for scene parsing. Their approach comprised of densely computing multi-scale CNN features
for each pixel and aggregating them over image regions upon which they are classiﬁed. However, their method
still required the post-processing step of generating over-segmented regions, like superpixels, for obtaining the ﬁnal
segmentation result. Additionally, the CNNs used for multi-scale feature learning were not very deep with only three
convolution layers.
Later, [Long et al., 2015] proposed a fully convolutional network architecture for learning per-pixel tasks, like
semantic segmentation, in an end-to-end manner. This is shown in Figure 3. Each layer in the fully convolutional
net (FullConvNet) performs a location invariant operation i.e., a spatial shift of values in the input to the layer will
only result in an equivalent scaled spatial shift in its output while keeping the values nearly intact. This property of
translational invariance holds true for the convolutional and maxpool layers which form the major building blocks
of a FullConvNet. Further, these layers have an output-centred, ﬁxed-size receptive ﬁeld on its input blob. These
properties of the layers of FullConv Net allow it to retain the spatial structure present in the input image in all of its
intermediate and ﬁnal outputs.
Unlike CNNs used for image classiﬁcation, a FullConvNet does not contain any densely connected/inner product
layers as they are not translation invariant. The restriction on the size of input image to a classiﬁcation CNN (e.g.,
227x227 for AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al., 2012], 224x224 for VGG [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014b]) is imposed due
to the constraint on the input size to its inner product layers. Since a FullConvNet does not have any of these inner
product layers, it can essentially operate on input images of any arbitrary size.
During the design of CNN architectures, one has to make a trade-oﬀbetween the number of channels and the
spatial dimensions for the data as it passes through each layer. Generally, the number of channels in the data are
made to increase progressively while bringing down its spatial resolution, by introducing stride in the convolution and
max-pool layers of the net. This is found to be an eﬀective strategy for generating richer semantic representations in a
hierarchical manner. While this method enables the net to recognize complex patterns in the data, it also diminishes
the spatial resolution of the data blob progressively after each layer. While this is not a major concern for classiﬁcation
nets which require only a single label for the entire image, this results in per-pixel prediction only at a sub-sampled
resolution in case of FullConvNets. For tackling this problem, [Long et al., 2015] have proposed a deconvolution layer
which brings back the spatial resolution from the sub-sampled output through a learned upsampling operation. This
upsampling operation is performed at intermediate layers of various spatial dimensions and are concatenated to obtain
pixel-level features at the original resolution.
On the other hand, [Chen et al., 2014] adopted a more simplistic approach for maintaining resolution by removing
the stride in the layers of FullConvNet, wherever possible. Following this, the FullConvNet predicted output is modeled
as a unary term for Conditional Random Field (CRF) constructed over the image grid at its original resolution. With
labelling smoothness constraint enforced through pair-wise terms, the per-pixel classiﬁcation task is modeled as a
CRF inference problem. While this post-processing of FullConvNet’s coarse labelling using CRF has been shown to
be eﬀective for pixel-accurate segmentation, [Zheng et al., 2015] have proposed a better approach where the CRF
constructed on image is modeled as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). By modeling the CRF as an RNN, it can be
integrated as a part of any Deep Convolutinal Net making the system eﬃcient at both semantic feature extraction
and ﬁne-grained structure prediction. This enables the end-to-end training of the entire FullConvNet + RNN system
using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm to obtain ﬁne pixel-level segmentation.
Visual Saliency Prediction is another important problem considered by researchers. This task involves predicting
the salient regions of an image given by human eye ﬁxations. Works by [Vig et al., 2014] and [Liu et al., 2015] proposed
CNN-based approaches for estimating the saliency score for constituent image patches using deep features. As a result,
they did not use a FullConvNet architecture. In contrast, [Kruthiventi et al., 2015] proposed a fully convolutional
architecture - DeepFix which learnt to predict saliency for the entire image in an end-to-end fashion and attained a
7

Figure 4: Two stream architecture for video classiﬁcation from [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014a]
superior performance. Their network characterized the multi-scale aspects of the image using inception blocks and
captured the global context using convolutional layers with large receptive ﬁelds. Another work, by [Li et al., 2015b],
proposed a multi-task FullConvNet architecture - DeepSaliency for joint saliency detection and semantic object
segmentation. Their work showed that learning features collaboratively for two related prediction tasks can boost
overall performance.
3.3
Multi-modal networks
The success of CNNs on standard RGB vision tasks is naturally extended to works on other perception modalities
like RGB-D and motion information in the videos. Recently, there has been an increasing evidence for the successful
adaptation of the CNNs to learn eﬃcient representations from the depth images. [Socher et al., 2012] exploited the
information from color and depth modalities for addressing the problem of classiﬁcation. In their approach, a single
layer of CNN extracts low level features from both the RGB and depth images separately. These low level features
from each modality are given to a set of RNNs for embedding into a lower dimension. Concatenation of the resulting
features forms the input to the ﬁnal soft-max layer. The work by [Couprie et al., 2013] extended the CNN method
of [Farabet et al., 2013b] to label the indoor scenes by treating depth information as an additional channel to the
existing RGB data. Similarly, [Wang et al., 2014a] adapt an unsupervised feature learning approach to scene labeling
using RGB-D input with four channels. [Gupta et al., 2014] proposed an encoding for the depth images that allows
CNNs to learn stronger features than from the depth image alone. They encode depth image into three channels at
each pixel: horizontal disparity, height above ground, and the angle the pixel’s local surface normal makes with the
inferred gravity direction. Their approach for object detection and segmentation processes RGB and the encoded
depth channels separately. The learned features are fused by concatenating and further fed into a SVM.
Similarly, one can think of extending these works for video representation and understanding. When compared
to still images, videos provide important additional information in the form of motion. However, majority of the
early works that attempted to extend CNNs for video, fed the networks with raw frames. This makes for a much
diﬃcult learning problem. [Jhuang et al., 2007], proposed a biologically inspired model for action recognition in
videos with a predeﬁned set of spatio-temporal ﬁlters in the initial layer. Combined with a similar but spatial
HMAX (Hierarchical model and X) model, [Kuehne et al., 2011] proposed spatial and temporal recognition streams.
[Ji et al., 2013] addressed an end-to-end learning of the CNNs for videos for the ﬁrst time using 3-D convolutions over
a bunch of consecutive video frames. A more recent work by [Karpathy et al., 2014] propose a set of techniques to
fuse the appearance information present from a stack of consecutive frames in a video. However, they report that the
net that processes individual frames performs on par with the net that operates on a stack of frames. This might
suggest that, the learnt spatio-temporal ﬁlters are not suitable to capture the motion patterns eﬃciently.
A more suitable CNN model to represent videos is proposed in a contemporaneous work by [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014a],
which is called two-stream network approach. Though the model in [Kuehne et al., 2011] is also a two stream model,
the main diﬀerence is that the streams are shallow and implemented with hand-crafted models. The reason for the
success of this approach is the natural ability of the videos to be separated into spatial and temporal components. The
spatial component in the form of frames captures the appearance information like the objects present in the video.
The temporal component in the form of motion (optical ﬂow) across the frames captures the movement of the objects.
These optical ﬂow estimates can be obtained either from classical approaches (see [Baker and Matthews, 2004]) or
8

Figure 5: Toy RNN Example: Problem of sequence addition. The inputs and outputs are shown in blue. The red cells
correspond to the hidden units. An unrolled version of the RNN is shown.
deep-learnt approaches (see [Weinzaepfel et al., 2013]).
This approach models the recognition system dividing into two parallel streams as depicted in Fig.4. Each is
implemented by a dedicated deep CNN, whose predictions are later fused. The net for the spatial stream is similar
to the image recognition CNN and processes one frame at a time. However, the temporal stream takes the stacked
optical ﬂow of a bunch of consecutive frames as input and predicts the action. Both the nets are trained separately
with the corresponding input. An alternative motion representation using the trajectory information similar to
[Wang and Schmid, 2013] is also observed to perform similar to optical ﬂow.
The most recent methods that followed [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014a] have similar two-stream architecture.
However, their contribution is to ﬁnd the most active spatio-temporal volume for the eﬃcient video representation.
Inspired from the recent progress in the object detection in images, [Gkioxari and Malik, 2015] built action models
from shape and motion cues. They start from the image proposals and select the motion salient subset of them and
extract saptio-temporal features to represent the video using the CNNs.
[Wang et al., 2015a] employ deep CNNs to learn discriminative feature maps and conduct trajectory constrained
pooling to summarize into an eﬀective video descriptor. The two streams operate in parallel extracting local deep
features for the volumes centered around the trajectories.
In general, these multi-modal CNNs can be modiﬁed and extended to suit any other kind of modality like audio,
text to complement the image data leading to a better representation of image content.
3.4
CNNs with RNNs
While CNNs have made remarkable progress in various tasks, they are not very suitable for learning sequences.
Learning such patterns requires memory of previous states and feedback mechanisms which are not present in CNNs.
RNNs are neural nets with at least one feedback connection. This looping structure enables the RNN to have an
internal memory and to learn temporal patterns in data.
Figure 5 shows the unrolled version of a simple RNN applied to a toy example of sequence addition. The problem
is deﬁned as follows: Let at be a positive number, corresponding to the input at time t. The output at time t is given
by
St =
t
X
i=1
ai
We consider a very simple RNN with just one hidden layer. The RNN can be described by equations below.
ht+1 = fh(Wih × at + Whh × ht)
St+1 = fo(Who × ht+1)
where Wih, Whh, Who are learned weights and fh and fo are non-linearities. For the toy problem considered above,
the weights learned would result in Wih = Whh = Who = 1. Let us consider the non-linearity to be ReLu. The
equations would then become,
ht+1 = ReLu(at + ht)
St+1 = ReLu(ht+1)
Thus, as shown in Figure 5, the RNN stores previous inputs in memory and learns to predict the sum of the sequence
up to the current timestep t.
9

Figure 6: LRCN: A snapshot of the model at time t. It refers to the frame and OF t the optical ﬂow at t. The video is
classiﬁed by averaging the output At over all t.
As with CNNs, recurrent neural networks have been trained with various back propagation techniques. These
conventional methods however, resulted in the vanishing gradient problem, i.e. the errors sent backward over the network,
either grew very large or vanished leading to problems in convergence. In 1997, [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997]
introduced LSTM (Long Short Term Memory), which succeeded in overcoming the vanishing gradient problem, by
introducing a novel architecture consisting of units called Constant Error Carousels. LSTMs were thus able to learn
very deep RNNs and successfully remembered important events over long (thousands of steps) durations of time.
Over the next decade, LSTM’s became the network of choice for several sequence learning problems, especially in
the ﬁelds of speech and handwriting recognition (see [Graves et al., 2009, Graves et al., 2013]). In the sections that
follow, we shall discuss applications of RNNs in various computer vision problems.
3.4.1
Action recognition
Recognizing human actions from videos has long been a pivotal problem in the tasks of video understanding and
surveillance. Actions, being events which take place over a ﬁnite length of time, are excellent candidates for a joint
CNN-RNN model.
In particular, we discuss the model proposed by [Donahue et al., 2014]. They use RGB as well as optical ﬂow
features to jointly train a variant of Alexnet combined with a single layer of LSTM (256 hidden units). Frames of the
video are sampled, passed through the trained network and classiﬁed individually. The ﬁnal prediction is obtained by
averaging across all the frames. A snapshot of this model at time t is shown in Figure 6.
3.4.2
Image and video captioning
Another important component of scene understanding is the textual description of images and videos. Relevant textual
description also helps complement image information, as well as form useful queries for retrieval.
RNNs (LSTMs) have long been used for machine translation (see [Bahdanau et al., 2014, Cho et al., 2014]). This
has motivated its use for the purpose of image description. [Vinyals et al., 2014] have developed an end-to-end system,
by ﬁrst encoding an image using a CNN and then using the encoded image as an input to a language generating
RNN. [Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2014] propose a multimodal deep network that aligns various interesting regions of the
image, represented using a CNN feature, with associated words. The learned correspondences are then used to train a
bi-directional RNN. This model is able, not only to generate descriptions for images, but also to localize diﬀerent
segments of the sentence to their corresponding image regions. The multimodal RNN (m-RNN) by [Mao et al., 2014]
combines the functionalities of the CNN and RNN by introducing a new multimodal layer, after the embedding and
recurrent layers of the RNN. [Mao et al., 2015] further extend the m-RNN by incorporating a transposed weight
sharing strategy, enabling the network to learn novel visual concepts from images.
[Venugopalan et al., 2014] move beyond images and obtain a mean-pooled CNN representation for a video. They
train an LSTM to use this input to generate a description for the video. They further improve upon this task by
developing S2VT [Venugopalan et al., 2015] a stacked LSTM model which accounts for both the RGB as well as ﬂow
information available in videos. [Pan et al., 2015] use both 2-D and 3-D CNNs to obtain a video embedding. They
introduced two types of losses which are used to train both the LSTM and the visual semantic embedding.
10

Figure 7: The facial expression recognition system of [Devries et al., 2014] which utilizes facial landmark (shown
overlaid on the face towards the right of the image) recognition as an auxiliary task which helps improve performance
on the main task of expression recognition.
3.4.3
Visual Question answering
Real understanding of an image should enable a system not only to make a statement about it, but also to answer
questions related to it. Therefore answering questions based on visual concepts in an image is the next natural step
for machine understanding algorithms. Doing this, however, requires the system to model both the textual question
and the image representation, before generating an answer conditioned on both the question and the image.
A combination of CNN and LSTM has proven to be eﬀective in this task too, as evidenced by the work of
[Malinowski et al., 2015] who train an LSTM layer to accept both the question as well a CNN representation of the
image and generate the answer. [Gao et al., 2015] use two LSTM’s with shared weights along with a CNN for the
task. Their experiments are performed on a multilingual dataset containing Chinese questions and answers along with
its English translation. [Antol et al., 2015] provide a dataset for the task of visual question answering containing both
real world images and abstract scenes.
3.5
Hybrid learning methods
3.5.1
Multi-task learning
Multi-task learning is essentially a machine learning paradigm wherein the objective is to train the learning system
to perform well on multiple tasks. Multi-task learning frameworks tend to exploit shared representations that exist
among the tasks to obtain a better generalization performance than counterparts developed for a single task alone.
In CNNs, multi-task learning is realized using diﬀerent approaches. One class of approaches utilize a multi-task
loss function with hyper-parameters typically regulating the task losses. For example, [Girshick, 2015] employ a
multi-task loss to train their network jointly for classiﬁcation and bounding-box regression tasks thereby improving
performance for object detection. [Zhang et al., 2014] propose a facial landmark detection network which adaptively
weights auxiliary tasks (e.g. head pose estimation, gender classiﬁcation, age estimation) to ensure that a task that
is deemed not beneﬁcial to accurate landmark detection is prevented from contributing to the network learning.
[Devries et al., 2014] demonstrate improved performance for facial expression recognition task by designing a CNN for
simultaneous landmark localization and facial expression recognition. A hallmark of these approaches is the division of
tasks into primary task and auxiliary task(s) wherein the purpose of the latter is typically to improve the performance
of the former (see Figure 7).
Some approaches tend to have signiﬁcant portions of the original network modiﬁed for multiple tasks. For
instance, [Sermanet et al., 2013b] replace pre-trained layers of a net originally designed to provide spatial (per-pixel)
classiﬁcation maps with a regression network and ﬁne-tune the resulting net to achieve simultaneous classiﬁcation,
localization and detection of scene objects.
Another class of multi-task approaches tend to have task-speciﬁc sub-networks as a characteristic feature of CNN
design. [Li et al., 2015a] utilize separate sub-networks for the joint point regression and body part detection tasks.
[Wang et al., 2015b] adopt a serially stacked design wherein a localization sub-CNN and the original object image are
fed into a segmentation sub-CNN to generate its object bounding box and extract its segmentation mask. To solve an
unconstrained word image recognition task, [Jaderberg et al., 2014a] propose an architecture consisting of a character
sequence CNN and an N-gram encoding CNN which act on an input image in parallel and whose outputs are utilized
along with a CRF model to recognize the text content present within the image.
11

3.5.2
Similarity learning
Apart from classiﬁcation, CNNs can also be used for tasks like metric learning and rank learning. Rather than asking
the CNN to identify objects, we can instead ask it to verify whether two images contain the same object or not. In
other words, we ask the CNN to learn which images are similar, and which are not. Image retrieval is one application
where such questions are routinely asked.
Structurally, Siamese networks resemble two-stream networks discussed previously. However, the diﬀerence here is
that both ‘streams’ have identical weights. Siamese networks consist of two seperate (but identical) networks, where two
images are fed in as input. Their activations are combined at a later layer, and the output of the network consists of a
single number, or a metric, which is a notion of distance between the images. Training is done so that images which are
considered to be similar have a lower output score than images which are considered diﬀerent. [Bromley et al., 1993]
introduced the idea of Siamese networks and used it for signature veriﬁcation. Later on, [Chopra et al., 2005] extended
it for face veriﬁcation. [Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2015] further extended and generalized this to learning similarity
between image patches.
Triplet networks are extensions of siamese networks used for rank learning. [Wang et al., 2014b] ﬁrst used this
idea for learning ﬁne-grained image similarity learning.
4
Open problems
In this section, we brieﬂy mention some open research problems in deep learning, particularly of interest to computer
vision. Several of these problems are already being tackled in several works.
• Training CNNs requires tuning of a large number of hyper-parameters, including those involving the model
architecture. An automated way of tuning such as that by [Snoek et al., 2012] is crucial for practitioners.
However, that requires multiple models to be trained, which can be both time consuming and impractical for
large networks.
• [Nguyen et al., 2014] showed that one can generate artiﬁcial images that result in CNNs producing a high
conﬁdence false prediction. In a related line of work, [Szegedy et al., 2013] showed that natural images can
be modiﬁed in an imperceptible manner to produce a completely diﬀerent classiﬁcation label.
Although
[Goodfellow et al., 2014b] attempted to reduce the eﬀects of such adversarial examples, it remains to be seen
whether that can be completely eliminated.
• It is well known (see [Gong et al., 2014b]) that CNNs are robust to small geometric transforms. However, we
would like them to be invariant. The study of invariance for extreme deformation is largely missing.
• Along with using a large number of data points, CNN models are also large and (relatively) slow to evaluate.
While there has been a lot of work in reducing number of parameters (see [Hinton et al., 2015, Denil et al., 2013,
Collins and Kohli, 2014, Jaderberg et al., 2014b, Srinivas and Babu, 2015]), it is not clear how to train non-
redundant models in the ﬁrst place.
• CNNs are presently trained in a one-shot way. The formulation of an online method of training would be
desirable for robotics applications.
• Unsupervised learning is one more area where we expect to deploy deep learning models. This would enable us
to leverage the massive amounts of unlabelled image data on the web. Classical deep networks like autoencoders
and restricted boltzmann machines were formulated as unsupervised models. While there has been a lot of
interesting recent work in the area (see [Goodfellow et al., 2014a, Bengio et al., 2013, Kingma and Welling, 2013,
Kulkarni et al., 2015]), a detailed discussion of these is beyond the scope of this paper.
5
Concluding remarks
In this article, we have surveyed the use of deep learning networks - convolutional neural networks in particular - for
computer vision. This enabled complicated hand-tuned algorithms being replaced by single monolithic algorithms
trained in an end-to-end manner. However, despite our best eﬀorts it may not be possible to capture the entire gamut
of deep learning research - even for computer vision - in this paper. We point the reader to other reviews, speciﬁcally
those by [Bengio, 2009], [LeCun et al., 2015] and [Schmidhuber, 2015]. These reviews are more geared towards deep
learning in general, while ours is more focussed on computer vision. We hope that our article will be useful to vision
researchers beginning to work in deep learning.
12
