A Survey Analyzing Generalization in
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Ezgi Korkmaz
University College London
London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Reinforcement learning research obtained significant success and attention with the
utilization of deep neural networks to solve problems in high dimensional state or action
spaces. While deep reinforcement learning policies are currently being deployed in many
different fields from medical applications to large language models, there are still ongoing
questions the field is trying to answer on the generalization capabilities of deep reinforce-
ment learning policies. In this paper, we will formalize and analyze generalization in deep
reinforcement learning. We will explain the fundamental reasons why deep reinforcement
learning policies encounter overfitting problems that limit their generalization capabilities.
Furthermore, we will categorize and explain the manifold solution approaches to increase
generalization, and overcome overfitting in deep reinforcement learning policies. From ex-
ploration to adversarial analysis and from regularization to robustness our paper provides
an analysis on a wide range of subfields within deep reinforcement learning with a broad
scope and in-depth view. We believe our study can provide a compact guideline for the
current advancements in deep reinforcement learning, and help to construct robust deep
neural policies with higher generalization skills.
1. Introduction
The performance of reinforcement learning algorithms (Watkins, 1989; Sutton, 1984, 1988)
has been boosted with the utilization of deep neural networks as function approximators
(Mnih et al., 2015). Currently, it is possible to learn deep reinforcement learning policies
that can operate in large state and/or action space MDPs (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2019). This progress consequently resulted in building reasonable deep reinforcement
learning policies that can play computer games with high dimensional state representations
(e.g. Atari, StarCraft), solve complex robotics control tasks, design algorithms (Mankowitz
et al., 2023; Fawzi et al., 2022), guide large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Google Gemini,
2023), and play some of the most complicated board games (e.g. Chess, Go) (Schrittwieser
et al., 2020). However, deep reinforcement learning algorithms also experience several prob-
lems caused by their overall limited generalization capabilities. Some studies demonstrated
these problems via adversarial perturbations introduced to the state observations of the pol-
icy (Huang et al., 2017; Kos and Song, 2017; Korkmaz, 2022; Korkmaz and Brown-Cohen,
2023), several focused on exploring the fundamental issues with function approximation, es-
timation biases in the state-action value function (Thrun and Schwartz, 1993; van Hasselt,
2010), or with new architectural design ideas (Wang et al., 2016). The fact that we are not
able to completely explore the entire MDP for high dimensional state representation MDPs,
even with deep neural networks as function approximators, is one of the root problems that
arXiv:2401.02349v2  [cs.LG]  30 Oct 2024

Korkmaz
limits generalization. On top of this, some portion of the problems are directly caused by
the utilization of deep neural networks and thereby the intrinsic problems inherited from
their utilization (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014; Korkmaz, 2022, 2024b).
In order to address open questions on generalization in deep reinforcement learning, there
needs to be some commonly agreed standard of what is meant by generalization. Currently,
different aspects of generalization are considered in various subfields either working on
the fundamental questions regarding or the applications of deep reinforcement learning.
We take the point of view in this paper that these various aspects can, and should, be
described and studied in a unified way. In particular, we argue that the various approaches
to generalization can be succinctly classified based on which part of the Markov Decision
Process is expected to vary. We make this classification formal and unify how much current
work on generalization in deep reinforcement learning fits clearly into the classification we
introduce.
In this paper we will focus on generalization in deep reinforcement learning
and the underlying causes of the limitations deep reinforcement learning research currently
faces. In particular, we will try to answer the following questions:
• How can we formalize the concept of generalization in deep reinforcement learning?
• What is the role of exploration in overfitting for deep reinforcement learning?
• What are the causes of overestimation bias observed in state-action value functions?
• What has been done to overcome the overfitting problems that deep reinforcement
learning algorithms have encountered so far, and to enable deep neural policies to
generalize to non-stationary complex environments?
To answer these questions we will go through research connecting several subfields in
reinforcement learning on the problems and corresponding proposed solutions regarding
generalization. In this paper we introduce a formal definition of generalization and cate-
gorization of the different methods used to both achieve and assess generalization, and use
it to systematically summarize and consolidate the current body of research. We further
describe the issue of value function overestimation, and the role of exploration in overfitting
in reinforcement learning. Furthermore, we explain new emerging research areas that can
potentially target these questions in the long run including meta-reinforcement learning
and lifelong learning. The objective of the paper is to introduce a formal generalization
definition and provide a compact overview and unification of the current advancements and
limitations in the field.
2. Preliminaries on Deep Reinforcement Learning
The aim in deep reinforcement learning is to learn a policy via interacting with an environ-
ment in a Markov Decision Process (MDP) that maximize expected cumulative discounted
rewards. An MDP is represented by a tuple M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ), where S represents
the state space, A represents the action space, r : S × A →R is a reward function,
P : S × A →∆(S) is a transition probability kernel, ρ0 represents the initial state dis-
tribution, and γ represents the discount factor. The objective in reinforcement learning
is to learn a policy π : S × A →R which maps states to probability distributions on ac-
tions in order to maximize the expected cumulative reward R = E PT−1
t=0 γtr(st, at) where
2

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
at ∼π(st, ·), st+1 ∼P(·|st, at). The temporal difference updates achieves this objective by
updating the value function V (s) (Sutton, 1984, 1988)
V (st) ←V (st) + α[r(st+1, a) + γV (st+1) −V (st)]
(1)
While Equation 1 represents the one-step temporal difference update, i.e.
TD(0), it is
further possible to consider multi-step TD which focuses on multi-step return, i.e. TD(λ).
In Q-learning the goal is to learn the optimal state-action value function (Watkins, 1989)
Q∗(s, a) = r(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
P(s′|s, a) max
a′∈A Q∗(s′, a′).
(2)
This is achieved via iterative Bellman update (Bellman, 1957; Bellman and Dreyfus, 1959)
which updates Q(st, at) by
Q(st, at) + α[Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(st+1, a) −Q(st, at)].
Thus, the optimal policy is determined by choosing the action a∗(s) = arg maxa Q(s, a) in
state s. The optimal Bellman operator is (Bellman, 1957)
BQ(s, a) := E[r(s, a)] + γEP[max
a′
Q(s′, a′)]
In high dimensional state space or action space MDPs the optimal policy is decided via a
function-approximated state-action value function represented by a deep neural network.
The loss function in deep reinforcement learning is the quadratic difference between that
target network and the current state-action value function.
Li(θi) = Ee∼D[(r(s, a) + γ max
a′
Q(s′, a′, θtarget) −Q(s, a, θi))2]
where D is the experience replay buffer (Lin, 1993) in which the experiences e = {st, at, rt, st+1}
sampled from D = {e1, e2, . . . eN}. The loss function is optimized by taking the gradient
with respect function approximation weights
θi+1 = θi + α(r(st, at, st+1) + γQ(st+1, arg max
a
Q(st+1, a; θtarget
i−1
); θtarget
i−1
)
−Q(st, at; θi))∇θiQ(st, at; θi).
In a parallel line of algorithm families the policy itself is directly parametrized by πθ (Sutton
et al., 1999), and the gradient estimator used in learning is
g = Et

∇θ log πθ(st, at)(Q(st, at) −max
a
Q(st, a))

where Q(st, at) refers to the state-action value function at time step t. The algorithms that
focus on directly parameterizing the policy try to solve the following optimization problem
(Schulman et al., 2015).
max
θ
Es∼ρθold;a∼πθold(s,·)
 πθ(s, a)
πθold(s, a)Qθold(s, a)

subject to Es∼ρθoldDKL(πθ(s, ·)||πold(s, ·)) ≤δ
3

Korkmaz
3. How to Achieve Generalization?
3.1 Generic Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
To be able to understand and analyze the connection between different approaches to achieve
generalization first we will provide a clear definition intended to capture the behavior of a
generic reinforcement learning algorithm.
Definition 3.1 (Generic reinforcement learning algorithm). A reinforcement learning train-
ing algorithm A learns a policy π by interacting with an MDP M. We divide up the exe-
cution of A into discrete time steps as follows. At each time t, the algorithm has a current
policy πt, observes a state st, takes an action at ∼πt(st, ·), and observes a transition to
state s′
t ∼P(· | st, at) with corresponding reward rt = r(st, at, s′
t). We define the history
of algorithm A in MDP M to be the sequence Ht = (π0, s0, a0, s′
0, r0), . . . (πt, st, at, s′
t, rt) of
all the transitions observed by the algorithm so far. We require that the policy πt and state
st at time t are a function only of Ht−1, i.e the transitions observed so far by A. At time
t = T, the algorithm stops and outputs the policy π = πT . We use the notation A to denote
the set of reinforcement learning training algorithms and Π to denote the set of policies π
in an MDP M.
Intuitively, a reinforcement learning algorithm has a current policy πt, performs a se-
quence of queries (st, at) to the MDP, and observes the resulting state transitions and
rewards. In order to be as generic as possible, the definition makes no assumptions about
how the algorithm chooses the sequence of queries, other than that at ∼πt(st, ·). Notably,
if taking action at in state st leads to a transition to state s′
t, there is no requirement that
st+1 = s′
t. Indeed, the only assumption is that st+1 and πt+1 may depend only on Ht, the
history of transitions observed so far. This allows the definition to capture deep reinforce-
ment learning algorithms, which may choose to query states and actions in a complex way
as a function of previously observed state transitions.
3.2 Base Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
We next introduce a basic metric capturing how well an algorithm generalizes given a fixed
amount of interaction with a given MDP.
Definition 3.2 (Base generalization). Given an MDP M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ), let πT and
ˆπT be policies output by training algorithms taking T steps. The base generalization Gbase
is the difference between the expected discounted cumulative rewards obtained by policy πT
and ˆπT in M.
Gbase(πT , ˆπT ) = Eat∼πT (st,·)
" ∞
X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1)
#
−Eˆat∼ˆπT (ˆst,·)
" ∞
X
t=0
γtr(ˆst, ˆat, ˆst+1)
#
The base generalization definition captures how well an algorithm can generalize to
unseen states and transitions, given only access to T interactions with the MDP M. Hence,
in base generalization the role of exploration is exceedingly dominant and this will be further
explained in Section 5.
4

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
3.3 Algorithmic Generalization
Based on the definition of generic reinforcement learning algorithm, we will now further
define the different approaches proposed to achieve generalization.
At a high level, the
approaches we will discuss will be divided into two classes:
I. Techniques that solely modify the training algorithm,
II. Techniques that directly modify the MDP (i.e. learning environment, training data)
that forms the interactions of the training algorithm with the learning environment.
Our first definition formalizes the techniques that solely modify the training algorithm.
Definition 3.3 (Algorithmic generalization). Let A be a training algorithm that takes an
MDP as input and outputs a policy. Given an MDP M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ), an algorithmic
generalization method GA is given by a function F : A →A that runs the algorithm F(A)
in the MDP M.
Algorithmic generalization captures modifications to the training algorithm itself that
can range from the choice of optimization methods or regularizers, to update rules for the
policy.
3.4 Generalization Through Rewards
Definition 3.4 (Rewards transforming generalization). Let A be a training algorithm that
takes as input an MDP and outputs a policy. Given an MDP M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ), a
rewards transforming generalization method GR is given by a sequence of functions Ft :
(Π × S × A × S × R)t × R →R. The method attempts to achieve generalization by running
A on MDP M, but modifying the rewards at each time t to be ˆrt(st, at, s′
t) = Ft−1(Ht−1, rt),
where Ht−1 is the history of algorithm A when running with the transformed rewards.
In particular, a method under the rewards transforming generalization category runs
the original algorithm to train the policy, but modifies the observed rewards. The instances
of these techniques will be mentioned and explained in Section 6.2, i.e. direct function
regularization, in Section 5, i.e. the role of exploration in overfitting, and in Section 8, i.e.
transfer in reinforcement learning.
3.5 Generalization Through Observations
Following the definition of reward transforming generalization we define state transforming
generalization which is one of the canonical approaches for achieving generalization in deep
reinforcement learning. The instances of generalization through observations will be cate-
gorized and explained in detail in Section 6.1, i.e. data augmentation, and Section ??, i.e.
the adversarial perspective for deep neural policy generalization.
Definition 3.5 (State transforming generalization). Let A be a training algorithm that
takes as input an MDP and outputs a policy.
Given an MDP M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ),
a state transforming generalization method GS is given by a sequence of functions Ft :
(Π × S × A × S × R)t × S →S. The method attempts to achieve generalization by running
5

Korkmaz
A on MDP M, but modifying the state chosen at time t to be ˆst = Ft−1(Ht−1, st), where
Ht−1 is the history of algorithm A when running with the transformed states.
3.6 Generalization Through Environment Dynamics
Another category of algorithms that tries to achieve generalization in deep reinforcement
learning focuses on achieving this objective through environment dynamics transformation.
The methods focusing on generalization through environment dynamics will be referred to
and explained in Section 6.2, i.e. direct function regularization.
Definition 3.6 (Transition probability transforming generalization). Let A be a train-
ing algorithm that takes as input an MDP and outputs a policy. Given an MDP M =
(S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ), a transition probability transforming generalization method GP is given
by a sequence of functions Ft : (Π × S × A × S × R)t × (S × A × S) →R. The method
attempts to achieve generalization by running A on MDP M, but modifying the transition
probabilities at time t to be ˆP(st, at, s′
t) = Ft−1(Ht−1, st, at, s′
t), where Ht−1 is the history of
algorithm A when running with the transformed transition probabilities.
3.7 Generalization Through Policy
The last type of generalization method we define is based on directly modifying the current
policy used by the algorithm to select actions at each time step.
We will explain the
instances of the techniques that focus on generalization through policy in Section 5, i.e. the
role of exploration in overfitting, and Section 7, i.e. meta reinforcement learning and meta
gradients.
Definition 3.7 (Policy transforming generalization). Let A be a training algorithm that
takes as input an MDP and outputs a policy.
Given an MDP M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0, γ),
a policy transforming generalization method Gπ is given by a sequence of functions Ft :
(Π × S × A × S × R)t × S × ∆(A) →∆(A). The method attempts to achieve generalization
by running A on MDP M, but modifying the current policy by which A chooses the action
at time t to be ˆπt(st, ·) = Ft−1(Ht−1, st, πt(st, ·)), where Ht−1 is the history of algorithm A
when running with the transformed policy.
3.8 Assessing Generalization
All the definitions so far categorize methods to modify either training algorithms and/or the
MDP, i.e. learning environment, training data, in order to achieve generalization. However,
many such methods for modifying training algorithms have a corresponding method which
can be used to assess the generalization capabilities of a trained policy. Our final definition
captures this correspondence.
Definition 3.8 (Generalization testing). Let ˆπ be a trained policy for an MDP M. Let Ft
be a sequence of functions corresponding to a generalization method from one of the previous
definitions. The generalization testing method of Ft is given by executing the policy ˆπ in
M, but in each time step applying the modification Ft where the history Ht is given by the
transitions executed by ˆπ so far. When both a generalization method and a generalization
testing method are used concurrently, we will use subscripts to denote the generalization
6

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
method and superscripts to denote the testing method.
For instance, Gπ
S corresponds to
training with a state transforming method, and testing with a policy transforming method.
4. Roots of Overestimation in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Many reinforcement learning algorithms compute estimates for the state-action values in
an MDP. Because these estimates are usually based on a stochastic interaction with the
MDP, computing accurate estimates that correctly generalize to further interactions is one
of the most fundamental tasks in reinforcement learning. A major challenge in this area
has been the tendency of many classes of reinforcement learning algorithms to consistently
overestimate state-action values. Initially the overestimation bias for Q-learning is discussed
and theoretically justified by Thrun and Schwartz (1993) as a biproduct of using function
approximators for state-action value estimates. In particular, Thrun and Schwartz (1993)
proves that if the reinforcement learning policy overestimates the state-action values by γc
during learning then the Q-learning algorithm will fail to learn optimal policy if γ >
1
1 + c.
Following this initial discussion it has been shown that several parts of the deep reinforce-
ment learning process can cause overestimation bias. Learning overestimated state-action
values can be caused by statistical bias of utilizing a single max operator (van Hasselt,
2010), coupling between value function and the optimal policy (Raileanu and Fergus, 2021;
Cobbe et al., 2021), or caused by the accumulated function approximation error (Boyan
and Moore, 1994).
Several methods have been proposed to target overestimation bias for value iteration
algorithms. In particular, van Hasselt (2010) demonstrated that the expectation of a maxi-
mum of a random variable is not equal to maximum of the expectation of a random variable.
E[max
i [Xi]] ̸= max
i [E[Xi]] where X = {X1, X2, . . . , XN}
This clear distinction shows that simple Q-learning is a biased estimator, and to solve this
overestimation bias introduced by the max operator van Hasselt (2010) proposed to utilize
a double estimator for the state-action value estimates. In particular, the double estimator
for double Q-learning works as follows
QI(s, a) ←QI(s, a) + α(s, a)(r(s, a) + γQII(s′, max
a
QI(s′, a)) −QI(s′, a))
and
QII(s, a) ←QII(s, a) + α(s, a)(r(s, a) + γQI(s′, max
a
QII(s′, a)) −QII(s′, a)).
Later, the authors also created a version of this algorithm that can solve high dimensional
state space problems (Hasselt et al., 2016).
Some of the work on this line of research
targeting overestimation bias for value iteration algorithms is based on simply averaging
the state-action values with previously learned state-action value estimates during training
time (Anschel et al., 2017). While overestimation bias was demonstrated to be a problem
and discussed over a long period of time (Thrun and Schwartz, 1993; van Hasselt, 2010),
recent studies also further demonstrated that actor critic algorithms also suffer from this
issue (Fujimoto et al., 2018).
7

Korkmaz
Table 1: Environment and algorithm details for different exploration strategies for general-
ization.
Citation
Method
Learning Environment
Algorithm
Mnih et al. (2015)
ϵ-greedy
Arcade Learning Environment
DQN
Bellemare et al. (2016)
Count-based
Arcade Learning Environment
A3C and DQN
Osband et al. (2016b)
RLSVI
Tetris
Tabular Q
Osband et al. (2016a)
Bootstrapped DQN
Arcade Learning Environment
DQN
Houthooft et al. (2016)
VIME
DeepMind Control Suite
TRPO
Fortunato et al. (2018)
NoisyNet
Arcade Learning Environment
A3C and DQN
Lee et al. (2021)
SUNRISE
DCS1& ALE
SAC & RDQN
Mahankali et al. (2024)
Random Latent
Arcade Learning Environment
PPO
5. The Role of Exploration in Overfitting
The fundamental trade-off of exploration vs exploitation is the dilemma that the agent
can try to take actions to move towards more unexplored states by sacrificing the current
immediate rewards. While there is a significant body of studies on provably efficient explo-
ration strategies the results from these studies do not necessarily directly transfer to the
high dimensional state or action MDPs. The most prominent indication of this is that, even
though it is possible to use deep neural networks as function approximators for large state
spaces, the agent will simply not be able to explore the full state space. The fact that the
agent is able to only explore a portion of the state space simply creates a bias in the learnt
value function (III, 1995).
In this section, we will go through several exploration strategies in deep reinforcement
learning and how they affect policy overfitting. A quite simple version of this is based on
adding noise in action selection during training e.g. ϵ-greedy exploration. Note that this is
an example of a policy transforming generalization method Gπ in Definition 3.7 in Section
3. While ϵ-greedy exploration is widely used in deep reinforcement learning (Wang et al.,
2016; Hamrick et al., 2020; Kapturowski et al., 2023), it has also been proven that to ex-
plore the state space these algorithms may take exponentially long (Kakade, 2003). Several
others focused on randomizing different components of the reinforcement learning training
algorithms. In particular, Osband et al. (2016b) proposes the randomized least squared
value iteration algorithm to explore more efficiently in order to increase generalization in
reinforcement learning for linearly parametrized value functions. This is achieved by simply
adding Gaussian noise as a function of state visitation frequencies to the training dataset.
Later, the authors also propose the bootstrapped DQN algorithm (i.e. adding temporally
correlated noise) to increase generalization with non-linear function approximation Osband
et al. (2016a). Recently, Mahankali et al. (2024) proposed to randomize the reward func-
tion to enhance exploration in high dimensional observation MDPs where policy gradient
algorithms are used to explore. This study is also a clear example of the generalization
through rewards as has been explained in Definition 3.4 in Section 3.
1. DeepMind Control Suite
8

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Houthooft et al. (2016) proposed an exploration technique centered around maximizing
the information gain on the agent’s belief of the environment dynamics. In practice, the
authors use Bayesian neural networks for effectively exploring high dimensional action space
MDPs. Following this line of work on increasing efficiency during exploration Fortunato
et al. (2018) proposes to add parametric noise to the deep reinforcement learning policy
weights in high dimensional state MDPs.
While several methods focused on ensemble
state-action value function learning (Osband et al., 2016a), Lee et al. (2021) proposed
reweighting target Q-values from an ensemble of policies (i.e. weighted Bellman backups)
combined with highest upper-confidence bound action selection. Another line of research
in exploration strategies focused on count-based methods that use the direct count of state
visitations. In this line of work, Bellemare et al. (2016) tried to lay out the relationship
between count based methods and intrinsic motivation, and used count-based methods for
high dimensional state MDPs (i.e. Arcade Learning Environment). Yet it is worthwhile
to note that most of the current deep reinforcement learning algorithms use very simple
exploration techniques such as ϵ-greedy which is based on taking the action maximizing
the state-action value function with probability 1 −ϵ and taking a random action with
probability ϵ (Mnih et al., 2015; Hasselt et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Hamrick et al.,
2020; Kapturowski et al., 2023).
It is possible to argue that the fact that the deep reinforcement learning policy obtained
a higher score with the same number of samples by a particular type of training method A
compared to method B is by itself evidence that the technique A leads to more generalized
policies. Even though the agent is trained and tested in the same environment, the explored
states during training time are not exactly the same states visited during test time. The
fact that the policy trained with technique A obtains a higher score at the end of an episode
is sole evidence that the agent trained with A was able to visit further states in the MDP
and thus succeed in them. Yet, throughout the paper we will discuss different notions of
generalization investigated in different subfields of reinforcement learning research. While
exploration vs exploitation stands out as one of the main problems in reinforcement learning
policy performance most of the work conducted in this section focuses on achieving higher
score in hard-exploration games (i.e.
Montezuma’s Revenge) rather than aiming for a
generally higher score for each game overall across a given benchmark. Thus, it is possible
that the majority of work focusing on exploration so far might not be able to obtain policies
that perform as well as those in the studies described in Section 6 across a given benchmark.
6. Regularization
In this section we will focus on different regularization techniques employed to increase
generalization in deep reinforcement learning policies. We will go through these works by
categorizing each of them under data augmentation, adversarial training, and direct function
regularization. Under each category we will connect these different lines of approach to
increase generalization in deep reinforcement learning to the settings we defined in Section
3.
9

Korkmaz
Table 2: Environment and algorithm details for data augmentation techniques for state
observation generalization. All of the studies in this section focus on state trans-
formation methods GS defined in Section 3.
Citation
Method
Environment
Algorithm
Yarats et al. (2021)
DrQ
DCS, Arcade Learning Environment
DQN
Laskin et al. (2020b)
CuRL
DCS, Arcade Learning Environment
SAC and DQN
Laskin et al. (2020a)
RAD
DeepMind Control Suite, ProcGen
SAC and PPO
Korkmaz (2023)
Semantic Changes
Arcade Learning Environment
DDQN & A3C
Wang et al. (2020)
Mixreg
ProcGen
DQN and PPO
6.1 Data Augmentation
Several studies focus on diversifying the observations of the deep reinforcement learning
policy to increase generalization capabilities. A line of research in this regard focused on
simply employing versions of data augmentation techniques (Laskin et al., 2020a,b; Yarats
et al., 2021) for high dimensional state representation environments. In particular, these
studies involve simple techniques such as cropping, rotating or shifting the state observations
during training time. While this line of work got considerable attention, a quite recent study
Agarwal et al. (2021b) demonstrated that when the number of random seeds is increased to
one hundred the relative performance achieved and reported in the original papers of (Laskin
et al., 2020b; Yarats et al., 2021) on data augmentation training in deep reinforcement
learning decreases to a level that might be significant to mention.
While some of the work on this line of research simply focuses on using a set of data
augmentation methods (Laskin et al., 2020a,b; Yarats et al., 2021), other work focuses on
proposing new environments to train in (Cobbe et al., 2020). The studies on designing new
environments to train deep reinforcement learning policies basically aim to provide high
variation in the observed environment such as changing background colors and changing
object shapes in ways that are meaningful in the game, in order to increase test time gen-
eralization. In the line of robustness and test time performance, a more recent work that
is also mentioned in Section 6.3 demonstrated that imperceptible semantically meaningful
data augmentations can cause significant damage on the policy performance and certified
robust deep reinforcement learning policies are more vulnerable to these imperceptible aug-
mentations (Korkmaz, 2021a, 2023).
Within this category some work focuses on producing more observations by simply
blending in (e.g. creating a mixture state from multiple different observations) several ob-
servations to increase generalization (Wang et al., 2020). While most of the studies trying
to increase generalization by data augmentation techniques are primarily conducted in the
DeepMind Control Suite or the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al.,
2013), some small fraction of these studies (Wang et al., 2020) are conducted in relatively
recently designed training environments like ProcGen (Cobbe et al., 2020). In the line of
research proposing learning environments Dennis et al. (2020) proposed unsupervised envi-
ronment design by changing the environment parameters to asses generalization for maze
structured environments by minimax training where the ”adversary” creating an environ-
10

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Table 3: Environment and algorithm details for different direct function regularization
strategies for trying to overcome overfitting problems in reinforcement learning.
Note that most of the methods based on direct function regularization are a form
of algorithmic generalization GA to overcome overfitting as described in Section 3.
Citation
Proposed Method
Learning Environment
Igl et al. (2019)
SNI and IBAC
GridWorld and CoinRun
Vieillard et al. (2020b)
Munchausen RL
Arcade Learning Environment
Lee et al. (2020)
Network Randomization
2D CoinRun and 3D DeepMind Lab
Amit et al. (2020)
Discount Regularization
GridWorld and MuJoCo2
Agarwal et al. (2021a)
PSM
DDMC and Rectangle Game3
Liu et al. (2021)
BN and dropout and L2/L1
MuJoCo
ment for the policy to solve a task with goal and obstacles as an underspecified parameter.
Cobbe et al. (2019) focuses on decoupling the training and testing set for reinforcement
learning via simply proposing a new game environment CoinRun.
6.2 Direct Function Regularization
While some of the work we have discussed so far focuses on regularizing the data (i.e. state
observations) as in Section 6.1, some focuses on directly regularizing the function learned
with the intention of simulating techniques from deep neural network regularization like
batch normalization and dropout (Igl et al., 2019). While some studies have attempted to
simulate these known techniques in reinforcement learning, some focus on directly applying
them to overcome overfitting. In this line of research, Liu et al. (2021) proposes to use
known techniques from deep neural network regularization to apply in continuous control
deep reinforcement learning training. In particular, these techniques are batch normaliza-
tion (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), weight clipping, dropout, entropy and L2/L1 weight
regularization. All these methods fall under the algorithmic generalization category GA as
described in Section3.
Lee et al. (2020) proposes to utilize a random network to essentially achieve a version of
randomization in the input observations to increase generalization skills of deep reinforce-
ment learning policies, and tests the proposal in the 2D CoinRun game proposed by Cobbe
et al. (2019) and 3D DeepMind Lab (?). In particular, the authors essentially introduce a
random convolutional layer to achieve this objective. This study is an example of an algo-
rithmic generalization method GA described in Definition 3.3 when the single layer random
network is not placed at the first layer of the deep neural network. However, when this
single layer random network is placed at the first layer of the neural network, this method
is essentially just introducing some noise to the state observations of the policy, thus this is
an example of state transforming generalization. When this single random layer is placed
2. Low dimensional setting of MuJoCo is used for this study (Todorov et al., 2012).
3. Rectangle game is a simple video game with only two actions, ”Right” and ”Jump”. The game has black
background and two rectangles where the goal of the game is to avoid white obstacles and reach to the
right side of the screen. Agarwal et al. (2021a) is the only paper we encountered experimenting with
this particular game.
11

Korkmaz
Table 4: Algorithm details for different direct function regularization strategies for trying
to overcome overfitting problems in reinforcement learning. Note that most of
the methods based on direct function regularization are a form of algorithmic
generalization GA to overcome overfitting as described in Section 3.
Citation
Proposed Method
Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
Igl et al. (2019)
SNI and IBAC
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
Vieillard et al. (2020b)
Munchausen RL
DQN and IQN
Lee et al. (2020)
Network Randomization
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
Amit et al. (2020)
Discount Regularization
Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3)
Agarwal et al. (2021a)
PSM
Data Regularized-Q (DrQ)
Liu et al. (2021)
BN and dropout and L2/L1
PPO, TRPO, SAC, A2C
other than first, the method is no longer a state transforming generalization method because
the states are not modified before they have been observed by the algorithm, but rather
implicitly changed due to a random convolutional layer added in the architecture. We will
further provide clear instances of the state transformation generalization also in Section
6.3 when the worst-case perturbation methods to target generalization in reinforcement
learning policies are explained.
Some work employs contrastive representation learning to learn deep reinforcement
learning policies from state observations that are close to each other (Agarwal et al., 2021a).
This study leverage the temporal aspect of reinforcement learning and propose a policy sim-
ilarity metric. The main goal of the paper is to lay out the sequential structure and utilize
representation learning to learn generalizable abstractions from state representations. One
drawback of this study is that most of the experimental study is conducted in a non-baseline
environment (i.e. Rectangle game and Distracting DM Control Suite). Malik et al. (2021)
studies query complexity of reinforcement learning policies that can generalize to multiple
environments. The authors of this study focus on an example of the transition probability
transformation setting GP in Definition 3.6, and the reward function transformation setting
GR in Definition 3.4.
Another line of study in direct function generalization investigates the relationship be-
tween reduced discount factor and adding an ℓ2-regularization term to the loss function,
i.e. weight decay (Amit et al., 2020). The authors in this work demonstrate the explicit
connection between reducing the discount factor and adding an ℓ2-regularizer to the value
function for temporal difference learning. In particular, this study demonstrates that adding
an ℓ2-regularization term to the loss function is equal to training with a lower discount term,
which the authors refer to as discount regularization. The results of this study however are
based on experiments from tabular reinforcement learning, and the low dimensional setting
of the MuJoCo environment (Todorov et al., 2012). This study is also another clear example
of algorithmic generalization GA as described in Definition 3.3.
On the reward transformation for generalization setting GR defined in Definition 3.4,
Vieillard et al. (2020b) adds the scaled log policy to the current rewards. To overcome
overfitting some work tries to learn explicit or implicit similarity between the states to
obtain a reasonable policy (Lan et al., 2021). In particular, the authors in this work try to
12

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Table 5: Environment and algorithm details for adversarial policy regularization and at-
tack techniques in deep reinforcement learning. Note that most of the methods
based on adversarial approaches are a form of generalization assessment through
state observations GS as described in Definition 3.8, and some falls under the
generalization through environment dynamics GP as described in Definition 3.6.
Citation
Method
Environment
Algorithm
Huang et al. (2017)
Fast Gradient Sign (FGSM)
ALE
DQN, TRPO, A3C
Kos and Song (2017)
Fast Gradient Sign (FGSM)
ALE
DQN & IQN
Korkmaz (2022)
Adversarial Framework
ALE
DDQN & A3C
Lin et al. (2017)
Timing
ALE
A3C & DQN
Pinto et al. (2017)
Zero-sum game
MuJoCo
RARL
Gleave et al. (2020)
Adversarial Policies
MuJoCo
PPO
Korkmaz (2023)
Natural Attacks
ALE
DDQN & A3C
Huan et al. (2020)
State Adversarial-DQN
ALE and LM4
DDQN & PPO
Korkmaz (2024c)
Diagnostic Adversarial Volatility
ALE
DDQN
unify the state space representations by providing a taxonomy of metrics in reinforcement
learning. Several studies proposed different ways to include Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the current policy and the pre-updated policy to add as a regularization term
in the reinforcement learning objective (Schulman et al., 2015).
Recently, some studies
argued that utilizing Kullback-Leibler regularization implicitly averages the state-action
value estimates (Vieillard et al., 2020a).
6.3 The Adversarial Perspective for Deep Neural Policy Generalization
One of the ways to regularize the state observations is based on considering worst-case
perturbations added to state observations (i.e.
adversarial perturbations).
This line of
work starts with introducing perturbations produced by the fast gradient sign method
proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2015) into deep reinforcement learning observations at test
time (Huang et al., 2017; Kos and Song, 2017), and compares the generalization capabilities
of the trained deep reinforcement learning policies in the presence worst-case perturbations
and Gaussian noise. These gradient based adversarial methods are based on taking the
gradient of the cost function used to train the policy with respect to the state observation.
sadv = s + ϵ ·
∇xJ(s, Q(s, a))
∥∇sJ(s, Q(s, a))∥p
,
Several other techniques have been proposed on the optimization line of the adversarial
alteration of state observations. In this line of work, Korkmaz (2020) suggested a Nes-
terov momentum-based method to produce adversarial perturbations for deep reinforcement
4. Low dimensional state MuJoCo refers to the setting of MuJoCo where the state dimensions are not
represented by pixels and dimensions of the state observations range from 11 to 117.
13

Korkmaz
learning policies.
vt+1 = µ · vt +
∇sadvJ(st
adv + µ · vt, a)
∥∇sadvJ(st
adv + µ · vt, a)∥1
st+1
adv = st
adv + α ·
vt+1
∥vt+1∥2
Here J(sadv, a) is based on the cost function used to train the policy, sadv represents the
adversarial state observation, and µ is the momentum acceleration parameter. While a line
of studies focused on optimization aspects of the adversarial perturbations, some studies
demonstrated further the hidden linearity of deep reinforcement learning policies by re-
vealing how these policies learn shared adversarial features across states, MDPs and across
algorithms (Korkmaz, 2022).
In this work the authors investigate the root causes of this problem, and demonstrate
that policy high-sensitivity directions and the perceptual similarity of the state observations
are uncorrelated. Furthermore, the study demonstrates that the current state-of-the-art
adversarial training techniques also learn similar high-sensitivity directions as the vanilla
trained deep reinforcement learning policies.5 More recently, a line of work proposed the-
oretically founded algorithms to understand the temporal and spatial correlation of deep
reinforcement learning decision making and what affects this decision making process (Ko-
rkmaz, 2024c). In particular, this study identifies what precisely affects and contributes to
the decision making process of deep reinforcement learning policies from distributional shift
to worst-case perturbations (i.e. adversarial), from algorithmic differences to architectural
changes.
While several studies focused on improving computation techniques to optimize optimal
perturbations, a line of research focused on making deep neural policies resilient to these
perturbations. Pinto et al. (2017) proposed to model the dynamics between the adversary
and the deep neural policy as a zero-sum game (Littman, 1994) where the goal of the
adversary is to minimize expected cumulative rewards of the deep reinforcement learning
policy.
Ragent = Es0∼ρ;aagent∼πagent;aadv∼πadv[
T−1
X
t=0
ragent(s, aagent, aadv)]
Here the adversarial policy is represented by πadv, the policy of the agent represented by
πagent, and the rewards received by the agent represented by ragent. The Nash equilibrium
of the optimal rewards for this zero-sum game is
Ragent∗= min
πadv max
πagent Ragent(πagent, πadv) = max
πagent min
πadv Ragent(πagent, πadv)
This study is a clear example of transition probability perturbation to achieve generaliza-
tion GP in Definition 3.6 of Section 3. Gleave et al. (2020) approached this problem with an
5. From the security point of view, this adversarial framework is under the category of black-box adversarial
attacks for which this is the first study that demonstrated that deep reinforcement learning policies
are vulnerable to black-box adversarial attacks (Korkmaz, 2022).
Furthermore, note that black-box
adversarial perturbations are more generalizable global perturbations that can affect many different
policies.
14

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Figure 1: Robust adversarial reinforcement learning proposed in (Pinto et al., 2017). This
paper proposes the zero-sum game to model the relationship between the agent
and the adversary while focusing on introducing disturbances to the environment
dynamics. Here the empirical studies are conducted in the MuJoCo environment.
adversary model which is restricted to take natural actions in the MDP instead of modifying
the observations with ℓp-norm bounded perturbations. The authors model this dynamic as
a zero-sum Markov game and solve it via self play Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO).
Some recent studies, proposed to model the interaction between the adversary and the deep
reinforcement learning policy as a state-adversarial MDP, and claimed that their proposed
algorithm State Adversarial Double Deep Q-Network (SA-DDQN) learns theoretically cer-
tified robust policies against natural noise and perturbations. In particular, these certified
adversarial training techniques aim to add a regularizer term to the temporal difference loss
in deep Q-learning
H(ri + γ max
a
ˆQˆθ(si, a; θ) −Qθ(si, ai; θ)) + κR(θ)
where H is the Huber loss, ˆQ refers to the target network and κ is to adjust the level of reg-
ularization for convergence. The regularizer term can vary for different certified adversarial
training techniques yet the baseline technique uses R(θ)
max{ max
ˆs∈B(s)
max
a̸=arg maxa′ Q(s,a′) Qθ(ˆs, a) −Qθ(ˆs, arg max
a′
Q(s, a′)), −c}.
where B(s) is an ℓp-norm ball of radius ϵ. While these certified adversarial training tech-
niques drew some attention from the community, more recently manifold concerns have been
raised on the robustness of theoretically certified adversarially trained deep reinforcement
learning policies (Korkmaz, 2021c,b, 2022, 2024a). In these studies, the authors argue that
adversarially trained (i.e. certified robust) deep reinforcement learning policies learn inac-
curate state-action value functions and non-robust features from the environment. More
importantly, recently it has been shown that certified robust deep reinforcement learning
policies have worse generalization capabilities compared to vanilla trained reinforcement
learning policies in high dimensional state space MDPs (Korkmaz, 2023). While this study
provides a contradistinction between adversarial and natural directions that are intrinsic to
the MDP, it further demonstrates that the certified adversarial training techniques block
generalization capabilities of standard deep reinforcement learning policies. Furthermore
note that this study is also a clear example of a state observation perturbation generaliza-
tion testing method GS
S in Definition 3.8 in Section 3. For a more comprehensive view on
generalization and robustness see Korkmaz (2024b).
15

Korkmaz
Base State
Shift
PT
Blur
DCT
B&C
Figure 2: State transformation generalization under adversarial perspective in the Arcade
Learning Environment (Korkmaz, 2023). Note that under the adversarial influ-
ence direction of research, the state transformation generalization is constrained
by the imperceptibility of the transformations. Columns: base frame, shifting,
perspective transformation, blurring, discrete cosine transform artifacts, bright-
ness and contrast. Up: JamesBond. Down: BankHeist.
It is important to observe that the methods that focuses on improving generalization, i.e.
robust training, described in this section rarely employ the different generalization testing
methods proposed by other work. Thus, focusing narrowly on one aspect of generalization
with one dimensional improvements in actuality decreases generalization on another aspect,
as has been shown in the case of adversarial training (Korkmaz, 2023). Therefore we again
emphasize the need to understand the significance of a concrete definition of generalization,
and a unified baseline to precisely measure it.
7. Meta-Reinforcement Learning and Meta Gradients
A quite recent line of research directs its research efforts to discovering reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms automatically, without explicitly designing them, via meta-gradients (Oh
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020). This line of study targets learning the ”learning algorithm”
by only interacting with a set of environments as a meta-learning problem. In particular,
η∗= arg max
η
Eε∼ρ(ε)Eθ0∼ρ(θ0)[EθN [
∞
X
t=0
γtrt]]
here the optimal update rule is parametrized by η, for a distribution on environments ρ(ε)
and initial policy parameters ρ(θ0) where EθN [P∞
t=0 γtrt] is the expected return for the end
of the lifetime of the agent. The objective of meta-reinforcement learning is to be able to
build agents that can learn how to learn over time, thus allowing these policies to adapt to
a changing environment or even any other changing conditions of the MDP.
Quite recently, a significant line of research has been conducted to achieve this objective,
particularly Oh et al. (2020) proposes to discover update rules for reinforcement learning.
This line of work also falls under the algorithmic generalization GA in Definition 3.3 defined
in Section 3. Following this work Xu et al. (2020) proposed a joint meta-learning frame-
work to learn what the policy should predict and how these predictions should be used in
16

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Figure 3: Meta training of the learned policy gradient that have been described in (Oh
et al., 2020). Right: The learned policy gradient algorithm that has been trained
in toy examples can generalize to more complex environment such as the Arcade
Learning Environment.
updating the policy. Recently, Kirsch et al. (2022) proposes to use symmetry information
in discovering reinforcement learning algorithms and discusses meta-generalization. There
is also some work on enabling reinforcement learning algorithms to discover temporal ab-
stractions (Veeriah et al., 2021). In particular, temporal abstraction refers to the ability of
the policy to abstract a sequence of actions to achieve certain sub-tasks. As it is promised
within this subfield, meta-reinforcement learning is considered to be a research direction
that could enable us to build deep reinforcement learning policies that can generalize to
different environments, to changing environments over time, or even to different tasks.
8. Transfer in Reinforcement Learning
Transfer in reinforcement learning is a subfield heavily discussed in certain applications of
reinforcement learning algorithms, e.g. robotics. In current robotics research there is not
a safe way of training a reinforcement learning agent by letting the robot explore in real
life. Hence, the way to overcome this is to train policies in a simulated environment, and
install the trained policies in the actual application setting. The fact that the simulation
environment and the installation environment are not identical is one of the main problems
for reinforcement learning application research. This is referred to as the sim-to-real gap.
Another subfield in reinforcement learning research focusing on obtaining generalizable
policies investigates this concept through transfer in reinforcement learning. The consider-
ation in this line of research is to build policies that are trained for a particular task with
limited data and to try to make these policies perform well on slightly different tasks. An
initial discussion on this starts with Taylor and Stone (2007) to obtain policies initially
trained in a source task and transferred to a target task in a more sample efficient way.
Later, Tirinzoni et al. (2018) proposes to transfer value functions that are based on learning
a prior distribution over optimal value functions from a source task. However, this study is
conducted in simple environments with low dimensional state spaces. Barreto et al. (2017)
considers the reward transformation setting GR in Definition 3.4 from Section 3. In partic-
ular, the authors consider a policy transfer between a specific task with a reward function
r(s, a) and a different task with reward function r′(s, a). The goal of the study is to decouple
17

Korkmaz
Figure 4: Transfer in reinforcement learning as has been described in (Gamrian and Gold-
berg, 2019) that falls under the generalization through observation category ex-
plained in Definition 3.5. The frames are taken from Breakout game in the Arcade
Learning Environment. The left frames represent the target task and the right
frames represents the source tasks generated via generative adversarial networks.
the state representations from the task. In the setting of state transformation for general-
ization GS in Definition 3.5 Gamrian and Goldberg (2019) focuses on state-wise differences
between source and target task. In particular, the authors use unaligned generative adver-
sarial networks to create target task states from source task states. In the setting of policy
transformation for generalization Gπ in Definition 3.7 Jain et al. (2020) focuses on zero-shot
generalization to a newly introduced action set to increase adaptability. While transfer
learning is a promising research direction for reinforcement learning, the studies in this
subfield still remain oriented only towards reinforcement learning applications, and thus
the main focus on applications centered on this subfield provides a non-unified progress
in research due to the lack of an established baseline in which the proposed claims and
algorithms can be consistently compared.
9. Lifelong Reinforcement Learning
Lifelong learning is a subfield closely related to transfer learning that has recently drawn
attention from the reinforcement learning community. Lifelong learning aims to build poli-
cies that can sequentially solve different tasks by being able to transfer knowledge between
tasks. On this line of research, Lecarpentier et al. (2021) provide an algorithm for value-
based transfer in the Lipschitz continuous task space with theoretical contributions for
lifelong learning goals. In the setting of action transformation for generalization Gπ in Def-
inition 3.7 Chandak et al. (2020) focuses on temporally varying (e.g. variations between
source task and target task) the action set in lifelong learning. In lifelong reinforcement
learning some studies focus on different exploration strategies. In particular, Garcia and
Thomas (2019) models the exploration strategy problem for lifelong learning as another
MDP, and the study uses a separate reinforcement learning agent to find an optimal ex-
ploration method for the initial lifelong learning agent. The lack of benchmarks limits the
progress of lifelong reinforcement learning research by restricting the direct comparison be-
tween proposed algorithms or methods. However, quite recent work proposed a new training
environment benchmark based on robotics applications for lifelong learning to overcome this
issue (Wolczyk et al., 2021)6.
6. The state dimension for this benchmark is 12. Hence, the state space is low dimensional.
18

A Survey Analyzing Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning
10. Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Inverse reinforcement learning focuses on learning a functioning policy in the absence of
a reward function. Since the real reward function is inaccessible in this setting and the
reward function needs to be learnt from observing an expert completing the given task,
the inverse reinforcement learning setting falls under the reward transformation for gener-
alization setting GR defined in Definition 3.4 in Section 3. The initial work that introduced
inverse reinforcement learning was proposed by Ng and Russell (2000) demonstrating that
multiple different reward functions can be constructed for an observed optimal policy. The
authors of this initial study achieve this objective via linear programming,
max
X
s∈Sρ
min
a∈A{p(Es′∼P(s,a1|·)Vπ(s′) −Es′∼P(s,a|·)Vπ(s′))}
s.t. |αi| ≤1 , i = 1, 2, . . . , d
where p(x) = x if x ≥0, p(x) = 2x otherwise and Vπ = α1Vπ
1 + α2Vπ
2 + · · · + αdVπ
d . In
this line of work, there has been recent progress that achieved learning functioning policies
in high-dimensional state observation MDPs (Garg et al., 2021). The study achieves this
by learning a soft Q-function from observing expert demonstrations, and the study further
argues that it is possible to recover rewards from the learnt soft state-action value function.
11. Conclusion
In this paper we tried to answer the following questions: (i) What are the explicit problems
limiting reinforcement learning algorithms from obtaining high-performing policies that can
generalize to complex environments? (ii) How can we unify and categorize the concept of
generalization in deep reinforcement learning considering many subfields under reinforce-
ment learning at their core focus on the same objective? (iii) What are the similarities
and differences of these different techniques proposed by different subfields of reinforcement
learning research to build reinforcement learning policies that can robustly generalize? To
answer these questions first we introduce a theoretical analysis and mathematical framework
to unify and categorize the concept of generalization in deep reinforcement learning. Then
we explain the connection and the significance of exploration in overfitting to a learning
environment, and explain the manifold causes of overestimation bias in reinforcement learn-
ing. Starting from all the different regularization techniques in either state representations
or in learnt value functions from worst-case to average-case, we provide a current layout of
the wide range of reinforcement learning subfields that are essentially working towards the
same objective, i.e. generalizable deep reinforcement learning policies. Finally, we provided
a discussion for each category on the drawbacks and advantages of these algorithms. We
believe our study can provide a compact unifying formalization on recent reinforcement
learning generalization research. We believe our theoretical framework can guide current
and future research to build deep reinforcement learning agents that can robustly generalize
to complex environments.
19

Korkmaz
