Multi-Vehicle Control in Roundabouts using
Decentralized Game-Theoretic Planning
Arec Jamgochian , Kunal Menda and Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University

Abstract
Safe navigation in dense, urban driving environ-
ments remains an open problem and an active
area of research.
Unlike typical predict-then-
plan approaches, game-theoretic planning consid-
ers how one vehicle’s plan will affect the ac-
tions of another.
Recent work has demonstrated
signiﬁcant improvements in the time required to
ﬁnd local Nash equilibria in general-sum games
with nonlinear objectives and constraints. When
applied trivially to driving, these works assume
all vehicles in a scene play a game together,
which can result in intractable computation times
for dense trafﬁc.
We formulate a decentralized
approach to game-theoretic planning by assum-
ing that agents only play games within their ob-
servational vicinity, which we believe to be a
more reasonable assumption for human driving.
Games are played in parallel for all strongly con-
nected components of an interaction graph, signif-
icantly reducing the number of players and con-
straints in each game, and therefore the time re-
quired for planning. We demonstrate that our ap-
proach can achieve collision-free, efﬁcient driv-
ing in urban environments by comparing perfor-
mance against an adaptation of the Intelligent
Driver Model and centralized game-theoretic plan-
ning when navigating roundabouts in the INTER-
ACTION dataset. Our implementation is available
at http://github.com/sisl/DecNashPlanning.
1
Introduction
A better understanding of human driver behavior could yield
better simulators to stress test autonomous driving policies.
A well-studied line of work attempts to build interpretable
longitudinal or lateral motion models parameterized by only
a few parameters. For example, the Intelligent Driver Model
(IDM) control law has ﬁve parameters that govern longitudi-
nal acceleration (Treiber et al., 2000; Kesting et al., 2010).
There are different ways to infer model parameters from
data (Liebner et al., 2012; Buyer et al., 2019; Bhattacharyya,
Senanayake, et al., 2020). However, one can typically only
use these models in well-deﬁned, simple scenarios (e.g. high-
way driving). Building models from data in complicated sce-
narios (e.g. roundabouts) remains an open area of research.
Figure 1: The DR USA Roundabout FT roundabout (Zhan et al.,
2019). Planning in a dense trafﬁc environment requires negotiating
with multiple agents, but not with all agents in a scene.
A general approach is to assume every driver acts to opti-
mize their own objective, as is the case in a Markov Game.
If no agent has any incentive for unilaterally switching its
policy, then the resulting joint policy is a Nash equilib-
rium (Kochenderfer et al., 2022). While typical policies may
be formed using predictions about other vehicles, Nash equi-
librium policies have the beneﬁt of considering how agents
may respond to the actions of others. Nash equilibrium (and
other game-theoretic) policies therefore can more closely
capture human driving, where drivers reason about how their
driving decisions will affect the plans of other drivers and ne-
gotiate accordingly.
Nash equilibrium strategies for ﬁnite-horizon linear-
quadratic games obey coupled Riccati differential equations,
and can be solved for in discrete time using dynamic pro-
gramming (Bas¸ar and Olsder, 1998; Engwerda, 2007). More
recent work has explored efﬁciently ﬁnding Nash equilibria
in games with non-linear dynamics by iteratively linearizing
them (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2020) or by searching for roots
of the gradients of augmented Lagrangians (Le Cleac’h et al.,
2020). Both kinds of approaches have been applied to urban
driving scenarios. However, they focus on scenarios where
the number of agents is low, and the methods are empirically
shown in the latter work to scale poorly as the number of
agents is increased.
In dense, urban driving environments, the number of agents
in a particular scene can be quite large. Navigating a round-
about, such as the one shown in Figure 1, can require success-
fully negotiating with many other drivers. Luckily, modeling
arXiv:2201.02718v1  [cs.RO]  8 Jan 2022

multi-agent driving in dense trafﬁc as one large, coordinated
game of negotiations is unrealistic. Drivers typically perform
negotiations with the only vehicles closest to them. Further-
more, they cannot negotiate with drivers who do not see them.
In this work, we formulate multi-vehicle decentralized,
game-theoretic control under the latter assumption that games
are only played when drivers see one another.
We use a
time-dependent interaction graph to encodes agents’ observa-
tions of other agents, and we delegate game-theoretic control
to strongly connected components (SCCs) within that graph.
Furthermore, we make the assumption any time a driver ob-
serves a vehicle that does not observe them in turn, that driver
must use forecasts of the other vehicle’s movements in their
plan. Thus, the game of an SCC of agents has additional col-
lision constraints imposed by outgoing edges from that SCC.
We demonstrate our method on a roundabout simulator de-
rived from the INTERACTION dataset (Zhan et al., 2019).
We observe that a decentralized model based on IDM is un-
tenable for safe control, and that our decentralized approach
to game-theoretic planning can generate safe, efﬁcient be-
havior. We observe that our approach provides signiﬁcant
speedup to centralized game-theoretic planning, though it is
still not fast enough for real-time control.
In summary, our contributions are to:
• Introduce a method for achieving (partially) decentral-
ized game-theoretic control, and
• Apply that method to demonstrate human-like driving in
roundabouts using real data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
outlines background material, Section 3 describes our ap-
proach and methodologies, Section 4 highlights experiments
and results, and Section 5 concludes.
2
Background
Research to model and predict human driver behavior was re-
cently surveyed by Brown et al. (2020). The ﬁeld of imitation
learning (IL) seeks to learn policies that mimic expert demon-
strations. One class of IL algorithms requires actively query-
ing an expert to obtain feedback on the policy while learn-
ing. Naturally, this method does not scale (Ross and Bagnell,
2010; Ross, Gordon, et al., 2011).
Other methods use ﬁxed expert data and alternate between
optimizing a reward function, and re-solving a Markov de-
cision process for the optimal policy, which can be expen-
sive (Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008). More re-
cent methods attempt to do these steps progressively while
using neural network policies and policy gradients (Finn et
al., 2016; Ho, Gupta, et al., 2016). Generative Adversarial
Imitation Learning (GAIL) treats IL as a two-player game
in which a generator is trying to generate human-like behav-
ior to fool a discriminator, which is, in turn, trying to dif-
ferentiate between artiﬁcial and expert data (Ho and Ermon,
2016). GAIL was expanded to perform multi-agent imitation
learning in simulated environments (Song et al., 2018). GAIL
has recently been tested with mixed levels of success on real-
world highway driving scenarios (Bhattacharyya, Phillips, et
al., 2018; Bhattacharyya, Wulfe, et al., 2020). GAIL has not
yet been implemented in more complex driving environments
(e.g. roundabouts), where success will likely require signiﬁ-
cant innovation.
The literature on multi-agent planning is rich and exten-
sive. A common assumption is cooperation, which can be
modeled with one single reward function that is shared by all
agents.
Multi-agent cooperative planning is surveyed recently
by Torreno et al., 2017. In real driving, agents do not coop-
erate, but rather optimize their individual reward functions.
One approach is to model real driving as a general-sum dy-
namic game. In non-cooperative games, different solution
concepts have been proposed. Nash equilibria are solutions in
which no player can reduce their cost by changing their strat-
egy alone (Kochenderfer et al., 2022). The problem of ﬁnd-
ing Nash equilibria for multi-player dynamic games in which
player strategies are coupled through joint state constraints
(e.g. for avoiding collisions) is referred to as a Generalized
Nash Equilibrium Problem (GNEP) (Facchinei and Kanzow,
2007).
Nash equilibrium strategies for ﬁnite-horizon linear-
quadratic games obey coupled Riccati differential equations,
and can be solved for in discrete time using dynamic pro-
gramming (Bas¸ar and Olsder, 1998; Engwerda, 2007).
A
recent approach, iLQGames, can solve more general dif-
ferential dynamic games by iteratively making and solving
linear-quadratic approximations until convergence to a lo-
cal, closed-loop Nash equilibrium strategy (Fridovich-Keil
et al., 2020).
An alternative method, ALGAMES, uses a
quasi-Newton root-ﬁnding algorithm to solve a general-sum
dynamic game for a local open-loop Nash equilibrium (Le
Cleac’h et al., 2020). Unlike iLQGames, ALGAMES allows
for hard constraints in the joint state and action space, but
it must be wrapped in model-predictive control to be used
practically. We note that neither method ﬁnds global Nash
equilibria, and the same game can result in different equilib-
ria depending on the initialization. The problem of inferring
which Nash equilibrium most closely matches observations
of other vehicles is considered by Peters et al., 2020. Since
the reward functions of other vehicles may be unknown, ad-
ditional work formulates an extension in which an Unscented
Kalman Filter is used to update beliefs over parameters in the
other vehicle’s reward functions (Le Cleac’h et al., 2021).
In this paper, we adopt the convention presented in AL-
GAMES. We denote the state and control of player i at time t
as xi
t and ui
t respectively. We denote the full trajectory of all
agents x1:N
1:T as X for shorthand. Xi indicates agent i’s full
trajectory, Xt indicates the joint state at time t. Similarly, we
use U to indicate the joint action plan u1:N
1:T , U i to indicate
agent i’s full plan, and Ut to indicates the joint action at time
t. The cost function of each player is denoted Ji(X, U i).
The objective of each player is to choose actions that mini-
mize the cost of their objective function subject to constraints
imposed by the joint dynamics f, and by external constraints
C (e.g. collision avoidance constraints, action bounds, etc.):
min
X,U i
Ji(X, U i)
s.t.
Xt+1 = f(t, Xt, Ut), t = 1, . . . , T −1,
C(X, U) ≤0
(1)
A joint plan U optimizes the GNEP and is, therefore, an open-
loop Nash equilibrium if each plan U i is optimal to its respec-
tive problem when the remaining agents plans U −i are ﬁxed.
That is to say, no agent can improve their objective by only
changing their own plan.

Figure 2:
Sample roundabout frame from the INTERACTION
dataset (Zhan et al., 2019). Observation edges are denoted with ar-
rows, and strongly connected components are drawn with circles.
Each strongly connected component must make a game-theoretic
plan while respecting forecasts of agents from edges leaving that
component.
3
Methodology
3.1
Decentralized Game-Theoretic Planning
We note that in dense trafﬁc, the assumption that all agents
play a game with all other agents is unrealistic. More realisti-
cally, agents only negotiate with a subset of the agents in the
scene at any one given point in time. If there are many agents
in the scene, then agents typically negotiate with the ones in
their immediate vicinity.
Furthermore, this game-theoretic negotiation exists only
when there is two-way communication between agents. If
two drivers can observe one another, they can negotiate, but
if a trailing vehicle is in a leading driver’s blind spot, then
the leading driver is agnostic to the trailing vehicle’s actions
while the trailing driver must plan around predictions about
the behavior of the leading vehicle.
We encode this information ﬂow using a directed graph
G = (V, E) where node i ∈V captures information about
agent i and an edge (i, j) ∈E captures whether agent i
can observe agent j. We deﬁne the agent i’s neighbor set
Ni = {j | (i, j) ∈E} as the set of all agents that agent i
actively observes.
At each point in time, we can generate the interaction graph
Gt based on the agents each agent actively observes. We as-
sume that a human driver can only reason about a small sub-
set of agents that are within its ﬁeld of view, so we add those
observed agents to the ego vehicle’s neighbor set. The cardi-
nality of each neighbor set |Ni| can therefore be much smaller
than the total number of agents in a scene. We then instanti-
ate one game for each of the strongly connected components
(SCCs) of Gt.
Within each SCC, agents must compute a Nash equilib-
rium. Agents within the SCC negotiate with one another, but
are constrained by the predictions of observed agents who do
not observe them (e.g. the outgoing edges of each strongly
connected component). If two agents observe one another,
and one of those two agents observed a third leading car, then
the agents must make a joint plan subject to predictions about
the third car. This can be done by instantiating a game with all
three cars and ﬁxing the actions of the third car to be those of
its forecasted plan. In our experiments, we forecast that ob-
served agents maintain their velocities, however, our method
is amenable to more complex forecasting methods. An exam-
ple interaction graph is shown in Figure 2.
To control the vehicles, this decentralized planning is
wrapped in model predictive control. Once each planner de-
termines the plan of all the agents in each sub-component,
the ﬁrst action of each plan is taken, a new interaction graph
is generated, and new game-theoretic planners are instanti-
ated. Decentralized game-theoretic planning is summarized
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Decentralized Game-Theoretic Planning
1: procedure DECNASH(X1)
2:
for t ←1 : T do
3:
gt ←InteractionGraph(Xt)
4:
SCCs ←StronglyConnectedComponents(gt)
5:
for SCC ∈SCCs do
6:
game ←Game(SCC, Xt)
7:
U[SCC.nodes] ←NashSolver(game)
8:
Xt+1 ←ExecuteAction(Xt, U)
We believe that this model of human driving more real-
istically captures real-life driving negotiations, where each
driver makes plans based only on a few observed neighboring
vehicles, and where game-theoretic negotiations only occur
between vehicles that actively observe one other. For exam-
ple, if a driver observes a vehicle they know is not observing
them, then that driver must plan using forecasts of the ob-
served vehicle’s motion, rather than play a game to commu-
nicate their intent. Furthermore, this decentralized approach
is much more scalable since the number of players, as well
as the O(n2) safety constraints within each game, stays rela-
tively small even when there are many vehicles in the driving
scenario. The dependence on the number of players was ob-
served empirically by Le Cleac’h et al. (2020), who saw a ten-
to twenty-fold increase in computation time for their method
when moving from two to four agents per game.
3.2
Roundabout Game
We formulate the local negotiations between agents in a
roundabout as separate GNEPs to be solved in parallel. Each
problem can be thought of to have N-players, Nc of which
are controlled, and No = N −Nc of which are observed. Nc
is the size of the SCC being considered, and No is the num-
ber of outgoing edges from that SCC. Since we only control
Nc agents in our decentralized plan, we only need to consider
the ﬁrst Nc ≤N optimization problems in the dynamic game
in Eq. (1).
In our roundabout game, we assume that vehicle trajec-
tories are determined beforehand (e.g. by a trajectory plan-
ner), and the goal of our planner is to prescribe accelerations
of vehicles along their respective trajectories. We do so by
parametrizing a vehicle’s trajectory using a polynomial map-
ping a distance travelled along the path to the x and y posi-
tions of the vehicle. A vehicle modulates acceleration along
this pre-determined path in order to safely and efﬁciently nav-
igate to its goal. We think it is valid to assume that trajecto-
ries can be computed a priori in roundabouts, but this may be
a less-valid assumption in highway trafﬁc, where agents can
plan their paths to react to other agents. Our decentralized

method can, however, be extended to other driving environ-
ments by reformulating the game setup.
With our assumptions, each vehicle’s state can be written:
xi
t =


pi
xt = p(si
t; θxi)
pi
yt = p(si
t; θyi)
si
t
vi
t

, where p(s; θ) =
|θ|−1
X
i=0
θisi.
(2)
Here, s and v encode the vehicle position and velocity along
its path and are the minimal state representation. To simplify
collision constraints, the ﬁrst two elements in the state ex-
pand the path position to x and y locations using coefﬁcients
θxi and θyi. Each vehicle directly controls its own accel-
eration, leading to the following continuous-time dynamics,
which are discretized at solve time:
˙xi
t =


˙p(si
t, vi
t; θxi)
˙p(si
t, vi
t; θyi)
vi
t
ui
t

, where ˙p(s, v; θ) = v
|θ|−1
X
i=1
θiisi−1.
(3)
To incentivize vehicles to reach their velocity targets
while penalizing unnecessary accelerations, we use a linear-
quadratic objective:
Ji(Xi, U i) =
T
X
t=1
qi∥vi
t −vi
target∥2
2 + ri∥ui
t∥2
2,
(4)
where qi and ri are vehicle-dependent objective weighting
parameters, and vi
target is the vehicle’s desired free-ﬂow speed.
Controls are constrained to be within the control limits
of each controlled vehicle, and to be equivalent to the pre-
dicted controls for the observed vehicles.
That is, for all
t ∈{1, ..., T}, we have
ui
min ≤ui
t ≤ui
min
∀i ∈{1, ..., Nc}
(5)
ui
t = ˆui
t
∀i ∈{Nc + 1, ..., N}
(6)
where ˆui
t is the predicted control of observed vehicle i at time
t.
Finally, we impose collision constraints between each pair
of (both observed and unobserved) vehicles at every point in
time. That is, for every pair of agents i and j at every time in
the horizon, we introduce constraints
(pi
xt −pj
xt)2 + (pi
yt −pj
yt)2 ≥r2
safe,
(7)
where rsafe is a safety radius.
4
Experiments
In our experiments, we empirically demonstrate our ap-
proach’s ability to generate human-like behavior in real-
world, complicated driving scenarios.
We use the IN-
TERACTION dataset (Zhan et al., 2019), which consists
of drone-collected motion data from scenes with compli-
cated driving interactions. We focus on control in a round-
about, a traditionally difﬁcult driving scenario that requires
negotiating with potentially many agents.
From the data,
we extract vehicle spawn times and approximate true paths
with twentieth-order polynomials.
In our simulator, we
ﬁx these values and allow for different methods to pro-
vide (one-dimensional) acceleration control for all agents
in the scene, thereby controlling agents along paths gener-
ated from real-world data.
Our code is made available at
github.com/sisl/DecNashPlanning.
We analyze behavior generated from a fully decentral-
ized policy in which vehicles follow an adaptation of
IDM (Treiber et al., 2000), a centralized game-theoretic pol-
icy, and our decentralized game-theoretic method. We discuss
observed behavior and compare collision rates, average speed
shortfalls, planning times, and agents in each game.
4.1
IDM Adaptation
Given speed v(t) and relative speed r(t) to a followed vehi-
cle, the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) for longitudinal ac-
celeration predicts acceleration as
ddes = dmin + τ · v(t) −
v(t) · r(t)
2
p
amax · bpref
(8)
a(t) = amax
"
1 −
 v(t)
vtarget
4
−
 ddes
d(t)
2#
,
(9)
where ddes is the desired distance to the lead vehicle, dmin is
the minimum distance to the lead vehicle that the driver will
tolerate, τ is the desired time headway, amax is the controlled
vehicle’s maximum acceleration, bpref is the preferred decel-
eration, and vtarget is the driver’s desired free-ﬂow speed.
Though IDM is intended for modeling longitudinal driv-
ing, we adapt it for use in roundabout driving by designating
the closest vehicle within a 20◦half-angle cone from the con-
trolled vehicle’s heading as the “follow” vehicle, and calcu-
lating the relevant parameters by casting the “follow” vehicle
to the controlled vehicle’s path.
4.2
Game-Theoretic Planning
We implement our decentralized game-theoretic planning ap-
proach as described in Section 3.1. To generate an interaction
graph, we say agent i observes agent j (e.g. (i, j) ∈E) if j is
within a 20 meter, 120◦half-angle cone from i’s heading. To
compute strongly connected components and their outgoing
edges, we use Kosaraju’s algorithm (Nuutila and Soisalon-
Soininen, 1994), which uses two depth-ﬁrst search traversals
to compute strongly connected components in linear time.
We implement the one-dimensional dynamic roundabout
game setup as described in Section 3.2. For predictions of the
outgoing edges of each strongly connected component, we
assume each observed uncontrolled vehicle will maintain its
velocity throughout the planning horizon (i.e. ˆui
t from Eq. (6)
is 0 for all t). We use Algames.jl (Le Cleac’h et al., 2020)
to solve for Nash equilibria by optimizing an augmented La-
grangian with the objective gradients. At each point in time,
we plan a four-second horizon, where decisions are made ev-
ery 0.2 seconds.
We also compare our method against a fully centralized
approach—that is, one where all agents in a frame play a sin-
gle game together.
4.3
Results
As a baseline, our IDM adaptation performs surprisingly well
even though IDM is designed to model single-lane driving.
We observe successful navigation within the ﬁrst few hun-
dred frames, with collisions happening rarely when two ve-
hicles do not observe one another while merging. As time

progresses, we observe severe slowdowns as more agents en-
ter the scene, and an eventual standstill. During standstill,
the number of collisions increases dramatically as new vehi-
cles enter the scene before space is cleared. One could imag-
ine designing sets of rules to circumvent problems from the
IDM-based approach, but rule design for such a complex en-
vironment can be very difﬁcult because of the edge cases that
must be considered. Regardless, this approach highlights the
lack of safety in simple systems.
On the contrary, decentralized game-theoretic planning
generates human-like driving without explicitly encoding
rules. We observe agents accelerating and decelerating natu-
rally with the ﬂow of locally observed trafﬁc. We also observe
instances of agents safely resolving complex trafﬁc conﬂicts
which would be difﬁcult to encode in rules-based planners.
Although our quantitative experiments focus on evaluating
performance at a single, more difﬁcult roundabout, we see
human-like, safe driving emerge across roundabout environ-
ments. That is, we observe collision-free generalization to
different roundabouts without doing any additional parame-
ter tuning. For videos of resulting behavior please refer to
supplementary material.
A sample decentralized open-loop, Nash equilibrium plan
can be seen in Figure 3. In it, one highlighted strongly con-
nected component consists of three vehicles that observe one
another, and observe one other vehicle that does not observe
them in turn. The optimal plan for this strongly connected
component has the three vehicles in the component safely in-
teracting to proceed towards their goals, while the other ob-
served but non-controlled vehicle maintains its velocity.
Figure 4 depicts the safe resolution of a trafﬁc conﬂict by
our method that would be otherwise hard to resolve. In it, the
vehicles resolve who has right-of-way and merge safely be-
hind one another without wholly disrupting the ﬂow of trafﬁc,
which happens often in the IDM adaptation baseline.
In Table 1, we compare the performance of the IDM adap-
tation, centralized game-theoretic planning, and decentral-
ized game-theoretic planning in some key metrics averaged
over ﬁve 100-second roundabout simulations where decisions
are made at 10 Hz. Namely, we compare the number of col-
lisions per 100 seconds, the average shortfall below target
speed, the number of players per game given our choice of
interaction graph, and the time to generate a joint policy. For
our decentralized approach, we deﬁne the number of play-
ers per game and the time to generate a joint policy using
the largest values across strongly connected components at
each time step, as the games can be parallelized. We note that
our solution times are slow because we are approximating the
paths as twentieth-order polynomials, and the times are meant
to highlight relative improvement when using a decentralized
approach.
We observe that though generating a joint policy is quick in
the IDM adaptation, it leads to unsafe behavior that is signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in the game-theoretic approaches. We observe
that the game-theoretic approaches are both a) much safer in
terms of collision rate and b) much more efﬁcient in terms
of vehicle speed. We see an average of 55.8, 4.8, and 0.2
collisions per 100 seconds when using the IDM, centralized
game-theoretic, and decentralized game-theoretic policies re-
spectively. Similarly, we see that the mean vehicle shortfall
velocity improves from 8.7 m/s with IDM, to 3.2 m/s with
the centralized game-theoretic policy, to 2.8 m/s with our
(a) Interaction Graph
Vehicle 1
Vehicle 2
Vehicle 3
Vehicle 4
(b) Planned Trajectory for SCC
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
6
8
10
12
Time (s)
Velocity (m/s)
vtarget
Vehicle 1
Vehicle 2
Vehicle 3
Vehicle 4
(c) Planned Velocity Proﬁle for SCC
Figure 3: A snapshot of an interaction graph, with a particular
strongly connected component highlighted (a).
There are three
agents in the SCC and a fourth one which is observed but not con-
trolled. The three vehicles inside the SCC safely negotiate with one
another en route their goals. The planned Nash equilibrium trajec-
tory is shown in (b) with points for every 0.2 seconds. The planned
velocity proﬁle is depicted in (c).

Figure 4: A set of snapshots of trafﬁc conﬂicts which gets resolved safely through decentralized game-theoretic planning. Snapshots are
shown at one second intervals (ten decision frames). The vehicles quickly resolve right-of-way and merge safely without the need for a
complex set of rules.
Table 1: A comparison of performance metrics with the IDM adap-
tation, centralized game-theoretic planning (C-Nash), and decentral-
ized game-theoretic planning (Dec-Nash) models, performed over
ﬁve scenes of 100 seconds of driving. We compare the mean number
of collisions per 100 seconds (collisions), the mean vehicle shortfall
below target speed (vtarget−vavg), the number of players in the largest
game at each time step (# players), and the time to generate a joint
policy.
Model
Collisions
vtarget −vavg
# Players
Time (s)
IDM
55.80±11.53
8.68±0.13
1
0.005±0.001
C-Nash
4.80±1.88
3.22±0.16
6.23±2.34
6.43±5.74
Dec-Nash
0.20±0.20
2.79±0.12
1.83±1.00
2.24±1.97
method.
We notice that using a centralized game-theoretic approach
leads to more driving hesitancy, which ultimately results in
slower average velocities when compared to our approach.
We observe collisions in the centralized approach being
caused by a) the solver being unable to ﬁnd adequate solu-
tions when the games are too large, and b) vehicles spawning
before their path has been cleared. With the decentralized
game-theoretic policy, we only observed one collision in the
500 total seconds of driving, which we believe to have also
been caused by the game in question being too large.
Furthermore, we observe that our decentralized approach
can generate plans much more quickly than a centralized one.
We also expect that in larger urban intersections and round-
abouts with much denser trafﬁc, the performance gaps would
become even more profound, and our method will be a neces-
sity to keep game-theoretic plan generation tractable.
5
Conclusion
Generating safe, human-like behavior in dense trafﬁc is chal-
lenging for rule-based planners because of the complex ne-
gotiations which drivers undergo to resolve conﬂicts. Game-
theoretic planning shows promise in allowing multiple agents
to safely navigate a dense environment because it enables
agents to reason about how their plans affect other agents’
plans.
Though ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium in a general-
sum Markov game can be quite expensive, recent work has
demonstrated signiﬁcant improvements in optimization ef-
ﬁciency for games with nonlinear dynamics and objectives
(Fridovich-Keil et al., 2020; Le Cleac’h et al., 2020). These
methods, however, are shown empirically to scale poorly with
the number of agents in the game.
In this project, we take a decentralized approach to game-
theoretic planning for urban navigation, in which we assume
that planning games are only played between vehicles that
are mutually interacting (e.g. who are visible to one another
within a strongly connected graph component). This assump-
tion signiﬁcantly reduces the number of agents in each game,
and therefore collision constraints, allowing reduced Nash
equilibrium optimization time. We demonstrate our approach
in roundabouts, where we control agent accelerations assum-
ing paths are known a priori (e.g. from a trajectory planner).
We observe the emergence of human-like driving behavior
which is safe and efﬁcient when compared to a baseline IDM
adaptation, and which is quick when compared to centralized
game-theoretic planning.
Our approach has the limitation that it assumes shared
knowledge of other agents’ objective functions within a
strongly connected component, and is therefore not fully de-
centralized. Future work involves relaxing this assumption.
Recent work tries to infer parameters of other players’ un-
known objective functions (Le Cleac’h et al., 2021), but this
presents challenges in the decentralized case when other play-
ers may only stay in a strongly connected component for a
short period of time. Future work also involves designing ob-
jectives to better imitate human behavior.
