Mining Healthcare Procurement Data Using Text Mining and Natural Language
Processing - Reflection From An Industrial Project
Ziqi Zhang1*, Tomas Jasaitis2, Richard Freeman2, Rowida Alfrjani1, Adam Funk1
1Information School, the University of Sheffield, Regent Court, Sheffield, UKS1 4DP

2 Vamstar Ltd., London

(* indicates correspondence author)
Abstract. While text mining and NLP research has been established for decades, there remain gaps in
the literature that reports the use of these techniques in building real-world applications. For example,
they typically look at single and sometimes simplified tasks, and do not discuss in-depth data
heterogeneity and inconsistency that is common in real-world problems or their implication on the
development of their methods. Also, few prior work has focused on the healthcare domain. In this
work, we describe an industry project that developed text mining and NLP solutions to mine millions
of heterogeneous, multilingual procurement documents in the healthcare sector. We extract structured
procurement contract data that is used to power a platform for dynamically assessing supplier risks.
Our work makes unique contributions in a number of ways. First, we deal with highly heterogeneous,
multilingual data and we document our approach to tackle these challenges. This is mainly based on a
method that effectively uses domain knowledge and generalises to multiple text mining and NLP tasks
and languages. Second, applying this method to mine millions of procurement documents, we develop
the first structured procurement contract database that will help facilitate the tendering process.
Second, Finally, we discuss lessons learned for practical text mining/NLP development, and make
recommendations for future research and practice.
Keywords: natural language processing, NLP, text mining, text classification, NER, table
information extraction, passage retrieval, industry, procurement
1. Introduction
Big data technologies have significantly impacted different industries in the last decade. The rapid increase
in the amount of data has created unprecedented opportunities for cost reduction, better products and
services, improved productivity and decision making. However, transforming data to knowledge that brings
real ‘business intelligence’ remains a non-trivial, challenging task. To achieve this, data mining has been
widely adopted in industries and this refers to a large range of techniques for finding patterns and
correlations within data, and using such insights to predict outcomes. While data mining is often applied to
structured data (e.g., database records, relational tables), it is widely acknowledged that up to 80% of ‘big
data’ is unstructured, with text (e.g., financial report, product catalogues) representing the majority (Bach et
al., 2019).
Extracting knowledge from unstructured textual data belongs to the field of text mining, which crosses
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) that aims to make machines understand human language.
These encompass a wide range of techniques such as text classification (Kowsari et al., 2019), named entity
recognition (Bose et al., 2021), relation extraction (Bassignana and Plank, 2022), and terminology extraction
(Dominika, 2021). And all these techniques may be used collectively to create structured knowledge bases
(Krzywicki et al., 2016). Indeed, text mining and NLP research can date back to as early as the 1960s
(Grishman and Sundheim, 1996) and has led to a vibrant community focusing on various tasks over the
years. However, studies have shown that progress made in academic literature is not always adopted in the
industrial, real-world-application context (Chiticariu et al., 2013; Krishna et al., 2016, Suganthan et al.,
2015). This is often due to factors such as the difference in the evaluation focus, the timeframe for
development, and the need for interpretability and after-maintenance.
For application to real-world problems, text mining finds a long history in analysing legal texts, such as
for similar case matching, event timeline extraction, question and answering (Zhong et al., 2020), and
judicial decision prediction (Francia et al., 2022). A significant body of work has also been done in mining
Web content related to service/product provisions (Kuma et al., 2021), such as analysing social media data

for customer relationship management, marketing intelligence, competitor analysis (Köseoğlu et al., 2021)
and more recently, combating misinformation (e.g., fake reviews). Further, text mining has also been used in
system requirements extraction and classification primarily for software engineering (Li et al., 2015; Khan et
al, 2020; Tiun et al., 2020), and quality and project report analysis in the construction industry (Lee et al.,
2014; Zhang et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2021). Recent studies by Rabuzin and Modrusan (2019) and Modrusan
et al. (2020) identified an emergent need but a lack of application of text mining to procurement document
analysis. Work in this area has only just taken off in recent years (Rabuzin and Modrusan, 2019; Modrusan et
al., 2020; Choi et al., 2021; Fantoni et al., 2021; Haddadi et al., 2021).
Focusing on the application of text mining in real-world problem solving, we identify several gaps in the
current literature. First, text mining for procurement is significantly under-represented but deserves increased
attention from the research community. Public procurement represents a significant part of a government’s
financial budget and is a very complicated process involving the analysis of multiple documents at both the
buyer and supplier’s end. Currently, a lack of standardisation of the documentation process within and across
national borders, and a lack of structured databases providing easy access to fine-grained supplier and buyer
information (e.g., supplier contractual history, service/product offerings, buyer contract criteria) render the
procurement process extremely time consuming and ineffective. Although some studies have looked at this
area, they examined very different tasks and some lack clarity on how the end system can support real
decision making (e.g., Grandia and Kruyen, 2020; Haddadi et al, 2021).
Second, we note that current studies address limited complexity in building real-world text mining
applications. We describe complexity from two levels: 1) high level of heterogeneity in data, which partially
leads to 2) the large range of text mining methods that need to be combined in a holistic solution. Early
studies such as Chalkidis et al. (2017) investigated well-curated data sources, while work in other industrial
contexts often deals with homogeneous document types ( Zhang et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2021). However, as
pointed out in Modrusan et al. (2020), procurement documents are highly heterogeneous in both file format
and content structure. The lack of standardisation implies a significant degree of data cleansing and in many
cases, adaptation of state-of-the-art methods that are typically developed with well-curated data. This is a
non-trivial process but is rarely documented in the existing literature. The complexity in the data also means
that the task cannot be achieved using a single method that is often the case in the literature. Instead, a
holistic approach combining multiple methods must be adopted.
Finally, a large number of studies relied on supervised methods (Chalkidis et al., 2017) that require
training data and studied a single language. Training data is expensive to acquire in a business context and is
often language-dependent. As a consequence, developing fully supervised methods in multilingual tasks may
be infeasible for businesses. However, in many cases, businesses often possess certain forms of ‘domain
knowledge’, such as domain specific vocabularies in Choi et al. (2021). The challenge is how to effectively
use such resources across multiple tasks for many languages in a generalisable way. We noticed a lack of
reporting on this particular problem.
This work fills these gaps through documenting an industry project (with Vamstar Ltd.) that developed
text mining methods and solutions to mine large scale, heterogeneous, multilingual procurement documents
in the healthcare sector (pharmaceuticals in particular), with an aim to construct a structured database of
supplier contract histories. The database incorporates fine-grained supplier information that allows
presenting a ‘supplier risk profile’ in terms of their capacity and credibility in fulfilling contractual terms. It
also enables gauging regional supply chain capacities by aggregating individual supplier data. To the best of
our knowledge, our work makes contributions to industrial text mining in several ways: 1) develops the first
structured database for healthcare procurement that can facilitate the tendering process; 2) being the first to
document the holistic backend text mining and NLP process involving multiple tasks working on
heterogeneous, multilingual datasets. This is based on a method that effectively uses domain knowledge and
can be easily generalised to multiple tasks and languages; 3) discusses lessons learned from adapting text
mining research to developing real world applications in industrial contexts.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We first (Section 2) introduce the domain and task
studied in this work, setting the wider background for literature review, which is covered in the following
section (Section 3). We then introduce our proposed solution (Section 4). Next in Section 5 we report
evaluation of the components and present the end product. We further discuss lessons learned (Section 6)
from this work and conclude with a reflection on the limitations and future work (Section 7).
2. Domain and Task

This work focuses on healthcare procurement, which has been rarely studied in the literature. The primary
goal of the project is to develop a platform that allows the dynamic creation of a ‘supplier risk profile’ for
each healthcare supplier. We envisage such a profile to consist of different ‘indices’ that evaluate different
perspectives (e.g, capacity for supplying certain products, geographical coverage) of ‘risks’ for potential
buyers to sign contracts with the supplier. This would enable questions such as ‘who are the suppliers able to
supply this kind of medication’, ‘to what extent are they capable of supplying for this country’, or ‘are they
able to supply such quantity’ to be easily answered. Such questions are often crucial for buyer decision
making. However, the current procurement process relies on manually sifting through multiple lengthy
documents to seek answers. This is a very resource consuming process. Understandably, an enabler of our
primary goal would be a structured database of healthcare suppliers’ historical contract data. Thus the
secondary goal of the project is to develop such a database and populate it with historical healthcare
procurement data. While public procurement data is vastly available, as we shall explain in the following,
there is a mixture of structured, semi-structured, and unstructured multilingual data that need to be mined and
linked. Therefore, a major part of the project’s work is developing text mining and NLP solutions that
automatically process large quantities of unstructured procurement data to mine information that can be used
to populate the database. The goal of this article is therefore, to report the development of these text mining
and NLP methods.
2.1. Data sources and complexity
The project targets procurement data from the ‘Tenders Electronic Daily’ (TED) platform, which is used by
the EU governments to publish their public procurement related projects. TED publishes over 460,000 calls
for tenders and contract awards in 26 official European languages per year, for about 420 billion euro of
value. Each tender may be divided into multiple ‘lots’, where a lot is the smallest contract unit. Each lot may
contain multiple items that are required. As an example, tender notice ‘2019/S 180-437985’1 lists 47 lots
from an NHS (UK) tender, with their sizes ranging from 2 to over 30 items. If a tender secures successful
bids, a ‘contract award’ (or multiple awards) will be made and recorded in TED for the tender. In the
following, for the sake of explainability, we assume there is one award for each tender (however in practice,
our methods are applied to all awards that are available for a tender). Note the lots offered in a tender and the
contract awards form a ‘many-to-many’ relationship. Namely, multiple lots can be awarded to a single entity
and documented in one contract award; a single lot can also be awarded to multiple entities, forming multiple
contract awards; further a single contract award can include one or multiple lots.
On TED, each tender and its corresponding contract award(s) has a structured XML file documenting key
elements of information. We refer to these as ‘tender XML’ and ‘award XML’. An example of a tender XML
is shown in Figure 1. Award XMLs generally follow the same structure. Tender XMLs document information
such as the buyer, the lots, items of lots, contract criteria, etc. Award XMLs document the buyer, the lots, the
awarded suppliers for each lot, contract value, quantity, etc. Each tender may also have a collection of
‘attachment documents’ that provide further details of the tender, especially on lots and items (‘tender
attachments’).
1 https://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:437985-2019:TEXT:EN:HTML, last accessed: Nov 2022

Figure 1. Excerpt of an example tender XML from TED (notice ID 2020/S 050-119757). Note section
II.2.1 lists a specific lot and its items, while II.2.5 lists the contract criteria.
Given the availability of tender and award XMLs, one may consider the task of developing and
populating the database to be easy. However, the data in reality is far more complicated. First and foremost,
the tender and award XMLs are often incomplete. The predominant missing information is lot and item
information. As an example, the tender XML for ‘2019/S 180-437985’, mentions 47 lots in the tender,
without detailing the specific items but a lot reference number. This critical information is available from a
bulk download of 7 tender attachments (PDFs). Both the tender and award XMLs then cross-reference these
data sources through the use of the lot references. Recovering such information is crucial to building the
supplier risk profile, which needs to account for the range and quantity of products that a supplier has
supplied in the past. Second, not every tender attachment is relevant for our aim. Among those for ‘2019/S
180-437985’, two PDFs list the actual lots and items (e.g., Figure 2), while others document specifications,
requirements, regulations and protocols etc. Third, not every page of a relevant attachment contains relevant
information. For example, Figure 3 shows that in another tender, lots and items are described in one page but
different sections of a long document. Fourth, as it is already shown in Figures 2 and 3, there is a significant
discrepancy in how lot and item information is described within the same country, or indeed, even the same
organisation. This discrepancy has been observed at different levels such as: the use of structured formatting
(e.g., free text v.s. tables/lists); the amount of information encoded (e.g., the table in Figure 2 lists 16
columns (attributes) for each item) even for the same kinds of products/services; and the semantics of
structure where structures are adopted (e.g., the order and names of columns). Such a high level of
complexity and inconsistency could be one major reason why there has been a lack of text mining and NLP
studies or applications for healthcare procurement.

Figure 2. A snapshot of one PDF attachment that is part of the tender ‘2019/S 180-437985’ (NHS, UK). The
picture only shows some of the columns of the table, due to limited page space. Each row describes an item,
while column 1 indicates lot references (as numbers).
Figure 3. An excerpt of one PDF attachment that is part of the tender ‘2020/S 111-270678’ (Department
of Health and Social Care, UK). The picture only shows part of a page of one PDF document that lists the
lots and items. Pricing information is shown on other pages.
2.2. Task definition
Relating to the project’s ultimate goal of enabling the dynamic creation of ‘supplier risk profiles’, we
envisage a database scheme that is partially (for reasons of both proprietary information and simplicity)
depicted in Figure 4 showing entities (rounded boxes), their attributes (dashed boxes) and relationships
(lines). Briefly, we hope to create a record for each contract award that has one buyer and one supplier, with
associated lots (one or multiple) and item information. We store certain attributes of the buyer, supplier,
contract award, lots and items, such that we can run queries to fetch ‘supplier centric’ award information like
the range of products (based on lot items) they have supplied, the monetary value and quantities for different
kinds of products, their buyers, and covered geographical regions (buyer country). Previously we mentioned

that one award XML may mention multiple contracts with multiple suppliers. In practice, we ‘flatten’ data
extracted from the award XML into multiple contract award records.
Figure 4. Partial database schema showing information of suppliers, buyers, contract awards, lot and item
information to be extracted and stored. Round boxes indicate entities, dashed boxes list attributes in bullet
points (only showing those important for understanding the rest of this article). The ‘1s’ indicate there is one
supplier and buyer in one award record; the ‘*s’ indicate there can be multiple lots in an award record and
multiple items in a lot.
As already mentioned, much of the information captured by this schema is already in (semi-)structured
format available from the tender and/or award XMLs. These can be easily extracted through XML parsing,
although some light-weight data cleansing and linking may be needed (e.g., extracting the country from a
buyer/supplier address, or matching buyer names from the tender and award XMLs). These tasks are
relatively straightforward and will not be the focus of this article. Instead, the real challenge is extracting and
populating the lot and item information (indicated in red dotted box) that is often missing in both the tender
and award XMLs. Therefore, our tasks can be defined as it is shown in Figure 5 - given a tender XML, its
associated award XML, and the associated tender attachments, we aim to:
1.
Extract the structured lot and item information often missing in tender and award XMLs (filling the
schema highlighted in the red dotted box in Figure 4; also the middle lane in Figure 5):
a.
From the tender attachments, identify the relevant documents, and the relevant content areas
(i.e., tables, lists, paragraphs) that contain information about the lots (lot zoning);
b.
From the identified content areas, detect content elements (e.g., sentences) associated with
lot items (lot item detection);
c.
From the detected lot items, parse the lot and item descriptions into a structured
representation, identifying attributes such as the lot reference, name of the items,
measurement units, etc (lot parsing). As an example, Figure 6 shows how we want to extract
structured lot and item information from the example in Figure 3.
2.
Extract the structured supplier, buyer, and contract award data from the tender and award XMLs
(filling other parts of the schema shown in Figure 4; also the upper and bottom lanes in Figure 5).
3.
Join the information extracted from 1 and 2 above to form supplier-centric contract records and
populate the database.
4.
Develop supplier risk indices using the populated database and a platform for exploring these
indices.
For the scope of this article, we will focus on 1), briefly cover 2) and 3) as they are more straightforward and
completed outside the scope of this project, and skip 4).

Figure 5. The overall workflow of the award record database construction process.
Figure 6. An example showing how structured lot information should be extracted.
3. Related Work
Due to the multi-task and heterogeneous dataset nature of our work, we can identify many areas of research
that are relevant. Our literature review will focus on the following scope. First, we give an overview of the
research of different text mining and NLP tasks relevant to our work. We avoid presenting details of
individual studies due to the too wide scope and the massive amount of literature. Our intention instead is to
draw literature that helped inform developing our solution and reflect on why mainstream research findings
cannot be easily adopted in industrial projects. Second, we examine the areas where text mining and NLP are

used to develop real world applications, such as the legal and construction domains mentioned above. Again
we will focus on a ‘big picture’ with an aim to articulate the difference from the procurement domain.
Finally, we give a detailed discussion of work done in procurement text mining, the core area that our work
belongs to. Here we will cover details of each study and compare it against this work.
3.1. Text mining and NLP research overview
Text mining and NLP are two different, but overlapping research fields each encompassing a wide range of
tasks. The first focuses on discovering or extracting information from unstructured texts, NLP on the other
hand, focuses on enabling machines to understand human natural language. For example, named entity
recognition (NER) and relation extraction (Han et al, 2020; Nasar et al., 2022) serve both purposes and
therefore, can be viewed as both text mining and NLP methods. However, speech recognition is a subfield of
NLP but not related to text mining. Both text mining and NLP are long-established research fields that
witnessed decades of development and the creation of sub-communities looking at specific tasks. Due to the
space limit of this article, we only discuss a number of tasks that are relevant to this work, including: text
classification, NER, text passage retrieval, and table information extraction.
Text classification (Kowsari et al., 2019) is one of the earliest text mining and NLP problems and it has
been widely studied and addressed in many real applications. In simple terms, the goal is to assign
predefined categories to text passages. In their survey on text classification, Kowssari et al. (2019) identified
four levels of text passages: full document, paragraph, sentence, or sub-sentence where segments of a
sentence are examined. While the definitions of labels and text passages depend on domains, it is widely
acknowledged that two key sub-processes are feature extraction and classifier training. Feature extraction
converts texts into numerical vector representations for machine learning, and over the years has evolved
from extracting lexical/syntactic patterns (e.g., bag of words, n-grams, words, part of speech) to word
embeddings that are learned through modelling word contexts based on very large corpora (Birunda and
Devi, 2021). When feature extraction results in high dimensional, sparse vectors, dimension reduction
techniques (e.g., Principal Component Analysis, Latent Dirichlet Analysis) are used to transform a high
dimensional vector into a low dimensional one optimised for machine learning. Following this, the classifier
training stage attempts to learn patterns that can differentiate texts with different labels from their feature
representations. This requires a dataset with ground truth labels to be provided (i.e., training data).
NER (Nasar et al., 2022) deals with the extraction and classification of mentions of named entities from
texts. In ‘He was named on the bench by Mexico in midweek but Wolves received an apology for that as Raul
Jimenez was never going to play’, texts in italics are NEs that are classified as country, organisation (football
club) and person (footballer) respectively. NEs represent important information in a text and are often
anchors for locating more complex information such as relationships and events. By definition, NER
comprises two sub-processes that are often dealt with by supervised classification. The first is to identify
‘boundaries’ of an NER which can be a sequence of tokens. The second is classifying that sequence into
predefined categories. Therefore, arguably, NER can be seen as low granularity text classification at token
level and hence follows the same ‘feature representation’ and ‘classifier training’ steps. Features are often
described at token-level, and can include for example, lexical/syntactic patterns of the token, and those of its
preceding and following tokens, or word embeddings.
Both text classification and NER are relevant to our work as the first may help filter irrelevant documents
or content areas through binary text classification, while the second allows targeting specific units of
information (e.g., contract items, volume) that need to be extracted. However, we face unique challenges of
no training data, and highly inconsistent content structure. Research in both fields are long-established, and
predominantly report studies conducted with well-curated datasets in consistent format and structures. For
example, multiple initiatives (Sang and Meulder, 2003; Piskorski et al., 2021) have been set up to foster NER
research. But the training data are well-curated, free form sentences, even with raw input tokens and their
features extracted and aligned. These hardly represent real-world problems. As discussed before, data we are
dealing with are highly inconsistent in terms of their content formatting and structure, and we have no
training data but general purpose domain lexicons. It is impractical to directly apply state-of-the-art methods
in our scenario.
Passage Retrieval (PR) is often used as a subprocess in Information Retrieval and Question Answering
(Zhu et al., 2021). The goal is to find matching textual fragments (or passages) for a given query, albeit at a
lower granularity than document. PR deals with splitting a long document into passages, and scoring and
ranking them against a query or question. In Othman and Faize (2016), common methods for each task are
well-summarised. Briefly, passage splitting may be based on textual discourse units such as subsections and
paragraphs, arbitrary windows that select a fixed or variable number of words/sentences, or ‘semantic

similarity’ where units such as NEs are extracted from documents first and matched against the query, and
then used as anchors to locate text passages. Ranking passages may be based on statistics such as the classic
TF-IDF model used for document retrieval (Llopis et al., 2015), or machine learning that takes into account
different features extracted from each passage.
PR is related to our work as part of our task is to identify text passages that contain relevant information
for further analysis. However, our work is different in two ways. First, we do not have specific queries or
questions to match against, but a rather vague notion of ‘relevance’. Second, we need to identify multiple
passages, while in typical PR for IR or QA, a single best match is needed.
Table Information Extraction (TIE) aims at extracting data points from tabular content and recovering
the semantic relationships between data points. This includes a very wide range of tasks that can be generally
divided into those detecting and parsing table structures to understand the geometric relationships between
table elements, and those conducting semantic analysis of its content to interpret the relationships embedded
in the textual content. A recent survey (Zhang and Balog, 2020) covers some of these tasks, while here we
only explain the tasks relevant to our work briefly. Table Structure Parsing (Paliwal et al., 2019) usually
starts with images (including PDFs where content is not machine accessible) that contain tabular data, to
detect tables, locate their cells, and analyse the row-column relationship (including complex column/row
spans). Table Interpretation deals with identifying entities from table text, and their semantic relations
encoded by the table structure.
Both tasks are relevant to our work. As mentioned above, a significant portion of the relevant content in
our procurement data is encoded in tables, which are predominantly found in PDF documents. But the
structure of tables varies depending on countries and contracts. Therefore, TSP is essential for detecting such
content, parsing the complex tabular geometric relationships, and converting the data into a structured,
machine accessible format. However, tables can include irrelevant data, or they can encode certain types of
content and relationships in different ways (e.g., different pairing of columns). Hence TI is needed to
interpret the semantic meanings of table columns and rows, to allow extracting the only relevant information
into structured formats. As we shall explain later, while we are able to use state-of-the-art TSP tools to detect
and extract tables, we have to opt for a different approach to TI. This is because typically, TI depends on an
external knowledge base that provides essential information for interpreting the content and their semantics
in a table. In our case, such a KB does not exist.
3.2. Text mining and NLP in industry use
Text mining and NLP already have wide use in a number of industry contexts. Here, due to limited space, we
only look at a few domains briefly and focus only on work for real applications instead of general purpose
tasks such as building domain corpora or language models, or fundamental NLP research adapted to domain
specific data.
In the legal domain, Zhong et al. (2020) summarised three main application areas: judicial decision
prediction, similar case matching and question answering. Judicial decision prediction studies the problem of
determining the verdict of a court on the basis of textual information about a court case before the verdict
was made. This is typically treated as a text classification task, where court decisions are categorised and
they are predicted based on features extracted from the case texts. For details, we refer readers to a survey by
Francia et al. (2022). Similar case matching is an important application where judicial decisions are made
according to similar and representative cases in the past. The goal is to find pairs of similar cases. This is
often cast as a retrieval task, and is being extensively studied in Legal IR (Xiao et al., 2019). Similar to
judicial decision prediction, existing methods mainly focus on comparing case texts at word or semantic
level. In both areas, recent studies have argued for extracting more fine-grained ‘case element’ information
(e.g., through using NER) that may better represent legal cases. For example, Hu et al. (2018) extracted
‘legal attributes’ that define the nature of cases in judicial decision prediction. Question answering is a rather
complicated NLP task that builds on many low-level tasks, such as finding relevant text passages (PR and
text classification), locating case elements (NER and relation extraction), and text similarity matching. QA is
not related to our work. For both reasons, we do not go into detail about legal QA. But generally, questions
typically concern explanation of legal concepts or case analysis.
Legal documents are often lengthy, but well-structured into different parts and follow standard structures
that make them easier to process. Over the years, the research community in this domain has defined
granular tasks, standards, and created rich resources including training data. In contrast, our work deals with
much more heterogeneous data and inconsistent structures, where creating training data for some tasks is
expensive. Most established methods in this domain are therefore not directly transferable to our task.

With the growth of e-commerce and social media, mining Web content related to service/product
provisions has been extensively studied and applied to develop competitive advantage for businesses. A
major area of application is analysing reviews from e-commerce or social media platforms to acquire
business intelligence that inform various practices. For example, through analysing customer reviews about
their own services or products, one can gain insights on customer satisfaction, to inform public relation
management (Nave et al., 2018) and product development (Yang et al., 2019). Analysing such data about a
sector in general including multiple competitors allows discovery of market trends and even forecast of
demands (Chatterjee, 2019; Sharma et al,. 2020). Further, with the increase of platforms of user-generated
content, the diffusion of fake information is made easier and becoming an increasing concern. Therefore,
work has been done to automatically detect and filter such misinformation (Fang et al., 2020). A thorough
review of work in the above areas can be found in Kuma et al. (2021).
Work in these areas heavily rely on sentiment analysis, which is a type of text classification task aiming to
analyse the sentiment of a text. It is also very useful to extract key elements related to service/product
provision (e.g., product features, service processes) for more fine-grained analysis, and this can benefit from
NER methods. Many studies also use topic modelling and social network analysis, which are beyond the
scope of this work. Compared to the domain in our work, data studied in these areas are rather homogeneous
- they are typically free-form review texts that are independent and self-contained, making it easy to adapt
state-of-the-art methods. Partially for this reason, there is an abundance of tools developed in this area.
However, as explained before, the data we have to deal with is much more complex.
Text mining and NLP are also widely used in system requirements analysis and quality control in
construction. To name a few, Li et al. (2015) processed software user manuals (PDFs) to extract functional
and non-functional requirements. A dictionary of keywords combined with rules are used to extract
sentences and topic modelling is applied to group similar sentences into groups, which may represent the
same/similar requirements. The work also needed to deal with filtering irrelevant text passages in the
extracted texts from PDFs, but this was done manually. Our work is similar in that some of our methods
make use of keywords and rules, and also process PDFs. However, we need to deal with a much larger and
more heterogeneous collection and the filtering of content must be done automatically. Tiun et al. (2020)
developed supervised classifiers of functional and nonfunctional system requirements using well-curated
training sentences obtained from Siemens Logistics and Automotive Organization. Khan et al. (2020)
analysed Reddit posts about Google Maps, and trained a text classifier to discover posts related to the
software feature requirements or issues using a set of manually annotated posts. Both deal with higher
quality of data and have access to a large amount of high quality training data, while our project only
managed to create limited training data for some but not all tasks due to resource constraints.
Lee et al. (2014) applied keywords extraction and co-occurrence analysis in marine structure quality
inspection reports. The co-occurrence map is used to aid humans in identifying which quality aspects are
most frequently mentioned and in what ways. Similar methods are used in Tian et al. (2021), who processed
construction project reports to extract keywords and concepts related to several key aspects of project
management (e.g., quality control, safety management). Zhang et al. (2019) developed a text classifier to
classify accident reports from construction projects, and implemented a rule-based extractor to identify
causes from accidents. The data used in these studies are also rather simple compared to ours. For example,
report cases used by Zhang et al. (2019) are composed of short paragraphs and use a consistent structure.
3.3. Text mining and NLP for procurement
Compared to other domains, there is a lack of work on text mining/NLP for procurement.We discuss a few in
this section. Grandia and Kruyen (2020) conducted an exploratory study of over 140,000 procurement
notices from the Belgium E-procurement platform between 2011 and 2016, to analyse the trend towards
‘sustainable public procurement’ (SPP). The work does not extract any information from procurement
documents. Instead, a light-weight keyword matching process is conducted to search for and count keywords
related to the SPP concepts found in the procurement documents. To compile the keywords, they manually
studied a large collection of legislations, policies and white papers. The keywords are then manually grouped
into different themes (e.g., circular economy, social return), and matched to the text content inside
procurement documents for counting. Authors also mentioned the heterogeneous nature of procurement
documents - although each record has a compulsory XML document, very little useful information is
encoded in it but inside a vast collection of PDF, Excel, or Word documents that need to be parsed to a
machine readable format. Haddadi et al. (2021) later applied a similar process to the ICT sector in Morocco
to measure, also to gauge the trend of addressing ‘sustainability’ in public procurement. Both studies do not
extract structured information from procurement documents but opted for simple keyword matching. This

does not require complex preprocessing or interpretation of document structures in order to target the right
content areas. Our task in comparison, is much more challenging.
Chalkidis et al. (2017) is one of the earlier studies that looked at extracting structured information from
contract data. They developed an NER process that identifies different elements (title, parties, start and
termination dates, contract period and value) in a contract document that is already converted to free-form
texts. Using a well-curated dataset of just over 2,400 contracts (sources unclear), the model is trained using
features such as word casing, token type (number, letter), length, and part of speech etc. Authors also used
post-processing rules to fix boundary detection errors (e.g., ‘2013’ missing from the date ‘23 Oct 2013’). Our
work also uses a mixture of supervised and rule-based methods. But the fundamental differences are that we
have to deal with multiple tasks beyond just NER, we do not have well-curated training data for all tasks, and
our datasets are much more complex.
Choi et al. (2021) analysed engineering and construction contracts with a goal to extract risk phrases and
entities using rule-based phrase matching. Authors acknowledged the content accessibility issue with
procurement documents, which are typically PDF documents. They used an OCR process that recognises
sentence boundaries, and opted for a sentence classification solution. Each ‘risk factor’ is associated with a
domain lexicon, which is used to match and label sentences. Our work is similar in the way that we also
make use of domain lexicons. However, we use both rule-based and self-supervised methods, and we
generalise the method to a number of NLP tasks and different languages.
Fantoni et al. (2021) working on the railway domain, acknowledged the heterogeneity and complexity of
procurement documents - some large engineering systems may list over 100,000 requirements, documented
in inconsistent ways and multiple documents that use non-standard structures and layouts. Their goal is to 1)
identify from multiple, long procurement documents the sentences describing system requirements; and 2)
classify these requirements into different railway subsystems/components. Authors mainly used unsupervised
methods. Starting with building a domain ‘knowledge base’, they used keyword/phrase extraction methods to
build a lexicon specific to the domain. Then rules are developed to match low granular information
equivalent to named entities, such as measurement units, standard references etc. This extracted information
is later used to match sentences in the document, and a score is computed based on the number of matched
units and the subsystems/components they relate to for ranking purposes. Again our work also uses domain
lexicons but we apply them to both rule-based and supervised methods for multiple tasks.
Rabuzin and Modrusan (2019) highlighted a lack of studies of text mining and NLP in procurement
analysis. With a goal to extract technical conditions and criteria in procurement contracts, they downloaded
documents from the Croatian procurement portal and converted them into machine readable texts. Authors
acknowledged the complexity and inconsistencies in document structures, hence the challenge in identifying
the relevant content areas for further analysis. They opted for a simple ‘sliding window’ solution: a
1000-word window around occurrences of ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. The task is then transformed into a
text classification one, for which authors trained three algorithms for comparison. However, it is unclear how
the training data is created. The authors later updated their work (Modrusan et al., 2020) in terms of how the
sliding windows are defined. Compared to our work, these studies belong to the task of ‘passage retrieval’,
while we deal with not only PR, but also multiple, more fine-grained extraction tasks.
3.4. Conclusion from literature review
Our literature review shows that, despite significant research in the areas of text mining and NLP, there is a
strong dominance by supervised methods built on well-curated data that do not transfer well to practical
scenarios. This is partially reflected by the number of industrial text mining/NLP studies that incorporated
rule-based methods and the use of domain lexicons, except a few areas (e.g., the legal domain) where high
quality curated resources are abundant. The majority of industrial studies also look at single and sometimes
simplified tasks, but do not report a full process in an end-to-end fashion, particularly with a lack of details
on how data heterogeneity and inconsistency is dealt with by their methods. Further, no prior work has
focused on the healthcare domain. Our work will address these gaps.
4. Proposed Methodology
Figure 5 presents an overview of our workflow. As mentioned before, this article focuses on extracting the
structured lot and item information often missing in tender and award XMLs (the middle lane). This will be
covered in Sections 4.1 to 4.5. In Section 4.6, we briefly cover the other parts of the workflow.
Given a collection of tender attachment documents associated with one tender notice, our first step
(content extraction) is to use various data extraction libraries to convert various content formats into a single,

universal data structure called ‘Vamstar Universal Documents (VUD)’ that represent text content in JSON
format. In ‘lot zoning’, we use passage retrieval/selection techniques to identify the content areas (pages and
tables) that potentially contain useful lot information. Next, ‘lot item detection’ uses text classification
techniques to process the extracted text passages to identify content (sentences and table rows) that describe
a lot and its items. Following this, we apply rule-based NER to parse the texts related to a lot and its
individual items to identify specific attributes and create a structured representation of the lot (lot parsing).
For most of these processes, we use domain knowledge in a generalisable way for multiple languages.
Meanwhile, other structured information is extracted from tender and award XMLs by simple XML
parsing. These extracted information is then joined to form supplier-centric contract award records, which
are used to populate our database. The database is then used to calculate supplier risk indices, which form a
supplier risk profile. In the following sections, we explain each component. However, details of certain
components may need to be redacted due to NDAs on proprietary content.
4.1. Domain knowledge
With the semi-structured data available from TED tender XMLs and award XMLs, Vamstar developed XML
parsers that extract different fields and store their unique values in a temporary data store (to be called the
‘tender and award fields’ or just ‘fields’ in short). As an example, given the XML in Figure 1, a record would
be created with fields such as: buyer name and addresses, lots (e.g., ‘Verapamil solution for inj. Lot No: 62’
but with multiple values as the notice contains more than 90 lots), award criteria, etc. This allows generation
of useful domain knowledge in different ways.
First, training data for different fields can be created by simply taking the unique values from each field.
These values usually take the form of short phrases or sentences, and therefore, can be used to train text
classifiers at phase/sentence level. Note that this data is multilingual.
Second, domain lexicons for different fields can be built by extracting ‘representative’ words from each
field. Given a field that we are interested in, we merge all values from different languages, and use machine
translation tools to translate them into English. Instead of drawing a boundary between what is and is not a
‘representative’ word for that field, here we explain a process to calculate the ‘specificities’ of words and we
refer to this as ‘domain specificity lexicon’, which is used in other components of our method. Given a word
, the basic idea is to measure how unique
is to lot/item descriptions compared to other text content in a
𝑤
𝑤
tender. The basic process is as follows:
1.
Identify the set of ‘fields’ that are most relevant to a tender. For this we selected 5 fields - this is
rather a subjective interpretation by the domain experts: ‘Name and addresses’ of buyers (Section
I.1.1 of the notice in Figure 1), ‘notice title’ (II.1.1), ‘short description’ (II.1.4), ‘lot and item
descriptions’ (a concatenation of values from fields like II.2.1), ‘contract criteria’ (a concatenation of
values from fields like II.2.5). Following the process mentioned above, all values are then translated
into English;
2.
For each field, create a bag-of-words (‘BOW’) representation by concatenating the values of that
field across all records in the database, applying stop words removal and lowercasing;
3.
For
, calculate 4 metrics as follows:
normalised frequency of
in the BOW representation
𝑤
𝑛𝑡𝑓(𝑤) 
𝑤
of the ‘lot and item descriptions’ field, calculated as the ratio between the frequency of
in the
𝑤
BOW over the total words in the BOW;
the normalised ‘document frequency’ of
,
𝑛𝑑𝑓(𝑤)
𝑤
calculated as the ratio between the number of fields in which
is found over the number of all fields
𝑤
(i.e., 5);
, inspired by the tf-idf measure used in document retrieval, this is the product
𝑛𝑡𝑓ᐧ𝑛𝑑𝑓(𝑤)
−
of
and the inverse of
;
, a score calculated by comparing
𝑛𝑡𝑓(𝑤) 
𝑛𝑡𝑓(𝑤) 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑟𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝑤)
𝑛𝑡𝑓(𝑤)
against that calculated in a reference, general purpose corpus (in this case, the Brown corpus).
Thus our domain specificity lexicon contains unique words found within the ‘lot and item descriptions’
field, and each word has four associated scores. In addition to this, we also use another two dictionaries
compiled by Vamstar. One is a list of words often used as measurement units (e.g., mg, ml), and the other is a
list of words often used to describe the ‘form’ of required items (e.g., pack, box, bottle). Both are very short
and contain only a few dozens of entries. These lexicons and dictionaries are also translated to other
languages using Google Translate.
4.2. Content extraction
In this component, our goal is to convert heterogeneous data file formats (Word, Excel, PDF, etc) into a
universal, machine accessible JSON format, which we refer to as VUD. For each file, depending on its

format, we use the corresponding APIs (e.g., Apache Tika for Word and Excel files, Apache Tesseract and
PDFPlumber for PDF). However, not all APIs or data files support the extraction of formatting features (e.g.,
font size, colour, header level), especially if a document is not structurally tagged. Therefore, we focus on
extracting only the text contents and a limited range of structure information. Our VUD documents contains
the following structured content:
●
Pages, corresponding to the pages in the source document;
●
Paragraphs, identified as a consecutive block of texts separated by at least two new line characters.
E.g., in Figure 1, ‘North Macedonia-Strumica: Pharmaceutical products’ and ‘2020/S 050-119757’ in
the title will be treated as separate paragraphs, while ‘Legal Basis: Directive 2014/24/EU’ is a single
paragraph;
●
Tables, extracted using the Camelot and Tabula libraries, contain basic tabular structures including
column and row indices (including column and row span information), and the textual content within
each cell. Tables across multiple pages are recognised as separate tables initially, but are then merged
if they meet the following simple rules: 1) there are no other non-tabular structures between two
tables; 2) they have the same number of columns.
4.3. Lot zoning
The text content extracted above may or may not contain relevant information for lots. Therefore, this
component deals with the filtering of the text content to identify the relevant content areas for further
processing (i.e,. ‘zoning’ to the right content). We focus on two tasks: 1) selecting the relevant pages; 2)
selecting the relevant tables. We define ‘relevance’ as containing a description of a lot (lot reference) and/or
its items (lot items). And for both, we cast them as a text classification task. For example, in Figure 2, a valid
‘lot reference’ is ‘Lot Number 1’, and it contains two items (row 2 and 3); in Figure 6, the first bullet point in
Section 2.1 has a lot reference ‘Lot 1’, with the following text being its only item.
4.3.1. Page selection
Given a page
, we define
as a sentence from
, and
as a function that can be applied to
or
𝑝
𝑠∈𝑝
𝑝
𝐵𝑂𝑊
𝑠
𝑝
to convert it into a simple BOW representation applying stopwords removal and lowercasing (lightweight
NLP that is language dependent). We create several language-independent features for learning a relevant
page classifier such that it can be used for content in any language.
For each word
in the domain specificity lexicon
, we search the word in
and count its
𝑤
𝑤∈𝐿
𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑝)
frequency as
. Then for each of the four metrics introduced above, we create four features (so a
𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤,  𝑝)
total of 16 features): the sum, average, minimum and maximum of the scores, as follows, where ‘metric’
generalises the four metrics explained before (ntf, ndf, ntf-ndf, weirdness). Further, for each of the two
domain dictionaries (form and measure), we create four features (so a total of 8 features) using the same
equations below, by replacing
with a dictionary
, and setting
always. Together this gives
𝐿
𝐷
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐(𝑤) = 1
us a total of 24 ‘page-level’ features.
[1]
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝑝) =
𝑤∈𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑝)∩𝐿
∑
𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤, 𝑝) × 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐(𝑤)
[2]
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑣𝑔(𝑝) =
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝑝)
𝑤∈𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑝)∩𝐿
∑
𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤,𝑝)
{
}[3]
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑝) = 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑤∈𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑝)∩𝐿𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤, 𝑝) × 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐(𝑤)
{
}
[4]
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑝) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑤∈𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑝)∩𝐿𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑤, 𝑝) × 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐(𝑤)
While the above features are based on word frequencies within a page without considering sentence/
paragraph boundaries, we also calculate 24 sentence level features. Using equation 1 as an example, if we
replace
with , we calculate the same metric for a sentence
. Then we define another feature
𝑝
𝑠
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝑠)
as the sum of
for all sentences in
. Similarly, we calculate
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝑠,  𝑝)
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝑠)
𝑝
,
and
. These measure the density of the domain
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑣𝑔(𝑠,  𝑝) 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑠,  𝑝)
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑠,  𝑝)
specificity lexicon used at individual sentence level. Replacing
with the four options, we obtain 16
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐
sentence level features. In the same vein, replacing
with the two dictionaries
and setting
𝐿
𝐷
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐(𝑤) = 1
gives us another 8 sentence level features.

Finally, we calculate the percentage of sentences that contain at least a number (e.g., indicating a
volume/quantity or measurement although can be noise sometimes), and evaluate the percentage of sentences
that contain at least one matched word from the lexicon/dictionaries and are calculated as follows (where 𝐿
indicates the domain specificity lexicon but can be replaced by either of the two dictionaries):
[5]
𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝑝) =
𝑠∈𝑝
∑1 [𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝑠) ∩ 𝐵𝑂𝑊(𝐿) > 0] 
𝑠∈𝑝
∑1
In total, we obtain 52 features for a page. Our feature extraction process is arguably language
independent, as it depends on counting word frequencies using lexicons/dictionaries and pre-computed
scores assigned to the entries in these lexicons/dictionaries. The language dependent processes are the
translation of the domain lexicons/dictionaries, and the lightweight NLP processes for which models for
different languages are more available. For businesses, these help create more affordable multilingual NLP
solutions than other choices such as translating input documents, or using more language dependent models.
We will discuss this further in later sections.
In order to learn a classifier that determines if a page is relevant or irrelevant, we asked domain experts to
annotate a random collection of pages extracted from the raw TED datasets. For the machine learning
algorithms, we compare linear SVM, logistic regression, and Random Forest.
4.3.2. Table selection
Similar to page selection, the goal here is to filter tables that are irrelevant. This is common because tables
are used in tender notices to describe not only the lots, but oftentimes award criteria, product specifications,
and formatting purposes. In this work, we assume that all tables are ‘horizontal’, that is, their columns define
attributes of data instances and their rows contain individual data instances. We define
as a table and
𝑡
𝑟∈𝑡
and
represents rows and columns in the table. If we consider content in a table as a structure-less page,
𝑐∈𝑡 
and concatenate each of its rows or columns into a sequence of words equivalent to a sentence potentially
describing an instance, then we can apply the same feature extraction methods explained above. In cases of a
row or column span, we duplicate the value across all the rows/columns covered by the span. Therefore, we
obtain a total of 80 features as follows:
●
24 ‘page’ level features if we treat the table as a simple flat textual page
●
28 ‘sentence’ level features if we treat the table as a simple flat textual page, and its rows as
sentences
●
28 ‘sentence’ level features if we treat the table as a simple flat textual page, and its columns as
sentences
For training, our domain experts annotated a collection of tables extracted from the raw TED dataset (to
be detailed later) and we compared the same group of machine learning algorithms.
4.4. Lot item detection
With the relevant pages and tables identified, our next step in the process is to identify the text elements in
the pages/tables that actually describe lots and items. We would like to capture two kinds of information: the
texts that indicate a lot reference and the texts that describe individual items in a lot. In practice, this is often
contained in a single, coherent text passage, such as that shown in Figure 5. Thus we handle this as a binary
sentence classification task where a sentence is a positive example if it contains either a lot reference, or item
information, or both; and negative otherwise. We deter the extraction of lot reference and structured item
information to the next component ‘lot parsing’. We also need to deal with unstructured texts from a page
and content from tables in slightly different ways.
4.4.1. Unstructured texts in a page
For unstructured texts in a page, we apply sentence splitting and then sentence classification. For features,
we adapt the 24 page-level features explained above in the ‘page selection’ section by applying them to each
sentence to classify. As an example, in equation 1, we replace
with the input sentence
and by alternating
𝑝
𝑠
the
we obtain 4 features. The same can be applied to equations 2~3. Then replacing
with the other
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐
𝐿
two domain dictionaries will produce another 8 features. Further, we add three binary features that help
capture lot references:
●
If the sentence contains the word ‘lot’ (and its translation in other languages)
●
If the sentence contains the word ‘number’ or ‘no.’ or ‘num’ (and its translations)

●
If the sentence contains number-like tokens (including roman/arabic numerals and patterns such as
‘1.1, 1.21, X.2, II.1’)
We also compare the same set of algorithms for classification.
4.4.2. Tables
Similar to the idea explained in passage selection, we simply treat each row as a sentence and therefore, the
solution would be almost the same as that for dealing with unstructured texts above. One exception is for
tables like that in Figure 2, where the lot references need to be interpreted based on combining the table
header ‘Lot Number’ and the text in the row spans below that header. Thus for tables, we add additional rules
for converting rows into sentences:
●
We apply a rule to match the table headers against the pattern ‘lot [token]’ where [token] is an
optional word (e.g., ‘number’, ‘no.’);
●
For the column headers matched by this rule, we find the one where all the texts of cells in that
column are ‘number-like’ tokens. Then, we insert the header text before the number-like token
within that cell. As an example, the row span with a value ‘1’ in Figure 2 will be updated to ‘Lot
Number 1’ and will be repeated for both row 2 and 3 when creating a sentence.
Some may argue that lot items detection from tables should be simpler as once a table is classified as a
‘relevant’ one containing lot and item descriptions, given our ‘horizontal table’ assumption, we can simply
take each row (after ‘expanding’ row/column spans) as an instance of item description. While this may be
true for many cases like that shown in Figure 2, practically, there are complex table structures such as that
shown in Figure 7. Here, each lot is split into a consecutive number of rows, and within each lot, the headers
are repeated for the item(s) in that lot. The actual content we wish to extract from the tables are those
indicated in the box.  For this reason, we opt for the generic approach described above, i.e., treating each row
in a table as a sentence for classification. The same feature set and algorithm described above are used, and
the training datasets will be explained later.
Figure 7. A complex table containing lot and item information written in Portuguese.
4.5. Lot parsing
The goal of this component is to take the sentences (including those converted from table rows) classified as
containing lot references/items (positive sentences), and parse them to create a structured representation of
the lots/items such as that shown in Figure 6. There are two tasks in this process: 1) determining the
boundaries of lots and the lot references, as the previous steps only classifies a sentence/table row as if it
contains lot information; 2) from a positive sentence, extracts the structured item information including:
name of the item, form, and measurement.
For 1), we use simple rules as follows:
●
Apply the pattern to match the start of a sentence ‘lot [token]+ [num]’, where [token] is an optional
word (e.g., ‘number’, ‘no.’) and [num] is a number-like token. If a positive sentence matches this
pattern, it is considered to contain a lot reference and the [num] value will be extracted as the
reference;
●
Each sentence the above rule marks the boundary of a lot;
●
Positive sentences including/following an identified lot reference are considered to be associated
with that lot and are subject to the second part of processing.
As examples, in Figure 2, we expect rows 2 and 3 to be considered as part of a single lot with a reference
indicated in column 1, and each row to describe a separate item. In Figure 6, we expect each bullet point in
Section 2.1 to be classified as a relevant lot item, with the lot reference extracted as ‘Lot 1’ for the first and

the remaining text for further parsing. In Figure 7, we expect the rows in the first and second boxes to be
classified as relevant, while the first row identifies the reference and the second describes the item.
For 2), in theory, one can build an NER tool given sufficient training data. However, creating training data
at token level is very time-consuming and deemed infeasible by Vamstar. Instead, Vamstar built an in-house
rule-based tagger that uses a combination of regular expressions and dictionary lookup. Details of this part of
the system is proprietary information and cannot be included in this article. However, we explain the main
principles below.
First, using all values extracted from the ‘lot and item descriptions’ field of the TED database mentioned
before, n-grams are extracted and their frequencies are generated. Domain experts were then involved in
manually inspecting the derived ranked list of n-grams, to determine a ‘threshold’ (practically, different
thresholds were derived for different ‘n’s) above which n-grams were deemed to be more reliable and
retained as a lookup dictionary - to be called the ‘lot and item n-gram dictionary’. Second, this dictionary and
together with the ‘form’ and the ‘measurement unit’ dictionaries mentioned before are used to match texts
within a sentence. Finally, once the matching is completed, post-processing rules will be applied to address
overlapping boundaries, or extract other values such as quantities. For example, given ‘Atropine Sulfate
Solution for Injection 3 mg/10 ml Pre-filled Syringe’, the ‘matching’ phase may identify ‘atropine sulfate’
and ‘sulfate solution’ as candidate n-grams, ‘mg’ and ‘ml’ as measurement, and ‘syringe’ as form. The
post-processing will merge ‘atropine sulfate’ and ‘sulfate solution’, and process a context window of the
identified measurement units to extract quantities.
4.6. XML parsing, data joining, and risk indices development
So far, we have explained how we extract missing lot and item information from tender attachment
documents. As per Figure 6, our workflow also parses tender and award XMLs to extract other structure
information about contract awards. This information is then joined with the lot and item information to create
supplier-centric contract award records. This is a relatively straightforward process that we will only briefly
explain here. For each award XML, one contract award record is created for a unique supplier-buyer pair.
The supplier information is extracted from the award XML; while the buyer in the award XML is matched to
that in the tender XML through name matching. This allows us to integrate additional buyer information
from the tender XML. Contractual terms such as the start and end dates and lot quantity and values are also
available from the award XML. However, where the award XML has missing lot and item information, we
use the lot references to map to the extracted lot and item information from the tender attachment documents.
Through this process, we populate our database with the schema partially shown in Figure 4.
Using this database, we can retrieve a particular supplier and its contract history for particular products.
We can also use this information to calculate quantitative ‘indices’ that summarise individual suppliers’ risks
from a buyer point of view. We introduce a number of metrics we developed in the current proof-of-concept.
Once again, these are proprietary and therefore we focus on explaining the intuitions behind instead of
revealing the mathematical calculations.
In total, we define 21 metrics that can be organised from two angles. For the first, we divide metrics into
two types: one that measures a supplier’s ability to supply different ranges of products, the other that
measures a supplier’s economic risk, taking into account their historical contract capacity and currently
‘active’ contracts. For the second, we define five sub-groups: ‘Product Metric (PM)’, ‘Buyer Metric (BM)’,
‘Location (LocM)’, ‘Lot Metric (LM)’, and ‘Value Metric (VM)’. PMs measure the ability of a supplier to
supply a number of different products, or indications of ‘divergence’ of their portfolio. These monitor each
year’s performance by taking into account their product portfolios and contract fulfilment track record.
Factors included are, for example, the number of different types of products they supply each year; how this
changes over time (increasing, or decreasing to a smaller number of products); quantity of specific types of
products delivered to buyers.  BMs measure the extent to which suppliers are generally able to retain their
customers (e.g., churn and retention). LocMs measure the supplier’s ability to sell goods across countries and
therefore, considers geographical coverage by their historical contracts. LMs measure at tender lot level the
suppliers’ ability to participate in multiple contracts over time. This accounts for contract durations and helps
us infer supplier stock levels. VM measures financial capacity and different value propositions suppliers can
offer and participate in. For example, these may look at the fluctuations in a supplier’s contract capacity to
identify risks of inability to supply. When a supplier signs a contract with a value (or quantity) that is
significantly beyond its ‘norm’ (e.g., based on the average and range of contract values). The intuition is that
signing contracts significantly deviating from the ‘norm’ can represent a risk of inability to supply. We will
demonstrate the end system that allows exploring these risk indices and supplier profiles in the next Section.

5. Experiment and Demonstration
In this section, we present evaluation of some of the components above and demonstrate part of the end
system.
5.1. Component evaluation
Here, we present evaluations of lot zoning and lot item detection, for which our domain experts were able to
create some gold standard for model building and evaluation. In both tasks, we use text classification and
compare three machine learning algorithms: linear SVM, logistic regression (LR) and random forest (RF).
Therefore, we use the standard evaluation metrics for classification: Precision, Recall and F1. These are
calculated as follows. Since each task has essentially two classes, we measure the scores for each class and
take their average for reporting (macro-average).
[5]
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 =
#𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠
#𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 + #𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 
[6]
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 =
#𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠
#𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 + #𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 
[7]
𝐹1 = 2×𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 
To evaluate lot zoning at page and table levels, we created two separate datasets. We asked domain
experts from Vamstar to annotate a random collection of pages and tables extracted from our raw TED
datasets into ‘relevant’ or ‘irrelevant’. This gave us a total of 781 pages, and 515 tables (multilingual in both
cases). To evaluate lot item detection, we conducted two sets of experiments. First, using the TED database
created by Vamstar, we identify the field containing values most similar to the description of lots and items,
i.e., ‘lot and item descriptions’, split the values based on sentence boundaries and take the unique values.
Values with less than 2 words or more than 20 words are excluded. This gives us a total of 18363 positive
examples (multilingual). For negative examples, we apply the same process to the other four fields: ‘name
and addresses’ of buyers, ‘notice title’, ‘short description’, and ‘contract criteria’. This gives us a total of
15632 negative examples. Combined together, we refer to this dataset as ‘lot item gold standard’. However,
this only allows evaluating sentence-level classifiers, and the dataset does not necessarily represent the real
documents that may describe lots in free-text and tables. Therefore, our second evaluation involves domain
experts manually verifying the extractions (sentences, table rows) of the best model from 20 English tender
notices for precision only. We refer to this dataset as ‘lot item verification’. Statistics of these datasets are
shown in Table 1. Tables 2 ~ 3 show the evaluation results for different tasks respectively.
Task/Dataset
Positive examples Negative examples
Lot zoning - pages
479
302
Lot zoning - tables
158
357
Lot item GS
18363
15632
Lot item verification
897
N/A
Table 1. Dataset information for different task evaluation.
Lot zoning - Pages
Lot zoning - Tables
Models
Precision
Recall
F1
Models
Precision
Recall
F1
SVM
0.90
0.90
0.90
SVM
0.86
0.76
0.79
LR
0.90
0.90
0.90
LR
0.90
0.86
0.88
RF
0.90
0.91
0.91
RF
0.86
0.88
0.87
Table 2. Evaluation results for lot zoning. Best results for each metric are highlighted in bold.

Lot item GS
Lot item verification - best model only
Models
Precision
Recall
F1
Model
Precision
SVM
0.89
0.88
0.88
RF
0.84
LR
0.90
0.89
0.90
RF
0.91
0.94
0.93
Table 3. Evaluation results for lot item detection. Best results for each metric on the lot item GS are
highlighted in bold.
The results show that arguably, random forest is the most robust algorithm as it performed best on page-level
lot zoning and lot item detection, while achieving comparable results on table-level lot zoning. We also
conducted error analysis to understand where the automated methods failed.
In terms of the two ‘zoning’ tasks, we found three main causes that applied to both pages and tables. First,
the low recall is typically due to ‘sparse’ signals, such as a tender containing only one lot with very few
items, described in a very short table or paragraph/list. Content as such is difficult to extract because the
features generated for those text passages would be sparse compared to ‘denser’ pages or larger tables. Low
precisions are primarily due to ‘noise’ in the domain lexicon, as some generic words (e.g. ‘solution’, ‘wrap’,
‘free’ as in ‘sugar free’) were retained and scored high. To address these issues, domain experts suggested
developing ‘post processing’ rules to ‘recover’ passages that are potentially valid candidates for processing.
For example, enforcing that at least one text passage must be extracted from each tender (thus those not
making the classifier decisions may be recovered). Also, excluding unigrams in the domain lexicon could
help address false positives. The third common cause of errors is due to content extraction from PDFs. As an
example, arbitrary whitespaces are recognised between every letter when parsing some PDFs (e.g., ‘book’
becomes ‘b o o k’). This is an issue that is much harder to address, as it depends on the quality of PDFs as
well as the third party extraction tool. This is an example of the practical challenges that industrial text
mining and NLP projects can face while research may not as they deal with much higher quality data. This
implies that in reality, system performance may be limited by some obstacles that are hard to overcome.
In terms of the lot item detection task, when examining the ‘lot item verification’ data, we find that the
most common issue causing the decrease in precision is ‘noisy’ domain lexicon entries, as explained above.
Further, complexity in the domain vocabulary also made the task challenging. For example, pharmaceutical
ingredients sometimes have long names and are written in certain patterns, such as ‘17-alpha-
hydroxyprogesterone’. For cases like these, domain experts suggested developing certain ‘regular
expressions’ incorporating domain dictionaries. This implies that industrial text mining and NLP projects are
often more complicated than tweaking a machine learning based method for performance measured by
established standards. Practical solutions often rely on incorporating domain knowledge in various forms,
oftentimes rules. This is consistent with earlier findings such as Chiticariu et al. (2013).
5.2. System demonstration
In this section, we present the end system to demonstrate the ‘supplier risk profiles’ in action. First, informed
by the evaluation above, we retrained the best-performing model - random forest - using all the labelled
datasets for each component in the pipeline. After retraining all models, we apply our workflow to the entire
raw TED dataset. This contains roughly 3.3 million healthcare related tender notices (with contract awards)
covering 2011 to 2022, involving over 167 thousands unique suppliers, 86 thousands buyers, with higher
than $2 trillion in monetary value. Processing this massive dataset using our workflow explained above
allowed us to create the biggest healthcare procurement database to date. We then run queries to obtain data
from the database to calculate the above-mentioned metrics for each supplier. We show a few examples in
screenshots below.
Figure 8 shows the supplier risk profile in terms of ‘ability to supply’ and ‘economic risk’ for Bausch &
Lomb, based on their contracts won between 2011 and 2022. The line chart on the left shows a number of
‘buyer’ metrics (BM) selected for review, such as: ‘buyer countries’ that measures a supplier’s global reach
by considering countries they won contract in; ‘buyers - moving average’ that considers the number of active
buyers for a supplier; and ‘buyers - yearly participation’ that considers the number of active buyers for
supplier each year. The line chart on the right aggregates these selected metrics to show an overall trend.
Figure 9 shows the supplier risk profile (also ‘ability to supply’ and ‘economic risk’) for Siemens covering

the same time period, but using a mixture of ‘lot’ and ‘buyer’ metrics (LM and BM). For example, ‘buyer -
churn/retention rate’ that measures the change in the supplier’s clients (based on the number of new buyers
they had and lost during each time period); ‘lots - average duration days’ and ‘lots - duration days’ looking at
lot duration in days to understand lot delivery time frames. Each figure demonstrates risks of a specific
supplier from different perspectives, hence allowing users to thoroughly evaluate a supplier.
Figure 8. Supplier risk profile for Bausch & Lomb between 2011 and 2022 measured by a set of buyer
metrics.
Figure 9. Supplier risk profile for Siemens between 2011 and 2022 measured by a set of lot metrics and
buyer metrics.

Figure 10. Comparison of several major global suppliers’ risk profiles.
Figure 11. Comparison of several small suppliers’ risk profiles.
Figure 10 and 11 compare global suppliers in a single view. Generally, a straight line with little
fluctuations is desirable as that indicates little change in risks over time. We can notice that in Figure 10,
most suppliers selected for review have relatively little change in terms of their risks. This is mainly due to
them being large, established suppliers that tend to win a continuous stream of contracts over time. However,
some suppliers had more fluctuations in their risk indices compared to others, suggesting they may be riskier

choices to buyers. Figure 11 compares several smaller suppliers, and we can see that their risk patterns are
much more erratic, due to a lack of continuity in their track record.
6. Discussion
In this section, we discuss lessons learned from the project that may potentially inform future research and
practice. These will be covered from several angles: the different focus of industry project compared to
research, the complexity of building a full NLP pipeline for heterogeneous data and its implication on the
development, the dilemma of choosing between the more advanced NLP methods and those earlier classic
methods, and the issue of training data in an industry context.
6.1. The ‘industry’ focus of the project
There are very few studies that explicitly discuss the different focuses between industry and research projects
and how these could impact the approach. Among these (Chiticariu et al., 2013; Suganthan et al., 2015;
Krishna et al., 2016), it is widely acknowledged that the lack of training data and the associated cost of
creating it, the fast development cycle, the need for interpretability of machine learning predictions, and the
continuous update of the model due to evolving business needs and knowledge are factors that typically
render a research-focused approach impractical. Industry projects focus on ‘problem solving’ in real world
contexts with (often harsh) time and resource constraints, while research projects focus on ‘creative
solutions’ to problems often studied in an ideal ‘lab’ environment that may not fully represent the reality.
Our experience has supported most - if not all - of the viewpoints above. The industry project has a clear
focus of developing a ‘proof-of-concept’ product within a time limit of one year and financial budget. The
business partner needs to be able to take the finished product for further development and/or extension
beyond the project. Analysis at the beginning of the project showed its ‘multi-task’ and ‘heterogeneous data’
nature. Combining all these factors, a typical research-driven approach aimed at developing ‘novel’ solutions
built on insights from rigorous critical evaluation of multiple baselines and state-of-the-art using research
‘benchmarks’ that may deviate from the real data, is infeasible. Instead, one lesson we learned is that one
needs to opt for ‘tried and tested’ methods that have low ‘barriers’ to users, who may need to take the
solution forward for future development. This is a fundamental principle that needs to be taken into account
when evaluating other aspects of the project.
6.2. Data heterogeneity, multilingual and multi-task nature
As already mentioned many times, compared to research as well as other industry text mining and NLP
practices reported in the literature, the data we dealt with are multilingual and heterogeneous such that the
goal of the project cannot be achieved by a single type of method, but relates to multiple subfields of text
mining and NLP research. While there may be well-established solutions in each of these subfields, as
discussed before, the difference in the raw data analysed, the multilingual nature and the lack of training data
in our project makes adopting these methods very difficult and time-consuming. Considering the wider
principle mentioned above, another lesson we learned is that given such a high level of complexity in our
tasks, it is imperative to develop ‘lightweight’ methods that are easy to maintain, or ‘generalised’ solutions
that could apply to multiple tasks, or both.
On reflection, we opted for treating many tasks as text classification, using a feature representation
scheme that is arguably language independent, and applies to, or can be easily adapted to, all of the tasks.
Specifically,  two components of our pipeline (lot zoning and lot item detection) deal with text classification
at different granularity and therefore, the machine learning algorithms can be easily reused across. The
feature representations are derived with reference to domain lexicons, which can be more easily and
affordably translated into multiple languages - particularly considering the massive amount of multilingual
documents we have to analyse, and the fact that only a fraction of them contain really useful content for
analysis. Another added benefit of our approach is that it enables domain experts and the system
administrators to update the trained models by simply revising the domain lexicons during re-training. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no prior literature that describes in detail a holistic text mining or NLP
process composed of multiple sub-tasks, or develops generalisable solutions like ours. Therefore, our work
sets an important reference for future industry projects dealing with complex tasks.
6.3. The dilemma of algorithmic choices
Our classification method is based on ‘classic’ machine learning algorithms and does not utilise the more
recent deep neural networks trained on very large datasets as ‘language models’, such as the well known

BERT (Delvin et al., 2018). These models have been shown to set new benchmarks for a wide range of NLP
tasks. However, we did not use BERT or similar language model based methods for a number of practical
reasons.
First, such models work in slightly different ways from classic algorithms in the sense that they take over
the feature extraction process through a ‘text reading’ process analogous to humans. The idea is that through
training such models using enormous data, they are expected to have a certain level of ‘understanding’ of
human language, and therefore, can learn to automatically extract useful features from the input texts. This
makes feature engineering not very compatible with such models, although one can still run such models as a
‘feature extractor’ to generate a feature representation vector, and combine it with other predefined features.
Second, such models are usually very resource intensive due to its complex architecture and the amount
of data used to train them. As a result, they usually can only take a limited length of text. Popular options are
a length of 256 or 512 tokens, with the second typically requiring significantly higher computing resources.
This means that some of our tasks, such as page or table classification, may not fit well when the content is
longer than this length, particularly the smaller option which is more affordable.
Third, we experimented with a generic BERT model (English uncased, 256) on the lot item detection task
using English training data only, and compared its performance against our best performing model, random
forest. However, we did not notice significant gain in F1 by BERT (under 2 percentage points). We assume
that a potential reason is that the generic BERT model is trained on general purpose corpus that may not be
closely related to healthcare. Studies (Alsentzer et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2019) have shown that usually,
language models need to be further trained using domain specific corpora when they are to be applied to
domain specific contexts. This again requires significant data and computing resources, especially when we
have to deal with multiple languages.
Therefore, the next lesson we learned is that for industry projects, practicality is an important factor when
it comes to choosing the methods. Resource constraints often outweigh algorithmic superiority, especially if
the performance gain is small given the potential resource investment needed.
6.4. The cost of training data
In the project, we used a mixture of supervised and unsupervised (rules) methods. There are many practical
reasons for this choice, but contrary to the scientific literature that is predominantly based on supervised
machine learning methods (Suganthan et al., 2015), the main reasons for not opting for a fully supervised
approach is the cost. This may be explained from many factors, such as the human labour, the time required,
the number (and complexity) of tasks to be addressed, and the tools needed for developing the training data.
The project uses a process that involves multiple tasks of varying complexity. Developing training data
for the two zoning tasks is relatively low-cost, as they do not require specialist tools to support the annotation
process. In both tasks, annotators were given the extracted text passages either in raw text or CSV (for tables
only), together with the original document for reference. The annotation task is also fairly easy, as it only
requires skimming through these documents, and does not require extensive reading. In contrast, annotating
lot items (lot item detection) and their specific attributes (lot parsing) are much lower granularity tasks, and
require examining content at sentence or phrase level. The data also needs to be transformed into formats that
can be loaded into state of the art annotation tools that are not always available for our data format. For
example, the widely used ‘spacyNER’ annotation format requires parallel sequences of tokens and their
labels for each sentence. Such data is very expensive to develop from a business perspective.
Further, as already raised in earlier studies, industrial solutions often favour rules over supervised models
as the latter offers easier interpretability and maintainability. These are crucial factors as the needs for their
applications can evolve over time and therefore, the solutions must be easy to modify over time. In these
cases, changing rules may be a much lighter effort than recreating training data and retraining the system. For
these reasons, training data for supervised models can be a barrier to the adoption of methods developed in
the research communities, when it comes to developing industrial applications.
7. Conclusion
Text mining and NLP have been long established research fields for decades. Their techniques have also
been widely adopted in industries to develop and deploy intelligent systems for automated analysis of large
scale text data. However, the literature is dominated by research that favours supervised methods built on
well-curated data. Solutions in such a ‘lab environment’ often do not transfer well to practical scenarios.
Instead, studies reporting industrial text mining/NLP tasks often make use of rule-based methods and domain
lexicons. But they typically look at single and sometimes simplified tasks, and do not discuss in-depth data

heterogeneity and inconsistency and their implication on the development of their methods. Further, few
prior work has focused on the healthcare domain.
Set in this context, our work describes an industry project that developed text mining methods and
solutions to mine millions of heterogeneous, multilingual procurement documents in the healthcare sector.
We extract structured procurement contract data and store them in a database that drives a platform enabling
easy evaluation of supplier risks. Our work sets reference for future research and practice in many ways: 1) it
develops the first structured procurement contract database that will help facilitate the tendering process; 2) it
documents a method that effectively uses domain knowledge and generalises to multiple text mining and
NLP tasks and languages; 3) and it discusses lessons learned for practical text mining/NLP development.
Drawing from our lessons, we make a few recommendations for researchers and practitioners. First, we
argue that research needs to ‘step out of the lab environment’ by using data that more reflects reality.
Research data are typically well-curated and pre-processed. But as we have seen, in practice, real data is
rarely good quality and highly inconsistent. This means that practitioners often need to make a significant
effort to cleanse their data, or adapt state-of-the-art from research. Both are non-trivial. Also, rules continue
to be important and effective in many real world applications, as they are easier to implement, fit for purpose,
and easy to interpret. We believe an interesting direction is for model explainability research to develop
methods that can explain model decisions in terms of rules beyond the current ‘primitive’ approaches (e.g.,
feature weights, attentions). These may offer valuable insights for building domain-specific applications.
Third, for practitioners, we recommend that they focus on their real needs when it comes to algorithmic
choices. While the recent text mining and NLP research has seen deep neural networks - especially very
large language models trained on massive corpora - taking over the centre stage, the added value to
businesses in practice may depend on the domain and task. This is particularly important if the business has
restricted access to resources, as these methods are much more resource intensive than classic machine
learning models. Finally, building industrial text mining and NLP applications usually entails a process
involving multiple tasks. While often, there can be tried-and-tested methods for each task, one needs to again
consider their resource constraints and it helps to think in terms of building solutions that can generalise to a
wide range of tasks instead of buying or adapting ad-hoc solutions for each task.
Our work has a number of limitations. First, we have not evaluated the end system, i.e., the platform for
deriving supplier risk profiles. This is primarily due to the work being taken further for development by the
industry partner before being presented to end users. An end-user evaluation would be an extremely valuable
exercise to examine the effectiveness of our text mining and NLP methods. Second, our work has focused on
a specific sub-area of healthcare - pharmaceuticals. This is arguably an easier sub-area compared to medical
equipment where the naming and standards can be very inconsistent. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude
how our methods can generalise to these areas.
In terms of future work, we identify three main directions. First, we will look at adapting our solution to
other areas of the healthcare sector (e.g., medical equipment as mentioned above), or other sectors. Second,
while within the project, we only analysed procurement documents, another source of useful information is
supplier websites and their product catalogues. We envisage to mine such data in the future to enrich our
database. Finally, we recognise a lack of research in the area of procurement text mining and NLP. For this
reason, we plan to release part of our data (subject to further processing to redact sensitive information) for
use by the research community and set up shared task to encourage effort on this direction.
