Open Challenges and Issues: Artificial Intelligence for Transactive 
Management 
 
Asma Khatun* , Sk. Golam Sarowar Hossain 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Aliah University, Kolkata, India 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
The advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has improved the automation of energy managements. In smart energy 
management or in a smart grid framework, all the devices and the distributed resources and renewable resources are 
embedded which leads to reduce cost. A smart energy management system, Transactive management (TM) is a concept to 
improve the efficiency and reliability of the power system. The aim of this article is to look for the current development of 
TM methods based on AI and Machine Learning (ML) technology. In AI paradigm, MultiAgent System (MAS) based 
method is an active research area and are still in evolution. Hence this article describes how MAS based method applied in 
TM. This paper also finds that MAS based method faces major difficulty to design or set up goal to various agents and 
describes how ML technique can contribute to that solution. A brief comparison analysis between MAS and ML techniques 
are also presented. At the end, this article summarizes the most relevant open challenges and issues on the AI based 
methods for transactive energy management. 
  
Keywords: Multi Agent System; Transactive Energy; Smart Grid; Machine Learning; Distributed Energy; Literature 
Review 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
According to GridWise Architecture Council, transactive energy is ‘‘a set of economic and control mechanisms that allow 
the dynamic balance of supply and demand across the entire electrical infrastructure using value as a key operational 
parameter’’ (n. a., 2015). Transactive energy (TE) allows for faster transmission of information, including supply and 
demand quantities and prices, across the grid. It can manage both demand and supply sides which are designed for a 
changing environment with an increasing number of distributed resources and intelligent devices (Chen, 2017). Moreover, 
according to the NIST (n. a., 2019), the cost to supply electricity actually varies minutes by minutes. 
TM has its own various disciplines such as smart grid (Romero, 2011, Reyasuddin, 2016), water pump (Sekar, 2015), 
telecommunications (Rahrah, 2015). Smart Grid, the way to future response, is different from the traditional grid since it 
facilitates two-way communications of electric data. Since smart grid can record data in real time with regards to electricity 
supply and real time demand during the transmission and distribution process of generation, transmission and distribution 
much more efficient and reliable, appealing to an optimized grid.  The availability of two-way communication and the use 
of smart meters will enable online implementation and facilitate data collection within a fully automated system (Elkazz, 
2016).  A good comparison analysis of different components of traditional and smart grid has presented in the paper of 
(Romero, 2011). Artificial intelligent (AI) has the capacity to solve and take decision on real life scenarios to a known or 
unknown variant data. Hence deployment of Artificial intelligent (or machine learning) based techniques could be an 
alternative potential solution for an optimized grid management system. In the current literature, several AI based methods 
are proposed and are presented in the next section 2. The aim of this article is to present up-to-date survey of artificial 
intelligence based technique for transactive management.  Rests of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
current state of the art technology on AI based methods providing a critical analysis of the relative merit, and potential 
pitfalls of the technique. Section 3 summarizes the article describing some of the open challenges as well as its future 
outlook.   
 
*Corresponding author 

2 
 
2. STATE OF THE ART METHODS 
In the current development of the state-of-the-art technology many artificial intelligent based methods have been proposed. 
Those are included Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Elkazaz, 2016), Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) (Chandler, 2014), Multi 
Agent System based method (MAS) (Reyasuddin, 2016, Stone, 2000). Interested researcher might find analytical survey 
papers (Romero, 2011, Nair, 2018) which reviews few AI based method in regards to the computational intelligence in the 
smart grid environment. Among all the aforementioned method stated, MAS based methods have achieved promising 
performance compared to the centralized energy management system on the state of the art technology.  
In the application of smart grid energy management system, ANNs techniques are applied for various distributed resources 
for example, control management, solar energy heat-up response, solar irradiance, voltage stability monitoring or even for 
security issues. Among them ANNs techniques has been successfully applied in voltage stability monitoring 
(Venayagamoorthy, 2011) and control management (Chandler, 2014) application. In the method of (Chandler, 2014), they 
applied an integrated method of integer linear programming and ANN method. They manually implemented their method 
on real time SCADA (n.a., 2019) data.  However, there need to more investigate on implementing and testing and with 
more data in an automated interface. In addition to that, the ANN techniques require a large amount of input data 
(Elkazaz,2016) proposed a method based on GA to apply in residence to reduce daily total operating cost by introducing 
different distributed grid (DG) units such as FC (fuel cell) and PV(rooftop photovoltaic) units at each home. As a 
comparing benchmark base scenario is used as a reference in which no FC and PV unit exist. There were total 4 scenario 
were performed in where each scenario 30 tests are performed. Given table 1 shows the comparison results of total daily 
cost of those scenarios. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above result indicates the difference in the total daily operating cost and the optimized result.  However the proposed 
method has limitation to find the error as uncertainty associated with forecasted load has a great effect on the optimal 
results of the proposed system (Ren, 2008). On the other hand several agents perform several particular tasks in a MAS 
system. In MAS based methods, (Reyasuddin, 2016) used an optimization technique for the hybrid renewable energy 
system. In their method seven numbers of agents are used as actuators. As an example PV agent is used for measuring the 
total power output and similarly for other agents. However their report didn’t cover for agent information in the case of 
learning process. They have shown higher performance and less power loss in the case of centralized energy management 
system. 
There are broadly two classifications of multi agent structure namely centralized and decentralized. An extra dedicated 
coordinator agent exists in the centralized MAS. On the other hand agents communicate themselves peer to peer bases in 
decentralized MAS architecture (Weiss, 1999). A typical example of the difference between the above mentioned 
architecture has been shown in the following Figure 1 (a) & (b). 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 (a) Centralized multi agent architecture                                                        Fig. 1 (b) Decentralized multi agent architecture 
 
In the current literature decentralized MAS is more popular than the former.  In MAS based system it is important to 
consider the interaction among the multi agents. Otherwise in some cases the agent becomes greedy to act or run to achieve 
its goal (Stone, 2000). To solve this issue, Game theory technique has been applied by (Reyasuddin, 2016) for balancing 
Table 1. Comparison results of total daily cost 
Total 
Cost 
C(TOTAL) 
$ 
Base 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S4 
27.02 
18.177 
23.05 
19.93 
23.48 
 

3 
 
the interaction among those multi agents. The game theoretic method is computationally complex as it is hard to find the 
equilibrium point  (Dehghanpour, 2016). In MAS framework, an agent consists of several classes, layers and interfaces to 
communicate each other (Sardinha, 2004). It requires more attention for research to solve the communication and 
interaction among the agents. However, a priority queue based techniques can also be applied to become more robust. 
Although multi agent systems are highly adaptive to market and trading environment and easy to incorporate social abilities 
to exchange information, this method has several disadvantages. A fully multi agent-based system is much complex to 
modeling, maintaining and updating of the system or removal of any changes need to suffer.  
Another challenge in multiple learning agents is to define a good learning goal. An agent must discover a solution on their 
own, using learning. Following are described how machine learning techniques are implemented in a distributed MAS 
system (Sardinha, 2004) for defining goal. The main aim of the method is to introduce cognition in agents through machine 
learning techniques that can leverage the performance of the system. Although integrating machine learning methods with 
MAS is a challenging task due to its inherent complexity in the interaction of multiple agents, this hybridization is not a 
new idea. From the past decades in many fields supervised machine learning techniques are introduced to MAS such as in 
semantic web (Williams, 2004), route planning  (Gehrke, 2008) and BDI (Belief-Desire-Intentions) model (Airiau, 2008). 
The framework for introducing machine learning technique is described in the following figure 2. The learning problem is 
defined by two entities goal and performance measure. After defining the agent roles and the description of the agent 
behavior it is necessary to identify the best agents. Normally in a design of a Multi Agent System, each agent is concerned 
with a sub problem, which can be solved by applying a specific machine learning technique. The combination of these 
solutions must achieve the organization’s goal and leverage the organization’s performance measure. In the Agent 
Selection phase, the designer of the system notices that a specific agent has a complex plan to perform and needs a machine 
learning technique in order to improve the performance of the system.  Moreover, for  every  selected  agent,  a problem  
domain  analysis  is  performed  to  identify  important  learning  issues.  This phase is the Problem Domain Analysis and 
has the goal to establish a well-defined learning problem. More details can be found in (Sardinha, 2004). 
 
 
Fig. 2.  The methodology for introducing learning techniques (Sardinha, 2004). 
 
Other problem occurs as learning agents need to keep track of other learning agents which may create overlapping of each 
other coordination  (Dehghanpour, 2016). To become more robust and sophisticated approach an example of approach has 
been seen which are integrated with machine learning and agent architecture (Khalil, 2015). In addition to that machine 
learning techniques are very autonomous for the decision making process and insensitive to market structure and large data 
sources (Chen, 2018). In the current development of the state-of-the-art methodology Reinforcement Learning (RL), a 
more powerful machine learning method is becoming hot research for transactive management energy system. In the 
approach of (Khalil, 2015) they implemented reinforcement machine learning technique in interactive multi agent systems 
namely MILIMAS in taxi domain and gained 80% improvement compared with traditional Q-learning (Watkins, 1992) 
algorithm for the same number of trials of the agents to reach to the passenger. Q-learning is a one kind of reinforcement 
learning which has no interaction of sharing information. Reinforcement learning allows generating a strategy for an agent 
Machine learning 
analysis
Implementation 
Training 
Testing and 
evaluation 
Problem domain 
analysis 
Agent selection 

4 
 
in a situation, when the environment provides some feedback after the agent has acted. Feedback takes the form of a real 
number representing reward, which depends on the quality of the action executed by the agent in a given situation. The 
goal of the learning is to maximize estimated reward. The way of  using  sharing  information in an interactive multi agent 
learning  help  to  decide  better  and maximize  the  agents  group  achievement  of  goals. The framework for a normal 
agent which interact with environment and a framework for an agent model with reinforcement machine learning are 
presented in the Figures 3 and 4 respectively. 
 
Fig. 3. Agents interact with environments through sensors and actuators, adapted from (Russel, 2010)  
 
 
Fig. 4. The reinforcement learning model in multi-agent systems, adapted from (Khalil, 2015) 
A modeling scheme with Markov's decision for transactive energy management in RL method has been seen in (Kim, 
2018). It is noteworthy that, the RL method has the potential to deal with the energy trading problem and guide energy 
entities to interact with the market environment  (Dehghanpour, 2016). The most important feature distinguishing RL from 
other types of learning is that it uses training information that evaluates the actions taken rather than instructions by giving 
correct actions (Sutton, 1998). In addition to that RL is more focused on goal directed learning from interaction (Sutton, 
1998) which will also solve the challenging issue of multiple learning agents for defining a good learning goal. A 
summarized table of different modeling method is shown in Table 2 below. 
Table 2. A comparison summary of different method (Chen, 2018) 
Method 
Advantage 
Disadvantage 
MAS(Reyasuddin
, 2016) 
Parralellism makes speed up the system operation; 
Modulaity, adding new agent is easier; 
Furthermore identifying subtasks and assigning control 
in programming is simpler; 
 parameters across the agents can be changed over time ; 
Lower in complexity 
 
Most neglect 
transmission/distribution grid 
constraints; Results are mostly 
non-deterministic with poor 
interpretation;  
Not reliable due to external 
conditions and for policy makers; 
Machine learning 
(Chandler, 2014) 
Very autonomous decision- 
making process; Insensitive to 
market structure and large data sources; 
Medium complex 
Data-driven and need realistic 
experiments;  
Usually need high computational 
resources; 
GA(Elkazaz, 
2016) 
Simple to implement; 
performs better for highly constrained optimization 
problems, especially for problems having many local 
minima and non-smooth function; 
Low complexity 
Uncertainty 
associated 
with 
forecasted load has a great effect 
on 
the optimal results; 
error need to be calculated; 

5 
 
3. FUTURE WORKS AND SUMMARY 
Transactive energy management gain popularity in recent studied in both academic and industry level. There exist very few 
articles on the state of the art artificial intelligence based method. Compare to other surveys, this paper covers the most 
recent and advanced work. In summary this article presented the current development of various artificial intelligence 
techniques and also look for the challenges occur in those methods. Comparative summary of the methods is also presented 
by describing merits and demerits. The way of integration of MAS and machine learning technique is also described 
briefly. As a future work, some of the proposed strategies are mentioned below: 
 
To adapt an unsupervised machine learning strategy such as (Stone, 2000) (as the data are unknown from 
previously) for transactive energy management. However, these learning techniques are not well suited for 
the multi agent as these are type of aimless learning (Khalil, 2015). But, a notable research found by 
developing hybrid learning approach which is computationally efficient and intelligent (Kiselev, 2008). 
The proposed approach is the application of multi agent algorithm for online agglomerative hierarchical 
clustering and is different from conventional unsupervised learning methods by being distributed, dynamic, 
and continuous. More details can be found in (Kiselev, 2008). 
 
To find a suitable evolution algorithm in order to make interaction among multi agents as MAS consists of 
several classes, layers and interfaces to communicate each other agents. 
 
To propose a hybrid technology with multi agent architecture and apply the clustering methods (machine 
learning techniques) with respect to learn new behavior in real time and to improve the system 
performance by facilitating the interaction dynamics among different agent entities (Elkazaz, 2016). 
 
To propose and establish a Reinforcement Learning based method for designing suitable goal as these 
methods is are most common algorithm for agent learning as they match the agent model exactly. In 
addition to that, Reinforcement learning allows an autonomous agent that has no prior knowledge of a task 
or an environment to learn its behavior by progressively improving its performance based on given rewards 
(Sadeghlou, 2014).
