Data-to-Text Generation with Style Imitation
Shuai Lin1,2, Wentao Wang2, Zichao Yang2, Xiaodan Liang1∗,
Frank F. Xu2
Eric P. Xing2,3, Zhiting Hu2,4∗
1Sun Yat-sen University, 2Carnegie Mellon University, 3Petuum Inc., 4UC San Diego

Abstract
Recent neural approaches to data-to-text gen-
eration have mostly focused on improving
content ﬁdelity while lacking explicit control
over writing styles (e.g., word choices, sen-
tence structures). More traditional systems use
templates to determine the realization of text.
Yet manual or automatic construction of high-
quality templates is difﬁcult, and a template
acting as hard constraints could harm content
ﬁdelity when it does not match the record per-
fectly. We study a new way of stylistic con-
trol by using existing sentences as “soft” tem-
plates. That is, the model learns to imitate the
writing style of any given exemplar sentence,
with automatic adaptions to faithfully describe
the content record. The problem is challeng-
ing due to the lack of parallel data. We de-
velop a neural approach that includes a hybrid
attention-copy mechanism, learns with weak
supervisions, and is enhanced with a new con-
tent coverage constraint. We conduct experi-
ments in restaurants and sports domains. Re-
sults show our approach achieves stronger per-
formance than a range of comparison methods.
Our approach balances well between content
ﬁdelity and style control given exemplars that
match the records to varying degrees.1
1
Introduction
Recent years have seen remarkable progress in
neural natural language generation to produce
well-formed coherent text (Sutskever et al., 2014;
Vaswani et al., 2017). Yet, controllability over var-
ious text properties, as an essential demand to en-
sure the utility of generations in real-world appli-
cations, has not attained the same level of advance-
ment. Data-to-text generation is one of such ap-
plications with ubiquitous practical use, in which
∗corresponding authors
1Data and code are publicly available at https://
github.com/ha-lins/DTG-SI
natural language text is generated to describe a
given data record such as a box score of a sports
player or an infobox table of a restaurant.
Though current data-to-text neural approaches
with encoder-decoder models could produce ﬂuent
text with high ﬁdelity to content (“what to say”),
they largely lack control over the writing style, such
as sentence structures and word choices (“how to
say”). Many efforts have been made to promote the
overall diversity in data-to-text generation through,
e.g., latent variables (Ye et al., 2020) or customized
model architectures (Jagfeld et al., 2018; Deriu and
Cieliebak, 2018). Yet ﬁne-grained style manipu-
lation is not permitted. This contrasts with the
traditional text generation systems which separate
content planning and surface realization (Reiter
and Dale, 1997), and usually determine the realiza-
tion with explicit templates (Kukich, 1983; McRoy
et al., 2000) or based on syntactic grammars (Robin
and McKeown, 1996; Power et al., 2003).
Controlling writing style with “hard” templates
could suffer from unscalable template creation and
lack of generation ﬂexibility. Though previous
work (Wiseman et al., 2018; Dou et al., 2018; An-
geli et al., 2010) has enabled automatic template
extraction, the templates usually act as hard con-
straints and could harm the content ﬁdelity of gen-
erations when the template does not exactly match
the content in a record.
In this paper, we study a new way of stylistic
control in data-to-text generation by using any ex-
isting sentences as “soft” templates. That is, we
learn to imitate the writing style of a given exem-
plar sentence. The goal is two-fold: to generate
text that not only faithfully describes all content in
the record, but also inherits as many of the exem-
plar’s stylistic characteristics as possible (Figure 1).
The new paradigm sidesteps the restrictions with
traditional dedicated templates and allows us to use
arbitrary exemplar sentences that could be describ-
arXiv:1901.09501v3  [cs.CL]  9 Oct 2020

Data Record
Zizzi is a pub providing fine French dining but with an expensive price, located near Cocum in the city center.
Loch Fyne provides fine Italian dining with a £20-25 price, located near Strada at the riverside.
Name
Food
Area
Price
Near
Loch Fyne
Italian
Riverside
£20-25
Strada
Exemplar 1
Generation 1
Located near the Blue Spice, there is a highly-rated place, the Mill, as a choice that frugally priced.
Located near Strada by the river, there is a place with Italian foods, Loch Fyne, as a choice that priced £20-25.
Exemplar 2
Generation 2
With a family-friendly atmosphere and a 5-star rating, Aromi is a pub in the city center.
With Italian foods and a moderate price range, Loch Fyne is near Strada at the riverside.
Exemplar 3
Generation 3
Figure 1: An example of generating sentences that describe the data record and imitate the style of given exemplar
sentences (i.e., soft templates). The generations adaptively inherit the structural and phrasing characteristics (high-
lighted with cyan boxes) of the exemplars. For instance, exemplar 2 does not match the record content perfectly
(e.g., it does not describe the food). The generation adapts the structure to add “with Italian foods”. All such
automatic adaptions are highlighted in orange. Note that the word “providing” in exemplar 1 is also adapted to
“provides” for grammar correction.
ing distinct content. As shown in Figure 1, the
model automatically adapts the soft templates to
varying extents based on how well they match the
record, and precisely expresses the desired content.
To this end, we develop a neural approach that
balances well between content ﬁdelity and style
imitation. A key learning challenge is the lack of
parallel data, i.e., triples of (record, exemplar sen-
tence, target description). Instead, we usually only
have access to abundant record-description pairs2.
The proposed approach learns with rich weak super-
visions derived from the record-description pairs.
Architecture-wise, we develop a hybrid attention-
copy mechanism that offers differentiated treat-
ments of the content and style sources. Further,
based on the structural nature of data records, we
devise a new content coverage constraint for the
balanced embodiment of both content and style in
the generation.
We conduct empirical studies on corpora from
two domains, including restaurant recommenda-
tion (Duˇsek et al., 2019) and NBA reports (Wise-
man et al., 2017). Experiments show our models
strongly improves over a diverse set of compari-
son methods in terms of both automatic and hu-
man evaluations. In particular, given exemplar sen-
tences that match data records to varying degrees,
our approach retains a good content-style balance.
2This highlights the difference from the recent retrieval-
and-generation work (e.g., Hashimoto et al., 2018; Weston
et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2019) which focuses
only on content ﬁdelity and thus is a supervised learning
problem given the record-description pairs.
2
Related Work
Data-to-Text Generation
Many efforts have
been made to improve the ﬁdelity of generated text
to the record content, through sophisticated neu-
ral architectures (Wiseman et al., 2017; Gehrmann
et al., 2018; Puduppully et al., 2019; Iso et al.,
2019), hybrid retrieval and generation (Hashimoto
et al., 2018; Weston et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2018;
Pandey et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2019), and others.
These approaches do not have the additional goal
of style control as ours, and usually perform super-
vised learning based on record-description pairs.
Traditional data-to-text generation systems imple-
ment a pipeline architecture consisting of separate
components, including content planning, sentence
planning, and surface realization (e.g., Reiter and
Dale, 1997; Kukich, 1983; McRoy et al., 2000;
Kondadadi et al., 2013). Recent work (Wiseman
et al., 2018) integrates the template use in a more
end-to-end neural model. Rather than treating tem-
plates as hard constraints as in the previous work,
we study the new setting of using existing sentences
as exemplars, allowing the model to adaptively im-
itate the style while ensuring content ﬁdelity.
Text Style Transfer
There has been growing in-
terest in text style transfer (Hu et al., 2017; Shen
et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018; Subramanian et al.,
2019, etc) which assumes an existing sentence of
certain content, and modiﬁes single or multiple
textual attributes (e.g., sentiment) of the sentence
without changing the content. Our problem differs

in important ways in that we assume the abstract
writing style is encoded in an exemplar sentence
and attempts to modify its concrete content to ex-
press the new information in a structured record
(we thus can call our setting text content rewriting).
The different settings can lead to different applica-
tion scenarios in practice, and pose varying tech-
nical challenges. In particular, though the recent
style transfer research (Subramanian et al., 2019;
Logeswaran et al., 2018) has controlled multiple
categorical attributes which are largely independent
or loosely correlated to each other, a data record
in our task, in comparison, can contain a varying
number of ﬁelds, have many possible values, and
are structurally coupled. Our empirical studies
(sec 5) show the recent models designed for style
transfer fail to perform well on the problem under
study. We also note recent work of syntactically-
controlled paraphrase generation based on either
constituency parse (Iyyer et al., 2018) or reference
sentences (Chen et al., 2019). The problem nature
of data-to-text generation in this work leads to a so-
lution with very different architectures and learning
approaches.
Controlled Generation without Parallel Data
Controlling different aspects (e.g., content, style,
discourse structures) in text generation requires
grasping the intrinsic mapping between the aspects
and the surface text. The lack of parallel data often
poses challenges in learning the mapping, making it
necessary to incorporate other forms of experiences
(supervisions) (Hu and Xing, 2020). For example,
the style transfer work (Hu et al., 2017; Shen et al.,
2017; Yang et al., 2018) used auxiliary models
such as attribute classiﬁers and language models
for supervision signals. Tang et al. (2019) learned
guided conversation ﬂow using standard conver-
sation data combined with logical control. Tan
et al. (2020) created weak supervision labels from
knowledge bases for aspect-based summarization.
This work devises competing training objectives
based on common record-description pairs. Joint
optimization of the competing objectives drives the
model to learn desired behaviors.
3
The Task: Data-to-Text Generation
with Style Imitation
For clarity, we ﬁrst formally describe the problem
of data-to-text generation with style imitation. We
also establish the key notations used in the paper.
Consider a data record x which consists of a set
of ﬁelds and their values (e.g., ﬁeld “Food” and
its value “Italian” in Figure 1). Note that different
records can include different ﬁelds. For example,
the ﬁeld “Customer Rating” is included in some
records but not the one in Figure 1. Data-to-text
generation aims to produce a sentence to describe
the content in the record. We are additionally given
an exemplar sentence ye which could be describing
distinct content in the same domain. The goal of
the task is thus to generate a new sentence y that
achieves (1) content ﬁdelity by describing the con-
tent in x accurately and completely, and (2) style
embodiment by retaining as much of the writing
style (e.g., sentence structure, word choice, etc) of
ye as possible.
A solution to the problem is required to bal-
ance well between the two objectives, by adaptively
rewriting necessary portions of the reference ye to
express the desired content in a correct and ﬂuent
way, while at the same time editing ye to a min-
imum extent to inherit its style. The demand for
adaptive trade-off necessitates developing learning
approaches for ﬂexible imitation and generation.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no large
data containing the desired (x, ye, y) triples for
supervised learning. Instead, we often only have
access to pairs of record and its description which
was originally written without following any des-
ignated style. In the next section, we develop a
neural approach that learns style imitation given
only the paired data.
4
The Approach
Denote the proposed neural model as pθ(y|x, ye).
The model has a hybrid attention-copy mechanism
(sec 4.1) for differentiated treatment of source con-
tent and style exemplar. We learn the model by
constructing weak supervisions from the available
non-parallel data (sec 4.2), and further encourage
accurate content description with a content cov-
erage constraint (sec 4.3). Figure 2 presents an
overview of the approach.
4.1
Hybrid Attention-Copy Architecture
The overall architecture of the neural model con-
sists of two encoders and one decoder. The two en-
coders extract the representation of the data record
x and exemplar ye, respectively. Concretely, for
each ﬁeld in x, we concatenate the embedding vec-
tors of the ﬁeld and its value, and feed the sequence
of ﬁeld-value embeddings to the encoder.

Encoder
Encoder
Decoder
!
Inference
"#
Training
!
#$
reconstruct
reconstruct
content fidelity
style preservation
joint atttention
copy + content coverage constraint
!
#%
#$
!%
"#
desired
Record and exemplar:
Model:
#%
#%
#%
!%
#%
There is a coffee shop named 
Strada.
Cocum is a pub with a low 
customer rating.
Name
Type
Strada
coffee shop 
Name
Type
Rating
Cocum
pub
low
There is a pub named Cocum
with a low customer rating.
retrieve
Figure 2: A (simpliﬁed) data example and retrieval (left) and the model overview (right). The proposed approach
uses a hybrid attention-copy mechanism, and is learned with weak supervisions and a content coverage constraint.
The decoder generates the output sentence with a
hybrid attention-copy mechanism. In particular, the
decoder applies joint attention over both ye and x,
and uses a copy mechanism (Gu et al., 2016) only
on the ﬁeld values in the record x. More concretely,
at each step t, the decoder ﬁrst attends jointly to the
hidden states of both encoders, and obtains a decod-
ing hidden state ht. The ﬁnal output distribution is
the weighted-sum of two distributions:
P (t)
out = gt · P (t)
V
+ (1 −gt) · P (t)
x
(1)
where gt is the probability of generating a token
from the vocabulary; P (t)
V
is the generation distri-
bution over the whole vocabulary; P (t)
x
is the copy
distribution over the ﬁeld values in the record.
4.2
Learning with Weak Supervisions
The two problem goals, namely content ﬁdelity
and style embodiment, are complementary and to
some extent competitive. We derive weak forms of
supervisions for each of them, respectively, based
on the corpus of record-description pairs available.
Exemplar Retrieval
First, for each record x, we
automatically construct the exemplar ye through
retrieval. Speciﬁcally, we use x to retrieve an-
other record xe based on their distance, and use
the description associated with xe as the exemplar
sentence ye in training. We deﬁne the distance
between y and ye as follows:
D(y, ye) = #[T (x)∪T (xe)]−#[T (x)∩T (xe)]. (2)
where T (·) is the set of all ﬁelds in the record; #[·]
represents the number of ﬁelds in the set. Figure 2
gives an illustration of retrieved exemplar (with
distance = 1). We study the effect of training with
exemplars of varying distances in the experiments.
Content Objective
Given the retrieved results,
we next tackle content ﬁdelity. Consider the de-
scription associated with x, which, though not fol-
lowing the desired style of ye, has accurately pre-
sented the content in x. Denote the description as
yx. We thus devise the ﬁrst learning objective that
reconstructs yx given (x, ye), in order to provide
the model with the hints on how the x content can
be presented in natural language:
Lcontent(θ) = log pθ(yx|x, ye).
(3)
Style Objective
For the second goal of style em-
bodiment, we want to encourage the model to gen-
erate sentences in a similar form of ye. To this end,
we notice that, if we feed the model with the exem-
plar sentence ye and its corresponding record xe,
then by deﬁnition the desired output would be ye
itself. We thus devise the second learning objective
that reconstructs ye given (xe, ye):
Lstyle(θ) = log pθ(ye|xe, ye).
(4)
The objective essentially treats the exemplar sen-
tence encoder and the decoder together as an auto-
encoding module, which effectively drives the de-
coder to reproduce the exemplar’s characteristics.
Joint Training
The above two learning objec-
tives are competitive with each other such that, by
combining them and optimizing jointly, the model
is encouraged to learn to balance between content
ﬁdelity and style embodiment. A similar learning
strategy of dividing a learning problem into mul-
tiple competitive objectives has also been used in
previous work such as text style transfer (Hu et al.,
2017; Shen et al., 2017). More formally, the above
two objectives are coupled together to train the
model as follows:
Ljoint(θ) = λLcontent(θ) + (1 −λ)Lstyle(θ),
(5)

Restaurant Recommend.
NBA Reports
Train
Dev
Test
Train
Dev
Test
#Instances
29,486
6,299
6,273
31,444
6,765
6,930
#Tokens
0.54M
0.12M
0.12M
7.88M
1.69M
1.75M
Avg Text Length
18.36
18.34
18.35
25.07
25.10
25.32
#Unique Fields
8
8
8
34
34
34
Avg #Fields
5.38
5.38
5.35
4.32
4.31
4.35
Table 1: Statistics of the two datasets.
where λ ∈(0, 1) is the balancing weight.
4.3
Content Coverage Constraint
As shown in the empirical study (section 5), the
above learning performs well in general yet some-
times still fall short of expressing the record ac-
curately. We thus devise an additional learning
constraint to enhance content ﬁdelity. The intuition
is that, given the copy mechanism over the record
x, each ﬁeld value in x should be copied exactly
once. We thus minimize the following L2 con-
straint that encourages the temporally aggregated
copy probability of each ﬁeld value in x to be 1:
C(θ) =

X
t P (t)
x
−1

2
(6)
where P (t)
x , as deﬁned in Eq.(1), denotes the copy
distribution over all ﬁeld values at decoding step t;
and 1 is a vector with all ones.
The full model training objective with the con-
straint is thus written as:
L(θ) = Ljoint(θ) −η · C(θ)
(7)
where η ≥0 is the weight of constraint.
5
Experiments
We study on two datasets in the restaurant recom-
mendations and NBA reports domains, respectively.
We conduct both automatic and human evaluations
to assess model performance. Experiment results
validate the proposed approach in learning an ef-
fective, balanced control of content and style.
5.1
Datasets
We derived and processed the two existing popular
corpora as below. As deﬁned in section 3, each
resulting dataset contains record-description pairs.
Table 1 shows the data statistics.
Restaurant Recommendations
The dataset is
extracted from the E2E NLG challenge (Duˇsek
et al., 2019). A restaurant record can contain a
subset of 8 ﬁelds, such as Eat Type, Price Range,
and others. See Figure 1 for an example record and
the different possible ways of description.
NBA Reports
We extract the dataset from the
NBA game corpus developed in (Wiseman et al.,
2017). The original corpus consists of box-score
tables of NBA matches and the corresponding full-
length match reports. We ﬁrst split each report
into individual sentences and extract the associated
information from the box-score table as the data
record. The data contains 34 unique ﬁelds, such
as Points, Rebounds , Field-Goal Percentage, etc.
Though the recorded ﬁelds look regular, the natural
language descriptions are rich with variation. For
example, for a ﬁeld value Points: 14, one could say
“contributed 18 points”, “reached double ﬁgures”,
or, fusing with other ﬁelds, “scored an amazingly
efﬁcient 18 points on 7-of-8 shooting”, etc.
5.2
Setup
Comparison Approaches
We compare with diverse approaches for a compre-
hensive analysis of the task and proposed approach:
• Reference for Content Fidelity: AttnCopy-
S2S. We ﬁrst consider a conventional data-to-
text model designed for only expressing the con-
tent. As style imitation is omitted, the method
is expected to excel on content ﬁdelity but fail
on style control. Speciﬁcally, we use a sequence-
to-sequence model (Sutskever et al., 2014) aug-
mented with the proposed attention-copy mecha-
nism (Section 4.1), which is trained supervisedly
on the record-description pairs.
• Reference for Style Embodiment: Slot-ﬁlling.
The second approach serving as a reference
is a traditional slot-ﬁlling method that ﬁrst re-
moves the content words in the exemplar sen-
tence ye to make a template, and ﬁlls in the slots
with respective values in the record x. As all
content-independent tokens in ye are preserved,
the method is expected to perform well on style
embodiment, but fail on content ﬁdelity due to
the possible mismatch between the exemplar
sentences and desired content x. We manually
crafted a large set of slot-ﬁlling rules for each of
the two datasets respectively.
• Multi-Attribute Style Transfer (MAST) (Sub-
ramanian et al., 2019). We compare with a recent
style transfer approach capable of manipulating
multiple attributes. To apply to our task, we treat

Restaurant Recommendations
NBA Reports
Content
Style
Content
Style
Method
%Incl.-new
%Excl.-old
m-BLEU
Precision
Recall
m-BLEU
Reference
AttnCopy-S2S
78.88±2.08
99.71±0.06
13.95±0.52
81.62±3.25
75.65±7.42
45.5±0.71
Slot-ﬁlling
61.23
66.2
100
56.69
71.34
100
Baselines
MAST
36.28±0.25
37.06±0.16
91.76±0.28
23.06±3.90
27.37±3.88
95.43±2.71
AdvST
51.64±4.45
57.06±4.44
76.02±5.27
67.37±0.66
66.79±1.43
64.67±4.81
Ours
Transformer w/o Coverage
60.03±2.16
74.65±2.69
77.81±3.83
62.58±2.88
70.22±3.58
81.75±2.32
+ Coverage
61.84±1.31
81.14±2.73
80.29±0.35
67.74±0.79
74.35±1.22
81.97±2.87
LSTM w/o Coverage
60.83±1.29
81.45±1.10
78.91±1.05
68.74±3.07
69.35±3.30
79.88±2.44
+ Coverage
65.02±4.16
82.53±0.70
82.92±3.18
69.54±1.16
73.27±1.18
80.66±1.89
Table 2: Results of automatic evaluation, averaged over 3 runs ± one standard deviation. The distance between
the record and the exemplar is set to ≤5 for exemplar retrieval (see the text). Methods in the ﬁrst block are
two reference approaches (Section 5.2), i.e., AttnCopy-S2S for content ﬁdelity and Slot-filling for style
embodiment. For our method, we evaluate the variants with and without the coverage constraint (Section 4.3). The
table highlights the best results in the blocks of Baselines and Ours under different metrics.
Style
Content
Figure 3: Effect of record-exemplar distance on model performance on the restaurant dataset. Left: Content ﬁdelity
performance, including “%Inc-new” and “%Exc-old”. Right: Style embodiment performance by “m-BLEU”.
the ﬁeld values in record x as separate attributes.
The method is based on back-translation (Sen-
nrich et al., 2015) that ﬁrst generates a target sen-
tence ˆy conditioning on (x, ye), and then treat
it as the reference to reconstruct ye conditioning
on (xe, ˆy). Auxiliary sentence yx is used in an
extra auto-encoding loss.
• Adversarial Style Transfer (AdvST) (Lo-
geswaran et al., 2018). As another style transfer
approach for multiple attributes, the model incor-
porates back-translation with adversarial training
to disentangle content and style representations.
Model Conﬁgurations
We studied both LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhu-
ber, 1997) and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
architectures. For LSTM, we use a single layer with
the Luong attention (Luong et al., 2015) and copy
mechanism (Gu et al., 2016). For Transformer, use
the recent copy-augmented variant following (Su
et al., 2019) with 3 blocks. During training, we ﬁrst
set (λ = 0, η = 0) to pre-train the model so that
it captures the full characteristics of the exemplar
sentence. We then switch to (λ = 0.2, η = 1.0)
for full training. Adam optimization (Kingma and
Ba, 2014) is used with an initial learning rate of
0.001. At inference time, we use beam search with
the width 5 and the maximum decoding length 50.
5.3
Automatic Evaluation
Metrics
Automatic evaluation of the task is an open and
challenging problem. We use several quantitative
metrics for the two goals of the task, namely con-
tent ﬁdelity and style embodiment.
• Content ﬁdelity. For the NBA data, we follow
the original work (Wiseman et al., 2017) and use
information extraction (IE) to measure content
ﬁdelity. Given a generated sentence ˆy and the
input data record x, we extract ﬁeld values from

Restaurant Recommendations
NBA Reports
Content
Fidelity
Style
Embody
Content
Fidelity
Style
Embody
Model
Fluency
Fluency
Slot-ﬁlling
3.36
5.00
4.70
2.79
5.00
4.86
AdvST
3.56
4.24
4.02
2.88
4.00
4.09
Ours, LSTM w/o Coverage
3.91
4.38
4.58
3.43
4.13
4.59
Ours, LSTM
4.28
4.73
4.54
3.88
4.53
4.52
Ours Better
No Prefer.
Ours Worse
Ours Better
No Prefer.
Ours Worse
Slot-ﬁlling
64.1%
18.6%
17.3%
67.5%
17.5%
15.0%
AdvST
70.4%
14.3%
15.2%
68.8%
17.5%
13.8%
Ours, LSTM w/o Coverage
52.0%
26.7%
21.3%
51.3%
32.5%
16.3%
Table 3: Results of human evaluation. Each metric achieves an average Pearson correlation coefﬁcient ≥0.73,
showing a reasonable inter-annotator agreement. Our improvement in terms of mean annotator ratings is statis-
tically signiﬁcant (p<0.01, t-test). Top: Scoring three aspects on a 5-point Likert scale. Bottom: Ranking the
generations from pairs of models. We use our LSTM-based full model to compare with other methods.
ˆy with an IE tool and compute the precision and
recall against x. We use the IE model provided
in (Wiseman et al., 2017), which achieves 81%
precision and 86% recall on the test set.
We found IE on the restaurant data is too dif-
ﬁcult to serve as a reliable metric, because the
descriptions are less structured. We thus instead
train a BERT-based binary classiﬁer to evaluate
whether a ﬁeld value is expressed in the gener-
ated sentence, which achieves 94% classiﬁcation
accuracy on the test set. We apply the classiﬁer
and compute both the percentage of desired x
ﬁeld values expressed in the generation (%Incl.-
new) and the percentage of original content in ye
(or equivalently, xe) removed from the genera-
tion (%Excl.-old). The higher both numbers, the
more faithfully the generation describes x.
• Style embodiment.
Imitating the exemplar
style involves inheriting the sentence structure,
word choices, and other surface forms of ye. In-
spired by the text style transfer literature (Sub-
ramanian et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018), we
measure the BLEU score between the generated
and the exemplar sentences. To reduce the inﬂu-
ence of the change of content tokens, we mask in
both sentences all obvious content tokens, e.g.,
player/team names and numbers, by replacing
them with a special token <M>. We denote the
metric as m-BLEU. This guarantees the refer-
ence approach, namely the slot-ﬁlling method,
achieves an m-BLEU score of 100.
Study: Balance between Content and Style
Table 2 shows the automatic evaluation results on
the two datasets. In this study, for exemplar re-
trieval (Section 4.2), we set the distance between
a record and an exemplar to be no larger than 5
both during training and when constructing test
cases. That is, the record and the exemplar sen-
tence can have 5 mismatched ﬁelds, which thus
requires strong ﬂexibility of the generation model
to be able to automatically adapt the exemplar in
order to describe the record accurately.
As expected, the reference methods excel only
in one of the two aspects, respectively. Speciﬁ-
cally, AttnCopy-S2S expresses the desired con-
tent well, yet is incapable of embodying the des-
ignated style (e.g., m-BLEU=13.95). On the con-
trary, the Slot-filling method achieves per-
fect style m-BLEU by deﬁnition, but falls short of
adaptively described the desired content in an accu-
rate way, as shown by the low content scores. The
two style transfer approaches (MAST and AdvST)
also fail in terms of content ﬁdelity performance.
This is partly because these models are built on
a different task assumption (i.e., modifying inde-
pendent textual attributes) and are incompetent in
manipulating the structured content well.
Our proposed approach is able to better bal-
ance between content ﬁdelity and style embodi-
ment. For example, in terms of content ﬁdelity,
our approach with an LSTM architecture improves
over the Slot-filling results by 16.3 on NBA
content precision and 12.9 on Restaurant content
%Excl.-old.
The approach meanwhile keeps a
high style m-BLEU score of over 80. Regarding
the ablation study, the results show the proposed
content coverage constraint (Section 4.3) consis-
tently improves both the content and style perfor-
mance by a large margin. We note that the LSTM
and transformer architectures perform compara-
bly, with LSTM slightly better on the restaurant

Content Record
Name
EatType
Food
PriceRange
CustomRating
FamilyFriendly
Cocum
coffee shop
Italian
£20-25
high
family friendly
Exemplar 1
Looking for French food near Zizzi? Come try Strada, which has a 3-star customer rating and priced lowly.
Slot ﬁlling
Looking for Italian [...] food near Zizzi? Come try [...] Cocum, which has a high customer rating and
priced £20-25.
AdvST
For Italian [...] place near Zizzi? Come try [...] Cocum, which has a high customer rating with priced
£20-25.
Ours
Looking for an Italian coffee shop? Come try family-friendly Cocum, which has a high customer rating
and priced £20-25.
Exemplar 2
Along the riverside near Cafe Rouge, there is a Japanese food place called The Golden Curry. It has an
average customer rating since it is not a family-friendly environment.
Slot-ﬁlling
Along the riverside near Cafe Rouge [...], there is a Italian food [...] place called Cocum. It has an high
customer rating since it is not a family-friendly environment.
AdvST
Along the riverside near the Ranch [...], there is a Italian food [...] place called Cocum. It has [...] high
customer rating since it is not a family-friendly environment.
Ours
Priced £20-25, there is an Italian food coffee shop called Cocum. It has a high customer rating since it is
a family-friendly environment.
Content Record
PLAYER
PLAYER
PLAYER
PTS
Patrick
Dwight Howard
Harden
10
Exemplar
Both J.J. Hickson and Timofey Mozgov reached double - ﬁgures , scoring 10 and 15 points.
Slot-ﬁlling
Both Patrick [...] and Dwight Howard reached double - ﬁgures , scoring 10 and 15 points.
AdvST
Both J.J. Hickson [...] and Dwight Howard reached double - ﬁgures , scoring 10 and 10 points.
Ours
Patrick , Dwight Howard and Harden reached double - ﬁgures , scoring 10 points.
Table 4: Example outputs by different models given various exemplar sentences. Text of erroneous content and
syntax are highlighted in red, where [...] indicates desired content that is missing. Text portions about the writing
style in both exemplars and the generated sentences by our model are highlighted in blue.
dataset. We speculate that the copy mechanism of
LSTM (Gu et al., 2016) is slightly more effective
than that of transformer (Su et al., 2019).
Study: Effect of Record-Exemplar Distance
We then study how well the different methods
would perform when given exemplars of varying
distances (mismatchness) to the records. Figure 3
show the content and style results under different
distances. We can see that, as the exemplars deviate
more from the structure of the records, the model
performance drops since it is getting harder to au-
tomatically adapt the exemplars to express the de-
sired content. For example, the “%Excl.old” score
(middle panel) of the methods Slot-filling
and AdvST decreases quickly. Our approach main-
tains a more stable performance and keeps a better
content-style balance. The results also show the
proposed content coverage constraint consistently
offers enhanced performance.
5.4
Human Evaluation
We also perform human evaluation for a more thor-
ough and accurate comparison. Following the ex-
perimental settings in prior work (Subramanian
et al., 2019; Logeswaran et al., 2018; Shen et al.,
2017), we undertake two types of human evalua-
tion: (1) We ask three human annotators to score
generation results in three aspects, namely content
ﬁdelity, style embodiment, and sentence ﬂuency,
on a 5-point Likert scale. (2) We present to each
annotator a pair of generated sentences, one from
our model and the other from a comparison method,
then ask the annotator to rank the two sentences by
considering the above criteria jointly. Annotators
can also choose “no preference” if the sentences are
equally good or bad. For each study, we evaluated
on 80 test instances. We use the LSTM architec-
ture as it outperforms the transformer slightly in
the automatic evaluation. We compare with the
Slot-filling method, AdvST (which is bet-
ter than MAST in automatic evaluation), and our
variant without the coverage constraint.
Table 3 shows the results. From the top block,
as discussed above, the Slot-filling method
performs well in terms of style embodiment and
ﬂuency. However, its content ﬁdelity is extremely
weak. In contrast, our model achieves a better
balance across the three criteria, by obtaining the
best performance on content ﬁdelity and reasonably

high scores on both style embodiment and ﬂuency.
The ﬂuency of our full model is slightly inferior to
the variant without the coverage constraint, which
is not unexpected since the full model modiﬁes
more portions of the exemplar sentences, which
would result in minor language mistakes.
The bottom block of Table 3 shows the human
ranking results. We can see that our model consis-
tently outperforms the comparison methods with
over 50% wins on both datasets.
5.5
Qualitative Study
Table 4 shows samples on two test cases.
We
can see that the proposed full model performs su-
perior to other approaches in effectively retain-
ing the desired style and describing the content.
For example, in the ﬁrst two examples, other ap-
proaches often fail to remove the redundant content
(e.g., “near Zizzi” or “riverside”) from the gener-
ation while neglecting desired ﬁelds in the record.
The proposed model performs better by adaptively
adding and deleting text portions for accurate con-
tent description. Similarly, in the third case, both
Slot-filling and AdvST fail to convey the
new ﬁeld value “Harden” given the exemplar, and
leave in irrelevant information given the second
one due to the different record structures between
x and xe. In contrast, our full model generates the
desired sentence.
6
Conclusion
We have studied the new problem of data-to-text
generation with style imitation. We developed a
new approach with an attention-copy mechanism,
weakly supervised learning, and a content cover-
age constraint. Experiments show the approach
achieves a good balance between content ﬁdelity
and style control, and is ﬂexible to adapt exemplars
that do not match the record perfectly. We are in-
terested in applying the style imitation approach to
control longer paragraphs given full data tables.
