arXiv:1101.0929v1  [stat.AP]  5 Jan 2011
The Annals of Applied Statistics
2010, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1642–1643
DOI: 10.1214/10-AOAS387
c
⃝Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2010
LEO BREIMAN
By Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
Statistics is a uniquely diﬃcult ﬁeld to convey to the uninitiated. It sits
astride the abstract and the concrete, the theoretical and the applied. It has
a mathematical ﬂavor and yet it is not simply a branch of mathematics. Its
core problems blend into those of the disciplines that probe into the nature of
intelligence and thought, in particular philosophy, psychology and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Debates over foundational issues have waxed and waned, but
the ﬁeld has not yet arrived at a single foundational perspective.
Given these complexities it might seem surprising that human beings
could have deﬁnite opinions about core issues in statistics, and surprising
that working in such a ﬁeld could be pleasurable. And yet there was Leo
Breiman, who had his deﬁnite opinions about statistics and who took great
pleasure in waking up every morning to see what more he could do to bring
the ﬁeld along.
To the extent that most statisticians have a vision about the ﬁnal conclu-
sive form the ﬁeld might take, I suspect that this vision is a mathematical
one—a set of core deﬁnitions, axioms and theorems. Moreover, I think that
many statisticians will expect for these mathematical ideas to involve a set
of optimality principles, such that it will be possible for a user of statistics
circa 2500 AD to dial in the description of a problem and out will pop the
optimal procedure.
I think that Leo had come to a diﬀerent vision. In thinking about Leo I
think about the box of tools in my basement. It contains hammers, screw-
drivers, pliers, nails, screws and rivets. Of the inﬁnite number of possible
physical forms that objects for manipulating the physical world could have
taken, these are the ones that have come to us from our ancestors in the
applied ﬁeld of “management of uncertainty in physical structures.” They
arose via little bits of human genius and they have stood the test of time.
My vision of Leo’s vision is, of course, an inference, and to support my
inference I will exhibit some of the (anecdotal) data on which it is based.
Received July 2010.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2010, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1642–1643. This reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
1

2
M. I. JORDAN
• I ﬁrst met Leo at a conference where I found myself at a lunch table
with Leo and Jerry Friedman. Leo initiated the lunchtime conversation as
follows: “Jerry, what do you think about nearest neighbor?” An outsider
might have naively thought that “nearest neighbor” was some recent fad,
but of course Leo (and Jerry) had been thinking about nearest neighbor
for decades. Leo simply wanted to kick nearest neighbor around the block
yet again, testing it against recent developments (e.g., hardware, algorith-
mic and mathematical) to see whether new reasons might have emerged
for preferring nearest neighbor as a solution for certain kinds of applied
problems. In subsequent years I had this kind of conversation with Leo
many times, and it left a strong sense that Leo was thinking carefully
about the “ultimate toolbox.” (He did not seem enthralled by nearest
neighbor, but he did seem to think that the jury was still out.)
• Consistent with the notion of constructing a toolbox, Leo delighted in
terminology for statistical procedures that have a physical connotation.
Some of these he invented, others he borrowed. Consider the following
examples: “curds and whey,” “bagging,” “stacking,” “garotte,” “CART”
and “forests.” One seeming counterexample is “ACE,” but I have had the
advantage of seeing Jerry Friedman’s tribute to Leo, where I learned that
“ACE” was Jerry’s invention. Moreover, Jerry relates that Leo only went
along with “ACE” when he realized that it is the name of a hardware
store. Case closed!
• Leo was an artist and I think that he would have subscribed to a vision
in which the users of statistics in 2500 AD would be given a set of tools
in which they could express their own creative solutions to problems. He
would have rejected a rigid prescription of what must be done in each and
every situation.
• Another preferred piece of Breimanesque terminology was “oﬀ-the-shelf,”
again a rather physical metaphor. Leo tended to be suspicious of “free
parameters”; procedures should work with little or no “tuning.” Whenever
I might tell Leo about a project of mine that had a Bayesian ﬂavor this
suspicion would come to the fore. While this might seem inconsistent with
the notion of the “statistician as artist,” the more reﬁned notion is perhaps
that of the “statistician as artisan.” Hammers and screwdrivers don’t tend
to have free parameters. Leo wanted each of the basic tools to do one job
and do it well.
Leo was a complex human being, and my portrait may at best have cap-
tured only one aspect of the man. But as Leo taught us, ensembles often do
surprisingly well, and hopefully the ensemble of portraits will do him justice.
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720
USA
