Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Filip Ilievskia,∗, Alessandro Oltramarib, Kaixin Mac, Bin Zhanga, Deborah L. McGuinnessd and
Pedro Szekelya
aInformation Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
bIntelligent Internet of Things, Bosch Research and Technology Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
cLanguage Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
dTetherless World Constellation, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
commonsense knowledge
semantics
knowledge graphs
reasoning
A B S T R A C T
Commonsense knowledge is essential for many AI applications, including those in natural language
processing, visual processing, and planning. Consequently, many sources that include commonsense
knowledge have been designed and constructed over the past decades. Recently, the focus has been
on large text-based sources, which facilitate easier integration with neural (language) models and
application to textual tasks, typically at the expense of the semantics of the sources and their harmo-
nization. Eﬀorts to consolidate commonsense knowledge have yielded partial success, with no clear
path towards a comprehensive solution. We aim to organize these sources around a common set of
dimensions of commonsense knowledge. We survey a wide range of popular commonsense sources
with a special focus on their relations. We consolidate these relations into 13 knowledge dimensions.
This consolidation allows us to unify the separate sources and to compute indications of their cover-
age, overlap, and gaps with respect to the knowledge dimensions. Moreover, we analyze the impact
of each dimension on downstream reasoning tasks that require commonsense knowledge, observing
that the temporal and desire/goal dimensions are very beneﬁcial for reasoning on current downstream
tasks, while distinctness and lexical knowledge have little impact. These results reveal preferences for
some dimensions in current evaluation, and potential neglect of others.
1. Introduction
Commonsense knowledge is information that humans
typically have that helps them make sense of everyday situa-
tions. As such, this knowledge can generally be assumed to
be possessed by most people, and, according to the Gricean
maxims [27], it is typically omitted in (written or oral) com-
munication. The fact that commonsense knowledge is often
implicit presents a challenge for automated natural language
processing (NLP) and question answering (QA) approaches
as the extraction and learning algorithms cannot count on the
commonsense knowledge being available directly in text.
Due to its prominence and implicit nature, capturing com-
monsense knowledge holds a promise to beneﬁt various AI
applications, including those in NLP, computer vision, and
planning. For instance, commonsense knowledge can be
used to ﬁll gaps and explain the predictions of a (neural)
model [47], understand agent goals and causality in stories [88],
or enhance robot navigation and manipulation [91]. Its ben-
eﬁts have already been shown in downstream applications,
such as software requirements localization [63] and aligning
local laws with public reactions [66].
Consequently, acquiring and representing commonsense
knowledge in a machine-readable form, as well as reason-
ing with it, has been a major pursuit of AI since its early
days [55]. This has manifested in the design, construction,
and curation of a rich palette of resources that include com-
∗Corresponding author

ORCID(s):
monsense information (potentially along with other content)
like Cyc [43], ATOMIC [72], WebChild [84], ConceptNet [81],
WordNet [56], FrameNet [3], and Visual Genome [40]. Some
of these, such as ConceptNet and Cyc, have been deliberately
created to capture information that would be useful for com-
mon sense-related reasoning tasks, while others, like Word-
Net or Visual Genome, were intended to support other tasks
such as word sense disambiguation or image object recogni-
tion. As reported in [35], the commonsense sources exhibit
great diversity in terms of their representational formats, cre-
ation methods, and coverage. While there is an opportunity
for this knowledge to be exploited jointly, the inherent diver-
sity makes the consolidation of these sources challenging.
Meanwhile, the last few years have featured an increased
focus on benchmarks that can be used to evaluate diﬀerent
aspects of common sense, including social [73], physical [8],
visual [92], and numeric [48] common sense. Further dis-
tinction has been made between discriminative tasks [73, 8,
83], where the goal is to pick the single correct answer from
a list, and generative tasks, where one has to generate one or
multiple correct answers [48, 9]. These tasks can be tackled
by using (the entire or a subset of the) training data [52, 47],
or in a zero-/few-shot evaluation regime [53, 78].
The wealth and diversity of commonsense sources, on
one hand, and benchmarks, on the other hand, raises a nat-
ural question: what is the role of these knowledge repos-
itories in real-world reasoning techniques that need to in-
corporate commonsense knowledge? While intuitively such
sources of commonsense knowledge can have tremendous
value for reasoning in downstream reasoning tasks, the prac-
tice shows that their impact on these tasks has been relatively
limited, especially in comparison to the contribution of the
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 21
arXiv:2101.04640v2  [cs.AI]  29 Jul 2021

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
language models (LMs).1 Knowledge sources tend to have
larger contributions when little or no training data is avail-
able: for example, one can generate artiﬁcial training sets
based on several sources, which can be used to pre-train lan-
guage models and apply them on downstream tasks without
using the oﬃcial training data [4, 53]. The impact of knowl-
edge resources so far has been generally restricted to the
special cases where the knowledge and the task are known
(in advance) to be well-aligned [53, 52]. While a variety of
sources [72, 56, 81] or their combination [35] have been used
to enhance language models for downstream reasoning, lit-
tle is known about how this alignment between knowledge
types and tasks can be dynamically achieved.
Most recent sources have focused on the breadth of knowl-
edge, sometimes at the expense of its semantics [6, 60]. Text-
based representations are particularly attractive, as they fa-
cilitate a more direct integration with language models, as
well as reasoning on NLP and QA tasks. These sources
are often treated as ‘corpora’, where each fact is typically
lexicalized (manually or automatically) into a single sen-
tence [52], which is used to inform or ﬁne-tune a language
model. Due to the lack of focus on formal representational
principles, the sources capture knowledge types which are
not trivial to align with other sources, as shown by the sparse
mappings available between these sources [35]. Considering
the lack of a common vocabulary and the lack of alignment
of these sources, their limited coverage, and lack of focus
on explicit semantics, knowledge is typically kept in an im-
poverished textual form that is easy to capture and combine
with language models. The downsides of this practice are:
1) the commonsense knowledge remains diﬃcult to harmo-
nize across sources; 2) without a thorough harmonization
or consolidation, it is not clear how to eﬀectively measure
coverage, overlap, or gaps; and 3) text-based representations
alone may be unable to match the human-like level of sophis-
tication typical for contextual reasoning.
Eﬀorts to consolidate commonsense knowledge across
sources [35, 22, 61] have managed to bring these sources
closer, which has shown impact on commonsense QA tasks [53].
In [34], we provide heuristics for deﬁning the boundaries of
commonsense knowledge, in order to extract such a subset
from one of the largest available graphs today, Wikidata [87].
Yet, these eﬀorts have limited success, and many consolida-
tion questions are left open. How should one think about
commonsense knowledge in a theoretical way? What does it
mean to build a consolidated knowledge graph (KG) of re-
sources created largely in a bottom-up fashion? How should
the relations be chosen? What is the right level of abstraction
for relations and nodes?
2. Approach
We aim to provide insights into such questions, aiming
primarily to organize the types of knowledge found in exist-
1This phenomenon can be seen on the benchmark leadearboards,
which are dominated by ‘pure’ language models, for instance: https://
leaderboard.allenai.org/socialiqa/submissions/public (accessed on Jan-
uary 5th, 2021).
ing sources of commonsense knowledge.
For this purpose, we survey a wide variety of sources of
commonsense knowledge, ranging from commonsense KGs
through lexical and visual sources, to the recent idea of us-
ing language models or corpora as commonsense knowledge
bases. We survey their relations and group them into a set
of dimensions, each being a cluster of its speciﬁc relations,
as found in the sources. We then apply these dimensions to
transform and unify existing sources, providing an enriched
version of the Commonsense Knowledge Graph (CSKG) [35].
The dimensions allow us to perform four novel experiments:
1. We assess the coverage of the sources with respect to
each dimension, noting that some sources have wide
(but potentially shallow) coverage of dimensions, whereas
others have deep but narrow coverage. This supports
the need to integrate these complementary sources into
a single one.
2. The consolidation of the dimensions enables us to com-
pare knowledge between the sources and compute met-
rics of overlap. The results show that there is little
knowledge overlap across sources, even after consoli-
dating the relations according to our dimensions.
3. The statements that are expressed with a dimension
form a cluster of knowledge. We contrast these dimension-
based clusters to language model-based clusters, which
allows us to understand some similarities and diﬀer-
ences in terms of their focus.
4. We measure the impact of each dimension on two rep-
resentative commonsense QA benchmarks. Follow-
ing [53], we pre-train a language model and apply it
on these benchmarks in a zero-shot fashion (without
making use of the task training data). The dimensions
provide a more direct alignment between common-
sense knowledge and the tasks, revealing that some
dimensions of knowledge are far more informative for
reasoning on these tasks than others.
The contributions of the paper are as follows. 1) We
survey a wide variety of existing sources of commonsense
knowledge, with an emphasis on their relations. We pro-
vide a categorization of those sources and include a short
overview of their focus and creation methods (Section 3).
2) We analyze the entire set of relations and abstract them to
a set of 13 commonsense dimensions. Each dimension ab-
stracts over more speciﬁc relations, as found in the sources (Sec-
tion 4). 3) The identiﬁed dimensions are applied to con-
solidate the knowledge in CSKG, which integrates seven of
the sources we analyze in this paper. The resulting resource
is publicly available (Section 5). 4) We make use of this
dimension-based enrichment of CSKG to analyze the over-
lap, coverage, and knowledge gaps of individual knowledge
sources in CSKG, motivating their further consolidation into
a single resource (Sections 5.1 - 5.3). 5) We evaluate the
impact of diﬀerent dimensions on two popular downstream
commonsense reasoning tasks. The results show that certain
dimensions, like temporal and motivational knowledge, are
very beneﬁcial and well-covered by benchmarks, whereas
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 1
Overview of commonsense knowledge sources. The asterisk (‘*’) indicates that the source is
extended with WordNet knowledge. For FrameNet and MetaNet, we specify their numbers
of frame-to-frame relations. WebChild contains a large number of relations, expressed as
WordNet synsets, which are aggregated into 4 groups.
Category
Source
Relations
Example 1
Example 2
Commonsense KGs
ConceptNet*
34
food - capable of - go rotten
eating - is used for - nourishment
ATOMIC
9
Person X bakes bread - xEﬀect - eat food
PersonX is eating dinner - xEﬀect - satisﬁes hunger
GLUCOSE
10
푆표푚푒표푛푒퐴makes 푆표푚푒푡ℎ푖푛푔퐴(that is food) Causes/Enables 푆표푚푒표푛푒퐴eats 푆표푚푒푡ℎ푖푛푔퐴
WebChild
4 (groups)
restaurant food - quality#n#1 - expensive
eating - type of - consumption
Quasimodo
78,636
pressure cooker - cook faster - food
herbivore - eat - plants
SenticNet
1
cold_food - polarity - negative
eating breakfast - polarity - positive
HasPartKB
1
dairy food - has part - vitamin
n/a
Probase
1
apple - is a - food
n/a
Isacore
1
snack food - is a - food
n/a
Common KGs
Wikidata
6.7k
food - has quality - mouthfeel
eating - subclass of - ingestion
YAGO4
116
banana chip - rdf:type - food
eating - rdfs:label - feeding
DOLCE*
1
n/a
n/a
SUMO*
1,614
food - hyponym - food_product
process - subsumes - eating
Lexical resources
WordNet
10
food - hyponym - comfort food
eating - part-meronym - chewing
Roget
2
dish - synonym - food
eating - synonym - feeding
FrameNet
8 (f2f)
Cooking_creation - has frame element - Produced_food
eating - evoke - Ingestion
MetaNet
14 (f2f)
Food - has role - food_consumer
consuming_resources - is - eating
VerbNet
36 (roles)
feed.v.01 - Arg1-PPT - food
eating - hasPatient - comestible
Visual sources
Visual Genome
42,374
food - on - plate
boy - is eating - treat
Flickr30k
1
a food buﬀet - corefers with - a food counter
a eating place - corefers with - their kitchen
Corpora & LMs
GenericsKB
n/a
Aardvarks search for food.
Animals receive nitrogen by eating plants.
GPT-2
n/a
Food causes a person to be hungry and a person to eat.
Eating at home will not lead to weight gain.
other dimensions like distinctness and lexical knowledge cur-
rently have little impact. These results show that our dimen-
sions can be used to facilitate more precise alignment be-
tween the available knowledge and question answering tasks.
This evaluation also points to gaps in the current knowledge
sources and tasks (Section 5.4). 6) We reﬂect on the results
of our analysis, and use the resulting observations as a ba-
sis to provide a roadmap towards building a more compre-
hensive resource that may further advance the representation
of, and reasoning with, commonsense knowledge. Such a
resource would be instrumental in building a general com-
monsense service in the future (Section 7).
3. Sources of Commonsense Knowledge
We deﬁne a digital commonsense knowledge source as
a potentially multi-modal repository from which common-
sense knowledge can be extracted.2 Commonsense knowl-
edge sources come in various forms and cover diﬀerent types
of knowledge. While only a handful of sources have been
formally proposed as commonsense sources, many others
cover aspects of common sense. Here, we collect a repre-
sentative set of sources, which have been either proposed as,
or considered as, repositories of commonsense knowledge in
the past. We categorize them into ﬁve groups, and describe
the content and creation method of representative sources
within each group. Table 3 contains statistics and examples
for each source.
2For brevity, we omit the word ‘digital’ in the remainder of this paper.
3.1. Commonsense Knowledge Graphs
ConceptNet [81] is a multilingual commonsense knowl-
edge graph. Its nodes are primarily lexical and connect to
each other with 34 relations. Its data is largely derived from
the crowdsourced Open Mind Common Sense corpus [80],
and is complemented with knowledge from other resources,
like WordNet.
ATOMIC [72] is a commonsense knowledge graph that
expresses pre- and post-states for events and their partici-
pants in a lexical form with nine relations. Its base events
are collected from a variety of corpora, while the data for
the events is collected by crowdsourcing.
GLUCOSE [60] contains causal knowledge through 10
relations about events, states, motivations, and emotions. The
knowledge in GLUCOSE is crowdsourced based on semi-
automatic templates, and generalized from individual stories
to more abstract rules.
WebChild [84] is a commonsense knowledge graph whose
nodes and relations are disambiguated as WordNet senses. It
captures 20 main relations, grouped in four categories. We-
bChild has been extracted automatically from Web informa-
tion, and then is canonicalized in a post-processing step.
Quasimodo [71] contains commonsense knowledge about
object properties, human behavior, and general concepts, ex-
pressed with nearly 80K relations. Its nodes and relations are
initially lexical and extracted automatically from search logs
and forums, after which a notable subset of them has been
clustered into WordNet domains.
SenticNet [12] is a knowledge base with conceptual and
aﬀective knowledge, which is extracted from text and aggre-
gated automatically into higher-level primitives.
HasPartKB [7] is a knowledge graph of hasPart state-
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
ments, extracted from a corpus with sentences and reﬁned
by automatic means.
Probase [90] is a probabilistic taxonomy of IsA state-
ments, which has been automatically extracted from a large
corpus.
IsaCore [13] is a taxonomy of IsA knowledge selected
from ConceptNet and Probase.
3.2. Common Knowledge Graphs and Ontologies
Wikidata [87] is a general-domain knowledge graph,
tightly coupled with Wikipedia, that describes notable enti-
ties. Its nodes and relations are disambiguated as Qnodes.
The content of Wikidata is collaboratively created by hu-
mans, as well as other existing sources. Given the vast num-
ber of statements in Wikidata and its sizable set of over 7
thousand relations, we consider its Wikidata-CS common-
sense subset, as extracted by Ilievski et al. [34].
YAGO [86] is a general-purpose knowledge graph, whose
nodes and relations are disambiguated entities. YAGO mod-
els its knowledge with 116 relations. The knowledge in YAGO
is extracted automatically from Wikipedia, and consolidated
with knowledge from other sources, like Schema.org [28].
DOLCE (Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cog-
nitive Engineering) [23] is an upper level ontology that cap-
tures the ontological categories underlying natural language
and human common sense with disambiguated concepts and
relations. It has been created manually by experts.
SUMO (Suggested Upper Merged Ontology) [62] is an
ontology of upper-level disambiguated concepts and their re-
lations. It has been created manually by experts.
3.3. Lexical Resources
WordNet [56] is a lexical database of words, their mean-
ings, and taxonomical organization, in over 200 languages.
WordNet has nearly a dozen relations. It has been created
manually by experts.
Roget [69] is a manually-created thesaurus that contains
synonyms and antonyms for English words.
FrameNet [3] is a lexical resource that formalizes the
frame semantics theory: meanings are mostly understood
within a frame of an event and its participants that fulﬁll
roles in that frame. FrameNet has 8 frame-to-frame rela-
tions. FrameNet was created manually by experts.
MetaNet [18] is a repository of conceptual frames, as
well as their relations which often express metaphors. There
are 14 frame-to-frame relations in MetaNet. It has been cre-
ated manually.
VerbNet [75] is a resource that describes syntactic and
semantic patterns of verbs, and organizes them into verb
classes. There are 36 relations about roles in VerbNet. Verb-
Net has been created manually by experts.
3.4. Visual Commonsense Sources
Visual Genome [40] contains annotations of concepts
and their relations in a collection of images. VisualGenome
has over 40K relations. The image descriptions are manually
written by crowd workers, while their concepts are mapped
automatically to WordNet senses and revised by crowd work-
ers.
Flickr30k [65] annotates objects in 30k images by mul-
tiple workers. The expressions used by diﬀerent annotators
are clustered automatically into groups of coreferential ex-
pressions by van Miltenburg [58].
3.5. Corpora and Language Models
GenericsKB [6] contains self-contained generic facts rep-
resented as naturally occurring sentences. The sentences
have been extracted from three existing corpora, ﬁltered by
handwritten rules, and scored with a BERT-based classiﬁer.
Language models, like RoBERTa [51] and GPT-2 [67],
can be used as KGs[64] to complement explicitly stated in-
formation, e.g., as a link prediction system like COMET [10]
or through self-talk [78].
3.6. Observations
As apparent from the descriptions in this section, the ex-
isting commonsense sources are based on a wide range of
representation principles and have been created using diﬀer-
ent construction methods. Through the example scenarios
of food and eating (Table 3), we show that they have notable
overlap in terms of their covered (typically well-known) con-
cepts. At the same time, the types of knowledge covered
diﬀer across sources: some sources provide truisms, such as
feeding is done with food, while others speculate on usual
properties of food, such as its capability to spoil (or “go rot-
ten”) or often be placed on a plate. Furthermore, we observe
that same or similar relations tend to have diﬀerent names
across sources (compare type of to subclass of or is; or has
quality in Wikidata to cook faster in Quasimodo).
These distinctions make the integration of these sources,
and the understanding of their coverage and gaps, very chal-
lenging. In order to integrate the knowledge in these sources,
we next propose a consolidation of their relations into a com-
mon set of dimensions.
4. Dimensions of commonsense knowledge
In the previous section, we surveyed 20 representative
commonsense sources from ﬁve categories: commonsense
KGs, common KGs, lexical sources, visual sources, and cor-
pora and language models. A key contribution of this paper
is a manual categorization (by the authors) of the kind of
knowledge expressed by the relations in these sources into
13 dimensions. Table 2 shows the correspondence of each
relation in these analyzed sources to our dimensions. An ex-
ample for each of the dimensions from diﬀerent sources is
shown in Table 4. We next describe each dimension in turn.
Lexical. Many data sources leverage the vocabulary of
a language or the lexicon in their relations. This includes
relationships such as plural forms of nouns, or past tenses
of verbs, for example. Lexical knowledge also covers sub-
string information. ConceptNet, for example, includes a re-
lationship called DerivedFrom that they describe as capturing
when a word or phrase appears within another term and con-
tributes to that term’s meaning. Lexical knowledge is also
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 2
Knowledge dimensions with their corresponding relations. Relations marked with ‘*’ de-
scribe knowledge in multiple dimensions. Relations with ¬ express negated statements.
Sources in the column Other: FN = FrameNet, WN = WordNet, RG = Roget, HP =
HasPartKB, PB = Probase, IC = IsaCore, SN = SenticNet.
Dimension
ATOMIC
ConceptNet
WebChild
Other
Wikidata
FormOf
lexical
DerivedFrom
lexical_unit (FN)
label
EtymologicallyDerivedFrom
lemma (WN)
Synonym
reframing_mapping (FN)
similarity
SimilarTo
hassimilar
metaphor (FN)
DeﬁnedAs
Synonym (RG)
said to be the same as
synonym (WN)
Antonym
Antonym (RG)
diﬀerent from
distinctness
DistinctFrom
antonym (WN)
opposite of
excludes (FN)
IsA
perspective_on (FN)
subClassOf
taxonomic
InstanceOf
hasHypernymy
inheritance (FN)
instanceOf
MannerOf
hypernym (WN)
description
isA (PB, IC)
PartOf
HasPart (HP)
HasA
physicalPartOf
meronym (WN)
has part
part-whole
MadeOf
memberOf
holonym (WN)
member of
AtLocation*
substanceOf
material used
AtLocation*
location
location
spatial
LocatedNear
spatial
anatomical location
creation
CreatedBy
creator
ReceivesAction
utility
UsedFor
hassynsetmember
using (FN)
used by
CapableOf
activity
use
¬NotCapableOf
participant
uses
xIntent
CausesDesire
xWant
MotivatedByGoal
desire/goal
oWant
Desires
¬NotDesires
ObstructedBy
shape
size
quality
HasProperty
color
frame_element (FN)
¬NotHasProperty
taste_property
polarity (SN)
color
xAttr
SymbolOf
temperature
has quality
comparative
6.3k relations
xNeed
HasFirstSubevent
subframe (FN)
xEﬀect
HasLastSubevent
time
precedes (FN)
temporal
oEﬀect
HasSubevent
emotion
inchoative_of (FN)
xReact
HasPrerequisite
prev
causative_of (FN)
has cause
oReact
Causes
next
has eﬀect
Entails
RelatedTo
ﬁeld of this occupation
relational
HasContext
thing
see_also (FN)
depicts
-other
EtymologicallyRelatedTo
agent
requires (FN)
health specialty
the formalization of the relation between a concept and its
expression in a language, e.g., denoted by through the label
relation in Wikidata.
Similarity. Most data sources include the notion of syn-
onymy between expressions. They typically allow deﬁni-
tions of terms, and some cover a broader notion of general
similarity. ConceptNet has all three subcategories - for in-
stance, regarding similarity, it establishes that wholesome
and organic food are similar notions, while eating is deﬁned
as process of taking in food. WebChild also captures sim-
ilarity between WordNet concepts, while WordNet, Wiki-
data, and Roget focus on synonymy. For instance, Roget de-
clares that food and edibles are synonyms, while Wikidata
expresses that food is said to be the same as nutriment.
Distinctness. Complementary to similarity, most data
sources have notions of some kind of distinguishability. Most
commonly, this is formalized as antonymy, where words have
an opposition relationship between them, i.e., they have an
inherently incompatible relationship. For example, both Ro-
get and ConceptNet consider hot and cold to be antonyms, as
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
these are two exclusive temperature states of objects. FrameNet
deﬁnes an Excludes relation to indicate that two roles of a
frame cannot be simultaneously ﬁlled in a given situation.
For instance, in the Placing frame, an event can either be
brought by a cause event or by an intentional agent, but not
both. Weaker forms of distinctness are deﬁned by Wikidata
and ConceptNet, for concepts that might be mistaken as syn-
onyms. For example, Wikidata states that food safety is dif-
ferent from food security, while ConceptNet distinguishes
food from drinks.
Taxonomic. Most data sources include a kind of ar-
rangement classiﬁcation where some objects are placed into
more general and more speciﬁc groupings with inheritance
relations. When those groupings are ordered categories based
on generality, this captures the notion of hyponymy, indicat-
ing a subcategory relationship. Hyponymy blends the dis-
tinction between the relationships subclass (intended for two
classes) and InstanceOf (intended as a relation between an
instance and a class). For instance, Wikidata states that a
sandwich wrap is street food, and that food is a disposable
product. WordNet has information that beverage and com-
fort food are hyponyms of food. While this dimension gen-
erally focuses on concepts (nouns), it also includes a spe-
cialization relation for verbs. Here, the MannerOf relation in
ConceptNet states that wheezing is a manner of breathing.
Two of the sources we review in this paper, Probase [90]
and IsaCore [13], focus only on taxonomic relations.
Part-whole. Many data sources include a notion of be-
ing a part of or a member of something. Part-whole knowl-
edge can be transitive, such as that of geographic contain-
ment, exempliﬁed by New York City being a part of New
York State, which is also part of the United states. Other
part-of notions, such as member-of are not necessarily tran-
sitive. A third category of part-whole knowledge is expressed
with the material or the building blocks of an object, such as
food being made of food ingredients. A useful distinction
between these three notions of part-whole: physical part of
(sunroof - car), member of (musician - duet), and substance
of (steel - boiler), is provided by WebChild. The importance
of this commonsense dimension is shown by HasPartKB [7],
which is an entire resource dedicated to part-whole relations.
Spatial. Spatial relations describe terms relating to or
occupying space. This may entail indicating the usual lo-
cation of a concept, as in the location property in wikidata
or the AtLocation in ConceptNet. ConceptNet expresses lo-
cations for geographic entities, for example Boston is at lo-
cation Massachusetts, as well as for things that can contain
things: butter is at location refrigerator. Similar to the lat-
ter case, Wikidata includes an example that toasters are lo-
cated in kitchens. A weaker spatial relation is one of spatial
proximity in WebChild or ConceptNet, specifying that, e.g.,
bikes are located near roads. While Visual Genome does not
explicitly have a spatial relation, concepts occurring in the
same image region can be represented with the LocatedNear
relation [35]. Example such statements include food being
located near a plate or a table.
Creation. This dimension describes the process or the
agent that brought something into existence. ConceptNet
gives an example that a cake is created by the bake process,
COMET has information that food is created from plants,
while Wikidata states that riﬂe factories create shotguns. Ta-
ble 2 reveals that no other source has creation information.
Utility. This dimension covers a notion of ﬁtness or use-
fulness of objects for some purpose. ConceptNet’s relation
UsedFor expresses knowledge that ‘the purpose of A is B’,
with an example of food being used for pleasure or nour-
ishment. Wikidata has several similar relations: use, used
by, and uses, which can express that platter is used for food
presentation, or food is used by organisms. ConceptNet in-
cludes the notion of CapableOf, described as ‘A is capable of
B if A can typically do B’, like food being capable of spoiling
or “going rotten”, or knives being capable of cutting. An-
other related notion is that of receiving an action: a button
may receive the push action. While a button does not have
the sole purpose of being pushed, it is capable of receiving
that action, and by inference, it may respond to the action.
Desire or goal. This dimension covers knowledge about
an agent’s motivation, i.e., their desires or goals. An agent
may want to have something or wish for something to hap-
pen. The agent typically has certain goals, aims, and/or plans,
that may motivate or explain those desires.
The relation
Desires in ConceptNet may indicate, e.g., that a person de-
sires regular access to food. Its negated version, NotDesires
expresses that a person does not desire poisoned food. ATOMIC
has two relations: xWant and oWant, to indicate the desires
of an agent or other agents in a given situation.
For in-
stance, when people watch a movie together, they want to
get some food. Regarding goals, ConceptNet includes the
MotivatedByGoal and ObstructedBy relations to indicate the
motivation and the constraint for a certain action. For in-
stance, ConceptNet indicates that one’s sleep is obstructed
by noise, while COMET’s extension of ConceptNet posits
that people cook a meal because they are hungry.
Quality. Commonsense sources typically describe at-
tributes of an agent or qualities related to an object. For ex-
ample, ConceptNet and COMET include the relation HasProperty,
to express knowledge like ice having the property cold and
that food has property tasty. ATOMIC uses xAttr to indicate
that, for example, the person that cooks food often has the
attribute hungry or creative. WebChild and Wikidata both
provide more speciﬁc qualities, such as taste, temperature,
shape, or color. For instance, WebChild would specify the
plant color as green. SenticNet describes the perceived “po-
larity” of an object, e.g., cold food is generally seen as neg-
ative.
Comparative. WebChild performs comparison of ob-
jects based on relative values for their attributes. Example
comparative relations in WebChild are: healthier than (home
cooking - fast food), faster than (car - bike), and larger than
(lion - hyena). Notably, no other source describes compara-
tive knowledge explicitly.3
3Here we exclude implicitly comparative knowledge, such as the in-
ferred information that eating food makes one more satisﬁed from the triple:
PersonX eats food - xReact - satisﬁed. We also include a separate category
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 3
Examples for food for each of the 13 dimensions. When the subject is diﬀerent from food,
we state it explicitly, e.g., xWant: watch movie together - get some food.
Dimension
Example
Source
lexical
derivationaly related form: nutrient
WordNet
etymologically related: fodder
ConceptNet
derived term: foodie
ConceptNet
similarity
synonym: dish
ROGET
said to be the same as: nutriment
Wikidata
similar to: wholesome - organic
ConceptNet
distinctiveness
opposite of: non-food item
Wikidata
distinct from: drink
ConceptNet
diﬀerent from: food safety - food security
Wikidata
taxonomic
hyponym: comfort food
WordNet
hyponym: beverage
WordNet
hypernym: substance
WordNet
subclass of: disposable product
Wikidata
part-whole
things with food: minibar
ConceptNet
is part of: life
COMET
material used: food ingredient
Wikidata
spatial
is located at: pantry
ConceptNet
is located at: a store
ConceptNet
location: toaster - kitchen
Wikidata
located near: plate
Visual Genome
located near: table
Visual Genome
creator
is created by: cook
COMET
is created by: plant
COMET
utility
use: eating
Wikidata
used by: organism
Wikidata
used for: pleasure
ConceptNet
used for: sustain life
COMET
used for: nourishment
ConceptNet
capable of: cost money
ConceptNet
capable of: go rotten
ConceptNet
is capable of: taste good
COMET
goal/desire
xWant: watch movie together - get some food
ATOMIC
desires: regular access to food
ConceptNet
not desires: food poisoning
ConceptNet
causes desire to: eat
ConceptNet
xIntent: eats food - quit feeling hungry
ATOMIC
motivated by: cook a meal
ConceptNet
is motivated by: you be hungry
COMET
quality
xAttr: makes food - creative
ATOMIC
has quality: shelf life
Wikidata
has the property: tasty
COMET
comparative
healthier: home cooking - fast food
WebChild
temporal
has ﬁrst subevent: cooking
ConceptNet
starts with: open your mouth
COMET
has eﬀect: food allergy
Wikidata
causes: you get full
COMET
causes: indigestion
COMET
relational-other
related to: refrigerator
ConceptNet
related to: cereal
ConceptNet
ﬁeld of work: food bank - food assistance
Wikidata
main subject: cuisine - food product
Wikidata
Temporal. Most sources have notions of time that may
support ordering by time and/or may capture relations that
for temporal representations that would include temporal comparison as one
type of temporal information.
one thing is a prerequisite for another or one thing may have
a particular eﬀect. ConceptNet, for example, expresses that
the ﬁrst event of eating may be cooking, while the last one
could be getting rid of the containers. COMET states that
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
eating starts with opening one’s mouth. More strongly, the
temporal relations often indicate relative ordering of two events,
through relations of causation and eﬀects, such as food po-
tentially causing allergy or indigestion. Such causal knowl-
edge is found in ATOMIC, ConceptNet, COMET, WebChild,
and Wikidata.
Relational-other. Conceptual and context-related rela-
tionships are often underspeciﬁed. Increasingly resources
are considering the setting or circumstances that surround an
event or statement. ConceptNet has a single relation HasContext
for this, while Wikidata has more concrete contextual rela-
tions, such as field of this occupation, depicts, and health
specialty. This allows Wikidata to express that the main
subject of a cuisine is a food product, and that the ﬁeld of
work of food banks is food assistance. Some resources have
a kind of “catch-all” relationship that can be used very broadly.
For example, most of the knowledge in ConceptNet belongs
to a generic relation called RelatedTo that may be used to
capture a relatively vague semantic connection between two
concepts, such as food being related to refrigerator or cereal.
Our organization of existing relations into 13 dimensions
provides a uniﬁed framework to reorganize and consolidate
these sources. We also mention two nuances of our pro-
cess. First, we placed the negative statements (marked with
¬ in Table 2) in the same dimension as the positive ones, as
they cover the same knowledge type, despite having a dif-
ferent polarity and, arguably, purpose. Following a similar
line of reasoning, we also placed inverse relations, such as
used for and uses, in the same dimension. Second, we rec-
ognize that the underlying data may not always be clearly
placed in only one of these dimensions. For instance, the
relation AtLocation, which intuitively should belong to the
spatial category, contains some statements that express part-
whole knowledge.
5. Experiments
Seven of the sources covered in the previous section:
ConceptNet, ATOMIC, Visual Genome, WordNet, Roget,
Wikidata-CS, and FrameNet, have been integrated together
in CSKG [35]. We start with CSKG and apply our dimension
classiﬁcation (section 4) to its sources, under an assumption
that each of their edge relations can be mapped unambigu-
ously to exactly one of the dimensions that ﬁts it the best.4
As a result, each edge in CSKG has dimension information
stored in its relation;dimension column.5 CSKG contains
knowledge for 12 out of our 13 dimensions - the dimen-
sion comparative is not represented, as its only source, Web
Child, is currently not part of CSKG. The resulting ﬁle is
publicly available at: http://shorturl.at/msEY5.
This enrichment of the CSKG graph allows us to study
the commonsense knowledge dimensions from multiple novel
4As discussed before, this assumption might not always hold in prac-
tice. Future work should attempt to reﬁne this mapping, e.g., by crowd-
sourcing or by clustering algorithms.
5We leave out the relations preﬁxed with /r/dbpedia from Concept-
Net, as these are being deprecated according to the oﬃcial documentation:
https://github.com/commonsense/conceptnet5/wiki/Relations.
perspectives. We investigate the following questions:
1. Experiment 1: How well is each dimension covered in
the current sources? Here we compute the number of
edges for each dimension across sources.
2. Experiment 2: Is knowledge redundant across sources?
We use the dimensions to quantify overlap between
sources with respect to individual edges.
3. Experiment 3: How do the edge dimensions compare
to their lexical encoding? We compute clusters based
on our dimensions and compare them to clusters com-
puted with Transformer-based language models, like
BERT [17] and RoBERTa [51].
4. Experiment 4: What is the impact of each dimension
on downstream reasoning tasks? Each of the dimen-
sions is used to select a subset of the available knowl-
edge in CSKG. The selected knowledge is then used
to pretrain a RoBERTa language model, which is ap-
plied to answer commonsense questions in a zero-shot
manner.
In this section, we formulate and run suitable studies for
each of the four questions, and reﬂect on the results.
5.1. Experiment 1: How well is each dimension
covered in the current sources?
We use the CSKG graph enriched with edge dimensions
to compute source coverage with respect to each dimension.
The coverage of each source, formalized as a count of the
number of edges per dimension, is presented in Table 4.6
We observe several trends in this Table. First, we rec-
ognize imbalance between the number of sources per di-
mension. Comparative knowledge and creation information
are very rare and are described by only one or two sources,
whereas taxonomic, temporal, and similarity knowledge are
much more common and are captured by most sources. Sec-
ond, some of the dimensions, like creation or part-whole,
are represented with relatively few edges, whereas similar-
ity and taxonomic knowledge generally have a much larger
number of edges. The exception for the former is the large
number of part-whole statements in WebChild, which is due
to the fact that WebChild is automatically extracted, result-
ing in many duplicates and noisy information. Third, we see
that some sources, like ConceptNet, FrameNet, and Wikidata-
CS, aim for breadth and cover most dimensions. Others,
like Roget and ATOMIC, have a narrow focus on speciﬁc di-
mensions: primarily desires/goals and temporal knowledge
in ATOMIC, and only knowledge on similarity and distinct-
ness in Roget. Yet, the narrow focus generally coincides with
much depth, as both sources have many edges for the small
set of dimensions that they cover. FrameNet, having a broad
focus, has a small number of edges for each dimension due to
its limited coverage of lexical units. Again here, WebChild
is a notable outlier with a large number of automatically ex-
tracted statements for most dimensions. Finally, we observe
6Python script:
https://github.com/usc-isi-i2/cskg/blob/master/
consolidation/compute_dimensions.py.
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 4
Coverage of sources in terms of the knowledge dimensions. The numbers presented are in
thousands.
Dimension
ATOMIC
ConceptNet
WebChild
Roget
Wikidata-CS
WordNet
FrameNet
lexical
704
0.5
207
14
similarity
255
343
1,023
1
152
0.4
distinctness
22
381
7
4
taxonomic
244
783
73
89
23
part-whole
19
5,752
8
22
spatial
28
660
0.5
creation
0.3
0.2
utility
69
2,843
2
1
desire/goal
244
20
quality
143
9
6,510
1
11
comparative
813
temporal
346
71
2,135
3
0.6
relational-other
1,969
291
6
0.7
Table 5
Overlap between various source pairs, based on the original re-
lations (Relations) or the abstracted dimensions (Dimensions).
Absolute overlap numbers are accompanied in brackets by the
Jaccard percentage of the overlap against the union of all
triples in the two sources.
Source pair
Relations
Dimensions
CN - RG
57,635 (1.23%)
73,992 (1.60%)
CN - WD
2,386 (0.07%)
2,623 (0.08%)
CN - WN
86,006 (2.14%)
97,946 (2.60%)
RG - WD
299 (0.02%)
333 (0.02%)
RG - WN
75,025 (3.55%)
75,025 (3.93%)
WD - WN
1,697 (0.19%)
1,704 (0.25%)
diﬀerent ratios between ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ semantic rela-
tions across sources. Most of ConceptNet’s knowledge falls
under the generic relational-other category, whereas only a
small portion of Wikidata-CS belongs to the same dimen-
sion. Most of Wikidata-CS is taxonomic knowledge.
5.2. Experiment 2: Is knowledge redundant across
sources?
Our analysis so far reveals that most dimensions are cov-
ered by more than one source. This leads us to the next ques-
tion: how often is a statement found in multiple sources?
Computing edge overlap between sources is conditioned
on identity mapping between their nodes and relations. While
CSKG provides such identity mappings between some of its
nodes, this cannot be expected to be complete. We align
the edges as follows. The nodes across sources are naively
compared through their labels.7 Regarding the relations, we
beneﬁt from CSKG’s principle of normalizing the relations
across sources to a shared set. With this procedure, a Word-
Net edge (food.n.01, synonym, dish.n.01) is modelled as
(food, /r/Synonym, dish) in CSKG. As a dimension-based
7If a node has more than one label, then we perform comparison based
on the ﬁrst one.
enhancement, we abstract each relation further by mapping
it to our dimensions, e.g., transforming (food, /r/Synonym,
dish) to (food, similarity, dish). This dimension-based
transformation allows for more ﬂexible matching within a
dimension, for instance, enabling similarity and synonymy
statements to be compared for equivalence, since both (food,
/r/Synonym, dish) and (food, /r/SimilarTo, dish) would be
normalized to (food, similarity, dish).
We apply the relation-based and dimension-based vari-
ants to compute overlap between four sources: ConceptNet,
Roget, Wikidata, and WordNet, in terms of each dimension.
Here we do not consider ATOMIC or FrameNet, as their
edges can be expected to have extremely low lexical overlap
with the other sources. The overlap is computed as a Jac-
card score between the number of shared triples between two
sources and the union of their triples. The obtained scores
are given in Table 5.8 We observe that the overlap is gen-
erally low, yet, translating the original relations into dimen-
sions constantly leads to an increase of the overlap for any of
the source pairs. The highest relative overlap is observed be-
tween Roget and WordNet (3.93%), with ConceptNet-WordNet
coming second (2.60%). The lowest overlap is obtained be-
tween the sources Roget and Wikidata (0.02%).
Next, we inspect the overlap between these sources for
each dimension. Will the edges that correspond to more
commonly found dimensions (e.g., part-whole, cf. Exper-
iment 1) occur more often in multiple sources? We provide
insight into this question in Table 6. Primarily, this Table re-
veals that there is very little edge overlap across sources. As
hypothesized, most of the shared edges belong to dimensions
that are common in many commonsense sources, describ-
ing taxonomic, similarity, and part-whole knowledge. The
highest Jaccard score is obtained on the taxonomic knowl-
edge between ConceptNet and WordNet, followed by simi-
larity knowledge in ConceptNet-Roget and Roget-WordNet.
Wikidata and ConceptNet share edges that belong to a num-
8Notebook:
https://github.com/usc-isi-i2/cskg/blob/master/
analysis/Overlap.ipynb.
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 6
Overlap distribution across dimensions.
Absolute overlap numbers are accompanied in
brackets by the Jaccard percentage of the overlap against the union of all triples in the
two sources. ’-’ indicates that at least one of the sources does not use the dimension.
Sources
part-whole
taxonomic
lexical
distinctness
similarity
quality
utility
creation
temporal
rel-other
CN-RG
-
-
-
4,639
69,353
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(1.17)
(5.79)
-
-
-
-
-
CN-WD
68
1,888
20
266
102
0
14
0
1
264
(0.25)
(0.62)
(0.00)
(1.00)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
CN-WN
4,710
73,123
-
1,053
19,060
-
-
-
-
-
(4.10)
(15.19)
-
(4.65)
(5.05)
-
-
-
-
-
RG-WD
-
-
-
206
127
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(0.05)
(0.01)
-
-
-
-
-
RG-WN
-
-
-
3,300
71,725
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(0.87)
(6.50)
-
-
-
-
-
WD-WN
82
1,533
-
63
26
-
-
-
-
-
(0.07)
(0.39)
-
(0.62)
(0.02)
-
-
-
-
-
ber of other dimensions, including distinctness, similarity,
and rel-other.
The sparse overlap in Tables 5-6 is ampliﬁed by our lex-
ical method of computing overlap, as the same or similar
nodes may have slightly diﬀerent labels. Both the low over-
lap and the relatively weak comparison method strongly mo-
tivate future work on node resolution of commonsense KGs.
Node resolution of commonsense KGs is non-trivial, as nodes
are intended to represent various aspects of meaning: words,
phrases, concepts, frames, events, and sentences. We dis-
cuss further the challenges and opportunities relating to node
resolution of commonsense KGs in Section 7.
5.3. Experiment 3: How do the edge dimensions
compare to their lexical encoding?
Next, we investigate how the information captured by
our dimensions relates to the encoding of edges by state-
of-the-art Transformer-based language models, like BERT
or RoBERTa.9 For this purpose, we cluster the knowledge
in CSKG according to our 13 dimensions, resulting in 13
disjoint clusters. We also compute clusters based on lan-
guage models in an unsupervised manner as follows. Each of
the edges is lexicalized into a natural language sentence by
relation-speciﬁc templates. Each sentence is then encoded
with a Transformer model, either BERT-large or RoBERTa-
large, into a single 1,024-dimensional embedding. These
embeddings are ﬁnally clustered with the k-Means [29] al-
gorithm into 푘= 13 disjoint clusters.
The two approaches for computing clusters, based on our
dimensions and based on Transformer embeddings, can now
be compared in terms of their agreement. We use the ad-
justed rand index (ARI) metric to measure agreement.10 The
ARI score is 0.226 for BERT and 0.235 for RoBERTa. These
9Notebook:
https://github.com/usc-isi-i2/cskg/blob/master/
embeddings/Summary%20of%20Dimension%20on%20CSKG.ipynb
10https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
metrics.adjusted_rand_score.html
scores signal low agreement between the dimension-based
and the unsupervised clustering, which is expected given
that the dimension-based clustering entirely depends on the
relation, while the unsupervised clustering considers the en-
tire triple. We also observe that the ARI score of RoBERTa
is slightly higher, which might indicate that the relation has
higher impact on the embedding in RoBERTa than in BERT.
Figure 1: UMAP clusters of RoBERTa.
In order to understand the information encoded by RoBERTa,
we use UMAP to visualize its k-means clusters for a ran-
dom sample of 5,000 edges (Figure 1). Curiously, certain
clusters are clearly delineated, while others are not. For in-
stance, cluster 5 has little overlap with the other clusters.
Looking into the contents of this cluster, we observe that it
is largely dominated by distinctness information: 92% (360
out of 390) of its edges belong to this dimension, mostly ex-
pressed through the /r/Antonym relation. Clusters 4, 7, and
8 are largely dominated by similarity, while clusters 1 and
6 are largely split between temporal (46%) and desire/goal
(36%) edges. At the same time, we observe a lot of over-
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 7
10 pairs with the highest Jaccard scores between dimension-
based and RoBERTa-based clusters.
RoBERTa cluster
Dimension cluster
Jaccard
5
distinctness
0.916
8
similarity
0.452
6
temporal
0.322
7
similarity
0.295
6
desire/goal
0.283
1
desire/goal
0.258
4
similarity
0.210
0
lexical
0.205
1
temporal
0.202
12
relational-other
0.182
laps between the clusters 0, 2, 9, 10, 11, and 12. These
clusters are dominated by lexical and relational-other edges
- e.g., around half of all edges in clusters 0 and 9 belong
to the category relational-other. The node frequency distri-
butions reveal that cluster 1 describes positive emotions, as
its most frequent node is /c/en/happy; nodes in cluster 5 are
often numbers, like rg:en_twenty-eighth; and the nodes in
cluster 9 describe concepts from natural sciences, the most
connected node being /c/en/zoology.
Figure 2: UMAP clusters according to our dimensions.
In Figure 2, we visualize the same set of edges, only this
time we color each according to their dimension. In accor-
dance with the relatively low rand index score, we observe
that the clusters are mostly not well-distinguished from one
another. We look for correspondences between the RoBERTa
clusters in Figure 1 and the dimension-based clusters in Fig-
ure 2, by computing Jaccard score between the edges that
constitute each pair of their clusters. The 10 cluster pairs
with the highest Jaccard scores are shown in Table 7. We ob-
serve the highest correspondence for distinctness with clus-
ter 5 (Jaccard score of 0.92) and similarity with cluster 8
(score 0.45). The overlapping clusters for desire and tempo-
ral knowledge both map relatively strongly to clusters 1 and
6, which appear nearby in the RoBERTa clustering as well.
Table 8
Top-3 highest-scored dimensions for each of the automatically-
computed clusters. Bold-faced results indicate the top score
for each dimension.
0
lexical (0.205), rel-other (0.121), taxonomic (0.060)
1
desire (0.258), temporal (0.202), quality (0.087)
2
lexical (0.133), rel-other (0.122), taxonomic (0.075)
3
spatial (0.119), lexical (0.061), quality (0.053)
4
similarity (0.21), quality (0.015), lexical (0.008)
5
distinctness (0.916), lexical (0.018), taxonomic (0.003)
6
temporal (0.322), desire (0.283), quality, (0.054)
7
similarity (0.295), quality (0.009), taxonomic (0.005)
8
similarity (0.452), lexical (0.004), taxonomic (0.003)
9
rel-other (0.143), lexical (0.085), taxonomic (0.081)
10
rel-other (0.169), taxonomic (0.015), quality (0.007)
11
rel-other (0.11), quality (0.068), taxonomic (0.066)
12
rel-other (0.183), taxonomic (0.059), spatial (0.053)
We also observe relatively high score for the cluster pairs 4-
similarity, 7-similarity, and 0-lexical, all of which conﬁrm
our prior analysis of Figure 1.
We show the top-3 highest-scored dimensions for each
of the automatically-computed clusters in Table 8. Here, we
observe that some dimensions, like creation, utility, and
part-whole do not fall within the top-3 dimensions for any
of the RoBERTa clusters. This is likely due to the lower
number of edges with these dimensions, as well as their dis-
persion across many RoBERTa clusters.
Figure 3: UMAP clusters for two selected nodes: /c/en/food
and /c/en/eat.
To investigate further, we select the two CSKG nodes
we considered earlier in Table 4: /c/en/food and /c/en/eat,
and visualize their edges according to their dimension. The
total set of 2,661 edges largely belongs to the dimension
relational-other (1,553), followed by temporal (319 edges),
and desire/goal (228 edges), whereas no edge belongs to the
creation dimension. Thus, most of the well-speciﬁed edges
about nutritional concepts express either temporal informa-
tion about the process, or knowledge about desires/goals re-
lating to nutrition. Within a single dimension, most relational-
other edges are expressed with RelatedTo (1,488 out of 1,553).
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Temporal knowledge is split into multiple relations, primar-
ily HasLastSubevent (113 edges), HasPrerequisite (69), and
HasSubevent (60). Desire/goal divided into at:xWant (78 edges),
MotivatedByGoal (47), and at:xIntent (47 edges). Besides
the two seed nodes (/c/en/food and /c/en/eat), the frequency
distribution of nodes in a cluster reveals other prominent
nodes. Naturally, the spatial dimension includes /c/e/plate
(with an edge degree of 3), the temporal cluster includes
/c/en/diminish_own_hunger (degree of 4), and the distinct-
ness cluster has 7 edges for /c/en/drink.
In summary, experiment 3 reveals a relatively low agree-
ment between the dimensions and the language model-based
clustering. This indicates that the nodes of an edge, which
are not considered by the dimensions, are important for the
language models. Meanwhile, we observe individual cor-
respondences between the language models and our dimen-
sions, most notably on the dimensions of similarity and dis-
tinctness. In addition, both the dimensions and the language
models naturally cluster nodes from diﬀerent sources together.
5.4. Experiment 4: What is the impact of each
dimension on downstream reasoning tasks?
Experiment 3 revealed overlaps between the information
captured by our dimensions and that captured by language
models. In our fourth experiment, we experiment with en-
hancing language models with knowledge belonging to indi-
vidual dimensions, in order to examine the eﬀect of diﬀerent
dimensions of knowledge on commonsense reasoning tasks.
We adopt the method proposed by Ma et al. [53] to pre-
train state-of-the-art language models and conduct zero-shot
evaluation on two commonsense question answering tasks.
According to this method, we ﬁrst transform ConceptNet,
WordNet, Wikidata, ATOMIC, and Visual Genome into syn-
thetic QA sets. We use templates to map each triple into a
QA pair and apply random sampling with heuristic-based ﬁl-
tering to collect two distractors for every QA pair. We group
synthetic QA pairs based on their dimension, resulting in 12
dimension-based QA buckets in total. Within each dimen-
sion, the QA data is split into a training and development set.
For ATOMIC, we adopt its original split to partition data.
For the other sources, we select 95% of the data as a training
set and the remaining 5% as a development set, following the
original paper. We note that Ma et al. [53] only selected 14
relations from ConceptNet, WordNet, Wikidata, and Visual
Genome, whereas we include all relations except RelatedTo.
The statistics for the synthetic QA sets are shown in Table 9.
We can see that the knowledge distribution across dimen-
sions is fairly skewed, with creation having very few ques-
tions, while taxonomic and temporal knowledge being very
well populated. Our experiments in this section will reveal
whether the amount of available knowledge aﬀects down-
stream task performance.
We pretrain the RoBERTa-large [51] model on each of
the dimensions using the corresponding synthetic QA set.
We use RoBERTa with a marginal ranking objective, as this
is the best combination according to [53]. We use the same
set of hyper-parameters as in [53], except for the creation
Table 9
Statistics of the number of QA pairs for each dimension.
Dimension
Train
Dev
part-whole
87,765
4,620
taxonomic
340,609
17,927
lexical
107,861
5,677
distinctness
20,286
1,068
similarity
166,575
8,768
quality
116,593
12,492
utility
63,862
3,362
creation
304
17
temporal
312,628
31,587
relational-other
242,759
12,777
spatial
21,726
1,144
desire/goal
194,906
20,912
dimension. Speciﬁcally, we train our models for 1 epoch us-
ing a learning rate of 1푒−5, a batch size of 32, and 1.0 as
a margin. For the creation dimension, since the number of
samples is much smaller, we train the model for 5 epochs
while keeping the other hyper-parameters ﬁxed. We evalu-
ate our models on two tasks: the CommonSenseQA (CSQA)
task [83], in which the model is asked to choose the correct
answer for a given question out of ﬁve options, and the So-
cialIQA (SIQA) task [73], in which the model chooses the
correct answer from three options based on a question and a
brief context.
The results from our experiments are shown in Table 10.
Overall, we see that the zero-shot pretraining on any dimen-
sion allows the model to outperform the no-knowledge base-
line. However, the variance of the improvement across di-
mensions is relatively large, revealing that certain dimen-
sions are more relevant for the two downstream tasks than
others. For example, although the training set size of lexical
dimension exceeds 107K, its performance gain on both tasks
is limited. This is not surprising, since the language model
can be expected to already have learned most of the lexical
knowledge during its pretraining on unstructured text cor-
pora. While the quality dimension has a similar training set
size as the lexical dimension, the model beneﬁts from it by
a large margin on both tasks: 20.7 and 12.7 absolute points,
respectively. This ﬁnding suggests that learning additional
knowledge on object qualities is novel and useful, as it has
not been fully acquired from unstructured data.
We note that reasoning on downstream tasks beneﬁts es-
pecially from the knowledge dimensions that align with the
task question types. For example, each question in SIQA
corresponds to an ATOMIC relation, and requires knowl-
edge primarily about the order of events, personal attributes,
and agent desires. Consequently, pretraining on quality, tem-
poral, and desire/goal knowledge provides the model with
the largest gain on the SIQA task. The improvements of the
temporal dimension are even higher than training on the en-
tire set of questions, suggesting that certain knowledge di-
mensions that are not related to social reasoning may even
lead to a decline in model performance. For the CSQA task,
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Table 10
Zero-shot evaluation results on two commonsense reasoning
tasks. We run every experiment 3 times with diﬀerent seeds,
and report mean accuracy with a 95% conﬁdence interval.
Dimension
CSQA
SIQA
Baseline
45.0
47.3
+part-whole
63.0(±1.4)
52.6(±1.9)
+taxonomic
62.6(±1.4)
52.2(±1.6)
+lexical
49.9(±2.9)
49.0(±0.4)
+distinctness
57.2(±0.5)
50.2(±1.5)
+similarity
61.4(±0.8)
53.5(±0.6)
+quality
65.7(±0.5)
60.0(±0.7)
+utility
ퟔퟕ.ퟒ(±ퟏ.ퟎ)
54.8(±0.7)
+creation
49.9(±1.1)
47.8(±0.2)
+temporal
67.3(±0.3)
ퟔퟐ.ퟔ(±ퟎ.ퟗ)
+relational-other
58.2(±1.7)
51.3(±1.7)
+spatial
63.3(±0.2)
53.1(±0.3)
+desire/goal
65.0(±1.8)
60.0(±0.6)
+all
66.2(±1.4)
61.0(±0.7)
since it is derived from the broad set of knowledge dimen-
sions covered in ConceptNet, we expect that many (if not
all) of these dimensions would help performance. Accord-
ingly, we observe large gains with many of the knowledge di-
mensions (+15%), whereas training on the utility dimension
yields the best performance (+22.4%), even slightly better
than training on the entire set of questions.
To improve our understanding of the impact of every
dimension of knowledge on diﬀerent questions, we further
break down the performance of the models per question type.
For CSQA, we classify the questions based on the Concept-
Net relations between the correct answer and the question
concept, as the model needs to reason over such relations in
order to be able to answer the question. For SIQA, since
the questions are initially generated using a set of templates
based on ATOMIC relations, we try to reverse-engineer the
process by manually deﬁning a mapping from the question
format to the ATOMIC relations. Using this method, we
are able to successfully classify more than 99% of questions
from SIQA’s development set. For every question type, we
compute the average accuracy over 3 seeds for the models
trained on each dimension. The results on CSQA and SIQA
are shown in the Figures 4 and 5, respectively.11
For some question types in CSQA, (one of) the largest
improvements is achieved by training on the corresponding
knowledge dimension. For example, temporal knowledge
for questions of type Causes, and desire/goal for Desires ques-
tions. However, in other cases, the accuracy improvement
by the corresponding knowledge dimension is much lower
than other dimensions, for example, distinctness knowledge
is less useful for Antonym questions compared to utility knowl-
edge. This could be interpreted as a signal that the knowl-
edge might not be clearly separated between the dimensions.
For SIQA, the results show that the corresponding knowl-
edge dimension is clearly impactful for most question types:
11For CSQA, we omit question types with less than 20 questions.
Table 11
Zero-shot evaluation results of RoBERTa on the synthetic QA
sets.
Dimension
Dev accuracy
part-whole
67.5
taxonomic
57.0
lexical
90.1
distinctness
77.3
similarity
65.6
quality
45.5
utility
67.9
creation
82.4
temporal
47.2
relational-other
37.6
spatial
56.9
desire/goal
48.0
desire/goal on xWant, xIntent, quality on xAttr and tempo-
ral on xNeed, oReact, oEffect. This is especially visible for
xIntent and xNeed, where very little gain is observed for most
knowledge dimensions except for the corresponding dimen-
sion, suggesting that aligning the questions to their knowl-
edge dimensions is important for building eﬀective mod-
els. We note that a similar ﬁnding on the alignment between
knowledge and the task has been reported in the original pa-
per [53]; yet, the dimensions allow us to validate this claim
more precisely.
Finally, to verify our hypothesis that certain dimensions
of knowledge are already learned by the state-of-the-art lan-
guage models to a large extent, while others are not, we di-
rectly evaluate the baseline LM on the synthetic QA sets for
each dimension. The results are shown in Table 11. As ex-
pected, even without any training, the model already achieves
a very high accuracy (over 90%) on the lexical dimension,
thus it could not receive much training signal from this di-
mension. Meanwhile, the LM accuracy on quality, tempo-
ral, and desire/goal dimensions is signiﬁcantly lower. This
is mostly because questions from ATOMIC take a large por-
tion in these dimension. As reported in [53], the questions
from ATOMIC are more challenging than those created from
other knowledge resources. We note that the accuracy for
relational-other is the lowest among all dimensions. We hy-
pothesize that this is because this dimension is noisier than
others and the knowledge in this dimension is less likely to
be found in the unstructured text. We leave further investi-
gation of this result for future research.
In summary, we observe that certain dimensions of knowl-
edge are very beneﬁcial and novel for language models, al-
lowing them to improve their performance on downstream
reasoning tasks. Other dimensions, like lexical knowledge,
are almost entirely redundant, as the language models have
already acquired this knowledge during their initial training.
The exact contribution for each dimension depends on the
knowledge required by the task at hand. We discuss the im-
plications of the obtained results further in Section 7.
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
Figure 4: Accuracy for each question type in CSQA, where AtL. means AtLocation, Cau. means Causes, Cap. means CapabelOf,
Ant. means Antonym, H.Pre. means HasPrerequisite, H.Sub. means HasSubevent, C.Des. means CauseDesires, Des. means
Desires, P.Of means ParfOf, M.Goal means MotivatedByGoal, H.Pro means HasProperty. The numbers in parentheses indicate
how many questions fall into the category.
Figure 5: Accuracy for each question type in SIQA. The numbers in parentheses indicate how many questions fall into that
category.
6. Related Work
6.1. Epistemic Foundations
World knowledge is what people learn and generalize
from physical and social experiences, distilling mental rep-
resentations out of the most signiﬁcant aspects of everyday
life.12 In these terms, commonsense knowledge can be con-
12According to the classic argument of the mind-body problem, it is
inherently impossible to characterize how generalization occurs, due to an
explanatory gap [44].
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
ceived as the partition of world knowledge that is commonly
shared by most people. This deﬁnition, however, has intrin-
sic limitations: in fact, the scale and the diversity of physical
and social experiences, as well as the ecological, context-
dependent nature of what constitutes ‘common’ and ‘uncom-
mon’ [25], make it hard to formulate any abstract criterion
of what should fall under commonsense knowledge. From
Aristotle’s theory of categories [1] to Brentano’s empirical
psychology [11], deriving knowledge dimensions from em-
pirical observations, as opposed to from abstract criteria
[31], is a fundamental epistemic approach that contributed
to the birth of Cognitive Science as a discipline [57], be-
sides serving as reference framework for our current investi-
gation. In this article, in fact, we neither propose nor adopt
any a priori principle to deﬁne what should be included in a
commonsense knowledge graph; rather, we analyze multiple
knowledge graphs and, supported by empirical methods and
experimental validations, elicit their most salient conceptual
structures.
In the history of general knowledge base systems, the dif-
ﬁculty of characterizing common sense has been a driver,
rather than an obstacle. For instance, Cyc [43], the most
monumental eﬀort to construct an axiomatic theory of com-
monsense knowledge, has been actively growing for almost
forty years. At present, the Cyc knowledge base comprises
around 1.5 million general concepts, and 25 million rules
and assertions about these concepts. Diﬀerent domain-speciﬁc
extensions of Cyc exist, funded by industry and government
programs: considering the key role that commonsense knowl-
edge can play in enhancing AI systems for private and public
enterprises, Cyc’s strategy of steering the general knowledge
base development in the direction of domain use cases can
represent a sustainable business model for other stakeholders
in the ﬁeld. Since our focus is on computational resources
of commonsense knowledge, it is beyond the scope of this
paper to discuss seminal work on axiomatization of com-
mon sense, such as Pat Hayes’ naive physics [30], Gordon
and Hobbs’ commonsense psychology [26], and Ken Forbus’
work on qualitative commonsense reasoning [21]. Similarly,
although we recognize the important role that semantic dis-
course theory plays in describing commonsense utterances
based on expressive logical criteria [2, 42], it is beyond the
scope of the current contribution to consider whether the
knowledge resources we illustrated can be used as a basis to
study the formal structures of dialog and, in general, socio-
linguistic interaction, grounded on common sense.
Existing commonsense knowledge graphs make implicit cat-
egorizations of knowledge, by deﬁning a tractable set of re-
lations which can be traced to some types proposed in cog-
nitive research. For instance, WebChild’s [84] part-of rela-
tions resemble the partonomic-metonimic relations in cog-
nitive science literature (e.g., see [14, 89]), while Concept-
Net [81] deﬁnes 34 relations, where the relation IsA can be
often approximated with taxonomic knowledge. In its ﬁrst
version [50], ConceptNet deﬁned 20 relations grouped into 8
categories: K-lines, Things, Agents, Events, Spatial, Causal,
Functional, and Aﬀective. Zhang et al. [93] extrapolate the
types in the Conceptual Semantic Theory with those in Con-
ceptNet 1.0 and propose the following six categories: prop-
erty, object, eventuality, spatial, quantity, and others. Ac-
cording to [54], four types of contextual knowledge are es-
sential for humans to interpret or frame in text: intratextual,
intertextual, extratextual, and circumtextual knowledge. These
generic knowledge types, which are orthogonal to the declar-
ative/procedural distinction, are relevant for most natural lan-
guage understanding tasks. In [36], we analyzed these types
for the task of entity linking; when it comes to commonsense
question answering, they might provide a guide for extend-
ing the coverage of the knowledge, when combined with spe-
ciﬁc theories/axioms, such as those deﬁned by the resources
in Section 3.2 or in Cyc.
Beyond the structural diﬀerences, commonsense knowledge
graphs share the same foundational elements. Commonsense
knowledge is generally split into declarative and procedu-
ral, where the former is contained in unconditional asser-
tions, and the latter requires conditional assertions13: we can
state, for instance, that windows are typically made of glass
(declarative), and assert that if a large rock is thrown against
a window, the glass typically breaks (procedural). As the
use of the adverb typically suggests, commonsense knowl-
edge rules out exceptions from the context of interpretation:
for instance, bulletproof glass doesn’t break when hit by a
rock.
There is a consensus that commonsense knowledge describes
the world in terms of objects with their properties and rela-
tions. Yet, there is no consensus in terms of how this knowl-
edge should be formalized and used for reasoning. Moore
[59] argues that reasoning over existentially quantiﬁed prepo-
sitions, negations, or by cases, all require an approach based
on formal logic. State-of-the-art techniques for common-
sense reasoning [47, 52, 53] are largely based on statisti-
cal (language) models, complemented with knowledge rep-
resented in a textual form [72, 81].
Statistical models are largely based on co-occurrence pat-
terns and primarily capture contextual similarity of concepts,
e.g., based on lexical co-occurrence and structured patterns [70].
Recent work has investigated the extent to which purely sta-
tistical models, such as the Transformer models, can per-
form reliable and generalizable inference. The work by Et-
tinger [20] shows that BERT struggles with complex infer-
ence, role-based event prediction, and the contextual impacts
of negation. Bhagavatula et al. [5] reveal that pretrained lan-
guage models perform relatively well on commonsense in-
ference, except on tasks that require numeric and spatial un-
derstanding. The logical commonsense probes in RICA [94]
show that LMs perform similar to random guessing in the
zero-shot setting, they are heavily impacted by statistical bi-
ases, and are not robust to linguistic perturbations. This is
in line with the ﬁndings of Elazar et al. [19], which indicate
that the good performance of LMs mostly comes from ﬁne-
tuning on the task data. Recognizing that commonsense rea-
soning largely relies on pragmatic understanding [27], Jeretič
13The distinction between these types of assertions was formalized in a
seminal work by Gentzen [24].
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
et al. [37] demonstrate that BERT exhibits partial ability for
pragmatic reasoning on certain scalar implicatures and pre-
suppositions.
It has been shown that language models have acquired cer-
tain commonsense knowledge during their pre-training on
large textual data [64, 16]. This inspired follow-up work that
queried/prompted language models directly, treating them as
knowledge bases [79, 77]. Alternatively, language models
can be pretrained with structured knowledge and applied to
downstream reasoning tasks in a zero-shot manner [53, 4].
Considering the large capacity of the pre-trained language
models and the goal of generalizing to unseen tasks [53],
lightweight alternatives to ﬁne-tuning have been proposed
recently. One approach is to preserve the knowledge ac-
quired during pretraining, but complement it by updating a
small amount of additional parameters [49, 46]. Alterna-
tively, one could keep the entire model intact and tune the
model input for optimal knowledge elicitation [39, 77]. Ul-
timately, it is unclear whether aspects like negation and case-
based reasoning can be fully solved by language models, or
require inclusion of structured knowledge and formal logic,
as suggested by Moore [59].
6.2. Consolidation eﬀorts
In this paper, we analyzed individual knowledge graphs
through suitable semantic dimensions, with the goal of pro-
viding insights on how alignment and consolidation of com-
monsense knowledge resources can be guided and, eventu-
ally, achieved. A natural extension of our work would be
to evaluate ongoing eﬀorts that adopt alternative methods of
consolidation: accordingly, Framester [22], BabelNet [61],
CSKG [35], and Predicate Matrix [41] constitute some of
the most mature projects in this space. In Framester, several
resources like WordNet, VerbNet, FrameNet, and BabelNet,
are aligned using an OWL schema based on Description and
Situations and Semiotics ontology design patterns.14 CSKG,
which we leverage in this paper, is also based on a schema,
but it doesn’t rely on traditional RDF/OWL semantics: in
fact, CSKG is a hyper-relational graph represented in a tabu-
lar format, designed to preserve individual knowledge struc-
tures of resources like ConceptNet, WebChild, Visual Genome,
etc., exploit direct mappings when available, derive indi-
rect mappings when possible (e.g., while ConceptNet and
Visual Genome do not have direct connections, they both
have mappings to WordNet), and infer links through statis-
tical algorithms. BabelNet is a multilingual lexicalized se-
mantic network based on automatically linking Wikipedia
with WordNet, and expanded by using additional informa-
tion from resources like FrameNet and VerbNet. Finally,
the Predicate Matrix exploits Word Sense Disambiguation
algorithms to generate semi-automatic mappings between
FrameNet, VerbNet, PropBank, WordNet, and the Events
and Situations Ontology [76].15
14These patterns can be accessed at http://ontologydesignpatterns.
org/wiki/Main_Page
15https://github.com/newsreader/eso-and-ceo
Ji et al. [38] survey knowledge graphs in terms of their repre-
sentation principles, acquisition methods, and applications.
This work considers commonsense reasoning as a key emerg-
ing application area for knowledge graphs. A review of the
state-of-the-art commonsense reasoning is provided by Storks
et al. [82], with a strong focus on benchmarks and reason-
ing techniques. Recently, several tutorials on commonsense
knowledge and reasoning have been held, with focus on con-
solidation [33], neural model reasoning [74], neuro-symbolic
integration [32], acquisition [85, 68], and broader applica-
tions [85].
7. Discussion and Roadmap
7.1. Summary of Findings
Commonsense knowledge sources use diﬀerent levels of
semantics, come in a variety of forms, and strive to capture
diverse notions of common sense. After surveying 20 com-
monsense knowledge sources, we proposed that their rela-
tions can be grouped into 13 dimensions, namely: lexical,
similarity, distinctness, part-whole, spatial, creation, utility,
desire/goal, quality, comparative, temporal, and relational-
other. Most relations can be unambiguously mapped to one
of the dimensions. We apply our dimensions to reorganize
the knowledge in the CSKG graph [35]. Following our de-
vised mapping of relations to dimensions, we add an addi-
tional column (relation;dimension) in CSKG, indicating the
dimension of each edge. This allows us to make use of the
consolidation of seven existing sources done by CSKG, and
complement it with the dimensions in order to perform more
abstract analysis of its knowledge types. We designed and
ran four experiments to analyze commonsense knowledge in
CSKG through the lenses of these 13 dimensions.
In experiment 1, we investigated the coverage of the 13
dimensions in current sources. Some dimensions, like part-
whole and similarity, are a subject of interest in most sources.
Others, like comparative knowledge and knowledge on de-
sires/goals, are rarely captured. Yet, the depth of knowledge
on the less commonly represented relations is still high, as il-
lustrated by the 244 thousand desire/goal edges in ATOMIC.
Here we also observed that the breadth of focus varies no-
tably across sources, as some (e.g., ConceptNet and Wikidata-
CS) cover a wide range of relations, while others (e.g., ATOMIC
or WordNet) have a narrower focus.
Experiment 2 posed the question of whether individual
knowledge statements are redundant across sources. Our ex-
periments with four sources indicated, with few exceptions,
that only a tiny portion of all edges were shared between a
pair of sources. This experiment points to a two-fold moti-
vation for node resolution over commonsense sources. On
one hand, node resolution is needed to increase the quality
of computing overlap beyond the current lexical comparison
of nodes. On the other hand, as the sources have generally
complementary goals, it is likely that even with a more se-
mantic computation the overlap will remain low. Node res-
olution is, thus, essential to consolidate diﬀerent views of a
node (concept) into a single representation.
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
In experiment 3, we cluster all edges in CSKG accord-
ing to their dimension, and compare these clusters with 푘=
13 clusters based on a language model encoding of each
edge. We noted that the overall agreement between the di-
mensions and the language model-based clustering is rel-
atively low, indicating that language models pay much at-
tention to the edge nodes. However, individual correspon-
dences were noted. Similarity and distinctness quite clearly
dominated some of the RoBERTa-based clusters, while other
clusters were consistently split between the dimensions of
desire/goal and temporal knowledge. Interestingly, the clus-
ters inferred from the RoBERTa embeddings often clustered
nodes from diﬀerent sources into a single cluster.
Finally, in experiment 4 we investigated the impact of
the dimensions on a downstream reasoning task of common-
sense question answering. We adopted a recent idea [53] for
pretraining language models with knowledge graphs. The
best-scoring model in this paper, RoBERTa-large with marginal
ranking loss, was provided with knowledge from one of our
dimensions at a time, and evaluated in a zero-shot manner on
two benchmarks testing broad (CommonsenseQA) and so-
cial (SocialIQA) commonsense reasoning. The experiments
showed that social commonsense reasoning clearly beneﬁts
from temporal, quality, and desire/goal knowledge, whereas
the CommonsenseQA benchmark beneﬁts from broad knowl-
edge from all dimensions. Certain dimensions, such as lex-
ical knowledge, were relatively uninformative, as it can be
expected that such knowledge has been already acquired by
the language models at their initial training stage. While the
extent of knowledge plays a role, adding more knowledge is
not always beneﬁcial, as the task performance depends on
the alignment between the dimensions and the task. This
motivates further work on automatic alignment between the
task questions and the our dimensions. This also motivates
future work that attempts to evaluate the value of additional
content additions related to particular dimensions aimed at
improving certain kinds of tasks.
7.2. Outlook
The goal of consolidating and applying commonsense
knowledge is an ambitious one, as witnessed by decades of
research on this topic. Our 13 dimensions are an eﬀort to
reorganize existing commonsense knowledge through uni-
ﬁcation of its knowledge types. We see this as a necessary,
but not suﬃcient, step towards a modern and comprehensive
commonsense resource. The dimensions could facilitate, or
complement, several other aspects of this pursuit:
1. Node resolution While potentially controversial, the con-
solidation of commonsense knowledge relations into dimen-
sions/knowledge types is achievable with careful manual ef-
fort. This is largely due to the relatively small number of
relations in most current sources. Resolving nodes across
sources is another key aspect of this consolidation, strongly
motivated by experiment 2 of this paper. Sources capture
complementary knowledge, whose combination is prevented
by the lack of mappings between their nodes. As nodes are
currently intended to represent various aspects of meaning:
words, phrases, concepts, frames, events, sentences — their
consolidation is not obvious. Moreover, the number of unique
nodes in most sources is on the order of many thousands
or even millions [35], preventing it from being solvable by
mere manual eﬀort. Node resolution could be framed as
a ‘static’ disambiguation/clustering task, where each state-
ment for a node is to be classiﬁed into one of its meanings,
similar to [15]. Here, the set of meanings can be either present
(e.g., WordNet synsets) or dynamically inferred from the
data. An alternative, ‘dynamic’ approach is defer the node
resolution to task time and perform it implicitly as a task
of retrieving evidence from a knowledge source [45]. An-
other option is a combination of the static and the dynamic
approaches.
2. Coverage and boundaries At present, it is diﬃcult to es-
timate the completeness of commonsense knowledge sources.
With the relations organized into dimensions of knowledge,
we gain insight into the volume of knowledge that falls within
each of the dimensions. An ideal node resolution would take
us one step further, allowing us to detect gaps, i.e., under-
stand which relevant facts are not represented by any of the
sources. If nodes are resolved to an ontology like WordNet,
one could leverage its taxonomy to infer new information.
For instance, ConceptNet is at present unable to infer that if
barbecues are held in outdoor places, they could be, by ex-
tension, be held in a park or someone’s patio. In addition, a
more semantic resource would allow us to deﬁne constraints
over the knowledge and detect anomalies and contradictory
knowledge, which can be argued to deﬁne the boundaries of
the knowledge that can be obtained. It is reasonable that such
boundaries exist, as commonsense knowledge is character-
ized by commonness of its concepts and restricted set of re-
lations [34]. Further, organizing by dimensions also allows
us to describe strengths (and/or weaknesses) of resources.
For example, a resource that has many partonomic relation-
ships might be the ﬁrst resource to consider using if a task
requires part-whole reasoning.
3. Generalizable downstream reasoning As current large-
scale commonsense sources are primarily text-based, they
are lexicalized prior to their combination with language mod-
els, losing much of their structure. As this lack of structure
prevents us from understanding their coverage and gaps, we
are unable to measure their potential for downstream reason-
ing as a function of the available knowledge. It remains un-
known to which extent a more complete source, organized
around dimensions of commonsense knowledge, would be
able to contribute to improving performance. Experiment
4 showed that there is correspondence between knowledge
dimensions and question answering tasks, motivating auto-
matic alignment between the two. Moreover, a comprehen-
sive semantic source may inspire new neuro-symbolic rea-
soning methods, with potentially enhanced generalizability
and explainability, opening the door for reliable common-
sense services to be made available in the future.
4. Evaluation and knowledge gaps Experiment 4 showed
that the potential of diﬀerent dimensions for reasoning varies
greatly and is largely dependent on the evaluation data. This
Ilievski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 21

Dimensions of Commonsense Knowledge
ﬁnding is in line with [53]. The fact that certain dimen-
sions consistently contribute little can be an indicator of gaps
in current evaluation. Namely, dimensions like distinctness
and spatial which currently contribute little or not at all are
likely to be underrepresented in current evaluations. These
gaps should ideally be addressed in the future by new bench-
marks that will represent these missing dimensions. We note
that our set of dimensions is based on the relations found in
current popular commonsense sources. Hence, in this paper,
we make an assumption that the knowledge types in these
sources suﬃce (or at least previously suﬃced) and can ex-
press the desired knowledge. The diversity of knowledge
expressed by the relational-other dimension, as pointed out
also in [34], might be an indicator for additional, latent di-
mensions hidden behind the vagueness of this dimension.
8. Conclusions
At present, commonsense knowledge is dispersed across
a variety of sources with diﬀerent foci, strengths, and weak-
nesses. The complementary knowledge covered by these
sources motivates eﬀorts to consolidate them into a common
representation. In this paper, we pursued the goal of orga-
nizing commonsense relations into a shared set of knowledge
dimensions in a bottom-up fashion. Starting from a survey
and analysis of the relations found in existing sources, we
grouped them into 13 dimensions: lexical, similarity, dis-
tinctness, part-whole, spatial, creation, utility, desire/goal,
quality, comparative, temporal, and relational-other. As each
relation in these sources can be mapped to a dimension, we
applied our method to abstract the relations in an existing
consolidated resource: the Commonsense Knowledge Graph.
This allowed us to empirically study the impact of these di-
mensions. First, we observed that some dimensions are in-
cluded more often than others, potentially pointing to gaps
in the knowledge covered in existing resources. Second, we
measured sparse overlap of facts expressed with each dimen-
sion across sources, which motivates future work on graph
integration through (automated) node resolution. Third, com-
paring the dimension-based clustering to language model-
based unsupervised edge clustering resulted in low overall
agreement, though in some cases, the unsupervised clusters
were dominated by one or two dimensions. This showed that
some of the dimensions represent a stronger signal for lan-
guage modeling than others. Fourth, we measured the im-
pact of each dimension on a downstream question answering
reasoning task, by adapting a state-of-the-art method of pre-
training language models with knowledge graphs. Here, we
observed that the impact diﬀers greatly by dimension, de-
pending largely on the alignment between the task and the
knowledge dimension, as well as on the novelty of knowl-
edge captured by a dimension. While this is in accordance
with the ﬁndings of the original method [53], the dimension-
driven experiments of this paper enabled this hypothesis to
be investigated much more precisely, revealing the direct im-
pact of each knowledge dimension rather than entire knowl-
edge sources.
Our experiments inspired a four-step roadmap towards
creation and utilization of a comprehensive dimension-centered
resource. (1) Node resolution methods should be introduced
and applied to unify the resources further. (2) Such an in-
tegration would allow us to better understand and improve
the coverage/gaps and boundaries of these sources. (3) A
large-scale, public semantic graph of commonsense knowl-
edge may inspire novel neuro-symbolic methods, potentially
allowing for better generalization and explainability. (4) The
impact of a dimension is an indicator of the coverage of that
dimension in current evaluation benchmarks; under-represented
dimensions are evaluation gaps that may need to be ﬁlled by
introducing new benchmarks. And, vice-versa, additional
knowledge dimensions might be hidden behind the generic
relational-other dimension.
Acknowledgement
Four of the authors (Filip Ilievski, Bin Zhang, Debo-
rah McGuinness, and Pedro Szekely) are sponsored by the
DARPA MCS program under Contract No. N660011924033
with the United States Oﬃce Of Naval Research.
