Determining Multifunctional Genes and Diseases in Human 
Using Gene Ontology  
 
 
 
Hisham Al-Mubaid1, Sasikanth Potu1, and M. Shenify2 
1Dept. of Computer Science. University of Houston - Clear Lake, Houston, TX 77058, USA  
2University of Baha, Baha, KSA 

 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The study of human genes and diseases is very rewarding 
and can lead to improvements in healthcare, disease 
diagnostics and drug discovery. In this paper, we further 
our 
previous 
study 
on 
gene–disease 
relationship 
specifically with the multifunctional genes. We investigate 
the multifunctional gene–disease relationship based on the 
published molecular function annotations of genes from 
the Gene Ontology which is the most comprehensive 
source on gene functions. We present a computational 
approach based on path length between molecular function 
annotations as our main metric for estimating the semantics 
of gene functions and multifunctionality in connection with 
gene–disease association. We utilized functional genomics 
data from OMIM, the Gene Ontology, and GOA 
Annotation databases and show that multifunctional genes 
based on mf path length approach are significantly more 
likely to be involved in human diseases. We conducted 
several evaluations and the results show that the path 
length (shortest distance) between gene mf annotations 
highly correlates with gene multifunctionality and gene – 
disease association. Our main contribution is the way we 
identify and determine multifunctional genes using GO mf 
path length which has not been used or investigated before 
as gene multifunctionality metric. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The study of multifunctional genes and diseases in the 
human genome is a very rewarding work and can benefit 
other branches of science on the long term [1–5]. 
Multifunctional genes are those human genes that are 
associated with more than one function within the cell [1, 
2].  It has been shown by numerous studies that such genes 
are more likely to be involved in diseases [1, 4, 8, 9]. 
Therefore, studying these multifunctional genes and 
furthering the knowledge about gene multifunctionality 
will help medicine and drug discovery.  This paper is 
intended 
to 
further 
the 
knowledge 
about 
gene 
multifunctionality in human for the purpose of verifying 
the relationships between gene multifunctionality and 
diseases in human. A great body of research has been 
conducted in the past two decades addressing the similarity 
between genes using various sources and most commonly 
using the Gene Ontology (GO) [5, 6]. GO has been 
extensively used to compute the similarity between genes 
(details in section 3) [19, 20].  In this work, we use the 
functional annotations of a gene from the Gene Ontology 
Annotation (GOA) databases to compute the shortest 
distance (path length) between the Molecular Function 
(mf) GO terms annotating the gene.  In the GO, molecular 
function (mf) terms are organized as nodes in a tree-like 
directed acyclic graph (DAG). For example, Figure 1 
exhibits 7 nodes representing 7 molecular function terms in 
GO [5, 6].  Based on the published molecular function 
annotations of genes from the GO, we examine the 
relationships between multifunctional genes and diseases 
and present a computational approach based on path length 
between mf annotations from Gene Ontology as our main 
metric for estimating the semantics of gene functions and 
multifunctionality in connection with gene – disease 
association.  
We utilize functional genomics data from OMIM, the 
Gene Ontology, and GOA Annotation databases and show 
that multifunctional genes based on mf path length 
approach are significantly more likely to be involved in 
human diseases compared with other non-multifunctional 
genes. Thus, we utilized the relationship between the 
functional 
terms 
of 
a 
gene 
to 
estimate 
the 
multifunctionality of the gene. If a gene is multifunctional 
then it is involved in more than one molecular function in 
the cell and thus more inclined to be a disease gene.  
  
Figure 1: a small part of the GO representing 7 nodes 
from the molecular function aspect. 

In other words, we utilized the functional GOA 
annotations of a gene to predict its multifunctionality and 
so to determine how likely that gene is associated with 
diseases. The main contribution of this work is in the new 
technique of determining multifunctional genes using GO 
mf path length which has never been used before as gene 
multifunctionality metric (or measure) to the best of our 
knowledge. Also we point out here that the relationship 
between diseases and multifunctional genes is not the main 
contribution of this paper. 
 
 
 
2. Background and Related Work                    
There are several databases and online resources for 
functions and other information on human genes and the 
human genome. The NCBI may be regarded as one of the 
most official resources about human genes in terms of gene 
name, gene sequence, gene symbols, etc. [17].   For 
example, when it comes to gene identifier (gene Id) there 
are at least four gene Id codings as shown in Table 1: NCBI 
(enterz) gene Id, UniprotKB, MIM, …etc [18]. In this work 
we try to report multiple Id’s for each gene.  
As reported by several research projects, multifunctional 
genes tend to have more association with diseases compared 
with non-multifunctional genes [1–4, 8–10]. Therefor the 
relationships between diseases and multifunctional genes is 
signification and proved [1, 10].  A multifunctional gene is 
a gene that is involved in several functions and activities, 
including molecular and cellular tasks, inside the cell [1-3, 
8]. Typically, studying multifunctional genes can disclose 
more knowledge about diseases associated with the 
multifunctional genes. In this paper, we rely on the gene 
ontology (GO) which is the most popular repository of 
functional information about human genes [5, 6].  Pritykin, 
Ghersi, and Singh (2015) presented a comprehensive study 
of genome-wide multifunctional genes in human [1]. They 
found that multifunctional genes are significantly more 
likely to be involved in human disorders [1].  Also, they 
found that 32% of all multifunctional genes produced by 
their method are involved in at least one OMIM disorder, 
whereas the fraction of other annotated genes involved in at 
least one OMIM disorder is 21% [1, 7]. 
In [12], Salathe et al. investigated the multifunctionality 
of yeast genes and proteins for a different goal. They found 
a positive correlation between how many biological process 
(bp) GO terms a gene is annotated with and its evolutionary 
conservation in yeast; that is, they found highly significant 
negative correlation between number of bp GO terms and 
rate of change of yeast genes [12]. Also in [1], they 
observed that that multifunctional genes tend to be more 
evolutionarily conserved. 
A method for identifying novel moonlighting proteins 
from current functional annotations in public databases was 
proposed by Khan et al. (2013) in [3].  They identified 
potential moonlighting proteins in the Escherichia coli K-
12 genome by examining clusters of GO term annotations 
taken from UniProt and constructed three datasets of 
experimentally confirmed moonlighting proteins [3].  
In another study of multifunctional genes [13], Clark and 
Radivojac (2011) discovered a statistically significant 
positive correlation between the number of GO biological 
process leaf terms a gene has and its number of Pfam 
domains and are usually longer [13]. 
 
3. Methods and Techniques 
A great body of research has been conducted in the past 
two decades addressing the similarity between genes using 
various sources and most commonly using the Gene 
Ontology (GO) [20].  GO is the main and most 
comprehensive source of information on gene functions, 
processes, and cellular localizations [5, 6, 19].  In the past 
decade or so, it has been used widely and extensively to 
predict and validate scientific results and findings related to 
genes [5, 6, 16, 19].  Also, GO has been used extensively to 
compute the semantic similarity between genes using the GO 
annotation terms of genes [20].  The semantic similarity 
measure is a function that estimates the similarity (or 
distance) between two genes or two GO terms as a numeric 
value [19, 20]. Typically, the similarity between two genes 
will be computed as a function of the similarity between their 
GO annotation terms.  
Basically the similarity 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑔(𝑔1, 𝑔2) between two genes 
𝑔1 and 𝑔2 can be a similarity function Simt(.,.) between the 
GO annotation terms of 𝑔1 and 𝑔2: 
𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑔(𝑔1, 𝑔2) = 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑡(𝑇𝑆1, 𝑇𝑆2) …………… (1) 
   where 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑔(𝑔1, 𝑔2)  is the similarity between genes 
𝑔1and 𝑔2; 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑡(𝑇𝑆1, 𝑇𝑆2) is the similarity between GO 
term sets 𝑇𝑆1 and 𝑇𝑆2 ; and 𝑇𝑆1 and 𝑇𝑆2 are the sets of 
GO terms annotating genes 𝑔1and 𝑔2 respectively. That is 
𝑇𝑆𝑖= {𝑡1, … , 𝑡𝑛} are the GO terms annotating gene 𝑔𝑖. 
In this paper we would like to use the path length (shortest 
distance) between GO terms in the molecular function (mf) 
aspect of GO as a metric of gene multifunctionality in 
connection with gene–diseases relationship.  Let 𝑃𝐿(𝑡1, 𝑡2) 
be the shortest path length between terms 𝑡1, 𝑡2 in the GO 
DAG (see Figure 2). For example, in Figure 2, the path 
length between GO terms (nodes) A and B is 6, while 
between B and C the path length is 3 using edge counting. 
Let 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑓(𝑔𝑘) = max
𝑖,𝑗𝑃𝐿(𝑡𝑖, 𝑡𝑗) ……….. (2) 
 

  
 Figure 2: Part of the molecular function aspect of the GO 
showing the four mf annotation terms of gene 
COL2A1 in GO {QuickGP – 
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO} 
 
where 𝑡𝑖 , 𝑡𝑗 are two GO annotation terms for gene 𝑔𝑘. That 
is, the mf distance 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑓(𝑔𝑘) of gene 𝑔𝑘 is the maximum  
pair-wise distance of all mf terms of gene 𝑔𝑘.  For example, 
in Table 1, we can see that gene COL2A1 (UniprotKB: 
P02458; gene Id: 1280; MIM: 120140) has four GO terms 
(in the molecular function aspect) representing four 
different functions that this gene is involved in as shown in 
Figure 2 (nodes A, B, C, and D), and these four mf GO terms 
are:  
 
The distance (shortest path length) between these four mf 
terms, as we can see in Figure 8, ranges from 3 (between B 
and C) to 7 (between A and C). If a gene is involved in two 
molecular functions that are relatively far apart in the mf 
aspect of the GO then these two functions are highly 
distinct (different) and more likely the gene is more 
candidate to be multifunctional gene. In this paper we 
investigate and analyze the maximum distance, equation 
(2), of all-pair mf terms of a gene and its relationship with 
multifunctionality and diseases for human genes.  
 
4. Evaluation Results and Discussion 
We conducted a number of experimental evaluations on 
human 
gene 
annotations, 
human 
diseases, 
and 
multifunctionality. We used data from Online Mendelian  
 
 
Figure 3: On average genes associated with highest 
number of OMIM diseases have significantly 
higher number of associated GO molecular 
function (mf) terms (i.e., 11.5 vs. 5.6) indicating 
that these genes are likely multifunctional. 
 
 
Inheritance in Man OMIM [7] on gene and disease 
relationships; also used GOA database for gene functional 
annotations from the molecular function aspect. We further 
verified some information and results from QuickGO and 
NCBI [17, 21]. In the first experiment, as shown in Figure 
3, we examined all human genes available in OMIM [7] that 
have at least on molecular function mf annotation in the gene 
ontology [5, 6] (roughly >16,000 genes). On average each 
gene is annotated (associated) with 5.6 molecular functions 
(i.e., 5.6 mf terms per gene). Next, we examined the top 20 
genes associated with highest number of diseases according 
to OMIM and found that on average each one of these genes 
is annotated with 11.5 molecular functions in the gene 
ontology as illustrated in Figure 3. This result is significant 
(p < 9e-8, significance by hypergeometric test) which is a 
clear indication that more molecular functions for a given 
gene indicate the multifunctionality of the gene and more 
likelihood of being a disease-gene. 
Let a disease-gene be a human gene that is associated with 
one or more phenotypes in the OMIM database [7], 
otherwise let us call it a non-disease gene.  Next, we proved 
that disease-genes have significantly higher distance in their 
molecular function terms in the gene ontology GO (Figure 
4) compared with all other genes in the OMIM database [7, 
16].  Figure 4 illustrates the significant difference in the GO 
term (node) distance between mf terms of all genes vs genes 
associated with highest number of phenotypes in OMIM. It 
is shown that the maximum distance between all molecular 
function mf terms in the GO is on average 7.75 for all 
OMIM genes whereas it is 10.8 for top 20 disease-genes. 
From these two evaluations, it is very clear that the human 
genes that are associated with the most number of diseases  
5.6
11.5
2
4
6
8
10
12
All OMIM genes with
mf GOA
Top 20 genes with
highest number of
associated
phenotypes
Avg no. of GO mf terms per gene

 
Figure 4: On average genes associated with highest 
number of OMIM phenotypes have higher 
distance between their mf terms (10.8) 
compared with all genes (7.75). This makes 
these genes that are associated with disease 
more likely to be multifunctional. 
 
have significantly higher number of mf terms and higher 
distances between their mf terms. Next, we investigated the 
maximum distance between mf terms for all genes using the 
gene ontology annotations GOA. The results are shown in 
Figure 5.  As shown, the largest number of genes (~1400) 
have distance of 12 between their mf terms and the least is 
distance 2 (~220 genes); Figure 5. 
To further the study, we examined the total number of mf 
terms and max GO mf term distance for the top 20 genes with 
the highest number of associated diseases.  From OMIM, we 
extracted the top 20 genes having the highest number of 
phenotypes. These genes are shown in Table 1 (we included 
MIM, UniprotKB, and NCBI gene Id for each gene).  We ran 
our technique and computed number of GO terms and the 
maximum distance between GO mf terms for each one of 
these 20 genes as shown in Table 1. Evidently, these too 
heavily disease-associated genes are multifunctional as their 
mf term distance average is 10.8 which is significantly higher 
than the average of all genes (which is 7.8); see Figure 4 and 
Table 1.  We say multifunctional because each one of these 
genes is associated on average with 11.5 different molecular 
functions (the average is 5.6). 
Moreover, we randomly extracted 20 non-disease genes 
(selected from OMIM randomly). These genes are not 
associated with any phenotype in OMIM. We analyzed these 
genes examining their molecular functions (mf) in GO and 
the distance between their mf terms and the results are in 
Table 2 and illustrated in Figure 6. As shown in Table 2, 
these genes have on average max distance of 6.4 which is 
not high enough compared with disease-genes (average 
10.8).  In fact, these genes have lower max distance (6.40) 
than the average of all human genes (which is 7.75 as shown 
in Figure 4). Moreover, these genes are annotated with an 
average of 3.6 mf terms in the GO which is significantly 
lower than the average of all genes 5.6 mf terms (shown in 
Figure 3). 
Finally, in the Gene Ontology Annotation GOA database, 
all genes having only one molecular function (GO mf term) 
were extracted and then we randomly selected a set of 20 
genes from them shown in Table 3.  Thus, these genes are 
highly likely non-multi-functional since each gene is 
associated with only one mf term in the GO. Therefore, we 
expect these genes to be non-disease genes more often than 
not.  This randomly selected set of genes were analyzed and 
found that only four of them (4 out of 20 or 20%) are 
associated with phenotypes (disease genes) and the 
remaining (80%) are not (non-disease genes).  This finding 
is fairly significant (hypergeometric test, p < 8e-9) as the 
ratio in OMIM database is more than 80%of genes having 
mf annotations are associated with at least one phenotype.  
 
 
 
Figure 5: Illustration of number of genes for each value of maximum distance between GO mf terms of all OMIM genes.  
7.75
10.8
2
4
6
8
10
12
All OMIM genes with mf
GOA
Top 20 genes with highest
number of associated
phenotypes
Max GO distance between mf terms
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Number of genes
Max distance of GO mf terms

5. Conclusion 
This paper presents a method for examining the 
relationships between diseases from OMIM database and 
gene ontology annotations of human genes using the 
molecular function aspect. Specifically, we used the 
distance between the molecular function mf annotation 
terms as an indicator or metric of gene multifunctionality. 
Numerous studies have shown that multifunctional genes 
are more likely associated with diseases compared with 
non-multifunctional genes [1, 3, 9, 8]. Therefore, we 
investigated the multifunctionality of a gene using the 
shortest distance between mf GO terms of the gene. The 
main goal and contribution of this paper is in the way of 
identifying and determining multifunctional genes using 
GO mf path length and using it as a gene multifunctionality 
metric which has never been used before to the best of our 
knowledge. The evaluation results proved that gene 
multifunctionality indicated by GO term distance is highly 
correlated with gene–disease association. We showed that, 
for example, the top 20 genes associated with the highest 
number of phenotypes in the OMIM database exhibit 
significantly higher GO distance (path length) compared 
with the average of all human genes in OMIM. We also 
showed that genes not associated with any disease exhibit 
significantly lower GO distance compared with all human 
genes in OMIM; and genes annotated with only one GO mf 
terms have significantly lower disease association 
compared with all human genes; and more results reported 
in section 4. All these findings clearly indicate the 
existence of this interesting correlation. Further study may 
be needed for a genome-wide correlation investigation 
with all aspects of GO with all human diseases in OMIM.
