How essential are unstructured clinical narratives and information fusion to 
clinical trial recruitment? 
Preethi Raghavan, MS, James L. Chen, MD, Eric Fosler-Lussier, PhD, Albert M. Lai, PhD 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
 
Abstract 
Electronic health records capture patient information using structured controlled vocabularies and unstructured 
narrative text. While structured data typically encodes lab values, encounters and medication lists, unstructured data 
captures the physician’s interpretation of the patient’s condition, prognosis, and response to therapeutic intervention. 
In this paper, we demonstrate that information extraction from unstructured clinical narratives is essential to most 
clinical applications.  We perform an empirical study to validate the argument and show that structured data alone is 
insufficient in resolving eligibility criteria for recruiting patients onto clinical trials for chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia (CLL) and prostate cancer. Unstructured data is essential to solving 59% of the CLL trial criteria and 77% 
of the prostate cancer trial criteria. More specifically, for resolving eligibility criteria with temporal constraints, we 
show the need for temporal reasoning and information integration with medical events within and across 
unstructured clinical narratives and structured data. 
Introduction 
The electronic health record (EHR) is a powerful repository of patient information that can be leveraged to build 
applications that benefit the clinical community such as clinical trial recruitment. Understanding and extracting 
information from EHRs enables reasoning with clinical variables and supports decision making.1 EHRs record 
patient information both as data coded in structured format, as well as in the form of free text clinical narratives. 
Structured data typically contains demographics, patient birth and death information, lab values, encounters, and at 
times procedures and diagnosis lists. Unstructured data includes free text clinical narratives that correspond to 
different encounters generated at various points of time, including admission notes, history and physical reports, 
discharge summaries, radiology reports, and pathology reports. 
Clinical trial recruitment may be semi-automated through information extraction from the EHR. Clinical trials have 
eligibility (inclusion and exclusion) criteria that describe characteristics and constraints that help determine if a 
patient qualifies for a trial. Typically, clinicians and trial recruitment coordinators identify potential clinical trial 
patients from characteristics described in their medical history and match them against the eligibility criteria for 
individual trials. This standard model of clinical trial enrollment is rife with errors.  If the clinical staff is unfamiliar 
with a particular trial or if there are competing trials, an eligible patient may be overlooked. On the opposite 
extreme, the clinical trials staff may be asked to evaluate patients who are clearly not candidates.  
This information mismatch has the potential to be streamlined. Generating automated queries corresponding to 
eligibility criteria and querying patient records from the EHR in order to identify qualifying patients provides an 
efficient and agnostic approach to clinical trials recruitment..The pertinent question then is whether structured data, 
being easier to automatically process and understand, has sufficient information to resolve these eligibility criteria, 
or if there is a need to extract and reason with medical concepts in unstructured clinical narratives. Researchers have 
often emphasized the importance of using clinical narratives for clinical decision support,1 information retrieval,2 
question answering1 and automated clinical trial recruitment.4 Unstructured data in clinical narratives captures 
important decisions and relationships between medical concepts including causal (symptom caused disease), 
consequential (why a drug or treatment was administered) and temporal (symptom before disease/ treatment). 
Furthermore, Rosenbloom et al.5 suggest that clinical notes containing naturalistic prose have been more accurate 
and reliable for identifying patients with given diseases, and more understandable to healthcare providers reviewing 
patient records. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no prior empirical studies that evaluate the 
usefulness of structured vs. unstructured data considering their advantages and limitations for a clinical task. 
In this paper, we study two datasets of structured and unstructured data with patients suffering from chronic 
lymphatic leukemia (CLL) and prostate cancer obtained from The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center. 
Given a set of eligibility criteria from corresponding clinical trials, we evaluate the number of criteria that can be 
resolved using information from just the structured data and the number of criteria that require information 
extraction from and reasoning with unstructured clinical narratives and data. There are three main contributions of 
this work: 1) Empirical evaluation of the commonly assumed hypothesis that unstructured clinical text processing is 
required and that structured data alone is insufficient to accurately resolve eligibility criteria with the help of a 
clinical trial use case; 2) Demonstration of the need for cross-narrative temporal reasoning in solving certain 
218

temporal eligibility criteria; 3) Demonstration of the need for information fusion across structured and unstructured 
data in solving certain temporal eligibility criteria. 
Related Work 
The recent decade has seen considerable research in the natural language processing (NLP) of unstructured clinical 
text.3,6-8 Fushman et al.1 discuss how successful processing of clinical narratives is the key to overall success of 
automated clinical decision support systems. They stress the importance of medical concepts with the help of named 
entity recognition and learning relations between those named entities are important for better understanding clinical 
narrative text. Wang et al.7 propose a framework for automated pharmacovigilance by applying NLP and association 
statistics on comprehensive unstructured clinical data from the EHR. They argue that previous algorithms have 
focused on coded and structured data, and therefore miss important clinical data relevant to this task. Medical NLP 
systems like Mayo’s cTakes,8 and MedLEE7 have components specifically trained or designed for information 
extraction from clinical text.  
There has been some work on modeling temporal knowledge in eligibility criteria to help effective clinical text 
processing. 9-10 Ross et al. 10 observe that temporal features were present in 40% of clinical trial criteria analyzed as 
part of their study, where the type of temporal expression in the criteria ranged from well-specified to loosely-
specified. Similarly, there have been considerable efforts, including rule-based algorithms, temporal annotation of 
clinical corpora, and machine learning methods, towards learning temporal relations and generating timelines of 
medical events from unstructured clinical text.11-13 Zhou et al.11 extract temporal relations between medical events in 
discharge summaries. The CLEF project12 uses a pairwise supervised classiﬁcation approach to learn temporal 
relations between medical events within the same narrative. While temporal information has been studied in the 
intra-document context, there is not much prior work in cross-narrative temporal relation learning and information 
fusion. Carlo et al.14 attempt to align medical problems in structured and unstructured EHR data using UMLS by 
studying the information overlap between structured ICD-9 diagnoses and unstructured discharge summaries. They 
conclude that this is a non-trivial task with the need for better methods to detect correlating structured and 
unstructured data before aligning them. Köpcke et al.15 compare the eligibility criteria defined in trial protocols with 
patient data contained in the EHR in multi-site trials to determine the extent of available data compared with the 
eligibility criteria of randomly selected clinical trials. However, their study is restricted to structured data in the 
EHR.  
In spite of the large body of recent work in processing structured and unstructured clinical narratives for temporal 
reasoning, and other NLP tasks, there are no prior studies that empirically evaluate the usefulness of structured vs. 
unstructured data for a clinical task. We perform an empirical analysis of CLL and prostate cancer patient records 
and evaluate the performance of structured and unstructured data in resolving clinical trial eligibility criteria. We 
specifically focus on criteria with temporal constraints and illustrate the need for unstructured clinical narrative 
analysis including cross-narrative temporal reasoning and information fusion. 
Patient Records and Clinical Trial Eligibility Criteria - Data Description 
The EHR data used in this study consists of medical records for 2060 CLL patients and 1808 prostate cancer 
patients. The CLL dataset contains 95 different types of unstructured reports including discharge summaries, history 
and physical reports, specialty reports such as wound care, operative notes, OB/GYN and psych evaluations, social 
work assessment, referral letters and progress notes. It also consists of radiology reports, pathology reports and 
cardiology reports. The total number of unstructured clinical narratives in the CLL dataset is 100704. The structured 
data consists of lab reports, procedures list, diagnoses list and encounters list. 
The prostate cancer dataset consists of 2652 oncology reports, 1582 pathology reports, 6606 radiology reports as 
part of unstructured data. The structured data in this dataset includes a discharge medications list (30178 
medications), laboratory values (939 values), and a medications list (141932 medications).  
The clinical trials dataset consists of a set of top 100 clinical trials each, as defined by clinicaltrials.gov, for both 
CLL and prostate cancer.  
Methodology 
Medical concept extraction - We annotated the clinical trial criteria datasets with medical concepts, concept unique 
identifiers (CUIs) and semantic types using MetaMap.14 We then extracted criteria containing the following 
semantic types: Disease or Syndrome, Laboratory or Test Result, Procedure, Sign or Symptom, and 
Pharmacological Substance. The criteria containing the Temporal Concept semantic type were labeled as temporal 
eligibility criteria. Similarly, we also annotated both patient datasets with medical concepts and the semantic types 
mentioned previously.  
Matching medical concepts across clinical trials and patient datasets - In order to evaluate the degree of overlap 
between the clinical trials dataset and structured and unstructured data in the medical records dataset, we compute 
219

the Match between medical concepts across these datasets. The match functions are computed across the datasets as 
follows. 1) UMLS CUI Match where an exact CUI match is computed and 2) Phrase Match where we compute a 
match between medical concepts (textual fragment identified as the medical concept). Thus we have,  
 
Match(CUI in the trial dataset, CUI in structured data) 
 
Match(CUI in the trial dataset, CUI in unstructured data) 
 
Match(Phrase in the trial dataset, medical concept in the structured data) 
 
Match(Phrase in the trial dataset, medical concept in the unstructured data) 
These match functions are computed for two levels of analysis - (1) medical concept-level, where we compare all 
the medical concepts in the trials dataset against the structured and unstructured data, and (2) eligibility criteria 
level, where we compare all the medical concepts in each criterion against the structured and unstructured data. 
The medical concept-level match helps analyze the number and type of medical concepts typically found in the 
structured and unstructured datasets when solving clinical trial eligibility criteria. As shown in the algorithm below, 
we compute the match between all medical concepts in the clinical trials dataset and the structured data. If there are 
no matching concepts found in the structured data, we then compute a match with the unstructured data. 
  
 
 
 
The eligibility criteria-level match helps us analyze the number of criteria that can be solved by structured data, 
unstructured data or both. In order to evaluate the need for temporal reasoning and information fusion and constrain 
the number of eligibility criteria, we restricted the eligibility criteria-level analysis to criteria with temporal 
constraints. We compare each eligibility criterion against both structured data and unstructured data to determine if 
the concepts in the criterion require only structured data, only unstructured data or both datasets together for 
resolution, as shown in the algorithm below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The algorithm first compares all medical concepts in the eligibility criterion against all medical concepts in the 
structured data. If all the concepts in the criterion are found in the structured data, we conclude that the criterion may 
be resolved using the structured data.  We then do a similar comparison for unstructured data and if all concepts in 
the criterion are found in the unstructured data, we conclude that the criterion may be resolved using the 
unstructured data.  
Information fusion - In the case where all the concepts in the criterion are found in both the structured as well as the 
unstructured data, we conclude that the criterion can be solved using either the structured or the unstructured data. 
However, the criterion may also require both structured as well as unstructured data for resolution. Taking this into 
consideration, we define information fusion as follows. 
Given medical concepts {m1, ... ,mn} in a clinical trial criterion, if Sk is a set of k concepts that match the structured 
data and Uj is a set of j concepts that match the unstructured data, where k, j>0 and k, j<n. Now there are two 
possibilities. 
1. L = Sk ∩ Uj is not empty. Here, L concepts match both structured and unstructured data.  
2. L= Sk ∩ Uj. is empty. Here, L concepts match the structured data and the remainder j concepts match the 
unstructured data. So Sk and Uj are disjoint. 
1. Calculate 
a. Match(CUI in the trial dataset, CUI in the structured data) 
b. Match(Phrase in the trial dataset, medical concept in the structured data) 
2. If there are no match results from step 1, then calculate 
a. Match(CUI in the trial dataset, CUI in the unstructured data) 
b. Match(Phrase in the trial dataset, medical concept in the unstructured data) 
1. For all temporal eligibility criteria,  
a. For all medical concepts (from 1 to n) in the criterion  
i. Match1(CUI in the criterion, CUI in the structured data)    …    (Matchn(CUI in the criterion, CUI in 
the structured data)  
ii. Match1(Phrase in the criterion, Phrase in the structured data)    …    (Matchn(Phrase in the criterion, 
Phrase in the structured data)  
2. If i OR ii returns true, then the criterion can be resolved by the structured data 
3. Repeat step 1. by replacing “structured data” with “unstructured data” 
a. If step i OR ii returns true, 
i. the criterion can be resolved by the unstructured data 
ii. else the criterion can be cannot be resolved by a concept match across unstructured data 
4. If in step 2, we get true for “structured” as well as “unstructured data”,  
a. the criterion can be solved using either the structured or unstructured data. 
220

Temporal reasoning in unstructured data - For subset of criteria that require unstructured data for resolution, we 
further analyze the temporal constraints in the criteria and attempt to answer the following questions. How many 
temporal constraints can be solved using coarse temporal reasoning within each clinical narrative? How many 
temporal constraints require more granular temporal ordering within each clinical narrative? How many temporal 
constraints require cross-narrative temporal reasoning?  
In order to answer these questions, we run a CRF-based time-bin tagger17 and learn to associate the medical events 
within each narrative with one of the coarse time-bins: “way before admission, before admission, admission, after 
admission, discharge”. The time-bin tagger was trained on different patient records not part of this dataset. We also 
perform fine-grained temporally ordering by learning to rank medical concepts within a clinical narrative by their 
order of occurrence.18 This gives us both a coarse ordering and a fine-grained ordering of medical concepts within 
each clinical narrative. These intra-narrative temporal orderings are then combined with the admission and discharge 
dates across narratives to generate a cross-document partially ordered timeline of medical concepts for each patient. 
Results 
The methodology is empirically evaluated by calculating the extent of match between the eligibility criteria dataset 
and the structured and unstructured datasets. The medical concept-level match results between the trials datasets, 
consisting of all eligibility criteria, and the structured and unstructured data are shown in Table 1. The CLL trials 
dataset has 2167 medical concepts and the prostate cancer dataset has 1019 medical concepts.  
The CLL trials have a total of 1720 eligibility criteria, while the prostate cancer trials have 1325 eligibility criteria, 
containing diseases, procedures, tests, symptoms and medications. We observe that more than half of the medical 
concepts in the CLL and prostate patient data were only found in the unstructured data. The most frequent medical 
concept semantic types found in the unstructured datasets include Finding, Sign or Symptom, Disease or Syndrome, 
whereas the most frequent medical concept semantic type in the structured data includes Laboratory Test or 
Procedure, Pharmacological Substance and Disease or Syndrome. If the structured data has diagnoses and 
encounters lists, there tend to be overlapping Disease or Syndrome type concepts across the structured data and 
unstructured clinical narratives. 
 
CLL 
Prostate Cancer 
 
CUI 
Medical Concept 
CUI 
Medical Concept 
Structured Data Match 
23% 
29% 
11% 
19% 
Unstructured Data Match 
61% 
68% 
48% 
57% 
Table 1: Medical Concept-level Analysis on CLL and Prostate Cancer Trials and Patient Records 
354 of the eligibility criteria in the CLL trials and 297 of the eligibility criteria in the prostate cancer trials have 
temporal constraints. Table 2 shows results from matching temporal clinical trial eligibility criteria against 
structured and unstructured data. In both patient datasets, matching the textual fragment identified as the medical 
concept gives us a higher match percentage than trying to match CUIs. Importantly, the dependence on unstructured 
data for resolution of temporal eligibility criteria is higher than structured data. There is especially a huge gap 
between the structured and unstructured data match in the case of prostate cancer, where structured data only 
contributes to the resolution of 9% of the criteria.  
 
CLL 
Prostate Cancer 
 
CUI 
Medical Concept 
CUI 
Medical Concept 
Structured Data Match 
35% 
37% 
9% 
9% 
Unstructured Data Match 
53% 
59% 
75% 
77% 
Table 2: Eligibility Criteria-level Analysis on CLL and Prostate Cancer Trials and Patient Records 
 
CLL 
Prostate Cancer 
Cross-Narrative Temporal Reasoning 
33% 
35% 
Information fusion L = Sk ∩ Uj is not empty 
24% 
3% 
Information fusion L = Sk ∩ Uj is empty 
17% 
1% 
Table 3: Eligibility Criteria that require Cross-narrative Temporal Reasoning and Information Fusion for resolution 
We observed that from the temporal criteria requiring unstructured data for resolution, frequently intra-narrative 
temporal reasoning was sufficient for resolving temporal constraints. The learned time-bins, along with the 
admission and discharge dates on each narrative, were useful in assigning medical concepts to coarse time-periods 
and in resolving 41% of the eligibility criteria that required an unstructured data match. For instance, the constraint, 
“patients with a distant history (greater than 6 months before study entry) of venous thromboembolic disease are 
eligible”, requires mapping of venous thromboembolic disease to a time-bin way before time. Whereas “clinically 
significant bleeding event within the last 3 months, unrelated to trauma, or underlying condition that would be 
expected to result in a bleeding diathesis” required fine-grained temporal ordering of medical concepts. 
221

Further, as shown in Table 3, from the criteria that required unstructured data for resolution, 33% and 35% required 
cross-narrative temporal reasoning in the CLL and prostate cancer dataset respectively. A criteria such as, “fever > 
100.5°F for 2 weeks without evidence of infection”, requires extracting the fact that fever lasted for 2 weeks by 
examining multiple mentions of fever across history and physical reports and discharge summaries to determine 
when fever started and stopped. This additionally requires the ability to perform coreference resolution across 
clinical narratives.19 Criteria requiring information from both structured and unstructured data (information fusion) 
were determined based on the presence of the medical concepts in the criteria across these data sources. For 
instance, “if they have achieved stable blood pressure (bp) on a regimen of over 2 drugs after 6-8 weeks of therapy.” 
The value of bp can be obtained from the structured data, however the nuanced relationship information about the 
drug regimen that was prescribed to stabilize bp, along with its time duration, requires time-bin learning and cross-
narrative temporal reasoning. 
We observed that while a large percentage of CLL criteria required fusion, the lower number of prostate cancer 
criteria is mainly due to limited structured data available for prostate cancer. 
 
Discussion 
We studied two datasets of patients – CLL and prostate cancer – and evaluated the usefulness of structured vs. 
unstructured data in recruiting for corresponding clinical trials. We observed that the type of structured data, its 
granularity, and the information available vary across patient datasets. While the CLL patient dataset has detailed 
structured data in the form of diagnoses lists, encounters list, procedures and lab values, the prostate cancer dataset 
has limited structured data mostly consisting of medication lists and lab values. More fundamentally, the data 
heterogeneity reflects the underlying tumor heterogeneity at multiple levels. These levels include: (1) patient referral 
patterns (2) patterns of disease treatment (3) and differences in disease stages. At The OSU James Cancer Hospital, 
the majority of prostate cancer patients tend to be referrals from community oncologists or urologists after failure of 
first and second line therapies. In contrast, CLL patients are mostly evaluated from time of diagnosis and thus their 
entire case history is within the OSU system. Secondly, laboratory values for prostate cancer patients are often 
drawn at their local laboratory and subsequently faxed to their oncologist at OSU. These labs are not directly 
accessible and are found in the unstructured component of the medical record. In stark contrast, CLL labs are nearly 
universally drawn at OSU. 
These tumor type differences would help explain our findings that prostate cancer requires the use of the 
unstructured data more frequently. The end result is that prior treatment history for prostate cancer patients who are 
seen at a later stage will have their disease course and treatment course summarized in the unstructured narrative. 
CLL patients are captured at an earlier stage and therefore their disease course and treatment history is more easily 
obtained from the structured text. This tumor type heterogeneity is reflected in the diagnosis codes that are available. 
In the case of CLL, these codes are useful in checking eligibility criteria that check for the presence or absence of a 
medical condition can be resolved easily from the structured data using these lists. In case of prostate cancer, this 
data is not as complete.  
Tumor heterogeneity aside, structured data may also fail if the medical concept is at a finer level of granularity than 
what is required for an exact match. In such cases, examining the unstructured data for additional information, or 
additional processing to check for related higher level concepts for medical events in the structured data may help 
better resolve the eligibility criteria.  
Conclusion 
We performed an empirical evaluation of clinical trial eligibility criteria resolution using structured and unstructured 
patient datasets from CLL and prostate cancer. We observed that unstructured data is essential to resolving 
eligibility criteria in 59% of the CLL trial criteria and 77% of the prostate cancer trials. We also demonstrated the 
need for cross-document temporal relation learning and information fusion across structured and unstructured data 
sources. Although structured data is useful in resolving certain criteria, it is limited by information granularity and 
structured data type. Thus, structured data is best used for first pass filtering of EHR data in eliminating a criterion 
based on the presence or absence of a certain lab test or diagnoses, prior to a more nuanced second pass using 
unstructured data. Moreover, improving the coverage of the structured data in the EHR would improve its ability to 
be used as a clinical trial recruitment tool.
