Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
Yinlam Chow 1 Oﬁr Nachum 2 Aleksandra Faust 2 Edgar Duenez-Guzman 1 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3
Abstract
We
study
continuous
action
reinforcement
learning problems in which it is crucial that
the agent interacts with the environment only
through safe policies, i.e., policies that do not
take the agent to undesirable situations.
We
formulate these problems as constrained Markov
decision processes (CMDPs) and present safe
policy optimization algorithms that are based
on a Lyapunov approach to solve them.
Our
algorithms can use any standard policy gradient
(PG) method, such as deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG) or proximal policy optimization
(PPO), to train a neural network policy, while
guaranteeing near-constraint satisfaction for
every policy update by projecting either the
policy parameter or the action onto the set of
feasible solutions induced by the state-dependent
linearized Lyapunov constraints. Compared to
the existing constrained PG algorithms, ours are
more data efﬁcient as they are able to utilize
both on-policy and off-policy data. Moreover,
our action-projection algorithm often leads to
less conservative policy updates and allows for
natural integration into an end-to-end PG training
pipeline. We evaluate our algorithms and compare
them with the state-of-the-art baselines on several
simulated (MuJoCo) tasks, as well as a real-world
indoor robot navigation problem, demonstrating
their effectiveness in terms of balancing perfor-
mance and constraint satisfaction. Videos of the
experiments can be found in the following link:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/
1pzuzFqWIE710bE2U6DmS59AfRzqK2Kek/
view?usp=sharing
1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning (RL) has witnessed
tremendous success in many high-dimensional control prob-
lems, including video games (Mnih et al., 2015), board
games (Silver et al., 2016), robot locomotion (Lillicrap et al.,
*Equal contribution
1DeepMind 2Google Brain 3Facebook
AI Research.
Correspondence to:
Yinlam Chow <yinlam-

Technical Report, Submitted to ICML 2019. Copyright 2019 by
the author(s).
2016), manipulation (Levine et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al.,
2018), navigation (Faust et al., 2018), and obstacle avoid-
ance (Chiang et al., 2019). In standard RL, the ultimate goal
is to optimize the expected sum of rewards/costs, and the
agent is free to explore any behavior as long as it leads to
performance improvement. Although this freedom might
be acceptable in many problems, including those involving
simulated environments, and could expedite learning a good
policy, it might be harmful in many other problems and
could cause damage to the agent (robot) or to the environ-
ment (plant or the people working nearby). In such domains,
it is absolutely crucial that while the agent (RL algorithm)
optimizes its long-term performance, it also maintains safe
policies both during training and at convergence.
A natural way to incorporate safety is via constraints. A stan-
dard model for RL with constraints is constrained Markov
decision process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999), where in addi-
tion to its standard objective, the agent must satisfy con-
straints on expectations of auxiliary costs. Although op-
timal policies for ﬁnite CMDPs with known models can
be obtained by linear programming (Altman, 1999), there
are not many results for solving CMDPs when the model
is unknown or the state and/or action spaces are large or
inﬁnite. A common approach to solve CMDPs is to use
the Lagrangian method (Altman, 1998; Geibel & Wysotzki,
2005) that augments the original objective function with
a penalty on constraint violation and computes the saddle-
point of the constrained policy optimization via primal-dual
methods (Chow et al., 2017). Although safety is ensured
when the policy converges asymptotically, a major drawback
of this approach is that it makes no guarantee with regards
to the safety of the policies generated during training.
A few algorithms have been recently proposed to solve
CMDPs at scale, while remaining safety during training.
One such algorithm is constrained policy optimization
(CPO) (Achiam et al., 2017). CPO extends the trust-region
policy optimization (TRPO) algorithm (Schulman et al.,
2015a) to handle the constraints in a principled way and
has shown promising empirical results in terms scalability,
performance, and constraint satisfaction, both during train-
ing and after convergence. Another class of algorithms of
this sort is by Chow et al. (2018). These algorithms use
the notion of Lyapunov functions that have a long history
in control theory to analyze the stability of dynamical sys-
tems (Khalil, 1996). Lyapunov functions have been used in
RL to guarantee closed-loop stability of the agent (Perkins &
arXiv:1901.10031v2  [cs.LG]  11 Feb 2019

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
Barto, 2002; Faust et al., 2014). They also have been used to
guarantee that a model-based RL agent can be brought back
to a “region of attraction” during exploration (Berkenkamp
et al., 2017). Chow et al. (2018) use the theoretical proper-
ties of the Lyapunov functions and propose safe approximate
policy and value iteration algorithms. They prove theories
for their algorithms, when the CMDP is ﬁnite and known,
and empirically evaluate them when it is large and/or un-
known. However, since their algorithms are value-function-
based, applying them to continuous action problems is not
straightforward, and was left as a future work.
In this paper, we build on the problem formulation and the-
oretical ﬁndings of the Lyapunov-based approach to solve
CMDPs, and extend it to tackle continuous action problems
that play an important role in control theory and robotics.
We propose Lyapunov-based safe RL algorithms that can
handle problems with large or inﬁnite action spaces, and
return safe policies both during training and at convergence.
To do so, there are two major difﬁculties which we resolve:
1) the policy update becomes an optimization problem over
the large or continuous action space (similar to standard
MDPs with large actions), and 2) the policy update is a
constrained optimization problem in which the (Lyapunov)
constraints involve integration over the action space, and
thus, it is often impossible to have them in closed-form.
Since the number of Lyapunov constraints is equal to the
number of states, the situation is even more challenging
when the problem has a large or an inﬁnite state space. To
address the ﬁrst difﬁculty, we switch from value-function-
based to policy gradient (PG) and actor-critic algorithms.
To address the second difﬁculty, we propose two approaches
to solve our constrained policy optimization problem (a
problem with inﬁnite constraints, each involving an inte-
gral over the continuous action space) that can work with
any standard on-policy (e.g., proximal policy optimization
(PPO) Schulman et al. 2017) and off-policy (e.g., deep de-
terministic policy gradient (DDPG) Lillicrap et al. 2015)
PG algorithm. Our ﬁrst approach, which we call policy
parameter projection or θ-projection, is a constrained op-
timization method that combines PG with a projection of
the policy parameters onto the set of feasible solutions in-
duced by the Lyapunov constraints. Our second approach,
which we call action projection or a-projection, uses the
concept of a safety layer introduced by Dalal et al. (2018)
to handle simple single-step constraints, extends this con-
cept to general trajectory-based constraints, solves the con-
strained policy optimization problem in closed-form using
Lyapunov functions, and integrates this closed-form into
the policy network via safety-layer augmentation. Since
both approaches guarantee safety at every policy update,
they manage to maintain safety throughout training (ignor-
ing errors resulting from function approximation), ensuring
that all intermediate policies are safe to be deployed. To
prevent constraint violations due to function approximation
and modeling errors, similar to CPO, we offer a safeguard
policy update rule that decreases constraint cost and ensures
near-constraint satisfaction.
Our proposed algorithms have two main advantages over
CPO. First, since CPO is closely connected to TRPO, it
can only be trivially combined with PG algorithms that
are regularized with relative entropy, such as PPO. This
restricts CPO to on-policy PG algorithms. On the contrary,
our algorithms can work with any on-policy (e.g., PPO) and
off-policy (e.g., DDPG) PG algorithm. Having an off-policy
implementation is beneﬁcial, since off-policy algorithms
are potentially more data-efﬁcient, as they can use the data
from the replay buffer. Second, while CPO is not a back-
propagatable algorithm, due to the backtracking line-search
procedure and the conjugate gradient iterations for comput-
ing natural gradient in TRPO, our algorithms can be trained
end-to-end, which is crucial for scalable and efﬁcient im-
plementation (Hafner et al., 2017). In fact, we show in
Section 3.1 that CPO (minus the line search) can be viewed
as a special case of the on-policy version (PPO version)
of our θ-projection algorithm, corresponding to a speciﬁc
approximation of the constraints.
We evaluate our algorithms and compare them with CPO
and the Lagrangian method on several continuous control
(MuJoCo) tasks and a real-world robot navigation problem,
in which the robot must satisfy certain constraints, while
minimizing its expected cumulative cost. Results show that
our algorithms outperform the baselines in terms of bal-
ancing the performance and constraint satisfaction (during
training), and generalize better to new and more complex
environments, including transfer to a real Fetch robot.
2. Preliminaries
We consider the RL problem in which the agent’s interaction
with the environment is modeled as a Markov decision pro-
cess (MDP). A MDP is a tuple (X, A, γ, c, P, x0), where
X and A are the state and action spaces; γ ∈[0, 1) is a
discounting factor; c(x, a) ∈[0, Cmax] is the immediate
cost function; P(·|x, a) is the transition probability distribu-
tion; and x0 ∈X is the initial state. Although we consider
deterministic initial state and cost function, our results can
be easily generalized to random initial states and costs. We
model the RL problems in which there are constraints on the
cumulative cost using CMDPs. The CMDP model extends
MDP by introducing additional costs and the associated con-
straints, and is deﬁned by (X, A, γ, c, P, x0, d, d0), where
the ﬁrst six components are the same as in the unconstrained
MDP; d(x) ∈[0, Dmax] is the (state-dependent) immediate
constraint cost; and d0 ∈R≥0 is an upper-bound on the
expected cumulative constraint cost.
To formalize the optimization problem associated with
CMDPs, let ∆be the set of Markovian stationary policies,
i.e., ∆=

π : X × A →[0, 1], P
a π(a|x) = 1
	
. At
each state x ∈X, we deﬁne the generic Bellman operator
w.r.t. a policy π ∈∆and a cost function h as Tπ,h[V ](x) =
P
a π(a|x)[h(x, a)+γ P
x′∈X P(x′|x, a)V (x′)]. Given a
policy π ∈∆, we deﬁne the expected cumulative cost and

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
the safety constraint function (expected cumulative con-
straint cost) as Cπ(x0) := E
 P∞
t=0 γtc(xt, at) | π, x0

and Dπ(x0) := E
 P∞
t=0 γtd(xt) | π, x0

. The safety con-
straint is then deﬁned as Dπ(x0) ≤d0. The goal in CMDPs
is to solve the constrained optimization problem
π∗∈min
π∈∆

Cπ(x0) : Dπ(x0) ≤d0
	
.
(1)
It has been shown that if the feasibility set is non-empty,
then there exists an optimal policy in the class of stationary
Markovian policies ∆(Altman, 1999, Theorem 3.1).
2.1. Policy Gradient Algorithms
Policy gradient (PG) algorithms optimize a policy by com-
puting a sample estimate of the gradient of the expected
cumulative cost induced by the policy, and then updating
the policy parameter in the gradient direction. In general,
stochastic policies that give a probability distribution over
actions are parameterized by a κ-dimensional vector θ, so
the space of policies can be written as

πθ, θ ∈Θ ⊂Rκ	
.
Since in this setting a policy π is uniquely deﬁned by its
parameter θ, policy-dependent functions can be written as a
function of θ or π interchangeably.
Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al.,
2015) and proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017) are two PG algorithms that have recently gained
popularity in solving continuous control problems. DDPG
is an off-policy Q-learning style algorithm that jointly trains
a deterministic policy πθ(x) and a Q-value approxima-
tor Q(x, a; φ). The Q-value approximator is trained to
ﬁt the true Q-value function and the deterministic policy
is trained to optimize Q(x, πθ(x); φ) via chain-rule. The
PPO algorithm we use is a penalty form of the trust region
policy optimization (TRPO) algorithm (Schulman et al.,
2015a) with an adaptive rule to tune the DKL penalty
weight βk. PPO trains a policy πθ(x) by optimizing a
loss function that consists of the standard policy gradi-
ent objective and a penalty on the KL-divergence between
the current θ and previous θ′ policies, i.e., DKL(θ, θ′) =
E[P
t γtDKL(πθ′(·|xt)||πθ(·|xt))|πθ′, x0].
2.2. Lagrangian Method
The Lagrangian method is a straightforward way to
address the constraint Dπθ(x0)
≤
d0 in CMDPs.
In this approach, we add the constraint costs d(x)
to
the
task
costs
c(x, a)
and
transform
the
con-
strained
optimization
problem
to
a
penalty
form,
i.e., minθ∈Θ maxλ≥0 E
P∞
t=0 c(xt, at) + λd(xt)|πθ, x0

−
λd0. We then jointly optimizes θ and λ to ﬁnd a saddle-
point of the penalized objective. The optimization of θ
may be performed by any PG algorithm, such as DDPG
or PPO, on the augmented cost c(x, a) + λd(x), while λ
is optimized by stochastic gradient descent. As described
in Section 1, although the Lagrangian approach is easy to
implement (see Appendix B for the details), in practice, it
often violates the constraints during training. While at each
step during training, the objective encourages ﬁnding a safe
solution, the current value of λ may lead to an unsafe policy.
This is why the Lagrangian method may not be suitable for
solving problems in which safety is crucial during training.
2.3. Lyapunov Functions
Since in this paper, we extend the Lyapunov-based approach
to CMDPs to PG algorithms, we end this section by intro-
ducing some terms and notations from Chow et al. (2018)
that are important in developing our safe PG algorithms. We
refer the reader to Appendix A for more details.
We deﬁne a set of Lyapunov functions w.r.t. initial state
x0 ∈X and constraint threshold d0 as LπB(x0, d0) =
{L
:
X
→
R≥0
|
TπB,d[L](x)
≤
L(x),
∀x
∈
X, L(x0) ≤d0}, where πB is a feasible policy of (1),
i.e., DπB(x0) ≤d0. We refer to the constraints in this
feasibility set as the Lyapunov constraints. For any ar-
bitrary Lyapunov function L ∈LπB(x0, d0), we denote
by FL =

π ∈∆: Tπ,d[L](x) ≤L(x), ∀x ∈X
	
, the set
of L-induced Markov stationary policies. The contraction
property of Tπ,d, together with L(x0) ≤d0, imply that
any L-induced policy is a feasible policy of (1). However,
FL(x) does not always contain an optimal solution of (1),
and thus, it is necessary to design a Lyapunov function that
provides this guarantee. In other words, the main goal of the
Lyapunov approach is to construct a Lyapunov function L ∈
LπB(x0, d0), such that FL contains an optimal policy π∗,
i.e., L(x) ≥Tπ∗,d[L](x). Chow et al. (2018) show in their
Theorem 1 that without loss of optimality, the Lyapunov
function that satisﬁes the above criterion can be expressed
as LπB,ϵ(x) := E
 P∞
t=0 γt d(xt) + ϵ(xt)

| πB, x

, in
which ϵ(x) ≥0 is a speciﬁc immediate auxiliary constraint
cost that keeps track of the maximum constraint budget
available for policy improvement (from πB to π∗). They
propose ways to construct such ϵ, as well as an auxiliary
constraint cost surrogate eϵ, which is a tight upper-bound
on ϵ and can be computed more efﬁciently. They use this
construction to propose their safe (approximate) policy and
value iteration algorithms, in which the goal is to solve the
following LP problem (Chow et al., 2018, Eq. 6) at each
policy improvement step:
π+(·|x) = arg min
π∈∆
Z
a∈A
QVπB (x, a)π(a|x), subject to (2)
Z
a∈A
QLπB (x, a)
 π(a|x) −πB(a|x)

≤eϵ(x), ∀x ∈X,
where VπB(x)
=
TπB,c[VπB](x) and QVπB (x, a)
=
c(x, a) + γ P
x′ P(x′|x, a)VπB(x′) are the value func-
tion and state-action value function (w.r.t. the cost
function
c),
and
QLπB (x, a)
=
d(x) + eϵ(x) +
γ P
x′ P(x′|x, a)LπB,eϵ(x′) is the Lyapunov function. Note
that in an iterative policy optimization method, such as those
we will present in this paper, the feasible policy πB can be
set to the policy at the previous iteration.
In (2), there are as many constraints as the number of states
and each constraint involves an integral over the entire action
space A. When the state space is large or continuous, even

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
if the integral in the constraint has a closed-form (e.g., when
the number of actions is ﬁnite), solving LP (2) becomes nu-
merically intractable. Since Chow et al. (2018) assume that
the number of actions is ﬁnite, they focus on value-function-
based RL algorithms and address the large state issue by
policy distillation. However, in this paper, we are interested
in problems with large action spaces. In our case, solving (2)
will be even more challenging. To address this issue, in the
next section, we ﬁrst switch from value-function-based al-
gorithms to PG algorithms, then propose an optimization
problem with Lyapunov constraints, analogous to (2), that is
suitable for the PG setting, and ﬁnally present two methods
to solve our proposed optimization problem efﬁciently.
3. Safe Lyapunov-based Policy Gradient
We now present our approach to solve CMDPs in a way that
guarantees safety both at convergence and during training.
Similar to Chow et al. (2018), our Lyapunov-based safe
PG algorithms solve a constrained optimization problem
analogous to (2). In particular, our algorithms consist of
two components, a baseline PG algorithm, such as DDPG or
PPO, and an effective method to solve the general Lyapunov-
based policy optimization problem (the analogous to (2))
θ+ = arg min
θ∈Θ
Cπθ(x0),
subject to
(3)
Z
a∈A
 πθ(a|x) −πB(a|x)

QLπB (x, a) da ≤eϵ(x), ∀x ∈X.
In the next two sections, we present two approaches to
solve (3) efﬁciently.
We call these approaches 1) θ-
projection, a constrained optimization method that combines
PG with projecting the policy parameter θ onto the set of fea-
sible solutions induced by the Lyapunov constraints, and 2)
a-projection, in which we embed the Lyapunov constraints
into the policy network via a safety layer.
3.1. The θ-projection Approach
In this section, we show how a safe Lyapunov-based
PG algorithm can be derived using the θ-projection ap-
proach.
This machinery is based on the minorization-
maximization technique in conservative PG (Kakade &
Langford, 2002) and Taylor series expansion, and it
can be applied to both on-policy and off-policy algo-
rithms. Following Theorem 4.1 in Kakade & Langford
(2002), we ﬁrst have the following bound for the cumu-
lative cost: −βDKL(θ, θB) ≤Cπθ(x0) −CπθB (x0) −
Ex∼µθB,x0,a∼πθ

QVθB (x, a) −VθB(x)

≤βDKL(θ, θB),
where µθB,x0 is the γ-visiting distribution of πθB starting at
the initial state x0, and β is the weight for the entropy-based
regularization.1 Using the above result, we denote by
C′
πθ(x0; πθB) =CπθB (x0) + βDKL(θ, θB)+
Ex∼µθB,x0,a∼πθ

QVθB (x, a) −VθB(x)

1Theorem 1 in Schulman et al. (2015a) provides a recipe for
computing β such that the minorization-maximization inequality
holds. But in practice, β is treated as a tunable hyper-parameter
for entropy-based regularization.
the surrogate cumulative cost. It has been shown in Eq. 10
of Schulman et al. (2015a) that replacing the objective func-
tion Cπθ(x0) with its surrogate C′
πθ(x0; πθB) in solving (3)
will still lead to policy improvement. In order to effec-
tively compute the improved policy parameter θ+, one fur-
ther approximates the function C′
πθ(x0; πθB) with its Tay-
lor series expansion (around θB). In particular, the term
Ex∼µθB,x0,a∼πθ

QVθB (x, a)−VθB(x)

is approximated up
to its ﬁrst order, and the term DKL(θ, θB) is approximated
up to its second order. Altogether this allows us to replace
the objective function in (3) with the following surrogate:
⟨(θ −θB), ∇θEx∼µθB,x0,a∼πθ

QVθB (x, a)

⟩
+ β
2 ⟨(θ −θB), ∇2
θDKL(θ, θB) |θ=θB (θ −θB)⟩.
Similarly, regarding the constraints in (3), we can use the
Taylor series expansion (around θB) to approximate the
LHS of the Lyapunov constraints as
Z
a∈A
 πθ(a|x) −πB(a|x)

QL(x, a) da ≈

(θ −θB), ∇θEa∼πθ

QLθB (x, a)

|θ=θB

.
Using the above approximations, at each iteration, our safe
PG algorithm updates the policy by solving the following
constrained optimization problem with semi-inﬁnite dimen-
sional Lyapunov constraints:
θ+ ∈arg min
θ∈Θ
D
(θ −θB), ∇θEx∼µθB,x0 ,a∼πθ

QVθB (x, a)
E
+ β
2
D
(θ −θB), ∇2
θDKL(θ, θB) |θ=θB (θ −θB)
E
,
(4)
s.t.
D
(θ −θB), ∇θEa∼πθ

QLθB (x, a)

|θ=θB
E
≤eϵ(x), ∀x ∈X.
It can be seen that if the errors resulted from the neural
network parameterizations of QVθB and QLθB , and the
Taylor series expansions are small, then an algorithm that
updates the policy parameter by solving (4) can ensure
safety during training. However, the presence of inﬁnite-
dimensional Lyapunov constraints makes solving (4) nu-
merically intractable. A solution to this is to write the
Lyapunov constraints in (4) (without loss of optimality) as
maxx∈X ⟨(θ−θB), ∇θEa∼πθ[QLθB (x, a)] |θ=θB⟩−eϵ(x) ≤
0. Since the above max-operator is non-differentiable, this
may still lead to numerical instability in gradient descent al-
gorithms. Similar to the surrogate constraint used in TRPO
(to transform the max DKL constraint to an average DKL
constraint, see Eq. 12 in Schulman et al. 2015a), a more
numerically stable way is to approximate the Lyapunov
constraint using the following average constraint surrogate:
D
(θ−θB), 1
M
M
X
i=1
∇θEa∼πθ

QLθB (xi, a)

|θ=θB
E
≤1
M
M
X
i=1
eϵ(xi),
(5)
where M is the number of on-policy sample trajectories of
πθB. In practice, when the auxiliary constraint surrogate
is chosen as eϵ = (1 −γ)
 d0 −DπθB (x0)

(see Appendix
A for the justiﬁcation of this choice), the gradient term

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
in (5) can be simpliﬁed as ∇θEa∼πθ

QLθB (xi, a)

=
∇θ
R
a πθ(a|x) ∇θ log πθ(a|x) QWθB (xi, a)da,
where
WθB(x)
=
TπB,d[WθB](x)
and
QWθB (x, a)
=
d(x) + γ P
x′ P(x′|x, a)WθB(x′)
are
the
constraint
value function and constraint state-action value func-
tion, respectively.
Combining with the fact that eϵ is
state independent, the above arguments further imply
that the average constraint surrogate in (5) can be ap-
proximated by the inequality DπθB (x0) +
1
1−γ ⟨(θ −
θB), 1
M
PM
i=1∇θEa∼πθ

QWθB (xi, a)

|θ=θB⟩≤d0, which
is equivalent to the constraint used in CPO (see Sec. 6.1
in Achiam et al. 2017). This shows a clear connection
between CPO (minus the line search) and our Lyapunov-
based PG with θ-projection. Algorithm 4 in Appendix E
contains the pseudo-codes of our safe Lyapunov-based PG
algorithms with θ-projection. We refer to the DDPG and
PPO versions of this algorithm as SDDPG and SPPO.
3.2. The a-projection Approach
Note that the main characteristic of the Lyapunov approach
is to break down a trajectory-based constraint into a se-
quence of single-step state dependent constraints. However,
when the state space X is inﬁnite, the feasibility set is char-
acterized by inﬁnite dimensional constraints, and thus, it is
actually counter-intuitive to directly enforce these Lyapunov
constraints (as opposed to the original trajectory-based con-
straint) into the policy update optimization. To address this
issue, we leverage the idea of a safety layer from Dalal
et al. (2018), that was applied to simple single-step con-
straints, and propose a novel approach to embed the set of
Lyapunov constraints into the policy network. This way, we
reformulate the CMDP problem (1) as an unconstrained op-
timization problem and optimize its policy parameter θ (of
the augmented network) using any standard unconstrained
PG algorithm. At every given state, the unconstrained action
is ﬁrst computed and then passed through the safety layer,
where a feasible action mapping is constructed by projecting
the unconstrained actions onto the feasibility set w.r.t. the
corresponding Lyapunov constraint. Therefore, safety dur-
ing training w.r.t. the CMDP problem can be guaranteed by
this constraint projection approach.
For simplicity, we only describe how the action mapping
(to the set of Lyapunov constraints) works for deterministic
policies. Using identical machinery, this procedure can be
extended to guarantee safety for stochastic policies. Recall
from the policy improvement problem in (3) that the Lya-
punov constraint is imposed at every state x ∈X. Given a
baseline feasible policy πB = πθB, for any arbitrary policy
parameter θ ∈Θ, we denote by Ξ(πB, θ) =

θ′ ∈Θ :
QLπB (x, πθ′(x)) −QLπB (x, πB(x)) ≤eϵ(x), ∀x ∈X
	
,
the projection of θ onto the feasibility set induced by the
Lyapunov constraints. One way to construct a feasible pol-
icy πΞ(πB,θ) from a parameter θ is to solve the following
ℓ2-projection problem at each state x ∈X:
πΞ(πB,θ)(x) ∈arg min
a
1
2∥a −πθ(x)∥2,
(6)
s.t. QLπB (x, a) −QLπB (x, πB(x)) ≤eϵ(x).
We refer to this operation as the Lyapunov safety layer. In-
tuitively, this projection perturbs the unconstrained action
as little as possible in the Euclidean norm in order to satisfy
the Lyapunov constraints. Since this projection guarantees
safety (in the Lyapunov sense), if we have access to a closed
form of the projection, we may insert it into the policy pa-
rameterization and simply solve an unconstrained policy op-
timization problem, i.e., θ+ ∈arg minθ∈Θ CπΞ(πB,θ)(x0),
using any standard PG algorithm.
To simplify the projection (6), we can approximate the LHS
of the Lyapunov constraint with its ﬁrst-order Taylor series
(w.r.t. action a = πB(x)). Thus, at any given state x ∈X,
the safety layer solves the following projection problem:
πΞ(πB,θ)(x) ∈arg min
a
1
2∥a −πθ,unc(x)∥2,
(7)
s.t.
 a −πB(x)
⊤gLπB (x) ≤eϵ(x),
where gLπB (x) := ∇aQLπB (x, a) |a=πB(x) is the action-
gradient of the state-action Lyapunov function induced by
the baseline action a = πB(x).
Similar to the analysis of Section 3.1, if the auxiliary cost eϵ
is state independent, one can readily ﬁnd gLπB (x) by com-
puting the gradient of the constraint action-value function
∇aQWθB (x, a) |a=πB(x). Note that the objective function
in (7) is positive-deﬁnite and quadratic, and the constraint
approximation is linear. Therefore, the solution of this (con-
vex) projection problem can be effectively computed by
an in-graph QP-solver, such as OPT-Net (Amos & Kolter,
2017). Combined with the above projection procedure, this
further implies that the CMDP problem can be effectively
solved using an end-to-end PG training pipeline (such as
DDPG or PPO). Furthermore, when the CMDP has a sin-
gle constraint (and thus a single Lyapunov constraint), the
policy πΞ(πB,θ)(x) has the following analytical solution.
Proposition 1. At any given state x ∈X, the solution to
the optimization problem (7) has the form πΞ(πB,θ)(x) =
πθ(x) + λ∗(x) · gLπB (x), where
λ∗(x) =
 
gLπB (x)⊤ πθ(x) −πB(x)

−eϵ(x)
gLπB (x)⊤gLπB (x)
!
+
.
The closed-form solution is essentially a linear projection
of the unconstrained action πθ(x) to the Lyapunov-safe
hyperplane characterized with slope gLπB (x) and intercept
eϵ(x) = (1−γ)(d0 −DπB(x0)). Extending this closed-form
solution to handle multiple constraints is possible, if there
is at most one constraint active at a time (see Proposition 1
in Dalal et al. 2018 for a similar extension).
Without loss of generality, this projection step can also be
extended to handle actions generated by stochastic policies

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
0
10
20
30
40
50
100
50
0
50
100
(a) HalfCheetah-Safe, Return
(b) HalfCheetah-Safe, Constraint
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
(c) Point-Gather, Return
(d) Point-Gather, Constraint
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(e) Ant-Gather, Return
(f) Ant-Gather, Constraint
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
200
400
600
800
000
200
400
(g) Point-Circle, Return
(h) Point-Circle, Constraint
Figure 1. DDPG (red), DDPG-Lagrangian (cyan), SDDPG (blue),
DDPG a-projection (green) on HalfCheetah-Safe and Point-Gather.
Ours (SDDPG, SDDPG a-projection) perform stable and safe
learning, although the dynamics and cost functions are not known,
control actions are continuous, and deep function approximations
are necessary. Unit of x-axis is in thousands of episodes. Shaded
areas represent the 1-SD conﬁdence intervals (over 10 random
seeds). The dashed purple line represents the constraint limit.
with bounded ﬁrst and second order moments (Yu et al.,
2009). For example when the policy is parameterized with
a Gaussian distribution, then one needs to project both the
mean and standard-deviation vector onto the Lyapunov-safe
hyperplane, in order to obtain a feasible action probability.
Algorithm 5 in Appendix E contains the pseudo-code of our
safe Lyapunov-based PG algorithms with a-projection. We
refer to the DDPG and PPO versions of this algorithm as
SDDPG-modular and SPPO-modular, respectively.
4. Experiments on MuJoCo Benchmarks
We empirically evaluate the Lyapunov-based PG algorithms
to assess: (i) the performance in terms of cost and safety
during training, and (ii) robustness with respect to constraint
violations in the presence of function approximation errors.
To that end, we design three interpretable experiments in
simulated robot locomotion continuous control tasks us-
ing the MuJoCo simulator (Todorov et al., 2012). The
tasks notions of safety are motivated by physical constraints:
(i)HalfCheetah-Safe: The HalfCheetah agent is rewarded
for running, but its speed is limited for stability and safety;
(ii) Point-Circle: The Point agent is rewarded for running
in a wide circle, but is constrained to stay within a safe
region deﬁned by |x| ≤xlim (Achiam et al., 2017); (iii)
Point-Gather & Ant-Gather: Point or Ant Gatherer agent, is
rewarded for collecting target objects in a terrain map, while
being constrained to avoid bombs (Achiam et al., 2017).
Visualizations of these tasks as well as more details of the
network architecture used in training the algorithms are
given in Appendix C.
We compare the presented methods with two state-of-the-art
unconstrained reinforcement learning algorithms, DDPG
(Lillicrap et al., 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
and two constrained methods, Lagrangian approach with
optimized hyper-parameters for fairness (Appendix B) and
on-policy CPO algorithm (Achiam et al., 2017). The orig-
inal CPO is based on TRPO (?). We use its PPO alterna-
tive (which coincides with the SPPO algorithm derived in
Section 4.1) as the safe RL baseline. SPPO preserves the
essence of CPO by adding the ﬁrst order constraint and the
relative entropy regularization to the policy optimization
problem. The main difference between CPO and SPPO is
that the latter does not perform backtracking line-search
in learning rate. The decision to compare with SPPO in-
stead of CPO is 1) to avoid the additional computational
complexity of line-search in TRPO, while maintaining the
performance of PG using the popular PPO algorithm, 2) to
have a back-propagatable version of CPO, and 3) to have
a fair comparison with other back-propagatable safe RL
algorithms, such as the DDPG and safety layer counterparts.
Comparisons with baselines: The Lyapunov-based PG al-
gorithms are stable in learning and all methods converge
to feasible policies with reasonable performance (Figures
1a, 1c, 1e, 1g, 2a, 2c, 2e, 2g). In contrast, when examining
the constraint violation (Figures 1b, 1d, 1f, 1h, 2b, 2d, 2f,
2g), the Lyapunov-based PG algorithms quickly stabilize
the constraint cost to be below the threshold, while the un-
constrained DDPG and PPO agents violate the constraints in
these environments, and the the Lagrangian approach tends
to jiggle around the constrain threshold. Furthermore it is
worth-noting that the Lagrangian approach can be sensitive
to the initialization of the Lagrange multiplier λ0. If λ0 is
too large, it would make policy updates overly conservative,
while if λ0 is too small then constraint violation will be
more pronounced. Without further knowledge about the
environment, here we treat λ0 as a hyper-parameter and
optimize it via grid-search. See Appendix C for more detail.
a-projection vs.
θ-projection:
In many cases the a-
projection (DDPG and PPO a-projections) converges faster
and has lower constraint violation than its θ-projection coun-
terpart (SDDPG, SPPO). This corroborates with the hypoth-
esis that the a-projection approach is less conservative dur-

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
0
20
40
60
80
100
100
50
0
50
100
(a) HalfCheetah-Safe, Return
(b) HalfCheetah-Safe, Constraint
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
(c) Point-Gather, Return
(d) Point-Gather, Constraint
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
(e) Ant-Gather, Return
(f) Ant-Gather, Constraint
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
200
400
600
800
000
200
400
(g) Point-Circle, Return
(h) Point-Circle, Constraint
Figure 2. PPO (red), PPO-Lagrangian (cyan), SPPO (blue), SPPO
a-projection (green) on HalfCheetah-Safe and Point-Gather. Ours
(PPO, SPPO a-projection) perform stable and safe learning, when
the dynamics and cost functions are not known, control actions are
continuous, and deep function approximations are necessary.
ing policy updates than the θ-projection approach (which is
what CPO is based on) and generates smoother gradient up-
dates during end-to-end training, resulting in more effective
learning than CPO (θ-projection).
DDPG vs. PPO: Finally, in most experiments (HalfCheetah,
PointGather, and AntGather) the DDPG algorithms tend to
have faster learning than the PPO counterpart, while the
PPO algorithms have better control on constraint violations
(which are able to satisfy lower constraint thresholds). The
faster learning behavior is potentially due to the improved
data-efﬁciency when using off-policy samples in PG up-
dates, however the covariate-shift in off-policy data makes
tight constraint control more challenging.
5. Safe Policy Gradient for Robot Navigation
We now evaluate the safe policy optimization on a real robot
task – point to point (P2P) navigation (Chiang et al., 2019) –
where a noisy differential drive robot with limited sensors
(Fig. 3a), is required to navigate to a goal outside of its
(a) Noisy Lidar observation in a corridor
22x18 m
Velocity and 
orientation 

Reward: Distance to reach goal
Constraint: Total energy on collision
Robot Agent                Training Environment: 22 x 18m
Observations: Noisy 1D lidar + Goal + Robot orientation
 Safe-DDPG
Parameters, θ
Policy, 
𝛑θ(o, a) = P(a|o)
Action
Actor
Critic
(b) SDDPG for point to point task
Figure 3. Robot navigation task details.
visual ﬁeld of view while avoiding collisions with obstacles.
The agent’s observations consist of the relative goal position,
the relative goal velocity, and the Lidar measurements (Fig.
3a). The actions are the linear and angular velocity vector
at the robot’s center of the mass. The transition probability
captures the noisy differential drive robot dynamics, whose
exact formulation is not known to the robot. The robot
must navigate to arbitrary goal positions collision-free and
without memory of the workspace topology.
Here the CMDP is non-discounting and has a ﬁxed horizon.
We reward the agent for reaching the goal, which translates
to an immediate cost that measures the relative distance to
goal. To measure the impact energy of obstacle collisions,
we impose an immediate constraint cost to account for the
speed during collision, with a constraint threshold d0 that
characterizes the agent’s maximum tolerable collision im-
pact energy to any objects. This type of constraint allows the
robot to touch the obstacle (such as walls) but prevent it from
ramming into any objects. Under this CMDP framework
(Fig. 3b), the main goal is to train a policy π∗that drives
the robot along the shortest path to the goal and to limit
the total impact energy of obstacle collisions. Furthermore,
we note that due to limited data, in practice intermediate
point-to-point policies are deployed on the real-world robot
to collect more samples for further training. Therefore, guar-
anteeing safety during training is critical in this application.
Descriptions about the robot navigation problem, including
training and evaluation environments are in Appendix D.
Experimental Results: We evaluate the learning algorithms
in terms of average mission success percentage and con-
straint control. The task is successful if the robot reaches
the goal before the constraint threshold (total energy of col-
lision) is exhausted, and the success rate is averaged over
100 evaluation episodes with random initialization. While
all methods converge to policies with reasonable perfor-
mance, Figure 4a and 4b shows that the Lyapunov-based
PG algorithms have higher success rates, due to their robust
abilities of controlling the total constraint, as well mini-
mizing the distance to goal. Although the unconstrained
method often yields a lower distance to goal, it violates the
constraint more frequently and thus leads to a lower success

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
(a) Navigation, Mission Success %
(b) Navigation, Constraint
Figure 4. DDPG (red), DDPG-Lagrangian (cyan), SDDPG (blue),
DDPG a-projection (green) on Robot Navigation. Ours (SDDPG,
SDDPG a-projection) balance between reward and constraint learn-
ing. Unit of x-axis is in thousands of steps. The shaded areas rep-
resent the 1-SD conﬁdence intervals (over 50 runs). The dashed
purple line represents the constraint limit.
(a) Lagrangian policy
(b) SDDPG (a-proj.)
(c) SDDPG (a-proj.)
on robot
Figure 5. Navigation routes of two policies on a similar setup (a)
and (b). Log of on-robot experiments (c). Larger version in Ap-
pendix D and the video is available in the supplementary materials.
rate. Furthermore, note that the Lagrangian approach is less
robust to initialization of parameters, and therefore it gener-
ally has lower success rate and higher variability than the
Lyapunov-based methods. Unfortunately due to function
approximation error and stochasticity of the problem, all the
algorithms converged pre-maturely with constraints above
the threshold. One reason is due to the constraint thresh-
old (d0 = 100) being overly-conservative. In real-world
problems guaranteeing constraint satisfaction is more chal-
lenging than maximizing return, and that usually requires
much more training data. Finally, Figures 5a and 5b illus-
trate the navigation routes of two policies. On similar goal
conﬁgurations, the Lagrangian method tends to zigzag and
has more collisions, while the Lyapunov-based algorithm
(SDDPG) chooses a safer path to reach the goal.
Next, we evaluate how well the methods generalize to (i)
longer trajectories, and (ii) new environments. P2P tasks are
trained in a 22 by 18 meters environment (Fig. 7) with goals
placed within 5 to 10 meters from the robot initial state,
Figure 6 depicts the results evaluations, averaged over 100
trials, on P2P tasks in a much larger evaluation environment
(60 by 47 meters) with goals placed up to 15 meters away
from the goal. The success rate of all methods degrades as
the goals are further away (Fig. 6a), and the safety methods
(a-projection – SL-DDPG, and θ-projection – SG-DDPG)
outperform unconstrained and Lagrangian (DDPG and LA-
DDPG) as the task becomes more difﬁcult. At the same
time, our methods retain the lower constraints even when
the task is difﬁcult (Fig. 6b).
(a) Navigation, Mission Success %
(b) Navigation, Constraint
Figure 6. Robot navigation generalization over success rate (a) and
constraint satisfaction (b) on a different environment.
Finally, we deployed the SL-DDPG policy onto the real
Fetch robot (Melonee Wise & Dymesich, 2016) in an every-
day ofﬁce environment. Figure 5c shows the top down view
of the robot log. Robot travelled a total of 500 meters to
complete ﬁve repetitions of 12 tasks, each averaging about
10 meters to the goal. The experiments included narrow
corridors and people walking through the ofﬁce. The robot
robustly avoids both static and dynamic (humans) obstacles
coming into its path. We observed additional ”wobbling”
effects, that was not present in simulation. This is likely
due to the wheel slippage at the ﬂoor that the policy was
not trained for. In several occasions when the robot could
not ﬁnd a clear path, the policy instructed the robot to stay
put instead of narrowly passing by the obstacle. This is
precisely the safety behavior we want to achieve with the
Lyapunov-based algorithms.
6. Conclusions
We formulated safe RL as a continuous action CMDP and
developed two classes, θ-projection and a-projection, of
policy optimization algorithms based on Lyapunov func-
tions to learn safe policies with high expected cumulative
return. We do so by combining both on and off-policy
optimization (DDPG or PPO) with a critic that evaluates
the policy and computes its corresponding Lyapunov func-
tion. We evaluated our algorithms on four high-dimensional
simulated robot locomotion tasks and compared them with
several baselines. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
Lyapunov-based algorithms in solving real-world problems,
we also apply these algorithms to indoor robot navigation,
to ensure that the agent’s path is optimal and collision-free.
Our results indicate that our Lyapunov-based algorithms 1)
achieve safe learning, 2) have better data-efﬁciency, 3) can
be more naturally integrated within the standard end-to-end
differentiable policy gradient training pipeline, and 4) are
scalable to tackle real-world problems. Our work is a step
forward in deploying RL to real-world problems in which
safety guarantees are of paramount importance. Future work
includes 1) further exploration of Lyapunov function proper-
ties to improve training stability and safety, 2) more efﬁcient

Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
use of Lyapunov constraints in constrained policy optimiza-
tion, and 3) extensions of the Lyapunov-approach to the
model-based setting to better utilize the agent’s dynamics.
