Big Data Architecture in Czech Republic Healthcare Service: 
Requirements, TPC-H Benchmarks and Vertica  
 
Running head title: 
Vertica in Czech Republic Healthcare  
 
Authors: 
Martin Štufia, Boris Bačićb and Leonid Stoimenovc 
aSolutia, s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic;  
bSchool of Engineering, Computer and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland University of 
Technology, Auckland, New Zealand;  
cFaculty of Electronic Engineering, Computer Science department, Niš, Serbia 
 
Keywords: Big data analytics (BDA), big data processing platform, NoSQL 
database cluster, Data Integration (DI), Master Data Management (MDM), Data 
Visualisation (DV). 
 
 

2 
 
 
Abstract 
   Big data in healthcare has made a positive difference in advancing analytical capabilities and 
lowering the costs of medical care. In addition to providing analytical capabilities on platforms 
supporting current and near-future AI with machine-learning and data-mining algorithms, there is 
also a need for ethical considerations mandating new ways to preserve privacy, all of which are 
preconditioned by the growing body of regulations and expectations. The purpose of this study is 
to improve existing clinical care by implementing a big data platform for the Czech Republic 
National Health Service. Based on the achieved performance and its compliance with mandatory 
guidelines, the reported big-data platform was selected as the winning solution from the Czech 
Republic national tender (Tender Id. VZ0036628, No. Z2017-035520). The platform, based on 
analytical Vertica NoSQL database for massive data processing, complies with the TPC-H1 for 
decision support benchmark, the European Union (EU) and the Czech Republic requirements, 
well-exceeding defined system performance thresholds. The reported artefacts and concepts are 
transferrable to healthcare systems in other countries and are intended to provide personalised 
autonomous assessment from big data in a cost-effective, scalable and high-performance manner. 
The implemented platform allows: (1) scalability; (2) further implementations of newly-developed 
machine learning algorithms for classification and predictive analytics; (3) security improvements 
related to Electronic Health Records (EHR) by using automated functions for data encryption and 
decryption; and (4) the use of big data to allow strategic planning in healthcare. 
 
 
 

3 
 
Introduction 
   Big data has influenced the ways we collect, manage, analyse, visualise and utilise data. For 
healthcare, adopting an eSystem with implemented big data analytics (BDA), there is an 
expectation that modern, robust, high-performance and cost-effective BDA technologies can 
preserve patient privacy while enhancing data-driven support for medical staff, as well as the 
broader patient population. Currently, the Czech Republic is in the process of adopting an eSystem 
in healthcare, leveraging BDA to enhance the quality of care with integrated national and regional 
support.  
The scope of this paper is to report on the prerequisite factors influencing the implementation of 
big data architecture with the performance required to support the national strategy for the BDA 
adoption in the healthcare system of the Czech Republic. The reported healthcare solution, had to 
pass more than 100 complex requirements, pre-requisites and system conditions which were tested 
on the proposed platform, in compliance with European Union and Czech Republic regulations as 
well as the Transaction Processing Performance Council’s TPC-H benchmarks.1 In the authors’ 
view, which aligns with global trends and EU initiatives:2-6 (1) the growing amount of data in the 
healthcare, as well as data streaming IoT devices and mobile apps have made the adoption of BDA 
technologies inevitable for modern society; (2) combining BDA and AI with healthcare 
applications is a crucial step in advancing towards the next generation of healthcare eSystems; and 
(3) regarding replicability and knowledge transfer, the BDA platform implementation in one of 
the EU member states will shape decisions for other EU members who are in the process of 
transforming their healthcare systems.2, 7  
 

4 
 
Multidisciplinary Background 
   Big data technologies have been adopted in many industries such as transport, banking, 
automotive, insurance, media, education and healthcare.7 Common to the exponential trend of 
Internet network traffic, the volume of data produced every day is also increasing exponentially in 
modern healthcare. When the volume of data grows beyond a certain limit, traditional systems and 
methodologies can no longer cope with data processing demands or transform data into a format 
for the task required. Traditionally, small data portions as parts of online transaction processing 
(OLTP) systems are collected in a controlled manner, known as short atomic transactions.8 In 
contrast, in big data clustered environments, there are stream and batch data processing, all 
requiring more flexibility for various data distribution patterns and matching eSystems scalability.  
Typically, for big-data eSystems, stream-processing is concerned with (near) real-time analytics 
and data prediction, while batch data processing deals with implementing complex business logic 
with advanced and specialised algorithms.  
Small data systems typically scale vertically by adding more resources to the same machine; this 
can be costly and eventually reach maximum possible upgrades. Contrastingly, big data systems 
are cluster-based and therefore depend mostly on horizontally scalable architecture, which in the 
long run provides increased performance efficiency at a lower cost by employing commodity 
hardware. 
 
Big Data Technology Perspective 
    The idea of applying big data cluster to process and analyse healthcare data is not new.9-12 For 
example, in 2009, early experiments conducted on a 100-nodes cluster with a set of benchmarks, 

5 
 
revealed various trade-offs in performance for selected parallel systems for storing and processing 
data intended for healthcare use.13  
Recently, there has been a growing interest and need for eSystem platforms and cloud-based 
technologies emphasising new and innovative big data tools employing various data mining, 
machine learning14, 15 and other AI-based techniques that could enable knowledge discovery, 
personalised patient-cantered modelling, identification of groups sharing similar characteristics, 
predictive analytics, improved drug safety and providing enhanced diagnostic capabilities.  
 
Challenges and Opportunities 
   The integration of big data technologies in healthcare has local and global implications in terms 
of challenges and opportunities. Challenges in healthcare include “issues of data structure, 
security, data standardisation, storage and transfers, and managerial skills such as data 
governance”.16 
The use of AI, machine learning, personalised (targeted learning) models, predictive models and 
variable rankings can assist precision medicine and treatment risk/benefits assessments.15 AI has 
the potential to automate the technical requirement for results from data to be traceable (inferring 
expert involvement, p.236 and using prescriptive analytics to infer explanations coupled with 
suggestions on an optimal set of actions, p.241).17 As in the near future AI is expected to explain 
generated diagnostic assessments from data, big data technology can be both a catalyst and enabler 
for research advancements in the field. For example, an AI-based prototype capable of providing 
explainable diagnostic assessment coupled with traceable suggested actions (communicated as  
coaching cues) was implemented using captured kinematic data from tennis activity.18 The 

6 
 
personalised tennis coaching (PTC) system also includes different criteria for personalised and 
group (or skill-level) diagnostic assessments embedded in machine learning models.18, 19 In a 
similar study, a neural network was unable to explain how it identified ‘good’ and ‘bad’ swings; 
however, it was able to demonstrate a flexible diagnostic assessment for novices and intermediate 
levels on the same observed motion dataset.20 To design the PTC system to be able to generate 
comprehensible explanations, its (machine-learning) problem space was matched with human 
expertise-driven subspace modelling (for assessing adherence to descriptive coaching rules).18 
To draw a parallel across healthcare, coaching and rehabilitation, let us consider on- and off-line 
data sources. Big data technologies can extract information and provide real-time analytics from 
healthcare records as well as processing large data streams that are pertinent to health, activity, 
and general wellbeing, all of which can be generated from a growing number of sensors found in 
mobile apps, medical IoT and wearable devices. If we consider data streams associated with body 
function (sleep, heartbeat, movement coupled with the ambient/environment and location) in our 
multidisciplinary approaches, produced research outcomes are likely to be transferable and 
strongly linked to the healthcare context.  
Therefore, it is possible to connect healthcare and human motion modelling and analysis (HMMA) 
research into areas such as:21 rehabilitation, sport, active life,22 urban planning,17, 22, 23 and ageing 
gracefully (including improvements in elderly care facilities). 
Common to big data and the above multidisciplinary contexts are open questions regarding privacy 
and data protection pertinent to healthcare and ethical considerations.2, 5, 24 In addition to privacy, 
safety and voluntary consent, which are common to address in academic data collection ethics, 
there are a number of issues transferrable to the contexts of big data and healthcare. Examples 
include25-27: legal aspects of data ownership, access, sensitive information, potential exploitation 

7 
 
and data misuse, data collections by employer, insurance companies, gambling parties, and other 
stakeholders combined with wearable technology in sport analytics,28 preventative medical 
benefits, optimisation of human performance while reducing the risk of injury. Thus, if legislation 
is lagging behind technological advancements and current trends towards private-public sector 
partnerships2, 3 it is important to consider possible opportunities for exchange of sensitive 
information.   
For a start, we may consider implementation of safety protocols and the exchange of anonymised 
metadata or other sensitive information to be restricted within the national legal boundaries. 
Anonymised data, such as video filtering while preserving diagnostic information, is of interest 
for online coaching and elderly care facilities. If we consider an example in which a patient falls 
overnight in the bathroom, unable to call for help, having a video stream via IoT device of only 
the silhouette or stick figure rendition of the patient would allow an AI-based medical alert to be 
triggered autonomously while preserving the privacy of the vulnerable user population. A 
computer vision systems that can extract a pseudo 2D and 3D silhouette have been developed and 
evaluated for diagnostic implications in augmented video golf coaching.29, 30 There is also a 
growing body of literature in deep learning and openCV (https://opencv.org) with open-source 
software available to enable video filtering and human pose estimation as stick figure, most of 
which are capable of running on low-cost hardware or embedded Linux IoT devices. Although 
there are not many research papers regarding the use of open source software for augmented video 
coaching and rehabilitation,31-33 it is important to know that there are open-source software tools 
that would not require users to ‘share’ their videos on cloud, or frequently ‘nudge’ end-users to 
upgrade their apps in order to manage their videos or perform common tasks such as 
streaming/previewing, saving or extracting a video sequence of interest.  

8 
 
To enable improvements to the quality and delivery of healthcare services, the implementation of 
big data architectures combined with data analytics to available EHR34, there is potential to:    
• improve the quality of personalised care and medical services; 
• reduce cost of treatment;  
• use predictive analytics for e.g. patients’ daily (loss of) income and disease progression; 
• use real-time visualisation and analytics for immediate care and the cases of readmission;35  
• enhance patient engagement with their own healthcare provider via processing satisfaction 
evaluation data and self-reported health status;6, 36, 37 
• reduce the occurrence of fraud and identify high-cost profiles that may require more 
healthcare resources than most of the population;6, 38 and  
• use healthcare data for identification of trends, strategic planning, governance, improved 
decision-making and cost reduction.16, 35  
To enable advancements towards the next generation of BDA platform that can help and improve 
healthcare outcomes, this study addresses the following questions:  
1. It is possible to design and build a BDA platform for the Czech Republic healthcare service, 
in line with EU legislation, TPC-H1 benchmarks and other statutory requirements? 
2. If so, what BDA platform would provide optimal cost and performance features while allowing 
installation of open-source software with various machine learning algorithms, development 
environments and commercial visualisation and analytical tools? 
3. To what extend would such a BDA-based eSystem be future-proof for maintaining reliability, 
robustness, cost-effectiveness and performance?  
 

9 
 
Industry Benchmarks 
   Industry benchmarks have an important role in advancing design and engineering solutions in 
database systems. For example, the Transaction Processing Performance Council (TPC),1 has an 
important role in encouraging the adoption of industry benchmarks in computing, which are today 
widely used by many leading vendors to demonstrate their products’ performance. Similarly, large 
buyers often use TPC benchmark results39, 40 as a measurable point of comparison between new 
computing systems and technologies to ensure a high level of performance in their computing 
environments.41 
 
Big Data Analytics 
   Analytical technologies for big data23 are showing promising results in their attempts to manage 
ever-expanding data in healthcare. For example, a 2014 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) study on big data in intensive care units12 reported findings that data analysis could 
positively predict critical information, such as duration of hospitalisation, number of patients 
requiring surgical intervention and which patients could be at risk of sepsis or iatrogenic diseases. 
For such patients, data analytics could save lives or prevent other complications that patients might 
encounter. 
Technologies utilising BDA are also being successfully employed outside of hospitals.42 The 
medical community and government bodies now recognise the importance of monitoring the 
incidence of influenza illness using massive data analysis technologies.43 Seasonal influenza 
epidemics are a significant problem for public health systems, annually leading to 250,000-
500,000 deaths worldwide.44-46  Furthermore, new types viruses against which population lacks 

10 
 
immunity can lead to a pandemic with millions of deaths.44  Early detection of disease activity 
leads to a faster response and may reduce the impact of both seasonal and pandemic influenza in 
terms of saving lives or reducing respiratory illnesses on world-wide scale.44 One method of early 
detection is to monitor Internet search behaviour in relation to health queries such as employed by 
Google.14, 46 In addition, it was discovered that some queries are strongly correlated with the 
percentage of doctor visits when the patient presents symptoms of influenza. This correlation made 
it possible for Google to produce an algorithm which estimates influenza activity in different 
regions of the United States with a one-day delay. Among other algorithms, this approach allows 
Google to use queries to detect epidemics from influenza-like searches in areas where population 
has regular access to the Internet.  
 
SQL vs NoSQL Approaches  
   Data can be stored and processed in either a row-oriented or column-oriented format. The row-
oriented principle based on Codd’s relational model is well-established in most database 
applications.47-50 However, such well-established relational database management systems 
(RDBMS)49, 51 are not efficient for analytical applications that mostly perform create, read, update 
and delete operations. Over the last years, NoSQL40 databases have been tested and studied as well 
as their performance has been evaluated in many different studies,52, 53 where some of the studies 
focused their evaluations on the advantages of the use of NoSQL technologies.54 For BDA 
platforms architects, known differences between Structured Query Language (SQL) and NoSQL 
database management systems makes a design a challenging task with a number of decisions to 
address the purpose and related set of requirements. Newer than SQL, NoSQL databases support 

11 
 
the notion of elastic scaling, allowing for new nodes to be added to improve availability, 
scalability, and fault tolerance.55 
Many of related work and reviews for big data techniques56 and technologies used in healthcare 
relay mostly on silo principle for data integration, data processing, and data visualisation.  An 
application which operates on the columns in the dataset allows overcoming performance problem 
with “NoSQL” or “Not Only SQL” database.44, 46 In nowadays, these databases we can recognise 
on premise or in the cloud. Cloud computing48, 57 offers this database service too. NoSQL databases 
provide elastic and horizontal scaling features allowing new nodes to be added. New nodes are 
typically designed based on low-cost (commodity) hardware.  
In relation to the main objective of this work, produced real-life platform for big data integration, 
master data management, ad-hoc analysis, data storing, data processing, and visualisation is based 
on NoSQL database for data storing and data processing on Vertica clusters. 
 
Materials and Methods 
   The dataset used for this cross-sectional study includes an anonymised real-life data sample 
provided by the Czech Republic healthcare institute (IHIS). To comply with the two-phase IHIS 
acceptance testing, the requirement analysis was combined with the design science approach52 
involving the production of the scalable platform, architecture, software and hardware 
infrastructure. The produced solution, based on the cyclic experimental design approach, has met 
all the requirements while also achieving the highest performance ranking.  
Incremental performance and functionality improvements from phase I and phase I+II evaluations 
involved:  

12 
 
1. Phase I-compliant big data eSystem requirements and design decisions influencing architecture 
design;  
2. Decomposition of acceptance testing requirements;  
3. System optimisation to of a set of the requirements (N=112) for weighted scoring, including  
TPC-H decision support, and minimal system performance; and  
4. Performance-driven eSystem optimisation from available test datasets. 
The performance evaluation is based on database management systems45 capable of tackling big 
data such as Cassandra, CouchDB, HBase, Impala,58 MongoDB49 and Vertica.59   
 
IHIS Requirements  
   The IHIS requirements can be grouped by the following aspects: 
• Scalability: the eSystem must allow performance enhancement via additional and 
accessible computing technology, including commodity hardware products.   
• Modularity, Openness, and Interoperability: the system components must be integrated 
via specified interfaces according to exact requirement specifications. It is also essential 
that a wide variety of vendors can readily utilise system components.  
• Exchangeability: the eSystem solution must support installation of open-source operating 
systems and contain tools for non-profit and educational purposes. The eSystem must 
comply with standard Data Warehouse (DWH) systems. Some components must be 
interchangeable with Massive High Data Analytics (MHDA) system components. 
• Extensibility: all tools and components of the eSystem must provide space for future 
upgrades, including functionality and capability advancements. 

13 
 
• Quality Assurance: a tool for validating data and metadata integrity is required to ensure 
that processed data remains accurate throughout the analysis procedure. 
• Security: the eSystem must be operable on local servers, without reliance on cloud or 
outsourced backup systems. It is essential that the eSystem provides security for all data 
against external or internal threats. Therefore, authorisation, storage access and 
communication are of utmost concern. User access rights had to be set to the database, 
table or column level to restrict data access to a limited number of advanced users. The 
eSystem must log all executions and read operations for future audits. The eSystem must 
support tools for version control and development, while meeting the requirements for 
metadata and data versioning, backup and archiving. 
• Simplicity: the eSystem must allow for parallel team collaboration on all processes, data 
flow and database schemas. All tasks must be fully editable, allowing commit and revert 
changes in data and metadata. It is essential that the eSystem be simple and easy to use, as 
well as stable and resilient to subsystem outages.  
• Performance: the eSystem must be designed for the specified minimum number of 
concurrent users. Batch processing of data sources and sophisticated data mining analyses 
are considered essential. Complete data integration processing of quarterly data increments 
must not exceed one hour.  
 
The most important IHIS requirements mandate that: 
1. All tools, licenses, and environmental features used in the Proof of Concept (PoC) tests must 
match the eSystem offer submitted and documented in the public contract. To meet contractual 

14 
 
obligations, the proposed solution cannot have: insincerely increased system performance, 
altered available license terms or otherwise improved or modified results vis-à-vis the delivery 
of the final solution. The environment configuration must satisfy the general requirements of 
the proposed eSystem (usage types, input data size, processing speed requirements).  
2. The proposed eSystem cannot be explicitly (manually) optimised for specific queries and 
individual task steps within a test. The test queries are not to be based on general metadata 
(cache, partitioning, supplemental indexes, derived tables and views), except in exceptional 
cases where optimising the loading of large amounts of data is needed. The techniques based 
on general metadata may be used in future for enhancing performance but are not required as 
a precondition for system availability. To load large amounts of data, the environment 
configuration can be manually adjusted to a non-standard configuration for further test steps 
(Fig.  1). 
3. The configuration must not be manually changed during the test to optimise individual tasks - 
the eSystem is required to be universal for tasks that may overlap in time. 
 
TPC-H Performance Requirements and Tests 
  Meeting TPC-H benchmarks involves testing for minimum requirements including a set of values 
and parameters. Standardised test conditions specified in the TPC-H Benchmark™ are available 
online (http://www.tpc.org/tpch). The IHIS requires that any proposed eSystem meets 
performance metrics aligned with standard TPC-H workloads during developmental phase testing 
(Fig. 1). 
 

15 
 
 
Fig.  1. Testing activity diagram for the data warehouse eSystem configuration. 
 
For data storage benchmarks, the data must be stored on independent disks, with a replication 
factor more significant than two. The solution must also support best practices regarding data 
security and data protection, including hot backup, cold backup and recovery. 
Table 1 shows predefined TPC-H parameters by IHIS for initial test datasets (1TB and 3TB), and 
values for the Power Tests in 1st and 2nd run for 1TB and 3TB limits. Before starting and testing 
TPC-H benchmarks, optimising the system for specific queries (such as manual or another non-
standard optimisation) is not permitted. 
 
 
 

16 
 
Table 1. TPC-H parameters predefined by IHIS for initial imports for data size (1TB and 3TB), including limiting 
values for Power Tests in 1st and 2nd runs for 1TB and 3TB 
Parameter 
Limit [hours] 
Achieved results [hours] 
Initial import TPC-H 1 TB 
24 
2.94* 
Initial import TPC-H 3 TB 
96 
5.99* 
Power test TPC-H 1TB – 1st run 
    1.5 
1.4** 
Power test TPC-H 1TB – 2nd run 
    1.5 
1.36** 
Power test TPC-H 3TB – 1st run 
5 
4.2** 
Power test TPC-H 3TB – 2nd run 
5 
4.17** 
 Note: 
 *  - Initial import of 1TB and 3TB data results (Table 2);  
 ** - TPC-H benchmark (Table 3). 
 
The TPC-H tests are to emulate the future production eSystem behaviour. For all contenders 
(Tender Id. VZ0036628, No. Z2017-035520), test data consisted of simulated medical 
documentation records from three fictional insurance companies: three standard quarterly 
packages (one quarter for each company), plus one correction (simulating a situation where one 
insurer supplied inadequate data). Data batches (compressed using the ZIP format) were 
exchanged in real time containing images and structured alphanumerical data in the comma-
separated (CSV) format. Standard input data were up to 30GB per packet, amounting to a total 3 
TB of data. Test data contained roughly the same number of rows of expected data, but with a 
reduced number of columns and with added redundant attributes to reflect the problem 
dimensionality and approximate amount of data anticipated. Data related to patient drug use was 
confirmed with The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System.60 
For the purpose of conducting TPC-H Benchmark testing, a contender’s MHDA system had to be 
installed on premise utilising a private network. The on-premise multi-user MHDA system must 
operate in a parallelised application environment. Once the metadata are loaded, the system was 
required to run without intervention to prevent any configurations being altered manually, thus 
compromising the TPC-H tests integrity. 

17 
 
The installed operating system chosen by Solutia was Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 6.8 
(Santiago). Our solution met all of the requirements for Massively Parallel Processing (MPP) as 
an MHDA system. The proposed architecture also allowed for both remote supports according to 
the specified Service Level Agreement (SLA) for fault correction, and by the end of Next Business 
Day (NBD) requirements. 
For step one of testing activities (Fig.  1), we configured the system architecture with five nodes 
operating in the Vertica 9.0.1-1 database cluster. For step two, a DBGEN program generated 1TB 
or 3TB databases. At this point, the initial data loaded into the system and we ran 1TB and 3TB 
power and throughput tests. These tests resulted in records of individual measurement results. 
After testing one cluster, we deleted the data and generated another 3TB database. We repeated 
these power tests for each of the five nodes, including the recording of measurement results. 

used equation (1), in compliance with the most recent TPC BenchmarkTM H standard specification 
(revision 2.18.0, p. 99)1:  

9:

99
CD8
E

9
HD8
∗𝑆𝐹        (1) 
where QI(i,0) is the timing interval, in seconds, of a query Qi within the single query stream of the 
TPC-H power test; RI(j,0) is the timing interval in seconds, of a refresh function RFj within the 
single query stream of the power test; and SF represents the corresponding scale factor of the 
database size.1 

18 
 
 
Fig. 2. Business process organisation and tests data flow. 
 
Business processes organisation and data flow (Fig. 2) shows integration of Talend, Vertica and 
Tableau. Processing flow of the supplied test dataset starts with Data Management Layer (through 
the Data Integration, Data Quality Management, and Ad-hoc Analysis subparts),  linked to Data 
Storing and Processing Layer. The final stage is the Data Visualisation Layer (for Data 
Visualisation and Analysis of the pre-processed data). 
 
Vertica-Based eSystem Solution Architecture 
   Within the presented BDA platform, we distinguish the following logical sub-components of the 
system: Data Integration Layer (DI), Data Storage (DS), Ad-hoc Analysis Preparation (AAP), Data 
Quality Management (DQM) and Meta Data Management (MDM). The entire eSystem solution 
based on Vertica is designed to support the processing Massively Parallel Processing (MPP) 
database requirements.57, 59, 61 Since the processing of big data requires high-performance 

19 
 
computing, we used a cluster computing architecture to take advantage of massive parallel and 
NoSQL database.55  
The Vertica Analytic Database enables the principle of C-Store project,51 which is widely used as 
commercial relational database systems for business-critical systems. Vertica database has 
characteristics that are important for exceeding expected system performance while meeting all 
IHIS requirements such as: (1) massively parallel processing (MPP) system, (2) columnar storage, 
(3) advanced compression, (4) expanded cloud integration and (5) specialised tool for database 
design and administration. It is also important to note that Vertica effectively utilised built-in 
functionalities for an analytic workload (e.g. few to ten per second) rather than for a transactional 
workload (e.g. few hundreds to thousands per second).  
To choose Vertica for our client’s requirements, we also considered the following benefits:  
• Vertica provides an SQL layer as well as it supports connection to Hadoop and fast data 
access to ORC, Parquet, Avro, JSON as column oriented data;  
• Vertica affords very high data compression ration with high degrees of concurrency and 
massive parallelism for processing tasks;  
• Vertica expanded analytical database support for Kafka, Spark;  
• we considered Vertica’s pricing model a good fit for enterprise solutions;  
• Vertica is specifically designed for huge analytical workloads;  
• Vertica allows cloud integration for the future development; and 
• Vertica provides advanced compression capabilities which can handle and deliver high 
speed results data at petabyte scale. 
 

20 
 
Key Components Overview 
   The presented BDA platform, as a distributed and large-scale system, is designed on commodity 
hardware with gigabit Ethernet interconnections (Fig.  3). Adding nodes the Vertica database 
allows system performance improvement as per IHIS requirements and general expectations for 
exponential growth in healthcare data. 
 
 
Fig.  3. Architecture and infrastructure diagram showing the key components of BDA platform. 
 
The BDA platform unifies three key components Talend, Vertica and Tableau. As a specialised 
data integration environment for BDA platforms, Talend provides functionality for: Ad-hoc 
Analysis Preparation, Metadata Management, Data Quality Management, and Data Integration. 

21 
 
Vertica NoSQL database built on five nodes provides Data Storage and Data Processing. The Data 
Visualisation is covered by the Tableau Desktop (Professional edition). 
 
Data Integration (DI) Layer 
   The data integration (DI) layer represents a system module which enables parameterised data 
manipulation functions, including: data transformation, processing control and hierarchy, reading, 
writing and parallel or sequential tasks/threads processing. We use the term metadata to describe 
the resulting statistics, classification or data aggregation tasks. The DI provides metadata for 
development, test and production environments. The DI layer also provides visualisation of its 
processes in the form of data-flow diagrams. Another DI-specific tool generates outputs from pre-
processed data. This tool also supports rapid process development including selection and 
transformation of large volumes of primary data in parallel multi-threaded execution. To deal with 
near-future technical and operational challenges, the DI module also contains a debugging tool for 
software development, testing and maintenance. 
 
Data Storage (DS) 
   The Data Storage (DS) represents a system module which contains cluster-based, horizontally 
scalable physical architectures built onto NoSQL Vertica databases.  The DS runs on commodity 
hardware with distributed storage capabilities, which allows for Massively Parallel Processing 
(MPP) over the entire data collection. The DS keeps data in a column format in two containers, 
Write Optimised Store (WOS) and Read Optimised Store (ROS), for best performance. Each 
cluster is a collection of hosts (nodes) with Vertica software packages. Each node is configured to 

22 
 
run a Vertica NoSQL database as a member of a specific database cluster, supporting: redundancy, 
high availability, and horizontal scalability, ensuring efficient and continuous performance. This 
infrastructure allows for recovery from any potential node failure by allowing other nodes to take 
control. For the presented solution (Fig.  3), we set a fault tolerance K-safety=2.61 The DI 
components specify how many copies of stored data Vertica should create at any given time. 
 
Data Quality Management (DQM) 
   The data quality management (DQM) module supports data quality control including trends and 
data structures. The DQM generates complex models for end-users supporting data analysis for 
error detection and correction as well as sophisticated visualisation and reporting required for 
quality control tasks. It creates, sorts, groups and searches for validation rules entered in a 
structured form. Validation rules can be executed over a user-defined dataset and managed 
centrally.  
 
Metadata Management (MDM) 
   The metadata management (MDM) module supports the management of user, technical and 
operational metadata. The MDM centrally processes metadata from every component of the 
MDHA system, housed collectively in the data warehouse.  
The MDM can compare different versions of metadata and display outputs including visualisation 
intended for data reporting. The MDM is able to create dynamic, active charts and tables allowing 
multidimensional and interactive views. The MDM uses sandboxing for testing temporary inputs 
and outputs and can generate outputs in HTML, PDF and PPT formats. The MDM component 

23 
 
utilises Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) operations over a multidimensional data model. 
Additionally, it contains a glossary of terms and concept links, to enable impact and lineage 
analysis. 
 
Ad-hoc Analysis Preparation (AAP) 
   For ad-hoc analysis preparation (AAP) processes, we programmed into the Talend Open Studio 
integration tool two different versions. In the first version, the MHDA uses Extract Transform and 
Load (ETL) components of the integration tool. These components read data from data warehouse 
structures (dimensions and fact tables) into memory. Then, the filtering and aggregation 
components process the data into an output table. The second version uses Extract Load and 
Transform (ELT) components of the integration tool. Both ETL and ELT components are able to 
generate user-friendly, unmodified SQL Data Manipulation Language (DML) statement(s) in the 
background. The AAP module accelerates the processing time without having to load large 
amounts of metadata into the program memory. 
Figure 4 shows forecasting on a historical test dataset supplied by IHIS, where we used the 
ARIMA62 in-database approach to timeseries. This model can be created either directly in the 
NoSQL Vertica database, which supports predictive modelling, or in a separate statistical tool such 
as Tableau, which will take data from the database and return the created model (written in 
Predictive Model Markup Language  (PMML) or another format the database supports). Including 
analytics algorithms into the database often leads to increased processing demands on BDA 
platforms. 
 

24 
 
 
Fig.  4. Visualisation of predictive model for timeseries forecasting based on supplied test data. 
 
Data Visualisation (DV) 
   The data visualisation (DV) module contains tools for describing data perspectives and 
knowledge discovery from data. The DV components represent data and metadata visually and 
give interpretations for possible insights. Additionally, we embedded DV components in Tableau 
to provide data and metadata visualisations in graphs and pictures. Tableau is a popular interactive 
analytical and data visualisation tool, which can help simplify raw data into easily comprehensible 
dashboards and worksheets. For example, Fig.  5, depicts a part of the data visualisations from one 
of the IHIS case studies with a geographical map overlay .  

25 
 
 
Fig.  5. Real-life diagnosis as regional data visualisation in the Czech Republic using Tableau Desktop. 
 
We found that the DV combined with Tableau provide a powerful, secure and end-to-end analytics 
platform for data visualisation tasks. 
 
Results 
   The presented winning solution as a proof of concept (PoC), was implemented and transferred 
to our client IHIS, which is integrated with the Ministry of Social and Labour Security, Ministry 
of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Health Insurance and Eurostat (Statistical 
Office of the European Union). IHIS requirements also complied with the EU-based General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR). 
 

26 
 
TPC-H Tests Configuration 
TPC-H requires data to be generated for eight tables using the specified scale factor (SF), which 
determines the approximate amount of data in gigabytes (Fig.  6). We used the TPC-H power test 
which measures the throughput/response times of a sequence of 22 queries (defined on p. 29).1 
Vertica supports the ANSI SQL-99 standard and all queries are applied with no syntax changes. 
The test datasets were created by TPC-H DBGEN program (Fig.  1). In our tests, we found that 
the queries Q 9 and Q 21 are more complex in comparison with the commonly expected queries. 
For power benchmark purposes, we have shared TPCH_SF1000, consisting of the row size x1000 
(several billion elements). 
 
 
Fig.  6. The components of TPC-H consisting of eight tables (adapted from p.13).1  
 

27 
 
 The performance achieved using the dataset predefined by TPC-H (Fig.  1) shows that the 
developed eSystem (as PoC) outperformed other competitors with similar product 
characteristics.63-65 Experiments using the presented BDA architecture (Fig.  3) and reported 
performance (Table 2, Table 3, Fig.  7, and Fig.  8) were also tested by the government. The 
developed eSystem was installed within the Czech Republic borders in on-premise centralised 
mode using data communication channels that are physically separated from the existing Internet 
infrastructure. 
 
Table 2. Measured results compliant with TPC-H benchmarks for initial import of 1TB and 3TB data 
Data Size 
1TB data 
3 TB data 
Table 
No. of rows 
Duration 
in [s] 
Duration 
in hours 
No. of rows 
Duration 
in [s] 
Duration 
in hours 
Customer 
150,000,000 
1,185.00 
0.33 
450,000,000 
4,100.00 
1.14 
Nation 
25 
0.10 
0.00 
25 
0.20 
0.00 
Orders 
1,500,000,000 
2,533.00 
0.70 
4,500,000,000 
5,423.00 
1.51 
Part 
200,000,000 
272.00 
0.08 
600,000,000 
865.00 
0.24 
Part supp. 
800,000,000 
1,342.00 
0.37 
2,400,000,000 
4,240.00 
1.18 
Region 
5 
0.07 
0.00 
5 
0.07 
0.00 
Supplier 
10,000,000 
105.00 
0.03 
30,000,000 
266.00 
0.07 
Line item 
5,999,989,709 
10,594.00 
2.94 18,000,048,306 
21,548.00 
5.99 
Total 
load 
duration in 
hours 
2.94*[h] (16,031.17[s]) 
5.99**[h] (36,442.27[s]) 
* - Measured results for 1TB dataset generated by DBGEN and imported into NoSQL Vertica DB;  
** - Measured results for 3TB dataset generated by DBGEN and imported into NoSQL Vertica DB. 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
Table 3.  TPC-H benchmark queries for 1 TB and 3 TB test data 
Data size 
1 TB data 
3 TB data 
Query No. 
3 
nodes  
3 
nodes 
5 
nodes 
5 
nodes 
3 
nodes 
3 nodes 
5 
nodes 
5 
nodes  
1st run 
2nd run 
1st run 
2nd run 
1st run 
2nd run 
1st run 
2nd run 
Q1 
51 
267 
232 
161 
427 
383 
441 
457 
Q2 
22 
23 
19 
15 
52 
42 
36 
40 
Q3 
65 
64 
55 
40 
128 
109 
121 
125 
Q4 
480 
470 
287 
320 
918 
897 
914 
900 
Q5 
114 
177 
71 
70 
484 
462 
465 
454 
Q6 
0.7 
0.6 
0.8 
0.5 
1.2 
1 
1.4 
1 
Q7 
129 
119 
65 
65 
144 
129 
140 
140 
Q8 
34 
37 
40 
22 
375 
361 
270 
263 
Q9 
2551 
2576 
1555 
1397 
16015 
15173 
3791 
3824 
Q10 
130 
52 
44 
72 
65 
58 
64 
64 
Q11 
7 
6 
5 
3.8 
13 
10 
10 
11 
Q12 
13 
13 
8 
11 
24 
20 
23 
23 
Q13 
237 
221 
180 
136 
296 
251 
325 
301 
Q14 
55 
49 
41 
36 
111 
102 
105 
105 
Q15 
7 
7 
4 
4 
9 
7 
9 
10 
Q16 
42 
42 
29 
30 
87 
78 
86 
88 
Q17 
12 
11 
8 
6 
23 
19 
23 
22 
Q18 
380 
376 
517 
554 
741 
721 
743 
746 
Q19 
58 
58 
41 
41 
112 
104 
111 
110 
Q20 
131 
129 
87 
73 
156 
137 
150 
147 
Q21 
1763 
2850 
1703 
1787 
7278 
7021 
7196 
7085 
Q22 
60 
67 
62 
35 
107 
88 
110 
106 
Results in 
seconds 
6341.7 
7614.6 
5053.8 
4879.3 
27566.2 
26173 
15134.4 
15022 
Results in 
hours 
1.76 
2.12 
1.4 
1.36 
7.66 
7.3 
4.2 
4.17 
Note (Q# - Query name):1 
Q1 - Pricing Summary Report, Q2 - Minimum Cost Supplier, Q3 - Shipping Priority,  
Q4 - Order Priority Checking, Q5 - Local Supplier Volume, Q6 - Forecasting Revenue Change, Q7 - Volume 
Shipping, Q8 - National Market Share, Q9 - Product Type Profit Measure, Q10 - Returned Item Reporting, Q11 - 
Important Stock Identification, Q12 - Shipping Modes and Order Priority, Q13 - Customer Distribution, Q14 - 
Promotion Effect, Q15 - Top Supplier, Q16 - Parts/Supplier Relationship, Q17 - Small-Quantity-Order Revenue, 
Q18 - Large Volume Customer, Q19 - Discounted Revenue, Q20 - Potential Part Promotion, Q21 - Suppliers Who 
Kept Orders Waiting, Q22 - Global Sales Opportunity. 
 

29 
 
The performance of TPC-H tests running on a Vertica cluster for 1 TB and 3 TB data size (Table 
3) are visualised in Fig.  7 and Fig.  8, indicating similar duration patterns for complex and 
commonly expected queries.  
 
 
Fig.  7. TPC-H query duration on 1TB database (from Q1 to Q22). 
 
 
Fig.  8. TPC-H query duration on 3TB database (queries Q1 to Q22).  

30 
 
 
Monitoring I/O requests to accurately capture workload behaviour is important for the design, 
implementation and optimisation of storage subsystems. The TPC-H trace collection on which we 
conducted the analysis, was collected on Vertica 9.0.1 database cluster running on CentOS Linux 

Adapter. 
As introduced, the TPC-H can also be used as a metric to reflect on multiple aspects of a NoSQL 
Vertica database system’s ability to process queries. The aspects of performance improvements 
for different database sizes and system expansion are captured collectively in  Table 4, Fig.  9, Fig.  
10 and Fig. 11. As such, it is possible to infer anticipated needs for future system upgrades and 
expected performance based on evidence from measured performance improvements from three 
to five nodes tested on 1 TB and 3 TB databases. 
 
Table 4. Vertica cluster on three and five nodes in the 1st and 2nd run on 1TB and 3TB 
Query No. 
3 nodes 
3 nodes 
5 nodes 
5 nodes 
1st run 
2nd run 
1st run 
2nd run 
Results in [s] for 1TB [s] 
6 341.7 
7 614.6 
5 053.8 
4 879.3 
Results in [s] for 3TB [s] 
27 566.2 
33 099.26 
15 134.4 
15 022.0 
 

31 
 
 
Fig.  9. Vertica cluster performance improvement for decision support queries. 
 
From the visualisation of 1 TB and 3 TB database tests, which were matched by adding hardware 
resources, it is possible to conclude that for larger near-future datasets, processing demands can 
be matched ad-hoc by increasing hardware resources and optimising cost-effectiveness of the 
healthcare eSystem. For example, five nodes in the Vertica cluster (Fig.  9, Fig.  10 and Fig. 11) 
shows a greater cost-effective performance increase for a 3 TB (around 50%) compared to a 
smaller 1 TB (around 25%) database.   
 

32 
 
 
Fig.  10. Query execution time on three to five nodes in the Vertica cluster. 
 
 
Fig. 11. Performance improvement comparing three to five nodes in the Vertica cluster for 1 TB database size. 
 

33 
 
In comparing performance improvement and scalability perspectives, the results show at least 25% 
performance increase from 3 to 5 nodes (Fig. 11) on 1 TB database size utilising a low-cost 
commodity hardware.  
Query execution times and performance improvements achieved by adding extra computer 
resources provide sufficient evidence of a scaled-out design to work in the future with larger 
datasets.  
 
Discussion 
   The use of big data technology intended to advance a healthcare eSystem, can be evaluated in 
terms of achieved performance, privacy, security, interoperability, compliance, costs and future 
proofing such as scalability to incremental hardware integrations, analytical tools and data 
increase.  In the case of the Czech Republic national tender (Id. VZ0036628, No. Z2017-035520), 
vendor-independent solutions had to meet a large number of requirements encompassing all of the 
above-mentioned criteria intended to modernising the national healthcare system within the 
European Union.  Due to contractual obligations with IHIS, as a participating party we were unable 
to obtain or to disseminate competitors’ details including their system performance benchmarks 
and proposed architecture. However, our contract permits dissemination of the results and the 
authorship for PoC before the handover to IHIS. The presented BDA solution accepted by the 
Czech Republic has met all the requirements and has demonstrated system performance results 
well-exceeding required thresholds.  
Concepts and insights transferrable to other healthcare systems are based on this case study and 
on the consensus of experts’ views, reported literature and existing knowledge available in the 

34 
 
public domain. The authors’ views and vision for big data in future healthcare eSystems are based 
on professional experience, findings from Vertica-based eSystem development and big data 
concepts. As such, we wish to emphasise the importance of scalability for future data and 
performance increases, accommodation of near-future machine learning algorithms and analytical 
tools, security and strategic healthcare planning. Therefore, looking beyond the primary scope of 
this project, we question what the implications are for healthcare and other big data industry 
professionals. For a start, the Vertica BDA platform runs on Amazon, Azure, Google and VMware 
clouds providing user agility and extensibility to quickly deploy, customise, and integrate a variety 
of software tools. Vertica enables data warehouse transition to the cloud and to on-premise 
providing flexibility to start small and grow along with the customer’s business requirements. In 
this case, our client (IHIS)  set the conditions for implementation of the proposed solution 
according to the on-premise principle. The solution had to be physically isolated from the Internet 
and it was not possible to propose a cloud-based solution. Nevertheless, Vertica provides end-to-
end security with support for industry-standard protocols, so we believe that the future of 
infrastructure will evolve as a multi-cloud and hybrid solution i.e. as a mixture of on-premise and 
cloud environments. Such data analytics and management approaches are not meant to be 
restricted to one type of environment only. For example, Vertica announced the availability of Eon 
Mode for Pure Storage (https://www.vertica.com/purestorage/) as the industry’s first analytical 
database solution with a separation of computing and storage architecture for on-premises 
workload distribution. 
The recommended operating system for the Vertica BDA platform is Linux Centos 7.3. Vertica 
also has support for other Linux-based operating systems such as (in order of authors’ preference): 

35 
 
Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 7.3, Oracle Enterprise Linux (OEL) 7.3, SUSE 12 SP2, Debian 
8.5, and Ubuntu 14.04 LTS. 
Regarding plans for our BDA solution in 2021, we are considering proposing further 
improvements to national healthcare and privacy protection by stream data processing from health 
IoT devices and mobile apps (including wearable devices such as smart watch sensors). Currently, 
we are conducting tests in a development environment expanded by another platform’s 
components (Eclipse Mosquitto open source broker for carrying out stream data from IoT devices 
by using MQTT protocol). Acquired test data from IoT devices are transferred as stream data via 
MQTT 
Mosquitto 
broker 
(https://mosquitto.org), 
transformed 
using 
Apache 
Spark 
(https://spark.apache.org) and stored for future data operation purposes in Hadoop. From that 
layer, data are further processed in a Vertica NoSQL cluster. For IoT platform management 
purposes, we are using Node.js (https://nodejs.org/) to build fast and scalable network applications 
and the Angular platform (https://angular.io) for building mobile and desktop applications. 
 
Conclusion 
   The growing volume of medical records and data generated from near-future IoT and mobile 
devices mandates the adoption of big data analytics (BDA) in healthcare and related contexts. As 
part of the national strategy for BDA adoption in healthcare, the Czech Republic healthcare 
institute (IHIS) has aligned its strategy with the European Union. With over 100 complex 
requirements, in line with statutory regulations, included in the national public tender, was the 
inclusion of a subset of criteria regarding performance, cost-effectiveness, robustness and fault 
tolerance. Such a BDA solution had to be capable of achieving competitive and above-expected 

36 
 
threshold results regarding overall system performance evaluation, based on TPC-H industry-
standard decision support benchmark.  
The tender-winning BDA solution reported here represents a snapshot in time, which exceeded 
expected operation on healthcare-specific TPC-H benchmark tests. The BDA solution and its 
control was transferred to IHIS, which over the past six month has unified the state-wide healthcare 
eSystem. In addition to demonstrated tests and real-life performance, the current eSystem has great 
potential to improve national healthcare in the Czech Republic, as well as to accommodate 
evolving expectations and future data needs. The produced eSystem based on Vertica analytic 
database management software is future proofed in terms of stream and high volume processing, 
scalability based on consumer/commodity hardware and fault tolerance (e.g. shutting down cluster 
nodes would not cause data loss). Horizontal scalability tests using commodity hardware 
demonstrate performance improvement of over 25% by increasing the number of cluster nodes 
from three to five, providing sufficient evidence of a scaled-out design based on cost-effective 
commodity hardware.  
Currently, the produced BDA healthcare eSystem is physically isolated from the Internet 
infrastructure by being installed in on premise mode within the national geographical boundaries 
and therefore is considered highly secure, supporting industry standards regarding data security 
and protocols. The BDA healthcare eSystem supports a variety of open-source software including 
Linux distributions with a growing number of machine-learning libraries and integration of 
commercial tools such as Tableau.  
The next steps in the future development of the presented healthcare eSystem includes:  (1) 
advancement of the eSystem architecture so that the existing solution remains the blueprint 
architecture; (2) support for data-driven decisions during high-traffic events; (3) an increase from 

37 
 
100 TB to 1 PB (Petabyte) processing capability; (4) the addition of new approaches to data 
cleaning, storing and retrieval with minimal latency; (5) integration with other national registers 
(e.g. to manage and facilitate drug distribution logistics); and (6) strategic planning using 
healthcare data.
