1
Integrated information increases with ﬁtness in the evolution of
animats
Jeﬀrey A. Edlund1, Nicolas Chaumont2,6, Arend Hintze2,3,6, Christof Koch1,7,8, Giulio Tononi4,
Christoph Adami2,5,6,∗
1 Computation & Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
2 Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences, Claremont, CA
3 Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
4 Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
5 Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
6 BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI
7 Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul Korea
8 Allen Institute for Brain Sciences, Seattle, WA

Abstract
One of the hallmarks of biological organisms is their ability to integrate disparate information sources to
optimize their behavior in complex environments. How this capability can be quantiﬁed and related to
the functional complexity of an organism remains a challenging problem, in particular since organismal
functional complexity is not well-deﬁned.
We present here several candidate measures that quantify
information and integration, and study their dependence on ﬁtness as an artiﬁcial agent (“animat”)
evolves over thousands of generations to solve a navigation task in a simple, simulated environment. We
compare the ability of these measures to predict high ﬁtness with more conventional information-theoretic
processing measures. As the animat adapts by increasing its “ﬁt” to the world, information integration
and processing increase commensurately along the evolutionary line of descent. We suggest that the
correlation of ﬁtness with information integration and with processing measures implies that high ﬁtness
requires both information processing as well as integration, but that information integration may be a
better measure when the task requires memory. A correlation of measures of information integration
(but also information processing) and ﬁtness strongly suggests that these measures reﬂect the functional
complexity of the animat, and that such measures can be used to quantify functional complexity even in
the absence of ﬁtness data.
Author Summary
Intelligent behavior encompasses appropriate navigation in complex environments that is achieved through
the integration of sensorial information and memory of past events to create purposeful movement. This
behavior is often described as “complex”, but universal ways to quantify such a notion do not exist.
Promising candidates for measures of functional complexity are based on information theory, but fail to
take into account the important role that memory plays in complex navigation. Here, we study a diﬀerent
information-theoretic measure called “integrated information”, and investigate its ability to reﬂect the
complexity of navigation that uses both sensory data and memory. We suggest that measures based on the
integrated-information concept correlate better with ﬁtness than other standard measures when memory
evolves as a key element in navigation strategy, but perform as well as more standard information pro-
cessing measures if the robots navigate using a purely reactive sensor-motor loop. We conclude that the
integration of information that emanates from the sensorial data stream with some (short-term) memory
of past events is crucial to complex and intelligent behavior and speculate that integrated information–to
the extent that it can be measured and computed–might best reﬂect the complexity of animal behavior,
arXiv:1103.1791v2  [q-bio.PE]  3 Oct 2011

2
including that of humans.
Introduction
Complexity is visible in most scientiﬁc disciplines: mathematicians, physicists, biologists, chemists, en-
gineers and social scientists all developed measures to characterize the complexity that they perceive in
their systems, borrowing tools from each other but rarely if ever agreeing on a measure that could be
used by all of them. Because the objects that each of these disciplines are most concerned with are so
diﬀerent, ranging from mathematical problems and computer programs over physical, chemical, or bio-
logical structures, to systems and networks of interacting agents, a convergence of quantitative measures
of complexity is perhaps not likely. However, a universal framework that would be capable of adapting its
notion to the speciﬁc discipline it is applied to would be a welcome trend. Complexity measures abound,
but exhaustive reviews are few. A good introduction to the dynamical systems approach to complexity
is Ref. [1], but it does not cover biological applications. The overviews [2–4] focus on the complexity of
biological sequences but not on their structure, and mostly ignore the complexity of networks. Neural
complexity measures are reviewed in [5].
Among the diﬀerent measures of complexity, some attempt to quantify the structure [6–13], others
the sequence giving rise to that structure [14–19], and others again the function of the sequence or
system [20–22]. All these studies attempt to capture “that which increases when self-organizing systems
organize themselves” [23] (a non-exhaustive list is presented in Ref. [24]). Increasingly, measures based
on information theory are being used to quantify the complexity of living systems, because information
provides its owner an obvious ﬁtness advantage compared to those without information by conferring the
ability to make predictions about the environment they operate in [25–27]. In particular Rivoire and
Leibler [27] study statistical measures based in information theory that maximize the ﬁtness of agents
that respond to variable environments, but they do not study evolution. Information-theoretic measures
of complexity are reviewed in [28] and applications to graphs in [29].
Here, we study how information-theoretic measures of complexity could be applied to capture the
complexity of nervous systems [5,30], or more generally speaking, any structure controlling a perception-
action cycle. In the absence of any well accepted deﬁnition of complexity, we study the correlation of
diﬀerent measures to organismal ﬁtness, following the intuition that a well-deﬁned measure of control
structure complexity should increase during adaptation [20].
Fitness is a quantitative measure that
predicts the long-term success of a lineage [31,32], and is given by the expected number of oﬀspring of an
average representative with the given genotype. Unfortunately, this is only a quantitative measure for
the simplest of organisms where the expected number of oﬀspring can be determined from the replication
rate, or in direct competition experiments (see, e.g., [33]). For more complex organisms, relative ﬁtness
can only be estimated in hindsight, and cannot be used as a proxy for organism complexity. However, if
we evolve control structures in silico where complete ﬁtness information is available, we can use ﬁtness
(within a niche) as an independent arbiter of putative information-based measures of complexity: any
measure that does not increase as the organism learns to exploit its environment is unlikely to reﬂect
complex information processing. Because in this type of evolution experiment the number of oﬀspring is
directly proportional–on average–to the performance of the organism in a task critical to its survival, we
here study the correlation of complexity directly with performance or function.
Note that because ﬁtness necessarily refers to the environment (it measures how well the organism
“ﬁts” its niche by exploiting the niche’s attributes), ﬁtness cannot be used to compare organism com-
plexity across niches (such as attempting to compare an elephant and an ant in terms of their ﬁtness),
but it does reveal functional diﬀerences between types that are due to eﬃciencies of exploiting the same
environment. For biological organisms that occupy the same niche, that is, “make a living” in the same
manner, relative ﬁtness should correlate with relative functional complexity. Is it true that given a con-
stant environment the more complex organism is necessarily more ﬁt? Answering this question in the

3
aﬃrmative clearly biases our notion of complexity: only useful characters are deemed complex, useless
ones are not. While such a bias may be restrictive for structural complexity, it is not so for information-
theoretic measures of complexity, as information (if it can be used to reduce uncertainty) will always be
useful: if it were not, it should be called entropy instead [25,34].
Predictive information
Perhaps the best known information-based measure of functional complexity is “predictive informa-
tion” [35], which quantiﬁes the amount of information that can be extracted from sensorial data in order
to select actions that are useful to the organism. In this manner, predictive information is able to sepa-
rate out those features of the sensorial data that are relevant for behavior, and quantiﬁes the amount of
information processed by the organism. Predictive information has also been proposed as a measure of
complexity of function [35].
If we describe a control network’s input variables (“sensors”, or “stimuli”) at time t by the random
variable St and the output variables (“motors”, or “response”) at that time by Rt, then the shared
information (used for prediction) is [35]
Ipred
=
I(St : Rt+1) = H(Rt+1) −H(Rt+1|St)
=
X
s,r
p(st, rt+1) log p(st, rt+1)
p(st)p(rt+1) ,
(1)
where Pr(St = st) ≡p(st) and Pr(Rt = rt) ≡p(rt) are the probability distributions of the sensor and
response variables at time t, respectively, and p(st, rt+1) is the joint probability distribution of the sensor
and response variables “in the future and the present” [35] (we use the binary logarithm throughout and
assume that the network evolves along discrete time steps). Ipred characterizes the capacity of the control
system to predict the future one time step ahead, using the present sensorial information. Essentially,
it quantiﬁes the correlation between inputs and outputs, and can be thought of as the Kullback-Leibler
divergence (or relative entropy) between the full probability distribution p(st, rt+1) and the product of
the independent ones, p(st)p(rt+1).
Note that for Markov processes, the one-step shared entropy (1) is equal to the shared entropy between
the entire past and the entire future (see [36], Appendix A.1), while this is not true for processes that can
use memory. Predictive information was previously used to characterize the complexity of autonomous
robot behavior without memory in Ref. [36] (see also Text S1). If the control structure is not purely
reactive and uses information encoded in internal nodes to integrate sensorial information streams, we
will need complexity measures that move beyond predictive information [27].
Integrated information
A fundamental and unique design principle of nervous systems is their extraordinary degree of integration
among highly-specialized modules [5,37,38]. Functional integration is achieved by an extended network
of intra- and inter-areal connections, and is reﬂected in dynamically shifting patterns of synchronization.
A precise way to measure a system’s capacity to integrate information was developed recently [39, 40],
and applied to small, simple example networks. This measure, called Φ and measured in bits, is based
on the notion that information integration is achieved by architectural designs that give rise to a single,
functionally uniﬁed complex (high integration) while ensuring that such a complex has a very large
repertoire of discriminable states (high information). Φ captures to what extent, informationally, the
whole is more than the sum of its parts, and cannot therefore be reduced to those parts. In this sense, Φ
represents the synergy of the system. Before introducing Φ proper, we deﬁne a few related quantities.
In order to study information integration, we have to deﬁne the information processed by the entire
network, not just the sensors and motors as in Eq. (1). Let us represent the system as a joint random

4
variable X = X(1)X(2) · · · X(n), where the X(i) represent the elements of the system (the nodes of a
control structure, such as a neuronal network). The random variable X evolves as the system progresses
forward in time, i.e., X(t = 0) ≡X0 →X1 →X2 →· · · Xt, and each variable Xt is described by a
probability distribution p(xt) to be found in states xt (here, we will restrict ourselves to binary random
variables). At the same time, each node i of the system has a time progression X(i)
0
→X(i)
t , and each
variable X(i)
t
is described by a probability distribution p(x(i)
t ). In the following, we formally deﬁne mea-
sures of information integration through t time steps (from 0 →t), but later focus on the computationally
more accessible integration through a single average step from t →t + 1.
The amount of information that is processed by the entire system through t time steps is given by
I(X0 : Xt) =
X
x0,xt
p(x0, xt) log p(x0, xt)
p(x0)p(xt) .
(2)
where p(x0) and p(xt) are the probability distributions of the system at time t = 0 and t respectively,
and p(x0, xt) is their joint distribution. This measure reduces to the predictive information Eq. (1) for
Markov processes connecting only sensor and response nodes, that is, if there are no internal (or hidden)
variables.
One way to measure information integration is to ask how much information is processed by the
system above and beyond what is processed by the individual nodes or groups of nodes (modules). To do
this, we introduce a partition of the network into k parts, P = {P (1), P (2), · · · , P (k)}, where each P (i) is
a part of the network: a non-empty set of nodes with no overlap between parts that completely tile the
network. We can then deﬁne a quantity that measures how much the information processed by the entire
network is more than the information processed by all the parts in this particular partition as follows.
Let I(P (i)
0
: P (i)
t ) be the information processed by the ith part as the system progresses from time 0 to
time t. Then, the synergistic information SI processed by the network X given a partition P quantiﬁes
the extent to which the entire processed information is a sum of the information processed by the system’s
parts, and is calculated as:
SI(X0 →Xt|P) = I(X0 : Xt) −
k
X
i=1
I(P (i)
0
: P (i)
t ) .
(3)
From an information-theoretic point of view, the synergistic information measures the excess amount
of information that can be encoded in a “multiple access” channel with correlated sources and a joint
decoder [41] over and above what each of the individual channels (the parts of the partition P (i)) can
encode separately. A measure related to the synergistic information is the “eﬀective information” EI:
EI(X0 →Xt|P) =
k
X
i=1
H(P (i)
0 |P (i)
t ) −H(X0|Xt) .
(4)
Here, H(P (i)
0 |P (i)
t ) is the conditional entropy of partition P (i)
0
given the state of that partition t time
steps later, and H(X0|Xt) is the conditional entropy of the entire system X at time step t = 0 given
the state of that system t steps later (see also Text S3). The quantity (4) is the average over network
states at time t (states xt) of the quantity called the “eﬀective information across a partition P” in
Ref. [40]. If the probability distribution governing X0 is uniform (maximum entropy), the two measures
agree: SI(X0 →Xt|P) = EI(X0 →Xt|P), but they are diﬀerent in general (see Text S3). Below, we
will mostly use Eq. (4).
In order to determine how a network integrates information, we should look for a partition that
minimizes (4), because it is easy to ﬁnd a high value of EI by assigning diﬀerent parts to nodes that are
strongly correlated. In essence, looking for the partition that minimizes EI is tantamount to searching for

5
the groups of nodes that are separated from other groups of nodes by a weak informational link [40]. To
ﬁnd this partition, expression (4) needs to be normalized because otherwise the partition that minimizes
(4) will almost always be the one that divides a network of N parts into one with N −1 parts and a
single other node [40]. We deﬁne the “Minimum Information Partition” (or ‘MIP’) as that partition that
minimizes a normalized EI:
MIP0
=
arg min
P
EI(X0 →Xt|P)
(k −1) mini
h
Hmax(P (i)
0 )
i ,
(5)
where Hmax(P (i)
0 ) is the maximum entropy of the ith partition P (i)
0 . If the neurons are binary, then
Hmax(P (i)
0 ) is just the number of neurons in partition i. Armed with this deﬁnition of the MIP, our
measure of information integration is:
Φ0
=
EI(X0 →Xt|P = MIP0) .
(6)
Note that Φ0 represents the average (over all possible ﬁnal states of the network) of the state-dependent
quantity Φ(xt) deﬁned previously [40], and the subscript 0 reminds us that the integration is measured
from an initial probability distribution at time t = 0 that is uniform.
The measure can be adapted to characterize the information integration across a single time step
simply by deﬁning
Φ
=
EI(Xt →Xt+1|P = MIP)
(7)
with a commensurately deﬁned MIP:
MIP
=
arg min
P
EI(Xt →Xt+1|P)
(k −1) mini
h
Hmax(P (i)
t )
i ,
(8)
where Hmax(P (i)
t ) is the maximum entropy of the ith partition at time step t. Note that we have omitted
an index t to Φ as deﬁned in Eq. (7) as we assume that for large t Φ becomes stationary: Φt →Φ (t →∞).
This MIP, just as the one deﬁned by Balduzzi and Tononi [40], divides the network into disjoint parts
that are maximally informationally disparate–those parts that are most independent. As deﬁned here, Φ
is equivalent to the recently deﬁned ˜ΦE [42], because EI(Xt →Xt+1|P = MIP) is based on the reduction
(at time step t + 1) in the Shannon entropy based on the empirical entropy at time step t, not on the
reduction from the maximum entropy at time step 0 as in [40]. Thus, our Eq. (7) is equivalent to Eq. (29)
in Ref. [42] (with ϕ replaced with ˜ϕ ), except that we search all partitions rather than just bi-partitions,
and the normalization factor of Barrett and Seth uses the largest of the actual entropies of the parts.
Because we will measure information integration for time series generated by a moving animat, we will
use Eq. (7) to quantify the animat’s complexity in what follows.
If networks are small, it is possible to ﬁnd the MIP by brute-force testing all possible partitions.
The number of partitions of n nodes is the nth Bell number, Bn [43]. Searching across all partitions
is exceedingly expensive and scales faster than exponential.
For example, B3=5, B10=115,975, and
B16 ≈1.05 × 1010. For networks of realistic size, search heuristics will be the only way to ﬁnd the MIP:
for the nematode C. elegans, for example, n = 302 [30], and the number of partitions of this network is
the absurdly large number B302 ≈4.8 × 10457. Here, the largest networks we analyze have 12 nodes, but
we have been able to calculate Φ for networks with up to 18 nodes using a fast exact algorithm that does
not store all the partitions.
Main complex
A system composed of a large network together with a single disconnected unit will always have Φ = 0,
because minimizing over all partitions ﬁnds the informational disconnect between the network and the

6
disconnected node, and the minimum eﬀective information between these parts is zero [40]. A measure
that captures information processing that is synergistic without being trivial can be obtained by deﬁning
the network’s computational proper complex [44] as a subset S of (joint) random variables within the
system X (S ∈X) that maximizes Φ over all subsets and supersets, that is:
If Φ(S) is deﬁned as the Φ of subset S, then
S ⊆X is a proper complex if
(
Φ(S) ≥Φ(R) ∀R ⊂S
Φ(S) > Φ(T) ∀T ⊃S .
(9)
Each network can have several (proper) complexes, with smaller complexes of higher Φ embedded within
larger complexes of lower Φ. We deﬁne the proper main complex as the subset associated with largest Φ
values over all subsets of the entire system. We denote the information integration in the proper main
complex as ΦMC. A simple network with MIP and main complex identiﬁed is shown in Fig. 1.
=
AND
A
B
Figure 1. Exemplar MIP and main complex. A: The logical units are AND gates with multiple
outputs (each output is the AND of the two inputs). B: A network of seven such units (877 distinct
possible partitions). The MIP for the entire system (solid lines) is a bi-partition, and the main complex
(dashed line, shaded area) consists of ﬁve units. We compute Φ = 0.269 bits for the entire network,
while ΦMC = 1.327 bits.
Other integration measures
Among all possible partitions, the “atomic partition” that partitions the network into its individual nodes,
plays an important role. For example, we can deﬁne the information processed by the network above and
beyond the information processed by the individual nodes as
SIatom = I(Xt : Xt+1) −
n
X
i=1
I(X(i)
t
: X(i)
t+1) ,
(10)

7
where the ﬁrst term is the total processed information Itotal, deﬁned as
Itotal = I(Xt : Xt+1) = H(Xt) −H(Xt|Xt+1) ,
(11)
The negative Eq. (10) has previously been used to quantify the redundancy of information processing of a
neural network [45,46], see also [47]. Incidentally, Barlow has long argued that reducing redundancy (and
thus compressing the sensorial information stream maximally) is the main purpose of the structure of the
sensorial information-processing system [48], and we would then, if Itotal is ﬁxed, expect a maximization
of ﬁtness to go hand-in-hand with a minimization of SIatom and therefore a maximization of redundancy,
Itotal measures the shared entropy between the system at adjacent time points, and is a useful measure
to determine whether an increase in Φ is due solely to increased information processing by the entire
network (resulting in an increased Itotal) rather than the eﬀective integration of that information. Writing
I(X(i)
t
: X(i)
t+1) = H(X(i)
t ) −H(X(i)
t |X(i)
t+1) for each node i, we see that
SIatom = −H(Xt|Xt+1) +
n
X
i=0
H(X(i)
t |X(i)
t+1) −I ,
(12)
where n is the number of individual nodes in the network and where
I =
n
X
i=1
H(X(i)
t ) −H(Xt) .
(13)
This quantity has been called “multi-information” [47,49]), and was used as a measure of brain complexity
called “integration” in [50–52], where the sum was over the components of a network rather than the
nodes. Thus, I is an “atomic” form of the Tononi-Sporns-Edelman (TSE)-complexity [50]. Note that
none of the measures discussed in this section should depend on t if t is large enough because we assume
that at large times the probability distribution p(Xt) becomes stationary.
The ﬁrst part in Eq. (12) is nothing but the eﬀective information EI (4), but for the “atomic partition”,
that is, the partition where each part is given by the individual nodes in the entire network and for
t →t + 1. Thus,
SIatom = Φatom −I ,
(14)
where
Φatom = EI(Xt →Xt+1|P = Patom) =
n
X
i=0
H(X(i)
t |X(i)
t+1) −H(Xt|Xt+1) .
(15)
Eq. (15) may be a particularly useful measure to approximate Φ when a search for MIPs is computationally
infeasible. It has previously been introduced under the name “stochastic information” by Ay [53–55].
However, it is neither an upper nor a lower bound on Φ. Because of its construction (Φatom = SIatom+I),
it incorporates elements of information processing (the excess information processed, in time, by the
system above and beyond the information processed by each of the nodes) as well as integration. In other
words, Φatom encompasses both temporal and spatial synergies of the network.
Results
In order to test how diﬀerent measures of functional complexity change as a system adapts to function
in its world, we evolve controllers for animats [56] that have to solve a task that requires sensory-motor
coordination as well as memory. Ay and coworkers tested predictive information Eq. (1) as a measure

8
of system complexity when evolving a simulated autonomous robot to solve a simple maze, and found
that Ipred reﬂects the performance of the robot [36]. Lungarella and coworkers used information-based
complexity measures to understand how appropriate motor action of embodied agents shapes the signal
structure perceived by the agent’s sensors [51], and studied the information ﬂow through the control
structures [52]. Klyubin and coworkers used mutual information between an agent’s starting position
and a representation of this information in the agent’s memory to evolve sensorimotor control structures,
and used measures of synergy to study whether the positional information could be factorized within the
sensors [57].
Description of evolutionary system
Our animats are embodied controllers with six binary sensors and two (binary) actuators, as well as four
internal bits that can be used for memory or processing (Fig. 2 and Methods).
11
10
1
2
0
5
4
3
7
8
9
6
Figure 2. Embodied virtual agent (animat) with six sensors, two actuators, and four
internal nodes. The complete animat is described by 12 bits: three front sensors (red triangles; # 0,1
& 2), two lateral collision detectors (blue triangles; # 4 & 5), and a single “door” sensor (magenta, #3)
that relays the direction of the next opening in the maze (but only while standing in the door). The
actuators (trapezoids; # 10 & 11) encode the actions “move left, move right, move forward, do
nothing”. The internal nodes (circles; # 6-9) can potentially store states used for internal processing.
The controllers are stochastic Markov networks (see, e.g., [58]), that is, networks of random variables
with the Markov property, where edges between nodes encode arbitrary fuzzy logic gates. As such, the
edges could represent simple binary logic gates or more complex computational units. Because these
networks actually encode decisions, strictly speaking they are encoding discrete-time stochastic Markov
decision processes (MDPs). Fundamentally, our Markov networks are related to the hierarchical temporal
memory (HTM) model of neocortical function [59–61] and the HMAX algorithm [62], except that the
organization of our stochastic Markov networks need not be strictly hierarchical because it is determined
via genetic evolution rather than top-down design (see Methods).
In what follows, the edges connecting the random variables are implemented as Hidden Markov Gates
(HMGs). Each such gate is a probabilistic ﬁnite state machine deﬁned by its input/output structure
and state transition probabilities (see Fig. 3A). For example, if ‘100’ was applied to the input state of
the HMG in Fig. 3A, ‘11’ is the output with probability p43 [P(100 →11) = p43], while an input ‘111’
generates ‘01’ with probability p71 [P(111 →01) = p71], and so forth. Such a gate can also be represented
as its dual graph, where the signal lines become the nodes of the Markov network, and the edges between
them represent the computation performed by the HMG (Fig. 3B). In this representation, arrows indicate
causal inﬂuence via an HMG, so in Fig. 3B for example, variable 4 is inﬂuenced by variables 1,2, and 3
(as is variable 3), while variables 1 and 2 only have outgoing arrows: they only inﬂuence variables 3 and

9
...0110100110...
....010100100.....
World Feedback
...0100110001...
p00 p01 p02 p03
p10 p11 p12 p13
p20 p21 p22 p23
p30 p31 p32 p33
p41 p42 p43
p40
p50
p60
p70
p51
p61
p71
p52 p53
p62
p72
p63
p73
3
3
1
2
4
A
B
1
2
3
4
Figure 3. Hidden Markov Gate representation. A: An HMG with three binary input and two
output Markov variables, where one of the outputs is fed back into the HMG (a hidden variable). The
state transition table has 23 × 22 entries that are determined by genetic evolution (see Methods and
Text S2). In the gate shown, bit three is a hidden state and can be used to implement a one-bit
memory. In principle, the probabilities in the HMG transition table can also be tuned via reinforcement
learning using a signal from the environment (“World Feedback”). However, this capacity is not utilized
in the present work. B: The “dual” representation of this gate, where the Markov variables are nodes,
and the gate connects these via edges. This network is obtained by drawing a directed edge between
bits that aﬀect each other causally via the logic gate. Because bit 3 feeds back to itself, for example, it
is given the same identiﬁer and there is a directed arrow from bit 3 to itself as well as bit 3 to bit 4. See
Text S2 and Fig. S1 for details on the genetic encoding and network visualization of HMGs.
4 but are not aﬀected by any other variable.
The 2n×2m probabilities of an n-input and m-output state transition table, as well as how each HMG
is connected to other gates, is encoded within a genome that, when read by an interpreter, creates the
network (see Methods, Text S2 and Figure S1, as well as Ref. [63] for a similar structure). Populations
of genomes are evolved using a standard Genetic Algorithm (but without crossover, see Methods). To
calculate the ﬁtness of each genome, the controller generated from the sequence is transplanted into the
animat shown in Fig. 2 and tested on its ability to traverse a maze that consists of repeated vertical
walls at varying distance to each other, with a single door placed at random locations within the wall.
Within each door, a “beacon” indicates the direction to follow for the shortest path to the next door,
but this information is erased the moment the animat emerges from the door. Thus, in order to use this
information, it has to be stored in memory for later usage. The actual maze has at least 26 walls to
traverse before the maze repeats. A section of a typical maze along with an adapted animat’s trajectory
as well as the states of the memory and motor bits are shown in Fig. 4. Videos S1 to S3 show several
movies that depict the motion of the animat, at diﬀerent evolutionary stages, traveling through the maze.
In each of 64 independent evolution experiments, a population of 300 initially random genomes (en-
coding random controllers, see Text S2) was evolved for 50,000 generations each. We calculate ﬁtness (f)
and control ﬁtness fctrl both for the highest ﬁtness animats at every generation and for genomes on the
line of descent (LOD) of the last common ancestor of the population that existed at generation 50,000
(see Methods). The control ﬁtness fctrl tests the performance of the controller on ten randomly generated
mazes that the animat has never before encountered (see Methods), in order to test whether the animat
evolved the navigation principles or simply adapted to a particular instance of the problem.

10
Figure 4. Maze structure and animat trajectory. Part of one of the test mazes, along with the
trajectory of an adapted animat as well as a view of the animat’s brain (the four internal nodes 6-9, top
four pixels in each animat location) and the motor outputs (bottom two pixels). A bit set to ‘1’ is
indicated in green, while blue indicates a bit set to ‘0’. The value of the sensory bits can be inferred
from the animat’s location. The downward pointing arrow inside a door reminds us that the animat
would perceive a ‘1’ on its door sensor at that location (indicating that the next door will be found to
the right of the animat’s position). If the door is straight ahead or to the left, the door sensor will be
set to ‘0’. The animat’s goal is to move as far across the maze as possible (see Methods). Note that this
representation does not show when the animat is stationary (waits) or retraces its path.
The LOD recapitulates the evolutionary history of the population, and allows a reconstruction of the
path taken mutation by mutation. Fig. 5 shows the evolution of ﬁtness and control ﬁtness for one of 64
experiments [panel (A) shows the ﬁtness on the LOD, while panel (B) shows the corresponding ﬁtness of
the best in the population of 300 individuals]. Notice that in Fig. 5B the ﬁtness of the ﬁttest individual
is almost always larger than the control ﬁtness for the same individual, while the ﬁtness on the LOD
instead scatters around the control ﬁtness, as seen in Fig. 5A. There is a good reason for this diﬀerence:
in any population, an animat can be ﬁt by chance through having correctly “guessed” the next door
position repeatedly. The control ﬁtness removes this element of chance by testing the individual on ten
randomly generated mazes. The individuals on the LOD on the other hand are there for a reason and not
by chance: their genes have proven themselves in later generations. In the run depicted in Fig. 5 (see also
the movies Video S1-S3), the animat evolved a sophisticated (but not perfect) algorithm to navigate the
maze, including the use of memory around generation 15,000 to store the doorway bit until the animat
reaches the next wall. The wiring diagram of the animat at generation 49,000 is depicted in Fig. 6A. The
animat uses only internal node 9 as memory, whose permanency is ensured using auto-feedback. The
other nodes are connected but have no ﬁtness impact whatsoever at this time, as determined by a knock-
out analysis (see Methods, data not shown), but may have been useful earlier on. The controller contains
a total of 17 HMGs, but only nine HMGs (including two pairs of redundant HMGs) are responsible for
this wiring. Of the nine useful HMGs, ﬁve have three inputs and one output, the other four HMGs are
NOT gates. Note that if more than one HMG output serves as input for another HMG, their values are
combined using an OR gate. The animat uses the information from the 3-bit retina, the lateral sensors, as
well as the conditional information from the door beacon (sensor 3 in Fig. 6A) eﬀectively by integrating
this information within the decision machinery for navigation. The central hub is the network’s memory:

11
Figure 5. Fitness evolution on the line of descent and in the population. A: Fitness (blue
line) and control ﬁtness (green line) for genotypes on the LOD. B: Fitness and control ﬁtness for the
same run as shown in (A), but for the ﬁttest individual in the population in each generation. Colors as
in (A).
10
11
0
2
1
5
3
4
9
10
11
0
2
1
5
3
4
9
A
B
Figure 6. Two evolved HMG networks. The shapes represent the 9 Markov variables (bits) at
time t = 49, 000 that are active in the network (bits 6, 7, and 8 are connected to the network, but are
not functional at generation 49,000 and not rendered here). The central feed-forward circuit for
navigation is rendered in bold arrows. Color codes and numbering as in Fig. 2. A: The network evolved
in our focus experiment that achieved 88% of possible ﬁtness. B: Another network that evolved in an
independent run, and that implements a variant of the hierarchical temporary memory algorithm that
creates an expectation of future sensory signals. In contrast to the controller that evolved in panel (A),
this one uses a feed-back strategy between memory and motors. This controller achieves 74% of
maximal ﬁtness within a random maze environment.
internal bit 9 is set to 0 if the door beacon is detected in the “on” state (b3=1) in a doorway, and to 1
if not. The value of bit 9 is maintained until the animat reaches the next wall. (The value of the door
bit itself is erased from the sensor after the animat passes through the door, and therefore cannot be
accessed by simply re-reading that value.) At that point the value of bit 9 determines if the animat goes

12
left (b9=1) or right (b9=0). Once the animat is moving along a wall, bit 9 is set to 1 and the animat
continues moving in the same direction keeping in mind the value of the left motor (b11). In a sense,
the motor bit b11 is also used as memory here, as indicated by the auto-feedback. If bit 5 indicates an
obstacle to the right, bit 11 is set, which forces bit 10 oﬀin turn. If bit 4 indicates an obstacle to the
left on the other hand, bit 9 is set to 0 which causes bit 11 to turn oﬀand bit 10 to turn on. Once the
animat is in front of the next doorway, it moves forward through the door. Thus, we see that this animat
eﬀectively uses the integration of diﬀerent streams of information (door sensor, retina, lateral sensors,
and current state of motion) to compute behavior that is appropriate in the given environment most of
the time. Reaching 88 % of “maximal” ﬁtness is fairly remarkable, as a hand-written optimal controller
reaches only 93% of maximal ﬁtness (data not shown) because we force our controllers to be minimally
stochastic.
In another run that achieved a ﬁtness of 74%, a related but fundamentally diﬀerent algorithm evolved
to achieve almost the same functionality (wiring depicted in Fig. 6B). The central part of this algorithm,
which is a version of the “hierarchical temporal memory algorithm” [59], is implemented by a feedback
loop between the motors 10 and 11 and internal bit 9 (bold arrows in Fig. 6B), as opposed to the feed-
forward loop seen in Fig. 6A. Because the animat can read from its motor bits, it can keep track of how
it is currently moving, and make decisions based on this state as well as the state of the internal variable
bit 9. Temporal memory is achieved by creating a basic expectation (bit 9 set to one) of encountering a
door beacon that will be pointing it to the left (bit 3=0). If instead it encounters a door pointing to the
right (bit 3=1), it changes that expectation (bit 9=0) and maintains it in memory until it moves in the
correct (right) direction. Once this happens, the expectation is changed back to anticipating a beacon
pointing it to the left, but the animat does not immediately react to this expectation because bit 9 is
ignored as long as the animat moves to the right.
Let us now look at our information-theoretic constructions as a function of evolutionary time. The
quantity ΦMC is expensive to calculate so they and other measures were calculated along the LOD of each
population every 500 generations up to generation 50,000. Each genome was evaluated by testing the
controller it spawns for 1,000 world-time steps in 10 control mazes (each tested 10 times, see Methods) in
order to even out chance achievements (animates can achieve high ﬁtness by chance due to the stochastic
nature of their controllers). We show the evolution of three information integration and three information
processing measures over time (for the same run whose ﬁtness evolution is depicted in Fig. 5) in Fig. 7.
Figure 7. Information-based measures of complexity. A: Three Φ related measures of
information integration for genomes on the LOD of the same run as shown in Fig. 5. Blue line: Φatom
deﬁned in (15), green: I deﬁned in (13) and red: ΦMC. B: Three information processing measures for
the same experiment as (A): Blue: total information Itotal (11), green: atomic information SIatom (12),
and red: predictive information Ipred (1).

13
As ﬁtness increases, all measures we plot here increase at ﬁrst, but quickly become stagnant when
ﬁtness ﬂattens out (see Fig. 5). Important changes are apparent in all measures when the capacity to use
the door beacon for navigation emerges around generation 15,000. To see diﬀerences in the measure’s
abilities to predict ﬁtness, we need to analyze how well these complexity proxies correlate with ﬁtness
across our set of 64 runs.
Statistics
In order to test whether ﬁtness correlates with a complexity proxy, we calculate the (nonparametric)
Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient of the “ﬁnal” ﬁtness (the ﬁtness of the genome at generation
49,000 on the LOD, see Methods) with the value of that variable measured at generation 49,000. We
chose generation 49,000 as ﬁnal time because the organism from this generation is guaranteed to represent
the common line of descent of the 300 individuals in any particular run (see Methods). While we have
correlation data of ﬁtness with each variable along the LOD every 500 generations for each run, these
points are not independent, and therefore cannot be used in order to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of
the correlation. The correlation of ﬁnal ﬁtness (across 64 independent samples) with each of the diﬀerent
information-theoretical candidates for functional complexity is shown in Fig. 8. Note that the highest
control ﬁtness achieved across the 64 runs is fctrl = 88.27 ± 0.78, or almost 90% of perfect performance
(see Methods for our deﬁnition of ﬁtness). That data point (for the run shown in Fig. 5, giving rise to the
controller depicted in Fig. 6A) is indicated in red in Fig. 8. The run that evolved the controller shown in
Fig. 6B is colored green in Fig. 8.
Table 1. Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcients (R) and signiﬁcance (p-value) between diﬀerent
candidate measures of functional complexity with “ﬁnal ﬁtness”, using the values achieved at generation
49K of the LOD (an approximation of the most recent common ancestor) for 64 independent runs.
ΦMC
Φatom
I
SIatom
Itotal
Ipred
R
0.937
0.784
0.776
0.553
0.335
0.63
p
4.1 × 10−30
1.8 × 10−14
4.8 × 10−14
2.1 × 10−6
6.8 × 10−3
2.4 × 10−8
For all measures, we observe positive and highly signiﬁcant correlations with ﬁtness (Fig. 8 and Table
1). The best correlation is achieved for the integrated information measure ΦMC (R = 0.937), followed
by the information integration across the atomic partition Φatom (Spearman’s R = 0.784), while the
correlation with Ipred is weaker (R = 0.63). Likewise, Itotal, which does not attempt to separate out
the integration of diﬀerent streams of information correlates only weakly with ﬁtness (R = 0.335). The
atomic processed information SIatom [Eq. (12), R = 0.553] and the integration I both contribute to the
strong correlation of Φatom with ﬁtness, as Φatom is a sum of I and SIatom as per Eq. (14). The integration
measures Φatom, ΦMC, and I also correlate well with each other (data not shown). The diﬀerence in the
correlation coeﬃcients for ΦMC and Ipred is highly signiﬁcant (p = 0 in a Fisher r-to-z transformation
test).
A clear separation between runs that achieved high (> 70% of maximal ﬁtness) and low ﬁtness
(<≈60%) is apparent in Fig. 8, indicating the diﬀerence between controllers that can or cannot access
the information in the door beacon, which in turn requires the evolution of at least a single bit of memory.
However, while it is not possible to achieve ﬁtness in excess of 70% without using the information from
the door beacon, one run utilized this information without exceeding 60% ﬁtness, as determined via a
knock-out analysis of the Markov variables.

14
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
bits
ΦMC
R = 0.937
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
I
R = 0.776
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Φatom
R = 0.784
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
% optimal ﬁtness
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
bits
Itotal
R = 0.335
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
% optimal ﬁtness
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Ipred
R = 0.63
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
% optimal ﬁtness
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
SIatom
R = 0.553
Figure 8. Correlation of information-based measures of complexity with ﬁtness. ΦMC, I,
Φatom, Itotal, Ipred, and SIatom plotted against fctrl (as a percentage of optimal ﬁtness) using the ﬁnal
ﬁtness (generation 49,000) on the LOD trajectory for 64 independent runs. R indicates Spearman’s
rank correlation coeﬃcient.
Discussion
We have characterized several diﬀerent information-theoretic measures in terms of their ability to reﬂect
the complexity of information processing and integration in discrete dynamical systems. In order to dis-
cuss non-trivial examples of networks that are functional, we evolved computational networks that control
an animat’s behavior in a maze, and tested whether an increase in appropriate behavior is correlated with
the putative proxies for complexity. The “brains” we evolved capture the essence of what it means to be
successful in the maze environment: they can navigate arbitrary mazes of the type they are confronted
with, and perform equally well with random versions of mazes that they never encountered during their
evolution. In particular, they integrate the sensory information from several sources appropriately, and
when they evolve memory they are able to implement it in a variety of ways, including a variant of the
hierarchical temporal memory paradigm [59]. We ﬁnd that a standard measure that has been used to
characterize complex robot behavior in the past [36], the predictive information Ipred, usually correlates
well with ﬁtness but sometimes fails to do so. We found examples where the failure to be predictive of
ﬁtness is associated with the evolution of memory (for example, the run indicated in green in Fig. 8),
but also examples where this is not the case (e.g., the run that achieved the highest ﬁtness, shown in
red in Fig. 8). We hypothesize that when memory emerges, the integration of information from memory
with the other signal streams is best reﬂected by measures of information integration such as Φatom, I,
and ΦMC. Indeed, it is possible to show under fairly general assumptions that measures like Ipred can
maximize ﬁtness under the condition that no other information is used by an agent (such as acquired or
inherited information [27], see also Text S1). Thus, while we expect that Ipred performs worse and worse
as a predictor of complex function as more and more memory is utilized for navigation, in some cases
Ipred turns out to perform very well counter to this expectation. It is currently unclear what is at the

15
origin of this diﬀerence in predictive performance of Ipred.
That Ipred ultimately has to fail as a predictor of ﬁtness when memory is used can be seen in the
limiting case of navigating entirely by memory. In that case, any correlation between sensory inputs
and motor actions would be purely accidental, in particular if the sensory data that ultimately predict
appropriate motor actions are not in the immediate past. However, a non-Markovian version of Ipred
that takes sensorial data from more distant time steps into account could conceivably perform well even
in this case.
On the other hand, measures of information integration could still be elevated even when navigating
by memory, as the motor units are driven by streams of information emanating from within, rather than
without. However, as sensorial information is not integrated, measures of information integration should
be lower when navigating entirely by memory as opposed to navigating via sensors complemented by
memory. At the same time, a brain that dreams rather than acts has vanishing predictive information
(as the sensor inputs as well as the motor units have vanishing entropy). Yet, integrated information
could still be high, and thus reﬂect complex information processing in the brain even in the absence of
behavior. In this respect, measures of integrated information are a good candidate for a quantitative
measure of consciousness, as advocated earlier [39,40,44,50]. We note, however, that evolving functional
networks with high Φ is not easy.
For our 12-bit controllers, ΦMC < 2 bits almost always, and the
main complex is signiﬁcantly smaller than the network size, usually only comprising sensor and motor
variables, and occasionally the memory bit when it is used.
Clearly, how useful Φ is as a measure of brain complexity let alone consciousness rests on testing it on
more complex networks that enable complex behavior in simulated environments that are both deep and
broad. Evolving networks that rely heavily on memory, and that have the capacity to observe their own
state [64] and integrate that information with the sensorial stream, would be particularly useful in this
respect. Ultimately, we expect that measures of information integration can then turn into predictors
of ﬁtness or function rather than the other way around. Indeed, the functional complexity of biological
organisms (measured in terms of ﬁtness) can only be estimated in the rarest of cases when we have a full
understanding of what makes an organism successful in its particular niche.
In future work, we hope to evolve animats in more complex environments that require more broad and
versatile use of memory, to thoroughly test the hypothesis that information integration measures outper-
form pure processing measures such as predictive information in complex tasks. Furthermore, we plan
to test whether animats evolve information matching [65], that is, whether the integrated informational
structure generated by an adapted complex ﬁts, or matches, the informational structure of its environ-
ment. As it is possible to determine in detail how information about the world is represented within the
Markov brains of these animats, the evolution of such creatures should demonstrate that evolution can
move beyond representation-free AI [66] towards autonomous intelligence.
Methods
Agent embodiment
Of the six sensors shown in Fig. 2, three are obstacle detection bits (binary sensors that indicate that an
obstacle is in front of it (bits 0-2 encode front, left-front, and right-front, respectively), as well as a “door
beacon” (bit 3) that indicates whether the next opening will be to the right (bit 3=‘1’) or else in front
or left (bit 3=‘0’) of the opening that the animat is currently passing through. This bit can be used to
navigate more successfully in the maze, by keeping this bit in memory and integrating this information
with the other sensors. The next opening-direction information is not available after the animat passes
through the previous opening. Because the animat cannot turn, it is important to detect whether an
animat has hit a lateral wall. Detectors 4 and 5 each return ‘1’ if there is a wall to the left or right
respectively.

16
For example, in Fig. 4, the opening-direction bit (bit 3=‘1’) in the door just after the starting location
indicates that the subsequent opening is to the right. After reaching this door and stepping through it,
the sensor bit is set to bit 3=‘0’ indicating that the next opening is to the left or in front (in this case,
in front). Therefore, eﬃciently navigating the maze requires memorizing this bit when the animat is in
an opening and acting on that information until the animat can see the next opening. Two output bits
(motors) control each animat’s movement: the animat moves right if only bit 10 is on, left if only bit 11
is on, and forward if both are on. The animat has four internal bits (circles 6-9 in Fig. 2) that it can use
for information memorization and integration.
Hidden Markov gates
The table depicted within each HMG in Fig. 3 represents the gate’s function in terms of a stochastic
ﬁnite state machine. The binary state of each HMG’s inputs corresponds to a row in its probability table.
These probabilities are encoded within the genes that specify the network, as described in Text S2. To
determine how those probabilities generate an output from an input, ﬁrst a random number between 0
and the sum of the elements of that row is generated. Comparing this random number to the cumulative
sum of the numbers in that row selects an element in the row whose column index corresponds to the
binary state of that gate’s outputs. The OR operator is used to combine the outputs from multiple gates
which output to the same bit.
Genetic encoding of network structure
Networks are encoded within circular genomes that are given by a sequence of unsigned characters [0,255].
Each gene encodes a single HMG and its connection to other gates via the Markov variables, as well as
the state-transition probabilities that deﬁne the gate. Details about the interpretation of the genome and
its translation into a network are given in Text S2. Each HMG can have at most 4 inputs, and at most 3
outputs. If more than one HMG writes into a single Markov variable, these outputs are combined via an
OR operation but we allow at most 3 write-attempts into a single Markov variable. If in the sequential
interpretation of the genome an HMG requests to write to a variable that already has three connections,
that HMG’s connection will instead be routed to the nearest available variable. The same restrictions
exist if an HMG tries to read from a variable that already has 3 read connections.
Fitness calculation
The animat’s ﬁtness in a maze m is determined by:
g(m) =
T
X
t=0
D −dt
D
+ Lt

(16)
where T is the number of time steps (T = 300), dt is the shortest path distance to the last doorway in
the maze from the animat’s position at time t, D is the maximum shortest path from all locations in the
maze to the last doorway, and Lt is the number of times the animat has passed the last doorway. The
maze environment is periodic so that if the animat goes past the end of the maze, the environment is the
same as the beginning of the maze.
The stochastic nature of the controller implies that the g(m) measured in one run through a single
maze m may not be a reliable estimate of the genome’s ﬁtness because chance decisions could lead to
either too high or too low ﬁtness. We therefore deﬁne the animat’s selection ﬁtness by:
f(m) =
 10
Y
i=1
g(i)(m)
gopt(m)
! 1
10
(17)

17
where g(i)(m) is the ith stochastic realization of the animat’s ﬁtness in maze m, and gopt(m) is the
maximum ﬁtness attainable in that maze. The geometric mean of 10 evaluations helps to ensure the
reproducibility of the animat’s ﬁtness, and make it a better predictor of the long-term success of the
lineage it represents.
In order to ensure that the genomes have evolved the ability to navigate through general mazes of this
type (rather than adapting to a single particular maze), a set of 10 control mazes are used to calculate
the control ﬁtness:
fctrl =
1
100
10
X
m=1
10
X
i=1
g(i)(m)
gopt(m)
(18)
The control ﬁtness uses the arithmetic rather than the geometric mean in order to better track perfor-
mance. The geometric mean in Eq. (17) allows for the elimination of controllers that ever completely fail
at a single instance (as ﬁtness is then multiplied by zero). The arithmetic mean in Eq. (18) is a better
numerical indicator for the power of the strategy, as a single failure does not result in a vanishing control
ﬁtness.
Evolution and Genetic Algorithm
64 populations of 300 individuals were evolved for 50,000 generations.
For the purpose of selection,
a single maze was randomly generated for each run, given a set of boundary conditions.
Every 100
generations a new maze was generated for each run so that the animats would not adapt to a speciﬁc
instance of the problem. To implement selection, the top three individuals from each generation (the
elite) were copied into the next generation without mutation, unless their ﬁtness was determined to
be zero after re-testing. The remaining places in the population were ﬁlled by roulette-wheel selection
with mutations [67]. This implies that the number of oﬀspring that any parent places into the next
generation is proportional to the relative ﬁtness advantage (or disadvantage) it holds with respect to
the average population ﬁtness. However, no individual could place more than 10 oﬀspring into the next
generation. The genomes (described in Text S2 and Fig. S1) were changed via a variety of processes
from generation to generation. Single loci were copied with a probability of µsitecopy = 0.025, deleted
with probability µsitedel = 0.05, a random value inserted after a loci with probability µsiteins = 0.025,
replaced with a uniformly drawn random number ∈[0, 255] with probability of µsiteuniform = 0.05, or
increased/decreased by a random number ∈[−10, 10] (restricted to the range [0, 255] if necessary) with
probability of µsite up/down = 0.05. Whole genes where duplicated with µGdup = 0.005, deleted with
µGdel = 0.01, and a random gene inserted with µGins = 0.005.
Finally, all mutation rates were normalized such that the whole genome mutation rate is equal to one
change per genome per generation on average. This has the consequence that the “expressed” genome
fraction (fraction with functioning start codon giving rise to HMGs connected to the main network)
decreases with evolutionary time. Around 50,000 generations, the amount of expressed genes is of the
order of 15% of the total genome size (on average about 200 of 3,000 loci are expressed in an evolved
genotype).
Knock-out analysis
In order to determine the importance and role of individual variables in the brain’s operation, we perform
“knock-outs” on the variables to test their eﬀect on the Markov animat’s performance. Four types of
per-bit knockouts were used: replace the value that the variable takes on by ‘always read 0’, ‘always
read 1’, ‘always write 0’, and ‘always write 1’. Some brains use variables with ﬁxed values on purpose,
in order to select certain rows from the probability tables with certainty. Such variables can be detected
when only one of the two read-knockouts (read-zero or read-one) reduce the ﬁtness of the controller.
Variables that actually store and/or process information will lead to reduced ﬁtness by both knockouts.

18
Motor variables that are not read from are unaﬀected by the read knockouts but are aﬀected by the write
knockouts. Similarly, write-knockouts from sensor variables do not aﬀect ﬁtness, while read-knockouts
do.
To determine the function of individual HMGs, ﬁrst each HMG was deleted from the controller to see
if it changed the ﬁtness. This identiﬁed unique important HMGs, but sometimes the results were masked
by redundant HMGs. Then, each entry in the probability table for each HMG was “knocked out” by
replacing the corresponding allele by zero or 255 [see Eq. (1) of Text S2 for the eﬀect of this replacement].
This data combined with the input distribution for each HMG was used to determine the role of any
particular HMG in the brain, and how it worked together with the other HMGs to control the animat.
Line of descent
For each run the line of descent (LOD) was obtained [68] by tracing back the ﬁttest organism in the pop-
ulation backwards towards the randomly constructed ancestral sequence used to begin each experiment
(encoding on average 12 HMGs, see Text S2). Seen from the point of view of the ancestral sequence,
each following generation creates a branching tree with some lines eventually becoming extinct and other
branches surviving. Because we simulate an asexual population in a single niche, only a single line of de-
scent can ultimately remain because of competitive exclusion between members of the same species [69].
This line can be identiﬁed from following the lineage back from any of the 300 organism present in the
ﬁnal generation (generation 50,000) back to the origins (300 individual lines of descent). Going back
ten generations, say, to 49,990, there will be fewer lines because some lines coalesced going backwards
(branched going forward). The further backwards one moves on this “tree of descent”, the more lines
coalesce until the last common ancestor (LCA) of the entire population that was alive at generation
50,000 has been reached. Because of the single-niche environment, the 300 lines coalesce very quickly,
and are virtually guaranteed to have coalesced to a single line when going back to generation 49,000,
which is the “ﬁnal” generation we study in our simulations, and deﬁnes the “ﬁnal ﬁtness”. The organism
at generation 49,000 of the LOD is not guaranteed to be the LCA, but it is guaranteed to be the ancestor
of all organisms present in the ﬁnal generation. Thus, the LOD records the evolutionary history of the
experiment mutation by mutation, and allows us to reconstruct the evolutionary path that led to the
adapted type. Fitness as well as complexity measures were calculated for organisms on the LOD every
500 generations.
