IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
5118617
TWR-MCAE: A Data Augmentation Method for
Through-the-Wall Radar Human
Motion Recognition
Weicheng Gao
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xiaopeng Yang
, Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiaodong Qu
, Member, IEEE, and Tian Lan
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—To solve the problems of reduced accuracy and
prolonging convergence time of through-the-wall radar (TWR)
human motion due to wall attenuation, multipath effect, and
system interference, we propose a multilink auto-encoding neural
network (TWR-MCAE) data augmentation method. Speciﬁcally,
the TWR-MCAE algorithm is jointly constructed by a singular
value decomposition (SVD)-based data preprocessing module,
an improved coordinate attention module, a compressed sensing
learnable iterative shrinkage threshold reconstruction algorithm
(LISTA) module, and an adaptive weight module. The data
preprocessing module achieves wall clutter, human motion fea-
tures, and noise subspaces separation. The improved coordinate
attention module achieves clutter and noise suppression. The
LISTA module achieves human motion feature enhancement.
The adaptive weight module learns the weights and fuses the
three subspaces. The TWR-MCAE can suppress the low-rank
characteristics of wall clutter and enhance the sparsity charac-
teristics in human motion at the same time. It can be linked
before the classiﬁcation step to improve the feature extraction
capability without adding other prior knowledge or recollecting
more data. Experiments show that the proposed algorithm gets
a better peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), which increases the
recognition accuracy and speeds up the training process of the
back-end classiﬁers.
Index Terms—Data augmentation, deep learning, human tar-
get recognition, sparse modeling, through-the-wall radar (TWR).
I. INTRODUCTION
U
LTRAWIDEBAND
(UWB)
through-the-wall
radar
(TWR) uses the penetrating ability of low-frequency
electromagnetic waves to detect human targets behind the wall
and is widely used in urban combat, anti-terrorist conﬂicts,
disaster rescue, criminal investigation, search, and rescue [1].
Manuscript
received
29
July
2022;
revised
20
September
2022;
accepted 8 October 2022. Date of publication 10 October 2022; date of current
version 24 October 2022. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61860206012, Grant
62101042, and Grant 61901441; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of
Chongqing under Grant cstc2020jcyj-msxmX0768 and Grant cstc2021jcyj-
msxmX0339; and in part by the Young Teachers of Beijing Institute of
Technology: Research on Indoor Target Imaging Method. (Corresponding
author: Tian Lan.)
The authors are with the Beijing Institute of Technology Chongqing
Innovation Center, Chongqing 401120, China, also with the School of
Information
and
Electronics,
Beijing
Institute
of
Technology,
Beijing
100081, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Electronic and
Information Technology in Satellite Navigation, Ministry of Education,

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3213748
Fig. 1.
Traditional TWR human motion recognition system.
In these ﬁelds, human motion recognition is one of the most
challenging topics [1]. Due to the effects of walls, such
as attenuation, refraction, and multipath effects [2], which
cause signiﬁcant distortion of the echo signal, the recognition
accuracy decreases signiﬁcantly, and the computational time
increases.
As shown in Fig. 1, a complete TWR human motion
recognition system consists of four steps: 1) signal acquisition;
2) clutter suppression; 3) imaging; and 4) classiﬁcation [3].
The presence of wall clutter, systematic interference, and
multipath effects in TWR data leads to poor accuracy and slow
convergence. Because of this, TWR imaging needs a new data
processing strategy to improve the recognition accuracy and
training speed of the back-end classiﬁers [4].
For UWB TWR human motion recognition work, the
existing methods have undergone two stages of development:
1) classical and 2) intelligent signal processing. The classical
signal processing methods mainly use the ﬁtting or decom-
position algorithms to convert the image matrix into feature
vectors, and then use the statistical decision methods for
classiﬁcation [1]. The scenario implemented by the methods
at this stage is relatively simple, with poor performance,
but strong interpretability [5]. Intelligent signal processing
can be divided into two categories. The ﬁrst category is
based on sparse and low-rank modeling or traditional machine
learning, including support vector machine (SVM) [6], time
delay estimation method (TDOE) [7] based on the orthogonal
matching tracking (OMP) algorithm, and synchronous OMP
algorithm based on cross-validation (CV-CSOMP) [8]. These
methods have better recognition results [9], but their gen-
eralization and inference performance are still limited when
dealing with complex image data of motion state scenes [10],
[11]. The second category is based on the new generation
of neural network theories, including autoencoder networks
(AENs) [12], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13],
long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) [14], multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) [15], and simple probabilistic graph-based
1558-0644 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
Fig. 2.
New TWR human motion recognition system.
neural networks (PGMs) [16]. Due to their powerful scene
generalization and feature extraction capabilities, the neural-
network-based algorithms are considered the best alternatives
to the original motion recognition methods. However, its
training process consumes a large amount of time.
In this article, a data augmentation method between the
imaging and classiﬁcation steps is proposed to extract and
enhance the human motion features to improve the back-end
classiﬁers’ recognition accuracy and training speed without
adding a prior knowledge or reacquiring data, as shown in
Fig. 2. Speciﬁcally, this article proposes a multilink convo-
lutional auto encoding neural network (TWR-MCAE), based
on the improved coordinate attention mechanism and adaptive
weight learning, for through-the-wall human motion feature
extraction in real scenes. The method introduces a paral-
lel generative network architecture by combining multiscale
information in 2-D image and the sparse and low-rank prop-
erties in physical context to enhance the motion features
in range-time map (RTM) and Doppler-time map (DTM).
Experiments demonstrate that the proposed data augmentation
method achieves a higher peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR)
and effectively improves the recognition accuracy and conver-
gence speed of the existing classiﬁers.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we describe the signal model of TWR human motion imag-
ing. In Section III, we introduce the structure, principle, and
realization of TWR-MCAE. Section IV gives the experimental
veriﬁcation of the reliability, efﬁciency, structural optimality,
and practical value of the proposed method, respectively.
Finally, the conclusion is given in Section V.
II. TWR HUMAN ECHO MODEL
Fig. 3 gives the geometric model of TWR human motion
detection, in which the transmitting and receiving antennas of
the radar are close to the wall. The signal is emitted from the
transmitting antenna and refracted through the wall. Then it
enters the free space. After being reﬂected by the target, the
return wave is refracted through the free space to the wall
and ﬁnally returns to the receiving antenna. The geometric
model in Fig. 3 shows that the echoes in the current scenario
need to introduce a wall compensation relative to the detection
scenario in free space. The system uses a stepped frequency
waveform as the transmit signal, which can be expressed as
follows:
S(t) =
K−1

k=0
rect
t −T/2 −kT
T

exp( j2π( f0 + kf )t)
(1)
Fig. 3.
Geometric model of electromagnetic propagation of TWR.
where T represents the duration of each frequency point, K
is the total number of frequency points, f0 is the starting
frequency, and f is the step size [17]. rect() represents the
gate function and is deﬁned as follows:
rect(t) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
1, t ∈
	
−1
2, 1
2

0, t ∈

−∞, −1
2

∪
1
2, ∞

.
(2)
Assuming that the human target can be divided into strong
scattering points, the number of the strong scattering points is
P [18]. Then the received echoes can be expressed as follows:
Sr(t) =
P

p=1
aps

t −τp

+ SW (t) + SN(t)
(3)
where ap is the echo intensity coefﬁcient of the pth scattering
point, τp denotes the echo time delay of the pth scattering
point, and SW (t) and SN(t) denote the wall echo and noise,
respectively [19].
For most TWR systems, the echo we receive is the
frequency-domain data. Therefore, we directly perform local
oscillation wave mixing and low-pass ﬁltering on the echo
signal to achieve coherent demodulation. The baseband radar
echoes are sampled at intervals T . It is assumed that there are
M periods of echo data. After the above signal processing
steps, we can reconstruct the echo data into an M × K
dimensional matrix Sr. Then one element Sr(m, k) of Sr can
be expressed as follows:
Sr(m, k) =
P

p=1
ap(m, k)e−j2π( f0+kf )τp
+ SW(m, k) + SN(m, k)
m = 1, . . . , M, k = 1, . . . , K
(4)
where SW and SN denote the discrete reconstruction matri-
ces of wall echoes and noise, respectively, m represents
the index in the slow time dimension, and k represents
the index in the fast time dimension. By the inverse fast
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
Fig. 4.
Flowchart of signal preprocessing.
Fourier transform (IFFT) r,ori along the matrix Sr fast time
dimension, one of its elements r,ori(m,r) can be expressed
as follows:
r,ori(m,r) =
1
2π
K−1

k=0
s(m, k)e j 2π
N rk
=
1
2π

k∈T
s(m, k)e j 2π
N rk + 1
2π

k∈W
s(m, k)e j 2π
N rk
+ 1
2π

k∈N
s(m, k)e j 2π
N rk
r = 0, . . . , N −1,
m = 1, . . . , M
(5)
where r is the index of the number of grids being divided
in the detection range. T, W, and N are the subscript sets
of human motion features, wall clutter, and noise subspaces,
respectively. To eliminate the effect of clutter and keep back
the target motion information, the moving target display (MTI)
technique is used [20]. We use the difference in the spectrum
between the Doppler effect of the moving target and the clutter
and use blocked-band ﬁlter to suppress the clutter spectrum so
as to extract the target motion information. The time-domain
echo matrix after MTI processing is rewritten as follows:
r = r,ori,end −r,ori,start
(6)
where r,ori,end
is the submatrix consisting of the last
M −1 slow time periods of r,ori, and r,ori,start denotes the
submatrix consisting of the ﬁrst M −1 slow time periods of
r,ori. Deﬁne φr as one frame of r.
In TWR human motion recognition, the existing common
methods include using RTM, DTM, or combining the two for
recognition [1]. As shown in Fig. 4, after MTI processing, the
target echo is accumulated into a matrix in slow time. Then the
echo matrix is normalized, gray-scale, and pseudo-red green
blue (RGB) mapped. The ﬁnal image is the RTM of human
motion. On the other hand, we ﬁrst perform time-domain
gating on the preprocessed RTM within the range of human
motion. Then Hilbert–Huang transform (HHT) is performed on
every effective range unit of the time-selected RTM to obtain
a time–frequency matrix corresponding to a plurality of single
frequency points. HHT is deﬁned as follows:

φr(t) = H{φr} = h(t) ∗φr(t)
=
 ∞
−∞
φr(τ)h(t −τ)dτ = 1
π
 ∞
−∞
φr(τ)
t −τ dτ
(7)
where h(t) = (1/πt) is the kernel of HHT ﬁlter response
function. Then we average the time–frequency matrix of each
single frequency point to obtain the Hilbert DTM. The ordinate
of DTM represents the Doppler frequency offset of human
motion, and the abscissa represents the slow time. Both RTM
and DTM can be used for the data augmentation method
to improve classiﬁers’ recognition accuracy and convergence
speed. Therefore, the numerical matrix corresponding to the
image to be enhanced is all represented by r.
III. TWR-MCAE METHOD FOR DATA AUGMENTATION
As shown in Fig. 5, the proposed TWR-MCAE data aug-
mentation method consists of four main modules and some
common network structures, including the following.
1) Data Preprocessing Module: The data preprocessing
module separates the coupled wall subspace, human
motion feature subspace, and noise subspace from the
TWR echo data and generates three links for neural
network processing.
2) Coordinate Attention Module: The coordinate attention
module enables the algorithm to consciously remember
and understand more information about human motion
and ignore image blocks containing wall clutter and
noise.
3) Learnable Iterative Shrinkage Threshold Module: The
learnable iterative shrinkage threshold (LISTA) module
improves the resolution and feature contour of the
block-focused RTM or DTM and effectively enhances
the contrast of the regions in the image concerning
human motion features.
4) Adaptive Weighting Module: The adaptive weighting
module uses larger weights to emphasize the feature of
human motion and smaller weights to make wall echoes
and noise in the image less noticeable.
In addition, the data augmentation method also includes
a polymerization module, a superposition module, and a
validation module. These modules jointly generate the ﬁnal
enhanced map and guide the training of the network. The
input and output structures, processing methods, hyperpara-
meter deﬁnitions, and connection modes of every module are
described in detail below.
A. Data Preprocessing Module
In this article, the singular value decomposition (SVD)
method is used to achieve the separation of wall clutter,
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
Fig. 5.
Structure of the TWR-MCAE method.
Fig. 6.
Schematic of the data preprocessing module.
human motion features, and noise subspace. Its principle and
purposes are shown in Fig. 6 [19]. The radar echo data are
decomposed into three subspaces by the SVD method. The
output images of each subspace are obtained by pseudo-RGB
mapping. According to Fig. 6, the impact of noise and wall
clutter can be diminished if a bigger weight is applied to the
middle-rank image and a smaller weight to both the low-rank
image and the high-rank image. This effectively highlights the
features of human motion. Speciﬁcally, the results of SVD
decomposition can be expressed as follows:
r = USV H =

i∈Wa
r,i +

i∈Ta
r,i +

i∈No
r,i
=

i∈Wa
σiuivH
i +

i∈Ta
σiuivH
i +

i∈No
σiuivH
i
(8)
where σi represents the singular values of the echo matrix after
SVD decomposition. ui and vi represent the left and right
chord vectors of the echo matrix after SVD decomposition,
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
Algorithm 1 SVD Subspace Separation Method
Input: Echo matrix r, singular value σi, left and right
vector ui, vi.
Output: Three subspaces ta
r , wa
r , and no
r .
Initializing ta
r , wa
r , and no
r
= ∅
α = E(ap)
/* E is the mathematical expectation.
*/
for every σi do
σd = E(σi) −α√D(σi)
/* Threshold of the wall subspace.
*/
if σi < σd then
σ ′
i = σi
end
else
wa
r
= wa
r
+ σ ′
i uivi H
σ ′
i = 0
/* Separation of the wall subspace,
where H is the Helmut transformation.
*/
end
Solve:
arg min AIC(i) =N log

1
M−i
 M
m=i+1 σm
M−i
M
m=i+1σm
+ 1
2(2M −i)i log N
/* Threshold of the noise subspace.
*/
if σi > σm then
σ ′
i = σi
end
else
no
r
= no
r + σ ′
i uivi H
σ ′
i = 0
/* Separation of the noise subspace.
*/
end
ta
r = ta
r + σ ′
i uivi H
/* The remaining is the human motion feature
subspace.
*/
end
respectively, U and V are the matrices composed by ui and
vi, respectively, and H denotes the Hermitian transform. The
range subscripts Ta, Wa, and No in the summation expres-
sion represent the target, wall clutter, and noise subspaces,
respectively. The three matrix subcomponents ta
r , wa
r , and
no
r
of the output represent the target echo, wall echo, and
noise subspaces, respectively. The speciﬁc solution procedure
is given by the Algorithm 1.
B. Coordinate Attention Module
The input of the coordinate attention module is the RTM or
DTM after data preprocessing, and the output is the RTM or
DTM after chunking and weighting in both slow time, range
or Doppler dimensions, which aims to make the algorithm
consciously remember and understand more information about
Fig. 7.
Improved coordinate attention mechanism for through-wall imaging.
human motion and ignore the image blocks containing wall
clutter and noise. The structure of the attention module for
through-the-wall human motion imaging is shown in Fig. 7.
After data preprocessing, a frame with 4 s of human motion
data will generate three blocked RTMs or blocked DTMs
that correspond to the human motion feature subspace, wall
clutter subspace, and noise subspace, including ta
r , wa
r ,
and no
r , respectively. All three subspaces are compressed
and mapped into C × H × W pseudocolor maps, which
are divided into three links and used as input to the three
coordinate attention modules. Here, we deﬁne the X−direction
as the range or Doppler, the Y−direction as the slow time
axis in TWR image, and the channel and spatial scales of
the image xc input to the coordinate attention mechanism are
C and H × W, respectively. Averaging pooling is done for
the X−direction and Y−direction of the image. The input
image is aggregated into two separate directions of perceptual
feature mapping along the vertical and horizontal directions,
respectively, to obtain scales C × H × 1 and C × 1 × W,
respectively, with two sets of data zh
c(h) and zw
c (w) [21] as
follows:
zh
c(h) = 1
W

0≤i<W
xc(h, i)
(9)
zw
c (w) = 1
H

0≤j<H
xc( j, w).
(10)
The algorithm then two-dimensionally mixes and convolves
the perceptual feature maps zh
c(h) and zw
c (w) in both the direc-
tions to obtain a set of data with scale C/kr × 1 × (W + H),
where kr is the ratio of the number of channels. The data are
then batch normalized and nonlinearized using the sigmoid
activation function to compress the pixel magnitude to the
[0, 1] interval. The processing result is then split into two
branches of C/kr × H × 1 and C/kr × 1 × W. A 2-D con-
volution with the ratio of input and output channel numbers
of 1/kr is applied to each of the two branches. It obtains two
sets of feature mappings with embedding direction-speciﬁc
information at scales of C × H × 1 and C × 1 × W, respec-
tively, which are then encoded into two attentional feature
mappings using the sigmoid activation function, each of which
captures the distant dependencies of the input feature map
along 1-D direction. The value of C × 1 × W is determined
by the image size of the input network, and the value of kr
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
needs to be adjusted with the value of C × 1 × W to obtain
the best feature extraction performance. In this article, kr = 3.
Finally, the encoded two attention feature maps are fused with
the input image of the coordinate attention module using the
point-by-point multiplication to obtain an image data output
with scale C × H × W [22]. The human motion information
can be effectively stored in the generated attention feature
maps.
C. LISTA Module
The input of the LISTA module is the output feature map
of each link after chunked by the coordinate attention module,
and the output is the enhanced data after feature extraction and
image reconstruction. The purpose is to improve the resolution
of the RTM or DTM. The structure of the LISTA module is
shown in Fig. 8.
Speciﬁcally, let the input image of the LISTA module be
xl, the set of learnable parameters be L P = [θ, Wd, S],
the weight matrix be deﬁned as We = (1/L)W−1
d , the bias
matrix be S = I −W T
d W d, and θ be a soft threshold. The
input image is ﬁrst processed by a 2-D convolution with a
convolution kernel size of 3 × 3 and an equal number of input
and output channels to obtain a series of image fragments after
disassembly in spatial dimensions. The series of fragments
are multiplied with the weight matrix We, respectively, and
the iterative shrinkage threshold function Fθ is deﬁned as the
activation function of the LISTA module [23] as follows:
Fθ = |x −θ| sgn(x)
(11)
where x represents the pixel point magnitude of the input
activation function image, and sgn() is the sign function.
Each pixel point magnitude of Fθ acting on the image
fragment is nonlinearized, and the nonlinearized fragment
matrix is multiplied with the bias matrix S. Finally, the
fragment matrices are added to obtain each image fragment
after one LISTA enhancement process. Finally, all the frag-
ments are stitched into a feature-enhanced image with the
input image scale C × H × W using deconvolution. The
feature-enhanced image zl, which is consistent with the input
image scale C × H × W, is used as the output of one LISTA
module as follows:
zl = deconv(Fθ(S conv(xl) + We conv(xl))).
(12)
Cascading multiple layers of LISTA modules, both the
input and output feature maps are scaled as C × H × W.
Each layer of LISTA module processing gives a ﬁner feature
enhancement result than the previous layer of the LISTA
module output. Finally, the results of each link’s image
enhancement are sent out and wait for the next step in the
fusion process.
D. Adaptive Weight Module
The input of the adaptive weight module is the RTM or
DTM after data preprocessing, and the output is the corre-
sponding weight size of each subspace in RTM or DTM, which
aims to enable the algorithm to highlight human motion infor-
mation by assigning larger weights and to reduce the intensity
Fig. 8.
Structure of LISTA module.
of wall echoes and noise in the image by assigning smaller
weights. The structure of our proposed adaptive weighting
module for through-the-wall imaging is shown in Fig. 9.
Speciﬁcally, similar to the preprocessing process of the
coordinate attention module, all three subspaces after data
preprocessing are compressed and mapped into a pseudo-RGB
map of size 227 × 227 × 3 [24], which are the input of the
three adaptive weight modules and processed by an eight-layer
deep CNN. The ﬁrst layer is the convolutional layer, with
the basic structure of convolution, rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
activation function, and pooling. The input scale of the convo-
lution operation is 227 × 227 × 3, containing 96 convolution
kernels of 11 × 11 × 3, padding = 0, and stride = 4. The
scale size of its output feature map is 55 × 55 × 96, and
then it is processed by ReLU function nonlinearization, and
the kernel size of the pooling operation is 3 × 3, padding =
0, and stride = 2. The scale size of the output feature map is
27 × 27 × 96. Similarly, the second to the eighth layers are
designed, and the detailed structure and parameter settings of
each layer are shown in Fig. 9. The output scale size of the last
layer is 1 × 1 × 1, which represents the size of the weight
occupied by each subspace. Let the outputs of the last fully
connected layer of the adaptive weight module for the three
links be q(a1), q(a2), and q(a3), respectively, and calculate as
follows:
za1 =
qa1
qa1 + qa2 + qa3
(13)
za2 =
qa2
qa1 + qa2 + qa3
(14)
za3 =
qa3
qa1 + qa2 + qa3
(15)
where za1, za2, and za3 are the results of the output weights of
the three adaptive weighting modules. Finally, we establish a
link from the ﬁfth layer feature map of the adaptive weight
module to the output feature map of every LISTA module.
Multiply and aggregate the two feature maps point by point
and input them to the next LISTA module.
E. Overall Network Structure and Loss Function
The input of the network is one RTM or DTM accumulated
over a period of 4 s, and the output is the enhanced image of
the input data. As shown in Fig. 5, after data preprocessing, the
network is divided into a total of six branches, corresponding
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
Fig. 9.
Structure and detailed parameter settings of the adaptive weight module.
to two branches per subspace, one of which is processed by
the coordinate attention module and the 12−layer cascaded
LISTA module to obtain the enhanced images zl1, zl2, and zl3
for each link. The other one compresses the image scale to
227 × 227 × 3 by scale transformation, and it is processed by
the adaptive weight module to obtain the weight sizes za1, za2,
and za3 for each link. The six links’ outputs from the three
subspaces are fused using weighted summation to obtain the
ﬁnal data-enhanced output of the network as follows:
zo =
3

ξ=1
Zaξ Zlξ
(16)
where ξ is the scale of the subspaces. The feature enhancement
effect of the network is evaluated using the perceptual function
as a loss function. The mean square error (MSE) loss function
can make the reconstruction result have a high PSNR, but it
lacks high-frequency information and seems to have an overly
smoothed texture. The perceptual loss function [25] is deﬁned
as follows:
LLISTA, j
ξ
(ˆz, z) =
1
CHW
LISTAξ, j(ˆz) −LISTAξ, j(z)
2
2
(17)
where j represents the jth layer of the LISTA module part of
the network, LISTA() represents the image after processing
in the ﬁrst j layers of the LISTA module, ˆz is the image we
need to enhance, the source is the real data under the system
settings, and z is the target image, the source is the simulation
dataset or real dataset with prominent features under the
same scenario. LLISTA, j
ξ
(ˆz, z) represents the Euclidean distance
between the image to be processed and the target image [26].
Then the overall training loss function of the network is
Loss(ˆz, z) =
3

ξ=1
12

j=1
zaξ LLISTA, j
ξ
(ˆz, z).
(18)
Both RTM and DTM contain human motion features, wall
clutter, and background noise. Therefore, datasets are estab-
lished for RTM and DTM, and the above methods are used for
training, respectively. When it is necessary to enhance a new
Fig. 10.
Schematic of the single-station TWR.
image with the network, ﬁrst determine whether the image is
an RTM before Doppler processing or a DTM after processing,
and then input it into the corresponding trained network model
for inference output.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present the designed TWR system
and the human motion datasets for the experiment. Then,
we test the PSNR performance of the proposed data augmenta-
tion method, compare it to the existing methods, and verify the
optimality of the method’s structural design. Finally, we check
to see whether the data augmentation algorithm can improve
the recognition accuracy and the training speed of the back-
end classiﬁers.
A. Experimental Setups and Dataset Construction
In this article, we use a single-transmission, single-
receiver UWB TWR to collect the datasets. Fig. 10 shows
the schematic of the system. For the UWB module part,
we designed a 2-D scanning penetrating radar hardware and
software system. To reﬂect the performance of the proposed
method in the data augmentation task, we specially build this
set of lightweight micro power TWR system to obtain poor
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
Fig. 11.
Experimental scenarios. (a) Antenna testing. (b) Radar. (c) Antenna settings. (d) Measurement of human motion distance. (e) Example of the
experimental process: a data acquisition of human parallel to radar walking.
quality data, which better simulates the challenges in practical
application scenarios. Among them, the signal processing
terminal of the radio frequency (RF) module is a com-
mercial handheld vector network analyzer (VNA), Keysight
N9923A [28]. The control system is connected to a UWB
Vivaldi antenna ﬁxed to the 2-D guide rail system, which is
also connected to the host computer with a set of coaxial
cables and forms the detection part of the whole system.
The UWB TWR is placed close to the wall, and the human
movement distance is in the range of 2–5 m behind the wall.
Fig. 11 shows the scenario. To show a clearer and complete
feature contour and simulate the real scene, we try to slow
down the speed of human motion and increase the amplitude
when collecting data. In the signal acquisition module, we use
sliding average and interchannel averaging with a window
length of 5 [29]. Finally, the images are generated using the
methods mentioned in Section II, processed by pseudo-RGB
mapping and contrast enhancement to obtain the data shown
in the example in Fig. 12 [30]. The RTM and DTM informa-
tion can be obtained in relatively complex wall and human
motion environments using the current TWR systems. After
data augmentation, we introduce several existing classiﬁers
to verify their effectiveness. The detailed parameters of the
radar system are given in Table I. In RTM, there are two
spikes. One spike shows a relatively high modality, and the
other shows a low-rank feature map. Similarly, in DTM, there
are also human motion features with relatively high frequency
but low energy, and low-frequency peaks with relatively high
energy [27]. These two spikes approximately represent the
moving body behind the wall and the wall clutter, respectively.
B. PSNR Comparison Experiments of Images Before and
After Data Augmentation
Assuming that the through-the-wall human motion image is
a m × n matrix, and MAXI is the point that represents the
maximum value of the focus intensity (point spread function)
I in image. Combined with the design concept of the loss
function, the PSNR value is used to evaluate the reconstruc-
tion quality of the proposed data augmentation method. The
deﬁnition of PSNR is as follows:
PSNR = 10 · log10
MAX2
I
MSE

= 20 · log10
 MAXI
√
MSE

(19)
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE RADAR SYSTEM
Fig. 12.
Examples of RTM, DTM, and the interpretation about how the data
augmentation method work on them.
where
MSE =
1
mn
m−1

i=0
n−1

j=0
∥I(i, j) −K(i, j)∥2
(20)
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
Fig. 13.
Human motion states. (a)–(g) Seven substates, one for empty space, three for human activity without changing position, and three for human activity
with changing position. (h) Angle of the radar observation.
in which K represents the image before data augmentation.
I is the image after data augmentation. The accepted evalu-
ation standard is that the PSNR higher than 40 dB indicates
that the image quality is excellent (which means very close
to the original one). PNSR of 30–40 dB usually indicates
that the image quality is good (which means the distortion
is perceptible but acceptable). PSNR of 20–30 dB indicates
poor image quality. Finally, images with PSNR lower than
20 dB are unacceptable. The following evaluation work focus
on seven different states shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 12 shows how the algorithm works on a set of real
experiment data. In one RTM image, the regions near the radar
and away from the human body contain wall clutter, multipath
ghosting, and some noise. These regions are not meaningful
for the recognition task, but their information can interfere
with the classiﬁer’s decision. Therefore, a lower weight should
be imposed on the clutter and noise regions. The human
motion feature part of the region contains the motion features
of the main body parts and some tightly coupled micro-
Doppler features, whose motion status is the key information
for recognition and should be forced to apply higher weights.
Similarly in one DTM image, the signal corresponding to the
frequency around 0 Hz is meaningless, while the relatively
high-frequency information of human motion is meaningful,
which can also be weighted and aggregated. Finally, the output
feature map information is more helpful for the learning and
convergence of the classiﬁers.
As shown in Fig. 14(a), when there is no human target
behind the wall, the image information is mainly focused on
the wall clutter. Since wall clutter is low-rank information,
it reﬂects similar features in the unoccupied image data.
Thus, with the training of the coordinate attention mechanism
module in the TWR-MCAE algorithm, the wall clutter region
is gradually understood by the network and assigned a lower
weight. When the input parameters of the neural network
are data containing an unmanned environment and six other
scenes containing human information, after a large number of
iterations, the neural network will automatically update the
adaptive weights of the coordinate regions where the wall
clutter is located. The ﬁnal weights are reduced to a level
where the current region can be ignored. Then, we use the
multiplier to combine the weight information from the adaptive
weight module and the coordinate attention LISTA module’s
output on image chunking. The aggregated image information
matrix is the result of data augmentation. In Fig. 14(a),
both the RTM and DTM information of the wall region is
better suppressed after the LISTA module and adaptive weight
processing, and on the contrary, the information of the space
behind the wall further accentuated. Since there is no human
target in the current scene, only a few noisy parts in the image
information are not picked up by the neural network results
and weighed down to make them less noticeable. Therefore,
the method can effectively make the empty scene data cleaner.
Fig. 14(b)–(d) are three different states of through-the-wall
human motion image, in which the position of the human body
relative to the radar will almost not change. These include
marking time facing radar, standing still parallel to the radar,
and squatting up. The human body’s closest point to the radar
antenna is ﬁxed at around 3 m. At this point, the radar image
information mostly consists of the echo information of the
stationary or slightly shaking human body with the signiﬁcant
wall clutter. The micro Doppler frequency and amplitude cor-
responding to these motion states are different, which can be
distinguished by the coordinate attention and LISTA modules.
The data augmentation method, like the previous unmanned
space, efﬁciently suppresses the clutter on the walls and the
majority of the noise, while also giving a clear knowledge of
the coordinate region of data where the human body is located.
Since the position does not change, the motion characteristics
of the human body also show a certain degree of low-rank
characteristics. This makes the feature extraction process of
the classiﬁers challenging. As a result, the data augmentation
method ﬁlters out some of the low-rank components in the
data from human imaging but keeps the components that are
most important for classiﬁcation and recognition. Therefore,
for these three cases of RTM and DTM, the proposed data
augmentation method can still play a good role.
Similarly, Fig. 14(e)–(g) represent the image information
and algorithm processing results when the human body walks
parallel, perpendicular, and diagonally folded back to the
wall, respectively. The RTM and DTM of walking human
contain more complicated micro-Doppler characteristics and
have fewer components that are misclassiﬁed during data-
enhanced inference, making them easier for the algorithm to
extract. In particular, the radar image information still includes
near-Gaussian modeling noise, substantial wall clutter, com-
plex distance, and frequency information of human motion
in the range of 2–5 m. The suggested algorithm achieves
the purpose of highlighting the human motion and suppress-
ing the wall clutter and noise by learning the information
within the human body range and gradually increasing its
weight during the training phase. The experimental results
show that the information in the regions with high-modal
micro-Doppler features is well kept. This is because the
moving human features, especially the human imaging fea-
tures moving parallel to the radar antenna, have low-rank
regions that look like wall clutter, which the neural network
may get rid of by adding lower weights. Therefore, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
Fig. 14.
RTM, DTM, and their delineation of coordinate attention regions and images after data augmentation. (a) Empty space. (b) Facing wall. (c) Parallel
to the wall. (d) Squat up. (e) Walking parallel to the wall. (f) Walking perpendicular to the wall. (g) Diagonal round trip walking.
method has good data augmentation performance on these
three cases.
For each of the seven different states, we conduct experi-
ments and ﬁnd the PSNR before and after data augmentation,
and then compare them with some previous data augmentation
methods in other ﬁelds shown in Table II. Among them, linear
interpolation, bicubic interpolation, and nearest neighbor (NN)
interpolation are the classical image enhancement methods.
L1- and L2-sparse coding are the image reconstruction
methods driven by the compressed sensing theory. Rapid and
accurate super image resolution (RAISR), range–τ conversion,
range–max conversion, and range–Doppler (r-D) conversion
are the image quality restoration algorithms referenced from
other ﬁelds. Generative adversarial network (GAN), pixel-by-
pixel CNN (Pixel-CNN), efﬁcient subpixel CNN (ESPCNN),
parallax attention for stereo image super-resolution network
(PASSRNet), and cascade U-net are the cutting-edge methods
that have been used for TWR image enhancement. The
comparison shows that previous methods achieve a PSNR
of 31.75–40.01 dB, and the proposed method achieves a
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
Fig. 15.
HOG of PSNR comparison corresponding to different parallel layers of the LISTA module and the replacement of the attention mechanism.
TABLE II
PSNR OF TWR-MCAE AND PREVIOUS ALGORITHMS
PSNR of 40.39 dB on the real-world RTM data and 40.05 dB
on the real-world DTM data. This proves that there is no
existing method that can enhance RTM and DTM to a perfect
level except cascade U-net. Cascade U-net can enhance
RTM to a perfect level, but its ability to enhance DTM is
still limited. The proposed method solves this problem and
outperforms the existing methods in both RTM and DTM.
It also reduces the number of network parameters compared
with Cascade U-Net. As a result, the proposed TWR-MCAE
algorithm has a better performance.
The PSNR values of the algorithm are compared in Table III
and Fig. 15 after replacing the coordinate attention module
with the existing channel attention, spatial attention, or con-
volutional attention module. It is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd that the
PSNR value of the proposed data augmentation method shows
an increasing trend as the number of parallel layers of the
LISTA module increases. Combined with the physical model
of TWR, the PSNR of the proposed data augmentation method
decreases when the number of parallel layers of the LISTA
modules is less than 12. In fact, when the layers of the LISTA
modules is greater than 12, the PSNR will still increase, but
the increase speed is slow. At the same time, with the increase
in LISTA layers, the network parameters and forward rea-
soning calculation will also increase. Therefore, balancing the
Fig. 16.
Information on the number of training and validation datasets.
computational cost and enhancement performance, we believe
that the minimum number of LISTA layers 12, which can make
both RTM and DTM achieve perfect image quality, is the best
design. In addition, the PSNR of the method also decreases
when the coordinate attention module is replaced with the
other three commonly used attention modules. As a result,
whether based on RTM or DTM training, the current method
is constructed in a relatively optimal way.
C. Classiﬁcation Comparison Experiments With and Without
Data Augmentation
In this section, we use some traditional classiﬁer algorithms
to verify the proposed data augmentation method. The number
of data in the training and validation sets is given in Fig. 16.
Table IV shows the classiﬁcation algorithms of the neural
network that maintain the uniﬁed parameter setting during
training. The comparison includes several popular classiﬁers
that have been used in TWR human motion recognition, such
as SVM, kernel function estimators with directional gradient
histogram (HOG) information, classiﬁers based on empirical
modal decomposition (EMD), and Bayesian decision, random
forest (RF) classiﬁers, several common probabilistic graphical
models (PGMs) and CNNs for classiﬁcation tasks, and other
algorithms that have been used by academics for TWR human
motion recognition. Speciﬁcally, we veriﬁed the changes in
the accuracy and convergence speed of recognition using
only RTM, only DTM, and fusion these two maps with and
without data augmentation. There are three methods for fusion
recognition these two kinds of image information. The method
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
TABLE III
PSNR COMPARISON CORRESPONDING TO DIFFERENT PARALLEL LAYERS OF THE LISTA MODULE AND THE
REPLACEMENT OF THE ATTENTION MECHANISM
Fig. 17.
Schematic of the validation process.
TABLE IV
UNIFORM PARAMETERS OF CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS
based on the data layer fusion mechanism concatenates RTM
and DTM by line [46]. After normalization and scaling, it is
input into the classiﬁer for recognition. The method based on
the feature layer fusion mechanism inputs RTM and DTM into
feature pyramid network (FPN) [47], respectively. After multi-
scale feature aggregation, the two feature maps are spliced and
superimposed according to the channel dimension. Then it is
normalized, scaled, and input into the classiﬁer for recognition.
The method based on the decision layer fusion mechanism
inputs RTM and DTM into the classiﬁer, respectively, and
the output result is the probability vector of the seven states.
The probability vectors are fused by the method of maximum
entropy (ME) [48], and the decision results are given. The
whole comparison process is shown in Fig. 17, and the results
are shown in Tables V–VII. The deﬁnition of recognition
accuracy is as follows:
Acc =
TP + TN
TP + FP + FN + TN
(21)
where FN: the amount of data decided as negative samples,
but in fact positive samples; FP: the amount of data decided as
positive samples, but in fact negative samples; TN: the amount
of data decided as negative samples, but in fact also negative
samples; TP: the amount of data decided as positive samples,
but in fact also positive samples.
When only RTM is used to train the classiﬁers, the pro-
posed data augmentation method can effectively improve the
accuracy. Among them, for the decision method of statisti-
cal signal processing, because of its relatively poor feature
extraction ability, the accuracy rate with data augmentation
is much higher. Some methods can exceed 8.5%. For some
non-network traditional machine learning methods, the accu-
racy can be effectively improved by more than 4.6%. For
some deep learning methods based on CNNs, the accuracy
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
TABLE V
RTM RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT COMMONLY USED CLASSIFIERS WITH AND WITHOUT ADDING TWR-MCAE
TABLE VI
DTM RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT COMMONLY USED CLASSIFIERS WITH AND WITHOUT ADDING TWR-MCAE
is improved by more than 5%. When using the original
RTM for classiﬁcation, the accuracy of all the comparison
methods is less than 90%. In the RTM classiﬁcation with
data augmentation, both ResNet-50 and ResNet-101 methods
exceed the validation accuracy of 90%. It is proven that
the proposed data augmentation method can improve the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5118617
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 60, 2022
TABLE VII
FUSION RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT COMMONLY USED CLASSIFIERS WITH AND WITHOUT ADDING TWR-MCAE
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 06,2023 at 12:39:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GAO et al.: TWR-MCAE: A DATA AUGMENTATION METHOD FOR TWR HUMAN MOTION RECOGNITION
5118617
recognition accuracy of RTM to a higher level. For the neural
network methods, we also compared the training convergence
speed with and without data augmentation. The number of
convergence rounds of all the classiﬁers decreased. Among
them, the training rounds of GoogleNet series and Resnet-101
on the original RTM exceeded 100, while the convergence
speed with data augmentation increased by more than 10%.
This proves the potential value of our proposed data augmen-
tation method in system deployment. Similarly, when only
DTM is used for training, the proposed data augmentation
method can also effectively improve the validation accuracy
and convergence speed of various classiﬁers. Due to the high
similarity of DTM features of some motion states, the accuracy
of some classiﬁers is less than 60%, which makes their relia-
bility low. However, with data augmentation, the recognition
accuracy of all the classiﬁers exceeds 65%. This proves that
the proposed data augmentation method further improves the
interpretability of the model. In addition, we compare the
recognition accuracy and the convergence speed for the three
ensemble methods based on data layer, feature layer, and
decision layer fusion. Among them, the data layer fusion has
the worst interpretability and the feature representation is not
clear, so the recognition accuracy is relatively low among the
three fusion methods. The proposed data augmentation method
can still improve the accuracy and convergence speed. The fea-
ture level fusion has the strongest interpretability and clearest
feature representation, so the recognition accuracy is relatively
high among the three fusion methods. Since data augmentation
mainly works on human motion features, the effect is the
most signiﬁcant in feature layer fusion classiﬁcation. Taking
ResNet-101, which has the highest recognition accuracy, as an
example, the recognition accuracy improves by more than
3%, and the training convergence speed increases by 27%.
Finally, using the data augmentation method, the GoogleNet-
V4, VGG-19, and ResNet series based on decision layer fusion
can all achieve a high recognition accuracy of more than
95%, and the training speed can be improved by more than
16%. This proves that the proposed data augmentation method
still has a good performance improvement on the ensemble
recognition method of multidimensional features.
Summarizing all the experimental results, we can get the
following conclusion.
1) Reliability:
The
proposed
data
augmentation
method
can
effectively
extract
information
from
RTM and DTM, enhance human motion features,
and
reduce
the
interference
of
wall
clutter
and
noise.
2) Efﬁciency: Compared with the existing data augmenta-
tion methods for TWR, the proposed method has the
highest PSNR for human motion image.
3) Optimality
of
Structural
Design:
The
proposed
data
augmentation
method
has
higher
PSNR
results by replacing modules or changing network
layers.
4) High Practical Value: The proposed data augmentation
method can improve the accuracy and convergence speed
of RTM only, DTM only, and three kinds of ensemble
recognition methods.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a multilink auto-encoding neural
network (TWR-MCAE) data augmentation method to solve the
problems of decreasing accuracy and prolonging the training
time of TWR human motion recognition due to wall atten-
uation and multipath effect. Speciﬁcally, the TWR-MCAE
method is jointly constructed by an SVD-based data pre-
processing module, an improved coordinate attention module,
a LISTA module, and an adaptive weight module. The data
preprocessing module achieves wall clutter, human motion fea-
tures, and noise subspace separation. The improved coordinate
attention module achieves clutter and noise suppression. The
LISTA module achieves human motion feature enhancement.
The adaptive weight module learns the weights and fuses
the three subspaces. The TWR-MCAE can simultaneously
improve the sparsity features of human motion and decrease
the low-rank characteristics of wall clutter. To increase the
feature extraction capability without adding more prior knowl-
edge or gathering more data, it can be linked before the
classiﬁcation stage. Experiments show that the PSNR of the
proposed algorithm is better than previous results. The recog-
nition accuracy and training speed of the existing classiﬁcation
algorithms are both improved by the proposed method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
For a selection of permitted open source materials related
to this research, please visit the author’s ofﬁcial website at
https://weichenggaoresearch.company.site/.
The authors would like to thank Junbo Gong from the
Chongqing Innovation Center, Beijing Institute of Technology,
and Jiancheng Liao and Jingbo Wang from the Special Radar
Laboratory (formerly: the New System Radar Laboratory),
Beijing Institute of Technology, for their help in related
experiments. In addition, the authors also would like to thank
Zhengliang Zhu and his team for their outstanding work
on “Open-Source Dataset of Human Motion Status Using
IR-UWB Through-Wall Radar” and Dr. Pengyun Chen and his
team for their series of outstanding work on “Ultra-Wideband
Radar Human Motion Intelligent Recognition,” which are the
inspiration and encouragement of this work.
