The Past and Present of Imitation Learning
A Citation Chain Study
Nishanth Kumar

I. INTRODUCTION
Imitation Learning is a promising area of active research.
Early research in ’programming by example’ began in
Software Development [9] before attracting the interest of
Robotics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) researchers, who
began using the terms ’Learning from Demonstration’ and
’Imitation Learning’ to describe their line of work. Over
the last 30 years, Imitation Learning has advanced sig-
niﬁcantly and been used to solve difﬁcult tasks ranging
from Autonomous Driving [12] to playing Atari games [5].
In the course of this development, different methods for
performing Imitation Learning have fallen into and out of
favor. In this paper, I will explore the development of these
different methods and attempt to examine how the ﬁeld has
progressed.
I will be discussing 4 landmark papers that sequentially
cite and inform each other. In discussing these papers, I will
focus on their ’big ideas’ and how each idea inﬂuenced those
that came after it. In order of their publication date, these
are:
1) ’ALVINN: An Autonomous Land Vehicle in a Neural
Network’ by Pomerleau [12]
2) ’Apprenticeship Learning via Inverse Reinforcement
Learning’ by Abbeel and Ng [2]
3) ’Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning’ by Ho
and Ermon [10]
4) ’A Divergence Minimization Perspective on Imitation
Learning Methods’ by Ghasemipour, Zemel and Gu
[7].
Before discussing the papers themselves, I will provide
some essential context by describing the fundamental prob-
lem that Imitation Learning attempts to solve.
II. BACKGROUND: THE PROBLEM OF IMITATION
LEARNING
1 At a high level, ’Imitation Learning’ attempts to learn
a general skill after observing some demonstrations of an
expert performing the skill. Crucially, this learned skill is
expected to generalize to situations where the learner has
not observed the expert’s actions.
More formally, let St represent a set of observations
obtained from sensors at time t that constitute the state. Let
Brown University Department of Computer Science
This writeup is intended as a Final Project submission for CSCI 1951M:
The Great Ideas in Computer Science, Fall 2019
1Material in this section adapted from Levine [11]
aEt represent a set of actions (eg. voltage sent to motors
of a robot) taken by the expert at time t. Let T represent a
trajectory that is a set of n state, expert action pairs [(St, aEt)
for 0 ≤t ≤n]. Imitation Learning essentially assumes it is
given m of these trajectories as input. The expected output
is a policy πθ(at, st) (where θ represents a set of policy-
parameters) that maps states to actions. Speciﬁcally, it is
taken to be a probability distribution that is a function of
actions to be taken and states observed at each time step.
Crucially, Imitation Learning hopes that the learned policy’s
distribution of actions will match the experts distribution of
actions (i.e, the distribution that aEt are drawn from).
III. POMERLEAU’S AUTONOMOUS DRIVING PAPER
Given the substantial research into and success of Machine
Learning methods, the most natural thing to do might be
to frame the Imitation Learning problem as a ’Supervised
Learning’ 2 problem. This can be done rather simply: use any
Supervised Learning algorithm to learn a function mapping
states (St) to actions (at) after having trained on the collected
trajectories of states observed and expert actions [(St, aEt)
for 0 ≤t ≤n]. This is the essence of Pomerleau’s approach
to using Imitation Learning for Autonomous Driving.
As can be seen from Fig. 1, Pomerleau used a Deep Neural
Network (DNN) to perform his Supervised Learning of the
expert actions. The network took two inputs: video and data
from a laser range ﬁnder mounted on the car. It used these to
produce a 45-unit long vector representing the curvature that
the vehicle would need to travel along to reach the center of
the road. It also produced an output indicating how much the
road visually contrasted its surroundings. This output was fed
back into the network as an input to improve its prediction
accuracy.
Unlike many contemporary DNN’s, Pomerleau didn’t use
a real-world dataset to train his DNN because it was in-
feasible for him to collect, store and process the necessary
amount of data. Instead, he created a ’road simulator’ that
would produce realistic images of roads with added noise
and varying lighting conditions. Pomerleau’s simulator also
generated laser range-ﬁnder input corresponding to his im-
ages. Finally, the simulator would produce ’expert’ actions
based on knowing the ground-truth curvature of the road it
produced.
Pomerleau’s approach exhibited rather impressive perfor-
mance. His trained DNN was able to drive CMU’s NAVLAB
2For more information on Supervised Learning, refer to Wikipedia’s
comprehensive and well-written article [1]
arXiv:2001.02328v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2020

Fig. 1: An image from Pomerleau’s paper depicting his neural
network.
(a modiﬁed Chevy van equipped with sensors and computers)
at a speed of 0.5 meters per second through a 400 meter area
of CMU’s campus under sunny conditions. This performance
was comparable to that achieved by the state-of-the-art hand-
engineered vision and navigation algorithms of the time.
Given that this happened in 1994 - a time when most
computers had a RAM of approximately 4 MB and DNN’s
were widely believed to be useless - Pomerleau’s results are
truly remarkable.
Even though Pomerleau only tested his algorithm on
one small environment in optimal weather conditions, his
results are still noteworthy. After having developed his road
simulator, Pomerleau was able to accomplish in ”30 minutes
of training time” what took CMU’s Vision and Navigation
groups months of hand-tuning their algorithms. This work
was one of Imitation Learning’s ﬁrst major successes and it
seems to have catalyzed a strong research interest in the ﬁeld
[3] [4] [2].
IV. ABBEEL’S INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
PAPER
Inspired by the success of Pomerleau [12] and others in
using Imitation Learning to solve complex problems, this
paper sought to view the Imitation Learning Problem through
a different lens. While almost all previous work had framed
Imitation Learning as a Supervised Learning problem, this
paper leveraged Reinforcement Learning (RL).
Roughly, RL attempts to learn a policy π that maps states
that an agent could be in (s) to actions to be taken from that
state (a) at every time step. Crucially, the policy is learned
such that the actions it takes maximize some reward function
R(s, a). At the time that this paper was written, a number
of RL algorithms existed to learn this policy 3.
It is important to note that RL algorithms require a reward
function (R(s, a)) to produce the policy π. Abbeel and Ng’s
key idea in this paper is that such an R can be derived
from the expert trajectories that Imitation Learning assumes
as input. This is what they call ’Inverse Reinforcement
Learning’ (IRL). Once this reward function (RE(s, a)) is
obtained, one can use any RL algorithm to obtain a policy
πr that maximizes this reward function. If we assume that
the expert was attempting to maximize RE, then the policy
πr returned by the RL algorithm will (roughly) match the
expert’s policy. In this way, the Imitation Learning problem
can be solved by ﬁrst using IRL to derive a reward function
and then using RL to obtain a policy.
Fig. 2: A visual illustration of how Imitation Learning can be
performed by the combination of RL and IRL, obtained from [13].
Since RL uses a reward function as input and outputs optimal
behavior, the method that takes an expert’s optimal behavior as
input and outputs a reward function is termed ’Inverse’ RL.
Unfortunately, Abbeel’s IRL method cannot take as input
only the expert trajectories. It also requires some set of
features φs over states that it can use to learn the reward
function. In the case of driving a car, these features might
be speciﬁc aspects we might want a car to optimize such as
whether it has just collided with a car, whether it is in the
middle of a lane, etc. Thus, Abbeel’s method requires this
extra human-speciﬁed input in addition to the expert trajec-
tories that Pomerleau [12]’s method operates on directly.
Abbeel is able to use his method to train a car to perform
various complicated behaviors in simulation. He demon-
strates 5 different learned behaviors that follow policies
ranging from simply avoiding all other cars on the road
to only driving within the right lane and going off-road to
overtake other cars to simply intentionally crashing into the
ﬁst car detected.
Overall, this paper introduced a different way of viewing
the Imitation Learning problem than that used by Pomerleau
[12] and most others before it. It is important to note that
3For a more thorough treatment of RL, refer to the Introduction and initial
chapters of Sutton and Barto [14]

this paper did not claim that using IRL and RL to perform
Imitation Learning is necessarily better than using Super-
vised Learning, it is simply different. One aspect of Abbeel’s
method that was appealing to many in the community is
that it learns an explicit reward function. By inspecting this,
one can determine the quantities the agent is attempting
to optimize and thus gain some understanding of why the
policy is taking the actions it takes. In this manner, Abbeel’s
method is more human-understandable and explainable than
the Supervised Learning approaches that came before it.
V. HO’S GAIL PAPER
In the years after the publication of Abbeel and Ng
[2]’s IRL paper, a signiﬁcant research interest developed
in using IRL methods to learn complex, real-world skills.
It was discovered that IRL methods are less error-prone
than Supervised Learning methods for Imitation Learning.
Since the Supervised Learning methods are trained to mimic
decisions the expert made at each time-step, small deviations
made early-on in the trajectory can lead to compounding
errors later in the trajectory. IRL methods, on the other
hand, learn the expert’s reward function and are thus able to
correct small errors simply by optimizing for the maximum
reward. Intuitively, IRL methods have an explicit notion of
the expert’s goal and can thus optimize for this while direct
Supervised Learning are simply attempting to copy what the
expert did and generalize slightly [10].
However, IRL methods were found to be slow and inefﬁ-
cient with data. This is because they need to iteratively esti-
mate the expert’s reward function and run an RL algorithm
to convergence. RL algorithms are notorious for requiring a
large number of environment steps to converge. This is espe-
cially crippling when attempting to learn complex behaviors
in large, high-dimensional environments. Ho’s GAIL paper
attempts to remedy precisely this efﬁciency issue.
Ho’s paper is riddled with mathematical intricacies, but
at a high-level the key insight they had is this: the process
of performing IRL then RL implicitly seeks to produce a
policy (πa) whose distribution of state-action pairs is similar
to the state-action pair distribution of the expert policy
(πE). This process of training a policy to match the state-
action distribution of an expert policy can be done using a
Generative Adversarial Neural Network (GAN) [8], which
is a speciﬁc Neural Network architecture built to learn to
match an arbitrary distribution. Performing this distribution
matching with a GAN instead of with the combination of
IRL and RL is signiﬁcantly more data-efﬁcient because
it does not need to run an RL algorithm to convergence
during each training iteration. Using a GAN in this way
to more-efﬁciently perform IRL followed by RL is what
the authors refer to as ’Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning’ (GAIL)4.
4Speciﬁcally, GAIL can be used to learn the same policy that Maximum
Entropy IRL [15] followed by RL would learn.
6Link to presentation here:
http://efrosgans.eecs.berkeley.edu/CVPR18 slides/GAIL by Ermon.pdf
Fig. 3: An image from a presentation by one of the authors 6. GAIL
was able to learn to make humanoid and ant walk in simulation
with only approximately 50 timesteps of state-action pairs from a
trajectory. The humanoid has approximately 17 joints and the ant
has approximately 8 joints that the policy must learn to control
individually to generate the desired behavior.
The paper experimentally demonstrates that GAIL is much
more efﬁcient with respect to expert data than ’Behavior
Cloning’ methods on a number of high-dimensional tasks in
simulation. ’Behavior Cloning’ methods are nothing but the
direct Supervised Learning methods for Imitation Learning
used by Pomerleau [12] and discussed in Section III. Fur-
thermore, GAIL is compared with two versions of state-of-
the-art IRL algorithms, including a version of the algorithm
from Abbeel and Ng [2]. GAIL is shown to achieve superior
performance given signiﬁcantly fewer expert trajectories.
In summary, this paper introduced a novel method called
GAIL that can induce the same policy that IRL methods
would, but in a more data-efﬁcient manner. Importantly,
even though GAIL uses a DNN to learn its policy, it still
requires access to the environment just as IRL methods
do. This contrasts the Supervised Learning methods (such
as Pomerleau’s) that can be trained only on the expert
demonstrations without needing access to the environment.
Furthermore, GAIL is only more efﬁcient than IRL methods
in terms of expert demonstration data. The authors note that
it is not very efﬁcient in terms of the number of interactions
required with the environment.
VI. GHASEMIPOUR’S DIVERGENCE MINIMIZATION
PERSPECTIVE PAPER
Ho and Ermon [10] experimentally demonstrated that
GAIL is more data-efﬁcient than direct Supervised Learning
(or Behavior Cloning). However, they did not provide any
strong theoretical justiﬁcation for why GAIL is able to
do this. In fact, as mentioned at the end of Section IV,
IRL methods are simply different than direct Supervised
Learning methods. Aside from some high-level intuitions, it
was theoretically unclear why they might offer more robust
performance. Ghasemipour et al. [7]’s recent paper sets out
to understand the differences between the various approaches
to Imitation Learning at a theoretical level to build a unifying
perspective amongst them and hopefully use this perspective
to develop novel methods.
Section V introduced Ho and Ermon [10]’s insight that

IRL methods are really just attempting to learn a policy
whose state-action distribution matches the state-action dis-
tribution of the expert’s policy. Ghasemipour builds on this
by proving that all Imitation Learning methods are simply
attempting to minimize some measure of divergence between
the expert’s state-action distribution and the learned policy’s
state-action distribution. Let’s use ρπE to denote the distribu-
tion of states and actions encountered when following the ex-
pert’s policy. Similarly, let ρπ denote the distribution of states
and actions encountered when following the learned policy.
Ghasemipour speciﬁcally shows that GAIL and related meth-
ods seek to minimize the divergence between ρπE(st, at)
and ρπ(st, at) whereas direct Supervised Learning methods
seek to minimize the divergence between ρπE(at|st) and
ρπ(at|st), where at denotes actions taken at time t and
st denotes the state at time t. Ghasemipour experimentally
demonstrates that it is precisely this difference - that direct
Supervised Learning methods attempt to match the expert’s
distribution of actions conditioned on states while GAIL
and other IRL-based methods attempt to match the expert’s
joint distribution of actions and states - that makes GAIL
perform better than the direct Supervised Learning methods
on complex tasks in high-dimensional state spaces.
Additionally, given the insight that all Imitation Learn-
ing methods just seek to match state-action distributions,
Ghasemipour raises the question of whether we should even
infer these distributions from expert demonstrations. Instead,
he introduces a variant of a state-of-the-art IRL method Fu
et al. [6] that he calls FAIRL and then uses a version of this to
learn to perform tasks that are directly-speciﬁed. Speciﬁcally,
instead of providing expert demonstrations, Ghasemipour
hand-speciﬁes the distribution of states and actions he wants
the learned policy to follow.
Fig. 4: An image from Ghasemipour’s paper showing a visualization
of experiments performed on learning a policy to match a hand-
speciﬁed distribution. Subﬁgures (a) through (d) are visualizations
of the distributions for movement actions Ghasemipour speciﬁed
and corresponding visualizations of the distributinos the learned
policies had. The images on the very left showcase the simulation
environments for the ’Fetch’ (top) and ’Pusher’ (bottom) tasks
respectively.
To summarize, this paper presented a theoretical justiﬁ-
cation for why recent IRL-based methods (such as GAIL)
achieve higher performance on complex Imitation Learning
tasks when trained on much fewer expert trajectories than
direct Supervised Learning methods. After experimentally
verifying their theoretical claim, the authors introduce a
new method to perform Imitation Learning without expert
trajectories by directly learning to match some hand-speciﬁed
state-action distribution. In domains where it is easy to
hand-specify such distributions (such as simple pushing or
movement domains), the author’s method is potentially easier
to performing Imitation Learning with expert demonstrations.
However, it is unlikely that such hand-speciﬁcation is easy,
or even possible, in all domains of interest.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
There has been much progress with Imitation Learning
methods over the past 30 years. Such methods have gone
from being able to learn simple, speciﬁc tasks given ideal
conditions and hand-engineered features (such as Pomerleau
[12]’s early success with steering a car) to learning complex
tasks in high-dimensional simulation environments (such as
block-pushing or teaching an ant to walk) from very few
expert demonstrations. Furthermore, we as a community have
developed a wide array of methods - ranging from direct Su-
pervised Learning to using Reinforcement Learning - to solve
the Imitation Learning problem. These different methods
have demonstrated different advantages and disadvantages,
and we have recently developed a theoretical understanding
of why such differences exist.
Despite all this progress, there are many open questions
that remain to be answered and much work that remains to
be done. Recent work has shown impressive experimental
results in simulation domains, however it remains to be seen
whether such methods will transfer well to complex tasks
in the real-world. This might be especially difﬁcult because,
as noted by Ho and Ermon [10], GAIL and related state-of-
the-art methods are not that efﬁcient in terms of interaction
with the environment needed for them to successfully learn
new skills. Furthermore, as Ghasemipour et al. [7] points out,
expert demonstrations may not be the easiest way to induce
policies for certain tasks. Thus, features of a task that make it
easily amenable to solving via Imitation Learning with expert
demonstrations should be studied. Additionally, novel ways
of providing state-action distributions for a learner to match
(for example, via language commands, etc.) can be explored.
Finally, while Ghasemipour et al. [7]’s work helped deepen
our theoretical understanding of Imitation Learning methods,
there is much more to be understood (for example, the exact
effect of the measure of divergence chosen (for example,
KL versus JS) on Imitation Learning’s performance) that
could help develop novel methods that can solve increasingly
complex tasks in real-world settings.
