Graphical House Allocation
Hadi Hosseini
Justin Payan
Rik Sengupta
Penn State Univ.
Univ. of Massachusetts Amherst
Univ. of Massachusetts Amherst

Rohit Vaish
Vignesh Viswanathan
IIT Delhi
Univ. of Massachusetts Amherst

Abstract
The classical house allocation problem involves assigning n houses (or items) to n agents
according to their preferences. A key criterion in such problems is satisfying some fairness
constraints such as envy-freeness. We consider a generalization of this problem wherein the
agents are placed along the vertices of a graph (corresponding to a social network), and each
agent can only experience envy towards its neighbors. Our goal is to minimize the aggregate
envy among the agents as a natural fairness objective, i.e., the sum of all pairwise envy values
over all edges in a social graph.
When agents have identical and evenly-spaced valuations, our problem reduces to the well-
studied problem of linear arrangements. For identical valuations with possibly uneven spacing,
we show a number of deep and surprising ways in which our setting is a departure from
this classical problem. More broadly, we contribute several structural and computational
results for various classes of graphs, including NP-hardness results for disjoint unions of paths,
cycles, stars, or cliques, and fixed-parameter tractable (and, in some cases, polynomial-time)
algorithms for paths, cycles, stars, cliques, and their disjoint unions. Additionally, a conceptual
contribution of our work is the formulation of a structural property for disconnected graphs
that we call separability which results in efficient parameterized algorithms for finding optimal
allocations.
1
Introduction
The house allocation problem has attracted interest from the computer science and multiagent
systems communities for a long time. The classical problem deals with assigning n houses to
a set of n agents with (possibly) different valuations over the houses. It is often desirable to
find assignments that satisfy some economic property of interest. In this work, we focus on the
well-motivated economic notion of fairness, and in particular, study the objective of minimizing
the aggregate envy among the agents.
Despite the historical interest in this problem, to the best of our knowledge, the house allocation
problem has not been studied thoroughly over graphs, a setting in which the agents are placed
on the vertices of an undirected graph G and each agent’s potential envy is only towards its
neighbors in G [Massand and Simon, 2019, Beynier et al., 2018a].
Incorporating the social structure over a graph enables us to capture the underlying restrictions
of dealing with partial information, which is representative of constraints in many real-world
1
arXiv:2301.01323v2  [cs.GT]  18 Sep 2023

applications. Thus, the classical house allocation problem is the special case of our problem when
the underlying graph is complete.
Our work is in line with recent literature on examining various problems in computational
social choice on social networks, including voting [Doucette et al., 2019, Tsang et al., 2015, Grandi,
2017], fair division [Abebe et al., 2017, Bredereck et al., 2022], and hedonic games [Peters, 2016,
Igarashi and Elkind, 2016]. By focusing on graphs, we aim to gain insights into how the structure
of the social network impacts fairness in house allocation.
We focus primarily on identical
valuation functions and show that even under this seemingly strong restriction, the problem is
computationally hard yet structurally rich. We provide a series of observations and insights about
graph structures that help identify, and in some cases overcome, these computational bottlenecks.
1.1
Overview and Our Contributions
We assume that the agents are placed at the vertices of a graph representing a social network, and
that they have identical valuation functions over the houses. Our objective is to find an allocation
of the houses among the agents to minimize the total envy in the graph. We call this the graphical
house allocation problem.
This is a beautiful combinatorial problem in its own right, as it can be restated as the problem
where, given an undirected graph and a multiset of nonnegative numbers, the numbers need to
be placed on the vertices in a way that minimizes the sum of the edgewise absolute differences.
In Section 2, we present the formal model and set up some preliminaries, including the
connection between the graphical house allocation problem and the minimum linear arrangement
problem, which has several notable similarities and differences.
In Section 3, we present computational lower bounds and inapproximability results for the
problem, even for very simple graphs. In particular, we show NP-hardness even when the graph
is a disjoint union of paths, cycles, stars, or cliques, which all have known polynomial-time
algorithms for linear arrangements.
In Section 4, we focus on connected graphs and completely characterize optimal allocations
when the graph is a path, cycle, star, or a complete bipartite graph. We also prove a technically
involved structural result for rooted binary trees, and discuss general trees.
In Section 5, we focus on disconnected graphs, starting with a fundamental difference between
graphical house allocation and linear arrangements, motivating our definitions of separable,
strongly separable, and inseparable disconnected graphs. We employ these characterizations to prove
algorithmic results for a variety of graphs. In particular, we show that disjoint unions of paths,
cycles, stars, and equal-sized cliques are strongly separable and develop natural fixed parameter
tractable algorithms for these graphs. Moreover, we show that disjoint unions of arbitrary cliques
satisfy separability (but not strong separability) and admit XP algorithms.
Finally, in Section 6, we wrap up with a concluding discussion.
In the interest of space, we mainly provide proof sketches and defer the details to the
appendices.
1.2
Related Work
House allocation has been traditionally studied in the economics literature under the housing
market model, where agents enter the market with a house (or an endowment) each and are
allowed to engage in cyclic exchanges [Shapley and Scarf, 1974]. This model has found important
practical applications, most notably in kidney exchange [Abdulkadiro˘glu and Sönmez, 1999, Roth
et al., 2004].
2

While the initial work on house allocation focused on the economic notions of core and
strategyproofness [Svensson, 1999], subsequent work has explored fairness issues. Gan et al. [2019]
study the house allocation problem under ordinal preferences (specifically, weak rankings) and
provide a polynomial-time algorithm for determining the existence of an envy-free allocation. By
contrast, the problem becomes NP-hard when agents’ preferences are specified as a set of pairwise
comparisons [Kamiyama, 2021]. Kamiyama et al. [2021] study house allocation under cardinal
preferences (similar to our work) and examine the complexity of finding a “fair” assignment for
various notions of fairness such as proportionality, equitability, and minimizing the number of
envy-free agents (they do not consider aggregate envy). They show that the latter problem is
hard to approximate under general valuations, and remains NP-hard even for the restricted case
of binary valuations. For binary valuations, the problem of finding the largest envy-free partial
matching has also been studied [Aigner-Horev and Segal-Halevi, 2022].
Recent studies have considered graphical aspects of house allocation (similar to us), though
with different objectives. Massand and Simon [2019] consider house allocation under externalities
and study various kinds of stability-based objectives. Beynier et al. [2018a], whose work is perhaps
closest to ours, study local envy-freeness in house allocation, which entails checking the existence
of an allocation with no envy along any edge of the graph. They delineate the computational
complexity of this problem with respect to various graph parameters such as maximum and
minimum degree, number of disjoint cliques, and size of minimum vertex cover. Notably, their
model involves agents with possibly distinct ordinal preferences and only the zero-envy condition,
which makes their results—hardness as well as algorithmic—not directly comparable with ours.
There is also a growing literature on fair allocation of indivisible objects among agents who are
part of a social network. Bredereck et al. [2022] present fixed-parameter tractability results, mainly
parametrized by the number of agents, though they leave results using graph structure to future
work. Eiben et al. [2020] extend these results, showing a number of parametrized complexity
results relating the treewidth, cliquewidth, number of agent types, and number of item types
to the complexity of determining if an envy-free allocation exists on a graph. This line of work
again focuses on deciding if envy-free allocations exist, not minimizing envy. Other works seek
to obtain envy-free allocations, maximum welfare allocations, or other objectives by swapping
objects along a graphical structure [Beynier et al., 2018b, Lange and Rothe, 2019, Gourvès et al.,
2017, Ito et al., 2022]. Their objectives differ from ours, though their work is similar in spirit.
2
Preliminaries
We use [t] to denote the set {1, 2, . . . , t}. There is a set of n agents N = {1, 2, . . . , n} and n houses
H = {h1, h2, . . . , hn} (often called items). Each agent i has a valuation function vi : H →R≥0; vi(h)
indicates agent i’s value for house h ∈H.
An allocation π is a bijective mapping from agents to houses. For each i ∈N, π(i) is the house
allocated to agent i under the allocation π, and vi(π(i)) is its utility.
Given a problem instance consisting of agents and houses, our goal is to generate an allocation
π that is “fair” to all the agents, for some reasonable definition of fairness. A natural way to define
fairness is using envy: an agent i is said to envy agent j under allocation π if vi(π(i)) < vi(π(j)).
While we would ideally like to find envy-free allocations, this may not always be possible —
consider a simple example with two agents and two houses but one of the houses is valued at 0
by both agents. Therefore, we instead focus on the magnitude of envy that agent i has towards
agent j, for a fixed allocation π. This is defined as envyi(π, j) := max{vi(π(j)) −vi(π(i)), 0}.
3

We define an undirected graph G = (N, E) over the set of agents, which represents the
underlying social network. Our goal is to compute an allocation that minimizes the total envy
along the edges of the graph, defined as Envy(π, G) := ∑(i,j)∈E(envyi(π, j) + envyj(π, i)); note that
edges are unordered. An allocation π∗that minimizes the total envy is referred to as a minimum
envy allocation. When there are multiple minimum envy allocations, we abuse notation slightly
and use π∗to denote any of them.
When the graph G is a complete graph Kn, a minimum envy allocation can be computed in
polynomial time by means of a reduction to a bipartite minimum-weight matching problem (for
a proof of this, see Proposition A.2 in Appendix A). However, it is known that for several other
simple graphs like paths and matchings, computing a minimum envy allocation is NP-complete
[Beynier et al., 2018a]. Given this computational intractability, we therefore explore a natural
restriction of the problem, when all agents have identical valuations, to gain insights into the
computational and structural aspects of fairness in social networks. More formally, we assume
that there is a fixed valuation function v such that vi = v for all i ∈N. Identical valuations capture
a natural aspect of real-world housing markets wherein the actual values or prices of the houses
are fixed, independent of whom they are being assigned to.
When all agents have the same valuation function v, the total envy of an allocation π along
the edges of a graph G = (N, E) can be written as Envy(π, G) = ∑(i,j)∈E |v(π(i)) −v(π(j))|. This
formulation also gives a new definition for envy along an edge e = (i, j) ∈E as envye(π) =
|v(π(i)) −v(π(j))|. Note that this value is still equal to envyi(π, j) + envyj(π, i), as one of those
terms is zero under the assumption of identical valuations.
We note that when G is Kn, under identical valuations, an optimal allocation is trivially
computable, as all allocations are equivalent.
For the rest of this paper, we will assume without loss of generality that the house values
are all distinct (see Lemma A.1 in Appendix A). In particular, every agent’s valuation function
(denoted by v) gives each house a unique nonnegative value, with v(h1) < v(h2) < · · · < v(hn).
We will say h1 ≺h2 to mean v(h1) < v(h2).
For an allocation π and a subset N′ ⊆N, we will refer to the set of houses received by N′ as
π(N′). If G′ is a subgraph of G, we will use π(G′) in the same way.
We will use G1 + G2 to mean the disjoint union of G1 and G2.
Definition 2.1. For an instance of the graphical house allocation problem, the valuation interval is defined
as the closed interval [v(h1), v(hn)] ⊂R+ with each v(hk) marked.
The motivation for Definition 2.1 is as follows. For an arbitrary allocation π, for each edge
e = (i, j) ∈E, we can draw a line segment from v(π(i)) to v(π(j)). This line segment has length
|v(π(i)) −v(π(j))| = envye(π). Therefore, Envy(π, G) is simply the sum of the lengths of all the
line segments we draw in this way. An optimal allocation π∗is any allocation that attains this
minimum sum. See Figure 1 for an example of a valuation interval, together with a graph G, and
a particular allocation on G depicted under the valuation interval.
A subset of houses H′ = {hi1, . . . , hik} ⊆H with hi1 ≺. . . ≺hik is called contiguous if there is
no house h′ ∈H \ H′ with hi1 ≺h′ ≺hik. Geometrically, the values in H′ form an uninterrupted
sub-interval of the valuation interval, with no value outside of H′ appearing inside that sub-
interval. In Figure 1 above, the subsets {h1, h2, h3} and {h5} are contiguous, whereas the subsets
{h1, h2, h5} and {h3, h5} are not.
4

h1
h4
h2
h5
h3
h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
1
2
4
5
6
Envy=15
Figure 1: (Left) A graph G on five agents along with a particular allocation π. The valuations are
identical and are given by ⃗v = (1, 2, 4, 5, 6). (Right) The valuation interval is shown via the thick
horizontal line in black. The five line segments in red denote the envy along the five edges of the
graph G. The total length of these line segments is Envy(π, G) = 15.
We will sometimes interchangeably talk about allocating hi and allocating v(hi) to an agent.
For readability, we will also sometimes refer to houses as being on the valuation line, rather than
their values. The meaning should be unambiguous from the context.
2.1
Connection to the Linear Arrangement Problem
The minimum linear arrangement problem is the problem where, given an undirected n-vertex graph
G = (V, E), we want to find a bijective function π : V →[n] that minimizes ∑(i,j)∈E |π(i) −π(j)|.
Note that this is a special case of our problem, when H = [n]; in other words, the minimum
linear arrangement problem is a special case of the graphical house allocation problem where the
valuation interval has evenly spaced values.
Note that we may assume without loss of generality that the underlying graph G in any
instance of the minimum linear arrangement problem is connected. This is a consequence of the
following folklore observation, whose proof we omit (see, for instance, [Seidvasser, 1970]).
Proposition 2.2 (Seidvasser [1970]). If G is any instance of the linear arrangement problem, then at least
one optimal solution assigns contiguous subsets of [n] to the connected components of G.
We will see in Section 5 that in the graphical house allocation problem, it no longer suffices to
only consider connected graphs.
It is known that finding a minimum linear arrangement is NP-hard for general graphs [Garey
et al., 1976], with a best known running time of O(2nm), where |V| = n, |E| = m. In fact,
the problem remains NP-hard even for bipartite graphs [Even and Shiloach, 1978]. However,
the minimum linear arrangement problem can be solved in polynomial time on paths, cycles,
stars, wheels, and trees. In fact, an optimal solution for any tree can be computed in time
O(nlog2 3) [Chung, 1984].
One of the fundamental difficulties with the minimum linear arrangement problem is that
there are no natural approaches towards proving lower bounds on the objective: the best known
general lower bounds are trivial ones based on degrees or edge counts. All other known lower
bounds are graph-specific and not easy to generalize.
3
Hardness and Lower Bounds
In this section, we prove lower bounds on the graphical house allocation problem, showing that
the problem is hard to solve in general.
First of all, note that our problem is NP-complete (for arbitrary graphs and valuations), because
even the linear arrangement problem is NP-complete, as stated in Section 2, and the graphical
house allocation problem is at least as hard as that problem.
5

We now show a different proof that the problem is NP-complete, which will result in inap-
proximability results as well. First we need a definition.
Definition 3.1. The Minimum Bisection Problem asks, for an n-vertex graph G and a natural number
k, if there is a partition of V(G) into two parts of size n/2, with at most k edges crossing the cut.
The Minimum Bisection Problem is a known NP-complete problem [Garey et al., 1976].
Furthermore, it is also known to be hard to approximate efficiently, a fact that is useful in light of
the following observation.
Theorem 3.2. There is a linear time reduction from the Minimum Bisection Problem to the graphical
house allocation problem with identical valuations.
Proof Sketch. Given an instance ⟨G, k⟩of the Minimum Bisection Problem, we construct an
instance of the house allocation problem by creating a cluster of n/2 values concentrated around
0, and a cluster of n/2 values concentrated around 1 on the valuation interval. Then, G has an
allocation with total envy at most k + ϵ (for sufficiently small ϵ) if and only if ⟨G, k⟩∈Minimum
Bisection Problem. This reduction is clearly linear time.
It follows immediately that the inapproximability results for minimum bisection carry over
to the graphical house allocation problem. In particular, for any fixed constant ϵ > 0, unless P =
NP there is no polynomial-time algorithm that can approximate the optimal total envy under the
house allocation problem within an additive term of n2−ϵ(v(hn) −v(h1)) [Bui and Jones, 1992].
Additionally, the house allocation problem has no PTAS unless NP has randomized algorithms
in subexponential time [Khot, 2006]. These hardness results suggest that our problem is hard to
approximate even with identical valuations.
Finally, we show that graphical house allocation is NP-complete even on simple instances of
graphs which are solvable in linear time in the case of linear arrangements, such as disjoint unions
of paths, cycles, cliques, or stars (and any combinations of them).
Theorem 3.3 (Hardness of Disjoint Unions). Let A be any collection of connected graphs, such that
there is a polynomial time one-to-one mapping from each nonnegative integer t (given in unary) to a graph
in A of size t. Let G be the class of graphs whose members are the finite sub-multisets of A (as connected
components). Then, finding a minimum envy house allocation is NP-hard on the class G.
Proof Sketch. We reduce from Unary Bin Packing. Recall that this problem asks if, given a set I of
items with sizes s(i) for i ∈I, a bin capacity B, and an integer k, all given in unary, whether there
exists a packing of all the items into at most k bins. This problem is known to be NP-complete (see,
for instance, Jansen et al. [2013]).
Given an arbitrary instance of Unary Bin Packing, we create an instance of graphical house
allocation by having k equispaced clusters of width ϵ separated by intervals of size C (for
sufficiently large C), with each cluster containing B values. Our graph G is a disjoint union of the
graphs in A that form the image of the sizes s(i) over all i ∈I. Note that G ∈G. Then, the given
instance is in Unary Bin Packing if and only if the graphical house allocation instance has an
allocation with envy less than C, provided ϵ is small enough.
Corollary 3.4. The house allocation problem under identical valuations is NP-complete on: (a) disjoint
unions of arbitrary paths, (b) disjoint unions of arbitrary cycles, (c) disjoint unions of arbitrary stars, and
(d) disjoint unions of arbitrary cliques.
6

(a) The star K1,5
(b) The path P7
(c) The cycle C5
(d) The graph K3,3
Figure 2: Examples of characterized connected graphs
In Section 5 we show that despite the hardness suggested by Corollary 3.4, it is possible to
exploit a structural property to develop FPT algorithms for the first three problems.
4
Connected Graphs
In this section, we characterize optimal house allocations when the underlying graph G is a star,
path, cycle, complete bipartite graph, or rooted binary tree. We also provide some observations
when G is any (arbitrary) tree.
4.1
Stars
Consider the star graph K1,n.
Theorem 4.1. If G is the star K1,n, then the minimum envy allocation π∗under identical valuations
corresponds to:
• for even n, putting the unique median in the center of the star, and all the houses on the spokes in any
order; the value of the envy is ∑i>n/2+1 v(hi) −∑i≤n/2 v(hi).
• for odd n, putting either of the medians in the center of the star, and all other houses on the spokes in
any order; the value of the envy for either median is ∑i>(n+2)/2 v(hi) −∑i<(n+2)/2 v(hi).
Proof. The proof is a restatement of the well-known fact that in any multiset of real numbers, the
sum of the L1-distances is minimized by the median of the multiset. It is easy to verify that for
even n, both medians yield the same value.
4.2
Paths
Consider the path graph Pn.
Theorem 4.2. If G is the path graph Pn, then the minimum envy allocation π∗under identical valuations
attains a total envy of v(hn) −v(h1), is unique (up to reversing the values along the path), and corresponds
to placing the houses in sorted order along Pn.
Proof Sketch. The minimum and the maximum have to go on some two vertices. The subpath from
the minimum to the maximum has to have envy at least the difference between the two.
4.3
Cycles
Now, consider the cycle graph Cn.
Theorem 4.3. If G is the cycle graph Cn, then any minimum envy allocation π∗under identical valuations
attains a total envy of 2(v(hn) −v(h1)), and corresponds to the following: place h1 and hn arbitrarily on
any two vertices of the cycle, and then place the remaining houses so that each of the two paths from h1 to
hn along the cycle consists of houses in sorted order.
7

Proof Sketch. In any allocation, there are two internally vertex-disjoint subpaths from h1 to hn on a
cycle. Each of those subpaths has an envy of at least the difference between the two values.
Corollary 4.4. For n ≥3, the number of optimal allocations along the cycle Cn is 2n−3, up to rotations
and reversals.
Perhaps slightly non-obviously, the proofs of Theorems 4.2 and 4.3 can be seen as purely
geometric arguments using the valuation interval. To see this, consider the path Pn, and take
any allocation π that does not satisfy the form stated in Theorem 4.2, and consider how the
allocation looks on the valuation interval. First, observe that every sub-interval of the valuation
interval between consecutive houses needs to be covered by some line segment from the allocation.
Otherwise, there would be no edge with a house from the left to a house from the right of the
sub-interval, which is impossible as Pn is connected. But the only way to meet this lower bound
of one line segment for each sub-interval of the valuation interval is to sort the houses along the
path. The allocation looks as follows on the valuation interval.
The geometric argument for cycles is similar (with an allocation illustrated below).
4.4
Complete Bipartite graphs
Let us start with the complete bipartite graph Kr,r (r ≥1) where both parts have equal size.
Theorem 4.5. When G is the graph Kr,r, the minimum envy allocation π∗has the following property: for
every i ∈[r] the houses {h2i−1, h2i} cannot be allocated to agents in the same side of the bipartite graph.
Moreover, all allocations which satisfy this property have the same (optimal) envy.
Proof Sketch. Consider an allocation π where the stated property does not hold and consider the
smallest i where the property is violated. In this case we can find a simple swap that can improve
envy. Assume h2i−1 and h2i are allocated to one part. If k is the least index greater than 2i such that
hk is not allocated to an agent in the same part, then swapping hk and hk−1 leads to a reduction in
envy. The exact calculation is quite technical; see Appendix C.
Note that this implies a straightforward linear-time algorithm to compute a minimum envy
allocation for the graph Kr,r.
We can now generalize this result to complete bipartite graphs where the two parts have
unequal size. Due to the similarity of the two proofs, we omit the proof sketch.
Theorem 4.6. When G is the graph Kr,s (r > s), the minimum envy allocation π∗has the following
property:
• If r −s =: 2m is even, then the first and last m houses are allocated to the larger part, and for all
i ∈[s], the houses hm+2i−1 and hm+2i are allocated to different parts.
8

• If r −s =: 2m + 1 is odd, then the first m and last m + 1 houses are allocated to the larger part. For
all i ∈[s], the houses hm+2i−1 and hm+2i are allocated to the larger and smaller parts respectively.
Moreover, all allocations which satisfy this property have the same (optimal) envy.
Corollary 4.7. For any complete bipartite graph Kr,s (r ≥s),
• If r −s is even, there are 2s optimal allocations;
• If r −s is odd, there is exactly one optimal allocation,
up to permutations over allocations to the same side of the graph.
It is easy to see that our linear time algorithm generalizes to general complete bipartite graphs
as well. We note here that Theorem 4.6 generalizes Theorem 4.1. When the number of spokes in
the star K1,n is odd (i.e., n −1 is even), there are two possible houses that can be allocated to the
center in an optimal allocation. However, when the number of spokes is even (i.e., n −1 is odd),
any optimal allocation allocates a unique house to the central node.
4.5
Rooted Binary Trees
In this section, we consider binary trees. A binary tree T is defined as a rooted tree where each
node has either 0 or 2 children.
Our main result is a structural property characterizing at least one of the optimal allocations
for any instance where the graph G corresponds to a binary tree. We call this the local median
property.
Definition 4.8 (Local Median Property). An allocation on a binary tree satisfies the local median property
if, for any internal node, exactly one of its children is allocated a house with value less than that of the node.
In other words, the value allocated to any internal node is the median of the set containing the node and its
children.
The proofs in this section will use the following lemma. We define the inverse of a valuation
function v as a valuation function vinv such that vinv(h) = −v(h) for all h ∈H (appropriately
shifted so that all values are nonnegative). We note that any allocation has the same envy along
any edge with respect to the inverted valuation and the original valuation, whose straightforward
proof we relegate to Appendix C.
Lemma 4.9. The envy along any edge of the graph G under an allocation π with respect to the valuation v
is equal to the envy along the same edge of the graph G under the allocation π with respect to the valuation
vinv.
We will now show that at least one minimum envy allocation satisfies the local median
property. More formally, we show the following: Given a binary tree T and any allocation π, there
exists an allocation that satisfies the local median property and has equal or lower total envy. The
proof relies on the following lemma.
Lemma 4.10. Let π be an allocation on a binary tree T, not satisfying the local median property. Let i be
the internal node furthest from the root which is not allocated the median among the values given to it and
its children. Then, there exists an allocation π′ such that
9

(a) For the subtree T′ rooted at i, we have that Envy(π(T′), T′) > Envy(π′(T′), T′);
(b) For any other subtree T′′ not contained by T′, we have that Envy(π(T′′), T′′) ≥Envy(π′(T′′), T′′).
Proof Sketch. Consider an internal vertex not satisfying the local median property; by Lemma 4.9,
it suffices to consider the case when this violating vertex has a value that is less than both its
children. We can now “push” the value allocated to this vertex down the tree by a series of swaps
until that value reaches a leaf or satisfies the local median property. It can be shown that the total
envy at the end satisfies the two criteria stated. A full proof is given in Appendix C.
Lemma 4.10 immediately gives rise to the following corollary, which we state as a theorem.
Theorem 4.11. For any binary tree T, at least one minimum envy allocation satisfies the local median
property.
Unfortunately, the local median property is too weak to exploit for a polynomial-time algorithm.
Ideally, we would like to use the property to show that some minimum envy allocation satisfies
an even stronger property called the global median property.
Definition 4.12 (Global Median Property). An allocation on a binary tree satisfies the global median
property if, for every internal node, all the houses in one subtree of the node have value less than the house
allocated to the node, and all the houses in the other subtree have value greater than the house allocated to
the node.
Empirically, it seems like minimum envy allocations on rooted binary trees do indeed satisfy
the global median property. If this turned out to be true, we would be able to devise an algorithm
that significantly reduces the search space for a minimum envy allocation from Θ(n!) to Θ(2d).
This would give us an O(2d) algorithm for computing minimum envy allocations on a rooted
binary tree of maximum depth d.
Conjecture 4.13. There is an algorithm that computes an optimal house allocation on a rooted binary
tree of maximum depth d in time O(2d). In particular, this algorithm runs in polynomial time on (nearly)
balanced trees.
4.6
General Trees
How do we take the approaches for rooted binary trees and build towards arbitrary trees? Note
that one consequence of Theorem 4.11 is that in an optimal allocation on a rooted binary tree, the
minimum and the maximum must appear on leaves.
In the minimum linear arrangement problem, it is known [Seidvasser, 1970] that when the
underlying graph is a tree, some optimal allocation assigns the minimum and maximum values
to leaves, and furthermore, the (unique) path from this minimum to the maximum consists
of monotonically increasing values. This characterization is used crucially in designing the
polynomial time algorithm on trees in this context [Chung, 1984].
Empirically, this same property for trees seems to hold for non-uniformly spaced values as
well. The proof technique used in [Seidvasser, 1970] does not extend to our setting, but testing the
problem on 200 randomly generated trees and uniformly random values on the interval [0, 100]
always gave us both these properties on trees: the minimum and maximum values both end up
on leaves, with a monotonic path between them.
We believe that graphical house allocation, unlike minimum linear arrangements, is NP-hard
on trees. It would be remarkable if the structural characterization holds for our problem, but the
polynomial-time algorithm does not work. We relegate answering this to future work.
10

Figure 3: For the valuation interval on top, the optimal allocation to P2 + C3 is to give the two
low-valued houses to the edge, and to give the three high-valued houses to the triangle. This is
the only allocation where the envy is negligible. For the valuation interval on the bottom, the
optimal allocation to P2 + C3 is to give the two extreme-valued houses to the edge, and the cluster
in the middle to the triangle. Any other allocation has to count one of the long halves of the
interval multiple times, and is therefore strictly suboptimal. This is an instance where we see one
of the connected components being “split” by another in the valuation interval.
5
Disconnected Graphs
In this section, we consider disconnected graphs, starting with a structural characterization, and
then using that to obtain upper bounds for several natural classes of disconnected graphs that
have lower bounds in Section 3.
5.1
A Structural Characterization
We start by remarking that Proposition 2.2 is false in our setting, and so we can no longer assume
our graph is connected without loss of generality. For instance, consider an instance when the
underlying graph G is a disjoint union of an edge and a triangle. The two valuation intervals in
Figure 3 yield very different optimal structures for this same instance.
We remark that this is a major departure from the linear arrangement problem, as the spacing
of the values along the valuation interval becomes a key factor in the structure of optimal
allocations. Recall from Proposition 2.2 that in the minimum linear arrangement problem, in an
optimal allocation, the connected components of a graph take the houses in contiguous subsets
along the valuation interval. The example in Figure 3 shows that this is not necessarily true in
our problem, and therefore serves as a motivation to classify disconnected graphs according to
whether they have this property or not. We call the relevant property separability, defined as
follows.
Definition 5.1 (Splitting). Let G1 = (N1, E1) and G2 = (N2, E2) be two of the connected components
of G = (N, E), and fix an arbitrary allocation π. For i ∈{1, 2}, let π(Gi) be the set of values given to
vertices in Gi. We say G1 splits G2 in π if the values of π(G1) form a contiguous subset of the values in
π(G1) ∪π(G2).
Definition 5.2 (Separability). Let G be a disconnected graph with connected components G1, . . . , Gk.
Then,
1. G is separable if there exists an ordering G1, . . . , Gk of the components where, for all valuation
intervals, there is an optimal allocation where for all 1 ≤i < j ≤k, Gi splits Gj.
2. G is strongly separable if, in addition, Gj also splits Gi. Note that this is only possible if some
optimal allocation assigns contiguous subsets of values to all connected components.
11

3. G is inseparable if there is a valuation interval where for each optimal allocation π, there are
components G1 and G2 with u, u′ ∈π(G1) and v, v′ ∈π(G2) such that u < v < u′ < v′.
A class A of graphs is separable (resp. strongly separable) if every graph in it is separable (resp. strongly
separable). Conversely, A is inseparable if it contains an inseparable graph.
We note that a graph G is inseparable if and only if it is not separable, and furthermore, it is
strongly separable only if it is separable.
For minimum linear arrangements, all disconnected graphs are strongly separable, by Proposi-
tion 2.2. In contrast, for our problem, Figure 3 already provides an example of a graph that is not
separable (equivalently, inseparable). We discuss several examples of strongly separable graphs
in our problem in Section 5.2; in particular, disjoint unions of paths (respectively, cycles or stars)
satisfy strong separability.
Our formulation of separability and strong separability has an immediate algorithmic conse-
quence. Specifically, if G is strongly separable and has k connected components, if we have an
efficient algorithm on each connected component individually, then we have an FPT algorithm
on G, parameterized by k. Similarly, if G is separable, if we have an efficient algorithm on each
connected component, then we have an XP algorithm on G.
It is not immediately obvious that there are separable graphs that are not strongly separable.
Figure 3 shows an example of such a graph (Theorem 5.14 proves separability). We will see more
examples of this later, but we remark that there are even separable forests that are not strongly
separable (Figure 4). We state this formally here, relegating the proof once again to Appendix D.
Proposition 5.3. There exists a separable forest that is not strongly separable.
Figure 4: Example of a separable forest that is not strongly separable. The forest is trivially
separable. For the bottom valuation line, an optimal allocation must allocate the extreme clusters
in the interval to the larger connected component. See Appendix D for a detailed proof.
Less obviously, inseparable forests exist, as shown by the following proposition (and Figure 5),
whose proof is in Appendix D.
Proposition 5.4. There exists an inseparable forest.
5.2
Disjoint Unions of Paths, Cycles, and Stars
We now move on to algorithmic approaches and characterizations of minimum envy allocations,
and start with the setting where G is a disjoint union of paths. Suppose G = Pn1 + . . . + Pnr. What
does an optimal allocation on G look like?
12

...
s1
...
s3
...
s2
...
s4
s1 + 1
s2 + 1
s3 + 1
s4 + 1
Figure 5: Example of an inseparable forest. Suppose s1 < s2 < s3 < s4, and they satisfy for all i, j,
|si −sj| ≥3, and for all i, j, k, si + sj > sk + 2. Then, an optimal allocation on this instance must
allocate the entire cluster of size si + 1 on the valuation interval to the corresponding star-like
cluster of the given forest. See Appendix D for a detailed proof.
Theorem 5.5. Let G be a disjoint union of paths, Pn1 + . . . + Pnr.
Then, G is strongly separable.
Furthermore, in any optimal allocation, within each path, the houses appear in sorted order.
Proof Sketch. In any allocation π, we may assume by Theorem 4.2 that the houses allocated to
each path appear in sorted order along that path. Next, in an allocation π, if there is any overlap
between two of the paths, then we can remove the overlap by reassigning the houses among just
those two paths, and obtain an allocation with strictly less envy.
The following corollary shows an FPT algorithm on the disjoint union of paths, parameterized
by the number of different paths.
Corollary 5.6. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
that is the disjoint union of paths in time O(nr!), where r is the number of paths.
Proof Sketch. By Theorem 5.5, it suffices to find the optimal ordering of the paths. There are r!
such orderings, and for each, we can test the envy in linear time.
If G is a disjoint union of cycles, say G = Cn1 + . . . + Cnr, the same theorems characterizing
optimal allocations go through, using Theorem 4.3. We omit the proofs, but state the results
formally.
Theorem 5.7. Let G be a disjoint union of cycles, Cn1 + . . . + Cnr.
Then G is strongly separable.
Furthermore, in any optimal allocation, within each cycle, the houses appear in the form characterized in
Theorem 4.3.
Corollary 5.8. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
that is the disjoint union of cycles in time O(nr!), where r is the number of cycles.
We remark here that if t is the number of different path (or cycle) lengths, then a dynamic
programming algorithm (Proposition D.1) computes the minimum envy allocation in time O(nt+1).
Therefore, combining the two approaches, we have a time complexity of O(min(nr!, nt+1)). An
immediate application of this dynamic programming algorithm is for graphs with degree at most
one. These graphs are special case of the disjoint union of paths where the path length can either
be 0 or 1.
13

Corollary 5.9. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
with maximum degree 1 in time O(n3).
Perhaps remarkably, there is no particularly elegant characterization when the underlying
graph G is a disjoint union of paths and cycles, even when there is only one path and one cycle.
This is a consequence of Figure 3.
Finally, a similar result holds for disjoint unions of stars, though the proof is somewhat
different. We omit the proof of Corollary 5.11, which follows from Theorem 5.10.
Theorem 5.10. Let G be a disjoint union of stars, K1,n1 + . . . + K1,nr. Then G is strongly separable.
Furthermore, in any optimal allocation, within each star, the houses appear in the form characterized in
Theorem 4.1.
Proof Sketch. We can “separate” any two stars while improving our objective. Given any allocation
π, suppose one of the stars K1,n1 splits another star K1,n2 (but not vice-versa). Suppose their centers
receive houses hi ≺hj respectively. We show that exchanging K1,n1’s most-valuable house for
K1,n2’s least-valuable house strictly decreases envy. We apply this repeatedly until the two stars
split each other. We apply Theorem 4.1 to every star at the beginning of the process and after
every swap to maintain the invariant that each star has a median house at its center.
Corollary 5.11. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
that is the disjoint union of stars in time O(nr!), where r is the number of stars.
5.3
Disjoint Unions of Cliques
We now turn our attention to disjoint unions of cliques. We first demonstrate that when all cliques
have the same size, we maintain strong separability.
Theorem 5.12. Let G be a disjoint union of cliques with equal sizes, K1
n/r + . . . + Kr
n/r. Then, G is
strongly separable.
Proof Sketch. WLOG consider two cliques, say K and K′, on n/2 vertices each, and consider
an arbitrary instance with n values. Suppose in some allocation π, K receives A ∪A′ and K′
receives B ∪B′, where A ∪B form the n/2 lower-valued houses, and A′ ∪B′ form the n/2 higher-
valued houses. We can show that we improve the envy by assigning them A ∪B and A′ ∪B′
respectively.
Because the cliques are all of equal sizes and agents have identical valuations, Theorem 5.12
implies that there is a trivial algorithm for assigning houses to agents. We can assign the first n/r
houses to one clique, the next n/r houses to the next clique, and so on.
Corollary 5.13. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
that is the disjoint union of equal-sized cliques in time O(n).
We now turn our attention to the case when the cliques are not all of the same size.
As we saw in Figure 3, strong separability must be ruled out when cliques have different
sizes. We will show that separability still holds. We show further that the largest clique gets a
contiguous subset, and then subject to that, the second largest clique gets a contiguous subset, and
so on. The proof is heavily technical, and we relegate the casework and details to Appendix D.
14

Theorem 5.14. Let G be a disjoint union of cliques with arbitrary sizes, Kn1 + . . . + Knr. Then, G is
separable (but not strongly separable if the ni’s are not all the same). In particular, if n1 ≥. . . ≥nr, the
ordering for separability is Kn1, . . . , Knr.
Proof Sketch. WLOG consider two cliques K and K′ with |K| > |K′|. We will show that K receives
a contiguous subset. The basic approach is that if there are three values v(hi) < v(hj) < v(hk)
with hj going to K′ but hi, hk going to K, we can swap houses around and obtain a better allocation
by a counting argument.
Theorem 5.14 implies an XP algorithm for finding a minimum envy allocation on unions of
cliques.
Corollary 5.15. We can find an optimal house allocation for an instance on an undirected n-agent graph G
that is the disjoint union of cliques in time O(nr+2), where r is the number of cliques.
There seems to be a separation between unions of differently-sized cliques and unions of stars,
cycles, and paths. We suspect the problem may be (at least) W[1]-hard for unions of arbitrary
cliques.
6
Conclusion and Discussions
We investigate a generalization of the classical house allocation problem where the agents are on
the vertices of a graph representing the underlying social network, and we wish to allocate the
houses to the agents so as to minimize the aggregate envy among neighbors. Even for identical
valuations, we show that the problem is computationally hard and structurally rich. Furthermore,
our structural insights facilitate algorithmic results for several well-motivated graph classes.
A natural question for future research is to consider other fairness objectives such as minimizing
the maximum envy present on any edge of the graph. This corresponds to the classical graph
theoretic property of bandwidth, which is also known to be NP-complete for general graphs, and
quite hard to approximate as well [Papadimitriou, 1976, Blache et al., 1997]. These questions
are tied with the choice of which norm to optimize our problem on. Indeed, optimizing for the
total envy (as in our work) and the maximum envy (as in the bandwidth problem) correspond to
optimizing over the L1 norm and L∞norm, respectively. Exploring these and other norms offers
scope for future research.
Resolving the separation between the minimum linear arrangement problem and the graphical
house allocation problem in the context of trees is an important question. It would be interesting
to know whether trees admit polynomial time characterizations of the minimum envy, or—more
remarkably—whether they are NP-complete but admit the structural similarities to the minimum
linear arrangement problem discussed in Section 4.6.
More generally, it is an interesting problem to find other natural classes of strongly separable
graphs, and eventually to completely characterize all strongly separable graphs in terms of their
graph theoretic structure, for algorithmic approaches. Another important future direction would
be to extend some of these results for non-identical valuations.
