Towards a Decentralized, Autonomous Multiagent Framework for
Mitigating Crop Loss
Roi Ceren
Dept. Computer Science
University of Georgia

Shannon Quinn
Dept. Computer Science
University of Georgia

Glen Rains
Dept. Entomology
University of Georgia

October 2018
Abstract
We propose a generalized decision-theoretic system for a heterogeneous team of autonomous agents who are tasked
with online identiﬁcation of phenotypically expressed stress in crop ﬁelds. This system employs four distinct types of
agents, speciﬁc to four available sensor modalities: satellites (Layer 3), uninhabited aerial vehicles (L2), uninhabited
ground vehicles (L1), and static ground-level sensors (L0). Layers 3, 2, and 1 are tasked with performing image
processing at the available resolution of the sensor modality and, along with data generated by layer 0 sensors, identify
erroneous differences that arise over time. Our goal is to limit the use of the more computationally and temporally
expensive subsequent layers. Therefore, from layer 3 to 1, each layer only investigates areas that previous layers have
identiﬁed as potentially afﬂicted by stress. We introduce a reinforcement learning technique based on Perkins’ Monte
Carlo Exploring Starts for a generalized Markovian model for each layer’s decision problem, and label the system
the Agricultural Distributed Decision Framework (ADDF). As our domain is real-world and online, we illustrate
implementations of the two major components of our system: a clustering-based image processing methodology and a
two-layer POMDP implementation.
1
Introduction
The low-cost availability of imaging technology has given rise to the rapidly developing ﬁeld of precision agriculture,
often marked by the use of multispectral image collection via autonomous uninhabited aerial vehicles (AUAVs) [25].
As an example, recent efforts combining AUAVs, normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) imaging, and
environmental barometric and water potential sensors have been used to create efﬁcient autonomous systems for
targeted crop ﬁeld watering [21]. Additionally, many targeted image processing systems have been developed for the
purpose of speciﬁc disease identiﬁcation based on phenotypic expression, such as lesions, browning, and tumors [11].
While precision watering techniques have dramatically improved yields for large-scale farms, the advent of
autonomous intervention for disease propagation is nascent [11]. While some generalized models exist to detect these
stresses, they have not been introduced to the distributed autonomous systems as in precision watering. To that end, we
adopt the problem of identifying and predicting the onset of stresses (pest and pathogen) in crop ﬁelds via environmental
sensor and image data, taken at various resolutions throughout a growing season. We factor the distribution of functional
capabilities of our physical system into four distinct layers, comprised of satellites (layer 3), AUAVs (L2), autonomous
uninhabited ground vehicles (AUGVS, L1), and static ground-level sensors (L0). Generally, the output of each layer
(excluding L0) is used to inform the decision making of the layer below it by raising a call-to-action, wherein the layer
believes a stress is occurring based on phenotypic expression that differs in a geographical location.
A common challenge of real-world problem domains, particularly in the agricultural domain, is the constraint on
sample availability for machine learning. Since we are attempting to uncover the true state of stress in a crop ﬁeld
without prior knowledge, we propose a model-free exploration of policies a la Perkins’ Monte Carlo Exploring Starts
1
arXiv:1901.02035v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2019

Figure 1: Layer composition of physical sensor modalities in ADDF. Images and Layer 0 data are used in each layer
to inform subsequent layers of possible stress, where UGVs are constrained by UAVs, and UAVs are constrained by
satellites.
(MCES) for Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), labeled MCES-P [13]. MCES-P iterates over
memory-less policies that directly map actions to observations, instead of beliefs of the state [23]. As a ﬁrst best effort
towards our goal, we assemble our sensor modalities into a heterogeneous team, utilize an image processing technique
to extract potentially stressed sectors, and learn policies that map these observations of phenotypic deviations to calls
for intervention.
This work is divided into the following sections. Section 2 covers the related topics in precision agriculture.
Section 3 introduces the necessary concepts for the algorithms used in Sec. 5. Before covering the framework, Sec. 4
describes the problem domain, including descriptions of our crop ﬁelds and the arrangement of our available physical
sensor modalities. We then test prototypical experiments of our real-world domain in Sec. 6.
2
Related Work
Our approach falls under the body of work characterized by the category of precision agriculture, tackled by a variety
of ﬁelds, including agriculture, agronomics, computer science, robotics, engineering, and physics. In particular, the
relevant subtopics we explore include disease detection, nutrient deﬁciency, and insufﬁcient water potential. This data
provides a basis for precision agro-management, such as through spot spraying, targeted water irrigation and nitrogen
application.
The most recent advance in precision agriculture is the FarmBeats initiative driven by Microsoft AI [21], in which
a variety of network-accessible sensor modalities, including soil water potential sensors and AUAVs, are arranged
to provide automated and targeted water intervention. This methodology is powerful for tackling stresses due to
underwatering, but is incapable of detecting the presence of pathogens, pests and nutrient deﬁciency, which express
themselves phenotypically.
Concerning the goal of disease identiﬁcation and intervention, the wide array of contemporary efforts leverage
phenotypic expressions of stress largely via thermal detection [8] and are often speciﬁc to the expression from a
speciﬁc disease [11]. What remains is a generalized model that encompasses the variety of stresses in a model-free
way. That is, instead of seeking a particular expression, learn the correlation between erroneous growth patterns, leaf
and fruit necrosis or chlorosis, leaf spots, leaf striations and wilting (as caused by stress) and the available image and
environmental data.
2

3
Background
In this section we cover the state of the art on the two major components of our work: modeling the temporal evolution
of systems via image processing and employing model-free reinforcement learning in Markov models.
3.1
Image Processing
The availability of high-dimensional multispectral image data of crop ﬁelds in the last few years [3] has dramatically
increased the development of computational systems designed to analyze and interpret crop image data. In parallel,
NDVI was established as a powerful metric for image data, as it computes visual attributes of crop ﬁelds while
eliminating non-vegetative properties [16].
The ﬁeld of crop ﬁeld temporally-evolving image processing via NDVI imaging is a nascent and quickly growing
ﬁeld [14]. Contemporary work largely focuses on retrospective curve-ﬁtting, as in time series analysis on Advanced
Very-High-Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) [12] and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)[15]
data, with several focusing on the root-mean-squared deviation (RMSD) metric over pairwise pixel differences as an
image comparison methodology [3].
As our system is online, and therefore must make immediate estimates of possibly early or ongoing crop stress,
retrospective models do not satisfy our needs. Therefore, we instead focus on adapting these methods to online settings,
exploring methodologies using pairwise image differences as a sufﬁcient metric.
3.2
Model-Free Markov Models
Monte Carlo Exploring Starts for POMDPs (MCES-P) [13] extends MCES for MDPs [18], an online implementation
of reinforcement learning that explores locally neighboring policies. Algorithm 1 describes the MCES-P process.
Algorithm 1 MCES-P
Require: Q-value table initialized and initial policy, πi, that is greedy w.r.t Q-values; a maximum number of trajectories,
k, to explore; α, ϵ
1: co,a ←0
2: m ←0
3: repeat
4:
Choose source observation history, o, and a
5:
Modify πi to πi ←(o, a)
6:
Generate trajectory, τ, according to πi ←(o, a)
7:
Qπi
o,a ←(1 −α(m, co,a)) · Qπi
o,a + α(m, co,a) · Rpost−o(τ)
8:
co,a ←co,a + 1
9:
if maxa′ Qπi
o,a′ > Qπi
o,πi(o) + ϵ(k, co,a, co,πi(o)) then
10:
πi(o) ←a′
11:
m ←m + 1
12:
for all oi, o¯i, ai, a¯i do
13:
co,a ←0
14: until termination
where τ is an observation, action, and reward {(oi, ai, ri)}|τ|
i=0.
MCES-P performs round robin transformations over observation sequences and actions via sample action approxi-
mation (SAA) [9]. After each transformation, MCES-P compares the current transformed policy against the current
best policy and, if it dominates, accepts the transformation as the current best policy.
After each τ is generated, MCES-P performs a Q-learning update to the current value of the observation sequence-
action pair with a depreciating learning rate, α(c) = 1/(c + 1) [22]. When comparing each policy against the current
best policy, MCES-P ensures that both policies have been sampled at least k times. To accomplish this, ϵ is simply
deﬁned as ϵ(k, p, q) = +∞if i < k or j < k, and 0 otherwise.
3

4
Problem Domain
In this work, we propose a novel aggregate framework for utilizing multispectral images and environmental metadata in
heterogeneous teams of sensor modalities. In our application, we will a probability of the presence of disease, nitrogen
or water stress, including identifying markers that indicate onset of these stresses. The resultant framework is called the
Agricultural Distributed Decision framework (ADDF). ADDF tackles individual and team learning and planning, as well
as approaches for accomplishing individual tasks, representing our task of organizing satellites, autonomous uninhabited
aerial vehicles (AUAVs), autonomous uninhabited ground vehicles (AUGVs), and ground-level environmental sensors,
speciﬁed in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: Available sensor modalities: (a) Images from the Sentinal-II, (b) 3DR Solo, (c) ClearPath Jackal, and (d)
Micasense Redenge (and others).
Beyond sensor modalities, the environmental domain (used in Sec. 6.1 and simulated in Sec. 6.2) is embodied by
large-scale peanut crop ﬁelds in Tifton, GA, managed by the Department of Agriculture at the University of Georgia,
Tifton campus. Extant stresses include crop ﬁeld erosion, damage done by local fauna, and several introduced stresses
including fungus and pathogen introductions resulting in crop blight and lesions.
The functional capabilities of our sensor modalities are deﬁned as follows:
• L3: The highest level will be comprised of satellites which collect images of the crops on average every week.
The Sentinel 2a and 2b satellites will be used for this layer of information. The data from these satellites are
available for free and the ESA also provides a tool box for processing data collected. This level is passive, as
it is not directly controlled, instead limited by a ﬁxed temporal component of passing over the same location
once every 5 days. Image data in this layer has a multi-spectral resolution of 10 meters per pixel and a thermal
resolution of 20 m per pixel.
• L2: Layer 2 represents the multispectral, high dimensional image data taken by AUAVs. While AUAVs have a
very high degree of control and speed of execution with limited challenge in pathing, images are taken above their
targets. Images generally have a resolution of 1-3 centimeters per pixel depending on the height of the AUAV and
the spatial resolution of the camera.
• L1: Like L2, this layer represents a controllable physical subsystem, but is executed by AUGVs. Pathing is
signiﬁcantly more challenging and, even given high resolution geolocation sensors, may require exploration for
the AUGV to reach its target. Though targeted exploration is more computationally costly and slower, image data
can be collected from a variety of perspectives (individual leaves, fruit, ﬂowers, whole plants) and have a similar
resolution to L2, albeit from alternative angles.
• L0: Although often not directly measuring features due to the onset of stress, we include a layer representing
an array of ground sensors which measure air and soil moisture, ground temperature, and relative humidity.
This helps acquire information valuable for predictive learning approaches that enhance the data model beyond
the other layers image data, enhancing model accuracy by capturing features that the resultant stresses are
conditionally dependent on.
As Fig. 3 illustrates, layers 3, 2, and 1 collect image data at various resolutions and spectra of the crop ﬁeld,
while also collecting environmental data from the layer 0 sensors. Each layer is able to instantly communicate with a
centralized server via a wireless network infrastructure. This centralized server then performs analysis and reasoning on
the collected image and environmental data, described in the next section.
4

Figure 3: Arrangement of physical sensor modalities. Layers 3, 2, and 1 delegates to subsequent layers, and all layers
take image data and collect environmental data from layer 0.
5
Agricultural Distributed Decision Framework
The ADDF is comprised of two distinct functional capabilities: the processing of NDVI image data to compute the
evolution of point-in-time crop growth metrics and the ability to learn when to raise a call-to-action, believing that
processed image data indicates immediate or impending crop stress. The former capability requires collecting NDVI
image data, computing a moving average pixel sufﬁcient metric, and identifying deviating segments of crop ﬁelds. The
latter capability introduces a reinforcement learning technique for exploring policies that, based on continuous-value
observations, trigger a call-to-action.
5.1
Processing Image Data
As introduced in Sec. 3.1, composing metrics of growth patterns via NDVI imaging is a popular methodology.
Unfortunately, much of the contemporary body of work leverages retrospective curve-ﬁtting as a departure point. As
our domain requires that immediate action be taken (i.e. at various points during the growing season), we instead
opt to develop a sufﬁcient statistic computed from two or more NDVI images taken at potentially diverse intervals by
proportionally merging error values.
Two distinct types of image processing using this methodology are required. The ﬁrst task is simple: two aligned
NDVI images, taken from highly similar perspectives (L3 and some L2 tasks), are compared via image difference with
n-square-pixel approximation. Due to possible slight deviations of the images (due to erroneous alignment or evolution
of crop size), the approximation, which takes the average index of an p × p square, can be used to alleviate information
loss.
The second, more complex methodology required is analyzing images of crops from dramatically different angles,
comprising some of L2’s tasks and nearly all of L1’s. In this case, we instead create a generate a distribution of the
NDVI image coloration of a crop and compare the distribution to average coloration taken by the layer. In this work, we
focus on the ﬁrst task and the theory of composing a heterogeneous team, leaving this task and online experiments for
future work.
Figure 4 shows a trivial implementation of a single pairwise comparison of two images taken 3 weeks apart of our
domain’s peanut ﬁeld in the late 2017 growing season. Interestingly, the results are quite telling. Known to the ﬁeld
workers, three standout features are identiﬁable via this comparison: (1) the ﬁeld is bisected by two lines as it was
originally 4 ﬁelds, (2) near the bisection point signiﬁcant crop erosion is occurring, and (3) the west, and particularly
northwest, sector of the ﬁeld is beset by damage from grazing deer.
Algorithm 2 annotates the relatively simplistic process of generating a difference sample between two NDVI images.
The resultant matrix approximates the index across a p square pixels, the set of which becomes a list of pairwise
comparisons. We are interested in p-size sectors that, over the growing season, have very low variance, as it indicates
5

Figure 4: Comparison of two NDVI peanut ﬁeld images taken over a 3 week period with 8 × 8 pixel approximation.
Algorithm 2 ADDF: NDVI image difference method
Require: Two NDVI images, a, b; image dimensions x, y; pixel approximation parameter p
1: i ←0
2: j ←0
3: diff ←∅
4: while i < x do
5:
while j < y do
6:
ai,j ←average index of pixels (i, j) to (i + p, j + p) for image a
7:
bi,j ←average index of pixels (i, j) to (i + p, j + p) for image b
8:
diffi,j ←min[(ai,j −bi,j), 0]
9:
i ←i + p
10:
j ←j + p
11: return diff
that either (a) crops are not growing or are dying quickly, or (b), at the near infrared portion of the spectrum, low
reﬂectance indicates low crop health from water stress.
Algorithm 3 ADDF: Variance estimation
Require: List of pairwise difference matrices d; individual diff matrix size m, n
1: Variance matrix v ←m × n matrix instantiated to 0
2: if |d| > 1 then
3:
for i in [0, m]; j in [0, n] do
4:
vi,j = V AR{dk
i,j}|d|
k=0, the variance of the approximate pixel at i, j for all image differences
5:
Normalize all values in v between 0 and 1
6: return v
As we are primarily interested in disproportionate changes in reﬂectance and growth, instead of examining pure
average indexes across the pairwise differences of images, we focus on the variance of those images. Following the
matrix generation in Alg. 2, Alg. 3 computes the variance across all pairwise differences and then normalizes relative to
the highest variance. When analyzing the resultant variance matrix, lower values are more concerning than higher ones.
As a last step, since the resultant matrix serves as rudimentary image data where lower variance is represented as
higher intensity pixels. In order to combat variance diffuseness, which is caused by crops separated by rows of soil, we
crop the image to the ﬁeld and apply a Gaussian blur where σ = 2.5. We then segment the image via straightforward
applications of image segmentation algorithms, such as K-means [20, 4], to create afﬂicted sectors of the crop ﬁeld.
6

These sectors, based on their average variance, are then decision moments for the agents described in the following
sections.
5.2
Composing a Heterogeneous Team
As introduced in Sec. 3, we have 4 layers of sensor modalities, each with the capability to take either image or
environmental data at varying resolutions. We are tasked with representing these layers, then, as a team, with the
common goal of identifying a stress while balancing (a) speed of identiﬁcation and (b) accuracy of the eventual
categorization.
Casting this problem as decision-theoretic is rather straightforward. Each layer is solving an independent game
formulation, though the state of the environment is (largely) identical for each of them. Since the eventual categorization
is used to inform the decisions of higher level layers, we adopt the perspective of reinforcement learning. Borrowing
from Perkins’ MCES-P, we explore a set of policies mapping call-to-actions to real-valued observations of the variance
across images of a crop ﬁeld. Figure 5 presents a visual representation of the actions of layers and the propagation of
feedback.
Figure 5: Image demonstrating the call-to-action and reinforcement process of layers 3, 2, and 1.
We ﬁrst present the general POMDP frame for layers 3, 2, and 1. The problem an individual agent faces is deﬁned
as a tuple ADDF L
i = ⟨S, A, T, Ω, O, R⟩, where L and i refers to the layer and agent respectively. AL refers to actions
taken at this layer, and AL−1 refers to the eventual action of the subsequent layer. Level 0 has no agency, represented in
our framework as additional state observation information.
• S: the distribution of stress and agent location over a multi-row and column large-scale crop ﬁeld
• A: the set of actions, uniquely deﬁned per layer
– L3: take low-resolution images of the entire ﬁeld on rare occasions
– L2: move; take image of a ﬁeld or section
– L1: move; take image of an individual plants, leaves and fruit
• T = S × A × S: state transition function dependent on agent movement
• Ω: the set of observations. Each agent receives information from level 0 and information as to how each
sector/crop deviates from expected image data using Alg. 3. We discretize to levels of severity via clustering.
• O = S × A: the observation function, mapping observations to actions dependent on the state
• R = S × AL × (AL−1) →R: the reward function, dependent on the agents action and the decision made by the
subsequent layer. The exception is at layer 1, which makes the ﬁnal decision on the presence of a stress.
Examining the reward function R raises an interesting caveat of our domain: reinforcements must be delayed due to
relying on subsequent layer categorization, and games are played in parallel even within each layer. Since each game is
a single horizon, and the policies that are learned are memory-less and reactive, this only means that games may be
resolved outside the order they were played in. Figure 6 demonstrates how a layer 3 agent may begin playing a game
before a previous decision was reinforced.
7

Figure 6: Layers 3 and 2 experience delayed reinforcements when a new game is started before subsequent layers make
a decision.
Here we present the algorithms for ADDF. We generally require two ﬂavors of ADDF: a high level agent that may
tackle several sectors at once (such as for layer 3 and, sometimes, layer 2) and a lower level, sector- and crop-speciﬁc
agent (layer 2 and 1). The high level agent creates multiple decision points for the lower agent, which often must tackle
the sectors one-by-one.
Algorithm 4 ADDF
Require: Maximum number of trajectories, k, to explore; sectors S; number of agents Z; observation and action
spaces O, A for each agent
1: for i ∈(2, Z) do
2:
QLio,a ←0 for all (Oi, Ai)
3:
cLio,a ←0 for all (Oi, Ai)
4:
πLi ←random initial policy
5: repeat
6:
Generate call to actions ⃗τ L3 = L3(πL3, k, S, cL3)
7:
Generate call to actions and collect rejections ⟨⃗τ L2,⃗rL2⟩= L2(πL2, k, S, cL2,⃗τ L3)
8:
Collect classiﬁcations ⃗rL1 = L1(⃗τ L2)
9:
⃗r = ⃗rL1 + ⃗rL2
10:
Update( ⃗Q,⃗c,⃗π,⃗r,⃗τ, Z)
11: until End of growing season
We begin by covering the high-level rotation of actions as a crop season progresses, deﬁned in Alg. 4. Line 1
initializes the Q-table, counts, and policies for each layer. Line 6 runs the call-to-action generation for Layer 3,
leveraging its current learned policy. Layer 2 is a bit different. While line 7 also generates calls to action, any sector
it considers without stress is served as stimuli for Layer 3. Layer 1 only generates stimuli. Line 10 then updates all
Q-values and transforms layer policies that have a new best action using reward stimuli.
As an important point, we omit the constraint of parallelism in the description of Alg. 4 for the purpose of brevity
and clarity. Line 7, for example, doesn’t occur every iteration. This is accomplished instead by creating a queue from
line 6 and iteratively executing line 7 until the queue is empty, illustrated in Fig. 6. Line 10 only executes when Layer 1
or 2 completes a task.
Algorithm 5 deﬁnes the L3 policy exploration and execution process. As in Alg. 1, we select a random observation-
action pair to explore, creating transformed policy π′. By taking variance samples of target sectors, L3 generates
observations, which it then acts on using the transformed policies. For those actions that indicate a stress, L3 returns a
call-to-action.
Since information must be passed between layers, we deﬁne τ differently than canonical MCESP. Here, each
element in τ Li includes the observation, action, and sector index (o, a, s) of that layer, omitting rewards. When we
8

Algorithm 5 L3(π, k, S, c)
Require: Policy π; a maximum number of trajectories, k, to explore; vector of potentially stressed sectors S; counts c
1: Choose random action a and observation o
2: Generate π′ as π ←(o, a)
3: Create variance samples X from S following Alg. 3
4: Generate trajectories ˆτ = {τx}|X|
x=0, according to π′
5: Update counts co,a ←co,a + 1
6: Extract call-to-actions for subsequent layers, ⃗τ = {τ ∈¯τ : τa > 0}
7: return ⃗τ
return rewards back to preceding layers via ⃗r, the preceding layer then knows which observation and action to update.
The algorithm for Layer 2 is omitted, as it differs from Layer 3 only in that it returns trajectories from ⃗τ L3 as a
negative reward if it fails to detect a stress in that sector, similar to Layer 1’s line 5 below, albeit only negative rewards.
Algorithm 6 L1(I)
Require: Call-to-actions I
1: ⃗r ←∅
2: for States from call-to-actions s ∈I do
3:
Create variance samples x from i(s) following Alg. 3
4:
Classify non-uniformity r = Classify(x)
5:
Dispense rewards ⃗r = APPEND(⃗r, (s, r))
6: return ⃗r
In our formulation, Layer 1 is considered objective in its classiﬁcation, and generates stimuli for the other two
(or more) layers. Like the previous layers, it generates an image of a particular crop, but if it detects signiﬁcant
non-uniformity, it immediately classiﬁes the sector as stressed.
Algorithm 7 Update( ⃗Q,⃗c,⃗π,⃗r,⃗τ, Z, k)
Require: Q-tables ⃗Q; count vectors ⃗c; current policies ⃗π; rewards ⃗r; call-to-actions ⃗τ; number of agents Z; trajectory
requirement count k
1: for Agent i ∈(2, Z) do
2:
for Agent’s call-to-actions t ∈⃗τ Li do
3:
Get reward for call-to-action r = ⃗r(t(s))
4:
QLi
o,a ←(1 −α(cLi
o,a)) · QLi
o,a + α(cLi
o,a) · r
5:
if maxa′ QLi
o,a′ > QLi
o,πLi(o) + ϵ(k, cLi
o,a, cLi
o,πLi(o)) then
6:
πLi(o) ←a′
7:
cLi
o,a ←0 for all o, a
Each iteration is concluded with an update of the Q-table. As in MCESP, if the sample complexity k is satisﬁed,
then transformations are possible, if the agent has learned enough about each potential policy.
Our domain differs from predominant exploration of POMDP domains in that the observation function is continuous.
That is, we receive real-valued differentials between expected crop growth when processing image data. However, via
utilizing lossless conversion to observation space partitions [7], we can solve this continuous problem discretely, even
considering layer 0 continuous-value environmental metadata.
In layers that contain multiple agents (excluding layer 3 and 0), since the problem requires potentially reacting to
multiple call to actions, we will utilize a generalization of the POMDP that solves for instant-communication team
9

play, the Multiagent POMDP [2]. The MPOMDP is an interesting formulation, representing the dynamism of the
decision problem by individually capturing the characteristics of each component of the system (in this case, the layers).
However, it is well-known that an MPOMDP can be directly converted to an equally expressive POMDP and solved as
such [1]. The value is in its interpretability, which doesnt affect the complexity to solve it.
We represent a layers homogeneous team as a tuple ADDF L =< Z, S, ⃗A, T, Ω, O, R >, with new or modiﬁed
frame elements:
• Z: the set of agents
• ⃗A = AL
z
Z
z=1: the set of all agents actions
• O = S × ⃗A: the team observation function, where the state and the teams actions result in a single, shared
observation
Utilizing our reinforcement learning perspective, we then learn the optimal policy for each layer as a Monte Carlo
solution to the (M)POMDPs [19, 13].
5.3
Tackling the Hyper-Conservative Local Optima
One complication of our methodology is that layers are incentivized to be highly conservative in their call-to-actions.
Since the presence of a stress is a rare event vis a vis normal growth patterns, learning is inherently biased to rejecting the
stress [6]. Besides dramatically overweighting rewards that indicate stress, we propose two options: forced exploration
even under rejection and random exploration in layer 1.
The ﬁrst option considers reserving a few call-to-actions at each interval (demonstrated in Fig. 6) to create an
objective for subsequent layers to explore near-accepted call-to-actions. For example, even if layer 3 rejects the notion
of a stress in a particular sector, it will still inform layer 2 of a stress in that sector (along with other positively-identiﬁed
stresses), a strategy similar to random policy exploration [24]. This may be added to Alg. 5 by adding rejected sectors
to the call-to-actions τ with exponentially-decaying weight w(τ, m, i) =
m
m+|τ|+i for each ith rejected sector where m
controls the steepness of the exponential decay. This methodology is explored in Sec. 6.
The second option capitalizes on potential dead-time in the lower layers. When not exploring the crop ﬁeld, we can
opt to set layer 1 and 2 to an exploration mode, where they peruse the ﬁeld randomly. When a stress is identiﬁed, a
call-to-action may be simulated sequentially through the entire system and immediately rewarded appropriately, creating
a positive sample to learn from. We reserve exploration of this methodology for real-world experiments in future work.
6
Experimental Results
We propose two toy implementations of our problem domains to test the approaches in Secs. 5.1 and 5.2. We
ﬁrst examine the performance of our image segmentation technique for identifying stressed crop areas by utilizing
actual AUAV images collected across several weeks of a growing season. We then introduce a two-layer POMDP
implementation of our ADDF framework with a simulated toy environment, showing the effectiveness of learning
a reward function vis a vis a subsequent layer’s decisions. In practice, Sec. 6.1 produces inputs for Sec. 6.2, but we
perform separate experiments in this work.
6.1
Identifying Phenotypic Stress
Through technology supplied to the Department of Entomology at the University of Georgia, Tifton campus, we
collected 5 images, each separated by 7 to 9 days, in July and August of 2017 of a peanut ﬁeld. These images were
collected by a 3DR Solo aerial drone indexed using NDVI at a resolution of 1-3 centimeters per pixel. The resultant
ﬁles were encoded as Tagged Image File Format (TIFF), sized around 20 megabytes each.
Since these images took place in a previous growing season, the department is aware of several stresses that occurred
during the growing season. First, the peanut ﬁeld used to be four separate ﬁelds, bisected by two roads, and a sector just
north of the east-west road suffered from stress due to soil erosion.
10

We experimented with several parameter settings for p, σ, and, in the case of K-means, k. Though we hand-selected
parameters for the ﬁnal result in this section, we hypothesize that performing gradient exploration methodologies,
parameters could be ﬁt by optimizing for ﬁt in the ﬁnal segmentation technique (such as the elbow method for
K-means [10].
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: Illustration of applying Alg. 2 with p > 1 to an original image (a) resulting in an approximate image (b).
For Alg. 2, we set p = 12, converting original image dimensions of around 4900x4200 to 620x530. Figure 7 shows
the effect of approximation, resulting in signiﬁcantly less diffuseness between crop rows, though some is retained.
Since the result of Gaussian blurring can lose too much information to compare between images, we wait until the ﬁnal
comparative image before applying it. Next, we compared the differences between two subsequent crop ﬁeld images.
(a)
(b)
→
(c)
Figure 8: Result after full completion of Alg. 2, where the difference of two subsequent images ((a) July 6th and (b)
July 13th) is computed, resulting in (c).
In Fig. 8 we see the result of the ﬁrst diff performed in our sample set for the ﬁrst two dates. It conﬁrms what we
know about this data set: the north side of the ﬁeld (which is darker, indicating less change) is performing signiﬁcantly
worse than the rest of the ﬁeld, and roads bisecting the ﬁeld are clearly visible.
Examining the images in Fig. 9 corroborates the growing concern from diffs computed on July 13th and 21st that
the middle mass of the crop ﬁeld is not producing. One drawback of this methodology is that the stress is certainly
visible by the diff on July 13th (recovering slightly by the 21st). After applying Alg. 3, since the variance image is
still too diffuse for effective image segmentation, we apply a Gaussian blur and then segment, demonstrated in Fig. 10.
Completing the approximation and segmenting technique then results in highly deﬁned and contoured areas, show
in Fig. 10.c for July 21st. 3 distinct layers are clearly visible (though the number of actual layers are determined by the
input k for the K-means method, 10 in our experiments). The center road and previously mentioned erosion due north
of the center of mass are both illustrated as very severe, with less severe sectors in the south and northeast.
We complete this section by illustrating the K-means processing for the ﬁnal two dates in our test set. Over the
course of the ﬁrst month and a half, we see that growth is stymied after our ﬁrst completion and the problem worsens
in the north side of the ﬁeld, though it improves in the south. By the last date, August 11th, the ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly
11

(a)
(b)
→
(c)
Figure 9: Calculating the variance between differences computed for (a) July 6th and 13th and (b) July 13th and 21st,
resulting in variance map (c).
(a)
→
(b)
→
(c)
Figure 10: To identify affected sectors, we take an (a) variance image, apply (b) Gaussian blur, and then (c) K-means.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: K-means processing for (a) July 30th and (b) August 11th
healthier, though the most severe problem areas from July 13th persist.
6.2
Solving Inter-Team Objectives
We test the effectiveness of the ADDF algorithm in a toy implementation of the crop ﬁeld problem 1. In our experiment,
two agents form a two-layer team, where the ﬁrst agent (referred to as the ”fast” agent) takes a low-precision image of
an entire crop ﬁeld, which contains 5 sectors, once every 3 days. The second, ”slow” agent can collect image data only
for a single sector, but can do it once a day. To simulate a L1 classiﬁer, we use an oracle that returns the true state of the
sector after each agent acts on a sector. Each agent receives one of |O| observations, each correlating to a conﬁdence of
1Code available on github at https://github.com/quinngroup/addf pomdp
12

the stress, from low to high. We illustrate the domain in Fig. 12, where the fast and slow agents are represented by a
satellite and AUGV, respectively.
Figure 12: The toy crop ﬁeld problem, where a fast and slow agent team up to learn crop stress probabilities.
The simulator generates a stress in each sector at the beginning of a growing season, which has 89 days, with a 50%
probability. Early in the season, the stress of the state is unstable, having a 50% chance to change status. This likelihood
decreases exponentially each subsequent day. The fast agent gets the maximally correlated observation of the true stress
of the environment (either o = 0 or o = |O| for the lack or presence of a stress, respectively) with 70% probability,
while the slow agent receives it with 85% probability. Incorrect observations are received with the remaining probability
with exponential weight towards the correct classiﬁcation. For example, the slow agent’s observations are received with
probability {o0 = 0.8, o1 = 0.1, o2 = 0.05} when no stress is present.
We test ADDF with conﬁgurations varying the number of observations and the inclusion of the heuristic in Sec. 5.3,
which adds rejected sectors to call-to-actions with exponentially decaying probabilities. Each conﬁguration is tested
with 500 seasons. We begin by setting the baseline with a canonical Q-learning technique, which does not perform
policy exploration and always exploits the current highest action-value for an observation.
|O|
Agent
Accuracy
True
False
Overall
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
3
Fast
5
37,416
2
37,577
49.9%
Slow
2
3
1
1
71.4%
5
Fast
64
37,695
3
37,238
50.3%
Slow
35
4
1
27
56.3%
Table 1: Q-learning baseline, varying the observation and sector counts.
As noted in Sec. 5.3, the relative rarity of positive stimuli for negative events causes Q-learning to quickly converge
to always rejecting the presence of a stress in a sector. Therefore, Q-learning performs essentially the same as the
random baseline. With almost no samples to learn from, we strike the essentially random accuracy of the slow agent.
We then test ADDF in this domain with trajectory limit k = 500.
ADDF performs dramatically better than the Q-learning baseline, achieving over 80% accuracy for the slow agent
and 3-obervation fast agent, performing relatively worse with more observations for the fast agent. The fast agent
performs comparatively worse than the slow agent likely due to the increased noise in its observation function. These
numbers are quite close to the theoretical maximum, considering noise for the environment.
13

|O|
Agent
Accuracy
True
False
Overall
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
3
Fast
26,068
34,032
3,671
11,229
80.1%
Slow
13,067
11,895
4,068
709
83.9%
5
Fast
20,756
36,737
3,732
14,775
75.6%
Slow
12,052
7,612
701
4,123
80.3%
Table 2: ADDF with k = 500.
Both the baseline and ADDF can potentially beneﬁt from increased workload. The baseline rejects nearly every
sector, and, referring to Tbl. 2, it is clear the slow agent is not given enough decision points. For example, when |O| = 3,
the fast agent generates just under 60 calls to the slow agent per season, when it can work 90. Without lowest-level
agents working every day, many stressed crops will not be identiﬁed. We show the results for both the baseline and
MCESP with the workload heuristic in Sec. 5.3 with m = 5.
Method
|O|
Agent
Accuracy
True
False
Overall
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Baseline
3
Fast
30552
26445
14202
3801
76%
Slow
22238
13629
5110
5023
78%
5
Fast
25249
28579
12067
9105
71.8%
Slow
17061
15549
4927
7463
72.5%
ADDF
3
Fast
30703
31355
2327
10615
82.7%
Slow
24260
13488
4936
1415
83.9%
5
Fast
28025
31995
6239
8741
80%
Slow
17865
18242
3991
4898
80.2%
Table 3: The baseline and ADDF algorithms utilizing increased workload heuristics to employ the slow agent more
frequently.
Table 3 shows a dramatic performance boost for the baseline but, much more importantly, additionally demonstrates
the slow agent working nearly every single available day. While ADDF still outperforms the baseline, it does not show
remarkable improvement over the non-heuristic version. However, this isn’t the major contribution of the heuristic. The
impact is that, since the slow agent works more days, it identiﬁes up to 83% more stressed crops.
7
Future Work
Several avenues exist for expanding the prototypical implementation we presented in this work. While we simulate layer
0 information in Sec. 6.2, we do not explore the ramiﬁcations it may have on image processing in Sec. 6.1. Additionally,
layer 1 image processing is a completely different, and far more complex, task than the algorithms presented in Sec. 5.1.
However, even in real-world experiments, the tasks accomplished by layer 1 may be readily replicated by a plant
pathologist.
Image processing may additionally be improved, beyond layer 1, via aligning images via homography. In some
14

recent work, UAV image data may employ homography computation to correct for small alterations, relieving some of
the pressure on our approximation technique in Sec. 5.1 [5].
Further expanding on future work in Sec. 5.1, there is much possibility for more profound image segmentation
techniques that can immediately be leveraged by the ADDF framework. Primarily, performing image segmentation
to identify and align subsections across the temporal evolution of the system, performing RMSD on subimages, is
a potentially fruitful path, explored recently via deep neural networks [17] as a learned classiﬁer. This would be
particularly valuable as a replacement for the proposed layer 1 methodology.
