Experimental Validation of Sensor Fusion-based GNSS Spoofing Attack Detection 
Framework for Autonomous Vehicles 
 
Sagar Dasgupta* 
Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering 
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487 

 
Kazi Hassan Shakib 
Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering 
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487 

 
Mizanur Rahman, Ph.D. 
Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering 
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487 

 
 
 
 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
2 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we validate the performance of the a sensor fusion-based Global Navigation Satellite System 
(GNSS) spoofing attack detection framework for Autonomous Vehicles (AVs). To collect data, a vehicle 
equipped with a GNSS receiver, along with Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is used. The detection 
framework incorporates two strategies: The first strategy involves comparing the predicted location shift, 
which is the distance traveled between two consecutive timestamps, with the inertial sensor-based location 
shift. For this purpose, data from low-cost in-vehicle inertial sensors such as the accelerometer and 
gyroscope sensor are fused and fed into a long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network. The second 
strategy employs a Random-Forest supervised machine learning model to detect and classify turns, 
distinguishing between left and right turns using the output from the steering angle sensor. In experiments, 
two types of spoofing attack models: turn-by-turn and wrong turn are simulated. These spoofing attacks are 
modeled as SQL injection attacks, where, upon successful implementation, the navigation system perceives 
injected spoofed location information as legitimate while being unable to detect legitimate GNSS signals. 
Importantly, the IMU data remains uncompromised throughout the spoofing attack. To test the effectiveness 
of the detection framework, experiments are conducted in Tuscaloosa, AL, mimicking urban road 
structures. The results demonstrate the framework's ability to detect various sophisticated GNSS spoofing 
attacks, even including slow position drifting attacks. Overall, the experimental results showcase the 
robustness and efficacy of the sensor fusion-based spoofing attack detection approach in safeguarding AVs 
against GNSS spoofing threats. 
 
Keywords: Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), GPS, Autonomous vehicle, Cybersecurity, 
Spoofing attack, LSTM. 
 
 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
3 
 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) heavily depend on the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 
for accurate and continuous real-time position information, crucial for their autonomous navigation, 
security, and safety-critical applications. GNSS comprises multiple systems owned by different countries, 
including GPS (USA) (2), BeiDou/BDS (China) (3), Galileo (Europe) (4), GLONASS (Russia) (5), 
IRNSS/NavIC (India) (6), and QZSS (Japan) (7). Despite their importance, GNSS signals are relatively 
weak, often likened to the visibility of a 25-watt light bulb from a distance of about 20,000 kilometers, 
making them susceptible to interference. While GPS provides both encrypted and unencrypted signals, the 
encrypted signals are accessible only to government and military users, leaving unencrypted civilian signals 
vulnerable to both intentional and unintentional threats. To meet the navigation requirements of AVs, 
precise location information is essential, with positioning errors needing to be within the centimeter level. 
Currently, AVs employ a differential global positioning system (DGPS) for correcting localization 
solutions. DGPS can achieve position error as low as 0.01m (8) by utilizing a reference station alongside 
regular GPS signal. Throughout the rest of this paper, DGPS will be referred to as both GNSS and GPS. 
The performance of the GNSS, is affected by physical degradation of the radio signal caused by 
natural, unintentional, and intentional threats (9). As GNSS signals travel through the Earth's atmosphere 
to reach an AV's GNSS receiver, their strength diminishes. Additionally, tall structures reflecting these 
signals introduce positional errors and disrupt continuous signal availability at the receiver (10–14), creating 
unintentional threats. On the other hand, intentional threats involve attackers blocking the GNSS signal or 
transmitting fake signals. International threats can be broadly categorized into two types: jamming and 
spoofing. In jamming (15), a powerful GNSS signal is transmitted to prevent the genuine signal from 
reaching the target GNSS receiver. However, spoofing (16–20) is a more sophisticated attack where the 
attacker manipulates the authentic GNSS signal structure, transmitting false location information to the 
target AV. The AV, unaware of the manipulation, updates its navigation route based on the spoofed signal 
(21). Such sophisticated GNSS spoofing attacks require the spoofer to obtain the target vehicle's current 
location, destination, and route information. In this experiment, the sensor fusion-based GNSS spoofing 
attack detection framework is tested against sophisticated spoofing attacks. 
One of the main objectives of manipulating a GNSS receiver during a spoofing attack is to interfere 
with the GNSS signal, potentially redirecting a target AV to the wrong destination, posing risks to the safety 
of passengers and transportation of goods. Spoofing attacks are categorized into three types: simplistic, 
intermediate, and sophisticated (22). Simplistic attacks involve using a commercial GPS signal simulator 
along with a power amplifier and antenna (23). These asynchronous attacks are akin to signal jamming, 
causing the GPS receiver to lose lock and go through partial or complete reacquisition. Detecting such 
attacks is relatively straightforward. Intermediate attacks utilize portable receiver spoofers, made feasible 
by the advent of software-defined radio (SDR) technology (24). This development has simplified the 
creation of these portable spoofers, enabling intermediate-level attacks. In this scenario, the attacker closely 
tracks the victim AV to gather information about its GPS receiver antenna's position and velocity, ensuring 
precise positioning of the spoofed signals relative to the legitimate signals at the AV's antenna. As these 
attacks are synchronous, they pose greater challenges for detection. Sophisticated attacks represent the 
highest level of sophistication, employing multiple phase-locked portable receiver-spoofers. These attacks 
are specifically designed to deceive angle-of-arrival-based defensive systems, making them highly 
formidable and difficult to counter. Unfortunately, due to the dynamic nature of spoofing attacks, no single 
detection method can identify all types of GNSS spoofing attacks (25). Therefore, researchers focus on 
developing methods that increase the difficulty of executing a spoofing attack, aiming to enhance the 
resilience of GNSS systems against these threats. The detection framework operates at the localization 
solution level, making it sufficient to model the attack by simply replacing the legitimate localization data 
(latitude, longitude, and altitude) with spoofed locations without actually spoofing the GPS receiver 
antenna. 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
4 
 
In this paper, we validate the performance of our previously proposed sensor fusion-based Global 
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) spoofing attack detection framework designed specifically for 
Autonomous Vehicles (AV) (1). The detection framework employs two strategies: First, it compares the 
predicted location shift (distance between consecutive timestamps) with the inertial sensor-based location 
shift, monitoring vehicle motion states. Data from low-cost in-vehicle inertial sensors are fused into an 
LSTM neural network to predict AV travel distance. Second, a Random-Forest model detects and classifies 
turns based on the steering angle sensor. Both strategies compare GNSS-derived speed with vehicle 
velocity. Two types of spoofing attacks (turn-by-turn, wrong turn) are simulated as SQL injections, with 
the IMU data remaining uncompromised. Experiments in Tuscaloosa, AL, mimic urban roads to test the 
framework's effectiveness. 
The paper follows the following structure: The "Attack Model" section introduces the attack 
scenarios and the process of creating the attacks. Next, the "Attack Detection Framework" section describes 
the attack models and the adapted attack detection framework utilized in the experiments. The 
"Experimental Setup" section provides an overview of the experimental arrangement. In the "Detection 
Framework Performance" section, the performance of the detection framework is analyzed. Lastly, the 
"Conclusion" section offers concluding remarks and highlights potential directions for future research. 
ATTACK MODEL 
Throughout the experiment, we simulate two types of GNSS spoofing scenarios (turn-by-turn, 
wrong turn)(See Figure 1). The spoofing detection model introduced in this paper is solely dependent on 
the latitude and longitude data from the GNSS, without considering any other signal parameters. Therefore, 
by substituting the legitimate latitude and longitude data in the MongoDB database with spoofed latitude 
and longitude values (See Figure 2), we can accurately mimic a spoofing attack and effectively test the 
detection framework's performance against such attacks. In these experiments, a spoofed database is 
created. The spoofed database contains the latitude and longitude of spoofed routes for both spoofing 
scenarios. The spoofed route is selected based on the assumption that an attacker possesses information 
about the probable route of the victim AV before initiating the attack. This knowledge allows the attacker 
to gradually manipulate the perceived location of the AV, making it challenging to detect spoofing. To 
create and obtain latitude and longitude data along the route, ArcGIS's Network Analyst tool is utilized. To 
replicate the movement of an actual vehicle, the update rate of the spoofed route's location is determined 
based on the average speed observed on that specific roadway. For the testing routes, it is assumed that the 
average vehicle speed is 25 mph, equivalent to 11.18 m/s. Considering the AV's GNSS data output 
frequency to be 1 Hz, latitude and longitude points along the spoofed route are generated approximately 11 
meters apart from each other. Once the attacker successfully spoofs the AV's GNSS receiver, the latitude 
and longitude data columns in the database are substituted with the spoofed route data from the spoofed 
database. Consequently, the AV will perceive the spoofed location as authentic. However, it is important 
to note that during the attack, all other sensor data remains uncompromised. This means that all other data 
columns are continuously updated in real-time with legitimate data from the CPT7700, maintaining their 
integrity throughout the spoofing attack. 
A set of spoofed routes are generated for each spoofing attack scenario. For the turn-by-turn attack 
data, a route is created wherein the AV's location is shifted from its current position. The shift is directed 
towards the adjacent parallel road, with consideration for the high density of the surroundings. As a result, 
the shift is intentionally kept relatively small. To create wrong turn attacks seven intersections are chosen, 
and four wrong right turn and three wrong left turn routes are created. Whenever the AV is near one of the 
chosen intersections, a spoofed route is injected into the database to simulate the attack. For all the spoofing 
attacks, the injection of the spoofed database is done by SQL injection attack (26, 27) technique that allows 
the attacker to add, delete, and modify the database contents. 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
5 
 
 
Figure 1 Modeled spoofing attacks (samples) 
ATTACK DETECTION FRAMEWORK 
The GNSS spoofing attack detection framework (1)  utilizes two concurrent strategies, fusing data 
from in-vehicle sensors—GNSS, accelerometer, gyroscope, and speedometer to achieve a unified and 
resilient GNSS spoofing attack detection approach. The first strategy focuses on developing a vehicle state 
prediction model by training a deep recurrent neural network (LSTM) with attack-free speed, acceleration, 
and gyroscope data to predict the location shift between consecutive timestamps. This strategy also 
continuously monitors the vehicle's motion state using the speedometer output. In the second strategy, 
gyroscope data is employed to recognize left and right turns. A Random Forest (RF) algorithm is trained 
with vehicle route data to learn patterns of left and right turns, enabling the detection and classification of 
turning maneuvers. The turn detection strategy considers both inertial sensor output and GNSS turning 
information and uses input from the speedometer sensor to distinguish such cases.  
The experimental framework is presented in Figure 2. A training dataset is created to test all the 
detection models using the setup explained in the previous paragraph. The driving route of the training 
dataset replicates an urban road structure, aiming to imitate real-world scenarios. The GNSS traces (latitude, 
and longitude) is presented in Figure 3. Data from the CPT7700's IMU, including X, -Y, Z acceleration, 
and X, -Y, Z gyro data, along with speed data (north, east, and up velocity) and location data (latitude and 
longitude), are stored in a MongoDB database. MongoDB is chosen for its superior performance, 
scalability, availability, and flexibility compared to SQL databases. (28). The frequency of data is 1Hz. The 
Haversine formula is utilized to determine the distance traveled between two consecutive timestamps based 
on the data obtained from GNSS. (See Equation 1) (29): 
 
𝑑𝑑= 2𝑟𝑟𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠−1(ඨ𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠2 ቀ𝜑𝜑2 −𝜑𝜑1
2
ቁ+ 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜑𝜑1) 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜑𝜑2) 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠2(𝜓𝜓2 − 𝜓𝜓1
2
))        (1) 
 
where d represent the distance in meters between two points on the Earth's surface; r denotes the 
Earth's radius  (6378 km); 𝜑𝜑1 and 𝜑𝜑2 represent the latitudes in radians; and 𝜓𝜓1 and 𝜓𝜓2 denote the longitudes 
in radians of two consecutive time stamps. 
Turn-by-turn
Wrong turn
Legitimate
Spoofed

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 2 Experimental detection framework 
 
 
Figure 3 GNSS traces from the training dataset 
The prediction of the distance traveled by an AV between two consecutive timestamps is achieved 
using an LSTM architecture with 50 neurons (30). The training and validation datasets include X, -Y, Z 
acceleration, X, -Y, Z gyro, and east, north, and up-speed data. The model's output is the location shift 
between the current timestamp and the immediate future timestamp. The data generation frequency is 1 Hz, 
resulting in a time difference of 1 second between two consecutive timestamps. For training purposes, the 
continuous driving data from the training dataset (see Figure 3) is split into training with 7,193 observations 
and validation with 3,083 observations. Prior to feeding the sensor output into the LSTM training, the input 
features are normalized between 0 and 1. To select the appropriate LSTM hyperparameters, such as the 
number of neurons, number of epochs, batch size, and learning rate, a Grid Search approach is employed 
due to the model's time series-based nature (30). The hyperparameter values and the optimizer's name are 
listed in Table 1. After evaluating the LSTM-based prediction model, the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) 
of the predicted location shift is measured to be 0.02 m, with the maximum absolute error being 0.06 m. 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
7 
 
TABLE 1 LSTM model hyperparameters and optimizer 
Hyperparameters and Optimizer Value 
Number if neurons 
50 
Number of epochs 
50 
Batch size 
12 
Learning rate 
0.01 
Optimizer 
Adam 
Figure 4 displays the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) loss profile, or learning curve, for the trained 
LSTM model. The y-axis represents the mean absolute error loss values for both the training and validation 
datasets, while the x-axis indicates the number of epochs. The learning curve illustrates that initially, the 
loss is comparatively high; however, the training loss steadily decreases and eventually stabilizes, indicating 
that the LSTM model is not under-fitted. Additionally, as both the training and validation losses reach a 
stable state quickly, it confirms that the LSTM model is not overfitted. Furthermore, the training and 
validation losses are consistently low, which is a positive sign of the model's effectiveness. The initial peak 
in both the training and validation losses indicates that the model was not well-generalized at that stage. 
However, as the number of epochs increases, the model becomes more stable and better generalized. It is 
worth noting that the training and testing data used in the analysis represent real-world driving data on 
urban routes. This ensures that the neural network model demonstrates generalized behavior within an urban 
network context. 
 
Figure 4 Comparison of Mean Absolute Error (loss) profiles with the optimal parameter set 
The RF statistical classifier is employed to categorize vehicle maneuvering into three classes: right 
turn, left turn, and no turn, based on gyroscope output. RF is preferred for its exceptional classification 
accuracy, capability to model intricate interactions among predictor variables, and its flexibility in 
conducting various types of statistical data analysis. The RF algorithm constructs classification trees using 
the dataset and aggregates predictions from all the individual trees to make the final classification decision. 
X, -Y, and Z gyro data are used as the input features. The training dataset (10026 data points) is labeled as 
right turn, left turn, and no turn and used as target labels. The training dataset is not balanced in terms of 
left and right turn data. To solve this problem, Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) (31) 
is used to resample the dataset. The SMOTE sampling strategy is set to “auto” so that the minority class is 
oversampled to achieve an equal number of samples as the majority class. Then the input feature data are 
normalized between 0 and 1 and fed to the RF model. Cross-validation is performed on the dataset splitting 
it to 5 folds or subsets. The performance of the trained RF model is presented in Table 2 in terms of 
precision, recall, accuracy, and F1 score. Precision is the measure of how accurately a specific turn or no 
turn is detected out of all observations. The precision of the RF model varies from 93% to 96%. Recall 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loss
Epochs
Training
ValidaƟon

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
8 
 
refers to the percentage of the observations where the classification is correct. The recall varies from 89% 
to 97%. The classification accuracy is 94%. The F1 score reflects the balance between precision and recall. 
The F1 score ranges from 0.92 to 0.95, which proves that the precision and recall are well-balanced.  
TABLE 2 Random Forest model validation result 
Turn type precision recall accuracy f1-score 
Right 
0.93 
0.95 
0.94 
0.94 
Left 
0.93 
0.97 
0.94 
0.95 
No turn 
0.96 
0.89 
0.94 
0.92 
To compare the gyroscope-based turn detection with the GNSS data. Three consecutive latitude 
and longitude data are used to determine the turn angle, and based on the turn angle value, the turns are 
classified. The vehicle's state is determined based on the SPAN data, which consists of north, east, and up 
velocity components. The RMSE of the SPAN velocity is measured to be 0.03 m/s. If any of the three 
velocity components (north, east, or up) exceed the threshold of 0.03 m/s, the vehicle state is classified as 
"moving." Otherwise, if all velocity components are below or equal to 0.03 m/s, the vehicle state is 
classified as "standstill." 
During a trip, all the pre-trained models operate in real-time on the onboard computing unit. The 
detection algorithms run in parallel. Data from the CPT7700, including GNSS and IMU data, is stored in 
the MongoDB database. Each model utilizes the required real-time data for spoofing detection. For instance, 
at timestamp t, the GNSS and IMU data from CPT7700 is immediately fed to the distance traveled 
determination model to calculate the actual distance traveled between timestamp t and t-1. Simultaneously, 
the distance traveled prediction model, which is a pre-trained LSTM, predicts the distance traveled between 
timestamp t and t-1. The results from both models are compared to verify if the GNSS signal is being 
spoofed. In parallel, the "turning maneuver detection" model leverages the gyroscope data at timestamp t 
to classify the maneuver type. This information is cross-referenced with the "turn detection" model using 
data from timestamps t-2, t-1, and t to detect any signs of a spoofing attack in real-time. Furthermore, the 
vehicle's motion state is determined using the SPAN data at timestamp t. This information is then compared 
with the GNSS speed output to detect any potential attack occurring in real-time. 
 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
To test the performance of the sensor fusion-based spoofing attack detection under two attack 
scenarios (turn-by-turn, wrong turn), a test setup is developed in the Connected and Automated Mobility 
Laboratory (CAM Lab) of the University of Alabama (See Figure 5). A Toyota Camry 2014 SE car is 
equipped with NovAtel CPT7700 with GNSS and Inertial Navigation System (INS) technology. CPT7700 
contains an OEM7700 multi-frequency GNSS receiver, which can track current and upcoming GNSS 
constellations, including GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, BeiDou, QZSS, and IRNSS. It also includes TerraStar 
Correction Services with RTK for centimeter-level real-time positioning. It is equipped with NovAtel’s 
SPAN technology for continuous 3D position, velocity, and attitude. The performance of the GNSS receiver 
is being presented in Table 3. CPT7700 is also equipped with the high-performing Honeywell HG4930 
Micro Electromechanical System (MEMS) IMU containing gyroscope and accelerometer. The performance 
of the IMU is being presented in Table 4. A CPT7 I/O2 cable is being used to connect CPT7700 with a 
Windows-based onboard computing unit with the USB port, which supports a hi-speed (480Mb/s) data rate. 
The Hexagon GNSS-850 tough high-precision antenna with superior tracking performance is being used, 
featuring multi-point feeding network and radiation pattern optimization technology. It has the ability to 
track low-elevation satellites while maintaining a high gain for higher-elevation satellites, making it suitable 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
9 
 
for applications where the sky is partially visible, such as operating close to tree lines, under foliage, or in 
urban canyons. 
 
Figure 5 Hardware setup 
TABLE 3 GNSS receiver performance 
Positioning 
Accuracy (RMS) 
Single Point L1 
1.5 m 
Single Point L1/L2 
1.2 m 
SBAS 
60 cm 
DGPS (code) 
40 cm 
TerraStar-C PRO 
2.5 cm 
TerraStar-L 
40 cm 
RTK 
1 cm + 1 ppm 
 
TABLE 4 IMU performance 
Gyroscope 
Accelerometer 
Technology 
MEMS 
Technology 
MEMS 
Dynamic range 
400 °/s 
Dynamic range 
20 g 
Bias instability 
0.45 °/hr 
Bias instability 
0.075 mg 
Angular random walk 0.06 °/√hr Velocity random walk 
0.06 m/s/√hr 
 
DETECTION FRAMEWORK PERFORMANCE 
 
The attack detection framework is tested against two distinct attack scenarios: turn-by-turn and 
wrong turn. real-time evaluations are performed, where the attacks are initiated by injecting spoofed latitude 
and longitude at specific points during the trip to closely replicate actual GNSS spoofing incidents. The 
driving route used for testing is depicted in Figure 6. For turn-by-turn attacks, three instances are conducted 
along the route, involving shifts to new locations (adjacent blocks) three times, each representing separate 
events. Additionally, six wrong turn attacks are conducted, where three cases involve spoofed routes 
indicating left turns while the AV is actually taking right turns, and the other three cases represent spoofed 
routes indicating right turns while the AV is making left turns in reality. The turn-by-turn attack detection 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
10 
 
model achieves a perfect detection accuracy, successfully identifying all three location shifts with 100% 
accuracy. 
 
Figure 6: Testing route 
 
Table 5 presents the results of the wrong turn detection algorithm in terms of precision, recall, 
accuracy, and F1 score. Precision measures the accuracy of detecting wrong turn attacks among all the 
attack detection instances considered in this study. The precision for detecting wrong right turns is 95%, 
and for wrong left turns, it is 96%. Recall, on the other hand, indicates the percentage of observations where 
attacks are correctly detected among all the compromised observations. As shown in Table 5, the recall for 
wrong turns is 1, indicating that all wrong turn attacks are successfully identified. The accuracy of detecting 
wrong right turns is 95%, and for wrong left turns, it is 96%. The F1 score, which balances precision and 
recall, is 0.97 for wrong right turns and 0.98 for wrong left turns, demonstrating a well-balanced 
performance. Thus, the attack detection framework excels in real-time detection of wrong turn attacks, 
whether they involve right turns or left turns. 
TABLE 5 Random Forest model validation result 
Turn type precision recall accuracy f1-score 
Right 
0.95 
1 
0.95 
0.97 
Left 
0.96 
1 
0.96 
0.98 
 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an experimental verification of a sensor fusion-based GNSS spoofing attack 
detection framework tailored for AVs. We model two types of spoofing attack scenarios and detail the 
attack creation process. The detection framework combines RTK GNSS receiver and high-performing IMU 
data to enhance AV navigation accuracy and reliability. The framework employs two distinct strategies: a 
LSTM neural network for predicting AV distance between timestamps, comparing it with inertial sensor-
based location shifts and monitoring motion states; and an RF-supervised machine learning model for 
detecting and classifying turns using the steering angle sensor's output. GNSS-derived speed is compared 
with the actual vehicle velocity output in both strategies. A testing dataset is created to train the LSTM 
model for distance prediction and the RF model for turn classification. Validation results demonstrate both 
models' high accuracy in their respective tasks. Experiments conducted in Tuscaloosa, AL, simulating urban 
road structures, confirm the framework's effectiveness in detecting various GNSS spoofing attacks. 

Dasgupta, Shakib, and Rahman 
 
11 
 
The results highlight the robustness and efficacy of the sensor fusion-based approach in safeguarding AVs 
against GNSS spoofing threats. By harnessing the integration of GNSS and IMU data, our proposed 
detection framework shows great potential in enhancing AV navigation security and resilience in real-time 
scenarios, thus advancing the safety and reliability of autonomous mobility.
