Ups and Downs: Modeling the Visual Evolution of Fashion
Trends with One-Class Collaborative Filtering
Ruining He
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, California, U.S.A.

Julian McAuley
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, California, U.S.A.

ABSTRACT
Building a successful recommender system depends on understand-
ing both the dimensions of people’s preferences as well as their dy-
namics. In certain domains, such as fashion, modeling such prefer-
ences can be incredibly difﬁcult, due to the need to simultaneously
model the visual appearance of products as well as their evolution
over time. The subtle semantics and non-linear dynamics of fashion
evolution raise unique challenges especially considering the spar-
sity and large scale of the underlying datasets. In this paper we
build novel models for the One-Class Collaborative Filtering set-
ting, where our goal is to estimate users’ fashion-aware personal-
ized ranking functions based on their past feedback. To uncover
the complex and evolving visual factors that people consider when
evaluating products, our method combines high-level visual fea-
tures extracted from a deep convolutional neural network, users’
past feedback, as well as evolving trends within the community.
Experimentally we evaluate our method on two large real-world
datasets from Amazon.com, where we show it to outperform state-
of-the-art personalized ranking measures, and also use it to visu-
alize the high-level fashion trends across the 11-year span of our
dataset.
Keywords
Recommender Systems; Fashion Evolution; Personalized Ranking;
Visual Dimensions
1.
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems play a key role in helping users to dis-
cover items matching their personal interests amongst huge corpora
of products. In order to surface useful recommendations, it is cru-
cial to be able to learn from user feedback in order to understand
and capture the underlying decision factors that have an inﬂuence
on users’ choices. Here we are interested in applications in which
visual decision factors are at play, such as clothing recommenda-
tion. In such settings, visual signals play a key role—naturally one
wouldn’t buy a t-shirt from Amazon without being able to see a pic-
ture of the product, no matter what ratings or reviews the product
Copyright is held by the International World Wide Web Conference Com-
mittee (IW3C2). IW3C2 reserves the right to provide a hyperlink to the
author’s site if the Material is used in electronic media.
WWW 2016, April 11–15, 2016, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
ACM 978-1-4503-4143-1/16/04.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2872427.2883037 .
2011                 2012                    2013                 2014
Figure 1: Above the timeline are the three most fashionable styles
(i.e., groups) of women’ sneakers during each year/epoch, revealed
by our model; while below the timeline is a speciﬁc user’s pur-
chases (one in each year), which we model as being the result of a
combination of fashion and personal factors.
had. Likewise then, when building a recommender system, we ar-
gue that this important source of information should be accounted
for when modeling users’ preferences.
In spite of their potential value, there are several issues that make
visual decision factors particularly difﬁcult to model. First is sim-
ply the complexity and subtlety of the factors involved; to extract
any meaningful signal about the role of visual information in users’
purchasing decisions shall require large corpora of products (and
images) and purchases. Second is the fact that visual preferences
are highly personal, so we require a system that models and ac-
counts for the preferences of and differences between individuals.
Third is the fact that complex temporal dynamics are at play, since
the features considered ‘fashionable’ change as time progresses.
And ﬁnally, it is important to account for the considerable amount
of non-visual factors that are also at play (such as durability and
build quality); this latter point is particularly important when try-
ing to interpret the role of visual decision factors, since we need to
‘tease apart’ the visual from the non-visual components of people’s
decisions.
Our main goal is to address these four challenges, i.e., to build
visually-aware recommender systems that are scalable, personal-
ized, temporally evolving, and interpretable. We see considerable
value in solving such problems—in particular we shall be able to
build better recommender systems that surface products that more
closely match users’ and communities’ evolving interests. This is
especially true for fashion recommendation, where product corpora
are particularly ‘long-tailed’ as new items are continually intro-
arXiv:1602.01585v1  [cs.AI]  4 Feb 2016

duced; in such cold-start settings we cannot rely on user feedback
but need a rich model of the product’s appearance in order to gen-
erate useful recommendations.
Beyond generating better recommendations, such a system has
the potential to answer high-level questions about how visual fea-
tures inﬂuence people’s decisions, and more broadly how fashions
have evolved over time. For instance, we can answer queries such
as “what are the key visual features or factors that people consider
when evaluating products?” or “what are the main factors differen-
tiating early 2000s vs. late 2000s fashions?”, or even “at what point
did Hawaiian shirts go out of style?”. Thus our main goal is to learn
from data how to model users’ preferences toward products, and by
doing so to make high-level statements about the temporal and vi-
sual dynamics at play.
Addressing our goals above requires new models to be devel-
oped. Previous models have considered either visual [14, 12] or
temporal data [39, 19, 23, 5] in isolation, though few have modeled
both aspects simultaneously as we do here. First, as we show quan-
titatively, the evolution of fashion trends can be abrupt and non-
linear, so that existing temporal models such as timeSVD++ [19]
are not immediately appropriate to address the challenge of captur-
ing fashion dynamics. Moreover, multiple sources of temporal dy-
namics can be at play simultaneously, e.g. dynamics at the user or
community level; the introduction of new products; or sales promo-
tions that impact the choices people make in the short term. Thus
we need a ﬂexible temporal model that is capable of accounting
for these varied effects; this is especially true if we want to in-
terpret our ﬁndings, which requires that we ‘tease-apart’ or sepa-
rate these visual vs. non-visual temporal dynamics. Secondly, real-
world datasets are often highly sparse, especially for clothing data
where new products are constantly emerging and being replaced
over time; this means on the one hand that accounting for content
(i.e., visual information) is critical for new items, but on the other
hand that only a modest amount of parameters are affordable per
item due to the huge item vocabulary involved. This drives us to
avoid using localized structures as much as possible. Thirdly, scal-
ability can be a potential challenge since the new model needs to
be built on top of a large corpus of product image data as well as
a huge amount of user feedback. Note that the high dimensionality
of the image data also exacerbates the above sparsity issue.
Speciﬁcally, our main contributions include:
1. We build scalable models to capture temporal dynamics in
order to make better recommendations for the classical One-
Class Collaborative Filtering setting [27], where only the im-
plicit (or ‘positive’) feedback of users (i.e., purchase histo-
ries, bookmarks, browsing logs, mouse activities etc. [38])
are available. To cope with the non-linearity of fashion trends,
we propose to automatically discover the important fashion
‘epochs’ each of which captures a separate set of prevailing
visual decision factors at play.
2. Our method also models non-visual dimensions and non-
visual temporal dynamics (in a lightweight manner), which
not only helps to account for interference from non-visual
sources, but also makes our method a fully-ﬂedged recom-
mendation system. We develop efﬁcient training procedures
based on the Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) frame-
work to learn the epoch segmentation and model parameters
simultaneously.
3. Empirical results on two large real-world datasets, Women’s
and Men’s Clothing & Accessories from Amazon, demon-
strate that our models are able to outperform state-of-the-art
methods signiﬁcantly, both in warm- and cold-start settings.
Table 1: Notation
Notation
Explanation
U, I
user set, item set
I+
u
the items for which user u expressed positive
feedback
Pu,Vu, Tu
training/validation/test subsets of I+
u
bxu,i
predicted preference of user u towards item i
bxu,i(t)
predicted preference of u towards i at time t
K
dimensionality of latent factors
K′
dimensionality of visual factors
F
dimensionality of Deep CNN features
α
global offset (scalar)
βu, βi
user u’s bias, item i’s bias (scalar)
βi(t)
item i’s bias at time t (scalar)
βCi(t)
subcategory bias item at time t (scalar)
γu, γi
latent factors of user u, item i (K × 1)
θu, θi
visual factors of user u, item i (K′ × 1)
θu(t), θi(t)
visual factors of user u, item i at time t (K′×1)
fi
Deep CNN visual features of item i (F × 1)
E
K′ × F embedding matrix
E(t)
K′ × F embedding matrix at time t
β
visual bias vector (visual bias = ⟨β, fi⟩)
β(t)
visual bias vector at t (visual bias = ⟨β(t), fi⟩)
4. We provide visualizations of our learned models and quali-
tatively demonstrate how fashion has shifted in recent years.
We ﬁnd that fashions evolve in complex, non-linear ways,
which can not easily be captured by existing methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce our
proposed method in Section 2, before we develop a Coordinate As-
cent ﬁtting procedure in Section 3. Comprehensive experiments on
real-world datasets as well as visualizations are conducted in Sec-
tion 4. We discuss related work in Section 5 and conclude in Sec-
tion 6.
2.
MODELING THE TEMPORAL DYNAM-
ICS OF VISUAL STYLES
We are interested in learning visual temporal dynamics from im-
plicit feedback datasets (e.g. purchase histories of clothing & ac-
cessories) where visual signals are at play, rather than (say) star-
ratings. This choice is made due to the expectation that evolving
fashion styles will be more closely reﬂected in purchase choices
than in ratings—our hypothesis being that people only buy items if
they are already attracted to their visual appearance, so that varia-
tion in ratings can be predominantly explained by non-visual fac-
tors, whereas variation in purchases is a combination of both visual
and non-visual decisions.
By accounting for evolving fashion dynamics for implicit feed-
back in the form of purchase histories, we hope to build systems
that are quantitatively helpful for estimating users’ personalized
rankings (i.e., assigning likely purchases higher ranks than non-
purchases), which can then be harnessed for recommendation.
Formally, we represent the set of users and items with U and I
respectively. Each user u ∈U is associated with a set of items I+
u .
About each item i ∈I+
u , u has expressed explicit positive feedback
(i.e., by purchasing it) at time tui. Additionally, a single image is
available for each item i ∈I. Using the above data, our objective is
to generate for each user u a time-dependent personalized ranking
of those items about which they haven’t yet provided feedback (i.e.
I \I+
u ). The challenge here is to develop efﬁcient methods to make

use of these raw images to learn visual styles that are temporally-
evolving and predictive of users’ opinions. The notation we use
throughout the paper is summarized in Table 1.
2.1
Matrix Factorization
We begin by brieﬂy describing the underlying ‘standard’ Matrix
Factorization method [20], whose basic formulation we adopt. Here
the preference of a user u toward an item i (i.e. bxu,i) is predicted
according to
bxu,i = α + βu + βi + ⟨γu, γi⟩,
(1)
where α is a global offset, βu and βi are user/item bias terms, and
γu and γi are K-dimensional latent factors describing user u and
item i respectively. Intuitively, γi can be interpreted as the ‘prop-
erties’ of the item i, while γu can be seen as user u’s personal
‘preferences’ toward those properties.
2.2
Modeling Visual Dimensions
Although the above standard model can capture rich interactions
between users and items, it suffers from cold start issues due to
the sparsity of real-world datasets, especially in domains like fash-
ion where the product vocabulary is long-tailed and continuously
evolving. Using explicit features like user proﬁles and product fea-
tures can alleviate this problem by making use of auxiliary signals
in cold start scenarios.
To model visual dimension and uncover users’ preferences to-
wards different visual styles, we are interested in incorporating the
visual appearance of items into the formulation. Previous meth-
ods for ‘visually aware’ recommendation have made use of fea-
tures from deep networks [26, 12] though made no use of tem-
poral dynamics. In those works the basic idea is to discover low-
dimensional ‘visual decision factors’ to explain user’s activities.
We build upon this idea and deﬁne our predictor as
bxu,i = α + βu + βi
|
{z
}
bias terms
+
⟨γu, γi⟩
| {z }
non-visual interaction
+
⟨θu, θi⟩
| {z }
visual interaction
,
(2)
where α, β, and γ are as in Eq. 1. θu and θi are newly introduced
K′-dimensional visual factors that encode the ‘visual compatibil-
ity’ between the user u and the item i.
Intuitively, we want θi to be explicit visual features of the item i.
Particularly, it is more desirable to use high-level features to capture
human notions of visual styles. Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
work (i.e., ‘Deep CNN’) features extracted from raw product im-
ages presented a good option due to their widely demonstrated ef-
ﬁcacy at capturing abstract notions of ﬁne-grained categories [31],
photographic style [17], aesthetic quality [24], and scene character-
istics [8], among others.
Let fi denote the Deep CNN features of item i and F represent
its number of dimensions. We further introduce a K′ × F embed-
ding matrix E to linearly embed the high-dimensional feature vec-
tor fi into a much lower-dimensional (i.e., K′) visual style space.
Namely, we take
θi = Efi.
(3)
Then the parameter set is Θ = {α, βu, βi, γu, γi, θu, E}. By learn-
ing the embedding E from the data, we are uncovering K′ visual
dimensions that are the most predictive of users’ opinions.
2.3
Modeling Visual Evolution
The above model is good at capturing/uncovering visual dimen-
sions as well as the extent to which users are attracted to each of
them. Nevertheless, fashions, i.e., the visual elements of items that
people are attracted to, evolve gradually over time. This presents
challenges when modeling the visual dimensions of opinions be-
cause the same appearance may be favored during some time peri-
ods while disliked during others. Our goal here is to discover such
trends both as a means of making better predictions, but also so
that we can draw high-level conclusions about how fashions have
evolved over the life of our dataset.
Thus we want to extend the above ‘static’ model to capture the
temporal dynamics of fashion. Considering the sparsity of real-
world datasets, it is important to develop models that are expressive
enough to capture the relevant dynamics but at the same time are
tractable in terms of the number of parameters involved.
2.3.1
Temporally-evolving Visual Factors
Here we identify three main fashion dynamics from which we
can potentially beneﬁt. We propose models to capture each of them
with temporally-evolving visual factors; that is we model user/item
visual factors as a function of time t, i.e., θu(t) and θi(t), with
their inner products accounting for the temporal user-item visual
interactions. This formulation is able to capture different kinds of
fashion dynamics as described below.
Temporal Attractiveness Drift. The ﬁrst notion of temporal dy-
namics is based on the observation that items gradually gain/lose
‘attractiveness’ in different visual dimensions as time goes by. To
capture such a phenomenon, it is natural to extend our embedding
matrix E to be time-dependent. More speciﬁcally, we model our
embedding matrix at time t as
E(t) = E + ∆E(t).
(4)
Here the underlying ‘stationary’ component of the model is cap-
tured by E while the time-dependent ‘drifting’ component is ac-
counted for by ∆E(t). Then item i’s visual factors at time t be-
come
θi(t) = E(t)fi.
(5)
In this way, we are modeling fashion evolution across entire com-
munities with global low-rank structures. Such structures are ex-
pressive while introducing only a modest number of parameters.
Temporal Weighting Drift. As fashion evolves over time, it is
likely that users weigh visual dimensions differently. For exam-
ple, people may pay less attention to a dimension describing col-
orfulness as communities become more tolerant of bright colors.
Accordingly, we introduce a K′-dimensional temporal weighting
vector w(t) to capture users’ evolving emphasis on different visual
dimensions, namely
θi(t) = Efi ⊙w(t),
(6)
where ⊙is the Hadamard product.
Combining the above two dynamics, our formulation for item
visual factors becomes
θi(t) = Efi ⊙w(t)
|
{z
}
base
+ ∆E(t)fi
|
{z
}
deviation
(7)
such that (when properly regularized) temporal variances are partly
explained by the weighting scheme while the rest are absorbed by
the expressive deviation term.
Note that compared to our basic model, so far we have only intro-
duced global structures that are shared by all users. This achieves
our goal of capturing temporal fashion trends that apply to the en-
tire population. Next, we introduce ‘local’ dynamics, in order to
model the drift of personal tastes over time.
Temporal Personal Drift. Apart from the above global tempo-
ral dynamics (i.e., fashion evolution), there also exist dynamics

bxu,i(t)
| {z }
preference of user u
towards item i at time t
= α + βu + βi(t) + βCi(t)
|
{z
}
temporal non-visual biases
+ ⟨
deﬁned by Eq. 10
z}|{
β(t)
, fi⟩
|
{z
}
temporal visual bias
|
{z
}
bias terms
+
⟨γu, γi⟩
| {z }
non-visual interaction
+ ⟨
deﬁned by Eq. 9
z }| {
θu(t)
,
deﬁned by Eq. 7
z}|{
θi(t)
⟩
|
{z
}
temporal visual interaction
|
{z
}
user-item interactions
.
(8)
Figure 2: The proposed fashion-aware preference predictor.
at the level of drifts in personal tastes over time. In other words,
users’ opinions are affected by ‘outside’ fashion trends as well as
their own personal preferences, both of which can evolve gradu-
ally. Modeling this kind of drift can borrow ideas from existing
works (e.g. timeSVD++ [19]) in order to extend our basic model
with time-evolving user visual factors, i.e., by modeling θu as a
function of time. Here we give one example formulation (see [19]
for more details) as follows:
θu(t) = θu + sign(t −tu) · |t −tu|κηu,
(9)
which uses a simple parametric form to account for the deviation of
user u at time t from his/her mean feedback date tu. This method
uses two vectors θu and ηu to model each user, with hyperparame-
ter κ learned with a validation set (to be described later).
2.3.2
Temporally-evolving Visual Bias
In addition to temporally evolving factors θi(t), we introduce a
temporal visual bias term to account for that portion of the variance
which is common to all factors. More precisely, we use a time-
dependent F-dimensional vector β(t) that adopts a formulation re-
sembling that of Eq. 7:
β(t) = β ⊙b(t) + ∆β(t).
(10)
Then the visual bias of item i at time t is computed by taking the
inner product ⟨β(t), fi⟩. The intention is to use low-rank structures
to capture the changing ‘overall’ response to the appearance, so that
the rest of the variance (i.e., per-user and per-dimension dynamics)
are captured by properly regularized higher-rank structures, namely
the inner product of θu(t) and θi(t). Experimentally, incorporating
this term improves the performance to some degree, and is also
useful for visualization.
2.3.3
Non-Visual Temporal Dynamics
Up to now, we have described how to extend our basic formula-
tion to model visual dynamics. However, there also exist non-visual
temporal dynamics in the datasets, such as sales, promotions, or
the emergence of new products. Incorporating such dynamics into
our model can not only improve predictive performance, but also
helps with interpretability by allowing us to tease apart visual from
non-visual decision factors. Here we want to distinguish as much
as possible those factors that can be determined by the item’s non-
visual properties (such as its category) versus those that can only
be determined from the image itself.
To serve this purpose, we propose to incorporate the following
two non-fashion dynamics in a lightweight manner, i.e., we guar-
antee that we are only introducing an affordable amount of addi-
tional parameters due to the sparsity of the real-world datasets we
consider.
Per-Item Temporal Dynamics. The ﬁrst dynamics to model are
on the per-item level. As said before, various factors can cause an
item to be purchased during some periods and not during others.
Our choice is to replace the stationary item bias term βi in Eq. 7
with a temporal counterpart βi(t) [19].
Per-Subcategory Temporal Dynamics. Next, for datasets where
the category tree is available (as is the case for the ones we con-
sider), it is also possible to incorporate per-subcategory temporal
dynamics. By accounting for category information explicitly as we
do here, we discourage the visual component of our model from
indirectly trying to predict the subcategory of the product, so that it
may instead focus on subtler visual aspects. Letting Ci denote the
subcategory the item i belongs to, we add a temporal subcategory
bias term βCi(t) to our formulation to account for the drifting of
users’ opinions towards a subcategory.
Gluing all above components together, we predict bxu,i(t), the
afﬁnity score of user u and item i at time t, with Eq. 8.1 Exper-
imentally, we found that global temporal dynamics (i.e., fashion
trends) are particularly useful at addressing personalized ranking
tasks. However, modeling user terms, i.e., temporal personal drift,
had relatively little effect in our datasets. The reasons are dataset-
speciﬁc: (a) our datasets span a decade and most users only re-
main active during a relatively short period of time; (b) our datasets
are highly sparse which means that the lack of per-user observa-
tions makes it difﬁcult to ﬁt the high-dimensional models required
(see Eq. 9). Therefore for our experiments we ultimately adopted
stationary user visual factors θu (note this way users’ preferences
are still affected by fashion trends).
2.3.4
Fashion Epoch Segmentation
So far we have described what temporal components to use in the
formulation of our time-aware predictor; what remains to be seen is
how to model the temporal term, i.e., how β(t), θ(t) change as time
progresses. One solution is to adopt a ﬁxed schedule to describe
the underlying evolution, e.g. to ﬁt some parameterized function
of (say) the raw timestamp, as is done by timeSVD++ [19]. How-
ever, fashion tends to evolve in a non-linear and somewhat abrupt
manner, which goes beyond the expressive power of such meth-
ods (we experimentally tried parameterized functions like those in
timeSVD++ but without success). Instead, a time-window design
which uncovers fashion ‘stages’ or ‘epochs’ during the life span of
the dataset proved preferable in our case. In other words, we want
to learn a temporal partition of the timeline of our data into discrete
segments during which different visual characteristics predominate
to inﬂuence users’ opinions.
To achieve our goal, we learn a partition of the timeline of our
dataset, consisting of N epochs, and to each epoch ep we attach a
set of parameters
Θep = {∆E(ep), ∆β(ep), w(ep), b(ep), βi(ep), βCi(ep)}.2
Then we predict the preference of user u towards item i at epoch
ep according to bxu,i(ep(t)), where the function ep(·) returns the
epoch index of time t according to the segmentation. Note that
while such a model could potentially capture seasonal effects (given
1Note that when computing personalized rankings for a single user
u, α and βu in Eq. 8 can be ignored.
2i.e., discretized ∆E(t), ∆β(t), w(t), b(t), βi(t), βCi(t) (respec-
tively).

ﬁne-grained enough epochs), this is not our goal in this paper since
we want to uncover long-term temporal drift; this can easily be
achieved by tuning the number of epochs such that they tend to
span multiple seasons (e.g. we obtained the best performance using
10 epochs in our 11 year dataset).
Finally, there are two components of the model to be estimated:
(a) the model parameters Θ = ∪epΘep ∪{α, βu, γu, γi, θu, E, β},
and (b) the fashion epochs themselves, i.e., a partition Λ of the
timeline into segments with different visual rating behavior.
3.
LEARNING THE MODEL
With the above temporal preference predictor, our objective is
for each user u to generate a personalized ranking of the items
they haven’t interacted with (i.e., I \ I+
u ) at time t. Here we adopt
Bayesian Personalized Ranking, a state-of-the-art ranking optimiza-
tion framework [30], to directly optimize the rankings produced by
our model. First we derive the likelihood function we are trying
to maximize according to BPR, before we describe the coordinate
ascent optimization procedure to learn the fashion epoch segmen-
tation as well as the model parameters.
3.1
Log-Likelihood Maximization
Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) is a pairwise ranking op-
timization framework which adopts Stochastic Gradient Ascent to
optimize the regularized corpus likelihood [30]. Let Pu ⊂I+
u be
the set of positive (i.e., observed) items for user u in the training set.
Then according to BPR, a training tuple set DS consists of triples
of the form (u, i, j), where i ∈Pu and j ∈I \ Pu. Given a triple
(u, i, j) ∈DS, BPR models the probability that user u prefers item
i to item j with σ(bxu,i−bxu,j), where σ is the sigmoid function, and
learns the parameters by maximizing the regularized log-likelihood
function as follows:
X
(u,i,j)∈DS
log σ(bxu,i −bxu,j) −λΘ
2 ||Θ||2.
Building on the above formulation, we want to add a temporal
term tui encoding the time at which user u expressed positive feed-
back about i ∈Pu. The basic idea is that we want to rank the ob-
served item i higher than all non-observed items at time tui. More
precisely, our training set DS+ is comprised of quadruples of the
form (u, i, j, tui), where user u expressed positive feedback about
item i at time tui with j being a non-observed item:
DS+ = {(u, i, j, tui)|u ∈U ∧i ∈Pu ∧j ∈I \ Pu}.
(11)
To simplify this notion, we introduce the shorthand
bxuij(ep(tui)) = bxu,i(ep(tui)) −bxu,j(ep(tui)),
where ep(t) returns the index of the epoch that timestamp t falls
into, and bxu,i(ep) as well as bxu,j(ep) are deﬁned by Eq. 8. Then
according to the BPR framework, our model is ﬁtted by maximiz-
ing the regularized log-likelihood of the corpus (i.e., BPR-OPT
in [30]):
bΘ, bΛ = arg max
Θ,Λ
X
(u,i,j,tui)∈DS+
log σ(bxuij(ep(tui))) −λΘ
2 ||Θ||2.
(12)
Again, note that there are two components to ﬁt to maximize the
above objective function, with one being the parameter set Θ and
the other being the segmentation Λ of the timeline comprising N
fashion epochs. Next we describe how to derive a coordinate-ascent-
style optimization procedure to ﬁt these two components.
3.2
Coordinate Ascent Fitting Procedure
We adopt an iterative optimization procedure which alternates
between (a) ﬁtting the model parameters Θ (given the segmented
timeline Λ), and (b) segmenting the timeline Λ (given the current
estimate of the model parameters Θ). This procedure resembles the
one used in [25], though the problem setting and data are different.
3.2.1
Fitting the Model Parameters Θ
This step ﬁxes the epoch segmentation Λ and adopts stochastic
gradient ascent to optimize the regularized log-likelihood in Eq. 12.
Given a randomly sampled training quadruple (u, i, j, tui) ∈DS+,
the update rule of Θ is derived as
Θ ←Θ + ϵ · (σ(−bxuij(ep(tui)))∂bxuij(ep(tui))
∂Θ
−λΘΘ), (13)
where ϵ is the learning rate. Sampling strategies may affect the per-
formance of the model to some extent. In our implementation, we
sample users uniformly to optimize the average AUC metric (to be
discussed later).
3.2.2
Fitting the Fashion Epoch Segmentation Λ
Given the model parameters Θ, this step ﬁnds the optimal seg-
mentation of the timeline to optimize the objective in Eq. 12. To
achieve this goal, we ﬁrst partition the timeline into N continuous
bins of equal size. Then the ﬁtting problem is solved with a dy-
namic programming procedure, which ﬁnds the segmentation such
that rankings inside all bins are predicted most accurately. This is a
canonical instance of a sequence segmentation problem [3], which
admits an O(|D+
S |×N) solution in our case.
Scaling to large datasets. Fitting the epoch segmentation in a naïve
way would be time-consuming due to the fact that the ‘ranking
quality’ has to be evaluated by enumerating all non-observed items
for each positive item. Fortunately, it turns out that for this step we
can approximate the full log-likelihood by sampling a relatively
small ‘batch’ of non-observed items for each positive user-item
pair. Experimentally this proved to be effective and allows the dy-
namic programming procedure to ﬁnd the optimal solution within
around 3 minutes on our largest datasets.
Finally, our parameters are randomly initialized between 0 and
1.0. The two ﬁtting steps above are repeated until convergence, or
until no further improvement is obtained on the validation set. We
discuss scalability further in Appendix A.
4.
EXPERIMENTS
We perform experiments on two real-world datasets to investi-
gate the efﬁcacy of our proposed method. First we introduce the
datasets we work with, before we compare and evaluate our method
against different baselines, and ﬁnally visualize the fashion dynam-
ics captured by our model.
4.1
Datasets
To evaluate the strength of our method at capturing fashion dy-
namics, we are interested in real-world datasets that (a) are broad
enough to capture the general tastes of the public, and (b) tempo-
rally span a long period so that there are discernibly different visual
decision factors at play during different times.
The two datasets we use are from Amazon.com, as introduced
in [26]. We consider two large categories that naturally encode
fashion dynamics (within the U.S.) over the past decade, namely
Women’s and Men’s Clothing & Accessories, each consisting of a
comprehensive vocabulary of clothing items. The images available
from this dataset are of high quality (typically centered on a white

Table 2: Dataset statistics (after processing)
Dataset
#users
#items
#feedback
Timespan
Women
99,748
331,173
854,211
Mar. 2003 - Jul. 2014
Men
34,212
100,654
260,352
Mar. 2003 - Jul. 2014
Total
133,960
431,827
1,114,563
Mar. 2003 - Jul. 2014
background) and have previously been shown to be effective for
recommendation tasks (though different from the one we consider
here).
We process each dataset by taking users’ review histories as im-
plicit feedback and extracting visual features fi from one image of
each item i. We discard users u who have performed fewer than 5
actions, i.e., for whom |I+
u |< 5. Statistics of our datasets are shown
in Table 2.
4.2
Visual Features
To extract a visual feature vector fi for each item i in the above
datasets, we employ a pre-trained convolutional neural network,
namely the Caffe reference model [15], which has previously been
demonstrated to be useful at capturing the properties of images of
this type [26]. This model implements the architecture proposed
by [21] with 5 convolutional layers followed by 3 fully-connected
layers and was pre-trained on 1.2 million ImageNet (ILSVRC2010)
images. We obtain our F = 4096 dimensional visual features by
taking the output of the second fully-connected layer (i.e., FC7).
4.3
Evaluation Methodology
Given a user-item pair (u, i), the preference of u towards i is a
function of time, i.e., the recommended item ranking for u is time-
dependent. Therefore for a held-out triple (u, i, tui), our evaluation
consists of calculating how accurately item i is ranked for user u at
time tui.
Each of our datasets is split into training/validation/test sets by
uniformly sampling for each user u from I+
u an item i (associated
with a timestamp tui) to be used for validation Vu and another for
testing Tu. The rest of the data Pu is used for training, i.e., I+
u =
Pu ∪Vu ∪Tu and |Pu|= |Vu|= |U|.
All methods are then evaluated on Tu with the widely used AUC
(Area Under the ROC curve) measure:
AUC =
1
|U|
X
u
1
|E(u)|
X
(i,j)∈E(u)
δ(bxu,i(tui) > bxu,j(tui)),
(14)
where the indicator function δ(b) returns 1 iﬀb is true, and the
evaluation goes through the pair set of each user u:
E(u) = {(i, j)|i ∈Tu ∧j /∈(Pu ∪Vu ∪Tu)}.
(15)
For all methods we select the best hyperparameters using the
validation set V = ∪u∈UVu and report the corresponding perfor-
mance on the test set T = ∪u∈UTu.
4.4
Comparison Methods
Matrix Factorization (MF) based methods are currently state-of-
the-art for modeling implicit feedback datasets (e.g. [30, 28, 22]).
Therefore we mainly compare against state-of-the-art MF methods
in this area, including both point-wise and pairwise MF models (see
Section 5 for more details).
• Popularity (POP): Items are ranked according to their pop-
ularity.
Table 3: Models
Model
Personalized Visually-
aware
Temporally-
aware
Taxonomy-
aware
POP
No
No
No
No
WR-MF
Yes
No
No
No
BPR-MF
Yes
No
No
No
BPR-TMF
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
VBPR
Yes
Yes
No
No
TVBPR
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
TVBPR+
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
• WR-MF: A state-of-the-art point-wise MF model for im-
plicit feedback proposed by [13]. It assigns conﬁdence levels
to different feedback instances and afterwards factorizes a
corresponding weighted matrix.
• BPR-MF: Introduced by [30], is a state-of-the-art method
for personalized ranking on implicit feedback datasets. It uses
standard MF (i.e., Eq. 1) as the underlying predictor.
• BPR-TMF: This model extends BPR-MF by making use of
taxonomies and temporal dynamics; that is, it adds a tem-
poral category bias as well as a temporal item bias in the
standard MF predictor (using the techniques introduced in
Subsection 2.3.3).
• VBPR: This method models raw visual signals for recom-
mendation using the BPR framework [12], but does not cap-
ture any temporal dynamics as we do in this work.
• TVBPR: This method models visual dimensions and cap-
tures visual temporal dynamics using the techniques we in-
troduced in Subsection 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, but does not account
for any non-visual dynamics.
• TVBPR+: Compared to TVBPR, this method further cap-
tures non-visual temporal dynamics (see Subsection 2.3.3) to
improve predictive performance and help with interpretabil-
ity, i.e., it makes use of all the terms in Eq. 8.
Ultimately these methods are designed to evaluate (a) the per-
formance of the current state-of-the-art non-visual methods (BPR-
MF); (b) the value to be gained by using raw visual signals (VBPR);
(c) the importance of visual temporal dynamics (TVBPR); and (d)
further performance enhancements from incorporating non-visual
temporal dynamics (TVBPR+). For clarity, we compare all above
models in terms of whether they are ‘personalized’, ‘visually-aware’,
‘temporally-aware’, and ‘taxonomy-aware’, as shown in Table 3.
All time-aware methods are trained with our proposed coordinate
ascent procedure.
Most of our baselines are from MyMediaLite [9]. To make fair
comparisons, our experiments always use the same total number of
dimensions for all MF models. Additionally, all visually-aware MF
models adopt a ﬁfty-ﬁfty split for visual vs. non-visual dimensions
for simplicity. All our experiments were performed on a standard
desktop machine with 4 physical cores and 32GB main memory.
4.5
Performance
We ﬁrst introduce the two settings used for evaluation, and then
present results and discuss our ﬁndings.

Table 4: AUC on the test set T (higher is better). ‘All Items’ evaluates the overall accuracy, while ‘Cold Start’ evaluates the ability to
recommend/rank cold start items. The best performance for each setting is boldfaced. All temporal methods (d, f, and g) use 10 epochs,
though we also report the performance with 5 epochs (g5) for comparison.
Dataset
Setting
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g5)
(g)
improvement
POP
WR-MF
BPR-MF
BPR-TMF
VBPR
TVBPR
TVBPR+
TVBPR+
g vs. d
g vs. e
Women
All Items
0.5726
0.6441
0.7020
0.7259
0.7834
0.8117
0.8148
0.8210
13.1%
4.8%
Cold Start
0.3214
0.5195
0.5281
0.5749
0.6813
0.7325
0.7355
0.7469
29.9%
9.6%
Men
All Items
0.5772
0.6228
0.7100
0.7069
0.7841
0.8064
0.8074
0.8084
14.6%
3.1%
Cold Start
0.3159
0.5124
0.5512
0.5498
0.6898
0.7314
0.7373
0.7459
35.7%
8.1%
4.5.1
All Items & Cold Start
We evaluate all methods in two settings: ‘All Items’ and ‘Cold
Start’. ‘All Items’ measures the overall ranking accuracy, including
both warm start and cold start scenarios. However, it is desirable
for a system to be able to recommend/rank ‘cold start’ items effec-
tively, especially in the domains we consider (i.e., fashion) where
new items are constantly added to the system and the data is incred-
ibly long-tailed. Therefore, we also evaluate our model in ‘Cold
Start’ settings.
To this end, our ‘All Items’ setting evaluates the average AUC on
the full test set T , while ‘Cold Start’ is evaluated by only keeping
the cold start items in T , i.e., items that had fewer than ﬁve positive
feedback instances in the training set P. It turns out that such cold
start items account for around 60% of the test set. This means that
to achieve acceptable performance on sparse real-world datasets,
one must be able to deal with their inherent cold start nature.
4.5.2
Results & Analysis
Table 4 compares the performance of different models with the
total number of dimensions set to 20. Due to the sparsity of our
datasets, no MF-based model observed signiﬁcant performance im-
provements when increasing the number of dimensions beyond this
point. We make a few comparisons to better explain and understand
our ﬁndings as follows:
1. Being a state-of-the-art method for personalized ranking from
implicit feedback, BPR-MF beats the point-wise method WR-
MF and the popularity-based baseline POP. POP is especially
ineffective in cold start settings since cold items are inher-
ently ‘unpopular’.
2. Further improvement over BPR-MF can be obtained by using
taxonomy (i.e., category) information and by modeling tem-
poral dynamics, as we see from the improvement of BPR-
TMF over BPR-MF, i.e., on average 1.5% for all items and
4.3% for cold start.
3. More signiﬁcant improvements over BPR-MF are obtained
by making use of additional visual signals, as is done by
VBPR. This leads to as high as an 11.6% improvement on
Women’s Clothing and 10.4% on Men’ Clothing. These vi-
sual signals are especially helpful in cold start settings where
BPR-MF does not have enough observations to learn reliable
item factors. In ‘Cold Start’ settings, VBPR beats BPR-MF
by as much as 29.0% on Women’s Clothing and 25.1% on
Men’s Clothing.
4. Although VBPR can beneﬁt from modeling visual signals, it
is limited by its inability to capture dynamics in the system.
However in data such as ours (where feedback spans more
than a decade) it is necessary to make use of a ﬁner-grained
model to capture evolving opinion dynamics. Here TVBPR
captures three types of ‘fashion dynamics’ (see Section 2)
and yields signiﬁcant improvements over VBPR.
5. TVBPR+ incorporates non-visual dynamics into TVBPR to
further account for the variety of temporal factors at play.
TVBPR+ outperforms VBPR by 4.8% on Women’s Clothing
and 3.1% on Men’s Clothing for the all items setting, and
even more for the cold start setting (9.6% and 8.1% respec-
tively).
Additionally, all temporal models observed comparably larger
improvements on Women’s Clothing than Men’s Clothing; presum-
ably this is due to the size of the dataset (see Table 2) or richer
temporal dynamics exhibited by women’s clothing.
4.5.3
Reproducibility
In all cases, regularization hyperparameters are tuned to perform
the best on the validation set V. The best regularization hyperpa-
rameter was λΘ = 100 for WR-MF, and λΘ = 1 for other MF-
based methods. For visually-aware methods, the embedding matrix
E and visual bias vector β are not regularized as they introduce
only a constant (and small) number of parameters to the model. In
TVBPR and TVBPR+, ∆E(t), w(t) and b(t) are regularized with
regularization parameter 0.0001. Complete code for all our exper-
iments and baselines is available at https://sites.google.com/a/eng.
ucsd.edu/ruining-he/.
4.6
Visualization
4.6.1
Visual Dimensions
Our ﬁrst visualization consists of demonstrating the visual di-
mensions uncovered by our method, i.e., what kind of characteris-
tics people consider when evaluating items, as well as the evolution
of their weights throughout the years.
A simple visualization of the learned visual dimensions is to ﬁnd
which items exhibit maximal values for each dimension. That is,
we select items according to
arg max
i
Ekfi,
for each row of the embedding matrix E in Eq. 7, corresponding to
a visual dimension k. This tells us which items most exhibit, or are
‘most representative’ of a particular visual aspect discovered by the
model.
Figure 3 shows such items for our model. Two things are notable
here. Firstly, the visual dimensions uncovered by our method seem
to be meaningful, and capture combinations of color, shape and
textural features (e.g. tees in the third row vary in shape but are
similar in pattern). Secondly, human notions seem to be revealed
by our method, e.g. semi-formal versus casual in rows 1 and 2,
graphic designs versus patterns in rows 3 and 5 etc. It is this ability
to discover visual characteristics that are correlated with human

-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
-4
4
Figure 3: Demonstration of ten visual dimensions discovered by
our model on Amazon Women’s Clothing. Here we focus on a single
subcategory, ‘tees,’ for a clear comparison. Each row shows the top
ranked tees for a particular dimension k (i.e., arg maxi Ekfi), as
well as the evolution of the weight (i.e., wk(t) in Eq. 7) for this
dimension across epochs (x-axis). Note that for many styles the
weight evolves non-linearly.
decision factors that explains the success of our model. Note that at
ﬁrst glance these dimensions may seem to pick up more than just
fashion trends (like model poses or photo setups). Considering the
size of the dataset we are experimenting on, this may be simply
due to the amount of visually similar items available in the corpus.
Examining longer ranked-lists for those dimensions helped assure
us that they indeed focus on capturing characteristics of the clothes
in the pictures.
In addition to the visual dimensions, our formulation of item vi-
sual factors (i.e., θi(t) in Eq. 7) also models how the weight of each
visual dimension has evolved during these years, with a weighting
vector w(t). We also show such evolution in Figure 3. Due to the
sparsity of the data in earlier years, we demonstrate the learned
weights of the nine epochs from Aug. 2004 to Jul. 2014. As we can
see from this ﬁgure, each visual dimension evolves roughly con-
tinuously as time progresses, although there do occasionally exist
comparatively abrupt changes.
4.6.2
Shifts in Fashion
Next we visualize the distribution of fashionable versus non-
fashionable appearances as well as the subtle shifts as time pro-
gresses. This enables us to see not only how people weigh each
speciﬁc dimension/aspect over time (as we did in Figure 3), but
rather to comprehensively evaluates fashion as a whole by com-
bining the dynamics from all dimensions. To achieve this goal, we
need a metric to qualitatively measure the overall visual popularity
of a product image, which we term its ‘visual score’.
The visual score of item i in epoch ep, VisualScore(i, ep) is
calculated by averaging the visual component of the predictor (i.e.,
Eq. 8) for all users, which naturally gives us the overall visual pop-
ularity of an item during epoch ep:
VisualScore(i, ep) =
1
|U|
X
u∈U
⟨θu, θi(ep)⟩+ ⟨β(ep), fi⟩. (16)
Then we can visualize how fashion has shifted using a normalized
visual score as the metric, i.e., by subtracting the average visual
score of all items in each epoch.
By modeling the visual dimensions that best explain users’ opin-
ions, our method uncovers a low-dimensional ‘visual space’ where
items that users evaluate similarly (i.e., with similar visual styles)
are embedded to nearby positions. By deﬁnition, nearby items in
the space will have similar visual scores. Then our visualization
consists of demonstrating the visual space, as well as the time-
dependent visual scores (i.e., popularity) attached to each of those
items in the space.
After training our TVBPR+ model with 10 epochs on Women’s
Clothing, we take the base portion of the embedding, i.e., Efi in
Eq. 7, to map all items into a visual space. The purpose is to help
visualize items that have similar visual evaluation characteristics
(or styles). Next, we use t-SNE [35] to embed a random sample of
30,000 items from the test set T into a 2d space. Figure 4 shows
the embedding we obtain. As expected, items from the same cate-
gory tend to be mapped to nearby locations, since they share com-
mon features in terms of appearance. What is interesting and useful
about the embedding is it can learn (a) a smooth transition across
categories, and (b) ‘sub-genres’ in terms of appearance similarity.
This is important since the available taxonomy is limited in its abil-
ity to differentiate between items within categories and in its abil-
ity to discover connections (especially visual ones) among items
across categories.
To demonstrate how fashion has shifted over the life-span of the
dataset, for each item i in the embedding we calculate its normal-
ized visual score during every discovered epoch ep, which can then
be used to build a ‘heat map’ demonstrating which items/styles
were considered popular during each epoch.
These heat maps are also presented in Figure 4, from which we
can observe the gradual evolution of users’ tastes. We highlight a
particular example where a certain style of shoe gradually gained
popularity, which then diminished in recent years (see the circled
area in Figure 4).
4.7
Case Study: Men’s Fashion in the 2000s
To help demonstrate that our method has captured interpretable
visual dynamics, we take a review of fashion trends in the 2000s
as ground-truth and conduct a case study on men’s clothing. The
model used for this case study is TVBPR+ trained on Amazon
Men’s Clothing.
1950s and 1980s fashions resurfaced for men in the late 2000s.3
Representative items include Ed Hardy T-shirts with low necklines,
Hawaiian shirts, ski jackets, straight leg jeans, black leather jackets,
windbreakers, and so forth. A simple evaluation then consists of
visualizing the visual popularity of such items to see if there is
any discernible resurgence around the late 2000s, as history tells us
there ought to be.
To this end, we randomly selected four query items (from outside
of the dataset we trained on, i.e., not from Amazon) representing
each of Ed Hardy T-shirts, Hawaiian shirts, black leather jackets,
and ski jackets respectively. In Figure 5, ﬁrst we visualize our vi-
sual space by retrieving nearest-neighbors for each of the query
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2000s_in_fashion,
retrieved
on
Oct. 1, 2015.

Aug. 2005 
Jul. 2014
Figure 4: Demonstration of the 2-d t-SNE [35] embedding of the visual space learned on Amazon Women’s Clothing. Images are 30,000
random samples from the test set T . Each cell randomly selects one image to show in case of overlaps. At the bottom we also demonstrate
the heat maps describing the normalized visual scores of these images over eight fashion epochs since Aug. 2005. Warmer means more
popular, i.e., larger visual score. The circled area shows an example of a certain style which became popular but lost its appeal over time.
items (in the middle of the ﬁgure), and then compute the normal-
ized visual score of each query image in each fashion epoch.
From Figure 5 we can see that, as expected, these styles are in-
deed predicted by our model to be gaining popularity especially
since 2009, no matter how they performed prior to this period. This
to some degree conﬁrms that our proposed method can capture real-
world fashion dynamics successfully.
5.
RELATED WORK
One-Class Collaborative Filtering. Collaborative Filtering (CF),
especially Matrix Factorization approaches, have seen wide suc-
cess at accurately modeling users’ preferences, perhaps most no-
tably for the Netﬂix Prize [4, 2, 20]. The concept of One-Class
Collaborative Filtering (OCCF) was introduced by Pan et al. [27]
to allow Collaborative Filtering methods to effectively cope with
scenarios where only positive feedback (e.g. purchases rather than
ratings) is observed. In the same work, they proposed to sample
unknown feedback as negative instances and perform matrix fac-
torization. This was further reﬁned by Hu et al. in [13], where they
assign varying conﬁdence levels to different feedback and factor-
ize the resulting weighted matrix. These two models can be classi-
ﬁed as ‘point-wise’ methods. Following this thread, there are also
subsequent works that build probabilistic models (e.g. [29, 33]) to
address the same task.
Pairwise methods were later introduced by Rendle et al. in [30],
where they proposed the framework of Bayesian Personalized Rank-
ing (BPR) and empirically demonstrate that Matrix Factorization
outperforms competitive baselines when trained with BPR (i.e.,
BPR-MF in our experiments). To our knowledge, this is the state-
of-the-art framework for the OCCF setting. Recently there have
been efforts to extend BPR to incorporate users’ social relations,
e.g. [22, 28, 40]. Our model is an extension of BPR-MF to make it
fashion-aware while maintaining its accuracy and scalability.
Modeling Temporal Dynamics. There has been some work in the
machine learning community that investigates the notion of con-
cept drift in temporally evolving data. Such learning algorithms in-
clude decision trees [37], SVMs [18], instance-based learning [1],
etc.; see the work of Tsymbal [34] for a comprehensive survey. Ac-
cording to [34], these methods can be summarized into three basic
approaches: instance selection, instance weighting, and ensemble
learning. In some sense, our method ﬁts into the instance selection
camp, i.e., we use a time-window (or epoch) mechanism to high-
light/favor appearance that are widely accepted by the community
in each window.

-0.5
1.5
-2.5
0
-1
1
-2.5
0
0
0
          2009
Figure 5: On the left we show query images each representing a
resurgent style in men’s fashion in the late 2000s. According to
TVBPR+ trained on Amazon Men’s Clothing, nearest neighbors of
these images in our style space are shown in the middle and nor-
malized visual scores (i.e., visual popularity) in the past decade on
the right. We can see that our model captures such a resurgence
especially since 2009.
There also have been CF models that take temporal dynamics
into consideration. For example, to improve similarity-based CF,
Ding et al. [7] propose a time weighting scheme to assign decaying
weights to previously-rated items according to the time difference.
Apart from being accurate and scalable, Matrix Factorization tech-
niques are also able to smoothly incorporate temporal dynamics.
For instance, Koren [19] investigated methods to model the under-
lying temporal dynamics in Netﬂix data with encouraging results.
Despite the success of these methods, existing work in this line
of research typically neglects visual data and thus can’t address
the unique challenges that come with modeling visual temporal dy-
namics as we do here.
Visual Models. Extensive previous research have emphasized the
importance of images in e-commerce scenarios (e.g. [6, 10, 11]). In
recent years, there is a growing interest in investigating the visual
compatibility between different items. For example, [26] learns a
distance metric to classify whether two given items are compatible
or not. [36] ﬁne-tunes a Siamese Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) to learn a feature transformation from the image space to
a latent space of metric distances. There are also related works
that focus more on parsing or retrieving clothing images. For in-
stance, the work of [32] can tell a user how to become more fash-
ionable after taking a look at a photograph with the user in it. An-
other method [16] uses segmentation to detect clothing classes in
the query image before it retrieves visually similar products from
each of the detected classes.
However, these works don’t use the historical feedback of users
to learn their personalized preferences, which is at the core of mak-
ing sensible personal recommendations. Additionally, it is also nec-
essary for a recommender system to take into account other non-
visual factors, which goes beyond the scope of the above methods.
Visually-aware Collaborative Filtering. It is beneﬁcial to com-
bine the above two streams of research to build recommender sys-
tems that are able to understand the visual aspects of the user-item
interactions. This is partly addressed in [12], which maps users
and items into a visual space with the inner products depicting the
visual compatibility. However, this model ignores the underlying
temporal dynamics of fashion and is therefore unable to answer the
type of questions we identiﬁed earlier.
6.
CONCLUSION
Modeling visual appearance and its evolution is key to gaining a
deeper understanding of users’ preferences, especially in domains
like fashion. In this paper, we built scalable models on top of prod-
uct images and user feedback to capture the temporal drifts of fash-
ion and personal tastes. We found that deep CNN features are useful
for modeling visual dimensions as well as the associated temporal
dynamics. Low-rank structures learned on top of such features are
efﬁcient at capturing fashion dynamics and help our method signif-
icantly outperform state-of-the-art approaches. Visualization using
our trained models helped demonstrate the non-linear characteris-
tics of the evolution of different visual dimensions, as well as how
fashion has shifted over the past decade.
APPENDIX
A.
SCALABILITY ANALYSIS
Building on top of BPR-MF, our method achieves the goal of
scaling up to large real-world datasets. Here we analyze and com-
pare our time complexity with those of BPR-MF and VBPR, the
two most related models.
Fitting the model parameters. For this step, our method adopts
the sampling scheme of BPR-MF implemented in MyMediaLite [9],
i.e., during each iteration we sample |P| training tuples to update
the model parameters Θ, which we repeat for 100 iterations.
For each training triple (u, i, j), BPR-MF requires O(K) to up-
date the parameters, while VBPR and TVBPR+ need to update the
visual parameters as well. VBPR takes O(K+K′) in total to ﬁnish
updating the parameters for each sampled training triple. Compared
to VBPR, although there are more visual parameters to describe
multiple fashion epochs, TVBPR+ only needs to update the param-
eters associated with the epoch the timestamp tui falls into. This
means that TVBPR+ exhibits the same time complexity as VBPR.
Additionally, visual feature vectors (fi) from Deep CNNs turn out
to be very sparse, which can signiﬁcantly reduce the above worst-
case running time.
Fitting the epoch segmentation. In addition to the model parame-
ters, TVBPR+ has to ﬁt a fashion epoch segmentation term. Com-
pared to the parameter ﬁtting step, training the segmentation (i.e.,
the ‘outer loop’) is performed at comparatively much lower fre-
quency and consumes much less time.
Generally speaking, TVBPR+ takes more iterations to converge
than VBPR due to learning the temporal dynamics. Training on our
Women’s Clothing dataset takes around 20 hours (in which epoch
ﬁtting accounting for around 45 minutes in total) on our commodity
desktop machine as described earlier.
B.
