23-bit Metaknowledge Template Towards Big Data 
Knowledge Discovery and Management 
 
Nima  Bari∗,  Roman  Vichr∗∗, Kamran Kowsari†, Simon  Berkovich‡,  
∗‡†Department of Computer Science, George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052 
∗∗Exprentis, Inc Fairfax VA  22030 

 
Abstract— the global influence of Big Data is not only 
growing but seemingly endless.  The trend is leaning towards 
knowledge that is attained easily and quickly from massive pools 
of Big Data.  Today we are living in the technological world that 
Dr. Usama Fayyad and his distinguished research fellows 
discussed in the introductory explanations of Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases (KDD) [1] predicted nearly two decades 
ago.  Indeed, they were precise in their outlook on Big Data 
analytics. 
In 
fact, 
the 
continued 
improvement 
of 
the 
interoperability of machine learning, statistics, database building 
and querying fused to create this increasingly popular science- 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. The next generation 
computational theories are geared towards helping to extract 
insightful knowledge from even larger volumes of data at higher 
rates of speed.  As the trend increases in popularity, the need for 
a highly adaptive solution for knowledge discovery will be 
necessary. In this research paper, we are introducing the 
investigation and development of 23 bit-questions for a 
Metaknowledge template for Big Data Processing and clustering 
purposes. This research aims to demonstrate the construction of 
this methodology and proves the validity and the beneficial 
utilization that brings Knowledge Discovery from Big Data. 
Keywords— 23-Bit Meta-knowledge template; Big Data 
Processing and Analytics; Meta-feature Selection, Knowledge 
Discovery; Metalearning System. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Researchers and developers are currently aware of the 
difficulty in processing data as the datasets become larger and 
gain complexity. There are challenges associated with the 
influx of Big Data.  For instance, according to [2], most 
businesses' metadata is arrayed across applications, databases, 
and "tribal knowledge” and managed by enterprises have no 
"formal metadata management system processes in place. 
Therefore, in theory there's a centralized mission but in 
practice there's a partition which separates Information 
Technology  from Business. Hence, Metaknowledge drives the 
accuracy of reports, validates data transformations, ensures 
accuracy of calculations and enforces consistent definitions of 
business terms across multiple business users.  Combined with 
the challenges Big Data proposes as it relates to time and 
memory complexities, new ideas for smart and insightful 
knowledge discovery are desperately needed. For this reason, 
Metaknowledge templates provide a visual representation of a 
process from its conceptualization to theory to implementation.  
The methodology can be applied to any dataset using tools 
employed for the goal of reaching an intended result.  For the 
purpose of this presentation, we will refer to our sample dataset 
(Cinema Movies) which will navigate the processes outlined in 
the Metaknowledge template from preprocessing to the 23-bit 
Golay clustering.  It is important to mention two important 
points: 1- The development of the 23 bits question template is 
not done arbitrarily but is done through a Metalearning process 
of Big Data Metaknowledge for feature selection and 
transformation. In addition to this, the process of formulating 
these 23 questions must fulfill the requirement of a) bias 
elimination and subjectivity and b) maximize probability of 
achieving the most accurate results; 2- the 23-bit template 
methodology can be applied and utilized for any domain 
knowledge, however, the specific 23-Bit questions are 
generated and applied for domain specificity to eliminate bias 
and maximize probability. 
From another perspective, the Metalearning system plays a 
pragmatic role in optimizing the usage of Data Mining and 
Machine Learning tools. As a result, it turns their usage into a 
profitable business. Indeed, a Meta learning system builds 
upon the repetitive use of a predictive model over tasks to steer 
profits. Subject to data and statistics, this system has proved to 
provide major contribution to the successful adaptation of 
models to ever-changing needs. More specifically, a Meta 
Learning system deploys its unique pattern recognition 
function across tasks and ultimately serves as a control 
measure to the process of exploiting cumulative expertise [12].  
II. 
METAKNOWLEDGE AND METALEARNING 
Metaknowledge is simply knowledge about knowledge. It 
allows data items to be examined inwardly for extraction of 
knowledge which can be used later.  Furthermore, 
Metaknowledge can be utilized by an application or program 
allowing enhanced analysis of an initial data item for more 
informed results.   From the Big Data point of view, the result 
is a data item representative of some formation, and the 
Metaknowledge is the information concerning the formation 
itself [3] (unclear). Early on, researchers in Artificial 
Intelligence mainly focused on developing one problem-
solving paradigm that would be widely accepted and 
applicable. By the late 1960’s, it was evident that such a 
paradigm is impossible to create because of the need to store 
large and domain specific knowledge [3]. For example, 
knowledge-based systems, which have been developed and 
captured amorphous data derived from tasks targeting specific 
areas like gaming, speech recognition, math, and chemistry, 
[4,5,6] etc. The large scale of task to collect the knowledge for 
these systems and the utilization and management of these 

large repositories has created a major research problem [3]. In 
addition, how to use and represent knowledge have both been 
problematic.  Many encoding methods have been developed to 
direct and apply knowledge.  Historically these tasks have been 
geared towards utilizing and applying knowledge for a 
particular domain [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. 
 
Metalearning is by far an efficient tool to troubleshoot 
problems associated with the application of Data Mining (DM) 
and Machine Learning (ML) tools. Such troubleshooting 
effects are particularly witnessed in areas such as regression 
and classification. From a practical standpoint, the successful 
use of Data Mining and Machine Learning tools is inextricably 
linked to the proper selection of a predictive model(s) ; a model 
that fits to the model of application. It is very important to note 
that a lack of assistance in the process of model selection and 
combination or wrong Metafeatures can result in a wide range 
of obstacles to end-users [12]. These obstacles, including a user 
lack of expertise to choose the right model, tend to hinder both 
the cost-effectiveness and ease of the use of technology. In 
addition, end-users often face the limitations of models that 
operate on a trial-error basis. In order to tackle these barriers, a 
Metalearning system ensures both the automatic and systematic 
learning of user guidance.  Unlike others systems, this learning 
system perfectly matches a specific task to a model or a 
combination of models [12]. 
From another perspective, the Metalearning system plays a 
pragmatic role in optimizing the usage of Data Mining and 
Machine Learning tools. More specifically, a Metalearning 
system deploys its unique pattern recognition function across 
tasks and ultimately serves as a control measure to the process 
of exploiting cumulative expertise through models [12]. 
III. 
23- BIT METAKNOWLEDGE VECTOR TEMPLATE   FOR 
BIG DATA INSIGHTFUL PROCESSING AND CLUSTERING  
Researchers and developers have been challenged in efficiently 
utilizing the hidden information from Metadata that comes 
with Big Data. Also called meaning of data, this hidden 
information can be localized through a simple observation of 
the desired clustering (posteriori), without prior knowledge of 
the applied clustering criteria. The computational Big data 
processing and clustering technique suggested here as a 23-bit 
template will allow the information retrieval of this valuable 
and insightful information[13]. 
 
The 23 meta-knowledge template processing technique to 
represent a record and to introduce its binary representation 
offers a unique added value such that it provides clusters of 
inter-related data objects quickly and in a linear timeframe. The 
database is scanned together by answering the 23 questions 
template (derived from Metaknowledge) in order to provide 
meaningful clusters of records.  The 23-bit questions’ 
Metaknowledge is inspired from the popular 20 questions 
game [14].  The 23 questions are structured so that each can be 
answered with either a yes (1) or no (0).  In other words, given 
a template called T=q1, q2, q3…q23, q is a single question 
representing a bit along the 23-bit vector. The assertion is that a 
23 bit vector template is considered sufficient to characterize 
any type of information. While putting in place 23-bit 
templates on all sorts of high level activities, this suggested 
technology is subject to distinct structuring of ontology 
interpretation; an unprecedented breakthrough that did not take 
place during the science of language[14].   
The Metaknowledge template approach interestingly allows the 
possibility to categorize an object based upon inherent 
characteristics 
such 
as 
image 
geometry, 
semantic 
interrelationships, and so on. It is very important to recall that 
today’s main form of research is written-based. As a result, 
other types of research have become too complex to conduct 
since they fail to successfully pass the process of generating 
meaningful clusters. When other research fails, the Golay 
Coding approach becomes very useful. The challenge that 
arises from an extension of the conventional searching 
methodology hinges upon developing constructive attributes 
that are in turn used to develop the Metaknowledge of 23-bit 
vector templates [13]. 
The selection of 23-bit templates is not random. This is an 
outcome of a unique structure of the world- a mathematical 
oddity associated with exclusive properties of the perfect 
Golay code [23, 12, 7]. Several possible adaptations of the 
code-word construction have been investigated in [15]. The 
experimental results in [22] show, that with 23 bit binary code-
word; a possible 277 representations with Hamming Distance 
0,1,2 can be found. Per [22] the algorithm complexity is at 
O(n) at FuzzyFind Dictionary (FFD) and O(1) to access FFD. 
In order to take advantage of this approach the 23 bit [1,0] 
representation 23 attributes (Metafeatures) are determined per 
23-bit vector. That 23-buit vector carries the Metaknowledge 
descriptor of the record itself in a given domain. This 
representation leads to creation of Goley Coding Hashes to 
index record and Goley Transformation Tables to represent a 
record for access [22]. Therefore the discovery and derivation 
of 23-bit attribute vector is essential to characterize the record 
itself. 
In the following section we will give examples and show how 
we were able to generate these 23 bit record of binary 
questions/answers representing Metaknowledge of the given 
domain based on the Metalearning process for Metafeature 
attribute selection and consequent transformation.  
IV. 
META-KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, 
ATTRIBUTE/FEATURE DERIVATION 
During the determination of questions to classify the stream of 
data we attempted to establish a framework-like process to 
avoid the pitfalls of representing meta-knowledge through 
possible domain knowledge, which is tempting on a small 
subset of data. Instead we adapted machine learning and data 
mining framework to derive and discover meta-knowledge 
contained in raw data. This Metaknowledge will allow us to 
classify input streams of data using Golay code to represent 
record as derived binary 23 bit vector for the purpose of 
indexing and accessing it.  

As we evaluate various algorithms for Metaknowledge 
characterization [4], [5], it allows for 23-bit binary attribute 
representation in a vector for processing through a Goley 
Code algorithm.  The record’s vector is representative of 
Metafeatures. The Metafeatures are corresponding to a best fit 
series of questions (23 questions representing 23 Metafeature 
attributes of Metaknowledge). The single Metafeature 
attribute representation corresponds to a single bit in Golay 
code’s 23-bit vector. This vector is utilized for the creation of 
Goley 
Coding 
Hashes 
to 
index 
records 
and 
Goley 
Transformation Table to access them [22]. 
The classification Algorithms used are summarized in the 
table below for the purpose of discovery. 
TABLE I.  
APPLIED ALGORITHMS FOR METAKNOWLEDGE FEATURE 
SLECTION AND REFINEMENT  
Num. 
Metaknowledge and meta-feature discovery algorithms 
Algorithm 
Benefits 
1 
Scatter Plots 
> A quick assessment if the “average” 
pattern is linear, curved, or random 
> If the trend is positive or negative 
association 
> Strength of relationship 
Identification of group of outliers  (x,y) 
2 
Statistical 
Relationship 
> Statistical relationship in variation of 
possible values of X and X. 
> Regression equation to describe the 
“best” line through the data and to 
predict Y based on X 
> If linear relationship anticipated then 
describe the strength and direction 
3 
Q-Q Plots 
> Plotted to verify if a “normal 
distribution” is a good model. 
> The loess line is used to assess 
whether the assumption of linearity is 
appropriate. 
4 
Decision Tree 
> A fast learning curve, easy to test 
model and effective way to find 
“terminal” nodes. 
> Purposeful test of quasi model by 
over-fitting to evaluate by 
adding/removing attributes. 
> Assistance in deriving threshold 
driven questions to qualify answer 
Yes/No [1, 0]. 
5 
DMRT 
> Discriminative classifier making 
validation of threshold setting in 
questions. 
> A wrong question would be indicated 
by no separation between class groups. 
6 
SVM 
> Discriminative classifier to derive 
optimal hyper-plane on input data 
considering binary outcome. 
7 
GLM 
A quick determination of attribute 
(questions) impact and contribution to 
the binary outcome. 
 
The sequence of algorithms applied provide guidance to 
determine Metaknowledge (for example, an indication of 
strength of relationships between attributes, ability to derive 
specific and concrete Metafeatures) [4], [5]. It also helps us 
make assertions about values (thresholds of boundaries) of 
feature questions. These questions are to be used as a 
foundation to represent the Metaknowledge in binary 23-bit 
word. 
A. Classification Margin 
As noted in [6], pp.34, several of the papers focus on applying 
algorithms to discover and extract Metaknowledge (sentence 
unclear). The [6] refers to a measurement of classification, 
which depends on number examples, algorithm error, and the 
parameter k as a user defined parameter determining size of 
the margin (perception of confidence). Such measures were 
helpful in comparing and quantifying differences among 
algorithms used and would be helpful in our next step to move 
to a semi-automated approach of Metaknowledge discovery 
translated into a series of questions for binary representation 
of a class based on Golay code. 
The [6] presents a formula to determine what algorithm is 
performing well in Metaknowledge discovery. This can be 
used when multiple ranges of algorithms are used to determine 
the most suited Metafeatures for a given problem and domain. 
The “formula” is to support the notion of qualification of 
“performing” well for an algorithm (while not applicable to all 
of them like scatter plots), which allows to set a margin for the 
set of algorithms utilized. 
B. Classification Framework 
We approach the problem first as a problem with a well-
defined outcome (given the domain of movies, that is 
represented as Oscar Wins with Yes or No answers). This 
approach allows us to represent effectively a knowledge and 
corresponding record as binary Golay code word. That is 
translated into input in the Golay code as a sequence of 23 bit 
questions with binary [1, 0] answers. The attribute value is 
then set to 1 to represent “true” answer and set to “0” to 
represent negative answer. We make the assertion that by 
defining the problem as a problem with binary outcome (in 
this case represented by Oscar Wins) we make a discovery of 
Metaknowledge and Metaknowledge more standardized 
andrepeatable.. The outcome is then 23-bit binary vector 
representing record. 
For our purpose we utilized extracted sample records from 
IMDB movie source [7], which contain a set of raw movie 
data points. These data points contained at the beginning 
unknown Metaknowledge, which had to be discovered 
(fragment). The framework of discovery is discussed in 
Section C. Through applied framework we attempted to 
increase information entropy of the record while minimizing 
the degree of freedom in given meta-feature attributes (which 
is done through the binary representation).  
We also assert that the discovered Metaknowledge from a 
given data sample can be applied to all records in the domain.  
Applying Bayes algorithm assumption of inferring a 
“complete” knowledge from raw or Metafeatures knowledge 
to classify a full record accurately [9] we see the chance of 
getting result “A” given a positive test for “X”, where X is not 

 
 
 
a zero. 
 
The prior knowledge of movie sample records (while 
attractive on small subset of records) was represented as 
binary questions of what exact actor or director received an 
Oscar win. It initially appeared as the right classifier to use. 
However, 
in 
the 
consequent 
evaluation 
to 
generate 
Metafeatures by algorithm(s) (Table I.) these turned out to 
represent minimal information entropy about the data record 
and were rather classified as weak Metaknowledge features. 
1)  Enhanced datasets ( a posterior Metaknowledge). 
Since the raw data did not contain Metafeatures for the 
purpose of deriving a posterior meta-knowledge we re-applied 
algorithms in Table I. We made this assertion with the purpose 
of deriving new additional features under the assumption of 
Shannon’s distribution of information entropy [8]. Each meta-
feature is represented as [1, 0] and consequently the 
distribution information is as “log of 2”. Therefore all 
probability of distribution pi is positive or NULL, and 
consequently the SUM (pi.) = 1 (formula below [8], [22]).  
 
This principle justifies lowering the degree of freedom in 
meta-feature attribute, while increasing predictability of quasi-
outcome. This allows us to apply Golay code as a means of 
classification and improve overall efficiency of given 
processing time.   
C. Classification Result (all graphs/explanations) 
Discovery of enhanced attributes - Enhanced datasets (a 
posterior meta-knowledge) 
Figure 1.: Scatter Plot (correlation of Oscars vs rtCriticsScore by mpaaRating) 
Figure 2.: Scatter Plot (correlation of OscarWins, rtAudienceScore, Wins) 
The correlation graph Fig…. below shows a correlation graph 
(repetitive) between critic’s Score and Audience Score 
grouped by Oscars attribute (where a number corresponds to 
the number of Oscars awards received). The area above the 
80th percentile is the area of interest showing strong 
correlation between high CriticsScore, AudienceScore and 
Oscar wins. 
 
Figure 3.: A scatter plot of CriticsScore vs AudienceScore by Oscar wins. 
 

 
 
Traditionally the distribution of pattern in records is assessed 
using histograms or cumulative distribution function (CDF). 
We approached it by using Q-Q (Quantile-Quantile) plots. The 
Figure 4 shows Q-Q plot of imdbRating shows correlation to 
outcome with rating above 6 and below 8.8 fitting linear 
model (wording). 
 
Figure 4.: Q-Q Plot of imdbRating . 
The Q-Q plot of imdbRating shows a range of 5.8 to 9 as the 
main range leading to outcome of tested Oscar award (as 
shown above Figure 3.) (sentence unclear). It shows 
imdbRating attribute as one to rely on in deriving the binary 
question. In the next step we subject this attribute to model 
testing (the case of overfitting is not that critical because we 
test feasibility and importance of meta-feature). We used this 
to derive a threshold value to tune a binary question to provide 
binary 
answer. 
Similarly 
we 
applied 
Q-Q 
plot 
to 
“movies.AudienceScore”, which shown the range between 55 
to 95 percentile mainstream with likelihood of classification to 
receive an Oscar award. Consequently, one can construct a 
binary answer question derive a Metafeature attribute 
classification, for example “Was the movie.AudienceScore 
above 55?. The answer can be Yes or No represented as [1,0] 
for the purpose of constructing a binary vector. 
 
The Q-Q plot Figure 5 was used to confirm our assertion that 
it is correct to classify the as problem with binary outcome [1, 
0]. The zero [0] is clearly defined and distinct outcome 
(fragment). Therefore the outcome of “1” is assigned to any 
movie that was awarded an Oscar in any movie category. 
 
 
Figure 5.: Q-Q plot of Oscar wins 
 
Based on the sequence of evaluations we determined, for 
example, the following attributes to be useful and benefiting 
our quasi model. It was criticsScore and imdbRating both 
being correlated to group defined as “Wins_GT4”, which had 
a value “1” for number of wins > 4 and “0” for wins <0, i.e. 
representing a question with [Yes,No] answer. The 
“wins_GT4 “is an example of a derived attribute based on the 
Metaknowledge in raw data.  The graph …… below shows the 
area in yellow, which is the area of strongest correlation 
between imdbRating and scriticsScore given “Wins_GT4” = 
1”.                                                                                                              
	
  
Figure 6.: Scatter plot of CriticsScore vs indbRating by “Wins_GT4”. 
 
The resulting Metafeature attribute derived was “What was the 
number of wins GT 4?”, which could then we answered as 
Yes, No [1,0] for the purpose of Golay code representation. 

We applied several variations of decision trees to test meta-
feature attributes and to revalidate the thresholds used in 
discovery of these Metafeatures. For this purpose we focus on 
terminal nodes of a decision tree. This way we derive a rule 
for threshold of a new metaattribute. The figure below shows 
the “regression tree” for Model C which utilized several 
discovered meta-feature attributes like “Nominations_gt20”, 
“Number_wins_GT15”, or “imdb_rating>=7.5”. 
 
Figure 8.: Regression Tree based on Model C definition (incorporated newly 
discovered meta-knowledge based Metafeatures). 
1) Decision Trees 
We also applied a conditional tree model technique to the 
input set of attributes (questions) that were evaluated for the 
best fit and to determine terminal nodes. 
Figure 7.: Conditional tree (model C) using discovered Metafeatures.	
  
 
The Golay code work is represented as a set of 23 attributes 
(parameters) to be represented as Yes, No [1,0] and the 
“decision tree” algorithms well suited for determination of 
Metafeatures through deriving conditions of terminal nodes on 
classification of data. We made a claim that the issue of over-
fitting into quasi model here does not pose a problem for 
classification.  
2) SVM (Support Vector Machine) 
The SVM method was effective in determining what initial 
set of features like ‘Francis_Fisher' and 'David_O_Russell' 
and 'Box_office_sales_GT50_LE120mil' were determined as 
not suited to represent record. However the 
CrititicsScore_GT40 as meta-feature was identified as high 
impact on outcome as well as Audience_Score_GT60 and 
Nominations_gt20 and Wins_GT4. The method was well 
suited to discover hidden meta-knowledge pattern and to 
confirm the selected Metafeatures. 
 
3) GLM (General Linear Model) 
This technique is used to quickly discover attribute and meta-
feature is strongly impacting the outcome (wording).  
 
Figure 9.: GLM output of the most significant and discovered Metafeatures 
The reason is to test easily and efficiently what meta-feature is 
to be evaluated more thoroughly (needs more explanation).  In 
one run we subjected to GLM method test the whole set of  26 
attributes that were subjects the of GLM method evaluation to 
confirm 
significant 
impact 
of 
attributes 
with 
[1,0] 
classification (i.e. low degree of freedom) on the intended 
outcome.  The GLM method provided a quick assessment of 
the attributes derived from raw data as well as discovered 
meta-feature attributes and their impact on simulated outcome 
(Oscar wins in our considered dataset). 
D. Classification Conclusions and Summary 
Table II is a summary and reflects the results of the applied 
framework to the raw data. It enlists an example of meta-
feature attributes.  
TABLE II.  
FINAL SET OF QUESTIONS 
Attribute 
Derivation of 23-bit attribute vector 
Metafeature Question 
Answer 
[Y, N] 
Q1 
Any Oscar award? 
Y 
N 
Q2 
Any Nominations? 
Y 
N 
Q3 
Any nomination awards > 20 
? 
Y 
N 
….. 
……… 
 
 
Q22 
Any wins > 4 
Y 
N 
Q23 
Is Audience Score > 55 
Y 
N 
 

The derived set of Metaknowledge of the domains leads to 
selection of the best questions representative of the records 
(Table II.) and the given domain and leads to 23-bit binary 
attribute vector representation (Figure 8), which is fed into 
Goley Code based algorithm to generate Goley Coding Hashes 
to index records and Goley Transformation Tables to access 
the records. 
 
Figure 8.: Goley code 23-bit attribute vector representation. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The established framework was instrumental to discover 
Metaknowledge and to derive Metafeatures for binary vector 
representation of attributes to process in Goley Code.  
We assert that such framework and Metaknowledge discovery 
approaches combined with Goley Code processing can be 
reliably applied in general to Big Data problem (indexing, 
clustering, and access). The correct derivation of Metafeature 
attributes for 23-bit vector representation is critical to proper 
indexing, clustering and access. The Metafeature related 
conclusions can then be extrapolated to Big Data based on 
sampling theories [18, 20] in a domain specific “point of 
view”. Such extrapolation of Metafeature characteristics to 
Big Data represented as a 23-bit binary vector in Golay code 
will lead to reliable classification regardless. 
We make the assertion that for the purpose of qualifying 
algorithm (like Golay code in our case) the problem is best 
approached as a problem with binary [1, 0] outcome. 
While some techniques, like decision trees, bring the notion of 
quasi-complete data separation issues, and thus questionablele 
validity of the model fit, it is not perceived as a negative 
impact in this case during the discovery of the Metafeatures to 
represent records (too many words, simplify). Simply, we 
desire to maximize (minimize?) over-fitting to avoid focusing 
on lesser impact Metafeatures. Therefore we are able to 
discover the driving meta-knowledge (driving patterns, factors 
and attributes) to represents the record in Golay code. 
The Automation of evaluation performing algorithms detects 
“optimization and performance” in regards to bit classification 
attributes on the fly for a final set of meta-knowledge 23 
attributes. Those are then used as input template of 23 
questions to classify input stream of data using Golay code. 
The framework (sequence of algorithms) to evaluate and 
characterize meta-knowledge appears stable and reliable, to 
produce reliable classifiers in the form of questions, each 
representing a single bit of Golay code. 
The next step is to provide a theoretical background to the 
meta-knowledge characteristics discovery which minimizes 
the error in classification and show how Golay code can 
ensure stable and consistent classification despite possible 
errors (mischaracterization) in few bits of the word itself. 
Acknowledgment	
  
 
We would like to sincerely thank Professor Simon 
Berkovich for his guidance and a special thanks to our friend 
and collaborator  Dr. Roman Vichr.
