Stochastic Planning and Lifted Inference
Roni Khardon
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University

Scott Sanner
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto

January 5, 2017
Abstract
Lifted probabilistic inference (Poole, 2003) and symbolic dynamic programming for lifted
stochastic planning (Boutilier et al, 2001) were introduced around the same time as algorithmic
eﬀorts to use abstraction in stochastic systems. Over the years, these ideas evolved into two dis-
tinct lines of research, each supported by a rich literature. Lifted probabilistic inference focused
on eﬃcient arithmetic operations on template-based graphical models under a ﬁnite domain
assumption while symbolic dynamic programming focused on supporting sequential decision-
making in rich quantiﬁed logical action models and on open domain reasoning. Given their
common motivation but diﬀerent focal points, both lines of research have yielded highly com-
plementary innovations. In this chapter, we aim to help close the gap between these two research
areas by providing an overview of lifted stochastic planning from the perspective of probabilistic
inference, showing strong connections to other chapters in this book. This also allows us to
deﬁne generalized lifted inference as a paradigm that uniﬁes these areas and elucidates open
problems for future research that can beneﬁt both lifted inference and stochastic planning.
1
Introduction
In this chapter we illustrate that stochastic planning can be viewed as a speciﬁc form of probabilistic
inference and show that recent symbolic dynamic programming (SDP) algorithms for the planning
problem can be seen to perform “generalized lifted inference”, thus making a strong connection to
other chapters in this book. As we discuss below, although the SDP formulation is more expressive
in principle, work on SDP to date has largely focused on algorithmic aspects of reasoning in open
domain models with rich quantiﬁed logical structure whereas lifted inference has largely focused
on aspects of eﬃcient arithmetic computations over ﬁnite domain (quantiﬁer free) template-based
models. The contributions in these areas are therefore largely along diﬀerent dimensions. However,
the intrinsic relationships between these problems suggest a strong opportunity for cross-fertilization
where the true scope of generalized lifted inference can be achieved.
This chapter intends to
highlight these relationships and lay out a paradigm for generalized lifted inference that subsumes
both ﬁelds and oﬀers interesting opportunities for future research.
To make the discussion concrete, let us introduce a running example for stochastic planning
and the kind of generalized solutions that can be achieved. For illustrative purposes, we borrow a
planning domain from Boutilier et. al. [1] that we refer to as BoxWorld. In this domain, outlined
in Figure 1, there are several cities such as london, paris etc., trucks truck1, truck2 etc., and boxes
box 1, box 2 etc. The agent can load a box onto a truck or unload it and can drive a truck from
one city to another. When any box has been delivered to a speciﬁc city, paris, the agent receives a
1
arXiv:1701.01048v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2017

Figure 1: A formal desciption of the BoxWorld adapted from [1]. We use a simple STRIPS-
like [2] add and delete list representation of actions and, as a simple probabilistic extension in the
spirit of PSTRIPS [3], we assign probabilities that an action successfully executes conditioned on
various state properties.
• Domain Object Types (i.e., sorts): Box, Truck, City = {paris, . . .}
• Relations (with parameter sorts):
BoxIn: BIn(Box, City), TruckIn: TIn(Truck, City), BoxOn: On(Box, Truck)
• Reward: if ∃B, BIn(B, paris) then 10 else 0
• Actions (with parameter sorts):
– load(Box : B, Truck : T, City : C):
∗Success Probability: if (BIn(B, C) ∧TIn(T, C)) then .9 else 0
∗Add Eﬀects on Success: {On(B, T)}
∗Delete Eﬀects on Success: {BIn(B, C)}
– unload(Box : B, Truck : T, City : C):
∗Success Probability: if (On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, C)) then .9 else 0
∗Add Eﬀects on Success: {BIn(B, C)}
∗Delete Eﬀects on Success: {On(B, T)}
– drive(Truck : T, City : C1, City : C2):
∗Success Probability: if (TIn(T, C1)) then 1 else 0
∗Add Eﬀects on Success: {TIn(T, C2)}
∗Delete Eﬀects on Success: {TIn(T, C1)}
– noop
∗Success Probability: 1
∗Add Eﬀects on Success: ∅
∗Delete Eﬀects on Success: ∅
positive reward. The agent’s planning task is to ﬁnd a policy for action selection that maximizes
this reward over some planning horizon.
Our objective in lifted stochastic planning is to obtain an abstract policy, for example, like the
one shown in Figure 2. In order to get some box to paris, the agent should drive a truck to the city
where the box is located, load the box on the truck, drive the truck to paris, and ﬁnally unload
the box in paris. This is essentially encoded in the symbolic value function shown in Fig. 2, which
was computed by discounting rewards t time steps into the future by 0.9t.
Similar to this example, for some problems we can obtain a solution which is described abstractly
and is independent of the speciﬁc problem instance or even its size — for our example problem the
description of the solution does not depend on the number of cities, trucks or boxes, or on knowledge
of the particular location of any speciﬁc truck. Accordingly, one might hope that computing such
a solution can be done without knowledge of these quantities and in time complexity independent
of them. This is the computational advantage of symbolic stochastic planning which we associate
with lifted inference in this chapter.
The next two subsections expand on the connection between planning and inference, identify
2

Figure 2: A decision-list representation of the optimal policy and expected discounted reward for
the BoxWorld problem. The optimal action parameters in the then conditions correspond to the
existential bindings that made the if conditions true.
if (∃B, BIn(B, paris)) then do noop (value = 100.00)
else if (∃B, T, TIn(T, paris) ∧On(B, T)) then do unload(B, T, paris) (value = 89.0)
else if (∃B, C, T, On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, C)) then do drive(T, C, paris) (value = 80.0)
else if (∃B, C, T, BIn(B, C) ∧TIn(T, C)) then do load(B, T, C) (value = 72.0)
else if (∃B, C1, T, C2, BIn(B, C1) ∧TIn(T, C2)) then do drive(T, C2, C1) (value = 64.7)
else do noop (value = 0.0)
opportunities for lifted inference, and use these observations to deﬁne a new setup which we call gen-
eralized lifted inference which abstracts some of the work in both areas and provides new challenges
for future work.
1.1
Stochastic Planning and Inference
Planning is the task of choosing what actions to take to achieve some goals or maximize long-
term reward. When the dynamics of the world are deterministic, that is, each action has exactly
one known outcome, then the problem can be solved through logical inference. That is, inference
rules can be used to deduce the outcome of individual actions given the current state, and by
combining inference steps one can prove that the goal is achieved. In this manner a proof of goal
achievement embeds a plan. This correspondence was at the heart of McCarthy’s seminal paper [4]
that introduced the topic of AI and viewed planning as symbolic logical inference.
Since this
formulation uses ﬁrst-order logic, or the closely related situation calculus, lifted logical inference
can be used to solve deterministic planning problems.
When the dynamics of the world are non-deterministic, this relationship is more complex. In
particular, in this chapter we focus on the stochastic planning problem where an action can have
multiple possible known outcomes that occur with known state-dependent probabilities. Inference
in this case must reason about probabilities over an exponential number of state trajectories for
some planning horizon.
While lifted inference and planning may seem to be entirely diﬀerent
problems, analogies have been made between the two ﬁelds in several forms [5–15]. To make the
connections concrete, consider a ﬁnite domain and the ﬁnite horizon goal-oriented version of the
BoxWorld planning problem of Figure 1, e.g., two boxes, three trucks, and four cities and a
planning horizon of 10 steps where the goal is to get some box in paris. In this case, the value of
a state, V (S), corresponds to the probability of achieving the goal, and goal achievement can be
modeled as a speciﬁc form of inference in a Bayesian network or inﬂuence diagram.
We start by considering the conformant planning problem where the intended solution is an
explicit sequence of actions. In this case, the sequence of actions is determined in advance and action
choice at the ith step does not depend on the actual state at the ith step. For this formulation, one
can build a Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) model where each time slice represents the state
at that time and action nodes aﬀect the state at the next time step, as in Figure 3(a). The edges
in this diagram capture p(S′|S, A), where S is the current state, A is the current action and S′ is
the next state, and each of S, S′, A is represented by multiple nodes to show that they are given
3

Sh,1%
Sh,2%
Sh,n%
S0,1%
S0,2%
S0,n%
S1%
S2%
Sn%
A%
A2%
A1%
S1%
S2%
Sn%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
(a)
Sh,1%
Sh,2%
Sh,n%
S0,1%
S0,2%
S0,n%
S1%
S2%
Sn%
S1%
S2%
Sn%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
A%
A2%
A1%
(b)
Figure 3: Planning as inference: conditioning on start and goal state. (a) Conformant planning
– actions selected per time step without knowledge of the state. (b) An exponential size policy
at each time step determines action selection. The transition depends on the current state and
policy’s actions for that state.
by a collection of predicates and their values. Note that, since the world dynamics are known, the
conditional probabilities for all nodes in the graph are known. As a result, the goal-based planning
problem where a goal G must hold at the last step, can be modeled using standard inference. The
value of conformant planning is given by marginal MAP (where we seek a MAP value for some
variables but take expectation over the remaining variables) [7,12,13]:
Vconformant(S0)
=
max
A0 , . . . , max
AN−1 Pr(G|S0, A0, . . . , AN−1)
=
max
A0 , . . . , max
AN−1
X
S1,S2,...,SN
Pr(G, S1, . . . , SN|S0, A0, . . . , AN−1).
The optimal conformant plan is extracted using argmax instead of max in the equation.
The standard MDP formulation with a reward per time time step which is accumulated can
be handled similarly, by normalizing the cumulative reward and adding a binary node G whose
probability of being true is a function of the normalized cumulative reward. Several alternative
formulations of planning as inference have been proposed by deﬁning an auxiliary distribution
over ﬁnite trajectories which captures utility weighted probability distribution over the trajectories
[6,9–11,15]. While the details vary, the common theme among these approaches is that the planning
objective is equivalent to calculating the partition function (or “probability of evidence”) in the
resulting distribution.
This achieves the same eﬀect as adding a node G that depends on the
cumulative reward. To simplify the discussion, we continue the presentation with the simple goal
based formulation.
The same problem can be viewed from a Bayesian perspective, treating actions as random
variables with an uninformative prior. In this case we can use
Pr(G|S0, A0, . . . , AN−1) = Pr(A0, . . . , AN−1|G, S0)Pr(G|S0)
Pr(A0, . . . , AN−1|S0)
.
to observe that [5,6,8]
argmaxA0, . . . , max
AN−1 Pr(G|S0, A0, . . . , AN−1) = argmaxA0, . . . , max
AN−1 Pr(A0, . . . , AN−1|G, S0)
and therefore one can alternatively maximize the probability conditioned on G.
However, linear plans, as the ones produced by the conformant setting, are not optimal for
probabilistic planning. In particular, if we are to optimize goal achievement then we must allow
4

the actions to depend on the state they are taken in.
That is, the action in the second step
is taken with knowledge of the probabilistic outcome of the ﬁrst action, which is not known in
advance. We can achieve this by duplicating action nodes, with a copy for each possible value of
the state variables, as illustrated in Figure 3(b). This represents a separate policy associated with
each horizon depth which is required because ﬁnite horizon problems have non-stationary optimal
policies. In this case, state transitions depend on the identity of the current state and the action
variables associated with that state. The corresponding inference problem can be written as follows:
V (S0) = max
A0(S0), . . . ,
max
AN−1(SN−1) Pr(G|S0, A0(S0), . . . , AN−1(SN −1)).
(1)
However, the number of random variables in this formulation is prohibitively large since we need
the number of original action variables to be multiplied by the size of the state space.
Alternatively, the same desideratum, optimizing actions with knowledge of the previous state,
can be achieved without duplicating variables in the equivalent formulation
V (S0) = max
A0
X
S1
Pr(S1|S0, A0) max
A1
X
S2
Pr(S2|S1, A1) . . .
max
AN−2
X
SN−1
Pr(SN−1|SN−2, AN−2) max
AN−1
X
SN
Pr(SN|SN−1, AN−1)Pr(G|Sn).
(2)
In fact, this formulation is exactly the same as the ﬁnite horizon application of the value iteration
(VI) algorithm for (goal-based) Markov Decision Processes (MDP) which is the standard formula-
tion for sequential decision making in stochastic environments. The standard formulation abstracts
this by setting
V0(S) = Pr(G|S)
Vk+1(S) = max
A
X
S′
Pr(S′|S, A)Vk(S′)
|
{z
}
Q(S,A)
.
(3)
The optimal policy (at S0) can be obtained as before by recording the argmax values. In terms of
probabilistic inference, the problem is no longer a marginal MAP problem because summation and
maximization steps are constrained in their interleaved order. But it can be seen as a natural exten-
sion of such inference questions with several alternating blocks of expectation and maximization.
We are not aware of an explicit study of such problems outside the planning context.
1.2
Stochastic Planning and Generalized Lifted Inference
Given that planning can be seen as an inference problem, one can try to apply ideas of lifted
inference to planning. Taking the motivating example from Figure 1, let us specialize the reward
to a ground atomic goal G equivalent to BIn(b∗, paris) for constants b∗and paris. Then we can
query maxA Pr(BIn(b∗, paris)|s0, A) to compute V (S0 = s0) where s0 is the concrete value of the
current state.
Given that Figure 1 implies a complex relational speciﬁcation of the transition probabilities,
lifted inference techniques are especially well-placed to attempt to exploit the structure of this
query to perform inference in aggregate and thus avoid redundant computations. However, we
emphasize that, even if lifted inference is used, this is a standard query in the graphical model
5

where evidence constrains the value of some nodes, and the solution is a single number representing
the corresponding probability (together with a MAP assignment to variables).
However, Eq 3 suggests an explicit additional structure for the planning problem. In particular,
the intermediate expressions Vk(S) include the values (the probability of reaching the goal in k
steps) for all possible concrete values of S. Similarly, the ﬁnal result VN(S) includes the values
for all possible start states. In addition, as in our running example we can consider more abstract
rewards.
This suggests a ﬁrst generalization of the standard setup in lifted inference.
Instead
of asking about a ground goal Pr(BIn(b∗, paris)) and expecting a single number as a response,
we can abstract the setup in two ways: ﬁrst, we can ask about more general conditions such
as ∃B, Pr(BIn(B, paris)) and second we can expect to get a structured result that speciﬁes the
corresponding probability for every concrete state in the world. If we had two box instances b1, b2
and m truck instances t1, . . . , tm, the answer for V1(S), i.e., the value for the goal based formulation
with horizon one, might take the form:
if (BIn(b1, paris) ∨BIn(b2, paris))
then V1(S) = 10
else if ((TIn(t1, paris)∧On(b1, t1))∨. . .∨(TIn(tm, paris)∧On(b2, tm)))
then V1(S) = 9
else V1(S) = 0.
The signiﬁcance of this is that the question can have a more general form and that the answer
solves many problems simultaneously, providing the response as a case analysis depending on some
properties of the state. We refer to this reasoning as inference with generalized queries and answers.
In this context, the goal of lifted inference will be to calculate a structured form of the reply directly.
A second extension arises from the setup of generalized queries. The standard form for lifted
inference is to completely specify the domain in advance. This means providing the number of
objects and their properties, and that the response to the query is calculated only for this speciﬁc
domain instantiation. However, inspecting the solution in the previous paragraph it is obvious that
we can at least hope to do better. The same solution can be described more compactly as
if (∃B, BIn(B, paris))
then V1(S) = 10
else if (∃B, ∃T, (TIn(T, paris)∧On(B, T))
then V1(S) = 9
else V1(S) = 0.
Arriving at such a solution requires us to allow open domain reasoning over all potential objects
(rather than grounding them, which is impossible in open domains), and to extend ideas of lifted
inference to exploit quantiﬁers and their structure. Following through with this idea, we can arrive
at a domain-size independent value function and policy as the one shown in Figure 2.
In this
context, the goal of lifted inference will be to calculate an abstracted form of the reply directly. We
call this problem inference with generalized models. As we describe in this chapter, SDP algorithms
are able to perform this type of inference.
The previous example had enough structure and a special query that allowed the solution to
be speciﬁed without any knowledge of the concrete problem instance. This property is not always
possible. For example, consider a setting where we get one unit of reward for every box in paris:
P
B:Box [if (BIn(B, paris)) then 1 else 0]. In addition, consider the case where, after the agent takes
their action, any box which is not on a truck disappears with probability 0.2. In this case, we can
6

still potentially calculate an abstract solution, but it requires access to more complex properties of
the state, and in some cases the domain size (number of objects) in the state. For our example this
gives:
Let n = (#B, BIn(B, paris))
if (∃B, ∃T, (TIn(T, paris)∧On(B, T))
then V1(S) = n ∗8 + 7.2
else V1(S) = n ∗8.
Here we have introduced a new notation for count expressions where, for example, (#B, BIn(B, paris))
counts the number of boxes in Paris in the current state. To see this result note that any existing
box in Paris disappears 20% of the time and that a box on a truck is successfully unloaded 90% of
the time but remains and does not disappear only in 80% of possible futures leading to the value
7.2. This is reminiscent of the type of expressions that arise in existing lifted inference problems
and solutions. Typical solutions to such problems involve parameterized expressions over the do-
main (e.g., counting, summation, etc.), and critically do not always require closed-domain reasoning
(e.g., a priori knowledge of the number of boxes). They are therefore suitable for inference with
generalized models. Some work on SDP has approached lifted inference for problems with this
level of complexity, including exogenous activities (the disappearing boxes) and additive rewards.
But, as we describe in more detail, the solutions for these cases are much less well understood and
developed.
To recap, our example illustrates that stochastic planning potentially enables abstract solutions
that might be amenable to lifted computations. SDP solutions for planning problems have focused
on the computational advantages arising from these expressive generalizations. At the same time,
the focus in SDP algorithms has largely been on problems where the solution is completely inde-
pendent of domain size and does not require numerical properties of the state. These algorithms
have thus skirted some of the computational issues that are typically tackled in lifted inference. It
is the combination of these aspects, as illustrated in the last example, which we call generalized
lifted inference. As the discussion suggests, generalized lifted inference is still very much an open
problem. In addition to providing a survey of existing SDP algorithms, the goal of this chapter is
to highlight the opportunities and challenges in this exciting area of research.
2
Preliminaries
This section provides a formal description of the representation language, the relational planning
problem, and the description of the running example in this context.
2.1
Relational Expressions and their Calculus of Operations
The computation of SDP algorithms is facilitated by a representation that enables compact spec-
iﬁcation of functions over world states. Several such representations have been devised and used.
In this chapter we chose to abstract away some of those details and focus on a simple language of
relational expressions. This is closest to the GFODD representation of [16,17], but it resembles the
case notation of [1,18].
Syntax. We assume familiarity with basic concepts and notation in ﬁrst order logic (FOL) [19–21].
Relational expressions are similar to expressions in FOL. They are deﬁned relative to a relational
signature, with a ﬁnite set of predicates p1, p2, . . . , pn each with an associated arity (number of
7

arguments), a countable set of variables x1, x2, . . ., and a set of constants c1, c2, . . . , cm. We do
not allow function symbols other than constants (that is, functions with arity ≥1). A term is
a variable (often denoted in uppercase) or constant (often denoted in lowercase) and an atom is
either an equality between two terms or a predicate with an appropriate list of terms as arguments.
Intuitively, a term refers to an object in the world of interest and an atom is a property which is
either true or false.
We illustrate relational expressions informally by some examples.
In FOL we can consider
open formulas that have unbound variables. For example, the atom color(X, Y ) is such a formula
and its truth value depends on the assignment of X and Y to objects in the world. To simplify
the discussion, we assume for this example that arguments are typed (or sorted) and X ranges
over “objects” and Y over “colors”. We can then quantify over these variables to get a sentence
which will be evaluated to a truth value in any concrete possible world. For example, we can write
[∃Y, ∀X, color(X, Y )] expressing the statement that there is a color associated with all objects.
Generalized expressions allow for more general open formulas that evaluate to numerical values.
For example, E1 = [if color(X, Y ) then 1 else 0] is similar to the previous logical expression but
E2 = [if color(X, Y ) then 0.3 else 0.5] returns non-binary values.
Quantiﬁers from logic are replaced with aggregation operators that combine numerical values
and provide a generalization of the logical constructs. In particular, when the open formula is
restricted to values 0 and 1, the operators max and min simulate existential and universal quan-
tiﬁcation.
Thus, [maxY , minX, if color(X, Y ) then 1 else 0] is equivalent to the logical sentence
[∃Y, ∀X, color(X, Y )] given above. But we can allow for other types of aggregations. For example,
[maxY , sumX, if color(X, Y ) then 1 else 0] evaluates to the largest number of objects associated
with one color, and the expression [sumX, minY , if color(X, Y ) then 0 else 1] evaluates to the num-
ber of objects that have no color association. In this manner, a generalized expression represents
a function from possible worlds to numerical values and, as illustrated, can capture interesting
properties of the state.
Relational expressions are also related to work in statistical relational learning [22–24]. For
example, if the open expression E2 given above captures probability of ground facts for the predicate
color() and the ground facts are mutually independent then [productX, productY , if color(X, Y )
then 0.3 else 0.5] captures the joint probability for all facts for color(). Of course, the open formulas
in logic can include more than one atom and similarly expressions can be more involved.
In the following we will drop the cumbersome if-then-else notation and instead will assume
a simpler notation with a set of mutually exclusive conditions which we refer to as cases.
In
particular, an expression includes a set of mutually exclusive open formulas in FOL (without
any quantiﬁers or aggregators) denoted c1, . . . , ck associated with corresponding numerical val-
ues v1, . . . , vk.
The list of cases refers to a ﬁnite set of variables X1, . . . , Xm.
A generalized
expression is given by a list of aggregation operators and their variables and the list of cases
[aggX1, aggX2, . . . , aggXm[c1 : v1, . . . , ck : vk]] so that the last expression is canonically represented
as [productX, productY , [color(X, Y ) : 0.3; ¬color(X, Y ) : 0.5]].
Semantics. The semantics of expressions is deﬁned inductively exactly as in ﬁrst order logic and
we skip the formal deﬁnition. As usual, an expression is evaluated in an interpretation also known
as a possible world. In our context, an interpretation speciﬁes (1) a ﬁnite set of n domain elements
also known as objects, (2) a mapping of constants to domain elements, and (3) the truth values
of all the predicates over tuples of domain elements of appropriate size to match the arity of the
predicate. Now, given an expression B = (aggX, f(X)), an interpretation I, and a substitution ζ
of variables in X to objects in I, one can identify the case ci which is true for this substitution.
8

Exactly one such case exists since the cases are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. Therefore, the
value associated with ζ is vi. These values are then aggregated using the aggregation operators. For
example, consider again the expression [productX, productY , [color(X, Y ) : 0.3; ¬color(X, Y ) : 0.5]]
and an interpretation I with objects a, b and where a is associated with colors black and white and
b is associated with color black. In this case we have exactly 4 substitutions evaluating to 0.3, 0.3,
0.5, 0.3. Then the ﬁnal value is 0.33 · 0.5.
Operations over expressions. Any binary operation op over real values can be generalized to
open and closed expressions in a natural way. If f1 and f2 are two closed expressions, f1 op f2
represents the function which maps each interpretation w to f1(w) op f2(w).
This provides a
deﬁnition but not an implementation of binary operations over expressions. For implementation,
the work in [16] showed that if the binary operation is safe, i.e., it distributes with respect to all
aggregation operators, then there is a simple algorithm (the Apply procedure) implementing the
binary operation over expressions. For example, + is safe w.r.t. max aggregation, and it is easy to
see that (maxX f(X)) + (maxX g(X)) = maxX maxY f(X) + g(Y ), and the open formula portion
of the result can be calculated directly from the open expressions f(X) and g(Y ). Note that we
need to standardize the expressions apart, as in the renaming of g(X) to g(Y ) for such operations.
When f(x) and g(y) are open relational expressions the result can be computed through a cross
product of the cases. For example,
[max
X , min
Y
[color(X, Y ) : 3; ¬color(X, Y ) : 5]] ⊕[max
X , [box(X) : 1; ¬box(X) : 2]]
= [max
Z , max
X , min
Y
[color(X, Y ) ∧box(Z) : 4; ¬color(X, Y ) ∧box(Z) : 6;
color(X, Y ) ∧¬box(Z) : 5; ¬color(X, Y ) ∧¬box(Z) : 7]]
When the binary operation is not safe then this procedure fails, but in some cases, operation-speciﬁc
algorithms can be used for such combinations.1
As will become clear later, to implement SDP we need the binary operations ⊕, ⊗, max and
the aggregation includes max in addition to aggregation in the reward function. Since ⊕, ⊗, max
are safe with respect to max, min aggregation one can provide a complete solution when the reward
is restricted to have max, min aggregation. When this is not the case, for example when using sum
aggregation in the reward function, one requires a special algorithm for the combination. Further
details are provided in [16,17].
Summary. Relational expressions are closest to the GFODD representation of [16, 17]. Every
case ci in a relational expression corresponds to a path or set of paths in the GFODD, all of which
reach the same leaf in the graphical representation of the GFODD. GFODDs are potentially more
compact than relational expressions since paths share common subexpressions, which can lead to
an exponential reduction in size. On the other hand, GFODDs require special algorithms for their
manipulation.
Relational expressions are also similar to the case notation of [1, 18].
However,
in contrast with that representation, cases are not allowed to include any quantiﬁers and instead
quantiﬁers and general aggregators are globally applied over the cases, as in standard quantiﬁed
normal form in logic.
1For example, a product of expressions that include only product aggregations, which is not safe, can be obtained
by scaling the result with a number that depends on domain size, and [Q
x1
Q
x2
Q
x3 f(x1, x2, x3)]⊗[Q
y1
Q
y2 g(y1, y2)]
is euqal to [Q
x1
Q
x2
Q
x3[f(x1, x2, x3) × g(x1, x2)1/n]] when the domain has n objects.
9

2.2
Relational MDPs
In this section we deﬁne MDPs, starting with the basic case with enumerated state and action
spaces, and then providing the relational representation.
MDP Preliminaries. We assume familiarity with basic notions of Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) [25,26]. Brieﬂy, a MDP is a tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩given by a set of states S, set of actions
A, transition probability Pr(S′|S, A), immediate reward function R(S) and discount factor γ < 1.
The solution of a MDP is a policy π that maximizes the expected discounted total reward obtained
by following that policy starting from any state. The Value Iteration algorithm (VI) informally
introduced in Eq 3, calculates the optimal value function by iteratively performing Bellman backups,
Vk+1 = T[Vk], deﬁned for each state s ∈S as,
Vk+1(s) = T[Vk](s) ←max
a∈A {R(s) + γ
X
s′∈S
Pr(s′|s, a)Vk(s′)}.
(4)
Unlike Eq 3, which was goal-oriented and had only a single reward at the terminal horizon, here we
allow the reward R(S) to accumulate at all time steps as typically allowed in MDPs. If we iterate
the update until convergence, we get the optimal inﬁnite horizon value function typically denoted
by V ∗and optimal stationary policy π∗. For ﬁnite horizon problems, which is the topic of this
chapter, we simply stop the iterations at a speciﬁc k. In general, the optimal policy for the ﬁnite
horizon case is not stationary, that is, we might make diﬀerent choice in the same state depending
on how close we are to the horizon.
Logical Notation for Relational MDPs (RMDPs). RMDPs are simply MDPs where the
states and actions are described in a function-free ﬁrst order logical language. A state corresponds
to an interpretation over the corresponding logical signature, and actions are transitions between
such interpretations.
A relational planning problem is speciﬁed by providing the logical signature, the start state,
the transitions as controlled by actions, and the reward function. As mentioned above, one of the
advantages of relational SDP algorithms is that they are intended to produce an abstracted form of
the value function and policy that does not require specifying the start state or even the number of
objects n in the interpretation at planning time. This yields policies that generalize across domain
sizes. We therefore need to explain how one can use logical notation to represent the transition
model and reward function in a manner that does not depend on domain size.
Two types of transition models have been considered in the literature:
• Endogenous Branching Transitions: In the basic form, state transitions have limited
stochastic branching due to a ﬁnite number of action outcomes.
The agent has a set of
action types {A} each parametrized with a tuple of objects to yield an action template
A(X) and a concrete ground action A(x) (e.g. template unload(B, T) and concrete action
unload(box23, truck1)). Each agent action has a ﬁnite number of action variants Aj(X) (e.g.,
action success vs. action failure), and when the user performs A(X) in state s one of the vari-
ants is chosen randomly using the state-dependent action choice distribution Pr(Aj(X)|A(X)).
To simplify the presentation we follow [16,27] and require that Pr(Aj(X)|A(X)) are given by
open expressions, i.e., they have no aggregations and cannot introduce new variables. For ex-
ample, in BoxWorld, the agent action unload(B, T, C) has success outcome unloadS(B, T, C)
10

and failure outcome unloadF(B, T, C) with action outcome distribution as follows:
P(unloadS(B, T, C)|unload(B, T, C)) = [(On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, C)) : .9; ¬ : 0]
P(unloadF(B, T, C)|unload(B, T, C)) = [(On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, C)) : .1; ¬ : 1]
(5)
where, to simplify the notation, the last case is shortened as ¬ to denote that it complements
previous cases. This provides the distribution over deterministic outcomes of actions.
The deterministic action dynamics are speciﬁed by providing an open expression, capturing
successor state axioms [28], for each variant Aj(X) and predicate template p′(Y ). Following
[27] we call these expressions TVDs, standing for truth value diagrams. The corresponding
TVD, T(Aj(X), p′(Y )), is an open expression that speciﬁes the truth value of p′(Y ) in the
next state (following standard practice we use prime to denote that the predicate refers to
the next state) when Aj(X) has been executed in the current state. The arguments X and
Y are intentionally diﬀerent logical variables as this allows us to specify the truth value of all
instances of p′(Y ) simultaneously. Similar to the choice probabilities we follow [16, 27] and
assume that TVDs T(Aj(X), p′(Y )) have no aggregations and cannot introduce new variables.
This implies that the regression and product terms in the SDP algorithm of the next section do
not change the aggregation function, thereby enabling analysis of the algorithm. Continuing
our BoxWorld example, we deﬁne the TVD for BIn′(B, C) for unloadS(B1, T1, C1) and
unloadF(B1, T1, C1) as follows:
BIn′(B, C) ≡T(unloadS(B1, T1, C1), BIn′(B, C))
≡[(BIn(B, C)∨
((B1 = B) ∧(C1 = C) ∧On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1))) : 1; ¬ : 0]
BIn′(B, C) ≡T(unloadF(B1, T1, C1), BIn′(B, C))
≡[BIn(B, C) : 1; ¬ : 0]
(6)
Note that each TVD has exactly two cases, one leading to the outcome 1 and the other leading
to the outcome 0. Our algorithm below will use these cases individually. Here we remark
that since the next state (primed) only depends on the previous state (unprimed), we are
eﬀectively logically encoding the Markov assumption of MDPs.
• Exogenous Branching Transitions: The more complex form combines the endogenous
model with an exogenous stochastic process that aﬀects ground atoms independently. As a
simple example in our BoxWorld domain, we might imagine that with some small prob-
ability, each box B in a city C (BIn(B, C)) may independently randomly disappear (falsify
BIn(B, C)) owing to issues with theft or improper routing — such an outcome is independent
of the agent’s own action. Another more complicated example could be an inventory control
problem where customer arrival at shops (and corresponding consumption of goods) follows
an independent stochastic model. Such exogenous transitions can be formalized in a number
of ways [17, 29, 30]; we do not aim to commit to a particular representation in this chapter,
but rather to mention its possibility and the computational consequences of such general
representations.
Having completed our discussion of RMDP transitions, we now proceed to deﬁne the reward
R(S, A), which can be any function of the state and action, speciﬁed by a relational expression.
11

Our running example with existentially quantiﬁed reward is given by
[max
B [BIn(B, paris) : 10; ¬BIn(B, paris) : 0]]
(7)
but we will also consider additive reward as in
[
X
B
[BIn(B, paris) : 10; ¬BIn(B, paris) : 0]].
(8)
3
Symbolic Dynamic Programming
The SDP algorithm is a symbolic implementation of the value iteration algorithm. The algorithm
repeatedly applies so-called decision-theoretic regression which is equivalent to one iteration of the
value iteration algorithm.
As input to SDP we get closed relational expressions for Vk and R.
In addition, assuming
that we are using the Endogenous Branching Transition model of the previous section, we get
open expressions for the probabilistic choice of actions Pr(Aj(X)|A(X)) and for the dynamics of
deterministic action variants as TVDs. The corresponding expressions for the running example are
given respectively in Eq (7), Eq (5) and Eq (6).
The following SDP algorithm of [16] modiﬁes the earlier SDP algorithm of [1] and implements
Eq (4) using the following 4 steps:
i. Regression: The k step-to-go value function Vk is regressed over every deterministic variant
Aj(X) of every action A(X) to produce Regr(Vk, Aj(X)). Regression is conceptually similar
to goal regression in deterministic planning. That is, we identify conditions that need to occur
before the action is taken in order to arrive at other conditions (for example the goal) after
the action. However, here we need to regress all the conditions in the relational expression
capturing the value function, so that we must regress each case ci of Vk separately. This can
be done eﬃciently by replacing every atom in each ci by its corresponding positive or negated
portion of the TVD without changing the aggregation function. Once this substitution is done,
logical simpliﬁcation (at the propositional level) can be used to compress the cases by removing
contradictory cases and simplifying the formulas. Applying this to regress unloadS(B1, T1, C1)
over the reward function given by Eq (7) we get:
[max
B
[(BIn(B, paris)∨
((B1 = B) ∧(C1 = paris) ∧On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1))) : 10; ¬ : 0]]
and regressing unloadF(B1, T1, C1) yields
[max
B
[BIn(B, paris) : 10; ¬ : 0]]
This illustrates the utility of compiling the transition model into the TVDs which allow for a
simple implementation of deterministic regression.
ii. Add Action Variants: The Q-function QA(X)
k
= R ⊕[γ ⊗⊕j(Pr(Aj(X)) ⊗Regr(Vk, Aj(X)))]
for each action A(X) is generated by combining regressed diagrams using the binary opera-
tions ⊕and ⊗over expressions. Recall that probability expressions do not refer to additional
variables. The multiplication can therefore be done directly on the open formulas without
12

changing the aggregation function. As argued by [27], to guarantee correctness, both sum-
mation steps (⊕j and R⊕steps) must standardize apart the functions before adding them.
For our running example and assuming γ = 0.9, we would need to compute the following:
Qkunload(B1,T1,C1)(S) =
R(S) ⊕0.9·
[(Regr(V0, unloadS(B1, T1, C1)) ⊗P(unloadS(B1, T1, C1)|unload(B1, T1, C1)))⊕
(Regr(V0, unloadF(B1, T1, C1)) ⊗P(unloadF(B1, T1, C1)|unload(B1, T1, C1)))].
We next illustrate some of these steps. The multiplication by probability expressions can be
done by cross product of cases and simpliﬁcation. For unloadS this yields
[max
B
[((BIn(B, paris) ∨((B1 = B) ∧(C1 = paris)))
∧On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1)) : 9; ¬ : 0]]
and for unloadF we get
[max
B
[BIn(B, paris) ∧(On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1)) : 1;
BIn(B, paris) ∧¬(On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1)) : 10;
¬ : 0]].
Note that the values here are weighted by the probability of occurrence. For example the
ﬁrst case in the last equation has value 1=10*0.1 because when the preconditions of unload
hold the variant unloadF occurs with 10% probability. The addition of the last two equations
requires standardizing them apart, performing the safe operation through cross product of
cases, and simplifying. Skipping intermediate steps, this yields
[max
B
[BIn(B, paris) : 10;
¬BIn(B, paris) ∧(B1 = B) ∧(C1 = paris) ∧On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1) : 9;
¬ : 0]].
Multiplying by the discount factor scales the numbers in the last equation by 0.9 and ﬁ-
nally standardizing apart and adding the reward and simplifying (again skipping intermediate
steps) yields
Q0unload(B1,T1,C1)(S) =
[ max
B
[BIn(B, paris) : 19;
¬BIn(B, paris) ∧(B1 = B) ∧(C1 = paris) ∧On(B1, T1) ∧TIn(T1, C1) : 8.1;
¬ : 0]].
Intuitively, this result states that after executing a concrete stochastic unload action with
arguments (B1, T1, C1), we achieve the highest value (10 plus a discounted 0.9*10) if a box
was already in Paris, the next highest value (10 occurring with probability 0.9 and discounted
by 0.9) if unloading B1 from T1 in C1 = paris, and a value of zero otherwise. The main source
of eﬃciency (or lack thereof) of SDP is the ability to perform such operations symbolically
and simplify the result into a compact expression.
13

iii. Object Maximization: Note that up to this point in the algorithm the action arguments
are still considered to be concrete arbitrary objects, (B1, T1, C1) in our example. However, we
must make sure that in each of the (unspeciﬁed and possibly inﬁnite set of possible) states we
choose the best concrete action for that state, by specifying the appropriate action arguments.
This is handled in the current step of the algorithm.
To achieve this, we maximize over the action parameters X of QA(X)
Vk
to produce QA
Vk for each
action A(X). This implicitly obtains the value achievable by the best ground instantiation
of A(X) in each state.
This step is implemented by converting action parameters X to
variables, each associated with the max aggregation operator, and appending these operators
to the head of the aggregation function. Once this is done, further logical simpliﬁcation may
be possible. This occurs in our running example where existential quantiﬁcation (over B1, C1)
which is constrained by equality can be removed, and the result is:
Qunload
0
(S) =
[max
T , max
B
[BIn(B, paris) : 19;
¬BIn(B, paris) ∧On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, paris) : 8.1;
¬ : 0]].
iv. Maximize over Actions: The k+1st step-to-go value function Vk+1 = maxA QA
Vk, is gener-
ated by combining the expressions using the binary operation max.
Concretely, for our running example, this means we would compute:
V1(S) = max(Qunload
0
(S), max(Qload
0
(S), Qdrive
0
(S))).
While we have only shown Qunload
0
(S) above, we remark that the values achievable in each
state by Qunload
0
(S) dominate or equal the values achievable by Qload
0
(S) and Qdrive
0
(S) in the
same state. Practically this implies that after simpliﬁcation we obtain the following value
function:
V1(S) = Qunload
0
(S) =
[max
T , max
B [BIn(B, paris) : 19;
¬BIn(B, paris) ∧On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, paris) : 8.1;
¬ : 0]].
Critically for the objectives of lifted stochastic planning, we observe that the value function
derived by SDP is indeed lifted: it holds for any number of boxes, trucks and cities.
SDP repeats these steps to the required depth, iteratively calculating Vk. For example, Figure 2
illustrates V∞for the BoxWorld example, which was computed by terminating the SDP loop once
the value function converged.
The basic SDP algorithm is an exact calculation whenever the model can be speciﬁed using
the constraints above and the reward function can be speciﬁed with max and min aggregation [16].
This is satisﬁed by classical models of stochastic planning. As illustrated, in these cases, the SDP
solution conforms to our deﬁnition of generalized lifted inference.
Extending the Scope of SDP. The algorithm above cannot handle models with more complex
dynamics and rewards as motivated in the introduction. In particular, prior work has considered
14

two important properties that appear to be relevant in many domains. The ﬁrst is additive rewards,
illustrated for example, in Eq 8. The second property is exogenous branching transitions illustrated
above by the disappearing blocks example. These represent two diﬀerent challenges for the SDP
algorithm. The ﬁrst is that we must handle sum aggregation in value functions, despite the fact that
this means that some of the operations are not safe and hence require a special implementation. The
second is in modeling the exogenous branching dynamics which requires getting around potential
conﬂicts among such events and between such events and agent actions. The introduction illustrated
the type of solution that can be expected in such a problem where counting expressions, that
measure the number of times certain conditions hold in a state, determine the value in that state.
To date, exact abstract solutions for problems of this form have not been obtained. The work
of [30] and [29] (Ch. 6) considered additive rewards and has formalized an expressive family of
models with exogenous events. This work has shown that some speciﬁc challenging domains can be
handled using several algorithmic ideas, but did not provide a general algorithm that is applicable
across problems in this class. The work of [17] developed a model for “service domains” which
signiﬁcantly constrains the type of exogenous branching.
In their model, a transition includes
an agent step whose dynamics use endogenous branching, followed by “nature’s step” where each
object (e.g., a box) experiences a random exogenous action (potentially disappearing).
Given
these assumptions, they provide a generally applicable approximation algorithm as follows. Their
algorithm treats agent’s actions exactly as in SDP above. To regress nature’s actions we follow the
following three steps: (1) the summation variables are ﬁrst ground using a Skolem constant c, then
(2) a single exogenous event centered at c is regressed using the same machinery, and ﬁnally (3) the
Skolemization is reversed to yield another additive value function. The complete details are beyond
the scope of this chapter. The algorithm yields a solution that avoids counting formulas and is
syntactically close to the one given by the original algorithm. Since such formulas are necessary,
the result is an approximation but it was shown to be a conservative one in that it provides a
monotonic lower bound on the true value. Therefore, this algorithm conforms to our deﬁnition of
approximate generalized lifted inference.
In our example, starting with the reward of Eq (8) we ﬁrst replace the sum aggregation with a
scaled version of average aggregation (which is safe w.r.t. summation)
[n · avgB[BIn(B, paris) : 10; ¬ : 0]]
and then ground it to get
[n · [BIn(c, paris) : 10; ¬ : 0]].
The next step is to regress through the exogenous event at c. The problem where boxes disappear
with probability 0.2 can be cast as having two action variants where “disappearing-block” succeeds
with probability 0.2 and fails with probability 0.8.
Regressing the success variant we get the
expression [0] (the zero function) and regressing the fail variant we get [n·[BIn(c, paris) : 10; ¬ : 0]].
Multiplying by the probabilities of the variants we get: [0] and [n · [BIn(c, paris) : 8; ¬ : 0]] and
adding them (there are no variables to standardize apart) we get
[n · [BIn(c, paris) : 8; ¬ : 0]].
Finally lifting the last equation we get
[n · avgB[BIn(B, paris) : 8; ¬BIn(B, paris) : 0]].
Next we follow with the standard steps of SDP for the agent’s action. The steps are analogous
to the example of SDP given above. Considering the discussion in the introduction (recall that in
15

order to simplify the reasoning in this case we omitted discounting and adding the reward) this
algorithm produces
[n · max
T , avgB, [BIn(B, paris) : 8;
(¬BIn(B, paris) ∧On(B, T) ∧TIn(T, paris)) : 7.2; ¬ : 0]],
which is identical to the exact expression given in the introduction. As already mentioned, the
result is not guaranteed to be exact in general. In addition, the maximization in step iv of SDP
requires some ad-hoc implementation because maximization is not safe with respect to average
aggregation.
It is clear from the above example that the main diﬃculty in extending SDP is due to the
interaction of the counting formulas arising from exogenous events and additive rewards with the
ﬁrst-order aggregation structure inherent in the planning problem. Relational expressions, their
GFODD counterparts, and other representations that have been used to date are not able to
combine these eﬀectively. A representation that seamlessly supports both relational expressions
and operations on them along with counting expressions might allow for more robust versions of
generalized lifted inference to be realized.
4
Discussion and Related Work
As motivated in the introduction, SDP has explored probabilistic inference problems with a speciﬁc
form of alternating maximization and expectation blocks.
The main computational advantage
comes from lifting in the sense of lifted inference in standard ﬁrst order logic. Issues that arise
from conditional summations over combinations random variables, common in probabilistic lifted
inference, have been touched upon but not extensively. In cases where SDP has been shown to
work it provides generalized lifted inference where the complexity of the inference algorithm is
completely independent of the domain size (number of objects) in problem speciﬁcation, and where
the response to queries is either independent of that size or can be speciﬁed parametrically. This
is a desirable property but to our knowledge it is not shared by most work on probabilistic lifted
inference. A notable exception is given by the knowledge compilation result of [31] (see Chapter 4
and Theorem 5.5) and the recent work in [32, 33], where a model is compiled into an alternative
form parametrized by the domain D and where responses to queries can be obtained in polynomial
time as a function of D. The emphasis in that work is on being domain lifted (i.e., being polynomial
in domain size). Generalized lifted inference requires an algorithm whose results can be computed
once, in time independent of that size, and then reused to evaluate the answer for speciﬁc domain
sizes.
This analogy also shows that SDP can be seen as a compilation algorithm, compiling a
domain model into a more accessible form representing the value function, which can be queried
eﬃciently. This connection provides an interesting new perspective on both ﬁelds.
In this chapter we focused on one particular instance of SDP. Over the last 15 years SDP
has seen a signiﬁcant amount of work expanding over the original algorithm by using diﬀerent
representations, by using algorithms other than value iteration, and by extending the models and
algorithms to more complex settings. In addition, several “lifted” inductive approaches that do not
strictly fall within the probabilistic inference paradigm have been developed. We review this work
in the remainder of this section.
16

4.1
Deductive Lifted Stochastic Planning
As a precursor to its use in lifted stochastic planning, the term SDP originated in the propositional
logical context [34,35] when it was realized that propositionally structured MDP transitions (i.e.,
dynamic Bayesian networks [36]) and rewards (e.g., trees that exploited context-speciﬁc indepen-
dence [37]) could be used to deﬁne highly compact factored MDPs; this work also realized that
the factored MDP structure could be exploited for representational compactness and computational
eﬃciency by leveraging symbolic representations (e.g., trees) in dynamic programming. Two highly
cited (and still used algorithms) in this area of work are the SPUDD [38] and APRICODD [39]
algorithms that leveraged algebraic decision diagrams (ADDs) [40] for, respectively, exact and
approximate solutions to factored MDPs. Recent work in this area [41] shows how to perform
propositional SDP directly with ground representations in PPDDL [42], and develops extensions
for factored action spaces [43,44].
Following the seminal introduction of lifted SDP in [1], several early papers on SDP approached
the problem with existential rewards with diﬀerent representation languages that enabled eﬃcient
implementations. This includes the First-order value iteration (FOVIA) [45, 46], the Relational
Bellman algorithm (ReBel) [47], and the FODD based formulation of [27,48,49].
Along this dimension two representations are closely related to the relational expression of
this chapter. As mentioned above, relational expressions are an abstraction of the GFODD rep-
resentation [16,17,50] which captures expressions using a decision diagram formulation extending
propositional ADDs [40]. In particular, paths in the graphical representation of the DAG represent-
ing the GFODD correspond to the mutually exclusive conditions in expressions. The aggregation
in GFODDs and relational expressions provides signiﬁcant expressive power in modeling relational
MDPs. The GFODD representation is more compact than relational expressions but requires more
complex algorithms for its manipulation. The other closely related representation is the case no-
tation of [1, 18]. The case notation is similar to relational expressions in that we have a set of
conditions (these are mostly in a form that is mutually exclusive but not always so) but the main
diﬀerence is that quantiﬁcation is done within each case separately, and the notion of aggregation
is not fully developed. First-order algebraic decision diagrams (FOADDs) [18,29] are related to the
case notation in that they require closed formulas within diagram nodes, i.e., the quantiﬁers are
included within the graphical representation of the expression. The use of quantiﬁers inside cases
and nodes allows for an easy incorporation of oﬀthe shelf theorem provers for simpliﬁcation. Both
FOADD and GFODD were used to extend SDP to capture additive rewards and exogenous events
as already discussed in the previous section. While the representations (relational expression and
GFODDs vs. case notation and FOADD) have similar expressive power, the diﬀerence in aggre-
gation makes for diﬀerent algorithmic properties that are hard to compare in general. However,
the modular treatment of aggregation in GFODDs and the generic form of operations over them
makes them the most ﬂexible alternative to date for directly manipulating the aggregated case
representation used in this chapter.
The idea of SDP has also been extended in terms of the choice of planning algorithm, as
well as to the case of partially observable MDPs. Case notation and FOADDs have been used to
implement approximate linear programming [18,51] and approximate policy iteration via linear pro-
gramming [52] and FODDs have been used to implement relational policy iteration [53]. GFODDs
have also been used for open world reasoning and applied in a robotic context [54]. The work
of [55] and [56] explore SDP solutions, with GFODDs and case notation respectively, to relational
partially observable MDPs (POMDPs) where the problem is conceptually and algorithmically much
more complex. Related work in POMDPs has not explicitly addressed SDP, but rather has implic-
17

itly addressed lifted solutions through the identiﬁcation of (and abstraction over) symmetries in
applications of dynamic programming for POMDPs [57,58].
4.2
Inductive Lifted Stochastic Planning
Inductive methods can be seen to be orthogonal to the inference algorithms in that they mostly
do not require a model and do not reason about that model. However, the overall objective of
producing lifted value functions and policies is shared with the previously discussed deductive
approaches. We therefore review these here for completeness. As we discuss, it is also possible to
combine the inductive and deductive approaches in several ways.
The basic inductive approaches learn a policy directly from a teacher, sometimes known as
behavioral cloning. The work of [59–61] provided learning algorithms for relational policies with
theoretical and empirical evidence for their success. Relational policies and value functions were
also explored in reinforcement learning. This was done with pure reinforcement learning using
relational regression trees to learn a Q-function [62], combining this with supervised guidance [63],
or using Gaussian processes and graph kernels over relational structures to learn a Q-function [64].
A more recent approach uses functional gradient boosting with lifted regression trees to learn lifted
policy structure in a policy gradient algorithm [65].
Finally, several approaches combine inductive and deductive elements. The work of [66] com-
bines inductive logic programming with ﬁrst-order decision-theoretic regression, by ﬁrst using de-
ductive methods (decision theoretic regression) to generate candidate policy structure, and then
learning using this structure as features. The work of [67] shows how one can implement relational
approximate policy iteration where policy improvement steps are performed by learning the in-
tended policy from generated trajectories instead of direct calculation. Although these approaches
are partially deductive they do not share the common theme of this chapter relating planning and
inference in relational contexts.
5
Conclusions
This chapter provides a review of SDP methods, that perform abstract reasoning for stochastic
planning, from the viewpoint of probabilistic inference.
We have illustrated how the planning
problem and the inference problem are related. Speciﬁcally, ﬁnite horizon optimization in MDPs
is related to an inference problem with alternating maximization and expectation blocks and is
therefore more complex than marginal MAP queries that have been studied in the literature. This
analogy is valid both at the propositional and relational levels and it suggests a new line of challenges
for inference problems in discrete domains.We have also identiﬁed the opportunity for generalized
lifted inference, where the algorithm and its solution are agnostic of the domain instance and its size
and are eﬃcient regardless of this size. We have shown that under some conditions SDP algorithms
provide generalized lifted inference. In more complex models, especially ones with additive rewards
and exogenous events, SDP algorithms are yet to mature into an eﬀective and widely applicable
inference scheme. On the other hand, the challenges faced in such problems are exactly the ones
typically seen in standard lifted inference problems. Therefore, exploring generalized lifted inference
more abstractly has the potential to lead to advances in both areas.
