338 
Incremental Tradeoff Resolution in Qualitative Probabilistic Networks 
Chao-Lin Liu and Michael P. Wellman 
University of Michigan AI Laboratory 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA 

Abstract 
Qualitative probabilistic reasoning in a Bayesian 
network often reveals tradeoffs: relationships 
that are ambiguous due to competing qualita­
tive influences. We present two techniques that 
combine qualitative and numeric probabilistic 
reasoning to resolve such tradeoffs, inferring 
the qualitative relationship between nodes in a 
Bayesian network. The first approach incremen­
tally marginalizes nodes that contribute to the 
ambiguous qualitative relationships. 
The sec­
ond approach evaluates approximate Bayesian 
networks for bounds of probability distributions, 
and uses these bounds to determinate qualitative 
relationships in question. This approach is also 
incremental in that the algorithm refines the state 
spaces of random variables for tighter bounds 
until the qualitative relationships are resolved. 
Both approaches provide systematic methods for 
tradeoff resolution at potentially lower compu­
tational cost than application of purely numeric 
methods. 
1 
Introduction 
Researchers in uncertain reasoning regularly observe that 
to reach a desired conclusion (e.g., a decision), full pre­
cision in probabilistic relationships is rarely required, and 
that in many cases purely qualitative information (for 
some conception of "qualitative") is sufficient (Goldszmidt 
1994). In consequence, the literature has admitted numer­
ous schemes attempting to capture various forms of quali­
tative relationships (Wellman 1994 ), useful for various un­
certain reasoning tasks. Unfortunately, we generally lack 
a robust mapping from tasks to the levels of precision re­
quired, and indeed, necessary precision is inevitably vari­
able across problem instances. As long as some potential 
problem might require precision not captured in the qualita­
tive scheme, the scheme is potentially inadequate for the as-
sociated task. Advocates of qualitative uncertain reasoning 
typically acknowledge this, and sometimes suggest that one 
can always revert to full numeric precision when necessary. 
But specifying a numerically precise probabilistic model as 
a fallback preempts any potential model-specification ben­
efit of the qualitative scheme, and so it seems that one may 
as well use the precise model for everything.' This is per­
haps the primary reason that qualitative methods have not 
seen much use in practical applications of uncertain reason­
ing to date. 
The case for qualitative reasoning in contexts where numer­
ically precise models are available must appeal to benefits 
other than specification, such as computation. Cases where 
qualitative properties justify computational shortcuts are of 
course commonplace (e.g., independence), though we do 
not usually consider this to be qualitative reasoning unless 
some inference is required to establish the qualitative prop­
erty itself in order to exploit it. Since pure qualitative in­
ference can often be substantially more efficient than its 
numeric counterpart (e.g., in methods based on infinitesi­
mal probabilities (Goldszmidt & Pearll992) or ordinal re­
lationships (Druzdzel & Henrion 1993)), it is worth explor­
ing any opportunities to exploit qualitative methods even 
where some numeric information is required. 
We have begun to investigate this possibility for the task 
of deriving the qualitative relationship (i.e., the sign of the 
probabilistic association, defined below) between a pair of 
variables in a Bayesian network. From an abstracted ver­
sion of the network, where all local relationships are de­
scribed qualitatively, we can derive the entailed sign be­
tween the variables of interest efficiently using propagation 
techniques. However, since the abstraction process dis­
cards information, the result may be qualitatively ambigu­
ous even if the actual relationship entailed by the precise 
1 If the qualitative formalism is a strict abstraction, then any 
conclusions produced by the precise model will agree at the qual­
itative level. Even in such cases, qualitative models may have ben­
efits for explanation or justification (Henrion & Druzdzel 1991), 
as they can indicate something about the robustness of the conclu­
sions (put another way, they can concisely convey broad classes 
of conclusions). 

model is not. 
In this paper, we report on two approaches that use qualita­
tive reasoning to derive these relationships without neces­
sarily resorting to solution of the complete problem at full 
precision, even in cases where purely qualitative reasoning 
would be ambiguous. Both approaches are incremental, in 
that they apply numeric reasoning to either subproblems or 
simplified versions of the original, to produce an interme­
diate model more likely to be qualitatively unambiguous. 
The next section reviews the concepts of qualitative influ­
ences and tradeoffs in a network model. The third sec­
tion explains the incremental marginalization approach, 
followed by the experimental results. We then discuss the 
state-space abstraction approach, and conclude with a brief 
comparison of our approaches with some others. 
2 
Qualitative probabilistic networks 
2.1 
Qualitative influences 
Qualitative probabilistic networks (QPNs) (Wellman 1990) 
are abstractions of Bayesian networks, with conditional 
probability tables summarized by the signs of qualitative 
relationships between variables. Each arc in the network is 
marked with a sign-positive ( + ), negative (-), or ambigu­
ous (?)-denoting the sign of the qualitative probabilistic 
relationship between its terminal nodes. 
The interpretation of such qualitative influences is based on 
first-order stochastic dominance (F S D) (Fishburn & Vick­
son 1978). LetF(x) andF'(x) denote two cumulative dis­
tribution functions (CDFs) of a random variable X. Then 
F(x) FSD F'(x) holds if and only if (iff) 
F(x) :S F'(x) for all x. 
(1) 
We say that one node positively influences another iff the 
latter's conditional distribution is increasing in the former, 
all else equal, in the sense of FSD. 
Definition 1 ((Wellman 1990)) Let F(zjxi,Y) be the cu­
mulative distribution function of Z given X = Xi and the 
rest of Z's parent nodes Y = y. We say that node X posi­
tively influences node Z, denoted s+(X , Z ), iff 
\fxi,Xj,Y· Xi:::; Xj => F(zjxj,y) FSD F(zjxi , y). 
Analogously, we say that node X negatively influences 
node Z, denoted s-(x, Z ), when we reverse the direction 
of the dominance relationship in Definition 1. The arc from 
X to Z in that case carries a negative sign. When the dom­
inance relationship holds for both directions, we denote the 
situation by S0(X, Z ). However, this entails conditional 
independence, and so we typically do not have a direct arc 
from X to Z in this case. When none of the preceding re­
lationships between the two CDFs hold, we put a question 
Incremental Tradeoff Resolution in QPNs 
339 
mark on the arc, and denote such situations as S7 (X, Z ). 
We may apply the preceding definitions to boolean nodes 
under the convention that true > false. 
2.2 
Inference and tradeoff resolution 
Given a QPN, we may infer the effects of the change in 
the value of one variable on the values of other variables of 
interest. The inference can be carried out via graph reduc­
tion (Wellman 1990), or qualitative propagation techniques 
(Druzdze1 & Henrion 1993). 
If we are fortunate, we may acquire decisive answers from 
the qualitative inference algorithms. Often, however, the 
results of such qualitative reasoning are ambiguous. This 
might be because the relationship in question actually is 
ambiguous (i.e., nonmonotone or context-dependent), or 
due to loss of information in the abstraction process. 
AFS 
GF 
AFS=true AFS=fals 
FP 
AFS=true AFS=fals 
true 
0.7 
true 
0.1 
e 0,4 
true 
0.8 
e 0 
false 0.3 
false 
0.9 
0.6 
false 
0.2 
I 
(FP, GF) 
BWB 
(true, true) (true, false) (false, true) (false, false) 
high 
0 
0.6 
0 
1.0 
medium 
0 
0.4 
0.4 
0 
low 
0 
0.6 
0 
Figure 1: A simple case of qualitative ambiguity. 
This can happen, for instance, when there are competing 
influential paths from the source node-whose value is ten­
tatively modified-to the target node-whose change in · 
value is of interest. While accept flu shots may decrease 
the probability of get flu, it also increases the probabil­
ity and degree of feel pain. On the other hand, increasing 
either get flu or feel pain decreases overall bodily well­
being, all else equal. As a result, qualitative reasoning 
about the problem of whether we should accept flu shots 
will yield only an ambiguous answer. The situation is illus­
trated by the QPN in Figure 1, where there is one positive 
path an% one negative path from accept flu shots to bodily 
well-bemg. The combination of these two paths is qualita­
tively ambiguous. Worse, the ambiguity of this relationship 
would propagate within any network for which this pattern 
forms a subnetwork. For example, if this issue plays a role 
in a decision whether to go to a doctor, the result would be 
ambiguous regardless of the other variables involved. 
Had we applied more precise probabilistic knowledge, such 
as a numerically specified Bayesian network, the result 
may have been decisive. Indeed, if accept flu shots and 

340 
Liu and Wellman 
bodily well-being are binary, then a fully precise model 
is by necessity qualitatively unambiguous. However, per­
forming all inference at the most precise level might squan­
der some advantages of the qualitative approach. In the 
developments below, we consider some ways to apply nu­
meric inference incrementally, to the point where qualita­
tive reasoning can produce a decisive result. 
We use the term tradeoff resolution to refer to the task of 
resolving the qualitatively ambiguous relationship between 
variables of interest. Next, we demonstrate that in the worst 
case, qualitative tradeoff resolution may be no easier than 
full numerical inference. 
2.3 
Computational complexity of tradeoff resolution 
Theorem 1 Qualitative tradeoff resolution is NP-hard. 
We show that resolving qualitative tradeoff is an NP-hard 
problem by reducing the problem of computing absolute 
approximations to the task of qualitative tradeoff resolu­
tion. An estimate 'Y is an absolute approximation of Pr(y) 
if 
Pr(y) - 8 ::; 'Y ::; Pr(y) + 8, 
where 8 is the range of error. The problem of computing 
absolute approximations has been shown NP-hard (Dagum 
& Luby 1993). 
Consider the task of computing absolute approximations 
for Pr(y) in a given Bayesian network in which Y is a 
boolean variable. 
We construct a corresponding trade­
off resolution problem for this task as follows. The net­
work for this tradeoff resolution problem includes the given 
Bayesian network and two boolean variables D and T. The 
tradeoff resolution task is to determine the qualitative in­
fluence of D on T in the network shown in Figure 2. The 
cloud where Y resides represents the given Bayesian net­
work. We use x and x to denote that X is true and false, 
respectively. 
To check the overall influence of D on T, we need to know 
whether Pr(tjd) ¬ Pr(tjd). Using the data shown in the 
following figure, we can show that the previous inequality 
implies that Pr(y) ::; 1!". Notice that the range of 1!" is 
[1/2, 1] when we change c between 1 and 0. 
Therefore, using an efficient algorithm for tradeoff reso­
lution, we can efficiently determine the range of Pr(y) if 
its range is in [1/2, 1]. This can be done by setting c to a 
very small number a, and gradually setting c to multiples 
of a, i.e., 2a, 3a, . . .  , etc. As a result, when the range of 
Pr(y) is in [1/2, 1], we will find a more precise range of 
Pr(y) by calling the efficient algorithm for tradeoff reso­
lution 0( $) times. Similarly, we can determine the range 
of Pr(y) when the range is in [0, 1/2], by calling the ef­
ficient algorithm for tradeoff resolution 0( $) times. This 
can be done by setting Pr(tjd, Y) and Pr(tjd, y) to c and 1 
in Figure 2, respectively. 
Pr(t I d,y) = 0 
Pr(t I d,Y) = I 
Pr(t I d,y) = E 
? 
Pr(t I d,y) = 0 
Figure 2: Resolving qualitative influence of D on T yields 
an approximate probability for Y. 
3 
Incremental marginalization 
3.1 
Node reduction 
The idea of incremental marginalization is to reduce the 
network node-by-node until the result is qualitatively un­
ambiguous. The basic step is Shachter's arc reversal oper­
ation. 
Theorem 2 ((Shachter 1988)) If there is an arc from node 
X to node Y in the given Bayesian network, and no other 
directed paths from X to Y, then we may transform the 
network to one with an arc from Y to X instead. In the 
new network, X andY inherit each other's parent nodes. 
Let P x, Py, and P XY respectively denote X' s own par­
ent nodes, Y's own parent nodes, and X andY's com­
mon parent nodes in the original network, and let Py, = 
Py -{X}. The new conditional probability distribution 
ofY and X are determined by the following: 
Prnew(YiPx,PY' ,Pxy) 
Lx Prold(yjpy,Pxy )Prold(xipx,Pxy) 
Prnew(xjy,px,py,,Pxy) 
Pr01d(yjpy,Pxy) Prold(xiPx,Pxy) 
Prnew (y jp X' PY1 • P XY) 
On reversing all the outgoing arcs from node X, the node 
becomes barren and can be removed from the network. The 
net effect of reversing arcs and removing barren nodes as 
described is equivalent to marginalizing node X from the 
network. 
3.2 
Tradeoff resolution via node reduction 
Consider the QPN shown on the left-hand side of Figure 3. 
Since there exist both a positive path (through X) and a 
negative path (direct arc) from W to Z, the qualitative in­
fluence of W on Z is ambiguous. This local "?" would 
propagate throughout the network, necessarily ambiguating 
the relationship of any predecessor of W to any successor 
ofZ. 
Once we have detected the source of such a local ambigu­
ity, we may attempt to resolve it by marginalizing node X. 

incremental 
marginauJtion 
Figure 3: Marginalizing X potentially resolves the qualita­
tive influence of W on Z. 
The new sign on the direct arc from W to Z can be deter­
mined by inspecting the new conditional probability table 
of Z, given by Equation (2). If we are fortunate, the quali­
tative sign a1 may turn out to be decisive, in which case we 
have resolved the tradeoff. 
This example illustrates the main idea of the incremental 
marginalization approach to resolving tradeoffs in QPNs. If 
we obtain an unambiguous answer to the desired qualitative 
relationship from the reduced network after marginalizing 
a selected node, then there is no need to do further com­
putation. If the answer is still ambiguous, we may select 
other nodes to marginalize. The iteration continues until a 
decisive answer is uncovered. We present the skeleton of 
the Incremental IradeQff Resolution algorithm below. The 
algorithm is designed to answer queries about the qualita­
tive influence of a decision node on a target node, using a 
given strategy for selecting the next node to reduce. 
Algorithm 1 /TOR( decision, target, strategy) 
1. Remove nodes that are irrelevant to the query about 
decision's influence on target (Shachter 1988). 
2. Attempt to answer the query via qualitative inference 
(Druzdzel & Henrion 1993). 
3. If the answer to the query is decisive, exit; otherwise 
continue. 
4. Select a node to reduce according to strategy. If there 
is no node that can be reduced, return "? ", else per­
form the node reduction, and calculate the qualitative 
abstractions of the transformed relationships. Return 
to Step 2. 
We expect the incremental approach to improve perfor­
mance over purely numeric inference on average. Since 
qualitative inference is quadratic whereas exact inference 
in Bayesian networks is exponential in the worst case, the 
qualitative inference steps do not add appreciably to com­
putation time. On the other hand, when the intermediate 
results suffice to resolve the tradeoff, we save numeric com­
putation over whatever part of the network is remaining. 
3.3 
Prioritizing node reduction operations 
The objective of carrying out node-reduction operations in 
ITOR is to resolve qualitative tradeoffs. The optimal strate-
Incremental Tradeoff Resolution in QPNs 
341 
gies for respective tasks will differ, in general. For exam­
ple, a node that is very expensive to reduce at a certain stage 
of the evaluation might be the best prospect for resolving 
the tradeoff. 
We exploit intermediate information provided in qualita­
tive belief propagation (Druzdzel & Henrion 1993) in de­
termining which node to reduce next. If we can propagate a 
decisive qualitative influence from the decision node D all 
the way to the target node T, we will be able to answer the 
query. Otherwise, there must be a node X that has an in­
decisive relationships from D. Recall that we have pruned 
nodes irrelevant to the query, so any nodes that have indeci­
sive relationship with D will eventually make the relation­
ship between D and T indecisive. We have identified sev­
eral conceivable strategies based on this observation, and 
have tried two of them thus far. 
The first strategy is to reduce node X, as long as X is not 
the target node T. When X is actually T, we choose to 
reduce the node Y that passed the message to X changing 
its qualitative sign from a decisive one to "?". However, 
this Y cannot be D itself. If it is, then either (1) there are 
only two nodes remaining in the network, and there is no 
decisive answer to the query, or (2) there are other nodes, 
and we randomly pick among those adjacent to D or T. 
The second strategy is similar to the first, except that we 
exchange the priority of reducing X andY. We handle the 
situations where X and/or Y happen to be D and/or T in 
the same manner as in the first strategy. 
These strategies have the advantage that finding the next 
node to reduce does not impose extra overhead in the ITOR 
algorithm. The selection is a by-product of the qualitative 
inference algorithm. However neither of these strategies 
(nor any that we know) is guaranteed to minimize the cost 
of resolving the tradeoff. 
4 
Experimental study 
We have tested the effectiveness of the algorithm using ran­
domly generated network instances. The experiments are 
designed to examine how connectivity of the network, sizes 
of state spaces, and strategies for scheduling node reduction 
affect the performance of the algorithm. 
4.1 
Generating random networks 
In the experiments, we use Bayesian networks in which 
arcs can be assigned decisive qualitative signs. To this 
end, we construct QPNs with only decisive signs on arcs, 
and then use the signs to govern the way we assign condi­
tional probability values for nodes in their corresponding 
Bayesian network. The conditional probability distribu­
tions of nodes and the qualitative signs on arcs must agree 
with each other. 

342 
Liu and Wellman 
To create a random QPN with n nodes and l arcs, we first 
create a complete directed acyclic graph (DAG) with n 
nodes. Each arc in this DAG is assigned a random num­
ber that is sampled from a uniform distribution. We then 
attempt to remove the arc with the largest assigned num­
ber, under the constraint that the DAG remains connected. 
If removing the arc with the largest assigned number will 
make the DAG disconnected, we will attempt to remove 
the arc with the next largest number. We remove arcs until 
the DAG contains only l arcs. After creating the network 
structure, we randomly assign qualitative signs (positive or 
negative) to the arcs. 
We then build a Bayesian network that corresponds to the 
generated QPN, that is, respects its structure and qualita­
tive signs. We select the cardinality of each node by sam­
pling from a uniform distribution over the range [2,MC], 
where MC denotes the maximum state-space cardinality. 
For nodes without parents, we assign prior probabilities by 
selecting parameters from a uniform distribution and then 
normalizing. 
For a node X with parent nodes PA(X), the qualitative 
signs in the QPN dictate a partial ordering of the con­
ditional probability distributions for various values of X, 
where the distributions are ordered based on the FSD 
relationship. Let pai(X) denote an instantiation of the 
parent nodes of X. To enforce this ordering, we iden­
tify the pai(X) that requires us to make the distribution 
F(xjpai(X)) dominate distributions F(xjpaj(X)) for all 
otherpaj(X). We assign the parameters for F(xjpai(X)) 
(as for priors) by sampling from a uniform distribution. We 
then assign the remaining distributions in stages, at each 
stage setting only those distributions dominated by the pre­
viously assigned distributions. We make these assignments 
using the same random procedure, but under the constraint 
that the resulting distribution must respect the qualitative 
signs given the previous assignments. 
4.2 
Results 
In each experiment, we specify the number of nodes, the 
number of arcs, and maximum cardinality of state spaces 
for the randomly generated networks. In all experiments, 
we create networks with I 0 nodes before pruning. We 
query the qualitative influence from the node1 to node1 0, 
and disregard the instances in which the answer is ambigu­
ous after exact evaluation of the network. 
Since the first step of the ITOR algorithm prunes nodes ir­
relevant to the query, the network actually used in inference 
is usually simpler than the original network. In Table 1, 
we record the average number of nodes and links after the 
pruning step. MC denotes maximum cardinality. All ex­
periments reported used the first node selection strategy; 
results from the second strategy were virtually identical. 
nodes 
links 
MC 
Rnodes 
Rreversals 
8.0 
14.2 
2 
0.697 
0.722 
8.0 
14.4 
3 
0.730 
0.754 
9.2 
26.1 
2 
0.846 
0.869 
9.4 
26.8 
3 
0.855 
0.874 
Table 1: Experimental results. Each experiment runs ITOR 
over 10000 random networks with decisive influence from 
node1 to node1 0. 
We measure the performance of ITOR with two metrics. 
The first metric, Rnodes• is the ratio of the number of re­
duced nodes when the decisive answer is found to the num­
ber of nodes that would be reduced in exact numerical eval­
uation. The second metric, Rreversals, is the ratio of num­
ber of arc reversal operations already done when the solu­
tion is found to the number of arc reversal operations that 
would be carried out for exact numerical evaluation. The 
latter figure is based on an arbitrary strategy for reducing 
the remaining network after the tradeoff is resolved, how­
ever, and so would tend to be an optimistic estimate of the 
saving. Table 1 reports averages for each metric. The sav­
ings due to incremental tradeoff resolution are 1 - Rnodes 
and 1 - Rreversals, respectively, and so lower values of the 
metrics indicate better performance. 
The results in Table 1 suggest that ITOR offers greater 
performance for sparsely connected networks and smaller 
state spaces. Further experimentation may lead us to more 
precise characterization of the expected savings achievable 
through incremental marginalization. 
5 
State-space abstraction 
Recall that qualitative relationships are defined based on 
the concept of first-order stochastic dominance defined by 
(1). Since only qualitative relationships among variables 
are of interest, exact calculation of the values of the CDFs 
may not be necessary if we can use approximate CDFs to 
determine whether F S D holds. 
In previous work, we report an iterative state-space ab­
straction (ISSA) algorithm for approximate evaluation of 
Bayesian networks (Wellman & Liu 1994). The ISSA al­
gorithm aggregates states of selected variables, called ab­
stracted nodes, into superstates to construct abstract ver­
sions of the original Bayesian networks (OBNs) that spec­
ify exact probability distributions. The aggregation of 
states requires the reassignment of the conditional proba­
bility tables (CPTs) of both the abstracted nodes and their 
child nodes. We call the method used in this assignment 
task a CPT assignment policy. These abstract Bayesian 
networks (ABNs) are then used to compute point-valued 
approximations of the probability distributions of interest. 
As a result of the abstraction operations, the computational 
cost of evaluating the ABNs can be less than that of evalu­
ating the OBNs. The algorithm iteratively refines the state 

spaces of the selected abstracted nodes for improving the 
quality of approximations, when the allocated computation 
time permits. 
In this section, we introduce a new policy for computing 
bounds of probability distributions, and apply the revised 
ISSA algorithm to resolving ambiguous qualitative rela­
tionships. 
5.1 
Motivation and definitions 
Consider the task of determining whether F(xldi) dom­
inates F(xidj) . 
Assume that we have ways to con­
trol approximation methods to obtain approximate CDFs 
F(xldi) and F(xidj) such that F(xldi) ::::; F(xldi) and 
F(xidj) ::::; F(xidj) for all x. Given these approximate 
CDFs, F(xidi) FSD F(xidj) will hold if we also have 
F(xidi) ::::; F(xid1) for all x. In other words, it is possible 
to determine qualitative relationship using bounds of prob­
ability distributions. We define bounds ofCDFs as follows. 
Definition 2 A CDF F(x) is an upper bound of F(x) , if 
F(x) ::::; F(x) for all x. A CDF F(x) is a lower bound of 
F(x) , if F(x) ::::; F(x) for all x. 
In terms of these definitions, s-(D, X) holds if there exist 
F(xidi) and F(xidj) such that 
for all x, di < d1 => F(xidi) ::::; F(xidj) · 
(2) 
Similarly, s+ (D, X) holds if there exist F(xid1) and 
F(xidi) such that 
for all x, di < dj => F(xidj) ::::; F(xldi) · 
(3) 
In addition, we may be able to tell that D neither positively 
nor negatively influences T by examining bounds. Specifi­
cally, a sufficient condition for 87 (D, X) is that there exist 
Xr, X8, and bounds such that, for some di < dj, 
F(xrldi) < F(xrldj) and F(xsldj) < F(xsldi) · 
(4) 
When (4) holds, the curves for F(xidi) and F(xidj) must 
intersect as illustrated in the following figure. 
X 
- F(xl d.l -F(xl d.) 
I 
J 
"'''' E(xl di) ·---- E(xl d} 
Figure 4: Bounds of F(xid) imply 87 (D,X). 
5.2 
Bounding probability distributions 
We may compute bounds of conditional probability distri­
butions by using an ISSA algorithm that applies the domi­
nance policy in aggregating states of abstracted nodes (Liu 
Incremental Tradeoff Resolution in QPNs 
343 
& Wellman 1998). Let PA(A) be the set of parent nodes 
of an abstracted node A, and [ai,Jl the superstate represent­
ing the aggregation of states from ai through a1, i ::::; j. The 
dominance policy modifies the CPT of A as follows: 
j 
Pr([ai,j]ipa(A)) = L Pr(akipa(A)). 
k=i 
Let Y be a child node of A, and P X (Y) be the subset of 
parent nodes of Y excluding A. Depending on whether we 
want to compute lower or upper bounds of selected CDFs, 
we strengthen or weaken the conditional probability dis­
tribution of Y given its parent nodes. To strengthen the 
distribution, we assign F(yi[ai,j],px(Y)) as follows: 
F(yi[ai,j],px(Y)) = mop F(yiaz,px(Y)). 
IE[t,J) 
To weaken the distribution, we assign F(yi[ai,j],px(Y)) 
as follows: 
F(yi[ai,j],px(Y)) = mq F(yiaz,px(Y)). 
IE[•,J) 
We have identified and reported conditions under which 
the ISSA algorithm may compute bounds of conditional 
probability distributions (Liu & Wellman 1998). Taking 
advantage of qualitative relationship and conditional inde­
pendence among variables, we can compute lower and up­
per bounds of desired conditional probability distributions. 
+ 
D 
A + 
.. '1 
Figure 5: We may use qualitative relationships for bound­
ing probability distributions. 
Consider the network in Figure 5. We have (a) Y1 pos­
itively influences X given D and Y2, (b) Y2 negatively 
influences X given D and Y1, (c) X and A are indepen­
dent given D, Y1, and Y2, (d) [D,A,Y1,Y2] is an an­
cestral ordering, and (e) Y1 is not a descendant of Y2 and 
vice versa in the network. An ordering [ J1, J2, ... , Jn) of 
nodes in a set of nodes J is an ancestral ordering if, for 
every Ji E J, all the ancestors of Ji are ordered before 
Ji. Given these conditions, we can compute the bounds 
of F(xid) when we abstract A with the dominance policy. 
Specifically, we obtain lower (upper) bounds of F(xid) by 
weakening (strengthening) F(y1ia, y2) and strengthening 
(weakening) F(y2ia, y1) with respect to A when we ab­
stract A. In addition, We can obtain lower (upper) bounds 
of F(xid) by strengthening (weakening) F(xiy1) with re­
spect to Y1 when we abstract Y1, given that (a) [D, y1, X] 

344 
Liu and Wellman 
is an ancestral ordering and (b) X is the only child node 
of Y1• Analogously, we may abstract Y2 in computing 
bounds of F(xid) to further reduce computation time. 
In addition, we have shown that bounds computed by the 
ISSA algorithm tighten as we refine the state space of the 
abstracted nodes (Liu & Wellman 1998). Therefore, we are 
more likely to resolve qualitative tradeoffs as we carry out 
more iterations of the ISSA algorithm. The computation 
can terminate whenever we determine the qualitative rela­
tionship of interest. 
5.3 
Tradeoff resolution via approximation 
As we discussed in Section 3.3, if the relationship between 
D and T is ambiguous, there must be a node X such that 
X is marked with "?" when we propagate the sign from 
D toward T. As an alternative to incremental marginaliza­
tion, we may apply any approximate evaluation algorithm 
for Bayesian networks in Step 4 of ITOR, if the approxima­
tion algorithm can return bounds of conditional probability 
distributions. We use ISSA with the dominance policy as 
such an alternative in the following discussion. 
Using the ISSA algorithm with dominance policy can save 
computation time for the tradeoff resolution task. As men­
tioned, the ISSA algorithm may find the correct qualitative 
relationship by the time it needs to exactly evaluate F(xid) 
using the conditions specified in (2) to (4). In addition, 
the ISSA algorithm may compute the bounds of F(xid) by 
evaluating a portion of the given Bayesian network. For in­
stance, T in Figure 5 is barren and can be ignored for the 
computation of F(xid). 
Notice that we should not terminate ITOR when ISSA re­
turns a"?" for the relationship of D and X in Step 4. When 
this occurs, we need to continue ITOR as usual. It is pos­
sible that we find a decisive relationship between D and T 
even when some nodes in the network have ambiguous re­
lationship with D. For instance, using ISSA, we might find 
that D positively influences T even if D neither negatively 
nor positively influences X in the network shown in the 
following figure. Therefore, ITOR should run until either a 
decisive relationship between D and T has been found in 
Step 2 or an ambiguous relationship between D and T is 
confirmed by ISSA in Step 4. 
? 
. .... ® 
+ 
Figure 6: ITOR should not terminate when ISSA reports 
S7(D,X). 
Some results obtained by ISSA may be reused in later it­
erations of ITOR. Take the network in Figure 5 as an ex-
ample. Assume that we find that D negatively influences 
X in Figure 5 by exactly computing the values of F(xid), 
and that we are about to use the ISSA algorithm to deter­
mine the qualitative relationship between D and T. In this 
case, if we do not reuse previous results, we may abstract 
A, Y1, Y2, and X in computing the bounds of F(t!d) in 
Step 4. However, given that CI(T, {D,X}, {A, Y1, Y2}) 
and that we have computed the exact values of F(xid), the 
network has been reduced to the one shown in the follow­
ing figure. Therefore, we could save computation time by 
running ISSA over the network in Figure 7, and should not. 
run ISSA over the network in Figure 5 from scratch. 
Figure 7: Reduced version of the network in Figure 5. 
W hether we reuse the information about the bounds that 
are obtained from running ISSA is a design issue. For in­
stance, assume that we find that D negatively influences X 
in Figure 5 by applying (2). Given this result, the qualita­
tive relationship between D and T is still ambiguous since 
there are still two competing influential paths from D to 
T as indicated in Figure 7. Upon locating this ambiguity, 
ITOR uses ISSA to resolve the ambiguity, and the issue 
is whether we reuse the information we have about F(xid) 
that is obtained from the previous execution of ISSA. Given 
that CI(T,{D,X},{A,Y1,Y2}) and that D decisively 
influences X in the network, a heuristic is that we use the 
knowledge about F(xid) obtained in the previous run of 
ISSA first. To do so, we set the conditional probability of 
X given D according to bounds of F(xld) in the network 
shown in Figure 7, and use this approximate network for re­
solving the ambiguity. If this opportunistic approach does 
not resolve the qualitative ambiguity between D and T, we 
then use ISSA to evaluate a network that includes A, Yl 
and Y2. Another alternative is to directly compute bounds 
of F(tid) using the original network. It is possible that we 
can resolve the ambiguity when A, Yl, Y2, and X have 
very small number of states in ISSA. The optimal choice 
for this design issue varies from network to network, de­
pending on ·their underlying probability distributions. 
6 
Discussion 
We have shown that resolving qualitative tradeoff is NP­
hard, and have discussed the application of incremen­
tal marginalization and state-space abstraction methods to 
the qualitative tradeoff resolution task. The incremental 
marginalization approach iteratively reduces a node in the 
network, and the state-space abstraction approach approx­
imately evaluates a portion of the network. Initial exper-

iments with incremental marginalization suggest that no­
ticeable savings are possible, but definitive evaluation of 
both methods awaits further empirical and theoretical in­
vestigation. 
The incremental marginalization approach bears some sim­
ilarity to symbolic probabilistic inference, as in the vari­
able elimination (VE) algorithm (Zhang & Poole 1996), in 
that we sum out one node from the Bayesian network at a 
time. The ITOR algorithm differs from the VE algorithm in 
the determination of the elimination ordering, and of course 
in the stopping criterion. 
Parsons and Dohnal (1993) discuss a semiqualitative ap­
proach for inference using Bayesian networks. The basic 
idea is similar to state-space abstraction. The center of 
their work is to design calculus for computing the the prob­
ability intervals of variables, and their methods may work 
even when the conditional probabilities in Bayesian net­
works are not completely specified. However, their meth­
ods cannot be applied to the qualitative tradeoff resolution 
task. Parsons (1995) also exploits more special numerical 
relationships among variables to define new qualitative re­
lationships for refining inference in QPN. 
There are other approaches that make use of numerically 
specified knowledge in qualitative inference. For instance, 
Kuipers and Berleant (1988) apply incompletely specified 
numerical information in qualitative inference tasks. 
The incremental approaches we propose in this paper pro­
vide systematic ways to resolving qualitative tradeoffs 
at potentially lower computational cost than fully pre­
cise methods. Empirical results suggest that incremental 
marginalization can provide savings for some networks. 
How to use qualitative information to guide the schedul­
ing of node reduction and how to reuse partial results ob­
tained from approximate evaluation of Bayesian networks 
to achieve the best performance possible remain as open 
problems for future work.
