REVIEW PAPER
Health and Technology
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12553-022-00722-2
external changes. Because ‘We are likely on the edge of a 
major transformation in how many of us live – and how 
goods are produced and distributed.’ [3]. The conceptual 
approach enables undertaking experimental developments 
on progressing from the current state of risk assessment into 
measuring risk with analytical methods. These experimental 
research developments are focused on the: (1) need to clas­
sify Covid-19 risk data into primary and secondary data sets 
for training predictive algorithms; (2) the need to include AI 
in healthcare networks that intersect a diverse set of isolated 
production and supply chain domains. The main motivat­
ing point for this article is the timing - global pandemics 
such as Covid-19 are very rare events. Although there are 
several viruses in circulation (e.g., Zika, AIDS), it has been 
a century since the last major global pandemic - the Spanish 
flu. Thus, we can say that investigating Covid-19 is once in 
a lifetime event and the findings will be of utmost value in 
dealing with Disease X.
1  Introduction
Covid-19 has triggered a chain of technological develop­
ments in healthcare systems that lead to the creation of 
‘Society 5.0’ [1], where artificial intelligence (AI) and 
industry 4.0 present the basis for digital personalised 
healthcare. Digitalising the healthcare system has proven 
beneficial for managing Covid-19 but has also increased 
the cyber risk surface, while the benefits and improve­
ments for vaccine production and supply remain to be seen. 
This article conceptualises the construction of predictive 
algorithms [2] that can improve the cyber risk posture of 
health care systems and the ability to rapidly adapt to huge 
	
 Petar Radanliev

1	
Oxford e-Research Centre, Department of Engineering 
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Objective  The objective of this theoretical paper is to identify conceptual solutions for securing, predicting, and improving 
vaccine production and supply chains.
Method  The case study, action research, and review method is used with secondary data – publicly available open access 
data.
Results  A set of six algorithmic solutions is presented for resolving vaccine production and supply chain bottlenecks. A dif­
ferent set of algorithmic solutions is presented for forecasting risks during a Disease X event. A new conceptual framework 
is designed to integrate the emerging solutions in vaccine production and supply chains. The framework is constructed to 
improve the state-of-the-art by intersecting the previously isolated disciplines of edge computing; cyber-risk analytics; 
healthcare systems, and AI algorithms.
Conclusion  For healthcare systems to cope better during a disease X event than during Covid-19, we need multiple highly 
specific AI algorithms, targeted for solving specific problems. The proposed framework would reduce production and supply 
chain risk and complexity in a Disease X event.
Keywords  Disease X · Vaccine production and supply chains · Risk assessment · Healthcare systems · Artificial 
intelligence · Industry 4.0
Received: 15 July 2022 / Accepted: 21 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2023
Disease X vaccine production and supply chains: risk assessing 
healthcare systems operating with artificial intelligence and industry 
4.0
Petar Radanliev1
 · David De Roure1
1 3

Health and Technology
1.1  Review of vaccine production and supply chain 
bottlenecks
We have learned valuable lessons from analysing past pan­
demics and viruses such as Influenza, yet the production and 
supply process for Influenza vaccines still takes months. To 
prepare the healthcare system for future pandemics, we need 
to improve the production and supply chain capacity and 
speed. One of the commonly discussed solutions is to stock­
pile medications, but that is not happening. For example, we 
have existing antivirals to combat viruses like Tamiflu for 
Influenza, but there are no sufficient stockpiles of antivirals 
in the world for even one country. Without stockpiling, the 
current production and supply chains will face many diffi­
culties and bottlenecks in a Disease X scenario.
To prevent vaccine production and supply chain bottle­
necks, this section conducts a conceptual analysis of six 
potential bottlenecks and suggests six solutions that encom­
pass a design process for constructing AI algorithms based 
on new and emerging data and technologies during a Dis­
ease X event. First solution S1: since the supply chain will 
be delivering a high-value, highly-needed vaccine, firstly 
the design process needs to concentrate on securing the 
deliveries from cyber-risk, theft, sabotage, counterfeiting, 
etc. The first solution is targeted at the first potential bottle­
neck, the risk of deliberate tampering. Second solution S2: 
is targeted for the second bottleneck and incorporates revi­
sion of the personal shortages and the requirement to vac­
cinate and protect from dangers the individuals operating 
the entire supply/value chain, before starting a large-scale 
vaccination. Triggering questions on who will deliver a vac­
cine to the people delivering the vaccines, and how long will 
that take. Thirst solution S3: is targeted at investigating the 
lack of coordination and risk from shortages caused by the 
lack of infrastructure to monitor the vaccination records. S4: 
Fourth is to identify a potential shortage of supplies in criti­
cal materials during Disease X, and these can be something 
meaningless, like rubber stoppers for the vials. S5: Fifth is 
to construct algorithmic optimisations and solutions for the 
supply chain bottlenecks that cause limited capacity, e.g., 
lack of cold chain storage and equipment failure, resulting 
in vaccine damage. This is even more concerning for rural 
areas and small towns, with small hospitals. S6: The final 
bottleneck is to categorise different misinformation strate­
gies and fake news during Disease X, (e.g., microchips in 
the vaccines) and prepare counter strategies. In some societ­
ies, almost 60% of the population is not planning to take the 
vaccine, and we need over 70% vaccination for a pandemic 
to subdue. Fake news spread six times faster than scientific 
news. This bottleneck places a great deal of focus on the dis­
semination of results and targeting different audiences with 
real-life stories and narratives.
In the first stage, the production and supply chains should 
focus on addressing these bottlenecks. In the second stage, 
the AI system should enable the development of quantita­
tive risk, impact and value assessment with real-time data, 
allowing for dynamic optimisation and managing of a Dis­
ease X event.
1.2  Integrating algorithms in cyber risk assessment 
of healthcare systems
The integration of algorithms in cyber risk impact assess­
ment of failures in healthcare systems - in the same way 
that was used to forecast Covid-19 growth rates [5], would 
enable a progression from manual to automated assessment. 
The integration of AI in risk assessment presents a novel 
concept for advancing from physical to digital healthcare 
systems and progressing from qualitative to quantitative 
assessment. Such algorithms can be designed with a quan­
titative ‘causal-comparative design’ for synthesising data 
on actions and events that occurred during Covid-19. This 
solution can predict the risks and enhance our preparedness 
for Disease X.
A quantitative ‘correlational research’ can be applied to 
assess the statistical relationship between the primary and 
secondary failures in healthcare systems, and to measure 
the actual loss [6]. This requires classifying probabilistic 
data into primary - Disease X events and the health sys­
tem response/failure to the events, and the secondary - the 
failure of other health systems as the reactions to Disease 
X event (e.g., delayed surgeries, delayed cancer diagnosis, 
and/or treatment). This classification will be a significant 
improvement on the current state-of-the-art in cyber loss 
assessment which is based on qualitative methodologies. At 
present, there are no methods, frameworks, models, or for­
mulas for measuring the secondary risk from cyber events, 
not to mention extraordinary events that could trigger cata­
strophic loss of life - such as Disease X. But as we have seen 
from the Covid-19, the secondary loss is not something that 
we can keep ignoring in our risk assessments. For example, 
if a cyber event disrupts the vaccine cold chain, resulting 
in a loss of a few thousand vaccines, then the primary risk 
is the loss of the vaccines, and that can easily be calculated 
and measured. The secondary risk is a different story, we 
need to consider the loss of life not only from Covid-19, 
but also from many other cascading events e.g., the medi­
cal staff being occupied for longer with vaccinations, and 
unable to perform other crucial healthcare work, resulting 
with more loss of life. Since there are no mechanisms for 
reporting cyber-attacks, and the associated damage from the 
event, finding probabilistic data is a challenge, especially 
the secondary risk data. This is one of the reasons why simi­
lar research has not been done in the past.
1 3

Health and Technology
1.3  New forms of data for assessing risk and 
optimising the vaccine production and supply 
chains
The separation of primary and secondary risk is developed 
upon past experiences in terms of the (un)availability of 
data. This concern can be addressed by expanding new and 
emerging forms of data (e.g., linking digital behavioural 
data (e.g., social media) with survey data). The integration 
of algorithms in risk assessing and optimising the vaccine 
production and supply chain can apply stratified sampling 
and random sampling and integrate the FAIR Institute 
method1 for the data analysis and the comparative aspects of 
the collected data. The difference between disciplines means 
that we need to adapt the model with a focus on healthcare 
systems and not on financial systems, which is the primary 
goal of the FAIR method. This adaptation can be conducted 
simultaneously with the advancement of the model with AI 
algorithms for automated risk assessment (Fig. 1). The auto­
mation approach should include unsupervised learning algo­
rithms, which would enable testing the model randomly, at 
different stages, and in different settings. Secondly, a quali­
tative case study and red-teaming approach should be used, 
to challenge and test the state-of-the-art in healthcare cyber­
security. Although failure and compromise will occur, the 
objective of applying red teaming would be to find solutions 
to how the system responds in these circumstances.
1  https://www.fairinstitute.org/about.
The six solutions in Table 1 are designed for securing 
digital health systems operating at the edge of the network. 
The algorithmic solutions in Fig. 1 are synthesised for pre­
dicting cyber risk magnitude through dynamic analytics 
of cyber-attack threat event frequencies. The conceptual 
framework integrating the vaccine production and supply 
chain solutions in Fig. 2 is constructed to improve the state-
of-the-art by intersecting the previously isolated disciplines, 
such as confidence intervals; time-bound ranges. The solu­
tion in Fig. 2 is constructed by applying a qualitative case 
study - action research on the knowledge we accumulated of 
Covid-19. The solutions interconnect contemporary mind­
sets on data privacy and security [7]. These are all novel 
concepts and approaches that lead to development between 
disciplines and expand beyond the current state of the art. 
To apply the new solutions, we need to develop a series of 
algorithms and build upon each algorithm to reach a state 
of AI that can perform to the satisfaction of our healthcare 
systems.
2  Discussion
The expected difficulties in applying the new solutions 
include the lack of data for testing the algorithms on a real-
time vaccine supply chain – healthcare providers might 
be reluctant to allow experimental technology in their 
operational supply chains. Although we identified numer­
ous testbeds (e.g., UK digital catapults), all of the testbeds 
are based in controlled environments, and Disease X can 
be unpredictable. Even if I could secure a real-world test­
bed, the pandemic might be finished before the algorithms 
Table 1  Six solutions for vaccine production and supply chain bottle­
necks
M
Algorithmic methods (M) emerging as solutions (S) to 
production and supply chain bottlenecks in Disease X 
event
S
M1
Securing the vaccine supply chain for Disease X: design 
algorithms for quantitative risk analytics with new and 
emerging forms of data.
S1
M2
Constructing alternative vaccine delivery systems based 
on new technologies e.g., drones, autonomous vehicles, 
and robots.
S2
M3
Algorithmic design for dynamic coordination and self-
adapting predictive (real-time) analytics of cyber risks 
in Disease X supply chains.
S3
M4
Identifying how modern technologies can help with 
resolving shortages of supplies in critical times e.g., 3D 
printing [4].
S4
M5
Constructing supply chain models based on modern 
technologies real-time data and adaptive algorithms.
S5
M6
Validation of the security readiness for Disease X: 
designing a self-adapting AI system that can continue 
operating when compromised by a cyber-attack.
S6
Fig. 1  Regression – algorithmic solution for predicting and forecasting 
risks from a Disease X event
 
1 3

Health and Technology
3  Conclusion
Covid-19 has caused a significant advancement in digital 
health, triggered by the advantages of remote management 
of the pandemic. The desperate need for fast and remote 
healthcare data sharing attracted an increased investment in 
internet-connected health systems and devices, but cyber­
security and the cyber-risk of these complex and coupled 
systems have not been investigated with a great deal of 
scrutiny.
This article engaged with undertaking tentative and 
experimental conceptual developments on examining how 
algorithms can secure, optimise, predict (forecast) failures 
and improve the vaccine production and supply chains in 
Disease X crises. Without appropriate risk assessment of 
the increasingly more digitalised healthcare systems, the 
potential risks could exceed the benefits, especially because 
of the expected difficulties in integrating legacy healthcare 
systems with complex AI networks.
Until present, we have trained AI algorithms to learn 
what we already know, and in managing Covid-19 we are 
trying to train algorithms (e.g., with unsupervised learning) 
to predict what we don’t know – namely, insights on Covid-
19 and future Disease X events. To mitigate the risk of cre­
ating a single point of failure, we need to design multiple 
highly specific AI algorithms, targeted for solving specific 
problems, then connect the output. This approach would 
present lower risk and less complexity.
What we have learned from Covid-19 is even with our 
advanced healthcare systems, global pandemics can spread 
undetected until it is too late to be contained. This article 
are operational, disabling the ability to test and verify the 
outcomes in real-world/real-time scenarios. In addition, 
expected difficulties include the modification of the health­
care systems’ physical parameters as a result of Disease X, 
for example, during Covid-19 many new hospitals were 
built at speed and the cybersecurity of these field hospi­
tals was not a priority, given the serious and urgent risk of 
Covid-19 on the loss of life. Assessing with precision the 
adaptation mechanisms without an understanding of the 
exact system setup will be difficult. The future researchers 
might get some insights from analysing Covid-19 on how 
to resolve this. Alternatives to mitigate this risk include (1) 
seeking existing real-world testbeds designed for similar 
purposes – by healthcare providers, governments, private 
organisations; research institutions; (2) building a small-
scale low-cost supply chain testbed for this project - with a 
limited number of connected devices – mostly sourced from 
existing testbeds built for different purposes. The second 
solution would be quite relevant for developing countries 
(e.g., Africa) where low-cost technology is often used in 
the medical supply chains. In addition, the second solution 
enables the project to test the algorithms more extensively. 
But the algorithms will not be tested in a practical scenario, 
resulting in a lack of understanding of their performance in 
an unexpected situation.
Fig. 2  Conceptual framework 
integrating the new solutions 
for production and supply chain 
response during a Disease X 
event
 
1 3

Health and Technology
Code availability  N/A – no code was developed; code was however 
used for running the R Studio analysis.
Declarations
Competing interests  On behalf of all authors, the corresponding au­
thor states that there is no conflict nor competing interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
