Intrinsic Motivation and Episodic
Memories for Robot Exploration of
High-Dimensional Sensory Spaces
Journal Title
XX(X):1–12
c
⃝The Author(s) 2019
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/
SAGE
Guido Schillaci1,2, Antonio Pico Villalpando3, Verena V. Hafner3, Peter Hanappe4, David
Colliaux4, Timoth´ee Wintz4
Abstract
This work presents an architecture that generates curiosity-driven goal-directed exploration behaviours for an image
sensor of a microfarming robot. A combination of deep neural networks for ofﬂine unsupervised learning of low-
dimensional features from images, and of online learning of shallow neural networks representing the inverse and
forward kinematics of the system have been used. The artiﬁcial curiosity system assigns interest values to a set of
pre-deﬁned goals, and drives the exploration towards those that are expected to maximise the learning progress. We
propose the integration of an episodic memory in intrinsic motivation systems to face catastrophic forgetting issues,
typically experienced when performing online updates of artiﬁcial neural networks. Our results show that adopting an
episodic memory system not only prevents the computational models from quickly forgetting knowledge that has been
previously acquired, but also provides new avenues for modulating the balance between plasticity and stability of the
models.
Keywords
Adaptive models, predictive models, episodic memory, memory consolidation, intrinsic motivation, robotics
1
Introduction
Intrinsic motivation refers to the act of engaging in a
pleasurable activity, where the satisfaction or reward is not
coming from an external source, but from the activity itself.
In psychology and robotics, this is connected to the cognitive
phenomenon of curiosity, a form of intrinsic motivation
that drives behaviours towards novel and surprising activity
(Oudeyer et al. 2007, 2016).
Exploration and play seem to be partially driven by
intrinsic motivation in infancy (Oudeyer et al. 2007). Visual
exploration is likely to be one of the earliest behaviours
inﬂuenced by this drive (Schlesinger 2013), although studies
in prenatal development suggest that other modalities, such
as touch (Zoia et al. 2013), may be more predominant.
In developmental sciences, intrinsic motivation and
curiosity are topics of great interest. It is through exploration
and play - likely affected by these drives - that infants
incrementally learn about their bodily capabilities and about
how to interact with their surroundings (Baldassarre and
Mirolli 2013). In developmental robotics, these processes
have been demonstrated to be promising tools for enabling
learning, adaptivity and curiosity-driven behaviours in
artiﬁcial agents (see for instance (Forestier et al. 2017;
Colas et al. 2019; Frank et al. 2014) and (Schillaci et al.
2016) for a review). Intrinsic motivation algorithms drive
the actions of an artiﬁcial agent towards activities that
are expected to maximise the information gain, and thus
the learning progress, when this is integrated within a
learning framework. These expectations are generated by
predictive models, which represent the core components of
such systems, allowing the agent to anticipate the sensory
consequences of self-generated actions. Prediction errors
can be computed as the discrepancy between the expected
sensory inputs and the actual sensory observations. The
system thus monitors the dynamics of such prediction errors
over time, and selects those behaviours that are expected
to produce big variations in the prediction errors - or, in
other words, those activities that may be generating a high
information gain.
Traditionally, algorithms implementing intrinsic motiva-
tion have been applied in the context of learning motor
control (Baranes and Oudeyer 2013; Oudeyer et al. 2007;
Baldassarre and Mirolli 2013). This approach, combined
with goal-directed exploration strategies (Rolf et al. 2012;
Schmerling et al. 2015), has shown to be highly efﬁcient
when learning controllers for high-dimensional actuators.
However, in such studies, the sensory space is often over-
simpliﬁed or low-dimensional. For instance, it is represented
as the Cartesian coordinates of the end-effector of the robot -
since the main focus is rather on learning controllers of com-
plex, high-dimensional and redundant robot manipulators.
1 The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy
2 Department of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy
3 Adaptive Systems Group, Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin, Germany
4 Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Paris, France
Corresponding author:
Guido Schillaci, Dr. rer. nat.
Marie Skłodowska Curie Fellow
The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
Viale Rinaldo Piaggio, 34, 56025 - Pontedera (PI) - Italy

Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]
arXiv:2001.01982v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2020

2
Journal Title XX(X)
Very few studies addressed more realistic sensory spaces
(e.g. full resolution visual inputs) in the literature on
intrinsic motivation algorithms for robots. (Santucci et al.
2016) proposed an architecture for intrinsically motivated
exploration in a humanoid robot, where the sensory space
is represented by the visual input grabbed from the
robot camera in a simulated environment. The authors
studied how to represent goals corresponding to changes
in the environment. The world consisted of a simulated
environment with few rounded objects placed in front of
the robot. Visual inputs and goals were encoded as binary
images.
Studies that speciﬁcally address the visual modality in
exploratory behaviours can be found in the wide literature
on active vision. Active vision is a robotic application in
which the pose and the conﬁguration of a visual sensor
is determined for solving vision-based tasks, usually those
that require obtaining multiple views of an object to be
manipulated (see (Chen et al. 2011) for a review). Although
interesting studies can be found in this literature, they mostly
focus on the speciﬁc tasks to be tackled by the active visual
perception and lack of generalisation to more complex and
integrated sensorimotor representations. Moreover, they miss
the explanatory potential that intrinsic motivation research
has towards the functioning of higher cognitive processes
(e.g. curiosity and learning).
There is however an important challenge in intrinsic
motivation systems. Intrinsically motivated agents collect
data and acquire skills in an incremental fashion through
the online self-generation of training samples (Parisi et al.
2019). Learning is tightly coupled with the behaviour of
the agent. When ”wrong” behaviours are generated in the
initial phases of the learning sessions, the computational
model may converge to sub-optimal solutions and local
minima, thus preventing the system to generate further
explorative behaviours. Adaptive systems should be escaping
such situations, perhaps
Strategies to avoid this issue imply a good balance
between instrumental (goal-directed) actions and epistemic
(novelty-seeking) actions, so that bad-bootstrapping of
models can be avoided (Tschantz et al. 2019). Different
solutions have been proposed, including ϵ-greedy strategies
(Oudeyer et al. 2007) (generating random actions or
replaying previous experience to the system) or active
inference approaches (Tschantz et al. 2019).
Related to this issue is also the problem of ﬁnding an
appropriate balance between plasticity and stability of the
models, when training them in an online fashion (Mermillod
et al. 2013). Typically, when a model is being trained
with new information, previously learned knowledge quickly
becomes overwritten by the new one. This is a well-
known issue in machine learning, especially in the context
of artiﬁcial neural networks, named catastrophic forgetting
(McClelland et al. 1995). In fact, the training on new samples
may disrupt connection weights in the neural network that
were encoding previous mappings (Masse et al. 2018).
Different strategies have been proposed to overcome this
problem. One of such approaches is known as memory
consolidation or system-level consolidation (McClelland
et al. 1995): an episodic memory system maintains a subset
of previously experienced sensorimotor data and replays
them, along with the new samples, to the networks during
the training.
The work presented here approaches the aforementioned
challenges by combining online deep learning, intrinsic
motivation and a memory consolidation system. To the best
of our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst studies in the
literature combining these features. In particular, we present
an architecture that generates curiosity-driven goal-directed
exploration behaviours in a robot, using computational
models that can deal with high dimensional sensory inputs.
The computational models are trained in an online fashion
throughout the exploratory behaviours generated by the
intrinsic motivation system. Thanks to the adoption of an
episodic memory, the system is less prone to catastrophic
forgetting. A combination of deep and shallow neural
networks has been used. In particular, deep convolutional
neural networks are adopted for ofﬂine unsupervised
learning of low-dimensional features from images. Online
learning is, instead, performed on shallow neural networks
encoding the internal models (i.e. inverse and forward
kinematics) of the robot. The intrinsic motivation system
relies on a set of pre-deﬁned goals, and drives the exploration
towards those goals which are expected to maximise the
learning progress. We adopt an episodic memory system
to face catastrophic forgetting issues experienced when
performing online updates of the internal models of the
robot.
We test the framework on a simulator of a microfarming
robot. Microfarms present interesting challenges for robotics
applications. These farms are characterised by small surfaces
(0.01 to 5 ha) and typically grow a much larger variety
of crops than conventional farms. A considerable amount
of work is still carried out manually, as their limited size
and their diversity prevents the usage of typical agricultural
machines, such as tractors. Open and lightweight robots for
microfarms may reduce manual labour and increase their
productivity. However, the robots must be able to cope with
many types of plants and dense plant populations.
A ﬁrst step in the development of such advanced
applications is to automatically construct a 3D representation
of plants in outdoor settings. The 3D scanning procedure
collects many images of the object of interest using either
multiple ﬁxed cameras or a single one that moves around
the object along a pre-deﬁned trajectory. The image set is
converted into a point cloud (e.g. as in structure-from-motion
algorithms (Schoenberger and Frahm 2016; Schoenberger
et al. 2016)) and then post-processed for estimating 3D
models or for detecting plant organs.
Plants are, however, complex objects to reconstruct
and many parts are hidden, for example, by leaves. If
the camera movements are not sufﬁciently accurate to
uncover such hidden spots, the reconstruction process may
generate incomplete 3D models. The trajectory of the camera
movements must therefore adapt to the plant of interest.
Intelligent and adaptive behaviours - like those generated by
the proposed framework - could maximise the information
captured by the robot camera.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First,
we introduce the robotic platform (Section 2.1) and the
simulator (Section 2.2) that have been used in this study. In
Section 3, we describe the learning architecture, including
Prepared using sagej.cls

Schillaci et al.
3
Figure 1. The LettuceThink micro-farming robot.
the computational models, the goal selection strategy, the
image encoding and the main learning algorithm. Sections 4
and 5 describe the experiments and the results, respectively.
In particular, we show the performance of the system under
different conﬁgurations, giving a particular emphasis on
the episodic memory system. We draw our conclusions in
section 6, where we present the plan for future work.
2
Experimental setup
2.1
Robotic platform
This work presents an architecture that generates curiosity-
driven goal-directed exploration behaviours for an image
sensor of a microfarming robot. The studies reported
here have been carried out on a simulated version
(described in Section 2.2) of the LettuceThink micro-
farming robot (Figure 1) developed by Sony Computer
Science Laboratories. The platform consists of an aluminium
frame with an X-Carve CNC machine mounted on it. The
CNC machine is used to provide 3-axes movements to a
depth camera (Sony DepthSense) mounted at the tip of the
vertical z-axis (hereafter, the end-effector camera). In the
experiments presented in this paper, the end-effector camera
is facing top-down and only two motors are used (x and
y). This conﬁguration is not intended to be used for 3D
reconstruction of plants, which requires more degrees of
freedom for the camera movements.
A Raspberry Pi embedded computer connects to the X-
Carve controller over a serial connection and to the end-
effector depth camera over USB. The X-Carve controller
consists of an Arduino board running the Grbl ﬁrmware,
an open source software that interprets G-code instructions
and controls the stepper motors of the CNC machine∗. The
stepper motors are not equipped with rotary encoders but
their status are obtained through a Grbl WPos (working
position) request that returns the offset of each motor from
the initial position by counting the steps performed from
the beginning of the operation. The Raspberry Pi uses the
ROS (Robot Operating System) middleware to let external
computers control the robot hardware and to synchronise the
motor and image data.
2.2
Robot simulator
A simulator of the LettuceThink robot has been developed
to ease the testing of different conﬁgurations of the learning
system. The simulator generates sensorimotor data from
requested trajectories of the end-effector camera. Knowing
the initial position of the CNC machine and the target
position, the simulator linearly interpolates the trajectory and
returns the intermediate positions of the camera together
with the images captured from each speciﬁc position. The
sensorimotor data returned by the simulator have been pre-
recorded by performing a full scan of the (x,y) plane of the
CNC machine using a resolution of 5mm. This resulted in
24,964 images, each mapped to an (x,y) position of the CNC
machine.
The simulator is freely available as as a python script that
generates sensorimotor data† from the recorded dataset‡. All
the software developed for this work is freely available in an
online repository§.
3
Learning architecture
The architecture implementing the curiosity-driven goal-
directed exploration behaviours combines one deep and two
shallow neural networks, as well as an episodic memory
system. A deep convolutional neural network is trained
ofﬂine using unsupervised methods to encode images using
low-dimensional features. The shallow neural networks learn
online how to represent the inverse and forward kinematics
of the robotics system. In addition, an artiﬁcial curiosity
system assigns interest values to a set of pre-deﬁned goals
and drives the exploration towards goals that are expected to
maximise the learning progress. An episodic memory system
is included to handle catastrophic forgetting issues.
The learning architecture controls the movements of the
end-effector camera of the LettuceThink platform using an
exploration behaviour driven by artiﬁcial curiosity. Differ-
ently to adopting pre-deﬁned trajectories, the behaviours
generated by this system aim at autonomously maximising
the information obtained with the image sensors. In par-
ticular, the aim of the learning architecture is to direct the
movements of the camera towards positions that produce
informative views of objects of interest, and in parallel
to update the internal models with the sensorimotor data
generated by the latest movements.
The architecture is illustrated in ﬁgure 2 and is partially
inspired by the intrinsic motivation algorithm presented by
(Oudeyer et al. 2007) and on our previous works on goal-
directed exploration (Schmerling et al. 2015). This paper
proposes more advanced computational models compared
to those presented by (Oudeyer et al. 2007), as well as
more adaptive exploration strategies that those adopted in
(Schmerling et al. 2015).
∗For further informations, please refer to https://github.com/grbl/grbl/wiki
†The
script
will
be
available
here:
https://github.com/
guidoschillaci/sonylettucethink_dataset
‡The repository containing the images will be made freely downloadable in
a ZENODO.
§The latest version can be downloaded here: https://github.com/
guidoschillaci/goal_babbling_cae_episodic_memory.
Prepared using sagej.cls

4
Journal Title XX(X)
Figure 2. The architecture that generates goal-directed movements driven by artiﬁcial curiosity. In the illustration, the system
selects a goal (an image) and encodes it into a lower-dimensional features vector using the convolutional autoencoder. The
compressed goal is fed into the inverse model, which infers the required motor command to reach it. An efferent copy of the motor
command is fed into the forward model, which estimates the sensory input that would be observed after the execution of the
command. Once the action is performed and the new sensory observation is available, this is compared to the prediction, resulting
in a prediction error. Prediction error is thus used to update the learning progress of the current goal. The system thus decides
whether to keep exploring this goal or to switch to another, according to their expected learning progress. The sensorimotor data
gathered throughout the exploration behaviour are used to update the inverse and forward models, and the episodic memory, in an
online fashion. See section 3.5 for further details.
3.1
Forward and inverse models
The architecture is based on two internal models (i.e. forward
and inverse models) which encode the dynamics of the
sensorimotor system of the robot. Such models are not pre-
programmed, but rather trained in an online fashion.
The forward and inverse models are implemented as
shallow artiﬁcial neural networks that link motor commands
to visual inputs and vice versa. The sensory space here is
identiﬁed as the space of images that can be grabbed from
the end-effector camera of the robot. The motor space is
identiﬁed as the space of the CNC (x,y) motor positions.
We deﬁne a goal as a speciﬁc state in the sensory space.
When the system is given a goal (i.e. a target image), the
inverse model is queried to generate the best possible motor
commands to reach this goal - i.e. to move the camera to the
position where the goal image has been recorded. A copy
of this motor command is sent to the forward model. The
forward model internally simulates the visual input as if the
movement were executed.¶
Both models are learned and updated in runtime in
an incremental fashion. At the beginning of the learning
session, the inverse model - whose weights are randomly
initialised - is likely to generate random motor commands.
This movement produces sensorimotor data that are used to
update the model on the ﬂy. Learning is thus coupled with
behaviour, meaning that the training data are produced by the
behaviours generated by the models, that are being updated -
in parallel - during the activity.
The system calculates a prediction error PE by comparing
the image predicted by the forward model and the sensory
observation captured from the visual input after the execution
of the movement. The dynamics of the prediction errors
recorded during each attempt to reach a speciﬁc goal are
monitored. In particular, we use the trend (i.e. the derivative)
of the prediction error as an indicator of the expected
learning progress: the larger the change in the prediction
error, the bigger the expected learning progress. In other
words, big changes in the mismatch between what the system
expects to perceive and what it observes are interpreted as
cues for novelty.
3.2
Goal selection and learning progress
At the beginning of the learning process, the system is given
a pre-deﬁned set of goals (i.e. a set of images recorded from
different camera positions). At every iteration, an interest
model chooses a goal according to a goal selection strategy.
This strategy relies on the estimated learning progress that is
measured for each goal. That is, the system maintains for
each goal an indicator about whether it is advantageous -
in terms of information gain - to continue exploring around
this goal or not. If exploring a goal is not expected to
produce big changes in the prediction error (i.e. the expected
learning progress is low), then the interest model drives the
exploration towards another interesting goal.
The expected learning progress LP of a goal g, i.e. LPg, is
computed as follows:
LPg = tanh(|PEg(t) −PEg(t −1)|)
(1)
where PEg(t) is the prediction error calculated at time t.
At every the iteration, the system choses with a probability
¶This process is inspired by the classical idea in neuroscience about
efference copy and corollary discharge (Kawato 1999; Straka et al. 2018;
Baltieri and Buckley 2018). We are aware of more recent theories that
challenged the usage of efference copies and of inverse models (Friston
2011; Feldman 2016; Lara et al. 2018). Future works will include reframing
the predictive models of this study, getting rid of inverse models and using
proprioceptive predictions to generate motor commands, as in the active
inference proposal(Friston 2010). As to the current state, we still believe
that the proposed approach contributes to the state-of-the-art in intrinsic
motivation systems and online learning.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Schillaci et al.
5
of 15% a greedy goal selection strategy, instead of the
aforementioned one (see (Oudeyer et al. 2007) for the
rationale behind this approach, and (Tschantz et al. 2019) for
alternative approaches). This strategy selects a random goal
from the existing set of goals.
Moreover, with a probability of 30%, a random movement
is generated instead of the predicted camera movement. This
is performed to prevent the system from converging towards
local minima ∥.
3.3
Image encoding
Using images as sensory states raises the issue about how to
measure dissimilarity between predictions and observations.
Images are high-dimensional data. Typically, in machine
learning, dissimilarity between images is not computed by
pixelwise comparisons, but rather by comparing features
extracted from them (Chen and Chu 2005). In this work,
we used an unsupervised learning technique to extract low-
dimensional features from images, so that the resulting
features can be simply compared using Euclidean distances.
We adopted deep convolutional autoencoders (CAEs) for
this task. A convolutional autoencoder (Masci et al. 2011)
is a deep neural network that is trained to reproduce
the same data passed as input. The dimensionality of the
layers in the network decreases from the input layer to
a central one (the latent layer), and then increases back
to the original dimensionality at the output layer. This
enables the learning of low-dimensional features in the
latent layer, representing the input data. Autoencoders are
typically used for compressing high-dimensional data, such
as raw images, into low-dimensional codes, and eventually
for reconstructing the input from these features.
Autoencoders generally have fully-connected layers.
Convolutional autoencoders extend the original structure of
autoencoders by using convolutional layers. In convolutional
layers, the connectivity between neurons resembles the
organisation of the human visual cortex, where neurons
respond only to limited parts of the visual ﬁeld, known as
the receptive ﬁeld. Beside being more biologically plausible,
convolutional layers considerably reduce the number of
parameters that need to be learned by the artiﬁcial neural
network and have been demonstrated to perform much better
in computer vision applications.
The usage of the CAE allows a simpler calculation of pre-
diction errors. Calculating prediction errors corresponds to
computing the Euclidean distance between the compressed
representations of the predicted image and the observed one.
3.4
Episodic memory
As mentioned in the introduction of this paper, training
artiﬁcial neural networks in an online fashion may produce
catastrophic forgetting issues. In the current architecture, the
shallow neural networks used in the forward and inverse
model are trained on new tasks on the ﬂy. Such training
on new samples may disrupt connection weights that were
encoding previous mappings (Masse et al. 2018). Different
strategies have been proposed to overcome this problem. We
adopt an episodic memory system that maintains a subset of
previously experienced sensorimotor data and replays them,
along with the new samples, to the networks during the
training. This approach is known as memory consolidation
or system-level consolidation (McClelland et al. 1995).
The episodic memory is fed with samples observed during
the behaviour of the artiﬁcial agent. In particular, the episodic
memory is empty at the beginning of the learning session.
New samples, as observed from the camera and from the
motor system (both sensorimotor information are stored
into a memory element), are added into the memory, as
soon as this reaches its full size (as described in Section
4, we vary this parameter in our experiments). When the
memory is full, the system keeps adding new samples into it,
whenever available, discarding old elements of the memory.
A greedy strategy is adopted, where random elements of
the memory are removed from the list and replaced with
new ones. Moreover, a second parameter drives such an
episodic memory update: pem, i.e. the probability of changing
an element in the episodic memory. The episodic memory
update process consists of iterating over all the elements of
the memory and, with a probability of pem, of discarding
each element and replacing it with the new sample. This
produces duplicates of the new samples in the memory,
which may increase the plasticity of the system towards latest
observations.
In Sections 4 and 5, we show the impact of different
conﬁgurations of the episodic memory to the whole learning
process, and to the behaviour of the simulated robot.
3.5
The learning algorithm
Using the components described above, we can now describe
the basic learning algorithm as follows:
1. The system selects N goals, gi, following the strategy
described in section 3.2. Each goal is the compressed
representation of an image produced by the pre-trained
convolutional autoencoder (CAE). The prediction
errors PE(gi, 0) are initialized to 0, and LP(gi, 0) to
0, for each goal.
2. The interest model selects the goal g(t) in {gi}
which has the maximum expected learning progress
LP(gi, t). The ﬁrst goal g(0) of the learning process is
randomly selected from {gi}.
3. The inverse model computes the new position of the
camera P(t) with the objective that the (encoded)
image of the camera after the movement corresponds
to the selected goal.
4. The position P(t) is sent to the forward model. The
forward model predicts the compressed image Ip(t)
that will be seen at the new position.
5. The camera is moved. A random noise is added to
the camera movement predicted by the inverse model,
in order to produce small ﬂuctuations and thus to
generate more views of the target locations.
6. The camera image Ic(t) is grabbed and compressed by
the CAE.
7. The prediction error PE(t) is computed as the
Euclidean distance between Ip(t) and Ic(t) (the
compressed representations of the predicted and
current images).
∥This may not be optimal, especially when the motor space is high-
dimensional. See (Tschantz et al. 2019) for more details.
Prepared using sagej.cls

6
Journal Title XX(X)
8. The estimated learning progress is updated using
equation 1 and PE(t).
9. The inverse model is updated with the recorded
sensorimotor data and the elements stored in the
memory.
10. The forward model is updated with the recorded
sensorimotor data and the elements stored in the
memory.
11. Update the episodic memory, as described in section
3.4.
12. Return to step 1, until the maximum number of
iterations is reached (5000 in the current experiment).
When the camera moves to a new position computed by
the inverse model, the difference between the expected image
and the obtained image may be very large. The prediction
error PE will be large in that case. If the previous action
of reaching the same goal produced a prediction error of
different magnitude, this results in a high estimated learning
progress LP: the system’s guess about the consequences of
the current action is not met, and it also changes very much
when re-iterating it, suggesting that such an action is very
informative. The interest model is then likely to select the
same goal for the next iteration (step 2). In case the current
activity does not produce big changes in the prediction error,
compared to the previous ones, the interest model selects
another goal, as the current one does not bring any novel
information to the learning process.
It has to be noted that we do not update the inverse and
forward models at each iteration but only after a given batch
size has been completed. The ﬁtting is then done using
the history of sensory and motor data for that batch. We
use batches for performance reasons and for preventing less
accurate gradient estimations due to the big ﬂuctuations that
would be produced, otherwise, by stochastic learning (i.e.
batch size of one sample).
4
Experiments
As mentioned in the previous sections, we adopt a
convolutional autoencoder (CAE) for unsupervised learning
of image features. The CAE is pre-trained in an ofﬂine
fashion, that is ahead of the learning experiment. Thereafter,
during the online test, image goals are compressed into
features, using the encoder part of the pre-trained CAE.
The CAE has been implemented using Keras deep
learning library and TensorFlow backend. The structure
of the CAE is the following. An input layer takes a
64 × 64 grayscale image and passes it to a sequence
of conv2D and MaxPooling2D layers: conv2d1 has 64 ×
64 × 256 neurons, conv2d2 has 32 × 32 × 128 neurons,
conv2d3 has 16 × 16 × 128 neurons. The output of conv2d3
is ﬂattened and connected to a Dense layer of size
32 (the size of the latent space, i.e. the feature vector
representing the compressed image). The decoder part
of the CAE starts with connecting the latent later to a
Dense layer of size 64, reshaping it into a 16 × 16 layer
and connecting it to a conv2d layer, characterised by
8 × 8 × 32 neurons. The following sequence of layers is
then expanding the latent signal: upsampling2d, conv2d
(16 × 16 × 128), upsampling2d, conv2d (32 × 32 × 512),
upsampling2d, conv2d (64 × 64 × 1). The latter represents
the output decoded layer, whose size matches the one of the
input. The MaxPooling kernel has size 2, padding ”same”.
All the conv2D layers have kernel size equals to 3 and ReLU
activation functions except the CAE output layer that has a
sigmoid activation function. An ADAM optimiser has been
used for training the network on an MSE loss function.
The inverse and forward models have been implemented
as shallow artiﬁcial neural networks and are trained in an
online fashion during the experiment. The structure of the
forward model is characterised by the following layer. An
input layer is fed with a two-dimensional vector (the (x,y)
motor command applied to the CNC machine), which is
expanded to a dense layer of 32 neurons, followed by
two dense layers of 320 neurons, and a dense layer of 32
neurons (the latent code dimensionality), representing the
output of the forward model. The structure of the inverse
model is characterised by the following layers. An input
layer is fed with a 32-dimensional vector (the latent code,
representing the goal image), which is passed to a dense layer
of the same size, then expanded to two dense layers of 320
neurons, and compressed back to a dense layer of 2 neurons,
representing the output of the inverse model (the (x,y) motor
command to apply to the CNC machine). For both the inverse
and forward models, the dense layers have tanh activation
functions. A standard gradient descent (LR: 0.0014, decay:
0.0, momentum: 0.8) is used as optimiser on an MSE loss
function. The training of the CAE, the inverse and forward
model updates, as well as the predictive processes are run on
a machine equipped with an NVIDIA graphics card.
As discussed in the previous sections, we adopt an
episodic memory system that maintains a subset of
previously experienced sensorimotor data and replays them,
along with the new samples, to the networks during the
training. As soon as they are available, new samples (image
and motor information) are added into the memory. When the
memory reaches its full size, random elements are removed
from the memory and replaced with new ones (see section
3.4 for more details).
The inverse and forward models are updated at constant
frequency, that is, every time a new buffer of 16 sensorimotor
samples (each consisting of (x,y) motor commands and 32-
dimensional compressed image codes gathered along the
exploration) is available. In particular, a new ﬁt for both the
inverse and forward models is triggered, passing as training
data the buffer with the new 16 observations together with all
the samples stored in the episodic memory.
In the current experiment, we vary two parameters over
different runs and analyse their inﬂuence onto the learning
process. In particular, we vary the size of the episodic
memory and the probability of changing an element in the
episodic memory (pem).
5
Results
As discussed in the previous section, the experiment
consisted of two phases. In an initial ofﬂine stage, a
convolutional autoencoder has been trained with the images
stored in the simulated robot data (24,964 images, see section
2.2). This neural network has been used to compress the
images (sensory inputs and goals) to be used in the online
learning process.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Schillaci et al.
7
Figure 3 shows an example of a sequence of encoded-
decoded images produced by such a convolutional autoen-
coder. As mentioned in the previous section, the image
features (i.e. the compressed version of the image) consists
of a 32-dimensional vector. Input images and reconstructed
images are characterised by a resolution of 64 × 64 pixels.
The reconstructed images showed in Figure 3 have been
generated by a CAE trained for 50 epochs.
Figure 3. Images encoded and decoded using the
convolutional autoencoder. The top row shows the original
images. The bottom row shows the result of encoding each
input image into a latent code and then decoding it back to the
original image resolution.
Once having trained the CAE, the full learning process can
be performed as described in Section 3.5. We carried out a
series of experiments, in which we varied two parameters
of the system: the size of the episodic memory memsize
and the probability of updating the memory elements pem.
In particular, we tested three different values for memsize :
{0, 10, 20} (with 0 meaning that no episodic memory
available) and two values of pem : {0.1, 0.01}, for a total of
6 experiments. The values of memsize specify the number of
batches (each batch has 16 sensorimotor samples) that are
contained in the memory. Each experiment has been run 5
times, for a total of 30 runs. Each run consisted of 5000
iterations of the algorithm described in Section 3.5. During
each run, the mean squared error of the forward and inverse
models, calculated on the same test dataset (consisting of 50
images randomly chosen from the simulator dataset) have
been monitored. The MSEs have been calculated every 50
iterations of the algorithm (behaviour and model updates). A
set of 9 goal images have been chosen from the simulator
dataset.
Figure 4 shows an example of a run of the exploration
behaviour under a speciﬁc conﬁguration (memsize = 20,
pem = 0.1) and over different time steps (50, 1000, 2000,
3000, 4000 and 5000 iterations). The axes specify the x and
y motor positions of the CNC machine. Red dots represents
the motor projections of the 9 image goals (ground truth
data from the simulator dataset). Green dots represent the
explored positions of the robot. As it can be seen, the
behaviour of the robot successfully tends towards exploring
more the regions around the goals. The effect of the ϵ-greedy
strategy is also evident from the almost uniformly distributed
green points within the action space.
Figure 5 shows the predictions of the inverse models
over time. The inverse model is fed with the encoded goal
image as input and returns as output the (x,y) coordinates
of the motor. It can be clearly seen that the learning process
brings the prediction towards the target motor goals (ground
truth data). The episodic memory makes sure that previous
knowledge (when alternating between goals) is not forgotten.
The impact of catastrophic forgetting, due to the absence of
the episodic memory, is more clear in Figure 6, which shows
the prediction of the inverse model over time. As it can be
seen, predictions over different goals are much more noisy
than in the previous case.
Figure 7 shows the dynamics of the expected learning
progress over the 9 goals of the same sample run described
above (memsize = 20, pem = 0.1). Each goal is characterised
by the expected learning progress described in equation 1. A
decay factor is also added, so that expected learning progress
slowly decays over time. The time scales (horizontal axis)
of this plot and those of ﬁgures 5 and 6 are not matching
as predictions are performed only when the speciﬁc goal is
selected by the intrinsic motivation system.
Figure 8 compares the learning progress of the forward
model in three different conﬁgurations of the episodic
memory. As it can be seen, the intrinsic motivation system
does not work well without episodic memory (red curve).
Adding an episodic memory has a positive impact on the
learning progress, as the mean squared error of the forward
model predictions decreases over time (bigger memory
generates better results). Similar trends can be observed for
the inverse model (Figure 9).
Reducing the probability of changing memory elements
to pem = 0.01 produces smoother descending trends in
the MSE of the conﬁgurations with episodic memory, for
both the forward (Figure 10) and the inverse (Figure 11)
models. We explain this effect as a result of a smaller
level of plasticity in the episodic memory. As explained in
the previous section, the current episodic memory update
strategy produces duplicates of the new observations in the
memory. Higher values of pem produces more duplicates of
the same samples, and may reduce the variance within the
episodic memory.
This can be also seen when comparing the MSEs of the
forward and inverse model by pivoting on the pem values, as
shown in the following ﬁgures. In Figure 12, for instance,
it can be seen that the system with higher probability
of memory updates (red curve) has a steeper descending
curve, although on the long run is outperformed by the
other strategy (both the conﬁguration are characterised by a
memory size of 10 batches). This suggests that updating the
episodic memory more quickly produces higher plasticity,
whereas doing it more slowly produces more stability. This
effect is however not clearly visible in the MSE curves of the
inverse model (Figure 13). Increasing the memory size to 20
batches leverages this different effect in the forward model,
as it can be seen from Figure 14, but makes it slightly more
evident in the inverse model MSE trends (Figure 15).
Further studies will focus on a deeper analysis of the
variance of the elements in the episodic memory, as well as
on more sophisticated strategies for memory update and their
effect on the plasticity and stability of the models.
6
Conclusions
We presented a learning architecture that generates curiosity-
driven goal-directed behaviours based on intrinsic motivation
and on an episodic memory system. In particular, we
implemented online learning mechanisms on artiﬁcial neural
Prepared using sagej.cls

8
Journal Title XX(X)
Figure 4. An example of a goal-directed exploration session driven by artiﬁcial curiosity (run no. 5, conﬁguration (memsize = 20,
pem = 0.1)). A set of 9 goals are deﬁned from the pre-recorded image dataset. The red dots show the (x,y) motor conﬁgurations -
which are stored as ground truth data in the dataset - that correspond to the image goals. Each of the plots shows the experienced
(x,y) motor commands after 50 (top left plot), 1000, 2000 (top right), 3000 (bottom left), 4000 and 5000 (bottom right) samples.
Green dots represent the (x,y) motor positions captured from the CNC machine while exploring. The red dashed line shows the
convex hull computed around the explored points.
networks using an episodic memory system for facing
catastrophic forgetting issues. We adopted and trained a
convolutional autoencoder for compressing image goals
and observations into low-dimensional features, that can
be more easily processed by our models. We showed the
performance of our system under different conﬁgurations,
where plasticity and stability of the learning process can be
modulated. Of fundamental importance were the predictive
processes implemented through the forward models. In
fact, processes of anticipation of sensorimotor activity have
enabled the advanced behaviours showed in our experiments.
We strongly believe that similar mechanisms may represent a
bridge between motor and cognitive development in humans,
and a promising tool for cognitive robotics. We tested the
models on simulated sensorimotor data from a microfarming
robot. This paper has contributed also to the widening of the
developmental robotics approach towards applications and
robotic platforms that are non-conventional in this ﬁeld.
Moreover, our experiments have shown that the intrinsic
motivation systems can work also in the presence of a high-
dimensional sensory space. Adopting an episodic memory
system not only prevents the computational models to
quickly forget knowledge that has been previously acquired,
but also provides new avenues for modulating the balance
between plasticity and stability of the system.
Several potential research directions are open from this
study. First, the adoption of alternative predictive processes.
As discussed in the introduction, more recent approaches
have been proposed in the literature, which would better
leverage instrumental, goal-directed actions with epistemic,
novelty-seeking, behaviour (i.e. active inference (Friston
2010; Tschantz et al. 2019)). This proposal has not been
yet implemented into high-dimensional sensory spaces and
robots such as the ones addressed in this study.
Second, to achieve the online learning process, image
features should be learned in an online and incremental
fashion. Similarly, goals could be autonomously generated
through unsupervised learning techniques. We are currently
exploring different possibilities, including the usage of self-
organising maps, trained in an online fashion on the latent
codes of the convolutional autoencoder. Goals would be
aligned to the -moving- neurons of the self-organising map.
Interesting insights could emerge from applying intrinsic
motivation systems on dynamic goals, that are autonomously
generated by the learning process. More advanced goal
selection strategies could be implemented, where prediction
error dynamics could be analysed over longer time lapses.
Third, similar investigations should be carried out on
a multimodal level. The literature on intrinsic motivation
systems and goal-directed behaviours in robotics is mostly,
if not totally, focusing on unimodal sensory spaces.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Schillaci et al.
9
Figure 5. The predictions of the 9 goals over time performed by
the inverse model in the run no.5 of the conﬁguration
(memsize = 20, pem = 0.1). The inverse model is fed with the
encoded goal image as input and returns as output the (x:
blue,y: red) coordinates of the motor. Solid lines show, for each
goal image, the ground truth motor positions. Dashed lines
show the predictions of the inverse model.
Figure 6. The predictions of the 9 goals over time performed by
the inverse model in the run no.0 of the conﬁguration without
episodic memory. The inverse model is fed with the encoded
goal image as input and returns as output the (x: blue, y:red)
coordinates of the motor. Solid lines show, for each goal image,
the ground truth motor positions. Dashed lines show the
predictions of the inverse model.
Investigating these algorithms in the context of multimodal
sensory
spaces
could
open
very
interesting
research
Figure 7. The dynamics of the expected learning progress for
each goal (from 2nd to 10th plots). The ﬁrst plot shows the ID of
the currently selected goal over time.
Figure 8. The mean squared error of the forward model
computed over 5000 iterations, averaged on 5 runs. The plot
compares the MSE of three conﬁgurations of the system:
without memory (0 batches), memsize = 10 and memsize = 20. In
this plot, the probability of changing memory elements is set to
pem = 0.1. Solid lines show the mean of the MSE over 5 runs,
for each conﬁguration. Shaded areas show the (mean −stddev,
mean + stddev) areas.
directions, for instance on how to leverage the competition
between modalities in the estimation of the learning progress
or in the deﬁnition and selection of goals.
