Overview: Generalizations of Multi-Agent Path Finding to Real-World Scenarios
Hang Ma, Sven Koenig, Nora Ayanian, Liron Cohen
Wolfgang H¨onig, T. K. Satish Kumar, Tansel Uras, Hong Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California

Craig Tovey
School of ISyE
Georgia Institute of Technology

Guni Sharon
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Multi-agent path ﬁnding (MAPF) is well-studied
in
artiﬁcial
intelligence,
robotics,
theoretical
computer science and operations research.
We
discuss issues that arise when generalizing MAPF
methods to real-world scenarios and four research
directions that address them.
We emphasize the
importance of addressing these issues as opposed
to developing faster methods for the standard
formulation of the MAPF problem.
1
Introduction
Multi-agent path ﬁnding (MAPF) has been well-studied by
researchers from artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, theoretical
computer science and operations research.
The task of
(standard) MAPF is to ﬁnd the paths for multiple agents in a
given graph from their current vertices to their targets without
colliding with other agents, while at the same time optimizing
a cost function. Existing MAPF methods use, for example,
reductions to problems from satisﬁability, integer linear
programming or answer set programming [Yu and LaValle,
2013b; Erdem et al., 2013; Surynek, 2015] or optimal,
bounded-suboptimal or suboptimal search methods [Silver,
2005; Sturtevant and Buro, 2006; Ryan, 2008; Wang and
Botea, 2008; Standley, 2010; Standley and Korf, 2011; Wang
and Botea, 2011; Luna and Bekris, 2011; Sharon et al., 2013;
de Wilde et al., 2013; Barer et al., 2014; Goldenberg et
al., 2014; Wagner and Choset, 2015; Boyarski et al., 2015;
Sharon et al., 2015].
We have recently studied various issues that arise
when generalizing MAPF to real-world scenarios, including
Kiva (Amazon Robotics) warehouse systems [Wurman et
al.,
2008] (Figure 1) and autonomous aircraft towing
vehicles [Morris et al., 2016].
These issues can be
categorized into two general concerns: 1. Developing faster
methods for the standard formulation of the MAPF problem
is insufﬁcient because, in many real-world scenarios, new
structure can be exploited or new problem formulations are
required. 2. Studying MAPF or its new formulations only as
combinatorial optimization problems is insufﬁcient because
the resulting MAPF solutions also need to be executed. We
discuss four research directions that address both concerns
from different perspectives:
1. In many real-world multi-agent systems, agents are
partitioned into teams, targets are given to teams, and
each agent in a team needs to get assigned a target from
the team, before one ﬁnds paths for all agents. We have
formulated the combined target assignment and path
ﬁnding (TAPF) problem for teams of agents to address
this issue. We have also developed an optimal TAPF
method that scales to dozens of teams and hundreds of
agents [Ma and Koenig, 2016].
2. In many real-world multi-agent systems, agents are
anonymous (exchangeable),
but their payloads are
non-anonymous (non-exchangeable) and need to be
delivered to given targets.
The agents can often
exchange their payloads in such systems.
We have
formulated the package-exchange robot routing (PERR)
problem as a ﬁrst attempt to tackle more general
transportation problems where payload transfers are
allowed [Ma et al., 2016]. In this context, we have also
proved the hardness of approximating optimal MAPF
solutions.
3. In many real-world multi-agent systems, the consistency
of agent motions and the resulting predictability of
agent motions is important (especially in work spaces
shared by humans and agents), which is not taken into
account by existing MAPF methods. We have exploited
the problem structure of given MAPF instances in two
stages: In the ﬁrst stage, we have developed a scheme
for ﬁnding paths for the agents that include many
edges from user-provided highways, which achieves
consistency and predictability of agent motions [Cohen
et al., 2015]. In the second stage, we have developed
methods that automatically generate highways [Cohen
et al., 2016].
4. MAPF is mostly motivated by navigation or motion
planning for multi-robot systems.
However,
the
arXiv:1702.05515v1  [cs.AI]  17 Feb 2017

Figure 1: Autonomous drive units and storage pods that
contain products and can be moved by the drive units
(left) and the layout of a typical Kiva warehouse system
(right) [Wurman et al., 2008].
optimality or bounded-suboptimality of MAPF solutions
does not necessarily entail their robustness, especially
given the imperfect plan-execution capabilities of real-
world robots.
We have developed a framework that
efﬁciently postprocesses the output of a MAPF method
to create a plan-execution schedule that can be executed
by real-world multi-robot systems [H¨onig et al., 2016].
We now showcase the practicality of these research
directions to demonstrate that, in order to generalize MAPF
methods to real-world scenarios, addressing both concerns is
as important, if not more, than developing faster methods for
the standard formulation of the MAPF problem.
2
Combined Target Assignment and Path
Finding (TAPF) for Teams of Agents
Targets are often given to teams of agents. Each agent in
a team needs to get assigned a target given to its team so
that the paths of the agents from their current vertices to
their target optimize a cost function.
For example, in a
Kiva warehouse system, the drive units that relocate storage
pods from the inventory stations to the storage locations
form a team because each of them needs to get assigned an
available storage location. Previous MAPF methods assume
that each agent is assigned a target in advance by some target-
assignment procedure but, to achieve optimality, we have
formulated TAPF, which couples the target-assignment and
the path-ﬁnding problems and deﬁnes one common objective
for both of them. In TAPF, the agents are partitioned into
teams. Each team is given the same number of unique targets
as there are agents in the team. The task of TAPF is to assign
the targets to the agents and plan collision-free paths for the
agents from their current vertices to their targets in a way
such that each agent moves to exactly one target given to its
team, all targets are visited and the makespan (the earliest
time step when all agents have reached their targets and stop
moving) is minimized. Any agent in a team can get assigned
a target of the team, and the agents in the same team are
thus exchangeable. However, agents in different teams are
not exchangeable. TAPF can be viewed as a generalization of
(standard) MAPF and an anonymous variant of MAPF:
• (Standard) MAPF results from TAPF if every team
consists of exactly one agent and the number of teams
thus equals the number of agents. The assignments of
targets to agents are pre-determined and the agents are
thus non-anonymous (non-exchangeable).
• The anonymous variant of MAPF (also called goal-
invariant MAPF) results from TAPF if only one team
exists (that consists of all agents). The agents can get
assigned any target and are thus exchangeable. It can
be solved optimally in polynomial time with ﬂow-based
MAPF methods [Yu and LaValle, 2013a; Turpin et al.,
2014].
The state-of-the-art optimal TAPF method, called the
Conﬂict-Based Min-Cost Flow [Ma and Koenig, 2016],
combines search and ﬂow-based MAPF methods.
It
generalizes to dozens of teams and hundreds of agents.
3
Package-Exchange Robot Routing (PERR)
and New Complexity Results for MAPF
Agents are often anonymous but carry payloads (packages)
that are assigned targets and are thus non-anonymous. For
example, in a Kiva warehouse system, the drive units are
anonymous but the storage pods they carry are assigned
storage locations and are thus non-anonymous.
If each
agent carries one package, the problem is equivalent to
(standard) MAPF. In reality, the packages can often be
transferred among agents, which results in more general
transportation problems, for example, ride-sharing with
passenger transfers [Coltin and Veloso, 2014] and package
delivery with robots in ofﬁces [Veloso et al., 2015]. We have
formulated PERR as a ﬁrst step toward understanding these
problems [Ma et al., 2016]. In PERR, each agent carries one
package, any two agents in adjacent vertices can exchange
their packages, and each package needs to be delivered to a
given target. PERR can thus be viewed as a modiﬁcation of
(standard) MAPF:
• Packages in PERR can be viewed as agents in (standard)
MAPF which move by themselves.
• Two packages in adjacent vertices are allowed to
exchange their vertices in PERR but two agents in
adjacent vertices are not allowed to exchange their
vertices in (standard) MAPF.
K-PERR is a generalization of PERR where packages
are partitioned into K types and packages of the same type
are exchangeable.
Since, in TAPF, agents are partitioned
into teams and agents in the same team are exchangeable,
K-PERR can be viewed as a modiﬁcation of TAPF with
K teams in the same sense that PERR can be viewed as
a modiﬁcation of (standard) MAPF. We have proved the
hardness of approximating optimal PERR and K-PERR
solutions (for K ≥2). One corollary of our study is that
both MAPF and TAPF are NP-hard to approximate within
any factor less than 4/3 for makespan minimization, even
when there are only two teams for TAPF. We have also
demonstrated that the addition of exchange operations to
MAPF does not reduce its complexity theoretically but makes
PERR easier to solve than MAPF experimentally. There is
a continuum of problems that arise in different real-world
scenarios: “One agent with many packages” yields the classic
rural postman problem; “as many agents as packages” yields
MAPF, TAPF or PERR. Understanding both extremes helps

Area1
Area2
Figure 2:
User-provided highways in a simulated Kiva
warehouse system.
one to attack the middle, as required by many other real-world
scenarios.
4
Exploitation of Problem Structure and
Predictability of Motions
Agents share their work spaces with humans, and the
consistency of their motions and the resulting predictability
of their motions are important for the safety of the humans,
which existing MAPF methods do not take into account.
This motivates us to exploit the problem structure of given
MAPF instances and design a scheme that encourages
agents to move along user-provided sets of edges (called
highways) [Cohen et al., 2015].
We use highways in the
context of a simple inﬂation scheme based on the ideas
behind experience graphs [Phillips et al., 2012] to derive
new heuristic values that encourage MAPF methods to
return paths that include the edges of the highways, which
avoids head-to-head collisions among agents and achieves
consistency and predictability of their motions. For example,
in a Kiva warehouse system, we can design highways along
the narrow passageways between the storage locations as
shown by the arrows in Figure 2.
We have demonstrated
in a simulated Kiva warehouse system that such highways
accelerate MAPF methods signiﬁcantly while maintaining
the desired bounded-suboptimality of the MAPF solution
costs. The problem structure of TAPF and PERR instances
can also be exploited with the same methods. We have also
developed methods that automatically generate highways that
are competitive with user-provided ones in our feasibility
study [Cohen et al., 2016].
5
Dealing with Imperfect Plan-Execution
Capabilities
State-of-the-art MAPF or TAPF methods can ﬁnd collision-
free paths for hundreds of agents optimally or with
user-provided sub-optimality guarantees in a reasonable
amount of computation time.
They perform well even in
cluttered and tight environments, such as Kiva warehouse
systems.
However, agents often have imperfect plan-
execution capabilities and are not able to synchronize their
motions perfectly, which can result in frequent and time-
expensive replanning.
Therefore, we have proposed a
framework that makes use of a simple temporal network to
postprocess a MAPF solution efﬁciently to create a plan-
execution schedule that works for non-holonomic robots,
takes their maximum translational and rotational velocities
into account, provides a guaranteed safety distance between
them and exploits slack (deﬁned as the difference of the latest
and earliest entry times of locations) to absorb imperfect
plan executions and avoid time-intensive replanning in many
cases [H¨onig et al., 2016].
This framework has been
evaluated in simulation and on real robots. TAPF and PERR
methods can also be applied in the same framework. Issues
to be addressed in future work include adding user-provided
safety distances, additional kinematic constraints, planning
with uncertainty and replanning.
6
Conclusions
We discussed four research directions that address issues
that arise when generalizing MAPF methods to real-world
scenarios and exploit either the problem structure or existing
MAPF methods.
Our goal was to point out interesting
research directions for researchers working in the ﬁeld of
MAPF.
7
