IEDM, an Ontology for Irradiation Experiment
Data Management
Blerina Gkotse1, 2, Pierre Jouvelot1 and Federico Ravotti2
1 MINES ParisTech, PSL University, Paris, France
2Experimental Physics Department, CERN, Geneva 23, CH-1211, Switzerland

Abstract. Irradiation experiments (IE) are an essential step in the develop-
ment of High-Energy Physics (HEP) particle accelerators and detectors. They
assess the radiation hardness of materials used in HEP experimental devices by
simulating, in a short time, the common long-term degradation effects due to their
bombardment by high-energy particles. IEs are also used in other scientific and
industrial fields such as medicine (e.g., for cancer treatment, medical imaging,
etc.), space/avionics (e.g., for radiation testing of payload equipment) as well as
in industry (e.g., for food sterilization). Usually carried out with ionizing radia-
tion, these complex processes require highly specialized infrastructures: the irra-
diation facilities. Currently, hundreds of such facilities exist worldwide.
    To help develop best practices and promote a computer-assisted handling
and management of IEs, we introduce IEDM, a new OWL-based Irradiation Ex-
periment Data Management ontology. This paper provides an overview of the
classes and properties of IEDM. Since one of the key design choices for IEDM
was to maximize the reuse of existing foundational ontologies such as the Ontol-
ogy of Scientific Experiments (EXPO), the Ontology of Units of Measure (OM)
and the Friend-of-a-Friend Ontology (FOAF), we discuss the methodological is-
sues of the integration of IEDM with these imported ontologies. We illustrate the
use of IEDM via an actual IE recently performed at IRRAD, the CERN proton
irradiation facility. Finally, we discuss other motivations for this work, including
the use of IEDM for the generation of user interfaces for IE management, and
their impact on our methodology.
Keywords: Ontology, OWL, Irradiation Experiment, Data Management, High-
Energy Physics.
1
Introduction
In an irradiation experiment (IE), a piece of material, or even an entire device, is
purposefully submitted to the waves or particles emitted by a radiative process; the time
of exposure, the energy and the type of radiation field (gamma rays, X-rays, protons,
ions, etc.) are parameters of the experiment. IEs are key experimental-physics proce-
dures required, for instance, when designing, developing or building High-Energy

2
Physics (HEP) accelerators and experiments. In the HEP field, the purpose of perform-
ing an IE is typically the qualification of materials, detectors and electronic components
in a radiation environment equivalent to the one these devices will encounter in the
actual HEP experiment, thus simulating in a short time long-term radiation-induced
degradation effects [1]. Moreover, worldwide, IEs also find applications in other scien-
tific and technical fields. For example, in the field of space and avionics, the materials
composing aircraft or spaceships also suffer from radiation damage during their flights.
Therefore, engineers need to test space components and materials during their devel-
opment projects [2]. Other examples can be found in industry, where irradiation exper-
iments are used for various purposes such as for food sterilization [3] or seed treatment
[4]. IEs are also nowadays performed on patients as part of radiotherapy treatments [5]
or for medical imaging in many hospital environments [6]. Even though all these IEs
are performed for different purposes and in various locations (e.g., hospitals, factories,
scientific institutes), these infrastructures can all be assimilated, at the abstract level, to
what we call "irradiation facilities".
An earlier thorough survey about the existent irradiation facilities of interest for HEP
applications and their practices shows that at least hundreds of these are operational
around the world [7]. Considering all the other IE-related fields of applications men-
tioned above, we estimate that these are only a small subset of what is currently existing
worldwide. Although these facilities use and produce knowledge of high scientific
value, our survey shows also that most of the teams in charge of the operation of IEs
follow informal procedures for their overall data handling; they often store their data in
ad-hoc spreadsheets in local computers or online, and even sometimes only on paper.
This practice makes irradiation facilities more prone to the risk of data errors, corrup-
tion or even loss, hence the apparent need for the introduction of a standardized ap-
proach in the data management of IEs.
Ontologies are known to facilitate knowledge sharing, reusability, and formalization
of specific domains [8]. Therefore, in this work, we decided to formalize the general
knowledge linked to the management of data associated with IEs by introducing a new
ontology, called Irradiation Experiment Data Management (IEDM) ontology. IEDM
has been built by investigating and analyzing the elements and practices commonly
used in irradiation facilities around the world, building thus upon the knowledge of
domain experts to provide a first step towards the structured management of IE data.
Developing an ontology is a long and incremental process that calls for significant
testing along the way. In order to provide the first evidence of the validity of our model,
we illustrate in this paper how an actual IE can be described using IEDM. We chose
FCC-Radmon [9], an experiment that has been performed at the CERN (European La-
boratory for Particle Physics [10]) IRRAD proton irradiation facility [11] which is
linked to the current development of a future particle monitoring device for the pro-
posed Future Circular Collider (FCC) [12] under consideration at CERN.
The development of IEDM is part of a larger project undertaken at CERN and linked
to the management of IE data [13]. In addition to the previous motivation related to
domain formalization, we intend to use IEDM as a model from which a whole suite of
web-based applications dedicated to IE data management can be automatically gener-
ated. Even further down the line, IEDM could be the foundational stone of an ontology

3
for all irradiation facilities. These long-term goals, detailed in this paper, have had a
significant impact on the way we structured IEDM, thus requiring specific methodo-
logical stances, which are described in the sequel. In particular, the development of
IEDM relies heavily on existing open-source standards such as Web Ontology Lan-
guage (OWL) [14] or physics-related ontologies (see Section 2).
The contributions of this paper are:
1.
IEDM, a new OWL-based ontology dedicated to the management of data
related to IEs;
2.
an experimental validation of IEDM with the encoding of FCC-Radmon,
an actual irradiation experiment performed in 2018 at the CERN IRRAD
proton irradiation facility;
3.
key methodological principles for ontology development linked to our
planned use of ontology-based representation data for the automatic code
generation of IE Web applications.
The present paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we investigate the current
state of the art in physics-related ontology development. Section 3 describes the meth-
odology and techniques we have followed for the development of the IEDM ontology.
In Section 4, we provide an overview of the main classes and relations present in IEDM.
In Section 5, we detail our test encoding in IEDM of an actual experiment, FCC-
Radmon. In Section 6, we discuss future work before, finally, presenting our conclu-
sions in Section 7.
2
Related Work
In the literature, several ontologies formalize and axiomatize the knowledge of physics.
One example of these is the Web Physics Ontology [15], which describes physics equa-
tions and relationships among physical quantities. However, this ontology is limited to
the domain of electromagnetism and mechanics, and there is no reference to particle
physics. Another approach is the ontology design pattern proposed for the particle phys-
ics analysis [16]. Although this work includes concepts that are typical in HEP experi-
ments, it focuses only on the analysis of HEP data and not the representation of exper-
iments.
To the best of our knowledge, an ontology dedicated to the formalization of the prin-
ciples of irradiation experiments does not exist yet; the goal of our paper is to describe
IEDM, an ontology that we specifically designed to address such a concern. To promote
best practices, we reuse as much as possible the earlier ontology developments that we
believe can partially describe irradiation experiments. The ones that we integrated in
our ontology are described in the following subsections.
2.1
EXPO
The Ontology of Scientific Experiments (EXPO) is a general ontology for the formali-
zation of scientific experiments. It introduces concepts specifically linked to the notions
of experimental design, scientific methods, and other core principles of experiments

4
[17]. Inheriting some of its structure from the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology
(SUMO) [18], EXPO similarly classifies all its concepts into an abstract level and a
physical one, providing in this way an elegant and quite flexible design. Taking both
advantage of the SUMO-inspired abstract/physical structure and of the fundamental
science-related entities of EXPO, IEDM derives many of its key classes from these two
upper-level ontologies.
2.2
OM
However, since EXPO does not elaborate on physical quantities and units, restricting
its key constructs to the logical structure of scientific experiments, it is not enough to
cover all of IEDM needs. In particular, IEDM has to be able to describe actual experi-
mental parameters such as the total fluence (number of particles received by unit of
area) impinging on a piece of material during an IE. We rely on OM, the Units of Meas-
ure ontology, for the representation of experimental quantities and of their physical
units [19]. OM contains entities from many physics-related domains, including con-
cepts from particle physics. This ontology is thus necessary for the formalization of the
physical quantities related to IEs and, as such, is the second most important ontology
used for the development of IEDM.
2.3
FOAF
The third ontology from which we borrow to develop some concepts of IEDM is the
Friend-of-a-Friend ontology (FOAF) [20]. This widely used ontology aims to describe
networks of people, their activities, and their relations. For example, FOAF can be used
to represent a social network on the web [21]. IEDM uses FOAF mostly to describe the
characteristics of the various individuals involved in IEs.
3
IEDM Ontology Design Methodology
As mentioned above, in this work, we aim to maximize the reusability of upper-level
ontologies that were described in Section 2. Therefore, we anchored the OWL-based
definition of IEDM on the three foundational ontologies EXPO, OM and FOAF. These
ontologies supplied the proper concepts, relations, and definitions for the representation
of irradiation experiments, allowing for a more explicit taxonomy and axiomatization.
In IEDM, we reused EXPO for describing abstract and physical concepts linked to
the various features of an irradiation experiment, from the definition of its requirements
to the representation of its numerical experimental results. For example, we used the
class expo:AdminInfoExperiment for representing the administrative infor-
mation of an irradiation experiment.  Yet, to ensure compatibility with the potential
future enhancements of EXPO and other ontologies while ensuring also the compati-
bility with ontologies that are compliant with our three foundational ontologies (EXPO,
OM and FOAF), one important IEDM design decision was to never copy, override or
modify them. Instead, when more specific information was needed, we introduced

5
IEDM-specific variants of existing classes, using OWL namespaces to avoid ambigui-
ties. Thus, as an example, we created iedm:AdminInfoIrradiationExperi-
ment as a subclass of expo:AdminInfoExperiment, instead of directly updating
the later.
To represent the experimental quantities specifically used when handling irradiation
experiments, we relied on OM instead of EXPO. Entities such as om:Energy,
om:AbsorbedDose (a dose is the amount of radiation energy delivered to matter per
unit of mass) or om:Activity  (an activity is a number of atom decays per unit of
time) are fundamental concepts that appear in an irradiation experiment, and they exist
in OM.
Another essential notion for our ontology is the concept of user. The term user has a
broad definition and can be a group, an organization, or a person. Therefore, we em-
ployed the definition of foaf:Agent, which contains, as subclasses, all these three
types of entities.
Of course, the domain of irradiation experiments is larger than those covered by the
three foundational ontologies we used to integrate some of IEDM concepts. The second
phase of the IEDM development thus required introducing concepts more specific to
irradiation experiments per se. In this step, we followed a top-down approach: IE-
specific concepts are added as subclasses of the upper ontologies’ classes. For instance,
iedm:Element, denoting the notion of atoms, is a subclass of expo:Object, and
we added the notion of iedm:RelativisticMomentum
or iedm:Fluence.
We also added new relations, i.e., superclasses created via IE-specific OWL object
properties. For example, the constraint iedm:hasResult some iedm:Cumulat-
edQuantity is a superclass of the class iedm:IrradiationExperiment,
which is, in fine, the only top-level new class introduced by IEDM.
During the integration of IEDM with the upper ontologies, we came across several
issues. One of them was that a concept could appear in more than one of the three upper
ontologies (e.g., expo:Quantity and om:Quantity). In that case, we decided to
use the concept whose definition better fit our model. We also noticed cases where two
concepts were in fact complementary to each other (e.g., expo:Agent and
foaf:Agent), and hence we decided to create another IEDM class (iedm:User)
that would be the subclass of both, taking advantage of OWL multiple inheritance for
classes. Finally, to simplify the handling of IEDM-related instances, we only added one
IEDM-specific data property, namely iedm:hasValue, which can be used at the
OWL-instance level in a polymorphic fashion to assign data values to instances, for
instance to specify actual numerical results (otherwise, as often, the OWL-generated
label string is enough to represent the pertinent data).
4
IEDM Ontology Core Structure
In this section, we highlight, analyze, and explain the core entities and relations that
characterize IEDM. Obviously, most of the entities that are described revolve around
the Irradiation Experiment class (iedm:IrradiationExperiment). However,

6
for easier comprehension, we start our description from the Irradiation Experiment Ob-
ject class (iedm:IrradiationExperimentObject) and radiation field
(iedm:RadiationField), which represent the key elements of an IE, and we build
up our description to the iedm:IrradiationExperiment class (see Fig. 1).
4.1
Radiation Field
A radiation field (iedm:RadiationField) is necessary in order to perform an ir-
radiation experiment. An iedm:RadiationField can be composed of particles
(iedm:Particle) of the same type (iedm:SingularField) or more
(iedm:MixedField).
4.2
Irradiation Experiment Object
An iedm:IrradiationExperimentObject object is a subclass of expo:Ob-
ject; it represents an object of the irradiation facility infrastructure that is exposed to
an iedm:RadiationField or an object that is under test. A Device Under Test
(DUT) during an irradiation experiment is an instance of iedm:DUT. The purpose of
performing an irradiation experiment is that the DUTs reach some target cumulated
quantity (iedm:CumulatedQuantity), which is a subclass of iedm:Dosi-
metricQuantity.  Two of the most common cumulated quantities in irradiation
experiments are the absorbed dose (iedm:AbsorbedDose) or fluence
(iedm:Fluence), which are both included in our model.
4.3
Irradiation Experiment
An Irradiation Experiment (iedm:IrradiationExperiment) denotes a whole
experiment where DUTs are exposed under a specific iedm:RadiationField. An
instance of iedm:IrradiationExperiment has some explicit detailed specifi-
cations, which describe experimental methods, and includes a plan of actions that is
defined by EXPO as expo:ProcedureExecuteExperiment. In IEDM, we ex-
tend this class with three subclasses. The first one is the iedm:PassiveStand-
ardIrradiation, where an iedm:DUT is simply put into a iedm:Radiation-
Field. The second class is iedm:PassiveCustomIrradiation, for which
very specific iedm:TechnicalRequirements have to be specified and imple-
mented by the experimenter. Finally, iedm:ActiveIrradiation represents the
third category and includes experiments requiring an active data acquisition (DAQ)
device and, typically, the usage of a readout system during the experiment execution.
Each iedm:IrradiationExperiment instance belongs to one category of
expo:ProcedureExecuteExperiment, which is defined by the OWL expres-
sion iedm:hasIrradiationCategory exactly 1 expo:ProcedureEx-
ecuteExperiment. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the iedm:IrradiationExperi-
ment class has several relations represented as superclass expressions (e.g.,

7
expo:HasPart exactly 1 iedm:AdminInfoIrradiationExperi-
ment).
4.4
DUT Irradiation
The DUT Irradiation class (iedm:DUTirradiation) refers to a specific irradiation
experiment related to a DUT. In contrast to iedm:IrradiationExperiment, this
class depends on one and only one iedm:DUT, and it can be considered as part of an
iedm:IrradiationExperiment. For this reason, we have defined the relation
iedm:IrradiationExperiment iedm:hasPart some iedm:DUTIrra-
diationExperiment.  The iedm:DUTIrradiationExperiment has two
specific points in time, from iedm:TimePosition, that denote the start and the
completion times of the radiation exposure.
4.5
Interaction Length and Occupancy
The parameters that define the degree of interaction of a particle with matter (interac-
tion lengths) [22] are important quantities for an irradiation experiment. In an actual
irradiation experiment as, for example, the one performed at CERN IRRAD (see Sec-
tion 5), these values need to be kept as low as possible since a high degree of interaction
(caused by too many DUTs placed in the iedm:RadiationField at the same time)
can produce an excess of secondary particles that, in turn, can perturb the result of an
iedm:IrradiationExperiment. These quantities, which are dependent upon
the DUT materials and radiation fields and are computed by a dedicated physics-simu-
lation program, are defined as iedm:InteractionLength and iedm:Inter-
actionLengthOccupancy.
4.6
Element, Compound, and Layer
In our model, we include the concepts of elements (iedm:Element), corresponding
to the basic entries of the Mendeleev periodic table, Compounds (iedm:Compound),
which are mixtures of elements, and Layers (iedm:Layer), which are used to de-
scribe the 1D structure of a typical DUT along the iedm:RadiationField main
propagation axis. These sets of information are necessary for properly computing quan-
tities related to the iedm:InteractionLength and iedm:Interaction-
LengthOccupancy.
4.7
User
An iedm:User is defined as a subclass of both expo:SentientAgent and
foaf:Agent. The expo:SentientAgent  defines a user that has rights but may
or may not have responsibilities and the ability to reason. If the latter is present, it can
also have cognitive abilities. A foaf:Agent can be a person, a group, or an organi-
zation. By specifying that an iedm:User has both of them as superclasses, we can

8
combine both concepts. In an irradiation facility, a user can have one or multiple roles
during an irradiation experiment. These IEDM-specific roles are represented by sub-
classes of expo:User, which is an expo:SubjectRole, viewed in EXPO as a
predicate, following SUMO's practice. In IEDM, we define the roles of irradiation fa-
cility coordinator (iedm:IrradiationFacilityCoordinator), irradiation
facility manager (iedm:IrradiationFacilityManager) and irradiation facil-
ity user (iedm:IrradiationFacilityUser). The class iedm:Irradia-
tionFacilityUser has two subclasses: the operator (iedm:Operator), who is
a person that performs the irradiation experiment, and the responsible person
(iedm:ResponsiblePerson), i.e., the person in charge of that specific irradiation
experiment.
Fig. 1. Graph representation in Protégé of the IEDM ontology, with the focus on the iedm:Ir-
radiationExperiment entity.
In the above subsections, we presented the main entities linked to an iedm:Irra-
diationExperiment. However, much more concepts exist in the IEDM ontology,
in particular regarding the OWL object properties that relate these classes together.
Therefore, we invite the interested reader to visit the IEDM Gitlab repository
(https://gitlab.cern.ch/bgkotse/iedm.git) that contains all the resources, including cop-
ies of the version of EXPO, OM and FOAF used at the time of the definition of IEDM.
All IEDM classes and relations are explained with proper annotations, definitions, and
comments for easier comprehension.
5
IRRAD Use Case
To assess the validity, coherence, and completeness of the IEDM ontology, we applied
it to the representation of a real irradiation experiment use case. CERN hosts the
IRRAD proton irradiation facility, a research irradiation infrastructure that relies on the

9
proton or ion beam delivered by the CERN Proton Synchrotron accelerator to perform
IEs [11]. One of the IEs performed during the 2018 PS run was FCC-Radmon [9]. With
the development of future accelerators such as the 100-Tev 80-kilometer-long Future
Circular Collider [12]) being proposed by CERN, and its related experiments, targeting
always higher performance, comes the need to monitor more intense radiation levels.
This calls for the development of new generations of radiation monitors that can cope
with these increased radiation levels. Thus, in the FCC-Radmon experiment, a new
technology of particle fluence monitor was tested against radiation damage levels that
could apply to a future accelerator such as the FCC [9].
Focusing mainly in the instances of the core classes (see Section 4), we aim to de-
scribe an IE with the concepts provided by IEDM. The name for this specific irradiation
experiment instance is iedm:FCC-Radmon.  For this experiment, we have created
the
iedm:FCC-RadmonIrradiation
instance. 
The
iedm:FCC-
RadmonIrradiation represents an experiment of only one iem:DUT, which in
this case is iedm:PCB5-run2017. For measuring, using a dedicated dosimeter, the
actual iedm:Fluence during the iedm:FCC-Radmon experiment in the irradia-
tion facility iedm:CERN_IRRAD, the iedm:Operator1 has installed an
iedm:IrradiationExperimentObject that, in this case, is the instance
iedm:Dosimeter004139. The iedm:FCC-RadmonIrradiation instance
has a specific start time (an iedm:TimePosition, which in our example is
iedm:_2018_03_30_12h_00), time at which the DUT is put inside the PS proton
radiation field (iedm:Protons_24GeV), and a specific end time, at which the radi-
ation exposure is completed: iedm:_2018_11_12_18h_00. The iedm:Cumu-
latedQuantity of interest, an iedm:Fluence in this experiment, is represented
by the instance iedm:_3e17_protons_per_square_cm and has as expo:
MeasurementError iem:_7_per_cent. (See Fig. 2). The complete use case
can be found in the online resources (https://gitlab.cern.ch/bgkotse/iedm.git).

10
Fig. 2. Graph representation in Protégé of the FCC-Radmon IE instance.
6
Future Work
As detailed in Section 1, the motivations for the development of IEDM are many, thus
leading to many possible future works, in addition to the maintenance and improve-
ments that this first version of IEDM surely deserves. Beyond its use as a knowledge
formalization foundation for the whole HEP IE community, a natural extension of the
IEDM project would be to model, beyond irradiation experiments, a whole irradiation
infrastructure, may be along the lines of the approach taken for designing ontologies
for other large organizations such as utilities [23].
Yet, our current vision for the future is more oriented towards practical applications
of IEDM. In fact, the conceptual model of IEDM has already been used as a guiding
aide during the manual development of the IRRAD Data Manager (IDM) system [24],
part of the AIDA-2020 project [13]. IDM has been successfully used for the handling
and management of the data coming from the CERN IRRAD IEs during all of 2018
(see Fig. 3). Inspired by the similarities between IDM and the structure of IEDM defi-
nitions, we believe that the IEDM ontology itself can be the basis for the automatic
generation of the user interface (UI) of data management systems for irradiation exper-
iments, thus significantly shortening the development time of IT data management sys-
tems such as IDM. This application would also be, we believe, of benefit to other irra-
diation facilities, which often manage their experiments not in a standardized manner.
 
There have already been a few attempts to link ontologies and user interface design
[25]. For our future work, we plan to provide a new approach in that regard, based on
translating the IEDM classes into Python classes using the Owlready2 package [26].
This package allows loading OWL ontology classes, properties and instances as Python

11
objects and manipulating them via Python code. By converting the IEDM entities into
Python classes, we can use the ontology as the model for UI projects that follow a
Model-View-Controller architecture (e.g., Django projects [27]). Our methodological
emphasis, during the development of IEDM, on the clean separation of concerns be-
tween different ontologies and the focus on object properties always declared as sub-
classes, which naturally map to the object-oriented programming notion of attributes,
should help streamline this translation process. Ultimately, a judicious design of IEDM-
like ontologies in other fields should enable the automatic generation of the UI required
by the corresponding data management systems.
Fig. 3. FCC-Radmon data as stored in IRRAD Data Manager.
7
Conclusion
We introduced IEDM, a new ontology for the data management of irradiation experi-
ments. Such an ontology can be used for the formalization and standardization of
knowledge related to irradiation experiments management, a concern for many of the
hundreds of irradiation facilities in the world. IEDM allows for knowledge sharing and
can be of great interest not only for the HEP scientific community, but also in other
scientific fields such as medicine, space, etc. as well as for industrial applications.
 
More specifically, in this paper we described the methodology applied to build
IEDM. Following a top-down approach, we based IEDM on three existing upper ontol-
ogies: EXPO, OM and FOAF. In a second step, these ontologies were extended and
enriched with concepts relevant to irradiation experiments. The key classes and rela-
tions have also been explained, and an example of the IEDM encoding of an actual
irradiation experiment, performed at the CERN IRRAD facility, is given, to illustrate

12
the main notions behind IEDM and provide some evidence for the validity of its spec-
ification. Finally, we discussed the intriguing possibilities of using IEDM as a model
for the automatic generation of user interfaces.
IEDM is open-source project and available at: https://gitlab.cern.ch/bgkotse/iedm.git.
