Optimal by Design: Model-Driven Synthesis of
Adaptation Strategies for Autonomous Systems
Yehia Elrakaiby
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg, Luxembourg

Paola Spoletini
Kennesaw State University
Georgia, USA

Bashar Nuseibeh
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK

Abstract—Many software systems have become too large and
complex to be managed efﬁciently by human administrators,
particularly when they operate in uncertain and dynamic envi-
ronments and require frequent changes. Requirements-driven
adaptation techniques have been proposed to endow systems
with the necessary means to autonomously decide ways to satisfy
their requirements. However, many current approaches rely on
general-purpose languages, models and/or frameworks to design,
develop and analyze autonomous systems. Unfortunately, these
tools are not tailored towards the characteristics of adaptation
problems in autonomous systems. In this paper, we present
OPTIMAL BY DESIGN (OBD ), a framework for model-based
requirements-driven synthesis of optimal adaptation strategies for
autonomous systems. OBD proposes a model (and a language)
for the high-level description of the basic elements of self-
adaptive systems, namely the system, capabilities, requirements
and environment. Based on those elements, a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) is constructed to compute the optimal strategy
or the most rewarding system behavior. Furthermore, this deﬁnes
a reﬂex controller that can ensure timely responses to changes.
One novel feature of the framework is that it beneﬁts both
from goal-oriented techniques, developed for requirement elic-
itation, reﬁnement and analysis, and synthesis capabilities and
extensive research around MDPs, their extensions and tools. Our
preliminary evaluation results demonstrate the practicality and
advantages of the framework.
Index Terms—Autonomous Systems, Markov Decision Pro-
cess, Controller Synthesis, Optimal Strategies, Adaptive Systems,
Requirements Engineering, Model-driven Engineering, Domain
Modeling Language
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous systems such as unmanned vehicles and robots
play an increasingly relevant role in our societies. Many factors
contribute to the complexity in the design and development
of those systems. First, they typically operate in dynamic
and uncontrollable environments [1]–[5]. Therefore, they must
continuously adapt their conﬁguration in response to changes,
both in their operating environment and in themselves. Since
the frequency of change cannot be controlled, decision-making
must be almost instantaneous to ensure timely responses.
From a design and management perspective, it is desirable to
minimize the effort needed to design the system and to enable
its runtime updating and maintenance.
A promising technique to address those challenges is
requirements-driven adaptation that endow systems with the
necessary means to autonomously operate based on their
requirements. Requirements are prescriptive statements of
intent to be satisﬁed by cooperation of the agents forming
the system [6]. They say what the system will do and not
how it will do it [7]. Hence, software engineers are relieved
from the onerous task of prescribing explicitly how to adapt
the system when changes occur. Many current requirements-
driven adaptation techniques [8], [9] follow the Monitor-
Analyze-Plan-Execute-Knowledge (MAPE-K) paradigm [10],
which usually works as follows [11]: the Monitor monitors the
managed system and its environment, and updates the content
of the Knowledge element accordingly; the Analyse activity
uses the up-to-date knowledge to determine whether there is a
need for adaptation of the managed element according to the
adaptation goals that are available in the knowledge element.
If adaptation is required, the Plan activity puts together a plan
that consists of one or more adaptation actions. The adaptation
plan is then executed by the Execute phase.
This approach has two main limitations in highly-dynamic
operational environments. First, it tends to be myopic since
the system adapts in response to changes without anticipating
what the subsequent adaptation needs will be [5] and, thus,
it does not guarantee the optimality of the overall behavior
of the autonomous system. This is particularly crucial for
systems that have to operate continuously without interrup-
tion over long periods of time, e.g., cyber-physical systems.
Second, the time to plan adaptations could make timely
reaction to changes impossible, particularly in fast changing
environments. Therefore, an approach that enables an almost
instantaneous reactions to changes is needed.
In this paper, we propose the Optimal by Design (OBD )
framework as a ﬁrst step towards dealing with the aforemen-
tioned challenges. OBD supports a model-based approach to
simplify the high-level design and description of autonomous
systems, their capabilities, requirements and environment.
Based on these high-level models, OBD constructs a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) that can then be solved (possibly
using state-of-the-art probabilistic model checkers) to produce
optimal strategies for the autonomous system. These strategies
deﬁne optimal reﬂex controllers that ensure the ability of
autonomous systems to behave optimally and almost instanta-
neously to changes in itself or its environment.
Several previous works [5], [12]–[14] encode adaptation
problems using general-purpose languages such as those pro-
posed by probabilistic model checkers, e.g., PRISM [15].
Unfortunately, these languages do not offer primitives tailored
arXiv:2001.08525v1  [cs.SE]  16 Jan 2020

to the design and analysis of autonomous systems. This makes
them unsuitable to adequately describe the software require-
ments [6] of the autonomous system and the environment in
which it operates. Examples of limitations of these languages
resolved in this paper through OBD are the Markovian as-
sumption [16] and the implicit-event model [17].
In a nutshell, OBD introduces a novel Domain Speciﬁc
Modeling Language (DSL) for the description of autonomous
systems, its environment and requirements. The semantics of
the DSL is then deﬁned in terms of a translation into a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) model to enable the synthesis of
optimal controllers for the autonomous system. This separation
between the model (i.e. the DSL) and its underlying compu-
tational paradigm (i.e. MDP), brings several important advan-
tages. First, the level of abstraction at which systems have to
be designed is raised, simplifying their modeling by software
engineers. Second, requirements become ﬁrst-class entities,
making it possible to elicit them using traditional requirements
engineering techniques [6], [18]–[20] and to beneﬁt from goal
reﬁnement, analysis and veriﬁcation techniques developed for
goal modeling languages. Moreover, this approach clariﬁes the
limitations of the underlying computational model, namely
the aforementioned Markovian assumption and the implicit-
event model, and permits the identiﬁcation and implementation
of extensions necessary to overcome those limitations and
support the required analysis, veriﬁcation and reasoning tasks.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II presents a motivating example, which will be used as
a running example throughout the paper. Section III presents
an overview of the OBD framework. Section IV introduces
the framework’s model and language. Section V provides the
semantics of OBD models by presenting their translation into
MDPs. Section VIpresents an evaluation of the framework.
Section VII discusses limitations and threats to validity. Fi-
nally, Section VIII discusses related work and Section IX
concludes the paper and presents future work.
II. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
Our running example, inspired by one of the examples
in [21], is the restaurant FoodX. Serving at FoodX is
RoboX, an autonomous mobile robot. The restaurant com-
prises three separate sections: (1) the kitchen, (2) the dining
area and (3) the ofﬁce. RoboX is equipped with various
sensors to monitor its environment and actuators to move
around the restaurant and perform different tasks.
Several challenges must be dealt with in order to develop
a controller for RoboX. First, there are events that occur
in the environment beyond RoboX’s control. For example,
a client may request to order or a weak battery signal may
be detected. There is also the uncertainty in action effects
caused by imperfect actuators, e.g. moving to the kitchen from
the dining room could sometimes fail, possibly due to the
movement of customers in the restaurant. RoboX may also
have multiple (possibly conﬂicting) requirements: it may have
to serve customers’ food while it is still hot but also has to
keep its batteries charged at all times. Thus, RoboX should
be able to prioritize the satisfaction of its requirements, taking
into account the effects of their satisfaction over the long-term.
It is also desirable that RoboX acts proactively. For instance,
waiting in the dining area should be preferred to staying in, for
example, the kitchen if doing so would increase the likelihood
of it getting orders from customers.
Since the time and frequency of change in the environment
cannot be controlled, enabling immediate and optimal re-
sponses to changes is highly desirable. In reactive approaches,
classical planning (e.g., STRIPS [22] and PDDL [23] plan-
ners) is often used to determine the best course of action after
detection of change. This approach has important limitations.
For example, imagine a situation where, while RoboX is
moving to serve a customer in the dining room, a weak battery
signal is detected. In this case, RoboX can either halt the
execution of the current plan until a new plan is computed or
continue pursuing serving the customer, having no guarantees
that this plan is still the optimal course of action. If the
frequency of changes in the environment is high, then the
autonomous system may get permanently stuck computing
new plans, or be always following sub-optimal plans.
This example highlights the ﬁve requirements for the soft-
ware to control RoboX which we explore in this paper:
1) Handling of uncertainty in event occurrences and effects;
2) Proactive and long-term behavior optimization to con-
sider the possible evolution of the system when deter-
mining the best course of action;
3) Fast and optimal response to changes to ensure their
ability to operate in highly dynamic environments;
4) Support of requirements trade-offs and prioritisation;
5) Support of requirements-driven adaptation to raise the
level of abstraction of system design.
III. FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW
OBD is a framework for the model-based requirements-
driven synthesis of optimal adaptation strategies for au-
tonomous systems. The model-based approach raises the level
of abstraction at which systems need to be described and
simpliﬁes model maintenance and update. Adaptation in OBD
is requirements-driven, enabling systems to autonomously
determine the best way to pursue their objectives. Based on
OBD models, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are con-
structed. Solving those MDPs determines the system’s optimal
strategy, i.e., the behavior that maximizes the satisfaction
of requirements. In a strategy, the best adaptation action
that should be taken in every possible (anticipated) future
evolution of the system is identiﬁed, eliminating the need to
re-analyze and re-plan after every change and enabling almost
instantaneous reactions. Indeed, an optimal strategy deﬁnes a
reﬂex controller that can react optimally and in a timely way.
Figure 1 depicts an overview of the framework, which in-
cludes a model (and a language) to describe the basic elements
of self-adaptive systems [11]: the environment refers to the part
of the external world with which the system interacts and in
which the effects of the system will be observed and evaluated;
the requirements or adaptation goals are the concerns that need

Environment
Adaptation 
Goals/Requirements
Sensors
Actuators
Managed 
System
Optimal 
Adaptation
Strategies
ObD
Model and 
Language
MDPObD
control
sense
eﬀect
has
models
ObD Framework
synthesise 
construct 
Fig. 1. Framework Overview
to be satisﬁed; the managed system represents the application
code or capabilities/actuators that can be leveraged to satisfy
the requirements. Based on these elements, the controller or
the managing system ensures that the adaptation goals are
satisﬁed in the managed system, is synthesized.
IV. OBD MODELING LANGUAGE
The computation of optimal strategies is based on a do-
main model. A domain model speciﬁes the environment,
the capabilities of the autonomous system (or agent) and
its requirements. Formally, an OBD model (Dr) is a tuple
⟨SV, AD, ED, RQ, sc⟩where:
• SV is a ﬁnite set of state variables with ﬁnite domains.
State variables describe the possible states, i.e., the con-
ﬁguration of the software system and the environment;
• AD is a ﬁnite set of action descriptions representing the
means that are available to the agent to change the system
state, i.e. update the state variables SV;
• ED is a ﬁnite set of event descriptions to represent the
uncontrollable occurrences in the environment, i.e., events
that change the state beyond the agent’s control.
• RQ is a ﬁnite set of requirements, i.e., the (operational-
isable) goals that the software system should satisfy;
• sc is the initial state of the system determined by the
agent’s monitoring components and sensors.
An OBD model has a corresponding textual representation
called its domain description. It is formalized in the following
using a variant of Backus-Naur Form (BNF): the names
enclosed in angular brackets identify non-terminals, names in
bold or enclosed within quotation marks are terminals, optional
items are enclosed in square brackets, | is ”or”, items repeated
one or more times are sufﬁxed with + and parentheses are used
to group items together.
A. State, Actions and Events
State Variables (SV): deﬁne the possible states, i.e.,
conﬁgurations of the software system and the environment.
A variable x ∈Xs is a multi-valued variable with a corre-
sponding domain, denoted dom(x). Every value y ∈dom(x)
is a conﬁguration of x. A state variable is deﬁned as follows:
⟨SV ⟩::= Variable ⟨ID⟩domain “{” ⟨V ALS⟩“}”
⟨V ALS⟩::= ⟨ID⟩| ⟨ID⟩“, ” ⟨V ALS⟩
where ⟨ID⟩is text, i.e., a concatenation of letters, digits
and symbols. For example, we can represent the location of
RoboX and the status of tables at the restaurant using the
following variables:
Variable location domain {atTable1, atTable2, atTable3,
atTable4, inDining room, inKitchen, inOffice}
Variable tablei
(∀1 ≤i ≤4)
domain {empty, occupied, requested, received,
in preparation, ready, collected, delivered, paid}
The variable location deﬁnes the possible locations of
RoboX. The variables tablei represent the status of tables:
when there are no customers at tablei, then tablei=empty.
When a customer arrives and sits at the table, tablei be-
comes occupied. Figure 2 depicts the update of the value of
tablei with the occurrence of the robot actions {get order,
give order, collect order, deliver
order, clean table} and
the exogenous events {customer arrives, customer orders,
kitchen notiﬁcation, customer pays}. In contrast to actions,
exogenous events have an occurrence probability denoting
their likelihood in a given situation. Actions, on the other
hand, have a cost that represent the effort or price of their
execution. Both exogenous events and actions do not have to
be deterministic, i.e., their execution can have various effects,
each with a different probability (in pink in the ﬁgure).
Variables which are not explicitly deﬁned are considered to
be boolean, i.e., their domain is {tt, ff}. The notations id and
!id are used as shortcuts for id=tt and id=ff, respectively. The
following declaration deﬁnes a boolean variable to represent
that customers sitting at a table had looked at the menu.
Variable lookedi
(∀1 ≤i ≤4)
Actions (AD): are means that are available to the agent to
change the system state. An action description is an expression
⟨AD⟩that is deﬁned as follows:
⟨AD⟩::= Action ⟨ID⟩⟨PEFFS⟩+ [cost ⟨N⟩]
⟨PEFFS⟩::= if ⟨CND⟩effects ⟨EFFS⟩+
⟨EFFS⟩::= “⟨”⟨EFF⟩+ [prob ⟨P⟩]“⟩”
⟨CND⟩::= ⟨ATOM⟩| ⟨BL⟩| “!”⟨CND⟩| ⟨CND⟩
“&” ⟨CND⟩| ⟨CND⟩“||” ⟨CND⟩| “(”⟨CND⟩“)”
⟨EFF⟩::= ⟨ID⟩“=”⟨ID⟩
⟨ATOM⟩::= ⟨ID⟩| “!”⟨ID⟩| ⟨ID⟩“=”⟨ID⟩
⟨BL⟩::= “true” | “false”
Actions can have a cost representing the difﬁculty level or
effort necessary to execute it. Action costs are useful to trade-
off the satisfaction of requirements with the required effort
and, when not speciﬁed, are set to zero. In the following
example, the cost of moving to tablei is set to 10.
Action move to kitchen if location=inDining room
effects ⟨location=inKitchen prob 0.8⟩
⟨location=inDining room prob 0.2⟩
cost 10
Note that an expression ⟨AD⟩is well-formed only if (1)
its various ⟨CND⟩are disjoint, i.e., they cannot be satisﬁed

empty1
occupied1
requested1
received1
in_preparation1
ready1
collected1
delivered1
paid1
[customer 
arrives] 
: 0.1
[customer 
orders]
<pass_order> 
[kitchen 
notiﬁcation] 
<collect_order> 
<deliver_order> 
[customer 
pays]
<clean_table> :
20
<get_order> :
10 
[Exogeneous Event] : 
Occurrence Probability
<Adaptation Action> :
Cost
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.4
Fig. 2. A simpliﬁed model of serving a table at restaurant FoodX.
at the same time and (2) for every ⟨PEFFS⟩, the sum of
the probabilities ⟨P⟩of its subexpressions ⟨EFFS⟩is one,
i.e., P|⟨EF F S⟩|
i=1
⟨P⟩= 1. Note that we allow P|⟨EF F S⟩|
i=1
⟨P⟩
to be less than one. In this case, action execution has no
effect with a probability of 1 −P|⟨EF F S⟩|
i=1
⟨P⟩. For ex-
ample, this makes it possible to remove the second effect,
⟨location = inDining room prob 0.2⟩, from the previous
action description without affecting the action semantics.
Events (EV): represent occurrences that are not con-
trolled by the agent. They may happen in the environment
at any moment. An event description is expressed as follows:
⟨EV ⟩::= Event ⟨ID⟩⟨PEFFS⟩+
⟨PEFFS⟩::= if ⟨CND⟩[occur prob ⟨P⟩] effects ⟨EFFS⟩+
Events are conditional and can occur with a different
probability depending on the situation. For instance, we can
represent that customers may order with a higher probability
if they had looked at the menu as follows:
Event request to orderi
(∀1 ≤i ≤4)
if tablei=occupied & lookedi occur prob 0.9
effects ⟨tablei=requested⟩
if tablei=occupied & !lookedi occur prob 0.2
effects ⟨tablei=requested⟩
B. Requirements
Requirements represent the objectives of the autonomous
system. Every requirement is associated with a reward denot-
ing its importance. OBD currently supports fourteen require-
ment types, which build upon and extend the goal patterns of
the KAOS goal taxonomy [24]. Requirements are expressions:
⟨RE⟩::= ReqID ⟨ID⟩⟨REP⟩
⟨REP⟩::= ((⟨UA⟩| ⟨UM⟩| ⟨CA⟩| ⟨DEA⟩| ⟨DFA⟩| ⟨CM⟩|
⟨DEM⟩| ⟨DFM⟩⟨PM⟩| ⟨PDEM⟩| ⟨PDFM⟩) [reward N]) |
((⟨RPM⟩| ⟨RPDEM⟩| ⟨RPDFM⟩) [reward once N])
A requirement’s type is determined based on whether it: is
conditional (C) or unconditional (U); is a maintain (M) or
achieve (A) requirement: duration of maintain requirements
can be time-limited and its compliance can be best-effort (P)
or strict (PR), i.e., during its duration the requirement does
not have to be “always” satisﬁed; has a deadline (D), which
can be exact (E), i.e., the requirement has to be satisﬁed at
the deadline, or ﬂexible (F), the requirement has to be satisﬁed
within the deadline. Due to space limitations, we only present
unconditional, conditional and achieve deadline requirements.
Unconditional Requirements: denote conditions that have to
be always maintained or (repeatedly) achieved.
⟨UA⟩::= achieve ⟨CND⟩
⟨UM⟩::= maintain ⟨CND⟩
For example, a ⟨UM⟩requirement to remain in the dining
room or an ⟨UA⟩to ensure that table1 repeatedly pays.
ReqID req1 maintain location=inDining room
ReqID req2 achieve table1=paid
Conditional Requirements: should be satisﬁed only after
some given conditions are true. They can have a cancellation
condition after which their satisfaction is no longer required.
⟨CA⟩:: =achieve ⟨CND⟩if ⟨CND⟩[unless ⟨CND⟩]
⟨CM⟩:: =maintain⟨CND⟩if⟨CND⟩[unless ⟨CND⟩]
For example, RoboX may have to get the order from tablei
only if tablei requests to order, or it should remain in the
dining room after it gets table1 until table1’s order is served.
ReqID req3 achieve tablei=received
if table1 = requested reward 100
ReqID req4 maintain location = inDining room
if table1=requested unless table1=received reward 100
Deadline Requirements: must be satisﬁed after an exact
number of time instants or within a period of time:
⟨DEA⟩::= achieve ⟨CND⟩after N+ if ⟨CND⟩[unless ⟨CND⟩]
⟨DFA⟩::= achieve ⟨CND⟩within N+ if ⟨CND⟩[unless ⟨CND⟩]
For example, RoboX may have to be at table1 within at
most 4 time units after table1 requests to place an order, or it
may have to be at the kitchen after exactly 4 time units after
it receives a notiﬁcation that food is ready.
ReqID req5 achieve location=atTable1 within 4
if table1=requested reward 100
ReqID req6 achieve location=inKitchen after 4
if table1=ready reward 100
In the following, we use the terms name, required condition,
activation condition, cancellation condition and deadline to
refer to the parts of a requirement expression that come after
‘ReqID’, ‘achieve’ or ‘maintain’, ‘if’, ‘unless’ and ‘after’ or
‘within’ parts of the requirement expression respectively.

V. CONTROLLER SYNTHESIS
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are mathematical
frameworks for modeling and controlling stochastic dynamical
systems [17]. Informally, MDPs may be viewed as Labeled
Transition Systems (LTSs) where transitions are probabilistic
and can be associated to rewards. Intuitively, solving an
MDP means ﬁnding an optimal strategy, i.e., determining the
actions to execute in every state in order to maximize the
total expected rewards. In the following, we ﬁrst introduce
MDPs (Section V-A), then we discuss the main steps needed
to construct an MDP starting from an OBD domain model
(Section V-B).
A. Introduction to MDPs with Rewards
A reward MDP is a tuple ⟨S, A, T , R, γ⟩, where:
• S is the ﬁnite set of all possible states of the system, also
called the state space;
• A is a ﬁnite set of actions;
• T : S × A × D(S) where D(S) is the set of probability
distributions over states S. A distribution d(S) ∈D(S) :
S →[0, 1] is a function such that Σs∈Sd(s) = 1. The
transition relation T (si, a, d) speciﬁes the probabilities
d(sj) of going from state si after execution of action a
to states sj. In the following, we will use the (matrix)
notation Pra(si, sj) to represent the probability d(sj) of
going to sj after execution of a in si;
• R : S × A × S →R is a reward function specifying a
ﬁnite numeric reward value R(si, a, sj) when the system
goes from state si to state sj as a result of executing
action a. Thus, rewards may be viewed as incentives for
executing actions. We will use Ra(si, sj) to represent
R(si, a, sj).
Formally, a (memoryless) strategy is a mapping π : S →A
from states to actions. An optimal strategy, denoted π∗, is
the one which maximizes the expected linear additive utility,
formally deﬁned as V π(s) = E[P∞
t′=0 γt′Rπs
t+t′]. Intuitively,
this utility states that a strategy is as good as the amount of
discounted reward it is expected to yield [25]. Setting γ = 1
expresses indifference of the agent to the time in which a
particular reward arrives; setting it to a value 0 ≤γ < 1
reﬂects various degrees of preference to rewards earned sooner.
MDPs have a key property: solving an MDP ﬁnds an
optimal strategy π∗, which is deterministic, Markovian and
stationary. This means that computed strategies are indepen-
dent of both past actions/states and time, which ensures their
compactness and practicality. Furthermore, there exist practical
algorithms for solving MDPs, e.g., value iteration and policy
iteration. Both of these algorithms can be shown to perform
in polynomial time for ﬁxed γ [26].
MDPs with memoryless strategies, depicted in Figure 3
(rounds are states and rounded squares are events), have
however the following restrictions:
The implicit-event action model [17]: MDPs do not sup-
port an explicit representation of exogenous events. Figure 4
shows exogenous events (in non-rounded squares connected
with pointed line to states) that can occur with certain oc-
currence probabilities (in green in the ﬁgure) in every state.
Exogenous events are an essential element to model aspects of
the environment that are not controllable by the agent. They
are the means to represent, for example, that customers can
arrive at the restaurant or that they may request to order.
The Markovian assumption [16], [27]: in MDP, reward
and transition functions have to be Markovian, i.e., they
can not refer to the history of previous states or transitions.
Figure 5 shows an example of a non-Markovian reward
(described on the dashed transition), i.e., one that is entailed
only if certain conditions are satisﬁed on the history of states
and transitions. The support of non-Markovian rewards is
necessary to associate transitions that satisfy requirements [6],
which are often conditional and can have deadlines, with
rewards.
B. Overview of the Construction of MDPs from OBD Models
The construction of MDPs based on OBD models1 relies on
the following intuitions:
• the states and the (probabilistic) transitions of the LTS
behind the MDP are constructed based on the variables,
actions and events in the OBD domain model;
• the rewards in the MDP are associated with transitions
that lead to the satisfaction of requirements.
Dealing with the Markovian assumption: Building an
MDP from an OBD model requires the satisfaction of the
Markovian assumption. In the context of this work, deter-
mining the satisfaction of requirements, with the exception of
unconditional requirements, requires to keep track of history.
To solve this issue, we extend the state space to store infor-
mation that is relevant to determine the status of requirements
in every state. This is done by associating every requirement
with a state variable, whose value reﬂects the status of the
requirement in the state2. The value of those variables, called
requirements variables, are updated whenever their corre-
sponding requirement is activated, canceled, satisﬁed, etc.
Requirements Variables RV are special variables whose do-
main represents all the possible statuses of their corresponding
requirement. The statuses of requirements and their update
after requirement activation, cancellation, satisfaction, etc are
deﬁned in the transitions part of Figures 8 and 9. On the
other hand, the rewards part deﬁnes transitions that satisfy
requirements and, consequently, entail a reward.
For example, consider a conditional achieve requirement
CA of the form ReqID m achieve S if A unless Z reward r.
This requirement is associated with a requirement variable
m whose domain includes the requirement’s possible statutes
{I, R}. The transitions part of Figure 9 shows the evolution
of CA requirements when their activation, cancellation and
required conditions occur. It is to be read as follows: when
the status is I and the activation condition A is true, then the
1The formal details can be found in https://goo.gl/aoLh7i.
2This technique is inspired by the state-based approach in [16] to handle
non-Markovian rewards, but is tailored to support requirements in OBD .

s2
s1
0.8
0.36
0.3
0.64
a2
a1
a1
a2
0.1
0.9
0.95
0.05
+5
-3
+5
Fig. 3. Basic MDP model
s2
s1
a2
a1
a1
a2
e1
e2
e1
0.3
0.7
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.5
Fig. 4. Support of Exogenous Events
s2
s1
a2
a1
a1
a2
+5 if s2 visited two time units ago
Fig. 5. Support of Non-Markovian Rewards
status is updated to R. Analogously, if the status is R and the
cancellation condition Z or the required condition S is true,
then the status is updated to I. The updating of a state variable
as just described enables the deﬁnition of a Markovian reward
when requirements are satisﬁed. The rewards part of Figure 9
shows transitions of CA requirements that entail rewards. This
ﬁgure should be read as follows: a requirement m of type CA
induces a reward r on a transition from a state i to a state j
iff, in i, the required condition of m does not hold and the
status of m is R; while S holds in j.
Dealing with the absence of exogenous events: OBD
models have explicit-event models whereas MDPs impose
an implicit-event action model. To overcome this limitation,
we exploit the technique proposed in [17] which enables
computation of implicit-event action transition matrices from
explicit-event models. The use of this technique assumes the
following rules: 1) the action in which exogenous events are
folded, always occurs before it and 2) events are commutative,
i.e., their order of occurrence from an initial state produces the
same ﬁnal state. Under those assumptions, which are satisﬁed
in our running example, the implicit-event transition matrix
Pra(si, sj) of an action a is computed in two steps: ﬁrst,
the transition matrix of a (without exogenous events) and
the transition matrix and occurrence vector of every event
e are computed separately; then, those elements are used to
construct the implicit-event matrix of every action a. This
process is illustrated in the following section using an example.
Note that it is possible to integrate other (more complex)
interleaving semantics into the framework if necessary by
changing the technique used to compute the implicit-event
transition matrix [17].
C. MDP Construction Process
An OBD MDP MDPr = ⟨S, A, T , R, γ⟩is constructed
from a model Dr = ⟨SV, AV, ED, RQ, s0⟩as follows.
States S: represent all possible conﬁgurations of the system
and the environment. A state is a speciﬁc conﬁguration, i.e.,
an assignment of every state variable in SV and requirement
variable in RV a value from their domain.
For example, consider a domain model Dr comprising of
two boolean variables x and y and one requirement m of type
CA. The set of states S constructed from Dr comprises all
possible conﬁgurations of its state and requirement variables.
Thus, S includes the eight states in Figure 6.
x=tt y=tt
x=tt y=ff
x=ff y=tt
x=ff y=ff
m=I
x=tt y=tt
x=tt y=ff
x=ff y=tt
x=ff y=ff
m=R
m=R
m=R
m=R
expanded state
base state
s0
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
s7
m=I
m=I
m=I
Fig. 6. Constructed States
x=ff y=tt
m=R
x=tt y=tt
m=I
s2
s4
a
0.8
0.2
b
noop
b
a
noop
(1)
(2)
x=ff y=tt
m=R
x=tt y=tt
m=I
s2
s4
a
0.832
noop
b
0.84
0.16
b
0.84
0.16
0.16
0.84
o.168
a
noop
Fig. 7. (1) action transitions, (2) implicit-event action transitions.
Actions A: are all the actions appearing in AV of the
domain model Dr extended with the empty action noop, which
produces no effects and has no cost, i.e., A = AV ∪{noop}.
The transition matrix T : is computed in two steps: ﬁrst,
the transition matrix of a (without exogenous events) and
the transition matrix and occurrence vector of every event
e are computed separately; then, those elements are used to
construct the implicit-event matrix of every action a.
For example, consider that our domain model Dr includes
one probabilistic action a, one deterministic action b and one
requirement m, which are deﬁned as follows:
Action a if !x effects ⟨x prob 0.8⟩⟨y prob 0.2⟩cost 10
Action b if x effects ⟨!x⟩cost 5
ReqID m achieve x if !x reward 100
Figure 7(1) shows the transitions caused by the execution of
actions in the states s2 and s4. For example, since the condition
!x is satisﬁed in s2, the execution of a in s2 produces x with
a probability of 0.8 and produces y with a probability of 0.2.
Notice that after the execution of a, the base state of both
s0 and s4 could be the result of executing action a in s2.
However, since the execution of a satisﬁes the requirement
m, i.e., makes x true, only the expanded state of s4 satisﬁes
the state transition model of the CA requirement m shown in
Figure 9 since m = I. Thus, the execution of a in state s2
leads to s0 with a probability 0.8, i.e., Pra(s2, s4) = 0.8. The
execution of b and noop do not change the state.
Events are similar to actions with the exception that they
have occurrence probabilities, do not have a cost and do not

(UM) 
ReqID m maintain S reward r
(UA) 
ReqID m achieve S reward r
Rewards
ӚS
6
S
6
r
r
Fig. 8. Unconditional Requirements States and Rewards
advance time since they occur concurrently with actions. Let
e be an event deﬁned similarly to a as follows:
Event e if !x occur prob 0.2 effects ⟨x prob 0.8⟩⟨y prob 0.2⟩
In this case, the transition matrix of e is similar to that of a,
i.e., Pre = Pra. The occurrence vector Oe of e represents
the probability of occurrence of e in every state. Since the
condition ¬x is satisﬁed in the states s2, s3, s6 and s7,
Oe(s2) = Oe(s3) = Oe(s6) = Oe(s7) = 0.2. Figure 7(2)
shows the implicit-event transitions for the states s2 and s4: in
s2, event e may occur with a probability of 0.2, thus its effects
are factored in action transitions as shown in Figure 7(2); in
s4, the condition of e is not satisﬁed and, therefore, it does
not affect the computed transitions for the actions noop and
a. Due to the interleaving semantics where exogenous events
(may) occur after action execution, the transition caused by b
in s4 is affected due to the possibility that e occurs after b.
Construction of the reward matrix R:: Transition rewards
are affected by: (1) action costs and (2) satisfaction of require-
ments. In particular, a transition reward Ra(si, sj) is the sum
of rewards obtained due to satisfaction of requirements on
the transition from si to sj minus the cost of a. For example,
consider the transition from s2 to s4 caused by the execution of
a in s2. On this transition, the requirement m is satisﬁed. Since
the cost of executing a is 10, this transition will be associated
with a reward of 100 −10 = 90, i.e., Ra(s2, s4) = 90.
D. Requirements Transitions and Rewards
This section explains the key intuitions behind the modeling
of requirements in OBD and their semantics.
Unconditional Achieve and Maintain Rewards: A main-
tain requirement deﬁnes a condition that should be kept
satisﬁed. Therefore, a reward is given to the agent whenever
this condition holds over two consecutive states, see, e.g.,
⟨UM⟩in Figure 8. On the other hand, an achieve requirement
deﬁnes a condition that should be reached. Therefore, the agent
is rewarded when this condition becomes true, i.e., when it
does not hold in a state but holds in the next, e.g., see ⟨UA⟩.
Conditional Requirements: The satisfaction of require-
ments is often necessary only after some condition A becomes
true, see for instance ⟨CA⟩and ⟨CM⟩in Figure 9. Those
requirements are therefore modeled as state machines which
are initially in an initial or inactive state I. When their
activation condition A occurs, a transition to a new state R
occurs. In a state R, the requirement is said to be in force, i.e.,
its satisfaction is required. While in R, the reward r is obtained
whenever the agent manages to comply with the required
condition S. If the cancellation conditions Z is detected while
the requirement is in force, a transition to I occurs, i.e., the
requirement is canceled and has no longer to be fulﬁlled.
Deadline Achieve Requirements: Requirements are some-
times associated with ﬁxed deadlines. Fixed deadlines can
represent either an exact time after which the agent should
comply with the requirement, see for example ⟨DEA⟩in
Figure 9; or a period of (discrete) time during which the agent
may comply at any moment, see for example ⟨DFA⟩. In both
cases, deadlines are modeled similarly. For example, consider
a requirement m having a deadline D. After m’s activation,
a transition to a state A(D) occurs. At every subsequent time
unit, a transition from a state A(X) to a state A(X −1) occurs
(unless X = 1). A transition entails the requirement’s reward
if the requirement is satisﬁed on this transition.
VI. EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present an empirical evaluation of
the framework by comparing the use of an OBD controller
to control RoboX in a simulated software environment of the
restaurant FoodX to a generic Monitor Analyze Plan Execute
(MAPE) controller (Section VI-A). The MAPE controller
relies on a Planning Domain Description Language (PDDL)
planner, similarly to state-of-the-art robotic systems such as
ROS [28]. Then, we present a qualitative comparison of OBD
with state-of-the-art probabilistic model-checkers, PAT [29],
PRISM [15] and STORM [30] which have been used in
several other previous works [5], [12]–[14] to solve adaptation
problems (Section VI-B). Finally, we describe the current
prototype tool implementation and conduct a performance
evaluation (Section VI-C).
A. Empirical Evaluation
Figure 10 depicts our simulation environment. It consists of
a system state, an agent and an environment. The simulation
runs in discrete time steps. At each step, the agent has to
choose, based on the current system state, one action to exe-
cute from actions whose preconditions are satisﬁed in the state.
On the other hand, some events are selected for execution,
according to their occurrence probability, if their preconditions
are true. After each time step, the state is updated by applying
the effects of the chosen action and events in the current state.
Effects of both actions and events are applied probabilistically
according to the probabilities speciﬁed in their action/event
descriptions, i.e. their execution can lead to different states.
Experiments are run for one hundred thousands steps.
To select the agent’s actions, two controllers were imple-
mented: an OBD controller and a generic MAPE controller.
The design rational of the experiment aims at comparing a
OBD controller and generic MAPE controllers with respect to:
types of supported requirements, enforcement model, response
time, quality of decision-making and problem representation.
Experiment Description: The experiment ran on a Mac-
Book pro with a 2.2GHz Intel Core i7 and 16 GB of DDR3
RAM. At each time step, the agent queries the state (the
(M)onitoring activity). The agent determines its action to
execute by interacting with its controller. The controller, given

Fig. 9. Conditional and Achieve Deadline Requirements States and Rewards
the current state, determines the next action of the agent. The
OBD controller is implemented in Java and uses the computed
OBD strategies to determine the optimal action that the agent
should take at each state. The MAPE controller is also imple-
mented in Java. It consists of three components: 1) an analysis
component that determines whether planning is needed, 2)
PDDL4J, an open source Java library for Automated Planning
based on PDDL [31], to compute plans and 3) a plan enforcer
which returns one action at each step to the agent. Below is
a comparison of the two controllers.
Supported requirements:
OBD supports the types of
requirements presented in Section IV-B. The MAPE controller,
since it relies on a PDDL planer, can naturally encode uncon-
ditional and conditional achieve requirements, i.e. ⟨UA, CA⟩.
The other types of requirements cannot be easily encoded in
the form of PDDL planning problems.
Enforcement model: The OBD controller enforces MDP
strategies. It has a simple enforcement model: it consults
the computed strategy and determines the optimal action that
corresponds to the current state at each time step. The MAPE
controller enforces requirements as follows: if the activation
condition of a conditional requirement is true in the state
then a planning problem (Pb) is formulated to satisfy the
requirement’s condition. When multiple requirements must
be satisﬁed, then the goal state of the planning problem
corresponds to the disjunction of their (satisfaction) conditions,
i.e. one requirement should be satisﬁed. If a plan (P) is found
by the PDDL planner, the plan enforcer module selects one
action of P to return to the agent at each time step. A plan
is pursued until its end, i.e. no re-planning is performed until
the plan’s last action is executed unless a plan execution fails.
A plan fails if one of its actions cannot be executed because
its preconditions are not satisﬁed in the current state. This
situation may occur due to nondeterministic action effects or
event occurrences3.
Response time: Figure 11 shows the average time of
decision making, i.e. the total decision-making time divided
by the total number of steps of the experiment. Several
domain descriptions differing in their total number of planning
goals/requirements and action success rate4 (100%-50%) are
considered. The decision time of an OBD controller is constant
3Another situation where re-planning would be required is cancellation of
requirements. This situation is not considered in this experiment for simplicity.
4Action success means that the action produced its (expected) effect, i.e.
the effect that is most likely to occur.
and almost instantaneous (∼200ns) as it consists of a simple
lookup in the policy (which is stored in the form of an array of
Integers) of the optimal action that corresponds to the current
state. On the other hand, the analysis and planning activities
of the MAPE controller introduce a signiﬁcant overhead when
compared to the OBD controller. The average decision-making
time of MAPE controllers also increases with action non-
determinism as re-planning is required more frequently due
to more frequent plan failures.
Quality of decision-making: Figure 12 shows the number
of satisﬁed goals per time step for MAPE and OBD controllers.
It demonstrates that the OBD controllers consistently outper-
form MAPE controllers for the same domain problems. This
is due, on one hand, to their ability to include probabilities of
event occurrences into their computation of optimal strategies.
For instance, imagine that RoboX has to pass the order of a
table to the kitchen but that it estimates that there is a high-
likelihood that another table orders. In this case, the OBD
controller may delay moving to the kitchen to pass the order
and wait until the other table orders ﬁrst before passing the two
orders to the kitchen together. MAPE controllers are incapable
of incorporating such intelligence in their decision-making.
Another reason explaining this result is that MAPE controllers,
once a plan is computed, commit to it unless the plan fails to
avoid getting stuck in re-planning without acting, which could
happen if the frequency of change in the environment is high.
This makes it impossible to guarantee the optimality of plans
throughout their execution. On the other hand, OBD strategies
are guaranteed to always select the optimal action at each state.
Representation:
An
important
difference
is
the
goal/requirement representation. In MAPE, planning goals
have to be satisﬁable using solely the actions that are available
to the agent. For example, consider a goal to achieve that a
table pays as many times as possible. The satisfaction of this
goal requires interactions with the environment as described
in Figure 2. This requirement cannot therefore be expressed
as a single planning goal but has to be decomposed into a
set of planning goals, each of which has to be satisﬁable by
the actions available to the agent. On the other hand, thanks
to the folding of events into actions, such requirements can
be expressed directly in OBD. Consequently, expression of
requirements in OBD can be much more succinct and enable
system designers to focus of what should be satisﬁed rather
than how they should be satisﬁed. In the running example, it

Ex1
Exn
…
Agent
ObD
Strategy
M
Analysis 
Module
PDDL 
Planner
P
E
Environment
State
S
C
M: Monitor
C: Chosen Action 
P: Plan
E: Execute
S: State
Pb: Planning Problem
Ex: Exogenous Event
S
Plan 
Enforcer
Pb
C
(1) REact
Controller
(2) MAPE
Controller
Fig. 10. Experiment Description
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
200
400
600
nb of planning goals
decision-making time per time step
M-100%
M-90%
M-80%
M-70%
M-60%
M-50%
A-all
Fig. 11. Decision-making time per time step
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.1
0.2
nb of planning goals
nb of satisﬁed goals per time step
M-100%
M-90%
M-80%
M-70%
M-60%
A-100%
A-90%
A-80%
A-70%
A-60%
Fig. 12. Goal satisfaction per time step
was possible to represent four MAPE planning goals in the
form of a single OBD requirement.
B. Qualitative Comparison of
OBD with State-of-the-Art
Probabilistic Model-checkers
State-of-the-art probabilistic model-checkers PAT [29],
PRISM [15] and STORM [30] support the description of
various models using a variety of languages. In this work,
we focus on MDP models because they support, as opposed
to other models such as for example Discrete-Time Markov
Chains, the synthesis of optimal strategies. With respect to the
general-purpose languages proposed by probabilistic model-
checkers, our model and language support exogenous events
and various typical software requirements (Section IV-B),
elements that cannot be modeled or expressed using the
general-purpose MDP languages of PAT, PRISM or Storm. An
extension of PRISM, namely PRISM-games, supports model-
ing of turn-based multi-player stochastic games. This enables
the modeling of the environment as a separate player whose
actions represent exogenous events. With respect to modeling
of autonomous systems and their requirements, PRISM-games
has two main limitations. First, similarly to PRISM, rewards
have to be Markovain which means that there is no way
to encode typical software requirements [6] such as those
presented in Section IV-B using the provided (Markovian)
reward structures. Furthermore, modeling of interactions be-
tween the agent and its environment in OBD where multiple
events occur with each action of the decision maker is more
realistic and natural than, in turn-based PRISM-games, where
the environment may only be represented in the form of a
separate player who selects at most one event to execute after
each action of the decision maker.
C. Preliminary Experimental Evaluation
We have implemented the OBD framework as a Java-
based prototype which uses EMFText [32], the MDPToolBox
package [33] and Graphviz [34]. There are at least two main
use cases of the framework:
At design-time: the textual editor generated by EMFText
can be used to deﬁne OBD models. The corresponding MDP
models and optimal strategies can be then visualized and
Fig. 13. MDP Construction
Fig. 14. MDP Solution
inspected by a system designer and/or used to synthesize
optimal controllers for the target autonomous systems;
At runtime: the OBD Java API can be used to create
instances of the OBD model and the computation of optimal
strategies at runtime. At runtime, strategies should be recom-
puted after change in either 1) requirements or 2) domain
descriptions. The former generally denotes a change in system
objectives or their priorities. On the other hand, the latter
is needed if new information (possibly based on interactions
with the environment) shows that model parameters need to be
revised. There are some limitations to this use scenario which
are discussed in Section VII.
Figures 13 and 14 show the MDP construction and solving
time for different state space sizes, respectively. It is clear from
the ﬁgures that the current implementation suffers from the
state explosion problem. However, the support of thousands of
states is typically sufﬁcient for a large number of problems.
Furthermore, solving an MDP is a one-time effort, i.e. once
an MDP is solved (given a set of requirements), the computed
strategies can be used until either requirements or the domain
model change.The improvement of the performance of our
current prototype represents future work.
VII. LIMITATIONS & ISSUES
This section discusses the current limitations and issues
related to using OBD and means to address them.
Setting of Model parameters: determining probabilities of
actions and events can be challenging. We envisage that they
shall be computed by adapting existing techniques that enable
computation and learning of model parameters at runtime.
For example, we could use [35] where Bayesian techniques
are used to re-estimate probabilities in formal models such
as Markov chains based on real data observed at runtime;

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF OBD WITH RELATED FRAMEWORKS
Comp.
Sub-criteria
F1
Q1
K1
R1
K2
A1
R
Model
Requirements
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Capabilities
✓
◦
✓
◦
◦
◦
✓
Events
×
◦
×
×
◦
×
✓
Uncert.
Occurrence
×
◦
×
×
◦
×
✓
Effects
×
◦
×
✓
◦
×
✓
Adapt
Explicit
✓
−
✓
✓
−
✓
−
Conﬁguration
−
✓
−
−
✓
−
−
Behavior
−
−
−
−
−
−
✓
✓: supported
×: not supported
◦: partially supported (implicit)
−: not applicable
F1: FLAGS [41]
Q1: QoSMOS [8]
K1: KAOS [24], [39], [42]
R1: Rainbow [43], [44]
K2: KAMI [45]
A1: ActivFORMS [46]
R: OBD
or [36] which proposes an on-line learning method that infers
and dynamically adjusts probabilities of Markov models from
observations of system behaviour. Alternatively, reinforcement
learning techniques [37] could be used.
Identiﬁcation of requirements: strategies are computed
according to requirements. It is thus crucial that they be
correctly identiﬁed. OBD supports traditional goal modeling
techniques [38]–[40]. Those techniques have been proven re-
liable over the years in ensuring correct elicitation, reﬁnement,
analysis and veriﬁcation of requirements [38]–[40].
Suitability of the Application Domain: it is necessary to
identify system conditions under which the framework may
be used. Towards answering this question, we ﬁrst deﬁne a
predictable (unpredictable) system as one where probabilities
of occurrence and effects of events/actions do not (do) change
with time. Similarly, we deﬁne a dynamic (erratic) system as
one where the rate of relevant5 change in those probabilities
is within the order of hours or days (minutes or seconds). Our
current prototype implementation computes strategies within
minutes. Consequently, we conjecture that it supports the run-
time synthesis of controllers in predicable and unpredictable
dynamic systems. Erratic systems are not supported. A more
precise deﬁnition of those limitations represents future work.
VIII. RELATED WORK
Table I compares the features of OBD with some notable
requirements-driven adaptation frameworks according to the
criteria in Sec. II, divided along the following dimensions.
Modeling compares the frameworks with respect to their
support of the explicit modeling and representation of require-
ments, capabilities and events. Those feature are desirable as
they simplify system design, its maintenance and modularity.
Uncertainty compares the support of uncertainty in exoge-
nous event occurrences and effects.
Adaptation compares the type of adaptation strategies,
which can be explicitly deﬁned, conﬁguration selection or
behavior optimization. Conﬁguration selection is a reactive
approach where, after requirements are violated, the alter-
native system conﬁgurations are compared and the best one
5A change is relevant if it renders computed strategies obsolete.
is selected. Behavior optimization is a proactive approach
which takes into account not only the current conditions, but
how they are estimated to evolve [12]. Only behavior-based
optimization supports the two requirements of (1) proactive
and long-term behavior optimization, and (2) fast and optimal
response to change. Note that adaptation based on explicitly
deﬁned strategies is fast but provides no optimality guarantees.
Table I shows that adaptations in many current frameworks
are either explicitly deﬁned [6], [24], [41]–[44], [46] or deter-
mined based on a comparison of possible system conﬁgura-
tions [8], [45], without taking into account future evolutions of
the system. It also shows that explicit-event and action models
are rarely considered. For example, QosMOS and KAMI
consider Markov chains. This is why these frameworks have
an implicit models of actions and events in Table I. Similarly,
ActivForms rely on Timed Automata and the Execute activity
is explicitly deﬁned. Therefore, ActiveForms has explicit adap-
tation strategies and uncertainty is not handled. In [5], MDP
is used to identify optimal adaptations at runtime, taking into
account the delay or latency required to bring about the effects
of adaptation tactics . In [12], [14], latency-aware adaptation
is studied using stochastic multi-player games (SMGs). In
[13], SMGs are used to generate optimal adaptation plans
for architecture-based self-adaptation. These works exploit
PRISM and PRISM-games to solve adaptation problems. So,
they have the limitations discussed in Section VI-B.
Several other works [47]–[49] studied the optimization
of system conﬁgurations. In contrast, this paper focuses on
behavior optimization. Several recent proposals explored the
application of concepts from control theory [50]–[53] to
perform system adaptation. One main difference with respect
to these works is that their focus is on the optimization
of quantiﬁable and measurable non-functional goals, such as
response time, as opposed to behavior optimization based on
functional requirements, the primary focus here.
IX. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces the OBD framework for the model-
based-requirements-driven synthesis of reﬂex controllers for
autonomous systems. The framework introduces a model and
a language to describe autonomous systems, their environment
and requirements. The semantics of the model is deﬁned in the
form of an MDP, which can be solved producing optimal adap-
tation strategies (reﬂex controllers) for autonomous systems.
In comparison with the general-purpose languages proposed
by probabilistic model-checkers, OBD solves two main lim-
itations, namely the Markovian assumption and the implicit-
event model. This enables the support of a comprehensive set
of software requirements and permits the accurate modeling
of the environment in which autonomous systems operate.
Future work consists of extending the framework to support
online learning (reinforcement learning) [37]. The study of
formal adaptation guarantees and assurances [9], [54]–[56],
and optimizing the performance of our framework [57], [58]
are other future planned extensions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation
Ireland grant 13/RC/2094 and ERC Advanced Grant 291652.
