Indian Regional Movie Dataset for Recommender Systems
Prerna Agarwal∗
IIIT Delhi

Richa Verma∗
IIIT Delhi

Angshul Majumdar
IIIT Delhi

ABSTRACT
Indian regional movie dataset is the ﬁrst database of regional Indian
movies, users and their ratings. It consists of movies belonging to
18 diﬀerent Indian regional languages and metadata of users with
varying demographics. Trough this dataset, the diversity of Indian
regional cinema and its huge viewership is captured. We analyze
the dataset that contains roughly 10K ratings of 919 users and
2,851 movies using some supervised and unsupervised collaborative
ﬁltering techniques like Probabilistic Matrix Factorization, Matrix
Completion, Blind Compressed Sensing etc. Te dataset consists of
metadata information of users like age, occupation, home state and
known languages. It also consists of metadata of movies like genre,
language, release year and cast. India has a wide base of viewers
which is evident by the large number of movies released every
year and the huge box-oﬃce revenue. Tis dataset can be used for
designing recommendation systems for Indian users and regional
movies, which do not, yet, exist. Te dataset can be downloaded
from htps://goo.gl/EmTPv6.
KEYWORDS
Movie dataset, Recommender System, Metadata, Indian Regional
Cinema, Crowd Sourcing, Collaborative Filtering
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommendation systems [17, 18, 19, 20, 33] utilize user ratings to
provide personalized suggestions of items like movies and products.
Some popular brands that provide such services are Amazon [34],
Netﬂix, IMDb, BarnesAndNoble [35], etc. Collaborative Filtering
(CF) and Content-based (CB) recommendation are two commonly
used techniques for building recommendation systems. CF systems
[21, 22, 23]operate by gathering user ratings for diﬀerent items in
a given domain and compare various users, their similarities and
diﬀerences, to determine the items to be recommended. Content-
based methods recommend items by comparing representations of
content that a user is interested in to representations of content
that an item consists of.
Tere are several datasets like MovieLens [1] and Netﬂix [2] that are
available for testing and bench-marking recommendation systems.
We present an Indian regional movie dataset on similar lines. India
has been the largest producer of movies in the world for the last
∗Prerna Agarwal (now working with IBM Research) and Richa Verma (now working
with TCS Research ) have equal contribution
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
few years with a lot of diversity in languages and viewers. As per
the UNESCO cinema statistics [9], India produces around 1,724
movies every year with as many as 1,500 movies in Indian regional
languages. India’s importance in the global ﬁlm industry is largely
because India is home to Bollywood in Mumbai. Tere’s a huge base
of audience in India with a population of 1.3 billion which is evident
by the fact that there are more than two thousand multiplexes in
India where over 2.2 billion movie tickets were sold in 2016. Te box
oﬃce revenue in India keeps on rising every year. Terefore, there
is a huge need for a dataset like Movielens in Indian context that can
be used for testing and bench-marking recommendation systems
for Indian Viewers. As of now, no such recommendation system
exists for Indian regional cinema that can tap into the rich diversity
of such movies and help provide regional movie recommendations
for interested audiences.
1.1
Motivation
As of now, Netﬂix and Movielens datasets do not have a comprehen-
sive listing of regional productions as the clipping shows in Figure
1( borrowed from [39]). Terefore, a substantial source of such a
data comprising movies of various regions, varying languages and
genres encompassing a wider folklore is strongly needed that could
provide such data in a suitable format required for building and
benchmarking recommendation systems.
To capture the diversity of Indian regional cinema, popular websites
like Netﬂix are trying to shif focus towards it [36, 37]. Te goal is
to bring some of the greatest stories from Indian regional cinema
on a global platform. Trough this, viewers are exposed to a wide
variety of new and diverse stories from India. As a result of this
initiative, Indian regional cinema will be available across countries.
Building a recommendation system using a dataset of such movies
and their audience can prove to be useful in such situations. Here,
we present such a dataset which is the ﬁrst of its kind.
1.2
Contributions
• Web portal for data collection: A web portal where a user

home town, languages known and occupation. Te user
can then provide rating to movies as like/dislike.
• Indian Regional Cinema Dataset: It is the ﬁrst dataset of
Indian Regional Cinema which contains ratings by users
for diﬀerent regional movies along with user and movie
metadata. User metadata is collected while signing up
on the portal. Movie metadata consists of genre, release
year, description, language, writer, director, cast and IMDb
rating.
• Detailed analysis of the dataset using some supervised and
unsupervised Collaborative Filtering techniques.
arXiv:1801.02203v1  [cs.IR]  7 Jan 2018

Figure 1: Amazon and Netﬂix: Focus on Regional Films
2
RELATED WORK
MovieLens [1] is a web-based portal that recommends movies. It
uses the ﬁlm preferences of its users, collected in the form of movie
ratings and preferred genres and then utilizes some collaborative
ﬁltering techniques to make movie recommendations. Te Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of
Minnesota houses a research lab known as Grouplens Research that
created Movielens in 1997 [38]. Indian Regional Cinema dataset is
inspired from Movielens. Te primary goal was to collect data for
performing research on providing personalized recommendations.
MovieLens released three datasets for testing recommendation sys-
tems: 100K, 1M and 10M datasets. Tey have released 20M dataset
as well in 2016. In the dataset, users and movies are represented
with integer IDs, while ratings range from 1 to 5 at a gap of 0.5.
Netﬂix released a training data set for their contest, Netﬂix Prize [8],
which consists of about 100,000,000 ratings for 17,770 movies given
by 480,189 users. Each rating in the training dataset consists of
four entries: user, movie, date of grade, grade. Users and movies
are represented with integer IDs, while ratings range from 1 to 5.
Tese datasets are largely for hollywood movies and TV series, and
their viewers. Tey are not designed for those user communities
which are inclined towards watching Indian regional cinema.
From the view point of recommender systems, there have been a lot
of work using user ratings for items and metadata to predict their
liking and disliking towards other items [4, 5, 6, 11]. Many unsuper-
vised and supervised collaborative ﬁltering techniques have been
proposed and benchmarked on movielens dataset. Here, in this
paper, we have chosen few popular techniques such as user-user
similarity to establish baseline and then other deeper techniques
such as Blind Compressed Sensing, Probabilistic Matrix Factoriza-
tion, Matrix completion, Supervised Matrix Factorization are used
on our dataset to provide benchmarking results. Tese techniques
are chosen over others because these techniques have proven to
provide beter accuracy in recent works [6].
3
INDIAN REGIONAL MOVIE DATASET
Tis is the ﬁrst dataset of Indian regional cinema which covers
movies of 18 diﬀerent regional languages and a variety of user
ratings for such movies. It consists of 919 users with varying demo-
graphics and 2,851 movies with diﬀerent genres. It has 10K ratings
from 919 users.
3.1
Metadata Information
Te data for movies has been scraped from IMDb [3]. IMDb has a
collection of Indian movies spanning across multiple Indian regional
languages and genres. Each movie is associated with the following
metadata.
• Movie id: Each movie has a unique id for its representation.
• Description: Description of the movie for users.
• Language: Language(s) used in the movie. A movie may
have been released in multiple regional languages. Te
distribution is shown in Table 1.
• Release date: Date of release of the movie.
• Rating count: As per IMDb, to judge the popularity of the
movie.
• Crew: Director, writer and cast of the movie.
• Genre: Movie genre. It can be one or multiple out of 20
genres available on IMDb. Te number of movies for each
genre are shown in Figure 2.
Table 1: Language Distribution
Languages
Movie Count
User Count
Hindi
615
902
Bengali
582
28
Assamese
22
9
Tamil
313
30
Nepali
51
9
Punjabi
150
78
Rajasthani
18
14
Malayalam
346
16
Bhojpuri
26
21
Kannada
303
11
Haryanvi
3
18
Manipuri
8
4
Urdu
129
23
Marathi
204
14
Telugu
338
18
Oriya
98
6
Gujarati
49
7
Konkani
6
4

Figure 2: Genre Distribution
For beter recommendations, it is important to include the factors
which inﬂuence user ratings the most. Following is the metadata
information collected for a user:
• User id: A user will have a unique id for its representation.
• Languages: Te languages known by the users. Its count is
shown in Table 1.
• State: Te state of India that the user belongs to. Te region
wise distribution is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Region-wise Distribution
• Age: Date of birth of the user is taken as input to calculate
the age of the user. Te distribution is shown in Figure 4.
• Gender: Denotes the gender of the user. Gender distribu-
tion of the data is shown in Figure 5.
• Occupation: It denotes the occupation of the user. It can be
any one out of student, self-employed, service, retired and
others. Its distribution is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 4: Age Distribution
Figure 5: Gender Distribution

Table 2: Comparison of Datasets
Dataset
Movie Count
User Count
Rating Count
Sparsity(%)
Release Year
Our Dataset
2851
919
10,000
99.96
2017
Movielens 100K
1700
1000
100,000
99.94
4/1998
Movielens 1M
6000
4000
1,000,000
99.96
2/2003
Figure 6: Occupation Distribution
3.2
MovieLens vs Indian Regional Cinema
Dataset
Te key diﬀerence between the presented dataset and movielens is
that the later does not contain movies from Indian regional cinema.
Movielens only has few Hindi and Urdu movies. Also, our data has
been collected mainly from the viewers of regional movies in India.
Te user metadata, thus, collected can be used to recommend more
relevant movies for such audiences.
Also, the MovieLens datasets are biased towards a certain category
of users. Tey contain data only from users who have rated at
least twenty movies. Te datasets do not include the data of those
users who could not ﬁnd enough movies to rate or did not ﬁnd the
system easy enough to use. Tere is a possibility that there is a
fundamental diﬀerence between such users and the other users in
the datasets. Our dataset makes no such distinction among users
based on the number of movies that they have rated.
To make the process of rating multiple movies easier for a user, we
have used the concept of binary rating for movies where, a user
can either ”like” or ”dislike” a movie denoted by ”1” and ”-1” in
the dataset. On the other hand, MovieLens uses a 10-point scale
for rating (from 0 to 5). A basic comparison of these datasets are
shown in Table 2. Te table indicates the number of users, movies,
ratings, release year and the sparsity of datasets.
3.3
Dataset Collection
For the collection of user information and movie ratings, a web
portal named Fickscore [15] is created where users can sign up
ﬁlling in all details as shown in Figure 7. Te user has to provide
the preferred languages so that the portal can ask users to rate the
movies of their preferred languages.
While signing up, the user is prompted to ﬁll up the metadata
Figure 7: Sign Up form on Portal
information. Te user can then login to the portal to rate movies as
either like or dislike and the responses are recorded as shown in
Figure 8.
Figure 8: Rating Movies on Portal

4
UNSUPERVISED COLLABORATIVE
FILTERING TECHNIQUES
To analyze the dataset, some unsupervised techniques are used
such as user-user similarity, item-item similarity, Matrix Factoriza-
tion, Probabilistic Matrix Factorization, Blind Compressed Sensing
etc. Te main advantage of using such techniques is the ease of
implementation and their incremental nature. On the other hand,
it is human data dependent its performance decreases on increase
of sparsity of data. Tese techniques cannot address the cold start
problem i.e., when a new user or item adds in the dataset whose
ratings are not available because these use ratings of users to make
predictions. Bias correction is performed on the dataset by cal-
culating global mean, user bias and item bias and then the above
techniques are used to predict the rating of a new user for an item.
4.1
User and Item-based similarity
In user-user model, a similarity matrix A is calculated, each entry
Aij indicates the score computed by cosine similarity between a
user i and another user j. It denotes how much similar are two
users i and j, higher the score higher is the similarity. Similarly, in
item-item model, each entry Aij of the similarity matrix ’A’ denotes
the cosine similarity score between an item i and another item j.
Higher the score, the two items are more similar.
Cosine similarity can be calculated for two users u and u’ using the
following equations:
Su,u′ =
Í
∀j ru,jru′,j
qÍ
∀j r2
u,j
Í
∀j r2
u′,j
(1)
Where, ri,j denotes the rating by ith user for jth item.
Prediction for uth user for jth item is done as:
ˆ
ru,j =
Õ
u′∈N (u),j ∈R(u′)
wu,u′ru,u′
(2)
Where, wu,u′ is the normalized similarity weight, ru,u′ is the
rating by u’ user for jth item.
Similar to user-user similarity, item-item similarity is calculated
by computing cosine similarity between two items and ratings are
predicted in the similar way.
4.2
Matrix factorization
Tere are some hidden traits (latent factors) of liking/disliking of
users which may depend on the patern of their ratings. Users and
movies are mapped by this model to a joint latent factor space. Each
itemi and user j is associated with vectorq andp respectively which
measures the possessiveness of an item or user for those factors.
Te dot product qT
i pu denotes the liking of a user for a speciﬁc item
which approximates the rating rui [10]. Computing the mapping of
each user and item to factor vectors is a major challenge. Imputation
can prove to be expensive as it noticeably increases the amount
of data during calculation. To model the observed ratings directly
with regularization, the following equation is used:
min
q∗.p∗
Õ
(u,i ∈k)
(rui −qT
i pu)2 + λ(||qi ||2 + ||pu ||2)
(3)
Here, k is the set of those user-item pairs in the training set for
which rui is known.
Te system uses the already observed ratings to ﬁt a model on them
and uses that model to predict the new ratings.
Te intuition behind using matrix factorization to analyze this
dataset is that there should be some latent features that determine
how a user rates an item. For example, two users may give high
ratings to a certain movie if they both like the actors/actresses of
the movie, or if the movie is an action movie, which is a genre
preferred by both users. Hence, if we can discover these latent
features, we should be able to predict the rating given by a certain
user to a certain item, because the features associated with the user
should match with the features associated with the item.
4.3
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization
It can handle large datasets because it scales linearly with the num-
ber of observations in the dataset. Let Rij represent the rating of
a user i for a movie j. Let U and V be latent feature matrices for
user and movie, respectively. Te column vectors are denoted as
Ui, representing user-speciﬁc latent feature vectors, and Vj, repre-
senting movie-speciﬁc latent feature vectors. [4]. Te log posterior
is maximized over movie and user features with hyper parameters
using the following equation:
1
2
N
Õ
i=1
M
Õ
j=1
Iij(Rij −UT
i Vj)2 + λu
2
N
Õ
i=1
||Ui ||2
f rob + λv
2
M
Õ
j=1
||Vj ||2
f rob
(4)
Where, λu and λv are the regularization parameters for user and
item respectively. A local minimum of the equation can be com-
puted by gradient descent in U and V . Te model performance is
measured by computing mean average error (MAE) and root mean
squared error (RMSE) on the test set.
Tis model can be viewed as a probabilistic extension of the SVD
model, since if all ratings have been observed, the objective given
by the equation reduces to the SVD objective in the limit of prior
variances going to inﬁnity. Tis technique beter addresses the
sparsity and scalability problems and thus improves prediction
performance. It gives an intuitive rationale for recommendation.
4.4
Blind Compressed Sensing
A dense user item matrix is not a reasonable assumption as each
user will like/dislike a trait to certain extent [24]. However, any
item will possess only a few of the atributes and never all. Hence,
the item matrix will ideally have a sparse structure rather than a
dense one as formulated in earlier works.
Te objective of this approach is to ﬁnd the user and item latent
factor matrices. As per the approach, user latent factor matrix can
be dense but the same does not logically follow for the item latent
factor matrix. Te sparsity of the item latent factor matrix increases
the recommendation accuracy signiﬁcantly. [5]. Te following
equation is minimized:
min
(U,V ) ||Y −A(UV )||2 + λu ||U ||f rob + λv ||V ||f rob
(5)
Where λu and λv are regularization parameters for user and item
respectively. A is the binary mask matrix and Y is the rating matrix.
U andV is the user latent matrix and item latent matrix respectively
which were assumed to be dense in earlier models.

Table 3: Unsupervised Techniques
Techniques
Movielens 100K
Our Dataset
Movielens 1M
Errors
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
User-User similarity
0.6980
1.026
0.5307
1.03
0.607
0.8810
Item-Item similarity
0.744
1.061
0.648
1.049
0.671
0.9196
Matrix Factorization
0.828
1.128
0.471
0.971
0.6863
0.8790
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization
0.7564
0.9639
0.481
0.9372
0.7241
0.9127
Blind Compressed Sensing
0.7356
0.9409
0.463
0.9612
0.6917
0.8789
Matrix Completion
0.8324
1.102
0.4827
0.9264
0.7196
0.9102
Table 4: Supervised Technique
Technique
Movielens 100K
Our dataset
Movielens 1M
Errors
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
Supervised Matrix Factorization
0.7199
0.9196
0.4367
0.9283
0.6709
0.8567
4.5
Matrix Completion
Matrix completion involves ﬁlling up the missing entries of a par-
tially observed matrix. It aims to compute the matrix with the
lowest rank or, if the rank of the completed matrix is known, a
matrix of rank r that matches the known entries. A popular ap-
proach for solving the problem is nuclear-norm-regularized (NN)
matrix [7] as shown in the following equation.
min ||B −R||2
f rob + λ||R||N N
(6)
Where,
B = Rk−1 + MT (Y −M.Rk−1)
(7)
and, M is the binary mask. R is the rating matrix imputed and Y is
the original rating matrix.
5
SUPERVISED COLLABORATIVE FILTERING
TECHNIQUES
To analyze the dataset, some supervised techniques are used such
as supervised Matrix Factorization. Te main advantage of using
supervised methods is that whenever a new user or new item comes
in, it can make predictions for them as well which unsupervised
techniques fail to do [28, 29, 30, 31]. Tis is also called as cold start
problem. Tese are scalable and are dependent on the metadata
information of user and item because of which it gives more accu-
rate predictions as it establishes relation well. Bias correction is
performed on the dataset by calculating user bias and item bias and
then the above technique is used to calculate the rating of a new
user for an item.
5.1
Supervised Matrix Factorization
Te task of predicting ratings becomes diﬃcult largely because
of the sparsity of the ratings available in the database of a recom-
mender system. Terefore, using the knowledge related to users
demographics and item categories can enhance prediction accuracy
[25, 26, 27, 32]. Classes are formed as per users age group, gender
and occupation. A user can belong to multiple classes at a time.
Class label information is important to learn the latent factor vec-
tors of users and movies in a supervised environment, in a way
that they are consistent with the class label information available.
Class label information puts in additional constraints which results
in reducing the search space as a result of which determinacy of
the problem is reduced.
Mathematically, within the matrix factorization framework, addi-
tional information of user metadata (U) and item metadata (V) can
be used and the following equation can be minimized [6].
min
(U,V,A,C) ||Y −M(UV )||f rob + λu ||U ||f rob + λv ||V ||f rob+
µu ||W −UC||f rob + µv ||Q −AV ||f rob
(8)
Where, Wij = 1 if user i belongs to class j else 0. C is the linear
map from latent factor space to classiﬁcation domain. Q is the
class information matrix created similar to W . Other variables
have their usual meanings. Introducing supervised learning into
the latent factor model helps in improving the prediction accuracy
by reducing the problem of rating matrix sparsity. Te value of
regularization parameters are determined using l-curve technique
[16]
6
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Tree diﬀerent datasets are used to compare the results of super-
vised and unsupervised collaborative ﬁltering techniques used to
predict user ratings. Te datasets used for experiments are Movie-
lens 100K, MovieLens 1M and our dataset of Indian regional movies.
For error calculation, Mean absolute error (MAE) and Root mean
squared error (RMSE) is calculated between the actual ratings and
the predicted ratings. Te datasets are divided into 5 folds for eval-
uation. Te ratings are binarized into like/dislike (1/-1) labels for
experiments. Results of diﬀerent techniques on these datasets are
shown in Table 3 and Table 4.
As the values in the Table 2 indicate, the basic cosine similarity mea-
sures between users and movies perform fairly well on all datasets.
Te minimum MAE values result from the experiments using our
dataset. Since the sparsity of regional cinema dataset and Movielens
1M dataset is is very high (as indicated in Table 2), techniques like
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization and Blind Compressed Sensing
perform beter than other basic similarity measures and among
them the least MAE is again shown for our dataset.
To use metadata information, the information is encoded in the

form of one hot vector of 1’s and 0’s where in case of languages, mul-
tiple 1’s can be present in the vector. Since supervised techniques
uses both user and item metadata they outperform unsupervised
collaborative ﬁltering techniques. Among all three datasets, min-
imum MAE is shown on our dataset. Tis shows that the Indian
Regional Cinema dataset can prove to be useful for building and
benchmarking recommendation systems in Indian context, which
has the most diverse languages and demographics.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
India is one of the country where not only varying languages are
present, it’s population’s demographics are also very diverse in
nature. Terefore, Indian regional cinema has a lot of diversity
when it comes to the number of languages and the demographics of
the viewers. Tere are thousands of such movies that are produced
annually and there is a huge community of people who watch them.
Terefore, a recommender system for Indian regional movies is
needed to address the preferences of the growing number of their
viewers. Tis dataset has around 10K ratings by Indian users, along
with their demographic information. We believe that this dataset
could be used to design, improve and benchmark recommendation
systems for Indian regional cinema. We plan to release the dataset
afer its publication. We further want to release another version
of this dataset with more number of ratings and users, which will
help to improve the current state of recommender systems for the
Indian audience.
