Incremental Monoidal Grammars
Dan Shiebler1, Alexis Toumi1, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh2
University of Oxford1, UCL2
January 13, 2020
Abstract
In this work we deﬁne formal grammars in terms of free monoidal categories,
along with a functor from the category of formal grammars to the category of
automata. Generalising from the Booleans to arbitrary semirings, we extend our
construction to weighted formal grammars and weighted automata. This allows
us to link the categorical viewpoint on natural language to the standard machine
learning notion of probabilistic language model.
Recurrent neural networks and probabilistic language models [BDVJ03] have be-
come standard tools in the natural language processing (NLP) community. These
networks are inherently incremental, scanning through the sequence of words they
are given and updating their prediction for what comes next. Despite their practical
success on hard language tasks such as translation and question answering, the struc-
ture underlying these machine learning models is yet poorly understood, and they are
generally only used as black boxes.
On the other hand, the categorical compositional distributional (DisCoCat) mod-
els of Coecke et al. [CCS08, CCS10, CGS13] use grammatical structure, explicitly
encoded as string diagrams in a free monoidal category, to compute natural language
semantics. DisCoCat models have received experimental support on small-scale tasks
[GS11, KSP12, KSP13], but the extra mathematical structure makes them hard to
scale to the billions of words used in the training of modern NLP models.
In this work, we aim to bridge this gap by constructing a functor which sends
formal grammars (encoded as monoidal categories) to a state automaton that parses
the grammar in an incremental way, reading one word at a time and updating the set
of possible parsings. In section 1 we introduce some core deﬁnitions and preliminaries.
In section 2 we introduce monoidal grammars and S-monoidal grammars for an arbi-
trary semiring S. In section 3 we deﬁne the functor I, from the category of S-monoidal
grammars to coalgebras of the weighted automata functor W(X) = S × (SX)V . In
section 4, we describe an algorithm for learning R≥0-monoidal grammars from a prob-
abilistic language model. This paper represents a work in progress, and we conclude
with a discussion of future work.
1
arXiv:2001.02296v2  [cs.FL]  10 Jan 2020

1
Preliminaries
1.1
Formal Grammars
Given a pair of sets X and Y , we write X × Y and X + Y for their Cartesian product
and disjoint union respectively. We use the Kleene star X∗= `
n∈N Xn to denote the
free monoid, with concatenation as product and the empty sequence ϵ ∈X0 as unit.
Similarly, we write X+ = `
n>0 Xn for the free semigroup (i.e. non-empty sequences).
If we ﬁx a ﬁnite set of words V called the vocabulary, then a the language of a
formal grammar over this set of words is a subset L ⊆V ⋆: the set of sequences of
words that form grammatical sentences accoridng to the rules of the grammar. A well-
known class of formal grammars is context-free grammars, introduced by Chomsky as
the ﬁrst level of his complexity-theoretic hierarchy [Cho56, Cho57, Cho65].
Deﬁnition 1.1. A context-free grammar is given by a 4-tuple (V, X, R, s) where:
• V is a ﬁnite set called the vocabulary (or terminal symbols),
• X is a ﬁnite set of syntactic variables (or nonterminal symbols),
• R ⊆X × (V + X)∗is a ﬁnite set of production rules,
• s ∈X is a syntactic variable called the start symbol.
We deﬁne the language L(G) ⊆V ⋆of a context-free grammar G = (V, X, R, s)
as follows: We ﬁrst construct a binary relation (→R) ⊆(V + X)∗× (V + X)∗where
for any pair of strings s, t ∈(V + X)∗we have s →R t if and only if there is some
production rule (x, v) ∈R and a pair u, w ∈(V + X)∗such that s = uxw and
t = uvw. We then compute its reﬂexive transitive closure →∗
R and deﬁne L(G) =
{ u ∈V ∗| s →∗
R u }. Note that this corresponds precisely to the preordered monoid
generated by the production rules R, i.e. with generators V + X and relations x ≤u
for each (x, u) ∈R.
Deﬁnition 1.2. A preordered monoid is a monoid X equipped with a reﬂexive tran-
sitive relation ≤such that v ≤v′ implies uvw ≤uv′w for all u, v, v′, w ∈X.
If we generalise this to arbitrary preordered monoids, i.e.
to grammars with
production rules that have arbitrary sources R (and not just the ones with an R
with restrictions as deﬁned above), we obtain abstract rewriting systems, also known
as semi-Thue systems [Thu14, Pow13]. If we forbid rules with empty source or target
we obtain the word-problem for semigroups, shown to be undecidable independently
by Markov [Mar47] and Post [Pos47]. Both are equivalent in computational power
to the last level of Chomsky’s hierarchy: unrestricted grammars (which are thus
undecidable).
Deﬁnition 1.3. An unrestricted grammar is a tuple G = (V, X, R, s) where V and X
are ﬁnite sets called the terminals and non-terminals with R ⊆(V + X)+ × (V + X)∗
and s ∈X. We deﬁne L(G) = { u ∈V ∗| s ≤u } the language of G, where the order
is given by the preordered monoid generated by R.
2

Empirically, the complexity of human languages has been shown to lie somewhere
in between that of context-free and unrestricted grammars [Shi87], see the line of work
on midly context-sensitive grammars [Jos85, Wei88, VW94].
We cannot infer the underlying structure of human languages from complexity-
theoretic arguments: indeed, the same class of languages can be generated by non-
isomorphic grammar formalisms. As our main example, Lambek’s pregroup grammars
[Lam99, Lam01, Lam08] have the same expressive power as context-free grammars
[BM08], i.e. there are back-and-forth translations which preserve the generated lan-
guages. However, pregroup grammars and context-free grammars are only weakly
equivalent: these translations do not give an isomorphism.
Deﬁnition 1.4. A pregroup1 is a preordered monoid P equipped with a pair of func-
tions (−)l, (−)r : P →P such that tlt ≤ϵ ≤ttl and ttr ≤ϵ ≤trt for all t ∈P.
Deﬁnition 1.5. A pregroup grammar is a tuple G = (V, B, D, s) where V, B and
D ⊆V ×PB are ﬁnite sets and s is an element of B, for B a set of basic grammatical
types and PB the free pregroup generated by B.
In the above, V is the Vocabulary, B a set of basic grammatical types such as
{n, s}, for n the type of a noun phrase and s that of a sentence, and D a relation known
as the type dictionary or the lexicon. The language L(G) of a pregroup grammar
G = (V, B, D, s) is the set of all strings w1w2 · · · wn ∈V ∗such that t1 . . . tn ≤s for
each (wi, ti) ∈D.
1.2
Monoidal Categories
We assume familiarity with monoidal categories, see e.g. [Awo06] for an introduction.
In order to ﬁx some notation, we deﬁne monoidal signatures and presentations.
Deﬁnition 1.6. A monoidal signature is a tuple Σ = (Σ0, Σ1, dom, cod) where Σ0
and Σ1 are sets of generating objects and arrows respectively, and dom, cod : Σ1 →Σ∗
0
are pairs of functions called domain and codomain.
A homomorphism of monoidal signatures h : Σ →Σ′ is given by a pair of functions
h0 : Σ0 →Σ′
0 and h1 : Σ1 →Σ′
1 such that the following diagram commutes:
Σ0
Σ1
Σ0
Σ′
0
Σ′
1
Σ′
0
h0
cod
dom
h1
h0
cod
dom
1 The original deﬁnition of a pregroup was a partial, rather than pre, ordered monoid, i.e. one
with an order relation with the anti-symmetry axiom. Anti-symmetry causes unwanted equalities
between types and preorders were suggested as an alternative.
3

We write MonSig for the category of monoidal signatures and their homomor-
phisms. The free monoidal category CΣ generated by a monoidal signature Σ is the
image of the left adjoint to the forgetful functor from MonCat to MonSig. Explic-
itly, the arrows f : x →y in CΣ are given by (planar progressive) string diagrams
with arrows in Σ1 as nodes and x, y ∈Σ⋆
0 as input/output, see [JS88, JS91, Sel10]. In
order to impose equations on diagrams, we need some extra data: a presentation.
Deﬁnition 1.7. A presentation for a monoidal category is given by a monoidal signa-
ture Σ and a set of relations R ⊆`
u,t∈Σ∗
0 CΣ(u, t) × CΣ(u, t) between parallel arrows
of the free monoidal category.
The monoidal category generated by (Σ, R) is the quotient CΣ/R, see [Lan98][II.8].
1.3
Coalgebras
Coalgebras are a useful framework for categorically modeling dynamical systems. In
functional programming terminology, some functor F deﬁnes a type signature for a
mapping on Set, and an F-coalgebra is a particular implementation of this signature.
Deﬁnition 1.8. For an endofunctor F : Set →Set, an F-coalgebra is a pair (X, g),
where X is a set and g : X →FX is a function that deﬁnes structure over X.
Example 1.8.1. For X a set of states and F the identity functor, an F-coalgebra
(X, g) maps states to states, computing a function over states such as permutations.
Example 1.8.2. The powerset functor F(X) = P(X) maps a state to a set of states,
computing the accessibility relation of a Kripke structure or the transitions of an
automata.
Example 1.8.3. The functor D(X) = B × XV maps states in X to the product of
{false, true} and the set of functions from some set V back to X. This signature is
the curried form of a deterministic automata transition function: each state in X is
tagged with a boolean value indicating whether or not it is an accept state, and each
state deﬁnes a function from a vocabulary V to the next state.
2
Monoidal Grammars
Our goal in this section will be to formally describe a characterization of formal
grammars in terms of monoidal categories. We will begin with the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2.1. A monoidal grammar is a tuple G = (Σ, R, s) where Σ, R is the
presentation of a monoidal category CG with V ∪{s} ∈Σ0.
We deﬁne L(G) =
{ u ∈V ∗| ∃f ∈CG(u, s) }.
Given two monoidal grammars G and G′ over a common vocabulary V , we will
deﬁne the morphisms between them to be the monoidal functors F : CG →CG′ such
that the following diagram commutes, where inc and inc′ are the inclusion maps from
V ∗∪{s} into the objects of CG and CG′ respectively:
4

CG
V ∗∪{s}
CG′
F
inc
inc′
Monoidal grammars and their morphisms trivially form a subcategory of (V +
{ s })∗/MonCat, which we will denote Grammar.
We can characterize the formal grammars that we described earlier as monoidal
grammars. For example:
Proposition 2.1. A pregroup grammar G = (V, B, D, s) is a monoidal grammar with
Σ0 = V + B × Z, Σ1 = D + `
x∈B×Z { cupx, capx }2 and the relations R given by the
snake equations, see [Sel10][4.1].
Proposition 2.2. A context-free grammar G = (V, X, RG, s) is a monoidal grammar
with Σ0 = V + X, Σ1 = {u →x| (x, u) ∈RG}, and R = ∅.
We can now express the languages of these constructions in a uniﬁed manner:
Deﬁnition 2.2. For w1w2...wn ∈V ∗we call an arrow w1w2...wn →r where r ∈
Obj(CG) a parse state of w1w2...wn. Whenever in a parse state we have r = s, we
call that parse state a parsing or a derivation.
Deﬁnition 2.3. The language of a monoidal grammar is the set of all strings w1 ⊗
w2...wn that have a parsing.
We can think of the string diagrams of parse states and parsings as akin to partially
constructed and fully constructed syntax trees respectively.
Example 2.3.1. Let G = (V, B, D, s) be a pregroup grammar with V = { Alice, loves, Bob },
B = { s, n } and D = { (Alice, n), (loves, nrsnl), (Bob, n) }. Then the following string
diagram represents the arrow in CG from Alice ⊗loves ⊗Bob to s:
Alice
loves
Bob
n
n
s
nl
nr
Example 2.3.2. Let G = (V, X, R, s) be a context-free grammar with V and X deﬁned
as:
V = { Complex, houses, students, disappoint }
X = { s, np, adj, vp, itv, tv }
2Z represents the number of adjoint applications, where negatives are left adjoints and positives
are right adjoints.
5

for s the non-terminal representing a sentence, np the non-terminal representing a
noun phrase, similarly, adj an adjective, itv an intransitive verb, tv a transitive verb,
and vp a verb phrase. Where the production rules are:
s →np vp, vp →tv np, vp →itv, np →adj np
np →complex, adj →complex,
np →houses, itv →houses,
np →students, itv →disappoint
Then the following string diagrams represent the arrows in CG from Complex ⊗
houses ⊗students to s and from Complex ⊗houses ⊗disappoint to s:
Complex houses students
s
np
np
tv
vp
Complex houses disappoint
s
np
vp
adj
np
itv
2.1
S-Monoidal Grammars
We can generalize monoidal grammars to associate weights (such as likelihoods or
probabilities) with each parse state.
Deﬁnition 2.4. For some semiring S, an S-monoidal signature is a monoidal signa-
ture Σ = (Σ0, Σ1, dom, cod) equipped with a mapping r : Σ1 →S.
A homomorphism of S-monoidal signatures h : (Σ, r) →(Σ′, r′) is given by a
monoidal signature homomorphism h0, h1 such that the following diagram commutes:
Σ1
S
Σ′
1
r
h1
r′
Deﬁnition 2.5. An S-monoidal grammar (G, r) is a tuple (Σ, R, s, r) such that (Σ, r)
is an S-monoidal signature and G = (Σ, R, s) is a monoidal grammar.
We can extend r into a function from Ar(CG) →S by deﬁning r(g◦f) = r(g)∗r(f)
and r(f1 ⊗f2) = r(f1) ∗r(f2). If we do this, then r deﬁnes a functor from CG to the
trivial monoidal category where arrows are the elements of S and both composition
and tensor product are semiring multiplication.
6

We will refer to the category of S-monoidal grammars over a common vocabulary
as GrammarS. The morphisms in this category are monoidal functors F : CG →CG′
such that the following diagram commutes:
CG
S
V ∗∪{s}
CG′
r
F
inc
inc′
r′
Let us note that we can characterize any monoidal grammar G as the B-monoidal
grammar (G, r) where B is the semiring of Booleans and r is the constant functor that
maps all arrows in CG to true in B.
3
Incremental Monoidal Grammars
In an S-monoidal grammar, we utilize the categorical composition to model the se-
quential nature of the parsing process and we use the tensor-product to model both
the adjacency of words/types in a sentence and the parallel application of processing
steps to diﬀerent parts of a sentence. In this section we will explore how we can study
the behavior of the tensor-product as a dynamic construct.
We can deﬁne an action of the free monoid V ∗on the category of endofunctors of
CG to model the process of adding a “new” word to our system. For any word w ∈V ,
the endofunctor Ww maps the object o to o⊗w and the arrow a to a⊗idw. In order to
model the interpretation of this new word in context, we look at the interaction of this
endofunctor with the arrows in CG by deﬁning a mapping W ∗
w(a) : Ar(CG) →SAr(CG)
as follows.
W ∗
w(a)(a′) =
(
r(a′)
a′ ∈X
0
a′ ̸∈X
X = {a′ ◦Ww(a) | a′ ∈Ar(C), dom(a′) = (cod(a) ⊗w)}
Intuitively, W ∗
w(a)(a′) is the generalized “likelihood” of the parse state a′ ◦Ww(a),
given Ww(a). Naturally, parse states that cannot be expressed as a′ ◦Ww(a) have a
likelihood of 0 given Ww(a).
If we deﬁne a “listener” to be an entity that assigns the parse state a to the string
of words w1w2...wn, then W ∗
w deﬁnes how a new word may update a listener’s parse
state. We can represent this process with an S-weighted automaton. The states in
the machine are parse states a : w1w2...wn →o, and the transition function is W ∗
w.
S-weighted automaton are also equipped with a function r0 that maps states to S.
For example, in the B case r0 picks out the “accept states” of the automaton. For
7

some S-monoidal grammar (CG, r) we will deﬁne this function r0 as follows:
r0(a) =
(
r(a)
cod(a) = s
0
cod(a) ̸= s
In order to formalize this relationship, we will use the theory of F-coalgebras
on Set [Rut96]. An S-weighted automaton is a coalgebra of the functor W(X) =
S×(SX)V and by [SBBR13] a given transition function will uniquely deﬁne coalgebras
of W up to bisimulation, so we simply need to deﬁne a mapping I between GrammarS
and coalgebras of W.
Deﬁnition 3.1. The Incremental Functor I is a map on the objects and arrows of
GrammarS that acts as follows:
• For some object (CG, r) in GrammarS, we deﬁne I(CG, r) to be the coalgebra
(Ar(CG), r0 × W ∗
w).
• For some morphism F between (CG, r0) and (C′
G, r′
0) in GrammarS, we deﬁne
I(F) to be the map hF : Ar(CG) →Ar(C′
G) that uses F’s mapping on arrows.
Lemma 3.1. The map I is a functor from GrammarS to the category of coalgebras
of W.
Proof. Since I(F) uses the functor F ′s mapping on arrows, I trivially preserves iden-
tity and composition.
All that remains is to prove that I(F) = hF is indeed a
coalgebra homomorphism. To do this we need to show that the following diagram
commutes:
Ar(CG)
Ar(C′
G)
S × (SAr(CG))V
S × (SAr(C′
G))V
r0×W ∗
w
hF
r′
0×W ′∗
w
S×(ShF )V
When we apply the function S × (ShF )V to r0 × W ∗
w we get the following function:
S × (ShF )V (r0 × W ∗
w)(a) = r′
0(hF (a)) × λa′.
(
r′(hF (a′))
hF (a′) ∈X′
0
hF (a′) ̸∈X′
X′ = {hF (a′ ◦(a ⊗idw)) | a′ ∈Ar(C′
G), dom(a′) = (cod(a) ⊗w)}
Here r′
0(hF (a)) = r0(a) because F and r commute in GrammarS. When we use the
fact that hF preserves composition and tensor product we can rewrite X′ as:
X′ = {hF (a′) ◦(hF (a) ⊗idw) | hF (a′) ∈Ar(C′
G), dom(hF (a′)) = (cod(hF (a)) ⊗w)}
8

This makes it clear that:
W ′∗
w (hF (a))(a′) =
(
r′(hF (a′))
hF (a′) ∈X′
0
hF (a′) ̸∈X′
Therefore, we can conclude that:
S × (ShF )V (r0 × W ∗
w) = (r′
0 × W ′∗
w ) ◦hF
So hF is indeed a coalgebra homomorphism.
The incremental functor reveals an interesting duality. Given a monoidal cate-
gory that describes how laterally composed (tensor product) objects are processed
vertically (by composition of arrows), we get for free an automaton that deﬁnes a
laterally evolving process upon vertically composed arrows. This automaton models
how the process that the monoidal category describes will behave in the face of new
information, and it reveals the monoidal category’s underlying incremental structure.
This suggests the following corollary:
Corollary 3.1.1. If the S-monoidal grammars (CG, r) and (C′
G, r′) have functors
between them, then the coalgebras I(CG, r) and I(C′
G, r′) are bisimulatable.
Proof. If (CG, r) and (C′
G, r′) have functors between them, then I(CG, r) and I(C′
G, r′)
have coalgebra homomorphisms between them. By [Lev], this implies that I(CG, r)
and I(C′
G, r′) are bisimulatable.
4
R≥0-Monoidal Grammars from Language Models
For some R≥0-monoidal grammar (G, r), we can think of r as assigning “conﬁdence
values” or “likelihoods” to the arrows in G. This allows us to model the relative
probability of diﬀerent interpretations of the same string of words and incorporate
probabilistic and distributional language models into the parsing process.
Let us
explore what this means.
4.1
Maximum Parse State Likelihood
Deﬁnition 4.1. A language model over the monoidal grammar G is the following
family of probability distributions:
• For any preﬁx w1 ⊗...wn, a probability distribution with ﬁnite support over the
possible completions wn+1⊗...wm such that there is a parsing w1⊗...wn⊗wn+1⊗
...wm →s. We will denote this as Pr(wn+1 ⊗...wm|w1 ⊗...wn).
• For any sentence w1 ⊗...wm with at least one parsing a : w1 ⊗...wm →s, a
probability distribution with ﬁnite support over the set of all such parsings. We
will denote this as Pr(a|w1 ⊗...wm).
9

We would like to develop a mapping from language models over a monoidal gram-
mars G to R≥0-monoidal grammars (G, r) such that r(p) is indicative of the probability
that a particular parse state is “optimal” according to that language model. We can
formalize this notion with the following concepts:
Deﬁnition 4.2. For some preﬁx w1 ⊗...wn equipped with a parse state p : w1 ⊗
...wn →o and sentence w1 ⊗...wn ⊗wn+1 ⊗...wm equipped with a parsing a : w1 ⊗
...wn ⊗wn+1 ⊗...wm →s, we say that a is p-compliant if there exist some arrows
ah : wn+1 ⊗...wm →o′, av : o ⊗o′ →s such that a = av ◦(p ⊗ah).
Deﬁnition 4.3. Given some preﬁx w1 ⊗...wn and sentence w1 ⊗...wn ⊗wn+1 ⊗...wm
such that there exists a parsing a : w1 ⊗...wn ⊗wn+1 ⊗...wm →s, we will deﬁne a
maximal parse state for w1 ⊗...wn on a to be a parse state p : w1 ⊗...wn →o such
that a is p-compliant and there exists no c such that c ◦p is not isomorphic to p and
a is (c ◦p)-compliant.
Intuitively, the parsing a is p-compliant if the parse state p factors a, and p is a
maximal parse state for a if p cannot be developed any farther while still maintaining
the possibility to extend it into a. We can use these constructs to deﬁne the following
quantity:
Deﬁnition 4.4. Given a parse state p : w1 ⊗...wn →o, its maximal parse state
likelihood prM(p) is:
prM(p) =
X
a∈Ap
Pr(a|w1 ⊗...wn ⊗wn+1 ⊗...wm)Pr(wn+1 ⊗...wm|w1 ⊗...wn)
Where Ap is the set of all parsings a such that p is a maximal parse state for w1⊗...wn
on a.
Intuitively, given a preﬁx w1 ⊗...wn, a parse state p : w1 ⊗...wn →o, and a
language model over the possible fully parsed sentences, prM(p) is the probability
that p will be the maximal parse state for the completed sentence.
Now say we want to construct an R≥0-monoidal grammar (G, r) such that for any
parse state, r(p) is as close as possible to prM(p). By the deﬁnition of S-monoidal
grammars, r is deﬁned by the values of r(g) for all generating arrows g ∈Σ1. For
example, for any parse state p in G, we have that:
r(p) =
Y
g∈Bp
r(g)
Here Bp is any bag of generating arrows in Σ1 that form p when combined by com-
position and tensor product.
Therefore, our objective is to ﬁnd r to minimize the following expression, where
PG is the set of all parse states in G:
minr

X
p∈PG

prM(p) −
Y
g∈Bp
r(g)



10

Because log is a monotonic function, we can rewrite this as the following, where Bp(g)
is the number of times that g appears in Bp:
minr

X
p∈PG

log(prM(p)) −
X
g∈Σ1
log(r(g)) ∗Bp(g)



This is a standard linear approximation of the coeﬃcients log(r(g)). If PG is ﬁnite,
we can use the normal equations or gradient descent to learn the values of r(g). If
not, we can use stochastic gradient descent [Bis06].
5
Future Work
We will close with some remarks on future directions.
• In section 4 we describe a simple algorithm for constructing an R≥0-monoidal
grammar from a language model over a monoidal grammar. However, since we
do not describe a method for constructing such language model from a dataset
and choice of monoidal grammar, it is not immediately clear how we can imple-
ment this algorithm in practice. Such a method would enable us to eﬃciently
implement our algorithm on top of any linguistic parsing library for CFGs, pre-
groups, or other monoidal grammars.
• In section 3 we introduce a functor I from GrammarS to the coalgebras of the
functor W = S × (SX)V . A natural question is whether there are functors in
the reverse direction as well. In particular, we are curious as to whether I has
left/right adjoints. If such functors exist, this would be further evidence of a
fundamental connection between dynamical systems and monoidal categories.
Such a discovery could help us unite these ﬁelds of study, as well as enable us
to reduce questions about automata into questions about monoidal categories.
• Our framework is fully syntax-based and is currently agnostic to semantic mean-
ing. In [CSC10], the authors deﬁne a functorial framework for aﬃliating syntac-
tic structure with vector space semantics, and in [SPHK18] the authors project
vector space semantics onto dynamic syntax trees in order to model incremen-
tality. This raises the question of how we can best incorporate semantic infor-
mation into our framework. For example, if we extend the functor from [CSC10]
to operate over monoidal grammars in general, it would be interesting to see
how the interaction between this functor and I compares to the construction in
[SPHK18].
