1	
  
Properties of Sparse Distributed Representations 
and their Application to Hierarchical Temporal 
Memory 
 
Subutai Ahmad and Jeff Hawkins 
Numenta 
Redwood City, CA 94063 

 
March 24, 2015 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Our neocortex continually processes an endless stream of rich sensory information. It 
does this remarkably well, better than any existing computer. A wealth of empirical 
evidence demonstrates that cortical regions represent all information using sparse 
patterns of activity. To function effectively throughout a lifetime these representations 
must have tremendous capacity and must be extremely tolerant to noise. However, a 
detailed theoretical understanding of the capacity and robustness of cortical sparse 
representations has been missing. 
 
Cortical representations are such that only a small percentage of neurons are very 
active while the rest remain relatively inactive, and hence the activity is considered 
sparse; the result of inhibitory neurons. The representations are considered distributed 
because the information is encoded not just in a single neuron but across a set of active 
neurons. Sparse distributed representations (SDRs) encode information throughout the 
cortex, and for a diverse variety of functions. The representations exist in early auditory 
and visual areas (Hromádka et al., 2008; Weliky et al., 2003), corresponding to sensory 
features such as audio frequencies, and visual lines and edges. The SDRs in later sensory 
areas encode more abstract and categorical information. Similarly, both concrete motor 
commands (Sanes & Donoghue, 2000) and abstract behavioral planning (Graziano et al., 
2002) are represented via sparse distributed encodings in primary motor and premotor 
areas, respectively.  
 
This paper analyzes certain properties and operations of SDRs relevant to cortical 
encoding. The binary SDR operations examined here are motivated by neuroscience and 
Empirical evidence demonstrates that every region of the neocortex 
represents information using sparse activity patterns. This paper examines 
Sparse Distributed Representations (SDRs), the primary information 
representation strategy in Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) systems 
and the neocortex. We derive a number of properties that are core to scaling, 
robustness, and generalization. We use the theory to provide practical 
guidelines and illustrate the power of SDRs as the basis of HTM. Our goal is 
to help create a unified mathematical and practical framework for SDRs as it 
relates to cortical function. 

	
  
2	
  
central to generalization, high order sequence memory, and achieving invariant 
representations in HTM learning algorithms. We derive classification error bounds and 
capacity scaling laws based on these operations.  The results demonstrate that neurons 
encoding information via SDRs have massive representational power. Robustness to 
noise is high enough such that reliable classification can be performed with as much as 
50% noise. We analyze the “union property” and show how it can be used to make 
multiple temporal predictions reliably. 
 
The theory behind sparse representations has become a topic of significant interest in 
recent years. They have been studied in the context of theoretical neuroscience (Kanerva, 
1988, Olshausen and Field, 2004), statistics (Tibshirani, 1996), machine learning (Lee, 
2008), compressed sensing (Donoho, 2006), and even web server data structures (Broder 
and Mitzenmacher, 2004). In our analysis we lean on the intuitions provided by Kanerva 
(Kanerva, 1988, Kanerva, 1997) as well as some of the techniques used for analyzing 
Bloom filters (Bloom, 1970). This discussion follows in Section II. The application of 
these properties to a number of different aspects of the HTM Learning Algorithm, as 
described in (Hawkins and Ahmad, 2010), is discussed in Section III. Section IV 
concludes the paper with the advantages of SDRs as the mathematical base of HTM. 
 
 
II. Mathematical Foundations of SDRs 
 
In this section we discuss certain mathematical properties of SDRs, with a focus on 
deriving fundamental scaling laws and error bounds. Properties such as probability of 
mismatches, robustness in noise, subsampling, classifying vectors, and unions 
demonstrate the usefulness of SDRs as a memory space. We illustrate properties and 
operations with examples to give an intuition to the mathematics. 
 
A. Definitions and Notation 
 
SDRs: Given a population of 𝑛 neurons, their instantaneous activity is represented as 
an SDR, i.e. an 𝑛-dimensional vector of binary components, e.g. 𝑥= 𝑏!, … , 𝑏!!! . 
Typically these vectors are highly sparse ,i.e. a small percentage of the components are 1. 
We use 𝑤! to denote the number of components in 𝑥 that are 1, i.e. 𝑤! =
𝑥!. 
 
Overlap: We determine the similarity between two SDR encodings using an overlap 
score. The overlap score is simply the number of bits that are ON in the same locations 
in both vectors.  If 𝑥 and 𝑦 are two binary SDRs, then the overlap can be computed as the 
dot product: 
 
𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) ≡𝑥∙𝑦 
 
Notice we do not use a typical distance metric, such as Hamming or Euclidean, to 
quantify similarity. With overlap we can derive some useful properties discussed later, 
which would not hold with these distance metrics. 
 
Matching: We realize a match between two SDRs if their overlap exceeds some 
threshold 𝜃: 
 
𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑥, 𝑦) ≡𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) ≥𝜃 
 
Typically 𝜃 is set such that 𝜃≤𝑤! and 𝜃≤𝑤!. 

	
  
3	
  
 
Consider an example of two SDR vectors: 
 
𝑥= [0100000000000000000100000000000110000000] 
𝑦= [1000000000000000000100000000000110000000] 
 
Both vectors have size 𝑛= 40, and 𝑤= 4. The overlap between 𝑥 and 𝑦 is 3, and thus 
the two vectors match when 𝜃= 3. Throughout the paper we’ll present examples of 
SDRs with sample parameters typical of current Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) 
implementations. These are listed below, and detailed later in Section III.  
 
HTM parameters: 
𝑛= 1024 to 65,536, representing the length of an SDR vector 
𝑤= 10 to 40, representing the number of ON bits in an SDR vector  
𝑠= 0.05% to 2.0%, representing the sparsity, where 𝑠=
!
! 
 
B. Uniqueness and Exact Matches 
 
Given a fixed n and w, the number of unique SDR encodings is 𝑛 choose 𝑤:  
  
𝑛
𝑤
=
𝑛!
𝑤! 𝑛−𝑤! 
(1) 
 
Note this is significantly smaller than the number of encodings possible with dense 
representations, which is 2!. This implies a potential loss of information, as the number 
of possible input patterns is much greater than the number of possible representations in 
the SDR encoding. In practice this is meaningless. With 𝑛= 40 and 𝑤= 4, the number of 
encodings is 91,390. With more typical values 𝑛= 2048  and 𝑤= 40 , the SDR 
representation space is astronomically large at 2.37×10!"  encodings; the estimated 
number of atoms in the observable universe is ~10!". 
 
Given two random SDR encodings with the same parameters, 𝑥 and 𝑦, the probability 
they are identical is 
 
𝑃𝑥= 𝑦= 1/ 𝑛
𝑤 
(2) 
 
With 𝑛= 1024 and 𝑤= 2 there are 523,776 possible encodings and the probability 
two random encodings are identical is rather high, i.e. 1 in 523,776. This probability 
decreases extremely rapidly as 𝑤 increases. With 𝑤= 4, the probability dives to less 
than 1 in 45 billion. For the HTM values 𝑛= 2048 and 𝑤= 40, the probability two 
random encodings are identical is essentially zero. These calculations are carried out for 
varying parameters in Table 1 of Appendix A. 
 
C. Overlap Sets 
 
We introduce the notion of an overlap set to help analyze the effects of matching under 
varying conditions.  Let 𝑥 be an SDR encoding. The overlap set of 𝑥 with respect to 𝑏 is 
Ω!(𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏), defined as the set of vectors of size 𝑛  with 𝑤 bits on, that have exactly 𝑏 bits 

	
  
4	
  
of overlap with 𝑥. The number of such vectors is Ω!(𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏) , the cardinality of the set. 
Assuming 𝑏≤𝑤! and 𝑏≤𝑤, 
 
Ω!(𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏) = 𝑤!
𝑏
× 𝑛−𝑤!
𝑤−𝑏 
(3) 
 
The first term in the product of (3) is the number of subsets of 𝑥 with 𝑏 bits ON, and 
the second term is the number of other patterns containing 𝑛−𝑤! bits, of which 𝑤−𝑏 
bits are on. 
 
D. Inexact Matching 
 
In general we would like the system to be somewhat tolerant to changes or noise in the 
input.  That is, it is rare to require exact matches where 𝜃= 𝑤. Lowering  𝜃 decreases the 
sensitivity and increases the overall noise robustness of the system. For example, 
consider SDR vectors 𝑥 and 𝑥′, where 𝑥′ is corrupted by random noise. With 𝑤= 40 and 
𝜃 lowered to 20, the noise can change 50% of the ON bits and still match 𝑥 to 𝑥′. 
 
Yet increasing the robustness comes with the cost of more false positives. That is, 
decreasing 𝜃 also increases the probability of a false match with another random vector. 
There is an inherent tradeoff in these parameters, as we would like the chance of a false 
match to be as low as possible while retaining robustness. With appropriate parameter 
values the SDRs can have a large amount of noise robustness with a very small chance of 
false positives. 
 
Given an SDR encoding 𝑥 and another random vector 𝑦, what is the probability of a 
false match, i.e. the chance the 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) ≥𝜃? A match is defined as an overlap of 𝜃 
bits or greater, up to 𝑤. With 𝑛
𝑤 total patterns, the probability of a false positive is: 
 
𝑓𝑝!! 𝜃=
|Ω! 𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏|
!
!!!
𝑛
𝑤
 
(4) 
 
Note an exact match occurs when 𝜃= 𝑤. The numerator in (4) evaluates to 1, and the 
equation reduces to (2). 
 
For example, again suppose vector parameters 𝑛= 1024 and 𝑤= 4. If the threshold 
is 𝜃= 2, corresponding to 50% noise, then the probability of an error is one in 14,587. 
That is, with 50% noise there is a significant chance of false matches. If 𝑤 and 𝜃 are 
increased to 20 and 10, respectively, the probability of a false match decreases drastically 
to less than 1 in 10!". Thus, with a relatively modest increase in 𝑤 and 𝜃 (holding 𝑛 
fixed), SDRs can achieve essentially perfect robustness with up to 50% noise. These 
calculations are carried out for varying parameters in Table 2 of Appendix A. 
 
For the majority of cases we are interested in1, the first term in the numerator sum of 
(4) dominates by at least an order of magnitude, thus (5) gives an excellent 
approximation of the false positive likelihood: 
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
1	
  That is, whenever 𝑤> 7 and 𝜃>
!
!.	
  

	
  
5	
  
 
𝑓𝑝!! 𝜃≈|Ω! 𝑛, 𝑤, 𝜃|
𝑛
𝑤
 
(5) 
 
 
 
E. Subsampling 
 
An interesting property of SDRs is the ability to reliably compare against a subsampled 
version of a vector.  That is, recognizing a large distributed pattern by matching a small 
subset of the active bits in the large pattern. Let 𝑥 be an SDR vector and let 𝑥′ be a 
subsampled version of 𝑥, such that 𝑤!! ≤𝑤!. The subsampled vector 𝑥′ will always 
match 𝑥, as long as 𝜃≤𝑤!, but as you increase the subsampling the chance of a false 
positive increases.  
 
What is the probability of a false match between  𝑥′ a random vector 𝑦? Here the 
overlap set is computed with respect to the subsample 𝑥!, rather than the full vector 𝑥. If 
𝑏≤𝑤!! and 𝑤!! ≤𝑤! then the number of patterns with exactly b bits of overlap with 𝑥′ 
is: 
 
Ω!!(𝑛, 𝑤!, 𝑏) = 𝑤!!
𝑏
×
𝑛−𝑤!!
𝑤! −𝑏 
(6) 
 
Given a threshold 𝜃≤𝑤!!, the chance of a false positive then is: 
 
𝑓𝑝!!
!
𝜃=
|Ω!! 𝑛, 𝑤!, 𝑏|
!!!
!!!
𝑛
𝑤!
 
(7) 
 
Notice (6) and (7) differ from (3) and (4), respectively, only in the vectors being 
compared. That is, subsampling is simply a variant of the inexact matching properties 
discussed above. 
 
For instance, suppose 𝑛= 1024 and 𝑤! = 8. Subsampling half the bits in 𝑥 and 
setting the threshold to 2 (i.e. 𝑤!! = 4, 𝜃= 2), we find the probability of an error is one in 
3,142. However, increasing 𝑤!  to 20 and the relevant parameter ratios fixed (i.e. 
𝑤!! = 10, 𝜃= 5) the chance of a false positive drops to 1 in 2.5 million. Increasing 𝑛 to 
2048, 𝑤! = 40 , 𝑤!! = 20 , and 𝜃= 10 , more practical HTM parameter values, the 
probability of a false positive plummets to better than 1 in 10!". This is remarkable 
considering that the threshold is about 25% of the original number of bits. These 
calculations are carried out for varying parameters in Table 2 of Appendix A. 
 
F. Classifying a Set of Vectors 
 
We consider a form of classification similar to nearest neighbor classification. Let 𝑋 be a 
set of 𝑀 vectors, 𝑋= 𝑥!, … , 𝑥! , where each vector 𝑥! is an SDR. We assume that all 
vectors in 𝑋 are unique with respect to matching, i.e. 
 

	
  
6	
  
∀!∈!∀!∈!,!!!𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑥, 𝑦= 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 
(8) 
 
Given any vector 𝑦 we classify it as belonging to this set as follows: 
 
𝑦∈𝑋   ≡  ∃!!∈!𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑥!, 𝑦= 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 
(9) 
 
How reliably can we classify a vector 𝑥! corrupted by up to 𝑡 bits of noise? Assuming 
𝑡≤𝑤−𝜃, there are no false negatives in this scheme, only false positives.  Our question 
is then what is the probability the classification of a random vector 𝑦 is a false positive? 
Since all vectors in 𝑋 are unique with respect to matching, the probability of a false 
positive is bounded by: 
 
𝑓𝑝!(𝑡) ≤
𝑓𝑝!!!
! (𝑡)
!
!!!
 
(10) 
 
 
This is an upper bound because it “double counts” a vector that matches two 
different vectors in X. In the special case where all vectors in
have identical w, this is 
just: 
 
𝑓𝑝!(𝜃) ≤𝑀𝑓𝑝!!(𝜃) 
(11) 
 
Consider for example 𝑛= 64 and 𝑤= 3 for all vectors. If 𝜃= 2, 10 vectors can be 
stored in the list and the probability of false positives is about 1 in 22. Increasing 𝑤 and 𝜃 
to 12 and 8, respectively, maintaining the ratio 
!
! =
!
!, the chance of a false positive drops 
to about 1 in 2363. Now increase the parameters to more realistic values: 𝑛= 1024, 
𝑤= 21, and 𝜃= 14 (i.e. two-thirds of 𝑤). In this case the chance of a false positive with 
10 vectors plummets to about 1 in 10!". In fact, with these parameters the false positive 
rate for storing a billion vectors is better than 1 in 10!". 
 
This result illustrates a remarkable property of SDRs. Suppose a large set of patterns 
is encoded in SDRs, and stored in a list. A massive number of these patterns can be 
retrieved almost perfectly, even in the presence of a large amount of noise.  The main 
requirement being the SDR parameters 𝑛, 𝑤, and 𝑡 need to be sufficiently high. As 
illustrated in the above example, low values such as 𝑛= 64, 𝑤= 3, etc. are insufficient 
to capture these properties. These calculations are carried out for a variety of parameters 
in Table 3 of Appendix A. 
 
G. The Surprising Union Property 
 
One of the most fascinating properties of SDRs is the ability to reliably store a set of 
patterns in a single fixed representation by taking the OR of all the vectors. We call this 
the “union property”.  To store a set of 𝑀 vectors, the union mechanism is simply the 
Χ

	
  
7	
  
Boolean OR of all the vectors, resulting in a new vector 𝑋. To determine if a new SDR 𝑦 
is a member of the set, we simply compute the 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑋, 𝑦). 
 
 
 
Figure 1: (top) Taking the OR of a set of 𝑀 SDR vectors results in the union vector 𝑋. With the 
sparsity of each individual vector at 2%, and 𝑀= 10, it follows that the sparsity of 𝑋 is at most 
20%. The logic is straightforward: if there is no overlap within the set of vectors, each ON bit will 
correspond to its own ON bit in the union vector, summing the sparsities. With overlap, 
however, ON bits will be shared in the union vector, resulting in a lower sparsity. (bottom) 
Computing the 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑋, 𝑦 reveals if 𝑦 is a member of the union set 𝑋 – i.e. if the ON positions in 
𝑦 are ON in 𝑋 as well. 
 
The advantage of the union property is a fixed-size SDR vector can store a dynamic 
set of elements. As such, a fixed set of cells and connections can operate on a dynamic 
list. It also provides an alternate way to do classification. In HTM’s, unions are used 
extensively to make temporal predictions, for temporal pooling, to represent 
invariances, and to create an effective hierarchy. However, there are limits on the 
number of vectors that can be reliably stored in a set. That is, the union property has the 
downside of increased potential for false positives. 
 
How reliable is the union property? There is no risk of false negatives; if a given 
vector is in the set, its bits will all be one regardless of the other patterns, and the overlap 
will be perfect. However, the union property increases the likelihood of false positives. 
With the number of vectors, 𝑀, sufficiently large, the union set will become saturated 
with ON bits, and almost any other random vector will return a false positive match. 
 
Let us first calculate the probability of a false positive assuming exact matches, i.e. 
𝜃= 𝑤. In this case, a false positive with a new random pattern 𝑦 occurs if all of the bits 
in 𝑦 overlap with 𝑋.  When 𝑀= 1, the probability any given bit is 0 is given by 1 −
!
!. As 
𝑀 grows, this probability is given by 
 
𝑝! = 1 −𝑤
𝑛
!
 
(12) 
 
𝑥! = [01000000000010000000 … 010]	
  
𝑥! = [00000000000000000010 … 100]	
  
𝑥! = [10100000000000000000 … 010]	
  
⋮	
  
𝑥!" = [00000000000000110000 … 010]	
  
	
  
𝑋= 𝑥!𝑂𝑅𝑥!𝑂𝑅, . . . , 𝑥!"	
  
	
  
𝑋= [11100000000110110000 … 110]	
  
	
  
𝑦= [10000000000001000000 … 001]	
  
	
  
∴𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑋, 𝑦) = 1	
  

	
  
8	
  
After 𝑀 union operations, the probability a given bit in X is ON is 1 −𝑝!. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The expected percentage of ON bits as a function of 𝑀, the number of vectors in the 
union set. In this case, 𝑁= 2048 and 𝑤= 40, i.e. 𝑠= 2%.  
 
The probability of a false positive, i.e. all 𝑤 bits in 𝑦 are ON, is therefore 
 
𝑝!" = 1 −𝑝! ! =
1 −𝑤
𝑛
! !
 
(13) 
 
The technique used to arrive at (13) is similar to the derivation of the false positive rate 
for Bloom filters (Bloom, 1970; Broder and Mitzenmacher, 2004)2. 
 
For instance, consider SDR parameters 𝑛= 1024 and 𝑤= 2. Storing 𝑀= 20 vectors, 
the chance of a false positive is about 1 in 680. However, if 𝑤 is increased to 20, the 
chance drops dramatically to about 1 in 5.5 billion. This is a remarkable feature of the 
union property. In fact, if increasing 𝑀 to 40, the chance of an error is still better than 
10!!. 
 
To gain an intuitive sense of the union property, the expected number of ON bits in 
the union vector is 𝑛(1 −𝑝!). This grows slower than linearly, as shown in Figure 2. 
Consider for instance 𝑀= 80, where 20% of the bits are 0. When we consider an 
additional vector with 40 ON bits, there is a reasonable chance it will have at least one 
bit among this 20, and hence it won’t be a false positive. That is, only vectors with all of 
their 𝑤 bits amongst the 80% ON are false positives. As we increase 𝑛 and 𝑤, the number 
of patterns that can OR together reliably increases substantially. Calculations to illustrate 
this property are carried out for a variety of parameters in Table 4 of Appendix A. 
 
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
2	
  The slight difference being in Bloom filters each bit is chosen independently, i.e. with 
replacement. As such, a given vector could contain less than 𝑤 ON bits. In this analysis we 
guarantee that there are exactly 𝑤 bits on in each vector. 	
  

	
  
9	
  
In HTMs the vector sizes are often substantially larger than 1024, and the union 
property proves incredibly useful. We will discuss the impact of these numbers in more 
detail in Section III. 
 
H. Inexact Matches with Unions 
 
The union property was derived above in the context of no noise, i.e. 𝜃= 𝑤. We would 
like to understand the effects of noise in the system, and therefore now relax the criteria 
of a perfect match when considering unions. How reliably then can we match 𝑦 against 
𝑋 using a threshold 𝜃< 𝑤?  
 
As mentioned above, the expected number of ON bits in the union vector 𝑋 is 
𝑤! = 𝑛(1 −𝑝!).  Assuming 𝑛≥𝑤! ≥𝑤, we can calculate the expected size of the 
overlap set: 
	
  
𝐸Ω!(𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏)
= 𝑤!
𝑏
× 𝑛−𝑤!
𝑤−𝑏	
  
(14)	
  
	
  
In order for a match, we can have an overlap of 𝜃 or greater bits (up to 𝑤). The 
probability of a false match is therefore: 
	
  
𝜀≈
|Ω! 𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏|
!
!!!
𝑛
𝑤
	
  
(15)	
  
	
  
Note (15) is an approximation of the error, as we’re working with the expected 
number of ON bits in 𝑋3. As in (4), for most of the cases we are interested in, the first 
term in the numerator sum dominates, allowing us to simplify (15). Thus, (16) is an 
excellent approximation for all practical purposes4.	
  
	
  
𝜀≈|Ω! 𝑛, 𝑤, 𝑏|
𝑛
𝑤
	
  
(16)	
  
 
As one would expect, the chance of error increases as the threshold is lowered. The 
consequences of this tradeoff can be mitigated by increasing 𝑛. Suppose 𝑛= 1024 and 
𝑤= 20. When storing 𝑀= 20 vectors, the chance of a false positive when using perfect 
matches is about 1 in 5 billion. Using a threshold of 19 increases the false positive rate to 
about 1 in 123 million. When 𝜃= 18, the chance increases to 1 in 4 million.  However if 
you increase 𝑛 to 2048 with 𝜃= 18, the false positive rate improves dramatically to 1 in 
223 billion.   This example illustrates the union property’s robustness to noise, and is yet 
another example of our larger theme: small linear changes in SDR numbers can cause 
super-exponential improvements in the error rates. 
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
3	
  Subsequently, in the simplified case of no unions, i.e. 𝑤! = 𝑤, there are slight discrepancies with 
(14), which is an exact calculation. Nevertheless, for numbers in the ranges we are concerned 
with, the discrepancies are insignificant. An excellent approximation of the error for all practical 
purposes is given by (16).	
  
4	
  Specifically whenever 𝑤> 12 and 𝜃>
!
!.	
  
	
  

	
  
10
  
 
I. Computational Efficiency 
 
Although SDR vectors are large, all the operations we've discussed run in time linear in 
the number of ON bits. That is they are 𝑂(𝑤) and independent of the size of the vector, 
𝑛. This would not be the case, however, with more standard distance metrics which are 
typically 𝑂(𝑛). For HTM systems this is important since in practice 𝑤≪𝑛. 
 
 
III. SDRs and HTM 
 
Hierarchical Temporal Memory is a detailed computational theory of the neocortex. 
At the core of HTM are time-based learning algorithms that store and recall spatial and 
temporal patterns. SDR is the primary data structure used in the cortex, and used 
everywhere in HTM systems. The algorithms as described in the HTM whitepaper 
(Hawkins and Ahmad, 2010) are critically reliant on binary SDRs. In HTM there isn’t a 
single unitary SDR, rather there are a number of distinct SDRs for specialized purposes. 
These SDRs are involved in different parts of the HTM model neuron, and different 
functions in the system of algorithms. 
 
The following discussion assumes familiarity with HTM basics. It would behoove the 
reader to understand the implementation and pseudocode in the HTM whitepaper 
(Hawkins and Ahmad, 2010), as we discuss SDRs in the context of the neuron model i.e. 
columns of cells, and their proximal and distal dendritic segments, and cortical 
operations – i.e. spatial pooling and predictions.  
 
Note that HTM structures and operations such as hierarchy, feedback, sensorimotor 
inference, and motor commands also use specific SDRs and rely on SDR properties. 
Although a discussion of those topics as well as the learning algorithm is beyond the 
scope of this paper, the same principles and intuitions apply. 	
  
 
A. Notation 
 
The main HTM algorithms discussed are “Spatial Pooling” (SP) and “Temporal 
Memory” (TM), where TM refers to the sequence learning portion of the pseudocode in 
Chapter 4 of HTM whitepaper (Hawkins and Ahmad, 2010) The following constants are 
used: 
 
N : size of input vector 
C : number of columns 
k : the number of columns active after spatial inhibition  
L : number of cells per column 
S : number of segments per cell 
 
B. Spatial Pooling 
 
Here we provide an overview of the SDR operations as they are implemented in the SP 
process, with vector operations depicted in Figure 3. The SP process takes as input a 
binary vector of length 𝑁. In practice this vector is usually sparse, but is not required to 
be sparse. Each column in the SP represents proximal segments in a cell. A binary matrix 
with dimensions 𝑁×𝐶 can be used to represent the set of connected synapses in the SP. 
This matrix is not restricted to be sparse, but in practice is almost always sparse. The 

	
  
11
  
result of the vector-matrix multiplication is a vector of overlap counts, the third data 
frame in Figure 3. An inhibition step chooses the column winners to form the output. 
That is, the indices corresponding to the top 𝑘 overlaps correspond to the ON bits in the 
output SDR. By construction this SDR is of size 1×𝐶 with 𝑘 components that are 1. 
 
 
Figure 3: SDRs used in spatial pooling, where SP inhibition is run on the input vector to yield an 
output binary vector representing the columns with the top overlap counts. 
 
In the absence of learning, the SP process examines the overlap between a set of 
randomly initialized columns and individual binary input vectors. The top 𝑘 columns, 
determined by calculating the overlap, win and form the ON bits in the resulting SDR. 
This SDR is then used as input into subsequent TM processes. 
 
Consider a collection of random binary vectors 𝑋 each with size 𝑛 and 𝑤! ON bits. 
Given a new random sparse vector 𝑦 of the same size, but possibly different 𝑤, how 
many vectors in 𝑋 will have exactly 𝑏 bits of overlap with 𝑦? The probability of such a 
match for a single vector in 𝑋 is: 
 
𝑝𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑥, 𝑦= 𝑏=
|Ω! 𝑛, 𝑤!, 𝑏|
𝑛
𝑤!
 
(17) 
 
It follows that the expected number of columns with b bits of overlap is 𝑋∙
𝑝(𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑥, 𝑦= 𝑏), from which we can calculate the “overlap curve”. This is the 
overlap for each column after sorting, shown in Figure 4 shows this curve for a 
representative set of parameters. This curve provides some intuition as to how a 
randomly initialized SP process functions. One can see that a small amount of noise at 
the input will somewhat change the output SDR, but that most of the winners will be 
unchanged. The sharper the drop off after k, the more noise robustness in the system. 
One of the effects of SP learning is to make the overlap curve sharper, thereby increasing 
robustness to noise. 
 

	
  
12
  
 
Figure 4: The overlap curve for the top 800 columns of 2048. 
 
C. Temporal Memory 
 
The TM process is discussed in two phases, where the first phase calculates the active 
states at time step 𝑡, and the second predicts which states will be active in the next time 
step, 𝑡+ 1. 
 
The first phase of TM follows the SP and determines the current active temporal state. 
This phase examines the cells in each column predicted in the previous time step, and 
the actual winning columns in the SP output SDR. Cells in winning columns that were 
correctly predicted stay ON to represent the active temporal state of the system. Figure 5 
shows a schematic of this operation. The first matrix is the 1×𝐶 SP output SDR, followed 
by the L×𝐶 matrix predicted state matrix. Row-by-row element-wise multiplication 
(represented by the symbol 
) of these two matrices is used to determine the active 
state, which is also 𝐿×𝐶. All three structures are sparse. 
 
Figure 5: SDRs used in phase 1 of temporal memory, where the inputs are the spatial-pooled SDR 
and the predicted state, and the output is the active state. 
 
⊙

	
  
13
  
The second phase of TM determines the predictions for the next time step by 
matching individual cell segments with the current active state. Figure 6 shows this 
operation schematically. Each cell contains a list of segments, where each segment is 
represented by an SDR of size 𝐿×𝐶. For each segment the TM computes a match 
between this representation and the current active state. If the match of any segment is 
above the threshold, the predicted state for this cell will be ON. 
 
 
Figure 6: SDRs in phase two of temporal memory, where the inputs are the active state and set of 
segments, and the output is the predicted state. 
 
Matching the active state is equivalent to the SDR classification function discussed in 
the previous section. The ability of each cell to robustly “classify” the active state will 
impact the overall performance of the TM. In addition, at time 𝑡 there may be many 
possible states predicted for time 𝑡+ 1, and all the cells corresponding to these states 
will be in predicted state. From a computational standpoint, this step then determines a 
union of possible temporal states for the next time step. The ability of the predicted state to 
robustly represent this union is a fundamental property of SDRs and key to the 
performance of the TM.  
 
The TM learns sequences of SDRs, but what is the mechanism by which HTM uses 
SDRs to represent high-order sequences? The TM can uniquely represent inputs as 
unique steps in a sequence by using the cells within columns to represent inputs in 
varying contexts. That is, in a learned temporal sequence, only one of the cells in an 
HTM column becomes active. High-order sequences rely on creating a unique temporal 
context. We can calculate the number of unique temporal contexts based on the number 
of cells per column. For 𝑤 columns of 𝑥 cells each, there are 𝑥! ways to represent the 
same input in different contexts. For conservative HTM parameters 𝑤= 40 and 𝑥= 8, 
this evaluates to 1.33×10!". This is a massive capacity, even with a limited number of 
cells per column; some HTM models implement 32 cells per column. 
 
The full set of segments implement classification as discussed above in Section IIF. 
The TM is able to make temporal predictions if and only if enough cells are able to 
correctly classify the current active state. In TM each of a cell’s dendrite segments 
connects to other cells in the region, but the connections are limited to only a small 
portion of the cells. A basic distal segment (without overloading or pooling) uses inexact 

	
  
14
  
matching, as discussed above. The equations (4)-(7) give us lower bounds on the number 
of synapses per segment and help us understand the effect of lowering the activation 
threshold. We can use the equations to set these parameters such that false classification 
by a segment is highly unlikely. With more segments per dendrite, the TM can learn 
more unique contexts. A higher activation threshold will call for more of the synapses 
on these segments to be active in order for a cell to become predicted, placing a more 
stringent requirement on segments’ subsampling their input. 
 
The TM makes a union of predictions. Using the union property we can figure out 
how many predictions can be made at a time with minimal probability of false matches.   
We can provide upper bounds on the number of simultaneous predictions before the 
predicted state saturation becomes useless – i.e. predict too many states. 
 
 
IV. Conclusion 
 
To fully understand any computational system, we need an understanding of the data 
structure and their properties. SDRs form the basic data structure in HTM systems. 
From their mathematics we can derive properties such as bounds and scaling laws, 
performance characteristics, and ideal parameters. In this paper we have shown that 
SDRs can be used to perform robust classification under noise and random deletions. 
The union property shows how dynamic lists can be robustly represented within a 
single fixed vector. We have outlined how various HTM operations map to SDRs.  
 
Under the right set of parameters SDRs enable a massive capacity to learn temporal 
sequences and form the basis for highly robust classification systems. Taken together 
these properties provide a simple and elegant mathematical theory characterizing the 
robustness of HTM systems. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors thank Alexander Lavin and Celeste Baranski for their help in editing this 
paper, and Yuwei Cui, Scott Purdy, and Chetan Surpur for many helpful discussions.
