arXiv:1901.00246v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2019
Natively Interpretable Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence:
Preliminary Results and Future Directions
Christopher J. Hazard∗, Christopher Fusting∗, Michael Resnick∗, Michael Auerbach∗,
Michael Meehan∗, Valeri Korobov∗
January 21, 2019
1
Abstract
Machine learning models have become more and more
complex in order to better approximate complex
functions.
Although fruitful in many domains, the
added complexity has come at the cost of model in-
terpretability. The once popular k-nearest neighbors
(kNN) approach, which ﬁnds and uses the most sim-
ilar data for reasoning, has received much less at-
tention in recent decades due to numerous problems
when compared to other techniques. We show that
many of these historical problems with kNN can be
overcome, and our contribution has applications not
only in machine learning but also in online learning,
data synthesis, anomaly detection, model compres-
sion, and reinforcement learning, without sacriﬁcing
interpretability.
We introduce a synthesis between
kNN and information theory that we hope will pro-
vide a clear path towards models that are innately
interpretable and auditable. Through this work we
hope to gather interest in combining kNN with infor-
mation theory as a promising path to fully auditable
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence.
2
Introduction
and
Motiva-
tions
As machine learning has matured the need to un-
derstand, interpret and explain models has become
increasingly important [Alpaydin, 2016, Mohri et al.,
2012, Goodfellow et al., 2016].
Machine learning
models are interpreted in a variety of ways includ-
ing exploring the internals of a model [Skapura, 1996,
Poerner et al., 2018], creating ex post rationaliza-
tions [Ribeiro et al., 2016, Google LLC, 2018] or us-
ing models that are interpretable from the begin-
∗Diveplane Corporation. If you are interested in using our

would like to thank the investors, employees, and supporters
of Diveplane Corporation for making this work possible.
ning and maximize their accuracy [Wang and Rudin,
2015]. There is a perception and some supporting ev-
idence that there exists a trade oﬀbetween accuracy
and interpretability [Cano et al., 2006].
The motivating philosophy behind our work is that
models should be innately interpretable. Speciﬁcally,
our motivations are:
• decisions should be directly traceable to the
training data that caused the decision to be
made;
• the regions of the model should be easily char-
acterized directly from the training data; and
• assumptions are minimal.
To achieve the aforementioned goals we combine k-
Nearest Neighbors (kNN) with the principle of max-
imum entropy to create models that are easy to un-
derstand, make minimal assumptions, and are non-
parametric.
k-Nearest Neighbors is one of the oldest, simplest,
and most accurate algorithms for pattern classiﬁca-
tion and regression models
[Hastie et al., 2001]. It
is a simple technique that is easily implementable
[Alpaydin, 1997]. The accuracy of kNN-based clas-
siﬁcation, prediction, and recommendation depends
solely on a data model.
Outputs from the model
are usually traceable back to the exact data that in-
ﬂuenced each decision. This traceability enables de-
tailed analysis of the decision inputs and characteri-
zation of the data local to the decision.
k-Nearest Neighbors was previously a dominant
machine learning technology [Coomans and Massart,
1982, Breiman et al., 1984, Altman, 1992, Alpaydin,
1997] but was largely abandoned with the growing
size of data and the computational complexity of
ﬁnding the nearest k points [Raikwal and Saxena,
2012, Schuh et al., 2014, Hmeidi et al., 2008]. Many
optimizations have been proposed over the years,
they generally seek to reduce the number of dis-
tances actually computed [Pedregosa et al., 2011].
The optimizations include linear scan, Kd-trees, ball-
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
1

trees, etc. [Pedregosa et al., 2011]. The curse of di-
mensionality has also been known to adversely af-
fect kNN [Hastie et al., 2001, Indyk and Motwani,
1998, Schuh et al., 2013, Tao et al., 2009] and the
selection of a distance function can be challenging
[V. B. Surya et al., 2017]. Additionally features may
have to be scaled or standardized to prevent distance
measures from being dominated by one of the fea-
tures. The accuracy of kNN can be severely degraded
by the presence of noisy or irrelevant features, or if
the features scales are not consistent with their rel-
evance. Finally, kNN requires a value of parameter
k. If k is too small, the model may have low bias
but be sensitive to noisy points and have too high
of variance. If k is too large, the neighborhood may
include points from other classes and may have too
little variance.
Our contributions in this paper are several. First,
we bring numerous well-studied techniques together
to improve the eﬃcacy of kNN. Second, we connect
kNN with information theory and describe numer-
ous ways this can be applied to machine learning.
Third, we illustrate how the ﬁrst two contributions
open the door to interpretable reinforcement learn-
ing.
Throughout this paper we discuss targetless
models (models in which we are interested in predict-
ing all the features using all the others), their utility
in understanding the data, and introduce an imputa-
tion method that naturally arises from such models.
The purpose of this paper is to oﬀer a glimpse as to
what the combination of kNN and information theory
can oﬀer in advancing the state of the art of machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence.
3
Targetless kNN and Entropy
We introduce term targetless learning to describe our
approach to kNN. Instead of the traditional approach
of building a model that learns the mapping from
a set of input features variables to a set of target
variables, or building multiple models to learn mul-
tiple mappings, our models consist of the relevant
training data stored in a data structure that can be
quickly queried. We may wish to predict and char-
acterize any set of variables given any other set of
variables. This ﬂexibility is generally not emphasized
in the related literature outside of a subset of work on
semi-supervised learning and imputation [Tan et al.,
2018, Zhao and Guo, 2015], and so we deﬁne two
more terms to help us describe inputs and outputs
in targetless learning. Context features are the fea-
ture variables being used as inputs for a particular
query. Action features are the feature variables that
are being labeled, actioned upon, or predicted; in tra-
ditional targeted machine learning, these are usually
referred to as target variables, labels, or responses
with regard to a targeted machine learning model.
These terms further reﬂect the origin and potential
for online learning applications of this approach.
3.1
Similarity of Points
When determining the value of an unknown action
feature, the action features of the k most similar
points are averaged or their values voted upon to de-
termine the most likely value. In general similarity
is determined by a distance metric. Unfortunately as
the number of dimensions increases it becomes dif-
ﬁcult to distinguish points [Hinneburg et al., 2000,
Beyer et al., 1999].
One proposed solution to this
problem is to use the number of shared nearest
neighbors as a similarity measure [Houle et al., 2010].
There is also evidence that fractional norms heading
towards zero enable points to be distinguished more
easily in high dimensional space [Aggarwal et al.,
2001]. Fractional norms are represented as ||x||p as
||x||p =
 X
i∈Ξ
wixp
i
!1/p
,
(1)
where p is the parameter for the Lebesgue space, Ξ is
the feature set, and wi is the weight for each feature,
often where wi = 1
n.
Motivated by this result we derived the Minkowski
distance as p →0 expressed over feature set Ξ
lim
p→0 dp (x, y) =
 Y
i∈Ξ
|xi −yi|
!
1
|Ξ|
.
(2)
When feature weights wi satisfy P
i∈Ξ wi = 1 we have
lim
p→0 dp (x, y) =
Y
i∈Ξ
|xi −yi|wi.
(3)
Note equations 2 and 3 are geometric means and
have the useful property of being scale invariant.
Scale invariance means that scaling a feature by any
factor will not aﬀect the ordering of proximity, as the
result is the same as multiplying all of the distances
by a constant. Thus using p = 0 enables the data to
be stored in its original form, not scaled, standard-
ized, or normalized, which improves the transparency
of the model and removes the need for that aspect of
feature engineering. As lim p →0, the scale of fea-
tures matters less, meaning that the Minkowski dis-
tance is approximately scale invariant with regard to
p values that are relatively close to 0.
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
2

3.1.1
A Probabilistic Approach
We are unaware of any prior work that has investi-
gated using p = 0 as a distance function.1 This is
unsurprising, as p = 0 causes signiﬁcant problems
for any data set that has categorical data or other
data that may be exactly equal. Consider a data set
that has two features. If two points have equal val-
ues for the ﬁrst feature, then the distance between
the points will be zero regardless of the distance be-
tween the other values of the other feature, due to
the multiplication by zero.
Instead, consider distance probabilistically, in the
sense that each feature “distance” is the probability
that the two values are diﬀerent given the observa-
tions or measurements of the feature values (instead
of being the absolute value of their diﬀerence) as a
way of handling uncertainty [Agarwal et al., 2016]. If
we assume that each observation is independent, then
simply multiplying the probabilities that each feature
value is the same yields the same distance measure
as Equation 2 when determining the conjunction of
the probabilities.
Solving the problems that come
from exact matches using p = 0 means we can work
directly with probabilities or deal with features on
wildly diﬀerent scales without having to standardize
or otherwise scale them. Using the geometric mean
to combine measurements of achieving diﬀerent goals
has been shown to be an eﬀective objective function
for multicriteria optimization [Harrington, 1965], and
so using it to provide contrast between diﬀerent sim-
ilarities is a natural use.2
Suppose we have made two observations of a value,
x and y respectively, and we would like to know the
“distance” between them. The obvious distance of
|x −y| yields the maximum likelihood value of the
distance, but does not yield the expected value of the
distance. Consider that there is considerable devia-
tion among observations of the same value, meaning
that there is likely to be a relatively large expected
diﬀerence between observations of the same value.
We use the term deviation to encompass both the
error, which pertains the diﬀerence between actual
and measurement, and the residual, which pertains
1Using p = 0 is in not a metric, and arguably not a distance
function, as it fails the triangle inequality. Further, it is not
technically p = 0 but rather limp→0, but we use this abuse of
notation for simplicity.
2We note that this realization was inspired by early blog
post drafts of work done by Leinster and Meckes [2016] in that
the generalized diversity index, which can be parameterized
to measure the Shannon entropy, is nothing more than the
reciprocal of the generalized mean when substituting p −1
for p when dealing with probabilities [Tuomisto, 2010], and
the Minkowski distance is just the generalized mean of the
diﬀerences.
to the diﬀerence between actual and estimated. This
generic use of deviation applies regardless of whether
the observation is measured, predicted, or inferred,
and regardless of whether the deviation is due to ran-
domness or lack of additional information that would
reduce the deviation.
Consider two observations, x and y, with consid-
erable deviation. If x = 100 ± 10 and y = 100 ± 10,
intuitively the expected distance between x and y is
likely to be greater than 0 even though the expected
values is the same, yet a simple subtraction yields 0.
Further, consider that x and y are feature vectors of
length two of x = {1.1, 100} and y = {1.2, 10}. If
we have a third observation that is z = {1.1, 10.01},
using p = 0 for measuring the similarity between z
and both x and y will yield x as inﬁnitely closer than
y because the diﬀerence between the ﬁrst terms is
zero and the multiplication makes the distance zero.
Though this may sometimes be desirable, larger de-
viations for the ﬁrst feature and smaller deviations
for the second feature should yield y as more similar
to z than x.
To solve the problem of zero expected distance for
identical measurements despite deviation, and to ad-
dress the high sensitivity of Lp with close or exact
matches with a low p value, we employ the  Lukaszyk-
Karmowski metric [ Lukaszyk, 2003, 2004]. Given a
probability density function of x, f, and a probabil-
ity density function of y, g, the expected diﬀerence
between them becomes
d(x, y) =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
|x −y|f(x)g(y) dx dy.
(4)
We assume that if both points are near enough to
be worth determining the distance between them,
then the distributions and parameters for the prob-
ability density functions should represent the local
data.
The two simple maximum entropy distribu-
tions on (−∞, ∞) given a point and a distance around
the point are the Laplace distribution (double ex-
ponential) and Gaussian distribution, depending on
whether the distance is represented as mean absolute
error or standard deviation respectively. The Gaus-
sian or normal distribution has a clean closed form
solution.
Letting µxy ≡|x −y|, the expected dis-
tance for two normal identical distributions becomes
dNN(x, y) = µxy+ 2σ
√π exp
 
−µ2
xy
4σ2
!
−µxy erfc
µxy
2σ

.
(5)
For the previous example of x = 100 ± 10 and y =
100±10, the expected distance is approximately 11.3,
which is more reasonable for two values that have a
standard deviation of 10.
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
3

In order to employ this measure, however, we need
a value for the deviations. Measurement error may
not always be readily available, and it does not take
into account the additional error among the relation-
ships within the model. For continuous values we can
ﬁnd the smallest nonzero distance between any two
points in the data with regard to the feature. Be-
cause that is the smallest observed distance, we do
not know whether the model’s relationships can yield
a ﬁner resolution, so this acts as an empirical lower
bound for the deviations and a good starting value.
Alternatively residuals can be calculated for each
prediction. The mean absolute error or standard de-
viation can be calculated for each observation us-
ing a hold-one-out approach, where instances are re-
moved from the model and each of the held out in-
stance’s features are predicted using the rest of the
data. These errors can be locally aggregated or can
be aggregated across the entire model to obtain the
expected residual, r, for predicting each feature, i,
as ri. We have found that using the residuals in the
kNN system with the  Lukaszyk-Karmowski metric,
calculating new residuals, and then feeding these back
in, generally yields convergence of the residual values
with notable convergence after only 3 or 4 iterations.
Measuring a distance value for each feature further
enables parameterization regarding the type of data a
feature holds. For example, nominal data can result
in a distance of 1 if the values are not equal and 0 if
they are equal. Thus, one-hot encoding, the expan-
sion of nominal values into multiple features, is not
needed. Ordinal data can use a distance of 1 between
each ordinal type. Cyclical data can perform appro-
priate subtractions while keeping the data on a single
dimension, which keeps the feature in one dimension
and directly understandable rather than having to
split the feature into two using trigonometry.
3.2
Information in the Data
We now quantify the amount of information in a kNN
model. Because our formulation of kNN uses a sim-
ilarity measure based on distance, we ﬁrst quantify
each point x by the amount of distance it contributes
to the k nearest points. In general, we deﬁne convic-
tion as a normalized measure of how much surprisal
one would expect for a given situation relative to the
surprisal observed.
If we have some form of prior
distribution of data given all of the information ob-
served up to that point, the surprisal is the amount
of information gained when we observe a new sample,
event, case, or state change and update the prior dis-
tribution to form a new posterior distribution after
the event. The surprisal of an event of observing a
random variable x ∼X is deﬁned as I(x) = −ln p(x).
Thus, the conviction, π, can be expressed as
π(x) = E[I(X)]
I(x)
.
(6)
This ratio results in conviction values π ∈[0, ∞),
where
• π = 0 means this point has an inﬁnite amount
of surprisal, that is, the point was previously
thought to be impossible to exist within the
dataset;
• π = 1 means this point has an average amount
of surprisal, that is, it adds an average amount
of information to the model; and
• π = ∞means this point is not at all surprising,
that is, it is so redundant that the point could
be discarded without aﬀecting the model at all.
This ratio is indicative of how much information
is required to encode one aspect of the model rel-
ative to another, whether dealing with cases or fea-
tures. In some cases conviction can act as a proxy for
several matters, such as how conﬁdent we are about
our data, whether the data is correct or anomalous,
whether the data belongs together, or whether the
data is useful in making predictions. In other cases,
conviction can inform how the model will be harmed
if data is removed, and additionally can be used to
control the surprisal when performing data synthesis.
Conviction can be computed in a targeted or tar-
getless manner. In a targeted manner, each feature or
case is compared against another set of target cases
or features one on one.
In an untargeted manner,
each case or feature is held out one by one and com-
pared against the rest of the data in the model. When
holding one out, the change in probability impact on
other elements of the model indicates a measure of
hubness or centrality of the data which, when iso-
lated, has been found to be of signiﬁcant importance
for determining the inﬂuence of data on the model
[Tomaˇsev and Mladeni´c, 2014].
If the probability space over which conviction is
normalized is broadened (or if surprisal is used with-
out normalization), then even the model impact of
combinations of features can be compared to that of
combinations of observations.
In the following sub-sections, we discuss diﬀer-
ent forms of conviction that can be derived. More
forms of surprisal and conviction can be conditioned
and computed, opening up a rich area for diﬀerent
kinds of informativeness about various aspects of the
model.
We note that conviction is related to, but not ex-
actly the same as, feature importance or case inﬂu-
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
4

ence and so care must be taken when comparing the
two.3
3.2.1
Prediction Conviction
We deﬁne prediction conviction is the amount of sur-
prisal required to predict a value given a model given
the model’s uncertainty. To characterize the model’s
uncertainty, we use residuals.
Deﬁnition 1 Let ξ be the number of features in a
model and n the number of observations. We deﬁne
the residual function, r : X →Rξ, on the training
data X as
r(x) = JΩ
1 (x), JΩ
2 (x), . . . , JΩ
ξ (x),
(7)
where JΩ
i
is the residual of the model on feature i at
point x, parameterized by a set of hyperparameters Ω.
We will refer to the residual function evaluated on all
of the model data as rM.
Typically, the feature residuals will be calculated
as mean absolute error or standard deviation. Fur-
ther, subsets of features may be used to compute the
residual, particularly when performing targeted op-
erations.
Deﬁnition 2 Given a point x ∈X and the set K
of its k nearest neighbors, a distance function d :
Rz ×Z →R, and a distance exponent α, the distance
contribution of x is the harmonic mean
φ(x) =
 
1
|K|
X
k∈K
1
d(x, k)α
!−1
.
(8)
The distance contribution reﬂects how much “dis-
tance” a point contributes to a graph connecting the
nearest neighbors, which is the inverse of the density
of points over a unit of distance in the Lebesgue space.
The harmonic mean of the distance contribution re-
ﬂects the inverse of the inverse distance weighting
often employed with kNN, though other techniques
may be substituted if inverse distance weighting is
not employed.
We can quantify the information needed to express
a distance contribution φ(x) by transforming it into
a probability. We begin by selecting the exponential
distribution to describe the distribution of residuals
as it is the maximum entropy distribution constrained
3It is possible to compare the results of estimating values
for a feature, and then compute a conviction ratio comparing
the mutual information among a set of estimated values as an
information theoretic representation of mean decrease in accu-
racy or Shapley value. This would be an information theoretic
result that is much closer to feature importance.
by the ﬁrst moment.4
We represent this in typical
nomenclature for the exponential distribution using
the norm from Equation 1 as
1
λ = ||r(x)||p.
(9)
We can directly compare the distance contribution
and p-normed magnitude of the residual. This is be-
cause the distance contribution and the norm of the
residual are both on the same scale, with the distance
contribution being the expected distance of new in-
formation that the point adds to the model, and the
norm of the residual is the expected distance of devi-
ation. Given the entropy maximizing assumption of
the exponential distribution of the distances, we can
then determine the probability that a distance con-
tribution is greater than or equal to the magnitude of
the residual ||r(x)||p in the form of cumulative resid-
ual entropy [Rao et al., 2004] as
P(φ(x) ≥||r(x)||p) = e−
1
||r(x)||p ·φ(x).
(10)
We then convert the probability to self-information
as
I(x) = −ln P(φ(x) ≥||r(x)||p),
(11)
which simpliﬁes to
I(x) =
φ(x)
||r(x)||p
.
(12)
As the distance contribution decreases, or as the
residual vector magnitude increases, less information
is needed to represent this point. We can then com-
pare this to the expected value in regular conviction
form, yielding a prediction conviction of
πp = EI
I(x),
(13)
where I is the self-information calculated for each
point in the model.
3.2.2
Prediction Contribution
Feature prediction contribution is motivated by mean
decrease in accuracy (MDA) [Archer and Kimes,
2008]. In MDA, scores are established for models with
4Other distributions may be selected by adjusting the as-
sumptions slightly, such as the log-normal distribution. The
log-normal distribution is the maximum entropy distribution
assuming that we know the standard deviation rather than
the mean, but this distribution assumes that something closer
is less likely, and may be better suited for familiarity convic-
tion.
Further, the exact distribution of the distance contri-
bution may be solved if the distributions of the features are
known.
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
5

all the features, M, and models with each feature held
out, M−fi, i = 1 . . . ξ. The diﬀerence |M −Mfi| is the
importance of each feature, where the result’s sign is
altered depending on whether the goal is to maximize
or minimize score. Feature prediction contribution
diﬀers from MDA in that feature prediction contri-
bution measures the conditional entropy of adding
a feature. This means using prediction conviction on
features with signiﬁcant information may yield higher
contribution values even if the feature is independent.
Prediction contribution information, πc, is corre-
lated with accuracy and thus can be used as a surro-
gate. The expected self-information required to ex-
press a feature is given by
EI(M) = 1
ξ
ξ
X
i=0
I(xi),
and the expected self-information to express a feature
without feature i is
EI(M−i) = 1
ξ
ξ
X
j=0
I−i(xj).
From these equations, we can more formally deﬁne
prediction contribution of a feature and prediction
conviction of a feature.
Deﬁnition 3 The prediction contribution of a fea-
ture, πc, of feature i is
πc(i) = EI(M) −EI(M−fi)
EI(M)
.
Deﬁnition 4 The prediction conviction of a feature,
πp, of feature i is
πp(i) =
1
ξ
Pξ
i=0 EI(M−fi)
EI(M−fi)
.
3.2.3
Familiarity Conviction
Familiarity conviction is a metric for describing sur-
prisal of points in a model relative to the training
data. This diﬀers fundamentally from prediction con-
viction. Consider a data set that has data points at
regular intervals, such as a data point for each corner
in a grid. Given this grid data, prediction conviction
will indicate that a data point very close to an ex-
isting data point will not be surprising and that it
should be easy to predict given the low level of un-
certainty. However, familiarity conviction would in-
dicate a higher surprisal for such a point even though
it is easy to label because the point is unusual with
regard to the even distribution of the rest of the data
points. This new point does not form another corner
of the grid. The pair of prediction conviction and fa-
miliarity prediction can be used together to ﬁnd and
remove data points that are easy to predict but un-
usual with regard to uniqueness of data. These prop-
erties make familiarity conviction valuable for sani-
tizing data and reducing data as well as extracting
patterns and anomalies, as is discussed in other sec-
tions.
Familiarity conviction is based on the similarity
metrics as described in Section 3.1.
As long as a
low or zero value of p is used in Lp space metrics for
similarity, familiarity conviction is independent of the
scale of the data and provided and does not overre-
act to feature dominance based on feature scale and
range.
Deﬁnition 5 Given a set of points X ⊂Rz for every
x ∈X and an integer 1 ≤k < |X| we deﬁne the
distance contribution probability distribution, C of
X to be the set
C =

φ(x1)
Pn
i=1 φ(xi),
φ(x2)
Pn
i=1 φ(xi), . . . ,
φ(xn)
Pn
i=1 φ(xi)

(14)
for a function φ : X →R that returns the distance
contribution.
Note that because φ(0) = ∞may be true under
some circumstances, multiple identical points may
need special consideration, such as splitting the dis-
tance contribution among those points.
Remark 1 Clearly C is a valid probability distribu-
tion. We will use this fact to compute the amount of
information in C.
Deﬁnition 6 The
point
probability
of
a
point
xi, i = 1, 2, . . ., n is
l(i) =
φ(xi)
P
i
φ(xi),
(15)
where we see the index i is assigned the probability of
the indexed point’s distance contribution.
Deﬁnition 7 We the set of random variables that
characterize the discrete distribution of point proba-
bilities, L, is the set of L = {l(1), l(2), . . ., l(n)}.
Remark 2 Because we have no additional knowledge
of the distribution of points other than they follow the
distribution of the data, we assume L is uniform as
the distance probabilities have no trend or correlation.
Remark 3 A distance contribution is a discrete dis-
tribution of point probabilities.
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
6

Deﬁnition 8 The familiarity conviction of a point
xi ∈X is
πf(xi) =
1
|X|
P
i
KL (L||L −{i} ∪El(i))
KL (L||L −{xi} ∪El(i))
,
(16)
where KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Since
we assume L is uniform, we have that the expected
probability El(i) = 1
n.
Equation 16 can thus be used to compute familiar-
ity conviction.
3.3
Consequences of kNN Endowed
with Conviction
Having deﬁned two methods (convictions) to mea-
sure surprisal in the space of points X, we introduce
techniques that naturally fall out of the information-
based representation.
The ability to add and re-
move points to a model easily without retraining,
coupled with familiarity and prediction conviction,
enable numerous applications in model compression,
online learning, anomaly detection, model to model
comparison, reinforcement learning, synthetic data
generation, and likely more techniques we have not
considered. We detail some of these in the subsec-
tions following.
3.3.1
Entropy-Based Model Reduction
Accuracy is best from models with more data, but
using kNN with additional data comes at a com-
putational cost.
Even for models where that rela-
tionship does not hold, the memory needed to store
the data can be expensive. This important problem
has received some attention with some promising re-
sults despite the diﬃculty of being an NP-hard prob-
lem [Gottlieb et al., 2014, Kontorovich et al., 2017].
Our probability and entropy based approach oﬀers
some new ways of looking at this problem in an in-
terpretable manner, relaxing some constraints with
regard to strict metric spaces.
The entropy measures we discuss can be employed
for pruning the model of cases as well as for targetless
feature pruning, thereby reducing data size while re-
taining information in the model. Overall, perform-
ing feature or case pruning can beneﬁt any system
by reducing the memory and possibly computational
resources needed to use the model.
Further, these
techniques can be used to help direct training, that
is, which parts of the model may beneﬁt from hav-
ing more data. We note that model reduction may be
targetless, and in such cases is not a substitute for fea-
ture engineering for a targeted application. Rather,
it is useful for removing redundant data to focus on
the most or least surprising relationships.
Our entropy-based techniques are generally appli-
cable to either feature or case pruning based on the
amount of information that each feature or case pro-
vides to the model. A ﬁrst step in data reduction can
be to detect and remove anomalies from the model.
Anomalous cases, arguably, reduce the average use-
fulness of decisions the model makes. Therefore, re-
moving anomalies can actually improve the usefulness
of the model while slightly reducing the model size.
A next step to reduce model size would be to use our
techniques to remove those cases or features that do
not provide signiﬁcant-enough amounts of informa-
tion to the model.
There are a few approaches we use to determine
which cases or features to prune.
We can look at
the surprisal of the case relative to the rest of the
model. If the surprisal is low, the case may be re-
moved from the model for being redundant, which
may be done dynamically for online learning.
In
some circumstances, we keep the instances with the
highest surprisal (i.e., the most informative) in or-
der to cap the model size, or remove the case with
the lowest surprisal in order to reduce the model size
by a set amount. We can also keep the cases with
a surprisal above a certain threshold, and perhaps
vary that threshold, balancing model size and infor-
mation. This also applies to features in the model.
Those features with high surprisal can be kept (or al-
ternatively, those features with low surprisal can be
removed), thereby reducing the model size in the fea-
ture space. Further, both case pruning and feature
pruning could be performed, reducing the model in
both dimensions.
Though we have outlined a few surprisal and con-
viction measures in this paper for model reduction,
they can be combined other ways to perform model
reduction, or used with other feature engineering
techniques. For example, feature prediction convic-
tion could be used to determine whether to include
features in a targetless model, based on high or low
surprisal for predictions. Feature familiarity convic-
tion could be used to determine which features have
training data that most conforms to typical training
data reﬂected in the rest of the model.
3.3.2
Model-to-Model Surprisal
In that kNN models are data, we can compare them
using prediction and familiarity conviction directly.
The use of such a comparison is of particular inter-
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
7

est in online learning where one could detect a non-
stationary process by comparing models built dur-
ing diﬀerent times.
In reinforcement learning one
could compare models to establish propensity for ex-
ploration verses exploitation.
Further, by measuring the amount of surprisal
that one model contributes to another, some sparse
machine learning problems can be transformed into
dense problems. Consider numerous individuals that
occasionally take some action of a certain type. A
model may be trained for each individual, and then
compared with surprisal against other individuals or
against larger aggregated models to ﬁnd which larger
model would be least surprising for the individual
to be included in. We have found promising initial
results in commercial settings with these techniques.
Combining these untargeted techniques with targeted
model selection techniques, such as Bayesian informa-
tion criterion [Schwarz et al., 1978] or Akaike infor-
mation criterion [Akaike, 1973] is another potential
future direction.
3.3.3
Data Imputation and Overcoming Data
Sparsity
Sparse data is an issue for many machine learning sys-
tems, which fail to perform or perform poorly when
trained with sparse data, especially if the data is
sparse across multiple features.5 The sparse data can
come from sporadic unobservability (i.e., failure to
capture the feature at particular times) and unavail-
ability (e.g., no collection of certain feature at certain
times, a common issue with historical datasets). Re-
gardless of the cause, the combination of targetless
kNN with entropy can be used to overcome sparsity
by imputing missing features in sparse data, and do-
ing so in a way that reﬂects the dataset.
In past approaches, generically solving for miss-
ing values in a data set has presented many chal-
lenging problems, such as Boolean satisﬁability and
other NP-complete and NP-hard problems.
When
the rules that determine the missing values are also
unknown, the problem becomes even more diﬃcult.
Semi-supervised learning has been a rich area of study
to attempt to tackle this problem [Triguero et al.,
2015]. Our targetless approach, when combined with
conviction, oﬀers a novel technique for imputation
that can ﬁll in missing data across all of the features
5We are referring to the limited semisupervised learning
techniques that are typically available to by data scientists.
There are a number of statistics techniques available if suﬃ-
cient information about a distribution is known, and domain
speciﬁc imputation techniques, particularly for language pro-
cessing, such as that of Gemmeke and Cranen [2008].
and scaﬀold knowledge from cases with missing data
as it ﬁlls the missing data in.
The algorithm ﬁnds the cases with missing data
that are least surprising, labels them, inserts the la-
bel into the model for the case, and repeats the pro-
cess until no more missing data exists. Grouping the
cases into batches (i.e.
imputing multiple missing
data points in a batch) can improve performance so
that conviction only needs to be computed occasion-
ally.
More speciﬁcally, the algorithm orders the cases
with missing data by their surprisal for each feature,
conditioned only on the data known for the case, from
lowest to highest. For particularly sparse data, we
have had success with ﬁrst ordering the cases by those
with the fewest nulls prior to ordering by entropy.6
Starting with the case with the lowest entropy, we
determine a value for the missing data using kNN
based on the known features.7
We can determine
values for multiple features at once (in batch), or de-
termine just one missing value, and then redetermine
the entropy for the cases, and return to impute more
data. This process continues until all of the data is
complete. When we want to merely reduce the spar-
sity of the data (vs. ﬁlling in all of the values), we
can continue until we hit a termination condition or
sparsity threshold. Additional work is needed, but we
believe a viable termination condition is ceasing data
imputation when the entropy for the lowest-entropy
case exceeds a threshold. We believe that, after that
point, the additional informational value of the im-
puted data may be low, and, as such, we cease im-
puting missing data.
3.3.4
Auditability, Explanations, and Auto-
mated Decision Making
The choice of a kNN model allows us number of inter-
esting opportunities related to providing explanations
of the data. With kNN, the model is the data. The
model is only complemented by kernel parameters to
deﬁne nearest neighbors, and with any weights, ad-
justments or removal of data. In both the assessment
of the model for decision or action suggestion, the
data points that are within the kernel, or that are
above a certain threshold for how much they impact
6Currently, we use entropy for the cases to determine what
data to impute ﬁrst, but we are also exploring the use of en-
tropy for features. We ﬁrst order by feature entropy, and then
by entropy of the cases missing the lowest entropy feature. We
would impute that data ﬁrst, then recalculate entropies for the
model, similar to the manner described above.
7We can also use the techniques described in this paper
for synthetic data generation to determine the value for the
missing feature as described in Section 3.3.6.
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
8

the kernel values, are the data points that caused the
decision.
This is compelling from a machine deci-
sion auditability perspective because it means that
the data relevant to each decision is directly identi-
ﬁed, and that auditing, editing or removing the train-
ing data identiﬁed as being associated with a decision
would have had a direct eﬀect on the decision.
Below, we discuss numerous types of explanation
data that can be derived from a kNN model.
For
each, we give a short description of how it is gen-
erated, and what a system or operator can do with
it. As an overview, for each type of explanation data
(or based on combinations of explanation data), that
data can be passed to a system or human operator
for review. The system or human operator can use
the explanation data to decide whether to perform
the action in question, perform a diﬀerent action, or
perform no action at all. Additionally, this data can
be used after-the-fact to audit decisions that were
made. Auditability begins, as alluded to above, with
the fact that we can determine what data was used
to suggested an action.
The explanation data can
also be generated either at the time of suggesting the
action or at the time of the audit.
One of the measures we use as part of our explana-
tion data is conviction, which can be seen, broadly,
as the ratio of the amount of surprisal of a particular
case to the actual surprisal. Numerous types of con-
viction are discussed in this paper, such as familiarity
conviction and prediction conviction. We also discuss
formulating each in a targeted or untargeted man-
ner.
Any of these formulations for conviction may
be used and provided as an explanation data along
with answers or suggested actions. As an example,
targeted or untargeted familiarity conviction may be
calculated and provided to along with a suggested de-
cision. An overly low (or high) conviction score can
be a cause for concern, and that suggested decision
may be ﬂagged for further reviewed or ignored com-
pletely. In contrast, a suggested decision or action
with a conviction score that is not concerning (e.g., a
moderate conviction score, or, in some circumstances,
a high conviction score), may be performed or acted
upon without further review. A low conviction score
may be associated with the data being outside the
usual pattern of the data, and therefore be of con-
cern for systems that are trying to perform “usual”
actions.
High conviction may be of concern when
there is a desire to not perform actions that are too
“usual.” A high and low pass ﬁlter can be used when
there is a desire to perform actions that are neither
overly usual or unusual, but instead are somewhere
in the middle in terms of how expected they are.
We can also use feature prediction contribution or
feature prediction contribution to ﬁnd bias in deci-
sion making.
Many models and data sets contain
many features, and are used for many decisions. As
described elsewhere herein, our techniques can help
prune a model of cases and features. Nevertheless,
there may always be features in models that, in an
ideal world, would contribute little to nothing to cer-
tain decisions. For example, in the context of ﬁnanc-
ing decisions to individuals, there are certain fea-
tures that, if decisions were made based on them,
would constitute undesirable bias. These may include
gender or race. The feature prediction contribution
can be provided to the system or human operator to
help determine whether making the decision based on
that feature would constitute unpermitted bias. This
could lead to pruning that feature from the model or
taking other steps to reduce or eliminate its impact
on the decision, such as the use of feature weights.
The local region of the model (which we will re-
fer to as the local model) comes with no added cost
with kNN and therefore we can perform analysis on
the local model and make other queries on relevant
data. As a few examples, we can easily ﬁnd counter-
factual cases [Wachter et al., 2018] and the boundary
conditions they yield by performing a query on the
data that maximizes the ratio of the action features
to the total set of features. We can also ﬁnd out if
any of the features in a case associated with the ac-
tions suggested by the model are outside the range
of the corresponding features of the cases in the lo-
cal model. Features being outside the range may be
cause for concern and may cause the suggested action
to not be performed.
As a counter-point to the counterfactual cases, we
can also determine archetype cases, cases that have
the same action as the suggested action, and are fur-
thest from other cases with diﬀerent actions.
The
distance from the case with the suggested action to
the archetype case can be used as explanation data,
audit data, and to determine whether to perform a
suggested action without further review.
We can ﬁnd ratios of diﬀerent types of conviction
in the local model to those of the total model, which
can indicate which cases and features add signiﬁcant
information to a particular region, and which add
less information. If the information is not correlated
with accuracy (e.g., has low conviction in the local
model and high conviction in the model as a whole),
then it may be a measure of noise. If the cases that
contribute to the suggestion of an action are above
a noisiness threshold, then it may be inadvisable to
perform a suggested action. On the other hand, if
the noisiness of the cases used to suggest an action
is low, the system or operator may be conﬁdent in
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
9

performing the action. There are many other ratios
of conviction that may be used as explanation and
audit data, and diﬀerent of them will be useful in
diﬀerent scenarios.
A “less similar” model can also be determined,
where the closest k cases (by distance, by count, by
density threshold) are excluded, and the distance to
the next closest cases is determined. That distance
can be used as explanation data, audit data, and
to determine whether to perform a suggested action
without further review. For example, a higher dis-
tance to the “less similar” cases can be an indicator
that the suggested action is in a sparsely populated
part of the model, and therefore should be reviewed
before being acted upon.
We can also deﬁne feature residuals based on the
local model (or a regional model that is the N nearest
neighbors, where N can be the same, higher, or lower
than the k used to deﬁne the local model). Here, we
can use the mean absolute error, variance, or other
moments or measures to predict how well the model
predicts each feature when it is removed. We can also
determine action probabilities, which, in the case of
categorical actions, can be measured as the percent-
age of cases in the local model that have that cate-
gorical action. For continuous or ordinal actions, the
action probability can be a probability measure based
on the conﬁdence interval of the suggested actions for
a given tolerance (e.g., an action value for 250 may
be 67% (the action probability) likely to be within
+/-5 (the tolerance) of 250). Feature residuals and
conviction can be used in conjunction; a prediction
with high prediction conviction but also wide residu-
als may not be reliable, but a prediction with low pre-
diction conviction but wide residuals may potentially
be improved if further training data is added similar
to the prediction. We can also determine local or re-
gional model complexity (i.e., whether the variance
is high, whether the accuracy is low, whether cor-
relations among variables are low, etc.) and fractal
dimensionality (i.e., placing a shape over the model
and shrinking the scale of the shape and counting the
number of smaller shapes needed to cover the extents
of the model).
3.3.5
Synthetic Data Generation and Rein-
forcement Learning
Given that prediction conviction is a method to ex-
press how surprising an observation is, we can re-
verse the math and use conviction to generate a new
sample of data for a given amount of surprisal. The
general approach is to randomly select or predict a
feature of a case from the training data and then re-
sample it based on the new condition. This approach
is related to Gibbs sampling [Martino et al., 2015,
Efros and Leung, 1999] in that it incrementally ob-
tains new values for each feature conditioned on the
previous values, though the conditioning and sam-
pling is based on our approach to kNN.
Using the conditioned local residuals for a part of
the model, as described in section 3.2.1, we can pa-
rameterize the random number distribution to gener-
ate a new value for a given feature. Our resampling
method is related to the approach used by the Mann-
Whitney test [Mann and Whitney, 1947], a power-
ful and widely used nonparametric test to determine
whether two sets of samples were drawn from the
same distribution. In the Mann-Whitney test, sam-
ples are randomly checked against one another to see
which is greater, and if both sets of samples were
drawn from the same distribution then the expecta-
tion is that both sets of samples should have an equal
chance of having a higher value when randomly cho-
sen samples are compared against each other. Our
approach for resampling a point is to randomly chose
whether the new sample is greater or less than the
other point and then draw a sample from the distri-
bution using the feature’s residual as the expected
value.
Just as the exponential distribution is en-
tropy maximizing given the sole constraint of a posi-
tive mean, the double-sided exponential distribution
(also known as the Laplace distribution) is the en-
tropy maximizing distribution given a positive mean
distance about a point.
The log-normal and other
distributions may be used as well, depending on the
types of residuals computed and assumptions made
about the local distributions.
If a feature is not continuous but rather nominal,
then the local residuals can populate a confusion ma-
trix, and an appropriate sample can be drawn based
on the probabilities for drawing a new sample given
the previous value.
Suppose we would like to generate synthetic data
with features i ∈Ξ. If there are no conditions placed
on the new synthetic data, then we start with a ran-
dom feature i. Because the observations within the
model are representative of the observations made so
far, a random instance is chosen from the observa-
tions using the uniform distribution over all observa-
tions. Then the value for feature i of this observa-
tion is resampled via the methods mentioned above.
The value for feature i then become a condition on
subsequently-generated features.
Next, suppose that we would like to generate fea-
ture j, given that features i ∈Ξ have corresponding
values xi.
The model labels feature j conditioned
by all xi to ﬁnd some value t. This new value t be-
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
10

comes the expected value for the resampling process
described above, and the local residual (or confusion
matrix) becomes the appropriate parameter or pa-
rameters for the expected deviation to ﬁnd the value
for xj.
The process for ﬁlling in the features for an instance
may begin with no feature values subject to condi-
tions, or some feature values may have been speciﬁed
as conditions for the data to generate. Either way,
the remaining features may be ordered (i.e., selected
for determination of a new value) randomly or may be
ordered via a feature conviction value. When a new
value is generated, then the process restarts with the
new value as an additional condition.
3.3.6
Parameterizing
Synthetic
Data
Via
Prediction Conviction
Continuing with the double-sided exponential distri-
bution as a maximum entropy distribution of distance
in Lp space, we can derive a closed form solution for
how to scale the exponential distributions based on a
prediction conviction value.
Starting with Equation 13, we specify a value, ν,
for the prediction conviction as
ν = πp(x) = EI
I(x)
(17)
which can be rearranged as
I(x) = EI
ν .
(18)
Substituting
in the self-information from Equa-
tion 12, we have
φ(x)
||r(x)||p
= EI
ν .
(19)
Note that the units on both sides of Equation 19
match. This is because of the natural logarithm and
exponential in the derivation of Equation 19 cancel
out, but leave the resultant in nats. We can rearrange
in terms of distance contribution as
φ(x) = ||r(x)||p · EI
ν
.
(20)
To proceed further we need to make an assump-
tion about the distribution of distance contributions
φ.
Seeking to minimize the complexity of our as-
sumptions we simply observe that distances are sup-
ported by the positive reals. Constraining the ﬁrst
or ﬁrst and second moments and maximizing the en-
tropy gives us the exponential and log normal distri-
butions respectively. For simplicity sake we proceed
with e(ζ) but note that in practice ln N(µ, σ) is often
observed. One may distinguish among the distribu-
tions using likelihood curvature tools such as Fisher
Information.
If we let p = 0, which is desirable for conviction
and other aspects of the similarity measure, we can
rewrite the distance contribution in terms of a norm
of the values observed for the number of features,
ξ, each with an expected mean of
1
ζi .
Taking the
expected value of both sides we ﬁnd

Πi
1
ζi
 1
ξ
= (Πiri)
1
ξ EI
ν
.
(21)
Due to the number of ways of assigning surprisal
across the features, many solutions may exist. How-
ever, unless otherwise speciﬁed or conditioned, we
would want to distribute surprisal across the features
holding expected proportionality constant. This al-
lows us to write the distance contribution, which be-
comes the mean absolute error for the exponential
distribution, as
1/ζi = ri
EI
ν
ξ
.
(22)
and solving for the ζi to parameterize the exponential
distributions, we ﬁnd
ζi = 1
ri
 ν
EI
ξ
.
(23)
Equation 23, taken with the value of the feature, be-
comes the distribution by which to generate a new
random number under the maximum entropy as-
sumption of exponentially distributed distance from
the value.
3.3.7
Reinforcement Learning
The ability to randomly generate data with a con-
trolled amount of surprisal is a novel way to charac-
terize the classic exploration versus exploitation trade
oﬀin searching for an optimal solution to a goal.
Currently, pairing a means to search, such as Monte
Carlo tree search [Abramson, 1987], with a universal
function approximator, such as neural networks, is
the most successful approach to solving diﬃcult rein-
forcement learning problems without domain knowl-
edge [Silver et al., 2017]. Because our data synthesis
technique comes from the universal function approx-
imator model (kNN) itself, we can create a reinforce-
ment learning architecture that is similar and tightly
coupled.
Because the synthetic data generation can be con-
ditioned, we can condition the search on both the cur-
rent state of the system, as it is currently observed,
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
11

and a set of goal values for features. As the system
is being trained, it can be continuously updated with
the new training data. Once states are evaluated for
their ultimate outcome, a new set of features or fea-
ture values can be updated or added to all of the ob-
servations indicating the ﬁnal scores or measures of
outcomes. Keeping track of which observations be-
long to which training sessions (or games) is a conve-
nient way to track and update this data. Given that
the ﬁnal score or multiple goal metrics are already in
the kNN database, the synthetic data generation can
query for new data conditioned upon having a high
score or winning conditions, with a speciﬁed amount
of conviction.
This results in a reinforcement learning algorithm
that can be queried for the relevant training data
for every decision, as described in Section 3.3.4.
The commonality among the similar cases, bound-
ary cases, archetypes, etc. can be combined to ﬁnd
when certain decisions are likely to yield a positive
outcome, negative outcome, or a larger amount of
surprisal thus improving the quality of the model.
By seeking high surprisal moves, the system will im-
prove the breadth of its observations and learning,
though it may not perform well. Setting the convic-
tion of the data synthesis to 1 yields a balanced trade
oﬀbetween exploration versus exploitation. As more
information is learned, this conviction value may be
reduced to focus on achieving goals.
The interpretability of reinforcement learning may
help overcome many of the data-availability issues.
For example, when data is needed for dangerous,
expensive, or otherwise diﬃcult-to-produce training
data, we can generate synthetic data conditioned in
value and conviction to match those diﬃcult circum-
stances. As such, our method can provide the sam-
pling strategy necessary for reinforcement learning
with more control than with current techniques.
4
Initial Results and Future Di-
rection
Although providing a rigorous review of our results
and methods is out of the scope of this paper, we
summarize a few here to motivate and encourage ad-
ditional exploration. We tested classic kNN as imple-
mented in scikit-learn [Pedregosa et al., 2011], stan-
dardizing the scale of the features as is common prac-
tice in machine learning, against kNN with fractional
p-values and limp→0 using uncertainty in distance as
mentioned in Section 3.1.1 without standardization.
We compared the results across a robust suite of 97
regression datasets and 78 classiﬁcation datasets se-
lected from among the benchmark data published by
Olson et al. [2017].
On the classiﬁcation datasets, scikit-learn’s ran-
dom forest implementation averaged an accuracy of
0.79.
kNN already performs well on classiﬁcation
problems, averaging an accuracy of 0.76. However,
using fractional p values, we saw the accuracy in-
crease to 0.77, and allowing the p value of 0 based
on uncertainty we saw the average accuracy improve
to 0.78. Though the accuracy improvements of our
techniques are slight, the use of low or zero p values
means that we can maintain the data directly with-
out scaling and that we have made a step toward
accurate probability-based reasoning on data using
conjunctions as described in Section 3.1.1.
On the regression datasets, scikit-learn’s random
forest implementation averaged an r-squared score of
0.77. In many situations, such as those involving ex-
trapolation, kNN regression does not perform as well
as other methods, and we saw this with the scikit-
learn implementation resulting in an r-squared score
of 0.53. However, our improvements yielded consider-
able gain in kNN’s regression scores. Using fractional
p values yielded an r-squared score of 0.57, which is
a signiﬁcant (p ≪.001) improvement based on the
Wilcoxon signed rank test. Further allowing the use
of a zero p value with uncertainty in distance as men-
tioned in Section 3.1.1, the r-squared score improved
to 0.66 which is also a signiﬁcant result (p ≪.001).
We believe that kNN’s regression scores can also be
improved to be competitive with other cutting edge
algorithms. In Section 3.3.3, we showed how a tar-
getless approach to data can ﬁll in missing data, and
from an auditability perspective it is easy to track
the history of data imputation. Conversely, we are
investigating exputation approaches can be employed
to synthesize likely data points outside the bounds of
the training data. Knowledge of the features, such as
their bounds, can help when reﬂecting or amplifying
or synthesizing exputed data points, which can then
be used for interpolation.
The reason for our belief that this is a core problem
lies with the topology of data as the dimensionality
grows.
As the number of dimensions increases for
a given set of data, many intuitive analytical tech-
niques such as Euclidian norms and Gaussian kernels
become inappropriate as the unit radius hypervol-
ume goes toward zero and the probability that data
points falling in sharp corners of a hypervolume goes
toward one [Verleysen and Fran¸cois, 2005]. This im-
plies that nearly all data points will be at or beyond
the periphery, requiring extrapolation. Dealing with
any kind of cost or value function to perform opti-
mization will mean that nearly all points are Pareto
Copyright 2018-2019 Diveplane Corporation.
12

optimal, meaning that it becomes increasingly more
diﬃcult to deﬁne “good” because nearly every point
has some unique quality. In many cases, the larger
number of dimensions can be helpful, but primarily
when the structure is extracted and the dimensional-
ity is reduced [Kittler, 1986, Kohavi and John, 1997,
Stoppiglia and Dreyfus, 2003]. As nearly all new ob-
servations will be on the periphery, we believe extrap-
olation techniques, such as exputation, are likely to
improve results while maintaining interpretability.
A dimensionality bottleneck is little diﬀerent than
the information bottlenecks used for generalization
and variance reduction across other areas of machine
learning [Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015]. By employing
clustering techniques in conjunction with model re-
duction techniques as mentioned in Section 3.3.1, se-
lecting prototypes or archetypes to represent a cluster
in a hierarchical fashion, we may be able to character-
ize the entropy ﬂux between parts of the model, and
hierarchical models and hierarchical explanations are
natural consequences. We note the striking common-
ality of zero p value Lebesgue space as depicted in Ap-
pendix A, the conjunction of probabilities of indepen-
dent distributions, and the core of the no-ﬂattening
theorem by Lin et al. [2017] that relates hierarchical
architectures for neural networks and performance.
Our future work will include further eﬀorts to use
probability throughout all parts of kNN such that
any form of entropy or probability can be calculated,
and assumptions can be clearly interpreted.
Additional future work will be to characterize our
work in the performance and scalability of targetless
kNN queries with fractional and zero p values, which
is outside the scope of this paper.
Maximizing the interpretability of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence leads to either understanding the generalized
relationships of the data, such as symbolic or tree-
based models, or to understand the data itself. With
the improved performance of computing and the ad-
vances in kNN, we conclude that using kNN provides
a promising foundation for the future of interpretable
artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning.
