arXiv:1102.5561v2  [cs.AI]  1 Mar 2011
Decision Making Agent Searching for Markov Models in
Near-Deterministic World
G´abor Matuz and Andr´as L˝orincz
E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, Budapest H-1117, Hungary,

WWW home page: http://nipg.inf.elte.hu
Abstract. Reinforcement learning has solid foundations, but becomes inefﬁcient
in partially observed (non-Markovian) environments. Thus, a learning agent –
born with a representation and a policy – might wish to investigate to what ex-
tent the Markov property holds. We propose a learning architecture that utilizes
combinatorial policy optimization to overcome non-Markovity and to develop
efﬁcient behaviors, which are easy to inherit, tests the Markov property of the
behavioral states, and corrects against non-Markovity by running a deterministic
factored Finite State Model, which can be learned. We illustrate the properties of
architecture in the near deterministic Ms. Pac-Man game. We analyze the archi-
tecture from the point of view of evolutionary, individual, and social learning.
Keywords: Inherited rules, reinforcement learning, combinatorial explosion,
look-ahead, Markov property
1
Introduction
We are concerned with real world scenarios, where decision making can be arbitrarily
poor if available sensory information is insufﬁcient or if some older, yet still ongoing or
implicating events are not taken into account. If past information can not improve deci-
sion making then state description is Markovian and the problem belongs to the realm
of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), which have solid theoretical foundations. The
only remaining question for MDPs is whether the description ﬁts into the memory and
whether optimization can be solved in reasonable time or not. The size of the problem
grows exponentially with the number of variables. Therefore in order to reduce problem
size, state description has to be compressed by extracting relevant features of the deci-
sion. As a result, factored reinforcement learning (RL) is obtained, which once again
raises the question whether compression spared the Markov property or not.
We are interested in scenarios, when the world is close-to-deterministic. Intrigu-
ingly, unless we refer to quantum mechanics, a well-informed Laplace’s demon can
make decent close-to-deterministic approximations [35]1. Surprisingly, this close-to-
deterministic nature may hold – to a great extent – to everyday human activities, too
[22]. With regards to human cooperation, there is a strong correlation between the abil-
ity of reading the hidden emotional and cognitive ‘parameters’ of the partners and col-
laborative (social) skills [7] indicating the necessity of Markovian state description in
1 Note that we read the theorem backwards.

2
behavior optimization. Last, but not least, MDP formalism tacitly includes the concept
of determinism: states are perfectly known to the agent within a ﬁnite time window. In
turn, the concept of state hides close-to-deterministic ﬁnite time processes in MDP.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1. Learning in a continuously changing world.
(a): Questions for RL in a changing world, (b): Methods to overcome non-Markovian character
of state description, and (c): Architecture for a changing world: agent in is born with a rela-
tively small set of low-complexity rules selected by evolution. Temporal difference (TD) error
may uncover non-Markovian character of the behavioral states. Decision surfaces based on TD
learning may diminish non-Markovian character. Lookahead method is valuable if factored and
close-to-deterministic ﬁnite state model of the environment can be learned.
Markovian description of the environment is questionable since inherited rules and
representations generated by observations may be non-Markovian, or the world may
change and the Markovian property may be lost, or agents may change due to the
changes of other agents’ behavior, and so on.

3
In turn, we are interested in learning agents. We restrict our considerations to envi-
ronment, which can be approximated by close-to-deterministic Finite-State Machines
(FSMs) or can be factored to such FSMs (fFSM). The practical points are that (i) the
so-called factored MDP model [6,10] is tractable from the point of view of optimization
[26], and (ii) near-deterministic processes are relatively easy to learn.
We address the following issues here: Does the problem description possess
Markov-property? Is it feasible to solve the underlying learning problem? If answers
are negative then which features are to be learned to improve problem description?
These questions are illustrated on Fig. 1(a). Figure 1(b) shows certain opportuni-
ties for checking the Markov property without increasing temporal depth. This occurs
by considering the difference of experienced and expected approximations of long-
term cumulated discounted rewards; the temporal difference (TD) errors. In the Fig-
ure, we depicted the optimization for non-Markovian state description by direct global
policy search as well as a method that may overcome traps posed by non-Markovian
states via look-ahead based value estimation. We will not address the delicate issue of
pulling out close-to-deterministic features/factors from high dimensional uncertain ob-
servations: this might be the main bottleneck of artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI).
Instead, we demonstrate that policy optimization may lead to good performance with
non-Markovian behavioral states, look-ahead using close-to-deterministic factors can
quickly overcome poor value estimations of those non-Markovian states and can be
used to improve decision making.
Figure 1(c) represents our main concepts about a learning agent in a changing world:
we assume that the agent is born with a low-complexity rule set that can save her. This
rule set can be developed, e.g., by evolution and we use selective global policy opti-
mization. The rule set, however, may lead to non-Markovian states (the behaviors) if
the rules are crude or they do not match the actual world. The agent starts to learn by
estimating the values of its behavioral states: it collects information about the distribu-
tion of TD errors of these states. Using the TD errors, the agent may develop new binary
sensors (decision surfaces) in order to improve state description and decision making.
Also, the agent may learn close-to-deterministic fFSMs to overcome problems of value
estimations for non-Markovian states by utilizing look-ahead methods, since (i) look-
ahead is efﬁcient for close-to-deterministic fFSMs and (ii) look-ahead can easily correct
poor value estimations.
The paper is built as follows: Markovity and related RL concepts are reviewed in
Section 2. We executed experimental demonstrations on the Ms. Pac-Man game in order
to illustrate the concepts of Fig. 1(c). Ms. Pac-Man was chosen because of our previous
experiences [25]. In this paper, considerations are restricted to the single Ms. Pac-Man
case (Section 3). However, if proper (mind reading) sensors are available that enable the
close-to-deterministic fFSM characterization of the other agent(s), then our methods
may have value for the multi-agent case [16].
Results of our experiments are discussed in Section 4. We connect our work to
theoretically proven favorable features of factored RL, but leave aside the problem of
learning the model of the environment. We elaborate on the concept of state in Subsec-
tion 4.2. We conclude in Section 5.

4
2
Reinforcement learning
During the last two decades, reinforcement learning has reached a mature state, and
has been laid on solid foundations. We have a large variety of algorithms, including
value- function-based, direct policy search and hybrid methods. For reviews on these
subjects, see, e.g., [2,23,24] and references therein. RL deals with sequential decision
tasks, where decisions of an agent are not based on information about locally optimal
actions, but its strategy is rather relying on a scalar reward associated to each state
transitions. MDP formalism encapsulates the RL task as follows:
A Markov Decision Process comprise of a quadruple {S, A, P, R}, where S is a
ﬁnite set of states, A is a ﬁnite set of actions, P : S ×A×S →[0, 1] is a state transition
probability telling the probability of arriving at state s′ after executing action a in state
s. R : S × A × S →R is the reward function, R(s, a, s′) is the immediate reward for
transition (s, a, s′).
The behavior of an agent is described by its policy a π : S × A →[0, 1] function,
which assigns a probability to an action in each state. For a given policy, each state
has an associated value, which is the expectation value of the long-term cumulated
discounted immediate reward:
Vπ(s) := Eπ
 ∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1|st = s
!
where 0 ≤γ ≤1 is the discount factor and rt+k+1 is the immediate reward in the
(k + 1)st step, Eπ denotes the expectation operator for policy π. The goal of an RL
agent is to ﬁnd an optimal policy that chooses the actions giving rise to the largest
values in each state.
When Markov-property holds, the optimal policy (π∗) is the greedy policy and the
corresponding value function is the optimal value function (V ∗):
π∗(s) = argmax
a
(X
s′∈S
P(s, a, s′)[R(s, a) + γV ∗(s′)]
)
.
2.1
Solving reinforcement learning problems
Many practical applications have appeared that utilize RL. Algorithms with good online
performanceare known and their asymptotic and ﬁnite-state behavior is well understood
in most cases.
Dynamic programming When S, A, P, R are available then an iterative method com-
prised of improvement and greediﬁcation steps can be used to obtain an optimal policy.
This approach may fall short when S is large or the model is not available.
Temporal differences Temporal Differences (TD) and its most simple form TD(0) can
be used to build an appropriate value function if matrices P and R are not known or are
unmanageably large:

5
Regarding time instants t = 0, 1, 2... assume that in state st+1 reward rt+1 is ob-
served, while value estimation at time t give rise to Vt(st) and Vt(st+1) for states st
and st+1, respectively. Then the TD(0) error of the estimation is
δt+1 = rt+1 + γVt(st+1) −Vt(st)
According to TD(0) learning, value estimation is updated in the following way:
Vt+1(s) =
Vt(s) + αδt+1 if
s = st
Vt(s)
if
s ̸= st,
where α is the learning factor.
Many real problems resist to RL, e.g., if state description is non-Markovian or if the
number of variables that describe the state is large since the size of the state space grows
exponentially with the number of variables. Solutions to such problem are considered
below.
Policy search, CE method The lack of the Markovian property can be circumvented
to some extent by global policy search methods that do not rely on a value function
but rather an explicit parametric representation of policies are maintained and updated
according to a measure of rewards acquired during one or more trial episodes. It has
been shown that the theoretically ﬁrm Cross-entropy Method (CEM) [21] is efﬁcient in
policy search [31]. Furthermore, CEM can deal with non-Markovian state-descriptions
and the optimization of multiple actions (action combinations) acting simultaneously,
enabling the optimization of factored action representations [25].
CEM works as follows: Let x = (x1, ..., xn) ∈X be a discrete vector and S :
X →R be a so-called goal or ﬁtness function, which deﬁnes the ﬁtness of a particular
solution vector x. The goal is to ﬁnd the vector with the highest corresponding ﬁtness
value:
x∗= argmax
x ∈X
{S(x)}
CEM maintains a distribution from a family of parametric distributions (G) over the set
of possible solutions X and converges towards a distribution in this family whose den-
sity is the highest in an arbitrary environment of the optimal solution x∗. The algorithm
has an iterative approach, where t = 0, 1, ..., T marks subsequent iterations:
In each iteration, let N
mark the number of independent sample points
(x(1), ..., x(N) ∈X) drawn from the actual distribution g(t). In case of arbitrary θ ∈R
the set of high-valued sample points is:
ˆLθ :=
n
x(i)|S(x(i)) ≥θ, 1 ≤i ≤N
o
which converges to the level set belonging to γ, i.e., to : Lθ := {x|S(x) ≥θ}
For high θ values a uniform distribution over the level set Lθ is concentrated around
the global optimum x∗. During the optimization, θ has to be adjusted adaptively because
at the beginning it is highly likely that the sample set ˆLθ is empty, for high θ values.
CEM speciﬁes a ρ ∈[0, 1] ratio, which describes the number of items in the level

6
set Lθ and therefore determines the actual θ value. The best N × ρ items are called
elite samples and they typically comprise of 2-10% of the samples. If the samples are
ordered by descending ﬁtness value, then the value of θ can be calculated from ρ as
θ := f(x(ρN)).
After sorting the samples in this way, distribution g(x) can be updated so that
the Kullback-Leibler divergence between a uniform distribution over the approximated
level set ˆLθ and the distribution decreases. For more details, see [15].
CEM is a selective batch method and it resembles to genetic algorithms in many
respects. CEM can be extended to online optimization [28], which may suit real world
RL problems better.
The exponential blow-up of the state space can be treated with function approxima-
tions and factored-state MDPs that are tied together:
Function approximation When the state- or action-space is large or continuous, func-
tion approximation methods (FAPPs) can also be involved, which create value functions
by the approximation of sample points while using supervised learning methods, but
now those are controlled by RL. In the case of FAPPs the goal is to create an explicit
representation of approximated value functions and parameters are typically updated
after each consecutive step. For convergent general algorithms see [20] and the refer-
ences therein. Special FAPPs that have temporal dynamics can also be used to diminish
consequences of non-Markovian observations [30].
Factored-state Markov Decision Processes We assume that S is the Cartesian product
of m smaller state spaces (corresponding to individual variables):
S = S1 × S2 × . . . × Sm,
where Si has the size |Si| ≪|S| (i = 1, . . . , m). This is the case of factored Markov
Decision Process (fMDP, or factored RL) [14,5,6]. A naive, tabular representation of
the transition probabilities would require exponentially large space (that is, exponential
in the number of variables m). However, the next-step value of a state variable often
depends only on a few other variables, so the full transition probability can be obtained
as the product of several simpler factors. It has been shown that by uniformly sampling
polynomially many samples from the (exponentially large) state space, the complexity
of the fMDP solver stays polynomial in the size of the fMDP description length, i.e.
in Pm
i=1 |Si| [26]. This convergent fMDP solver makes use of function approximations
and ties fMDPs to FAPPs.
Factored MDPs may also take advantage of the module concept of RL, see below.
RL modules The concept of time step is very ﬂexible in MDPs. A particular solution
deﬁnes time intervals by actions: the state is described by the available modules, i.e.,
the complex actions that can be used at a given time. Then state changes only when
the set of available modules changes and the new set deﬁnes the new state, whereas
the activated module of the set deﬁnes the action in that state [12]. This formulation is
advantageous for two reasons. For one, the formulation can easily be extended by robust

7
controllers [32]. In addition the formulation enables to activate more than one module
– a macro – at a time [25] giving rise to combinatorial ﬂexibility, factored descriptions,
and behavioral states upon optimization as we shall see it later.
Model construction and planning in RL Learning of the transition probability matrix,
the dynamical model of RL, offers several advantages. First of all, this model enables
planning. It is useful if value estimation is imprecise, for example if rewards may dis-
appear, or new rewards may appear. In this case, one can run the learned model, like in
dynamic programming. Typical usage of the model computes the expected value of a
state by summing up discounted future rewards according to the dynamical model and
the policy. Advantages appear if real world experimentation is limited, and some of the
rewards, certain transition probabilities, or a few of the factors may change, but can
be learned easily. Upon observation of such changes, the dynamical model can update
value estimation without further real world experiments.
The other advantage of model learning is that the exploration exploitation dilemma
can be resolved under certain conditions, both for RL [27] and for factored RL [29].
Factored Finite State Model approximation for planning Planning in the Ms. Pac-
Man game (see later [25]) is severely restricted by the size of the state space. On the
other hand, the state transition can be easily described with factors. For example, if
Ms. Pac-Man walks over a dot then it disappears. Learning of this ‘machine’ is very
simple. Walls and corridors of the game are also simple ‘machines’ since they do not
change. There are other, somewhat more complex machines in the game; they have a bit
of probabilistic behavior. All of these components are simple to learn and thus an ap-
proximate sampling based [13] or a risk avoiding [1] (close-to-)deterministic (factored)
model can be run by Ms. Pac-Man for a low cost and with low memory demand for the
sake of look-ahead (planning).
Note that look-ahead is typical in games, including Ms. Pac-Man (see e.g. [33]) and
it is also considered in the MDP literature (see, e.g., [9] and the references therein).
Here, we consider look-ahead from the point of view of a general RL architecture that
inherits knowledge, learns, and faces new challenges. There are many methods to solve
the FSM identiﬁcation task [4], provided that the close-to-deterministic features are
available.
3
Architecture through an illustrative example
In this section we illustrate the logic of the algorithmic components as shown in
Fig. 1(c). We assume a reinforcement learning scenario, where an MDP possesses a
large action- and/or state-space but no method is known to efﬁciently compress the in-
formation via feature extraction, while preserving the Markov-property of the descrip-
tion. We use the Ms. Pac.Man game for the illustration.
3.1
Pac-Man and reinforcement learning
The video-game Pac-Man was ﬁrst released in 1979, and it is considered to be one of
the most popular video games to date [34].

8
Fig. 2. A snapshot of the Pac-Man game
The player maneuvers Pac-Man in a maze (see Fig. 2), while Pac-Man eats the dots
in the maze. In this particular maze there are 174 dots, each one is worth 10 points. A
level is ﬁnished when all the dots are eaten. There are also four ghosts in the maze who
try to catch Pac-Man, and if they succeed, Pac-Man loses a life. Initially, he has three
lives, and gets an extra life after reaching 10,000 points.
There are four power-up items in the corners of the maze, called power dots (worth
40 points). After Pac-Man eats a power dot, the ghosts turn blue for a short period (15
seconds), they slow down and try to escape from Pac-Man. During this time, Pac-Man
is able to eat them, which is worth 200, 400, 800 and 1600 points, consecutively. The
point values are reset to 200 each time another power dot is eaten, so the player would
want to eat all four ghosts per power dot. If a ghost is eaten, his remains hurry back to
the center of the maze where the ghost is reborn. At certain intervals, a fruit appears
near the center of the maze and remains there for a while. Eating this fruit is worth 100
points.
We restricted our studies to the ﬁrst level, so the maximum achievable score is
174 · 10 + 4 · 40 + 4 · (200 + 400 + 800 + 1600) = 13, 900 plus 100 points for each
time a fruit is eaten.
In the original version of Pac-Man, ghosts move on a complex but deterministic
route, so it is possible to learn a deterministic action sequence that does not require any
observations. In Ms. Pac-Man, randomness was added to the movement of the ghosts.
This way, there is no single optimal action sequence, observations are necessary for
optimal decision making. We used the implementation available on the Internet [19].
Ms. Pac-Man as an RL task Ms. Pac-Man meets all the criteria of a reinforcement
learning task. The agent has to make a sequence of decisions that depend on its obser-
vations. The environment is stochastic (because the paths of ghosts are unpredictable).

9
There is also a well-deﬁned reward function (the score for eating things), and actions
inﬂuence the rewards to be collected in the future.
The full description of the state would include (1) whether the dots have been eaten
(one bit for each dot and one for each power dot), (2) the position and direction of
Ms. Pac-Man, (3) the position and direction of the four ghosts, (4) whether the ghosts
are blue (one bit for each ghost), and if so, for how long they remain blue (in the
range of 1 to 15 seconds) (5) whether the fruit is present, and the time left until it
appears/disappears (6) the number of lives left. The size of the resulting state space is
huge, so some kind of function approximation or feature-extraction is necessary for RL.
The action space is much smaller, as there are only four basic actions: go
north/south/east/west. However, a typical game consists of multiple hundreds of steps,
so the number of possible combinations is still enormous. This indicates the need for
temporally extended actions.
We provide mid-level domain knowledge to the algorithm: we use domain knowl-
edge to preprocess the state information and to deﬁne action modules. On the other
hand, it will be the role of the policy search reinforcement learning to combine the
observations and modules into rule-based policies and ﬁnd their proper combination.
Ms. Pac-Man is attractive for the illustration, because the environment – alike to
many other games – has some life-like characteristics, and the agent has to solve inter-
related tasks and identify interconnected behaviors in a changing environment. These
interrelated tasks are not separable and have mutual effects on each other.
The purpose of our demonstration is to assemble a common sense RL architecture
by utilizing certain RL techniques. We shall argue later that feature extraction is the
main bottleneck for this architecture and shall consider what kind of features are ad-
vantageous for RL.
3.2
Development of rule-based policies and learning macros
A rule-based policy is a set of rules with some mechanism for breaking ties, i.e., to de-
cide which rule is executed, if there are multiple rules with satisﬁed conditions. Actions
can last for a while and some of them may be applied in combinations. We reproduced
the actions of [25], examples being like
(i) ToDot: Go towards the nearest dot,
(ii) ToPowerDot: Go towards the nearest power dot,
(iii) FromPowerDot: Go in direction opposite to the nearest power dot,
(iv) ToEdGhost: Go towards the nearest edible ghost,
(v) FromGhost: Go in direction opposite to the nearest ghost,
among others. Here are some examples for observations used for rule constructions. For
the full list, see the original publication [25]:
(i) NearestDot: Distance of nearest dot,
(ii) NearestPowerDot: Distance of nearest power dot,
(iii) NearestGhost: Distance of nearest ghost,
(iv) NearestEdGhost: Distance of nearest edible (blue) ghost.

10
Observations can be extended to conditions. For the sake of simplicity, conditions
were restricted to have the form [observation] < [value], [observation]
> [value], [action]+, [action]-, or the conjunction of such terms. For ex-
ample,
(NearestDot<5) and (NearestGhost>8) and (FromGhost+)
is a valid condition for our rules.
Once we have conditions and actions, rules can be constructed easily. In our imple-
mentation, a rule has the form “if [Condition], then [Action].” For ex-
ample,
if (NearestDot<5) and (NearestGhost<5) then FromGhost+
makes a potential rule. Each rule has a priority assigned. When the agent has to make
a decision, she checks her rule list starting with the ones with highest priority. If the
conditions of a rule are fulﬁlled, then the corresponding action is executed, and the
decision-making process halts.
If a rule with priority k switches on an action module, then the priority of the action
module is also taken as k. Intuitively, this makes sense: if an important rule is activated,
then its effect should also be important. If a rule with priority k switches off a module,
then it is executed, regardless of the priority of the module. The procedure is depicted in
Fig. 3. Rules can be pre-wired, or can be created randomly, and a global search method
can select the good ones and assign their priorities [25]. Thus, learning can be concerned
with (i) combining different conditions and actions to form rules and (ii) deciding about
the priorities of the rules. This policy optimization is accomplished by the cross-entropy
method. Macros are simultaneously used rule combinations.
The optimization procedure gives rise to a ‘low-complexity policy’: there can be
many rules in the policy but only a few rules can be concurrently active at a time. The
effective length of policies is biased towards short policies. Frequent, low-complexity
rule combinations can be used as building blocks in a search for a more powerful but
still low-complexity policies. The result, i.e. the optimized Ms. Pac-Man policy may be
seen as a new action that can be selected under certain conditions. For more details on
the rules, see [25].
3.3
Score, macro values and macro sequences
Score Global policy optimization gave rise to good performance: we used only the ﬁrst
level and the average score was 6680 and the average life was 2.82, out of the 3 possible
lives. The maximum achievable score is 174·10+4·40+4·(200+400+800+1600) =
13, 900. Ms. Pac-Man was not able to eat all ghosts after eating a power dot. From the
score it follows that she could eat about 2 to 3 ghosts after consuming the power dot.
Behavioral states Macros correspond to a group of simultaneously active rules and
can be interpreted as behavioral states or behavioral patterns with the action equivalent
to the application of the actions of the macro. A very little set of macros emerged in the

11
Fig. 3. Decision-making for Ms. Pac-Man agent. At time step t, the she receives the actual obser-
vations and the state of her action modules. She checks the rules of her priority list in order, and
executes the ﬁrst rule with satisﬁed conditions. Plus sign means that an action module is enabled.
No.
Code
Score
V (s)
Description
1.
010011
5133
6621
FromGhost- & FromPowDot
2.
010101
6812
7024
FromGhost- & ToEdGhosts
3.
011001
4006
6606
FromGhost- & ToPowDot
4.
100011
6732
6142
FromGhost+ & FromPowDot
5.
100101
6024
6455
FromGhost+ & ToEdGhosts
6.
101001
1770
6100
FromGhost+ & ToPowDot
Table 1. Behavioral states, or macros, their codes and their values.
1st column: number of behavioral states. 2nd column: individual digits denote if an action is ‘on’
or ‘off’. Meaning of the digits from left to right: FromGhost+, FromGhost-, ToPowDot,
ToEdGhosts, FromPowDot, and if Constant>0 then ToNearestPill+. The last
digit of the code applies under all conditions. 3rd column: Ms. Pac-Man scores after CEM op-
timization of actions during the time when behavioral state is effective. Averages for 5000 runs.
Bold italic: optimization of the actions of the macro increased the score above 6680 (the average
score of inherited behavior) and policy greediﬁcation is possible. 4th column: estimated values
of inherited behavioral states V (s) upon optimization of the actions. Averages for 5000 runs.
5th column: description of the behavioral states.
Ms. Pac-Man game, there were only 6 macros. They are listed in Table 1. The values of
the behavioral states can be estimated, e.g., by the TD method.

12
Since Table 1 is very small, it is easy to pre-wire these rules. Since CEM is a prob-
ability based, selective, global optimization method, we consider it as the model of
evolution here. These pre-wired rules and their respective priorities give good chances
for the agent to survive for a while and to collect additional information to improve
performance via individual learning. We note that thought experiments may also apply
CEM, but CEM may be too dangerous for experimentation.
Some macros often occur consecutively and could be joined into macro sequences.
The formation of macro sequences means a higher level of abstraction, which basically
incarnates a new behavior. An example of this phenomenon is the observed zig-zagging
behavioral pattern, when the Ms. Pac-Man agent performs turns towards and from the
power dot in each step: out of the many potential choices, CEM selected a rule set at
the second priority level:
P2: if GhostDensity<1.5 and NearestPowerDot<5 then
FromPowerDot+
P2: if NearestEdGhost>99 then ToPowerDot+
That is, if ghost density is low and the power pill is close then move away from the
power pill. If this rule is on, then the other rule is considered: if there is no edible ghost
then move towards the power pill. These two rules at priority level 2 achieve good
performance since they give rise to a zig-zagging behavior close to the power pill until
ghost density is small. It looks like as if the Ms. Pac-Man were waiting for the Ghosts
and to eat the power dot when they approach in order to have a better chance to catch
them afterwards. This is an emerging behavior, since there is no rule for ‘waiting’. It is
unrelated to foreseeing that ghosts may come closer in the future, it is simply the result
of selection under global policy optimization. Zig-zagging may also gives rise to a trap
as shown in Fig. 4(a).
There are proper conditions for the zig-zagging behavior, so one could turn zig-
zagging ON and OFF and zig-zagging could be a new macro. The repetitive behavioral
pattern can be easily identiﬁed during execution and it is easy to compress it into a new
module that may undergo CEM optimization (but see Lamarckism). In the following,
we consider individual learning during a small number of episodes, i.e., during the
game.
3.4
Individual Learning
Policies and macros can be optimized further e.g. by:
1. considering each macro state as a sub-problem as long as the macro is ‘ON’ and
applying CEM during this time interval,
2. computing the values of the states, inspecting the TD error histogram and then
building up predictors and decision surfaces for large TD errors and thus increasing
the ‘state space’. Then, using the new states and using the rule set, a new CEM
optimization may improve performance.
3. Alternatively, we may apply a look-ahead procedure.

13
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. Lack of look-ahead.
(a) Clyde chooses a random move and moves to the right instead of chasing Ms. Pac-Man [left]
and [middle]. Then Clyde switches behavior, approaches Ms. Pac.Man, and comes form the trou-
bled direction: it crosses the power dot and then she can catch Ms. Pac-Man [right]
(b) [left]: Ms. Pac-Man could escape, [middle]: She chases the edible ghost, and [right]: falls into
the trap closed by Pinky.
Note that the ﬁrst option develops a new behavior for each state without using additional
information. This method can help since it extends the range of priorities by introducing
new priority set within each ‘state’. The other two options take advantage of additional
information collected during the game. We consider the three options below.
Subtask optimization The optimization of individual macro states via CEM may give
rise to novel behaviors that collect more rewards in each state. We executed this program
and could increase the collected rewards in each state of the Ms. Pac-Man game. Then
– if Markov condition is satisﬁed – greedy replacement of the new behavior should

14
improve performance. However, there is no warranty for improvement if the Markov
condition is not satisﬁed. The third column of Table 1 shows average performance after
greedy behavior optimization in each state. Since average performance equals to 6680
points, performance improves only by changing behaviors in state 2 and state 4 and
not in the other states. For example, optimizing behavior for state 6, we get very poor
performance (1770 points on average) upon greedy policy optimization.
Subtask optimization does not suit individual learning well, since it applies CEM
and is thus slow. It is also dangerous since overall performance may easily drop even if
optimization of behavior is successful.
Decision surface using TD errors We have estimated the values of the behavioral
states (Table 1, fourth column) and computed the histogram of TD errors (Fig. 5). Large
TD errors occur (Fig. 5(a)) that we made visible by excluding the most frequent TD
error that determine behavioral success (Fig. 5(b)). Consider state 2, for example. The
average reward collected in this state is about 330. This is cumulated from dots and
ghosts. The largest TD peak is at around -150, i.e., in this case Ms. Pac-Man collected
about a single ghost and very few dots. The second peak is at around 600 and it is
broader. This corresponds to eating two ghosts and about 30 dots. The third and the
fourth peaks are at around 1,400 and 2,800 meaning that Ms. Pac-Man could collect
three or four ghosts, respectively.
It would be ideal for Ms. Pac-man to avoid TD errors -150, 600, and 1,400 and to
collect all four ghosts. One may build a classiﬁer for this purpose by collecting situa-
tions when all four ghosts will be captured and all other situations. The classiﬁer then
forecasts the reward and deﬁnes an RL problem, which either wins (reaches the goal)
or looses. CEM can be applied to the optimization of actions starting from a number of
situations collected during the game. This procedure is a special form of goal-related
feature extraction. It can be solved by RL methods and we did not execute it. The situ-
ation corresponds to categorical perception (see, [11] and references therein), which is
to be favored if factored description is not available. We will come back to this point
later. We will argue that searching for close-to-deterministic factors, applying factored
FSM approximation together with look-ahead is more ﬂexible.
3.5
Look-ahead module
In the previous section, we argued that decision surfaces should help decision making.
However, there are potential problems with decision surfaces even in the Ms. Pac-Man
game that we list here.
World may change: Considerable part (if not all) of the knowledge that we encode
into the decision surface may be lost if the world changes. There are many vari-
ables of the world and changes to any of them may spoil decisions. We note that
human recognition utilizes both component based recognition, when decision about
a category involves the presence or absence of the components [3], and categori-
cal perception, or example based learning, when sensory observation is changed
around the decision surfaces (see e.g., [11]). This latter version of learning appears
only if component based recognition is not useful. Component based recognition

15
(a) Histogram of TD errors
(b) Histogram of TD errors without the main peak
Fig. 5. TD error distribution. Distributions are uneven indicating that decision making can be
improved.
seems easier. As an example, consider face recognition. The hierarchical structure
of the components, i.e., the components of the face do not change when the envi-
ronment changes, e.g., if light condition changes. Furthermore, component based
recognition works also under occlusion.
Learning is hard: It is hard to learn to learn decision surfaces in real life scenarios.
Even in the artiﬁcial example of Ms. Pac-Man a slight change of the corridors of

16
the labyrinth or the actual number, position, and type of the Ghosts may make a big
difference. Such sensitivity to small changes of individual variables or combina-
tions of the variables may be be compensated by an enormous number of training
examples, but it becomes prohibitively expensive. Whereas the component based
recognition suits high dimensional problems and it is typically easy to learn, cate-
gorical perception is hard to learn. Categorical perception appears mostly in prob-
lems, where the inherent dimension is low. Examples include decisions about fe-
male or male faces, borders between colors, and so on.
Taken together, example based learning of decision surfaces in the Ms. Pac-Man prob-
lem is fragile and takes long.
It is however, easy to learn the behavior of the components. For example, any brick
of the wall is a component in the Ms. Pac-Man game. Bricks have coordinates and they
do not move. Dots are different: they also have coordinates, but they disappear when
Ms. Pac-Man crosses them. Power dots are similar, but they also change the behavior
of the ghosts. Ghosts are either escaping or they are chasing Ms. Pac-Man. State tran-
sitions are simple, but chasing behavior has some randomness. Fruits (that we did not
use) appear randomly, they have close-to-deterministic trajectories: upon observation,
a decision could be made if the fruit trajectory can be intercepted or not.
Thus, sophistication of the Ms. Pac-Man game comes from the conﬁgurational di-
versity, whereas the behavior of the components are very simple, sometimes determinis-
tic, and they are easy to learn ”on the ﬂy”. Learning of the dynamics of the components
enables factored description and produces a factored world model with low branching
ration that can produce potential conﬁgurations. Changes in the world, like different
labyrinth, or different ghost speed are again easy to observe and learn. Finally, since
branching ratio is low, such models are easy to run and can be used for look-ahead
(LA). LA is commonly used in RL, including games (see, e.g., [13,1,33]).
Here, we implemented and non-perfect fFSM model, a model of the game.2 Look-
ahead used this game model and was implemented as a set of trajectories, where each
trajectory contained a future state and the rewards collected up to that future state.
Trajectories were enumerated using a depth-ﬁrst search strategy applied on the state
graph of the original model. If look-ahead model approximates the world closely, then
it can improve policy starting at (any) state s0:
πLA(s0) =
argmax
LA trajectory
X
LA trajectory
P(s0, a0, s1) [R(s1, a1
+ P(s1, a1, s2) [R(s2, a2 + . . .
+ P(sT −1, aT , sT ) [R(sT , aT ) + V LA(sT )] . . .].
with discount factor γ = 1. That is, estimated value may make only a relatively small
contribution to the value estimation and that estimated value is about future states closer
to the end of the game when they exhibit smaller estimation errors.
In the look-ahead model, branching factor was reduced by the following heuristics:
2 We have bypassed the learning of the fFSM, which is very simple for Ms. Pac-Man and would
be misleading. We believe that pulling out the close-to-deterministic features is the most rele-
vant piece of the learning problem. This problem is treated elsewhere [17]

17
– We used a deterministic model and reduced the branching factor since each stochas-
tic event would require a branch in the look-ahead tree. Approximations: (i) non-
edible ghosts are always chasing Ms. Pac-Man, (ii) edible ghosts are ﬂeeing away
from Ms. Pac-Man, and (iii) Ms. Pac-Man may stop at positions, where it used to
perform zig-zagging.
– No agent can turn back to a previously visited position. It renders the state graph
to a simple tree – where backtracking is not possible – reducing branching factor
further.
– The trajectory is not evaluated further in case of any event that resets the model,
such as the death of Ms. Pac-Man agent.
Tables 2 and 3 show the results.
Look-ahead
none
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
45
Average score
6680 6089 4702 4677 4622 6013 6266 6533 6561 6601 7130
Table 2. The effect of look-ahead on the score for 3 lives. Single level game, which is over when
all dots are eaten.
Look-ahead
none
45
Avg. life lost
2.82 1.25
Avg. score/life
2368 5704
Table 3. The effect of look-ahead on the average life lost out of 3 lives. Average score per life
increased by about a factor of 2.4 using look-ahead. Single level game, which is over when all
dots are eaten.
For this illustration we used a single level game. The optimization algorithm did
not make use of the information that a life (out of three) is lost, so Ms. Pac-Man could
make sudden transitions in certain cases. Score per life improved considerably by look-
ahead, it increased from about 2,400 (no look-ahead) to 5,700, i.e, by more than a factor
of 2. In turn, lookahead helped Ms. Pac-Man to escape traps. Overall score improved
from 6680 to 7130 for a relatively high lookahead value. This is so, because score can
be increased considerably if more ghosts are catched after eating a single power dot
and deep look-ahead is needed to judge this. There is an interesting interplay between
categorical perception and look-ahead, since a decision surface may work well: the
only relevant variable (apart from the look-ahead estimated value) is the ghost density,
which is a single dimension, so example based learning could work here. The learned
decision surface would thus implicitly measure ghost density, which could be used in
other situations, too.
Lookahead decreases performance if it is shallow. This is due to the non-Markovian
state value estimation that overrides inherited behavior. The estimated value of eating

18
the power dot is high due to the zig-zagging behavior that have emerged. However,
lookahead trusts value estimation, overrides zig-zagging, and that decreases the score.
Deeper look-ahead overcomes this problem.
4
Discussion
We summarize the main features of the architecture, relate them to RL algorithms and
consider the learning demands. Certain cognitive aspects will also be mentioned. We
analyze the architecture from the point of view of evolutionary, individual, and social
learning.
We emphasize that fFSM is very easy to learn in the Ms. Pac-Man game and it is
very simple to run. The memory and computer time demand of look-ahead depends on
the branching ratio and the size of the state space. fFSM, however, works in the space
of factored variables and may considerably reduce the exponent of the size of the state
space of RL.
We have given an example that feature extraction is hard: the machine learning
algorithm should ﬁgure out high level concepts, like ghost density, to make a correct
decision if it should eat the power dot or, instead it should escape in order to attract
more ghosts to another power dot. Such extraction of low-dimensional observations, or
features is an unsolved problem in machine learning for the general case. Ghost density
is an illuminating example: we argued that TD error can be used to learn the decision
surface and the decision will reﬂect ghost density. The parameter ‘ghost density’ could
be used in other scenarios, too. However, in the general case it is unclear how to separate
this factor from the power dot, or the particular structure of the labyrinth where the
decision is to be made.
Modules: modules are spatial-temporal entities. Consider playing volleyball: in this
scenario, there are multiple modules and accompanying activities, such as catching
the ball and running, which involves arm and body modules. Ms. Pac-Man is sim-
ple from this point of view, we did not have to consider problems like the decou-
pling of catching the ball and running. Such problems, however, may pose consider-
able challenge for other applications. If arm and body modules can be properly de-
coupled, then look-ahead can take advantage of the factored FSM description in both
domains. In the example above, the FSM may be written as a rule: “if Run+ and
CatchTheBall+ then PassTheBall+”. An analog example for Ms. Pac-Man
is “if DotOn+ and IStepOnIt+ then DotOn-”.
In order to illustrate the problems of missing information we showed two examples
in Fig. 4. In one situation (Fig. 4(a)), Ms. Pac-Man is waiting on the wrong side of the
power dot. In the other case (Fig. 4(b)), Ms. Pac-Man is chasing and edible ghost and is
surrounded by non-edible ones. For the human observer, these are simple cases. But the
situation becomes different also for human observers if only the odor of the power dot
and the odor of the ghosts are available. We note that for such poor sensory systems,
temporal depth could hardly help, whereas TD error would clearly indicate that there
are occasions that largely differ. Additional (e.g., visual) information is needed to build
the fFSM in order to use look-ahead.

19
The fFSM based description has a number of advantages: fFSM model can be the
zeroth approximation and can be enriched, e.g., stochastic aspects can be included, if
more information becomes available. Also, fFSM model offers considerable improve-
ments at moderate computer time requirements. For example, changes in the labyrinth
can be incorporated, new FSMs like doors, which can be open or closed can be included.
An fFSM becomes costly if branching ratio is large. In this case, sampling methods
can be used, but look-ahead becomes time-consuming making look-ahead useless under
time constraints. Furthermore, look-ahead will not work in partially observed worlds
when value estimation may be very poor. Cognitive aspects include certain forms of
autism. In autism, sensing of the ‘partner’s mind’ is sometimes spoiled; emotion de-
tection or emotion understanding are weak. Then, the lack of information about the
emotional state and the intentions of the partner makes computational costs high since
branching ratio becomes high. At the same time, estimation of rewards is spoiled under
such circumstances.
The fFSM description is advantageous in event-learning formalism described in
[32]. In event-learning optimization decides about the desired next state creating a sub-
problem in the RL task. This subproblem is given to a backing controller, which tries
to solve it. Beyond the advantage that desires may be factored, event-learning supports
ﬂexible deﬁnition of time steps, can utilize backing robust controllers making use of
crudely learned inverse dynamics and thus it ﬁts the module description we used here.
State description as the list of available modules and choice of action as the choice
of a module was ﬁrst described in [12]. The choice of a single module was extended to
the choice of low-complexity modules, the macros in [25] by means of slow, evolution-
like, globally optimizing policy search, the CEM.
Low-complexity macros might serve RL since they are factored. If states deﬁned
by such macros is Markovian then large RL problems can be optimized since learning
time will scale polynomially if sampling is used [26]. A further advantage appears if
the model, i.e., the transition probability matrix is learned since then the exploration–
exploitation dilemma is resolved [29].
With regards to macros, we have found experimentally that (i) the number of op-
timized macro states can be very small, but (ii) these states may be non-Markovian.
Non-Markovity can be early detected by measuring the distribution of the TD errors
in each state, which is easy. One may try to optimize each temporally extended macro
states by applying policy optimization during the time the macro is used followed by
greediﬁcation.
Extension of state description by temporal depth is not feasible in general, since
temporal depth comes to the exponent of the size of the state space. For example, in
Ms. Pac-Man huge temporal depths are required to improve cumulated rewards (Ta-
ble 2). On the other hand, fFSM approximations may be easy to learn, look-ahead
comes cheap for fFSM models and even crude approximations may improve perfor-
mance. Look-ahead may also improve value estimations, since it works by computing
immediate rewards and then adds the estimated (and discounted) values of the inherited
macro states.
From the point of view of cognition, inherited CEM optimized policy provides in-
herited values for the behavioral states. Look-ahead can decrease the error of these

20
inherited values in the actual world since it estimates the rewards and discounts the
effect of the inherited policy. Look-ahead thus changes behavior. However, inherited
rules and related behaviors may reappear by aging if working memory degrades since
look-ahead relies on working memory.
Further work is needed to provide a solid mathematical framework for the look-
ahead extended approximately deterministic fFSM description (LE-fFSM). LE-fFSM is
promising since look-ahead can diminish non-Markovity and then factored RL methods
with attractive scaling properties may apply. However, the feature extraction problem
that suits LE-fFSM is largely unsolved. Neurally motivated hierarchical exact matrix
completion on spatio-temporal representations [17] seem appealing in this respect.
4.1
Evolutionary, individual and social learning
It has been a long-standing problem how to distinguish evolutionary, individual and
social learning [8]. Our architecture offers the following nomenclature:
Evolutionary learning is a selective globally optimizing method that gives rise to
low-complexity rules, i.e., macros and behavioral states. The result of evolution-
ary learning is simple and is easy to pre-wire.
Individual learning learns TD errors, optimizes modules, e.g., ﬁne tunes the thresh-
olds of the rules, computes values and TD errors of macro-states, may increase state
space by decision surfaces, learns factored (stochastic) FSM, applies look-ahead to
predict the behavior, learns to control the individual fFSMs (e.g., switches them on
and off), may learn the inverse dynamics and apply robust controller to improve
control and to solve subtasks.
Social learning requires that the state of other agents including their value estimations
be sensed, so other agents become fFSMs in the model. The lack of this knowledge,
however, means that stochastic FSM agents with hidden variables enter the opti-
mization problem. Such tasks are hard, value estimation may become highly im-
precise, and may prohibit collaboration and social learning, especially since other
agents are not stationary, they learn [18].
4.2
The concept of state in MDPs
Close-to-deterministic factored ﬁnite-state machine description seem attractive for
MDPs, since Laplace’s demon is a good initial approximation of the world for dif-
ferent reasons [35,22] and fFSMs are tractable from the point of view of problem size
in reinforcement learning. However, the extraction of close-to-deterministic variables
(features) is an unsolved problem. Low-complexity, temporally extended and close-to-
deterministic factors can satisfy the concept of states in MDPs to a large extent. The
environment as well as the agent’s action may switch the factors ON and OFF and it
would correspond to state-action-state transitions. Controlled optimal switching is then
the task of MDPs, which is the concept of event-learning [32].

21
5
Conclusions and outlook
We considered spatio-temporal modules in this paper. We showed how to make the tran-
sition from the modular description to state description and how to ﬁnd out if states are
Markovian or not. We treated different options for achieving the Markovian property
and suggested that the learning of factored FSM is the key since it suits look-ahead
based improvement of value estimation. We also argued that learning of the factors in
the Ms. Pac-Man problem happens to be easy and noted that the general problem is un-
solved in machine learning. We introduced look-ahead into the architecture by means
of a deterministic and approximate fFSM, and conjectured that factored RL models
with fFSM look-ahead have many desirable features, including close to Markovian de-
scription, polynomial scaling and diminishing the exploration-exploitation dilemma by
model learning.
We sketched some cognitive aspects of the model; one of the origins of autistic
behavior and changes of behavior if the capacity of working memory changes.
We considered the architecture from the point of view of evolutionary, individual
and social learning and tried to separate key aspects of this long-standing problem.
We have shown that CEM may give rise to simple low-complexity policies, which are
easy to inherit. A particular property of individual learning is to construct fFSM, use it
for look-ahead in order to diminish errors of value estimation and the non-Markovian
characteristics of inherited macro states. Social learning, in our framework, depends on
sensory information; if values or TD errors of the partners can be sensed then fFSM
description may be sufﬁcient and collaborative planning may be eased considerably.
6
Acknowledgement
Thanks are due to ´Akos Bontovics and to M´ark Farkas for their help and support during
the course of this work. The European Union and the European Social Fund have pro-
vided ﬁnancial support to the project under the grant agreement no. T ´AMOP 4.2.1./B-
09/KMR-2010-0003.
