CheXplain: Enabling Physicians to Explore and Understand
Data-Driven, AI-Enabled Medical Imaging Analysis
Yao Xie
HCI Research, UCLA
Los Angeles, California,
United States

Melody Chen
HCI Research, UCLA
Los Angeles, California,
United States

David Kao
HCI Research, UCLA
Los Angeles, California,
United States

Ge Gao
College of Information
Studies, University of
Maryland, College Park
Maryland, United States

Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen
HCI Research, UCLA
Los Angeles, California,
United States

ABSTRACT
The recent development of data-driven AI promises to auto-
mate medical diagnosis; however, most AI functions as ‘black
boxes’ to physicians with limited computational knowledge.
Using medical imaging as a point of departure, we conducted
three iterations of design activities to formulate CheXplain—
a system that enables physicians to explore and understand
AI-enabled chest X-ray analysis: (i) a paired survey between
referring physicians and radiologists reveals whether, when,
and what kinds of explanations are needed; (ii) a low-ﬁdelity
prototype co-designed with three physicians formulates eight
key features; and (iii) a high-ﬁdelity prototype evaluated by
another six physicians provides detailed summative insights
on how each feature enables the exploration and understand-
ing of AI. We summarize by discussing recommendations for
future work to design and implement explainable medical AI
systems that encompass four recurring themes: motivation,
constraint, explanation, and justiﬁcation.
Author Keywords
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence; physician-centered design;
system design.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →Human computer inter-
action (HCI);
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

CHI’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04...$15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.XXXXXXX
Figure 1. We conducted three user-centered activities to formulate the
design of CheXplain — a system that enables physicians to explore and
understand AI-enabled chest X-ray analysis. (i) A paired survey study
learns about how referring physicians expect explanations from radiolo-
gists. (ii) A user-centered design with three physicians formulates eight
design ideas as low-ﬁprototypes. (iii) An integrated high-ﬁprototype
evaluated by six physicians provides insights and recommendations for
future development of explainable medical AI systems.
INTRODUCTION
Intelligent systems—computational agents that employ artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI) to process and make sense of data—are
becoming increasingly ubiquitous in modern workplaces [1].
For example, stakeholders use algorithms to assist them in
urban planning, predicting the risk of future crimes or estimat-
ing insurance risk [61, 69]. Despite the promise of assisting
human decision making through a data-driven approach, non-
computing professionals often ﬁnd it challenging to under-
stand how a â ˘AŸblack boxâ ˘A´Z system transforms their initial
input into a ﬁnal decision.
In medicine, the ‘black box’ problem of AI also raised con-
cerns. Started in the 1950s [44], medical AI has been widely
applied in many subﬁelds such as early detection, diagnosis,
and treatment planning [35]. Early work on medical expert sys-
tems such as DXplain [4] was able to incorporate rule-based
explanation as part of the automatically generated results.
The recent development of deep neural networks promises that
data-driven AI can process diagnostic imaging on par with hu-
man physicians [32]. However, compared with expert systems,
1
arXiv:2001.05149v2  [cs.HC]  19 Jan 2020

neural networks rely on very low-level constructs—a large
number of neurons distributed across stacks of layers, making
it challenging, if not impossible, for medical professionals to
understand how a data-driven AI arrives at certain conclusions.
Such a lack of transparency creates a barrier of understanding,
preventing AI from being widely adopted in the clinic despite
of its promising performance [70].
To solve the ‘black box’ problem, prior work has been focus-
ing on developing interpretable, accountable and transparent
algorithms [16, 56], visualizing obscure features in medical
images [17, 68] or employing cognitive psychological theories
to explore effective explanations [41, 42, 44]. Little of this
work, however, approaches AI’s explainability problem from
the physicians’ point of view, i.e., considering physicians’
domain-speciﬁc needs and day-to-day practices.
Our goal is to enable physicians to understand existing data-
driven, AI-enabled medical imaging analysis. We choose
imaging as it is the primary data source in medicine [35]. In
this paper, we focus on one of the most common modalities—
chest X-ray (CXR) images. To achieve this goal, as shown
in Figure 1, we started with a survey, which informed a user-
centered design to formulate CheXplain—a system for physi-
cians to interactively explore and understand CXR analysis
generated by a state-of-the-art AI [32].
Iteration #1: Survey We conducted a paired-survey on both
referring physicians (N=39) and radiologists (N=38) to learn
about how radiologists currently explain their analysis to refer-
ring physicians and how referring physicians expect explana-
tions from both human and (hypothetical) AI radiologists. The
ﬁndings reveal whether, when, and what kinds of explanations
are needed between referring physicians and radiologists. By
juxtaposing referring physicians’ response to these questions
with respect to human vs. AI radiologists, we elicit system
requirements that encompass the current practices and a future
of AI-enabled diagnosis.
Iteration #2: Low-ﬁprototype.
A co-design with three
physicians manifested the survey-generated system require-
ments into eight speciﬁc features: augmenting input CXR
images with speciﬁc inquiries, mediating system complexity
by the level of urgency, presenting explanations hierarchi-
cally, calibrating regional ﬁndings with contrastive examples,
communicating results probabilistically, contextualizing im-
pressions with additional information, and comparing with
images in the past or from other patients.
Iteration #3: High-ﬁprototype. We integrate the eight fea-
tures into CheXplain—a functional system front-end that al-
lows physician users to explore real results generated by an AI
[32] while all the other explanatory information either comes
from real clinical reports or is manually generated by a radiolo-
gist collaborator. An evaluation with six medical professionals
provides summative insights on each feature. Participants
provided more detailed and accurate explanations of the un-
derlying AI after interacting with CheXplain. We summarize
the design and implementation recommendations for future
development of explainable medical AI.
Contributions
Our contributions are as follows:
• An empirically-informed, user-centered iterative design of
CheXplain—a proof-of-concept system prototype that inte-
grates eight key features for enabling physicians to explore
and understand AI-generated medical imaging analysis;
• A summary of design and implementation recommenda-
tions for future development of explainable medical AI, en-
compassing four recurring themes: motivation, constraints,
explanation, and justiﬁcation. For example:
– Insight: often what referring physicians look for is not
explanation, but justiﬁcation—information extrinsic to
a CXR image that can support an AI’s analysis result.
– Recommendation: more explanation for medical data
analysis (e.g., radiologists), and more justiﬁcation for
medical data consumers (e.g., referring physicians).
BACKGROUND: AI AND RADIOLOGY
The advent of data-driven AI has given rise to a plethora of
research and development using AI to perform radiographic
analysis [45, 55, 60]. The recent work on CheXpert [32]
developed a deep neural network with a dataset that contains
224,316 chest X-ray images from 65,240 patients with 14
different observations. Such an ‘AI radiologist’ takes single
CXR image as the input and outputs the labels that consist of
a list of observations. The model in CheXpert has achieved
a radiologist-level performance—an accuracy of 83% based
on ground truths from CXR reports—and importantly, much
faster diagnosis than human radiologists.
Nomenclatures
• Referring physician: a non-radiologist physician who sends
imaging data (e.g., CXR images) of a patient to a specialist
for more information or treatment.
• Observation: in radiology reports, an observation is a de-
scription or ﬁnding from the radiograph.
• Impression: in radiology reports, impression comes as a list
of summary statements or differential diagnoses concluded
from the observations.
RELATED WORK
We review explainable AI (XAI) and its recent development in
the HCI community. We then introduce literature in Clinical
Decision Support Systems (CDSS), and since our focus is on
imaging, we further discuss prior work on the communication
between radiologists and referring physicians.
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) Systems
Researchers have focused on the explanations of expert intelli-
gent systems since the 1970’s [63]. The topic of explainability
was rejuvaneted as recent developments in data-driven AI
(e.g., deep learning) exacerbates the obscurity of the hidden
intelligent process. Ras et al. summarized recent XAI re-
search into four topics: users, laws/regulations, explanations
and algorithms [49]. A plethora of work on interpretable ma-
chine learning has sought to explain the inner principles of
2

the machine learning models with mathematical and algorith-
mic solutions [7]. However, there is no clear agreement on
the deﬁnition of interpretability and controversy still exists.
Lipton [40] proposed the motivations and methods to achieve
interpretability. Doshi-Velez and Kim [19] discussed how to
measure interpretability. Miller [45] deﬁned interpretability
as the degree to which a human can understand the cause of
a decision and provided an overview of research about how
people deﬁne, generate, validate, on present explanations.
To explain data-driven AI, researchers have focused on three
categories of XAI solutions: rule-extraction methods, attribu-
tion methods, and intrinsic methods [49].
• Rule-extraction methods generate rules based on input and
output information to simulate the â ˘AŸblack box’ decision-
making process. For example, Frosst and Hinton distilled
a more understandable soft decision tree from a neural net-
work [26]. Murdoch and Szlam constructed a simple, rule-
based classiﬁer that approximates the output of LSTM [33].
Ribeiro et al. developed LIME, which learns the model lo-
cally around the prediction and explains the prediction in
an interpretable and faithful manner [51].
• Attribution methods measure the importance of a compo-
nent to the output by changing the input or internal com-
ponents. DeepLIFT decomposed the output prediction of a
speciﬁc input by backpropagating the contribution of all the
neurons to the input features [57]. Zintgraf et al. proposed
a method of visualizing the response of a DNN to a speciﬁc
input to analyze the prediction difference [71].
• Intrinsic methods enhance the interpretability of a model’s
internal constructs without affecting its performance. San-
toro et al. transformed a DNN model into one that is able
to answer rationale questions by adding a reasoning mod-
ule that learns a relational function [52]. Others used a
framework that consists of an attentive encoder-decoder
network for video caption generation and an interpretive
loss to visualize the learned features [18, 65].
Besides the works in ML and AI communities, in the HCI
community, people attempt to understand AI from the users’
perspective, which we review below.
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) Research in HCI
Intelligent sensing systems need to provide users with not
only results but also accounts for their behaviors [5]. XAI in
HCI contains topics that intersect context awareness, cognitive
psychology, and software learnability [56]. For explainable
context-awareness, the key is using simplistic representations
of the context to inform users what is obtained and which
action will be done by the systems [20]. Dey and Newberger
designed a tailored interface that provides visual and textual ex-
planations for context-aware rules [14]. Cognitive psychology
focuses more on explanation theory. Lombrozo studied cogni-
tive explanations and found that it is strongly connected with
causality reasoning [41]. Software learnability is an important
part of usability [28] and Abdul summarized topics of learn-
ability such as hints, guidance as well as visualizations that are
related to design an XAI system [1]. Another study proposed
a framework emphasizing empirical application-speciﬁc inves-
tigations of XAI by exploring the theoretical underpinnings
of human decision-making [64]. Others focused on informa-
tion visualization and ML algorithms visualization to help
non-expert users understand AI [9].
However, the research in the HCI and AI communities often
seem to be disconnected [1]. There is a lack of research
that crosses and combines both ﬁelds to interdisciplinarily
approach the XAI problem.
Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS)
Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) provide knowl-
edge to enhance medical decision-making for physicians.
CDSS is widely adopted in ﬁelds such as screening and pre-
vention, medication decision-making, therapeutic planning,
and diagnostics [9]. With the advent of available medical data
and data processing techniques, CDSS have become increas-
ingly powerful in extracting useful information from a large
amount of patient data to assist medical decision making [22,
46]. AI-based Medical Diagnosis Support Systems (AIMDSS)
have become an important part of CDSS. Currently, research
in AIMDSS primarily focuses on pathology and radiology,
with the ability to detect nuanced patterns that are otherwise
hardly noticeable by human doctors. For example, Jha and
Topol mentioned AIMDSS is able to identify radiographs for
radiologists and recognize patterns for pathologists to work as
a information specialist during the diagnostic process [34].
However, the actual usage of these AI-based Clinical Decision
Support Systems is limited because of a lack of understanding.
Fan et al. found that initial and performance expectancy both
have signiﬁcant effects on doctors’ behavioral intention of
using AIMDSS [21]. Medical professionals may not use a
system if the system cannot provide relevant information or
capture the mental model of doctors [36, 38, 66]. Thus it is
crucial that CDSS are able to explain themselves. The expla-
nation capabilities of AI systems using knowledge bases were
ﬁrst added to medical decision making and computer-aided di-
agnosis in 1983 [59]. MYCIN was one of the earliest systems
that incorporated domain knowledge and rule representations
to achieve explainability [63]. DXplain explained and justiﬁed
the interpretations by proposing knowledge-based diagnostic
hypotheses including signs and symptoms to users in med-
ical decision-making [4]. A diagnostic reasoning theory is
proposed to ﬁnd the components of the system that explain
the discrepancy between the expected result and observed be-
haviors [50]. An argumentation-based interaction [25] that
is ﬂexible and easily understood by human users can help
doctors make decisions based on this question. Better explana-
tions can let users better understand the reasoning chain and
enhance the system’s conﬁdence [9]. Park and Han proposed
explanations as one of the methods of evaluating the clinical
performance and effect of CDSS [48].
New research also emerged to address explainability chal-
lenges in medical AI systems that started to incorporate data-
driven models. Caruana et al. developed an interpretable sys-
tem using the generalized additive models with pairwise inter-
actions GA2M model predicting pneumonia risk and hospital
30-day readmission [11]. Krause et al. designed a visual
3

analytics system to help support interactive dependence diag-
nostics by feature representation and visualization [39].
In sum, research in CDSS attempted to bridge the gap of
actual use by making it understandable to domain experts in
medical decision-making. As this paper is conerned with XAI
in radiology, below we review past research on the exchange
of information between radiologists and referring physicians
to understand their decision-making process.
Communication between Radiologists and Physicians
One study mentioned that the ambiguous requests from refer-
ring physicians may prevent radiologists from assisting physi-
cians efﬁciently and a more precise medical history should
be helpful for radiologists to better understand the cases [37].
Fischer et al. found that direct communication, informative
request forms and questioning the patients will also be useful
to lead to better communication between referring physicians
and radiologists [23]. Another study proposed speciﬁc sugges-
tions on how to improve reporting performance from referring
physicians’ points of view. The study indicated that reporting
should receive more attention in training and practice than
it currently does [29]. The American College of Radiology
(ACR) also deﬁned practice guidelines for communication of
diagnostic imaging ﬁndings for radiologists aiming for bet-
ter communication [2]. In addition, the quality of requests,
transparency with regard to waiting time, a portal for easier
scheduling, and making radiation dose information visible
were also mentioned in a survey [53]. One study pointed out
that the vagueness of the radiology report, e.g., inappropriate
use of words in radiology reports, would lead to informa-
tion asymmetry between referring physicians and radiologists,
which might prevent timely treatments [62]. Clinger men-
tioned referring physicians’ satisfactory is mainly affected by
diagnostic accuracy, clarity of language, and a detailed discus-
sion of the ﬁndings [12]. Berlin pointed out that radiologists’
duty extends beyond interpreting and sending out a written re-
port to referring physicians. The communication of diagnosis
is altogether as important as the diagnosis itself [6].
Despite all this research, little has been studied about how
explanation—a speciﬁc form of communication—is currently
used between referring physicians and radiologists, not to men-
tion what difference there will be in an AI-enabled scenario.
To bridge this gap and to inform the design of our system, be-
low we started with a survey of explanations between referring
physicians and radiologists.
ITERATION #1: LEARNING ABOUT EXPLANATIONS
BETWEEN PHYSICIANS & RADIOLOGISTS
Given the limited prior art on explanation between physicians
and radiologists, we conducted a survey to set the scene for
the subsequent design activities. Speciﬁcally, we investigated
whether, when, and what kinds of explanations are needed be-
tween referring physicians and radiologists when performing
a diagnosis based on CXR images.
Survey Design
The authors all have computer science backgrounds. To un-
derstand communications between radiologists and referring
physicians in real workﬂow, and to design survey questions,
we conducted several interviews with two radiologists.
We employed a paired-survey design where both referring
physicians and radiologists would answer the same set of ques-
tions, respectively, as explanation involves both an explainer
and an explainee. For example, physicians would answer
“what kinds of information do radiologists use to explain their
examination results to you? ”, whereas the same question
for the radiologists would be “what kinds of information do
you use to explain your examination results to the referring
physicians?”. This design allows us to compare and synthe-
size both parties’ response vis-Ã˘a-vis in order to obtain a more
complete picture of explanations between referring physicians
and radiologists.
Further, we asked another set of questions only to referring
physicians, speciﬁcally about when and what kinds of ex-
planations they expect if the results were to come from an
AI rather than a human radiologist. Given that very few AI-
enabled radiograph analysis tools exist in clinical use, this set
of questions is by nature speculative. Based on the state-of-
the-art development [32], we described an AI radiologist to
participants as a computer program that can produce—in real
time—observations commonly found in human radiologists’
report. This design allows us to identify if there is any differ-
ence in referring physicians’ expectations of explanation when
it comes to AI.
Participants
We distributed our surveys via social media groups of medi-
cal professionals across the US and personal connections to
local medical centers. We recruited 77 participants in total
(39 referring physicians and 38 radiologists). The study was
conducted anonymously on Survey Monkey Platform and each
participant received $20 as payment.
Findings
Whether Explanation Is Needed
In general, a lack of information motivates but the time cost
constrains the seeking of explanations. Referring physicians
often ﬁnd themsevles in need for more information, e.g., “more
comparisons”, “more details instead of vague descriptions of
abnormalities”. Calling radiologists or colleagues for explana-
tion is considered “one effective way to obtain information”. In
the meantime, as is similar to the process of reporting [8], seek-
ing explanation is also time-consuming: participants reported
that waiting time for initiate a communication ranges from 15
minutes to one day, where only 56% of the participants felt
satisﬁed with such efﬁciency.
With AI, a lack of trust becomes the motivating factor. Re-
ferring physicians remain skeptical, as only 1/3 of them ex-
pressed trust of an AI radiologist, compared to 38/39 reported
likely or very likely to trust a human radiologist. Participants
indicated that an AI radiologist would need to explain itself
with “probabilities” and “professional knowledge”.
When Explanation Is Needed
Referring physicians seek explanations when their questions
are unanswered or when the results are atypical or critical.
4

Results show that asking for explanations of a speciﬁc question
is one of the most frequent scenarios when referring physi-
cians contact radiologists. As explainers, radiologists reported
that they would like to “know what the referring physician is
looking for” and “have a more focused question rather than
a vague description” in order to generate more efﬁcient and
more speciﬁc explanations. Meanwhile, referring physicians
looked for explanations for critical or atypical ﬁndings, e.g.,
“descriptions indicating high or low incidence of being signiﬁ-
cant”.
With AI, physicians would seek explanations when their hy-
potheses are in discordance with AI’s results. Referring physi-
cians reported more likely to need explanations when they
believe they are right and AI’s results are wrong or when they
are not sure who is right.
What Kinds of Explanation Are Needed
Comparison with patients’ prior images or other image modal-
ities (e.g., CT scan) is most commonly used for explanations,
as reported by both referring physicians and radiologists. Fur-
ther, 18 participants considered more differential diagnoses as
another way of explaining CXR-based results.
With AI, referring physicians further expect annotations on
CXR and regional comparisons across patients. Referring
physicians requested more than what current AI’s textual de-
scription of the observations, e.g., “... area of concern instead
of ambiguous descriptions”.
The needs for justiﬁcations emerged under this question. Dif-
ferent from explanation that explains with intrinsic process
about how the results are generated, justiﬁcations apply extrin-
sic sources of information such as prior images or other image
modalities to justify AI’s results.
ITERATION #2: LOW-FI PROTOTYPING TO FORMULATE
KEY SYSTEM DESIGNS
Building off of the survey’s ﬁndings that point to system re-
quirements, we conducted a user-centered design to formulate
CheXplain in two major iterations. In this section we describe
the initial low-ﬁprototype co-designed with three physicians.
Participants
Recruited from a local medical center, the three physicians
came from different specialties but all had experience reading
radiographs. As shown in Table 1, the participants had various
degree of radiological knowledge, thus allowing us to calibrate
system designs that serve for both novices and experts in
radiology.
Apparatus & Procedure
To help participants understand the current status of ‘AI radi-
ologists’, we ﬁrst presented a simple ‘system’ based on the
type of CheXpert’s output without any explanation (Figure
2). Next, we used a combination of paper/pencil and Google
Slides to create a series of low-ﬁprototype mock-ups. We
used these artifacts as probes to elicit participants’ reactions,
critical feedback, and more discussions. Further, we asked
participants to brainstorm more interactive features that could
help them explore and understand an AI radiologist.
Participant
Specialty
Radiological Knowledge
P1
Pulmonologist
Competent
P2
Radiologist
Expert
P3
Allergist
Novice
Table 1. Iteration #2 physicians’ knowledge in radiology. Novice: do not
know much about radiology and do not report CXR images in workﬂow.
Competent: know much about radiology but do not report CXR images
in workﬂow. Expert: proﬁcient in radiology and report CXR images in
workﬂow.
Figure 2. An example of AI-radiologist without any explanation to help
participants understand the current status of AI radiologists
Results: Key System Designs
Through iterative development with three physicians, we con-
solidated the following key features of CheXplain. According
to the ﬁndings in iteration #1, feature #1, #2, #8 are explana-
tions and the others are justiﬁcations.
#1 Augmenting CXR images with speciﬁc inquiries
Prior AI-related work often considered a medical image as
the only input and attempted to exhaust all possible diag-
noses. However, as indicated in the survey and another paper
[8], physicians often have a speciﬁc question for a CXR im-
age, sometimes with important contextual information. P2
mentioned that “For chest pain, they’re usually looking for
pneumothorax but for swallowing an object, they are looking
for that object”. P1 and P3 suggested that allowing for a range
of questions/auxilliary information as additional input.
Design As shown in Figure 3a, we design an initial step for re-
ferring physicians to select or type in keywords that character-
ize their questions speciﬁc to the patient’s case. Accordingly,
an AI should use such keywords to ‘ﬁlter’ the examination
process, e.g., only paying attention to relevant regions of the
CXR image.
#2 Presenting explanations hierarchically
Previous work also mentioned that radiographical reports need
to be itemized and better structured [8]. According to our dis-
cussion with physicians and existing radiologists’ guidelines,
there are three levels of radiographical information: (i) low-
level examination—which body part to look at in a CXR im-
age, e.g., lungs, trachea; (ii) mid-level observation—what
characteristics or phenomena are observed, e.g., cardiomegaly,
pleural effusion; (iii) high-level impression—differential di-
agnosis based on observations, e.g., pleural effusion suggest
pericardial disease or congestive heart failure.
5

Figure 3. Low-ﬁprototypes of eight key system designs formulated in iteration #2. (a) Augmenting CXR images with speciﬁc inquiries: directed
explanation based on a user’s target question; (b) Presenting explanations hierarchically: connecting low-level annotation, mid-level observation, and
high-level impression; (c) Contextualizing observations with contrastive examples: contrasting a user-selected region with both normal and abnormal
samples; (d) Interpreting observations probabilistically: calibrating the understanding of AI’s probability by referring to same observations in other
CXRs with different probabilities; (e) Contextualizing impressions with prevalence & traces: presenting prevalence and known factors that affect a
user-selected impression; (f) Comparison across time: showing the same patient’s prior images; (g) Comparison across patients: comparing with CXRs
from different patients having the same observation; (h) Mediating system complexity by urgency level: showing different amount of information in
urgent vs. non-urgent mode.
Given such a hierarchy of information, we observed that more
radiologically knowledgeable physicians tended to reason
about AI’s explanations in a bottom-up way while less knowl-
edgeable physicians often took a top-down path when trying
to make sense of AI.
Design As shown in Figure 3b, the main interface of CheX-
plain embraces the three-level hierarchy: annotations on the
CXR image indicate low-level examinations (where the AI
is looking at); observations and impressions are presented
next to one another. As a user selects a speciﬁc examina-
tion/impression/observation, the system ‘connects the dots’:
for example, by clicking Pneumonia, the user can see that AI
makes that impression based on Edema observations, which
are based on the examinations from CXR.
#3 Contextualizing observations with contrastive examples
Physicians mentioned that comparing abnormal and normal
CXR images is a common practice in teaching radiologists.
Relatedly, XAI research has proposed contrastive [15] and
counterfactual [31] explanations that allow a person to under-
stand something in light of plausible alternatives.
Design As shown in Figure 3c, as a user selects a speciﬁc
region of examination on the CXR image, the system shows
a pair of contrastive examples also generated by the same
AI examining the same region. By looking at images that
contrast the AI’s observation, a physician can explore ‘what-if’
questions, e.g., “what if there is no cardiomegaly?” By looking
at images of the same observation, a physician can see if there
is any common pattern, and whether the current image shares
that pattern (if not, it might be a misdiagnosed outlier).
#4 Interpreting observations probabilistically
Many AI models can output a probability for each possible
conclusion, which can be leveraged to explain the result. For
example, a seemingly unlikely observation/impression is ex-
plainable if there is a low probability. However, physicians
expressed confusion about interpreting a numeric probability,
e.g., “Why AI is only 90% sure, why is it not 100% sure? I
would like to see the gap between 90% and 100%” (P2). Ac-
cording to participants, we found that it was not the numeric
values of probabilities that matter but how these values are
mapped in medical workﬂows.
Design As shown in Figure 3d, as a physician user clicks
an observation label, the system shows an array of CXR im-
ages of the same observation, sorted by their probability and
calibrated by medical professionals’ understanding of an AI
obervation’s probability: unlikely (0%), likely (50%) and very
likely (100%). For example, a 80% edema turns out to be
quite similar to a near 100% case.
#5 Contextualizing impressions with prevalence & traces
Participants brainstormed various ways to support the under-
standing of impressions: P1 suggested “using epidemiologic
6

standpoints” as a baseline to explain the probability of an im-
pression; P2 addiontially suggested “including the factors that
AI took into consideration when generating the probability
of impressions (e.g., the patient’s age, risk factors, smoking
history)”.
Design As shown in Figure 3e, the system provides two addi-
tional information to contextualize an impression: (i) preva-
lence, i.e., prior probability of the same impression in a given
population; and (ii) traces that go back to observations that
contribute to higher or lower probability of such impression.
#6 Comparison across time
All three participants reacted positively to our initial idea of
comparing with the same patient’s prior images. P1 mentioned
that an AI’s observation is more explainable if the patient had
similar diagnoses before. Similarly, P2 would like to see if
the observations were already there in the prior images, and
whether they were getting better or worse. P3 mentioned
that previously non-existing observations should be prioritized
when seeking explanations.
Design As shown in Figure 3f, a physician user can switch to
a side-by-side view between the current and prior cases, view
annotations and ﬁlter to see only what is different.
#7 Comparison across patients
To respond to the initial inquiry, participants suggested show-
ing other patients whose cases had similar inquries.
Design As shown in Figure 3g, in the same view as comparing
with prior images, a physician user can see a lists of other
patients’ cases responding to cardiomegaly inquiry.
#8 Mediating system complexity by urgency level
Our survey shows that time cost contrains referring physicians
from seeking explanations. While an explainable AI radiolo-
gist can mitigate such problem, sometimes physicians might
not even have time to interact with our system. P3 mentioned,
“I will just pick the important abnormalities if I am in a hurry
and look back to see other information later”. P1 suggested
two different modes of the system for urgent and non-urgent
cases.
Design As shown in Figure 3h, we design an ‘urgent’ mode
that can be toggled by the user, where the system only shows
annotations to explain the most signiﬁcant AI-generated ob-
servations, i.e., observations that have both high conﬁdence
and lead to impressions of critical nature.
ITERATION #3: EVALUATING A HIGH-FI PROTOTYPE
We integrated the eight key features into a high-ﬁdelity pro-
totype of CheXplain, which allowed us to further iterate the
design by having physicians interact with the system to explore
and understand the AI-generated radiograph analysis.
Physicians
We invited 39 referring physicians who participated in the
survey study and other medical professionals via connections
to a local medical center. We ﬁnally recruited six participants.
As shown in Table 2, the participants had various degree of
radiological knowledge.
Participant
Specialty
Radiological Knowledge
P1
Pediatrics
Competent
P2
Internist
Expert
P3
Pediatrics
Competent
P4
Medical student
Novice
P5
Pediatrics
Competent
P6
Medical student
Novice
Table 2. Iteration #3 Participants’ knowledge in radiology. Novice: do
not know much about radiology and do not report CXR images in work-
ﬂow. Competent: know much about radiology but do not report CXR
images in workﬂow. Expert: proﬁcient in radiology and report CXR
images in workﬂow.
Apparatus
Figure 4 shows the study testbed system. We implemented the
front-end of CheXplain as a web-based platform. All patient
cases including input, regional annotations, prior and across-
patient images were from the CheXpert dataset. Similarly,
CXR observations were generated by a convolutional neural
network used in CheXpert paper. The remaining requisite
information was manually generated based on external medical
guidelines [43] and was veriﬁed by a radiologist collaborator.
Using manually-generated data to test a fully-implemented
front-end allowed us to agily test the system design without
committing to a computationally costly implementation of the
back-end.
Physicians interacted with CheXplain using their own
browsers. All the studies were conducted remotely via Zoom
through which we observed physicians’ interactions in real-
time via screen sharing. We recorded the sessions with physi-
cians’ permission and transcribed the audio for further data
analysis.
Tasks & Procedure
We started with a brief introduction of AI’s application in
medical image analysis. Next, physicians were presented with
a patient’s case randomly selected from the database, which
came with textual labels indicating AI-generated observations.
The main task was to interpret AI’s results, i.e., describing
their understanding of why AI arrived at certain results of the
case. We asked the physicians to respond as succintly and
accurately as possible.
We asked each physician to describe their interpretation of
AI after presenting CheXpert’s results (Figure 4a). Then, we
guided the physician to interact with CheXplain (Figure 4b),
using it as a tool to explore and understand AI-generated
results of the same patient’s case. Afterwards, we asked the
physician to describe their interpretation of AI again.
Physicians were also encouraged to think aloud during their
interaction with CheXplain. We asked physicians in situ ques-
tions as they interacted with each of the eight key features—
whether and how each feature helped them understand AI’s
results. We ended by asking each physician to summarize how
CheXplain overall changed their understanding of the underly-
7

Figure 4. High-ﬁprototyping. (a) CheXpert: AI radiologist without
explanations. (b) CheXplain: The high-ﬁdelity prototype with 8 key fea-
tures.
ing AI, and whether and how such systems can be integrated
into their existing workﬂow.
Analysis & Findings
We analyzed each physician’s response at a rolling basis. The
ﬁrst experimenter transcribed and coded physicians’ responses
and iteratively developed a code book. A second experimenter
reviewed the codes and resolved disagreements via discussion
with the ﬁrst experimenter.
How physicians interpreted AI before & after CheXplain
We compare physicians’ interpretation of AI before and after
interacting with CheXplain. Results show that pre-CheXplain
responses (i.e., only relying on CheXpert’s results) contain
very little information—all but one physicians acknowledged
that they were not able to provide an interpretation. The only
physician who did respond described that “AI gathered a lot
of images with readings similar to human radiologists”, which
was based on his previous knowledge of AI. In contrast, re-
sponses contained more substance after interacting with CheX-
plain. All physicians mentioned that AI arrived at the observa-
tions based on comparison against normal/abnormal images
and prior images, which captured the data-driven, learning-
based nature of AI. In addition, three physicians also men-
tioned that AI pointed out where it was looking at (P3, P5,
P6)—“It would give you a better idea because it tells you what
areas to look at if you are not sure about the analysis and this
is exactly what I would be looking for” (P4).
Figure 5. Percentages of physicians’ ratings for grouped features. The
vertical axis presents groups in a top-down descending order by mean
values of ratings.
Overall feedback: how CheXplain enables understanding AI
Participants were asked whether and how each feature helped
them understand AI’s result as well as rating the helpfulness
from 1 (not helpful at all) to 5 (extremely helpful). We group
the aforementioned eight design features into three different
categories: image-based comparisons, interconnection among
different information, and information ﬁlters. As shown in
Figure 5, image-based comparisons were regarded as the most
helpful features. Below we provide detailed qualitative discus-
sion about each of the three categories (numbers in parentheses
refer to individual features discussed in Iteration #2).
Image-based comparisons (#3, #4, #6, #7)
Image-based comparisons help physicians to understand AI by
drawing on speciﬁc CXR examples as evidence, which helped
physicians overcome the difﬁculty of understanding AI’s re-
sults in isolation. Though image comparisons are common
in image studies, CheXplain enables physicians to screening
out whether AI makes mistakes in each step by comparisons.
For example, Interpreting observations probabilistically by
calibrating physicians’ understanding of probability is helpful
because offering images with different probabilities “deﬁnes
different likelihoods so I know which is statistically more likely”
(P1) while preventing users from “missing something that’s
really obvious in AI’s deﬁnitive category” (P2). Contextual-
izing observations with contrastive examples was helpful by
“constrasting regions, I can tell what a normal region looks
like, determine how similar the images are and understand
AI’s conclusion” (P5). Comparison across time pointed out
the difference of AI’s observations from prior images, which
might seem unlikely if viewed in isolation (P3, P6) and Com-
parison across patients surfaced common features for the same
observation across multiple patients (P1, P2, P6).
However, there were confusions when physicians tried to un-
derstand AI-based on multiple sources of images. P1 and
P2 thought AI also analyzed the patient’s prior images when
processing the present case, which suggests that design should
clearly show what is and is not the input data to the AI. P3 men-
tioned that a common feature of the same observation might
not always exist because sometimes it appears very differently
across patients. To address this, future design should group
cross-patient cases based on their variance so that physicians
can look for common features only in the same group.
8

Interconnection among different information (#2, #5)
Although establishing interconnection of information is not
novel in medical systems [27], we initially employ it in medi-
cal explainable AI. Participants found it useful for CheXplain
to present AI’s ﬁndings in an interconnected way, which serves
as a road map for them to navigate CXR results at different
levels of detail, although not all the interconnected information
was found equally helpful for their understanding of AI.
For example, presenting explanations hierarchically provided
an organized way for physicians to interpret AI’s output, from
which low-level annotations were found to be more helpful—
“I can know where AI looked at to ﬁgure out the result and it
tells you exactly what’s there, where, and why” (P6). Impres-
sions, on the other hand, were more controversial and often
considered less helpful: P4 believed generating impressions is
more complicated than what the system shows, which simply
traces an impression to the lower-level observations and exami-
nations. Contextualizing impressions with prevalence & traces
was considered beyond the scope of the system. While physi-
cians liked the concept of having such contextual information
for each impression, most thought it was ambitious to explain
both radiological and clinical factors, and were concerned that
other important factors might be missing here. Future design
can adopt an on-demand approach, e.g., allowing physicians
to ask speciﬁc questions about what they believe are relevant
to contextualize a given impression.
Information ﬁlters (#1, #8)
Physicians found that both features in this category were not
directly related to helping physicians understand AI; rather,
physicians considered them as ﬁlters to help physicians target
their understanding or reduce time cost of interacting with the
system. Despite almost all AI research in medical domain
claiming that they speed up the diagnosis, which are actually
provided by computing power, we start from a physician-
centered perspective and improve this problem by interaction.
Physicians mentioned that Augmenting CXR images with spe-
ciﬁc inquiries and Mediating system complexity by urgency
level helped narrowing down the information when under-
standing AI and sorting signiﬁcant observations fast—”they
help me to focus on observations that AI thinks are more likely
to be related to my input questions” (P5). P3 noted that AI
presents ﬁndings related to his question input in the image.
Mediating system complexity by urgency level opened up physi-
cians’ various preferences in ﬁltering information: P4 would
like to “see the important observations faster” when running
out of time; P6, on the other hand, “still wants to see everything
to get a better understanding”; P3 preferred to “pick what I
think is urgent” (P3). Further design could address these di-
verse requirements by making this feature customizable based
on physicians’ personal preferences.
DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MEDICAL AI SYSTEM
Based on our survey and a user-centered process of prototyp-
ing CheXplain, we summarize design recommendations for
developing medical AI systems that can be understandable
to physicians. Speciﬁcally, there are four recurring themes
across our three iterations of design activities: motivation vs.
constraint and explanation vs. justiﬁcation.
Motivation vs. Constraint
Motivation is what drives a physicians to try to understand an
AI’s diagnosis results, and constraint is what prevents them.
Enable a physician to achieve an understanding of AI tar-
geted at a speciﬁc clinical problem, rather than to attain a
general, open-ended understanding of AI. Our survey indi-
cates that a lack of information motivates physicians to seek
explanations; however, when co-designing CheXplain, physi-
cians tended to focus on understanding aspects of AI’s results
only if they are relevant to their own hypothesis or differential
diagnosis. Besides, in radiographic reporting, referring physi-
cians also need to state clearly what clinical question they
want to have answers to [8]. To address this, we recommend
starting with a question input to narrow the scope of AI’s anal-
ysis. Such a question-answering (QA) ability also presents
implementation challenge to the medical AI community given
the recent development of visual QA [3, 47, 54]. Currently,
one potential pitfall is attempting to explain too much, or too
deep into the technical stack, which might actually constrain a
physician’s ability to see and understand the more clinically
relevant aspects of AI.
Make a wide range of data sources available as a physcian
tries to understand the AI, as differential diagnosis seldom
relies on a single type of data [67]. We recommend going
beyond how a medical AI currently handles one speciﬁc type
of input modality only (e.g., CheXpert only looks at CXR
images). A mixed-modality approach is more familiar to
physicians and more likely to motivate them to understand AI’s
results. In contrast, one potential pitfall is developing multiple
XAI systems for multiple types of data, e.g., System A explains
mining eletronic health records while System B explains deep
convolutional network’ processing of MRI data, which is likely
to constrain a physician’s effort in understanding how a clinical
case is handled by AI.
Let physicians customize how much time they want to
spend trying to understand AI. CheXplain provides an ur-
gency toggle for physicians with low time budget to under-
stand AI; yet this design still cannot address different ap-
proaches physicians take to juggle time and information. We
recommend that, instead of adjusting time, the system should
let a physician freely control the amount of information they
would like to process, from trying to make sense of only the
critical results, to revealing more explanation hierarchically,
and to referencing other regional, previous or cross-patient
examples.
Explanation vs. Justiﬁcation
Our research started with a focus on explanations of AI, which
enables physicians to understand AI with intrinsic processes
of producing certain output given certain input data, e.g., pro-
cessing pixels of a CXR image to arrive at certain observations.
Later, as we co-designed CheXplain with physicians, a dif-
ferent set of ideas emerged, which tried to draw on extrinsic
sources of information to justify AI’s results. Such justiﬁca-
tions include prevalence of a disease, contrastive examples
9

from other CXR images, and a patient history. Thus, we
consider explanations and justiﬁcations as two categories of
methods that help physicians understand AI.
Use more explanation for medical data analysts (e.g., ra-
diologists), and more justiﬁcation for medical data con-
sumers (e.g., referring physicians). We ﬁnd that radiologists
tend to expect more explanations for details such as low-level
annotations of CXR images, while referring physicians are
generally less concerned about the instrinsic details but care
more about extrinsic validity of AI’s results. Retrospectively,
we can see that ﬁve of CheXplain’s features are justiﬁcation
(#3-7).
Enable explanation and justiﬁcation at different levels
of abstraction, similar to how CheXplain employs the
examination-observation-impression hierarchy to scaffold
both explanation and justiﬁcation. Holistically, as a physi-
cian follows a bottom-up or top-down path to understand an
AI’s diagnosis of a patient, at any step along the way, they
should be able to seek both explanation and justiﬁcation. To
achieve this, the XAI community need to consider explanation
regulated by a user-speciﬁed level of abstraction; research on
Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) should enable search
criteria at multiple levels of abstraction, e.g., from a region
of speciﬁc visual features to a global image that presents a
speciﬁc impression.
Implementation challenges for medical imaging AI: ex-
plain how AI ‘looks at’ a region; justify how two images
are clinically (dis)similar.
A plethora of prior work [13, 24, 54, 58] has achieved lo-
calizing where AI is ‘looking at’ on an input image, but not
how—e.g., how does AI consider this region as edema? Gener-
ating a natural language explanation—analogous to Hendricks’
work on bird classiﬁcation [30]—presents a new challenge for
medical imaging AI.
When comparing images to justify AI’s result, one challenge
is to inform physicians how two images are radiographically
(dis)similar, thus further enable them to gain insight from such
justiﬁcations. Cai et al. designed a TCAV-like [10] tool for
pathologists to ﬁnd images based on self-deﬁned concepts,
which should be generalized to enable justiﬁcations beyond
comparing visual features.
LIMITATION
Our current work has the following limitations:
• Survey questions regarding an AI radiologist were in-
evitably speculative due to the limited adoption of AI in
current medical practices;
• The number of participants was limited due to the scarcity
of medical professionals’ availability;
• The available CXR dataset we used has limited information
to further the exploration using CheXplain, e.g., missing
patients’ medical history, no additional lab results.
• The ﬁnal evaluation of system design is inevitable specula-
tive instead of in a real workplace due to strict regulations.
The results may have slight differences in the actual diag-
nostic workﬂow.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we identiﬁed the gap between current XAI re-
search and domain experts’ understanding of AI in medical
decision-making. Our work contributes to a bridge of this gap
by conducting a physician-centered design of CheXplain —
a system that enables physicians to understand AI-enabled
chest X-ray analysis by interaction. Ultimately, we propose a
series of recommendations for future human-centered medical
AI development around four recurring themes: motivation vs.
constraint and explanation vs. justiﬁcation.
Taken together, our work provides implications for how physi-
cians can explore and understand data-driven, AI-enabled med-
ical imaging analysis to assist physicians in medical decision-
making process. The future work will explore the development
of human-centered medical AI beyond medical imaging anal-
ysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was funded in part by the National Science Founda-
tion under grant IIS-1850183.
We thank Fereidoun Abtin and Jonathan Barclay for their
valuable comments on earlier design of CheXplain. We thank
all the anonymous participants for their contributions to our
study. We also thank Lauren Hung for her suggestions on
interface design of the system.
