On the Possibilities and Limitations of Multi-hop Reasoning
Under Linguistic Imperfections
Daniel Khashabi1∗Erfan Sadeqi Azer2
Tushar Khot1
Ashish Sabharwal1
Dan Roth3
1Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, USA
2Indiana University, Bloomington, USA
3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
Abstract
Systems for language understanding have be-
come remarkably strong at overcoming lin-
guistic imperfections in tasks involving phrase
matching or simple reasoning. Yet, their accu-
racy drops dramatically as the number of rea-
soning steps increases. We present the ﬁrst for-
mal framework to study such empirical obser-
vations. It allows one to quantify the amount
and effect of ambiguity, redundancy, incom-
pleteness, and inaccuracy that the use of lan-
guage introduces when representing a hidden
conceptual space.
The idea is to consider
two interrelated spaces: a conceptual mean-
ing space that is unambiguous and complete
but hidden, and a linguistic space that cap-
tures a noisy grounding of the meaning space
in the words of a language—the level at which
all systems, whether neural or symbolic, oper-
ate. Applying this framework to a special class
of multi-hop reasoning, namely the connectiv-
ity problem in graphs of relationships between
concepts, we derive rigorous intuitions and im-
possibility results even under this simpliﬁed
setting. For instance, if a query requires a mod-
erately large (logarithmic) number of hops in
the meaning graph, no reasoning system oper-
ating over a noisy graph grounded in language
is likely to correctly answer it. This highlights
a fundamental barrier that extends to a broader
class of reasoning problems and systems, and
suggests an alternative path forward: focusing
on aligning the two spaces via richer repre-
sentations, before investing in reasoning with
many hops.
1
Introduction
Reasoning can be viewed as the process of combin-
ing facts and beliefs, in order to infer new conclu-
sions (Johnson-Laird, 1980). While there is a rich
∗Work was done when the ﬁrst author was afﬁliated with
the University of Pennsylvania.
Figure 1: The interface between meanings and words
capturing linguistic imperfections: each meaning (top)
can be uttered in many ways as words (bottom), and
the same word can have multiple meanings.
literature on reasoning, there is limited understand-
ing of it in the context of natural language, par-
ticularly in the presence of linguistic noise. There
remains a substantial gap between the strong empir-
ical performance and little theoretical understand-
ing of models for common language tasks, such as
question answering, reading comprehension, and
textual entailment. We focus on multi-hop or multi-
step reasoning over text, where one must take mul-
tiple steps and combine multiple pieces of informa-
tion to arrive at the correct conclusion. Remarkably,
the accuracy of even the best multi-hop models is
empirically known to drop drastically as the num-
ber of required hops increases (Yang et al., 2018;
Mihaylov et al., 2018). This is generally viewed as
a consequence of linguistic imperfections, such as
those illustrated in Figure 1.
We introduce a novel formalism that quantiﬁes
arXiv:1901.02522v3  [cs.CL]  1 May 2020

these imperfections and makes it possible to theo-
retically analyze a subclass of multi-hop reasoning
algorithms. Our results provide formal support for
existing empirical intuitions about the limitations
of reasoning with inherently noisy language. Im-
portantly, our formalism can be applied to both
neural as well as symbolic systems, as long as they
operate on natural language input.
The formalism consists of (A) an abstract model
of linguistic knowledge, and (B) a reasoning
model. The abstract model is built around the
notion of two spaces (see Figure 1): a hidden
meaning space of unambiguous concepts and an
associated linguistic space capturing their imper-
fect grounding in words. The reasoning model
captures the ability to infer a property of interest in
the meaning space (e.g., the relationship between
two concepts) while observing only its imperfect
representation in the linguistic space.
The interaction between the meaning space and
the linguistic space can be seen as simulating and
quantifying the symbol-grounding problem (Har-
nad, 1990), a key difﬁculty in operating over lan-
guage that arises when one tries to accurately map
words into their underlying meaning representation.
Practitioners often address this challenge by en-
riching their representations; for example by map-
ping textual information to Wikipedia entries (Mi-
halcea and Csomai, 2007; Ratinov et al., 2011),
grounding text to executable rules via semantic
parsing (Reddy et al., 2017), or incorporating con-
texts into representations (Peters et al., 2018; De-
vlin et al., 2019). Our results indicate that advances
in higher ﬁdelity representations are key to making
progress in multi-hop reasoning.
There are many ﬂavors of multi-hop reasoning,
such as ﬁnding a particular path of labeled edges
through the linguistic space (e.g., textual multi-hop
reasoning) or performing discrete operations over
a set of such paths (e.g., semantic parsing). In this
ﬁrst study, we explore a common primitive shared
by various tasks, namely, the connectivity problem:
Can we determine whether there is a path of length
k between a pair of nodes in the meaning graph,
while observing only its noisy grounding as the
linguistic graph? This simpliﬁcation clariﬁes the
exposition and analysis; we expect similar impossi-
bility results, as the ones we derive, to hold for a
broader class of tasks that rely on connectivity.
We note that even this simpliﬁed setting by it-
self captures interesting cases. Consider the task
of inferring the Is-a relationship, by reasoning over
a noisy taxonomic graph extracted from language.
For instance, is it true that “a chip” Is-a “a nu-
trient”? When these elements cannot be directly
looked up in a curated resource such as Word-
Net (Miller, 1995) (e.g., in low-resource languages,
for scientiﬁc terms, etc.), recognizing the Is-a rela-
tionship between “a chip” and “a nutrient” would
require ﬁnding a path in the linguistic space con-
necting “a chip” to “a nutrient”, while addressing
the associated word-sense issues. Is-a edges would
need to be extracted from text, resulting in poten-
tially missing and/or extra edges. This corresponds
precisely to the linguistic inaccuracies modeled and
quantiﬁed in our framework.
Contributions.
This is the ﬁrst mathematical
study of the challenges and limitations of reasoning
algorithms in the presence of the symbol-meaning
mapping difﬁculty. Our main contributions are:
1. Formal Framework. We establish a novel, lin-
guistically motivated formal framework for ana-
lyzing the problem of reasoning about the ground
truth (the meaning space) while operating over its
noisy linguistic representation. This allows one
to derive rigorous intuitions about what various
classes of reasoning algorithms can and cannot
achieve. 2. Impossibility Results. We study in
detail the connectivity reasoning problem, focusing
on the interplay between linguistic noise (redun-
dancy, ambiguity, incompleteness, and inaccuracy)
and the distance (inference steps, or hops) between
two concepts in the meaning space. We prove that
under low noise, reliable connectivity reasoning
is indeed possible up to a few hops (Theorem 1).
In contrast, even a moderate increase in the noise
level makes it provably impossible to assess the
connectivity of concepts if they are a logarithmic
distance apart in terms of the meaning graph nodes
(Theorems 2 and 3). This helps us understand em-
pirical observations of “semantic drift” in systems,
causing a substantial performance drop beyond 2-3
hops (Fried et al., 2015; Jansen, 2016). We discuss
practical lessons from our ﬁndings, such as fo-
cusing on richer representations and higher-quality
abstractions to reduce the number of hops.
3. Empirical Illustration. While our main con-
tribution is theoretical, we use the experiments to
illustrate the implications of our results in a con-
trolled setting. Speciﬁcally, we apply the frame-
work to a subset of a real-world knowledge-base,
FB15k237 (Toutanova and Chen, 2015), treated as
2

the meaning graph, illustrating how key parameters
of our analytical model inﬂuence the possibility (or
impossibility) of accurately solving the connectiv-
ity problem.
2
Overview of the Formalism
(A)
Linguistically-inspired
abstract
model.
We propose an abstract model of linguistic
knowledge built around the notion of two spaces
(see Figures 1 and 2). The meaning space refers
to the internal conceptualization in human mind,
where we assume the information is free of
noise and uncertainty.
In contrast to human
thinking that happens in this noise-free space,
human expression of thought via the utterence
of language introduces many imperfections, and
happens in the linguistic space.
This linguistic
space is often redundant (e.g., multiple words1
such as “CPU” and “computer processor” express
the same meaning), ambiguous (e.g., a word
like “chips” could refer to multiple meanings
),
incomplete (e.g.,
common-sense relations
never expressed in text), and inaccurate (e.g.,
incorrect facts written down in text). Importantly,
the noisy linguistic space—with its redundancy,
ambiguity, incompleteness, and inaccuracy—is
what a machine reasoning algorithm operates in.
(B) Reasoning model.
For the purposes of this
work, we deﬁne reasoning as the ability to infer
the existence or absence of a property of interest
in the meaning space, by only observing its imper-
fect representation in the linguistic space. Speciﬁ-
cally, we focus on properties that can be captured
by graphs, namely the meaning graph which con-
nects concepts via semantic relationships, and the
(noisy) linguistic graph which connects words via
language. Nodes in the linguistic graph may rep-
resent words in various ways, such as using sym-
bols (Miller, 1995), ﬁxed vectors (Mikolov et al.,
2013), or even words in context as captured by con-
textual vectors (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2019).
The target property in the meaning graph char-
acterizes the reasoning task. E.g., relation extrac-
tion corresponds to determining the relationship
between two meaning graph nodes, by observing
their grounding in text as linguistic graph nodes.
1For simplicity of exposition, we use the term ‘words’
throughout this paper as the unit of information in the linguis-
tic space. Often, the unit of information is instead a short
phrase. Our formalism continues to apply to this case as well.
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) corresponds to
identifying a meaning graph node given a word (a
node in the linguistic graph) and its surrounding
context. Question-answering may ask for a linguis-
tic node that has a desired semantic relationship
(when mapped to the meaning space) to another
given node (e.g., what is the capital of X?).
2.1
Example
Figure 2 illustrates a reasoning setting that in-
cludes edge semantics. Most humans understand
that V1:“present day spoons” and V2:“the metal
spoons” are equivalent nodes (have the same mean-
ing) for the purposes of the query, “is a metal spoon
a good conductor of heat?”. However, a machine
must infer this. In the linguistic space (left), the
semantics of the connections between nodes are ex-
pressed through natural language sentences, which
also provide a context for the nodes. For exam-
ple, edges in the meaning graph (right) directly ex-
press the semantic relation has-property(metal,
thermal-conductor), while a machine, operating
on language, may struggle to infer this from read-
ing Internet text expressed in various ways, e.g.,
“dense materials such as [V3:]metals and stones are
[V5:]good conductors of heat”.
To ground this in existing efforts, consider
multi-hop reasoning for QA systems (Khashabi
et al., 2016; Jansen et al., 2018).
Here the
reasoning task is to connect local information,
via multiple local “hops”, in order to arrive
at a conclusion.
In the meaning graph, one
can trace a path of locally connected nodes
to verify the correctness of a query; for ex-
ample, the query has-property(metal-spoon,
thermal-conductor) can be veriﬁed by tracing
a sequence of nodes in Fig. 2. Thus, answering
some queries can be cast as inferring the existence
of a path connecting two nodes.2 While doing so
on the meaning graph is straightforward, reliably
doing so on the noisy linguistic graph is not. In-
tuitively, each local “hop” introduces additional
noise, allowing reliable inference to be performed
only when it does not require too many steps in the
underlying meaning graph. To study this issue, our
approach quantiﬁes the effect of noise accumula-
tion for long-range reasoning.
2This particular grounding is meant to help relate our
graph-based formalism to existing applications, and is not
the only way of realizing reasoning on graphs.
3

Figure 2: The meaning graph (right) captures a clean and unique (canonical) representation of concepts and facts,
while the linguistic graph (left) contains a noisy, incomplete, and redundant representation of the same knowledge.
Shown here are samples of meaning graph nodes and the corresponding linguistic graph nodes for answering the
question: Is a metal spoon a good conductor of heat?. Relationships in the linguistic graph are here indirectly
represented via sentences.
3
Related Work
AI literature contains a variety of formalisms for au-
tomated reasoning, including reasoning with logi-
cal representations (McCarthy, 1963), semantic net-
works (Quillan, 1966), Bayesian networks (Pearl,
1988), etc. For our analysis, we use a graphical for-
malism since it provides a useful modeling tool and
is a commonly used abstraction for representing
items and relations between them.
One major challenge in reasoning with natural
language tasks is grounding free-form text to a
higher-level meaning. Example proposals to deal
with this challenge include semantic parsing (Steed-
man and Baldridge, 2011), linking to a knowledge
base (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007), and mapping to
semantic frames (Punyakanok et al., 2004). These
methods can be viewed as approximate solutions
to the symbol-grounding problem (Harnad, 1990;
Taddeo and Floridi, 2005) — the challenge of map-
ping symbols to a representation that reﬂect their
accurate meaning. Our formalism is an effort to
better understand the fundamental difﬁculties that
this problem poses.
Several efforts focus on reasoning with disam-
biguated inputs, such as using executable formu-
las (Reddy et al., 2017; Angeli and Manning,
2014) and chaining relations to infer new rela-
tions (Socher et al., 2013). Our analysis covers
any algorithm for inferring patterns that can be rep-
resented in a graphical form, e.g., chaining local
information, often referred to as multi-hop reason-
ing (Jansen et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2018). For exam-
ple, Jansen et al. (2017) propose a structured multi-
hop reasoning approach by aggregating sentential
information from multiple KBs. They demonstrate
improvements with few hops and degradation when
aggregating more than 2-3 sentences. Our theoreti-
cal ﬁndings align well with such observations and
further quantify them.
4
The Meaning-Language Interface
We formalize our conceptual and linguistic notions
of knowledge spaces as undirected graphs:
• The meaning space, M, is a conceptual hidden
space where all the facts are accurate and com-
plete, without ambiguity. We focus on the knowl-
edge in this space that can be represented as an
undirected graph, GM(VM, EM). This knowl-
edge is hidden, and representative of the informa-
tion that exists within human minds.
• The linguistic space, L, is the space of knowl-
edge represented in natural language for ma-
chine consumption (written sentences, curated
knowledge-bases, etc.). We assume access to a
graph GL(VL, EL) in this space that is a noisy
approximation of GM.
The two spaces interact: when we read a sen-
tence, we are reading from the linguistic space and
interpreting it in the meaning space. When writing
out our thoughts, we symbolize our thought pro-
cess, by moving them from meaning space to the
linguistic space. Fig.1 provides a high-level view
of this interaction.
A reasoning system operates in the linguistic
space and is unaware of the exact structure and
information encoded in GM. How well it performs
depends on the local connectivity of GM and the
level of noise in GL, which is discussed next.
4

Algorithm 1: Generative, stochastic construc-
tion of a linguistic graph GL given a meaning
graph GM.
Input: Meaning graph GM(VM, EM), discrete
distribution r(λ), edge retention prob. p+, edge
creation prob. p−
Output: Linguistic graph GL(VL, EL)
foreach v ∈VM do
sample k ∼r(λ)
construct a collection of new nodes U s.t. |U| = k
VL ←VL ∪U,
O(v) ←U
foreach (m1, m2) ∈(VM × VM), m1 ̸= m2 do
W1 ←O(m1), W2 ←O(m2)
foreach e ∈W1 × W2 do
if (m1, m2) ∈EM then
with probability p+: EL ←EL ∪{e}
else
with probability p−: EL ←EL ∪{e}
4.1
Meaning-to-Language mapping
Let O : VM →2VL denote an oracle function that
captures the set of nodes in GL that each (hidden)
node in GM should ideally map to in a noise-free
setting. This represents multiple ways in which a
single meaning can be equivalently represented in
language. When w ∈O(m), i.e., w is one of the
words the oracle maps a meaning m to, we write
O−1(w) = m to denote the reverse mapping. For
example, if CHIP represents a node in the meaning
graph for the common snack food, then O(CHIP)
= {“potato chips”, “crisps”, ...}.
Ideally, if two nodes m1 and m2 in VM have
an edge in GM, we would want an edge between
every pair of nodes in O(m1)×O(m2) in GL. The
actual graph GL (discussed next) will be a noisy
approximation of this ideal case.
4.2
Generative Model of Linguistic Graphs
Linguistic graphs in our framework are constructed
via a generative process. Starting with GM, we
sample GL ←ALG(GM) using a stochastic pro-
cess described in Alg.1. Informally, the algorithm
simulates the process of transforming conceptual
information into linguistic utterances (web-pages,
conversations, knowledge bases, etc.). This con-
struction captures a few key properties of linguistic
representation of meaning via 3 control parameters:
replication factor λ, edge retention probability p+,
and spurious edge creation probability p−.
Each node in GM is mapped to multiple linguis-
tic nodes (the exact number drawn from a distri-
bution r(λ), parameterized by λ), which models
redundancy in GL. Incompleteness of knowl-
edge is modeled by not having all edges of GM
be retained in GL (controlled by p+). Further, GL
contains spurious edges that do not correspond to
any edge in GM, representing inaccuracy (con-
trolled by p−). The extreme case of noise-free
construction of GL corresponds to having r(λ) be
concentrated at 1, p+ = 1, and p−= 0.
4.3
Noisy Similarity Metric
Additionally, we include linguistic similarity based
edges to model ambiguity, i.e., a single word map-
ping to multiple meanings. Speciﬁcally, we view
ambiguity as treating (or confusing) two distinct
linguistic nodes for the same word as identical even
when they correspond to different meaning nodes
(e.g., confusing a “bat” node for animals with a
“bat” node for sports).
Similarity metrics are typically used to judge the
equivalence of words, with or without context. Let
ρ : VL × VL →{0, 1} be such a metric, where
ρ(w, w′) = 1 for w, w′ ∈VL denotes the equiv-
alence of these two nodes in GL. We deﬁne ρ to
be a noisy version of the true node similarity as
determined by the oracle O:
ρ(w, w′) ≜
(
1 −Bern(ε+)
if O−1(w) = O−1(w′)
Bern(ε−)
otherwise
,
where ε+, ε−∈(0, 1) are the noise parameters of
ρ, both typically close to zero, and Bern(p) denotes
the Bernoulli distribution with parameter p.
Intuitively, ρ is a perturbed version of true simi-
larity (as deﬁned by O), with small random noise
(parameterized with ε+ and ε−). With a high prob-
ability 1 −ε+/−, ρ returns the correct similarity
decision as determined by the oracle (i.e., whether
two words have the same meaning). The extreme
case of ε+ = ε−= 0 models the perfect similarity
metric. In practice, even the best similarity systems
are noisy, captured here with ε+/−> 0.
We assume reasoning algorithms have access to
GL and ρ, and that they use the following proce-
dure to verify the existence of a direct connection
between two nodes:
function NODEPAIRCONNECTIVITY(w, w′)
return (w, w′) ∈EL or ρ(w, w′) = 1
Several corner cases result in uninteresting mean-
ing or linguistic graphs. We focus on a regime
of “non-trivial” cases where GM is neither overly-
connected nor overly-sparse, there is non-zero
5

noise (p−, ε−, ε+ > 0) and incomplete informa-
tion (p+ < 1), and noisy content does not dominate
actual information (e.g., p−≪p+).3 Henceforth,
we consider only such “non-trivial” instances.
Throughout, we will also assume that the repli-
cation factor (i.e., the number of linguistic nodes
corresponding to each meaning node) is a constant,
i.e., r is such that P [|U| = λ] = 1.
5
Hypothesis Testing Setup: Reasoning
About Meaning via Words
While a reasoning engine only sees the linguistic
graph GL, it must make inferences about the latent
meaning graph GM. Given a pair of nodes vL :=
{w, w′} ⊂VL, the reasoning algorithm must then
predict properties about the corresponding nodes
vM = {m, m′} = {O−1(w), O−1(w′)}.
We use a hypothesis testing setup to assess
the likelihood of two disjoint hypotheses deﬁned
over GM, denoted H 1
M(vM) and H 2
M(vM) (e.g.,
whether vM are connected in GM or not). Given
observations XL(vL) about linguistic nodes (e.g.,
whether vL are connected in GL), we deﬁne the
goal of a reasoning algorithm as inferring which
of the two hypotheses about GM is more likely to
have resulted in these observations, under the sam-
pling process (Alg.1). That is, we are interested in:
argmax
h∈{H 1
M(vM),H 2
M(vM)}
P(h) [XL(vL)]
(1)
where P(h) [x] denotes the probability of an event
x in the sample space induced by Alg.1, when
(hidden) GM satisﬁes hypothesis h. Defn. 6 in the
Appendix formalizes this.
Since we start with two disjoint hypotheses on
GM, the resulting probability spaces are generally
different, making it plausible to identify the cor-
rect hypothesis with high conﬁdence. However,
with sufﬁcient noise in the sampling process, it can
be difﬁcult for an algorithm based on the linguis-
tic graph to distinguish the two resulting probabil-
ity spaces (corresponding to the two hypotheses),
depending on observations XL(vL) used by the
algorithm and the parameters of the sampling pro-
cess. For example, the distance between linguistic
nodes can often be an insufﬁcient indicator for dis-
tinguishing these two hypotheses. We will explore
these two contrasting behaviors in the next section.
Not all observations are equally effective in
3Defn. 5 in the Appendix gives a precise characterization.
distinguishing h1 from h2. We say XL(vL) γ-
separates them if:
P(h1) [XL(vL)] −P(h2) [XL(vL)] ≥γ.
(2)
(formal deﬁnition in Appendix, Defn. 7) We can
view γ as the gap between the likelihoods of
XL(vL) having originated from a meaning graph
satisfying h1 vs. one satisfying h2. When γ = 1,
XL(vL) is a perfect discriminator for h1 and h2. In
general, any positive γ bounded away from 1 yields
a valuable observation,4 and a reasoning algorithm:
function SEPARATOR XL(GL, vL = {w, w′})
if XL(vL) = 1 then return h1 else return h2
Importantly, this algorithm does not compute the
probabilities in Eqs. (1) and (2). Rather, it works
with a particular instantiation GL. We refer to such
an algorithm A as γ-accurate for h1 and h2 if, un-
der the sampling choices of Alg.1, it outputs the
‘correct’ hypothesis with probability at least γ; that
is, for both i ∈{1, 2}: P(hi) [A outputs hi] ≥γ.
This happens when XL γ-separates h1 and h2
(cf. Appendix, Prop. 8). The rest of the work will
explore when one can obtain a γ-accurate algo-
rithm, using γ-separation of the underlying obser-
vation as an analysis tool.
6
Main Results (Informal)
Having formalized a model of the meaning-
language interface above, we now present our main
ﬁndings. The results in this section are intention-
ally stated in a somewhat informal manner for ease
of exposition and to help convey the main mes-
sages clearly. Formal mathematical statements and
supporting proofs are deferred to the Appendix.5
One simple but often effective approach for rea-
soning is to focus on connectivity (as described in
Fig. 2). Speciﬁcally, we consider reasoning chains
as valid if they correspond to a short path in the
meaning space, and invalid if they correspond to
disconnected nodes. Mathematically, this translates
into the d-connectivity reasoning problem, de-
ﬁned as follows: Given access to a linguistic graph
GL and two nodes w, w′ in it, let m = O−1(w) and
m′ = O−1(w′) denote the corresponding nodes in
the (hidden) meaning graph GM. While observ-
ing only GL, can we distinguish between two hy-
potheses about GM, namely, m, m′ have a path of
4If the above probability gap is negative, one can instead
use the complement of XL(vL) for γ-separation.
5While provided for completeness and to facilitate follow-
up work, details in the Appendix are not crucial for under-
standing the key concepts and results of this work.
6

length d in GM, vs. m, m′ are disconnected? Dis-
tinguishing between these two hypotheses, namely
h1 = m
d
↭m′ and h2 = m
↭m′, is the problem
we are interested in solving.
The answer clearly depends on how faithfully
GL reﬂects GM. In the (unrealistic) noise-free case
of GL = GM, this problem is trivially solvable by
computing the shortest path between w and w′ in
GL. More realistically, the higher the noise level is
in Alg.1 and NODEPAIRSIMILARITY, the harder
it will be for any algorithm operating on GL to
conﬁdently infer a property of GM.
In other words, the redundancy, ambiguity, in-
completeness and inaccuracy of language discussed
earlier directly impact the capability and limitations
of algorithms that perform connectivity reasoning.
Our goal is to quantify this intuition using the pa-
rameters p+, p−, λ, ε+, ε−of our generative model,
and derive possibility and impossibility results.
A simple connectivity testing algorithm.
The
ﬁrst set of results assume the following algorithm:
given w, w′ with a desired distance d in GM, it
checks whether w, w′ have a path of length at most
˜d, which is a function of d and the replication factor
λ. If yes, it declares the corresponding meaning
nodes m, m′ in GM have a path of length d; other-
wise it declares them disconnected.6
Let a ⊕b denote a + b −ab, and B(d) denote
the maximum number of nodes within distance d
of any node in GM. The following result shows
that even the simple algorithm above guarantees
accurate reasoning (speciﬁcally, it correctly infers
connectivity in GM while only observing GL) for
limited noise and small d (i.e., few hops):
Theorem 1 (Possibility Result; Informal). If
p−, ε−, d, and γ are small enough such that
(p−⊕ε−) · B2(d) <
1
2eλ2n, then there exists
a γ ∈[0, 1] that increases with p+, λ and de-
creases with ε+,a such that the simple connec-
tivity testing algorithm with ˜d = λ · d + λ −1
correctly solves the d-connectivity problem
with probability at least γ.
aSee Defn. 10 in formal results for exact expression
for γ.
Here, the probability is over the sampling
choices of Alg. 1 when constructing GL, and the
function NODEPAIRCONNECTIVITY for determin-
6The simple connectivity algorithm is described formally
using the notion of a SEPARATOR in Appendix B.1.
ing node similarity in GL.
On the other hand, when there is more noise
and d becomes even moderately large—speciﬁcally,
logarithmic in the number of nodes in GM—then
this simple algorithm no longer works even for
small values of desired accuracy γ:
Theorem 2 (Impossibility Result #1; Infor-
mal). If p−and ε−are large enough such
that p−⊕ε−≥
c
λn and d ∈Ω(log n) where
n is the number of nodes in GM, then the
simple connectivity algorithm with ˜d = λd
cannot solve the d-connectivity problem cor-
rectly with probability γ for any γ > 0.
This result exposes an inherent limitation to
multi-hop reasoning: even for small values of noise,
the diameter of GL can quickly become very small,
namely, logarithmic in n (similar to the small-
world phenomenon observed by Milgram (1967) in
other contexts), at which point the above impossi-
bility result kicks in. Our result afﬁrms that if NLP
reasoning algorithms are not designed carefully,
such macro behaviors will necessarily become bot-
tlenecks, even for relatively simple tasks such as
detecting connectivity.
The above result is for the simple connectivity
algorithm. One can imagine other ways to deter-
mine connectivity in GM, such as by analyzing the
degree distribution of GL, looking at its clustering
structure, etc. Our third ﬁnding extends the im-
possibility result to this general setting, showing
that if the noise level is increased a little more (by
a logarithmic factor), then no algorithm can infer
connectivity in GM by observing only GL:
Theorem 3 (Impossibility Result #2; Infor-
mal). If p−and ε−are large enough such
that p−⊕ε−> c log n
λn
and d > log n where n
is the number of nodes in GM, then any algo-
rithm cannot correctly solve the d-connectivity
problem correctly with probability γ for any
γ > 0.
This reveals a fundamental limitation, that we
may only be able to infer interesting properties of
GM within small, logarithmic sized neighborhoods.
We leave the formal counterparts of these results
(Theorems 11, 12, and 13, resp.) to Appendix B,
and focus next on a small scale empirical validation
to complement our analytical ﬁndings.
7

Figure 3: Colors in the ﬁgure depict the average distance
between node-pairs in GL, for each true distance d (x-axis) in
GM, as the noise parameter p−(y-axis) is varied. The goal
is to distinguish squares in the column for a particular d with
the corresponding squares in the right-most column, which
corresponds to node-pairs being disconnected. This is easy in
the bottom-left regime and becomes progressively harder as
we move upward (more noise) or rightward (higher distance
in GM). (ε+ = 0.7, λ = 3)
7
Empirical Validation
Our formal analysis thus far offers worst-case
bounds for two regions in a fairly large spectrum of
noisy sampling parameters for the linguistic space,
namely, when p−⊕ε−and d are either both small
(Theorem 1), or both large (Theorems 2 and 3).
This section complements our theoretical ﬁnd-
ings in two ways: (a) by grounding the formalism
empirically into a real-world knowledge graph, (b)
by quantifying the impact of sampling parameters
on the connectivity algorithm. We use ε−= 0 for
the experiments, but the effect turns out to be iden-
tical to using ε−> 0 for appropriate adjustments
of p−and p+ (see Remark 9 in the Appendix).
We consider FB15k237 (Toutanova and Chen,
2015), a set of ⟨head, relation, target⟩triples from
FreeBase (Bollacker et al., 2008). For scalabil-
ity, we use the movies domain subset (relations
/film/*), with 2855 entity nodes and 4682 rela-
tion edges. We treat this as the meaning graph GM
and sample a linguistic graph GL (via Alg.1) to
simulate the observed graph derived from text.
We sample GL for various values of p−and plot
the resulting distances in GL and GM in Fig. 3, as
follows. For every value of p−(y-axis), we sample
pairs of points in GM that are separated by distance
d (x-axis). For these pairs of points, we compute
the average distance between the corresponding
linguistic nodes (in sampled GL), and plot that in
the heat map using color shades.
We make two observations from this simulation.
First, for lower values of p−, disconnected nodes in
GM (rightmost column) are clearly distinguishable
from meaning nodes with short paths (small d) as
predicted by Theorem 11, but harder to distinguish
from nodes at large distances (large d). Second,
and in contrast, for higher values of p−, almost ev-
ery pair of linguistic nodes is connected with a very
short path (dark color), making it impossible for a
distance-based reasoning algorithm to conﬁdently
assess d-connectivity in GM. This simulation also
conﬁrms our ﬁnding in Theorem 12: any graph
with p−≥1/λn (which is ∼0.0001 here) can-
not distinguish disconnected meaning nodes from
nodes with paths of short (logarithmic) length (top
rows).
8
Implications and Practical Lessons
Our analysis is motivated by empirical observa-
tions of “semantic drift” of reasoning algorithms,
as the number of hops is increased. For example,
Fried et al. (2015) show modest beneﬁts up to 2-
3 hops, and then decreasing performance; Jansen
et al. (2018) make similar observations in graphs
built out of larger structures such as sentences,
where the performance drops off around 2 hops.
This pattern has interestingly been observed under
a variety of representations, including word-level
input, graphs, and traversal methods. A natural
question is whether the ﬁeld might be hitting a
fundamental limit on multi-hop information aggre-
gation. Our “impossibility” results are reafﬁrma-
tions of the empirical intuition in the ﬁeld. This
means that multi-hop inference (and any algorithm
that can be cast in that form), as we’ve been ap-
proaching it, is exceptionally unlikely to breach the
few-hop barrier predicted in our analysis.
There are at least two practical lessons: First,
our results suggest that ongoing efforts on “very
long” multi-hop reasoning, especially without a
careful understanding of the limitations, are un-
likely to succeed, unless some fundamental build-
ing blocks are altered. Second, this observation
suggests that practitioners must focus on richer rep-
resentations that allow reasoning with only a “few”
hops. This, in part, requires higher-ﬁdelity abstrac-
tion and grounding mechanisms. It also points
to alternatives, such as ofﬂine KB completion/ex-
pansion mechanisms, which indirectly reduce the
number of steps needed at inference time.
Our formal results quantify how different lin-
guistic imperfection parameters affect multi-hop
reasoning differently. This provides an informed
design choice for which noise parameter to try to
control when creating a new representation.
8

9
Conclusion
This work is the ﬁrst attempt to develop a formal
framework for understanding the behavior of com-
plex natural language reasoning in the presence of
linguistic noise. The importance of this work is
two-fold. First, it proposes a novel graph-theoretic
paradigm for studying reasoning, inspired by the
symbol-meaning problem in the presence of redun-
dancy, ambiguity, incompleteness, and inaccuracy
of language. Second, it shows how to use this
framework to analyze a class of reasoning algo-
rithms. We expect our ﬁndings, as well as those
from future extensions to other classes of reasoning
algorithms, to have important implications on how
we study problems in language comprehension.
