1
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Dynamical Systems in
Wireless Communications: Modeling for the Future
Harun Siljak, Senior Member, IEEE, Irene Macaluso, and Nicola Marchetti, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Dynamical systems are no strangers in wireless
communications. Our story will necessarily involve chaos, but
not in the terms secure chaotic communications have introduced
it: we will look for the chaos, complexity and dynamics that
already exist in everyday wireless communications. We present a
short overview of dynamical systems and chaos before focusing
on the applications of dynamical systems theory to wireless
communications in the past 30 years, ranging from the modeling
on the physical layer to different kinds of self-similar trafﬁc
encountered all the way up to the network layer. The examples
of past research and its implications are grouped and mapped
onto the media layers of ISO OSI model to show just how
ubiquitous dynamical systems theory can be and to trace the
paths that may be taken now. When considering the future
paths, we argue that the time has come for us to revive the
interest in dynamical systems for wireless communications. It
did not happen already because of the big question: can we
afford observing systems of our interest as dynamical systems
and what are the trade-offs? The answers to these questions are
dynamical systems of its own: they change not only with the
modeling context, but also with time. In the current moment the
available resources allow such approach and the current demands
ask for it. Reservoir computing, the major player in dynamical
systems-related learning originated in wireless communications,
and to wireless communications it should return.
Index Terms—Dynamical systems theory, wireless communica-
tions, chaos, reservoir computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Everything is a dynamical system, depending on how you
deﬁne everything (and how you deﬁne a dynamical system).
In the realm of wireless communications, we can observe
quantiﬁable system outputs evolving in time (an essential
property of a dynamical system) at every level of the ISO
model hierarchy, where some aspects of the behavior are seen
as governed by simple rules and very ordered, while others are
seemingly random. The random cases attract more attention as
they are more difﬁcult to predict and harness, and they usually
include more interaction with the external factors: users and
the environment. The question of whether to model these parts
as dynamical systems is a multi-layered one.
Not all systems can be described by a low-order, low-
complexity model. We could model the universe using ele-
mentary particles positions and momenta at a certain point
Manuscript
received
../../....
The
authors
are
with
the
CONNECT

grant from Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), co-funded under the Euro-
pean Regional Development Fund under Grant Numbers 13/RC/2077 and
13/RC/2077 P2, as well as the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement
No 713567.
in time, but the computational power for such a variant of
Laplace’s demon surpasses the information limits of the same
universe greatly. Measurements might be hard to obtain as
well, and while throwing a die is a perfectly deterministic
process with simple dynamics, not knowing the precise (and
ever-changing) initial conditions at the time of the throw makes
it look random (the level of understanding of the processes and
the granularity of the model ties closely with the traditional
understanding of uncertainty in engineering models [1], [2]).
While randomness is usually portrayed as the opposite of
determinism and modeled in a different fashion, dynamical
systems embrace it as much as they embrace determinism.
Random dynamical systems are a generalized version of the
deterministic ones, as they allow for a stochastic component.
In wireless communications, this is the channel equation we
start with: a linear random dynamical system with noise as a
random component.
The history of dynamical systems theory shows its early
bond with wireless communications, as some of the fun-
damental dynamical systems theory concepts introduced by
Poincare came from his wireless telegraphy seminars (1908).
The development of both disciplines in the following decades
continued going hand in hand with the oscillators that were
the central object of interest in dynamical systems theory
and an invaluable component of every radio device from
their inception. The perspectives we investigate here are those
opened in dynamical systems theory once the theory of de-
terministic chaos was established in the second half of the
20th century, with the notions of sensitive dependence on the
initial conditions, fractal dimension attractors, ergodicity, etc.
The path we chose is one of understanding the already existing
dynamical phenomena within wireless systems and putting
them to use.
The other road in observing dynamical systems in wireless
communications is the one of chaotic communications. This
has been the dominant topic in the area since the early
nineties when the possibility of synchronization of two chaotic
systems was demonstrated [3]. This topic has repeatedly been
surveyed in the past and it represents the chaos added to a
communication system, not the one found existing within it.
We begin our story by presenting the basics of dynamical
systems theory. This will help us appreciate the efforts made in
the past to identify elements of dynamical systems in wireless
communications settings. These efforts will then be presented
systematically, mapped onto the media layers of ISO OSI
(International Organization for Standardization - Open Sys-
tems Interconnection) model to put the concepts into a context
and to suggest the ways to proceed with the research today.
arXiv:1901.02661v2  [math.DS]  27 Oct 2021

2
Then we proceed with our central claim: the combination of
dynamical systems theory and machine learning has a potential
to radically change wireless communications performance. We
offer some initial results motivated by recent developments in
the ﬁeld as a motivation for further work.
II. DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS AND CHAOS
While chaotic behavior remains the trademark of dynamical
systems theory and the most interesting exhibit in its zoo,
it also remains a rare catch. When we aim to understand a
dynamical system, we are interested in its stability, periodicity,
controllability, observability: properties of the system acting
on its own and under our inﬂuence.
Giving attributes of a dynamical system to signal compo-
nents previously considered to be random noise: (1) allows
a better prediction, which in turn enables better suppression
of interference; (2) opens an opportunity to examine it as “a
feature, not a bug”- i.e. adds another degree of freedom; (3)
offers a physical interpretation.
A. Signals, Phase Space, Attractors
A dynamical system is, once we know all of its degrees
of freedom and sources of dynamics, a system of differential
or difference equations depending on whether we work in
continuous or discrete time. However, we tend to know so
much only about very simple models seen in nature, or the
models we devise ourselves. Usually, a dynamical system seen
in the wild is a black box for us.
Both the system of equations and a black box take inputs,
change their states and produce outputs, which all change in
time. The number of state variables of a system is its order, the
order of the equations’ system in case we have a mathematical
description. The outputs are usually some of the states of the
system visible to us.
Traditionally, system identiﬁcation, i.e. building a model
from the limited knowledge about the black box, is a matter
of statistics and special sets of test inputs. This is the way the
wireless channel is estimated with a (pilot) signal. Often, we
try to obtain static or linear dynamic models as they are easy
to work with. However, they are usually valid only within a
narrow time or parameter interval. Nonlinear systems ask for
different identiﬁcation and modeling methods.
Having n state variables, it is often useful to plot them in
an n-dimensional coordinate system, the phase space. This
is where phase trajectories are observed; typical examples
are shown in Figure 1. The unstable systems may diverge to
inﬁnity either quasi-periodically or aperiodically; the stable
systems may converge to an equilibrium in the same manner;
while the periodical systems remain conﬁned to a cycle.
However, the chaotic systems were found not to follow any of
these patterns: they end up conﬁned in a bounded part of state
space called the attractor (unlike unstable systems), traverse
it in a non-periodic manner (unlike periodic systems) and
never converge to a single equilibrium (unlike stable systems).
Often it is an example of a motion around two equilibria and
jumping from orbiting one to orbiting the other, as seen in the
celebrated Lorenz attractor shown in Fig. 1. The evolution
Fig. 1. Signals in time (odd rows) and corresponding attractors in phase space
(even rows). The arrow indicates the direction along which system evolves in
phase space (from start to end).
of trajectories on the attractor demonstrates two important
properties of a chaotic system. The ﬁrst one is the sensitive
dependence on initial conditions as two arbitrarily close phase
space trajectories will separate exponentially fast on the attrac-
tor, rendering prediction of future motion impossible in the
long run. The second one is ergodicity: a phase trajectory will
get arbitrarily close to any point on the attractor, given enough
time has passed.
The signals and the attractors are easily obtained when
the mathematical model of the system exists: even though
the nonlinear differential/difference equations governing the
dynamics are usually not solvable in closed form, a numerical
solution can be found. However, while the system is a black
box, we usually have only few (typically, only one) system
outputs available. How to reconstruct the other state variables?
How many to reconstruct in the ﬁrst place? The signal analysis
and processing for chaotic dynamical systems has a toolbox
for this task. While a detailed description goes out of the
scope of this paper, Fig. 2 gives an overview of the attractor
reconstruction and quantitative analysis of the results.
B. The Metrics
Dynamical systems are quantitative, so many metrics are
devised to assess and categorize them. From the viewpoint of
control and stability, measures of stability margins describe
how stable and robust a system is and how much disturbance
it could take without a failure.
For chaotic systems, the measure called the Lyapunov
exponent gained importance. In a conventional, non-chaotic

3
Fig. 2.
The tool-chain for dynamical systems and chaos. The attractor
reconstruction is based on the Takens theorem, which shows that it is possible
to reconstruct an attractor based on a single output signal and delayed versions
of it serving as the other state variables. The delay (lag) that should be
used for the remaining state variables can be determined based on the auto-
mutual information function of the signal. The use of auto-mutual information
function is another hint of how closely intertwined dynamical systems theory
and information theory are. After determining the delay and applying an
algorithm to determine the dimension the attractor is going to be embedded
into, i.e. the order of the system, an attractor can be generated. While
not perfectly the same as the original, it can reveal a lot about system’s
dynamics and serve as a foundation for the calculations of relevant metrics.
The importance of this process is the transition from signals to systems, from
the particular inputs and outputs to the general mechanism.
deterministic system, it is a negative exponent which de-
scribes how fast two separate phase trajectories converge. In
chaotic systems, however, we have already learned that even
inﬁnitesimally close trajectories diverge at an exponential rate:
a positive Lyapunov exponent describes this dynamic. Positive
Lyapunov exponent thus became a symbol of chaos and a basis
for its measure.
An n-dimensional dynamical system has n Lyapunov ex-
ponents, and if it is chaotic, at least one of them is positive,
resulting in sensitive dependence on the initial conditions. If at
least two Lyapunov exponents are positive, we speak of hyper-
chaotic systems. Now, how do we measure just how chaotic
a system is, and how do we compare two chaotic systems in
any way?
One possible entropy-based approach, the Kolmogorov-Sinai
entropy is related to the positive Lyapunov exponents and
may give us a hint of just how unpredictable a chaotic
system is, with a numerical value between 0 (non-chaotic
deterministic systems) and inﬁnity (purely random systems).
The link with Shannon’s entropy and information theory in
general is straightforward, but interesting non-trivial results
linking Lyapunov exponents of random dynamical systems and
entropy in wireless channels suggest there is more to it than
it meets the eye [4].
Another metric is the dimension. In the usual sense, we
perceive dimension of a geometric construct as an integer,
living in a 3D space, observing images as 2D projections, etc.
However, if we make a ﬁner measure of the dimension (e.g.
Hausdorff dimension), to describe just how much of space the
Fig. 3. What has been done in dynamical systems research over the years?
Fractals, chaos, and dynamical systems control have been put to use on
different layers of the media part of ISO OSI model.
object whose dimension we measure takes, we discover that
not everything is integer-dimensional. In particular, observing
the Lorenz attractor in Figure 1 may lead to a conclusion that
it is not exactly 2-dimensional: its dimension is in fact just
slightly larger than two. The non-integer dimension of strange
attractors is thus another indicator and a measure of chaos.
When speaking of non-integer dimensions, it is necessary
to mention self-similarity and fractals, as one of the most
often mentioned features in dynamical systems and chaos, at
least in the popular view. Fractals are self-similar structures,
as a zoomed in part of it looks just like the bigger one,
iterating the structure. The inﬁnitely rough structure of a
fractal results in its non-integer Hausdorff dimension, while
retaining integer topological dimension (e.g. fractals with the
topological dimension of 2 can ﬁt in a plane).
III. UP AND DOWN THE MEDIA LAYERS
The quest for chaos and other interesting dynamical system
properties was a hot topic with all features of a bandwagon
at the end of the last century. The development of algorithms
described in the previous section to determine chaoticity of
the data (and the systems generating it) brought a series of
investigations and results in different areas of science and en-
gineering. Chaos was looked for in the phenomena previously
considered random (from the stock market to temperature
oscillations), and dynamical system formulation was sought in
the ﬁelds where the systems were not considered quantitative
at all, such as learning processes and interpersonal interaction.
Wireless communications followed suit, and the aspects
examined were all over the media layers of the ISO OSI model
describing it. The logic behind is simple: where there is a time
series or a signal to be measured, there is a dynamical system
producing it. And as we have seen, we can ﬁnd out the details
about the system from the outputs, even more so if it is chaotic.
A preview of this historical review is given in Figure 3 and
elaborated upon in this section. Illustrative references related
to different layers are presented in Table I.

4
TABLE I
EXAMPLES OF DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS RESEARCH FROM LITERATURE, REFLECTING CONTINUOUS, BUT NOT INTENSIVE EFFORTS IN THE AREA.
Reference
Description
Holliday et al. 2006, [4]
Tackling the open problem of capacity analysis of channels characterized as
Markov chains by interpreting it in terms of Lyapunov exponents
Tannous et al. 1991, [5]
Low-order chaos in the multipath propagation channel with a strange attractor
having a dimension between 4 and 5
Galdi et al. 2005, [6]
Accessible survey of ray chaos
Sirkeci-Mergen & Scaglione 2005, [7]
Continuum approximation of dense wireless networks, making a continuous
distribution of nodes
Costamagna et al. 1994, [8]
First in a decade-spanning series of works suggesting a possible way of having an
attractor from a known chaotic mapping to represent a channel error model. As the
next order of approximation, one may use several attractors stitched together to get
a behavior closer to the dynamics observed in experiments, and different channels
might be represented with different system parameters.
Savkin et al. 2005, [9]
MAC for wireless networks as a hybrid system. The discrete ﬂow of data (fast
dynamics) in the network is approximated as a continuous process, while the status
of nodes in the network (working/not working, slow dynamics) remains a discrete
time variable.
Scutari et al. 2008, [10]
Applying tools from dynamical systems theory, stability theory and nonlinear
control for multiuser MIMO (multiple input multiple output) systems
Moioli et al. 2020, [11]
Drawing inspiration from dynamical system inside human brain for sixth
generation communication systems, and seeking ways to integrate those
communication systems with the human brain
A. The Physics
The wireless channel has been viewed as a dynamical
system from the early beginning, but keeping a lot of its
effect on the signal under the umbrella of random noise and
unpredictable changes. Chaos-theoretic tools and new trends
in dynamical systems theory have provided some hope to
distinguish the magic of noise from the science of complexity
and chaos in the channel.
Detecting low order chaos in multipath propagation in
the early nineties [5] opened some promising paths for the
future, but similar experiments performed later show that the
deterministic chaos is not always present. The focus turned
to sea clutter in radar context, but again the results have
been inconclusive, and again coming short of the revolutionary
applications chaotic sea clutter nature might have in detection
and tracking of targets near the sea surface, if and when
conﬁrmed [12].
For a moment, examine the billiard ball system in which a
tiny difference in the initial condition drastically changes the
trajectory of the billiard ball, depending on the table shape and
the position of other balls. The billiard ball analogy works to
an extent in the context of electromagnetic waves in a chamber
and explains ray chaos: the divergence of two electromagnetic
waves originating from almost the same place, due to multiple
bounces off the environment [6]. Ray chaos is achievable in
other wave settings as well, e.g. the acoustic case. The case
of sound waves is actually the one from which we borrow a
useful application of ray chaos for radio: enabling good time
reversal.
Time reversal in acoustics is the idea of creating a sound
wave which is a time-reversed version of a given sound wave
received: like an echo, but converging into the point of the
original wave’s source. This idea [13] extends to optics and
radio communications, serving as the core principle of sev-
eral localization and communication schemes, e.g. conjugate
beamforming. In a rich scattering environment with a lot of
reﬂections, the bounces in the multipath quickly map the entire
space and allow good time reversal. A chaotic environment has
this property as well, as it exhibits ergodicity: the system will
eventually pass through any part of its attractor, if we can
afford to wait.
Time in dynamical system can either be a discrete or a
continuous variable. An interesting example of blurring the
lines between the two is the calculation of a continuous-time
limit of a discrete system. The continuous model is a limit of
a discrete model as the discrete time interval shrinks. If the
systems are spatial instead of temporal (i.e. a distance plays the
role of time), the shrinking distance produces a continuum in
the limit process. In a network, the inﬁnitely increasing density
aims for the limiting continuous process [7] (Table I). The
resulting continuous system may either be an approximation
good enough, or a way to obtain lower/upper bounds on the
discrete system performance.
B. Data Link Layer
Taking a step up on the ladder, we stay in the realm of
channel modeling. The question of channel errors, their oc-
currence, modeling and distribution is observed and answered
at the data link layer [8]. Channel error models are dynamical
systems: they have a time evolution, have outputs in the form
of discrete time series, but are they chaotic? Can a model
based on chaotic systems encompass the dynamics of channel
errors?
The subtle problem of modeling is bringing in all the
existing elements of the real system into the model while
keeping out all the non-existing ones. A certain dynamical
system model that happens to be chaotic may represent certain
statistical properties of the real system well. However, if the
original system is not chaotic, the model is bringing a lot of
rich, but unwanted properties of its own.
The example of channel errors is an example of a discrete-
time system, but the processes we describe at this layer could
be inherently a combination of both continuous and discrete

5
time modes. This is the case of a discrete system interacting
with a continuous one, one being embedded within the other.
Medium access control (MAC) for wireless networks can be
modeled as such a system [9] (Table I).
C. Self-similar trafﬁc across the layers
The characteristics of the trafﬁc in (wireless) networks have
been investigated for years from the perspective of signal
processing, statistics, linear and nonlinear signal theory. The
identiﬁcation of statistical properties and nonlinear model
parameters of both wireless LAN (local area network) and
IP (internet protocol) trafﬁc would enable better models and
therefore better control, prediction, caching and routing. An
elementary question is that of memory: is the time series of
the wireless LAN trafﬁc showing any long range dependence
over time, or it is just coin tossing at every time instant? The
same question was raised at the network layer for the IP trafﬁc,
observing the TCP (transmission control protocol) congestion
control. The rise and the fall of the Nile, a celebrated example
of complex patterns in nature is an example of a system’s
memory. In the study of the Nile, Hurst introduced the notion
of Hurst Exponent as a measure of long term dependence in
data. It was not too surprising when the Hurst exponents were
found to be directly related with fractal dimension of self-
similar data, as the memory of the system described by the
Hurst exponent is affecting the smoothness of a signal and the
fractal scale.
The wireless LAN trafﬁc was expected to be self-similar:
in the mid-nineties, the self-similarity in Ethernet trafﬁc was
detected and the research community had a ﬁeld day in
wireless trafﬁc. The packets, the bursts, the round trip time,
the errors, self-similarity appeared to be everywhere. A con-
tributing factor for this illusion was the non-existence of the
one right way to determine and quantify self-similarity in data.
Another reason was the existence of external effects creating
an illusion of self similarity, such as periodic interference. The
case of IP trafﬁc was more fruitful in self-similarity terms, but
less relevant to the wireless context.
Down on the physical layer, some researchers have sug-
gested the introduction of generated self-similar signals into
wireless communication. One example is the use of self-
similar carriers (and consequently, fractal modulation), which
had limited adoption [14]. The physical fractal structure,
however, has a long tradition in antenna design for wireless
communications. A typical fractal antenna has a fractal shape
and puts to use the two advantages of fractals, the existence
of scaled structures and the space-ﬁlling properties. The self-
similar scaled structures offer different scales of length for
the antenna to work at, directly resulting in similar effects for
different wavelengths. This does not necessarily mean good
performance for the said wavelengths, so the story of fractal
antennas is not that straightforward. The space-ﬁlling property
is related to the capability of all fractals to achieve dense
packing in some parts (in terms of antennas, it is dense packing
of wires within a small surface area). For chaotic signals,
it was suggested that their transmission would be robust to
multipath effects and severe noise [15].
D. The Cameos: brain, control and games
Wireless communications have a long term relationship with
several disciplines heavily relying on dynamical systems. This
part of the story must not be overlooked, so we examine the
control over wireless and the game theory in the wireless
setting.
First, we note the cameo role of dynamical systems in
wireless communication as seen in differential games. Deﬁned
as a game over a dynamical system, a differential game can
model, control and optimize various processes in wireless
communications. Again, it is very often a hybrid dynamical
system the control is performed on, dealing with external
dynamics such as drone or robotic movement, but also the
intrinsic “dynamics” of wireless including power control,
transmission rates and delays [10]. To make it realistic and
useful for practical considerations, the models of the dynam-
ical systems have to be faithful to the reality. This means
that the differential game theory eagerly awaits the results
of everything dynamical systems research can get from the
wireless of the day.
Closely related to game theory is the control over wireless:
it uses the wireless channel as the control signal medium and
has to deal with all of its peculiarities, determinism and ran-
domness alike (a timely example is that of teleoperation [16]).
The control engineers got rid of the wires cluttering the factory
and decreasing mobility, but had to face a whole new world
of wireless communications, technologies and protocols. The
distributed control system just got another dynamical system
on top of it, between its nodes: the wireless. The ubiquitous
wireless sensor networks are essentially control networks, just
without actuators. And there again the dynamical systems
emerge: the ones whose outputs are measured by the sensors
and the ones the sensory data travels through.
Finally, one area of wireless communications that recognises
the importance of dynamical systems and chaos is at the
crossroads of engineering and neuroscience, where researchers
both draw inspiration from the dynamical systems and chaotic
activity in brain for bio-inspired network and device design,
and seek ways to integrate modern wireless communications
with human organism (brain in particular), for health-related
applications of the next generation communications [11].
IV. LEARNING DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS IN WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS
The two decades of the new century saw the new artiﬁcial
intelligence spring, growing data availability and the growing
capacity for data handling. In wireless communications, an
early major milestone was the pioneering work on reservoir
computing [17]. This concept, illustrated in Fig. 4 is the
quintessential machine learning model for dynamical systems:
the intermediate stage between inputs and outputs in this net-
work is a dynamical system on its own–it does not attempt to
adapt to the actual system, except for the subset of connections
leading to the outputs. As such a general dynamical systems
tool, reservoir computing quickly left the realm of wireless
communication (only two reservoir computing applications
cited in the most recent surveys of learning in this area [18],

6
Fig. 4. Reservoir computing principle. Borrowing the structure from neural
networks, reservoirs are dynamical systems with temporal dynamics and
random ﬁxed connections between state nodes (randomly selected when the
reservoir is created and ﬁxed for the future, unchanged during training). Only
the output connections (toward the output nodes) are the result of training,
which reduces the complexity of learning and allows the reservoir computer
to use the large dynamic reservoir for different dynamical systems.
[19]) and found greener pastures. It aims, together with other
machine learning paradigms, at providing a helping hand in
predicting the behavior of otherwise hard-to-anticipate nonlin-
ear systems, but we are still arguably waiting for revolutionary
results. They are within the reach once we offer a helping
hand to the machine learning as well: we need better models
of dynamical systems for it to work on. More detailed models
may ask for more computing power, but we do have it now, and
in turn they greatly reduce the search space for the machine
learning and allow it to focus its efforts.
Recent developments suggest that even the black box ap-
proach in which the model has no knowledge of the actual
physicality of the process has a lot to offer for nonlinear
dynamic systems. The application of reservoir computing
to spatiotemporal chaotic systems allowed an expansion of
prediction horizon–as we stated earlier, prediction of chaotic
behavior is hard as two inﬁnitesimaly close trajectories diverge
exponentially fast, and they separate within the time period
called Lyapunov time (cf. Lyapunov exponents). Pathak et
al. [20] report the extension of reliable prediction window
from one Lyapunov time interval to eight Lyapunov times for
a particular chaotic system (Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation).
This promising result, applicable to wider classes of chaotic
systems, motivates our investigation of its effects in wireless
communications: how to convert the information about the
future into gains in basic communication quality parameters
such as sum rates and latency? Improvement in these metrics
has been a signiﬁcant driver of the technological progress,
a major argument for inclusion of new approaches (massive
MIMO, mmWave) in the new standards, and a deﬁning aspect
of the current wireless communications generation, the 5G. In
this analysis, we focus on sum rate increase, computational
burden decrease and latency decrease (Fig. 5(a)). These results
from simple use case scenarios (Fig. 5(b-d)) suggest signiﬁcant
direct beneﬁt from dynamical systems approach to system state
prediction and add quantitative incentives to our initiative for
dynamical systems research: even relatively short prediction
has a major effect on the observed variable, justifying investing
resources into it.
The scenarios are inspired by use cases on next generation
networks. The co-located massive MIMO example (5(b))
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
prediction window
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
normalized quantities
Sum rates
Latency
Computation
(a) The sum rates increase over 20%, latency drops by 20%
and the computation burden (directly related to the power con-
sumption reduction and minimization of hardware) drops by
90% in scenarios observed by increasing the prediction horizon
from one unit interval at which prediction is currently possible
(one Lyapunov time) to eight unit intervals. The conversion of
prediction time gain into gain in other metrics was performed in
straightforward manner.
(b) The sum rates in
a fast changing system
with many users in a
cell depend on up-to-
date channel state in-
formation (CSI) for a
large number of users
(our scenario is a co-
located Massive MIMO
base station with users
in motion). Modelling
the effect of CSI acqui-
sition at the beginning
of each coherence in-
terval on the sum rates
and the gradual detori-
ation of the CSI rele-
vance over increasingly
larger intervals leads to
the expected results of
sum rate increase by the
virtue of less frequent
need for corrections via
CSI acquisition.
(c) Distributed massive
MIMO with antenna se-
lection also relies heav-
ily on constant CSI up-
dates for a large num-
ber of users. Using the
power of prediction in-
crease from 1 to 8 co-
herence intervals and at
the same time allow-
ing
the
vast
network
of transmitters and re-
ceivers to take a contin-
uous form in its limit,
we
trade
the
burden
of CSI acquisition and
consequent optimisation
for the burden of dy-
namical system predic-
tion, which reduced the
total computation.
(d) We observe the time
needed to deliver a mes-
sage in a multi-hop sys-
tem (somewhat similar
to the dynamics of epi-
demic spread, a famous
dynamical system) as a
measure of latency. The
message is transferred
from the initial point
with the goal of reach-
ing the ﬁxed destination
via relays which move
on a walk assumed pre-
dictable by the reservoir
computer. Before hand-
ing the message from
one relay to another, it
is checked whether the
new carrier will come
closer to the destination
than the original car-
rier within the predic-
tion horizon.
Fig. 5. The direct improvements of communication quality based on better
dynamical system prediction: (a) sum rate, computational burden and latency
improvements, (b) co-located massive MIMO scenario for sum rate analysis,
(c) distributed massive MIMO scenario for computation analysis, (d) multi-
hop scenario for latency analysis.
explores the question of what beneﬁt for sum rates can we
observe if we can predict changes in channel state information
(CSI) between coherence intervals (periods in which CSI can
be considered known and constant). The distributed massive
MIMO example (5(c)) was used to compare the computational
overhead for prediction against the computation needed for
sensing, processing, and re-calculation of CSI updates. Fi-
nally, the mobile multi-hop system example (5(d)) was set
up inspired by trafﬁc scenarios (e.g. autonomous cars in
urban settings) to see how predictability of motion helps in

7
minimising the message delivery time. These examples and
their spatiotemporal variability link well with the original work
of Pathak et al. [20] .
When we speak of models, their integration with machine
learning, and reservoir computing, it is interesting to note that
Pecora and Carroll, the same researchers who have founded the
ﬁeld of chaotic communications with their work on synchro-
nisation of circuits [3], have also recently done major work
on understanding the effect choice of network connections
within the reservoir [21]. Depending on the dynamical system
the reservoir computer is trying to predict the behaviour of,
the structure of computer itself does in fact matter: ﬂipping
some of the ﬁxed connections in the reservoir (full line
arrows in Fig. 4) deliver different prediction results for the
same inputs. Design of structures, given information about
application domain, hence becomes an important segment
of work and asks for understanding of complex networks.
Network science and study of complex networks are additional
promising techniques for the telecommunications community’s
emergent toolbox of the future. The complexity is both a
blessing and a curse: unintended consequences may lead to
massive failures of complex networks of ”smart agents” [22],
but carefully designed solutions have a lot of promise for the
future of technology facing climate emergency and the demise
of current economic systems [23].
V. CONCLUSIONS
The time is now: the toolbox for dynamical systems has
been reinforced with machine learning techniques born out of
dynamical systems, and the dynamics of wireless communi-
cations offer much more to work with every day. This does
not mean that the work done in the past was not important;
we need to revisit it with techniques and technology we have
today, and the results might have an application that could not
have been foreseen decades ago.
Again, to repeat the statement we began with: the question
is not whether we can treat everything in a wireless network
as a dynamical system, but whether we can afford to do
so. The demand is high, as the 6G and the generations of
wireless to follow will beneﬁt from getting to know the
nature of the complex, dynamical world they are creating and
embedding into at the same time. It is hard to ﬁnd a use
case of next generation networks where we could not see a
nonlinear differential equation waiting to be modeled: be it the
“wetware” integration with dynamics of a human body, motion
in the high mobility scenario, or the myriad of rays running
into potentially ray-chaotic states in Massive MIMO, terahertz
communications, metasurfaces, the dynamical systems are
within reach.
