A Pluggable Learned Index Method via
Sampling and Gap Insertion
Yaliang Li∗, Daoyuan Chen∗, Bolin Ding, Kai Zeng, and Jingren Zhou
Alibaba Group

ABSTRACT
Database indexes facilitate data retrieval and benefit broad applica-
tions in real-world systems. Recently, a new family of index, named
learned index, is proposed to learn hidden yet useful data distribu-
tion and incorporate such information into the learning of indexes,
which leads to promising performance improvements. However,
the “learning” process of learned indexes is still under-explored. In
this paper, we propose a formal machine learning based framework
to quantify the index learning objective, and study two general and
pluggable techniques to enhance the learning efficiency and learning
effectiveness for learned indexes. With the guidance of the formal
learning objective, we can efficiently learn index by incorporating
the proposed sampling technique, and learn precise index with en-
hanced generalization ability brought by the proposed result-driven
gap insertion technique.
We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets and
compare several indexing methods from the perspective of the in-
dex learning objective. The results show the ability of the proposed
framework to help to design suitable indexes for different scenarios.
Further, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed sampling
technique, which achieves up to 78x construction speedup while
maintaining non-degraded indexing performance. Finally, we show
the gap insertion technique can enhance both the static and dy-
namic indexing performances of existing learned index methods
with up to 1.59x query speedup. We will release our codes and pro-
cessed data for further study, which can enable more exploration
of learned indexes from both the perspectives of machine learning
and database.
1
INTRODUCTION
Database indexes have been extensively studied in the database
community for past decades, resulting in fruitful designed index
methods and broad real-world applications, e.g., [1, 9, 41, 50]. The
related topics become even more important in the era of big data
as tremendous data are generating and collecting from numerous
sources at every second. Recently, a new family of index, namely
learned index, has attracted increasing attention due to its promis-
ing results in terms of both index size and query time [13, 16, 19, 29].
The research direction of learned index is opened up by [29],
which regards the traditional indexes such as B+Tree as models that
predict the actual location within a sorted array for a queried key.
From this view, indexes can be machine learning models trained
from data to be indexed, and the hidden distribution information
of data (for example, patterns and regular trends) can be leveraged
to optimize the “indexing” components of traditional indexes. For
example, to achieve small index size, the index storage layout of
∗The first two authors contributed equally to this work and are joint first authors.
B+Tree, i.e., the height-balanced tree, can be replaced by a small
tree whose nodes are machine learning models with a few learn-
able parameters [29], or a small B+Tree whose nodes maintain the
learned parameters of a few piece-wise linear segments [19] rather
than the whole data. To achieve fast query speed, the index query-
ing algorithm of B+Tree is changed from traversing internal nodes
with multiple comparisons and branches to inferences of machine
learning models with a few numeric calculations [13, 16].
However, the “learning” of learned indexes is still under-explored
in existing learned index methods. First, how to compare different
learned indexes with evaluation from the perspective of machine
learning, such as learning objectives and capacity of chosen models?
For different data with varied hidden patterns and different resource
constraints, a formal learning objective can help us to design and
optimize learned index. Second, few existing learned index methods
study the cost of index learning while the sizes of real-world data
are heavily increasing. Can we reduce the learning cost of learned
indexes to enhance their applicability for large-scale datasets? Third,
existing learned index methods explore few about distributions of
the data to be learned. Can we deeply explore the data distribution
information to further improve the learned index performance?
Motivated by these three questions, in this paper, we propose a
formal machine learning based framework to measure the index
learning objective, and study two general and pluggable learning-
oriented techniques, i.e., sampling to enhance the learning effi-
ciency, and data redistribution via gap insertion to improve the
index performance from the view of learning effectiveness.
First, to formally quantify the learning objective and learning
quality of learned indexes, we regard the learned indexes as en-
coding mechanisms that compress data information into learned
models and measure the learned index using the minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) principle [22]. By formulating an MDL-based
objective function as the learning objective, we connect two impor-
tant concepts of machine learning, overfitting and underfitting, to
the flexible learning of indexes. With the help of the index learn-
ing objectives, we discuss how to compare existing learned index
methods and design suitable learned indexes for different scenarios.
Second, to reduce the learning cost and accelerate the index con-
struction especially for large-scale datasets, we propose to learn
index with sampled small subsets. By capturing the data distribu-
tion information hidden in the data, it is possible to learn the index
with a small subset of data while achieving high learning effective-
ness. We theoretically prove the feasibility of learning index with
sampling, and provide the asymptotic guideline on how large the
sample should be in order to learn an index having a comparable
performance with the index learned on the whole dataset.
Last but not the least, to enhance the performance and general-
ization ability of off-the-shelf learned indexes with few extra efforts,
arXiv:2101.00808v1  [cs.DB]  4 Jan 2021

we study what a data distribution can be beneficial to index learn-
ing, and propose a data re-distribution technique via gap insertion.
Specifically, we design a result-driven strategy to estimate the gaps
that should be inserted in a data-dependent manner, and propose
a gap-based data layout and strategy to physically place keys on
positions with gaps inserted. In comparison to the original distri-
bution, the re-distributed data is easier to be learned and can boost
the performance of static indexing operations. Surprisingly, the
result-driven gap insertion also enables us to handle dynamic in-
dexing scenarios well, which is due to the reason that the estimated
gap-inserted positions can be predictively reserved for possible
inserted keys in the dynamic workloads.
We conduct comprehensive experiments on four wildly adopted
real-world datasets. We compare several index methods [1, 16, 19,
29] from the perspective of the proposed MDL-based framework,
and examine these methods in terms of learning objective, model
regularization and model capacity, providing a new understand-
ing of them. Further, we apply the proposed two general learning-
oriented techniques, sampling and data re-distribution via gap inser-
tion into existing learned index methods. Promising improvements
are achieved for both these two techniques: The proposed sampling
technique achieves up to 78x construction speedup, meanwhile
maintaining non-degraded query performance and reasonable pre-
diction preciseness; The gap insertion technique significantly im-
proves the preciseness of learned indexes and achieves up to 1.59x
query speedup over strong learned index baselines. Finally, we also
show that the learned indexes with gap insertion can achieve good
performance on dynamic workloads.
To summarize, we make the following contributions: (1) We
propose an MDL-based framework that enables formal analysis of
learning objectives and comparison of different learned indexes,
and more importantly, the framework can guide us to design flexible
learned indexes for various scenarios; (2) We propose a pluggable
sampling technique that can improve the learning efficiency of
learned index, which is practical and useful for index construction
acceleration, especially on large-scale datasets; (3) We propose a
pluggable technique, data re-distribution via gap insertion, to better
utilize the hidden distribution information of indexed data, which
improves the preciseness and generalization ability of learned in-
dexes; (4) We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify the
effectiveness of the proposed techniques, and we will release our
codes and datasets to promote further studies. With these contribu-
tions, we hope to better connect the database community with the
machine learning community to enhance each other for the topic
of learned indexes.
2
PRELIMINARY
Indexes as Mechanisms. Let’s first formalize the task of learning
index from data: Given a database D with 𝑛records (rows), assume
that a range index structure will be built on a specific column 𝑥. For
each record 𝑖∈[𝑛], the value of this column, 𝑥𝑖, is adopted as the
key, and 𝑦𝑖is the position where the record is stored (for the case of
primary indexes), or the position of the pointer to the record (for the
case of secondary indexes). 𝑦𝑖can be interpreted as the position of
𝑥𝑖in an array sorted by 𝑥𝑖, and to support range queries, a database
to be indexed needs to satisfy the key-position monotonicity.
Definition 1 (Key-position Monotonicity). For a set of key-
position pairs {(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖)}, the key-position monotonicity means that,
for any 𝑥𝑖and 𝑥𝑗, 𝑦𝑖< 𝑦𝑗iff 𝑥𝑖< 𝑥𝑗.
The task of learned index aims to train and learn a predictive
index mechanism 𝑀(𝑦|𝑥) from D: 𝑀takes a record’s key 𝑥as input
and outputs a predicated position ˆ𝑦←𝑀(𝑥) in the sorted array for
data access. From this perspective, classic index structures such
as B+ tree [1, 24], B∗tree [10] and Prefix B-tree [4] can be also
regarded as such a mechanism designed by experts, which gives
the exact position or the page number for a given key.
Prediction-Correction Decomposition. The learning of an in-
dex mechanism 𝑀is essentially to approximate the joint distribu-
tion of keys and positions. Ideally, the predicted position ˆ𝑦should
be exactly the same as the true position of a record 𝑥, i.e., ˆ𝑦= 𝑦.
However, in general, ˆ𝑦is different with 𝑦since it is difficult to per-
fectly fit a real-world dataset containing complex patterns. Thus,
the query process of 𝑥can be decomposed into a “prediction” step
that gives prediction ˆ𝑦based on 𝑥using 𝑀, and a “correction” step
that finds the true position 𝑦of indexed record based on ˆ𝑦.
For example, considering B-Tree index, it gives the page number
ˆ𝑦where the record𝑥is located in, and requires a further page scan to
get the exact position of this particular record. For learned indexes,
after getting the predicted position ˆ𝑦through machine learning
model inference, we also need to conduct, e.g., a binary/exponential
search around ˆ𝑦to find the true position 𝑦where the record is
stored. The cost of this “correction” step depends on the difference
| ˆ𝑦−𝑦|. Indeed, one goal is to minimize the difference between ˆ𝑦and
𝑦. But the difference can be non-zero, which provides the flexibility
to adjust the cost of “prediction” step for a mechanism, i.e., how
much space we need to store 𝑀and how much time we need to
calculate 𝑀(𝑥). This raises several questions: can we evaluate a
learned index from the costs of these two decomposed steps? And
what roles do these two steps play in the index learning?
3
AN MDL-BASED FRAMEWORK
In this section, we formally quantify the index mechanisms using
the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle [21, 22]. We first
connect the above prediction-correction decomposition of index
mechanisms with MDL, then formulate the learning objective of
index mechanisms with two general terms that can encode various
indexing criteria, and finally discuss the physical meanings of the
proposed concepts with several instantiations of index mechanisms.
3.1
Measuring Mechanism with Minimum
Description Length
The idea of MDL is to regard both the given data D and a mecha-
nism 𝑀as codes, and regard the learning as appropriately encoding
or compressing the data D using 𝑀. Then we can use the code length
or description length to measure the “simplicity” of a mechanism:
The more we learn the hidden patterns in the data and reduce its
redundancy, the shorter the description lengths for the compressed
data and the learned mechanism. Specifically, the description length
of a mechanism 𝑀is decomposed into 𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(D|𝑀): 𝐿(𝑀) in-
dicates the description length of the mechanism itself, and 𝐿(D|𝑀)
indicates the conditional description length of D given 𝑀, which
can be interpreted as how many extra bits do we need to exactly
2

describe D using 𝑀. In the context of learned index, we can link
𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(D|𝑀) to the prediction and correction respectively.
Formally, in this paper, we will use the MDL criteria to measure
the quality of an index mechanism 𝑀as MDL(𝑀, D) = 𝐿(𝑀) +
𝐿(D|𝑀). To be more specific, the two terms:
• 𝐿(𝑀) measures the cost of using 𝑀for prediction, i.e., getting
the predicted position ˆ𝑦based on the key 𝑥, which is usually
proportional to the size of 𝑀;
• 𝐿(D|𝑀) = E{𝑥,𝑦}∈D𝐿(𝑦, ˆ𝑦) measures the average cost of
getting the true position 𝑦based on the predicted position ˆ𝑦,
in the position correction step.
Two Example Instantiations. To better illustrate the idea of MDL,
let’s consider two instantiations of mechanism 𝑀, classic B-tree
and polynomial function. For a classic B-tree, 𝐿(𝑀) denotes the
cost of traversing index tree, which is usually proportional to the
height of the index tree ℎ, i.e., 𝐿(𝑀) ∝ℎ. The concrete form of
𝐿(𝑀) = 𝑓(ℎ) depends on several implementation details of B-tree,
such as the maximum number of children a node can have, or the
minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node can have.
The second term 𝐿(D|𝑀) denotes the cost of page scan in the leaf
node, which is a function of page size 𝑠, i.e., 𝐿(D|𝑀) = 𝑓(𝑠). When
binary scan is adopted, 𝑓(𝑠) is a linear function of log(𝑠).
For the second example, let’s consider the case that a polynomial
function is learned to act as the mechanism, that is 𝑀(𝑥) = Í𝑇
𝑡=0 𝑎𝑡·
𝑥𝑡+𝑐𝑡, where𝑎𝑡and𝑐𝑡are learnable parameters for a corresponding
degree 𝑡, and 𝑇is the highest degree. In this example, 𝐿(𝑀) can be
measured as O(𝑇), because O(𝑇) multiplications are needed to get
the predicted position ˆ𝑦based on the key 𝑥. For the second term in
MDL, 𝐿(D|𝑀) = E{𝑥,𝑦}∈D𝐿(𝑦, ˆ𝑦) = E{𝑥,𝑦}∈D (log(|𝑦−ˆ𝑦|) + 1) if
binary search is adopted for the correction step.
3.2
Objective Function for Learned Indexes
From the above discussion of two instantiations, we can see the
MDL provides a criterion to formally analyze and compare differ-
ent indexes, including both classic B-tree and machine learning
based indexes. This enables us to design suitable index structures
for various scenarios. Formally, given the data D and a family of
possible mechanisms M, the process of learning index from data
can be formulated as to find the best mechanism 𝑀∗that minimizes
the description length as follows:
𝑀∗= arg min
𝑀∈M
MDL(𝑀, D) = arg min
𝑀∈M
(𝐿(𝑀) + 𝛼𝐿(D|𝑀)) ,
(1)
where 𝛼is a coefficient to balance the two terms in MDL. From
the view of machine learning, D is fed into the learning procedure
stated in Equation (1) and the description length (𝑀, D) acts as
the objective function to be minimized. By fitting the dataset, the
learning procedure finds an optimal mechanism 𝑀to predict the
position 𝑦based on given 𝑥. If a mechanism achieves minimum
description length, it learns and stores the underlying key-position
distribution information about data in the most compact form. For
example, given a toy data D = {(2, 1), (4, 2), (5, 3), (6, 4), (8, 5)},
the learned index can represent it as 𝑀(𝑥) = Round(0.7𝑥−0.5).
Instead of storing the key-position pairs, only parameters of 𝑀are
needed to store, which reduces the redundancy of raw data and
compresses the information to store. Although the distributions of
real-world data are not so simple, various patterns can be mined
by machine learning methods, and be expressed in compact forms.
In Equation (1), three factors 𝐿(𝑀), 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀) and 𝛼act as the
knobs to tune the performance of learned indexes, and next we will
give more discussion about these factors.
Choice of 𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀). To learn an index mechanism from
data, the first step is to choose the concrete forms of these two terms
in the above framework. As the list of keys and corresponding posi-
tions {(𝑥,𝑦)} are given and the underlying physical storage format
is fixed, we can first choose a specific search method for the correc-
tion step, and thus the concrete form of 𝐿(D|𝑀) = E{𝑥,𝑦}∈D𝐿(𝑦, ˆ𝑦)
can be determined. For 𝐿(𝑀), it has more flexibility. It can be set as
the number of operations to calculate 𝑀(𝑥), the number of model
parameters in 𝑀, or the summarization of the 𝑝-norm of all model
parameters, etc. The choice of 𝐿(𝑀) can be made by considering
the requirements of database systems and the constraints of compu-
tation resources (e.g., on-disk or in-memory) to fit various scenarios.
For example, existing learned index method PGM [16] implicitly
adopts 𝐿(D|𝑀) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔(| ˆ𝑦−𝑦)|) + 1 since it uses a binary search,
and 𝐿(𝑀) to be the number of learned model parameters as it uses
an optimal linear segmentation learning algorithm.
Overfitting v.s. Underfitting. When learning to build the in-
dex from data, the coefficient 𝛼in Equation (1) plays an impor-
tant role. From the perspective of machine learning, 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀) =
E{𝑥,𝑦}∈𝐷𝐿(𝑦, ˆ𝑦) measures the prediction loss on training data 𝐷,
while 𝐿(𝑀) is the regularization term of learned model. These two
terms are usually contradicted: We can learn a very complex model
M to make the prediction loss on training data zero or close to zero,
which leads to a small 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀) while a large 𝐿(𝑀), the so-called
overfitting phenomenon [8, 46]; On the other hand, if we learn a
simple model, 𝐿(𝑀) is small while 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀) is large as the model is
too simple to make precious predictions, the so-called underfitting
phenomenon. The coefficient 𝛼makes a trade-off between these
two terms and aims to learn an index mechanism having the min-
imum description length, i.e., a relatively simple model 𝑀while
also having a small prediction loss on training data.
𝛼in Existing Index Methods. For existing index methods, there
are some tunable parameters playing the role of𝛼to adjust the 𝐿(𝑀)
term and 𝐿(𝐷|𝑀) term in MDL. For example, the page size of B+
Tree, the tree depth and the layer width of RMI [29], and the error
bound 𝜖of FITting-Tree [19] and PGM [16]. These parameters are to
be tuned for a given D and reflect the degree we want to fit D: With
a small page size, a deep and wide model tree, and a small 𝜖, these
index mechanisms will substantially gain small perdition errors
𝐿(D|𝑀) and usually large 𝐿(𝑀) such as large index sizes or long
prediction times. In other words, these parameters implicitly act
as the regularization factors in index learning. In the experiments
(Section 6.2), we will investigate the trade-offs of several index
mechanisms with different 𝛼s in more detail.
4
LEARNING INDEX WITH SAMPLING
As formulated above, we aim to choose 𝑀from a candidate family
M to minimize the objective function 𝐿(𝑀)+𝛼𝐿(D|𝑀), for a given
dataset D. When |D| is large, it is an expensive learning task. In fact,
it is expensive just to evaluate the loss 𝐿(D|𝑀). In this section, we
will investigate a computationally efficient solution via sampling.
3

4.1
Accelerating Index Construction
Recall that the cost of the correction step (corresponding to the
term 𝐿(D|𝑀) in the MDL objective function) is proportional to
log |𝑦−𝑀(𝑥)| = log |𝑦−ˆ𝑦| when binary search is adopted (refer
to above Two Example Instantiations). Let’s focus on the objective
function in the following form:
𝐿(D|𝑀) = E(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D[𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥))] = E(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D[log |𝑦−𝑀(𝑥)|] .
Let E be the maximum absolute prediction error, i.e., the maximum
absolute value of all differences between predicated positions and
true positions: ∀(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D, |𝑀(𝑥) −𝑦| ≤E. We have such an
upper bound 𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥)) ≤log E, for any (𝑥,𝑦) ∈D and a binary
or an exponential search. Thus, we can show that a small sample
from D suffices to approximate 𝐿(D|𝑀):
Proposition 1. Given that 𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥)) ≤log E, we draw a ran-
dom sample D𝑠from D with |D𝑠| = 𝑛𝑠. For any candidate mecha-
nism 𝑀, we can estimate 𝐿(D|𝑀) using
𝐿(D𝑠|𝑀) = 1
𝑛𝑠
∑︁
(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D𝑠
𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥)),
s.t., with probability as most 1 −𝛿, we have
𝐿(D𝑠|𝑀) −𝐿(D|𝑀)
 ≤log E
√2𝑛𝑠
·
√︂
log 2
𝛿.
Proof. Here we provide a proof sketch due to the space limita-
tion. Let’s consider the random sample {(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D𝑠}. Indeed, we
have
E[𝐿(D𝑠|𝑀)] = 1
𝑛𝑠
∑︁
(𝑥,𝑦) ∈D𝑠
E[𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥))] = 𝐿(D|𝑀).
Since 𝐿(𝑦, 𝑀(𝑥)) ∈[0, log E], we apply Hoeffding’s inequality to
finish the proof.
We can interpret 𝐿(D|𝑀) as the expected cost of the correction
step. Theoretically, we only need to estimate it with an error up to
a constant factor (e.g., no more than the size of a page). To this end,
we only need to draw a small sample.
Theorem 1. Consider the optimization problem:
𝑀∗= arg min
𝑀∈M
MDL(𝑀, D) = arg min
𝑀∈M
(𝐿(𝑀) + 𝛼𝐿(D|𝑀)) .
We can solve it on a random sample 𝐷𝑠with size 𝑠= O(𝛼2 log2 E) as
ˆ𝑀∗= arg min
𝑀∈M
MDL(𝑀, D𝑠)
s.t., MDL( ˆ𝑀∗, D) ≤MDL(𝑀∗, D) + O(1) with high probability.
Proof. Indeed, we have
MDL( ˆ𝑀∗, D) −MDL(𝑀∗, D)
= MDL( ˆ𝑀∗, D) −MDL( ˆ𝑀∗,𝑆) + MDL( ˆ𝑀∗, D𝑠)
−MDL(𝑀∗, D𝑠) + MDL(𝑀∗, D𝑠) −MDL(𝑀∗, D)
≤|𝐿(D| ˆ𝑀∗) −𝐿(D𝑠| ˆ𝑀∗)| + 0 + |𝐿(D|𝑀∗) −𝐿(D𝑠|𝑀∗)|,
where MDL( ˆ𝑀∗, D𝑠) −MDL(𝑀∗, D𝑠) ≤0 if from the optimality of
ˆ𝑀∗. Using Proposition 1, both terms |𝐿(D| ˆ𝑀∗) −𝐿(D𝑠| ˆ𝑀∗)| and
|𝐿(D|𝑀∗) −𝐿(D𝑠|𝑀∗)| can be bounded to complete the proof.
We can interpret Theorem 1 as follows. For the purpose of min-
imizing the MDL function considered in Equation (1), it suffices
to learn the index 𝑀on a small random sample with size as small
as O

𝛼2 log2 E

. Further, the parameter 𝛼controls how much we
weigh the cost of the correction step in relative to the size of the
index 𝐿(𝑀) in our goal. The larger the weight is, the larger sample
we need to draw in order to learn the index; in other words, more de-
tails about the data are needed to learn an index in finer granularity.
It should be noticed that there must be some constants hidden in the
big O notation, which does matter in practice; however, the above
theorem enables us to speed up index learning with small samples,
and serves as an asymptotic guideline on how large the sample
needs to be. We will show that the proposed sampling technique
can achieve significant construction speedup while maintaining
comparable query performance in experiments (Section 6.3).
4.2
Discussion
E in Existing Learned Index Methods. Now let’s examine the
maximum prediction error E for several existing learned index
methods. FITing-Tree [19] and PGM [16] introduce an error bound
𝜖to limit the maximum absolute difference between the actual
and predicted position of any key, and thus E can be set as E = 𝜖.
For RMI [29], recall that the maximum prediction errors, (𝑦′ −𝑦)
where 𝑦′ can be larger or less than 𝑦, are recorded during the train-
ing, and thus E can be bounded by the maximum value of them:
E = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(|𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒_𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟|, |𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒_𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟|). For these
existing learned index methods, we can see that Es are usually far
smaller than |D|, indicating that we can learn an index mecha-
nism efficiently via sampling a small subset of D. In experiments
(Section 6.3), we will see that these three learned index methods re-
quire different numbers of samples to achieve non-degraded perfor-
mances and their numbers of samples meet our asymptotic analysis
O

𝛼2 log2 E

with different 𝛼s and different Es.
Unseen Keys in Sampling. Interestingly enough, the sampling
technique can bridge two indexing scenarios, static indexing and
dynamic indexing, which correspond to two machine learning con-
cepts, overfitting and generalization. In static indexing scenarios,
we only need to consider how to overfit D since all {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖} to be
indexed can be accessed during the learning. However, when learn-
ing on a sampled subset data D𝑠, the learned index mechanism 𝑀
has to consider the model generalization ability to precisely predict
positions for unseen data D−𝑠= D−D𝑠. While for dynamic index-
ing scenarios including possible inserted data, similarly, a learned
index mechanism 𝑀needs to be generalized to unseen new keys.
This inspires us that if we can learn an indexing mechanism having
good generalization ability from a small sampled data D𝑠, we will
be able to learn a dynamic index that has good generalization ability
and can handle inserted keys. Thus, as shown in the example of
Figure 1(a), besides index construction speedup, the sampling tech-
nique also improves the model generalization ability. This seems
contradicted with machine learning theory: usually the generation
bound can be improved when we have more data, not fewer data.
However, for learned index, the data pairs are not independent and
a small sample can be enough to learn the correlation between keys
and their positions. Moreover, the sampling technique can help to
4

learn the underlying distribution of D better by extracting more
general patterns (red segments in Figure 1(a)) from D𝑠and alleviate
the overfitting (blue segments in Figure 1(a)) caused by some noisy
keys in the unseen D−𝑠.
(a) Sampling
(b) Gap Insertion
Figure 1: Examples of learned index with sampling and gap
insertion.
5
LEARNING INDEX WITH GAP INSERTION
5.1
Gap insertion
As discussed above, the proposed sampling technique can somehow
improve the generalization ability of learned index methods. Here
we explore more along this direction: Can we further enhance the
generalization ability of learned index methods and improve their
preciseness? In the fruitful research work of index structure in
the database community, there are some ideas about how to leave
certain empty space for dynamic data, such as Packed Memory
Array [5] or Gapped Array [13]. Actually, we can further leverage
the empty space to re-distribute the data such that the updated key-
position distribution is easy to be learned and the generalization
ability of index can be further enhanced.
Let’s consider the example in Figure 1(b): Can we insert some
gaps, move the original data (i.e., blue dots) to the gap-inserted data
(i.e., green dots), and learn the index as red segments? If so, the
newly learned index (i.e., red segments) fits the gap-inserted data
better and has better generalization ability. However, we should
note that the number of inserted gaps cannot be very large since
the gaps can increase storage and query costs, which are also part
of the optimization goals.
Result-Driven Gap Insertion. The gap insertion can be formu-
lated as a position manipulation problem: given a set of data D =
{𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1 with the monotonicity of key-position, how to insert
gaps and adjust each record’s position from 𝑦𝑖to 𝑦𝑔
𝑖while preserv-
ing the monotonicity of key-position, such that the preciseness of
learned mechanism can be improved? Formally, let D𝑔= {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑔
𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1
be a gap-inserted data and 𝑢𝑖= 𝑦𝑔
𝑖−𝑦𝑔
𝑖−1 −1 be the number of
inserted gaps between 𝑥𝑖−1 and 𝑥𝑖. Then 𝑦𝑔
𝑖= 𝑦𝑖+ Í
1≤𝑗≤𝑖𝑢𝑗and
we aim to find a manipulated D𝑔that maximizes the objective:
max
{𝑦𝑔
𝑖}
∑︁
{𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖}∈D
𝐿(𝑦𝑖, 𝑀∗
D (𝑥𝑖)) −𝐿(𝑦𝑔
𝑖, 𝑀∗
D𝑔(𝑥𝑖))
s.t. ∀𝑖: 𝑢𝑖∈Z≥0, and
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑢𝑖≤𝜌· 𝑛,
∀𝑖: 𝑦𝑔
𝑖= 𝑦𝑖+
∑︁
1≤𝑗≤𝑖
𝑢𝑗, ∀𝑖, 𝑗: 𝑦𝑔
𝑖< 𝑦𝑔
𝑗, iff 𝑥𝑖< 𝑥𝑗,
(2)
where 𝜌indicates the gap ratio that defines at most how many gaps
(i.e., 𝜌· 𝑛) can be introduced, 𝑀∗
D and 𝑀∗
D𝑔indicate the optimal
learned index mechanism from original data D and gap-inserted
data D𝑔respectively.
Inspired by block coordinate gradient descent [6], here we de-
scribe a two-step result-driven solution to solve the optimization
problem in Equation (2): The solution first proposes a new index
mechanism 𝑀′ that can achieve better preciseness than the index
mechanism on the original data, and then move records to 𝑦𝑔that
are as close as possible to the positions predicted by 𝑀′. In other
words, as the new index mechanism 𝑀′ meets our optimization
goal, i.e., reducing the prediction error, we can “backward inference”
𝑦𝑔using the predictions from 𝑀′ and learn a mechanism 𝑀D𝑔from
the estimated gap-inserted data D𝑔.
Gap
!",$
%
!",&
%
'(%")*
!",+
%
!",*
!",&
Gaps
,",*
,",&
,",$
,",+ 



'(%"
Key
Position
for '(%-
Insertion
Original Segment
Hypothetical Segment
Figure 2: The illustration of result-driven gap insertion.
Specifically, since the linear models are adopted in existing
learned index methods including RMI, FITing-Tree and PGM, here
we discuss how to manipulate the positions for linear models based
on the proposed result-driven solution. Considering that real-world
datasets usually cannot be indexed with only one linear model, we
first learn an index mechanism with 𝐾linear segments to glob-
ally split the data, then locally insert gaps for each linear segment.
Let’s consider the example in Figure 2: for the 𝑘-th linear segment
(𝑘∈[1, 𝐾]), we can propose a hypothetical linear model shown in
red line by connecting two anchoring points after gap insertion:
the first data point {𝑥𝑘,1,𝑦𝑔
𝑘,1} and the last data point {𝑥𝑘,𝑚,𝑦𝑔
𝑘,𝑚}.
For the first data point, 𝑦𝑔
𝑘,1 = 𝑦𝑘,1 + Í
𝑗<=𝑘𝑈𝑗where 𝑈𝑗is the
number of total inserted gaps in the previous 𝑗-th segment, while
for the last data point, 𝑦𝑔
𝑘,𝑚= 𝑦𝑘,𝑚+ Í
𝑗<=𝑘𝑈𝑗+ 𝜌(𝑦𝑘,𝑚−𝑦𝑘,1)
as 𝜌(𝑦𝑘,𝑚−𝑦𝑘,1) is the total number of gaps to be inserted in the
𝑘-th segment. In this way, the gap-inserted positions 𝑦𝑔
𝑘,𝑖can be
calculated as:
𝑦𝑔
𝑘,𝑖= 𝑦𝑔
𝑘,1 + (𝑥𝑘,𝑖−𝑥𝑘,1) ×
𝑦𝑔
𝑘,𝑚−𝑦𝑔
𝑘,1
𝑥𝑘,𝑚−𝑥𝑘,1
,
= 𝑦𝑘,1 +
∑︁
𝑗<=𝑘
𝑈𝑗+ (𝑥𝑘,𝑖−𝑥𝑘,1) × (𝑦𝑘,𝑚−𝑦𝑘,1)(1 + 𝜌)
𝑥𝑘,𝑚−𝑥𝑘,1
.
(3)
From a geometric perspective, the data after inserting gaps are
placed along the red hypothetical line and consequently, the data
is re-distributed to meet our “expected linear results”. Note that
the estimated 𝑦𝑔s can be non-integers and we will discuss how to
physically place the keys according to their 𝑦𝑔s in Section 5.2. Now
let’s first theoretically examine the effectiveness of the proposed
result-driven gap insertion technique.
5

Theoretical Analysis. In this section, we will theoretically show
that the index mechanism learned on D𝑔achieves better preciseness
and tighter generalization bound than the one learned on D. Here
we leverage the information bottleneck principle [47] to quantify
the mutual information between the input keys and the positions
to be predicted, and analyze the preciseness and generalization for
indexes learned on D𝑔and D.
Let’s consider the index learning task in the context of infor-
mation compression: The key 𝑥∈X and the position 𝑦∈Y are
both random variables, and there are some statistical dependencies
between 𝑥and 𝑦. The index learning task can be regarded as to
find an optimal compact representation ˜𝑥of 𝑥, which compresses 𝑥
by removing the un-related parts of 𝑥that have no contribution to
the prediction of 𝑦; and then learn the correlation between ˜𝑥of 𝑦.
Formally, the index learning task is minimizing 𝐼(𝑥; ˜𝑥) −𝛽𝐼( ˜𝑥;𝑦),
where 𝐼() indicates the mutual information and 𝛽is a coefficient to
adjust the trade-off between the degree of compression 𝐼(𝑥; ˜𝑥) and
the degree of preserving predictive information 𝐼( ˜𝑥;𝑦).
Let ˜X be the set of minimal sufficient statistics of X with respect
to Y, i.e., ∀𝑥∈X, ˜𝑥∈˜X,𝑦∈Y : 𝑝(𝑥| ˜𝑥,𝑦) = 𝑝(𝑥| ˜𝑥). In the context
of index learning, we interpret ˜X as the optimal hidden compact
representation of keys X. Note ˜X = X is always sufficient for Y
while usually not the optimal compact one with minimal | ˜X|. Then
we can see that | ˜X| becomes smaller on D𝑔after inserting gaps into
the original data D, which makes the index learning easier and
improves the index preciseness. To clarify the reason, recall that
we insert gaps based on several hypothetical linear models. As
the linearity of transformed data increases, the linear correlation
between keys and gap-inserted positions increases accordingly. In
other words, we need less data information to learn the parameters
of linear models, resulting in redundant ˜X and smaller | ˜X|. In the
extreme case, ˜X can have only one trivial ˜𝑥, that is ˜X = {𝑥1 −1}, if
the whole transformed data is on a simple line (e.g., 𝑦= 𝑥−𝑥1 + 1).
Besides, we can show that the index learned on D𝑔achieves a
tighter generalization bound after inserting gaps into the original
D. Let ˆ𝐼() be the empirical estimate of the mutual information for
a given data, which is a sample of size 𝑛from the joint distribu-
tion {X, Y}. Shamir et al. [47] prove that the generalization error
𝐸( ˜𝑥,𝑦) = |𝐼( ˜𝑥;𝑦) −ˆ𝐼( ˜𝑥;𝑦)| can be bounded in a data-dependent
form with a probability of at least 1 −𝛿:
𝐸( ˜𝑥,𝑦) ≤(3| ˜X| + 2)
√︁
𝑙𝑜𝑔(4/𝛿)
√
2𝑛
+ (|Y| + 1)(| ˜X| + 1) −4
𝑛
.
(4)
In summary, the generation error between the optimal hidden com-
pact representation and the empirical estimates from finite sample
D or D𝑔is bounded in 𝑂( | ˜X||Y |
√𝑛
).
Now let’s compare the bounds on the original data D and the
gap-inserted data D𝑔. Note that we transform the original 𝑦into 𝑦𝑔
with a one to one mapping due to the key-position monotonicity,
and thus the |Y| and data size 𝑛remain the same. The other factor
| ˜X| does matter, and it becomes smaller after gap insertion as we
analyzed above. As a result, the index mechanism learned on D𝑔has
a tighter generation bound than the index mechanism learned on D,
and it can generalize to possible keys better. Later, we will discuss
how the proposed gap insertion technique can handle dynamic
scenarios in Section 5.3 and experimentally confirm its advantages
in Section 6.4.
Gap Insertion for Non-Linear Models. So far, our discussion
about the proposed gap insertion is based on a collection of linear
models. However, the idea of results-driven gap insertion is general
and easy to be extended to other non-linear models. Specifically,
as long as the non-linear models to be learned are monotonically
increasing functions, we can also introduce the non-linear hypothet-
ical lines by anchoring a few points whose transformed positions
can be determined. Then based on the hypothetical lines, we can
inference the positions for the keys of other non-anchoring points
to fit hypothetical models.
5.2
Physical Implementation of Gaps
Physical Key Placement. We have discussed how to logically esti-
mate the gaps to be inserted such that a better index can be learned
on the gap-inserted data. However, as the estimated positions can
be non-integral, we need to round them into integers and physically
place the keys according to their adjusted positions. This is non-
trivial since we have to maintain the key-position monotonicity
during the placement. Let’s assume two anchoring keys 𝑥𝑖and 𝑥𝑗
where 𝑥𝑖< 𝑥𝑗, whose physical positions are integers and have been
determined to be 𝑦𝑔
𝑖and 𝑦𝑔
𝑗respectively. In practice, the first and
last points of each learned segment can be such anchoring points
(please refer to Result-Driven Gap Insertion above). Consider 𝑚non-
anchoring keys to be placed, whose keys are larger than 𝑥𝑖and less
than 𝑥𝑗, we need to choose suitable positions to place them. On
one hand, the rounding of estimated (non-integral) positions may
lead to conflicted 𝑦𝑔s. On the other hand, there may be more than
𝑚available positions used for physical placement, i.e., 𝑦𝑔
𝑗−𝑦𝑔
𝑖> 𝑚.


	




	





	

!"
!#
!$
!$%&
'( = ("
* + ,
'( = ("
* + ,
Figure 3: Illustration of linking array based key placement.
To address this problem, we propose a linking array based key
placement strategy as shown in Figure 3. We place a key 𝑥𝑙ac-
cording to its predicted position 𝑀(𝑥𝑙). If two keys get conflicted
predictions, we place them on an external linking array with the
same position. This strategy reduces the differences between physi-
cal positions and result-driven estimated positions by fully utilizing
the prediction ability of learned index 𝑀, at the price of introduc-
ing potential disambiguation costs to determine exact positions in
the linking arrays, and increasing storage costs for linking arrays.
We also explore two other strategies to balance the advantage of
accurate prediction and the disadvantage of extra cost, and experi-
mental results show that the strategy presented above works well
in practice. Due to the space limitation, we omit the details and
keep with the above linking array based key placement strategy.
As a result, we place all data in a gapped array 𝐺and several
linking arrays A = {𝐴𝑖}. A linking array 𝐴𝑖contains the 𝑖-th occu-
pied key in 𝐺and at least one other key having the same position
6

𝑦𝑔= 𝑖in 𝐺. The 𝑖-th occupied key in 𝐺will be the minimum keys
of 𝐴𝑖, i.e., 𝐺(𝑖) = 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐴𝑖). Clearly, the key-position monotonicity
is maintained for keys in the first-level gapped array. Next, we will
describe how to read (i.e., lookup operation) and write (i.e., dynamic
scenario) with the gap-based array.
Lookup Operation. As mentioned above, in the gapped array 𝐺,
there are more positions than the number of indexed keys, i.e.,
𝑦𝑔
𝑗−𝑦𝑔
𝑖> 𝑚. Further, the proposed linking arrays can increase
the number of unoccupied positions. So how to conduct lookup
operations on such data layout? The key idea here is to maintain a
total order for keys in the first-level gapped array 𝐺, such that the
unoccupied positions in 𝐺are comparable to indexed keys. Specifi-
cally, we set the key of unoccupied position to be the key of the first
occupied position at its right hand, and use an additional indicator
to indicate that such unoccupied positions have no payloads. In this
way, we can define a comparison rule for the situation of having the
same key but different payloads: a key pointing to an empty pay-
load is smaller than the same key pointing to a non-empty payload,
and thus the 𝐺is totally ordered.
In practical, if the searched positions point to the secondary
linking arrays, we conduct a linear scan on the linking arrays due
to the fact that there are usually a limited number of keys with the
same conflicted predicted position.
5.3
Dynamic Scenario
Handling Dynamic Scenarios. Dynamic operations, especially
inserting new keys, are challenging for learned index since the
machine learning models may need to be re-trained to maintain
precise predictions. Thanks to the proposed gap insertion, we can
introduce a simple yet effective extension to efficiently support dy-
namic operations, meanwhile, maintaining comparable prediction
preciseness without model re-training. This is because we have re-
distributed the data by introducing gaps in a result-driven manner.
Further, we place keys directly according to their predicted posi-
tions and allow position conflicts, thus the unoccupied positions are
data-dependently reserved for possible inserted new keys. In other
words, we can insert new keys based on their predicted positions
by a learned index 𝑀. These positions can be either unoccupied
or occupied, and for both cases, the inserted data follow hidden
key-position distribution already learned by 𝑀, such that 𝑀can
maintain preciseness at no price or a small price of correction cost
in the lookup operation.
Specifically, given a key 𝑥to be inserted, we expect to place 𝑥on
the position as close as possible to its predicted position by 𝑀. Mean-
while, to simplify the lookup operation after new data insertion, we
need to maintain the total order for 𝐺with corresponding linking
arrays A: ∀𝐴𝑖−1 ∈A, 𝐺(𝑖−1) = 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐴𝑖−1) ≤𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐴𝑖−1) < 𝐺(𝑖).
Using 𝑀, we first get 𝑥’s predicted position ˆ𝑦and its upper bound’s
position 𝑦𝑢𝑏in 𝐺, i.e., the position of largest key in 𝐺that is less
than or equal to 𝑥, and then we insert 𝑥in either 𝐺( ˆ𝑦) (unoccupied
case) or the linking array 𝐴𝑦𝑢𝑏−1 (occupied case) to maintain the
key-position monotonicity and the total order of 𝐺.
For the delete operation, first, we look up the 𝑥to be deleted.
If 𝑥is stored in a linking array 𝐴, we can easily remove 𝑥from 𝐴
when |𝐴| > 2, or make the corresponding position an occupied one
with the other key in 𝐴, and delete 𝐴when |𝐴| = 2. Otherwise, the
deletion will make an unoccupied position, and we need to update
the keys in 𝐺whose values are the same as 𝑥, by setting them as
the key at 𝑥’s upper bound’s position 𝑦𝑢𝑏, i.e., ∀𝑦𝑗: 𝐺(𝑦𝑗) = 𝑥, set
𝐺(𝑦𝑗) ←𝐺(𝑦𝑢𝑏). For the update operation, we can look up the
data to be updated using its key and simply reset its payload value.
5.4
Reducing Cost of Gap Insertion
Now let’s analyze the cost of the proposed gap-based index learn-
ing. Recall that we first learn an index with 𝐾linear segments on
original data D = {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1, then we generate gap-inserted data
D𝑔= {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑔
𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1 and re-learn a better index on D𝑔. With existing
learned index methods such as FITing-Tree [19] and PGM [16], the
cost of these three steps are all 𝑂(𝑛). Although the complexity of
the proposed gap-based index learning is still 𝑂(𝑛), we introduce
some extra training costs due to the inserted gaps. Fortunately, we
can leverage the sampling technique mentioned in Section 4 to
further reduce the learning cost using small sampled data, and thus
maintain high learning efficiency.
Combining Sampling and Gap Insertion. Formally, with a sam-
ple rate𝑠∈(0, 1.0] and the sample size𝑛𝑠= 𝑛∗𝑠, we first learn index
𝑀on a sampled subset D𝑠= {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖}𝑛𝑠
𝑖=1 of D. Then we use all the
𝐾segments of 𝑀to estimate the positions of anchoring keys, physi-
cally place other non-anchoring keys based on their predicted posi-
tions from proposed hypothetical models, and get the gap-inserted
dataset D𝑠,𝑔= {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑔
𝑖}𝑛𝑠
𝑖=1. Finally we re-learn an index mechanism
on D𝑠,𝑔, and get the whole gap-inserted data D𝑔= {𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑔
𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1 by
physically placing the un-sampled keys D−𝑠= D −D𝑠into D𝑠,𝑔.
Summing up, we can learn an index with a data scale of 𝑛𝑠and
physically maintain the whole data layout in 𝑂(𝑛). In Section 6.4.2,
we will experimentally show that by combining sampling and gap
insertion techniques, both the preciseness and efficiency of existing
learned index methods can be significantly improved.
6
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments aiming to answer the fol-
lowing questions: (1) What are the strengths and weaknesses of the
existing learned index methods evaluated by the proposed MDL
framework (Section 6.2)? (2) Can we improve the learning efficiency
of the learned index by the sampling technique (Section 6.3)? (3)
Can we enhance the learning effectiveness of learned index by the
proposed result-driven gap insertion technique (Section 6.4)?
6.1
Experimental Settings
We conduct all the experiments on a Linux server with an Intel
Xeon Platinum 8163 2.50GHz CPU, whose L1 cache size, L2 cache
size and L3 cache size are 32KiB, 1MiB and 33MiB respectively.
Baselines. We compare a traditional and three learned index meth-
ods, which are also adopted as base methods to incorporate the
plug-in sampling and gap insertion techniques.
B+ Tree: we use a standard in-memory B+ Tree implementation,
stx::btree (v0.9) [7]. Following [19, 29], we evaluate the B+ Tree
index with dense pages, i.e., the filling factor = 100%.
7

Recursive Model Index (RMI) [29]: RMI is a hierarchy learned
index method consisting of typically two-layer or three-layer ma-
chine learning models. Following previous works [13, 16, 29], we
adopt a two-layer RMI with linear models.
FITing-Tree [19]: This is an error-guaranteed learned index method
using a greedy shrinking cone algorithm to learn piece-wise linear
segments. The learned segments are organized by a B+ Tree and
here we adopt the stx::btree to organize these learned segments.
Piecewise Geometric Model (PGM) [16]: PGM is a state-of-the-art
error-guaranteed learned index method, which improves FITing-
Tree by learning an optimal number of linear segments. There
are three PGM variants based on binary search, CSS-Tree[43] and
recursive construction. Here we evaluate its recursive version since
it beats the other two variants.
Datasets. We conduct experiments on four wildly adopted real-
world datasets that cover different data scales, key types, data dis-
tributions and patterns:
Weblogs [16, 19, 29]: The Weblogs dataset contains about 715M
log entries requesting to a university web server. The index keys
are unique log timestamps. This dataset contains typical non-linear
temporal patterns caused by school online transactions, such as
department events and class schedule arrangements.
IoT [16, 19]: The IoT dataset contains about 26M recordings from
different IoT sensors in a building. The index keys are unique times-
tamps of the recordings. This dataset has more complex temporal
patterns than Weblogs, since IoT data are more diverse (e.g., motion,
door, etc.) and prone to noise during the data collection.
Longitude and LatiLong [13, 16, 19, 29]: These two datasets con-
tain location-based data that are collected around the world from
Open Street Map [38]. The index keys of Longitude are the longitude
coordinates of about 1.8M buildings and points of interest. Similar
to [13], the index keys of LatiLong is compounded of latitudes and
longitudes as 𝑘𝑒𝑦= 90 × 𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒+ 𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒.
Evaluation Metrics. For the storage cost evaluation, we measure
the index size. We use 64-bit payloads for all baselines and 64-bit key
pointers for all datasets. The index size of B+ Tree is the sum of the
sizes of inner nodes and the sizes of leaf nodes including payloads.
The index size of RMI is the sum of payloads and the sizes of linear
models, including slopes, intercepts, maximum positive/negative
prediction errors storing as double-precision floats. The index sizes
of Fitting-Tree and PGM are the sum of payloads and the sizes of
their linear segment models, including slopes and intercepts storing
as double-precision floats.
For the efficiency evaluation, we measure several kinds of time
costs in nanoseconds, including the index construction time, the
index prediction time per query (i.e., getting predicted position ˆ𝑦
given queried key 𝑥), the index correction time per query (i.e., getting
the true position 𝑦given ˆ𝑦) and the overall query time per query
(i.e.., getting 𝑦given 𝑥). Besides, we calculate the Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) between predicted positions and true positions as
1
|𝐷|
Í
𝑥∈𝐷|𝑦−ˆ𝑦|). MAE is a metric widely adopted for machine
learning algorithms and determines the index correction time in
the context of learned index.
6.2
Comparison under MDL Framework
The proposed MDL-based framework quantifies an index as terms
of 𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(D|𝑀). In this subsection, we compare several exist-
ing index methods to demonstrate several performance trade-offs
between 𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(D|𝑀), and the impact of varying the mecha-
nism family M. We demonstrate the results on IoT dataset and omit
the results on the other three datasets due to the space limitation
and similar conclusions.
6.2.1
Performance Trade-Off. From the view of machine learning,
𝐿(D|𝑀) measures the prediction loss on training data while 𝐿(𝑀)
plays a regularization role of the learned model. These two terms are
usually contradicted and can be balanced by the coefficient 𝛼that
controls performance trade-offs. As analyzed in Section 3.2, several
parameters of existing index methods implicitly take the role of
𝛼: the number of the layer-2 models in RMI is proportional to 𝛼,
while the page size of B+ Tree and error bound 𝜖of Fitting-Tree and
PGM are inversely proportional to 𝛼. Here we vary these tunable
parameters to study various performance trade-offs by adopting
different 𝐿(𝑀) and 𝐿(D|𝑀).
Trade-off between Storage Cost and Query Efficiency. We
first set 𝐿(D|𝑀) = 𝑡𝑞(D|𝑀) indicating the overall query time per
query and 𝐿(𝑀) = 𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸(𝑀) indicating the index size to explore
the trade-off between storage cost and query efficiency. We plot the
curves of overall query time per query and index size by varying
𝛼s of different methods in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Trade-off between storage cost and query efficiency
of four index methods.
Overall speaking, all the four methods have consistent trade-
off trends: a smaller 𝛼achieves a smaller index size, but leads to
larger query time, as it penalizes less on the term 𝐿(D|𝑀). Here
we test several 𝛼s for each method, and among them, some choices
gain good trade-offs (e.g., 𝜖= 128 for FITing-Tree). These results
naturally raise an open question: what is the “best” space-time
trade-off and how to achieve it by tuning 𝛼? In practice, it depends
on the demand of users. PGM has explored both ends of the space-
time trade-off by varying the degree of linear approximation and
searching an 𝜖that achieves minimal space or minimal query time.
8

𝑇𝑏𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑑
𝑇𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡
𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡
𝑇𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑙
Index Size
MAE
B+ Tree (pageSize=256)
7,770,595,420
305
338
643
489,877,504
63.5005
RMI (|𝑀|=100k)
682,842,396
68
539
607
128,720,736
173.513
FITing (𝜖= 128, |𝑀|=11,830)
788,580,446
106
203
309
121,910,880
27.3392
PGM (𝜖= 128, |𝑀|=8,813)
1,556,264,268
121
224
355
121,740,264
36.817
Table 1: Performance comparison on the IoT dataset for B-tree with dense page, RMI, Fitting-tree and PGM. For RMI, FITing-
Tree and PGM, |𝑀| indicates their numbers of last-layer linear models. 𝑇indicate time in ns, and the index size is in bytes.
In the context of MDL, we can explicitly incorporate the prefer-
ence of users into the objective functions. And then the fruitful
ideas of hyper-parameter optimization [17] can be incorporated to
automatically search an optimal 𝛼to achieve preferable trade-offs.
Also note that the query time of B+ Tree increases heavily from
page size 256 to 512 since the index begins to fall out of the L1-cache.
Inspired by this phenomenon, we can see an interesting future
direction: designing cache-sensitive regularization in index learning.
For example, we can harness the information about the size of cache
lines into the objective function by gate-control techniques [11].
Trade-off between Prediction and Correction. We then drill
down the index querying process and explore the trade-offs be-
tween prediction cost and correction cost. To measure the pre-
diction cost, we set 𝐿(𝑀) = 𝑡𝑝(𝑀), where 𝑡𝑝(𝑀) means the pre-
diction time. To measure the correction cost, we can set 𝐿(D|𝑀)
to be the correction time, i.e. 𝐿(D|𝑀) = 𝑡𝑐(D|𝑀), or MAE, i.e.,
𝐿(D|𝑀) =
1
|D |
Í
𝑥∈D |𝑦−ˆ𝑦|.
Figure 5: Trade-off between prediction time and correction
cost of four index methods.
We plot the prediction time and correction cost (including correc-
tion time and MAE) for different index methods in Figure 5. As the
parameter 𝛼increases (i.e., page size and error bound decrease as
they are inversely proportional to 𝛼), the prediction time of B+Tree,
FITing-Tree and PGM both increase while their correction costs
decrease. From the view of MDL, a more complex 𝐿(𝑀), requiring
a longer prediction time, usually make precise predictions and thus
smaller correction cost 𝐿(D|𝑀). Here RMI is a bit different as its
prediction time keeps almost the same as 𝛼changes. This is due
to the fact that the major part of inference in RMI is calculating
𝐿linear functions through a 𝐿layer tree (here 𝐿is 2), which is
independent of the tunable number of the layer-2 models.
Besides, the results in terms of MAE and correction time of all
the index methods have the consistent increasing trends: all of
them increase as 𝛼increases, while with different increasing speeds
(see the different gaps between red lines and green lines). This
meets our expectation since the evaluated index methods use a bi-
nary search within certain ranges: page size for B+ Tree, maximum
positive/negative errors for RMI, and 𝜖for FITing-Tree and PGM.
Meanwhile, the MAEs are bounded by these values and approxi-
matively reflect the correction time. Note that the MAE are usually
smaller than these fixed search ranges, which allow us to further
use exponential search to speed up the correction as studied in [13].
Another observation is that the prediction time is usually larger
than the correction time for B+Tree, FITing-Tree and PGM. Compar-
ing to their lookups within a continuous memory in the correction
stage, their recursive lookups in the prediction stage tend to incur
more costs, which are due to the organization of hierarchical mod-
els. This inspires us to design learned index having as few layers as
possible, which is adopted by RMI method.
6.2.2
The Effect of Model Capacity. We have studied the impact of
varying the regularization coefficient 𝛼for different index methods.
Now we study the intrinsic property of the mechanism by com-
paring different model capacity, or say, comparing the different
families of learning models.
To fairly compare these four index methods, we choose the most
favorable 𝛼s for each of them, which are the values of 𝛼s closest
to the intersections of their time-space trade-off lines in Figure 4.
The results are summarized in Table 1. We can see that all the three
learned index methods achieve much smaller storage costs while
faster lookup speeds than traditional B+Tree. Among the three
learned index methods, we observe that FITing-Tree and PGM have
much smaller MAE, better query efficiency, and smaller index size
than RMI. However, RMI method requires less construction time
since it doesn’t need the organization of learned segments, such
as an assistant B+Tree for FITing-Tree and a recursive strategy for
PGM. Note that with the same 𝜖= 128, PGM achieves a smaller in-
dex size than FITing-Tree by learning the optimal number of linear
segments, while FITing-Tree adopts a greedy learning algorithm
that leads to more segments than PGM.
6.3
Learned Indexes with Sampling
Recall that existing learn index methods including RMI, FITing-Tree
and PGM need to scan at least one pass of the whole data to learn
several sub-models, and further organize the learned sub-models
by a model tree or a B+Tree. There is a great potential to reduce
9

the data scanning cost with smaller data, and reduce the index or-
ganization cost with fewer sub-models to be learned. Here we plug
the proposed sampling technique into these learned index methods
to accelerate the index learning. Specifically, given a sample rate
𝑠∈(0, 1.0], we first get a sampled dataset D𝑠by randomly sampling
𝑠× |D| keys from D, then learn the indexes from D𝑠, and finally
test the indexes on the whole dataset D. When directly applying
this procedure with original RMI, FITing-Tree and PGM methods,
we found some pretty large prediction errors caused by few unsam-
pled keys that cannot be covered by learned sub-models (i.e., linear
segments here). Fortunately, we can eliminate these large errors
by some simple yet effective patches. For FITing-Tree and PGM,
we connect the adjacent segments learned from D𝑠to cover all the
un-sampled keys. For RMI, we propose a RMI-Nearest-Seg patch,
which re-assigns a key covered by an un-trained (empty) sub-model
to its nearest trained sub-model. Since the sampling may cause few
violations of error bounds, we adopt the exponential search to find
the searching boundary around the predicted position.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sample Rate
66
68
70
72
74
Mean
Absolute Error (AE) for Patched PGM
60
62
64
66
68
70
STD
1 <= s <= 0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sample Rate
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Query Time (ns)
Build Time and Overall Query Time for Patched PGM
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Build Time (ns)
1e9
10
3
10
2
10
1
Sample Rate
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Query Time (ns)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Build Time (ns)
1e8
Overall Query Time
Build Time
Mean of AE
STD of AE
10
3
10
2
10
1
Sample Rate
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Mean
0.1 <= s <= 0.001
100
150
200
250
300
STD
1 <= s <= 0.1
0.1 <= s <= 0.001
Mean of AE
STD of AE
Overall Query Time
Build Time
Figure 6: MAE, build time and overall query time of PGM
index with varied 𝑠. The gray and green horizontal dotted
lines indicate the MAE of 𝑀D and 𝜖= 256 respectively.
By varying 𝑠from 1.0 to 0.001, we evaluate the MAE, build time
and query time for all patched learned indexes on all the datasets.
The results of PGM on IoT dataset are shown in Figure 6, the other
two index methods or on other datasets have similar conclusions
and we omit those results due to the space limitation. In Figure
6, the two right subfigures show the results for extremely small
sample rates (i.e., 0.1 to 0.001). For comparison, let’s denote the
index learned from the original whole data D as 𝑀D. In the top-
right subfigure, the gray and green horizontal dotted lines indicate
the MAE of 𝑀D and the adopted error bound 𝜖= 256 respectively.
Construction Speedup. From Figure 6, we can see that the patched
PGM gains significant construction speedup (e.g., the build time
decrease from 1.63𝑒9 when 𝑠= 1 to 1𝑒8 when 𝑠= 0.01, which be-
comes about 78x smaller), while maintaining non-degraded query
performance (e.g., when 𝑠= 0.01, the MEA is still very close to
the one of 𝑀D, the gray dotted line). Generally speaking, the build
time linearly decreases as the sample rate decreases. On the other
hand, the curves of MAE and query time are near-horizontal when
the sample rate decreases until the very small one (e.g., 𝑠= 0.0025).
These results show that we can significantly accelerate the learning
of index with the proposed sampling technique while the learned
index is still precise.
Generalization Improvement. As discussed in Section 4.2, the
sampling technique can improve the generalization ability of learned
index methods, which leads to a fewer number of learned segments
and correspondingly smaller index size. We conduct statistics of the
number of learned segments for patched FITing-Tree and patched
PGM, and the results are illustrated in Figure 7.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sample Rate
12000
13000
14000
15000
16000
17000
Number of Learned Segments
Patched FITing-Tree
Patched PGM
IoT
Sample Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Number of Learned Segments
Longtitude
Figure 7: Number of learned segments for patched FITing-
Tree and patched PGM with varied 𝑠.
We can observe that the numbers of learned segments of both
patched FITing-Tree and PGM decrease as sample rates decrease.
This is because that as the sampled dataset becomes smaller, learned
index methods can extract more general patterns in the data as some
noisy keys are discarded. So some adjacent learned segments hav-
ing similar slopes can be merged, and the generalization ability
improves. Note that PGM adopts an optimal piece-wise segmenta-
tion learning algorithm, and thus it is more stable than FITing-Tree
that adopts a greedy learning algorithm.
The 𝛼Adjustment. To gain more insights about the proposed
sampling technique, here, we vary the tunable 𝛼of learned index
methods and check their the smallest “safe” sampled data size 𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑓𝑒
that maintains a non-degraded performance.
102
103
Error Bound
104
105
Patched FITing-Tree
Patched PGM
104
105
Number of Layer-2 Models
106
Smallest Safe Sampled Data Size
Smallest Safe Sampled Data Size
RMI-Nearest-Seg
Figure 8: The smallest “safe” sampled data size𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑓𝑒to main-
tain a non-degraded performance, by varying 𝛼of different
learned index methods on IoT dataset.
The results are shown in Figure 8. Recall that in Section 4, we
theoretically show that it suffices to learn the index on a small
10

Figure 9: Boxplots of performance for PGM index with gap insertion on IoT dataset.
sample with size as small as 𝑂(𝛼2𝑙𝑜𝑔2E) in Theorem 1. Apply-
ing simple log transformation, we can get 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑂(𝛼2𝑙𝑜𝑔2E)) =
𝑂(4𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑔E × 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝛼)) = 𝑂(𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝛼)). That is, the 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑓𝑒) for
these methods are asymptotically linear to 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝛼). In Figure 8, the
x-axis and y-axis represent 𝛼and 𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑓𝑒with log transformation
respectively, and the linear trends of those plots match the above
theoretical analysis (again, note that the number of layer-2 models
in RMI is proportional to 𝛼, while the error bound of Fitting-Tree
and PGM are inversely proportional to 𝛼). With a smaller 𝛼, we can
achieve non-degraded performance with fewer samples, while a
larger 𝛼requires us to draw more samples since more details about
the data are needed to learn an index in finer granularity.
6.4
Learned Indexes with Gap Insertion
As discussed in Section 5, we propose to learn precise index by
adjusting the distribution of keys and positions, at the cost of gap
insertion and index re-training. The cost can be further reduced
by combining the sampling technique. In this section, we empiri-
cally examine the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed gap
insertion technique.
6.4.1
Static Scenarios. We conduct experiments on all the adopted
datasets and the three learned index methods, by varying the gap
insertion rate 𝜌from 0.5 to 0.001 and the sample rate 𝑠from 1 to
0.005. Due to similar results and space limitation, we only report the
results for PGM and IoT dataset here. The overall query time and
other detailed performance numbers are summarized as boxplots
in Figure 9, where each box indicates the middle 50% experimental
points and the “No Gap” boxes represent the baseline index 𝑀D
learned without gap insertion.
Clearly, indexes learned on the gap-inserted datasets gain sig-
nificantly smaller overall query times comparing with the baseline
(e.g., the speedup is up to 1.59x), which verifies the effectiveness
of the gap insertion technique. Note that the overall query time is
the overall performance including the advantage of improved MAE
and the disadvantage of additional index size. To further analyze
the detailed performance, we further break down the overall query
times into the prediction time and corrections time, and also plot
MAE and index size in Figure 9. Comparing with the baseline with-
out gap insertion, we can see that PGM with gap insertion achieves
slightly better prediction time and much better correction time. To
explain the improvements, we can check the MAE results, which
show a significant improvement. However, the index size, including
the size of introduced gaps and linking arrays, becomes larger and
reduce the benefits brought by the MAE improvements. So in total,
the correction time shows an averaged 2x improvement, and the
overall query time shows an averaged 1.4x speedup, which is less
than the improvement in terms of MAE. These results and analysis
show that our gap insertion technique can learn preciser indexes,
and thus improve overall performance.
6.4.2
Effect of Gap Insertion and Sampling. Above we analyze the
overall performance of the gap insertion and sampling techniques,
here we discuss the performance of various cases with specific 𝑠
and 𝜌, as illustrated in Figure 10.
Overall Query Time
Sample Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Gap Rate
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Overall Time (ns)
500
480
460
440
420
400
380
65
58
51
44
37
30
23
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mean of Absolute Error
Gap Rate
Sample Rate
MAE
Figure 10: The performance of PGM with varied 𝑠and 𝜌.
Overall speaking, comparing with the results without gap in-
sertion and sampling (𝑠= 1, 𝜌= 0, i.e., the left upper concern in
each subfigure), large gap rates and moderate sample rates achieve
much smaller MAE and significant query efficiency improvements,
verifying the effectiveness of proposed sampling and gap insertion
techniques again. Specifically, a larger 𝜌allows us to transform the
data distribution and enhance the patterns via the result-driven
gap insertion. For the sampling technique, we can observe that it
behaves a bit different from the results in Section 6.3, where both
reasonable MAE and query time can be maintained as 𝑠decreases
from 1.0 to 0.1. Here the reasonable MAE will be maintained but
overall query time will decrease firstly and then increase slightly.
This is because that when combining the sampling and gap inser-
tion, with a very small 𝑠, we need to put more un-sampled keys
into the linking arrays, resulting in an increased total query time.
6.4.3
Dynamic Performance. As mentioned in Section 5.3, our pro-
posed techniques can be easily extended to handle the dynamic sce-
narios. To show how the performance varies with different dynamic
scenarios, as an example here, we evaluate PGM with dynamic link-
ing arrays on both read-heavy and write-heavy workloads. Specifi-
cally, we randomly split the IoT dataset into D𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡and D−
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡with
write proportion 𝑤, i.e., D = D𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡+ D−
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡, |𝐷−
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡| = 𝑤· |𝐷|. We
choose 𝑤= 0.3 and 𝑤= 0.7 for read-heavy and write-heavy work-
loads respectively, and randomly split D−
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡into 𝐵equal-sized data
11

batches D−
1 , . . . , 𝐷−
𝐵. We initially learn the index on D𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡and then
insert D−
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡in batches. After inserting the 𝑏-th batch, we evaluate
its MAE, prediction time, correction time and overall query time
by randomly querying the data we have seen so far.
No Gap 0
(No Write)
2
4
6
8
10
Inserted Batch
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Time Per Query (ns)
Read-Heavy Workload
0.58
0.59
0.60
0.61
0.62
0.63
Gap Fraction
Predict Time
Correction Time
Overall Query Time
Gap Fraction
No Gap 0
(No Write)
2
4
6
8
10
Inserted Batch
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Time Per Query (ns)
Write-Heavy Workload
0.62
0.63
0.64
0.65
0.66
0.67
0.68
0.69
Gap Fraction
Figure 11: The performance of PGM with linking arrays on
dynamic scenarios.
The left subfigure in Figure 11 shows the querying-related time
and gap fraction after each batch insertion for the read-heavy work-
load. As more new data are inserted into the reserved unoccupied
positions, the fraction of available gaps decreases as expected. For
querying-related performance, the prediction time remains the
same, while the correction and overall query time slightly increase
as some new data are placed into the linking arrays. Note that
during the insertion procedure, the index with dynamic linking
arrays achieves about 1.364x faster correction speed and 1.227x
faster overall lookup speed than the index without gap insertion
technique (the leftmost points in the left subfigure of Figure 11,
and this baseline can access to all the data D), showing the great
potentials of the gap-based index to handle dynamic scenarios. In
the right subfigure, we also plot the results for write-heavy work-
load, which shows similar trends as read-heavy workload. The only
difference is that the correction and overall query time increases
a bit faster than the ones in ready-heavy workload, as we have
more new data to insert in the write-heavy workload. All these
results confirm that the proposed method can effectively leverage
the reserved gaps and maintain comparable query performance for
dynamic scenarios.
7
RELATED WORK
Learned Indexes. There have been many well-studied traditional
indexes, such as tree-based [3, 4, 20, 26, 32, 40, 44], hash-based
[41, 50] and bitmap-based [2, 9, 25, 42, 51]. Recently, the learned
indexes gain increasing interest, which learn and utilize the hidden
distribution of data to be indexed. Recursive Model Index (RMI)
[29] firstly introduces the idea of predicting positions of keys with
machine learning models. FITing-Tree [19] greedily learns piece-
wise linear segments with a pre-defined bounded error, and PGM
[16] further improves FITing-Tree by finding the optimal number
of learned segments given an error bound. ALEX [13] proposes
an adaptive RMI with workload-specific optimization, achieving
high performance on dynamic workloads. RadixSpline [28] gains
competitive performance to RMI with a radix structure and a single-
pass training. In addition to single-dimensional indexes, existing
methods also explore the multi-dimensional scenarios, such as Flood
[37], Tsunami [14], NEIST [52] and LISA [33].
Our work is kind of complimentary to above existing learned
index methods. We propose an MDL-based learning framework to
quantify the learning objective and propose two pluggable tech-
niques that can be incorporated by existing methods to further
enhances their performance as shown in experiments.
Sampling in Index. Sampling has also been explored in partial
index [45, 48], tail index [18], cost estimation [12, 13] and index
layout estimation [31, 37]. Different from sampling a user-interested
subset in partial indexes [48] or a rare subset in tail index [18], we
adopt a uniform sampling in our experiments. ALEX [13] samples
every 𝑛-th key of data to predict the cost of data node for bulk
loading. Flood [37] trains RMI on each dimension and samples data
to estimate how often certain dimensions are used. Different from
ALEX and Flood, we propose the sampling technique for learning
acceleration, and we also provide some theoretical analysis that is
further confirmed by experimental results.
Gapped Structure. To support dynamic operations, several gapped
data structures have been studied to reserve gaps between ele-
ments, including Packed Memory Array (PMA) [5], Packed-Memory
Quadtree [49], B+Tree that reserves continuous gaps at the end of
data arrays, and ALEX [13] that adopts a gapped array with key
shifts and model-based insertion. PMA and B+Tree reserve gaps
that are independent with different data distributions, while our
method and ALEX reserve data-dependent gap using learned mod-
els. Further, different from ALEX, we use linking arrays to simplify
the dynamic operations and make the key-position distribution of
gap-inserted data suitable for possible inserted data.
Machine Learning based Database. We compare several learned
indexes from the perspective of minimum description length [21,
22], which falls in the category of machine learning based database.
Recently, there are many works facilitating database components
with machine learning, such as query optimization [15, 27, 30, 35,
36, 39], workload forecasting [34], memory prefetchers [23], and
selectivity estimation [53].
8
CONCLUSION
Learned index gains promising performance by learning and utiliz-
ing the hidden distribution of the data to be indexed. To facilitate
the learned index from the view of machine learning, we propose a
minimum description length based framework that can formally
quantify index learning objective and help to design suitable learn-
ing indexes for different scenarios. Besides, we study two general
and pluggable techniques, i.e., the sampling technique to enhance
learning efficiency with theoretical guidance, and the result-driven
gap insertion technique to enhance learning effectiveness in terms
of index preciseness and generalization ability. Extensive exper-
iments demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the pro-
posed framework and the two pluggable techniques, which boost
existing learned index methods by up to 78x construction speedup
meanwhile maintaining non-degraded performance, and up to 1.59x
query speedup on both static and dynamic indexing scenarios. With
this paper, we hope to provide a deeper understanding of current
learned index methods from the perspective of machine learning,
and promote more explorations of learned index from both the
perspective of machine learning and database.
12
