Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 39 (2010) 179- 216
Submitted 04/10; published 09/10
Cooperative Games with Overlapping Coalitions
Georgios Chalkiadakis

School of Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
Edith Elkind

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Nanyang Technological University, 637371, Singapore
Evangelos Markakis

Department of Infomatics,
Athens University of Economics and Business, GR10434, Greece
Maria Polukarov

Nicholas R. Jennings

School of Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
Abstract
In the usual models of cooperative game theory, the outcome of a coalition formation process is
either the grand coalition or a coalition structure that consists of disjoint coalitions. However, in
many domains where coalitions are associated with tasks, an agent may be involved in executing
more than one task, and thus may distribute his resources among several coalitions. To tackle such
scenarios, we introduce a model for cooperative games with overlapping coalitions—or overlap-
ping coalition formation (OCF) games. We then explore the issue of stability in this setting. In
particular, we introduce a notion of the core, which generalizes the corresponding notion in the
traditional (non-overlapping) scenario. Then, under some quite general conditions, we characterize
the elements of the core, and show that any element of the core maximizes the social welfare. We
also introduce a concept of balancedness for overlapping coalitional games, and use it to charac-
terize coalition structures that can be extended to elements of the core. Finally, we generalize the
notion of convexity to our setting, and show that under some natural assumptions convex games
have a non-empty core. Moreover, we introduce two alternative notions of stability in OCF that
allow a wider range of deviations, and explore the relationships among the corresponding deﬁni-
tions of the core, as well as the classic (non-overlapping) core and the Aubin core. We illustrate the
general properties of the three cores, and also study them from a computational perspective, thus
obtaining additional insights into their fundamental structure.
1. Introduction
Coalition formation, widely studied in game theory and economics (Myerson, 1991), has attracted
much attention in AI as means of forming teams of autonomous selﬁsh agents that need to cooperate
to perform certain tasks (Sandholm & Lesser, 1997; Shehory & Kraus, 1998; Sandholm, Larson,
Andersson, Shehory, & Tohme, 1999; Manisterski, Sarne, & Kraus, 2008; Rahwan, Ramchurn,
Jennings, & Giovannucci, 2009). Traditionally, in the game theory literature it is assumed that the
outcome of the coalition formation process is either the grand coalition (i.e., the set of all agents), or
a coalition structure that consists of disjoint coalitions (i.e., a partition of the set of agents). While
natural for some settings, in many scenarios of interest this assumption is not applicable.
c⃝2010 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
Speciﬁcally, it is often natural to associate coalitions with tasks to be performed by the agents. In
such situations, some agents may be involved in several tasks, and therefore may need to distribute
their resources among the coalitions in which they participate. Indeed, such “overlaps” may be
necessary to obtain a good outcome, and are natural in a plethora of interesting applications. As
a simple e-commerce example, consider online trading agents representing individuals or virtual
enterprises, and facing the challenge of allocating their owners’ capital to a variety of projects
(i.e., coalitions) simultaneously. There are many other examples of settings in which an agent (be
it a software entity or a human) splits his resources (such as processing power, time or money)
among several tasks. These tasks, in turn, may require the participation of more than one agent: a
computation may run on several servers, a software project usually involves more than one engineer,
and a start-up may rely on several investors. Thus, each task corresponds to a coalition of agents,
but agents’ contributions to those coalitions may be fractional, and, moreover, agents can participate
in several tasks at once, resulting in coalition structures with overlapping coalitions. The formation
of overlapping coalitions is particularly prevalent in systems demanding multiagent or multirobot
coordination, computational grid networks, and sensor networks—see, e.g., the work of Patel et
al. (2005), and Dang, Dash, Rogers, & Jennings (2006). To date, however, there has been essentially
no theoretical treatment of the topic, with just a few exceptions (which we discuss in Section 3).
Against this background, the goal of this paper is to introduce and study a model that explicitly
takes overlapping coalition formation (OCF) into account. Our model is applicable in situations
where agents need to allocate different parts of their resources to simultaneously serve different
tasks as members of different coalitions. Besides allowing for overlapping coalitions, it departs
from the conventional coalition formation framework in two important aspects. First, there is no
inherent superadditivity assumption in our work, and hence the grand coalition does not always
emerge. Thus, our subsequent deﬁnition of the core incorporates coalition structures. Second, ex-
actly because we are interested in outcomes other than the grand coalition formation, we do not
use the standard transferable utility (TU) framework, where agents can make arbitrary payments to
each other. Instead, following the seminal paper by Aumann and Dreze (1974), we allow arbitrary
monetary transfers within coalitions, but not cross-coalitional transfers. That is, an agent not con-
tributing to a coalition should not expect to receive payoff from it. Indeed, as argued by Aumann
and Dreze, the inability of some of the agents to work together and share payoffs may be one of the
primary reasons why the grand coalition does not form, and a particular coalition structure arises.
Finally, our model can take task (coalitional action) execution explicitly into account; this facilitates
possible extensions to tackle coalition formation under uncertainty.1
Apart from deﬁning a model for overlapping coalition formation, the main contribution of this
work is exploring the stability concept of the core in the OCF setting. We suggest three different
notions of the core, depending on the nature of deviations allowed, since, as we shall see, the
range of permissible deviations in an overlapping setting can be much richer than in the traditional
non-overlapping one. More speciﬁcally, the deﬁnition of stability depends on whether a deviator
who reduced his contribution to some—but not all—coalitions, expects to get any payoff from the
coalitions that he did not abandon completely.
To provide more intuition, consider the example of two construction companies, 1 and 2, who
are currently partners (not necessarily the only partners) working on construction projects A (“build-
ing a university campus”) and B (“building a hospital”). Assume that partner 1 has more stakes in
1. To simplify notation, we only show how to incorporate coalitional actions in the model in Section 10.
180

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
project B, expecting to extract from it a great value, and has contributed to it 75% of its available re-
sources, contributing the remaining 25% to A; while partner 2 contributes most of its resources (say
67%) to project A and the remaining fraction (say 33%) to B. Thus, they currently participate in two
overlapping coalitions, each one performing a different task. Now, if partner 2 feels unhappy about
the current payoff division arrangement, it might consider abandoning project A (by cancelling the
project if it is the project leader, or by taking advantage of some contractual exit clause) in order to
commit its resources to a more proﬁtable to 2 project (say C). However, by doing so, it might hurt
project A’s chances of completion. Does this mean that 2’s actions will trigger the spite of company
1, which might use available means to kick 2 out of project B? And what if company 2 lowered
its degree of participation in A instead of withdrawing completely? How much of the proﬁts from
completing A would 2 then be entitled to? The different answers one can provide to these ques-
tions correspond to different notions of proﬁtable deviations, and, therefore, to different notions of
core-stability. In particular, we demonstrate that the core notions we put forward in this paper are
substantially different from each other with respect to the sets of outcomes they characterize.
Our main technical results involve the c-core, the ﬁrst core concept that we suggest. Among the
three concepts of the core introduced in this paper, the c-core is the closest to the standard deﬁnition
of the core in general non-transferable utility (NTU) games. In particular, we provide conditions
for the existence of the c-core as follows. Under quite general assumptions, we ﬁrst provide a
characterization for outcomes, i.e., pairs of the form (overlapping coalition structure, imputation),
to be in the c-core. Our proof is based on a graph-theoretic argument, which may be of independent
interest. As a corollary of this result, we show that any outcome in the c-core maximizes the social
welfare. Second, we characterize coalition structures that admit payoff allocations such that the
resulting outcome is in the c-core. This is done by generalizing the Bondareva-Shapley theorem
to our setting (note that this theorem does not hold for arbitrary non-transferable utility games).
Furthermore, we extend the notion of convexity in coalitional games to overlapping coalitions, and
show that under mild assumptions any convex OCF game has a non-empty c-core.
We then discuss the properties of all three versions of the OCF-core we suggest, and relate
them to each other and to the classic core. We also demonstrate how our model and core con-
cepts differ from fuzzy coalitional games (Aubin, 1981); though relevant to that model, our work
is fundamentally different. In addition, we initiate the study of computational aspects of stability
in the overlapping setting. Note that the computational analysis of coalitional games, even in non-
overlapping scenarios, is hindered by the fact that, in general, coalitional games do not possess a
compact representation, as one may have to list the value of every possible coalition. Thus, the ex-
isting work on algorithmic aspects of coalitional games focused on game representations that are ei-
ther incomplete—such as, e.g., weighted voting games (Elkind, Goldberg, Goldberg, & Wooldridge,
2009), induced subgraph games (Deng & Papadimitriou, 1994), or network ﬂow games (Bachrach
& Rosenschein, 2007)—or are only guaranteed to be succinct for speciﬁc subclasses of games, such
as MC-nets (Ieong & Shoham, 2005) or coalitional skill games (Bachrach & Rosenschein, 2008);
another approach is to show complexity bounds for all games representable by polynomial-sized
circuits (Greco, Malizia, Palopoli, & Scarcello, 2009). This issue is even more severe in the OCF
setting, as now we have to specify the value of every partial coalition. Therefore, in this paper,
we follow the ﬁrst of these approaches, and introduce a formalism of threshold task games that is
capable of describing a large family of overlapping coalition formation settings in a succinct man-
ner. Within this formalism, we obtain both negative and positive results regarding the complexity of
181

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
deciding the questions of membership and non-emptiness for our OCF-core concepts. We conclude
by describing some natural extensions of our model and suggesting directions for future work.2
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the basic concepts in cooperative game theory re-
garding non-overlapping coalition structures. To begin, let N = {1, . . . , n} be a set of players (or
“agents”). A subset S ⊆N is called a coalition. A coalition structure (CS) in non-overlapping
environments is a partition of the set of agents.
Under the assumption of transferable utility, coalition formation can be abstracted into a fairly
simple model. This assumption postulates the existence of a (divisible) commodity (e.g., “money”)
that can be freely transferred among players. The role of the characteristic function of a coalitional
game with transferable utility (TU-game) is to specify a single number denoting the worth of a
coalition. Formally, a characteristic function v : 2N 7→R deﬁnes the value v(S) of each coalition
S (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944). A transferable utility game G is completely speciﬁed by
the set of players N and the characteristic function v; we can therefore write G = (N, v).
While the characteristic function describes the payoffs available to coalitions, it does not pre-
scribe a way of distributing these payoffs. This is captured by the notion of an imputation, deﬁned as
follows. We say that an allocation is a vector of payoffs x = (x1, . . . , xn) assigning some payoff to
each j ∈N. An allocation x is efﬁcient with respect to a coalition structure CS if P
j∈S xj = v(S)
for all S ∈CS; and it is called an imputation if it is efﬁcient and satisﬁes individual rationality, i.e.,
xj ≥v({j}) for j = 1, . . . , n. The set of all imputations of CS is denoted by I(CS).
Now, when rational agents seek to maximize their individual payoffs, the stability of the un-
derlying coalition structure becomes critical, as agents might be tempted to abandon agreements in
pursuit of further gains for themselves. A structure is stable only if the outcomes attained by the
coalitions and the payoff combinations agreed to by the agents satisfy both individual and group
rationality. Given this requirement, research in coalition formation has developed several notions of
stability, among the strongest and the most well-studied ones being the core (Gillies, 1953). Taking
coalition structures into account, the core of a TU game is a set of outcomes (CS, x), x ∈I(CS),
such that no subgroup of agents is motivated to depart from their coalitions in CS.
Deﬁnition 1. Let CS be a coalition structure, and let x ∈Rn be an allocation of payoffs to the
agents. The core of a TU game (N, v) is the set of all pairs (CS, x) such that x ∈I(CS) and for
any S ⊆N it holds that P
j∈S xj ≥v(S).
Hence, no coalition would ever “block” the proposal for a core allocation. It is well-known that
the core is a strong notion, and there exist many games where it is empty (Myerson, 1991).
The core deﬁnition above is essentially the deﬁnition provided by Sandholm and Lesser (1997)
(and is also very similar to the one given by Dieckmann & Schwalbe, 1998). If we assume super-
additivity of the characteristic function (i.e., v(U ∪T) ≥v(U) + v(T) for any disjoint coalitions U
and T) then in the deﬁnition above we may only consider outcomes where CS is simply the grand
2. Parts of this work, namely the model and the statement of some of our results, have appeared in a preliminary
conference paper (Chalkiadakis, Elkind, Markakis, & Jennings, 2008). However, (a) the introduction of alternative
notions of the core and all related results presented here are entirely novel; (b) similarly, our complexity-related
results are entirely novel; and (c) the discussion on the properties of the cores and the in-depth comparison with
fuzzy coalitional games appear here for the ﬁrst time as well.
182

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
coalition and P
j∈N xj = v(N). The core deﬁnition then becomes the traditional deﬁnition that has
been used in the vast majority of the economics literature (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994).
The environments of interest in our work however are mainly non-superadditive and we will
not make any such assumption on the characteristic function. Indeed, there is a plethora of realistic
application scenarios where the emergence of the grand coalition is either not guaranteed, might be
perceivably harmful, or is plainly impossible (Sandholm & Lesser, 1997; Sandholm et al., 1999).
In addition to such motivations, Aumann and Dreze (1974) also provide a thorough and insightful
discussion on why coalition structures arise: they put forward a series of arguments on how this
might happen, and explain that coalition structures may emerge naturally even in superadditive
environments for a variety of reasons. Brieﬂy, their arguments describe how a subset of agents
might ﬁnd it more worthwhile to bargain within the framework of a speciﬁc structure, than within
the framework of the grand coalition; or how the emergence of a coalition structure may reﬂect
considerations that are by necessity excluded from the formal description of the game because they
are impossible to measure or communicate. Exogenous arguments for the emergence of coalition
structures naturally include the impossibility of communication among all negotiators, or the by law
prohibition of the grand coalition (Aumann & Dreze, 1974).
3. Related Work
The work that is most relevant to ours is the research on fuzzy coalitional games, introduced by
Aubin (1981). Branzei, Dimitrov, & Tijs (2005) also provide a detailed exposition of such games.
A player in a fuzzy game can participate in a coalition at various levels, and the value of a coalition
S depends on the participation levels of the agents in S. Given this model, Aubin then deﬁnes the
core for fuzzy games (also referred to as the Aubin core). Though our model also allows for partial
participation in a coalition, there are several crucial differences between fuzzy games and OCF
games, and the corresponding notions of stability. We postpone listing these until after presenting
our model and results, but will do so in Section 8.2. For now, let us just point out that, in distinction
to our work, the formation of coalition structures (overlapping or not) is not addressed in the fuzzy
games literature.
Apart from fuzzy games, very little work exists on overlapping coalition formation settings.
Here we discuss some notable exceptions, as well as some related work on the core in the context
of non-overlapping coalition structures.
To begin, Shehory and Kraus (1996) present a setting for overlapping coalition formation. In
their model, the agents have goals and capabilities—i.e., abilities to execute certain actions. To
serve their goals, the agents have to participate in coalitions, to each of which they contribute some
of their capabilities, which can thus be thought of as resources. The authors then propose heuristic
algorithms that lead to the creation of overlapping coalition structures. However, the authors stop
short of addressing the question of the stability of overlapping coalitions. Dang et al. (2006) also
examine heuristic algorithms for overlapping coalition formation to be used in surveillance multi-
sensor networks. However, their work does not deal with payoff allocation issues, and does not
view the overlapping coalition formation problem from a game-theoretic perspective.
Conconi and Perroni (2001) present a model of international multidimensional policy coordi-
nation in a non-cooperative setting: agreement structures between countries can be overlapping,
namely a country may participate in multiple agreements, by contributing any number of proposed
“elementary strategies” (which can be regarded as being chosen from discrete sets of resources).
183

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
They then introduce an equilibrium concept to describe stability in this setting. However, in con-
trast to our work, the setting in the work of Conconi and Perroni is non-cooperative, and does not
apply to agents with continuous resources.
More recently, Albizuri, Aurrecoechea, & Zarzuelo (2006) presented an extension of Owen’s
value (1977)—which, in turn, can be thought of as a generalization of the Shapley value (1953)—to
an overlapping coalition formation setting. Speciﬁcally, they present an axiomatic characterization
of their conﬁguration value. However, in the work of Albizuri et al. there exists no notion of
resources that an agent needs to distribute across coalitions.
With regard to non-overlapping coalition structures as presented in Section 2, Sandholm and
Lesser (1997) examine the problem of allocating computational resources to coalitions. They do not
restrict themselves to superadditive settings, but discuss the stability of coalition structures instead.
In particular, they introduce a notion of bounded rational core that explicitly takes into account coali-
tion structures. Apt & Radzik (2006) and Apt & Witzel (2009) also do not restrain themselves to
coalition formation problems where the outcome is the grand coalition only. Instead, they introduce
various stability notions for abstract games whose outcomes can be coalition structures, and discuss
simple transformations (e.g., split and merge rules) by which stable partitions of the set of players
may emerge. However, none of these papers considers any extensions to overlapping coalitions.
4. Our Model
In this section we extend the traditional model of Section 2 to cooperative games with overlapping
coalitions. In most scenarios of interest, even if overlapping coalitions are allowed, an agent would
not be able to participate in all possible coalitions due to lack of time, cash ﬂow, or energy. To model
this, we assume that each agent possesses a certain amount of resources which he can distribute
among the coalitions he joins. Without loss of generality, we can make a normalization and assume
that each agent has one unit of resource: an agent’s contribution to a coalition is thus given by the
fraction of his resources that he allocates to it. We can also think of this as the agent’s “participation
level”, or the fraction of time he devotes to a coalition. Of course, an agent may own several types
of resources (e.g., time and money), and his contribution to a coalition would then be described
by a vector rather than a scalar. Our model, and all of our results, extend to this more general
setting in a straightforward manner. Nevertheless, for conciseness, we restrict our presentation to
the single-resource setting.
As discussed above, in the non-overlapping model a coalition is a subset of agents, and a game
is deﬁned by its characteristic function v : 2N 7→R, representing the maximum total payoff that
a coalition can get. In our setting, a partial coalition is given by a vector r = (r1, . . . , rn), where
rj is the fraction of agent j’s resources contributed to this coalition (rj = 0 means that j is not a
member of the coalition). The support of a partial coalition r is denoted by supp(r) and is deﬁned
as supp(r) = {j ∈N | rj ̸= 0}. We can now deﬁne the cooperative games with overlapping
coalitions, or overlapping coalition formation games (OCF-games for short), which we will be
considering in the rest of this work.
Deﬁnition 2. An OCF-game G with player set N = {1, . . . , n} is given by a function v : [0, 1]n →
R, where v(0n) = 0.
Function v maps each partial coalition r to the corresponding payoff. We denote this game by
G = (N, v), or, if N is clear from the context, simply by v. Clearly, a “classic” coalition S ⊆N
184

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
can now be represented as the vector eS, where (eS)j = 1 for j ∈S and 0 otherwise. In the
economics literature, these are sometimes called crisp coalitions, whereas coalitions of the form
(r1, . . . , rn) with at least one rj in (0, 1) are referred to as fuzzy coalitions (Branzei et al., 2005).
We will avoid the latter term in our work so as not to cause confusion with fuzzy games, and refer
instead to coalitions of this kind as partial coalitions, or simply coalitions.
In most scenarios of interest, v is monotone, i.e., satisﬁes v(r) ≥v(r′) for any r, r′ such that
rj ≥r′
j for all j = 1, . . . , n. Note that if v is monotone, we have v(r) ≥0 for any r ∈[0, 1]n, since
we set v(0, . . . , 0) = 0. In our discussion of stability of overlapping coalitions, we will assume that
v is monotone.
We now need to specify the possible outcomes of an OCF-game. In the non-overlapping setting,
an outcome is a pair (CS, x), where CS is a partition on N and x is an imputation for CS. To
extend this deﬁnition to our scenario, we start by introducing the notion of a coalition structure
with overlapping coalitions. While we will be mostly interested in coalition structures over N, the
deﬁnition below is given for coalition structures over an arbitrary subset T ⊆N, as this will be
useful for deﬁning the maximum proﬁt a subset of agents can achieve (see the deﬁnition of the
function v∗below).
Deﬁnition 3. For a set of agents T ⊆N, a coalition structure on T is a ﬁnite list of vectors
(partial coalitions) CS T = (r1, . . . , rk) that satisﬁes (i) ri ∈[0, 1]n; (ii) supp(ri) ⊆T for all
i = 1, . . . , k; and (iii) Pk
i=1 ri
j ≤1 for all j ∈T. We will refer to k as the size of the coalition
structure CS T and write |CS T | = k. Also, CST denotes the set of all coalition structures on T.
In the deﬁnition above, each ri = (ri
1, ri
2, . . . , ri
n) corresponds to some partial coalition (ri
j
being the fraction of the resources that agent j contributes to ri). The constraints state that every
agent from T distributes at most one unit of his resources among the various coalitions he partici-
pates in (those may include the singleton coalition). This allows coalitions to be overlapping. Note
that the coalition structure is a list rather than a set, i.e., it can contain two or more identical partial
coalitions. Observe also that an agent is not required to allocate all of his resources, i.e., it can be
the case that Pk
i=1 ri
j < 1. However, under monotonicity, we can assume that for each agent j we
have Pk
i=1 ri
j = 1 (i.e., a coalition structure is a fractional partition of the agents).
We would like to remark that one could conceive of other models that also allow agents to form
overlapping coalitions. As an example, instead of requiring agents to distribute at most one unit of
resources among partial coalitions, we could have constraints on the number of (crisp) coalitions
an agent could take part in. While we believe that our model is ﬂexible enough to represent a wide
range of realisitc scenarios, and we focus on it throughout our work, in Section 10, we discuss
several extensions of our model.
The introduction of overlapping coalition structures imposes some new technical challenges.
For instance, while in the non-overlapping setting the number of different coalition structures is
ﬁnite, in our setting there can be inﬁnitely many different partial coalitions, and hence inﬁnitely
many coalition structures. This implies that it is impossible to ﬁnd the social welfare-maximizing
coalition structure by enumerating all candidate solutions—in fact, the maximum may not even be
attained. In contrast, in a non-OCF setting this approach is possible—though, in general, infeasible.
We now extend the deﬁnition of v to coalition structures by setting v(CS) = P
r∈CS v(r).
Furthermore, for any S ⊆N we deﬁne v∗(S) = supCS∈CSS v(CS). Intuitively, v∗(S) is the
least upper bound on the value that the members of S can achieve by forming a coalition structure;
for the interested reader, we note that it corresponds to the characteristic function of the game’s
185

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
superadditive cover (Aumann & Dreze, 1974). Clearly, v∗(S) may exceed the value of coalition
S itself, i.e., v(eS), since it may be proﬁtable for the players in S to form several overlapping
coalitions over S. We say that v is bounded if v∗(N) < ∞; for most games of interest, v is likely
to be bounded.
As in our setting the agents will not necessarily form the grand coalition, we will be interested
in reasoning about coalition structures from CSN. The coalition structure will impose restrictions
on admissible ways of distributing the gains; a payoff vector corresponds to an imputation if and
only if it is obtained by distributing the value of each coalition:
Deﬁnition 4. Given a coalition structure CS ∈CSN, |CS| = k, an imputation for CS is a k-tuple
x = (x1, . . . , xk), where xi ∈Rn for i = 1, . . . , k, such that
• (Payoff Distribution) for every partial coalition ri ∈CS we have Pn
j=1 xi
j = v(ri) and ri
j =
0 implies xi
j = 0;
• (Individual Rationality) the total payoff of agent j is at least as large as what he can achieve
on his own: Pk
i=1 xi
j ≥v∗({j}).
The set of all imputations for CS is denoted by I(CS). Notice that in Deﬁnition 4, the proﬁt
from a task assigned to a partial coalition is only distributed among agents involved in executing it.
Thus, no transfers of that payoff are allowed to outsiders. Note also that the individual rationality
constraint is deﬁned in terms of v∗rather than v, as even for a single agent it may be proﬁtable to
split into several partial coalitions (e.g., if there are many tasks, each of which only requires a small
fraction of his resources).
Now, the set of outcomes that is of interest to us is the set of feasible agreements:
Deﬁnition 5. A feasible agreement (or an outcome) for a set of agents J ⊆N is a tuple (CS, x)
where CS ∈CSJ, |CS| = k for some k ∈N, and x = (x1, . . . , xk) ∈I(CS). We denote the set
of all feasible agreements for J by F(J).
The payoff pj of an agent j under a feasible agreement (CS, x) is pj(CS, x) = Pk
i=1 xi
j. We
write p(CS, x) to denote the vector (p1(CS, x), . . . , pn(CS, x)). Finally, note that it is straight-
forward to extend the deﬁnitions above to games on subsets of the agents. In particular, we require
that an imputation x ∈I(CS J) satisﬁes xi
j = 0 for j ̸∈J.
Given this model, we are now ready to deﬁne the concept of the core for cooperative games with
overlapping coalitions.
5. The Core with Overlapping Coalitions
In this section, we investigate several approaches to deﬁning stability in OCF-games. Speciﬁcally,
here we propose and analyze three alternative deﬁnitions of the core.
Before presenting the core deﬁnitions, we deﬁne a new class of games, which we will be using
as our running example, namely the class of threshold task games (TTGs). TTGs form a simple,
but expressive class of coalitional games, and can be used to model collaboration in multi-agent
systems. In TTGs agents pool resources in order to accomplish tasks, so the idea of agents con-
tributing resources to more than one task and thus participating in several coalitions simultaneously
is extremely natural in this context. Thus, and due to their simplicity, TTGs provide a convenient
vehicle for the study of core-stability in the overlapping setting, and we will be using them for this
purpose throughout the rest of the paper (though our work is not limited to this class of games).
186

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
5.1 Threshold Task Games
Threshold task games are deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 6. A threshold task game G = (N; w; t) is given by:
• a set of agents N = {1, . . . , n};
• a vector w = (w1, . . . , wn) ∈R+ of the agents’ weights;
• a list t = (t1, . . . , tm) of task types, where each task type tj is described by a threshold
T j ≥0 and a utility uj ≥0; we write tj = (T j, uj).
Intuitively, such games describe scenarios where agents can split into teams to work on tasks.
There is one type of resource (e.g., time or money) that is needed for all tasks, and each agent has
a certain amount of this resource which corresponds to his weight wi (we chose the term “weight”
to avoid confusion with the use of the term “resource” in the context of OCF-games). There are m
types of tasks, each of which is described by a resource requirement T j and a utility uj. If the team
of agents that works on tj has total weight at least T j, this means that it has sufﬁcient resources to
complete the task, so it obtains the full value of this task uj. Otherwise, its payoff from this task is
0. We assume that there are inﬁnitely many tasks of each type, so that if one team of agents chooses
to work on tj, this does not prevent another team from choosing tj as well. In what follows, we
assume that the list t is monotone, i.e., it satisﬁes T 1 < . . . < T m and u1 < . . . < um. Indeed, if
there are two task types ti, tj such that T i ≤T j, but ui ≥uj, we can safely assume that no team
of agents will choose to work on tj, and hence tj can be deleted from t. Hence, our monotonicity
assumption can be made without loss of generality.
The description above suggests that we can interpret a TTG G = (N, w, t) as a (non-overlapping)
coalitional game ˆG = (N, ˆv), where for S ⊆N we set
ˆv(S) = max{0, max{uj | w(S) ≥T j}}
(note that we use the standard convention max ∅= −∞). Such games provide a direct general-
ization of weighted voting games (WVGs) with coalition structures introduced by Elkind, Chalki-
adakis, & Jennings (2008). Indeed, WVGs with coalition structures can be seen as TTGs in which
there is only one task type t = t1 with utility 1.
At the same time, one can also interpret TTGs as games with overlapping coalitions by allowing
each agent to spread his weight across several tasks. The corresponding OCF-game ˇG = (N, ˇv) is
given by
ˇv(r1, . . . , rn) = max{0, max{uj |
n
X
i=1
riwi ≥T j}}.
That is, a partial coalition can successfully complete a task of type tj and earn its value uj if the
total weight contributed by all agents to this partial coalition is at least T j.
Example 1. Consider a TTG G = (N; w; t), where N = {1, 2, 3}, w = (2, 2, 2) and t =
t1 = (3, 1). For the corresponding non-overlapping game ˆG we have ˆv({1}) = 0, ˆv({1, 2}) =
ˆv({1, 2, 3}) = 1. Note that when overlapping coalitions are not allowed, the maximum social
welfare achievable by any coalition structure over N is 1, as agents cannot split into two disjoint
groups each of which having weight at least 3.
187

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
In contrast, for the corresponding OCF-game ˇG = (N, ˇv) we have ˇv(1, 0, 0) = 0, ˇv(1, 1, 0) =
ˇv(1, 1, 1) = 1, and, moreover, ˇv(1, .5, 0) = 1 and ˇv(0, .5, 1) = 1. Hence the maximum social
welfare is 2 in the overlapping setting since the second agent can split his weight between two
coalitions so that each of them has enough resources to complete the task.
From Example 1, it should be clear that for any TTG G, the maximum social welfare achievable
in its overlapping version ˇG is at least as large as the maximum social welfare in its non-overlapping
version ˆG—i.e., allowing agents to split their weights between the tasks can only increase efﬁciency.
Moreover, this increase can be arbitrarily large even for a single agent. Indeed, consider one agent
of weight w and one task type t with T = 1, u = 1. If overlapping coalitions are not allowed,
the agent’s total utility is 1, while in the overlapping scenario he can obtain w. For the interested
reader, Appendix A discusses algorithmic aspects of social welfare maximization in TTGs, both in
the overlapping and in the non-overlapping scenario.
5.2 Three Deﬁnitions of the Core
As explained in Section 2 above, core-stability implies that no group of agents should be able to
proﬁtably deviate from a conﬁguration in the core. Hence, any deﬁnition of the core has to depend
on the notion of permissible deviations used. Now, in the non-overlapping setting a deviator aban-
dons the coalition he originally participated in, and joins a new coalition. Thus, there is no reason
why he should obtain any payoff from the coalition that he left. In the overlapping setting, the situ-
ation is less clear-cut. Indeed, when deviating, an agent may abandon some coalitions completely,
withdraw some—but not all—of his contribution to other coalitions, and keep his contribution to
the remaining coalitions unchanged. The question then is whether this agent should expect to obtain
any payoff from the partial coalitions with non-deviators that he is still contributing to.
Our ﬁrst notion of the core assumes that the answer to this question is “no”. Thus, once an
agent is identiﬁed as a deviator—i.e., he alters his contribution to any given coalition—he no longer
expects to beneﬁt from his cooperation with non-deviators. By monotonicity, this means that the
deviators have nothing to gain from contributing resources to coalitions with non-deviators. There-
fore, under the ﬁrst deﬁnition of the core which we present here, we assume that the deviators only
form coalitions among themselves, or, in other words, each deviation can be seen as an overlapping
coalition structure over the set of deviators. We remark that this deﬁnition can be seen as the most
straightforward generalization of the standard notion of the core: indeed, just as in the standard
setting, each deviator completely withdraws from coalitions with non-deviators, and only beneﬁts
from coalitions with other deviators. We formalize this approach as follows.
Deﬁnition 7. Given an OCF-game G = (N, v) and a set of agents J ⊆N, let (CS, x) and
(CS ′, y) be two outcomes of G such that for any partial coalition sℓ∈CS ′ either supp(sℓ) ⊆J
or supp(sℓ) ⊆N \ J. Then we say that (CS′, y) is a proﬁtable deviation of J from (CS, x) if for
all j ∈J we have pj(CS ′, y) > pj(CS, x). We say that an outcome (CS, x) is in the core of G if
no subset of agents J has a proﬁtable deviation from it. That is, for any set of agents J ⊆N, any
coalition structure CS J on J, and any imputation y ∈I(CS J), we have pj(CS J, y) ≤pj(CS, x)
for some agent j ∈J.
In this deﬁnition, the deviation CS ′ is restricted to be a coalition structure in which there are
no partial coalitions involving both the deviators and the non-deviators—i.e., each partial coalition
contains either deviators only (supp(sℓ) ⊆J) or non-deviators only (supp(sℓ) ⊆N \ J). Thus,
188

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
any payoff that the players in J can receive under CS ′ would have to come from partial coalitions
over J only.
Example 2. Consider the OCF-game ˇG that corresponds to a threshold task game G = (N; w; t),
where N = {1, 2}, w = (4, 6), and t = (t1, t2) with t1 = (5, 15), t2 = (4, 10) (one can think of
the players as the two companies A and B discussed in Section 1; the tasks then correspond to the
two construction projects). Suppose that the players form two partial coalitions r1 and r2 of total
weight 5 each so that player 1 contributes a unit of weight to r1 and 3 units of weight to r2, while
player 2 contributes 4 units of weight to r1, and 2 units of weight to r2, that is, CS = (r1, r2),
where r1 = (1
4, 2
3), r2 = (3
4, 1
3). Both of these partial coalitions have weight 5, so each of them can
successfully complete t1, resulting in a payoff of 15 for each of them. Now, suppose that the players
divide the gains using an imputation x = ((7, 8), (9, 6)). Then, the total payoff obtained by player
2 is 14, so he can successfully deviate by withdrawing from both of these coalitions, and forming a
single partial coalition of weight 5. This coalition can complete t1 and receive a payoff of 15 > 14.
On the other hand, suppose that the players keep the same coalition structure, but distribute the
gains as y = ((7, 8), (8, 7)). Then player 2 can no longer gain by withdrawing from both of these
coalitions. He is tempted to withdraw his resources from r1, as he can use these 4 units of weight
to complete t2 and earn u2 = 10 > 8. However, if he does that, he can no longer get his share of
payoffs from r2. Hence, in case of this deviation his total payoff will be 10 < 15. Also, it is easy
to see that player 2 cannot gain by deviating from r2 only, and player 1 is better off in CS than he
would be on his own. Hence, (CS, y) is in the OCF-core of ˇG.
In some sense, Deﬁnition 7 takes a rather pessimistic, or conservative, view on what the mem-
bers of the deviating group can expect to get from the non-deviators: indeed, in Example 2 as soon
as player 2 withdraws from the partial coalition r1 ∈CS he expects to be thrown out of r2, even
though r2 is not affected by this deviation. Therefore, in what follows, we will refer to the notion of
proﬁtable deviation introduced in Deﬁnition 7 as a c-proﬁtable deviation, and to the corresponding
notion of the core as the conservative core, or the c-core.
This deﬁnition is applicable when a deviation by an agent is interpreted by other agents as an
indicator that this agent is not trustworthy, and therefore one should immediately stop all collab-
oration with him. While this kind of reaction is not unusual, there may be coalitions that are not
affected by the deviation and may not want to punish the deviators. In this case, the deviators need
to decide which of the existing coalitions to abandon and for which existing coalitions to keep their
contribution intact. The members of these partial coalitions will react accordingly, sharing the pay-
off as before if they have not been affected by the deviation and punishing the deviators otherwise.
Therefore, we refer to the corresponding notion of the core as reﬁned. Before giving the formal
deﬁnition, we ﬁrst introduce a notion of agreement between two coalition structures.
Deﬁnition 8. Given a set of agents J ⊆N, we say that two coalition structures CS and CS ′ over
N agree outside of J with respect to a function f if f is a a bijection between the lists of partial
coalitions {ri ∈CS | supp(ri) ⊈J} and {sℓ∈CS ′ | supp(sℓ) ⊈J} such that f(ri) = sℓ
implies ri
j = sℓ
j for all j /∈J. Further, we say that CS and CS ′ agree outside of J if they agree
outside of J with respect to some function f.
Intuitively, this deﬁnition says that if two coalition structures agree outside of J, then the con-
tributions of all players not in J to all partial coalitions must be the same under both outcomes.
If J is the set of deviators, this condition captures the fact that the deviation by the players in J
189

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
does not change the behavior of the non-deviators; the function f is used to establish a correspon-
dence between the partial coalitions involving the non-deviators before and after the deviation. For
illustration, consider the following example.
Example 3. Consider a game with three players N = {1, 2, 3} and a coalition structure CS =
(q1, q2), where q1 = (1, 1
2, 1
2), q2 = (0, 1
2, 1
2). Let CS ′ = (s1, s2, s3), where s1 = (0, 0, 1
2),
s2 = (0, 1
2, 1
2), s3 = (1, 1
2, 0). Intuitively, CS ′ can be obtained from CS when players 1 and 2
deviate by abandoning their joint project with player 3 and forming a coalition of their own. Set
J = {1, 2}. It is not hard to see that CS and CS ′ agree outside of J with respect to the function
f given by f(q1) = s1, f(q2) = s2. On the other hand, CS and CS ′ also agree outside of J
with respect to the function f′ given by f′(q1) = s2, f′(q2) = s1; this function assumes that when
players 1 and 2 decided to deviate, player 1 withdrew his contribution to q1 and player 2 withdrew
his contribution to q2.
Deﬁnition 9. Given an OCF-game G = (N, v) and a set of agents J ⊆N, let (CS, x) and (CS ′, y)
be two outcomes such that CS and CS ′ agree outside of J with respect to a function f. Suppose
that for any partial coalition sℓ∈CS ′ with supp(sℓ) ⊈J and for all j ∈J we have yℓ
j = xi
j
if ri = f−1(sℓ) and yℓ
j = 0 otherwise. Then we say that (CS ′, y) is an r-proﬁtable deviation of
J from (CS, x) w.r.t. f if for all j ∈J we have pj(CS ′, y) > pj(CS, x). Further, we say that
(CS ′, y) is an r-proﬁtable deviation of J from (CS, x) if there exists a function f such that CS and
CS ′ agree outside of J with respect to f and (CS ′, y) is an r-proﬁtable deviation of J from (CS, x)
w.r.t. f. We say that an outcome (CS, x) is in the reﬁned core, or the r-core, of G if no subset of
agents J posesses an r-proﬁtable deviation from it.
In Deﬁnition 9, the bijection f matches the partial coalitions in CS and CS ′ that involve non-
deviators; the number of such coalitions is the same in both coalition structures. Moreover, the
contribution of the non-deviators to the partial coalitions matched by f is the same in CS and CS ′.
Now, if also the deviators do not change their contribution to some partial coalition r, they can
claim their share of its payoff, as determined by x. On the other hand, if the deviators change their
contribution to r, they are not entitled to any of its payoff. Observe that we allow the deviators
to pick the “most favourable” bijection f between CS and CS ′: for instance, in the context of
Example 3 we would pick f rather than f′, thereby allowing the deviators to claim their payoff from
the coalition (0, 1
2, 1
2). In other words, we assume that the deviators will withdraw their contributions
to disturb the non-deviators as little as possible.
Example 4. Consider the game ˇG and the outcome (CS, y) as described in Example 2. While it has
been argued that player 2 cannot c-proﬁtably deviate from (CS, y), he can r-proﬁtably deviate from
it by withdrawing his weight from r1 and dedicating it to t2. As he does not change his contribution
to r2, he can still claim the payoff he gets from r2, so his total payoff is 10 + 7 = 17 > 15.
On the other hand, suppose that players 1 and 2 both split their weights equally between two
partial coalitions, forming the structure CS ′ = (q1, q2), where q1 = q2 = (1
2, 1
2). Clearly, both
q1 and q2 have weight 5, so each of them can earn 15 by completing t1. Now, suppose that the
players distribute the gains using an imputation x′ = ((3, 12), (12, 3)). Now, both players earn
15, so none of them can beneﬁt from withdrawing from both partial coalitions at the same time,
and therefore the outcome (CS ′, x′) is in the c-core. Moreover, if any of the players deviates from
one coalition only, he does not have enough weight to complete any of the tasks, and therefore the
outcome (CS ′, x′) is also in the r-core.
190

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
We now provide another example, which suggests that the set of proﬁtable deviations allowed
by Deﬁnition 9 may still be too small.
Example 5. Consider again the game ˇG and a coalition structure CS ′′ = (s1, s2), where player 1
contributes all of his weight to s1, while player 2 contributes 3 units of weight to s1 and 3 units of
weight to s2, i.e., s1 = (1, 1
2), s2 = (0, 1
2). Observe that we have v(s2) = 0, as the total weight
of s2 is 3 only. Now, consider an imputation z = ((3, 12), (0, 0)). Note that player 2 could reduce
his contribution to s1 by 2 units of weight without affecting the value of this coalition, and use this
weight to boost the value of s2. However, this is not allowed by our deﬁnition of an r-proﬁtable
deviation, since as soon as player 2 alters his contribution to s1, he loses the payoff of 12 that he
gets from s1. This does not mean, however, that the outcome (CS ′′, z) is in the r-core of ˇG: players
1 and 2 can collectively deviate to ((1, 1
6), (0, 5
6)). If they share the payoff as ((4, 11), (0, 15)), this
will constitute an r-proﬁtable deviation for both of them.
Example 5 demonstrates that Deﬁnition 9, while being considerably more lax with respect to
the deviators than Deﬁnition 7, can still be too strict: the deviators are punished as soon as they
reduce their contribution to a coalition, irrespective of whether it affects the value of this coalition.
In fact, according to Deﬁnition 9, the deviators would still be punished even if they increase their
contribution to a partial coalition with non-deviators (though this type of deviation is, of course,
unlikely). One way to ﬁx this is to allow the deviators to claim their share of payoffs from a
coalition sℓ= f(ri) as long as v(sℓ) = v(ri). However, the non-deviators can be even more
generous to deviators. Indeed, it can be the case that after the deviators reduce their contribution
to a particular partial coalition, this coalition is still able to perform some task, albeit of a smaller
value. If the value of this task is still larger than the total amount of payoff originally received by
the non-deviators from this partial coalition, the deviators could be allowed to claim the “leftover”
payoff. In other words, this notion of deviation assumes that the non-deviators have no objection to
switching tasks, and only care about the payoff they receive. While this may well be the case, it is
quite optimistic of the deviators to expect this kind of reaction when they contemplate whether to
deviate. Therefore, we refer to this notion of deviation as o-proﬁtable, and call the corresponding
solution concept the optimistic core, or the o-core.
Deﬁnition 10. Given an OCF-game G = (N, v) and a set of agents J ⊆N, let (CS, x) and
(CS ′, y) be two outcomes such that CS and CS ′ agree outside of J with respect to a function f.
Suppose also that for any partial coalition sℓ∈CS′ with supp(sℓ) ⊈J we have P
j∈J yℓ
j =
max{v(sℓ) −P
k∈N\J xi
k, 0}, where ri = f−1(sℓ). We say that (CS ′, y) is an o-proﬁtable devia-
tion of J from (CS, x) w.r.t. f if for all j ∈J we have pj(CS′, y) > pj(CS, x). Further, we say
that (CS ′, y) is an o-proﬁtable deviation of J from (CS, x) if there exists a function f such that CS
and CS ′ agree outside of J with respect to f and (CS ′, y) is an o-proﬁtable deviation of J from
(CS, x) w.r.t. f. We say that an outcome (CS, x) is in the optimistic core, or the o-core, of G if no
subset of agents J has an o-proﬁtable deviation from it.
Example 6. Consider again the game ˇG discussed in Examples 2, 4, and 5, and the outcome
(CS ′, x′), where CS ′ = (q1, q2), q1 = q2 = (1
2, 1
2), x′ = ((3, 12), (12, 3)), which was described
in Example 4. Note that if player 2 reduces his contribution to q1 to 2, this coalition would still
be able to earn 10 by focusing on task t2. As player 1 only gets 3 units of payoff from q1 anyway,
under our deﬁnition of an o-proﬁtable deviation, player 2 is entitled to the remaining payoff from
this modiﬁed partial coalition, i.e., 10 −3 = 7. He can then combine the unit of weight saved in
191

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
this manner with the weight he contributes to q2, and embark on t2 making a proﬁt of 10. Thus,
by abandoning q2 altogether and reducing his contribution to q1, player 2 can earn 7 + 10 > 15.
Thus, the outcome (CS ′, x′) is not in the o-core of ˇG.
In contrast, consider an outcome that combines CS with a more symmetric payoff division
scheme, such as, e.g., y = ((7, 8), (8, 7)). Now, if player 2 reduces his contribution to q1 by 1, the
resulting partial coalition can earn 10 by focusing on t2. Of those payoffs, player 1 must receive 7,
leaving 3 for player 2. While player 2 can still use his remaining weight to complete t2, this will
only give him a total proﬁt of 10 + 3 = 13 < 15, i.e., this deviation is not o-proﬁtable. Similarly, we
can show that withdrawing some of the resources from q2 and abandoning q1 is even less proﬁtable
for player 2. Finally, it is easy to see that player 1 does not have an o-proﬁtable deviation either.
Hence, the outcome (CS ′, y) is in the o-core of ( ˇG).
6. Core Characterization
In the previous section, we introduced three deﬁnitions of the core for overlapping coalition forma-
tion games. Among the three deﬁnitions of the core, the c-core, though in some sense conservative,
is the closest to the traditional deﬁnition of the core in general NTU games (Osborne & Rubinstein,
1994). Indeed, unlike the other two deﬁnitions, it does not assume any interaction between the devi-
ators and the non-deviators. This motivates us to study this overlapping core variant in more detail,
which we proceed to do in this section and the next. To promote readability, in those two sections
we will be referring to the c-core simply as “the core”.
We start by providing a characterization of the set of outcomes in the core: essentially, an
outcome is in the core if and only if under this outcome the total payments to each subset of agents
match or exceed the maximum value that can be achieved by this subset. Our proof relies on
some technical restrictions on the function v that deﬁnes the game. In particular, we require v to be
continuous, monotone and bounded (observe that if a game is monotone and bounded, then v∗(S) <
∞for any S ⊆N), as well as to satisfy another natural restriction deﬁned later. These assumptions
allow us to avoid some pathological situations that may arise in our model at its generality, such as
the supremum v∗(N) being unachievable (e.g., if v is strictly concave in one of its arguments, it can
be the case that no ﬁnite coalition structure can achieve v∗(N)).
Speciﬁcally, we say that a game (N, v) is U-ﬁnite if for any (CS, x) such that |CS| > U and
x ∈I(CS), there exists a (CS ′, y) such that |CS ′| ≤U, y ∈I(CS ′), and pj(CS, x) ≤pj(CS ′, y)
for all j = 1, . . . , n (i.e., for any outcome (CS, x) with more than U coalitions there exists another
outcome (CS ′, y) with at most U coalitions that is weakly prefered to (CS, x) by all agents).
When this condition holds, we can assume that all coalition structures that arise in a game consist
of at most U partial coalitions. This is a natural restriction in many practical scenarios, as it might
be difﬁcult for agents to maintain a very complicated collaboration pattern. It holds when, for
example, there is a bound on the number of partial coalitions each agent can be involved in. In
general U-ﬁniteness imposes some upper bound on the total number of partial coalitions with the
same support that can occur. A natural example is provided by a class of games where for any two
partial coalitions r, r′ such that supp(r) = supp(r′) and rj + r′
j ≤1 for any j = 1, . . . , n, we
have v(r + r′) ≥v(r) + v(r′). Note that in such games we can assume that no coalition structure
contains two partial coalitions with the same support S, as it is at least as proﬁtable for the players
in S to merge these partial coalitions. (However, notice that this does not imply superadditivity,
192

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
nor does it mean that the grand coalition necessarily emerges, as the criterion above refers only to
coalitions with identical support.) Hence, any such game is 2n-ﬁnite.
Remark 1. Note that in all of our results U can be a function of n (as long as U(n) < ∞).
Alternatively, instead of imposing the condition of U-ﬁniteness on v(·), we could restrict the set of
allowed outcomes (or potential deviations) to coalition structures with at most U partial coalitions.
All of our results hold under this model as well.
We now state and prove the ﬁrst of our main results.
Theorem 1. Given a game (N, v), where v is monotone, continuous, bounded, and U-ﬁnite for
some U ∈N, an outcome (CS, x) is in the c-core of (N, v) if and only if for all S ⊆N
X
j∈S
pj(CS, x) ≥v∗(S).
(1)
Proof. For the “if” direction, suppose that (CS, x) satisﬁes P
j∈S pj(CS, x) ≥v∗(S) for all S ⊆
N. Assume for the sake of contradiction that (CS, x) is not in the core, i.e., there exists a set S, a
coalition structure CS S ∈CSS and an imputation y ∈I(CS S) such that pj(CS S, y) > pj(CS, x)
for all j ∈S. Then we have v(CS S) = P
j∈S pj(CS S, y) > P
j∈S pj(CS, x) ≥v∗(S), a
contradiction with the way v∗(S) was deﬁned.
For the “only if” direction, consider an outcome (CS, x) that does not satisfy (1); we will show
that (CS, x) is not in the core. To begin, set p = p(CS, x), and assume P
j∈S pj < v∗(S) for some
S ⊆N. To show that (CS, x) is not in the core, we will construct a set S′, a coalition structure
CS S′ ∈CSS′ and an imputation y ∈I(CS S′) such that pj(CS S′, y) > pj for all j ∈S′. Fix a
set S that satisﬁes P
j∈S pj < v∗(S). Choose ε small enough so that P
j∈S pj < v∗(S) −ε, and
let CSε
S = {CS S ∈CSS | v(CS S) ≥v∗(S) −ε}. By deﬁnition of v∗(S), there is an inﬁnite
sequence of coalition structures CS (t) that satisﬁes limt→∞v(CS (t)) = v∗(S), so the set CSε
S is
non-empty. Given a coalition structure CS S ∈CSS, an imputation y ∈I(CS S) and a respective
payoff vector q = p(CS S, y), deﬁne the total loss TL(CS S, q) of (CS S, q) as P
j:pj>qj(pj −qj).
Set TLmin = inf{TL(CS S, q) | CS S ∈CSǫ
S, y ∈I(CS S), q = p(CS S, y)}. First, we prove that
there exists a coalition structure CS ∈CSε
S and an imputation y ∈I(CS S) that achieve the total
loss of TLmin.
Lemma 1. Under the theorem’s conditions, there exists a CS S ∈CSǫ
S, an imputation y ∈I(CS S)
and a payoff vector q = p(CS S, y) s.t. TL(CS S, q) = TLmin.
Proof. By deﬁnition of TLmin, there exists an inﬁnite sequence of coalition structures CS (t)
S , t =
1, . . . , ∞, and respective imputations y(t), t = 1, . . . , ∞, such that
lim
t→∞TL(CS (t), p(CS (t), y(t))) = TLmin
and CS (t)
S
∈CSǫ
S for all t = 1, . . . , ∞. As the game is U-ﬁnite, a coalition structure can be
seen as a list of at most U vectors in [0, 1]n. By adding all-zero partial coalitions if necessary, we
can assume that each coalition structure is a list of exactly U vectors in [0, 1]n, which are ordered
lexicographically. As v is monotone and bounded, there exists a B > 0 such that the value of each
partial coalition in any of the CS (t)
S is between 0 and B. Consequently, each y(t) corresponds to a
193

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
vector in [0, B]nU. Hence, the sequence (CS (t)
S , y(t)), t = 1, . . . , ∞can be viewed as a subset of
[0, B]K(for sufﬁciently large but ﬁnite value of K) and hence has a limit point, which we denote by
(CS ∗, y∗). It is easy to see that the limit of a sequence of coalition structures is a coalition structure,
i.e., for any ri ∈CS ∗we have r ∈[0, 1]n, and for any j = 1, . . . , n it holds that PU
i=1 ri
j ≤1.
Moreover, by continuity of v, the value of each partial coalition in CS ∗is the limit of the values
of the respective partial coalitions in CS (t)
S , t = 1, . . . , ∞. From this, it is easy to see that y∗is in
I(CS ∗). Also, as all CS (t)
S are in CSε
S, so is CS ∗. Finally, as p(·, ·) and TL(·, ·) are continuous
functions of their arguments, we conclude that TL(CS ∗, p(CS ∗, y∗)) = TLmin.
Continuing with the proof of our Theorem, let (CS S, y) be an outcome that satisﬁes v(CS S) ≥
v∗(S) −ε, TL(CS S, p(CS S, y)) = TLmin, whose existence is guaranteed by Lemma 1. Set
q = p(CS S, y). Let us now construct a directed graph Γ whose vertices are the agents and there
is an edge from j to i if there exists a coalition in CS S containing both j and i such that under y,
agent j gets a non-zero payoff from that coalition, i.e., for some rk ∈CS S we have rk
j , rk
i > 0
and yk
j > 0. Observe that if there is an edge (j, i) in Γ, we can change yk by increasing the
payoff to i by a small enough δ and decreasing the payoff to j by the same value of δ without
violating the constraints, i.e., we have z = (z1, . . . , zt) ∈I(CS S), where zl = yl for l ̸= k and
zk = (yk
1, . . . , yk
j −δ, . . . , yk
i + δ, . . . , yk
n). Now, color all vertices of Γ as follows: a vertex j is red
if the agent j is underpaid under y, i.e., qj < pj, white if j is indifferent, i.e., qj = pj, and green if
he is overpaid, i.e., qj > pj. As P
j∈S pj < v∗(S) −ε and P
j∈S qj = v(CS S) ≥v∗(S) −ε, the
graph contains at least one green vertex. As argued above, if there is a path from a green vertex j
to a red vertex i, we can transfer a small amount of payoff from j to i and hence decrease the total
loss, which is a contradiction with our choice of (CS S, y). Hence, given an arbitrary green vertex
j, the set of all vertices reachable from j in the graph, which we denote by R(j), can only contain
green or white vertices.
We would now like to argue that the agents in R(j) can successfully deviate from (CS, x).
Indeed, let CS ′ be the coalition structure that consists of the coalitions that the agents in R(j) form
among themselves in CS S. Clearly, the value of CS ′ is equal to the total value of the coalitions
formed by these agents in CS S. Note also that under (CS S, y), the agents in R(j) do not get any
payoffs from coalitions that involve agents not in R(j). Indeed, suppose that an i ∈R(j) gets a
non-zero payoff from a coalition that involves an agent k ̸∈R(j). Then in Γ there is an edge from
i to k, a contradiction with how R(j) was constructed. In other words, in CS S, the payoffs that the
agents in R(j) get come only from the coalitions that they form among themselves, and yet these
agents are all green or white, i.e., each of them is doing no worse than what he was doing under CS,
and some of them (in particular, agent j) are doing strictly better. To ﬁnish the proof, let the agents
in R(j) distribute the payoffs in the same way as in (CS S, y), except that player j transfers a small
fraction of his payoffs to each of the white players in R(j) (this is possible by construction). The
last step ensures that each agent in R(j) is strictly better off than in (CS, x). This demonstrates that
(CS, x) is not in the core, as required.
Remark 2. Note that we did not have to make use of the additional restrictions we imposed on v
to prove the “if” direction of the theorem (these are used in the proof of Lemma 1). Hence, this
implication holds for an arbitrary G.
It is easily veriﬁable that Theorem 1 holds in the non-overlapping case with coalition structures
as well. The result is trivial to prove in that setting, as each agent’s payoffs come from just one
194

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
coalition; in contrast, we had to use more involved combinatorial arguments for transferring payoffs
among agents. We also get the following interesting result as a corollary:
Corollary 1. By setting S = N in the statement of Theorem 1, we conclude that any outcome in the
c-core maximizes the social welfare.
We now turn our attention to characterizing the set of coalition structures CS that admit payoff
allocations x such that the corresponding tuple (CS, x) belongs to the core. That is, while in
Theorem 1 we saw a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for a tuple (CS, x) to belong to the core,
suppose that we are now only given a structure CS = (r1, . . . , rk) and we want to check whether
there exists some payoff allocation x such that (CS, x) belongs to the core. Our characterization
can be seen as a generalization of the notion of balancedness in the context of overlapping coalition
formation. In the classic setting, the analogous question is “when does the grand coalition admit
a payoff allocation in the core”, answered by Bondareva (1963) and Shapley (1967). Before we
proceed to our result, we deﬁne balancedness with respect to a coalition structure.
Deﬁnition 11. Fix a coalition structure CS = (r1, . . . , rk), k ∈N, and let K = {1, ..., k}. A
collection of numbers {λS}S⊆N, {µi}i∈K is called balanced w.r.t. the given coalition structure CS
if and only if λS ≥0 for all S, and P
S:j∈S λS + µi = 1 for all i ∈K, j ∈supp(ri).
Deﬁnition 12. A game is called balanced w.r.t. a coalition structure CS = (r1, ..., rk) if and only
if for every collection {λS}S⊆N, {µi}i∈K that is balanced w.r.t. CS it holds that P
S λSv∗(S) +
Pk
i=1 µiv(ri) ≤v∗(N).
The proof of the following theorem is based on LP-duality, and relies on the characterization
result of Theorem 1; furthermore, the proof illustrates that the condition of balancedness introduced
above arises rather naturally.
Theorem 2. Let (N, v) be an OCF-game, where v is monotone, continuous, bounded, and U-ﬁnite
for some U ∈N and consider a coalition structure CS = (r1, ..., rk), for some k ∈N. There exists
an imputation x s.t. (CS, x) belongs to the c-core if and only if the game is balanced w.r.t. CS.
Proof. Suppose there exists a payoff allocation x such that (CS, x) belongs to the core, and let
K = {1, . . . , k}. Then the following linear program (denoted as LP) has an optimal solution:
min
P
i∈K,j∈N xij
s.t.
P
j∈S
P
i:j∈supp(ri) xij ≥v∗(S)
∀S ⊆N
P
j xij = v(ri)
∀i ∈K
The ﬁrst constraint expresses the condition of Theorem 1, and the second the fact that the payoff
of each partial coalition needs to be distributed exactly. Note that we have no variables xij if
j ̸∈supp(ri)—recall Deﬁnition 4. These are precisely the conditions that need to be satisﬁed for
(CS, x) to be in the core and clearly the optimal value of the LP is v∗(N) (using the ﬁrst constraint
and Corollary 1). By the LP-duality theorem, this means that the dual program also has an optimal
solution of value v∗(N). The dual is given by:
max
P
S λSv∗(S) + Pk
i=1 µiv(ri)
s.t.
P
S:j∈S λS + µi = 1
∀i ∈K, j ∈supp(ri)
λS ≥0
∀S ⊆N
195

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
Hence for any feasible solution of the dual, the value of the objective function is at most v∗(N),
which implies that for any balanced collection {λS}S⊆N, {µi}i∈K, it holds that P
S λSv∗(S) +
Pk
i=1 µiv(ri) ≤v∗(N).
For the other direction, suppose that for any balanced collection, the above holds. This means
that for any feasible solution, the value of the dual is at most v∗(N). Therefore the dual is both
bounded and feasible (setting µi = 1 and the rest to 0 is feasible), which implies that it has an
optimal solution. But then the primal program also has an optimal solution x and this means by
Theorem 1 that (CS, x) belongs to the core.
Remark 3. In the traditional superadditive setting, the condition of balancedness is somewhat
simpler and more intuitive. In our setting, the characterization leads to a slightly more complicated
expression, essentially due to the fact that the linear program that describes core allocations for
each coalition structure requires a larger set of constraints.
7. Convex OCF-Games Have a Non-Empty Core
In this section, we ﬁrst generalize the notion of convexity to OCF-games and then proceed to show
that it provides a sufﬁcient condition for non-emptiness of the c-core.
Recall that for classical TU-games convexity means that for R ⊆N and S ⊂T ⊆N \ R it
holds that v(S ∪R) −v(S) ≤v(T ∪R) −v(T). Thus, convexity in the classic TU-games setting
means that it is more useful for a coalition R to join a larger coalition than a smaller one. We now
apply this intuition to our setting (recall that F(S) denotes the set of all feasible agreements for S):
Deﬁnition 13. An OCF-game G = (N, v) is convex if for each R ⊆N and S ⊂T ⊆N \ R
the following condition holds: for any (CS S, xS) ∈F(S), any (CS T , xT ) ∈F(T), and any
(CS S∪R, xS∪R) ∈F(S ∪R) that satisﬁes pj(CS S∪R, xS∪R) ≥pj(CS S, xS) ∀j ∈S, there exists
an outcome (CS T∪R, xT∪R) ∈F(T ∪R) s.t.
pj(CS T∪R, xT∪R)
≥
pj(CS T , xT )
∀j ∈T, and
pj(CS T∪R, xT∪R)
≥
pj(CS S∪R, xS∪R)
∀j ∈R.
This deﬁnition is similar in ﬂavour to that provided by Suijs and Borm (1999), where a general-
ization of convexity is deﬁned in the context of stochastic cooperative games. The intuition behind
this deﬁnition is as follows: Consider two ﬁxed agreements, one on S and one on T respectively.
Any time that there is a feasible agreement on S ∪R that the members of S do not object to com-
pared to their own agreement (i.e., all members of S are weakly better off than in their previous
agreement), then there is a feasible agreement on T ∪R such that (i) the members of T do not ob-
ject to this agreement, compared to the previous agreement on T and (ii) the members of R weakly
prefer this agreement to the agreement on S ∪R.
We note that a different notion of convexity has been deﬁned for fuzzy games by Branzei,
Dimitrov, & Tijs (2003). That deﬁnition deals with the marginal contribution of a partial coalition
when joining another existing partial coalition, where the result of the join is a new partial coalition.
We, on the other hand, quantify the marginal contribution of adding a set of players R, to a set of
players T, w.r.t. the best overlapping coalition structure that the set R ∪T can form. Secondly, the
deﬁnition of Branzei et al., as well as the classic deﬁnition of convexity, simply enforce a property
on the function v(·), concerning the marginal contribution v(R ∪T)−v(T). In our case, our games
196

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
are not fully transferable and hence we cannot simply talk about the difference in values. Instead,
our deﬁnition has to enforce the existence of a coalition structure on R ∪T such that individually
every player is at least as well-off as in the coalition structure over R ∪S, where S ⊆T.
We now show that convexity is a sufﬁcient condition for the non-emptiness of the core, in
analogy to the classic result on convex TU-games (Shapley, 1971).
Theorem 3. If an OCF-game G = (N, v) is convex and v is continuous, bounded, monotone and
U-ﬁnite for some U ∈N, then the c-core of this game is not empty.
Proof. Let G = (N, v) be a convex OCF-game. For any S ⊆N, let GS be the restriction of
G on S. To prove the theorem, we explicitly construct an outcome (CS, x), x ∈I(CS), and
show that it belongs to the core of G: Fix an arbitrary ordering of the players 1, 2, . . . , n −1, n.
The construction takes place in rounds. First, let ˆp1 = v∗({1}), ˆp2 = v∗({2}); by assumptions
of the theorem and using arguments similar to those in the proof of Lemma 1, there exist coalition
structures in CS{1}, CS{2} that achieve these payoffs. Let CS 1 be the structure that achieves this for
player 1 in G{1}, and let x1 be the corresponding imputation. We know that there exists at least one
coalition structure CS 2 ∈CS{1,2} and a corresponding imputation x2 such that p1(CS 2, x2) ≥ˆp1,
p2(CS 2, x2) ≥ˆp2 (e.g., take the union of payoff-maximizing structures in G{1} and G{2}, and
combine the corresponding imputations). If there exist more than one such feasible agreement, we
pick the one most preferred by player 2. More formally, we choose a feasible agreement (CS 2, x2)
that maximizes the payoff p2(CS 2, x2) (which will be at least ˆp2) over all feasible agreements on
{1, 2} subject to p1(CS 2, x2) ≥p1(CS 1, x1) (by our assumptions on v(·), this maximum exists).
Now, let ˆp3 be the maximum payoff that agent 3 can get in G{3}. Again, there exists at least one
coalition structure CS 3 in CS{1,2,3} and a corresponding imputation x3 such that agents 1, 2 are
(weakly) better off than in (CS 2, x2), and 3 is also weakly better off than being on its own. If there
exist more than one such feasible agreement, we pick one that maximizes 3’s payoff, i.e., we pick
an agreement (CS 3, x3) so that p3(CS 3, x3) is maximized over all agreements on {1, 2, 3} subject
to the constraints p1(CS 3, x3) ≥p1(CS 2, x2), p2(CS 3, x3) ≥p2(CS 2, x2).
Continuing in the same manner, at every round k we pick an outcome (CS k, xk) that maximizes
pk(CS k, xk) subject to constraints pi(CS k, xk) ≥pi(CS k−1, xk−1) for i ∈{1, ..., k −1}; the
assumptions on v(·) ensure that all these maxima exist. In the end, we obtain a feasible agreement
(CS n, xn) on N in which all the agents are weakly better off than on their own, as well as weakly
better off compared to the agreements of the previous rounds.
We now show that (CS n, xn) belongs to the core of G. For this it sufﬁces to prove the following
stronger claim.
Claim 1. For k = 1, . . . , n, the feasible agreement (CS k, xk) belongs to the core of the game
G{1,...,k}.
Proof. We prove this by induction. For k = 1, it is obvious that (CS 1, x1) belongs to the core of
G{1}.
Now, suppose that for some m, 2 ≤m ≤n, we have (CS k, xk) ∈core(G{1,...,k}) for all
k < m. We will prove that (CS m, xm) is in the core of G{1,...,m}.
Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that this is not the case. Then there is a subset S ⊆
{1, ..., m} and (CS ∗, x∗) ∈F(S) such that
pi(CS ∗, x∗) > pi(CS m, xm) ∀i ∈S.
(2)
197

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
We consider three different cases for the members of S:
Case 1: m ̸∈S. In this case we know by construction that for all i ∈{1, . . . , m −1} we have
pi(CS m, xm) ≥pi(CS m−1, xm−1), which implies that pi(CS ∗, x∗) > pi(CS m−1, xm−1) for all
i ∈S. Hence, the tuple (CS ∗, x∗) is a deviation that makes the members of S strictly better off than
in the agreement (CS m−1, xm−1). But this is a contradiction since by induction (CS m−1, xm−1) ∈
core(G{1,...,m−1}).
Case 2: S = {1, . . . , m}. Now we will get a contradiction with how we constructed (CS m, xm).
Indeed, we chose (CS m, xm) to maximize pm(CS m, xm) subject to the constraints pi(CS m, xm)
≥pi(CS m−1, xm−1) for all i = 1, . . . , m −1. However, by (2), the outcome (CS ∗, x∗) also
satisﬁes these constraints and provides a higher payoff to m than (CS m, xm) does, a contradiction.
Case 3: S = S′ ∪{m}, where S′ is a strict subset of {1, . . . , m −1}. In this case we will utilize
convexity. Let CS ′ be the coalition structure that consists of the singleton coalitions for all agents of
S′, and let x′ be the corresponding imputation. By construction, (CS ∗, x∗) is a feasible agreement
on S′ ∪{m} such that pi(CS ∗, x∗) ≥pi(CS ′, x′) for all i ∈S′. Let T = {1, . . . , m −1}.
Since (CS m−1, xm−1) ∈F(T), by applying Def. 13 for S′ ⊆T and with R = {m}, we get
that there exists a feasible agreement (CS, x) on T ∪{m} = {1, . . . , m} such that pi(CS, x) ≥
pi(CS m−1, xm−1) for i = 1, . . . , m −1, and pm(CS, x) ≥pm(CS ∗, x∗). But then by (2) above
we get that pm(CS, x) > pm(CS m, xm), a contradiction with how we chose (CS m, xm).
Applying Claim 1 with k = n, we get that the core of G is non-empty.
In the traditional setting, if a game is represented using oracle access for v(S), there is a trivial
algorithm for computing an element of the core in convex games. Indeed, one can set the payoff
vector to be the vector of the marginal contributions of the agents for an arbitrary permutation of
the set of agents. In our setting, our proof does yield a procedure for constructing an element of the
core, though not a polynomial-time one. Our procedure requires solving a series of optimization
questions, which for arbitrary convex games are NP-hard. In the future, we would like to ﬁnd
classes of convex games where our proof yields a polynomial-time algorithm. In particular, looking
at our proof, this would be true for games in which we can solve in polynomial time the following
problem: Given a set of agents S ⊆N, a feasible agreement on S, an outcome (CS, x), and an
agent k ̸∈S, ﬁnd a feasible agreement (CS ′, y) on S ∪{k} that maximizes pk(CS ′, y) subject to
the constraints pj(CS ′, y) ≥pj(CS, x).
8. Properties of the Three Cores
Following the detailed study of the c-core stability concept in the previous two sections, in this
section we further explore the properties of our three notions of the OCF-core. In particular, we
investigate the relationships among these notions, and study the effects of allowing overlapping
coalition formation on the stability of the underlying game. We also compare our OCF model and
notions of the core to the fuzzy games setting and the notion of the fuzzy core (Aubin, 1981).
We start by exploring the connection between stability and social welfare maximization in
TTGs. As demonstrated earlier in the paper, in OCF-games these two properties are closely re-
lated. Indeed, Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 show that any outcome in the c-core of an OCF-game
maximizes the social welfare as long as the characteristic function of the game satisﬁes a number of
technical conditions; by Theorem 5 below the same holds for the r-core and the o-core. However,
as one of these conditions is continuity, this result does not directly apply to TTGs. While the proof
198

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
of Theorem 1 can be adapted to work for the TTG setting, there also exists a direct proof for the
following theorem.
Theorem 4. For any TTG G = (N; w; t) and any outcome (CS, x) ∈c-core( ˇG), we have
v(CS) ≥v(CS ′) for any coalition structure CS ′ ∈CSN.
Proof. Fix an outcome (CS, x) ∈c-core( ˇG), and let p be the payoff vector that corresponds to
(CS, x). Suppose that there exists a coalition structure CS ′ ∈CSN such that v(CS ′) > v(CS).
Let CS ′ = (r1, . . . , rk). For j = 1, . . . , k, let zj be the total weight of the partial coalition rj, i.e.,
set zj = rj
1w1 + · · · + rj
nwn.
Now, consider a coalition structure CS ′′ = (q1, . . . , qk) given by qj
i = zj/w(N) for all i ∈N,
all j = 1, . . . , k; note that we have Pk
j=1 qj
i ≤1. The total weight of a partial coalition qj can be
computed as P
i∈N qj
i wi = zj. Therefore, qj ∈CS′′ can accomplish the same task as rj ∈CS ′,
and hence v(CS ′′) = v(CS ′) > v(CS). Now, observe that since in CS ′′ all players contribute to
all partial coalitions, there are no restrictions on how the value of CS ′′ can be distributed among
the players. In particular, we can set δ = v(CS ′′)−v(CS)
n
, and construct an imputation y ∈I(CS ′′)
by setting yj
i =
v(rj)
v(CS ′′)(pi + δ). Indeed, we have P
i∈N yj
i = v(rj), Pk
j=1 yj
i = pi + δ. Now,
it is clear that the entire set of agents N can deviate from (CS, x) to (CS ′′, y); as they all deviate
simultaneously, this is a c-proﬁtable deviation, a contradiction with (CS, x) being in the c-core of
ˇG.
The discussion in Section 5.2 suggests a natural relationship between the three notions of a
successful deviation, and, consequently, between the three cores. (In what follows, we refer to the
outcomes in the c-core, r-core and o-core as c-stable, r-stable and o-stable, respectively.)
Theorem 5. For any OCF-game G, we have o-core(G) ⊆r-core(G) ⊆c-core(G). Moreover, these
containments can be strict, i.e., there exists an OCF-game G such that o-core(G) ⊂r-core(G) ⊂
c-core(G).
Proof. Observe that any c-proﬁtable deviation can be viewed as an r-proﬁtable deviation in which all
players abandon all coalitions they contributed to. Similarly, any r-proﬁtable deviation corresponds
to an o-proﬁtable deviation where whenever a deviator changes his contribution to coalition, he
withdraws all of his resources from it; note that, as illustrated by Example 5, the deviators’ payoff
in this o-proﬁtable deviation can be strictly higher than in the original r-proﬁtable deviation. It
follows that any outcome that is r-stable is also c-stable, and any outcome that is o-stable is also
r-stable, thus proving the ﬁrst part of the theorem.
To prove the second part of the theorem, consider the game ˇG described in Examples 2, 4, 5
and 6. We have demonstrated that the outcome (CS, x) is in c-core( ˇG) \ r-core( ˇG) and that the
outcome (CS ′, x′) is in r-core( ˇG) \ o-core( ˇG).
Theorem 5 shows that our three notions of stability can be substantially different with respect to
individual outcomes. However, it does not exclude the possibility that they are equivalent when seen
as notions of stability of the entire game, i.e., that for any OCF-game G we have c-core(G) ̸= ∅iff
r-core(G) ̸= ∅iff o-core(G) ̸= ∅. We will now show that this is not the case. The games used in
the proofs of the following two propositions are not threshold task games. However, they, too, can
be described in terms of agents’ weights and tasks.
199

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
Proposition 1. There exists an OCF-game G such that c-core(G) ̸= ∅while r-core(G) = ∅.
Proof. Consider an OCF-game G = (N, v) with seven agents N = {1, . . . , 7} whose weights are
given by w = (1, 1, 1, 1, 3, 3, 3), and two task types t1 and t2 with values 100 and 2, respectively.
The ﬁrst task can be completed in any of the following four ways:
• 1 unit of player 1’s weight and 2 units of player 5’s weight;
• 1 unit of player 2’s weight and 2 units of player 6’s weight;
• 1 unit of player 3’s weight and 2 units of player 7’s weight;
• 1 unit of player 4’s weight and 2 units of weight from either of the players 5, 6, or 7.
That is, v(r) = 100 if wiri ≥1 and wjrj ≥2, where
(i, j) ∈{(1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 7), (4, 5), (4, 6), (4, 7)}.
The second task t2 requires 2 units of weight in total from players 5, 6 and 7.
Consider a coalition structure CS = (r1, r2, r3, r4), given by
r1 = (1, 0, 0, 0, 2
3, 0, 0),
r2 = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 2
3, 0),
r3 = (0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 2
3),
r4 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1
3, 1
3, 0).
That is, partial coalitions r1, r2 and r3 successfully complete t1, while r4 successfully com-
pletes t2. Consider also an imputation x ∈I(CS) given by
x1 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 100, 0, 0),
x2 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 100, 0),
x3 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 100),
x4 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0).
Let p be the payoff vector that corresponds to x: we have p1 = p2 = p3 = p4 = 0, p5 =
p6 = 101, p7 = 100. It is not hard to see that (CS, x) ∈c-core(G). Indeed, suppose for the sake
of contradiction that there is a set of players J that can c-proﬁtably deviate from (CS, x). Since
(CS, x) maximizes the social welfare, the deviation cannot be simultaneously proﬁtable for all
players in N, so |J| < 7. Moreover, J cannot contain 2 or more players from the set S = {5, 6, 7}:
indeed, if one of these players deviates, he loses 100 units of payoff, which can only be replaced
if he forms a coalition with 4. However, since 4 cannot form two distinct coalitions of value 100
each, this is not possible. Therefore, J cannot contain any of the players in the set S: each of these
players already gets the maximum payoff from t1, and, since the other two players from S are not
in J, the set of deviators does not have enough resources for t2. Finally, there is no c-proﬁtable
deviation for players in N \ S, as no task can be completed by agents in N \ S only.
We will now show that the r-core of G is empty. Suppose otherwise, and let (CS ′, y) be an
outcome in the r-core of G. Let p be the payoff vector that corresponds to y. It is not hard to
show that any outcome in the r-core of G maximizes the social welfare; the proof is similar to that
of Theorem 4. Hence, we can assume without loss of generality that CS = (q1, q2, q3, q4) with
v(q1) = v(q2) = v(q3) = 100 and v(q4) = 2, and, moreover, q1
5 ≥2
3, q2
6 ≥2
3, q3
7 ≥2
3. It follows
200

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
that either (a) q1
1 = q2
2 = q3
3 = 1 or (b) qj
4 = 1 for some j ∈{1, 2, 3} and qi
i = 1 for i ∈{1, 2, 3},
i ̸= j. We say that a player i is useful for a coalition r if v(r′) < v(r), where r′ is given by r′
i = 0,
r′
j = rj for all j ̸= i. Observe that in an r-stable outcome no player can get any payoff from a
partial coalition for which he is not useful: otherwise the other members of that coalition, who can
complete the corresponding task on their own, can r-proﬁtably deviate. We will now show that we
have p1 = . . . = p4 = 0 both in case (a) and in case (b). Observe that by the argument above player
1 can get payoff from q1 only, player 2 can get payoff from q2 only, player 3 can get payoff from
q3 only, and player 4 can get payoff from exactly one of the coalitions q1, q2, and q3.
In case (a), we clearly have p4 = 0, as player 4 is not useful for any coalition in CS ′. Now, if,
e.g., y1
1 > 0, then y1
5 < 100, and players 4 and 5 can r-proﬁtably deviate by forming a coalition that
performs t1. Hence y1
1 = y2
2 = y3
3 = 0, and therefore p1 = p2 = p3 = 0. In case (b), assume
without loss of generality that q1
4 = 1. Then p1 = 0, as player 1 is not useful for any coalition
in CS ′, so y1
4 = 0, since otherwise players 1 and 5 can r-proﬁtably deviate, and, consequently,
p4 = 0. This implies that also y2
2 = y3
3 = 0: if, e.g., y2
2 > 0, then y2
6 < 100, and players 4 and
6 can r-proﬁtably deviate by forming a coalition that performs t1. Hence, in both cases we have
p1 = · · · = p4 = 0.
Now, as v(q4) = 2, we have y4
5 + y4
6 + y4
7 = 2, so at least one of the payoffs y4
5, y4
6 and y4
7 is
strictly positive. Assume without loss of generality that y4
5 = δ > 0. Then players 6, 7 and their
partners in q2 and q3 (i.e., players i′, i′′ such that q2
i′ = 1, q3
i′′ = 1) can r-proﬁtably deviate from
(CS ′, y) by forming a coalition structure CS ′′ = (s1, s2, s3), where s1 is given by
s1
i′ = 1,
s1
6 = 2
3,
s1
ℓ= 0 for ℓ̸= i′, 6,
s2 is given by
s2
i′′ = 1,
s2
7 = 2
3,
s2
ℓ= 0 for ℓ̸= i′′, 7,
and s3 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1
3, 1
3). We will now construct an imputation z for CS ′′ by setting z1
i′ =
z2
i′′ =
δ
4, z1
6 = z2
7 = 100 −δ
4, z3
6 = y4
6 + δ
2, z3
7 = y4
7 + δ
2, and zj
i = 0 for all (i, j) ̸=
(i′, 1), (6, 1), (i′′, 2), (7, 2), (6, 3), (7, 3). It is not hard to see that z ∈I(CS ′′), and, moreover,
the deviation (CS ′′, z) is r-proﬁtable for 6, 7, i′ and i′′. Hence, (CS ′, y) is not in the r-core of
G.
Proposition 2. There exists an OCF-game G such that r-core(G) ̸= ∅while o-core(G) = ∅.
Proof. Consider an OCF-game G = (N, v) with 3 agents N = {1, 2, 3} whose weights are given
by w = (8, 8, 8), and 2 task types t1 and t2. The ﬁrst task needs 6 units of weight from each player,
and has value 300, i.e. v(r1, r2, r3) = 300 if wiri ≥6 for i = 1, 2, 3. The second task needs 4 units
of weight in total from any of the players and has value 2.
Let CS = (r1, r2), where r1 =
¡7
8, 7
8, 6
8
¢
, r2 =
¡1
8, 1
8, 2
8
¢
. Clearly, v(r1) = 300, v(r2) = 2.
Consider also an imputation x ∈I(CS) given by x1 = (100, 100, 100), x2 = (0.5, 0.5, 1). It is
not hard to see that (CS, x) ∈r-core(G). Indeed, as CS maximizes the social welfare, there is no
deviation that will be simultaneously proﬁtable for all agents. Furthermore, if any agent withdraws
his contribution from r1, he will lose the associated payoff of 100 and no deviation can compensate
for this loss. Moreover, it is clear that withdrawing contribution from r2 cannot be proﬁtable either,
as there is no way to earn more than 2 = v(r2) with this amount of weight.
201

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
We will now show that G has an empty o-core. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there
exists an outcome (CS ′, y) ∈o-core(G). It is not hard to show that any outcome in the o-core of
G maximizes the social welfare; the proof is similar to that of Theorem 4. Hence, we can assume
that CS ′ = (q1, q2), where v(q1) = 300, v(q2) = 2, and, moreover, q1
i ≥6
8 for i = 1, 2, 3. We
have y2
1 + y2
2 + y2
3 = 2, so we can assume without loss of generality that y2
1 = δ > 0. This means
that players 2 and 3 can o-proﬁtably deviate from (CS ′, y) as follows: players 2 and 3 withdraw
q1
2w2 −6 and q1
3w3 −6 units of weight from q1, respectively (as argued above, we have q1
2w2 ≥6,
q1
3w3 ≥6), as well as their entire contribution to q2, and use these resources to complete t2. If they
divide the resulting payoff by allocating y2
2 + δ
2 to player 2 and y2
3 + δ
2 to player 3, this constitutes
an o-proﬁtable deviation for them. Thus, (CS ′, y) is not in the o-core of G.
Thus, so far in this section we investigated the relationships among our notions of the overlap-
ping core; it is also insightful to compare them to the non-overlapping and the fuzzy one. We now
proceed to do so.
8.1 Comparison with the Non-Overlapping Core
Given an OCF-game G = (N, v), we can deﬁne a non-overlapping game Gno = (N, vno) by
setting vno(C) = v(rC), where the partial coalition rC is given by rC
i = 1 if i ∈C and rC
i = 0
otherwise for all C ⊆N. Observe that for a threshold task game G applying this transformation to
its overlapping version ˇG gives us exactly its non-overlapping version ˆG. We can now compare the
core of the game Gno and the overlapping cores of the original game G. In particular, it is natural
to ask whether the core of Gno can be empty when the o-core of G (and hence by Theorem 5 also
the r-core and the c-core of G) is not, and vice versa, i.e., whether the c-core (the largest of the
overlapping cores) of G can be empty when the core of Gno is not. Interestingly, it turns out that the
answer to both of these questions is positive. We demonstrate this via examples based on threshold
task games; as argued above, for any such game G we have ˇGno = ˆG.
Proposition 3. There exists a TTG G with core( ˆG) = ∅, but o-core( ˇG) ̸= ∅.
Proof. Consider a threshold task game G = (N; w; t), where N = {1, 2, 3}, w = (2, 2, 2),
t = t1 = (3, 1). In ˆG, any coalition structure CS contains at most one coalition C with v(C) = 1.
Let p = (p1, p2, p3) be an imputation for CS. As v(CS) = 1, there exists some i ∈N with pi > 0.
Then the coalition C′ = N \ {i} can successfully deviate from (CS, p), as we have w(C′) = 4,
p(C′) = 1 −pi < 1. Hence, any outcome of ˆG is not stable.
In ˇG, the players can form two successful partial coalitions. Now, consider an outcome (CS, x),
where CS = (r1, r2) with r1 = (1, 1
2, 0), r2 = (0, 1
2, 1), and x1 = (2
3, 1
3, 0), x2 = (0, 1
3, 2
3). We
claim that (CS, x) is in the o-core of ˇG. Indeed, suppose for the sake of contradiction that there is
a group of players J that has an o-proﬁtable deviation from (CS, x). We have |J| ∈{1, 2, 3}. It is
easy to see that |J| ̸= 1: no player has enough weight to complete t1 on his own. Also, |J| ̸= 2: any
pair of players earns 4
3 in (CS, x), and on their own they can make at most 1 < 4
3. Finally, |J| ̸= 3,
as (CS, x) maximizes the social welfare. The contradiction completes the proof.
Intuitively, Proposition 3 holds because ˇG has more feasible outcomes than ˆG, and some of
these additional outcomes turn out to be stable. On the ﬂip side, ˇG allows for a wider range of
deviations, so an outcome that is stable with respect to ˆG may be unstable with respect to ˇG. Our
next proposition illustrates this.
202

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
Proposition 4. There exists a TTG G with c-core( ˇG) = ∅, but core( ˆG) ̸= ∅.
Proof. Consider a threshold task game G = (N; w; t), where N = {1, 2, 3}, w = (9, 1, 1),
t = (t1, t2) with t1 = (8, 100), t2 = (2, 1).
In ˆG, player 1 can work on task t1, while players 2 and 3 can cooperate on task t2, sharing the
proﬁts equally. Clearly, the resulting outcome is stable.
On the other hand, ˇG has no c-stable outcomes. Indeed, suppose that there is an outcome
(CS, x) in the c-core of ˇG, and let p be the corresponding payoff vector. By Theorem 4, CS
consists of two partial coalitions: r1, which completes t1, and r2, which completes t2. Hence,
v(CS) = 101. If p1 > 100, then p2 + p3 < 1, and hence players 2 and 3 can deviate by forming a
coalition r = (0, 1, 1) that can complete t2 and has value 1. If p1 < 100, player 1 can deviate by
forming a coalition r = (1, 0, 0) that can complete t1 and has value 100. Hence, we have p1 = 100,
p2 + p3 = 1, and therefore we can assume without loss of generality that p2 ≤1
2. Now, players
1 and 2 can deviate by forming a coalition structure CS′ = (8
9, 0, 0), (1
9, 1, 0) and distributing the
payoffs as ((100, 0, 0), (1
3, 2
3, 0)). We conclude that (CS, x) is not c-stable, a contradiction.
8.2 Comparison with Fuzzy Games
As mentioned earlier in this paper, Aubin (1981) introduces the notion of a fuzzy game, in which a
player can participate in a coalition at various levels, and the value of a coalition S depends on the
participation levels of its members. Thus, at a ﬁrst glance, the deﬁnition of a fuzzy game is identical
to the deﬁnition of an OCF-game, as both are given by characteristic functions deﬁned on [0, 1]n.
However, there are several crucial differences between fuzzy and OCF-games.
First, fuzzy games and OCF-games differ in their deﬁnition of an outcome. Indeed, while in
OCF-games an outcome is an (overlapping) coalition structure together with a list of payoff vectors,
in fuzzy games the only allowable outcome is the formation of the grand coalition. Furthermore, an
outcome of an OCF-core needs to be stable against any deviation of a set S to a (possibly overlap-
ping) coalition structure. In the Aubin core, outcomes need only be stable against a deviation to a
partial (“fuzzy”) coalition, but not necessarily against deviations to a coalition structure. Indeed, the
formation of coalition structures (overlapping or not) is not addressed in the fuzzy games literature.
One could try to represent games with overlapping coalition structures using the fuzzy games
formalism.
Indeed, given an OCF-game, we can construct a fuzzy game whose characteristic
function simulates the behaviour of the characteristic function of the original OCF-game on coali-
tion structures. Speciﬁcally, given any OCF-game G = (N, v), we deﬁne a related fuzzy game
G′ = (N, v′) as follows. For any r ∈[0, 1]n, we deﬁne
CSr = {(q1, . . . , qk) | k ≥1, qj
i ≥0 for i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , k,
k
X
j=1
qj
i = ri},
and set v′(r) = supCS∈CSr v(CS). That is, for each partial coalition r, v′ identiﬁes the best
coalition structure CS that can be obtained by splitting r into subcoalitions, and returns its value
v(CS). The resulting fuzzy game G′ is very similar to the original OCF-game G. For example, for
TTGs, this transformation would enable the members of the grand coalition to work on several tasks
simultaneously. More generally, given a TTG G, any outcome of ( ˇG)′ (i.e., a payoff vector for the
grand coalition) corresponds to a social-welfare maximizing outcome (CS, x) of ˇG and vice versa.
203

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
In fact, this relationship holds between any OCF-game G and the corresponding fuzzy game G′ as
long as the set {v(CS) | CS ∈CS(1,...,1)} is compact (and thus contains its least upper bound).
However, this approach fails to capture several delicate aspects of overlapping coalition forma-
tion. The main reason for this is that in the fuzzy game formulation, the actual set of tasks executed
by a partial coalition is implicit in the deﬁnition of the characteristic function. Indeed, an outcome
of the fuzzy game is simply a payoff vector, and while we are guaranteed that there is a set of tasks
that provides the corresponding total payoff, this set of tasks cannot be “read off” the description of
the outcome. This leads to a number of difﬁculties.
First, the fuzzy games formalism would not allow us to reason about partial coalition structures
with suboptimal social welfare. While by Theorem 4 such coalition structures are unlikely to be the
ﬁnal outcomes of a game, a dynamic coalition formation protocol may produce such partial coalition
structures as intermediate steps. Thus, using the language of fuzzy coalitions impairs our ability to
study the processes that lead to the formation of partial coalition structures. As such processes are
of great interest from the practical perspective, this is an important disadvantage of the fuzzy model.
Further, under the OCF representation, there is a one-to-one correspondence between partial
coalitions and tasks. This makes the OCF approach intuitively appealing, and suggests that it pro-
vides the right level of granularity for reasoning about partial coalition formation. Indeed, consider
our problem from a computational perspective in the context of TTGs. While under the OCF repre-
sentation ﬁnding a socially optimal coalition structure can be difﬁcult (see Appendix A), computing
the value of a given partial coalition r is straightforward: we simply pick the most valuable task
that can be completed using the resources posessed by r. In contrast, in the fuzzy game framework,
the two issues are intertwined, so even computing a partial coalition’s worth is a hard problem.
Even more importantly, the deﬁnition of the fuzzy core given by Aubin (1981) is not appropriate
for many natural scenarios, and, in particular, TTGs. Speciﬁcally, the fuzzy core of a fuzzy game
G = (N, v) is deﬁned as the set of all outcomes (N, p) such that p(N) = v(1, . . . , 1) and for any
partial coalition r it holds that Pn
i=1 piri ≥v(r). Essentially, this means that when a group of
players deviates from the grand coalition via a partial coalition r, each deviating player i receives
both her payoff from r, and her original payoff from the grand coalition, scaled down by a factor of
(1 −ri). Thus, the fuzzy core is even more “optimistic” from the deviators’ perspective than the o-
core. Indeed, the deviators do not worry what the grand coalition will be able to do once they leave.
They simply assume that if they withdraw, say, 40% of their resources, they will get 60% of what
they used to get. However, in many games—and, in particular, TTGs—if some players abandon the
grand coalition, the latter may not have sufﬁcient resources to complete any task. Clearly, in this
case the deviators could not possibly get any payoff from what remains of the grand coalition. Thus,
the fuzzy core may be empty, even if in practice the game is stable. The example in the proof of
Proposition 5 illustrates this.
Proposition 5. There exists a TTG G such that o-core( ˇG) ̸= ∅, but the fuzzy core of the corre-
sponding fuzzy game ( ˇG)′ is empty.
Proof. Consider a TTG G given by N = {1, 2}, w = (10, 10), and t = ((20, 20), (7, 9)), and the
induced OCF-game ˇG. The corresponding fuzzy game ( ˇG)′ = (N, v′) is given by
204

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
v′(r) =











20
if r1 + r2 = 2
18
if 1.4 ≤r1 + r2 < 2
9
if 0.7 ≤r1 + r2 < 1.4
0
if r1 + r2 < 0.7
It is not hard to see that the outcome (CS, x) of ˇG, where CS = r = (1, 1) and x = (10, 10) is
o-stable. Moreover, intuitively, it is clear that no rational agent or a coalition of agents would want
to deviate from this outcome. On the other hand, under the deﬁnition of the fuzzy core the outcome
(10, 10) of ( ˇG)′ is not stable: indeed, for q = (.7, .7) we have p1q1 + p2q2 = 14 < 18 = v′(q).
We will now prove that no outcome of ( ˇG)′ is in the fuzzy core. Observe that since v′(1, 1) =
20, any outcome of ( ˇG)′ is of the form (z1, z2), where z1 + z2 = 20. Clearly, any outcome with
z1 < 9 or z2 < 9 is unstable, as the partial coalition (1, 0) (respectively, (0, 1)) can proﬁtably
deviate from it. Thus we can assume that z1 ≥9, z2 ≥9, or, equivalently, z2 ≤11, z1 ≤11. Thus,
for the partial coalition q considered above, we have z1q1 + z2q2 ≤11 × 1.4 = 15.4 < 18 = v(q),
which means that (z1, z2) is not in the fuzzy core.
Remark 4. To remedy some of the difﬁculties illustrated above, we can devise a notion of stability
that is deﬁned within the framework of fuzzy games, yet is essentially equivalent to the c-core. Let
us say that an outcome p of G′ is f-stable if for any r ∈[0, 1]n we have v′(r) ≤P
i∈supp(r) pi,
and deﬁne the f-core of G′ to be the set of all f-stable outcomes of G′. Note that this deﬁnition is
different from the standard deﬁnition of the fuzzy core. For TTGs, one can show that an outcome
p of G′ is in the f-core of G′ if and only if the corresponding outcome (CS, x) of ˇG is in the c-
core of ˇG. The proof makes use of the fact that in TTGs one can distribute the proﬁt v′(r) of a
deviating partial coalition r among the members of supp(r) arbitrarily. (In more detail, one can
construct a partial coalition structure CS involving agents in supp(r) that performs tasks of total
value v′(r) so that each agent in supp(r) participates in each partial coalition in CS.) Moreover,
this equivalence is true for general OCF games whose characteristic functions satisfy some natural
regularity conditions; the proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 1. Unfortunately, while the f-core
provides an analogue of the c-core in the fuzzy game setup, it is not clear how to devise an analogue
of the r-core or the o-core for this setting. Indeed, to deﬁne these concepts, we would have to reason
about partial coalitions that are hurt by a deviation. However, the description of an outcome of
a fuzzy game does not indicate which partial coalitions a given player belongs to, so we cannot
determine which tasks will be affected by a deviation.
We conclude that there are natural settings where OCF-games provide a more realistic and
nuanced model than fuzzy games; threshold task games appear to be one such example.
9. Computational Aspects of Stability in Threshold Task Games
In this section, we investigate the computational complexity of core-related questions in TTGs. Our
goal here is twofold. First, TTGs provide a natural model of agent collaboration, and therefore it
is important to understand how to allocate resources in such games in a stable manner. Second,
our analysis highlights important differences between the three deﬁnitions of the core for games
with overlapping coalitions. In particular, the results presented in this section provide a complexity-
theoretic separation between the c-core, on one hand, and the r-core and the o-core, on the other
205

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
hand. We believe that results of this type are useful for building a better understanding of stability
in the context of general OCF games.
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, we make the usual assumption that all parameters of the
game—i.e., all weights, thresholds and task utilities—are integers given in binary. This assumption
can be made without loss of generality, and is necessary for a formal complexity-theoretic analysis.
9.1 Games with Non-Overlapping Coalitions
We start by analyzing the complexity of TTGs in the non-overlapping setting. As mentioned in
Section 5.1, such games can be seen as a generalization of weighted voting games with coalition
structures. Elkind, Chalkiadakis & Jennings (2008) show that several stability-related questions in
such games are computationally hard when weights are integers given in binary. Hence, we can
formulate the following proposition, whose proof follows immediately from those results.
Proposition 6. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t), it is coNP-hard to decide whether the corresponding
game ˆG has an empty core. Also, given an outcome (CS, p) of ˆG, it is coNP-complete to decide
whether (CS, p) is in the core of ˆG. These results hold even if there is only one task type, and the
utility of this task is 1.
On the other hand, Elkind et al. (2008) provide a polynomial-time algorithm for checking if an
outcome of a weighted voting game is in the core if weights are given in unary. That algorithm is
based on dynamic programming: given a weighted voting game G described by a set of players N,
a list of weights w and a threshold T, for each weight 1, . . . , w(N) it identiﬁes the minimum payoff
Pw to a coalition that has weight w, and then checks if Pw < 1 for some w ≥T.
It is not hard to see that a similar approach works for threshold task games as well. The only
complication is that for each weight w, in addition to computing the minimum payoff to a coalition
of this weight under the given imputation, we have to compute the maximum utility available to a
coalition of this weight, i.e., max{uj | w ≥T j}, and compare the two quantities. However, these
additional steps are very easy (in particular, they can be performed efﬁciently even if task utilities
are large). This gives us the following result.
Proposition 7. There exists an algorithm that, given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and an outcome (CS, p)
of ˆG, checks whether (CS, p) is in the core of ˆG and runs in time poly(w(N), |p|), where |p| is the
number of bits in the binary representation of p.
For weighted voting games with unary weights, Elkind et al. (2008) also show that, by con-
structing a linear program that uses the algorithm of Proposition 7 as an oracle, we can check in
polynomial time whether a given coalition structure CS can be stabilized, i.e., whether there exists
a payoff vector p ∈I(CS) such that (CS, p) is in the core. This algorithm can be easily adapted to
work for TTGs with unary weights. Hence, the question of whether a given coalition structure can
be stabilized is poly-time solvable for these games, too.
9.2 Games with Overlapping Coalitions
We will now show that, similarly to the non-overlapping case, if all weights, thresholds and utilities
in a TTG are integers given in binary, then it is computationally hard to check if a given outcome
of the corresponding OCF game is stable. Moreover, this hardness result holds for all three deﬁ-
nitions of stabilty, i.e., the c-core, the r-core, and the o-core. While these results are perhaps not
206

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
surprising given the similar result for the non-overlapping setting (i.e., Proposition 6 above), the
reason behind the computational hardness is quite different. Indeed, the reduction used in the proof
of Proposition 6 is based on PARTITION, a classic NP-hard problem which asks whether, given a
set of weights, we can split it into two sets of the same weight. Essentially, the proof proceeds by
constructing an outcome that is stable if and only if a certain subset of agents cannot be split into
two groups that have the same weight. This proof technique is unlikely to work in the overlapping
scenario, as one can always form two partial coalitions of the same weight by allowing all agents to
split their weight equally between two coalitions. Hence, the proof of the following theorem uses a
somewhat different approach.
Theorem 6. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and an outcome (CS, x) of the corresponding OCF game
ˇG, it is coNP-complete to decide whether (CS, x) is in the c-core of ˇG.
Proof. Our reduction is based on UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK, a well-known NP-hard problem. An
instance of UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK (Martello & Toth, 1990) is given by a set of ℓitems, where
each item i has a size si and a value zi, the knapsack size B and the target value Z. It is a “yes”-
instance if we can ﬁll the knapsack using an unlimited number of copies of each item so that the
total size of the resulting set of items is at most B, while their total value is at least Z, i.e., if there
is a vector of non-negative integers (α1, . . . , αℓ) such that Pℓ
i=1 αisi ≤B and Pℓ
i=1 αizi ≥Z.
Otherwise, it is a “no”-instance.
Consider an instance I = ((s1, . . . , sℓ); (z1, . . . , zℓ); B; Z) of UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK. We
can assume without loss of generality that sj < B, zj < Z for all j = 1, . . . , ℓ. Moreover, we can
assume that I is monotone, i.e., si ≤sj implies zi ≤zj. Indeed, if we have a pair of items such that
si ≤sj, but zi > zj, we can simply delete the jth item, as it is not used by any optimal solution.
We will now construct an instance of our problem as follows. Set N = {1} and let w1 = B.
Set t = (t1, t2, . . . , tℓ+1), where T j = sj, uj = zj for j = 1, . . . , ℓand T ℓ+1 = B, uℓ+1 = Z −1.
Due to our restrictions on I, the game G = (N; w; t) is a threshold task game.
Consider an outcome (CS, p) where CS consists of a single partial coalition r with r1 = 1
and p ∈I(CS). As B > sj for all j = 1, . . . , ℓ, this coalition executes the task tℓ+1 and receives
utility of Z −1. Hence, player 1 can c-proﬁtably deviate from (CS, p) if and only if he can ﬁnd a
collection of tasks whose total resource requirement is at most his weight B and whose total utility
is at least Z, i.e., if and only if we started with a “yes”-instance of UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK.
In the proof of Theorem 6 the outcome (CS, x) consists of a single partial coalition. Thus, any
r-proﬁtable deviation from (CS, x) is c-proﬁtable. This implies the following corollary.
Corollary 2. Given a TTG G and an outcome (CS, x) of the corresponding OCF game ˇG, it is
coNP-complete to decide if (CS, x) is in the r-core of ˇG.
For the o-core, the situation is somewhat more complicated. However, a more careful examination
of the proof of Theorem 6 allows us to obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 3. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and an outcome (CS, x) of the corresponding OCF
game ˇG, it is coNP-complete to decide if (CS, x) is in the o-core of ˇG.
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 6, we construct an OCF game with 1 player and an outcome (r, x).
Consider any o-proﬁtable deviation (CS, y) from (r, x). This deviation itself is not necessarily a
c-proﬁtable deviation from (r, x): under (CS, y), agent 1 may withdraw some, but not all of his
207

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
resources from (r, x) and therefore continue to derive some beneﬁt from it. However, for a single
agent, allocating some of the resources to the original partial coalition r is equivalent to forming
a new partial coalition using that amount of resources, i.e., given (CS, y), one can construct a
deviation from (r, x) that will be c-proﬁtable for agent 1. On the other hand, any c-proﬁtable
deviation from (r, x) is also o-proﬁtable. Hence, (r, x) is o-stable if and only if it is c-stable, i.e.,
if and only if we started with a “no”-instance of UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK.
In the rest of the section, we will focus on the case where all parameters of the game (i.e.,
all players’ weights, all thresholds and all task utilities) are integers that are given in unary, or,
equivalently, are at most polynomial in the number of players. Given a game G = (N; w; t), where
tj = (T j, uj) for j = 1, . . . , m, let |G| = w(N) + Pm
j=1(T j + uj).
It turns out that in this setting checking whether an outcome is in the c-core becomes easy.
Intuitively, the reason for this is that once a group of players decides to deviate, the agents in this
group can easily decide how to proceed: they need to pool their weights and ﬁnd the most proﬁtable
set of tasks that can be completed using this amount of resources.
Theorem 7. There exists an algorithm that, given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and an outcome (CS, x)
of the corresponding OCF game ˇG, checks whether (CS, x) is in the c-core of ˇG and runs in time
poly(|G|, |x|), where |x| is the size of the binary representation of the imputation x.
Proof. Our algorithm is based on dynamic programming. First, for any w = 1, . . . , w(N), let Uw
be the maximum proﬁt that a coalition of weight w can make, i.e.,
Uw = max



m
X
j=1
αjuj |
m
X
j=1
αjT j ≤w, (α1, . . . , αm) ∈Nm


.
For each w = 1, . . . , w(N), the quantity Uw can be computed using the dynamic programming
algorithm for UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK. The running time of this procedure is polynomial in |G|.
Now, let p be the payoff vector that corresponds to the imputation x. For all i = 1, . . . , n and
all w = 1, . . . , w(N), set Pi,w = min{p(S) | S ⊆{1, . . . , i}, w(S) = w}. The quantities Pi,w
can be easily computed using dynamic programming. Indeed, we have P1,w = p1 if w = w1 and
P1,w = +∞otherwise (we use the convention that min ∅= +∞). Furthermore, we can compute
Pi+1,w given the values (Pi,w′)w′=1,...,w by setting Pi+1,w = min{Pi,w, pi +Pi,w−wi}. The running
time of this procedure is poly(|G|, |p|).
Suppose that we have computed Pn,w for w = 1, . . . , w(N). Observe that the value Pn,w is the
least amount received by a coalition of weight w under p. Now, for each w = 1, . . . , w(N), we can
compare the quantities Pn,w and Uw. If there is a value of w for which the latter exceeds the former,
there is a coalition in N that could increase its collective earnings by deviating from (CS, x), i.e.,
(CS, x) is not in the c-core of ˇG. It is not hard to see that the converse is also true: if Pn,w ≥Uw
for all w = 1, . . . , w(N), then no coalition has a c-proﬁtable deviation from (CS, x), and hence
(CS, x) is in the c-core of ˇG.
Clearly, this algorithm runs in time poly(|G|, |x|).
In contrast, the corresponding problems for the r-core and the o-core are computationally hard.
Intuitively, the reason for this is that the decisions the players make are no longer binary: instead
of simply deciding whether or not to deviate, they have to decide which of their coalitions with
208

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
non-deviators to abandon. In the case of the o-core, there is also the possibility of reducing one’s
contribution to a partial coalition rather than abandoning it altogether.
Theorem 8. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and an outcome (CS, x) of the corresponding OCF game
ˇG, it is strongly coNP-complete to decide whether (CS, x) is in the r-core of ˇG.
Proof. It is not hard to see that this problem is in coNP: to show that an outcome (CS, x) is not in
the r-core of ˇG, we can guess a set of deviators J and a deviation (CS ′, y), and check that (CS ′, y)
is r-proﬁtable for J by computing the payoffs of all players in J under x and y.
To show coNP-hardness, we reduce from MAXIMUM EDGE BICLIQUE (Peeters, 2003). An
instance on MAXIMUM EDGE BICLIQUE is given by a bipartite graph B = (L, R, E) with a set
of vertices L ∪R and a set of edges E ⊆L × R, and a parameter K. It is a “yes”-instance if B
contains a biclique of size at least K, i.e., if there are sets L′ ⊆L, R′ ⊆R such that |L′|∗|R′| ≥K,
and for all λ ∈L and all ρ ∈R we have (λ, ρ) ∈E. Otherwise, it is a “no”-instance.
Suppose that we are given an instance (B, K) of MAXIMUM EDGE BICLIQUE with B =
(L, R, E), L = {λ1, . . . , λ|L|}, R = {ρ1, . . . , ρ|R|}. Then we create an instance of our problem as
follows. Assume without loss of generality that |L| ≤|R|, We set n = |R|+1, k = |L|, M = k2n2,
V = k2nM, and create n players with weights w1 = · · · = wn−1 = k, wn = k(kn −n + 1) and
2 task types t1 = (kn; V ) and t2 = (K; (n −1)k + 1). Also, we create a coalition structure
CS = (r1, . . . , rk) given by rj
i = 1/k for all i = 1, . . . , n and all j = 1, . . . , k. Observe that the
total weight of each rj ∈CS is kn, so each such partial coalition performs t1. Finally, to construct
the imputation x = (x1, . . . , xk), for all j = 1, . . . , k and all i = 1, . . . , n −1, we set xj
i = 1 if
(i, j) ∈E and xj
i = M otherwise. Also, we set xj
n = V −Pn−1
i=1 xj
i for all j = 1, . . . , k.
Suppose we started with a “yes”-instance of MAXIMUM EDGE BICLIQUE, and let (L′, R′) be
the corresponding subgraph of B. Then the subset of players J = {i | ρi ∈R′} can r-proﬁtably
deviate from (CS, x) by abandoning the partial coalitions in the set S = {rj | λj ∈L′}, and using
the freed-up resources to embark on t2. Indeed, under x the players in J collectively earn at most
(n −1)k from partial coalitions in S, and devote at least K units of weight to these coalitions.
Conversely, consider any r-proﬁtable deviation (CS ′, y), and let J be the corresponding set of
deviators. Suppose that k1 coalitions in CS ′ work on t1, and k2 coalitions work on t2. First, suppose
n ∈J. Observe that (CS ′, y) is proﬁtable for player n if and only if k1 = k, k2 = 0: indeed, under
(CS, x) player n earns at least k(V −(n −1)M), whereas under any outcome that completes less
that k copies of t1 he earns at most (k −1)V + k2n
K ((n −1)k + 1) < k(V −(n −1)M). However,
any deviation that results in executing k copies of t1 must involve all resources of all players, i.e.,
J = {1, . . . , n}, and any such deviation cannot be simultaneously proﬁtable for all members of the
deviating set. Hence, we have n ̸∈J, and therefore w(J) ≤k(n −1). Consequently, k1 = 0
and the deviators’ total proﬁt is at most w(J)
K ((n −1)k + 1) < M. This means that (CS ′, y) is an
r-proﬁtable deviation only if no player i ∈J abandons a coalition rj ∈CS such that xj
i = M.
On the other hand, to successfully execute even one copy of t2, the members of J must collectively
withdraw at least K units of weight. Let R′ = {ρi | i ∈J}, and let L′ correspond to the set of
partial coalitions in CS affected by the deviation; then (L′, R′) is a biclique of size at least K.
It is not hard to check that in the proof of Theorem 8 no player can withdraw part of his re-
sources from a partial coalition in CS and still claim any proﬁt from that coalition. This implies
that checking whether a given outcome is in the o-core is computationally hard, too.
209

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
Corollary 4. Given a TTG G and an outcome (CS, x) of the corresponding OCF game ˇG, it is
strongly coNP-complete to decide whether (CS, x) is in the o-core of ˇG.
On the other hand, combining the techniques of Theorem 7 and Theorem 4 leads to a pseu-
dopolynomial algorithm for checking whether the c-core of a TTG is non-empty.
Theorem 9. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t), one can check in time poly(|G|) whether the corre-
sponding OCF game ˇG has a non-empty c-core.
Proof. We will show that if the c-core of a game ˇG is non-empty, then for any social welfare-
maximizing set of tasks we can construct a coalition structure CS that executes this set of tasks and
an imputation x ∈I(CS) such that (CS, x) is in the c-core of ˇG; moreover, in CS each agent
contributes to each coalition. Hence, our algorithm ﬁrst selects a social welfare-maximizing set of
tasks, then constructs a coalition structure that can perform this set of tasks, and ﬁnally solves a
linear program to check if this coalition structure can be stabilized. The details follow.
Assume for simplicity that t contains a task type t with T = 1; if this is not the case we
can add a task type t0 = (1, 0) to t. This allows us to assume that in any coalition structure all
agents’ resources are committed to some tasks. Fix a social welfare-maximizing multi-set of tasks
{α1t1, . . . , αmtm}. Suppose c-core( ˇG) ̸= ∅, and let (CS ′, y) be an outcome in the c-core of ˇG.
By Theorem 4, we have Pm
j=1 αjuj = v(CS ′). Consider a coalition structure CS that contains
α1 + · · · + αm coalitions: the ﬁrst α1 coalitions have weight T 1 each, the next α2 coalitions have
weight T 2 each, etc., and each agent i distributes his resources evenly between all coalitions, i.e.,
he contributes wi
T 1
w(N) units of weight to each of the ﬁrst α1 coalitions, etc. As in CS all agents
contribute to all partial coalitions, and v(CS) = v(CS ′), we have y ∈I(CS). Moreover, it is
clear that the outcome (CS, y) is in c-core( ˇG): any c-proﬁtable deviation from (CS, y) is also a
c-proﬁtable deviation from (CS ′, y).
By Proposition 9 when all weights are given in unary, we can ﬁnd a social welfare-maximizing
coalition structure CS = (r1, . . . , rk) in polynomial time. Consider the following linear program:
pi
≥
0 for i = 1, . . . , n
X
i∈N
pi
=
v(CS)
X
i∈J
pi
≥
Uw(J) for all J ⊆N,
where Uw is deﬁned as in the proof of Theorem 7. While this linear program has exponentially
many constraints, it can be solved in linear time by the ellipsoid method (Schrijver, 1986), since it
has a polynomial-time separation oracle. Indeed, we can decide whether a given candidate solution
is feasible using the algorithm described in the proof of Theorem 7.
Clearly, if this linear program has a feasible solution p, then the imputation x given by xj
i =
pi
v(rj)
v(CS) for all i ∈N and all j = 1, . . . , |CS| satisﬁes x ∈I(CS), and, moreover, (CS, x) ∈
c-core( ˇG). Conversely, if it does not have a feasible solution, then CS cannot be stabilized, and
hence by the argument above the c-core of ˇG is empty.
210

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
10. Conclusions, Extensions, and Future Work
In this paper we introduced a model of cooperative games that allows for overlapping coalitions and
takes into account the need for resource allocation. In doing so, we generalized the usual models
where either the grand coalition is the only desirable outcome or the outcomes are required to be
partitions of the set of agents. Given our model, we deﬁned and studied in depth a notion of the
core (the c-core) which is a generalization of the core in the traditional models of cooperative game
theory. Under some quite general conditions, we provided a characterization for an outcome—that
is, a (coalition structure, imputation) pair—to belong to the core. We also showed that any outcome
in the core maximizes the social welfare. Further, we introduced a notion of balancedness for OCF-
games, and showed that a coalition structure CS admits an imputation x so that (CS, x) is in the
core if and only if the game is balanced. Moreover, we extended the notion of convexity to our
setting and showed that convex games have a non-empty core.
In addition, we considered two other notions of core-stability in OCF-games, which differ from
each other (as well as from the ﬁrst one) in what the deviators expect to obtain from their collabora-
tion with non-deviators. Together, our three notions of the core span a wide range of beliefs that the
deviators may hold regarding payoffs from coalitions with non-deviators, and can be substantially
different from each other with respect to the sets of outcomes that they characterize, and with respect
to their computational complexity. We also compared the OCF-games with their non-overlapping
analogues, and showed that from the social welfare maximization perspective, OCF-games may
provide higher total utility, and are easier to work with than their classic counterparts. We have
also argued that OCF-games provide a more appropriate modelling framework than fuzzy games
for many scenarios; in particular, this is certainly the case for threshold task games. To summarize,
our paper is one of the very ﬁrst attempts to provide a theoretical treatment of overlapping coalition
formation, and to study stability in this setting in a thorough manner.
10.1 Extensions
In many environments, when a coalition is formed, it may have a choice of actions to execute.
While in a deterministic setting such as the one considered in this paper, the coalition will simply
choose the action that results in the highest possible payoff, in a probabilistic environment this
choice is more difﬁcult: a coalition may want to strike a balance between the expected payoff and
the variance. To address this issue, we can incorporate coalitional actions in our model as follows.
A coalition is allowed to select an action from a (usually ﬁnite) action space A. Without loss of
generality, we assume that each coalition can undertake any action in A.3 The value of a coalition is
then determined by the resource contribution levels of its members and the action selected. There-
fore, the characteristic function in our setting is then deﬁned on (r, a) pairs, where r = (r1, . . . , rn)
is a vector of resources, and a ∈A is an action. All of our deﬁnitions and results generalize readily
to the situation where each coalition has a choice of actions (simply put, our presentation so far
corresponds to a situation where each coalition had exactly one action available to it).
Another extension we have examined has to do with modelling the available resources. For
ease of presentation it was assumed throughout the paper that there exists only one type of (contin-
uous) resource. Nevertheless, all of our results still hold if we assume multiple types of resources
(e.g., agents have to distribute both time and money among their coalitions). Moreover, we have
3. The situation where this is not the case can be modeled by setting the value of the respective (coalition, action) pair
to 0.
211

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
also studied a “discrete” OCF setting, with agent contribution levels taking values in a ﬁnite set
(i.e., an agent may be able to contribute 20%, but not 21% of his resources to a given coalition).
Such a setting is obviously of interest in many applications involving countable resources (as the
discretization of effectively any kind of resources is common in practice). With discrete resources,
the number of possible coalition structures is now ﬁnite (as a coalition in our setting is a collection
of resources—see Section 4). All of our deﬁnitions and theorems carry through in this setting with
minor differences in the arguments used in the proofs.
10.2 Future Work
There exist many exciting open questions for future work. First of all, an important research di-
rection is to develop a better understanding of scenarios where overlapping coalitions can natu-
rally arise, and to identify the appropriate stability concepts for these scenarios. We believe that
techniques developed in this paper will prove useful for this purpose. Moreover, one of our ﬁrst
priorities is to investigate further the alternative notions of stability (i.e., the o-core and the r-core)
proposed above, and obtain relevant characterization results, as we did with the c-core. Extending
other solution concepts for coalitional games—such as, e.g., the Shapley value—to OCF settings is
an important research direction as well.
We also plan to study further the computational complexity of core-related questions in this
setting. First, while we have initiated the study of complexity-theoretic aspects of stability in OCF
games, in this paper we have focused on the complexity of checking whether a given outcome is
stable. Another natural problem in this domain is studying the complexity of checking whether a
game has a stable solution—i.e., whether its c-core (r-core, o-core) is non-empty. Theorem 9 makes
the ﬁrst steps in this direction, suggesting that this problem may be easier in the overlapping setting
than in the classic setting: indeed, Elkind et al. (2008) conjecture that for WVGs with coalition
structures checking the non-emptiness of the core is hard for unary weights.
Now, the hardness results for computing an allocation in the core or checking if the core is non-
empty in the traditional setting—as those in the work of Chvatal (1978), Tamir (1991), Deng and
Papadimitriou (1994), Sandholm et al. (1999), Conitzer and Sandholm (2006)—and our hardness
results in this paper suggest that one can only hope to identify special classes of games where we can
have efﬁcient algorithms for computing core allocations. As noted earlier, an element of the core in
convex games can be computed in the traditional setting simply by taking the vector of the marginal
contributions of the agents for an arbitrary permutation of the set of agents. In our setting, even
though our proof yields a procedure for constructing an element of the c-core, it requires solving a
series of optimization questions, which for arbitrary convex games are NP-hard. Naturally, it would
be desirable to ﬁnd classes of convex games where our proof yields a polynomial time algorithm.
We are also interested in ﬁnding processes that lead to the core in not necessarily convex games;
though randomized algorithms such as the ones of Dieckmann and Schwalbe (1998) and Chalki-
adakis and Boutilier (2004) trivially extend to the overlapping setting, they would be of little prac-
tical value here due to the huge space of potential overlapping conﬁgurations. Therefore, we are
interested in ﬁnding ways to exploit known game structure to prune the search space for potential
stable conﬁgurations. Another subject of future research is extending our model to allow for inﬁnite
coalition structures. Furthermore, it would be interesting to establish links between outcomes in the
core and outcomes of bargaining equilibria in overlapping coalitional bargaining games.
212

COOPERATIVE GAMES WITH OVERLAPPING COALITIONS
Finally, the incorporation of actions in our model allows for the investigation of action stochas-
ticity and, more generally, uncertainty in an OCF setting. For instance, a coalitional action can
be associated with a distribution over possible payoff outcomes resulting from its execution. This
poses challenges to study such models from both a theoretical and a practical standpoint, since the
introduction of uncertainty leads to several intricacies not readily resolved by the use of “determin-
istic” concepts and models, as the work of Suijs and Borm (1999), Suijs, Borm, Wagenaere, and Tijs
(1999), Blankenburg, Klusch, and Shehory (2003), Chalkiadakis and Boutilier (2004) and Chalki-
adakis, Markakis, and Boutilier (2007) demonstrates. On a related note, enriching our model de-
scription so as to capture type uncertainty (Chalkiadakis & Boutilier, 2004; Chalkiadakis et al.,
2007) would allow for the ready translation of uncertainty regarding the types (capabilities) of play-
ers to coalitional value uncertainty, while still capturing the potential stochasticity of coalitional
action outcomes at the same time.
11. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This research was
supported by the ALADDIN (Autonomous Learning Agents for Decentralised Data and Information
Networks) project, which is jointly funded by a BAE Systems and EPSRC strategic partnership
(EP/C548051/1); as well as by EPSRC (GR/T10664/01), ESRC (ES/F035845/1), and Singapore
NRF Research Fellowship 2009-08.
Appendix A. Algorithmic Aspects of Social Welfare Maximization in TTGs
In this appendix, we study the complexity of ﬁnding a social welfare-maximizing outcome in TTGs,
both in the overlapping and in the non-overlapping scenario. Unless explicitly mentioned otherwise,
we make the standard assumption that all parameters in the description of a TTG (i.e., all agents’
weights, all thresholds and all task utilities), are integers given in binary.
It is not hard to see that ﬁnding a non-overlapping coalition structure that maximizes the social
welfare is an NP-hard problem.
Proposition 8. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and a parameter K, it is NP-complete to decide if ˆG
has an outcome (CS, p) with v(CS) ≥K. This holds even if there is just one task type, i.e., t = t1,
and all weights, thresholds and utilities are given in unary.
Proof. It is easy to see that the problem is in NP. To show NP-hardness, we give a reduction from 3-
PARTITION (Garey & Johnson, 1990) to our problem. An instance of 3-PARTITION is given by a list
of non-negative integers A = (a1, . . . , a3ℓ) and an integer parameter B that satisﬁes P3ℓ
i=1 = ℓB
and B/4 < ai < B/2 for all i = 1, . . . , 3ℓ. It is a “yes”-instance if the elements of A can
be partitioned into ℓsets S1, . . . , Sℓsuch that a(S1) = · · · = a(Sℓ) = B and a “no”-instance
otherwise.
Given an instance of 3-PARTITION, consider a TTG G with N = {1, . . . , 3ℓ}, wi = ai for
i = 1, . . . , 3ℓand a single task type t = (T, u) with T = B and u = 1. Clearly, deciding whether
the maximum social welfare achievable in ˆG is at least ℓis equivalent to checking whether the given
instance of 3-PARTITION is a “yes”-instance. Moreover, since 3-PARTITION is known to remain
NP-hard when the input is given in unary, the same is true for our problem.
213

CHALKIADAKIS, ELKIND, MARKAKIS, POLUKAROV & JENNINGS
In contrast, ﬁnding a social welfare-maximizing coalition structure in the OCF game that cor-
responds to a TTG is a somewhat easier problem. Indeed, we can simply add together all agents’
weights, and then ﬁnd an optimal set of tasks to execute given this amount of resource. The latter
problem is equivalent to UNBOUNDED KNAPSACK, which is known to be NP-hard when the inputs
are given in binary, but is polynomial-time solvable if all elements of the input are given in unary or
if there are at most 2 items; for details, see (Martello & Toth, 1990), Section 3.6. Consequently, a
similar conclusion holds for our problem.
Proposition 9. Given a TTG G = (N; w; t) and a parameter K, it is NP-complete to decide if
ˇG has an outcome (CS, x) with v(CS) ≥K. However, this problem becomes polynomial-time
solvable if all weights, thresholds and utilities are given in unary or if there are at most 2 task types.
