ULTRA: A Data-driven Approach for
Recommending Team Formation in Response to
Proposal Calls
Biplav Srivastava
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute
University of South Carolina
Columbia, USA

Tarmo Koppel
Organization and Management Group
Tallinn University of Technology
Tallinn, Estonia

Sai Teja Paladi
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute
University of South Carolina
Columbia, USA

Siva Likitha Valluru
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute
University of South Carolina
Columbia, USA

Rohit Sharma
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute
University of South Carolina
Columbia, USA

Owen Bond
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute
University of South Carolina
Columbia, USA

Abstract—We introduce an emerging AI-based approach and
prototype system for assisting team formation when researchers
respond to calls for proposals from funding agencies. This is
an instance of the general problem of building teams when
demand opportunities come periodically and potential members
may vary over time. The novelties of our approach are that we:
(a) extract technical skills needed about researchers and calls
from multiple data sources and normalize them using Natural
Language Processing (NLP) techniques, (b) build a prototype
solution based on matching and teaming based on constraints,
(c) describe initial feedback about system from researchers at a
University to deploy, and (d) create and publish a dataset that
others can use.
Index Terms—Team recommendation, Researcher Matching,
Recommendation systems, Request for Proposals, Natural Lan-
guage Processing, User Evaluation
I. INTRODUCTION
Building teams in response to an opportunity is a common
business activity. Examples are: responding to calls for pro-
posals in product and services supply chains, expert teams
for a medical procedure at a hospital, players for a match
for team-based sports and crew for an airline ﬂight. In this
paper, we will focus on teaming for researchers applying
to funding agencies in response to their call for proposals,
denoted TeamingForFunding.
A large proportion of funding for research in public univer-
sities comes from funding agencies. Hence, it is very important
for researchers to be able to identify funding opportunities and
make successful proposals. Moreover, many of the funding
opportunities are multi-disciplinary requiring teams to be
quickly assembled from a wide variety of backgrounds who
can work together. The advantage of this setting is that all
data is readily available in public - proposal calls and their suc-
cessful decisions (awards) from agencies like National Science
Foundation (NSF) and National Institutes of Health (NIH), and
proﬁles of researchers from data sources like Google Scholar.
The users interested in the problem are researchers who will
like to collaborate as well as administrators at researchers’
organizations (e.g., Universities) who want to promote more
collaborations, proposals and diversity at their institutions. The
objectives of teaming can be short-term (S), long-term (L) or
a combination of the two.
Fig. 1.
Team participant view of ULTRA showing team recommendations
for select proposals (user view).
In this paper, we present a novel approach and prototype
system called ULTRA1. The system extracts technical skills
from proposal calls found at multiple open data sources and
those present in proﬁles of researchers online, and normalizes
them using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques. It
1ULTRA stands for University Lead Team builder from Rfps and Analysis.
arXiv:2201.05646v2  [cs.IR]  28 Nov 2022

Environment
T1
T2
T3
C1
Environment
Time
USER (1): Administrator
E.g., University Research 
Administrator
SYSTEM
Teaming Opportunity 
E,g., Funding Call 
(Public Info: Funding agencies, 
Government websites)
User (2): Potential Team Participants
E.g., Researchers
(Public Info: Publications, Patents, Profiles)
•
Reviews teaming recommendation(s)
•
Decides to participate or reject 
•
Provides business constraints
•
Oversees teaming process at
an institution
•
May reject teaming choices
•
Needs teams to respond
•
Provides opportunity features that System and 
Team Participants check
•
Provides teaming recommendations
•
Attempts to satisfy teaming business constraints
•
Maximizes short and long term objectives 
Ann
Bob
Carl
C2
Ann
Bob
Carl
Don
Environment
C3
Don
Ann
Fig. 2. Team-building setup with users who can be administrators or potential team participants. A trusted team is one where all stakeholders are convinced
that the right members from those available have been selected on the needs of the call for unknown success in future.
then performs matches between calls and potential researchers,
and from these matches, creates teams respecting teaming
constraints. The recommendations can be informed based on
features from recent awards if the calls are repeating, and skill
normalization extended using technical classiﬁcation trees/
ontologies. Initial feedback of ULTRA from researchers at
a University has been promising and in future, we plan a
large scale evaluation of the system for a large administrative
unit (College). We have created a dataset of calls, proﬁles and
recommendations that others can use as baseline and extend.
In the rest of the paper, we ﬁrst give a demonstration of
the current prototype and then describe background of the
problem and related work. Then we formally introduce the
problem and describe our solution and implementation. We
then present initial evaluation and conclude with a discussion
of future work.
II. A DEMONSTRATION
In Figure 1, we show how the system works for an individ-
ual user who can become a team participant. When the user
has logged in, he can see his details on top panel like Name,
Area of Expertise, Designation. The Area of Expertise - P4
programmable switches, Science DMZs, IoT Security - have
been generated from the extracted research interest from the
researcher’s personal website and the Google Scholar account.
Below researcher’s details, the system shows a list of
recommendations on the left, 3 at a time (a conﬁgurable
parameter, and details of a selected recommendation on the
right. In each proposal, the system shows the proposal call and
team members recommended to be in the team, an estimated
budget, and details from the proposal call like deadline and de-
scription. In Figure 1, the ﬁrst recommendation is for Network
Technology and System NeTS Proposal. The system displays
some important information like the Agency name, link (URL)
to the call and the deadline. It also shows the supporting team
members (Ali Mohammod, Huang Chin, Nelakuditi Srihari,
Ziehl Paul), whose expertise complement the user as lead and
a proposed budget.
A few technical challenges are apparent in this example.
The public data about researchers background may be obsolete
or not reﬂect their future research interests, the technical
terms used in the proposal call and researchers background
may not match, the budget size allowed in the call has
to be respected while recommending team participants, the
recommended participants may already know each other but
may not be free to work on the proposal. The recommendation
from ULTRA can be seen as a data-based trigger to kickstart
collaboration transparently at an institution.
III. TEAMING FOR FUNDING DOMAIN AND PROBLEM
In this section, we provide preliminaries about the domain
and introduce the problem. Then in the next section, we
describe the related work.
Funding agencies issue Request For Proposals (RFPs) on
themes where they are looking for ideas which they can fund.
We will also refer to RFPs with the term calls. Researchers
respond to RFP calls with proposals where they explain their
ideas, list the activities that will be conducted and budget to
complete the work. They look to team with other colleagues
to respond to such calls.
The team building setting we consider is shown in Figure 2.
Here, on the left, at different times, the environment offers
candidate participants (indicated by blue ovals) the chance to
match speciﬁc opportunity (indicated by square). The candi-
date set may change over time with signiﬁcant overlap across
time periods and also their skills or interests. On the right, the
interactions within the proposed system at each time period
are shown. The users of the system can be administrators
representing institution(s) (Ua) as well as candidate team
participants (Up). They interact with the system during an
opportunity (Ti) at time i. The system creates teaming choices
which the users accept or reject.
At a given time, the inputs for a TeamingForFunding
problem are: (a) a call for request for proposal (called call or
RFP for short), (b) the proﬁles of researchers at an institution

who are eligible to participate in teams, and (c) business
objectives of the administrator and team participants at the
institution. The solution to the teaming problem is a list of
candidate teams where each team has two or more members
with one designated leader. Optionally, each team will have an
estimation of team’s budget and chance of the team’s success
chances.
The objectives of teaming can be short-term (S), long-term
(L) or a combination of the two. For example, in Teaming
For Funding, the short-term aims can be: meet skill needs of
funding opportunity (Sf
a), increase chance of success (Sf
b ),
satisfy business constraints of researchers’ institutes (Sf
c )2. In
the long-term, the objectives can be: maximize awards size
over a time period (Lf
a), have a robust (diversiﬁed) pipeline
of experienced talent (Lf
b ), and satisfy diversity goals of
researchers’ institutions (Lf
c ).
Further, teaming solutions consist of two phases: (a) match-
ing, to determine which researchers may be of interest to the
calls based on skills needed, and (b) grouping, to determine
which subset of researchers should be recommended to be in
a team. We address both these phases.
IV. RELATED WORK
We now discuss previous work related to the TeamingFor-
Funding problem which are along teaming and matching.
Team Formation: There is a rich history of AI in team
formation. The most well studied type of teams are those
formed in the Hedonic Games framework [1] where a team
member only cares about other team members in their group.
In our setting, a type of non-participants, administrators at
institutions, are considered. However, our setting does not have
another type of non-participants - user of a team’s output like
a patient in medical teaming. In [2], the authors consider the
problem of creating general teams of equal sizes.
Team formation has also been considered in sports team se-
lections. In [3], the authors used a systematic, multi-objective
genetic algorithm and multiple criteria decision making aids
to optimize team selection for cricket tournaments. Some
factors that the system takes into consideration are batting
and bowling performance of each candidate player, brand
value of players, success rate of the captain, wicket-keeper’s
past performances, and overall team budget. Based on the
team selector’s requirements, each of the above factors are
given a certain ranking and the ﬁnal formation set is picked
according to it. If all the factors are deemed equally important,
a domination approached can be applied instead. [4] theo-
retically explore team formation in entrepreneurial settings,
i.e., studying how the addition of a new member to a team
may impact overall performance. From prior literature, the
authors summarize two views for team member additions. The
ﬁrst view identiﬁes that new members are typically added
to a team to ﬁll certain resource and economic needs (e.g.,
2Examples of business constraints: not over-burden the experienced re-
searchers whose historical performance data is available, give opportunities to
new researchers with little historical data, avail special provisions in funding
opportunity.
hiring solely based on required skill sets). The second view
states that adding a new member might impact or be driven
by existing team members’ social psychological needs. This
means that new members may be added by relational trust,
homophily (e.g., with respect to personal characteristics such
as gender, race, and ethnicity), and similarities personality
trait characteristics. Though these two views seem contrasting,
the authors argue that they are not mutually exclusive, and
further advise that instrumental needs coupled with personal
relationships may increase a team’s overall success within a
venture. [5] explored dynamic team formation in the context
of multi-agent systems (e.g., supply chains, sensor networks).
They introduced the idea of agent-organized networks (AONs)
and identiﬁed two robust strategies to improve organizational
performance in dynamic supply and demand environments.
In the ﬁrst strategy, agents adapt their network connectivity
based on preferential attachment, a concept derived from graph
theory which states that the more connected a node is within
a network, the more likely it is to receive newer connections.
The second AON strategy is based more on performance and
referrals. Agents ﬁrst derive an estimate of their individual
performance, and then form connections with their highest-
performing neighbors. Agents whose performance estimates
are lower than the average of that of their neighbors’ are
removed. This strategy especially allows for real-time network
learning and leads to more efﬁcient network structures.
In recent literature, [6] developed a comprehensive gener-
alization of team formation problems and identiﬁed various
applications for which team formation algorithms are formu-
lated. They may also be used in domains such as software
development, relief teams in the events of natural disasters,
and cabinet formation in political settings, and search-and-
rescue operations in hostile conditions. Due to the various
factors and constraints (e.g., budget, time), team formation
problems can quickly become NP-hard. The authors of this
paper discuss popular techniques used in earlier research.
Genetic algorithms have been used to evolve better teams,
i.e., gathering and optimizing collective abilities of team
members rather than individual ones. Other methods include
heuristics-based approximations, which reduce computational
complexity by ﬁrst gathering top-k highest suitable candidates
and pruning the rest. Note that k is a small value here but still
high enough for an optimized solution to exist. Clustering is
also another popular technique, where teams are formed by
grouping candidates with similar cost, team suitability scores,
and total interaction scores [7].
In some unique scenarios, such as negotiation teams in
hostage crises, teams may be required to form in the event of
loss or unavailability of some members. Cases like this require
robust and reliable formulation algorithms. [8] proposed a
community-based team formation problem, which calculates
robustness scores (a non-negative integer) for potential teams
and also takes member skill redundancy into account. A team
that can function and meets skill requirements even with the
removal of k members is deﬁned as k-robust. The authors
also set a cost restriction c, thereby making it a bi-objective

Role-based UI
(Html,css,js, php)
Controller
)
API, php
(
DataBase
(MySql)
Feedback
Recommendation
Results
Content 
Extractors
Researcher
RfP
Team Recommender
Matcher
Previous Awards
Team Reco
Manager
Feedback Analyzer
Data Sources
Analytics
Roles : Researcher, Administrator
Fig. 3. System Architecture of ULTRA.
constraint optimization problem.
[9] explored team formation in crowdfunding and used
a probabilistic generative model to build CrowdRec, which
recommends Kickstarter projects to a group of investors by
accounting for each project’s current status, future plans,
preferences of individual members, and collective preferences
of the group.
We recognize teaming as an ongoing area of research and
propose to advance the state-of-the-art in fair teaming with a
wider set of stakeholders inspired by practical applications.
Matching Concepts: Matching of concepts is a well studied
problem in Computer Science and AI [10], [11]. There are two
variants - matching the concepts as expressed representations
of strings [10] or as real world entities [11]. We presently
consider concepts as strings during matching.
There are many techniques to match strings starting with
exact matches. Another method is Fuzzy String Matching, also
known as approximate string matching, to match a pattern
approximately within a distance threshold rather than exactly.
This allows us to ﬁnd matches even when users misspell
words or provide partial words for the (skill) search. Another
type of technique is embedding based matching. Here, a
(deep) learning architecture learns a word or document level
representation (embedding) from a large document corpus
and numeric operations, like cosine similarity, is used to
ﬁnd similar terms [12]. Another type of technique, popular
in recommendation literature, relies on multi-arm bandits
techniques when matching happens repeatedly over time and
with different users [13].
Commercial Software for Advertising Researching Fund-
ing:
For research funding, there are a few commercial offerings.
One system is Pivot 3 which sends keyword based alerts to
faculties whose interests match the areas listed in a RFP. An-
other system is Scry4 which matches proposals to faculty but
3https://exlibrisgroup.com/products/pivot-funding-opportunities-and-
proﬁles/
4https://www.amaforge.com/
does not identify teaming opportunities. In focus sessions with
researchers, we learnt that researchers wanted to have decision
support tools that can help them with knowing more about
calls, fellow researchers and about teaming opportunities.
V. SOLUTION
We show the main components of our solution in Figure 3.
They consist of a Content Extractor (CE) to consume public
data about researchers, calls (RFP) and previous awards. We
have a Matching system to match calls to researchers (M)
and a Team Recommendation (TR) system to help for system
output. The system also has components to analyze users
feedback of output (FA) and a team recommendation manager
(TRM) to send notiﬁcations to candidate team participants
for their conﬁrmations and helping the team prepare the
ﬁnal submission. We now explain the working of the main
components.
A. Content Extractor (CE)
The CE module extracts content through webpage or Ap-
plication Programming Interface (API) requests. It utilizes
BeautifulSoup5 library to parse through exhaustive content that
may sometimes span hundreds of pages. It also uses the Spacy6
library to extract key details such as exact budget of RFP.
RFPs are extracted from the NSF website’s search page7.
We use data about both historical calls whose deadline has
expired and also open calls whose deadline is in future. From
the search page, we acquire links to the individual RFP pages,
then extract the HTML and parse it for important information
such as the synopsis, title, and application deadlines. Table I
gives the statistics of extraction for each information type. The
extractors are generally accurate but they face challenges with
calls when they have multiple sub-tracks and corresponding
deadlines.
5https://pypi.org/project/beautifulsoup4/
6https://spacy.io/
7https://www.nsf.gov/publications/index.jsp

Type
Number
% Extracted
RFP
1,797
100
Title
1,782
99.1
Deadline
1,626
90.4
Budget
1,729
96.2
Synopsis/
Keywords
1,797
100
Users
240
100
Users/Research
205
85.4
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF CONTENT EXTRACTION FOR CALLS AND USERS.
USERS/RESEARCH REFERS TO NUMBER OF USERS WE WERE ABLE TO
CONFIRM AS RESEARCHERS WITH A MATCH WITH GOOGLE SCHOLAR.
We also looked at XML archives hosted by NSF, and
the search page of Grants.gov8 (called Grants henceforth), a
website containing a list of research proposals from several
different agencies. We found that the XML archives had
nothing linking them back to the original grant page, and did
not include active grants, so we did not use them. The Grants
search page had a wider variety of organizations to choose
from, and included active grants updated daily. However, the
information was both inconsistent and costly to parse, as
getting from the search to the Grants page took inordinate
amount of processing time to exhaustively search the list.
To get potential team members, a list of researchers is made
by pulling information from a University College’s faculty list9
hosted on their web site. This list is then ﬁltered down to a
subset in research role using heuristics that is applied to job
titles and designations. To accurately ﬁlter and extract our data
for these researchers, we perform two additional check. First,
we check the individual’s university webpage for keywords,
then we search Google Scholar API10 for the individual’s
scholar page. From these sources, we are able to retrieve past
published works, and a list of keywords of the individual’s
technical skills (research interests). We then consolidate and
normalize skills obtained from different sources using NLP
techniques - stop word removal, stemming and lemmatization.
When no skill information is available for a person, they are
omitted from the system. In numbers, for the current proto-
type, 318 total experts were extracted from the University’s
employees’ websites out for which 78 were removed on the
basis of designation. In the remaining 240, 205 had either
research background from University website or interests as
retrieved from Google Scholar. 83 actually had Google Scholar
proﬁles and were conﬁrmed researchers at the University
eligible to apply for calls. In Table I, Users/Research refers
to the extraction of researcher information.
We also retrieve previous awards by funding agencies to
analyze features and trends in successful proposals. We fo-
cused on NSF and NIH who are front-runners for research
funding in the US with NSF having budgeted $6.5B11 in FY
8At: https://www.grants.gov/. It contains information about US government-
funded programs and projects.
9https://sc.edu/study/colleges schools/engineering and computing/
faculty-staff/index.php
10Using library scholarly - https://pypi.org/project/scholarly/.
11https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2020/nsf20002/pdf/nsf20002.pdf
2019 and the NIH $31.8B12. Previous award data was obtained
by accessing the agencies’ websites13 and downloading ZIP
ﬁles containing XML ﬁles corresponding to all projects (and
subprojects) awarded across years of interest. We do not use
previous award data in current prototype but could use in
future.
B. Matching Proposal Calls To Researchers Skills
We now describe how a proposal call (RFP) is matched to
researchers’ skills representing teaming demand with potential
supply. We experimented with multiple matching methods all
of which use the call synopsis obtained by CE and researchers’
skills.
As the ﬁrst method, we consider approximate string match-
ing as implemented in the Fuzz library14. We will refer to it
as fuzzy. The second method we use is embedding based. For
this, we rely on SPECTER (Scientiﬁc Paper Embedding using
Citation Informed Transformers15) [14]. SPECTER is a repre-
sentation learning method based on BERT [15] but uses a pow-
erful signal of document-level relatedness: the citation graph.
SPECTER is particularly helpful for recommendation tasks
with reported performance like nDCG (Normalized Discount
Cumulative Gain16 index of 53.9). We ﬁrst generate document-
level embedding on the collected corpus of call synopsis using
SPECTER. Then, we implement a match function that takes
call synopsis and a skills vector and provides score based on
the computed embedding.
As an example, on call summary - The Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Cognitive Science AICS program focuses on advancing
the state of the art in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Cognitive
Science. The program supports research and related education
activities fundamental to the development of computer systems
capable of performing a broad variety of intelligent tasks
and to the development of computational models of intelligent
behavior across the spectrum of human intelligence, and a skill
proﬁle = [’Artiﬁcial Intelligence’, ’Services’, ’Smarter Cities
(Water’, ’Health’, ’Trafﬁc)’], the fuzzy method’s matching
score is 51 on a 0-100 scale where 100 represents full match.
For the same, the embedding matching score is 79 on a 0-
100 scale where 100 represents full match. The call is highly
relevant to the researcher and the embedding method reﬂects
this more accurately than the fuzzy method. We note that the
two scores are from two different systems, and in theory, may
be incomparable. So, to verify whether they correspond to
what researchers perceive in practice, we created a large subset
of matches with both methods and gave to researchers for
their evaluation. As reported in evaluation section, we found
empirically that researchers preferred matches which scored
higher by embedding based method. Hence, we use it in our
implementation.
12https://report.nih.gov/nihdatabook/report/283
13https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/download.jsp
14https://github.com/seatgeek/thefuzz
15https://github.com/allenai/specter
16https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/normalized-discounted-cumulative-gain-
multilabel-ranking-metrics-ml/

For the researcher shown in Figure 1, the system found 10
calls that have the highest match. These are used to explore
possible teams with the researcher as team leader.
C. Team Suggestions
To get team recommendations from matches, we use a
greedy strategy for team formation. First, we run our matching
algorithm in a user-item recommendation format i.e. for each
user system recommends at most k (= 10) relevant synopsis
(of a RFP) in descending order of match score. Then, in
second step, we form team groups to associate users with
recommended RFP based on short and long term constraints.
The constraints we use have been obtained after discussions in
focus groups with University administrators and researchers.
They are: (a) limit upper team size to 5 members unless
budget size allows larger participants, (b) have at least $50K
per participant (c) each member should have at least one
non-overlapping skill with another. The approach can easily
incorporate new constraints and can explain request for change
to team composition by showing which constraints would
be respected or violated. We anticipate additional constraints
at user-level (by researchers) like in maximum number of
recommendations in a time period. If the number of users
recommended for a call are more than team size limit, we
sort the matched users and select in the descending order of
matched score. At the end of this step, we get user-speciﬁc
recommendation of calls and possible teams, and call-speciﬁc
recommendation of potential teams.
We present an example of team formed by the above method
in Table II consisting of 5 researchers on a historical call.
In ULTRA screen, the user could go to the link associated
with this RFP, the synopsis obtained is from the section of
call - Summary of Program Requirements Section. It is related
to computational neuroscience and computer science research.
The team has 4 researchers directly related to bio-informatics
or neuromorphic computing and the ﬁfth one related to deep
learning. Therefore, we see that system is able to match very
effectively and its results are promising.
VI. EVALUATION
We have conducted preliminary evaluation ULTRA’s output.
The main output of the system is a list of experts who
compose a team and whose skill set, experience and scientiﬁc
excellence are compatible with the RFP topic. The evaluation
of the effectiveness of the system was done retrospectively by
analyzing historic data of both the previous RFPs and experts’
engagement with the latter.
During initial evaluation, seven users from a College in
the University were selected for evaluation. The aim of the
evaluation was to determine if the system had identiﬁed the
RFPs for each user ﬁtting well within their competence set.
For each user the system had generated ten best matches,
based on the pool of historic RFPs. The RFP match was
assessed in Likert scale 1...10, by the user themselves or by the
expert panel, if the user feedback was not reached. The human
assessment revealed the following: for two users, all the ten
User
Research Interests
Score
Agostinelli
For-
est
[’Artiﬁcial
Intelligence,
Deep
Learning, Reinforcement Learning,
Search, Bioinformatics’]
84
Hu Jianjun
[’Deep learning, machine learning,
materials informatics, bioinformat-
ics, evolutionary computation’]
84
Valafar
Homay-
oun
[’Computational Biology, Bioinfor-
matics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ma-
chine Learning, Neural Information
Processing’]
83
Zand Ramtin
[‘Hardware Design for Machine
Learning Systems , Neuromorphic
Computing , Emerging Nanoscale
Electronics’]
80
Luo Lannan
[’Sofware and Systems Security,
Mobile Security, Software Engi-
neering, Programming Language,
Deep Learning’]
76
TABLE II
TEAM FORMATION RESULT GENERATED BY ULTRA FOR HISTORIC NSF
CALL - INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
RESEARCH ON BRAIN FUNCTION. URL:
HTTPS://WWW.NSF.GOV/PUBS/2014/NSF14504/NSF14504.HTM
system matched RFPs ﬁt very well within their competence (at
least rating 7 in Likert scale). For the remaining ﬁve users, nine
out of ten RFPs were matched very well, whereas one RFP
had been assessed as 6 or lower on Likert scale. Altogether,
from 70 matches, 65 RFPs were assessed by respondents as 7
or higher in Likert scale, demonstrating the high effectiveness
of the system in matching users’ skills to historic RFPs.
In particular, the user17 in Figure 1 commented that a new
search term cybertraining helped him to locate a RFP which
would have normally be unknown to him. Also, he noted that
“I looked at the NSF grants and they seem very relevant”,
noting the satisfaction with ULTRA’s output.
Next, we obtained the records of awarded RFPs made
available by the University’s division responsible for spon-
sored research. We manually annotated the synopsis for each
awarded project. The included awards were limited to NSF
data, as information about the awards is publicly well acces-
sible. We ran our user-item recommendation system for the
corpus of synopsis. We got the recommendation for Principal
Investigators in the form of 10 best awards - the results were
compared to actual award data, resulting in the accuracy of
54.5 per cent where the system was able to match the users
with the actual awards they had received. This level can be
considered satisfactory system output, as the success in getting
the awards does depend also on many other factors, besides
competence matching. In future, we will incorporate matching
and teaming enhancements to improve over the matching
baselines.
VII. ULTRA FAMILY OF TOOLS
In this section, we will describe some of the important tools
that we have developed as part of the Ultra effort. They started
17Jorge Crichigno, PhD, Associate Professor in Integrated Information
Technology

out as useful features that we then made into stand-alone
capabilities recognizing their potentia for wider usage.
A. Tools for Exploring Ultra Data
We have created a webpage where one can see or retrieve all
the content we have extracted about the users, proposal calls,
and previous awards by selecting through the dropdown. When
one chooses the Proposal calls or em Users in the dropdown,
one can search through the proposals using the proposal id,
agency id, and users using user id and username. Additionally,
we have Application Programming Interface (API) documen-
tation of how one can retrieve records of proposals, users, or
awards. And also, we can extract the desired records by giving
the agency id for proposals, username for users, and award
number for the awards, respectively.
B. Unsupervised Text Visualization with KITE
Kite [16] is an unsupervised system for exploring textual
data and generating insights. This is used for unstructured
documents like news articles, survey results, proﬁles of people
and proposals. In Ultra case, one can use KITE to explore the
background of researchers and proposal calls that we extract.
Figure 4 shows an example of it use for a researcher. Here,
View-1 displays the sample URL of the person’s webpage,
View-2 displays the user interface of KITE, and Views3-
8 shed light about the person’s technical background using
concepts, relationships and their change over time, including
using standard terminologies from the computing (ACM) and
economics (JEL) domains.
C. Text to Classsiﬁcation Mapper
Mapper is a tool that takes the input as a text and matching
threshold as a number and returns the ACM or JEL classiﬁ-
cation codes and description based on the input text. Figure 5
shows an example of how to get the result in a table using the
input text.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We now discuss the impact of our approach, initial user
feedback and opportunities for future improvement. Initial
Feedback: The feedback we have received from administrative
and research users has been encouraging. One is to expand
ULTRA’s data coverage beyond engineering. Here, Web of
Science has wider coverage about researchers than Google
Scholar. Forming teams is challenging, especially for cross
disciplinary teams like social sciences, arts, humanities. Sec-
ond, users want the system to assign star rating to team leaders
who have had good experiences and track record. Third, some
proposals expect junior faculty or member from disadvantaged
groups to be in the lead, and this could be prioritized by the
tool for teaming. Fourth, sometimes a user displays having
competence in certain ﬁelds, but this is not reﬂected on their
track record, such as previous publications and projects. The
system can then use reliable online information to properly
characterize users’ competence. At the same time, the system
should also allow people to update their research proﬁles.
Overall, stakeholders agree that this is a complex problem and
our system is trying to get ahead of curve trying to solve this
problem.
Future Directions: The current prototype can be extended
along many development directions. First, we can increase the
scale of experiments and data about researchers to outside of
engineering. Second, we can normalize the technical areas that
are used from the proposal call and researcher proﬁles beyond
NLP techniques. In [16], the authors present an unsupervised
approach to visualize text documents where they normalize
skills of researchers and those mentioned in technical calls.
In our tool, we can use their approach and focus on the
area of Computing to use the ACM Computing Classiﬁca-
tion System (1998) [17], [18] - a set of 1532 Terms and
their Codes. Beyond ACM, one can use American Economic
Association Classiﬁcation for the ﬁeld of economics and the
healthcare classiﬁcation ICD-10 containing codes for diseases,
signs and symptoms, abnormal ﬁndings, complaints, social
circumstances, and external causes of injury or diseases. Third,
one can improve matching using Bandit and Hedonic games
methods. The data about previous awards could be useful
in this regard. Fourth, one can also improve team formation
approach with metrics for short and long-term optimization of
team proposal results and performance on funded projects.
Finally, it is an open question whether users will actually
follow an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) system’s recommenda-
tions for collaboration even if there is analytically a higher
chance of success. After all, the AI system can only be as
accurate as the data it uses and there are many intricacies
of interpersonal collaboration that data may fail to capture.
Only a careful long-term longitudinal evaluation will be able
to establish if data-driven teaming recommendations actually
works and we are only in the early stages of this investigation.
If that is the case, this area would be a fertile ground to
nudge groups of users and personalize their recommendations
towards high potential collaboration.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we tackled the emerging problem of how
AI can assist researchers identify right funding opportunities,
assessing their suitability for the program and suggest teaming
opportunities for successful proposals. This is an example of
the general problem of team formation when opportunities
may repeat over time. We proposed an approach based on
content extraction from open sites about calls and researchers,
matching users to calls, and then forming teams based on
business constraints. We described a prototype, ULTRA, and
presented preliminary empirical evidence that the approach is
promising. This work lays the basis for future work on AI-
assisted teaming spanning multiple disciplines at University-
scale.
.
X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We will like to thank Ronak Shah and Austin Hetherington
for their contributions in early implementation.

Fig. 4. Using KITE to explore the webpage (document) of a Researcher
.
Fig. 5. Text to Classiﬁcation Mapper
.
