Practical Approach of Knowledge Management in 
Medical Science 
 
M. Bohlouli1, P. Uhr1, F. Merges1, S. Mohammad Hassani1, and M. Fathi1 
1 Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of Siegen, NRW, Germany 
 
 
Abstract - Knowledge organization, infrastructure, and 
knowledge based activities are all subjects which help in 
creation of business strategies for new enterprise. In this 
paper, first basics of knowledge based systems are studied. 
Practical issues and challenges of Knowledge Management 
(KM) 
implementations 
are 
then 
illustrated. 
Finally 
comparison of different knowledge based projects is presented 
along with abstracted information on their implementation, 
techniques and results. Most of these projects are in the field 
of medical science. Based on our study and evaluation on 
different KM projects, we conclude that KM is being used in 
every science, industry and business. But its importance in 
medical science and assisted living projects is highlighted 
nowadays with the most of research institutes. Most medical 
centers are interested in using knowledge based services like 
portals and learning techniques of knowledge for their future 
innovations and supports. 
Keywords: Knowledge Management, Knowledge Based 
Systems, Practical Knowledge Management, Knowledge 
based Medical Applications, Implementation Issues of 
Knowledge Management 
 
 
1 Introduction 
  Knowledge Management (KM) is a concept of business 
administration and computer science, but it is not limited to 
these areas, and it brings interesting ideas which could be 
useful for other sciences. There are various definitions and 
discussions on what exactly KM is about [1, 3, 4, 5, and 6], 
the definition of KM and Knowledge Based Systems (KBS) 
are interconnected to the definition of knowledge. In practice, 
the terms knowledge, information and data are often used 
interchangeably, but giving a correct definition of knowledge 
is possible by distinguishing among knowledge, information 
and data [3]. 
A commonly held view with sundry minor variants is that 
data is raw numbers and facts, information is processed data, 
and knowledge is authenticated information [9 and 11]. In 
fact Data is unclassified and unprocessed values, a static set 
of transactional elements, such as 211102345, John is 6 feet 
tall, or structured records of transactions. Information is 
meaningful collection of data which has been processed and 
organized. Knowledge is a set of understandings and the state 
of knowing acquireed through experience or study to use in 
decision making activities. It includes facts, opinions, ideas, 
theories, 
principles, 
models, 
ignorance, 
awareness, 
familiarity, understanding, facility, and so on. Knowledge is 
based on data and Information. Information Systems (IS) can 
convert data into information, but it is not able to convert 
information to knowledge.  
2 KM and KBS 
 As we mentioned before, definition of KM and KBS 
depend on knowledge. Alavi and Leidner [3] have defined 
five different perspectives for knowledge. KM involves 
enhancing individual's learning and understanding through 
provision of information. It is the process of creation, sharing, 
and distributing knowledge and to build and manage 
knowledge stocks. KM is also organized access to and 
retrieval of content. t is about building core competencies and 
understanding strategic know-how, too. [3] 
The role of IT in KBSs is to provide access to sources of 
knowledge rather than knowledge itself, gathering, storing, 
and transferring knowledge and to provide link among sources 
of knowledge to create wider breadth and depth of knowledge 
flows. Providing effective search and retrieval mechanisms 
for locating relevant information is also supported with IT in 
KBSs. IT can enhance intellectual capital by supporting 
development of individual and organizational competencies in 
KBSs [3]. Generally KM is any attempt to convert employees’ 
knowledge (personal properties) to shared organizational 
knowledge (organizational property). It is aim to improve 
effectiveness and speedup, and decrease expenses of an 
organization. Giving correct knowledge in the suitable format 
and time to a proper expert or individual with reasonable costs 
is the aim of KM. Therefore:  
Knowledge is explicit and/or tacit, individual and/or 
organizational and authenticated information which has been 
acquireed through study or experience to potentially influence 
action, and applying expertise. 
KM is the practice of collecting knowledge and selectively 
applying it from previous experiences of decision making to 
current and future decision making activities with the express 
purpose of improving the organization's effectiveness [6].  
KMS is any system which is aiming to improve the 
effectiveness and speedup of the organization based on the 
previous experiences and activities. KBS is able to create new 
knowledge, exchange the current knowledge, and apply all to 
the system.  
Ann Macintosh of the Artificial Intelligence Applications 
Institute has written a "Position Paper on Knowledge Asset 
Management" that identifies some of specific business factors 
about necessarily of KM in contemporary life, including: 
• 
Marketplaces are increasingly competitive and the rate 
of innovation is rising. 

• 
Reduce of staffs create a need to replace informal 
knowledge with formal methods. 
• 
Competitiveness reduces the size of the work force that 
holds valuable business knowledge. 
• 
The amount of time available to experience and 
acquire knowledge has diminished. 
• 
Early requirements and increasing mobility of work 
forces lead to loss of knowledge. 
• 
There is a need to manage increasing complexity as 
small operating companies are transnationals sourcing 
operations. 
• 
Change in strategic direction may result in the loss of 
knowledge in a specific area. 
As a result KM enables sharing of essential knowledge to 
complete organization tasks and provides improvements in 
organizations 
quality 
and 
human 
performance 
and 
competitive advantage. 
2.1 
Practical issues and challenges of KM  
KM is being used in every science, industry and business. 
If developers and designers of KBS don’t have enough 
information about implementation requirements of KM and 
KBS, their implementation results will not be as successful. In 
the following section we present some success factors and 
common failures of KM implementations.  
Any failure and mistake of individuals has a cost to the 
system. Therefore in case of any failure, the system should 
analyse and predicate enough information about the failure for 
the future scopes. By transferring acquired knowledge of 
failures to the current and incoming individuals, the amount of 
failures will be decreased in the system and therefore KM will 
succeed in decreasing the costs of organization.  
 Feedback data from customers is very important in 
optimizing future generations of products and quality 
management. Therefore the system should provide a 
completely creative backbone to collect feedback data and 
keep a close relationship with customers and users. Any 
missing feedback data leads to unsuccessful scenarios of KM 
in optimizing system and quality issues. After obtaining the 
feedback data, the system should analyse, abstract, and 
preserve it.  
Due to staff awareness of former activities and projects 
some experiments are repeated in the system. As a result 
informing individuals about former works and projects in the 
organization is required. The progress of former experiments 
and results should be stored in a knowledge repository of the 
system and should be easily accessible to the individuals of 
the organization at any time.    
Due to security and trust issues, thoughts, ideas, and good 
functionalities are not often shared with expert. Successful 
KM implementation needs to create the trustworthy culture 
and teamwork in which professionals feel safe and secure, and 
can trust in the system; providing the safe and trustable 
culture is critical to KM success in any system. Designers and 
administrators' awareness of basic psychological rules lead to 
the defeat of KBS. Sharing of key information and progresses 
needs individuals' trust. 
Only a limited amount of people in the organizations are 
aware of key knowledge about their projects and works. That 
is because only a few people work in the key positions of 
projects, therefore when these people are absent, others miss 
key knowledge and it is more cost-intensive for an 
organization to reacquire the missed knowledge. When 
sharing of key knowledge is not possible generally, system 
should provide a secure process to preserve key knowledge. 
Security techniques such as encryption methods should be 
used to make it more secure. Access to this knowledge should 
be controlled securely and the system should allow the use of 
them just in specific cases, but not generally. 
Organizational Learning (OL) is always slow. Resulting 
inconveniences include delays in development of products or 
missing better opportunities. Therefore organizations need to 
employ better and more rapid technologies to accelerate their 
learning methods. Because of great developments in IT and 
their application in learning methods, it could be useful to 
optimize OL. Members of an organization will be 
disappointed when they couldn’t acquire knowledge from the 
system. Therefore providing good access to the available 
knowledge resources is another requirement of KBSs.   
In addition to mentioned propositions, some other success 
factors of KM implementation are as follows: 
• 
Employee involvement 
• 
Information System (IS) infrastructure 
• 
Performance measurement 
• 
Benchmarking 
• 
Knowledge-friendly culture 
• 
Optimized knowledge representation methods 
• 
Knowledge abstraction usage 
• 
Intelligent data mining methods 
• 
Organizational culture 
• 
Motivational incentives for KM users 
• 
A standard and flexible knowledge structure 
• 
Ability to transfer knowledge with another KBSs via 
recent and IT technologies like Web 2.0 or Cloud 
computing 
• 
Security and knowledge protection 
 
3 KM in Medical Science 
Various fields of application, huge amounts of data and 
experts with specific know-how are the main reasons why the 
field of medical research can be seen as a precursor for other 
branches of applied KM. Evolutionary algorithms, fuzzy logic 
or neural networks have the potential of improving knowledge 
and can help medical practitioners in creating diagnoses for 
different diseases.  
Conducting knowledge audits are necessary to determine 
specific experts in a healthcare organization who have 
knowledge on a certain issue (e.g. disease or therapy). This 
process called “Knowledge Identification and Capture” and is 
one of the important steps in Medical KM (MKM).  
In the healthcare setting, knowledge creation can take place 
in terms of improved organizational processes and systems in 
hospitals, advances in medical methods and therapies, better 

patient relationship management practices, and improved 
ways of working within the healthcare organization.  
A healthcare organization is a collection of professional 
specialists who contribute to the delivery of patient care, but 
also often act competitively inside the organization, without 
being willing to transfer knowledge because of associated 
status and power within the organization and the society. 
Effective knowledge management in the Medical Application 
area as well as in other branches requires a “knowledge 
sharing” culture to be successful.  
Knowledge application refers to taking the shared knowledge 
and internalizing it within one’s perspective and worldviews. 
Knowledge-enabling technologies which can effectively be 
applied to healthcare organizations are: Groupware, Intranet, 
Collaborative tools and Knowledge Portals. 
3.1 
Knowledge based Medical Systems 
By incorporating applied KM and medical science many 
fields of application can be discovered. Modern medicine 
generates huge amounts of heterogeneous data [14] almost 
daily. Researchers and medical practitioners have to deal with 
data on one hand and with personnel know-how on the other 
hand. Knowledge discovery as an early step in the KM 
process transforms data into knowledge [14], and helps 
medical practitioners in that way to decrease information 
overload. Knowledge Management and Medical Engineering 
center (KMME) in corporation with some medical experts and 
clinical centers discovered a wide gap between raw data and 
concluded knowledge. Disparity of data collection and data 
comprehension makes computerized techniques necessary to 
help humans to address this problem [14]. In the following 
section three projects of the KMME and one another MKM 
project will be described briefly with their aims and benefits. 
3.1.1 
StroPoS 
The Stroke Portal System for emergency risk patients 
(StroPoS) was implemented based on the concept of a 
corresponding portal solution [21]. The need for a portal like 
StroPoS results from serious influences strokes have on the 
association. Strokes are the fifth common cause of death in 
Germany in 2008 [25] and they are often affiliated with severe 
disablements. Early diagnosis supported by a Stroke Portal 
System could decrease the costs of therapy and aftercare 
immensely.  
Figure 1: Architecture of the Stroke Portal StroPoS 
 
The architecture of StroPoS System has been illustrated in 
Figure 1. Furthermore, a Stroke Portal System should offer a 
service which recognizes warnings. Concerning recognizing 
warnings, a Medical Call Center (MCC) with agents can help 
as well. The KMME developed several methods of KM within 
this portal which will be integrated and realized in the next 
steps of the project.  
Patients and experts can access StroPoS via Web browser. 
Some other components like the Risk Test (RT) and Stroke 
Information Unit (SIU) can be accessed by the MCC. The 
system is divided into two parts: Patient section and expert 
section. While patients have free access to information like 
definition and descriptions about the stroke disease, experts 
have to log in to get access to the expert area on the portal. 
After this authentication procedure they can use the CDB, 
which includes patient case studies, as well as the SDB for 
DB queries. In the database experts can find special stroke 
cases and can set up several parameters to localize a case. 
Experts can also make an anonymous case file and upload it to  
 
share with other experts. The challenge was to implement a 
program structure by abstracting the anonymous example 
health records for entering, saving and comparing different 
courses of disease [20]. With the RT, users can test their 
stroke risk. The test contains ten questions which are easy to 
understand and be proved by clinical partners of KBS group. 
Figure 2: Diagram of the DiProS project 
Users have also the opportunity to search for special stroke 
clinics. To find the nearest clinic users need only to type their 
post code, and system will find nearest stroke clinic. 
3.1.2 
DiProS 
Disc Prolapse System (DiProS) is another knowledge-based 
medical application implemented by KMME at the University 
of Siegen. The major goal of the project is to achieve a 
modular and structural portal in the field of disc herniation 
disease. DiProS focuses on allocation of reliable and authentic 
information supplemented by additional knowledge for 
experts and individuals, regardless if they are just interested or 
affected by spinal disc herniation. The offered information in 
the portal is extended by interactive services, which allow 
instantaneous contact to medical practitioners and make 
telemedical consultation possible. Methods for estimation of 
individual patients are also offered in the portal.  

 
The reuse of components like the CBD or the forums saved 
a lot of time but it also shows that the components can be 
reused in other projects.  
Besides the well-proven components, new components have 
been developed, for instance, the navigation assistant which 
helps users to navigate through the system and find the 
information they need. 
3.1.3 
AlWiP 
This project is another implemented project by KMME. 
The major goal of the Alzheimer Wissen Portal (AlWiP) 
project is the early detection of Alzheimer disease indicators. 
Reasons, symptoms and factors of risk have to be evaluated 
through data and picture material (i.e. brain MRT’s, course of 
brain alteration) in terms of correlation and integrated into the 
Knowledge portal as a decision support component. 
The whole project aims to create a knowledge management 
portal for the medical application of Alzheimer’s disease. An 
image analysis of the brain, combined with information about 
the general state of health of patients can indicate the danger 
of developing Alzheimer's. (Fig. 3) 
Figure 3: Alzheimer Knowledge Portal 
 
With the help of the Alzheimer's and dementia specialists at 
the University of Cologne (the cooperation partners of the 
KMME), an Alzheimer's knowledge database was built for 
users such as family members of patients and experts, in 
which different forms of dementia were shown. 
In the discussion area, family members are able to share 
their experience with other concerned persons. In this way 
people can share their knowledge and find solution for their 
special problems. 
The portal should not replace other information sources like 
health personnel, expert’s guides [18] or caregiver's guides 
[7]. In fact the portal is planned as a knowledge platform 
which completes these traditional resources. Beside this 
AlWiP is a quick and easy opportunity to get Alzheimer 
information on demand. 
For best possible user support a navigation assistant is 
implemented in the portal. It enables the user to ask questions 
like ‘what is dementia’. Another new feature is that if there is 
reason why a user cannot read articles, the assistant can read 
out articles and every text file on the portal Therefore it is 
possible for that person to receive needed information by 
using the assistant. 
3.1.4 
OncoDoc 
Developed and implemented in the Service d'Oncologie 
Medicale Pitie-Salpetriere (Paris, France) [12], OncoDoc is a 
decision support system designed to provide best therapeutic 
recommendations for breast cancer patients. While clinical 
trials offer cancer patients the optimum treatment, historical 
accrual of such patients has not been very successful. 
Developed as a browsing tool of a knowledge base structured 
as a decision tree, OncoDoc allows physicians to control the 
contextual instantiation of patient characteristics to build the 
best formal equivalent of an actual patient [26]. 
Originally published as textual documents, clinical practice 
guidelines have poorly penetrated medical practice because 
their editorial properties do not allow the reader to easily 
solve a given medical problem at the point of care [15]. 
OncoDoc has been developed as a guideline-based decision 
support system to provide best treatment recommendations 
[15]. It is non-automated and allows flexibility in guideline 
interpretation to obtain best patient-specific recommendations 
at the point of care [24]. Rather than providing automated 
decision support, OncoDoc allows medical practitioners to 
control the operationalization of guideline knowledge through 
his hypertextual reading of a knowledge base encoded as a 
decision tree. In this way, physicians have the opportunity to 
interpret the information provided in the context of the 
patient, therefore, controlling the categorization to the closest 
matching formal patient [15]. 
Within the tree different parameters describe the actual 
state of a patient. The complete expansion of the decision tree 
can be seen as a patient centered repository of all theoretical 
clinical situations that could be met within breast cancer 
pathology [26]. Recommendations based on the clinical state 
of the patient are displayed at the lower side of the decision 
tree and the path through it represents the clinical profile of 
the patient. (Fig. 4) 
The System has been tested at the Institut Gustave Roussy 
(IGR) with a before-after study in which treatment decisions 
for breast cancer patients were measured before and after 
using the system in order to evaluate its impact upon 
physicians' prescribing behaviour [24]. To assess how the 
system could be reused in another institution which was not 
involved in the development process, a new experiment at 
IGR was conducted. Minor site-specific customizations of the 
knowledge base were performed. After four months, 127 
cases were recorded. Results showed that there was no 
significant difference of physician compliance with OncoDoc 
(85%) when site-specific recommendations were, or not, 
available, although local recommendations were chosen 
preferably (55%), thus legitimating the adaptation [12]. 

Figure 4: Representation of the process underlying eligibility criteria 
screening [26] 
 
Summing up, the system uses patient characteristics to 
discriminate 
between 
different 
treatments 
alternatives, 
furthermore it offers matching clinical trials for the actual 
case. Physicians can be supported in disseminating between 
next therapy steps.   
4 Conclusions 
The domain and benefit of KM is not limited to a specific 
science or industry, its techniques are being implemented in 
each field and industry. For example, every company wants to 
acquire knowledge with less time and cost, and most research 
and innovation is based on traditional knowledge and 
information. All of these are possible with only the use of KM 
systems and techniques.  
  After studying different projects and their focus we 
conclude that KM is going to be more important and useful in 
medical science and assisted living, implementing knowledge 
based portals and knowledge learning techniques for future 
innovations. Of course KM is not limited to medical science, 
but it has had very sensitive growth and success in this area. 
Most medical centers and doctors want to function in real time 
and medicate their patients immediately, therefore research in 
assisted living projects is the most highlighted and this could 
be more efficient by employment of KM. 
First minutes of most medical attacks are very important for 
the consequences of disease. When patients are living in their 
private areas, direct support of the patient during the first 
minutes of an attack is not possible for the medical and 
support team. Therefore having urgent remote medicating and 
guidance system could be more helpful to decrease the 
consequences of diseases. That is the basic idea of assisted 
living projects which is common in most research institutes 
nowadays. Since some diseases need full time controlling and 
it is not possible for everybody to employ a full time nurse, 
the importance of remote and intelligent controlling systems 
are clear for everybody. One example of these applications 
could be knowledge based portals. They are able to share the 
knowledge of experts with individuals, exchange professional 
knowledge between experts, find the best fit and nearest 
medical centers for patients, find and introduce special cases 
of diseases for experts, establish panel discussion between 
experts and individuals, and so many other facilities. All of 
these services use different categories and techniques of KM. 
As a result KM is used in most sciences and industries 
because of its reasonable advantages to the systems, but 
nowadays it is more successful and helpful in medical 
sciences and most medical centers are interested in 
implementation and using KBSs. In this paper we have 
studied some failures in implementation of KM in 
organizations and some case studies of KM in medical 
science. Of course we know that challenges and success 
factors of KM implementations are not just limited to the 
what we have mentioned, but these are the most basic and 
mandatory conditions which every KBS should support. We 
think that KM will be more innovative and important given 
time. 
5 References 
[1] 
J. A. Albers, “A Practical Approach To Implementing Knowledge 
Management”, Journal of Knowledge Management Practice, Vol. 10, No. 1, 
March 2009. 
[2] 
M. Alavi, and D. E. Leidner, “Knowledge Management Systems: 
Issues, Challenges, and Benefits”, Communications of AIS, Vol. 1, Article 7, 
Feb. 1999. 
[3] 
M. Alavi, and D. E. Leidner, “Review: Knowledge Management and 
Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual Foundations and Research 
Issues”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 25, pp. 107–136, 2001. 
[4] 
S. Sarnikar, and A. Deokar, “Knowledge Management Systems for 
Knowledge-Intensive Processes: Design Approach and Illustrative Example”, 
in Proc. HICSS10, 2010. 
[5] 
M. E. Jennex, “What is KM?”, International Journal of Knowledge 
Management, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. I-iv, 2005. 
[6] 
M.E. Jennex, D. Croashell, “Knowledge Management: are we a 
discipline?”, International Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol. 1, No. 1, 
pp. I-iv, 2005.  
[7] 
P. Callone, A Caregiver's Guide to Alzheimer's disease: 300 Tips for 
Making Life Easier, Demos Medical Publishing ISBN-10: 1932603166, New 
York 2005. 
[8] 
C. Saunders, and M. Chiasson, “Using Knowledge Management 
Systems to Structure Knowledgeable Practices”, in Proc. HICSS09, 2009. 
[9] 
F. Machlup, Knowledge: Its Creation, Distribution, and Economic 
Significance, Volume 1, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 1983.   
[10] C. Bals, S. Smolnik and G. Riempp, “A Case for Integrated 
Knowledge Management”, in Proc. of the 4th Conference Professional 
Knowledge Management: Experiences and Vision, GITO, Berlin, 2007. 

[11] D. Vance, and J. Eynon, “On the Requirements of Knowledge- 
Transfer Using IS: A Schema Whereby Such Transfer is Enhanced”, in Proc. 
4th American Conference on Information Systems, pp. 632- 634, 1998. 
[12] J. Bouaud, B. Seroussi, “Impact of site-specific customizations on 
physician compliance with guidelines”, in Studies in health Technologies and 
Informatics; IOS Press; Netherlands, 2002. 
[13] C. Krzysztof, “Medical Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery”, 
Physica-Verlag, 2001. 
[14] B. Seroussi, J. Bouaud, and E. C. Antoine, “ONCODOC: A successful 
experiment 
of 
computer-supported 
guideline 
development 
and 
implementation in the treatment of breast cancer”, Artif. Intell. Med., Vol. 22 
No. 1, pp. 43-64, April 2001. 
[15] S. Chong, and Y. S. Choi, “Critical Factors in the Successful 
Implementation of Knowledge Management”, Journal of Knowledge 
Management Practice- In the Knowledge Garden, Vol. 6, June 2005. 
[16] L.P. Cooper, “An Evolutionary Model for KM Success”, in Proc. 
HICSS06, 2006. 
[17] P. Doraiswamy, L. Gwyther, and T. Adler, The Alzheimer's Action 
Plan: The Experts' Guide to the Best Diagnosis and Treatment for Memory 
Problems, St. Martin's Press ISBN-10: 0312355394, New York 2008. 
[18] S. Pantazi, J. Arocha, and J. Moehr, “Case-Based Medical 
Informatics”, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making Journal, Vol. 
4, No. 19, 2004. 
[19] F. Merges, A. Exner, N. Gummersbach, C. Höhne, C. Jaya, D. Klein, 
S. Klein, and B. Will, “Stroke Portal System”, Univ. of Siegen, StroPoS Tech. 
Rep.  2007. 
[20] R. Maier, Knowledge Management Systems – Information and 
Communication Technologies for Knowledge Management, Ed. Berlin, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2002. 
[21] J. Bouaud, B. Seroussi, E. C. Antoine, L. Zelek, and M. Spielmann, “A 
before-after study using OncoDoc, a guideline-based decision support-system 
on breast cancer management: impact upon physician prescribing behaviour”,  
in Proceedings of the 10th world Congress on Medical Informatics., pp.420-
4. 
[22] Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland; Todesursachen in Deutschland - 
Fachserie 12 Reihe 4 – 2008: Sterbefälle nach ausgewählten Todesursachen, 
Altersgruppen und Geschlecht; Gestorbene in Deutschland; Wiesbaden 2010. 
[23] B. Seroussi, J. Bouaud, E. C. Antoine, L. Zelek, M. Spielmann, “Using 
OncoDoc as a Computer-Based Eligibility Screening System to Improve 
Accrual onto Breast Cancer Clinical Trials”, Artificial Intelligence in 
Medicine Journal, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 53-67, Sep.-Oct. 2003
