arXiv:1001.2813v1  [nlin.AO]  18 Jan 2010
A Monte Carlo Algorithm for Universally
Optimal Bayesian Sequence Prediction
and Planning
Anthony Di Franco
Part I. Algorithm
Abstract
The aim of this work is to address the question of whether we can in prin-
ciple design rational decision-making agents or artiﬁcial intelligences embed-
ded in computable physics such that their decisions are optimal in reasonable
mathematical senses. Recent developments in rare event probability estimation,
recursive bayesian inference, neural networks, and probabilistic planning are suf-
ﬁcient to explicitly approximate reinforcement learners of the AIXI style with
non-trivial model classes (here, the class of resource-bounded Turing machines).
Consideration of the eﬀects of resource limitations in a concrete implementation
leads to insights about possible architectures for learning systems using optimal
decision makers as components.
Keywords
recurrent neural network, Turing machine, AIXI, reinforcement learning, plan-
ning, sequence prediction, Universal prior
1
Introduction
Hutter [1] deﬁnes the universal algorithmic agent AIXI, a Pareto-optimal policy
for arbitrary computable stochastic environments. Here we consider a Monte
Carlo algorithm for sequence prediction and planning in a Turing-universal
model class which seeks to statistically approximate resource-bounded AIXI
while avoiding the enumerative search in similarly powerful algorithms replac-
ing it with statistical approximations to the governing probability distributions.
Hutter held that “AIXI is computationally intractible, however, AIXI can
serve as a gold standard for A[rtiﬁcial] G[eneral] I[ntelligence] and AGI research.”
[2] The main diﬃculty in computing AIXI in a universal model class is obtaining
the algorithmic probabilities of the hypotheses, since the algorithmic probabil-
ities are only limit-computable. Previous approaches to learning in this class
enumerate proofs or enumerate and run programs in a hypothesis space with
their executions interleaved [3], [4]. We take a diﬀerent approach characterized
1

2
2 Architecture
by two main points: 1) The computation runs in tandem with the environmen-
tal process, and to succeed must produce the correct result at the same time
the environment demands it. Thus there is an implicit “speed prior” [5] im-
posed on the model parameterized by the frequency of operation of the model
with respect to the environment, or, alternatively, we are approximating AIXI-tl
with a time bound equal to the relative frequencies of the model’s cycle and the
environmental inputs, and length bound determined by the space available for
the model representation, but we rely directly on statistically valid approxima-
tions rather than proofs of valid approximation. 2) Otherwise, hypotheses are
weighted according to their representation-length complexity as in AIXI.
This part presents the algorithm, with experimental results deferred to the
second part, which is in preparation.
2
Architecture
Using the equivalence between recurrent neural networks and Turing machines
[6], we choose recurrent neural networks as the model class. Additional infor-
mation on the relationships between recurrent neural network architectures and
computational classes is available in [7]. The main advantages of this represen-
tation are that 1) it is parameterized by vectors of dense numbers and therefore
straightforward to sample from in a meaningful and statistically eﬃcient way
using established Monte Carlo techniques, and 2) while recurrent neural net-
works embed the class of Turing machines, they can be counted on to produce
meaningful outputs at any point in their operation, so do not suﬀer from the
halting problem in a way that presents algorithmic diﬃculties.
Among the class of recurrent neural networks, we choose a modiﬁed ver-
sion of Long Short-Term Memory [8] because it has established state-of-the-
art performance on benchmark tasks and because it can easily be seen as a
continuously-parameterized ﬂip-ﬂop fed and controlled by perceptrons, making
the the interpretation of the model more straightforward, and constraining it
to perform in a way known to be useful. This is a diﬀerent motivation from
its original one which was to prevent the premature decay of error signals in
training. The modiﬁcation here is to add a “bypass” gate which mixes the com-
putation directly into the output, rather than forcing the computation to ﬁrst
be stored in the state before being output, so that a cell can act either as a
memory or as a computational element according to circumstance.
The network outputs are made to predict the network inputs at the next
time step. Network inputs are presented in a binary encoding, so that network
outputs can be treated directly as a probability (that of observing a set input
bit) without less general assumptions on the probability distributions of network
inputs.
To plan, we present as input to the network a concatenation of the observed
environmental inputs (of which some subset is interpreted as a reward signal)
and the agent’s own outputs, and make the network generate samples of likely
continuation sequences by predicting a distribution over inputs and outputs for
the next timestep, sampling from the predicted distribution, predicting again by
taking the sample as if it had been observed, and so on recursively, and generated
samples from likely continuation sequences to plan by generating them out to
a speciﬁed horizon and selecting the next action in the continuation that yields

3
the most aggregate reward in the sample.
3
Algorithm
Overview
We ﬁrst obtain a sample from the Universal prior over the model class. This
must be done only one for a certain choice of model class (i.e. network topology).
Thereafter, the algorithm operates in discrete timesteps. At each timestep, the
current environmental inputs and the agent’s most recent outputs are presented
as inputs to the network, and the network updates its estimate of the neural
network parameters according to the probabilities it previously assigned to the
observed inputs. If an action is called for at the current timestep, the current
estimate of the network parameters is used to generate likely continuation se-
quences out to a speciﬁed time horizon, generating a likely continuation of the
sequence of network inputs, which consist of (environmental input, agent out-
put) pairs and where the environmental input contains a reward signal. The
next action is chosen as the agent output that serves as a partial preﬁx to the
set of continuation sequences with the most expected reward.
3.1
Prediction
Prediction has two components, the ﬁrst being obtaining a useful sample from
the Universal prior, and the second being recursively updating that sample to
reﬂect the posterior distribution in light of the data. For the sample from the
Universal prior, we face the practical diﬃculty that we wish to have signiﬁ-
cant numbers of samples from regions of the sample space with exponentially
decreasing probability, and so turn to techniques from rare-event probability es-
timation. For the computation of the posterior probability, we rely on standard
techniques from recursive Bayesian inference.
We seek to sample models from the model class with large weights w under
the following distribution so as to use ξ, the Universal posterior, as our predic-
tor, that is, we take the prior probabilities of hypotheses to be their Universal
probabilities and maintain their posterior likelihoods by Bayes’ rule (equations
and notation from [1]):
wν(xt=0) = 2−K(ν)
ξ(xt|x<t) =
X
ν∈M
wν(x<t)ν(xt|x<t), wν(x1:t) ←wν(x<t)ν(xt|x<t)
ξ(xt|x<t)
We measure the encoding-length (Kolmogorov) complexity of the mapping
from current states and inputs to subsequent states and outputs with the B
quantity from Flat Minimum Search [9] which gives the number of bits required
to encode the network’s parameters to maintain a certain amount of precision in
the mapping it represents. In the general case of multiple inputs going to mul-
tiple outputs, the full B quantity is required, but in this implementation where
each weight directly inﬂuences only one output within an iteration, the follow-
ing simpliﬁcation obtains, (with a constant term omitted as being irrelevant,) a
quantity reminiscent of the Fisher information:

4
3 Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Sampling from the Universal Prior
1. Choose a sample size S, number of levels desired NL, and quantile P; sug-
gested are S = 2parameterSpaceCardinality, NL = parameterSpaceCardinality,
P = 2.
2.
Generate an initial set of samples with Metropolis-Hastings by repeat-
edly drawing from a (say) multivariate Gaussian or Laplacian proposal cen-
tered at the current sample, accepting samples as their bounded likelihood ratio
min( 2−B(ν′)+K(xν′ )
2−B(ν)+K(xν ) , 1) is greater than a draw from a uniform(0,1) random vari-
able.
3. Proceed with algorithms 2.2 and 2.1 of [10] with a transition kernel g∗given
by a kernel density estimator over the sample, suggested is the multivariate
Gaussian or Laplace distribution with the sample variances or covariances.
B =
X
w∈weights
log(∂outputw
∂w
)2
We might also do this by following up to the determination of the gradient
the RTRL algorithm, or an equivalent technique given a diﬀerent choice of RNN
architecture, in which case we might then maintain the prior and posterior
terms in the ξ weighting separately, and recompute the prior term with the
recursive formula for the RTRL partial derivatives, and update the posterior
term recursively according to the formula given previously for ξ. However, the
previous paragraph’s method is most appropriate to the interpretation of the
recurrent neural network as a Turing machine, with the states serving as a
bounded work tape, and the neural network map serving as the state-transition
dynamics, and is preferred here.
Using B(ν) to approximate K(ν), we initialize a sample set of size S by rare-
event probability estimation by strata and acceptance / rejection according to
the Universal prior distribution parameterized by B. That is, given a propor-
tion P between zero and one, say one half, we generate samples from ν ∈M
according to p(ν) = 2−B(ν)+K(xν) with Metropolis-Hastings where K(xν) is the
encoding complexity of a state vector sampled jointly with the weights of ν,
then within the upper Pth quantile of the sample, we construct a kernel den-
sity estimator and recursively repeat the Pth quantile sample with the quantile,
recording the boundary value of the quantile at each step of the recursion as a
sequence of levels. Given the sequence of levels, we repeat the process with the
level thresholds replacing the quantiles. Notably, we obtain from this process
an estimate of the normalization constant of the Universal distribution, though
it is unused here. See [10].
Having thus obtained a sample from the Universal prior, which must only
be done once per instantiation of a network of a certain architecture, we then
update the posterior term recursively according to the formula given previously
for ξ.
Upon a degeneration of the sample as indicated by the variance of the weights
falling below a given threshold, we may resample by replicating and replacing
samples with samples from a kernel density estimate according to their weights
as in the sequential Monte Carlo literature, especially [11]. We can include in

3.2 Planning
5
Algorithm 2 Recursive Bayesian Posterior Update
Denote the current observation by xt, the previous set of weights by wν(x<t),
then:
1. Compute the probability of each sample ν in the sample set by propagating
each of the current weighted state samples through the network evolution rep-
resented by ν, and taking the likelihood of the resulting multivariate Bernoulli
with respect to the observed bits;
2. Update the weights using the resulting likelihoods according to wν(x1:t) ←
wν(x<t) ν(xt|x<t)
ξ(xt|x<t).
3. If the eﬀective sample size
(P
ν wν)2
P
ν(wν)2 has fallen below a pre-determined thresh-
old, say 50%, then:
3a. Sample with replacement from the set of ν with probabilies wν and assign
each a unit weight to form a new sample with the same distribution;
3b. Form a kernel density estimator for the new sample and take a new sample
from it, assigning each unit weight. Suggested is the shrunk kernel density esti-
mator given, for a kernel bandwidth b, by computing a =
√
1 −b2, translating
each parameter Θν in each sample ν towards the sample mean ¯Θ by taking the
linear combination aΘi + (1 −a)¯Θ, then sampling from a kernel parameterized
by the translated particles and a covariance of b2V , V being the sample variance
matrix. (See [11])
4. Sample a new set of states by repeating steps 2 and 3 with the roles of the
network parameters and states reversed.
eachν a representation of the state vector, that is, sample states and dynamics
as a block, or maintain separate estimates conditional on one another as is
more common in Kalman-ﬁltered recurrent neural networks. Here we choose
the latter. We may choose to use multiple RNN simulation steps per time step
of the environment to relax the time bound on the computation. Our estimate
of the probability of an input bit being set is then given by the wν-weighted
sum of our samples from M.
3.2
Planning
This model is observable, and state-determined, so the prerequisites for the
application of the approximately optimal stochastic planning algorithm in [12]
are satisﬁed. To plan, we jointly model environmental inputs, including the
reward signal, and agent actions, and sample continuations of the joint sequence
of these. We obtain a distribution over the future rewards of certain actions or
action sequences by grouping continuation samples according to the actions or
action sequences they contain, and plan by selecting at each time step the next
action with the highest expected total future reward. Arbitrary discounting
is easily accomodated by applying the appropriate factor to the sum at each
step in the continuation sequence. As an optimization, if the environment is
suﬃciently stationary and suﬃciently well-approximated by the model, it is
conceivable that preﬁxes longer than one timestep in length could be chosen
and executed without re-running the planner, but this is not considered further
here.

6
4 Outlook
Algorithm 3 Planning
At each time step when an action is called for:
1. Generate a probability distribution over continuations of network input se-
quences by making a copy of the state samples, and iterating steps 2 - 4 of
algorithm 2 on the state copy but without modifying the estimate of the net-
work parameters, until a sample of continuation sequences has been produced
out to the desired time horizon.
2. Group the continuation sequences according to their sharing a common next
agent action, and take the expected discounted future reward within each group.
3. Perform the action with the highest expected discounted future reward.
3.3
Remarks
The algorithmic-complexity-based parameter smoothing accomplishes a form of
principled dimensionality reduction within the upper bound imposed by the
dimension of the representation. A reversible-jump Monte Carlo sampler could
be used to select the dimensionality without an explicit upper bound [13].
To model input-output relationships, input-output pairs should be presented
as network inputs, with use of the planner being unnecessary, although the more
typical approach analogous to the operation of other neural networks of giving
the input as the network input, calling for the output as the agent action, and
giving a reward signal inversely related to the output error should also work,
but waste planning eﬀort.
3.4
Implementation notes
A prototype implementation is available at http://code.google.com/p/machine-tools
in the SolomonoﬀNet module.
We compute the partial derivatives of network outputs with respect to
weights, the key input to the computation of B, using forward-mode automatic
diﬀerentiation, a choice made mostly for implementation convenience and be-
cause in the general case here, where input dimension equals (or is less than)
output dimension, simply-implemented forward-mode diﬀerentiation is as eﬃ-
cient as (resp. more eﬃcient than) the reverse-mode (backpropagation) more
commonly encountered in neural network algorithms.
4
Outlook
This paper applies sampling to eﬀect AIXI-style learning in a speciﬁc Turing-
universal model class, but analogous techniques apply to any model class where
the parameters can be sampled, with appropriate modiﬁcations to take into
account the needs of sampling from another such model class, particularly the
determination of the encoding complexity, and the resulting mixture estimate
is as close to the true distribution as the model class permits [1].
In the recurrent network setting the map encoding complexity of the system
dynamics B is equivalent to the information rate of the corresponding process
and the topological entropy of the corresponding dynamical system. Together
with the sampling method presented here for the Universal prior, it could be

7
used to numerically characterize the complexity of other classes of dynamical
systems.
Approximately, but neglecting the encoding complexity structure of the pa-
rameter space, the size of the parameter space to be sampled grows exponentially
with network dimension, as does thus the cost associated with maintaining the
sample set, and the costs of other implementation details such as the Jacobian
accumulation and the peephole connections across modules in LSTM grow faster
than linearly. To mitigate these costs, a large network may be constructed as a
set of small network modules with the ability to view one another’s outputs or
states as additional environmental inputs, and a perhaps probabilistic locality
structure can be imposed to limit the interconnection costs while maintain-
ing bandwidth among computational nodes in the network, such as a topology
with power-law node degrees. An analogy can be drawn to decoupled extended
Kalman ﬁlter training of recurrent neural networks, though the interactions of
the modules require a more powerful theoretical framework to analyze because
of the bounded-Universal power of the models. Computability Logic [14] may be
such a framework, wherein the network modules can take each other as oracles.
Additionally, one can consider allowing these modules, capable of arbitrary com-
putation, to interact with other special-purpose modules, such as smoothers of
system input / output, pattern-associative memories, chess programs, etc. de-
pending on the problem domain.
This motivation for decoupling the large network into modules and to view
interactions of modules with their environment in terms of computabilty logic
suggests a model for the mammalian brain where cortical columns are identiﬁed
with resource-bounded general-purpose-computation modules and other parts
of the brain are either computational oracles or ﬁlters on input / output with
the environment. Suppose that the thalamus serves as the communication net-
work by which the modules are connected with one another over long ranges
and with other oracles / ﬁlters in the brain and the (perhaps ﬁltered) environ-
mental inputs / agent controls, and is responsible for distributing reward signal
information across the computational modules; that the hippocampus serves as
a pattern-associative memory in tandem with the cortical ensemble; that the
cerebellum serves as motor output consolidation and smoothing. Working un-
der that hypothesis, the functional specialization of diﬀerent regions of cortex
might be derived from considerations of the computational capacity of individ-
ual modules and the information bandwidth of the connections between groups
of modules in a region, other regions relevant to its function, and the locations
in the network of the relevant environmental inputs / outputs, rather than any
sort of a priori enforced anatomical specialization. Also, the brain can thus be
seen to implement a solution to the prediction and planning problems that is
optimal in a resource-bounded, stochastic sense, and quite general.
Separately, but also based on the idea of an architecture for an intelligent
agent built around a communication network that transmits data from the en-
vironment to a set of computational units, permits these computational units to
communicate with one another, and transmits commands back to be executed
upon the environment by the agent’s eﬀectors, this agent architecture suggest a
means of quantifying Boyd’s Observe-Orient-Decide-Act loop conceptual frame-
work [15] for analyzing strategic interactions, where observation is the capacity
in units of bits per second to provide sensory information to the computational
units, orientation is the capacity of the computational units to inform one an-

8
