AntiDeepFake: AI for Deep Fake Speech
Recognition
Enkhtogtokh Togootogtokh
Technidoo Solutions Lab
Technidoo Solutions Germany and Mongolian University of Science and Technology
Bavaria, Germany

Christian Klasen
Technidoo Solutions Lab
Technidoo Solutions Germany
Bavaria, Germany

Abstract—In this research study, we propose a modern artifi-
cial intelligence (AI) approach to recognize deepfake voice, also
known as generative AI cloned synthetic voice. Our proposed AI
technology, called AntiDeepFake, consists of all main pipelines
from data to evaluation in the whole picture. We provide
experimental results and scores for all our proposed methods. The
main source code for our approach is available in the provided
link: https://github.com/enkhtogtokh/antideepfake repository.
Index Terms—Anti DeepFake, AI DeepFake Detection, Voice
Clone
Recognition,
Synthetic
Voice
Recognition,
DeepFake
Recognition, Spoof Recognition, AI for Anti Spoof
I. INTRODUCTION
Deepfake technology refers to the use of artificial intelli-
gence and machine learning algorithms to create, manipulate,
or enhance digital images, videos, and audio recordings in
a way that makes them appear real and authentic. This
technology has the potential to be used for a variety of pur-
poses, including entertainment, marketing, and even political
propaganda. However, it also has the potential to be used
for malicious purposes, such as spreading misinformation,
blackmail, and identity theft.
One of the main concerns about deepfake technology is its
ability to create highly convincing fake videos and audios
that can be used to manipulate public opinion and spread
false information. As example, a deepfake video and audio
could be used to make it appear as though a politician said
something they never actually said, or to make it appear as
though a celebrity endorsed a product they never actually used.
This could have serious consequences for the reputation and
credibility of the individuals involved, as well as for the wider
public.
Another concern about deepfake technology is its potential
to be used for identity theft. With the ability to create highly
convincing fake audios and videos, it is possible for someone
to impersonate another person and use their identity to commit
crimes or access sensitive information. This could have serious
legal and financial consequences for the individuals involved,
as well as for the wider society.
In addition to these concerns, deepfake technology also
raises important ethical questions about the use of artificial
intelligence and the potential for technology to be used to
manipulate and deceive people. As this technology continues
to develop, it is important to consider the potential risks and
benefits, and to develop appropriate safeguards and regulations
to ensure that it is used in a responsible and ethical manner.
With current generative AI technology, deepfake technology
has become increasingly prevalent, with the ability to create
highly convincing audio and video clones of individuals. This
has raised concerns about the potential for misuse and the
need for effective methods to detect and prevent the spread
of deepfakes. In this paper, we propose a modern artificial
intelligence (AI) approach to recognize deepfake voice, which
we call AntiDeepFake.
The AntiDeepFake system consists of five main pipelines,
from data pipe to performance evaluation. The first pipeline
involves collecting a large dataset of real and deepfake audio
samples, which are then preprocessed feature extraction and
engineering to data split. The second pipeline involves training
a gradient boosted and tabular encoding decoding architecture
to classify the audio samples as either real or deepfake.
We present experimental results and scores for the An-
tiDeepFake system, which demonstrate its effectiveness in
recognizing deepfake voice. Our results show that the system
achieves high accuracy and robustness, even when faced with
challenging edge cases and synthetic deepfake samples. We
also provide the main source code for the AntiDeepFake
system, which can be used by other researchers and developers
to build upon our work and further improve the performance
of deepfake voice recognition systems.
Deepfake technology poses a significant threat to the in-
tegrity of audio and video content, and there is a urgent need
for effective methods to detect and prevent the spread of
deepfakes. Our proposed AI approach,AntiDeepFake, provides
a robust and accurate solution for recognizing deepfake voice,
and has the potential to significantly improve the security and
reliability of digital media.
Concretely, the key contributions of the proposed work are:
• The industry level AI technology for AntiDeepFake
• The tabular AI framework for tabular classification, re-
gression, and other tasks
Systematic experiments conducted on real-world acquired
data have shown as:
• It is possible to be common framework for many type of
deep fake speeches and synthetic data recognition.
arXiv:2402.10218v1  [cs.SD]  4 Jan 2024

• It is possible to achieve 99.9% accuracy on well prepared
training data to recognize.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The proposed
framework is described in Section II. The data pipeline is
explained in Section II-A. The state-of-the-art (SOTA) models
are explained in Section II-D. The details about the exper-
imental results and evaluations are presented in Section III.
Finally, Section IV provides the conclusions and future work.
II. THE PROPOSED ANTI DEEPFAKE VOICE
ARCHITECTURE (ANTIDEEPFAKE)
In this section, we discuss the proposed AntiDeepFake
approach for deepfake speech recognition as shown in Figure
1. The AntiDeepFake has five main pipelines which are the
data processing to extract efficient features and AI evaluation
and experimental results as shown in Figure 2. We discuss
them in detail with coming sections.
A. The data pipeline
Audio significant feature extraction is the important part of
modern deep learning. There are many mechanisms to do it.
Here we extract melspectrogram audio feature later to train
machine with high accuracy.
1) The data collection: To collect an audio dataset labeled
as genuine simply as real and spoof simply as fake, several
methods can be employed, including crawling technologies
and existing audio resources with ethical considerations.
• 1. For real audio datasets, speech datasets such as ljspeech
and public speeches can be utilized, as they are readily
available and have no restrictions, particularly for aca-
demic research purposes.
• 2. On the other hand, collecting fake audio dataset is
relatively straightforward due to the advancements in
modern synthetic voice cloning AI models, such as re-
cent state-of-the-art generative synthetic voice cloning AI
with generative pretrained transformer (GPT) architecture
technologies.
2) The data transformation: Furthermore, the audio voice
feature extraction process will result in tabular data, which we
will discuss in detail in the following sections.
B. The Feature Extraction
In order to analyze the unique characteristics of real human
voice, it is necessary to extract all relevant features from
an audio dataset. Audio significant feature extraction is the
important part of modern AI and deep learning [1]. In this
study, we have extracted the most significant features from
the dataset for the purpose of further feature engineering. The
extracted features, as presented in Table I, will be utilized in
subsequent analyses.
C. The Feature Engineering (Selection)
In practice, it is not necessary to consider all extracted
features, rather, it is more appropriate to focus on the most
significant features, which can be referred to as feature se-
lection or engineering. The importance of feature engineering
Feature Name
Variations
Pitch
STD, Mean
Shimmer
STD, Mean
Jitter
STD, Mean
Formants
F1, F2, F3, F4
Chroma STFT
STD, Mean
RMSS
STD, Mean
Spectral Centroids
STD, Mean
Spectral Bandwidths
STD, Mean
Rolloffs
STD, Mean
Zero Crossing Rates
STD, Mean
MFCC
STD, Mean
TABLE I
THE FEATURE EXTRACTION FROM AUDIO DATASET. STD - STANDARD
DEVIATION
lies in the fact that the quality and relevance of the features
used in a model can greatly affect its ability to accurately
predict outcomes. In addition, feature engineering can help to
address issues such as missing data and outliers, which can be
common in real-world datasets. By handling these issues, the
model can be more robust and better able to handle variations
in the data.
Overall, feature engineering plays a critical role in machine
learning by helping to ensure that the model is able to
accurately capture the underlying patterns and relationships
in the data, and by improving the efficiency and accuracy of
the model.
In general, there are three primary categories of methodol-
ogy for feature engineering:
• Filter. As example, Pearson
• Wrapper. As example, Custom Boosted Tree based new
approach (RFE) – SOTA
• Embedded. As example, Lasso Regularization
• Ensemble. As example, Combination of above 3 method-
olies
In this study, we applied a novel custom wrapper category
methodology as a gradient boosted Recursive feature elimina-
tion (RFE) approach. In our forthcoming research paper, we
will elaborate on this custom feature engineering methodology.
The success of any AI model in addressing a given problem
is highly dependent on the quality and quantity of the data
pipeline used. Therefore, it is crucial to have a well-proposed
data pipeline in place before implementing any SOTA AI
models or other advanced techniques.
The following is the algorithm for obtaining data process-
ing:
D. The AI modeling
In the field of tabular AI classification, gradient boosted
AI models and deep tabular data learning architectures that
incorporate sequential attention models have emerged as the
dominant approaches. Which means state-of-the-art models are
as example CatBoost [2] TabNet [4] , XGBoost [3] . The
expermintal results discuss in Section III. It will show how
their comparision and evaluation results.

Fig. 1. The proposed AntiDeepFake architecture (AntiDeepFake)
Algorithm 1: Data Process // AntiDeepFake Data
Process //
1: data = collect data() // Collect data
2: data = clean data(data) // Clean data
3: explore data(data) // Explore data
4: data = extract features(data) // Data Transformation and
Extract features
5: data = select features(data)
6: X train,y train,X test,y test = train test split(data)
7: return X train,y train,X test,y test
E. The AI training
In our research, we train on all state-of-the-art (SOTA)
models described in Section II-D, and the main training
algorithm employed is presented below:
Fig. 2. The Main AI Pipelines
Algorithm 2: Train // AntiDeepFake Train //
1: X train, y train, X test, y test = Process Data()
2: sota models = [TabNet(),XGBoost(),CatBoost()]
3: model = sota models[i], i= selected index
4: model.fit(X train,y train)
5: model.save(model save path)
F. The inference
After training process, the main inference algorithm em-
ployed is presented below:
Algorithm 3: Inference // AntiDeepFake Inference //
1: model = load(model save path)
2: y hat = model.predict(inference data)
3: return y hat

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND EVALUATION
In this section, we present the setup of our research and then
evaluate the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models using the selected
features. We conduct experiments in systematic scenarios to
analyze the performance of the models.
A. Setup
We train and test on ubuntu 18 machine with capacity of

NVidia GeForce GTX 1070, 16 GB).
B. The dataset
In this research paper, we present a dataset that was col-
lected in accordance with the description provided in Section
II-A1. The dataset contains two distinct speech labels, namely
real and fake speeches.
C. The AI Scores
Along with classification accuracy, further metrics are also
considered for model comparison. These are precision, which
measures the rate at which predicted positives are correct
among all positive predictions, and allows for false-positive
analysis. Precision is important since a high precision would
minimise false accusations of AI-generated speech when the
audio is, in fact, natural voice. Similarly, recall which is a
measure of how many positive cases are correctly predicted,
which enables analysis of false-negative predictions. Higher
recall suggests that the model is not falsely classifying AI-
generated speech as human speech. These results are then
combined to compute the F-1 score.
The accuracy of training and testing for SOTA models
is presented in Table II. Among the models evaluated, the
CatBoost model achieved the highest score
AI model
Training Accuracy
Testing Accuracy
CatBoost [2]
1.0
0.937
XGBoost [3]
1.0
0.925
TabNet [3]
0.86
0.80
TABLE II
THE SOTA MODEL TRAINING AND TESTING ACCURACY.
The following table III presents the main scores for the
CatBoost [2] model.
Name
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Real
0.94
0.93
0.94
Fake
0.93
0.94
0.94
Accuracy
0.94
Macro avg.
0.94
0.94
0.94
Weighted avg.
0.94
0.94
0.94
TABLE III
THE CATBOOST MODEL CONFUSION SCORES.
The following table IV presents the main scores for the
XGBoost [3] model.
The following table V presents the main scores for the
TabNet [4] model.
Fig. 3. The ROC Curve of CatBoost
Name
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Real
0.94
0.91
0.92
Fake
0.91
0.94
0.93
Accuracy
0.93
Macro avg.
0.93
0.93
0.93
Weighted avg.
0.93
0.93
0.93
TABLE IV
THE XGBOOST MODEL CONFUSION SCORES.
Fig. 4. The ROC Curve of XGBoost
Name
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Real
0.83
0.78
0.80
Fake
0.79
0.84
0.81
Accuracy
0.81
Macro avg.
0.81
0.81
0.81
Weighted avg.
0.81
0.81
0.81
TABLE V
THE TABNET MODEL CONFUSION SCORES.

Fig. 5. The ROC Curve of TabNet
IV. CONCLUSION
This research paper focuses on the recognition of gen-
erative AI, specifically, those related to deepfake with AI-
generated synthetic human speech. The contributions of this
study include the development a comprehensive analysis of the
modern AI pipeline significance of audio features extraction
and engineering from real and AI-generated synthetic speech,
and the SOTA of AI models that can predict the both real
and synthetic of speech. In future works, we will publish next
series of research to apply on AntiDeepFake for video analysis
tasks.
