arXiv:1101.3381v1  [cs.AI]  18 Jan 2011
Eﬃcient Independence-Based MAP Approach for Robust
Markov Networks Structure Discovery
Facundo Bromberg

Federico Schl¨uter

Information Systems Department
National Technological University, Facultad Regional Mendoza
Rodriguez 273, CP 5500, Mendoza, Argentina
Editor:
Abstract
This work introduces the IB-score, a family of independence-based score functions for ro-
bust learning of Markov networks independence structures. Markov networks are a widely
used graphical representation of probability distributions, with many applications in sev-
eral ﬁelds of science. The main advantage of the IB-score is the possibility of computing it
without the need of estimation of the numerical parameters, an NP-hard problem, usually
solved through an approximate, data-intensive, iterative optimization. We derive a formal
expression for the IB-score from ﬁrst principles, mainly maximum a posteriori and condi-
tional independence properties, and exemplify several instantiations of it, resulting in two
novel algorithms for structure learning: IBMAP-HC and IBMAP-TS. Experimental re-
sults over both artiﬁcial and real world data show these algorithms achieve important error
reductions in the learnt structures when compared with the state-of-the-art independence-
based structure learning algorithm GSMN, achieving increments of more than 50% in the
amount of independencies they encode correctly, and in some cases, learning correctly over
90% of the edges that GSMN learnt incorrectly. Theoretical analysis shows IBMAP-HC
proceeds eﬃciently, achieving these improvements in a time polynomial to the number of
random variables in the domain.
Keywords:
Graphical Models, Structure Discovery, Independence-based , Score-based,
Markov networks, Reliability.
1. Introduction
The present work presents a novel approach for the problem of learning the indepen-
dence structure of a Markov network (MN) from data by taking a maximum-a-posteriori
(MAP) Bayesian perspective of the independence-based approach (Spirtes et al., 2000).
Independence-based algorithms learn the structure by performing a succession of statistical
tests of independence among diﬀerent groups of random variables. They are appealing for
two important reasons: they are amenable to proof of correctness (under assumptions, see
more details on these and other Markov network concepts in the next section below); and
they are eﬃcient, reaching time complexities of O(n2) in the worst case, with n the number
of random variables in the domain. This runtime is an overwhelming improvement over
score-based approaches such as maximum-likelihood, that has super-exponential runtime
(more later).
1

Unfortunately, the above holds only in theory, as the correctness of the algorithms, i.e.,
the guarantee they produce the correct structure, is compromised when the independence
decision of the statistical tests is unreliable, an almost certainty when these tests are per-
formed on data. Moreover, as we discuss in more detail in the following sections, for tests to
be reliable they require data with size exponential in the number of variables n.To address
these important concerns, the present work focuses on algorithms for improving the quality
of independence-based approaches, while maintaining a manegeable runtime.
Our main contribution is the IB-score, the result of a hybrid approach between indepen-
dence and score based approaches, with improvements over both. On one hand, generalizing
on previous works, e.g. (Margaritis and Bromberg, 2009), it improves the quality of existing
independence-based algorithms by taking a Bayesian, MAP approach, modelling explicitly
the posterior distribution of structures given the data. On the other, it can be computed
eﬃciently, contrary to existing scores, as it does not require estimating the model param-
eters, an NP-hard computation usually approximated through a data-intensive iterative
algorithm.
This is achieved by ﬁrst modelling the uncertainty in the independencies as
random variables, and then expanding the posterior over these independencies, an opera-
tion that results in an expression for the posterior of the structures dependent only on the
posterior of independence assertions, that can be computed eﬃciently (c.f. §3).
We now proceed in the next Section 2 to discuss in more detail many of these concepts
and algorithms, including a thorough literature review. Following, Section 3 formalizes and
derives the IB-score from ﬁrst-principles. Section 4 introduces two algorithms IBMAP-
HC and IBMAP-TS, each exemplifying two diﬀerent possible optimization searches for
the MAP, and two diﬀerent possible instantiations of the IB-score.
Then, in Section 5
we present experimental results that conﬁrm the robustness of IBMAP-HC and IBMAP-
TS, and the polynomial runtime of IBMAP-HC. To conclude, we present a summary and
possible directions of future works in Section 6.
2. Markov networks
In this section we describe and motivate MNs in more detail, comparing various existing
approaches for learning an independence structure from data (Section 2.1), expanding on
the deﬁciencies of the approaches described above, and how our contribution addresses these
deﬁciencies successfully.
The innovation rate of computing and digital storage capacity is increasing rapidly as
time passes, producing an important increase in the data available in digital format. As
a response, the community of data mining and machine learning is constantly producing
novel and improved algorithms for extraction of the knowledge and information implicit in
this data. Without a doubt, the well-established probabilistic theory is a powerful mod-
eling tool contributing to most of these algorithms, specially when the data is uncertain
(i.e., measurements are noisy). Probabilistic graphical models (Pearl, 1988; Lauritzen, 1996;
Koller and Friedman, 2009) are a family of multi-variate, eﬃcient probability distributions
that, by codifying implicitly the conditional independences among the random variables
in a domain, produce sometimes exponential reductions in storage requirements and time-
complexity of statistical inference (more details below). These eﬃciencies are the reason
2

that probabilistic graphical models (or simply graphical models) has had an increasingly
important role in the analysis and design of machine learning algorithms in recent years.
Examples of successful applications include: computer vision (Besag et al., 1991; Anguelov et al.,
2005), restoration of noisy images, texture classiﬁcation and image segmentation; genetic re-
search and disease diagnosis (Friedman et al., 2000); spatial data mining such as geography,
transport, ecology, and many others (Shekhar et al., 2004).
A graphical model is a probabilistic model over the joint set V of random variables. It
consists in a set of numerical parameters Θ, and a graph G which encodes —compactly—
independences among all the random variables of the domain. The edges of G represent
explicitly all the possible probabilistic conditional independences among the variables, thus
called sometimes the independence structure or simply structure of the domain. We are
interested in the problem of learning a graphical model from data, that consists in learning
both the independence structure G, and the numerical parameters Θ, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
As in any statistical modeling process, we assume the data available (Fig. 1, center) is a
sampling of some unknown underlying probability distribution (Fig. 1, left), and learning
consists in producing a structure G and parameters Θ (Fig. 1, right) that best ﬁt the data,
with the hope that this model matches the underlying distribution.
Figure 1: Outline of the problem: we have at our disposal a dataset (center), assumed to be
a sampling of some unknown underlying probability distribution (left). Learning consists
in analyzing the input dataset to produce a model distribution (left). Learning consists in
analyzing the input dataset to produce a model that best ﬁts it (right), with the hope that
it matches the underlying model.
There are two predominant types of graphical models: Bayesian networks (BN) and
Markov networks (MN). For BNs, G is a directed and acyclic graph, and for MNs, G
is an undirected graph. These two families diﬀer in the independencies they can encode.
Not all sets of independences —and therefore not all the probability distributions— are
representable by graphs, and moreover, some sets of independences —and therefore some
distributions— are only representable by a BN, and others only by a MN (and some exists
that cannot be represented by neither a BN nor MN). For the case of MNs (our focus in
this work), distributions that can be faithfully representable by undirected graphs are called
graph-isomorph (see (Pearl, 1988) for more details). A common practice, and one we follow
in this work, is to assume that the underlying distribution (of which the input data is a
sample) is graph-isomorph.
3

In what follows, we use capitals X, Y , Z, . . . to denote random variables, and bold
capitals X, Y, Z, . . . to denote sets of random variables. We denote by V the set of all the
random variables in the problem domain, and its cardinality by n, i.e., | V |= n. In this
work, we assume that all variables in V are discrete. We denote the input dataset by D,
and its cardinality (i.e., the number of data points) by N. As we said before, a MN consists
in a set of numerical parameters Θ, and a graph G that encodes conditional independences
among the random variables contained in the set V. We use the notation I(X, Y | Z) to
denote the conditional independence predicate I over the triplet (X, Y | Z) which is true
(false) whenever X is independent (dependent) of Y , given the set of variables Z. The
graph G consists of n nodes, one for each X ∈V, and a set of edges E(G) between this
nodes that encode the set of all probabilistic conditional independences among the random
variables in V. Fig. 2 shows an example of a MN. The encoding of independences in a MN
is as follows:
(X, Y ) ∈E(G)
⇔
∀Z ⊆{V −{X, Y }}, ¬I(X, Y | Z)
(1)
In other words, an edge between two variables X and Y encodes the fact that X is
dependent of Y , conditioned on any set Z ⊆{V−{X, Y }}, and the lack of an edge between
variables X and Y means that ∃Z ⊆{V −{X, Y }} that satisﬁes I(X, Y | Z).
As shown in Pearl (1988), when the underlying model is graph-isomorph, the encoding is
equivalent to reading independences through vertex-separation, i.e., two variables X and Y
are independent (dependent) according to the graph given the set Z, if and only if variables
X and Y are disconnected (connected) in the sub-graph of G resulting from removing all
edges incident in a variable in Z. In other words, the set Z intercepts (does not intercepts)
every path from X to Y . To illustrate, consider variables 0 and 5. These variables are
dependent given {2} because there is still a path through variable 3, and thus independent
given {2, 3}.
Figure 2: An example Markov network with 7 nodes.
As mentioned, the strength of graphical models, both MNs and BNs, lies in the some-
times exponential reduction in storage capacity and time complexity of statistical infer-
ence. Storage and statistical inference (mostly marginalization) is exponential because the
representation of a multi-variate joint probability distribution over V consists in a multi-
dimensional table with n + 1 columns, and exponentially many tuples, each consisting in
a complete assignments of the n variables, and one column to store the probability of that
assignment. Fig. 3 (left) illustrates the table for the joint probability of a system of n binary
4

variables (i.e., that can take any of two values), consisting on 2n tuples, one per conﬁgura-
tion. The exponential reduction in storage and inference occurs because certain conditional
independences allow a decomposition of the joint probability into a product of factor or
potential functions, each quantiﬁed by the parameters Θ, and dependent on only a subset
of V. For instance, it is a well-known fact that when all n variables in V = {V1, ..., Vn}
are mutually independent, Pr(V1, ..., Vn) =
nQ
i=1
Pr(Vi). Since the tables associated with a
function over some set of variables is exponential in the number of variables in that set (as
exempliﬁed earlier in this paragraph for the case of the joint), the decomposition requires
then a polynomial number of (exponentially) smaller tables. Moreover, it can be shown
that in many cases the number of variables in each factors is bounded by a small number,
resulting in the exponential reduction in both storage and marginalization. To continue
with our example, the decomposition of the n binary variables results in n tables with only
2 tuples each, as illustrated in Fig. 3 (right). An important diﬀerence between MNs and
BNs lies in the properties of their factor functions. The factor functions of MNs are not
normalized, thus, in order to obtain a fully quantiﬁed probabilistic model, an exponential
computation of a normalization constant (known as the partition function) over all possible
assignments of the n variables is required. BNs, instead, allow a factorization of the joint
distribution into conditional probability distributions, i.e., normalized factors, that can thus
be learned eﬃciently from data (does not require normalization).
V1
V2
...
Vn
Pr(V1, .., Vn)
0
0
...
0
0.121
0
0
...
1
0.076
.
.
...
.
.
.
.
...
.
.
.
.
...
.
.
1
1
...
0
0.21
1
1
...
1
0.12
⇒
V1
Pr(V1)
0
0.21
1
0.79
,
V2
Pr(V2)
0
0.45
1
0.55
...
Vn
Pr(Vn)
0
0.42
1
0.58
Figure 3: Storage reduction over n binary variables from 2n to 2n.
2.1 Structure learning algorithms: background and related work
In this section we discuss the problem, and motivate our approach for solving it, in the
context of existing algorithms for learning structure from data.
Historically, the literature has presented two broad approaches for learning MNs: score-
based algorithms, and independence-based (also called constrained-based) algorithms. Score-
based algorithms, exempliﬁed by Lam and Bacchus (1994); McCallum (2003); Acid and de Campos
(2003), perform a search on the space of all possible graphs to ﬁnd the structure with maxi-
mum score. These algorithms diﬀer in the approach taken to explore the space of all graphs
(super-exponential in size, e.g., there are 2(n choose 2) undirected graphs with n nodes), and
in the functional form, and theoretical justiﬁcation, for the score. Examples of scores are
maximum likelihood Pr(D | G, Θ) of the data D given the model (Θ, G) (Besag, 1974),
5

minimum description length of the model (Θ, G) (Lam and Bacchus, 1994), or pseudo-
likelihood (Besag, 1975; Yu and Cheng, 2003; Koller and Friedman, 2009)), again of the D
given the model (Θ, G). The last approach, pseudo-likelihood, introduces an approximate
expression for computing the likelihood that does not require the normalization of the model
(i.e., the computation of its normalization constant). To compute the score of each struc-
ture G “visited” during the search, it is necessary to estimate the parameters Θ. For BNs
this operation can be performed eﬃciently (Heckerman et al., 1995), but for MNs this is a
costly operation that consists in an optimization in itself (Besag, 1974; Yu and Cheng, 2003;
Koller and Friedman, 2009). For instance, in the case of the likelihood, the optimization
would be over the space of parameters, for a ﬁxed structure G. We will later show that our
approach, although it requires a search over the space of structures, can compute eﬃciently
the (independence-based) score at each step as it does not require the estimation of the
parameters.
Independence-based algorithms (Spirtes et al., 2000; Aliferis et al., 2003; Tsamardinos et al.,
2003; Bromberg et al., 2009; Margaritis and Bromberg, 2009) have the ability to learn the
independence structure eﬃciently, as they do not require neither a search over structures,
nor the estimation of parameters at each step of their execution (of course, in order to ob-
tain a complete model (G, Θ) they do need to estimate the parameters once the structure
has been learned). Instead, these algorithms take a rather direct approach for construct-
ing the independence structure by inquiring about the conditional independences that hold
in the input data.
This inquiry is performed in practice through statistical tests such
as Pearson’s χ2 test (Agresti, 2002), more recently the Bayesian test (Margaritis, 2005;
Margaritis and Bromberg, 2009), and for continuous Gaussian data the partial correlation
test (Spirtes et al., 2000), among others. At each step, these algorithms propose a triplet
(X, Y | Z) and inquire the data whether independence or dependence holds for that triplet.
Which triplet is proposed at some step depends on the independence information the al-
gorithm has up to that point, that is, which triplets has been proposed so far, and their
corresponding independence value. To ﬁnd the structure consistent with this independence
information, these algorithms proceed by discarting, at each step, all those structures that
are inconsistent (i.e., do not encode) the independence just learned, until all but one struc-
ture has been discarded. Algorithms exist that require a number of tests that is polynomial
in the number n of variables in the domain, which, together with the fact that statisti-
cal tests can be executed in a running time proportional to the number of data points N
in the dataset, result in a total running time that is polynomial in both n and N. On
top of their eﬃciency, another important advantage of these algorithms, is that, under as-
sumptions (statistical tests are correct, and the underlying model is graph-isomorph), it is
possible to prove the correctness of these algorithms, i.e., that they return the structure
of the underlying model.
For a thorough example of such proof we refer the reader to
Bromberg et al. (2009). Unfortunately, statistical independence tests are not always reli-
able. Most independence-based algorithms are oblivious to this fact, evident from their
design, which discards structures based on a single test. If the test is wrong (i.e., it asserts
independence when in fact the variables in the triplet are dependent, or vice versa), the
underlying (true) structure may be discarded. This problem is not to be underestimated be-
cause the quality of statistical independence tests degrades exponentially with the number
of variables involved in the test. For example, (Cochran, 1954) recommends that Pearson’s
6

χ2 independence test be deemed unreliable if more than 20% of the cells of the tests con-
tingency table have an expected count of less than 5 data points. Since the contingency
table of a conditional independence test over (X, Y | Z) is d-dimensional, with d = 2+ | Z |
(Agresti, 2002), the number of cells, and thus the number of data points required, grows
exponentially with the size of the test. In other words, for a ﬁxed size dataset, the quality
of the test degrades exponentially with the size of its conditioning set.
This problem has been addressed by Bromberg and Margaritis (2009) using Argumen-
tation. Their approach modeled the problem as an inconsistent knowledge base consisting
on Pearl’s axioms of conditional independence as rules, and the triplets and their corre-
sponding assignments of independence values as fact predicates. If the underlying model
is graph-isomorph, its set of independencies must satisfy the axioms (see Pearl (1988);
Koller and Friedman (2009) for details).
In practice, however, independencies are not
queried directly to the underlying model, but to its sampled dataset. These independencies
may be unreliable, and thus may violate the rules. Argumentation is an inference procedure
designed to work in inconsistent knowledge bases. Bromberg and Margaritis (2009) used
this framework to infer independencies, sometimes resulting in inferred values diﬀerent than
measured values. Taking the inferred value as the correct one, they obtained important im-
provements in the quality of the reliability of statistical independence tests, and thus of the
independence structures discovered.
We present here an alternative approach to the unreliability problem. Our approach is
inspired by the work of Margaritis and Bromberg (2009), that designed an algorithm that
instead of discarding structures based on outcomes of statistical tests, maintains a distribu-
tion over structures conditioned on the data, i.e., the posterior distribution of the structures.
To learn the structure, the algorithm takes the maximum-a-posteriori approach. In the next
section we present the IB-score (independence-based score), an expression for computing ef-
ﬁciently the posterior of some structure based on outcomes of statistical independence tests,
and in the following sections we use this score in two diﬀerent algorithms that conduct the
search for its maximum. The resulting algorithms are hybrids of score and independence
based algorithms. Score-based because they proceed by maximizing a score, i.e., the poste-
rior of the structures given the data or as we call it, the IB-score; and independence-based,
because the IB-score is computed through statistical tests of independence (thus its name).
However, contrary to previous score-based approaches, the computation of the score (the
IB-score) does not require the estimation of the numerical parameters Θ and is therefore
eﬃcient.
3. Our approach: independence-based MAP structure learning
As discussed in the previous section, independence-based algorithms has the advantage of
not requiring neither a search over structures, nor an interleaved estimation of the param-
eters estimation at each iteration of the search (a search in itself, (Yu and Cheng, 2003)).
Unfortunately, these advantages are compensated by a major robustness problem as the
vast majority of the independence-based algorithms rely blindly on the correctness of the
tests they perform, with the risk of discarting the true, underlying structure when the test
is incorrect. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that the reliability of statistical in-
dependence tests degrades exponentially with the size of the conditioning set of the test
7

(for some ﬁxed size dataset). To overcome this robustness problem we take a Bayesian
approach, inspired and extended from (Margaritis, 2005; Margaritis and Bromberg, 2009).
This approach models the problem of MN structure learning as a distribution over structure
given the data, i.e., the posterior distribution of structures. Under this model, structures
that are inconsistent with the outcome of a test are not discarded, but their probability is
reduced. The approach taken is a combination of score and independence based algorithms
for structure learning. Score-based because we search for the structure G⋆whose poste-
rior probability Pr(G | D) is maximal, that is, we take the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP)
approach:
G⋆= arg max
G Pr(G | D),
(2)
and independence-based because the expression obtained for computing the posterior
probability is based on the outcome of statistical independence tests, as explained in detail in
the following section. Later, in section 4 we present two practical algorithms for conducting
the maximization: IBMAP-HC (Independence-based maximum a posteriori hill climbing)
and IBMAP-TS (Independence-based maximum a posteriori tree search).
3.1 Independence-based posterior for MN structures: the IB-score
In this section we present the IB-score, a computationally feasible expression for the pos-
terior Pr(G | D). We proceed by re-expressing the posterior of structure G in terms of
the posterior of a particular set of independence assertions C(G) we call the closure, and
then, through approximating assumptions, obtain an eﬃciently computable expression for
the posterior we call the IB-score.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne formally the closure C(G) of a structure G:
Deﬁnition 1 (Closure). A closure of an undirected independence structure G is a set C(G)
of conditional independence assertions that are suﬃcient for determining G.
We can illustrate this deﬁnition by a couple of examples:
Example 1. According to Eq. (1), we can construct a closure for G by adding the assertion
I(X, Y | V−{X, Y }) for every pair of variables X, Y ∈V, X ̸= Y , for which there is no edge
in G, i.e., (X, Y ) /∈E(G). Otherwise, if there is an edge between them, i.e., (X, Y ) ∈E(G),
add the assertions ¬I(X, Y | Z) for every Z ⊆V −{X, Y }.
Example 2. Our second example considers any independence-based algorithm for which
exists a proof of correctness; under the usual assumptions of faithfulness and correctness of
the independence assertions. That is, proof that when provided with correct independence
values for each independence inquiry, the structure G⋆output by the algorithm is the only
one consistent with those values. Being G⋆the only possible structure for those indepen-
dencies, the independencies determine G⋆, and they conform a closure. Examples of correct
algorithms for MNs are the GSMN and GSIMN algorithms (Bromberg et al., 2009).
We now prove an important Lemma that asserts that the posterior Pr(G | D) of a
structure exactly matches the posterior Pr(C(G) | D), for any closure of G C(G).
8

Lemma 2 (Probabilistic equivalence of structures and closures). For any undirected inde-
pendence structure G and any closure C(G) of G, it holds that
Pr(G | D) = Pr(C(G) | D).
Proof The proof proceeds by incorporating, in two steps, the information of independence
assertions contained in the closure C(G) of G into the posterior Pr(G | D).
First, we
model as random variables the uncertainty of independence assertions obtained through
unreliable statistical independence tests.
Formally, the uncertainty in the independence
assertion I(T) = t, denoting that the triplet T is independent (dependent) when t = true
(t = false), is formalized by a random variable T taking the values t ∈{true, false}
(note the notation overload). Second, for each independence assertion (I(Ti) = ti) ∈C(G),
i = 1, . . . , c, and c = |C(G)|, we incorporate Ti (its corresponding random variable) into the
posterior using the law of total probability, namely:
Pr(G | D) =
X
t1∈{t,f}
X
t2∈{t,f}
. . .
X
tc∈{t,f}
Pr(G, T1 = t1, T2 = t2, . . . , Tc = tc | D)
where t and f are abbreviations of true and false, respectively. We simplify this expres-
sion by ﬁrst collapsing the c uni-dimensional summations over {t, f} into a single, multi-
dimensional summation over {t, f}c, then abbreviating Ti = ti by ti, and then {t1, t2, . . . , tc}
by t1:c, obtaining
Pr(G | D) =
X
t1:c∈{t,f}c
Pr(G, t1:c | D).
Applying the chain rule to the terms in the summation we obtain
Pr(G | D) =
X
t1:c∈{t,f}c
Pr(G | t1:c, D) × Pr(t1:c | D)
Now, by deﬁnition of a closure, a structure G is determined by its independence asser-
tions, i.e., the probability of G given these assertions (and any other variable such as D),
must equal 1. Moreover, if we ﬂip the independence value of any of these assertions, then
it is clear that G cannot be the structure, in other words, its probability given the ﬂipped
assertions (and any other variable such as D) must be 0. This results in the left factor
Pr(G | t1:c, D) in all terms of the summation being 0, except for the term containing the as-
signments consistent with the closure (where it is 1). If we denote by {tG
1 , tG
2 , . . . , tG
c } = tG
1:c
these assignments, we get
Pr(G | D) = Pr(tG
1:c | D),
and the lemma is proved by noticing that tG
1:c is not more than the closure C(G).
Unfortunately, to the best of the authors knowledge, there is no method for computing
the joint Pr(C(G) | D) of many independence assertions. We are forced then to make the
9

approximation that the independence assertions in the closure are all mutually independent.
This gives us the IB-score(G) of G:
c
Pr(C(G) | D) = IB-Score(G) =
Y
(I(T)=t)∈C(G)
Pr(T = t | D)
(3)
which can now be computed using the Bayesian test of independence of Margaritis (2005);
Margaritis and Bromberg (2009) to compute the factors Pr(T = t | D).
The approximation implies that our belief in the independence of any triplet T in the
closure is not aﬀected by our knowledge that some other triplet T ′ in the closure is inde-
pendent (or dependent). This my not be true in practice. It is certainly false when the
two triplets are related through Pearl axioms of independence (Pearl, 1988). In that case
they determine each other, i.e., Pr(T | T ′, D) = 1, and thus their joint probability is easily
computable: Pr(T, T ′ | D) = Pr(T | T ′D) × Pr(T ′ | D) = Pr(T ′ | D). For triplets that
are not related through Pearl axioms we are forced into this approximation until a method
for computing the joint over several independence assertions is developed (if this is at all
possible).
To conclude this section we note that we had made a single approximation, namely, that
the random variables of independence assertions are mutually independent. The expression
found can be computed eﬃciently, with a runtime complexity proportional to the sum of the
complexities of the statistical tests performed for computing the probability Pr(T = t | D)
of each factor. In Bromberg and Margaritis (2009) it is argued that the computational cost
of performing a statistical test on data for the triplet (X, Y | Z) is proportional to the
number of data points in the dataset, i.e., N, times the total number of variables involved
in the test, i.e., 2 + |Z|. So in the worst case, the complexity of the IB-score would be
O(|C(G)|.N.τ ∗),
(4)
where τ ∗= maxT∈C(G) |T|, i.e., the number of variables in the triplet, among all triplets in
the closure, with the maximum number of variables.
4. Practical algorithms for MAP optimization
A full speciﬁcation of the MAP search of Eq. (2) requires the speciﬁcation of the search
mechanism and the closure chosen for the structures.
We present in what follows two
approaches: IBMAP-HC (Independence-based maximum a posteriori hill climbing) and
IBMAP-TS (Independence-based maximum a posteriori tree search) that diﬀer in both
the search mechanism (hill climbing and tree search, respectively), and in the choice of
closure (Markov blanket based, and algorithm based, respectively).
The motivation for
these choices is two-fold. First, they serve as more realistic examples of closures than those
given in Section 3.1, and second, the more implementations of the IB-score, more robust
the experimental conclusions. Let us discuss in detail each of these approaches.
4.1 IBMAP-HC: Independence-based MAP structure learning using hill
climbing and Markov based closure.
We proceed now with the speciﬁcation of the closure and search procedure chosen for
IBMAP-HC.
10

Given a domain of variables V, n = |V|, we propose the hill climbing local search
mechanism for ﬁnding the best structure in the space of all undirected structures of size n.
Starting from some structure G, the search proceeds ﬁnding the structure G′ with maximum
IB-score among all structure one edge-ﬂip away from G.
An edge-ﬂip of some pair of
variables (X, Y ), consists on removing the edge (X, Y ) from G, if such edge exists, or adding
it otherwise. The amount of neighbors thus equals the number of pairs of variables, which is
n(n −1)/2. The algorithm continues recursively from G′, until all structures one ﬂip-away
has smaller IB-score, i.e., until the algorithm reaches a local maxima. As a starting structure
we chose the structure output by the GSMN algorithm (Bromberg et al., 2009). This way,
the hill climbing search can be seen as a perturbation of the output of GSMN, with the hope
that the local maxima in the proximity of GSMN has better quality. Experimental results
conﬁrm this is in fact the case. This could be done of course with structures output by any
other structure learning algorithm, although we expect improvements only on independence-
based algorithms. Our experiments show results for GSMN only.
For the closure, we chose one based on Markov blankets. Let us ﬁrst deﬁne the concept
of Markov blanket and then explain how it can be used to specify a closure.
Deﬁnition (Pearl (1988), p.97). The Markov blanket of a variable X ∈V is a set BX ⊆
V −{X} of variables that “shields” X of the probabilistic inﬂuence of variables not in BX.
Formally, for every W ̸= X ∈V,
W /∈BX ⇒I(X, W | BX −{X, W})
(5)
A Markov boundary is a minimal Markov blanket, i.e., non of its proper subsets satisfy
Eq.(5).
The substraction of X and Y from BX in the consequent of Eq. (5) is redundant, as
neither X nor Y are in the blanket, and it is made explicit for later convenience. Also,
unless explicitly stated, from now on any mention of Markov blanket refers to a minimal
Markov blanket, that is, to a boundary.
It can be proven that for Markov boundaries, the opposite direction of Eq. (5) also
holds, that is,
Lemma 3. For every W ̸= X ∈V, if BX is the Markov boundary of X, then
W /∈BX ⇐I(X, W | BX −{X, W}),
(6)
The proof of this Lemma is discussed in Appendix A.
We can now present the Markov-blanket closure used by IBMAP-HC. We do it through
the following Theorem:
Theorem 4 (Markov-blanket closure). Let V be a domain of random variables, G an
independence structure over V, and let BX denote the Markov boundary of a variable X ∈
V. Then, the set of independences
CMB(G) =
n
I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) | X, Y ̸= X ∈V, (X, Y ) /∈E(G)
o [
n
¬I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) | X, Y ̸= X ∈V, (X, Y ) ∈E(G)
o
(7)
11

is a closure of G. That is, for each variable X and each other variable Y ̸= X, if the pair
(X, Y ) is an edge in G then add ¬I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) to the closure, otherwise add
I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }).
We need one ﬁnal result to prove the Theorem, a relation between Markov boundaries
and independence structures:
Corollary 2 (Pearl (1988), p.98). The independence structure G of any strictly positive
distribution over V can be constructed by connecting each variable X ∈V to all members
of its Markov boundary BX. Formally,
∀Y ∈BX ⇔(X, Y ) ∈E(G)
(8)
Proof [Theorem 4]
To prove that CMB(G) determines G, we must prove the fact that an edge between X
and Y exists or not is determined by the independencies in CMB(G). We do it separately
for existence and non-existence of edges.
For edge existence:
Let (X, Y ) ∈E(G). Is this edge determined by CMB(G)? By deﬁnition of CMB(G),
the assertion ¬I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) must be in CMB(G). It is suﬃcient then to prove
that ¬I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) ⇒(X, Y ) ∈E(G). This follows from the counter positive of
Eq. (5) and Eq. (8).
For edge absence: Let (X, Y ) /∈E(G). Is this lack of edge determined by CMB(G)?
By deﬁnition of CMB(G), the assertion I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) must be in CMB(G). It is
suﬃcient then to prove that I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }) ⇒(X, Y ) /∈E(G). This follows from
Eq. (6) and Eq. (8).
4.1.1 Complexity of IBMAP-HC
Let’s ﬁrst discuss the computational complexity of IB-score using the Markov blanket clo-
sure. According to Eq. (4), this complexity is O(|CMB|Nτ ∗). To obtain |CMB| note that for
each variable X in V, and each other variable Y ̸= X, there is either an edge or not, but
both cases cannot happen. Thus, for any pair X ̸= Y either the condition on the l.h.s. of
the union in Eq. (7) is true, or the condition in the r.h.s. is true, so only one independence
assertion is added per pair of variables. Therefore, |CMB| = n(n −1). We can also note
that τ ∗= 2 + |BX∗|, where X∗is the variable with the largest blanket.
A straight-forward implementation of the hill climbing computes the IB-Score for each
of the n(n −1)/2 neighbors, resulting in a total complexity of O
 n2(n −1)2Nτ ∗/2

. There
is a trick, however, for reducing the complexity of each neighbor’s IB-Score by one order
of magnitude. The diﬀerence of each neighbor with the currently visited structure G is
exactly one edge, say (X, Y ). In the two cases of an edge being removed, or an edge being
added, the blanket of both X and Y would change, and thus the conditionant of all 2(n−1)
independence assertions in the closure containing either X or Y . All other independence
assertions would remain exactly as in G, and thus, an incremental computation of the
IB-score would require only 2(n −1) statistical tests, resulting in a time complexity of the
(incremental) IB-score of O (2(n −1)Nτ ∗), and a time complexity of one hill climbing step of
12

O
 n(n −1)2Nτ ∗
. That is, a reduction of a factor n/2 with respect to the non-incremental
alternative.
Finally, if we denote by M the total number of hill climbing iterations, the overall
complexity of the IBMAP-HC algorithm is O
 Mn(n −1)2Nτ ∗
. Unfortunately M is un-
known, and can only be obtained through empirical measurement. We thus report it in our
experiments.
4.2 IBMAP-TS: Independence-based MAP structure learning using tree
search and GSMN based closure.
In this section we introduce another algorithm, IBMAP-TS (Independence-based max-
imum a posteriori using tree search) for learning an independence structure using the
independence-based MAP approach of Section 3.
This algorithm implements the maxi-
mization through a tree search, the uniform cost algorithm, using an algorithm-based closure
described brieﬂy above in Example 2. The resulting algorithm is not eﬃcient, requiring an
exponential number of statistical tests to ﬁnd the structure with maximum IB-score. How-
ever, we believe its description here and the presentation of experimental results later, to
be helpful in two ways. First, the closure presented is generic, in the sense that can be eas-
ily instantiated for other independence-based algorithm besides the GSMN algorithm used
here. Also, although the algorithm is exponential in time, the quality improvements ob-
tained through experimentation help to reinforce the hypothesis that the IBMAP approach
improves the quality of the structures learned.
Let’s start formalizing the process followed by an independence-based algorithm. As
mentioned above in Section 2.1, an independence-based algorithm proceeds as follows: at
each iteration i, it proposes a triplet Ti and performs a statistical independence test (SIT)
on data to obtain an independence assertion Ti = tSIT
i
. The superscript SIT is included for
later convenience, and denotes that the independence value considered is the one indicated
by the statistical independence test. Which triplet is selected at iteration i depends on
T1:i−1 = tSIT
1:i−1, that is, on the sequence T1:i−1 of triplets proposed so far (in iterations 1
through i−1), and the independence values tSIT
1:i−1 that statistical tests assigned them (with
T1:0, tSIT
1:0
indicating the empty set of triplets and assertions, respectively). Each iteration
of an independence-based structure learning algorithm can thus be summarized as follows:
Ti
←−
A(T1:i−1 = tSIT
1:i−1)
(9)
tSIT
i
←−
SIT(Ti)
where A denotes the operator that decides the next triplet.
These algorithms proceed until the set of independence assertions done so far is suﬃcient
for determining a structure. By the deﬁnition of closure, this set is thus a closure. We call
the closure obtained in this way an algorithm-based closure.
How can we then use this closure in a MAP search? At each iteration i, we propose
considering, besides the independence assertion Ti = tSIT
i
, the alternative value Ti = ¬tSIT
i
.
In other words, we propose to distrust the statistical test. Interestingly, this change should
not aﬀect the algorithm. It would simply continue as if the statistical test would have given
the other value. Moreover, it would also ﬁnd a structure eventually, and the assertions
found during its execution would thus be a closure as well. Clearly, the structure found
13

would be diﬀerent.
In summary, each such bifurcation into Ti = tSIT
i
and Ti = ¬tSIT
i
produces a diﬀerent family of structures whose posterior can be computed using as closure
the assertions obtained during its execution.
To ﬁnalize, we can notice each bifurcation splits the sequence of independences in two,
each of which is recursively split in the next iteration. This can be modeled by a binary tree,
with each node corresponding to an independence assertion, and whose children correspond
to the two assignments for the triplet obtained by applying A to the assertions in the path
from the root to the parent. An exception is the root node, which represents a dummy
empty sequence node. Each path from the root to a leave, not only determines a structure,
but it determines a closure {T1 = t1, T2 = t2, . . . , Tc = tc} for that structure. This closure
can then be used to compute the IB-score of the structure by multiplying the posterior
of the independence assertion of each node in the path, i.e.,
cQ
i=1
Pr(Ti = ti | D). Under
this view, ﬁnding the structure with maximum IB-score (i.e., the MAP structure) can be
done through any tree search algorithm using as successor function the operator A, and as
cost of each action −log Pr(Ti = ti | D). Since the log of a product is the sum of the logs,
and the log is a monotonous function, ﬁnding the maximum IB-score
cQ
i=1
Pr(Ti = ti | D)
is equivalent to ﬁnding the path with the minimal path-cost, i.e., the sum of the costs of
nodes in the path or
cP
i=1
−logPr(Ti = ti | D).
We implemented and tested IBMAP-TS with the closure constructed using the GSMN
algorithm and uniform cost strategy to search the tree. We chose GSMN to demonstrate
our approach for being a well established independence-based Markov networks structure
learning algorithm. This algorithm uses the GS algorithm (Margaritis and Thrun, 2000)
for learning the Markov blanket of every variable X ∈V, and uses Corollary 2 to build the
structure. Results comparing the quality of structures learned by GSMN versus IBMAP-TS
with uniform cost and GSMN based closure are shown in the experimental results section.
One important advantage of uniform cost is that its solutions are optimal. To improve over
its exponential runtime, we tested a few heuristics (not reported here), but with no success
in avoiding exponential runtimes. We thus limit our ﬁndings to uniform cost.
Fig.(4) shows an example (partial) search tree for a small system of three random
variables V = {0, 1, 2}.
Each node is annotated with both the triplet and indepen-
dence assertion of the triplet (e.g., node 1I is labeled by I(0, 1 | {})), the posterior prob-
ability of this independence assertion (e.g.,Pr(I(0, 1 | {}) | D) = 0.6), the local cost
(e.g.,−log(Pr(I(0, 1 | {}) | D)) = 0.511), the partial computation of the IB-score (e.g.,
for 1I this would 0.4 × 0.6, the product of costs of all nodes from the root to 1I), and
ﬁnally, the partial path-cost as the minus log of the product (e.g., 1.427 for 1I). The node
with the checkmark (and underlined) is the one with lowest path-cost, and thus the next
in line to be expanded by uniform-cost.
5. Experimental evaluation
We describe several experiments for testing the eﬀectiveness of the IB-score for improv-
ing the quality of independence structures discovered by our novel independence-based
algorithms IBMAP-HC and IBMAP-TS (c.f. §4). The experiments also corroborate the
14

0
2I
t = I(0, 2 | {})
Pr(t | D) = 0.4
cost = 0.916
1I
t = I(0, 1 | {})
Pr(t | D) = 0.6
cost = 0.511
0.6 × 0.4 = 0.24
path-cost= 1.427
1D
t = ¬I(0, 1 | {}),
Pr(t | D) = 0.5
cost = 0.693
0.5 × 0.4 = 0.20
path-cost= 1.609
2D ✓
t = ¬I(0, 2 | {}) ,
Pr(t | D) = 0.7
cost = 0.357
1I
t = I(0, 1 | 2),
Pr(t | D) = 0.75
cost = 0.288
0.75 × 0.7 = 0.53
path-cost= 0.647
1D ✓
t = ¬I(0, 1 | 2),
Pr(t | D) = 0.85
cost = 0.163
0.85 × 0.7=0.60
path-cost= 0.52
Figure 4: Example partial binary tree expanded by IBMAP-TS with uniform cost search
and GSMN-based closure.
practicality of IBMAP-HC, i.e., its polynomial running time, as discussed theoretically in
Section 4.1.1.
5.1 Experimental setup
We discuss here the performance measures we use for testing the quality of output networks,
and the time complexity of the algorithms, as well the datasets on which these performance
was measured.
5.1.1 Datasets
We ran our experiments on benchmark (real-world) and sampled (artiﬁcial) datasets. Real
world datasets allow an assessment of the performance of our algorithms in realistic settings
with the disadvantage of lacking the solution network, thus resulting in approximate mea-
sures of quality. We used the publicly available benchmark datasets obtained from the UCI
Repositories of machine learning (A. Asuncion, 2007) and KDD datasets (Hettich and Bay,
1999). Artiﬁcial datasets, although more limited in the scope of the results, are sampled
from known networks allowing a more systematic and controlled study of the performance
of our algorithms.
Using a Gibbs sampler, data was sampled from several randomly generated undirected
graphical models, each with a randomly generated graph and parameters. We considered
models with diﬀerent number of variables n (e.g., n = 12, 50), and diﬀerent number τ of
neighbors per node (we used τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 in all our experiments). For a given n and τ, 10
graphs were generated, connecting randomly and uniformly, each of the n nodes to τ other
nodes. This was achieved by connecting each node i with the ﬁrst τ nodes of a random
permutation of [1, . . . , i−1, i+1, . . . , n]. For each of the generated graphs, a set of parameters
was generated randomly following a procedure described in detail in Bromberg et al. (2009)
15

that guarantees dependencies remains strong for variables distant in the network. Finally,
one dataset was sampled for each of the generated pair of graph and set of parameters.
5.1.2 Computational cost measure
One of the hypothesis we wanted to prove with our experiments is the polynomial run-
time of IBMAP-HC. In Section 4.1.1 we found the time complexity of IBMAP-HC to be
O
 Mn(n −1)2Nτ ∗
. For this expression to be polynomial both M and τ ∗should at most
grow polynomially with n. The size of the largest triplet test τ ∗depends only in the con-
nectivity of the networks, which we kept ﬁxed at τ. Instead, we have no elements to predict
the behavior of M, as it depends solely on the landscape of the score function. We thus
report M in our experiments as a measure of complexity.
5.1.3 Error measures
We measured quality through two types of errors between the output network and a model
considered to be the correct one: the edges and independences Hamming distance.
For
the case of artiﬁcial datasets the comparison was done against the true, known, underlying
network, whereas for real datasets the comparison was done against the data itself. Let us
discuss these quantities in detail:
• The edge Hamming distance HE(G, G′) between two graphs G and G′ of equal number
of nodes, represents the number of edges that exist in G, and do not exist in G′, and
vice versa. Put another way, it measures the minimum number of edge substitutions
required to change one graph into the other. To measure the error of a structure
G output by a structure learning algorithm we measure its edges Hamming distance
HE(G⋆, G), or simply H⋆
E(G), with the solution network G⋆. Formally, if we deﬁne
the following indicator function for evaluating the existence of an edge between two
variables X and Y in G,
EG(X, Y ) =
 1
(X, Y ) is an edge in G
0
otherwise.
(10)
the edges Hamming distance is deﬁned as
H⋆
E(G) =

(
X, Y ∈V, X ̸= Y
 EG(X, Y ) ̸= EG⋆(X, Y )
)
(11)
• Given two probability distributions P and P ′ over the same set of variables V, we
deﬁne the independences Hamming distance HI(P, P ′) between them to be the (nor-
malized) number of matches in a comparison of the independence assertions that holds
in P and P ′. That is, if T denotes the set of all possible triplets over V, it is checked
for how many triplets t ∈T , t is independent (or dependent) in both distributions, and
then normalized by T . Unfortunately, the size of T is exponential. We thus compute
the approximate Hamming distance ˆHI(P, P ′) over a randomly sampled subset of bT ,
uniformly distributed for each conditioning set cardinality. In all our experiments we
used | bT | = 2, 000, constructed as follows: for each m = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n −2, | bT |/(n −1)
16

triplets (X, Y | Z) with cardinality |Z| = m were sampled randomly and uniformly
by ﬁrst generating a random permutation [π1, π2, . . . , πn] of the set of all variables V,
and the assigning X = π1, Y = π2, and Z = [π3, . . . , πm].
In what follows we are not given a fully speciﬁed distribution. Instead, dependending
on the type of dataset being artiﬁcial or real, we are given the independence structure
or a sample (i.e., a dataset), respectively. Independencies, however, can be measured
over both independence structures and datasets, so in both cases we can measure
(approximately) the independence Hamming distance. Let’s consider both cases.
To estimate the error of structures output by our algorithms when run over artiﬁcial
datasets, we measured their independence Hamming distance HI(G, G⋆) (or simply
bH⋆
I (G)), with the underlying true network G⋆, querying independences directly on
the structures using vertex-separation. Formally, if we denote IG⋆(t) the result of a
test t ∈bT performed on the true model, and by IG(t) the result of the same test t
performed on a model G, then the independence Hamming distance bH⋆
I (G) is deﬁned
formally as:
bH⋆
I (G) =
1
| bT |
{t ∈bT
 IG(t) ̸= IG⋆(t)}

(12)
In experiments over real datasets the underlying structure G⋆is unknown. We thus
conducted experiments learning the structure over smaller datasets with sizes 1/3 and
1/5 of the input dataset D, and compared the independencies in the output structure
G, and the complete dataset D. The resulting Hamming distance is denoted bHI(G, D),
or simply bHD
I (G). Formally, if we denote by ID(t) the result of a test t ∈bT performed
on the complete dataset, then bHD
I (G) is deﬁned as:
bHD
I (G) =
1
| bT |
{t ∈bT
 IG(t) ̸= ID(t)}

(13)
We are interested in comparing the errors of structures output by our algorithms (IBMAP-
HC , IBMAP-TS) and GSMN, the competitor. For that we report the ratio r =
H(GHC)
H(GGSMN )
of the errors of the network GHC output by IBMAP-HC against the error of the network
GGSMN output by GSMN. Similarly, for network GTS output by IBMAP-TS, we report
the ratio r =
H(GT S)
H(GGSMN). Being three diﬀerent types of errors, the edge Hamming distance
H⋆
E(G) and the two independence Hamming distances bH⋆
I (G) and bHD
I (G), this results in
six possible ratios, three for HC and three for TS:
r⋆
E(HC)
=
H⋆
E(GHC)
H⋆
E(GGSMN),
r⋆
I(HC)
=
b
H⋆
I (GHC)
b
H⋆
I (GGSMN),
rD
I (HC)
=
b
HD
I (GHC)
b
HD
I (GGSMN)
r⋆
E(TS)
=
H⋆
E(GTS)
H⋆
E(GGSMN),
r⋆
I(TS)
=
b
H⋆
I (GTS)
b
H⋆
I (GGSMN),
rD
I (TS)
=
b
HD
I (GTS)
b
HD
I (GGSMN)
These ratios allows a quick comparison between the two algorithms it involves as a ratio
equal to one means the same error in the structures they output, a ratio lower than one
means a reduction in the error of the structures output by our algorithms (HC or TS) and
a ratio greater than one means a reduction in quality by our algorithms.
17

5.2 Experimental results
We show now the results of our experiments.
5.2.1 Sampled Data Experiments
In our ﬁrst set of experiments, we demonstrate that our two IBMAP algorithms IBMAP-HC
and IBMAP-TS are successful in improving the quality over artiﬁcially generated datasets
by comparing their edge errors H⋆
E(GHC) and H⋆
E(GTS) as well as their independence errors
bH⋆
I (GHC) and bH⋆
I (GTS) against the corresponding errors H⋆
E(GGSMN) bH⋆
I (GGSMN) of GSMN.
As the IBMAP-TS algorithm is impractical for larger domains, we considered two sce-
narios, one over underlying models of size n = 12, comparing errors of both IBMAP-HC
and IBMAP-TS against GSMN, and one over larger models of size n = 50, comparing only
IBMAP-HC against GSMN (with results shown in ). To assess our algorithms over dif-
ferent conditions of reliability and connectivity, we ran them over datasets with increasing
number of datapoints N = 40, 200, 800, 5000, 12000, sampled from networks of increasing
node degrees τ = 1, 2, 4, 8. To increase statistical signiﬁcance, 10 datasets were sampled for
each pair (n, τ), and for each of them, one subsample of size N was obtained by randomly
selecting N datapoints.
Table 1 shows the edge errors for n = 12, reporting the mean values and standard
deviations (in parenthesis) of the edge errors H⋆
E(GGSMN), H⋆
E(GTS), and H⋆
E(GHC) of GSMN,
IBMAP-TS and IBMAP-HC, respectively, for the diﬀerent conditions of connectivity and
reliability.
The last two columns show their corresponding ratios r⋆
E(TS) and r⋆
E(HC),
indicating in bold the statistically signiﬁcant improvements (i.e. ratios lower than 1), and
underlined the statistically signiﬁcant reductions in errors (i.e., ratios greater than 1). These
error ratios are plotted also in Figure 5 (left column). The independence errors bH⋆
I (GGSMN),
bH⋆
I (GTS) and bH⋆
I (GHC) for n = 12 are shown in Table 2 with a similar structure, with the
ratios also plotted in Figure 5 (right column).
These results show that in most cases our proposed algorithms present quality improve-
ments over GSMN. For datasets with connectivities τ = 1, 2, 4, the Hamming distances are
better or equal for IBMAP-TS and IBMAP-HC on all cases in Table 1, and almost all cases
in Table 2. In some cases the improvement are drastic (e.g. r⋆
E(HC) = 0.058(0.088), for
τ = 4, N = 12000 meaning that for approximately 6 wrong edges in GHC there are 100
wrong edges in GGSMN). The pour results for datasets with connectivity τ = 8 can be
explained by recalling the approximation made in Eq.(3), namely, that conditional inde-
pendence assertions are mutually independent. This independence is not expected to hold
over assertions involving the common variables, with the stronger dependence for larger
overlaps.
This tendency is clearer in the results for n = 50, shown in Table 3, plotted in Figure 6.
The table shows the mean value and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of edge Hamming
distance H⋆
E(GGSMN), H⋆
E(GHC) and their ratio r⋆
E(HC) on the left group of columns, and
bH⋆
I (GGSMN), bH⋆
I (GHC) and their ratio r⋆
I(HC) on the right group of columns. Again, bold
(underline) signiﬁes an increase (decrease) in the quality IBMAP-HC over the quality of
GSMN. We can observe that for the case of edge Hamming distance, as τ increases, the
number of bold ratios decreases (5,4,2, and 2 for τ = 1, 2, 4, 8, respectively), and the number
of underlined ratios increases (1,2,3, and 2 for τ = 1, 2, 4, 8, respectively).
18

Comparison of Hamming distances, n = 12
τ
r⋆
E
r⋆
I
1
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*E(TS)
r*E(HC)
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*I(TS)
r*I(HC)
2
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*E(TS)
r*E(HC)
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*I(TS)
r*I(HC)
4
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*E(TS)
r*E(HC)
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*I(TS)
r*I(HC)
8
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*E(TS)
r*E(HC)
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
40
200
800
5K
12K
N
r*I(TS)
r*I(HC)
Figure 5:
Average of r⋆
E(TS), r⋆
E(HC) (left column), r⋆
I(TS) and r⋆
I(HC) (right column)
over 10 datasets with n = 12 and τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 (rows).
Error bars represents standard
deviation. The smaller the value, more important is the improvement, with values greater
(smaller) than 1 represent reduction (increase) in the quality.
19

Edges Hamming distances, n = 12
τ
N
H⋆
E(GGSMN)
H⋆
E(GTS)
H⋆
E(GHC)
r⋆
E (TS)
r⋆
E (HC)
1
40
20.500(2.471)
10.200(1.875)
12.700(3.920)
0.504(0.087)
0.599(0.125)
200
10.800(2.505)
4.700(1.630)
3.700(1.664)
0.441(0.132)
0.364(0.150)
800
3.600(1.915)
1.800(0.648)
1.000(0.576)
0.592(0.266)
0.318(0.225)
5000
0.800(0.928)
0.900(1.125)
0.400(0.493)
1.025(0.056)
0.800(0.247)
12000
0.300(0.341)
0.200(0.297)
0.000(0.000)
0.900(0.223)
0.700(0.341)
2
40
20.900(2.453)
13.900(1.864)
16.200(2.044)
0.673(0.087)
0.777(0.055)
200
12.000(3.487)
5.800(1.363)
7.800(3.654)
0.524(0.133)
0.658(0.177)
800
4.600(0.681)
2.100(0.966)
1.200(0.928)
0.428(0.171)
0.282(0.235)
5000
2.100(1.022)
1.400(0.681)
0.300(0.476)
0.725(0.242)
0.200(0.247)
12000
0.700(0.581)
0.700(0.581)
0.000(0.000)
1.000(0.000)
0.500(0.372)
4
40
21.000(3.308)
18.100(2.408)
22.200(2.717)
0.880(0.124)
1.073(0.098)
200
13.700(2.352)
10.400(2.402)
13.000(2.955)
0.772(0.157)
0.947(0.088)
800
8.300(1.332)
4.400(1.669)
4.600(1.457)
0.553(0.203)
0.543(0.136)
5000
4.400(1.734)
2.200(0.986)
0.500(0.499)
0.542(0.135)
0.183(0.221)
12000
2.400(0.828)
1.500(0.685)
0.200(0.297)
0.575(0.245)
0.058(0.088)
8
40
30.600(4.475)
33.600(3.261)
34.300(2.702)
1.116(0.082)
1.145(0.100)
200
23.200(2.634)
25.600(3.086)
28.900(3.414)
1.112(0.103)
1.250(0.079)
800
17.400(2.402)
19.900(2.648)
25.000(2.532)
1.152(0.089)
1.462(0.132)
5000
10.300(1.489)
13.600(1.494)
16.400(1.601)
1.362(0.230)
1.631(0.198)
12000
9.200(2.913)
12.200(2.613)
12.900(2.810)
1.469(0.356)
1.520(0.290)
Table 1: Average and standard deviation of H⋆
E(GGSMN), H⋆
E(GTS) and H⋆
E(GHC) (columns)
for datasets sampled from 10 random networks of n = 12 and τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 (rows). Last two
columns shows r⋆
E(TS) and r⋆
E(HC), with quality improvements when r < 1 (in bold), and
quality reductions when r > 1 (underlined).
The plots in Figure 6 show clearly how both ratios r⋆
E(HC) (left) and r⋆
I(HC) (right)
decrease with N, with the decrease being slower as τ increases. Although for small Ns there
are some pour results for edge errors, these ratios are never greater than 1.231 (for τ = 4,
N = 500), and in most cases has a corresponding improvement in the independence error.
For instance, for the same case of τ = 4, N = 500, the independence ratio is 0.926(0.061),
a value smaller than 1 with statistical signiﬁcance. In all other cases, only the four cases of
N = 100 show no improvement, with only the case of τ = 4 showing an increase in error.
The remaining cases of edge errors show signiﬁcant improvements reaching in many cases
of large Ns ratios smaller than 0.1, with proportions of 50 to 1 wrong edges in GSMN and
IBMAP-HC, respectively, for τ = 4, N = 12000.
To conclude this section we present results for M, the number of hill climbs conducted
by IBMAP-HC. We measured this quantity for runs of the algorithms on datasets sampled
from graphs of increasing size n, connectivities τ = 1, 2, 4, 8, and three diﬀerent reliability
conditions N = 200, 1000, 5000. Figure 7 shows four plots, one per τ, with 3 curves each,
one per dataset size N.
20

Independences Hamming distances, n = 12
τ
N
b
H⋆
I (GGSMN)
b
H⋆
I (GTS)
b
H⋆
I (GHC)
r⋆
I (TS)
r⋆
I (HC)
1
40
0.593(0.058)
0.293(0.048)
0.322(0.098)
0.497(0.074)
0.541(0.139)
200
0.397(0.093)
0.186(0.069)
0.113(0.043)
0.550(0.236)
0.396(0.301)
800
0.164(0.096)
0.084(0.054)
0.020(0.013)
0.565(0.267)
0.235(0.247)
5000
0.027(0.032)
0.036(0.044)
0.012(0.015)
1.132(0.276)
0.766(0.280)
12000
0.005(0.006)
0.004(0.005)
0.000(0.000)
0.916(0.229)
0.700(0.341)
2
40
0.444(0.031)
0.379(0.052)
0.376(0.058)
0.858(0.118)
0.843(0.111)
200
0.297(0.078)
0.208(0.045)
0.254(0.066)
0.742(0.153)
0.904(0.197)
800
0.166(0.040)
0.094(0.050)
0.045(0.036)
0.507(0.199)
0.273(0.220)
5000
0.085(0.054)
0.062(0.042)
0.006(0.012)
0.777(0.228)
0.200(0.247)
12000
0.030(0.032)
0.031(0.033)
0.000(0.000)
1.000(0.025)
0.500(0.372)
4
40
0.197(0.032)
0.296(0.034)
0.272(0.033)
1.555(0.244)
1.426(0.225)
200
0.127(0.020)
0.134(0.045)
0.152(0.025)
1.071(0.343)
1.238(0.278)
800
0.094(0.018)
0.056(0.022)
0.052(0.017)
0.597(0.193)
0.534(0.110)
5000
0.051(0.023)
0.026(0.011)
0.007(0.009)
0.596(0.168)
0.203(0.234)
12000
0.027(0.011)
0.022(0.012)
0.002(0.003)
0.800(0.532)
0.060(0.093)
8
40
0.238(0.145)
0.291(0.128)
0.271(0.132)
1.382(0.196)
1.246(0.132)
200
0.094(0.013)
0.142(0.018)
0.125(0.016)
1.531(0.166)
1.343(0.083)
800
0.059(0.006)
0.095(0.012)
0.097(0.010)
1.606(0.142)
1.644(0.102)
5000
0.031(0.003)
0.044(0.005)
0.052(0.004)
1.453(0.207)
1.713(0.182)
12000
0.024(0.007)
0.033(0.008)
0.036(0.008)
1.488(0.326)
1.600(0.307)
Table 2: Average and standard deviation of bH⋆
I (GGSMN), bH⋆
I (GTS) and bH⋆
I (GHC) (columns)
for datasets with n = 12 and τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 (rows). Last two columns shows r⋆
I(TS) and
r⋆
I(HC), with quality improvements when r < 1 (in bold), and quality reductions when
r > 1 (underlined).
In all cases, M presents a quasi-linear grow on n. After incorporating M as a a linear
function on n into the expression O(Mn(n−1)2Nτ ∗) for the complexity of the IBMAP-HC
algorithm (c.f. §5.1.2), we obtain empirically the runtime grows as O(n4).
To give the reader a sense of the runtime, we report the runtime for the hardest scenario.
In a Java virtual machine running on an AMD Athlon processor of 64 bits and 4800 Mhz
and 1 Gb of RAM, the case for n = 50, N = 12000, and τ = 8 took 5 days, with a reduction
to 5 hours after implementing a simple cache for avoiding the computation of repeated tests.
5.2.2 Experiments on benchmark datasets
To conclude the discussion of our experiments we compare quality performances of IBMAP-
HC against GSMN on benchmark datasets. For this datasets the underlying true network
is unknown, and we are thus restricted to independence Hamming distances measured on
the dataset.
21

Comparison of bHD
I (GHC), n = 50
r⋆
E
r⋆
I
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
100
500
1K
2K
5K
12K
N
τ = 1
τ = 2
τ = 4
τ = 8
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
100
500
1K
2K
5K
12K
N
τ = 1
τ = 2
τ = 4
τ = 8
Figure 6:
r⋆
E(HC) (left) and r⋆
I(HC) (right) for datasets with n = 50 and τ = 1, 2, 4, 8
(color-coded) ran on datasets with increasing number of datapoints N . Bars represents
average over ten diﬀerent datasets. Error bars represents standard deviation.
Growth in the number of ascents of IBMAP-HC
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
n
Network size τ=1
N = 200
N=1000
N=5000
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
n
Network size τ=2
N = 200
N=1000
N=5000
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
n
Network size τ=4
N = 200
N=1000
N=5000
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
n
Network size τ=8
N = 200
N=1000
N=5000
Figure 7: Number of IBMAP-HC ascents M on datasets with increasing number of variables
n, connectivities τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 (four plots), N = 200, 1000, 5000 (three curves).
We ran the IBMAP-HC and GSMN algorithms ten times on each of a set of datasets
obtained from the UCI Repositories of machine learning (A. Asuncion, 2007) and KDD
datasets (Hettich and Bay, 1999). Each ran on a diﬀerent randomly sampled subset of the
22

n = 50
Edges Hamming distances
Independences Hamming distances
τ
N
H⋆
E(GGSMN)
H⋆
E(GHC)
r⋆
E (HC)
b
H⋆
I (GGSMN)
b
H⋆
I (GHC)
r⋆
I (HC)
1
100
193.200(4.255)
205.800(3.133)
1.066(0.026)
0.789(0.010)
0.770(0.022)
0.977(0.029)
500
156.500(9.919)
145.200(16.865)
0.923(0.063)
0.720(0.023)
0.447(0.075)
0.616(0.089)
1000
91.200(10.771)
37.300(18.338)
0.389(0.160)
0.556(0.034)
0.189(0.072)
0.333(0.122)
2000
55.000(12.296)
1.556(0.422)
0.030(0.009)
0.389(0.075)
0.004(0.002)
0.010(0.004)
5000
22.200(3.758)
1.700(0.943)
0.071(0.040)
0.163(0.034)
0.005(0.003)
0.029(0.015)
12000
13.400(2.514)
0.800(0.728)
0.055(0.049)
0.098(0.020)
0.002(0.002)
0.018(0.016)
2
100
186.200(4.370)
206.200(3.959)
1.108(0.025)
0.605(0.014)
0.615(0.020)
1.016(0.020)
500
153.500(7.465)
163.900(12.135)
1.067(0.055)
0.566(0.022)
0.435(0.036)
0.767(0.044)
1000
117.100(11.527)
93.200(21.019)
0.778(0.108)
0.502(0.027)
0.230(0.035)
0.457(0.059)
2000
81.400(10.540)
14.500(13.967)
0.150(0.137)
0.433(0.030)
0.067(0.055)
0.146(0.119)
5000
35.700(4.595)
0.900(0.966)
0.024(0.025)
0.273(0.028)
0.005(0.005)
0.016(0.017)
12000
20.600(3.328)
0.600(0.595)
0.034(0.037)
0.163(0.019)
0.003(0.004)
0.022(0.026)
4
100
167.727(9.113)
199.818(6.557)
1.195(0.033)
0.257(0.012)
0.286(0.012)
1.115(0.047)
500
128.700(5.097)
158.200(7.175)
1.231(0.056)
0.258(0.012)
0.238(0.016)
0.926(0.061)
1000
118.900(4.315)
140.900(5.791)
1.186(0.034)
0.243(0.009)
0.200(0.014)
0.823(0.053)
2000
106.200(6.297)
98.900(12.825)
0.928(0.089)
0.219(0.008)
0.129(0.021)
0.585(0.081)
5000
85.800(7.594)
35.100(14.526)
0.395(0.142)
0.205(0.012)
0.045(0.018)
0.218(0.085)
12000
51.800(6.200)
0.900(1.348)
0.015(0.022)
0.145(0.011)
0.002(0.002)
0.012(0.015)
8
100
296.000(7.433)
298.600(9.795)
1.009(0.024)
0.157(0.004)
0.150(0.006)
0.961(0.040)
500
261.900(4.707)
276.700(4.760)
1.057(0.024)
0.137(0.003)
0.130(0.004)
0.947(0.032)
1000
237.800(9.145)
255.700(8.231)
1.077(0.042)
0.134(0.004)
0.119(0.002)
0.888(0.033)
2000
244.222(13.415)
253.889(10.707)
1.042(0.045)
0.125(0.005)
0.115(0.005)
0.919(0.041)
5000
263.000(19.221)
225.000(9.314)
0.860(0.047)
0.127(0.006)
0.102(0.003)
0.807(0.036)
12000
232.100(23.718)
188.400(12.461)
0.822(0.071)
0.112(0.007)
0.089(0.005)
0.793(0.056)
Table 3:
Experiments results of edge (left) and independence (right) Hamming distances
for several datasets with n = 50, τ = 1, 2, 4, 8 and increasing number of data points N
(rows). Standard deviations are shown in parenthesis. Again, quality improvements are in
bold, and quality reductions are underlined.
whole dataset of 1/3 its size. The same was repeated for subsets of 1/5 the total size. The
independence Hamming distances bHD
I (GHC), and bHD
I (GGSMN) where then computed com-
paring the independencies of the output networks with the independencies of the complete
dataset.
Results of these experiments are shown in Table 4 and Figure 8 (left) for the 1/3 case,
and Table 5 and Figure 8 (right) for the 1/5 case. On both ﬁgures, the numbers in the x-
axis represent the indexes of each dataset in the corresponding table. The tables also show
on their last two columns values for rD
I (HC) and M. These results show improvements
in most cases, again, shown in bold in the tables and bars lower than one in the ﬁgures.
Quality reductions are underlined in both tables.
23

Comparison of independence Hamming distances
for benchmark data sets
N/3
N/5
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
rI
D(HC)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
rI
D(HC)
Figure 8:
Experimental results for real datasets. The table shows average and standard
deviation of rD
I (HC) over 10, 1/3 subsets of D (left) and over 10, 1/5 subsets (right). Again,
smaller values mean greater improvements.
#
name
n
N
b
HD
I (GGSMN)
b
HD
I (GHC)
rD
I (HC)
M
1
bridges.csv
12
140
0.445(0.018)
0.450(0.020)
1.012(0.046)
7.700(1.105)
2
dependent.csv
3
1000
0.000(0.000)
0.000(0.000)
1.000(0.000)
1.000(0.000)
3
ﬂare2.csv
13
1065
0.203(0.009)
0.204(0.016)
1.006(0.074)
10.200(2.298)
4
haberman.csv
5
612
0.309(0.029)
0.309(0.024)
1.003(0.040)
1.500(0.372)
5
imports-85.csv
25
386
0.601(0.006)
0.602(0.007)
1.001(0.014)
20.667(1.942)
6
balance-scale.csv
5
1250
0.421(0.015)
0.412(0.013)
0.980(0.024)
1.100(0.223)
7
car.csv
7
3456
0.425(0.006)
0.412(0.006)
0.968(0.016)
2.000(0.412)
8
monks-1.csv
7
1112
0.091(0.011)
0.091(0.031)
0.952(0.158)
1.182(0.393)
9
dermatology.csv
35
357
0.724(0.008)
0.687(0.025)
0.949(0.028)
69.556(6.525)
10
glass.csv
10
210
0.449(0.029)
0.418(0.014)
0.939(0.069)
5.700(1.054)
11
nursery.csv
9
25920
0.551(0.035)
0.491(0.024)
0.895(0.053)
4.000(0.940)
12
machine.csv
10
201
0.411(0.044)
0.341(0.015)
0.839(0.083)
6.750(1.088)
13
hayes-roth.csv
6
264
0.358(0.056)
0.291(0.061)
0.816(0.133)
3.600(1.531)
14
tictactoe.csv
10
1916
0.584(0.021)
0.476(0.021)
0.815(0.024)
9.500(1.459)
15
baloons.csv
5
20
0.324(0.113)
0.244(0.087)
0.806(0.164)
1.900(0.617)
16
lenses.csv
5
48
0.306(0.080)
0.145(0.046)
0.545(0.223)
2.200(0.446)
Table 4: Real data independence Hamming errors experiments for a 1/3 of the complete
dataset. Quality improvements when r < 1 (in bold), and quality reductions when r > 1
(underlined).
These results show again quality improvements of IBMAP-HC over GSMN, with only
two cases, lenses and ﬂare2 in the 1/5 case showing reductions. Improvements occurred in
the 8 out of 16 in both cases.
24

#
name
n
N
b
HD
I (GGSMN)
b
HD
I (GHC)
rD
I (HC)
M
1
lenses.csv
5
48
0.241(0.076)
0.294(0.093)
1.225(0.174)
1.700(0.341)
2
baloons.csv
5
20
0.378(0.407)
0.417(0.406)
1.176(0.356)
1.100(0.844)
3
ﬂare2.csv
13
1065
0.190(0.004)
0.208(0.011)
1.099(0.060)
9.300(1.792)
4
bridges.csv
12
140
0.404(0.022)
0.407(0.027)
1.011(0.063)
9.000(1.287)
5
dependent.csv
3
1000
0.000(0.000)
0.000(0.000)
1.000(0.000)
1.000(0.000)
6
glass.csv
10
210
0.358(0.041)
0.342(0.015)
0.980(0.123)
7.300(0.943)
7
machine.csv
10
201
0.357(0.047)
0.336(0.024)
0.967(0.130)
5.400(0.595)
8
haberman.csv
5
612
0.315(0.023)
0.302(0.019)
0.965(0.049)
1.900(0.617)
9
dermatology.csv
35
357
0.709(0.006)
0.653(0.012)
0.922(0.021)
58.100(4.490)
10
imports-85.csv
25
386
0.550(0.024)
0.495(0.016)
0.902(0.027)
19.900(2.290)
11
balance-scale.csv
5
1250
0.422(0.033)
0.366(0.048)
0.871(0.107)
1.700(0.581)
12
nursery.csv
9
25920
0.469(0.029)
0.405(0.028)
0.868(0.066)
4.100(0.966)
13
car.csv
7
3456
0.386(0.034)
0.331(0.040)
0.860(0.066)
3.000(0.940)
14
tictactoe.csv
10
1916
0.584(0.021)
0.476(0.021)
0.815(0.024)
9.500(1.459)
15
monks-1.csv
7
1112
0.126(0.041)
0.096(0.018)
0.812(0.094)
1.300(0.341)
16
hayes-roth.csv
6
264
0.302(0.062)
0.227(0.040)
0.782(0.120)
1.900(0.844)
Table 5: Real data independence Hamming errors experiments for a 1/5 of the complete
dataset. Quality improvements when r < 1 (in bold), and quality reductions when r > 1
(underlined).
6. Conclusions and future work
In conclusion, the IBMAP-HC algorithm provides the possibility of solving the problem for
complex systems getting signiﬁcant quality improvements over GSMN. IB-score seems to
be a good and eﬃcient likelihood function.
From this work, several future research possibilities arise that we are motivated to pur-
sue, including continuing to look into a practical algorithm with lower computational cost
(to be used with even more complex systems), experience with other approximate opti-
mization algorithms such as local beam Metropolis Hastings, continue with the analysis of
quality measures and propose new, more eﬃcient and reliable scoring functions, and per-
form a thorough comparison of these novel scoring functions and existing scoring functions
such as the likelihood of the data given the complete model (structure plus parameters).
7. Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a postdoctoral fellowship from CONICET, Argentina; and the
scholarship program for teachers of the National Technological University, Ministry of Sci-
ence, Technology and Productive Innovation and the National Agency of Scientiﬁc and
Technological Promotion, FONCyT; Argentina.
Appendix A. Proof of Lemma 3
All along this work we made the running assumption of graph-isomorphism, that is, that
the underlying distribution we are trying to learn has a graph that encodes all and only the
25

independencies that holds in the distribution. According to Theorem 2 of [Pearl (1988),
p.97], the following properties among independence hold in any graph-isomorph distribution:
• Intersection: I(X, Y | Z, W) ∧I(X, W | Z, Y ) ⇒I(X; Y, W | Z)
• Decomposition: I(X; Y, W | Z) ⇒I(X, Y | Z) ∧I(X, W | Z)
• Strong Union: I(X, Y | Z) ⇒I(X, Y | Z, W)
Before proving the main lemma of the appendix we present an auxiliaty lemma.
Auxiliary Lemma 5. For all X ̸= Y ̸= W ∈V and Z ⊆V −{X, Y, W},
¬I(X, Y | Z) ∧I(X, Y | Z, W) ⇒¬I(X, W | Z)
Proof By Intersection and decomposition,
I(X, Y | Z, W) ∧I(X, W | Z, Y )
⇒
I(X; Y, W | Z)
⇒
I(X, Y | Z).
Then, by the counter-positive of this expression and the counter-positive of Strong Union,
¬I(X, Y | Z) ∧I(X, Y | Z, W)
⇒
¬I(X, W | Z, Y )
⇒
¬I(X, W | Z).
We can now prove Lemma 3, reproduced here for convenience:
Lemma 3. For every W ̸= X ∈V, and BX the boundary of X,
W /∈BX ⇐I(X, W | BX −{X, W})
Proof
We prove its counter-positive W ∈BX ⇒¬I(X, W | BX −{X, W}). By minimality of
BX, there must be a variable Y /∈BX such that removing W from the blanket, Y becomes
dependent of X, i.e., ¬I(X, Y | BX −{W} −{X, Y }). Also, since Y /∈BX, by the deﬁni-
tion of boundary of Eq. (5) it holds that I(X, Y | BX −{X, Y }). The lemma follows then
from Auxiliary Lemma 5 by letting Z = BX −{X, Y } −{W}.
26
