Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 34 (2009) 707-755
Submitted 08/08; published 04/09
Efﬁcient Informative Sensing using Multiple Robots
Amarjeet Singh

Andreas Krause

Carlos Guestrin

William J. Kaiser

Abstract
The need for efﬁcient monitoring of spatio-temporal dynamics in large environmental applica-
tions, such as the water quality monitoring in rivers and lakes, motivates the use of robotic sensors
in order to achieve sufﬁcient spatial coverage. Typically, these robots have bounded resources, such
as limited battery or limited amounts of time to obtain measurements. Thus, careful coordination of
their paths is required in order to maximize the amount of information collected, while respecting
the resource constraints. In this paper, we present an efﬁcient approach for near-optimally solv-
ing the NP-hard optimization problem of planning such informative paths. In particular, we ﬁrst
develop eSIP (efﬁcient Single-robot Informative Path planning), an approximation algorithm for
optimizing the path of a single robot. Hereby, we use a Gaussian Process to model the underly-
ing phenomenon, and use the mutual information between the visited locations and remainder of
the space to quantify the amount of information collected. We prove that the mutual information
collected using paths obtained by using eSIP is close to the information obtained by an optimal
solution. We then provide a general technique, sequential allocation, which can be used to extend
any single robot planning algorithm, such as eSIP, for the multi-robot problem. This procedure
approximately generalizes any guarantees for the single-robot problem to the multi-robot case. We
extensively evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on several experiments performed in-ﬁeld
for two important environmental sensing applications, lake and river monitoring, and simulation
experiments performed using several real world sensor network data sets.
1. Introduction
Global climate change and corresponding impetus on sustainable practices for environment-related
activities has brought forth the challenging task of observing natural phenomena exhibiting dynam-
ics in both space and time. Observing and characterizing these dynamics with high ﬁdelity will
be critical for answering several questions related to policy issues for monitoring and control and
understanding biological effects on activity of microbes and other organisms living in (or dependent
on) these environments. Monitoring algal bloom growth in lakes and salt concentration in rivers, as
illustrated in Fig. 1, are speciﬁc examples of related phenomena of interest to biologists and other
environment scientists (MacIntyre, 1993; Ishikawa & Tanaka, 1993; MacIntyre, Romero, & Kling,
2002).
Monitoring environmental phenomena, such as algal bloom growth in a lake, requires mea-
suring physical processes, such as nutrient concentration, wind effects and solar radiation, among
others, across the entire spatial domain. One option to acquire data about such processes would be
to statically deploy a set of sensing buoys (Reynolds-Fleming, Fleming, & Luettich, 2004). Due to
the large spatial extent of the observed phenomena, this approach would require a large number of
sensors in order to obtain high ﬁdelity data. The spatio-temporal dynamics in these environments
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
(a) Conﬂuence of San Joaquin and Merced River
(b) Lake Fulmor, San Jacinto mountain reserve
Figure 1: Deployment sites used for performing path planning in-ﬁeld.
motivate the use of actuated sensors – robots carrying sensors together with an efﬁcient approach
for planning the paths of these actuated sensors. These actuated sensors have been used in the past
(Dhariwal et al., 2006) for measuring the phenomena at various locations and hence providing the
biologists with critical information about the state of the lake.
Typically however, such robots have strict resource constraints, such as storage battery energy,
that limits the distance they can travel or the number of measurements they can acquire before the
observed phenomena varies signiﬁcantly. These constraints necessitate careful motion planning for
the robots – coordinating their paths in order to maximize the amount of collected information,
while satisfying the given resource constraints. In this paper, we tackle this important problem of
seeking informative paths for a collection of robots, subject to constraints on the cost incurred by
each robot, e.g. due to limited battery capacity.
In order to optimize the paths of these robots, we ﬁrst need to quantify the informativeness of
any particular chosen path. In this work, we adopt an approach from spatial statistics and employ
probabilistic models of the spatial phenomena. Using these models, informativeness can be viewed
in terms of the uncertainty about our prediction of the phenomena at unobserved locations, given
the observations made by the mobile robots at a subset of locations (the selected path). In partic-
ular, we use a rich class of probabilistic models called Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006) that has been shown to accurately model many spatial phenomena (Cressie, 1991),
and apply the mutual information (MI) criterion (Caselton & Zidek, 1984) to quantify the reduction
in uncertainty achieved through selected robot paths.
Unfortunately, the problem of ﬁnding an optimal collection of paths, maximizing the mutual
information criterion, is an NP-hard search problem, which is typically intractable even for small
spatial phenomena. In this paper, we will develop an approximation algorithm which efﬁciently
ﬁnds a provably near-optimal solution to this optimization problem. The key insight which will
allow us to obtain such an algorithm is that the mutual information (and several other notions of
informativeness (as discussed in Krause and Guestrin, 2007) satisﬁes submodularity, an intuitive
diminishing returns property - making a new observation helps more if we have made only a few
observations so far, and less if we have already made many observations (Krause et al., 2008).
The problem of optimizing the path of a single robot to maximize a submodular function over
the visited locations was studied by Chekuri and Pal (2005), who developed an algorithm, recursive-
greedy, with strong theoretical approximation guarantees. Unfortunately, the running time of their
708

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
approach is quasi-polynomial: it scales as Mlog M, for M possible sensing locations. This property
makes the algorithm impractical for most environmental sensing applications, with typical numbers
(M) of observation locations reaching to several hundreds and more. In this paper, we present two
techniques – spatial decomposition and branch and bound search – for overcoming these limita-
tions of the recursive-greedy approach of Chekuri et al., making it practical for real world sensing
problems. We call this efﬁcient approach for single robot path planning eSIP (efﬁcient Single-robot
Informative Path planning).
We then provide a general approach, sequential-allocation, which can be used to extend any
single robot algorithm, such as eSIP, to the multi-robot setting. We furthermore prove that this
generalization only leads to minimal reduction (independent of the number of mobile robots) of the
approximation guarantee provided by the single robot algorithm. We combine eSIP with sequential-
allocation to develop the ﬁrst efﬁcient path planning algorithm (eMIP) that coordinates multiple
robots, each having a resource constraint, in order to obtain highly informative paths, i.e. paths that
maximize any given submodular function, such as mutual information. By exploiting submodular-
ity, we prove strong theoretical approximation guarantees for our algorithm.
We extensively evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on several experiments performed
in-ﬁeld for two important environmental sensing applications, lake and river monitoring. The river
campaign was executed at the conﬂuence of two rivers, Merced river and San Joaquin river, in Cal-
ifornia from August 7-11, 2007. Fig. 1a displays an aerial view of the San Joaquin deployment site.
The lake campaign was executed at a lake located at the University of California, Merced campus
from August 10-11, 2007. Fig. 1b displays an aerial view of lake Fulmor. In both campaigns, the
Networked Info Mechanical System (NIMS) (Jordan et al., 2007), a cable based robotic system, was
used to perform path planning while observing a two dimensional vertical plane (cross-section). In
addition to analyzing data from these deployments, we provide extensive experimental analysis of
our algorithm on several real world sensor network data sets, including the data collected using a
robotic boat at lake Fulmor (Dhariwal et al., 2006).
This manuscript is organized as follows. We formally introduce the Multi-robot Informative
Path Planning (MIPP) problem in Section 2. In Section 3, we discuss the sequential-allocation
approach for extending any single robot path planning algorithm to the multi-robot setting while
preserving approximation guarantees. We then review the recursive-greedy algorithm proposed by
Chekuri et al. (Section 5), an example of such a single-robot algorithm. Subsequently, we present
our spatial decomposition (Section 6) and branch and bound techniques (Section 7) which dras-
tically improve the running time of recursive-greedy and make it practical for real world sensing
applications. In Section 8, we evaluate our approach through in-ﬁeld experiments as well as in sim-
ulations on real world sensing datasets. In Section 9, we review related work, and we present our
conclusions in Section 10. The proofs for all our results are presented in the Appendix.
2. The Multi-robot Informative Path Planning Problem
We now formally deﬁne the Multi-robot Informative Path Planning (MIPP) problem. We assume
that the spatial domain of the phenomenon is discretized into ﬁnitely many sensing locations V. For
each subset A ⊆V, let I(A) denote the sensing quality, i.e. the informativeness, of observing the
phenomenon at locations A. Details on appropriate choices for the sensing quality I are given below.
We also associate with each location v ∈V, a sensing cost C(v) > 0, quantifying the expenses of
obtaining a measurement at location v. When traveling between two locations, u and v, a robot in-
709

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
curs a traveling cost C(u, v) > 0. A robot traverses a path in this space: an s–t-path P is a sequence
of l locations starting at node s, and ﬁnishing at t. The cost C(P) of path P = (s = v1, v2, . . . , vl =
t) is the sum of sensing costs and traveling costs along the path, i.e. C(P) = Pl−1
i=2 C(vi) +
Pl
i=2 C(vi−1, vi). In the case l = 2, cost of the path P will only involve traveling cost between the
starting and ﬁnishing locations C(s, t). We will use the notation P to both refer to the sequence of
nodes in the path, and to the subset of sensing locations P ⊆V (ignoring their sequence). For a col-
lection of k paths P = {P1, . . . , Pk}, one for each robot, I(P) = I(P1 ∪· · ·∪Pk) denotes the sens-
ing quality of the paths, which quantiﬁes the amount of information collected by the k paths. The
goal of the MIPP problem is to ﬁnd a collection P of k paths, with speciﬁed starting and ﬁnishing
location si and ti (not necessarily different), such that each path has bounded cost C(Pi) ≤B for
some speciﬁed budget B, and that the paths are the most informative, i.e. I(P) is as large as possible.
Formally, the problem can be deﬁned as:
max
Pi⊆V I(∪k
i=1Pi);
subject to C(Pi) ≤B, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , k}.
(1)
In our lake monitoring example with the goal of performing surface monitoring using boats,
we ﬁrst discretized the two-dimensional surface of the lake into ﬁnitely many sensing locations (as
depicted in Fig. 1b). For the single robot scenario, we then seek to ﬁnd the most informative path
P1 (in terms of predicting the algal bloom content) starting from location s and ﬁnishing in location
t. The experiment cost C(vi) corresponds to the energy required for making chlorophyll and related
measurements (indicators of amount of algal bloom). The traveling cost C(vi−1, vi) corresponds to
the energy consumption when traveling from location vi−1 to vi. The budget B quantiﬁes the total
energy stored in the boat’s battery.
2.1 Quantifying Informativeness:
How can we quantify the sensing quality I? To model spatial phenomena, a common approach in
spatial statistics is to use a rich class of probabilistic models called Gaussian Processes (GPs, c.f.,
Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). Such models associate a random variable Xv with each location
v ∈V. The joint distribution P(XV) can then be used to quantify uncertainty in the prediction
P(XV\A | XA = xA) of phenomena at unobserved locations XV\A, after making observations
XA = xA at a small subset A of locations. To quantify this uncertainty we use, for example,
the mutual information (MI) criterion (as discussed by Caselton and Zidek, 1984). For a set of
locations, P, the MI criterion is deﬁned as:
MI(A) ≡H(XV\A) −H(XV\A | XA)
(2)
where H(XV\A) is the entropy of the unobserved locations V \ A, and H(XV\A | XA) is the
conditional entropy of locations V \ A after sensing at locations A. Hence mutual information
measures the reduction in uncertainty at the unobserved locations. Therefore, in our lake monitoring
example, we would like to select the locations that most reduce the uncertainty in the algal bloom
content prediction for the lake environment. Conveniently, in a GP, the mutual information criterion
can be computed efﬁciently and analytically (Caselton & Zidek, 1984). The effectiveness of mutual
information to select informative sensing locations was studied by Krause et al. (2008). Several
alternative information criteria such as entropy (Ko et al., 1995), information disk model (Bai et al.,
2006) and alphabetical optimality criterion such as A-, D- and E-optimal have also been used to
associate sensing quality with observation locations in related problem domain.
710

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
2.2 Submodularity:
Even if we do not consider the constraints on the length of the paths of the robots, the problem
of selecting locations that maximize mutual information is NP-hard (Krause et al., 2008). Hence,
in general, we most likely cannot expect to be able to efﬁciently ﬁnd the optimal set of locations.
Instead, our goal will be to efﬁciently ﬁnd near-optimal solutions, for which the sensing quality
(e.g. mutual information), is provably close to the optimal sensing quality.
The key observation, which will allow us to obtain such strong approximation guarantees, is
that mutual information satisﬁes the following diminishing returns property (Krause et al., 2008):
The more locations we have already sensed, the less information we will gain by sensing a new
location. This intuition is formalized by the concept of submodularity: A function f is submodular
(Nemhauser et al., 1978) if:
∀A ⊆B ⊆V and s ∈V \ B; f(A ∪s) −f(A) ≥f(B ∪s) −f(B).
(3)
Another intuitive property is that sensing quality is monotonic1, which means that I(A) ≤I(B) for
all A ⊆B ⊆V. Hence, as we select more and more sensing locations, we will collect more and
more information. Lastly, mutual information is normalized, i.e. I(∅) = 0.
We thus deﬁne our MIPP problem as the problem of optimizing paths of length at most B for
k robots, such that the selected sensing locations maximize a normalized, monotonic submodu-
lar function I(·). This deﬁnition of the MIPP problem allows our approach to be applied to any
monotonic submodular objective function, not just mutual information. This generalization is very
useful, as several other notions of informativeness can be shown to satisfy submodularity (Krause
& Guestrin, 2007).
2.3 Online vs Ofﬂine Path Planning:
Many robotic path planning applications, such as search and rescue, involve uncertain environments
with complex dynamics that can only be partially observed. Informative path planning – selecting
the best locations to observe subject to given sensing constraints, in such uncertain environments
necessitates a trade off between exploration (gathering information about the environment) and
exploitation (using the current belief about the state of the environment most effectively). We dis-
tinguish two different classes of algorithms: nonadaptive (ofﬂine) algorithms, that plan and commit
to the paths before any observations are made, and adaptive (online) algorithms, that update and
replan as new information is collected. Both the online and ofﬂine settings are NP-hard optimiza-
tion problems. In this paper, we only discuss the approximation algorithms for the ofﬂine setting
that exploit the known belief about the environment for efﬁcient path planning. We plan to work to-
wards extending our approach for an exploration-exploitation trade-off to incorporate online model
adaptation in the future.
3. Approximation Algorithm for MIPP
The problem of optimizing the path of a single robot (i.e. k = 1) to maximize a submodular func-
tion of the visited locations, constrained by an upper bound (B) on the path cost, was ﬁrst studied
by Chekuri and Pal (2005). We will review their recursive-greedy algorithm in detail in Section 5.
1. This monotonicity holds only approximately for mutual information (Krause et al., 2008), which however is sufﬁcient
for all purposes of this paper.
711

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
Algorithm:sequential-allocation
1
Input: B, k, starting / ﬁnishing locations s1, . . . , sk, t1, . . . , tk, V
Output: A set of informative paths P1, . . . , Pn
begin
2
A0 ←∅;
3
for 1 ≤i ≤k do
4
// Performing path planning for the ith robot
Pi ←SPP(si, ti, B, Ai−1, V);
5
// Committing to the previously selected locations
Ai ←Ai−1 ∪Pi;
6
return P1, . . . , Pk;
7
end
8
Algorithm 1: Sequential allocation algorithm for multi robot path planning using any single robot path plan-
ning algorithm SPP. Output set of paths P1, . . . , Pk provides an approximation guarantee of 1 + η where η is the
approximation guarantee of single robot path planning algorithm SPP.
In our lake monitoring problem, we seek to plan multiple paths, one for each robot. One pos-
sibility is to apply the single-path algorithm to the product graph, i.e. plan a path over tuples of
locations simultaneously representing the locations of all robots. However, such straightforward
application of the single-robot planning algorithm would lead to an increase in running time which
is exponential in the number of robots, and therefore intractable in practice. We are not aware
of any sub-exponential approximation algorithm for this challenging multiple-robot path planning
problem. In this paper, we present a simple algorithm for the multi-robot scenario that can exploit
any approximation algorithm for the single robot case, such as the recursive-greedy algorithm, as
discussed by Chekuri and Pal (2005), and (almost) preserve the approximation guarantee, while
avoiding the exponential increase in running time.
Our algorithm, sequential-allocation, successively applies the single robot path planning algo-
rithm k times to get the paths for k robots. Hereby, when planning the jth path, the approach takes
into account the locations already selected by the previous j −1 paths. Committing to the (approx-
imately) best possible path at each stage before moving on to the next stage makes our approach
“greedy” in terms of paths.
The pseudocode of the algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1 and Fig. 2 illustrates the approach
for three robots. The algorithm takes as input the budget constraint B, number of available robots
k, starting and ﬁnishing location for each available robot s1, . . . , sk, t1, . . . , tk and the complete set
of discrete observation locations V to select from. Let us assume that we have a single robot path
planning algorithm, SPP, that takes as input a starting location si, a ﬁnishing location ti, budget
constraint B, a set of locations already selected for observation and a set of possible observation
locations that can be visited. In Fig. 2, all the three robots have same starting and ﬁnishing location.
While planning the path for the ﬁrst robot (i = 1), the input set of already selected observation
locations is empty. At each subsequent stage, we commit to the locations selected in all the previous
stages and pass the already observed locations as input to our next call to SPP. Let Ai−1 be the lo-
cations already visited by paths P1, . . . , Pi−1, and A0 = ∅. Then the residual information, IAi−1 for
a path P over unvisited locations is deﬁned as IAi−1(P) = I(Ai−1∪P)−I(Ai−1). It can be veriﬁed
that if I is a normalized, monotonic and submodular function, then so is the residual information
712

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Figure 2: Illustration of sequential allocation algorithm for three robots, each with the same starting and ﬁnishing
location.
IAi−1. Thus, at stage i we use SPP to ﬁnd the most informative path with respect to the modiﬁed
residual sensing quality function. In Fig. 2, when planning P2, locations selected for P1 are consid-
ered and the sensing quality function used is IP1. Similarly, while evaluating the path P3, locations
selected for P1 and P2 are taken into account and the sensing quality function used is IP1∪P2.
Perhaps surprisingly, this straight-forward “greedy” sequential allocation approach is guaran-
teed to perform almost as well as the black box algorithm used for path planning. More formally,
assume we have an η -approximate algorithm for the single robot problem, i.e. an algorithm which,
starting with budget B and a monotonic submodular function f, is guaranteed to ﬁnd a path re-
covering at least a fraction of 1/η of the optimal information achievable with the same budget. In
this case, the following theorem proves that the sequential allocation procedure has approximation
guarantee close to η as well:
Theorem 1. Let η be the approximation guarantee for the single path instance of the informative
path planning problem. Then our sequential-allocation algorithm achieves an approximation guar-
antee of (1 + η) for the MIPP problem. In the special case, where all robots have the same starting
(si = sj, ∀i, j) and ﬁnishing locations (ti = tj, ∀i, j), the approximation guarantee improves to
1/(1 −exp (−1/η)) ≤1 + η.
The work by Blum et al. (2003) proved Theorem 1 for the special case of additive (modular)
sensing quality functions. In this paper, we extend their result to general submodular functions.
As an example of an η-approximate algorithm for the single robot problem, in the next section,
we review the recursive-greedy algorithm as proposed by Chekuri and Pal (2005). This algorithm
has an approximation guarantee η of O(log2 |P∗|), where |P∗| is the number of locations visited
by an optimal solution P∗. Hence, for this algorithm, the performance guarantee obtained for the
MIPP problem through sequential allocation is O(log2 |P∗|) as well2.
2. In order to apply sequential allocation to the recursive-greedy algorithm, we can, when planning the ith path, simply
pass the set of nodes visited by the previous i −1 paths as the input parameter R, as is illustrated in Algorithm 2.
713

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: Illustration of performance of simple greedy approaches compared to an optimal approach.
4. A Note on Greedy Path Planning
The work by Krause et al. (2008) considered the sensor placement problem, where a subset A ⊆V
of k locations is selected in order to maximize the mutual information, without considering path
costs. By exploiting the submodularity property of MI, they proved that if the discretization V is
ﬁne enough and the GP satisﬁes mild regularity conditions, greedily selecting locations based on
this criterion is near-optimal. More speciﬁcally, the greedy algorithm (which we call GreedySubset
in the following), after selecting the ﬁrst i locations Ai, picks the location with maximum residual
information i.e. vi+1 = argmaxv IAi({v}) and sets Ai+1 = Ai ∪{vi+1}. GreedySubset hence
iteratively adds locations which increase mutual information the most. Using a result proposed by
Nemhauser et al. (1978) on the performance of the greedy algorithm for submodular functions,
the work by Krause et al. (2008) showed that GreedySubset selects sets which achieve mutual
information of at least (1 −1/e) OPT −ε, where OPT is the optimal mutual information among
all sets of the same size, and ε is a small error incurred due to the discretization.
The strong performance of the greedy algorithm in the unconstrained (no traveling costs be-
tween locations) case motivates the question of whether a simple greedy approach could perform
well in the more complex path planning setting considered in this paper. While it is difﬁcult to
give a general impossibility statement for such a question, several natural extensions of the greedy
algorithm can be shown to perform arbitrarily badly.
For example, consider a setting where we deﬁne the cost C(A) of a set of nodes as the cost
of the cheapest path connecting the nodes A. Assuming locations Ai have already been picked,
a natural extension of the greedy algorithm will be to add a location v which most improves the
beneﬁt-cost ratio
v∗= argmax
v∈V\A
IAi(v)
CAi(v),
714

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
where CAi(v) = C(Ai ∪{v}) −C(Ai) is the increase in cost after adding v to the already selected
locations Ai.
Fig. 3 shows a small example illustrating that this intuitive greedy procedure can perform ar-
bitrarily poorly compared to an optimal approach. The example is illustrated in Fig. 3a, with s as
both the starting and the ﬁnishing location and 2B as the total available budget. The reward asso-
ciated with each observation location is displayed in parenthesis with the corresponding locations.
For the ease of illustration, we assume that the reward associated with each observation location is
some modular function (instead of a submodular function). Traveling cost is associated with the
corresponding edges in the example. Starting at location s, possible options for the ﬁrst observation
location are to select either of o1, g1 or t. Observation location o1 will lead to a cluster of n (=
B/ϵ) locations each separated by a traveling cost ϵ and with an associated reward of 1 (except o1
that has an associated reward of ϵ). o1 is separated from g1 by a traveling cost of B/2 while the
rest of the locations in the cluster are assumed to be unreachable from any other location outside the
cluster. Observation location g1 will lead to a series of m (= B/ϵ) locations, each separated from
the previous one by ϵ traveling cost and with an associated reward of 2ϵ.
As illustrated in Fig. 3b, an optimal approach would select o1 as the ﬁrst location, paying a
traveling cost of B/2 and earning a very small reward ϵ. Once the robot observes o1, it can then
observe the rest of (B/ϵ−1) locations in the cluster, each providing a reward of 1 and return back to
s while spending a total of 2B as the traveling cost. Thus, the total reward collected by an optimal
approach, for this example, will be 1(B/ϵ −1) + ϵ.
As illustrated in Fig. 3c, a “greedy” approach based on the reward-cost ratio will select g1 as the
ﬁrst observation location (with the highest reward to cost ratio of 2). Since o1 is at a distance B/2
away from g1 and only provides a reward of ϵ, this approach will continue along the series, observ-
ing all the locations till gm and returning back to s. Total reward collected by such an approach will
be 2B. On the other hand, a simple “greedy” approach based on reward (as illustrated in Fig. 3d)
will simply select t as the ﬁrst observation location and return back to s, collecting a total reward
of 1. Since the ratio B/ϵ can be arbitrarily large as ϵ →0, the reward collected by simple intuitive
greedy approaches (2B or 1) can be arbitrarily poor when compared to the reward collected by an
optimal approach (1(B/ϵ −1) + ϵ).
Although, the reward function considered in the example was assumed to be a modular func-
tion, the submodular optimal reward can also be arbitrarily large, compared to submodular reward
collected by simple greedy approaches (the difference between the submodular and modular reward
will depend on the correlation of the selected observation locations). This insight necessitates the
development of more complex algorithms for path planning as considered in this paper.
5. The Recursive-greedy Algorithm
We will now review the recursive-greedy algorithm as proposed by Chekuri and Pal, since it forms
the basis for our efﬁcient single robot path planning approach. The basic strategy of the algorithm
is a divide-and-conquer approach. Any path from the starting location (s) to ﬁnishing location (t)
has a middle location (vm) such that there are same number of locations (or different by at most 1)
on either side of vm in the s −t path. Thus, the problem of ﬁnding a s −t path can be divided into
two smaller subproblems of ﬁnding smaller subpaths (s −vm and vm −t) and then concatenating
these small subpaths. While having the same number of locations, the subpaths on either side of the
middle node can have different costs, i.e. the budget for the total path has to be split into two smaller
715

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
Algorithm:recursive-greedy (RG)
1
Input: s,t,B,R,iter
Output: An informative path P
begin
2
if c(s, t) > B then
3
return Infeasible;
4
P ←s, t;
5
Base case: iter=0 return P;
6
m ←fR(P);
7
// Trying each location as middle node
foreach vm ∈V do
8
// Trying all possible budget splits
for 1 ≤B1 ≤B do
9
// Planning subpath on one side of the middle node
P1 ←RG(s, vm, B1, R, iter −1);
10
// Planning subpath on other side of the middle node,
committing to nodes selected in first subpath
P2 ←RG(vm, t, B −B1, R ∪P1, iter −1);
11
if fR(P1 ∪P2) > m then
12
P ←P1 ∪P2;
13
m ←fR(P);
14
return P;
15
end
16
Algorithm 2: Recursive greedy algorithm for single robot instance of MIPP as proposed by Chekuri and Pal
(2005). Output path P provides an approximation guarantee of IX(P) ≥IX(P∗)/ ⌈1 + log k⌉, where I represent
the submodular reward function, P∗represent an optimal path and k represent the number of nodes in the optimal
path.
budgets (not necessarily equal), one for each subpath. Searching for the best middle location and
trying all possible budget splits on either side of the middle location, while optimizing the complete
s −t path, would result in an exhaustive search for the optimal solution and therefore will be pro-
hibitively expensive. Instead of performing this exhaustive search, the recursive-greedy algorithm
follows a simple greedy strategy, wherein for each of the possible budget splits and each possible
middle nodes considered, one can ﬁrst plan the optimal subpath on one side of the middle location,
then commit to the planned subpath and optimize for the subpath on the other side. Such a path,
consisting of independently optimized subpath s−vm and a subpath vm−t optimized subject to ob-
servation locations already selected in s −vm, may result in a suboptimal s −t path. Nonetheless,
Chekuri and Pal proved that such a path has an approximation guarantee of O(log2 |P∗|), where
|P∗| is the number of locations visited by an optimal solution P∗.
In order to implement such a greedy approach, the recursive calls planning the second sub-
path will – similarly as done in sequential allocation – optimize a residual reward function which
measures the incremental gain taking into account the information already obtained by the loca-
tions selected in the ﬁrst subpath. More formally, let the set P1 refer to the locations selected in
the ﬁrst subpath, and consider the residual submodular function fP1 over a set of locations A as
716

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
fP1(A) = f(A ∪P1) −f(P1). If P2 is the set of locations in the second subpath, then it holds that
f(P1) + fP1(P2) = f(P1 ∪P2). Hence, if the ﬁrst recursive call (with submodular function f)
returns path P1, and the second recursive call (with submodular function fP1) returns path P2, then
the sum of the scores of the subproblems exactly equals the score of the concatenated path.
Let us now formalize the intuitive description of the recursive-greedy algorithm. The pseu-
docode of the algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. The inputs to the algorithm are a starting
location s, a ﬁnishing location t, an upper bound on the path cost B, a parameter R that deﬁnes the
residual for the submodular function such that the function that needs to be maximized is deﬁned as
fR(P) = f(P ∪R) −f(R), and a parameter i that represents the recursion depth. The maximum
number of locations that can be selected at each stage is calculated using the recursion depth as 2i.
In the base case (recursion depth i = 0), the algorithm simply returns the path P = (s, t) (if the
cost c(s, t) ≤B).
In the recursive case, the algorithm searches for a s −t path with maximum reward by iterating
over all possible locations (that can be reached with given budget constraint) as middle locations
(Line 8), i.e. locations that could possibly split the required path into two subpaths with equal num-
ber of locations on either side. For each such middle location, the algorithm explores all possible
splits of available budget (Line 9) across the two subpaths on either side of the middle location.
Reducing the recursion depth by 1, for each subpath, ensures that the same number of locations are
selected on either side of the middle location. However, before exploring the second subpath, the
algorithm commits to the locations selected in the ﬁrst subpath by passing them as input through
the “residual” parameter (Line 11). The two subpaths found in such a way are then concatenated to
provide a complete s −t path. The algorithm stores the best possible s −t path over the already
searched problem space, replacing it with a better path whenever such a path is found.
5.1 Structure of the Search Problem
It is instructive to consider the recursive structure generated by the recursive-greedy algorithm.
Fig. 4 illustrates an example of such a structure when running recursive-greedy for our lake sensing
application with the given starting (s) and ﬁnishing (t) location and an upper bound on the path cost
(B). The search using recursive-greedy can be represented graphically as a sum-max tree. At the
root is a max node representing the objective of ﬁnding a s−t path with maximum possible reward,
while the cost of the path is bounded by budget B. For each such max node, the children in the
search tree represent sum nodes corresponding to sum of rewards collected from the two subpaths
on either side of the middle location. Therefore, at the end of the ﬁrst iteration, the graphical repre-
sentation will have a max node as root with several sum nodes as children, for each feasible middle
location and each possible budget splits around that middle location. A partial tree at the end of ﬁrst
iteration is shown in Fig. 4a.
For each sum node, formed at the end of the ﬁrst iteration, the algorithm is then applied recur-
sively on the left subpath. Thus the ﬁrst step of second iteration seeks to ﬁnd a s −vm path with
maximum possible reward under the budget constraint corresponding to the respective budget split
for the sum node. Then, their approach commits to the selected locations on the left side, and re-
curses on the right subpath (to search for a vm −t path), given these selected locations. As a result,
each sum node will have two max nodes as children, each representing an objective to ﬁnd a subpath
of maximum reward on either side of the selected middle location. This algorithm is “greedy” in
that it commits to the locations selected in the ﬁrst subpath before optimizing the second subpath.
717

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
(a) recursive-greedy during ﬁrst iteration
(b) recursive-greedy during second iteration
Figure 4: Illustration of recursive greedy algorithm, as proposed by Chekuri and Pal, for the lake sensing application.
Sum-max tree presents the graphical representation of the problem space.
A partial tree at the end of second iteration is shown in Fig. 4b. Despite the greedy nature, the
recursive-greedy approach provides the following approximation guarantee:
Theorem 2. (Chekuri & Pal, 2005) Let P∗= (s = v0, v1, . . . , vk = t) be an optimal s-t-path
solution. Let P be the path returned by RG(s, t, B, R, i). If i ≥⌈1 + log k⌉, then IX(P) ≥
IX(P∗)/ ⌈1 + log k⌉.
Hence, the recursive-greedy solution P obtains at least a fraction of
1
⌈1+log2 k⌉of the optimal
information, where k ≤n, i.e. the total number of locations traversed by the optimal path will be
smaller than the total number of locations in the discretized spatial domain. Referring back to The-
orem 1, for the MIPP problem using recursive-greedy as the single robot path planning approach,
η = ⌈1 + log k⌉.
5.2 Running Time
By inspecting the recursive structure, the running time of the recursive-greedy algorithm can be seen
to be quasi-polynomial. More speciﬁcally, the running time of the algorithm is O((MB)O(log2 M)),
where B is the budget constraint and M = |V| is the total number of possible observation locations.
So, even for a small problem with M = 64 locations, the exponent will be 6, resulting in a very
large computation time, making the algorithm impractical for observing several real world physical
processes.
The large computational effort required by recursive-greedy can be attributed to two issues: 1)
the large branching factor at each of the max nodes of the recursion tree (sum nodes for each possible
middle node and each possible budget split across that middle node) and 2) (possibly) unnecessary
recursion while exploring subtrees in problem space that can not provide us with an improved re-
ward compared to current best solution. In the following sections, we propose two complementary
approaches (can be used independently of the others) which are intended to ameliorate these con-
cerns: a spatial decomposition technique, and a branch and bound approach. Spatial decomposition
718

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Starting node s
Ending node t
Starting cell Cs
Ending cell Ct
(a) Spatial decomposition of the phenomenon
Cs
Middle cell Cm
Ct
P1, budget = B’
a
b
c
d
Incoming 
path P1
Exiting path
P2
Cell center
P2, budget = Be–B’
(b) Cell paths and travel within cells
Smoothed path
(c) Cell paths and path smoothing
Figure 5: Illustration of spatial decomposition in recursive-eSIP using surface sensing in lake environment as an
example. The sensing domain ((a), top) is decomposed into a grid of cells ((a), bottom). recursive-eSIP jointly optimizes
over cell-paths ((b), top) and allocations of experiments in the cells ((b), bottom). Within the cells, locations are connected
to cell center. recursive-eSIP concatenates paths between-cell and within cell paths ((c), top) and ﬁnally heuristics are
applied in eMIP to smooth the path ((c), bottom).
(discussed in Section 6) seeks to reduce the high branching factor (i.e. the number of sum nodes
in the search tree) by clustering the sensing locations and then running the recursive-greedy over
these clusters instead of actual sensing locations. Branch and bound (discussed in Section 7) seeks
to avoid unnecessary recursion by maintaining a lower and an upper bound on the possible reward
from a subtree in the search tree and pruning the tree accordingly. These two approaches, together
with sequential-allocation (discussed in Section 3) provide an efﬁcient algorithm for multi robot
informative path planning.
6. Spatial Decomposition – Approximating MIPP as SD-MIPP
In this section, we explain in detail the process of spatial decomposition and the corresponding im-
provements in running time achieved through this process. Our approach assumes that the traveling
cost between arbitrary locations is given by their euclidean distance.
An intuitive approach for improving the running time is to spatially decompose the sensing
region into smaller sub-regions, each containing a cluster of sensing locations. We can thus think
about planning informative paths as deciding which sub-regions to explore, and then deciding which
locations to sense within these sub-regions. The idea of exploring the sub-regions motivates the
decomposition of the sensing domain into smaller regions (cells). We can then run the recursive-
greedy algorithm on these cells instead of the actual sensing locations. Since the size of each cellular
region is small, traveling cost within each cell can be ignored3. Once we ignore the traveling cost
within the cells, sensing locations inside the selected cells can be chosen using the GreedySubset
approach (as proposed by Krause et al., 2008), taking advantage of its strong approximation guar-
3. There may be robotic platforms where non-holonomic motion constraints will make small motions much more chal-
lenging and thus traveling cost for smaller distances within a cell may become non-negligible. For such systems,
with large traveling cost for smaller motions, some system speciﬁc constraints may be possible to account for while
performing cellular decomposition or the greedy algorithm may be constrained to not select locations that are “too”
close).
719

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
antee in an unconstrained setting as discussed in Section 4. Fig. 5 presents an illustration of our
approach and is explained as follows:
1. We decompose the sensing region, containing ﬁnitely many discrete sensing locations (c.f.,
Fig. 5a, top), into a collection of non-overlapping cells eV = {C1, C2, . . . , CN} (c.f., Fig. 5a,
bottom). The distance between two cells is deﬁned as the distance between the centroids
of these cells. Each cell Ci contains a set of locations vi ∈V, representing sensing loca-
tions, such that the coordinates of these locations, in a euclidean metric space, lie within the
boundary of the containing cell.
2. We approximate the original MIPP problem with the spatially decomposed MIPP problem, or
SD-MIPP problem on eV. In SD-MIPP, we jointly optimize over cell-paths in eV (c.f., Fig. 5b,
top) using the recursive-greedy algorithm, and over the allocation of observations within the
cells visited by the paths using the GreedySubset algorithm. Thus, when allocating measure-
ments to a cell, we ignore the traveling cost within the cell (c.f., Fig. 5b, bottom). Since
the cells are not very large, this simpliﬁcation only leads to a small additional cost when the
SD-MIPP solution is transformed back to the original MIPP problem.
3. We transfer the (approximate) SD-MIPP solution, consisting of a cell-path and an allocation
of observations to cells (c.f., Fig. 5c, top), back to the original MIPP problem. We then smooth
the path (c.f., Fig. 5c, bottom) using heuristics, e.g. the tour-opt heuristics as discussed by
Lin (1965).
Dual optimization of cell paths and budget allocation for observations within each visited cell
motivated splitting the available budget eB into a budget Bt for traveling between the cells and a bud-
get Be for making experiments at sensing locations within the visited cells. Such a split can be easily
incorporated in recursive-greedy algorithm as well but was not required as the paths in recursive-
greedy were optimized over observation locations and not cells containing these locations. Formally,
the SD-MIPP problem is the following: We want to ﬁnd a path P∗
C = (Cs = Ci1, . . . , Cil = Ct),
for each robot i with starting cell Cs containing the starting node s and ﬁnishing cell Ct containing
the ﬁnishing node t, with a travel cost of at most Bt. This travel budget is measured in terms of
distances between centers of visited cells, and the cost of traveling within the cells is deﬁned as 0.
In addition, for each visited cell Cij in P∗
C, we want to select a set of sensing locations Aij, such that
the total experimental cost (for making observations within the visited cells) is upper bounded by
Be, i.e. C(Ai1 ∪· · · ∪Ail) ≤Be, and that the information I(Ai1 ∪· · · ∪Ail) is as large as possible.
The optimal SD-MIPP solution uses the optimal split of the budget eB into Bt and Be. To simplify
the presentation, we rescale the costs such that the cells form a uniform grid of quadratic cells with
width L, and assume that the sensing cost Cexp is constant over all locations. These assumptions
can easily be relaxed, but they allow us to relate the path costs to the number of cells traversed, to
simplify the discussion.
The following lemma states that there exists an SD-MIPP version (P∗
C) of the MIPP-optimal
path (P∗), with (almost) the same cost, and the same information.
Lemma 3. Let P∗= (s = v0, v1, . . . , vl = t) be an optimal s-t-path solution to MIPP, constrained
by budget B. Then there exists a corresponding SD-MIPP path P∗
C = (Cs = Ci1, . . . , Cil = Ct),
traversing through locations Ai1 ∪· · · ∪Ail, with budget eB of at most 2
√
2B + 4L collecting the
same information.
720

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Algorithm: eMIP
1
Input: eB, k, starting / ﬁnishing locations s1, . . . , sk, t1, . . . , tk
Output: A collection of informative paths P1, . . . , Pk
begin
2
Perform spatial decomposition into cells;
3
Find starting and ending cells Csi and Cti;
4
R ←∅;
5
// Path planning for each robot
for i = 1 to k do
6
// Trying different combination of traveling and
experimental budget
for iter = 0 to ⌊log2 eB⌋do
7
Be ←eB −2iter;
8
P′
iter ←recursive-eSIP (Csi, Cti,Be,R,iter);
9
Smooth P′
iter using tour-opt heuristics;
10
Pi ←argmaxiter I(P′
iter);
11
R ←R ∪Pi;
12
return P1, . . . , Pk;
13
end
14
Algorithm 3: eMIP algorithm for informative multi robot path planning. Procedure from Line 7 to Line 11
effectively implements eSIP algorithm. eSIP is then repeated (Line 6) using sequential allocation described in
Section 3 (Line 6) to get paths for each robot i.
We now present an algorithm for ﬁnding an approximately optimal solution to SD-MIPP, and
then we show that this solution gives us an approximate solution to the original MIPP problem, with
just slightly increased cost of 2
√
2B + 4L, for ensuring that the optimal solution for MIPP exists in
the corresponding SD-MIPP setting.
6.1 Algorithm for SD-MIPP
Our eMIP algorithm solves the SD-MIPP problem on eV and then smooths out the paths over the
selected observation locations to provide a solution to MIPP. Let us ﬁrst clarify the algorithmic
nomenclature speciﬁcally:
• recursive-eSIP: implements an approach similar to recursive-greedy for selecting a path over
eV and greedily selects the observation locations within each visited cell using GreedySubset;
• eSIP: iterates through different values of traveling budget by calling recursive-eSIP with cor-
responding values of input Be and i and smoothing the output path from recursive-eSIP using
tour-opt heuristics;
• eMIP: effectively implements sequential-allocation with eSIP as the single robot path plan-
ning algorithm
The complete algorithm works as follows: An outer loop (Line 6 in Algorithm 3) implements
the sequential allocation algorithm for performing path planning for multiple robots. The procedure
721

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
inside the outer loop (Line 7 to Line 11 in Algorithm 3) implements the eSIP algorithm. This pro-
cedure iterates through different combination of traveling and experimental budget, allocating Bt
(= 2iter) out of the total budget eB for traveling between the cells, and Be(= eB −Bt) for making ex-
periments within the visited cells. Stepping through Bt in powers of 2 results in faster performance
(log2 eB instead of eB iterations). If we increase the input budget eB by a factor of 2, the exponential
increase in traveling budget is guaranteed to try traveling budget, Bt (= 2iter ≥BtApp) where BtApp
is the traveling budget for the best approximation path. Since the overall budget eB is increased by a
factor of 2, the remaining experimental budget is also guaranteed to be more than the experimental
budget corresponding to the best approximation path. Therefore, exponential increase in traveling
budget will only increase the required budget eB by at most a factor of 2. The eSIP procedure then
calls recursive-eSIP (explained in Algorithm 4), selecting the cells to visit, and greedily allocating
observations in the visited cells. Finally, the eSIP procedure calls tour-opt heuristics to smooth the
output path from recursive-eSIP.
The recursive-eSIP procedure takes as input a starting cell Cs, a ﬁnishing cell Ct, an experimen-
tal budget Be, a residual R indicating the locations visited thus far (initially passed empty from
eMIP), and a maximum recursion depth, iter (initially passed log2 Bt from eMIP). We then:
1. Iterate through all possible choices of middle cells Cm (such that there are, almost, equal
number of cells on either side of Cm) and budget splits f
Be (of the available experimental
budget Be) to spend for making experiments on the subpaths from Cs to Cm and Cm to Ct
(c.f., Fig. 5b). The budget splits f
Be can either be linearly (more accurate) or exponentially
(faster) spaced, as described below.
2. Recursively ﬁnd a subpath P1 from Cs to Cm, constrained by budget B′, leaving the remaining
budget (Be −B′) for the other subpath P2. Reducing recursion depth (iter) by 1, for each
of the subpaths P1 and P2, ensures that equal number of cells are visited on either side Cm.
The lowest level of recursion depth 0 signiﬁes the cell selected for the corresponding path.
At the lowest recursion level, we then use the GreedySubset algorithm (c.f., Section 4) to
select the sensing locations based on the residual information function IR and constrained by
budget B′. As an illustration, the black locations in the middle cell Cm in Fig. 5b bottom,
are selected by the GreedySubset algorithm with budget B′ = 4 such that they provide the
maximum improvement in mutual information.
3. We then commit to the locations selected in P1, and recursively ﬁnd a subpath P2 from
Cm to Ct, with experimental budget Be −B′. Committing to the locations selected in P1
requires that we greedily select the sensing locations at lowest recursion level based on the
residual information function IR∪P1.
4. Finally, we concatenate the locations obtained in P1 and P2 to output the best path from the
algorithm (c.f., Fig. 5c, top).
6.2 Linear vs. Exponential Budget Splits
Step 1 of the recursive-eSIP procedure (as explained in Section 6.1) considers different budget splits
B′ ∈f
Be to the left and right subpaths. Similar to the recursive greedy algorithm, one can choose
f
Be = {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , Be−1, Be} to be linearly spaced. Since the branching factor is proportional to
the number of considered splits, linear budget splits leads to a large amount of computation effort.
722

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Algorithm: recursive-eSIP
1
Input: Cs, Ct, Be, R, iter
Output: An informative path P from Cs to Ct
begin
2
if (d(Cs, Ct) > 2iterL) then return Infeasible;
3
// Greedy node selection within starting and finishing cell
P ←GreedySubsetBe,R(vi : vi ∈Cs ∪Ct);
4
if (iter = 0) then return P;
5
reward ←IR(P);
6
// Trying each cell as middle cell
foreach Cm ∈C do
7
// Trying each possible budget split
for B′ ∈f
Be do
8
// Planning subpath on one side of the middle cell
P1 ←recursive-eSIP (Cs, Cm, B′, R, iter −1);
9
// Planning subpath on other side of the middle cell
while committing to nodes selected in first subpath
P2 ←recursive-eSIP (Cm, Ct, Be −B′, R ∪P1, iter −1);
10
if (IR(P1.P2) > reward) then
11
P ←P1.P2;
12
reward ←IR(P);
13
return P;
14
end
15
Algorithm 4: recursive-eSIP procedure for path planning.
An alternative is to consider only exponential splits: f
Be = {0, 20, 21, 22, . . . , 2log2 Be} ∪{Be, Be−
20, Be−21, Be−22, . . . , 0}. In this case, the branching factor is only logarithmic in the experimental
budget. Even though we are not guaranteed to ﬁnd the same solutions as with linear budget splits,
we can both theoretically (as given by Lemmas 4 and 7) and empirically (as illustrated in Fig. 14c
and 14d) show that the performance only gets slightly worse in this case, compared to a signiﬁcant
improvement in running time. In addition to these two ways of splitting the budget, we also con-
sidered one-sided exponential budget splits (i.e. f
Be = {0, 20, 21, 22, . . . , 2log2 Be}), which further
reduces the branching factor by a factor of 2 compared to the exponential splits deﬁned above. Al-
though we do not provide theoretical guarantees for this third possibility, we experimentally found
it to perform very well (c.f., Section 8).
6.3 Algorithmic Guarantees
Our algorithm is greedy in two ways:
• At recursion depth 0, the sensing locations are selected greedily based on the mutual infor-
mation criterion.
• Before exploring the subpath P2, recursive-eSIP procedure commits to the locations selected
in subpath P1.
723

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
Due to the these greedy steps, recursive-eSIP is an approximation algorithm and does not nec-
essarily ﬁnd an optimal solution. The following lemma, however, guarantees a performance bound
for the path output by the eSIP procedure:
Lemma 4. Let P∗
C = (Cs = C1, . . . , Ck = Ct) be an optimal solution for single robot instance
of SD-MIPP, constrained by budget eB, where an optimal set of locations are selected within each
visited cell Cj. Let bP be the solution returned for eSIP. Then I( bP) ≥
1−1/e
1+log2 k I(P∗
C).
6.4 Solving the MIPP Problem
Now, we need to transfer the approximately optimal solution obtained for SD-MIPP back to MIPP.
A path over cells, with observation locations selected greedily within each visited cell, is trans-
formed into a path over observation locations by connecting all locations selected in cell Cij to the
cell’s center, (as indicated in Fig. 5b bottom), then connecting all selected centers to a path (Fig. 5c
top), and ﬁnally expanding the resulting tree into a tour by traversing the tree twice (by traversing
each edge of the tree once in each direction, a set of nodes connected by a tree can be converted
into a set of nodes connected by a path). This traversal results in a tour which is at most twice as
long as the shortest tour connecting the selected vertices. (Of course, an even better solution can be
obtained by applying an improved approximation algorithm for TSP, such as the algorithm proposed
by Christoﬁdes, 1976). The following Theorem completes the analysis of our algorithm:
Theorem 5. Let P∗be the optimal solution for the single robot instance of the MIPP problem with
budget constraint B. Then, our eSIP algorithm will ﬁnd a solution bP achieving an information
value of at least I( bP) ≥
1−1/e
1+log2 N I(P∗), whose cost is no more than 2(2
√
2B + 4L)(1 + L
√
2
Cexp ) in
the case of linear budget split for f
Be and no more than 2(2
√
2B + 4L)(1 + L
√
2
Cexp )Nlog2
3
2 in the
case of exponential budget split for f
Be.
The performance guarantee is w.r.t. the number of cells N instead of the number M of sensing
locations, as was the case in the work by Chekuri and Pal (2005). However, the input budget
constraint is violated by an amount based on the size of cells during the spatial decomposition. This
violation in input budget constraint leads to a tradeoff between computation effort and additional
cost incurred that can be tuned based on speciﬁc application requirements. If the size of the cell is
small (in the limit reducing each cell to each observation location), the number of cells will be large
and will result in higher computation time with reduced additional cost. On the other hand, if the
size of the cell is large, the computation time will be small and the algorithm needs to pay higher
additional traveling cost.
Running time analysis of eSIP is straightforward. The algorithm calls the routine recursive-eSIP
log2 B times. If TI is the time to evaluate the mutual information I, then the time for computing
greedy subset Tgs (Line 4, Algorithm 4) is O(N2
C TI), where NC is the maximum number of
locations per cell. At each recursion step we try all the cells that can be reached with the avail-
able traveling budget (Line 7, Algorithm 4). For the possible experimental budget split, we try all
(linearly or exponentially spaced) splits of Be ∈f
Be among the two subpaths P1 and P2 (Line 8,
Algorithm 4). The recursion depth would be log2(min(N, eB)). The following proposition states the
running time for eSIP:
724

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Proposition 6. The worst case running time of eSIP for linearly spaced splits of the experimental
budget is O
 Tgs log2 B(NB)log2 N
, while for the exponentially spaced splits of the experimental
budget it is O
 Tgs log2 B(2N log2 B)log2 N
Comparing this running time to the recursive-greedy algorithm (O((MB)O(log2 M))), we note
a reduction from B to log2 B in the base, and log of the number of locations (log2 M) to log of the
number of cells (log2 N) in the exponent. These two improvements turn the impractical recursive-
greedy approach into a much more viable algorithm.
Varying the number of cells (and correspondingly the size of each cell) results in a trade-off
between the computation effort and the traveling cost within the cell that is ignored by the eSIP
algorithm. Proposition 6 states that the computation effort is directly proportional to the number
of cells “N”. Therefore as we increase the number of cells, corresponding computation effort for
the eSIP algorithm will also increase. On the other hand, reducing the number of cells will result
in increasing the size of each of the cell. Since eSIP algorithm ignores the traveling cost within
the cell, larger cell size will imply larger traveling cost ignored by the eSIP algorithm and hence
larger overshoot in the cost of the resultant output path over the input budget B. Lemma 3 states the
corresponding additional cost incurred by the output path calculated using eSIP algorithm in terms
of the cell size “L”. Based on the speciﬁc application requirements, one can decide the appropri-
ate number of cells and ﬁne tune the trade-off between computation effort and additional path cost
incurred. Fig. 14f shows that the corresponding collected reward did not vary signiﬁcantly as we
varied the number of cells for the application of observing temperature in a lake environment.
7. Branch and Bound
The spatial decomposition technique effectively enables a trade-off between running time com-
plexity and achieved approximation guarantee. However, the eSIP algorithm still has to solve a
super-polynomial, albeit sub-exponential, search problem. In the following, we describe several
branch and bound techniques which allow further reduction in the computation effort making our
approach tractable for real world sensing experiments.
7.1 Problem Representation
The speciﬁc structure of the search space representation motivated many of the proposed branch and
bound approaches. Similarly to the recursive structure of the recursive-greedy algorithm (discussed
in Section 5), the recursive-eSIP problem structure can also be represented as a sum-max tree, as
shown in Fig. 6a. A small difference exists in the selection of observation locations along the
solution path. In the case of recursive-greedy, each of the sum nodes traversed in the selected
path represents a physical observation location. However, in the case of recursive-eSIP, each sum
node in the selected path represents a cell in the corresponding traversed path. The observation
locations at the sum node are selected greedily, within the corresponding cell, based on the available
experimental budget. Using the sum-max tree problem structure, we now explain the proposed
branch and bound approaches to prune parts of the tree that will not provide any further improvement
over the currently known best solution path. All of the proposed branch and bound techniques are
outlined in the recursive-eSIP procedure presented in Algorithm 5.
725

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
Algorithm: recursive-eSIP with branch and bound
1
Input: Cs, Ct, Be, R, iter, rewardLB, α
Output: An informative path P from Cs to Ct
begin
2
if (d(Cs, Ct) > 2iterL) then
3
return Infeasible
4
P ←GreedySubsetBe,R(vi : vi ∈Cs ∪Ct);
5
if (iter = 0) then
6
return P
7
filterCells ←∪Ci ∀Ci s.t. d(Cs, Ci) ≤2iterL/2 and d(Ci, Ct) ≤2iterL/2 ;
8
foreach Cm ∈filterCells do
9
for B′ ∈f
Be do
10
// Calculating upper bound using GreedySubset
UBP1 ←calculateUB(Cs, Cm, B′, iter −1, R);
11
UBP2 ←calculateUB(Cs, Cm, Be −B′, iter −1, R);
12
if ((UBP1 + UBP2) > α ∗rewardLB) then
13
// Calculating lower bound for P1
heurP1 ←heuristicOP(Cs, Cm, B′, R, iter −1);
14
LBP1 ←max(IR(heurP1), rewardLB −UBP2);
15
// Recursive search for P1
P1 ←recursive-eSIP (Cs, Cm, B′, R, iter −1, LBP1, α);
16
// Calculating lower bound for P2
heurP2 ←heuristicOP(Cm, Ct, Be −B′, R ∪P1, iter −1);
17
LBP2 ←max(IR∪P1(heurP2), rewardLB −IR(P1));
18
// Recursive search for P2
P2 ←recursive-eSIP (Cm, Ct, Be −B′, R ∪P1, iter −1, LBP2, α);
19
if (Iresid(P1.P2) > rewardLB) then
20
P ←P1.P2;
21
rewardLB ←Iresid(P1.P2);
22
return P;
23
end
24
Algorithm 5: recursive-eSIP procedure with branch and bound approaches for efﬁcient path planning. Each
procedure corresponds to a max node in the search space with input rewardLB representing the calculated lower
bound. A sum node in the search space effectively combines the recursive calls to each of the subpaths (imple-
mented in Line 16 and Line 19). Since recursion reduces the traveling budget (2iterL) by half, the initial pruning in
Line 8 removes the cells that can not be reached in the next recursion step. Line 15 and Line 18 calculate the lower
bound for subpaths on either side of the selected middle cell. Input α represents the scaling factor for one of the
sub-approximation heuristics. Approximation guarantee for the output path P is given as I( bP) ≥
1−1/e
1+log2 N I(P∗)
where I is the submodular reward function and P∗is the optimal path.
726

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
(a) sum-max tree
(b) Pruning of sum nodes
(c) Tighter lower bounds
Figure 6: Illustration of our branch & bound approach. (a) shows the sum-max tree representing the search space. Each
max node selects a middle cell and a budget allocation, and each sum node combines two subpaths on either side of the
selected middle cell. (b) shows how upper bound at a sum node (e.g. a value of 18 at Sum2), when smaller than the
lower bound of the parent max node (e.g. a value of 20 for Max1) can be used to prune branches in the search tree. (c)
shows how lower bound at a max nodes is tightened (e.g. a value of 7 at Max6 is improved to 9 using upper bound of 11
at sibling Maxn7 and lower bound of 20 at grandparent Max1) to allow further pruning which otherwise may not have
been possible (e.g. pruning of Sum4 with upper bound value of 8).
7.2 Efﬁcient Search of the Problem Space
In a naive implementation of recursive-eSIP, the entire recursion tree would eventually be traversed.
However, many of the considered subpaths may be highly suboptimal. Several heuristics have been
proposed in the past for similar path planning problem with empirical efﬁciency claims, but without
any approximation guarantee. We use one such heuristic (c.f., Chao et al., 1996, hereafter referred
to as heuristicOP) to calculate a solution path satisfying the budget constraints, while trying to max-
imize the collected reward. Since such a path can be efﬁciently calculated with small computation
effort, we use this path as an initial known solution. The total reward collected in this path is used as
an input lower bound (input variable rewardLB in Algorithm 5) for the root max node. Since the
computation effort associated with heuristicOP is small, it is also used at the rest of the max nodes
in the search tree to calculate the lower bound for these nodes (discussed in detail in Section 7.2.2).
For each of the child sum nodes, an upper bound for the collected reward is calculated by ex-
ploiting the submodularity of the reward function (procedure calculateUB called in Line 11 and 12
727

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
Algorithm:calculateUB
1
Input: Cs, Ct, Be, iter, R
Output: An upper bound UB on information gain
begin
2
// Selecting set of reachable cells
possibleCells ←∪Ci ∀Ci s.t. d(Cs, Ci) + d(Ci, Ct) ≤2iterL ;
3
// Greedy node selection within reachable cells
P ←GreedySubsetBe,R(vi : vi ∈possibleCells);
4
UB ←Iresid(P);
5
return UB;
6
end
7
Algorithm 6: Procedure for calculating upper bound at max nodes. Upper bound of child max nodes is added
to obtain upper bound at parent sum node.
in Algorithm 5 and explained in detail in Algorithm 6). We then only need to process the sum node
children with upper bounds greater than the current best solution (Line 13 in Algorithm 5). The
current best solution for the parent max node is updated when the collected reward from any of the
child sum nodes is greater than the previously known best solution reward (Line 20 in Algorithm 5).
Fig. 6b presents a graphical illustration of this concept. After completely exploring branch
Sum1, the current best solution of value 20 is updated as a lower bound for Max1. A smaller lower
bound (18) at Sum2 results in pruning of sub-branch rooted at Sum2. However, nodes such as Sum3
with upper bound (24) higher than the current best solution (20), need to be explored further as they
can potentially provide a solution path with a better reward than the current best solution.
7.2.1 UPPER BOUND ON THE Sum NODES
Algorithm 6 presents the calculateUB procedure for obtaining an upper bound on the collected
reward at each max node and is used in recursive-eSIP (Line 11, 12 in Algorithm 5) for pruning the
search space. The upper bound at a sum node is calculated by adding the upper bound of each of the
child max nodes. We calculate the upper bounds by relaxing the path constraints, and then ﬁnding
an optimal set of reachable locations for each path (P1 and P2). Since this problem itself is NP-
hard, we exploit the submodularity of reward function and approximate it using the GreedySubset
algorithm. Fig. 7 illustrates an example of calculating the upper bound. We ﬁrst calculate the set
of reachable locations w.r.t. the remaining traveling budget. These locations are contained within
the cells Ci reachable from cells Cs and Ct (Line 3 in Algorithm 6). Such a boundary for reachable
locations is illustrated by an ellipse in Fig. 7.
Then, we run the GreedySubset algorithm to greedily select best possible Be locations from all
the possible reachable locations (Line 4 of Algorithm 6). As an example, Vi and Vj are selected
using GreedySubset in Fig. 7. Since GreedySubset guarantees a constant factor (1−1/e) approxima-
tion (Nemhauser et al., 1978), multiplying the resulting information value by (1 −1/e)−1 provides
an upper bound on the information achievable by the path (and hence the corresponding max child
node). Therefore, in Fig. 7 the reward collected from locations Vi (MI(Vi)) and Vj (MI(Vj)) when
multiplied by the factor (1−1/e)−1 provides upper bound for the collected reward. However, since
the path cost constraint are relaxed, the total cost of observing Vi and Vj (dsi + dij + djt) may be
728

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Figure 7: Illustration of calculating upper bound using GreedySubset.
more than the available budget B. In Fig. 6c, for example, we use calculateUB to get upper bounds
13 for Max6 and 11 for Max7, resulting in an upper bound of 13 + 11 = 24 for Sum34.
7.2.2 LOWER BOUND ON THE Max NODES:
Effective pruning of subtree rooted at sum nodes would require calculating the lower bounds for the
parent max node efﬁciently. One way to calculate such lower bounds is by exploring one branch
completely (as explained in Section 7.2). This procedure will be computationally expensive. In-
stead, we implement two other ways for acquiring such lower bounds faster: Using heuristicOP 5
(as explained above for obtaining the initial best solution), and based on the current best solution of
the grandparent max node. We then use the larger of two different lower bounds.
Fig. 6c illustrates the graphical presentation of the procedure for calculating the lower bounds
using the current best solution of the grandparent max node. We call this procedure altLB. We calcu-
late an upper bound (exploiting the submodularity) of 11 for Max7 node. For the node Max6, since
the grandparent node Max1 has a lower bound of 20, the subtree rooted at Max6 has to provide a
reward of at least 9 (20 - 11) to be explored further. The lower bound of value 9 calculated using
altLB is tighter than the lower bound provided by the heuristic (7), and enabled pruning of branch
Sum4 (with upper bound 8).
Lines 15 and 18 in Algorithm 5 illustrate the altLB procedure. While using altLB, the lower
bound for subpath P1 (in Line 15), is calculated using the upper bound of subpath P2. On the other
hand, while calculating the lower bound using altLB for subpath P2 (in Line 18), the exact reward
from P1 (IR(P1)) is used instead of the upper bound. Since the actual reward is always tighter than
the calculated upper bound, the lower bound calculated for subpath P2 (using altLB) will be tighter
than the lower bound calculated for subpath P1. This motivates exploring the subpath with higher
experimental budget ﬁrst such that the upper bound for the unexplored subpath (with lower exper-
imental budget) is tighter making the lower bound for the ﬁrst subpath tighter6. The heuristic for
4. We can even compute tighter online bounds for maximizing monotonic submodular functions, as discussed
by Nemhauser et al. (1978).
5. heuristicOP was only proposed for modular functions but we found it to provide good solution paths even in the
submodular setting.
6. We note that with higher experimental budget, GreedySubset (used to calculate the upper bound) can potentially
select more locations that are far apart (since the path cost constraint are ignored). When path cost constraint is
incorporated, such locations will become infeasible and will make the upper bound loose.
729

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
exploring the subpath with higher experimental budget ﬁrst was also exploited to further improve
the computation effort.
Maintaining a lower bound at each node in the search tree also makes our approach anytime,
i.e. the search can be terminated at any point even before it is completed. The current best solution
from the graph already searched will be available after this early termination. Early termination is
particularly advantageous in scenarios when it is required to obtain the best possible path traversed
by the robot with a hard upper bound on the available time to calculate such a path.
7.2.3 NODE ORDERING
The illustration in Fig. 6b demonstrates that a better currently known solution will likely help in
increased pruning of the search tree. In order to improve the current best solution faster, at each
max node we explore the sum nodes in the decreasing order of their upper bounds. The intuitive
idea is that a higher upper bound is a likely indicator for higher reward value. Thus the upper bound
in Line 11 and 12 in Algorithm 5 can be calculated separately and the rest of the computation (in
loops implemented in Line 9 and 10 in Algorithm 5) can then be executed in decreasing order of
upper bound. Such an approach is similar to node ordering that is employed to improve the pruning
efﬁciency of Depth First Branch and Bound (DFBnB) (Zhang & Korf, 1995).
7.2.4 SUB-APPROXIMATION
Upper and lower bounds derived as explained above can potentially be loose. We can address this
issue, and further trade off collected information with improved execution time, by introducing
several sub-approximation heuristics. As a ﬁrst heuristic, once the node ordering is performed, we
explore only the top K sum nodes. This heuristic, termed as sub-approximation (Ibaraki et al.,
1983), is found to be effective in practice.
As a second heuristic, instead of comparing the lower bound of a parent max node directly with
the upper bound from the child sum nodes (when deciding which subproblems to prune), we scale
up the lower bound by a factor of α > 1 (Line 13 of Algorithm 5). This scaling often allows us
to prune many branches that would not have been pruned otherwise. Unfortunately, this optimistic
pruning can also potentially cause us to prune branches that should not have been pruned, and de-
crease the information collected by the algorithm. In practice, for sufﬁciently small α values, this
procedure can speed up the algorithm signiﬁcantly, without much effect on the quality of the solu-
tion. This performance comparison for both computation effort and collected reward using several
real world sensing datasets is discussed in Section 8.2.
8. Experimental Results
We performed several experiments both in-ﬁeld as well as in simulation (using real world sensing
datasets) to demonstrate the usefulness of our proposed algorithm for several diverse environmental
sensing applications. In-ﬁeld experiments were performed using the Networked InfoMechanical
System (NIMS) (Jordan et al., 2007), a tethered robotic system. Real world sensing datasets used
for performing scaling and multi robot experiments in simulation were collected using either a
network of static sensors or a robotic boat.
730

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
(a) Schematic representation of the system
(b) Image captured while performing path plan-
ning
Figure 8: Aquatic based NIMS (NIMS-AQ)is a platform in the NIMS family used for performing path planning in the
lake environment.
8.1 In-ﬁeld Experiments
Several experiments were performed in-ﬁeld to demonstrate the applicability of modeling a phe-
nomenon as a Gaussian Process and using eMIP to perform path planning for diverse aquatic sens-
ing applications. These include a river monitoring application with the objective of studying salt
concentration, and lake monitoring for several applications of interest to limnologists. In each of
these applications, NIMS was used to monitor a cross-section (two dimensional vertical plane in an
environment) in the aquatic environment. The phenomenon of interest is then modeled as a Gaus-
sian Process and we use the mutual information criterion as submodular reward function, quantify-
ing the informativeness of observation locations. The learned Gaussian Process model and mutual
information objective are then provided as input to eMIP and the subset of locations as output by the
algorithm are subsequently observed, again using NIMS as the robotic platform. In order to quantify
the efﬁciency of our approach, we predict the phenomenon at unobserved locations and compute the
root mean square (RMS) error between the predicted phenomenon and the ground truth (calculated
by observing at all the uniformly spaced locations before and after the path planning experiment).
8.1.1 ROBOTIC PLATFORM:
The Aquatic Networked InfoMechanical Systems platform (NIMS-AQ) is the latest in the family of
NIMS systems (Jordan et al., 2007; Pon et al., 2005; Borgstrom et al., 2006), developed speciﬁcally
for aquatic applications and used during the lake deployment. The family of NIMS systems had
been successfully deployed for several terrestrial and aquatic sensing applications. In 2006 alone,
NIMS was used in several successful campaigns in forests (La Selva, Costa Rica and James Reserve,
California), rivers (San Joaquin, California and Medea Creek, California), lake (Lake Fulmor, Cali-
fornia), and mountain ecosystems (White Mountains, California),
Fig. 8a displays the schematic view of the system. The basic infrastructure of the system in-
cludes a rigid sensing tower supported by two Hobie FloatCat pontoons7 in a catamaran conﬁgu-
ration. An actuation module resides on top of the sensing tower that drives the horizontal cable
and vertical payload cable (horizontal and vertical motion respectively) across a cross-section of the
aquatic environment. Power for the system is provided by two deep cycle marine batteries housed
on top of the pontoons. The horizontal drive cable is kept center-aligned to the craft by using guide
7. Developed by Hobie Cat Company.
731

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
(a) Observed distribution during a raster scan on Au-
gust 11
(b) Predicted distribution after observing at locations
as output by eMIP
Figure 9: Distribution of electrical conductivity (microSiemens per centimeter) as observed at the conﬂuence of San
Joaquin river, California. Points represent observation locations during the corresponding experiment.
pulleys that can be repositioned based on the type of aquatic environment in which NIMS-AQ is
sampling (ﬂowing or still water conditions). Fig. 8b shows NIMS-AQ performing path planning in
the lake environment.
8.1.2 SENSING IN A RIVER ENVIRONMENT
The ﬁrst in-ﬁeld application of our approach was executed at the conﬂuence of two distinct rivers,
Merced river and San Joaquin river, in California from August 7-11, 2007 (hereafter referred to as
San Joaquin deployment). Fig. 1a displays an aerial view of the San Joaquin deployment site. The
scientiﬁc objective at the conﬂuence zone is to characterize the transport and mixing phenomena
at the conﬂuence of two distinct rivers – Merced river (relatively low salinity) and the agricultural
drainage-impacted San Joaquin River (relatively high salinity) by observing several parameters that
may indicate the mixing behavior of the two streams. Such river observations are useful for answer-
ing important questions pertaining to the spatio-temporal variability of velocity and water quality
dynamics resulting from pollutant inputs, hydrodynamic mixing regimes, and biogeochemical cy-
cling processes that are themselves distributed in time and space. Understanding such mixing pat-
terns are important for policy issues related to water distribution from river ecosystems (Brekke
et al., 2004).
The total width of the observed cross-section was 40 meters with the maximum depth of 1.4 me-
ters (closer to the middle of the cross-section). Several experiments had been executed in the past
to characterize the mixing phenomena at this conﬂuence site (Singh et al., 2007a; Harmon et al.,
2007). Primary experimental design during these campaigns comprised of making observations at
uniformly spaced locations in a two dimensional cross-section (hereafter referred to as raster scan)
and repeating these experiments several times to understand the spatial and temporal dynamics in
the environment. Each of these experiments took several hours, thus restricting the experiments to
a very small number of cross-sections (one or two) within the limited deployment time. However,
a detailed understanding of the conﬂuence environment would require observing multiple cross-
sections, within the limited time frame. This necessitates the use of an adaptive sampling approach
that can model the observed phenomenon, make observations at a small number of locations based
on that model and then effectively predict the phenomenon at the unobserved locations.
732

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
Mixing patterns were characterized at the conﬂuence by observing electrical conductivity that
indicated the amount of salt concentration in the water. Fig. 9a displays typical distribution at a
cross-section in the conﬂuence zone with x-axis representing the distance along the cross-section
and y-axis representing the depth. Low concentration of electrical conductivity towards the lower
x values is contributed by clear water from the Merced river with the other end displaying high
concentration of salts carried by the San Joaquin river. We ﬁrst use the data from one such raster
scan performed on the ﬁrst day of the deployment (displaying similar characteristics) to learn a
non-stationary Gaussian Process model, using a covariance function parameterization as described
by Krause and Guestrin (2007). The parameters are chosen by maximizing the marginal likeli-
hood (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). This non-stationary process was learned by dividing the
complete region into smaller sub-regions and combining the locally-stationary GPs from each of
these sub regions.
A total of 114 locations were observed during the raster scan and used for learning the GP
model. A set of 16 locations was selected out of the total of 114 (14%) using the eMIP algorithm
with the starting and ﬁnishing location on either end of the cross-section as displayed in Fig. 9a.
This set of 16 observation locations was then observed over the next few days. With the required
dwelling time8 of 30 seconds for observing electrical conductivity, large reduction in number of ob-
servation locations resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in experimental time as well (14% compared
to the raster scan).
Since the environmental phenomena exhibit spatial and temporal dynamics, we performed raster
scans before and after our experiment to get a measure of ground truth for electrical conductivity.
The predicted electrical conductivity, as computed after making the observations at the subset of 16
locations selected using eMIP, is then compared with this ground truth. Fig. 9b displays the pre-
dicted distribution of speciﬁc conductivity with points representing the observed locations as output
by eMIP. Fig. 9a displays the distribution as observed using raster scan performed just before the
path planning experiment.
The RMS error between the predicted distribution and the raster scan performed before the path
planning experiment was 45.99 µS/cm. On the other hand, the RMS error between the predicted
distribution and the raster scan performed after the path planning experiment was 53.87 µS/cm.
The RMS error between the two raster scans performed before and after the path planning experi-
ment, indicating the temporal variation in the environment, was 57.55 µS/cm. Low RMS error for
our predicted distribution, when compared with the RMS error between the raster scans performed
before and after the path planning experiment clearly indicates the effectiveness of our approach
for modeling and path planning in such environments. Path planning experiments performed during
other days also demonstrated similar prediction accuracy, while maintaining the signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in total experimental time.
8.1.3 SENSING IN A LAKE ENVIRONMENT
The second set of in-ﬁeld experiments was executed at a lake on the campus of University of Cali-
fornia, Merced from August 10-11, 2007 (hereafter referred to as lake deployment). This site was
chosen based on its convenience for being accessibly located on the university campus and its sim-
ilarity to several other lakes that are of interest for diverse limnology applications, including the
study for growth patterns of “algal bloom”. Nuisance algal bloom can impair the beneﬁcial use of
8. Time for which the sensor has to be kept static to get an accurate measurement.
733

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
(a) Observed distribution during a raster scan on Au-
gust 11
(b) Predicted distribution after observing at locations
as output by eMIP
Figure 10: Distribution of temperature (oC) at the little on UC Merced campus. Points represent observation locations
during the corresponding experiment.
aquatic systems, by blocking sunlight to underwater vegetation, consuming oxygen in the water,
and producing surface scum and odors. The growth pattern of algal bloom in a lake is dependent
on the spatial and temporal dynamics of temperature, dissolved nutrients and light occurring in dif-
ferent layers of its environment. Thus, temperature is one of the critical parameter to observe in
the lake environment as it controls several physical processes occurring in such low ﬂow aquatic
environments (in contrast to the San Joaquin river environment where there is considerable water
ﬂow).
The total width of the observed cross-section was 70 meters, with a maximum depth of up to
1.81 meters. Similarly to the San Joaquin deployment, we ﬁrst learned the non-stationary GP model
using the temperature data from one of the raster scans performed on August 10. Fig. 10a displays
a typical surface distribution of temperature as observed during the raster scan at the lake. A total of
89 locations were observed during the raster scan. A set of 15 locations was selected out of these 89
locations (17%) using the eMIP algorithm with the starting and ending location on either end of the
cross-section as displayed in Fig. 10a. This set of 15 observation locations was then observed the
next day using NIMS as the robotic platform. Similar to San Joaquin deployment, we performed
raster scans before and after our experiment to get a measure of ground truth for the temperature
distribution. The predicted temperature, as computed after making the observations at the subset of
locations selected using eMIP, is then compared with this ground truth. With a smaller dwelling time
of 10 seconds (required for measuring temperature) and having to cover the entire length of the lake
cross-section, the reduction in experimental time was 50% (when compared with the raster scan).
Fig. 10b displays the predicted distribution of temperature with points representing the observed
locations as output by eMIP. Fig. 10a displays the distribution as observed using raster scan per-
formed after the path planning experiment. The RMS error between the predicted distribution and
the raster scan performed after the path planning experiment was 0.73 oC. On the other hand, the
RMS error between the predicted distribution and the raster scan performed before the path planning
experiment was 0.82 oC. The RMS error between the two raster scans performed before and after
the path planning experiment, indicating the temporal variation in the environment, was 1.25 oC.
The low RMS error between the predicted distribution and the raster scans, in comparison with the
temporal variation exhibited by the lake environment, indicates the effectiveness of our approach in
the low-ﬂow lake environment as well.
734

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
8.2 Experiments on Sensing Datasets
Several experiments were performed in simulation using real world sensing datasets to analyze the
scaling of our algorithm for different approaches such as varying the experimental cost, exponential
increase in budget split, varying the size of the cells of the spatial decomposition and comparison of
several heuristics, among others. Three different datasets, collected from real world sensing applica-
tions, were used for these experiments. The ﬁrst dataset consists of measurements of the temperature
in Lake Fulmor, James Reserve (hereafter referred to as lake temperature dataset). Fig. 1b displays
the aerial view of Lake Fulmor. A robotic boat, part of Networked Aquatic Microbial Observing
System (NAMOS) (Dhariwal et al., 2006), was used to collect the surface temperature data around
the lake, of width around 50 meters and length around 250 meters. As discussed earlier, understand-
ing temperature distribution is of prime importance in limnology since it governs several physical
phenomena occurring in the lake environment, including the growth of algal bloom.
The average speed of the boat was approximately 0.4 m/s. Half of the total measurements (218
different sensing locations) were used to learn a nonstationary Gaussian Process model by maxi-
mizing the marginal likelihood (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), and the remaining measurements
were used for experimentation. We divided the lake into 22 cells (except during the experiments for
studying the effect of changing the size of the cell in spatial decomposition), with distance between
adjacent cell approximately 21 meters. Based on the average speed, and motivated by a typical
measurement duration of roughly 25 seconds, we set the experiment cost to be 10.5 meters (except
during the experiment for understanding the effect of scaling the experimental cost).
As our second dataset, we used data from an existing deployment of 52 wireless sensor motes
to learn the amount of temperature variability at the Intel Research Laboratory, Berkeley (hereafter
referred to as Berkeley temperature dataset). These sensing locations lie within a bounding region of
length 45 meters and width 40 meters. We divided the complete region into a uniform grid contain-
ing 20 equal sized cells, and determined the experimental cost to be 9 meters (approximate distance
to travel between adjacent cells). We learned a GP model as discussed by Krause et al. (2006).
Finally, we explored the performance of our algorithm on a precipitation dataset collected from
167 regions of equal area, approximately 50 km apart, during the years 1949-1994. We followed the
preprocessing and model learning described in the work by Krause et al. (2008). The large physical
spread of the sensing regions makes this dataset unconventional for a mobile robot path planning
application. To avoid this unrealistic scenario, we normalized the coordinates of the regions to lie
within a bounding region of length 7 meters and width 9 meters, while keeping the actual sensing
data observed at each location. We then divided the complete region into a uniform grid of 20 cells
with experimental cost as 1.4 meters (approximate traveling distance between adjacent cells).
For each of the plots comparing the performance of our algorithm, x-axis represent the total
cost of the path including both the traveling cost between the selected locations and the sensing
cost at each selected location (translated into distance as discussed above). When comparing the
computation effort as a measure of performance, in seconds, y-axis is drawn in logarithmic scale.
The computation effort is for running the code implemented in Matlab on a 3.2 GHz dual processor
core with 4 GB RAM. When comparing the collected reward as a measure of performance, y-axis
represent the mutual information (submodular reward function) collected by making observations
at the selected locations.
735

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
60
80
100
120
140
160
10
0
10
5
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
1
Execution Time (seconds)
Cost of output path (meters)
 
 
eMIP
Recursive
greedy
(a) Comparison of computation effort
60
80
100
120
140
160
4
6
8
10
Collected Reward 
Cost of output path (meters)
 
 
eMIP
Recursive 
greedy
(b) Comparison of collected reward
Figure 11: Comparison of eMIP and recursive-greedy on a subset of Berkeley temperature dataset with 23 sensing
locations.
200
250
300
350
400
450
10
0
10
5
Execution Time (seconds)
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Best Possible 20
 subproblems
Sub−approx: 10%
Sub−approx: 20%
No sub−approximation
(a) Comparison of computation effort
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
5
10
15
Collected Reward
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Best possible 20 
subproblems
Sub−approx: 10%
Sub−approx: 20%
No sub−approximation
Uniform density
(b) Comparison of collected reward
Figure 12: Comparison of computation effort and collected reward for several sub-approximation heuristics used to
improve the running time of eMIP on lake temperature dataset. Signiﬁcant improvement in execution time was observed,
particularly for longer paths, without signiﬁcant reduction in collected reward.
8.2.1 COMPARISON WITH RECURSIVE-GREEDY ALGORITHM:
To compare the performance of our approach with the recursive-greedy algorithm, as proposed by
Chekuri et al., we selected a subset of 23 locations from the total of 52 locations from the Berkeley
temperature dataset. A small subset of locations was selected since the running time of recursive-
greedy is quasi-polynomial and was very large for the complete dataset. Fig. 11a and Fig. 11b
display the comparison in the computation effort and collected reward on this smaller dataset for
the two algorithms. As is evident from the plots, our approach provides signiﬁcant improvement in
running time (of several orders of magnitude at higher budget values) with (almost) the same col-
lected reward. Since the recursive greedy algorithm is essentially a search procedure with greedily
restricted search space, this result also indicates that an exhaustive search over all paths is intractable
for even a small real world sensing problem. The sudden jump in execution time of eMIP in Fig. 11a
at budget = 100 meters is due to an additional iteration step (c.f., Line 7 in Algorithm 3) added due
to the increase in the input budget constraint. Thereafter, additional increase in budget only re-
sults in increase in experimental budget. Since the recursive-eSIP computes efﬁciently for such a
small problem, additional increase in experimental budget does not increase the computation effort
signiﬁcantly.
736

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Distance (meters)
Distance (meters)
Lake Boundary
Cells
Possible observation 
locations
eMIP Path
Starting
Location
Figure 13: Illustration of a path selected using eMIP on lake temperature dataset.
8.2.2 COMPARISON WITH UNIFORM SAMPLE SPACING:
We compared the performance of eMIP with a simple uniform sample spacing algorithm, referred
to as Uniform density. For the case of Uniform density, starting and ﬁnishing at given locations,
we greedily select two observation locations within each of the nearest cells and compute the cor-
responding path cost and path reward. Uniform density algorithm will output the best possible path
amongst all possible simple uniform sample spacing algorithms due to greedy observation selection
within each cell. Fig. 12b, compares the collected reward for Uniform density with eMIP for the
lake temperature dataset. Increased collected reward by eMIP, compared to Uniform density, em-
pirically justiﬁes the complexity of eMIP. Additionally, eMIP also provides a strong approximation
guarantee which is not possible for any uniform sample spacing algorithm. Fig. 13 illustrates a
path selected by eMIP for the lake temperature dataset, demonstrating that eMIP does not tend to
cause uniform sample spacing. For a few of the traversed cells, there was no location selected for
observation, while for others as many as three observation locations were selected from within the
cell.
8.2.3 COMPARISON OF SUB-APPROXIMATION HEURISTICS:
Various sub-approximation heuristics discussed in Section 7 were compared empirically to analyze
their utility in improving the execution time and the corresponding reduction in collected reward,
if any. As is displayed in Fig. 12a that compares these heuristics for computation effort, each of
these sub-approximation heuristic provides improvement in the execution time over the scenario
when all branch and bound heuristics other than sub-approximation heuristics were used. The most
improvement at higher values of input budget was observed when the lower bound is increased by
a factor of α(= 1.2 or 20%). Fig. 12b displays the corresponding comparison of these heuristics
for collected reward. It was interesting to observe that none of the sub-approximation approaches
resulted in considerable reduction in collected reward.
737

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
15
20
25
30
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
Cost of output path (meters)
Execution Time (seconds)
Cost = 0.56
Cost = 0.84
Cost = 1.12
Cost = 1.4
(a) Computation effort with variation in sensing cost us-
ing precipitation dataset
15
20
25
30
3
4
5
6
7
8
Cost of output path (meters)
Collected Reward
Cost = 0.56
Cost = 0.84
Cost = 1.12
Cost = 1.4
(b) Collected reward with variation in sensing cost using
precipitation dataset
200
250
300
350
400
450
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
Execution Time (seconds)
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Linear variation
Exponential variation 
from both ends
Exponential variation from 0
(c) Computation effort with variation in experimental
budget split using lake temperature dataset
200
250
300
350
400
450
6
8
10
12
14
Collected Reward
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Linear variation
Exponential increase from 0
Exponential variation 
from both ends
(d) Collected reward with variation in experimental bud-
get split using lake temperature dataset
0
200
400
600
800
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
Execution Time (seconds)
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Grid: 33 cells
Grid: 22 cells
Grid: 20 cells
Grid: 14 cells
(e) Computation effort with variation in grid size for
spatial decomposition using lake temperature dataset
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
Collected Reward
Cost of output path(meters)
 
 
Grid: 33 cells
Grid: 14 cells
Grid: 20 cells
Grid: 22 cells
(f) Collected reward with variation in grid size for spa-
tial decomposition using lake temperature dataset
Figure 14: Comparison of collected reward and computation effort with variation in several approaches used in eMIP.
738

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
8.2.4 VARIATION IN SENSING COST:
Fig. 14a and Fig. 14b compare the computation effort and collected reward as the sensing cost is
varied for the precipitation dataset. With the reduction in experimental cost, more locations were
observed for the same total input budget resulting in increased collected reward. However, for each
of the experiments, the computation effort was approximately the same. Due to the diversity in
environmental applications, the sensing cost will depend on the sensors (settling time) and the scale
of dynamics occurring in the observed phenomena. This experiment indicates that eMIP can be used
over a diverse range of sensing costs, as per the demands of diverse environmental applications.
8.2.5 VARIATION IN EXPERIMENTAL BUDGET SPLIT:
As discussed in Section 6, the strategy of exponentially increasing the experimental budget split
results in an increased additional path length required to guarantee the approximation factor for
the collected reward. We performed several experiments with the available datasets to analyze the
empirical performance of increasing the budget splits exponentially. Fig. 14c and Fig. 14d compares
the computation effort and collected reward for linear increase, one sided exponential variation
from 0 and two-sided exponential variation from both 0 and budget B for the lake temperature
dataset. Since a smaller number of budget splits are considered in recursive-eSIP in the case of an
exponential increase, the computation effort will be smaller as compared to the linear increase in
the budget splits. Interestingly, there was very small reduction in collected reward, for only a few
budget values, when the exponential increase was employed. Hence, even though the theoretical
approximation guarantee with exponential increase in experimental budget is weaker, empirically
the collected reward for both the linear and exponential increase in budget splits was found to be
comparable over a wide range of input budgets.
8.2.6 ANALYSIS OF SPATIAL DECOMPOSITION:
As discussed in Section 6, the conversion of an SD-MIPP solution (a cell path) into a solution for
MIPP (a path over observation locations) will result in additional path length exceeding the input
budget B. This additional path length will depend on the size of the cell (or size of the grid covering
the complete spatial domain) in SD-MIPP problem and will result in trade-off with the computation
effort. Variation in grid-size will result in corresponding variation in the traveling cost between the
neighboring cells. This will result in an opportunity to travel more cells for a denser grid with the
same input budget constraint. However, to keep the experimental cost constant across the varying
grid size (since the experiment cost only depends on observed phenomena and is independent of
the spatial decomposition), it was scaled accordingly, in proportion to the traveling cost between
the neighboring cells. Fig. 14f compares the collected reward for varying grid sizes on the lake
temperature dataset, changing the grid size from 14 to 33 cells. It is interesting to observe that such
a change in grid size had (almost) negligible effect on the collected reward. On the other hand,
such increase in grid density resulted in a larger number of cells over which path planning is to be
performed thus leading to increased computation effort for the same input budget. The comparison
of the computation effort for the varying grid size is displayed in Fig. 14e. Note the drastic increase
in computation time as the grid discretization is made ﬁner.
739

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
200
250
300
350
400
450
5
10
15
20
Total Collected Reward 
Average cost of output path per robot (meters)
 
 
1 Robot
2 Robots
3 Robots
(a) Collected reward for same starting location
200
250
300
350
400
450
8
10
12
14
16
Total RMS Error
Average cost of output path per robot (meters)
 
 
1 Robot
2 Robots
3 Robots
(b) RMS error for same starting location
200
250
300
350
400
5
10
15
20
25
Total Collected Reward 
Average cost of output path per robot (meters)
Single Robot
2 Robots
3 Robots
(c) Collected reward for different starting location
250
300
350
400
450
0
5
10
15
Total RMS Error
Average cost of output path per robot (meters)
 
 
1 Robot
2 Robots
3 Robots
(d) RMS error for different starting location
73
1
33
Robot-3
Robot-2
Robot-1
Start 2
Start 1
Start 3
Boundary
Cells
(e) Paths selected using MIPP
Figure 15: Analysis of experiments performed for multiple robots with different (optimized) starting location using the
lake temperature dataset.
8.2.7 MULTI-ROBOT EXPERIMENTS
We evaluated the performance of our eMIP multi-robot algorithm in simulation using several sens-
ing datasets. Fig. 15 displays the empirical analysis of several experiments using the lake temper-
ature dataset. The ﬁrst experiment was performed with each robot starting from the same starting
location. Fig. 15a and Fig. 15b display the collected reward and root mean square (RMS) error
when the number of robots were varied from one to three. Due to the sequential-allocation ap-
740

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
proach (wherein we remove the locations that are already selected before selecting the locations for
the next robot) and “information never hurts” principle, collected reward increases as the number
of robots were increased and hence the corresponding root mean square error for prediction at the
unobserved locations gets reduced. However, the incremental change in performance from one to
two robots was larger than the incremental change from two to three robots, which is expected from
the submodularity (diminishing returns) property of mutual information.
Fig. 15c and Fig. 15d display the collected reward and RMS error when a different starting lo-
cation is chosen for each robot. In this scenario, a set of four starting locations is pre-determined
with each location at one end of the lake (see for reference Fig. 15e where three of the four starting
locations are marked). The starting location for each of the three robots was selected greedily based
on the collected information. With a different starting location selected on the opposite end of the
lake for the second robot, the incremental change in collected reward (and corresponding decrease
in root mean square error) as the number of robots was increased from one to two is much higher
than the corresponding change when the same starting location was chosen for the second robot
as well. However, similar to the scenario with same starting location, the incremental change as
the number of robots was increased from one to two is higher as compared to when the number
of robots was increased from two to three (due to submodularity of mutual information). Fig. 15e
illustrates the selected paths for each of the three robots as selected using eMIP.
9. Related Work
There is a large body of related work both in the theory of path planning and its applications. Ap-
proximation algorithms have been proposed for several related problems. Variants of path planning
have been studied in the ﬁeld of Operations Research as the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
or the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP). In robotics, several path planning approaches have been
studied for applications such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) and search and
exploration. In sensor networks and geostatistics, a closely related work studies optimal placement
of static sensors modeling the phenomenon as Gaussian Processes. Several adaptive sampling ap-
proaches have been studied to decide on the subset of locations to observe in order to understand the
phenomenon dynamics effectively. In addition, similar approaches are explored for planning paths
for mobile robots acting as data mules, collecting data sampled by the network of static sensors.
9.1 Operations Research
An interesting special case of the MIPP problem is given in the case where each node has a ﬁxed
reward, and the goal is to ﬁnd a path that maximizes the sum of these rewards (Traveling Salesman
Problem with Proﬁts, TSPP, Feillet et al., 2005). Such a sum of rewards is a modular (additive)
function, which is a special case of submodular functions. A subcategory of TSPP is an optimiza-
tion problem deﬁned to maximize the collected reward while keeping the associated cost less than
some given budget B. This was studied as Orienteering Problem (OP) or selective TSP (Laporte &
Martello, 1990), or Maximum Collection Problem (Kataoka & Morito, 1988) in the literature. The
additivity assumption made in the orienteering problem is very unrealistic in our informative path
planning setting, as it assumes that the information provided by adjacent locations is independent,
whereas we would typically expect a strong amount of correlation. In fact, if the observations were
all independent, there would be no point in selecting observations for spatial prediction. In this
741

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
paper, we hence study the more general orienteering problem with submodular reward functions,
proposed earlier as Submodular Orienteering Problem (Chekuri & Pal, 2005).
9.1.1 MULTIPLE-PATH EXTENSIONS:
The extension of TSPP to multiple paths was studied as Vehicle Routing Problem with Proﬁts
(VRPP) in the literature. Like TSPP, several variants of VRPP have been previously considered.
The Prize Collecting VRP (PCVRP) (Tang & Wang, 2006) is a class of VRPP where the objec-
tive is to determine a subset of all customers to visit so as to minimize the total distance traveled,
minimize the vehicles used and maximize the collected reward. The multi-robot version of the OP
(in the case of additive reward functions) was studied as the Team Orienteering Problem by I-Ming
et al. (1996) and Multiple Tour Maximum Collection Problem by Butt and Ryan (1999).
9.1.2 KNOWN APPROXIMATIONS FOR THE ORIENTEERING PROBLEM:
The OP is known to be NP-hard (Golden et al., 1987). Several versions of the OP studied in the
literature can be classiﬁed into those for which the starting (and the ﬁnishing) location (root) is
pre-speciﬁed or not. For the case of the unrooted OP (when no starting location is speciﬁed), the ap-
proximation guarantees known for Prize Collecting TSP and k-TSP can be easily extended (Johnson
et al., 2000). There are several constant factor approximations known for the PC-TSP and k-TSP
problems with the best one being a 2 approximation (Garg, 2005). However the same extension does
not apply for the rooted version of the problem as the best path for the unrooted version may not
contain the root and may be far away from the root thus leading to violation of the budget constraint.
For the rooted OP, Arkin et al. (1998) gave a (2 + ϵ) approximation for the OP in geometric
settings. Blum et al. (2003) gave the ﬁrst constant factor approximation for the rooted OP in general
undirected graphs. They also extended their algorithm for multi-path OP. The running time of their
algorithm, though polynomial, is very large (more speciﬁcally, O(πn5 log(1
ϵ)) where π is the total
reward in the path). Recently Chekuri et al. (2008) gave a polynomial time algorithm for the OP in
undirected graphs with an improved approximation guarantee of (2 + ϵ). Our problem formulation
with speciﬁed starting location (s) and ﬁnishing location (t) falls under the category of rooted OP
with submodular (non-additive) reward function.
Another classiﬁcation of OP can be done based on the symmetry of the space of the possible
locations. All of the above approximation guarantees hold true on symmetric spaces (undirected
graphs). Obtaining good approximation algorithm for the directed (asymmetric) orienteering prob-
lem was stated as an open problem by Blum et al. (2003). Chekuri and Pal (2005) gave the ﬁrst
approximation algorithm with O(log n) guarantee that runs in quasi-polynomial running time. The
running time was recently improved independently by two different works (Chekuri et al., 2008;
Nagarajan & Ravi, 2007), each proposing a poly-time approximation algorithm providing an ap-
proximation guarantee of O(log2 n), though using different approaches. The metric space conver-
sion procedure used during our spatial decomposition approach limits eMIP to symmetric spaces
only.
9.1.3 SEQUENTIAL ALLOCATION:
Blum et al. (2003) proposed a sequential allocation approach to extend algorithms for single-robot
orienteering to the multiple robot setting, but only for the special case of additive (modular) reward
functions. In this paper, we generalize their result to submodular reward functions. After the initial
742

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
version of this paper was published (Singh et al., 2007b), we realized that our sequential-allocation
procedure is an instance of maximizing a submodular function subject to a matroid constraint (Ca-
linescu et al., 2007). We can deﬁne a partition matroid on the disjoint union M = M1 ∪· · · ∪Mk
of k ground sets Mi, one for each robot. Each set Mi contains all feasible paths for robot i. The
collection I ⊆2M of all subsets P ∈I such that |P ∩Mi| ≤1 (i.e. each P corresponds to
a collection of paths, with the constraint that we can pick at most one from each set Mi) forms
independent sets of the partition matroid. Hence, the problem of ﬁnding a collection of maximally
informative paths is the problem of ﬁnding an independent set of a matroid maximizing a submod-
ular function. Current work in progress by Goundan and Schulz (2008) provides general results on
the performance of a sequential allocation procedure in such a setting, which can be used to prove
the same sequential allocation results originally presented by Singh et al. (2007b).
9.2 Robotic Applications
There is considerable work in path planning in the robotics community for several applications,
including simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and search and exploration. Several
different approaches have been studied for each of these applications, including auction based algo-
rithms, data-adaptive approaches and information gain based algorithms.
9.2.1 SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION AND MAPPING:
The goal of Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) is to build maps of an environment
by performing an exploration of the environment with an objective to estimate the robot position
and world features simultaneously. Several approaches optimizing different objective functions had
been proposed to perform path planning for SLAM. Bourgault et al. (2002) proposed an exploration
framework using an occupancy grid (OG) environment model (performing spatial decomposition of
the observed environment) with an objective to maximize mutual information over the OG map.
Stachniss et al. (2005) developed a greedy algorithm for selecting the next location to visit to
maximize information gain about the map.
In contrast to such approaches, Sim and Roy (2005) attempted to optimize the entire trajec-
tory, not just the next step, but their algorithm introduces some approximations without theoreti-
cal bounds. Simmons et al. (2000) proposed a distributed approach for exploration and mapping
with multiple robots by minimizing the overlap in information gain amongst multiple robots. They
provided quantitative results from simulation but did not provide any theoretical bounds for their
approach. There is little work in SLAM setting with an upper bound on the total cost of the path. In
addition, we are not aware of any approaches to SLAM which carry approximation guarantees for
either the single or multi-robot cases. An interesting direction for future work would be to analyze
the applicability of our approach to the SLAM setting.
9.2.2 SEARCH AND EXPLORATION:
The search and exploration application involves path planning for a robot with the goal of searching
for a moving target(s) in a given environment, e.g. target surveillance in security applications and
patient tracking in health care domain. Performing path planning using stochastic inference provides
advantage of robustness to sensing and motion uncertainty though with an added complexity of com-
putational intractability. Roy and Earnest (2006) proposed an approach to effectively compute the
trajectories for target tracking based on maximizing mutual information (evaluated using the change
743

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
in variance of the probability distribution). They used a particle ﬁlter approach, performing cluster-
ing over the particles followed by path planning over these clusters. Lau et al. (2006) formulated the
target tracking in indoor environments as a generalization of an NP-complete optimal searcher path
(OSP) problem (Trummel & Weisinger, 1986). They sought to optimize the probability of detection
within a given time horizon while accounting for the undetected target probability that is a function
of previously visited locations during the search. They used several branch and bound approaches
to speed up the search process. The objective of maximizing information gain subject to the budget
constraints on the path cost makes eMIP a suitable candidate for performing path planning for such
problems.
Ryan (2008) used an approach of partitioning the search space into subgraphs for multi-robot
path planning. We take a conceptually similar approach, also reducing the search space by decom-
posing the space into regions and then performing path planning over those regions. However, we
address more complex utility functions, such as quantifying the informativeness of visited locations
and are not limited to speciﬁc graph structures such as stacks, halls, cliques, rings as is the case in
the work of Ryan (2008). Recently, Thompson and Wettergreen (2008) used our eMIP algorithm
for near-term path planning while performing autonomous exploration of surﬁcial units at Amboy
Crater in Mojave desert, California.
9.2.3 PLANNING SYSTEMS AND APPLICATIONS:
Certain applications in robotic path planning used plan graphs (Blum & Furst, 1997) to compute
an estimate of the resources and time required to achieve goals from states encountered in the
search process. In the case of over-subscription planning problem – wherein only a subset of goals
that can be accomplished within the limited time or resources available for the planning system,
the work by Smith (2004) used an orienteering heuristic to provide an ordered set of goals to be
considered by the planner. Briel et al. (2004) proposed several heuristics for efﬁciently solving
the over-subscription planning problem. However, in each of the earlier proposed heuristics, the
reward function considered is modular (additive). eMIP can be used to efﬁciently solve the over-
subscription planning problem in the submodular setting with strong approximation guarantees.
9.3 Sensor Networks
Phenomenon modeling to decide on the optimal placement of a set of static sensors is well studied
in the sensor networks and geostatistics communities. Gaussian Process models for spatial phe-
nomena had been studied extensively (Cressie, 1991). Guestrin et al. (2005) proved that, in the case
of phenomena governed by Gaussian Process models, selecting the placement of sensors greedily
based on mutual information is near-optimal. Krause et al. (2006) extended this work to include
communication cost between sensors while optimizing the sensor placement. In the communica-
tion constrained setting, similar to the path planning problem considered in this paper, the greedy
algorithm performs badly, and more involved algorithms have to be developed. Batalin et al. (2004)
showed that combining the static and mobile sensing devices, even in a simple scenario, can result
in signiﬁcant improvement in sensing performance. In such a scenario, where a combination of
static and mobile sensing devices are available, several approaches for optimal placement of static
sensors can be combined with eMIP to observe a given phenomenon efﬁciently.
744

EFFICIENT INFORMATIVE SENSING USING MULTIPLE ROBOTS
9.3.1 DATA COLLECTION FROM A SENSOR NETWORK:
A different scenario where a mobile robot can be combined with a network of static sensors is to
improve the lifetime of the sensor network by performing the tours for collecting the data sampled
by the static network. Somasundara et al. (2007) showed that the problem of collecting the data
when the environment shows both spatial and temporal dynamics is NP-complete and provided an
integer linear programming formulation for the same. They compared the performance of several
heuristics in simulation for both single and multi-robot scenario. Meliou et al. (2007) proposed a
nonmyopic approach for the application of data gathering tours using an algorithm for submodular
orienteering (SOP) as a black box. They provided strong approximation guarantees and extensive
empirical evaluation that indicates the applicability of their approach for such applications. In this
setting, eMIP can be used as an orienteering algorithm to provide a better approximation guarantee
in addition to improved running time.
9.3.2 ADAPTIVE SAMPLING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATIONS:
Recent advances in robotics have opened up opportunities for high ﬁdelity monitoring of dynamic
environmental sensing applications. Rahimi et al. (2004) explored several policies for adaptively
sampling the environment. Singh et al. (2006) proposed a multiscale adaptive sampling approach
with uniformly sampling the environment in the ﬁrst stage followed by sampling at locations in order
to minimize the mean square error the most. They also extended their approach for multiple robots,
although without providing any theoretical bounds. Using several in-ﬁeld experiments as well as
simulations using real world sensing datasets, we demonstrate here that several such environmental
phenomenon can be effectively sampled adaptively using eMIP.
10. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we presented eSIP, an approximation algorithm for efﬁcient planning of informative
paths. eSIP near-optimally solves the NP-hard problem of maximizing the collected information
with an upper bound on path-cost. Our eSIP algorithm builds on the recursive-greedy algorithm of
Chekuri and Pal (2005). eSIP preserves the approximation guarantees of recursive-greedy, while
overcoming its computational intractability through spatial-decomposition and several branch and
bound approaches. We also presented a general approach, sequential-allocation, which extends any
single-robot algorithm, such as eSIP, to the multiple-robot setting while providing a provably strong
approximation guarantee.
We also provide extensive empirical evaluation to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
for real world sensing applications. We performed several in-ﬁeld experiments for two important
environmental sensing applications – lake monitoring (at a small lake at UC Merced campus) and
river monitoring (at San Joaquin river, California). The Networked Info Mechanical System (NIMS)
was used as the robotic system for performing path planning during each of these deployments to
demonstrate the practicality of our algorithm. We also performed extensive simulation experiments
using several real world sensor network data sets. With global climate change and corresponding
impetus on sustainable practices, we expect that such efﬁcient path planning approaches can help
address the challenge of monitoring environment-related activities effectively.
In the future, we plan to explore the applicability of our algorithm in other application domains
such as SLAM and search and rescue. We plan to work towards understanding the limitations of
745

SINGH, KRAUSE, GUESTRIN & KAISER
learning a static GP model in real world scenarios, and extend our approach for online model adap-
tation.
