A Joint Model for Multimodal Document Quality Assessment
Aili Shen, Bahar Salehi, Timothy Baldwin, Jianzhong Qi
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

Abstract
The quality of a document is affected by various factors,
including grammaticality, readability, stylistics, and ex-
pertise depth, making the task of document quality as-
sessment a complex one. In this paper, we explore this
task in the context of assessing the quality of Wikipedia
articles and academic papers. Observing that the vi-
sual rendering of a document can capture implicit qual-
ity indicators that are not present in the document text
— such as images, font choices, and visual layout —
we propose a joint model that combines the text con-
tent with a visual rendering of the document for docu-
ment quality assessment. Experimental results over two
datasets reveal that textual and visual features are com-
plementary, achieving state-of-the-art results.
Introduction
The task of document quality assessment is to automatically
assess a document according to some predeﬁned inventory
of quality labels. This can take many forms, including es-
say scoring (quality = language quality, coherence, and rel-
evance to a topic), job application ﬁltering (quality = suit-
ability for role + visual/presentational quality of the applica-
tion), or answer selection in community question answer-
ing (quality = actionability + relevance of the answer to
the question). In the case of this paper, we focus on docu-
ment quality assessment in two contexts: Wikipedia docu-
ment quality classiﬁcation, and whether a paper submitted
to a conference was accepted or not.
Automatic quality assessment has obvious beneﬁts in
terms of time savings and tractability in contexts where the
volume of documents is large. In the case of dynamic docu-
ments (possibly with multiple authors), such as in the case of
Wikipedia, it is particularly pertinent, as any edit potentially
has implications for the quality label of that document (and
around 10 English Wikipedia documents are edited per sec-
ond1). Furthermore, when the quality assessment task is de-
centralized (as in the case of Wikipedia and academic paper
assessment), quality criteria are often applied inconsistently
by different people, where an automatic document quality
assessment system could potentially reduce inconsistencies
and enable immediate author feedback.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Statistics
(a) Featured article
(b) Lower quality article
Figure 1: Visual renderings of two example Wikipedia doc-
uments with different quality labels (not intended to be read-
able).
Current studies on document quality assessment mainly
focus on textual features. For example, Warncke-Wang et
al. (2015) examine features such as the article length and
the number of headings to predict the quality class of a
Wikipedia article. In contrast to these studies, in this paper,
we propose to combine text features with visual features,
based on a visual rendering of the document. Figure 1 il-
lustrates our intuition, relative to Wikipedia articles. With-
out being able to read the text, we can tell that the article
in Figure 1a has higher quality than Figure 1b, as it has a
detailed infobox, extensive references, and a variety of im-
ages. Based on this intuition, we aim to answer the following
question: can we achieve better accuracy on document qual-
ity assessment by complementing textual features with visual
features?
Our visual model is based on ﬁne-tuning an Inception V3
model (Szegedy et al. 2016) over visual renderings of doc-
uments, while our textual model is based on a hierarchical
biLSTM. We further combine the two into a joint model. We
perform experiments on two datasets: a Wikipedia dataset
novel to this paper, and an arXiv dataset provided by Kang
et al. (2018) split into three sub-parts based on subject cate-
gory. Experimental results on the visual renderings of docu-
ments show that implicit quality indicators, such as images
and visual layout, can be captured by an image classiﬁer, at
a level comparable to a text classiﬁer. When we combine the
two models, we achieve state-of-the-art results over 3/4 of
our datasets.
This paper makes the following contributions:
arXiv:1901.01010v2  [cs.CL]  14 Jan 2019

(i) this is the ﬁrst study to use visual renderings of docu-
ments to capture implicit quality indicators not present
in the document text, such as document visual layout;
experimental results show that we can obtain a 2.9%
higher accuracy using only visual renderings of docu-
ments compared with using only textual features over
a Wikipedia dataset, and we can obtain competitive re-
sults over an arXiv dataset.
(ii) we further propose a joint model to predict document
quality combining visual and textual features; we ob-
serve further improvements on the Wikipedia dataset
and on two of the three arXiv subsets, indicating that
visual and textual features are complementary.
(iii) we construct a large-scale Wikipedia dataset with full
textual data, visual renderings, and quality class labels;
we also supplement the existing arXiv datasets with
visual renderings of each document.
All code and data associated with this research will be re-
leased on publication.
Related Work
A variety of approaches have been proposed for document
quality assessment across different domains: Wikipedia arti-
cle quality assessment, academic paper rating, content qual-
ity assessment in community question answering (cQA), and
essay scoring. Among these approaches, some use hand-
crafted features while others use neural networks to learn
features from documents. For each domain, we ﬁrst brieﬂy
describe feature-based approaches and then review neural
network-based approaches.
Wikipedia article quality assessment: Quality assess-
ment of Wikipedia articles is a task that assigns a quality
class label to a given Wikipedia article, mirroring the qual-
ity assessment process that the Wikipedia community carries
out manually. Many approaches have been proposed that use
features from the article itself, meta-data features (e.g., the
editors, and Wikipedia article revision history), or a combi-
nation of the two. Article-internal features capture informa-
tion such as whether an article is properly organized, with
supporting evidence, and with appropriate terminology. For
example, Lipka and Stein (2010) use writing styles repre-
sented by binarized character trigram features to identify
featured articles. Warncke-Wang, Cosley, and Riedl (2013)
and Warncke-Wang et al. (2015) explore the number of
headings, images, and references in the article. Dang and
Ignat (2016a) use nine readability scores, such as the per-
centage of difﬁcult words in the document, to measure the
quality of the article. Meta-data features, which are indirect
indicators of article quality, are usually extracted from revi-
sion history, and the interaction between editors and articles.
For example, one heuristic that has been proposed is that
higher-quality articles have more edits (Dalip et al. 2017;
Dalip et al. 2014). Wang and Iwaihara (2011) use the per-
centage of registered editors and the total number of editors
of an article. Article–editor dependencies have also been ex-
plored. For example, Stein and Hess (2007) use the author-
ity of editors to measure the quality of Wikipedia articles,
where the authority of editors is determined by the articles
they edit.
Deep learning approaches to predicting Wikipedia article
quality have also been proposed. For example, Dang and
Ignat (2016b) use a version of doc2vec (Le and Mikolov
2014) to represent articles, and feed the document embed-
dings into a four hidden layer neural network. Shen, Qi, and
Baldwin (2017) ﬁrst obtain sentence representations by av-
eraging words within a sentence, and then apply a biLSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to learn a document-
level representation, which is combined with hand-crafted
features as side information. Dang and Ignat (2017) exploit
two stacked biLSTMs to learn document representations.
Academic paper rating: Academic paper rating is a rel-
atively new task in NLP/AI, with the basic formulation be-
ing to automatically predict whether to accept or reject a pa-
per. Kang et al. (2018) explore hand-crafted features, such
as the length of the title, whether speciﬁc words (such as
outperform, state-of-the-art, and novel) appear in the ab-
stract, and an embedded representation of the abstract as
input to different downstream learners, such as logistic re-
gression, decision tree, and random forest. Yang et al. (2018)
exploit a modularized hierarchical convolutional neural net-
work (CNN), where each paper section is treated as a mod-
ule. For each paper section, they train an attention-based
CNN, and an attentive pooling layer is applied to the con-
catenated representation of each section, which is then fed
into a softmax layer.
Content quality assessment in cQA: Automatic quality
assessment in cQA is the task of determining whether an an-
swer is of high quality, selected as the best answer, or ranked
higher than other answers. To measure answer content qual-
ity in cQA, researchers have exploited various features from
different sources, such as the answer content itself, the an-
swerer’s proﬁle, interactions among users, and usage of the
content. The most common feature used is the answer length
(Jeon et al. 2006; Suryanto et al. 2009), with other features
including: syntactic and semantic features, such as read-
ability scores. (Agichtein et al. 2008); similarity between
the question and the answer at lexical, syntactic, and se-
mantic levels (Agichtein et al. 2008; Belinkov et al. 2015;
Hou et al. 2015); or user data (e.g., a user’s status points
or the number of answers written by the user). There have
also been approaches using neural networks. For example,
Suggu et al. (2016) combine CNN-learned representations
with hand-crafted features to predict answer quality. Zhou
et al. (2015) use a 2-dimensional CNN to learn the se-
mantic relevance of an answer to the question, and apply
an LSTM to the answer sequence to model thread con-
text. Guzm´an, M`arquez, and Nakov (2016) and Guzm´an,
Nakov, and M`arquez (2016) model the problem similarly
to machine translation quality estimation, treating answers
as competing translation hypotheses and the question as the
reference translation, and apply neural machine translation
to the problem.
Essay scoring: Automated essay scoring is the task of
assigning a score to an essay, usually in the context of
assessing the language ability of a language learner. The
quality of an essay is affected by the following four pri-

mary dimensions: topic relevance, organization and coher-
ence, word usage and sentence complexity, and grammar
and mechanics. To measure whether an essay is relevant to
its “prompt” (the description of the essay topic), lexical and
semantic overlap is commonly used (Persing and Ng 2014;
Phandi, Chai, and Ng 2015). Attali and Burstein (2004) ex-
plore word features, such as the number of verb formation
errors, average word frequency, and average word length,
to measure word usage and lexical complexity. Cummins,
Zhang, and Briscoe (2016) use sentence structure features
to measure sentence variety. The effects of grammatical and
mechanic errors on the quality of an essay are measured via
word and part-of-speech n-gram features and “mechanics”
features (Persing and Ng 2013) (e.g., spelling, capitalization,
and punctuation), respectively. Taghipour and Ng (2016),
Alikaniotis, Yannakoudakis, and Rei (2016), and Tay et
al. (2018) use an LSTM to obtain an essay representation,
which is used as the basis for classiﬁcation. Similarly, Dong,
Zhang, and Yang (2017) utilize a CNN to obtain sentence
representation and an LSTM to obtain essay representation,
with an attention layer at both the sentence and essay levels.
The Proposed Joint Model
We treat document quality assessment as a classiﬁcation
problem, i.e., given a document, we predict its quality class
(e.g., whether an academic paper should be accepted or
rejected). The proposed model is a joint model that inte-
grates visual features learned through Inception V3 with tex-
tual features learned through a biLSTM. In this section, we
present the details of the visual and textual embeddings, and
ﬁnally describe how we combine the two. We return to dis-
cuss hyper-parameter settings and the experimental conﬁgu-
ration in the Experiments section.
Visual Embedding Learning
A wide range of models have been proposed to tackle the im-
age classiﬁcation task, such as VGG (Simonyan and Zisser-
man 2014), ResNet (He et al. 2016), Inception V3 (Szegedy
et al. 2016), and Xception (Chollet 2017). However, to the
best of our knowledge, there is no existing work that has
proposed to use visual renderings of documents to assess
document quality. In this paper, we use Inception V3 pre-
trained on ImageNet2 (“INCEPTION” hereafter) to obtain vi-
sual embeddings of documents, noting that any image classi-
ﬁer could be applied to our task. The input to INCEPTION is
a visual rendering (screenshot) of a document, and the out-
put is a visual embedding, which we will later integrate with
our textual embedding.
Based on the observation that it is difﬁcult to decide what
types of convolution to apply to each layer (such as 3×3
or 5×5), the basic Inception model applies multiple convo-
lution ﬁlters in parallel and concatenates the resulting fea-
tures, which are fed into the next layer. This has the bene-
ﬁt of capturing both local features through smaller convo-
lutions and abstracted features through larger convolutions.
INCEPTION is a hybrid of multiple Inception models of dif-
ferent architectures. To reduce computational cost, INCEP-
2http://www.image-net.org/
document text
document visual rendering
(screenshot image)
BILSTM
INCEPTION
GlobalAveragePooling2D
Maxpooling
Feed Forward Layer
ˆc
softmax
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed model.
TION also modiﬁes the basic model by applying a 1×1 con-
volution to the input and factorizing larger convolutions into
smaller ones.
Textual Embedding Learning
We adopt a bi-directional LSTM model to generate textual
embeddings for document quality assessment, following the
method of Shen, Qi, and Baldwin (2017) (“BILSTM” here-
after). The input to BILSTM is a textual document, and the
output is a textual embedding, which will later integrate with
the visual embedding.
For BILSTM, each word is represented as a word em-
bedding (Bengio et al. 2003), and an average-pooling layer
is applied to the word embeddings to obtain the sentence
embedding, which is fed into a bi-directional LSTM to gen-
erate the document embedding from the sentence embed-
dings. Then a max-pooling layer is applied to select the most
salient features from the component sentences.
The Joint Model
The proposed joint model (“JOINT” hereafter) combines the
visual and textual embeddings (output of INCEPTION and
BILSTM) via a simple feed-forward layer and softmax over
the document label set, as shown in Figure 2. We optimize
our model based on cross-entropy loss.
Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the two datasets used in our
experiments: (1) Wikipedia, and (2) arXiv. Then, we report
the experimental details and results.
Datasets
Wikipedia dataset
The Wikipedia dataset consists of ar-
ticles from English Wikipedia, with quality class labels as-
signed by the Wikipedia community. Wikipedia articles are
labelled with one of six quality classes, in descending order
of quality: Featured Article (“FA”), Good Article (“GA”),
B-class Article (“B”), C-class Article (“C”), Start Article
(“Start”), and Stub Article (“Stub”). A description of the
criteria associated with the different classes can be found

Class
Train
Dev
Test
Total
FA
4000
500
500
5000
GA
4000
500
500
5000
B
4000
500
455
4955
C
4000
500
467
4967
Start
4000
500
451
4951
Stub
4000
500
421
4921
Total
24000
3000
2794
29794
Table 1: Wikipedia dataset.
in the Wikipedia grading scheme page.3 The quality class
of a Wikipedia article is assigned by Wikipedia reviewers
or any registered user, who can discuss through the article’s
talk page4 to reach consensus. We constructed the dataset
by ﬁrst crawling all articles from each quality class repos-
itory, e.g., we get FA articles by crawling pages from the
FA repository: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Category:Featured_articles. This resulted in
around 5K FA, 28K GA, 212K B, 533K C, 2.6M Start, and
3.2M Stub articles.
We randomly sampled 5,000 articles from each quality
class and removed all redirect pages, resulting in a dataset
of 29,794 articles. As the wikitext contained in each doc-
ument contains markup relating to the document category
such as {Featured Article} or {geo-stub}, which reveals the
label, we remove such information. We additionally ran-
domly partitioned this dataset into training, development,
and test splits based on a ratio of 8:1:1. Details of the dataset
are summarized in Table 1.
We generate a visual representation of each document via
a 1,000×2,000-pixel screenshot of the article via a Phan-
tomJS script over the rendered version of the article,5 en-
suring that the screenshot and wikitext versions of the arti-
cle are the same version. Any direct indicators of document
quality (such as the FA indicator, which is a bronze star icon
in the top right corner of the webpage) are removed from the
screenshot.
arXiv dataset
The arXiv dataset (Kang et al. 2018) con-
sists of three subsets of academic articles under the arXiv
repository of Computer Science (cs), from the three sub-
ject areas of: Artiﬁcial Intelligence (cs.ai), Computation
and Language (cs.cl), and Machine Learning (cs.lg). In line
with the original dataset formulation (Kang et al. 2018), a
paper is considered to have been accepted (i.e. is positively
labeled) if it matches a paper in the DBLP database or is oth-
erwise accepted by any of the following conferences: ACL,
EMNLP, NAACL, EACL, TACL, NIPS, ICML, ICLR, or
AAAI. Failing this, it is considered to be rejected (noting
that some of the papers may not have been submitted to one
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:
Grading_scheme
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:
Talk_pages
5https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/blob/
master/examples/rasterize.js
Subject
Accepted
Train
Dev
Test
Total
cs.ai
10%
3682
205
205
4092
cs.cl
30%
2374
132
132
2638
cs.lg
32%
4543
252
253
5048
Table 2: arXiv dataset. “Accepted” indicates the proportion
of accepted papers in the given subject.
of these conferences). The median numbers of pages for pa-
pers in cs.ai, cs.cl, and cs.lg are 11, 10, and 12, respectively.
To make sure each page in the PDF ﬁle has the same size in
the screenshot, we crop the PDF ﬁle of a paper to the ﬁrst
12; we pad the PDF ﬁle with blank pages if a PDF ﬁle has
less than 12 pages, using the PyPDF2 Python package.6 We
then use ImageMagick7 to convert the 12-page PDF ﬁle to
a single 1,000×2,000 pixel screenshot. Table 2 details this
dataset, where the “Accepted” column denotes the percent-
age of positive instances (accepted papers) in each subset.
Experimental Setting
As discussed above, our model has two main components —
BILSTM and INCEPTION— which generate textual and vi-
sual representations, respectively. For the BILSTM compo-
nent, the documents are preprocessed as described in Shen,
Qi, and Baldwin (2017), where an article is divided into
sentences and tokenized using NLTK (Bird 2006). Words
appearing more than 20 times are retained when building
the vocabulary. All other words are replaced by the spe-
cial UNK token. We use the pre-trained GloVe (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014) 50-dimensional word embed-
dings to represent words. For words not in GloVe, word em-
beddings are randomly initialized based on sampling from a
uniform distribution U(−1, 1). All word embeddings are up-
dated in the training process. We set the LSTM hidden layer
size to 256. The concatenation of the forward and backward
LSTMs thus gives us 512 dimensions for the document em-
bedding. A dropout layer is applied at the sentence and doc-
ument level, respectively, with a probability of 0.5.
For INCEPTION, we adopt data augmentation techniques
in the training with a “nearest” ﬁlling mode, a zoom range of
0.1, a width shift range of 0.1, and a height shift range of 0.1.
As the original screenshots have the size of 1,000×2,000
pixels, they are resized to 500×500 to feed into INCEPTION,
where the input shape is (500, 500, 3). A dropout layer is ap-
plied with a probability of 0.5. Then, a GlobalAveragePool-
ing2D layer is applied, which produces a 2,048 dimensional
representation.
For the JOINT model, we get a representation of 2,560
dimensions by concatenating the 512 dimensional represen-
tation from the BILSTM with the 2,048 dimensional rep-
resentation from INCEPTION. The dropout layer is applied
to the two components with a probability of 0.5. For BIL-
STM, we use a mini-batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
6https://pypi.org/project/PyPDF2/
7https://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.
php

0.001. For both INCEPTION and joint model, we use a mini-
batch size of 16 and a learning rate of 0.0001. All hyper-
parameters were set empirically over the development data,
and the models were optimized using the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba 2014).
In the training phase, the weights in INCEPTION are
initialized by parameters pretrained on ImageNet, and the
weights in BILSTM are randomly initialized (except for
the word embeddings). We train each model for 50 epochs.
However, to prevent overﬁtting, we adopt early stopping,
where we stop training the model if the performance on the
development set does not improve for 20 epochs. For eval-
uation, we use (micro-)accuracy, following previous studies
(Dang and Ignat 2016a; Kang et al. 2018).
Baseline Approaches
We compare our models against the following ﬁve baselines:
• MAJORITY: the model labels all test samples with the ma-
jority class of the training data.
• BENCHMARK: a benchmark method from the literature.
In the case of Wikipedia, this is Dang and Ignat (2016a),
who use structural features and readability scores as fea-
tures to build a random forest classiﬁer; for arXiv, this
is Kang et al. (2018), who use hand-crafted features, such
as the number of references and TF-IDF weighted bag-of-
words in abstract, to build a classiﬁer based on the best of
logistic regression, multi-layer perception, and AdaBoost.
• DOC2VEC: doc2vec (Le and Mikolov 2014) to learn doc-
ument embeddings with a dimension of 500, and a 4-
layer feed-forward classiﬁcation model on top of this,
with 2000, 1000, 500, and 200 dimensions, respectively.
• BILSTM: ﬁrst derive a sentence representation by averag-
ing across words in a sentence, then feed the sentence rep-
resentation into a biLSTM and a maxpooling layer over
output sequence to learn a document level representation
with a dimension of 512, which is used to predict docu-
ment quality.
• INCEPTIONFIXED: the frozen INCEPTION model, where
only parameters in the last layer are ﬁne-tuned during
training.
The hyper-parameters of BENCHMARK, DOC2VEC, and
BILSTM are based on the corresponding papers except that:
(1) we ﬁne-tune the feed forward layer of DOC2VEC on
the development set and train the model 300 epochs on
Wikipedia and 50 epochs on arXiv; (2) we do not use hand-
crafted features for BILSTM as we want the baselines to be
comparable to our models, and the main focus of this paper
is not to explore the effects of hand-crafted features (e.g.,
see Shen, Qi, and Baldwin (2017)).
Experimental Results
Table 3 shows the performance of the different models over
our two datasets, in the form of the average accuracy on the
test set (along with the standard deviation) over 10 runs, with
different random initializations.
On Wikipedia, we observe that the performance of BIL-
STM, INCEPTION, and JOINT is much better than that of
all four baselines. INCEPTION achieves 2.9% higher accu-
racy than BILSTM. The performance of JOINT achieves an
accuracy of 59.4%, which is 5.3% higher than using tex-
tual features alone (BILSTM) and 2.4% higher than using
visual features alone (INCEPTION). Based on a one-tailed
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, the performance of JOINT is sta-
tistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). This shows that the textual
and visual features complement each other, achieving state-
of-the-art results in combination.
For arXiv, baseline methods MAJORITY, BENCHMARK,
and INCEPTIONFIXED outperform BILSTM over cs.ai, in
large part because of the class imbalance in this dataset (90%
of papers are rejected). Surprisingly, INCEPTIONFIXED is bet-
ter than MAJORITY and BENCHMARK over the arXiv cs.lg
subset, which veriﬁes the usefulness of visual features, even
when only the last layer is ﬁne-tuned. Table 3 also shows
that INCEPTION and BILSTM achieve similar performance
on arXiv, showing that textual and visual representations are
equally discriminative: INCEPTION and BILSTM are indis-
tinguishable over cs.cl; BILSTM achieves 1.8% higher ac-
curacy over cs.lg, while INCEPTION achieves 1.3% higher
accuracy over cs.ai. Once again, the JOINT model achieves
the highest accuracy on cs.ai and cs.cl by combining textual
and visual representations (at a level of statistical signiﬁ-
cance for cs.ai). This, again, conﬁrms that textual and visual
features complement each other, and together they achieve
state-of-the-art results. On arXiv cs.lg, JOINT achieves a
0.6% higher accuracy than INCEPTION by combining vi-
sual features and textual features, but BILSTM achieves the
highest accuracy. One characteristic of cs.lg documents is
that they tend to contain more equations than the other two
arXiv datasets, and preliminary analysis suggests that the
BILSTM is picking up on a correlation between the vol-
ume/style of mathematical presentation and the quality of
the document.
Analysis
In this section, we ﬁrst analyze the performance of INCEP-
TION and JOINT. We also analyze the performance of dif-
ferent models on different quality classes. The high-level
representations learned by different models are also visual-
ized and discussed. As the Wikipedia test set is larger and
more balanced than that of arXiv, our analysis will focus on
Wikipedia.
INCEPTION
To better understand the performance of INCEPTION, we
generated the gradient-based class activation map (Selvaraju
et al. 2017), by maximizing the outputs of each class in the
penultimate layer, as shown in Figure 3. From Figure 3a
and Figure 3b, we can see that INCEPTION identiﬁes the
two most important regions (one at the top corresponding
to the table of contents, and the other at the bottom, cap-
turing both document length and references) that contribute
to the FA class prediction, and a region in the upper half of
the image that contributes to the GA class prediction (cap-
turing the length of the article body). From Figure 3c and
Figure 3d, we can see that the most important regions in

MAJORITY
BENCHMARK
DOC2VEC
INCEPTIONFIXED
BILSTM
INCEPTION
JOINT
Wikipedia
16.7%
46.7±0.34%
23.2±1.41%
43.7±0.51
54.1±0.47%
57.0±0.63%
59.4±0.47%†
arXiv
cs.ai
92.2%
92.6%
73.3±9.81%
92.3±0.29
91.5±1.03%
92.8±0.79%
93.4±1.07%†
cs.cl
68.9%
75.7%
66.2±8.38%
75.0±1.95
76.2±1.30%
76.2±2.92%
77.1±3.10%
cs.lg
67.9%
70.7%
64.7±9.08%
73.9±1.23
81.1±0.83%
79.3±2.94%
79.9±2.54%
Table 3: Experimental results. The best result for each dataset is indicated in bold, and marked with “†” if it is signiﬁcantly
higher than the second best result (based on a one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test; p < 0.05). The results of BENCHMARK on
the arXiv dataset are from the original paper, where the standard deviation values were not reported. All neural models except
for INCEPTIONFIXED have larger standard deviation values on arXiv than Wikipedia, which can be explained by the small size
of the arXiv test set.
(a) FA
(b) GA
(c) B
(d) C
(e) Start
(f) Stub
Figure 3: Heatmap overlapped onto screenshots of each
Wikipedia quality class. Best viewed in color.
terms of B and C class prediction capture images (down the
left and right of the page, in the case of B and C), and doc-
ument length/references. From Figure 3e and Figure 3f, we
can see that INCEPTION ﬁnds that images in the top right
corner are the strongest predictor of Start class prediction,
and (the lack of) images/the link bar down the left side of the
document are the most important for Stub class prediction.
JOINT
Table 4 shows the confusion matrix of JOINT on Wikipedia.
We can see that more than 50% of documents for each qual-
ity class are correctly classiﬁed, except for the C class where
Quality
FA
GA
B
C
Start
Stub
FA
397
83
20
0
0
0
GA
112
299
65
22
2
0
B
23
53
253
75
44
7
C
5
33
193
124
100
12
Start
1
6
36
85
239
84
Stub
0
0
6
7
63
345
Table 4: Confusion matrix of the JOINT model on
Wikipedia. Rows are the actual quality classes and columns
are the predicted quality classes. The diagonal (gray cells)
indicates correct predictions.
Quality
Metric
BILSTM
INCEPTION
JOINT
FA
P
76.6
74.8
73.8
R
72.0
68.2
79.4
Fβ=1
74.2
71.3
76.5
GA
P
51.3
57.7
63.1
R
59.8
59.0
59.8
Fβ=1
55.2
58.3
61.4
B
P
37.6
41.8
44.2
R
42.4
44.0
55.6
Fβ=1
39.9
42.9
49.2
C
P
36.3
38.9
39.6
R
27.0
36.0
26.6
Fβ=1
31.0
37.4
31.8
Start
P
48.2
49.4
53.3
R
44.8
57.2
53.0
Fβ=1
46.4
53.0
53.1
Stub
P
71.9
83.3
77.0
R
78.9
78.2
81.9
Fβ=1
75.2
80.7
79.4
Table 5: Precision (“P”), recall (“R”), and F1 (“Fβ=1”) of
BILSTM, INCEPTION, and JOINT on Wikipedia.
more documents are misclassiﬁed into B. Analysis shows
that when misclassiﬁed, documents are usually misclassiﬁed
into adjacent quality classes, which can be explained by the
Wikipedia grading scheme, where the criteria for adjacent

BILSTM
FA
GA
B
C
Start
Stub
INCEPTION
JOINT
Figure 4: t-SNE scatter plot of Wikipedia article representations (representations from penultimate layer of each model, 200
random samples from each quality class; best viewed in color)
quality classes are more similar.8
We also provide a breakdown of precision (“P”), recall
(“R”), and F1 score (“Fβ=1”) for BILSTM, INCEPTION,
and JOINT across the quality classes in Table 5. We can see
that JOINT achieves the highest accuracy in 11 out of 18
cases. It is also worth noting that all models achieve higher
scores for FA, GA, and Stub articles than B, C and Start ar-
ticles. This can be explained in part by the fact that FA and
GA articles must pass an ofﬁcial review based on structured
criteria, and in part by the fact that Stub articles are usu-
ally very short, which is discriminative for INCEPTION, and
JOINT. All models perform worst on the B and C quality
classes. It is difﬁcult to differentiate B articles from C ar-
ticles even for Wikipedia contributors. As evidence of this,
when we crawled a new dataset including talk pages with
quality class votes from Wikipedia contributors, we found
that among articles with three or more quality labels, over
20% percent of B and C articles have inconsistent votes from
Wikipedia contributors, whereas for FA and GA articles the
number is only 0.7%.
We further visualize the learned document representations
of BILSTM, INCEPTION, and JOINT in the form of a t-
SNE plot (van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) in Figure 4.
The degree of separation between Start and Stub achieved
by INCEPTION is much greater than for BILSTM, with the
separation between Start and Stub achieved by JOINT be-
ing the clearest among the three models. INCEPTION and
JOINT are better than BILSTM at separating Start and C.
JOINT achieves slightly better performance than INCEPTION
in separating GA and FA. We can also see that it is difﬁcult
for all models to separate B and C, which is consistent with
the ﬁndings of Tables 4 and 5.
Conclusions
We proposed to use visual renderings of documents to
capture implicit document quality indicators, such as font
choices, images, and visual layout, which are not captured in
8Suggesting that ordinal regression should boost accuracy, but
preliminary experiments with various methods led to no improve-
ment over simple classiﬁcation.
textual content. We applied neural network models to cap-
ture visual features given visual renderings of documents.
Experimental results show that we achieve a 2.9% higher
accuracy than state-of-the-art approaches based on textual
features over Wikipedia, and performance competitive with
or surpassing state-of-the-art approaches over arXiv. We fur-
ther proposed a joint model, combining textual and visual
representations, to predict the quality of a document. Exper-
imental results show that our joint model outperforms the
visual-only model in all cases, and the text-only model on
Wikipedia and two subsets of arXiv. These results under-
line the feasibility of assessing document quality via visual
features, and the complementarity of visual and textual doc-
ument representations for quality assessment.
