High-Level Plan for Behavioral Robot Navigation with Natural Language 
Directions and R-NET  
Amar Shrestha*, Krittaphat Pugdeethosapol*, Haowen Fang, Qinru Qiu 
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Syracuse University, USA 

 
 
 
Abstract 
When the navigational environment is known, it can be rep-
resented as a graph where landmarks are nodes, the robot 
behaviors that move from node to node are edges, and the 
route is a set of behavioral instructions. The route path from 
source to destination can be viewed as a class of combinato-
rial optimization problems where the path is a sequential 
subset from a set of discrete items. The pointer network is 
an attention-based recurrent network that is suitable for such 
a task. In this paper, we utilize a modified R-NET with gat-
ed attention and self-matching attention translating natural 
language instructions to a high-level plan for behavioral ro-
bot navigation by developing an understanding of the be-
havioral navigational graph to enable the pointer network to 
produce a sequence of behaviors representing the path. 
Tests on the navigation graph dataset show that our model 
outperforms the state-of-the-art approach for both known 
and unknown environments. 
 Introduction   
In a complex but known environment, an automated robot 
needs to follow a route to reach the destination from a 
starting point. When the environment is described in terms 
of a graph (Sepulveda et al. 2018) where landmarks are 
nodes and the robot behaviors that moves it from one node 
to its adjacent nodes are edges, the route is a set of behav-
ioral instructions (go left, go right, go forward, etc.). The 
route path from source to destination can be viewed as a 
class of combinatorial optimization problems where the 
path is a sequential subset from a set of discrete items.
 Thus, this robot navigation application should take the 
environment or behavioral graph and the source-
destination pair along with natural language directions as 
input and produce a sequence of behavioral instructions to 
reach the destination from the source. In terms of Neural 
Program Learning, this can be taken as an example-driven 
induction (Devlin et al. 2017).  
 
* These authors contributed equally to this work. 
 Sequence- to-sequence paradigm of recurrent neural 
networks (RNNs) have been a staple of neural network 
architectures for learning functions over sequences (encod-
er) from examples and producing sequences of outputs 
(decoder). The content-based attentional mechanism has 
also been used to provide contextual information from the 
encoded input to the decoder. But these methods require a 
fixed-sized output dictionary which is not suitable for 
combinatorial problems where the size of the output dic-
tionary depends on the length of the input sentence. This 
problem can be resolved by utilizing Pointer Networks 
(Vinyals et al. 2015) which augment the attention mecha-
nism to create pointers to the input elements. The augmen-
tation is simple: instead of blending the hidden encoder 
units using attention to provide context at each decoder 
step, utilize the attention as a pointer to select a member of 
the input sequence as the output. 
 In this work, we utilize the behavioral graph dataset 
from (Zang et al. 2018). Given the complexity of the prob-
lem, we move from the straight-forward sequence-to-
sequence architecture in the original pointer network in 
(Vinyals et al. 2015) to a modification of R-Net (Wang et 
al. 2017) with gated-attention and self-matching attention 
mechanisms to:  
1. Incorporate an understanding of the behavioral 
graph with the source-destination pair and natural 
language directions. 
2. Aggregate evidence from the entire graph to infer 
the route from source to destination based on natural 
language directions. 
Related work 
In order for an automated robot to follow a route based on 
navigation commands to reach the destination, the robot 
needs to be able to process and understand the natural lan-
guage direction, as well as translating into plans or com-
mands to execute. The most common approaches can be 

divided into three categories, manually parsing commands, 
constraining language descriptions, and statistical machine 
translation methods (Zang et al. 2018). 
 Manually parsing commands is a straight forward meth-
od to translate natural language into command, but it is 
inapplicable in a real-world situation. For example, (Levit 
and Roy 2007) proposed a method to translate the spatial 
language to a map navigational task by manually parsing 
natural language instructions into navigation information 
units (positions, orientations, moves, turns, and location 
references) sequence for navigation.  
 In constraining language descriptions, the space of input 
descriptions is limited to aid the translation into execution 
commands. (Schulz et al. 2015) proposed a symbolic navi-
gation system that utilizes symbolic information extracted 
from door label and map environments to navigate robot 
from source to destination.  
 The statistical machine translation is the most recent 
approach translating the natural language to robot naviga-
tion instructions by utilizing translation rules created from 
a corpus of data. For example, (Matuszek et al. 2010) parse 
natural language instructions into a grammar liked lan-
guage sequence by using the word alignment-based seman-
tic parser (Wong and Mooney 2007). 
 In this work, we mainly focus on end-to-end learning to 
translate free-from natural language instruction to a high-
level plan for behavioral robot navigation by utilizing a 
sequence to sequence neural network for natural language 
processing. 
Experimental Task  
Behavioral Graph 
The navigation environment in the dataset (Zang et al. 
2018) consists of 7 types of semantic locations, 12 types of 
behaviors shown in Table 1., and 20 different types of 
landmarks. A location in the environment can be a room, a 
lab, an ofﬁce, a kitchen, a hall, a corridor, or a bathroom. 
As we require unique sets of elements in the graph and as 
the behaviors are not unique to its location, we encode the 
environment into a behavioral graph 𝑚 into unique triplets 
𝑇# =< 𝑝'; 𝑏#; 𝑝+ >, where 𝑝' and 𝑝+ are adjacent nodes in 
the graph, and the edge 𝑏# is an executable behavior to nav-
igate from 𝑝' to 𝑝+. In this work, as opposed to (Zang et al. 
2018), we remove the landmarks as they do not provide 
any more information and increases the dimensionality of 
the behavioral graph. 
 An example from the dataset and problem sets are 
shown in Figure 1. (a) shows the environment with the 
source and destination represented by red and green sym-
bol respectively, and the red line showing the desired path 
between them which correspond to natural language direc-
tion. (b) shows the result behavioral navigation graph and 
the desired behavior sequence. (c) shows the problem set-
ting where the inputs of the model are a behavioral graph, 
source-destination pair, and natural language instruction 
for the target path such as “Exit the room, turn left, follow 
the corridor, turn left and enter the room”. The dataset 
consists of 8066 pairs of navigation plans and source-
destination for training. This training data was collected 
from 88 unique simulated environments, totaling 6064 
 
(a)                                                                         (b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 1. (a) Map of an environment. (b) Its behavioral navigation graph and desired behavioral sequence. (c) Problem setting. The red 
part of (b) corresponds to the representation of the route highlighted in red in (a). The codes “oo-left”, “cf”, “cf”, and “io-left”, corre-
spond to the behaviors “Exit the room, turn left”, “follow the corridor”, “follow the corridor”, “turn left and enter the room” respective-
ly. 
Hall 1
Room 1
Room 2
Lab 1
Lab 2
Lab 3
Hall 2
Start
Destination
Room 3
Room 4
C-0
C-1
C-2
C-3
C-4
Room
1
Hall 1
Room
2
Room
3
Room
4
Lab 1
Hall 2
Lab 3
Lab 2
C-0
C-1
C-2
C-4
C-3
oo-left
cf
cf
cf
cf
io-right
io-left
io-right
io-right
io-right
io-left
io-left
io-right
oo-left
oo-right
Desired behavioral sequence
<Start, behavior 1, behavior 2, behavior 3, … destination>
<Lab 2, oo-left, cf, cf, …, Hall 1>
Model
Destination: Hall 1
Behavioral graph
Exit the room, turn 
left, follow corridor, 
turn left and enter 
the room. 
Start point: Lab 2
Behavior 
sequence
oo-left
cf
cf
…
Behavior 
Description 
oo<d> 
Go out of the current place and turn <d> 
io<d> 
Turn <d> and enter the place straight ahead 
oio 
Exit current place and enter straight ahead 
<d>t 
Turn <d> at the intersection 
cf 
Follow (or go straight down) the corridor 
sp 
Go straight at a T intersection 
st 
Go straight through the corridor 
ch<d> 
Cross the hall and turn <d> 
 
Table 1: Behaviors (edges) of the navigation graphs consid-
ered in this work. The direction <d> can be left or right 
(Zang et al. 2018). 
 

distinct navigation plans. The dataset consists of two test 
sets  
 (1) Test-repeated: This test set contains 1012 pairs of 
navigation plans and source-destination pair. These routes 
are not part of the training set; however, they are collected 
using environments that are part of the training set.  
 (2) Test-new: This test set contains 946 samples collect-
ed using environments that are not part of the training set. 
In the training set, the largest set of triplets is 500 and the 
smallest set is 200. Thus, we limit the training set to 300 
maximum triplets. The graph with fewer triplets is padded 
and the graph with more than 300 triplets is cut but ensur-
ing that the target sequence of triplets is included in the 
300. 
Problem Formulation 
The task in the work is to build a model to extrapolate the 
path from the source to the destination with natural lan-
guage direction in a behavioral navigational graph for an 
indoor environment. We provide the model, source-
destination triplet pair (𝑠, 𝑑), natural language direction I, 
and behavioral navigational graph 𝑚. Formally, we con-
struct a model to predict the correct sequence of triplets to 
provide the correct sequence of behaviors (𝑏2, 𝑏3, … ) based 
on the previously unseen input of (𝑚, 𝑠, 𝑑, 𝐼). From a su-
pervised learning perspective, the goal is then to estimate: 
 
𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥
:;,…,:<
𝑃(𝑇2, … 𝑇>|𝑚, 𝑠, 𝑑, 𝐼) 
(1) 
 
From the dataset, the input-output pair is {𝑥', 𝑦') | 0 ≤𝑖≤
𝑁} 
where 
𝑥' = (𝑚, 𝑠, 𝑑, 𝐼)' 
and 
𝑦' = (𝑏2, … , 𝑏>)' ∈
(𝑇2, … , 𝑇>)'. 
 
Proposed Work  
Figure 2. shows the overview of the modified R-NET ar-
chitecture (Wang et al. 2017) that we utilize in this work. 
First, the behavioral navigational graph m is processed by a 
bidirectional recurrent network (BiRNN) (Schuster and 
Paliwal 1997) to get 𝑢I. The source-destination triplet pair 
(𝑠, 𝑑) is separately processed by a multilayer perceptron 
(MLP) with ReLU activation. The natural language direc-
tion I is separated into words and embedded using GLOVE 
embedded vectors (Pennington et al. 2014), then processed 
by BiRNN to get 𝑒K.  Second, we concatenate the pro-
cessed source-destination triple pair with processed natural 
language direction to get 𝑢K: 
 
𝑢K = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡P𝑀𝐿𝑃K(𝑠, 𝑑), 𝑒KS 
(2) 
 
Third, we pass 𝑢I and 𝑢K into a gated attention-based re-
current network to incorporate natural language direction 
and source-destination information into a behavioral navi-
gational graph representation. Then, we refine the graph 
representation by aggregating the evidence from the whole 
navigational graph utilizing self-matching attention. This is 
then fed into the decoder layer with a pointer network con-
taining Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) to produce predic-
tions over the input triplets in the behavioral navigational 
graph. 
 The main differences from the original R-NET architec-
ture are in the encoder where we use MLP and BiRNN to 
produce the new representation 𝑢Kand the pointer network 
in the decoder where the initial hidden state (𝑟K) of the 
BiRNN for the pointer network is determined from the 
encoding of the encode 𝑢K: 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Modified R-NET Structure with natural language direction. 
E[iWUighW, and enWeU Whe Vecond
dooU on \oXU lefW, afWeU Whe
ShoWo, befoUe Whe lamS
NaWXUaO LaQJXaJe DLUecWLRQ
GLOVE
EPbedded
BLRNN
CONCAT
SRXUce-DeVWLQaWLRQ TULSOeW PaLU
MLP
<OIÀce 13, RR-ULJKW, C-2 OeIW>¬
<C-0, RR-ULJKW, OIÀce 3>
BeKaYLRUaO NaYLJaWLRQaO GUaSK TULSOeWV
<OIÀce 13, RR-ULJKW, C-2 OeIW>
<C-2 OeIW, cI (cKaLU OeIW), C-1 OeIW>
<C-1 OeIW, OeIW-LR, BaWKURRP>
......
......
......
<C-0, RR-ULJKW, OIÀce 3>
BLRNN
GaWed AWWeQWLRQ
RNN
SeOI-MaWcKLQJ AWWeQWLRQ
BLRNN
MLP
PRLQWeU
LAB 0
OeIW-LR
C-2 OeIW
RR-OeIW
oo-UighW
OIÀce 13
UighW-io
BaWKURRP
OIÀce 3
lefW-io
C-1 OeIW
cI
oo-lefW
C-0 OeIW
cI
OIÀce 1
oo-UighW
ULJKW-LR
OIÀce 0
RR-ULJKW

𝑟K = 𝑀𝐿𝑃(𝑢K) 
(3) 
The other parts remaining the same as the original R-NET 
paper and we use the same notations to ensure that the dif-
ferences are visible. 
Evaluation  
Training Details 
The training procedure used in this is straight-forward. We 
utilize the entire training set containing 8066 samples for 
training and the entire test-repeated set containing 1012 
samples for validation. The summary of the dataset is 
shown in Table 2.  
 We utilize backpropagation with the ADAM optimizer 
to optimize the network. We also utilize a variational drop-
out as used in the original R-NET architecture. The evalua-
tions were performed in both test-repeated and test-new 
set. The model is trained for 45 epochs. The number of 
units in BiRNN is set to 100 and there are 3 GRU layers in 
the BiRNN. 
Evaluation metrics 
We utilize four metrics to evaluate the model as in (Zang et 
al. 2018):  
- 
Exact Match (EM): If the predicted plan exactly 
matches the ground truth, the value is 1 and it is 0 
otherwise. 
- 
F1 score (F1): The harmonic mean of precision 
and recall. 
- 
Edit Distance (ED): The minimum number of 
changes need to be made in order to transform a 
predicted sequence to ground truth sequence. 
- 
Goal Match (GM): If a predicted sequence reach-
es the ground truth destination, the value is 1 even 
it has a different sequence and it is 0 otherwise. 
Results 
As shown in Table 3, our model outperforms the original 
work (Zang et al. 2018) in both test-repeated and test-new 
set. This is because of modified R-NET, gated-attention 
and self-matching attention that produce a better under-
standing of the navigational graph, and pointer network to 
produce the output behavior sequence by producing a 
probability over the input graph instead of producing prob-
abilities over the list of behaviors. 
 We can also see that our model performance does not 
drop when applying to test-new set compare to (Zang et al. 
2018) in which EM and GM significantly drop. 
Conclusion  
In this paper, we utilize the behavioral graph dataset from 
(Zang et al. 2018) and given the complexity of the prob-
lem, we move from the straight-forward sequence-to-
sequence architecture in the original pointer network to a 
modiﬁcation of R-Net with gated attention and self-
matching attention mechanisms. We utilize the graph, nat-
ural language direction, and the source-destination triplet 
pair as inputs to produce a sequence of behaviors.
