LINEAR REPRESENTATION META-REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING FOR INSTANT ADAPTATION
Matt Peng, Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao∗
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces Fast Linearized Adaptive Policy (FLAP), a new meta-
reinforcement learning (meta-RL) method that is able to extrapolate well to out-
of-distribution tasks without the need to reuse data from training, and adapt al-
most instantaneously with the need of only a few samples during testing. FLAP
builds upon the idea of learning a shared linear representation of the policy so
that when adapting to a new task, it sufﬁces to predict a set of linear weights.
A separate adapter network is trained simultaneously with the policy such that
during adaptation, we can directly use the adapter network to predict these linear
weights instead of updating a meta-policy via gradient descent, such as in prior
meta-RL methods like MAML, to obtain the new policy. The application of the
separate feed-forward network not only speeds up the adaptation run-time signiﬁ-
cantly, but also generalizes extremely well to very different tasks that prior Meta-
RL methods fail to generalize to. Experiments on standard continuous-control
meta-RL benchmarks show FLAP presenting signiﬁcantly stronger performance
on out-of-distribution tasks with up to double the average return and up to 8X
faster adaptation run-time speeds when compared to prior methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has led to recent advancements that allow autonomous agents
to solve complex tasks in a wide range of ﬁelds (Schulman et al. (2015), Lillicrap et al. (2015a),
Levine et al. (2015)). However, traditional approaches in DRL learn a separate policy for each
unique task, requiring large amounts of samples. Meta-Reinforcement learning (meta-RL) algo-
rithms provide a solution by teaching agents to implicitly learn a shared structure among a batch
of training tasks so that the policy for unseen similar tasks can quickly be acquired (Finn et al.
(2017)). Recent progress in meta-RL has shown efforts being made in improving the sample com-
plexity of meta-RL algorithms (Rakelly et al. (2019), Rothfuss et al. (2018)), along with the out-of-
distribution performance of meta-RL algorithms during adaptation (Fakoor et al. (2019); Mendonca
et al. (2020)). However, most of the existing meta-RL algorithms prioritize sample efﬁciency at
the sacriﬁce of computational complexity in adaptation, making them infeasible to adapt to fast-
changing environments in real-world applications such as robotics.
In this paper, we present Fast Linearized Adaptive Policy (FLAP), an off-policy meta-RL method
with great generalization ability and fast adaptation speeds. FLAP is built on the assumption that
similar tasks share a common linear (or low-dimensional) structure in the representation of the
agent’s policy, which is usually parameterized by a neural network. During training, we learn the
shared linear structure among different tasks using an actor-critic algorithm. A separate adapter net
is also trained as a supervised learning problem to learn the weights of the output layer for each
unique train task given by the environment interactions from the agent. Then when adapting to a
∗Matt Peng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of
California, Berkeley. Banghua Zhu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
at the University of California, Berkeley. Jiantao Jiao is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science and the Department of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley.
1
arXiv:2101.04750v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2021

new task, we ﬁx the learned linear representation (shared model layers) and predict the weights for
the new task using the trained adapter network. An illustration of our approach is highlighted in
Figure 2. We highlight our main contributions below:
• State of the Art Performance. We propose an algorithm based on learning and predict-
ing the shared linear structures within policies, which gives the strongest results among
the meta-RL algorithms and the fastest adaptation speeds. FLAP is the state of the art in
all these areas including performance, run-time, and memory usage. As is shown in Fig-
ure 1, the FLAP algorithm outperforms most of the existing meta-RL algorithms including
MAML (Finn et al. (2017)), PEARL (Rakelly et al. (2019)) and MIER (Mendonca et al.
(2020)) in terms of both adaptation speed and average return. Further results from our
experiments show that FLAP acquires adapted policies that perform much better on out-of-
distribution tasks at a rapid run-time adaptation rate up to 8X faster than prior methods.
• Prediction rather than optimization. We showcase a successful use of prediction via
adapter network rather than optimization with gradient steps (Finn et al. (2017)) or the
use of context encoders (Rakelly et al. (2019)) during adaptation. This ensures that differ-
ent tasks would have policies that are different from each other, which boosts the out-of-
distribution performance, while gradient-based and context-based methods tend to produce
similar policies for all new tasks. Furthermore, the adapter network learns an efﬁcient way
of exploration such that during adaptation, only a few samples are needed to acquire the
new policy. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst meta-RL method that directly learns and
predicts a (linearly) shared structure successfully in adapting to new tasks.
Figure 1: Strong Experimental Results: We showcase the performance of meta-RL methods on
tasks that are very different from the training tasks to assess the generalization ability of meth-
ods. We also analyze the adaptation run-time speed of these methods on tasks that are similar (in-
distribution) and tasks that are not very similar (out-of-distribution) to further evaluate these models.
Flap presents signiﬁcantly stronger results compared to prior meta-RL methods.
Figure 2: Overview of our approach: In training, for different tasks {Ti}, we parametrize their
policy as πi = φ · wi, where φ ∈Rd is the shared linear representation we hope to acquire. In
testing (adaptation), we ﬁx the acquired linear representation φ and directly alter the weights wtest
by using the output of the feed-forward adapter network.
2

1.1
RELATED WORK
The idea behind learning a shared linear structure is motivated by the great progress of representation
learning and function approximation in domains such as robotics (Kober et al. (2013)) and natural
language processing (Keneshloo et al. (2018)). Representation learning has seen success in cases of
transfer learning RL in different tasks, and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) where dif-
ferent agents may share common rewards or dynamics (Taylor & Stone (2009), Silva et al. (2018)).
The idea of learning shared information (embeddings) across different tasks has been investigated
deeply in transfer learning, including for example, universal value function approximators (Schaul
et al. (2015)), successor features (Barreto et al. (2017), Hunt et al. (2019)), and invariant feature
spaces (Gupta et al. (2017))).
Using a prediction model during meta-testing presents a new idea into meta-RL. The current trend
in meta-reinforcement learning has been to either use an encoder based method through the use of
context captured in recurrent models (Fakoor et al. (2019)) or variational inference (Rakelly et al.
(2019)), or use a variation of model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al. (2017)), which
aims at ﬁnding some common parametrization of the policy such that it sufﬁces to take one gradient
step in adaption to acquire a good policy. In contrast, FLAP aims at predicting the weights for the
policy network directly in adaptation without the need of taking gradient steps or using context and
comparing with existing data. This gives better performance in (a) faster adaptation speeds due to
the minimal amount of computation required; (b) smaller sample complexity during adaptation due
to the better exploration strategy provided by adapter network; (c) strong out-of-distribution gener-
alization ability resulting from the fact that the policy for each new task can be completely different
in the last layer (in contrast, the new policies produced by gradient-based algorithms like MAML
only differ in a single gradient update, which makes them highly similar, hurting the generalization
ability). We believe the idea of predicting instead of ﬁne-tuning via gradient descent can shed light
to broader questions in meta-learning.
2
BACKGROUND
We consider the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) reinforcement learning setting deﬁned by
a tuple T = (S, A, µ, µ0, r, T), where S is the state space, A is the action space, µ(st+1|st, at) is
the unknown transition distribution with µ0 being the initial state distribution, r(st, at) is the reward
function, and T is the episode length. Given a task T , an agent’s goal is to learn a policy π : S →A
to maximize the expected (discounted) return:
qγ(π, T ) = E[
T −1
X
t=0
γtr(st, at)], s0 ∼µ0, at ∼π(st), st+1 ∼µ(st, at)
(1)
We now formalize the meta-RL problem. We are given a set of training tasks Ttrain = {Ti}n
i=1
and test tasks Ttest = {Tj}m
j=1. In meta-training, we are allowed to sample in total k trajectories
Dk
train from the tasks in Ttrain and obtain some information φ(Dk
train) that could be utilized for
adaptation. The choice of φ(Dk
train) varies for different algorithms. In meta-testing (or adaptation),
we are allowed to sample l trajectories Dl
test from each Ti ∈Ttest. We would like to obtain a policy
π(φ(Dk
train), Dl
test) for each testing task Ti, such that the average expected return for all testing
tasks is maximized:
1
m
X
Ti∈Ttest
qγ(π(φ(Dk
train), Dl
test), Ti).
(2)
Here the policy only depends on the training data through the information φ(Dk
train), and can be
different for different test tasks. We are interested in getting the expected return in equation 2 as large
as possible with the smallest sample complexity k, l. Furthermore, we hope that the information
φ(Dk
train) is reasonably small in size such that the memory needed for testing is also controlled.
We also state that in-distribution tasks typically refer to the test tasks being drawn from the same
distribution as the training distribution of tasks whereas out-of-distribution tasks represent the test
distribution as very different from the training distribution (in our case, all out-of-distribution tasks
are completely disjoint from the training set).
3

3
FAST LINEARIZED ADAPTIVE POLICY (FLAP)
In this section, we describe the FLAP algorithm. We ﬁrst assert and justify our assumption behind
the goal of the FLAP algorithm (Section 3.1), and then discuss the high-level ﬂow of the algorithm
(Section 3.2).
3.1
ASSUMPTION AND MOTIVATION
Our FLAP algorithm is based on the following assumption on the shared structure between different
tasks during training and testing:
Assumption 3.1 We assume that there exists some function φ : S →Rd1 such that for any task
in the meta-RL problem Ti ∈{Ttrain ∪Ttest}, there exists a policy πi of the following form that
maximizes the expected return qγ(π, Ti):
πi = σ(⟨φ, wi⟩+ bi).
(3)
Here wi ∈Rd1×d2, bi ∈Rd2. d1 is the latent space dimension and d2 is the dimension of the action
space. The function φ represents a shared structure among all tasks, and wi and bi are the unique
weight and bias for task Ti. The function σ is the activation function depending on the choice of the
action space.
Similar assumptions that constrain the policy space also appear in literature, e.g. Levine et al. (2016);
Lillicrap et al. (2015b); Schmidhuber (2019); Mou et al. (2020) and references therein. One can
also extend the linear representation in equation 3 to quadratic or higher-order representations for
more representational ability and looser asumptions. We compare the performance between linear
structures and non-linear structures in Section C.1.3.
3.2
ALGORITHM OVERVIEW
Given assumption 3.1, the overall workﬂow of the algorithm is quite straightforward: in meta-
training, we would like to learn the shared feature φ from the training tasks Ttrain; in meta-testing,
we utilize the learned linear feature φ to derive the parameters wi, bi for each new task. To speed up
the adaptation, we also train a separate feed-forward adapter network simultaneously that takes the
trajectories of each task as input and predicts the weights that are learned during training. The full
pseudo-code for both meta-training and meta-testing is provided in Appendix A.
3.2.1
META-TRAINING
In order to learn the linear representation φ from Assumption 3.1, we use a deep neural network for
the policy, sharing all but the output layer among all the train tasks in the training set. Each train task
will have a unique output layer during meta-training, and the shared neural network is the feature φ
we hope to learn during training.
Mathematically, we parametrize the policy via a neural network as π(φ, wi, bi) = σ(⟨φ, wi⟩+ bi),
where wi and bi are the weights and bias unique to task i, and σ represents the linear activation for
the output layer since for all the tasks we considered in this paper, the action space takes values in
the range of [−∞, +∞].
FLAP uses the general multi-task objective to train the policy over all the n training tasks during
meta-training. We maximize the average returns over all training tasks by learning the policy pa-
rameters represented by {φ, {wi, bi}n
i=1}. We would like to ﬁnd the meta-learned parameters via
solving the following optimization problem:
{φ, {wi, bi}n
i=1} =
arg max
{φ,{wi,bi}n
i=1}
1
n
n
X
i=1
qγ(π(φ, wi, bi), Ti).
(4)
Here φ is parameterized by a neural network, and πi is parameterized by the parameters
{φ, {wi, bi}n
i=1}.
4

Figure 3:
Each task shares a feature mapping in the critic and a different shared feature mapping
in the policy network. In this illustration, for the training task 1 input data x1, only the output y1
from its corresponding output layer will be used in the meta-loss function. Similarly for task 2 input
data x2, only the output y2 from its corresponding output layer will be used in the meta-loss. This
is extended up to n points where n is the number of training tasks used.
Actor-Critic.
For solving the optimization problem in equation 4, we apply the off-policy soft
actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al. (2018)) for sample efﬁciency.
In the actor-critic model, besides the policy network, we also have a critic network which learns a
Q function for evaluating the current policy. We linearize the critic network in a similar fashion to
the policy by ﬁxing a set of shared layers in the critic network. We show the shared layer structure
for both policy and critic network in Figure 3. Linearizing the critic network, though not explicitly
required, does not incur any loss in performance from experimental results, and drastically reduces
the number of parameters needed to be learned during training for the critic portion of the actor-critic
method. We discuss in more detail about the use of the soft actor-critic in Appendix D.1.
Adapter network.
Learning the shared structure is a standard approach in multi-task transfer
learning (Pan & Yang (2009); Asawa et al. (2017); D’Eramo et al. (2020)). The key contribution
and distinction of our algorithm is the use of an adapter network for rapid adaptation. We train a
separate adapter network simultaneously with the shared structure during meta-training. We deﬁne
the SARS tuple as a tuple containing information from one time step taken on the environment by
an agent given a single task, including the current state, action taken, reward received from taking
the action given the current state, and the next state the agent enters (st, at, st+1, r(st, at)). The
adapter net is fed a single tuple or a sequence of the most recent SARS tuples from a task and pre-
dicts the unique weights ( ˆwi) needed to acquire the new policy for that task. We train the adapter
network with mean squared error between the output of the adapter net ( ˆwi) obtained from the input
SARS tuples, and the set of weights obtained from meta-training contained in each output layer. The
process of training the adapter net is shown in Figure 4.
Training the Adapter Network
Figure 4: Illustration of training the adapter network. The weights of the corresponding output layer
for the training task are ﬂattened and concatenated to form a 1-D target for the output of the adapter
model.
3.2.2
META-TESTING
In meta-testing, the FLAP algorithm adapts the meta-learned policy parameters wi, bi to a new task
(Ti ∈Ttest) with very little data sampled from the new task. Following Assumption 3.1, we assume
that the shared structure φ is already learned well during meta-training. Thus in meta-testing, we ﬁx
the structure φ obtained in training, and only adjust the weights for each test task. Mathematically,
we run the following optimization problem to obtain the policy for each new test task Tnew ∈Ttest:
The objective for the new task (Tnew) is to ﬁnd the set of weights that with the shared structure φ
5

form the adapted policy
wnew, bnew = arg max
w,b
qγ(π(φ, w, b), Tnew).
(5)
We then output π(φ, wnew, bnew) as the policy for the new task.
Online Adaptation
Figure 5: The ﬁrst step taken is arbitrary. Each step following the ﬁrst is fed into the feed-back loop
where the SARS pair is inputted to the adapter network providing a new set of weights for the output
layer of the policy.
In our practical implementation and results, we show our contribution that requiring an objective
function to be optimized during meta-testing does not necessarily have to be the only approach
for meta-RL, though FLAP can still have the optimization in Equation 5 easily integrated in meta-
testing. FLAP performs rapid online adaptation by using the adapter network to predict the weights
of the output layer as opposed to performing the optimization step. The ﬁrst time-step taken by the
agent is based off the most recent weights learned from the adapter network. This then initiates a
feed-back loop where now each time-step gives the adapter network a single tuple or a sequence
of the most recent SARS tuples which inputted to the adapter network, immediately produces a
set of predicted weights to use with the linear feature mapping (φ) to acquire an adapted policy
(πadapt = φT · wi + bi). Only a ﬁxed number of online adaptation steps are needed to acquire the
fully adapted policy. Once the last time-step of weights is predicted, FLAP keeps only the last set of
predictive weights for the rest of the episode. The meta-testing loop is shown in Figure 5.
4
EXPERIMENTS
This section presents the main experients of our method. We evaluate FLAP in Section 4.1 by
comparing it to prior meta-learning approaches on in-distribution tasks. We then examine how the
FLAP algorithm is able to generalize to very different test tasks using out-of-distribution tasks in
Section 4.2. We take a holistic view of FLAP as a meta-RL method and analyze its run-time and
memory usage on an autonomous agent during the meta-testing stage in Section 4.3. We leave
the ablation studies and sparse reward experiments to Appendix C. Finally, we provide thorough
discussions on the empirical performance in Section 4.4.
4.1
SAMPLE EFFICIENCY AND PERFORMANCE COMPARED TO PRIOR METHODS
We evaluate FLAP on standard meta-RL benchmarks that use in-distribution test tasks (training
and testing distributions are shared). These continuous control environments are simulated via the
MuJoCo simulator (Todorov et al. (2012)) and OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. (2016)). Rakelly
et al. (2019) constructed a ﬁxed set of meta-training tasks (Ttrain) and a validation set of tasks
(Ttest). These tasks have different rewards and randomized system dynamics (Walker-2D-Params).
To enable comparison with these past methods, we follow the evaluation code published by Rakelly
et al. (2019) and follow the exact same evaluation protocol. In all the tasks we consider, the adapter
network is fed with a single SARS tuple during training and adaptation. Other hyper-paramters
of our method are given in Appendix D.3 and we report the result of FLAP on each environment
from 3 random seeds. We compare against standard baseline algorithms of MAML (Finn et al.
(2017)), RL2 (Duan et al. (2016b)), ProMP (Rothfuss et al. (2018)), PEARL (Rakelly et al. (2019)),
6

Figure 6: Validation Test-Task performance over the course of the meta-training process on standard
in-distribution meta-RL benchmarks. Our algorithm is comparable in all environments to prior meta-
RL methods.
MQL (Fakoor et al. (2019)), and MIER (and MIER-wR) (Mendonca et al. (2020)). We obtained
the training curves for the ﬁrst four algorithms from Rakelly et al. (2019) and the latter two from
Mendonca et al. (2020).
4.2
GENERALIZATION TO OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION TASKS
To evaluate generalization ability, we test on the extrapolated out-of-distribution (OOD) environ-
ments, where the train and test distributions are highly dissimilar and completely disjoint.
Figure 7: Validation Test-Task performance over the course of the meta-training process on out-of-
distribution meta-RL benchmarks. Our algorithm is comparable if not better to prior methods in all
environments except for the Ant-Negated task.
7

These environments were created by Mendonca et al. (2020) and Fakoor et al. (2019), and we closely
follow their evaluation protocols for fair comparisons. The environments include changes in rewards
and dynamics. We run FLAP on 3 random seeds to evaluate the performance. In all the tasks
we consider, the adapter network is fed with a single SARS tuple during training and adaptation.
Hyperparameters are listed in Appendix D.3.
4.3
OVERALL MODEL ANALYSIS
In this section, we assess the run-time of FLAP. We compare our method to MIER-wr and PEARL
in meta-testing speeds on benchmarks from both in-distribution and out-of-distribution tasks. MIER
and MQL both reuse the training buffer during testing, causing adaptation speeds and memory usage
that are far worse than prior methods (MIER took 500+ seconds for meta-testing). We only compare
with the most competitive algorithms speed and memory-wise to showcase FLAP’s strength. We
defer the analysis of storage efﬁciency to Appendix (B).
To calculate the run-time speeds, we use the Python Gtimer package and a NVIDIA GEFORCE GTX
1080 GPU and time each of the Meta-RL methods on four MuJoCo environments (Ant, Cheetah,
Humanoid, Walker) on 30 validation tasks after allowing each algorithm to achieve convergence
during meta-training.
Figure 8: Our method clearly outperforms all other meta-RL algorithms in runtime during adapta-
tion to new tasks.
4.4
DISCUSSION
Beyond the experiments on in-distribution and out-of-distribution tasks, we did more experiments
and analysis to justify the superiority of FLAP, including ablation studies and extra experiments on
MDPs with sparse rewards. We brieﬂy describe the results and take-aways in Section 4.4.1 and 4.4.2,
and leave the details on experiments to Appendix C. Lastly, we analyze all the experimental results
and summarize the reason for the validity and generalization ability of the adapter network in Sec-
tion 4.4.3
4.4.1
ABLATION STUDIES
We validate the effectiveness of FLAP via a large amount of ablation studies. In particular, we
compare the performance under the following different settings:
1. With adapter net vs Without adapter net: One may wonder whether the adapter network
really boosts the performance compared to the approach of directly learning the linear
weights via soft actor-critic during adaptation without the help of the adapter network. As
is shown in Appendix C.1.1, although both algorithms converge to approximately the same
average reward in the end, the adapter network drastically decreases the sample complexity
during the adaptation process and accelerates the speed (at least 30X faster among all the
experiments) compared to the algorithm without the adapter.
2. Shared linear layer vs Non-linear layers: One may wonder why we assume the policies
share only the very last layer instead of the last two or more layers as embeddings. Indeed,
experiments in Appendix C.1.3 show that when sharing two (or more) layers, the policies
8

may have too much degree of freedom to converge to the global minimum. The shared
linear layer turns out to be the best assumption that balances the performance with the
speed.
3. Single SARS tuple vs a Sequence of SARS tuple as Input of Adapter Net: All the
experiments above work with the adapter net with a single (the most recent) SARS tuple
as input. We show in Appendix C.1.4 that if we let the adapter net take a sequence of
the most recent SARS tuples as input, the average return would not be affected on the
tasks we considered above. However, we see a reduction in variance with a slightly slower
adaptation speed. Overall, taking a longer sequence of SARS tuples as input tends to
stabilize the adaptation and reduce the variance in the sacriﬁce of runtime. However,
for some speciﬁc tasks with sparse rewards and similar SARS tuples, it also helps improve
the average return, as is discussed in the next section.
4.4.2
EXPERIMENTS ON SPARSE REWARD
We show in Appendix C.2 that for tasks with sparse rewards and similar dynamics (e.g. the naviga-
tion tasks), the performance of FLAP may deteriorate a little since the resulting policy highly relies
on the chosen transition tuple, which may lead to higher variance. However, it is still comparable to
PEARL if we let the adapter net take a sequence of SARS tuples as input. This is due to fact that
a sequence of SARS tuples provides more information on the context for the adapter, making the
resulting policy less dependent on the single chosen transition tuple.
However, for most of the other tasks we considered above, one single transition tuple sufﬁces to
provide enough information for the success of adapter network with small variance and strong gen-
eralization ability. We also validate it in Appendix C.3 by showing that the loss for adapter net
converges in a reliably fast and stable way.
4.4.3
ON THE VALIDITY AND GENERALIZATION ABILITY OF FLAP AND THE ADAPTER
NETWORK
To summarize the experimental results above, we see that FLAP guarantees a much smaller sample
complexity during adaptation, improved generalization ability and faster adaptation speeds. We
provide justiﬁcation as to why FLAP can achieve all the properties separately.
1. Small Sample Complexity: From our ablation study in Appendix C.1.1, it is clear that the
small sample complexity during meta-testing comes from the introduction of adapter net.
We conjecture that during training, the adapter net learns the structure of optimal policies
shared by all the training tasks; and during adaptation, the predicted weights encourage the
most efﬁcient exploration over potential structures of optimal policies such that the average
return converges in a fast and stable way.
2. Strong generalization:
From our ablation study in Appendix C.1.1, we see that the al-
gorithms with and without adapter converge to a similar average return. Thus we conclude
that the generalization ability is not related to the speciﬁc design of adapter net, but comes
from the shared linear structure. In traditional gradient-based meta-RL approaches like
MAML, the new policies are generated from taking one gradient step from the original
weights in training, which makes the new policies very similar to the old ones. In contrast,
the new policy in FLAP can have a completely different last layer, which guarantees more
ﬂexibility in varying policies, and thus a better generalization to new tasks.
3. Fast adaptation: Compared to other meta-RL approaches, FLAP only requires evaluating
the output of a ﬁxed adapter net, which provides instant adaptation when the adapter net is
small enough.
The successful experiments also justify the validity of Assumption 3.1: for all the tasks we consider,
they do have some near-optimal policies with shared embedding layers. We believe this could also
provide interesting theoretical directions as well.
9

5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented FLAP, a new method for meta-RL with signiﬁcantly faster adaptation
run-time speeds and performance. Our contribution in the FLAP algorithm presents a completely
new view into meta reinforcement learning by applying linear function approximations and predict-
ing the adaptation weights directly instead of taking gradient steps or using context encoders. We
also believe the idea behind the adapter network during meta-testing can be extended to other meta
learning problems outside of reinforcement learning.
