Inference in Probabilistic Logic Programs using Weighted CNF’s
Daan Fierens, Guy Van den Broeck, Ingo Thon, Bernd Gutmann, Luc De Raedt
Department of Computer Science
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
Abstract
Probabilistic logic programs are logic pro-
grams in which some of the facts are an-
notated with probabilities. Several classical
probabilistic inference tasks (such as MAP
and computing marginals) have not yet re-
ceived a lot of attention for this formalism.
The contribution of this paper is that we de-
velop eﬃcient inference algorithms for these
tasks. This is based on a conversion of the
probabilistic logic program and the query and
evidence to a weighted CNF formula. This al-
lows us to reduce the inference tasks to well-
studied tasks such as weighted model count-
ing. To solve such tasks, we employ state-of-
the-art methods. We consider multiple meth-
ods for the conversion of the programs as well
as for inference on the weighted CNF. The re-
sulting approach is evaluated experimentally
and shown to improve upon the state-of-the-
art in probabilistic logic programming.
1
Introduction
There is a lot of interest in combining probability
and logic for dealing with complex relational domains.
This interest has resulted in the ﬁelds of Statistical Re-
lational Learning (SRL) and Probabilistic Logic Pro-
gramming (PLP) [3]. While the two approaches essen-
tially study the same problem, there are diﬀerences in
emphasis. SRL techniques have focussed on the ex-
tension of graphical models with logical and relational
representations, while PLP has extended logic pro-
gramming languages (such as Prolog) with probabil-
ities. This has resulted in diﬀerences in representation
and semantics between the two approaches but also,
and more importantly, in diﬀerences in the inference
tasks that have been considered. The most common
inference tasks in the graphical model and the SRL
communities are that of computing the marginal prob-
ability of a set of random variables w.r.t. the evidence
(the MARG task) and ﬁnding the most likely joint
state of the random variables given the evidence (the
MAP task). In the PLP community one has focussed
on computing the probability of a single random vari-
able without evidence. This paper alleviates this situ-
ation by contributing general MARG and MAP infer-
ence techniques for probabilistic logic programs.
The key contribution of this paper is a two-step ap-
proach for performing MARG and MAP inference in
probabilistic logic programs.
Our approach is simi-
lar to the work of Darwiche [2] and others [14, 12],
who perform Bayesian network inference by conver-
sion to weighted propositional formulae, in particu-
lar weighted CNFs. We do the same for probabilistic
logic programs, a much more expressive representa-
tion framework (it extends a programming language,
it allows for cycles, etc.) In the ﬁrst step, the prob-
abilistic logic program is converted to an equivalent
weighted CNF. This conversion is based on well-known
conversions from the knowledge representation litera-
ture. The MARG task then reduces to weighted model
counting (WMC) on the resulting weighted CNF, and
the MAP task to weighted MAX SAT. The second step
then involves calling a state-of-the-art solver for WMC
or MAX SAT. In this way, we establish new links be-
tween PLP inference and standard problems such as
WMC and MAX SAT. We also identify a novel con-
nection between PLP and Markov Logic [13].
Further contributions are made at a more technical
level. First, we show how to make our approach more
eﬃcient by working only on the relevant part (with
respect to query and evidence) of the given program.
Second, we consider two algorithms for converting the
program to a weighted CNF and compare these algo-
rithms in terms of eﬃciency of the conversion process
and how eﬃcient the resulting weighted CNFs are for
inference. Third, we compare the performance of dif-
ferent inference algorithms and show that we improve

upon the state-of-the-art in PLP inference.
This paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst review the
basics of LP (Section 2) and PLP (Section 3). Next we
state the inference tasks that we consider (Section 4).
Then we introduce our two-step approach (Section 5
and 6). Finally we evaluate this approach by means
of experiments on relational data (Section 7).
2
Background
We now review the basics of logic programming [15]
and ﬁrst order logic.
2.1
First Order Logic (FOL)
A term is a variable, a constant, or a functor applied
on terms. An atom is of the form p(t1, . . . , tn) where
p is a predicate of arity n and the ti are terms.
A
formula is built out of atoms using universal and exis-
tential quantiﬁers and the usual logical connectives ¬,
∨, ∧, →and ↔. A FOL theory is a set of formulas that
implicitly form a conjunction. An expression is called
ground if it does not contain variables. A ground (or
propositional) theory is said to be in conjunctive nor-
mal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of disjunctions
of literals. A literal is an atom or its negation. Each
disjunction of literals is called a clause.
A disjunc-
tion consisting of a single literal is called a unit clause.
Each ground theory can be written in CNF form.
The Herbrand base of a FOL theory is the set of all
ground atoms constructed using the predicates, func-
tors and constants in the theory. A Herbrand interpre-
tation, also called (possible) world, is an assignment of
a truth value to all atoms in the Herbrand base. A
world or interpretation is called a model of the theory
if it satisﬁes all formulas in the theory. Satisfaction of
a formula is deﬁned in the usual way.
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) [13] are a probabilis-
tic extension of FOL. An MLN is a set of pairs of the
form (ϕ, w), with ϕ a FOL formula and w a real num-
ber called the weight of ϕ.
Together with a set of
constants, an MLN determines a probability distribu-
tion on the set of possible worlds. This distribution
is a log-linear model (Markov random ﬁeld): for every
grounding of every formula ϕ in the MLN, there is a
feature in the log-linear model and the weight of that
feature is equal to the weight of ϕ.
2.2
Logic Programming (LP)
Syntactically, a normal logic program, or brieﬂy logic
program (LP) is a set of rules.1 A rule is a universally
1Rules are also called normal clauses but we avoid this
terminology because we use ‘clause’ in the context of CNF.
quantiﬁed expression of the form h :- b1, ... , bn,
where h is an atom and the bi are literals. The atom
h is called the head of the rule and b1, . . . , bn the body,
representing the conjunction b1 ∧. . . ∧bn. A fact is
a rule that has true as its body and is written more
compactly as h.
Note that ‘:-’ can also be written
as ‘←’.
Hence, each rule can syntactically be seen
as a FOL formula.
There is a crucial diﬀerence in
semantics, however.
We use the well-founded semantics for LPs. In the case
of a negation-free LP (a ‘deﬁnite’ program), the well-
founded model is identical to the Least Herbrand Model
(LHM). The LHM is deﬁned as the least (‘smallest’)
of all models obtained when interpreting the LP as a
FOL theory. The least model is the model that is a
subset of all other models (in the sense that it makes
the fewest atoms true). Intuitively, the LHM is the
set of all ground atoms that are entailed by the LP.
For negation-free LPs, the LHM is guaranteed to exist
and be unique.
For LPs with negation, we use the
well-founded model, see [15].
The reason why one considers only the least model of
an LP is that LP semantics makes the closed world
assumption (CWA). Under the CWA, everything that
is not certainly true is assumed to be false. This has
implications on how to interpret rules. Given a ground
LP and an atom a, the set of all rules with a in the
head should be read as the deﬁnition of a: the atom a
is deﬁned to be true if and only if at least one of the
rule bodies is true (the ‘only if’ is due to the CWA).
2.3
Diﬀerences between FOL and LP
There is a crucial diﬀerence in semantics between LP
and FOL: LP makes the CWA while FOL does not.
For example, the FOL theory {a ←b} has 3 models
{¬a, ¬b}, {a, ¬b} and {a, b}. The syntactically equiva-
lent LP {a :- b} has only one model, namely the least
Herbrand model {¬a, ¬b} (intuitively, a and b are false
because there is no rule that makes b true, and hence
there is no applicable rule that makes a true either).
Because LP is syntactically a subset of FOL, it is
tempting to believe that FOL is more ‘expressive’ than
LP. This is wrong because of the diﬀerence in seman-
tics.
In the knowledge representation literature, it
has been shown that certain concepts that can be ex-
pressed in (non-ground) LP cannot be expressed in
(non-ground) FOL, for instance inductive deﬁnitions
[5]. This motivates our interest in LP and PLP.
3
Probabilistic Logic Programming
Most probabilistic programming languages, including
PRISM [3], ICL [3], ProbLog [4] and LPAD [11], are

based on Sato’s distribution semantics [3]. In this pa-
per we use ProbLog as it is the simplest of these lan-
guages. However, our approach can easily be used for
the other languages as well.
Syntax. A ProbLog program consists of a set of prob-
abilistic facts and a logic program, i.e. a set of rules.
A probabilistic fact, written p::f, is a fact f anno-
tated with a probability p. An atom that uniﬁes with
a probabilistic fact is called a probabilistic atom, while
an atom that uniﬁes with the head of some rule is
called a derived atom. The set of probabilistic atoms
must be disjoint from the set of derived atoms. Be-
low we use as an example a ProbLog program with
probabilistic facts 0.3::rain and 0.2::sprinkler
and rules wet :- rain and wet :- sprinkler. In-
tuitively, this program states that it rains with prob-
ability 0.3, the sprinkler is on with probability 0.2,
and the grass is wet if and only if it rains or the
sprinkler is on.
Compared to PLP languages like
PRISM and ICL, ProbLog is less restricted with re-
spect to the rules that are allowed in a program.
PRISM and ICL require the rules to be acyclic (or
contingently acyclic) [3]. In addition, PRISM requires
rules with uniﬁable heads to have mutually exclu-
sive bodies (such that at most one of these bodies is
true at once; this is the mutual exclusiveness assump-
tion). ProbLog does not have these restrictions, for
instance, we can have cyclic programs with rules such
as smokes(X) :- friends(X,Y), smokes(Y). This
type of cyclic rules are often needed for tasks such
as collective classiﬁcation or social network analysis.
Semantics.
A ProbLog program speciﬁes a proba-
bility distribution over possible worlds. To deﬁne this
distribution, it is easiest to consider the grounding of
the program with respect to the Herbrand base. Each
ground probabilistic fact p::f gives an atomic choice,
i.e. we can choose to include f as a fact (with prob-
ability p) or discard it (with probability 1 −p).
A
total choice is obtained by making an atomic choice
for each ground probabilistic fact.
To be precise, a
total choice is any subset of the set of all ground prob-
abilistic atoms. Hence, if there are n ground proba-
bilistic atoms then there are 2n total choices. More-
over, we have a probability distribution over these to-
tal choices: the probability of a total choice is deﬁned
to be the product of the probabilities of the atomic
choices that it is composed of (atomic choices are
seen as independent events). In our above example,
there are 4 total choices: {}, {rain}, {sprinkler}, and
{rain, sprinkler}. The probability of the total choice
{rain}, for instance, is 0.3 × (1 −0.2).
Given a particular total choice C, we obtain a logic
program C ∪R, where R denotes the rules in the
ProbLog program. This logic program has exactly one
well-founded model2 WFM(C ∪R). We call a given
world ω a model of the ProbLog program if there in-
deed exists a total choice C such that WFM(C ∪R) =
ω. We use MOD(L) to denote the set of all models of a
ProbLog program L. In our example, the total choice
{rain} yields the logic program {rain, wet :- rain,
wet :- sprinkler}.
The WFM of this program is
the world {rain, ¬sprinkler, wet}. Hence this world is
a model. There are three more models corresponding
to each of the three other total choices. An example
of a world that is not a model of the ProbLog program
is {rain, ¬sprinkler, ¬wet} (it is impossible that wet
is false while rain is true).
Everything is now in place to deﬁne the distribution
over possible worlds: the probability of a world that is
a model of the ProbLog program is equal to the prob-
ability of its total choice; the probability of a world
that is not a model is 0. For example, the probability
of the world {rain, ¬sprinkler, wet} is 0.3 × (1 −0.2),
while the probability of {rain, ¬sprinkler, ¬wet} is 0.
4
Inference Tasks
Let At be the set of all ground (probabilistic and de-
rived) atoms in a given ProbLog program. We assume
that we are given a set E ⊂At of observed atoms (evi-
dence atoms), and a vector e with their observed truth
values (i.e. the evidence is E = e). We are also given
a set Q ⊂At of atoms of interest (query atoms). The
two inference tasks that we consider are MARG and
MAP. MARG is the task of computing the marginal
distribution of every query atom given the evidence,
i.e. computing P(Q | E = e) for each Q ∈Q. MAP
(maximum a posteriori) is the task of ﬁnding the most
likely joint state of all query atoms given the evidence,
i.e. ﬁnding argmaxqP(Q = q | E = e).
Existing work.
In the literature on probabilistic
graphical models and statistical relational learning,
MARG and MAP have received a lot of attention,
while in PLP the focus has been on the special case of
MARG where there is a single query atom (Q = {Q})
and no evidence (E = ∅). This task is often referred
to as computing the success probability of Q [4]. The
only works related to the more general MARG or MAP
task in the PLP literature [3, 11, 8] make a number of
restrictive assumptions about the given program such
as acyclicity [8] and the mutual exclusiveness assump-
tion (for PRISM [3]). There also exist approaches that
transform ground probabilistic programs to Bayesian
networks and then use standard Bayesian network in-
ference procedures [11]. However, these are also re-
2Some LPs have a three-valued WFM (atoms are true,
false or unknown), but we consider only ProbLog programs
for which all LPs are two-valued (no unknowns) [15].

stricted to being acyclic and in addition they work
only for already grounded programs.
Our approach
does not suﬀer from such restrictions and is applicable
to all ProbLog programs. It consists of two steps: 1)
conversion of the program to a weighted CNF and 2)
inference on the resulting weighted CNF. We discuss
these two steps in the next sections.
5
Conversion to Weighted CNF
The following algorithm outlines how we convert a
ProbLog program L together with a query Q and ev-
idence E = e to a weighted CNF:
1. Ground L yielding a program Lg while taking
into account Q and E = e (cf. Theorem 1, Sec-
tion 5.1).
It is unnecessary to consider the full grounding of
the program, we only need the part that is rele-
vant to the query given the evidence, that is, the
part that captures the distribution P(Q | E = e).
We refer to the resulting program Lg as the rel-
evant ground program with respect to Q and
E = e.
2. Convert the ground rules in Lg to an equivalent
CNF ϕr (cf. Lemma 1, Section 5.2).
This step takes into account the logic program-
ming semantics of the rules in order to generate
an equivalent CNF formula.
3. Deﬁne a weight function for all atoms in ϕ = ϕr∧
ϕe (cf. Theorem 2, Section 5.3).
To obtain the weighted CNF, we ﬁrst condition
on the evidence by deﬁning the CNF ϕ as the
conjunction of the CNF ϕr for the rules and the
evidence ϕe. Then we deﬁne the weight function
for ϕ.
The correctness of the algorithm is shown below; this
relies on the indicated theorems and lemma’s. Before
describing each of the steps in detail in the following
subsections, we illustrate the algorithm on our sim-
ple example ProbLog program, with probabilistic facts
0.3::r and 0.2::s and rules w :- r and w :- s (we
abbreviate rain to r, etc.). Suppose that the query set
Q is {r, s} and the evidence is that w is false. Step
1 ﬁnds the relevant ground program. Since the pro-
gram is already ground and all parts are relevant here,
this is simply the program itself. Step 2 converts the
rules in the relevant ground program to an equivalent
CNF. The resulting CNF ϕr contains the following
three clauses (see Section 5.2): ¬r ∨w, ¬s ∨w, and
¬w∨s∨r. Step 3 conditions ϕr on the evidence. Since
we have only one evidence atom in our example (w is
false), all we need to do is to add the unit clause ¬w to
the CNF ϕr. The resulting CNF ϕ is ϕr ∧¬w. Step 3
also deﬁnes the weight function, which assigns a weight
(∈[0, 1]) to each literal in ϕ; see Section 5.3. This re-
sults in the weighted CNF, that is, the combination of
the weight function and the CNF ϕ.
5.1
The Relevant Ground Program
In order to convert the ProbLog program to CNF we
ﬁrst need to ground it.3
We try to ﬁnd the part of
the grounding that is relevant to the queries Q and
the evidence E = e. To do so, we make use of the
concept of a dependency set with respect to a ProbLog
program [8].
The dependency set of a ground atom a is the set of
ground atoms that occur in a proof of a. The depen-
dency set of multiple atoms is the union of their de-
pendency sets. We call a ground atom relevant with
respect to Q and E if it occurs in the dependency set
of Q ∪E. Similarly, we call a ground rule relevant if
it contains relevant ground atoms. It is safe to restrict
the grounding to the relevant rules only [8]. To ﬁnd
these rules we apply SLD resolution to prove all atoms
in Q ∪E (this can be seen as backchaining over the
rules starting from Q ∪E). We employ memoization
to avoid proving the same atom twice (and to avoid
going into an inﬁnite loop if the rules are cyclic). The
relevant rules are simply all ground rules encountered
during the resolution process.
The above grounding algorithm does not make use of
all the information about the evidence E = e. Con-
cretely, it makes use of which atoms are in the evidence
(E) but not of what their value is (e). We can make
use of this as well. Call a ground rule inactive if the
body of the rule contains a literal l that is false in the
evidence (l can be an atom that is false in e, or the
negation of an atom that is true in e). Inactive rules do
not contribute to the semantics of a program. Hence
they can be omitted. In practice, we do this simulta-
neously with the above process: we omit inactive rules
encountered during the SLD resolution.
The result of this grounding algorithm is what we call
the relevant ground program Lg for L with respect to Q
and E = e. It contains all the information necessary
for solving MARG or MAP about Q given E = e.
The advantage of this ‘focussed’ approach is that the
weighted CNF becomes more compact, which makes
subsequent inference more eﬃcient. The disadvantage
is that we need to redo the conversion to weighted
CNF when the evidence and queries change. This is
3In Section 2.3 we stated that some non-ground LPs
cannot be expressed in non-ground FOL. In contrast, each
ground LP can be converted to an equivalent ground FOL
formula or CNF [9].

no problem since the conversion is fast compared to
the actual inference (see Section 7).
Theorem 1 Let L be a ProbLog program and let Lg
be the relevant ground program for L with respect to
Q and E = e. L and Lg specify the same distribution
P(Q | E = e).
The proofs of all theorems can be found in a technical
report [6].
5.2
The CNF for the Ground Program
We now discuss how to convert the rules in Lg to an
equivalent CNF ϕr. For this conversion, the following
lemma holds; it will be used in the next section.
Lemma 1 Let Lg be a ground ProbLog program. Let
ϕr denote the CNF derived from the rules in Lg. Then
SAT(ϕr) = MOD(Lg).4
Recall that MOD(Lg) denotes the set of models of a
ProbLog program Lg (Section 3). On the CNF side,
SAT(ϕr) denote the set of models of a CNF ϕr.
Converting a set of logic programming (LP) rules to an
equivalent CNF is a purely logical (non-probabilistic)
problem and has been well studied in the LP literature
(e.g. [9]). Since the problem is of a highly technical
nature, we are unable to repeat the full details in the
present paper, but shall refer to the literature for more
details. Note that converting LP rules to CNF is not
simply a syntactical matter of rewriting the rules in
the appropriate form. The point is that the rules and
the CNF are to be interpreted according to a diﬀerent
semantics (LP versus FOL, recall Section 2). Hence
the conversion should compensate for this: the rules
under LP semantics (with Closed World Assumption)
should be equivalent to the CNF under FOL semantics
(without CWA).
For acyclic rules, the conversion is straightforward,
we simply take Clark’s completion of the rules [9, 8].
For instance, consider the rules w :- r and w :- s.
Clark’s completion of these rules is the FOL formula
w ↔r ∨s. Once we have the FOL formula, obtaining
the CNF is simply a rewriting issue. For our example,
we obtain a CNF with three clauses: ¬r ∨w, ¬s ∨w,
and ¬w ∨s ∨r (the last clause reﬂects the CWA).5
For cyclic rules, the conversion is more complicated.
This holds in particular for rules with ‘positive’
4The conversion from rules to CNF ϕr sometimes intro-
duces additional atoms. We can safely omit these atoms
from the models in SAT(ϕr) because their truth value is
uniquely deﬁned by the truth values of the original atoms
(w.r.t. the original atoms: SAT(ϕr) = MOD(Lg)).
5For ProbLog programs encoding Boolean Bayesian net-
works the resulting CNF equals that of Sang et al. [14].
loops (atoms depend positively on each other, e.g.
smokes(X) :- friends(X,Y), smokes(Y)). It is well
known that for such rules Clark’s completion is not
correct, i.e. the resulting CNF is not equivalent to the
rules [9]. A range of more sophisticated conversion al-
gorithms have been developed. We use two such algo-
rithms. Given a set of rules, both algorithms derive an
equivalent CNF (that satisﬁes Lemma 1). The CNFs
generated by the two algorithms might be syntacti-
cally diﬀerent because the algorithms introduce a set
of auxiliary atoms in the CNF and these sets might
diﬀer. For both algorithms, the size of the CNF typi-
cally increases with the ‘loopyness’ of the given rules.
We now brieﬂy discuss both algorithms.
Rule-based conversion to CNF. The ﬁrst algo-
rithm [9] belongs to the ﬁeld of Answer Set Program-
ming. It ﬁrst rewrites the given rules into an equiv-
alent set of rules without positive loops (all resulting
loops involve negation). This requires the introduc-
tion of auxiliary atoms and rules. Since the resulting
rules are free of positive loops, they can be converted
by simply taking Clark’s completion. The result can
then be written as a CNF.
Proof-based conversion to CNF. The second algo-
rithm [10] is proof-based. It ﬁrst constructs all proofs
of all atoms of interest, in our case all atoms in Q∪E,
using tabled SLD resolution. The proofs are collected
in a recursive structure (a set of ‘nested tries’ [10]),
which will have loops if the given rules had loops. The
algorithm then operates on this structure in order to
‘break’ the loops and obtain an equivalent Boolean for-
mula. This formula can then be written as a CNF.
5.3
The Weighted CNF
The ﬁnal step constructs the weighted CNF from the
CNF ϕr. First, the CNF ϕ is deﬁned as the conjunc-
tion of ϕr and a CNF ϕe capturing the evidence E = e.
Here ϕe is a conjunction of unit clauses (there is a unit
clause a for each true atom and a clause ¬a for each
false atom in the evidence).
Second, we deﬁne the
weight function for all literals in the resulting CNF.
If the ProbLog program contains a probabilistic fact
p::f, then we assign weight p to f and weight 1−p to
¬f. Derived literals (literals not occuring in a proba-
bilistic fact) get weight 1. In our example, we had two
probabilistic facts 0.3::r and 0.2::s, and one de-
rived atom w. The weight function is {r 7→0.3, ¬r 7→
0.7, s 7→0.2, ¬s 7→0.8, w 7→1, ¬w 7→1}. The weight
of a world ω, denoted w(ω), is deﬁned to be the prod-
uct of the weight of all literals in ω. For example, the
world {r, ¬s, w} has weight 0.3 × 0.8 × 1.
We have now seen how to construct the entire weighted
CNF from the relevant ground program. The following

theorem states that this weighted CNF is equivalent -
in some sense - to the relevant ground program. We
will make use of this result when performing inference
on the weighted CNF.
Theorem 2 Let Lg
be the relevant ground pro-
gram for some ProbLog program with respect to Q
and E = e.
Let MODE=e(Lg) be those models in
MOD(Lg) that are consistent with the evidence E = e.
Let ϕ denote the CNF and w(.) the weight function of
the weighted CNF derived from Lg. Then:
(model equivalence) SAT(ϕ) = MODE=e(Lg),
(weight equivalence) ∀ω
∈
SAT(ϕ):
w(ω)
=
PLg(ω), i.e. the weight of ω according to w(.) is equal
to the probability of ω according to Lg.
Note the relationship with Lemma 1: while Lemma 1
applies to the CNF ϕr prior to conditioning on the
evidence, Theorem 2 applies to the CNF ϕ after con-
ditioning.
The weighted CNF can also be regarded as a ground
Markov Logic Network (MLN). The MLN contains all
clauses that are in the CNF (as ‘hard’ clauses) and
also contains two weighted unit clauses per probabilis-
tic atom. For example, for a probabilistic atom r and
weight function {r 7→0.3, ¬r 7→0.7}, the MLN con-
tains a unit clause r with weight ln(0.3) and a unit
clause ¬r with weight ln(0.7).6 We have the following
equivalence result.
Theorem 3 Let Lg be the relevant ground program
for some ProbLog program with respect to Q and E =
e. Let M be the corresponding ground MLN. The dis-
tribution P(Q) according to M is the same as the dis-
tribution P(Q | E = e) according to Lg.
Note that for the MLN we consider the distribution
P(Q) (not conditioned on the evidence). This is be-
cause the evidence is already hard-coded in the MLN.
6
Inference on Weighted CNFs
To solve the MARG and MAP inference tasks for the
original probabilistic logic program L, the query Q and
evidence E = e, we have converted the program to a
weighted CNF. A key advantage is that the original
MARG and MAP inference tasks can now be reformu-
lated in terms of well-known tasks such as weighted
model counting on the weighted CNF. This implies
6A ‘hard’ clause has weight inﬁnity (each world that
violates the clause has probability zero). The logarithms,
e.g. ln(0.3), are needed because an MLN is a log-linear
model. The logarithms are negative, but any MLN with
negative weights can be rewritten into an equivalent MLN
with only positive weights [3].
that we can use any of the existing state-of-the-art al-
gorithms for solving these tasks. In other words, by
the conversion of ProbLog to weighted CNF, we “get
the inference algorithms for free”.
6.1
MARG Inference
Let us ﬁrst discuss how to tackle MARG, the task of
computing the marginal P(Q | E = e) for each query
atom Q ∈Q, and its special case ‘MARG-1’ where Q
consists of a single query atom (Q = {Q}).
1) Exact/approximate MARG-1 by means of
weighted model counting. By deﬁnition, P(Q =
q | E = e) = P(Q = q, E = e)/P(E = e).
The
denominator is equal to the weighted model count of
the weighted CNF ϕ, namely P
ω∈SAT (ϕ) w(ω).7 Sim-
ilarly, the numerator is the weighted model count of
the weighted CNF ϕq obtained by conjoining the orig-
inal weighted CNF ϕ with the appropriate unit clause
for Q (namely Q if q = true and ¬Q if q = false).
Hence each marginal can be computed by solving two
weighted model counting (WMC) instances. WMC is
a well-studied task in the SAT community.
Solving
these WMC instances can be done using any of the
existing algorithms (exact [1] or approximate [7]).
It is well-known that MARG inference with Bayesian
networks can be solved using WMC [14]. This paper is
the ﬁrst to point out that this also holds for inference
with probabilistic logic programs.
The experiments
below show that this approach improves upon state-
of-the-art methods in probabilistic logic programming.
2) Exact MARG by means of compilation. To
solve the general MARG task with multiple query
atoms, one could simply solve each of the MARG-
1 tasks separately using WMC as above.
However,
this would lead to many redundant computations. A
popular solution to avoid this is to ﬁrst compile the
weighted CNF into a more eﬃcient representation [2].
Concretely, we can compile the CNF to d-DNNF
(deterministic Decomposable Negation Normal Form
[1]) and then compute all required marginals from the
(weighted) d-DNNF. The latter can be done eﬃciently
for all marginals in parallel, namely by traversing the
d-DNNF twice [2].8
In the probabilistic logic programming (PLP) commu-
7This is because P(E = e) = P
ω∈MODE=e(L) PL(ω) =
P
ω∈SAT (ϕ) w(ω), where the second equality follows from
Theorem 2 (model equivalence implies that the sets of over
which the sums range are equal; weight equivalence implies
that the summed terms are equal).
8In the literature one typically converts the weighted
d-DNNF to an arithmetic circuit (AC) and then traverses
this AC. This is equivalent to our approach (the conversion
to AC is not strictly necessary, we sidestep it).

nity, the state-of-the-art is to compile the program into
another form, namely a BDD (reduced ordered Bi-
nary Decision Diagram) [4]. The BDD approach has
recently also been used for MARG inference (to com-
pute all marginals, the BDD is then traversed in a
way that is very similar to that for d-DNNFs [8]).
BDDs form a subclass of d-DNNFs [1]. So far, general
d-DNNFs have not been considered in the PLP com-
munity, despite the theoretical and empirical evidence
that compilation to d-DNNF outperforms compilation
to BDD in the context of model counting [1]. Our ex-
perimental results (Section 7) conﬁrm the superiority
of d-DNNFs.
3) Approximate MARG by means of MCMC.
We can also use sampling (MCMC) on the weighted
CNF. Because the CNF itself is deterministic, stan-
dard MCMC approaches like Gibbs sampling are not
suited. We use the MC-SAT algorithm that was de-
veloped speciﬁcally to deal with determinism (in each
step of the Markov chain, MC-SAT makes use of a SAT
solver to construct a new sample) [13]. MC-SAT was
developed for MLNs. Theorem 3 ensures that MCMC
on the appropriate MLN samples from the correct dis-
tribution P(Q | E = e).
6.2
MAP Inference
Also MAP inference on weighted CNFs has been stud-
ied before. We consider the following algorithms.
1) Exact MAP by means of compilation. We can
compile the weighted CNF to a weighted d-DNNF and
then use this d-DNNF to ﬁnd the MAP solution, see
Darwiche [2]. The compilation phase is in fact inde-
pendent of the speciﬁc task (MARG or MAP), only the
traversal diﬀers. Compilation to BDD is also possible.
2)
Approximate
MAP/MPE
by
means
of
stochastic local search.
MPE is the special case
of MAP where one wants to ﬁnd the state of all non-
evidence atoms. MPE inference on a weighted CNF
reduces to the weighted MAX SAT problem [12], a
standard problem in the SAT literature. A popular
approximate approach is stochastic local search [12].
An example algorithm is MaxWalkSAT, which is also
the standard MPE algorithm for MLNs [3].
7
Experiments
Our implementation currently supports (1) exact
MARG by compilation to either d-DNNF or BDD, (2)
approximate MARG with MC-SAT, (3) approximate
MAP/MPE with MaxWalkSAT. Other algorithms for
inference on the weighted CNF could be applied as
well, so the above list is not exhaustive.
The goal of our experiments is to establish the feasi-
bility of our approach and to analyze the inﬂuence of
the diﬀerent parameters. We focus on MARG infer-
ence (for MAP/MPE, our current implementation is a
proof-of-concept).
7.1
Experimental Setup
Domains.
As
a
social
network
domain
we
use
the
standard
‘Smokers’
domain
[3].
The
main
rule
in
the
ProbLog
program
is
smokes(X) :- friend(X,Y), smokes(Y), inf(Y,X).
There is also a probabilistic fact p::inf(X,Y), which
states that Y inﬂuences X with probability p (for each
ground (X, Y ) pair there is an independent atomic
choice).
This means that each smoking friend Y of
X independently causes X to smoke with probability
p.
Other rules state that people smoke for other
reasons as well, that smoking causes cancer, etc. All
probabilities in the program were set manually.
We also use the WebKB dataset, a collective classiﬁca-
tion domain (http://www.cs.cmu.edu/∼webkb/). In
WebKB, university webpages are to be tagged with
classes (e.g. ‘course page’). This is modelled with a
predicate hasclass(P, Class). The rules specify how
the class of a page P depends on the textual content
of P, and on the classes of pages that link to P. All
probabilities were learned from data [8].
Inference tasks. We vary the domain size (number
of people/pages). For each size we use 8 diﬀerent in-
stances of the MARG task and report median results.
We generate each instance in 3 steps. (1) We gener-
ate the network. For WebKB we select a random set of
pages and use the link structure given in the data. For
Smokers we use power law random graphs since they
are known to resemble social networks. (2) We select
query and evidence atoms (Q and E). For WebKB we
use half of all hasclass atoms as query and the other
half as evidence. For Smokers we do the same with all
friends and cancer atoms. (3) We generate a sam-
ple of the ProbLog program to determine the value e
of the evidence atoms. For every query atom we also
sample a truth value; we store these values and use
them later as ‘query ground truth’ (see Section 7.3).
7.2
Inﬂuence of the Grounding Algorithm
We compare computing the relevant ground program
(RGP) with naively doing the complete grounding.
Grounding. The idea behind the RGP is to reduce
the grounding by pruning clauses that are irrelevant
or inactive w.r.t. the queries and evidence. Our setup
is such that all clauses are relevant. Hence, the only
reduction comes from pruning inactive clauses (that

 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
runtime (s) conversion to CNF
number of people
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
(a) runtime of conversion to CNF
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
CNF size
number of people
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
(b) CNF size (number of clauses)
 1
 10
 100
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
runtime (s) exact inference
number of people
d-DNNF / proof-based
BDD / proof-based
d-DNNF / rule-based
BDD / rule-based
(c) runtime of exact inference (compilation+traversal)
 0.45
 0.5
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
norm. neg. loglikelihood MC-SAT
number of people
proof-based
rule-based
(d) normalized negative log-likelihood (lower is better)
Figure 1: Results for Smokers in function of domain size. (When the curve for an algorithm ends at a particular
domain size, this means that the algorithm is intractable beyond that size.)
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
runtime (s) conversion to CNF
number of pages
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
(a) runtime of conversion to CNF
 1000
 10000
 100000
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
CNF size
number of pages
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
(b) CNF size (number of clauses)
 1
 10
 100
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
runtime (s) exact inference
number of pages
d-DNNF / proof-based
BDD / proof-based
d-DNNF / rule-based
(c) runtime of exact inference (compilation+traversal)
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 1e+07
 1e+08
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
number of samples MC-SAT
number of pages
proof-based
rule-based
(d) number of samples drawn by MC-SAT
Figure 2: Results for WebKB in function of domain size.

have a false evidence literal in the body). The eﬀect of
this pruning is small: on average the size of the ground
program is reduced by 17% (results not shown).
Implications on the conversion to CNF. The
proof-based conversion becomes intractable for large
domain sizes, but the size where this happens is sig-
niﬁcantly larger when working on the RGP instead of
on the complete grounding (see Fig. 1a/2a). Also the
size of the CNFs is reduced signiﬁcantly by using the
RGP (up to a 90% reduction, Fig. 1b/2b). The reason
why a 17% reduction of the program can yield a 90%
reduction of the CNF is that loops in the program
cause a ‘blow-up’ of the CNF. Removing only a few
rules in the ground program can already break loops
and make the CNF signiﬁcantly smaller. Note that the
proof-based conversion suﬀers from this blow-up more
than the rule-based conversion does.
Computing the grounding is always very fast, both for
the RGP and the complete grounding (milliseconds on
Smokers; around 1s for WebKB). We conclude that
using the RGP instead of the complete grounding is
beneﬁcial and comes at almost no computational cost.
Hence, from now on we always use the RGP.
7.3
Inﬂuence of the Conversion Algorithm
We compare the rule-based and proof-based algorithm
for converting ground rules to CNF (Section 5.2).
Conversion. The proof-based algorithm, by its na-
ture, does more eﬀort to convert the program into a
compact CNF. This has implication on the scalabil-
ity of the algorithm: on small domains the algorithm
is fast, but on larger domains it becomes intractable
(Fig. 1a/2a). In contrast, the rule-based algorithm is
able to deal with all considered domain sizes and is al-
ways fast (runtime at most 0.5s). A similar trend holds
in terms of CNF size. For small domains, the proof-
based algorithm generates the smallest CNFs, but for
larger domains the opposite holds (Fig. 1b/2b).
Implications on inference. We discuss the inﬂuence
of the conversion algorithm on exact inference in the
next section. Here we focus on approximate inference.
We use MC-SAT as a tool to evaluate how eﬃcient
the diﬀerent CNFs are for inference. Concretely, we
run MC-SAT on the two types of CNFs and measure
the quality of the estimated marginals. Evaluating the
quality of approximate marginals is non-trivial when
computing true marginals is intractable. We use the
same solution as the original MC-SAT paper: we let
MC-SAT run for a ﬁxed time (10 minutes) and mea-
sure the quality of the estimated marginals as the like-
lihood of the ‘query ground truth’ according to these
estimates (see [13] for the motivation).
On domain sizes where the proof-based algorithm is
still tractable, inference results are better with the
proof-based CNFs than with the rule-based CNFs
(Fig. 1d). This is because the proof-based CNFs are
more compact and hence more samples can be drawn
in the given time (Fig. 2d).
We conclude that for smaller domains the proof-based
algorithm is preferable because of the smaller CNFs.
On larger domains, the rule-based algorithm should be
used.
7.4
Inﬂuence of the Inference Algorithm
We focus on the comparison of the two exact infer-
ence algorithms, namely compilation to d-DNNFs or
BDDs. We make the distinction between inference on
rule-based and proof-based CNFs (in the PLP liter-
ature, BDDs have almost exclusively been used for
proof-based CNFs [4, 8]).9
Proof-based CNFs. On the Smokers domain, BDDs
perform relatively well, but they are nevertheless
clearly outperformed by the d-DNNFs (Fig. 1c). On
WebKB, the diﬀerence is even larger: BDDs are only
tractable on domains of size 3 or 4, while d-DNNFs
reach up to size 18 (Fig. 2c).
When BDDs become
intractable, this is mostly due to memory problems.10
Rule-based CNFs. These CNFs are less compact
than the proof-based CNFs (at least for those domain
sizes where exact inference is feasible).
The results
clearly show that the d-DNNFs are much better at
dealing with these CNFs than the BDDs are. Con-
cretely, the d-DNNFs are still tractable up to reason-
able sizes. In contrast, using BDDs on these rule-based
CNFs is nearly impossible: on Smokers the BDDs only
solve size 3 and 4, on WebKB they even do not solve
any of the inference tasks on rule-based CNFs.
We conclude that the use of d-DNNFs pushes the limit
of exact MARG inference signiﬁcantly further as com-
pared to BDDs, which are the state-of-the-art in PLP.
8
Conclusion
This paper contributes a two-step procedure for MAP
and MARG inference in general probabilistic logic
9Compiling our proof-based CNFs to BDDs yields ex-
actly the same BDDs as used by Gutmann et al. [8]. In
the special case of a single query and no evidence, this also
equals the BDDs used by De Raedt et al. [4].
10It might be surprising that BDDs, which are the state-
of-the-art in PLP, do not perform better. However, one
should keep in mind that we are using BDDs for exact
inference here.
BDDs are also used for approximate in-
ference, one simply compiles an approximate CNF into a
BDD [4]. The same can be done with d-DNNFs, and we
again expect improvement over BDDs.

programs. The ﬁrst step generates a weighted CNF
that captures all relevant information about a speciﬁc
query, evidence and probabilistic logic program. This
step relies on well-known conversion techniques from
logic programming. The second step then invokes well-
known solvers (for instance for WMC and weighted
MAX SAT) on the generated weighted CNF.
Our two-step approach is akin to that employed in
the Bayesian network community where many infer-
ence problems are also cast in terms of weighted CNFs
[2, 12, 14].
We do the same for probabilistic logic
programs, which are much more expressive (as they
extend a programming language and do not need to
be acyclic). This conversion-based approach is advan-
tageous because it allows us to employ a wide range
of well-known and optimized solvers on the weighted
CNFs, essentially giving us “inference algorithms for
free”. Furthermore, the approach also improves upon
the state-of-the-art in probabilistic logic programming,
where one has typically focussed on inference with a
single query atom and no evidence (cf. Section 4), of-
ten by using BDDs.
By using d-DNNFs instead of
BDDs, we obtained speed-ups that push the limit of
exact MARG inference signiﬁcantly further.
Our approach also provides new insights into the rela-
tionships between PLP and other frameworks. As one
immediate outcome, we pointed out a conversion of
probabilistic logic programs to ground Markov Logic,
which allowed us to apply MC-SAT to PLP inference.
This contributes to further bridging the gap between
PLP and the ﬁeld of statistical relational learning.
