Hedera: Scalable Indexing and Exploring
Entities in Wikipedia Revision History
Tuan Tran and Tu Ngoc Nguyen
L3S Research Center / Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany

Abstract. Much of work in semantic web relying on Wikipedia as the
main source of knowledge often work on static snapshots of the dataset.
The full history of Wikipedia revisions, while contains much more useful
information, is still diﬃcult to access due to its exceptional volume. To
enable further research on this collection, we developed a tool, named
Hedera, that eﬃciently extracts semantic information from Wikipedia re-
vision history datasets. Hedera exploits Map-Reduce paradigm to achieve
rapid extraction, it is able to handle one entire Wikipedia articles’ revi-
sion history within a day in a medium-scale cluster, and supports ﬂexible
data structures for various kinds of semantic web study.
1
Introduction
For over decades, Wikipedia has become a backbone of sematic Web research,
with the proliferation of high-quality big knowledge bases (KBs) such as DB-
pedia [1], where information is derived from various Wikipedia public collec-
tions. Existing approaches often rely on one oﬄine snapshot of datasets, they
treat knowledge as static and ignore the temporal evolution of information in
Wikipedia. When for instance a fact changes (e.g. death of a celebrity) or en-
tities themselves evolve, they can only be reﬂected in the next version of the
knowledge bases (typically extracted fresh from a newer Wikipedia dump). This
undesirable quality of KBs make them unable to capture temporally dynamical
relationship latent among revisions of the encyclopedia (e.g., participate together
in complex events), which are diﬃcult to detect in one single Wikipedia snap-
shot. Furthermore, applications relying on obsolete facts might fail to reason
under new contexts (e.g. question answering systems for recent real-world inci-
dents), because they were not captured in the KBs. In order to complement these
temporal aspects, the whole Wikipedia revision history should be well-exploited.
However, such longitudinal analytics over ernoumous size of Wikipedia require
huge computation. In this work, we develop Hedera, a large-scale framework that
supports processing, indexing and visualising Wikipedia revision history. Hedera
is an end-to-end system that works directly with the raw dataset, processes them
to streaming data, and incrementally indexes and visualizes the information of
entities registered in the KBs in a dynamic fashion. In contrast to existing work
that handle the dataset in centralized settings [2], Hedera employs the Map-
Reduce paradigm to achieve the scalable performance, which is able to transfer
raw data of 2.5 year revision history of 1 million entities into full-text index
arXiv:1701.03937v1  [cs.AI]  14 Jan 2017

2
Tuan Tran and Tu Ngoc Nguyen
within a few hours in an 8-node cluster. We open-sourced Hedera to facilitate
further research 1.
2
Extracting and Indexing Entities
2.1
Preprocessing Dataset
Here we describe the Hedera architecture and workﬂow. As shown in Figure 1,
the core data input of Hedera is a Wikipedia Revision history dump 2. Hedera
currently works with the raw XML dumps, it supports accessing and extracting
information directly from compressed ﬁles. Hedera makes use heavily the Hadoop
framework. The preprocessor is responsible for re-partitioning the raw ﬁles into
independent units (a.k.a InputSplit in Hadoop) depending on users’ need. There
are two levels of partitioning: Entity-wise and Document-wise. Entity-wise par-
titioning guarantees that revisions belonging to the same entity are sent to one
computing node, while document-wise sends content of revisions arbitrarily to
any node, and keeps track in each revision the reference to its preceding ones
for future usage in the Map-Reduce level. The preprocessor accepts user-deﬁned
low-level ﬁlters (for instance, only partition articles, or revisions within 2011 and
2012), as well as list of entity identiﬁers from a knowledge base to limit to. If
ﬁltered by the knowledge base, users must provide methods to verify one revi-
sion against the map of entities (for instance, using Wikipedia-derived URL of
entities). The results are Hadoop ﬁle splits, in the XML or JSON formats.
Wikipedia 
Revisions 
History Dump 
Wikipedia-derived 
Ontologies (optional) 
Preprocessor 
User-defined 
Filters 
Input split 
Transformer 
Transformer 
Transformer 
…
Entity 
snippet 
Entity 
snippet 
Extraction 
Hadoop job 
Pig work flow 
 
   Extension 
Batch Indexing 
Temporal 
Information  
Extraction  
Longitudinal 
Analytics 
…
Fig. 1. Hedera Framework Architecture
2.2
Extracting Information
Before extracted in the Map-Reduce phase (Extraction component in Figure 1),
ﬁle splits outputed from the preprocessor are streamed into a Transformer. The
main goal of the transformer is to consume the ﬁles and emits (key,value) pairs
suitable for inputting into one Map function. Hedera provides several classes of
transformer, each of which implements one operator speciﬁed in the extraction
1 Project
documentation
and
code
can
be
found
at:
https://github.com/
antoine-tran/Hedera
2 http://dumps.wikimedia.org

Hedera: Processing Tools for Wikipedia Revision
3
layer. Pushing down these operators into transformers reduces signiﬁcantly the
volume of text sent around the network. The extraction layer enables users to
write extraction logic in high-level programming languages such as Java or Pig 3,
which can be used in other applications. The extraction layer also accepts user-
deﬁned ﬁlters, allowing user to extract and index diﬀerent portions of the same
partitions at diﬀerent time. For instance, the user can choose to ﬁrst ﬁlter and
partition Wikipedia articles published in 2012; and later she can sample, from
one partition, the revisions about people published in May 2012. This ﬂexibility
facilitates rapid development of research-style prototypes in Wikipedia revision
dataset, which is one of our major contributions.
3
Indexing and Exploring Entity-based Evolutions in
Wikipedia
In this section, we illustrate the use of Hedera in one application - incremental
indexing and visualizing Wikipedia revision history. Indexing large-scale lon-
gitudinal data collections i.e., the Wikipedia history is not a straightforward
problem. Challenges in ﬁnding a scalable data structure and distributed storage
that can most exploit data along the time dimension are still not fully addressed.
In Hedera, we present a distributed approach in which the collection is processed
and thereafter the indexing is parallelized using the Map-Reduce paradigm. This
approach (that is based on the document-based data structure of ElasticSearch)
can be considered as a baseline for further optimizations. The index’s schema is
loosely structured, which allows ﬂexible update and incremental indexing of new
revisions (that is of necessity for the evolving Wikipedia history collection). Our
preliminary evaluation showed that this approach outperformed the well-known
centralized indexing method provided by [2]. The time processing (indexing) gap
is exponentially magniﬁed along with the increase of data volume. In addition,
we also evaluated the querying time (and experienced the similar result) of the
system. We describe how the temporal index facilitate large-scale analytics on
the semantic-ness of Wikipedia with some case studies. The detail of the exper-
iment is described below.
We extract 933,837 entities registered in DBpedia, each of which correspond
to one Wikipedia article. The time interval spans from 1 Jan 2011 to 13 July
2013, containing 26,067,419 revisions, amounting for 601 GBytes of text in un-
compressed format. The data is processed and re-partitioned using Hedera before
being passed out and indexed into ElasticSearch 4 (a distributed real-time index-
ing framework that supports data at large scale) using Map-Reduce. Figure 2
illustrates one toy example of analysing the temporal dynamics of entities in
Wikipedia. Here we aggregate the results for three distinct entity queries, i.e.,
obama, euro and olympic on the temporal anchor-text (a visible text on a hy-
perlink between two Wikipedia revision) index. The left-most table shows the
top terms appear in the returned results, whereas the two timeline graphs illus-
trate the dynamic evolvement of the entities over the studied time period (with
3 http://pig.apache.org
4 http://www.elasticsearch.org

4
Tuan Tran and Tu Ngoc Nguyen
Fig. 2. Exploring Entity Structure Dynamics Over Time
1-week and 1-day granuality, from left to right respectively). As easily observed,
the three entities peak at the time where a related event happens (Euro 2012 for
euro, US Presidential Election for obama and the Summer and Winter Olympics
for olympic). This further shows the value of temporal anchor text in mining
the Wikipedia entity dynamics. We analogously experimented on the Wikipedia
full-text index. Here we brought up a case study of the entity co-occurrance (or
temporal relationship) (i.e., between Usain Bolt and Mo Farah), where the two
co-peak in the time of Summer Olympics 2012, one big tournament where the
two atheletes together participated. These examples demonstrate the value of
our temporal Wikipedia indexes for temporal semantic research challenges.
4
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced Hedera, our ongoing work in supporting ﬂexible
and eﬃcient access to Wikipedia revision history dataset. Hedera can work di-
rectly with raw data in the low-level, it uses Map-Reduce to achieve the high-
performance computation. We open-source Hedera for future use in research
communities, and believe our system is the ﬁrst in public of this kind. Future
work includes deeper integration with knowledge bases, with more API and ser-
vices to access the extraction layer more ﬂexibly.
