UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
317 
Making Sensitivity Analysis Computationally Efficient 
Uffe Kj::erulff 
Department of Computer Science 
Aalborg University 
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7, DK-9220 Aalborg 
Denmark 

Abstract 
To investigate the robustness of the output 
probabilities of a Bayesian network, a sensi­
tivity analysis can be performed. A one-way 
sensitivity analysis establishes, for each of the 
probability parameters of a network, a func­
tion expressing a posterior marginal proba­
bility of interest in terms of the parameter. 
Current methods for computing the coeffi­
cients in such a function rely on a large num­
ber of network evaluations. In this paper, we 
present a method that requires just a single 
outward propagation in a junction tree for es­
tablishing the coefficients in the functions for 
all possible parameters; in addition, an in­
ward propagation is required for processing 
evidence. Conversely, the method requires 
a single outward propagation for computing 
the coefficients in the functions expressing all 
possible posterior marginals in terms of a sin­
gle parameter. We extend these results to an 
n-way sensitivity analysis in which sets of pa­
rameters are studied. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The robustness of the output probabilities of a 
Bayesian network can be investigated by performing 
a sensitivity analysis of the network. For mathemat­
ical models in general, sensitivity analysis serves to 
identify the effects of the inaccuracies in a model's pa­
rameters on its output (Morgan & Henrion 1990). For 
a Bayesian network, more specifically, performing a 
sensitivity analysis yields insight in the relation be­
tween the probability parameters of the network and 
its posterior marginals. The simplest type of sensi­
tivity analysis is a one-way analysis in which a single 
parameter is studied; a more general n-way analysis 
serves to investigate the joint effects of inaccuracies in 
Linda C. van der Gaag 
Department of Computer Science 
Utrecht University 
P.O. Box 80.089, 3508 TB Utrecht 
The Netherlands 

a set of parameters. 
In the brute-force approach to performing a one-way 
sensitivity analysis of a Bayesian network, each proba­
bility parameter of the network is varied systematically 
and the effect on the output probabilities of the net­
work is investigated. Performing a sensitivity analysis 
in this way requires thousands of network evaluations, 
or (full) propagations, and is, therefore, much too time 
consuming to be of any practical use. 
Laskey (1995) has been the first to address the compu­
tational complexity of sensitivity analysis of Bayesian 
networks. She has introduced a method for computing 
the partial derivative of a posterior marginal proba­
bility with respect to a parameter under study. Her 
method thus yields a first-order approximation of the 
effect of varying a single probability parameter on a 
posterior marginal. Compared to the brute-force ap­
proach, her method requires considerably less compu­
tational effort. The method, however, provides insight 
only in the effect of small variations of parameters; 
when larger variations are considered, the quality of 
the approximation may rapidly break down. 
The relation between a posterior marginal probability 
of interest and a parameter under study can be ex­
pressed through a simple mathematical function. The 
function expressing the posterior marginal is a quo­
tient of two linear functions in the parameter, as has 
been shown by Castillo et al. (1996). Building upon 
this property, it suffices to establish the coefficients 
in this function to determine the effect of parameter 
variation. Castillo et al. (1997) and Coupe & van der 
Gaag (1998) have designed methods to this end. These 
methods require a single network evaluation for each 
coefficient to be established. Although these methods 
currently are the most efficient available, they rely on 
a large number of network evaluations and, as a con­
sequence, are infeasible for large realistic networks. 
In this paper, we present a new method for sensitivity 
analysis of Bayesian networks. Our method, like the 

318 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
two methods mentioned above, exploits the property 
that a posterior marginal probability relates by a sim­
ple mathematical function to a parameter under study. 
It requires just a single outward propagation in a junc­
tion tree, however, to compute the coefficients in the 
functions for all possible parameters; in addition, it re­
quires an inward propagation for processing evidence. 
Conversely, the method requires a single outward prop­
agation for establishing the coefficients in the functions 
expressing all possible posterior marginals in terms of 
a single parameter. Our method can be readily ex­
tended to an n-way sensitivity analysis in which sets 
of parameters are varied. 
In addition to a sensitivity analysis, an uncertainty 
analysis can be performed for investigating the robust­
ness of the output probabilities of a Bayesian network. 
In an uncertainty analysis, all parameters are varied si­
multaneously through sampling; it therefore provides 
little insight into the effects of variation of specific pa­
rameters. Experiments with uncertainty analysis have 
led to the suggestion that Bayesian networks are in­
sensitive to inaccuracies in their parameters (Pradhan 
et al. 1996, Henrion et al. 1996). In these experiments, 
however, a measure of model robustness was obtained 
by assuming a lognormal distribution for each parame­
ter and averaging over the probability of the true diag­
nosis for various diagnostic situations in a medical ap­
plication. Rather than in the average of the probabili­
ties of the true diagnosis, however, it is in the variation 
of these probabilities that inaccuracies in parameters 
are reflected. From these experimental results, there­
fore, no decisive conclusions can be drawn as to the 
sensitivity of Bayesian networks. In fact, Coupe et al. 
(1999) have reported high sensitivities in an emprical 
study in the medical domain, involving real patient 
data. We feel that these and emerging similar expe­
riences warrant further investigation into sensitivity 
analysis of Bayesian networks. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews 
the important basic property that a posterior marginal 
probability can be expressed as a quotient of two linear 
functions in a parameter under study. In Section 3, we 
briefly describe currently available methods for sensi­
tivity analysis that build upon this property. In Sec­
tion 4, we present our method for computing the co­
efficients in the functions for all possible parameters, 
using just one propagation in a junction tree. In Sec­
tion 5, we describe a similar method for computing 
the coefficients in the sensitivity functions relating all 
possible posterior marginals to a single probability pa­
rameter. These methods are generalised to an n-way 
sensitivity analysis in Section 6. The paper ends with 
some concluding remarks in Section 7. 
2 
THE BASIC P ROPERTY 
Sensitivity analysis of a Bayesian network basically 
amounts to establishing, for each of the network's pa­
rameters, a function expressing an output probabil­
ity in terms of the parameter under study. For out­
put probabilities, we shall consider posterior marginal 
probabilities of the form y = p( a I e), where a is a 
value of a variable A and e denotes the evidence avail­
able. Each of the network's parameters is of the form 
x = p(bi l1r), where b; is a value of a variable B and 
1r is an arbitrary combination of values of the set of 
parents II= pa(B) of B. We will write p(ale)(x) to 
denote the function expressing the posterior marginal 
p( a I e) in terms of the parameter x. 
In the sequel, we will assume that in a sensitivity anal­
ysis, upon varying a parameter x = p(b; l1r), each of 
the other probabilities p( bj l1r) is co-varied accordingly, 
by scaling by the ratio between the probability masses 
left. More formally, let the variable B have for its do­
main dom(B) = {b1, ... , bm}, m 2: 1. Note that the 
parameters p(bj l1r), j =f. i, are functions of x. We now 
assume for these functions that 
with p(b; l1r) < 1. 
if j = i 
otherwise, 
(1) 
With the assumption of co-variation as outlined above, 
the function y(x) yielded by a sensitivity analysis is a 
quotient of two linear functions in x. The following 
theorem reviews this important property; the associ­
ated proof provides the basis for the algorithms pre­
sented in Sections 4 and 5. 
Theorem 1 Let p be the probability function defined 
by a Bayesian network over a set of variables V. Let 
y = p( a I e) and x 
= p(b; l1r) be as indicated above. 
Then, 
y= p(a, e)(x) 
p( e) (x) 
ax+ f3 
"(X+ 8' 
(2) 
where a, (3, "(, and 8 are constants with respect to x. 
Proof: The joint probability p(a, e) can be expressed 
in terms of x as 
p(a,e}(x)  (Z:{V)) (x), 
where Lv:a, ... ,dp(V) denotes summation over the vari-
ables V\ {A, . . .  , D} with A, ... , DE V fixed at values 
a, ... , d, respectively. 
The sum Lv:a,e p(V) in the above equation can be 
split into n + 1 separate sums, such that the first sum 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
319 
includes only terms with the value b1 for B and the 
state 1r for II, the second sum includes only terms with 
the value b2 for B and II in state 1r, and so on, and 
the last sum includes the remaining terms. So, 
" l:v:a,e,b;,11' p(V) 
+ 
" p(V). 
L 
1-p(b·l7r) 
L 
j#i 
' 
V:a,e,n'f11' 
For the probability p( e) we derive a similar expression 
by summing, in the above derivation, over all values of 
the variable A instead of keeping it fixed at a. From 
the resulting expressions p(a, e)(x) and p(e)(x), it is 
readily seen that the output y = p(a I e) can be written 
as a quotient of two functions that are linear in x. D 
From Theorem 1 we have that the function that ex­
presses a posterior marginal probability y in terms 
of a single parameter x is characterised by at most 
three coefficients. The theorem is easily extended to 
n parameters. The function then includes the prod­
ucts of all possible combinations of parameters, termed 
monomials, in both its numerator and its denomina­
tor. The numerator as well as the denominator are 
characterised by 2n coefficients, many of which may 
be zero. 
3 
CURRENT METHODS 
The most efficient methods for sensitivity analysis of 
Bayesian networks currently available exploit the basic 
property reviewed in the previous section. We briefly 
review these methods. 
Not all parameters in a Bayesian network can influ­
ence a posterior marginal probability of interest. The 
subset of parameters (possibly) influencing the poste­
rior marginal is dependent upon the evidence e. The 
set of relevant parameters is easily identified using a 
variation of the algorithm described by Geiger et a!. 
(1990), as described by Castillo et a!. (1997). After 
having identified the set of relevant parameters, the 
sensitivity analysis can be restricted to this set. 
Building upon the set of n relevant parameters, 
x1, ... , Xn, the algorithm of Castillo et a!. (1997) iden­
tifies sets of monomials for which the coefficients will 
be zero in the linear function p(a, e)(x1, . . .  , Xn) · For 
the resulting m monomials, the algorithm constructs 
a system of m independent equations of the form 
yi 
= p(a, e)(xi, . . .  , x:), where, for each j, xj denote 
arbitrary values for parameter Xj. The corresponding 
values yi, i 
= 1, ... , m, are obtained through m net­
work evaluations. The coefficients in the function are 
now determined by solving the set of equations thus 
obtained. Coupe & van der Gaag independently de­
scribed a similar method, also based on the idea of 
solving a system of independent equations. They fur­
ther argue that in a one-way sensitivity analysis three 
network evaluations suffice per relevant parameter. 
The methods reviewed above have a computational 
complexity that is considerably less than the brute­
force approach of systematic variation of parameters. 
However, the methods can still be quite time consum­
ing: for a network of realistic size, it can easily require 
several hundreds of network evaluations to perform a 
one-way sensitivity analysis. An more general n-way 
sensitivity analysis to study the joint effect of simulta­
neous variation of n parameters can in fact be so time 
consuming that it is infeasible in practice. 
4 
ANALYSIS OF ONE OUTPUT 
WRT. ALL PARAMETERS 
The new methods for sensitivity analysis presented in 
this paper have been tailored to Bayesian networks in 
their junction-tree representation. The methods basi­
cally perform a single or a few outward propagations 
in a junction tree and, as a result, are much less time 
consuming than the methods reviewed in the previous 
section. 
In this section, we present our method for computing 
the coefficients in the sensitivity functions expressing 
a posterior marginal of interest y = p( a I e) in terms of 
all possible probability parameters x. Recall that these 
functions are of the form presented in Theorem 1. Our 
method now builds on the idea that, in a junction tree, 
the expressions for p( a, e) and p( e) in terms of x can be 
derived from the potential of a clique containing both 
the variable and the parents to which the parameter x 
pertains. The following theorem details the coefficients 
to be computed. 
Theorem 2 Let p be the probability function defined 
by a Bayesian network and let T be a junction tree 

320 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
for the network. Let y = p(aie) and x = p(b;l1r) be 
as before. Suppose that, in T, an inward propagation 
has been performed towards a clique containing the 
variable of interest A; suppose that subsequently an 
outward propagation from this clique has been per­
formed with the value a for A. 
Now, let K be a 
clique in T containing both the variable B and its par­
ents II = pa(B); let ¢x = p(K, a, e) be the potential 
of clique K after the abovementioned propagations. 
Then, p(a, e)(x) = ax+ (3 with 
LK:b;,,. ¢x 
""'LK:b;,,. ¢x 
a= 
p(b;l1r) 
- [1-p(b;l7r)' 
J -r- 1 
(3) 
(3 = L 
LK:b;,,. ¢x + L ¢x. 
(4) 
#i 1-p(b; 17r) 
K:ll-=f-11" 
Proof: 
The property follows directly from the proof 
of Theorem 1 by observing that p( a, e) = 2:: K ¢ K. D 
Building upon similar observations, we have the fol­
lowing corollary. 
Corollary 1 Let p be the probability function defined 
by a Bayesian netwerk and let T be a junction tree for 
the network. Let x = p(b; l1r) and K be as before. 
Suppose that the evidence e has been processed in T 
by an inward and subsequent outward propagation. 
Let ¢'K = p(K, e) be the potential of clique K after 
the propagation. Then, p(e)(x) = "(X+ 6 with 
6 = ""' LK:b;,,. ¢'K 
+ ""' ¢'K. 
 1 -p(b ·i7r) 
 
j-=f-i 
1 
K:0-=/-1r 
(5) 
(6) 
Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 provide the basis for our 
method for computing the coefficients in the func­
tions expressing the posterior marginal of interest 
y = p(a I e) in terms of all possible parameters x. The 
method is composed of the following steps: 
1. Enter the evidence e into the junction tree and 
perform an inward and an outward propagation 
using an arbitrary root clique. 
2. Compute the coefficients 'Y and 6, using the equa­
tions (5) and (6) from Corollary 1, for all relevant 
parameters, locally per clique. 
3. Perform an outward propagation from a clique 
containing the variable of interest A, with the ad­
ditional evidence A = a. 
4. Compute the coefficients a and (3, using the equa­
tions (3) and (6) from Theorem 2, for all relevant 
parameters, locally per clique. 
We would like to note that our method requires just 
one inward and two outward propagations to estab­
lish all sensitivity functions for a specific posterior 
marginal, whereas the methods reviewed in the pre­
vious section require three inward and outward prop­
agations per parameter. 
The method described above outlines the basic idea. 
The method, however, may be easier to implement in 
the alternative form based upon Theorems 3 and 4. 
Theorem 3 Let the junction tree T be as before. 
Also, let y = p(aie) and x = p(b;l1r) be as before 
and let K be a clique in T including both B and 
II = pa( B). 
Now, let x1 be the initially specified 
value for x and let x2 denote an arbitrary other value 
for x. Suppose that, in T, an inward propagation has 
been performed towards a clique containing the vari­
able of interest A; suppose that subsequently an out­
ward propagation has been performed with the value a 
for A. Now, let ¢x = p(K, a, e) be the resulting clique 
potential for clique K. Let 
y1 = p(a, e)(x1) = L ¢x, 
K 
2 
2 
""'
p'(Bi1r) 
y =p(a,e)(x )= \ ¢Kp(B i 7r)
' 
(7) 
(8) 
where p( B l1r) and p' ( B l1r) denote parameter vectors 
with x = x1 and x = x2, respectively. 
Then, y = 
ax+ (3 with 
(9) 
Proof: Since both variable B and its parents are in­
cluded in clique K, we can obtain from the parameter 
vector 
p(Bi1r) 
= (q1 (x1 ), ... , Qi-1 (x1 ), x1, Qi+l (x1 ), ... , Qn(x1 )) 
the parameter vector 
p'(Bi1r) 
(q] (x2), ... 'q^-1 (x2), x2, q^+l (x2), ... , q_(x2)) 
where q and q' are parameters co-varying according 
to equation (1), by multiplication of the potential ¢x 
by p'(B l1r)jp(B l1r). From Theorem 1, we have that 
y = ax + (3. The expressions for a and (3 now follow 
from simple mathematical manipulation. 
D 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
321 
Theorem 4 Let the junction tree T be as before. 
Also, let y = p(afe) and x = p(bif1r) be as before. 
Suppose that, in T, an inward propagation has been 
performed towards a clique including the variable of 
interest A. Then, p(e)(x) ="(X + 8 with 

(10) 
where aa, f3a and aAa, f3Ba are as in equation (9), ob­
tained from outward propagations with the evidence 
A = a and A -::/:- a, respectively. 
Proof: 
We begin by observing that p(e)(x) = 
p(a,e)(x) + p(•a,e)(x). 
By entering the evidence 
A = a in a clique H containing the variable A 
and propagating outwards, we obtain the potential 
¢K 
= p(K, a, e) for clique K. From this potential, 
Y1. 
= p(a, e) 
= LK cPK is readily computed, as de­
scribed in equations (7) from Theorem 3. Similarly, 
by entering the evidence that A does not have the 
value a (that is, by multiplying the clique potential 
for H with a vector over dom(A), in which the en­
try corresponding to state a is zero and all other en­
tries equal 1) and propagating outwards, we obtain 
the potential ¢/ 
= p(K, •a, e). 
From this poten­
tial, YCa = p(•a,e) = LK¢/ is readily computed. 
Using equation (8) from Theorem 3, we get y7 and 

sion p( e) (x) = p(a, e) (x) + p( •a, e) (x) yields the result 
stated in the theorem. 
D 
Our alternative method, building upon Theorems 3 
and 4, is composed of the following steps: 
1. Enter the evidence e into the junction tree and 
perform an inward propagation towards a clique 
H containing the variable of interest A. 
2. Perform an outward propagation from H with the 
additional evidence A = a. 
3. Compute y;,_ and y8, using the equations (7) 
and (8) from Theorem 3. 
4. Compute the coefficients a = a a and f3 = f3a, 
using (9), for all relevant parameters, locally per 
clique. 
5. Retract the evidence A 
= a without retracting 
the evidence e. 
6. Perform an outward propagation from H with the 
additional evidence A -::/:- a. 
7. Compute YDa and Y9a' using the equations (7) 
and (8) from Theorem 3. 
8. Compute a6a and f36a, using (9). 
9. Compute the coefficients 'Y and 8, using equation 
(10) from Theorem 4. 
To allow for retracting the evidence A = a in Step 5 of 
our method without retracting e, fast-retraction prop­
agation (Cowell & Dawid 1992) is used in Step 2. 
Comparing the computational costs of the two al­
ternative methods, we note that they both require 
one inward and two outward propagations. Consider­
ing the first method, we observe that Steps 2 and 4 
are equally costly. The computation of the coeffi­
cients a and 'Y costs 2 ·Jdom(K)J/m operations, where 
m = fdom(pa(B))J; the computation of j3 and 8 costs 
2fdom(K) I arithmetic operations. Thus, the addi­
tional cost of the first method is roughly in the or­
der of 2 to 3 times Jdom(K)f. The additional costly 
steps in the second method are Steps 3 and 7, both 
costing approximately 3 ·fdom(K)J operations. Thus, 
the additional cost of the second method is roughly 
6 · fdom(K)f arithmetic operations. This rough com­
parison of the computational costs of the two methods 
only addresses the number of arithmetic operations in­
volved. The first method, however, has a much larger 
overhead in terms of computing indices in performing 
the various summations. Thus, depending on the im­
plementation, the two methods might very well have 
comparable performance. 
5 
ANALYSIS OF ALL OUTPUTS 
WRT. ONE PARAMETER 
Having identified a parameter x to which an output 
probability of a Bayesian network is particularly sensi­
tive, one might be interested in establishing sensitivity 
functions for all possible posterior marginals in terms 
of this parameter. Such an analysis amounts to com­
puting the coefficients in these functions. Note that 
while the method described in Section 4 provides for 
evaluating the overall robustness of a Bayesian net­
work, the method described in this section is provides 
for getting insight in the spread of influence from sep­
arate parameters. 
The method of Castillo et a!. ( 1 997) and the method of 
Coupe & van der Gaag (1998) can be exploited for es­
tablishing the coefficients in the sensitivity functions 
for all possible output probabilities, requiring three 
propagations per posterior marginal. Building upon 
the ideas put forward in the previous section, how­
ever, a more efficient method is obtained. Theorem 5 
provides the basis for our method. 
Theorem 5 Let the junction tree T be as before. 
Also, let y 
= p(afe) and x 
= p(bl1r) be 
as be­
fore. Suppose that, in T, an inward propagation has 

322 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
been performed towards a clique containing the vari­
able B to which the parameter x pertains. 
Then, 
p(e)(x) ="(X+ J with 
'Y = O:a + O:6a and J = f3a + f37a, 
(11) 
where O:a,f3a and a.6a,f38a are as in equation (9), ob­
tained from two outward propagations with two dis­
tinct values for x. 
Proof: Let K be a clique containing both the variable 
B and its set of parents II = pa(B). Let x1 and x2 
denote two different values of the parameter x. From 
the outward propagation using x1 from clique K, we 
obtain the probability vector p(A,e)(x1) = (y;,Y<a) 
through marginalization of the clique potential for a 
clique H containing A. Similarly, from the outward 
propagation with x2, we find the vector p'(A, e)(x2) = 
(y=, Y9a)· From 
= 
we get the result stated in the theorem. 
0 
Theorem 5 provides the basis for our method for com­
puting the coefficients in the functions expressing all 
possible output probabilities y = p( a I e) in a single pa­
rameter x = p(blrr). The method is composed of the 
following steps: 
1. Enter the evidence e into the junction tree and 
perform an inward and an outward propagation 
using an arbitrary root clique. 
2. Compute the probability vector p(A, e) 
(y;, Y>a) through marginalization of the clique po­
tential for a clique H containing A, for all vari­
ables of interest. 
3. Change the value of parameter x and perform 
an outward propagation from a clique containing 
both the variable B and its parents. 
4. Compute the probability vector p'(A, e) = 
(y?, Y:a) through marginalization of the potential 
for clique H, for all variables of interest. 
5. Compute a.a, a.6a, f3a, and f38a, using the equation 
(9) from Theorem 3. 
6. Compute 'Y and J, using the equation (11). 
We would like to note that our method requires just 
one inward and two outward propagations to estab­
lish all sensitivity functions for a specific probability 
parameter. 
6 
n-WAY SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
So far, we have addressed one-way sensitivity analy­
ses only, in which the effects of separate parameters 
are studied. In this section, we turn our attention to 
more general n-way analyses in which the effects of 
simultaneous variation of n parameters are studied. 
One can regard n-way sensitivity analysis as involving 
analyses of joint effects for all subsets of size n or less 
of all, say m, relevant parameters. Using the method 
of Castillo et al. (1997), this would involve L:::9=l ( 7) 
separate analyses and I::9= I ri ( 7) probability propa­
gations to compute the 2n coefficients, assuming r-ary 
variables. 
Provided the n parameters all belong to the same 
clique, Theorem 6 below states that we only need 
one propagation to compute the 2n coefficients, but 
I::9= I ( 7) local computations involving marginaliza­
tions of clique potentials. 
In essence, Theorem 1 states that the mathematical 
expression for a probability, p(e)(x), of a vector of in­
stantiations, e, as a function of a probability parame­
ter, x, takes the form of a linear function of x. The­
orem 6 generalizes this statement to the case with n 
parameters, x1, . . .  , Xn, and states that the resulting 
function is a multilinear function in x1, ... , Xn. 
To simplify the exposition, we shall assume that the 
parameters are independent; that is, for each pair of 
parameters, x; = p(bx; lrrx;) and Xj = p(bx; lrrx;), with 
the associated variables Bx;, IIx;, Bx;, and IIx;, it 
holds true that rrx; # rrx;, Bx; (j. IIx;, and Bx; (j. 
IIx;. To generalize the theorem to cover the case of 
dependent parameters is fairly straightforward. 
Theorem 6 Let p be the probability function for a 
Bayesian network, where evidence e has been prop­
agated in a junction tree, T, for the network. Let 
X 
= { x1, . . .  , Xn} be a set of parameters of the net­
work, where, for each i = 1, . . . ,n, 
X;= p(bx; lrrx;), 
with the associated variables, Bx; and IIx;, being 
members of a clique, C, in T. Then 
p(e)(X) = L 'Yx(Z) II z + L 1/Jc, 
zTx 
zEZ 
C:ll#1r 
where II = {IIx,, ... , IIxn }, rr = (rrx,, ... , rrxn ), and 
where 
fx(Y) 
'Yx(Z) = ( -1)1X\ZI L !x(Y), 
yUz 
( -1)1X\YI 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
323 
where¢>c = p(C,e), W = X\Y 
= {w1, •
•
•
 ,wk}, 
k = !WI, by= (byp···,byiY1), b¢ = (b:n,, ... ,b:n1w1), 
and Px, denotes the initial value of Xi. 
Proof: 
Using the same procedure as in the proof of 
Theorem 1 we get 
p(e)(X) ( ¢>c) (X) 
( F  c,o, ·. /
c + 
c/
c) 
(X) 
= L 
· · · LP(b£1 !1l"x,)(xr) · · · p(b£n !1l"xn )(xn) 
b' 
b' 
zt 
Zn 
Lc·b' 
b' 
¢>c 
. zl , ... , :l!n ,1f 
L 
p(b¤, 17l"x,) ... p(b¤n 11l"xJ 
+ 
C:0¥71" 
¢>c. 
The multiple sum can be grouped into sums over the 
subsets Z ² X such that b¥ = bz for each z E Z: 
p(e)(X) 
L:: li
z L:: ... 
p(b¦, !1ru,)(ur) ·
. ·p(b¦1u111l"uiui)(uiUI) 
Lc:bz,b;_,,11" ¢>c 
flzEZ p(bz !1r z) fluEU p(b§ i1r u) 
+ 
L ¢>c, 
(12) 
C:07"'7r 
where U = X\ Z 
= {u1, ... ,uiUI}. Now, expand­
ing the terms p(b¨ 17ru)(u), u E U, using (1), an easy 
calculation yields 
p(b¦, l1r u,) ( ur) · · · p(b¦1u1 l1r u1u1) ( uiUI) 
II ( p(b¨ 17ru) 
p(b¨ 17ru) ) 
= 
U 1 -p(bul1ru) -U1-p(bul1ru) 
uE 
= II 
1 	(b¨ 1l"u; (L (-1)ISI II x)
. (13) 
uEU 
p( u I u) 
sr::;u 
xES 
Inserting (13) in (12) and rearranging terms yields 
p(e)(X) 
= L IT z L ( -1)ISI IT x 
Z<;;X zEZ S<;;U 
xES 
If, instead of summing over subsets S ² X \ Z, we sum 
over the subsets of Z and takes care that the signs of 
the terms are preserved, we get the desired result. 
D 
Note that, since the computation of /X (X) ranges over 
all subsets of X, rx(Z) can be computed, for each 
Z C X, as a sum over a subset of the terms involved 
in the computation of 'Yx(X). 
The result presented in Theorem 6 is limited in the 
sense that all parameters under investigation must 
belong to the same clique in the junction tree. We 
shall now present a more general method which uti­
lizes the results obtained by lower-order analyses. Let 
X = { x1, •
•
.
 , Xn } be the n parameters under investi­
gation and write 
p(e)(X) = L r(Z) II 
z + J. 
(15) 
Z<;;X 
zEZ 
Through one-way analysis involving the parameter x 
we obtain the constants ax and f3x in 
p(e)(x) = axx + f3x· 
The 2n constants in (15) are related to ax and f3x 
in the way that ax equals the sum of all coefficients, 
r(Z), for which x E Z, and f3x equals the sum of the 
remaining coefficients. That is, 
and 
ax= L r(Z) 
Z<;;X:xEZ 
f3x = L r(Z) + J. 
Z<;;X:x{lZ 
(16) 
(17) 
Thus, for each one-way analysis of a parameter Xi, 
i 
= 1, ... , n, we obtain 2 equations of the form (16) 
and (17). In addition, we obtain the equation 
p(e) = L r(Z) II 
Zo + J, 
(18) 
Z<;;X 
zEZ 
where z0 denote the value specified for parameter z in 
the Bayesian network. This gives us a total of 2n + 1 
equations. However, we need (at least) 2n equations 
to compute the 2n coefficients. 
Now, if for each parameter, z E Z, we assign a new 
value and perform a full propagation, then we obtain 
an additional 2n + 1 equations. Thus, we can obtain 
at least 2n equations by performing 
l2n2: 1J 
full propagations with different parameter values, in 
addition to the initial propagation performed for the 

324 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
one-way analyses. 
For example, to perform 4-way 
analyses, a total of two full propagations is sufficient. 
This result can be generalized very easily, since each 
m-way analysis gives rise to 2m equations of the form 
(16) and (17). Thus, to perform n-way analyses, where 
n > m, we need at most 
additional propagations, as there are ( ;:,) relevant m­
way analyses. So, for example, if we have performed 
2-way analyses and want to perform 5-way analyses, 
no further propagations are needed. 
7 
CONC LUDING REMARKS 
We have presented methods for sensitivity analysis 
of Bayesian networks which are significantly more ef­
ficient than current methods. 
In the case of one­
way analysis, the number of probability propagations 
of current methods grows linearly in the number of 
relevant parameters, whereas the methods presented 
above only requires one inward and one or two out­
ward propagations, no matter the number of relevant 
parameters. 
To substantiate the importance of this difference, we 
have investigated three real-world networks to get an 
idea of the typical number of relevant parameters in 
a realistic scenario. All three networks are from the 
medical domain: a subnetwork of Munin (Andreassen 
et a!. 1989) containing 1003 variables, a network mod­
elling the pathophysiology of ventricular septal defect 
(Coupe et al. 1999) containing 38 variables, and a net­
work related to disorders in the oesophagus containing 
70 variables. The investigation were conducted using 
real patient data involving, respectively, 15, 5, and 3 
patients. The average number of relevant parameters 
were found to be 16313, 738, and 992, respectively. 
(Since no censoring of parameters representing func­
tional relationships were performed on parameters for 
the Munin network, the figure 16313 is probably some­
what overestimated.) 
Efficient methods for sensitivity analysis play an im­
portant role in both the knowledge acquisition and the 
validation phases for manually constructed Bayesian­
network models. 
Coupe et al. (1999) reports on an empirical study using 
sensitivity analysis to focus attention on the most in­
fluential parameters in the knowledge acquisition pro­
cess, thereby considerably reducing the time required 
to acquire the parameter values. 
The validation phase involves two aspects: fine-tuning 
and robustness analysis. The fine-tuning aspect in-
volves adjustment of the parameter values to make the 
network respond correctly to a number of test cases. 
A gradient descent approach is useful for that purpose 
( cf. neural network type training), where the gradi­
ent of a posterior marginal with respect to a subset of 
parameters can easily be computed through a minor 
modification of the algorithms for sensitivity analy­
sis. Based on the work described in the present paper, 
Jensen (1999) has suggested a method for gradient de­
scent training of Bayesian networks. 
Once a network has been fine-tuned, and thus responds 
correctly on a selection of test cases, the robustness 
of the network may be investigated. This involves, 
in essence, determining lower and upper bounds for 
parameter values for which the output of the network 
still agrees with the test cases. A parameter value 
close to one of the bounds indicate a possible lack of 
robustness. Given analytic expressions for the outputs 
in terms of the parameters, derived by e.g. methods 
described in the present paper, these bounds are easily 
determined. 
The time complexity of n-way sensitivity analysis may 
be fairly high for large n, even with the methods pre­
sented in this paper. Also, our method assumes that 
the variables and the parents associated with then pa­
rameters reside in the same clique in a junction tree. 
The method of Coupe et al. (2000) for n-way sensitiv­
ity analysis is based on propagation of tables of coeffi­
cients in a junction tree, and, therefore, has a (poten­
tially very much) larger space requirement. However, 
their method is general in the sense that it does not 
put any restrictions on the location of the parameters.
