Jointly Learning Multiple Measures of Similarities from Triplet Comparisons
Liwen Zhang
University of Chicago

Subhransu Maji
UMass Amherst

Ryota Tomioka
Toyota Technological Institue at Chicago

Abstract
Similarity between objects is multi-faceted and it can be
easier for human annotators to measure it when the fo-
cus is on a speciﬁc aspect. We consider the problem of
mapping objects into view-speciﬁc embeddings where
the distance between them is consistent with the sim-
ilarity comparisons of the form “from the t-th view,
object A is more similar to B than to C”. Our frame-
work jointly learns view-speciﬁc embeddings exploiting
correlations between views. Experiments on a number
of datasets, including one of multi-view crowdsourced
comparison on bird images, show the proposed method
achieves lower triplet generalization error when com-
pared to both learning embeddings independently for
each view and all views pooled into one view. Our
method can also be used to learn multiple measures of
similarity over input features taking class labels into ac-
count and compares favorably to existing approaches
for multi-task metric learning on the ISOLET dataset.
Introduction
Measure of similarity plays an important role in applica-
tions such as content-based recommendation, image search
and speech recognition. Therefore a number of techniques
to learn a measure of similarity from data have been pro-
posed (Xing et al. 2002; Davis et al. 2007; Weinberger,
Blitzer, and Saul 2006; McFee and Lanckriet 2011). When
the measure of distance is induced by an inner product in a
low-dimensional space as is done in many studies, learning a
distance metric is equivalent to learning an embedding of ob-
jects in a low-dimensional space. This is useful for visualiza-
tion as well as using the learned representation in a variety of
down-stream tasks that require ﬁxed length representations
of objects as has been demonstrated by the applications of
word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013) in language.
Among various forms of supervision for learning dis-
tance metric, similarity comparison of the form ‘object A is
more similar to B than to C”, which we call triplet com-
parison, is extremely useful for obtaining an embedding
that reﬂects a perceptual similarity (Agarwal et al. 2007;
Tamuz et al. 2011; van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012).
Triplet comparisons can be obtained by crowdsourcing, or it
may also be derived from class labels if available.
The task of judging similarity comparisons, however, can
be challenging for human annotators. Consider the problem
B
A
C
back
head
Figure 1: Ambiguity in similarity. Depending on whether
we focus on the back (middle row) or on the head (bottom
row), bird A may appear more similar to B or C.
of comparing three birds as seen in Fig. 1. Most annotators
will say that the head of bird A is more similar to the head of
B while the back of A is more similar to C. Such ambiguity
leads to noise in annotation and results in poor embeddings.
A better approach would be to tell the annotator the de-
sired view or the perspective of the object to use for mea-
suring similarity. Such view-speciﬁc comparisons are not
only easier for annotators, but they can also enable precise
feedback for human “in the loop” tasks, such as, interactive
ﬁne-grained recognition (Wah, Maji, and Belongie 2015),
thereby reducing the human effort. The main drawback of
learning view speciﬁc embeddings independently is that the
number of similarity comparisons scales linearly with the
number of views. This is undesirable as even learning a sin-
gle embedding of N objects may require O(N 3) triplet com-
parisons (Jamieson and Nowak 2011) in the worst case.
We propose a method for learning embeddings jointly that
addresses this drawback. Our method exploits underlying
correlations that may exist between the views allowing a bet-
ter use of the training data. Our method models the correla-
tion between views by assuming that each view is a low-rank
projection of a common embedding. Our model can be seen
as a matrix factorization model in which local metric is de-
ﬁned as LM tL⊤, where L is a matrix that parametrizes
arXiv:1503.01521v3  [stat.ML]  6 Oct 2015

the common embedding and M t is a positive semideﬁnite
matrix parametrizing the individual view. The model can be
efﬁciently trained by alternately updating the view speciﬁc
metric and the common embedding.
We experiment with a synthetic dataset and two realis-
tic datasets, namely, poses of airplanes, and crowd-sourced
similarities collected on different body parts of birds (CUB
dataset; Welinder et al., 2010). On most datasets our joint
learning approach obtains lower triplet generalization error
compared to the independent learning approach or naively
pooling all the views into a single one, especially when the
number of training triplets is limited. Furthermore, we apply
our joint metric learning approach to the multi-task metric
learning setting studied by (Parameswaran and Weinberger
2010) to demonstrate that our method can also take input
features and class labels into account. Our method compares
favorably to the previous method on ISOLET dataset.
Formulation
In this section, we ﬁrst review the single view metric learn-
ing problem considered in previous work. Then we extend it
to the case where there are multiple measures of similarity.
Metric learning from triplet comparisons
Given
a
set
of
triplets
S
=
{(i, j, k)
|
object i is more similar to object j than object k}
and
possibly input features x1, . . . , xN
∈
RH, we aim
to ﬁnd a positive semideﬁnite matrix M
∈
RH×H
such that the pair-wise comparison of the distances
induced by the inner product ⟨x, y⟩M
=
x⊤My
parametrized by M (approximately) agrees with S, i.e.,
(i, j, k) ∈S ⇒∥xi −xj∥2
M < ∥xi −xk∥2
M. If no input
feature is given, we take xi as the ith coordinate vector in
RN, and learning M, which would become N × N, would
correspond to ﬁnding embeddings of the N objects in a
Euclidean space with dimension equal to the rank of M.
Mathematically the problem can be expressed as follows:
min
M∈RH×H,
M⪰0
X
(i,j,k)∈S
ℓ(∥xi −xj∥2
M, ∥xi −xk∥2
M) + γtr(M),
(1)
where ∥x −y∥2
M = (x −y)⊤M(x −y); the loss func-
tion can be, for example, logistic (Cox et al. 2000), or hinge,
ℓ(di,j, di,k) = max(1 + di,j −di,k, 0) (Agarwal et al. 2007;
Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006; Chechik et al. 2010).
Other choices of loss functions lead to crowd kernel learn-
ing (Tamuz et al. 2011), and t-distributed stochastic triplet
embedding (t-STE) (van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012).
Penalizing the trace of the matrix M can be seen as a con-
vex surrogate for penalizing the rank (Agarwal et al. 2007;
Fazel, Hindi, and Boyd 2001). γ > 0 is a regularization pa-
rameter.
After the optimal M is obtained, we can ﬁnd a low-rank
factorization of M as M = LL⊤with L ∈RH×D. This
is particularly useful when no input feature is provided, be-
cause each row of L, which is N × D in this case, corre-
sponds to a D dimensional embedding of each object.
Jointly learning multiple metrics
Now let’s assume that T sets of triplets S1, . . . , ST are avail-
able. This can be obtained by asking annotators to focus on
a speciﬁc aspect when making pair-wise comparisons as in
human in the loop tasks (Wah et al. 2014; Wah, Maji, and
Belongie 2015). Alternatively, different measures of similar-
ity can come from considering multiple related metric learn-
ing problems as in (Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010;
Rai, Lian, and Carin 2014).
While a simple approach to handle multiple similarities
would be to parametrize each aspect or view by a positive
semideﬁnite matrix M t, this would not induce any shared
structure among the views. Our goal is to learn a global
transformation L that maps the objects in a common D di-
mensional space as well as local view-speciﬁc metrics M t
(t = 1, . . . , T).
To this end, we formulate the learning problem as follows:
min
L∈RH×D,
M t∈RD×D,
M t⪰0 (t=1,...,T )
T
X
t=1
X
(i,j,k)∈St
ϕi,j,k(L, M t)
+ γ
T
X
t=1
tr(M t) + β∥L∥2
F ,
(2)
where ϕi,j,k(L, M) := ℓ
 ∥L⊤(xi −xj)∥2
M, ∥L⊤(xi −
xk)∥2
M

, and ℓis a loss function as above. We use the
hinge loss in the experiments in this paper, but the proposed
framework readily generalizes to other loss functions pro-
posed in literature (Tamuz et al. 2011; van der Maaten and
Weinberger 2012). Note again that when no input feature is
provided, the global transformation matrix L becomes an
N × D matrix that consists of D dimensional embedding of
the objects.
Intuitively the global transformation L plays the role of a
bottleneck and forces the local metrics to share the common
D dimensional subspace because they are restricted in the
form LM tL⊤.
The proposed model (2) includes various simpler models
as special cases. First, if L is an H×H identity matrix, there
is no sharing across different views and indeed the objective
function will decompose into a sum of view-wise objectives;
we call this independent learning. On the other hand, if we
constrain all M t to be equal, the same metric will apply to
all the views and the learned metric will be essentially the
same as learning a single shared metric as in Eq. (1) with
S = ∪T
t=1St; we call this pooled learning.
We employ regularization terms for both the local metric
M t and the global transformation matrix L in (2). The trace
penalties tr(M t) are employed to obtain low-rank matrices
M t as above. The regularization term on the norm of L is
necessary to resolve the scale ambiguity. Although the above
formulation has two hyperparameters β and γ, we show be-
low in Proposition 1 that the product βγ is the only hyper-
parameter that needs to be tuned.
To minimize the objective (2), we update M t’s and L al-
ternately. Both updates are (sub)gradient descent. The M t
update is followed by a projection onto the positive semi-
deﬁnite (PSD) cone. Note that if we choose a convex loss

function, e.g., hinge-loss, then it becomes a convex problem
with respect to M t’s and M t’s can be optimized indepen-
dently since they appear in disjoint terms. The algorithm is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
Effective regularization term
The sum of the two regu-
larization terms employed in (2) can be reduced into a single
effective regularization term with only one hyperparameter
√βγ as we show in the following proposition (we give the
proof in the supplementary material).
Proposition 1.
min
L∈RH×D,
M 1,...,M T ∈RD×D
γ
T
X
t=1
tr(M t) + β∥L∥2
F = 2
p
βγtr
 T
X
t=1
Kt
! 1
2
,
s.t.
LM tL⊤= Kt (∀t)
where the power 1/2 in the r.h.s. is the matrix square root.
As a corollary, we can always reduce or maintain the reg-
ularization terms in (2) without affecting the loss term by
the rescaling M t ←M t/α2 and L ←αL with α =
(γ PT
t=1 tr(M t)/(β∥L∥2
F ))1/4.
Number of parameters
A simple parameter counting ar-
gument tells us that independently learning T views requires
to ﬁt O(DHT) parameters, where H is the number of input
dimension, which can be as large as N, D is the embedding
dimension, and T is the number of views. On the other hand,
our joint learning model has only O(HD + D2T) parame-
ters. Thus when D < H, our model has much fewer param-
eters and enables better generalization, especially when the
number of triplets is limited.
Efﬁciency
Reducing the dimension from H to D by the
common transformation L is also favorable in terms of com-
putational efﬁciency. The projection of M t to the cone of
D × D PSD matrices is much more efﬁcient when D ≪H
compared to independently learning T views.
Learning embeddings from triplet
comparisons
In this section, we demonstrate the statistical efﬁciency of
our model in both the triplet embedding (no input feature),
and multi-task metric learning scenarios (with features).
Experimental setup
On each dataset, we divided the triplets into training and test
and measured the quality of embeddings by the triplet gen-
eralization error, i.e., the fraction of test triplets whose re-
lations are incorrectly modelled by the learned embedding.
The error was measured for each view and averaged across
views. The numbers of training triplets were the same for
all the views. The regularization parameter was tuned using
a 5-fold cross-validation on the training set with candidate
values

10−5, 10−4, . . . , 105	
. The hinge loss was used as
the loss function. We use mmax = 20 as the number of inner
iterations in the experiments.
In addition, we inspected how the similarity knowledge
on existing views could be transferred to a new view where
Algorithm 1: Multiple-metric Learning
Input: the number of objects N (or input features (xi)N
i=1);
dimension of embedding D; triplet constraints St,
t = 1, . . . , T; regularization parameters β, γ; the
number of inner gradient updates mmax
Output: Global transformation L; PSD matrices {M t}T
t=1
Initialize L randomly; initialize M t as identity matrices;
while not converged do
Update L using step-size η = η0/√m for mmax times as
L ←L −η



T
X
t=1
X
(i,j,k)∈St
∇Lϕi,j,k(L, M t) + 2βL



for t ∈{1, 2, . . . , T} do
Update M t using step-size η = η0/√m for mmax
times by taking a gradient step
M t ←M t −η



X
(i,j,k)∈St
∇Mtϕi,j,k(L, M t) + γID



and projecting M t to the PSD cone;
end
end
— view 1
— view 2
— view 3
— view 4
— view 5
view 1
view 2
view 3
view 4
view 5
view 6
Figure 2: (Left) View-speciﬁc similarities between poses of
planes were obtained by considering subsets of landmarks
shown by different colored rectangles and measuring their
similarity in conﬁguration up to a scaling and translation.
(Right) Perceptual similarities between bird species were
collected by showing users either the full image (view 1),
or crops around various parts (view 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). The aver-
age image for each view is also shown.
the number of similarity comparisons is small. We did this
by conducting an experiment in which we drew a small set
of training triplets from one view but used large numbers of
training triplets from the other views.
We compared our method with the following two
baselines. Independent: We conducted triplet embedding
on each view treating each of them independently. We
parametrized M = LL⊤with L ∈RN×D and mini-
mized (1) using the software provided by van der Maaten
and Weinberger (2012). Pooled: We learned a single embed-
ding with the training triplets from all the views combined.
Synthetic data
Description
Two synthetic datasets were generated. One
consisted of 200 points uniformly sampled from a 10 di-
mensional unit hypercube, while the other dataset had 200
objects from a mixture of four Gaussian with variance 1
whose centers were randomly chosen in a hypercube with
side length 10. Six views were generated on each dataset.

10
3
10
4
10
5
number of training triplets across all views
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
triplet generalization error
joint-5d
ind-5d
pooled-5d
joint-10d
ind-10d
pooled-10d
(a) Clustered
10
3
10
4
10
5
number of training triplets across all views
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
triplet generalization error
joint-5d
ind-5d
pooled-5d
joint-10d
ind-10d
pooled-10d
(b) Uniform
10
3
10
4
number of training triplets across all views
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
triplet generalization error
joint-3d
ind-3d
pooled-3d
joint-10d
ind-10d
pooled-10d
(c) Poses of planes
Figure 3: Triplet generalization errors averaged across views
for various datasets.
Each view was produced by projecting data points onto a
random subspace. The dimensions of the six random sub-
spaces were 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 respectively.
Results
Embeddings were learned with embedding di-
mensions D = 5 and 10. Triplet generalization errors are
plotted in Fig. 3 (a) and (b) for clustered and uniform data,
respectively. Our algorithm achieved lower triplet general-
ization error than both independent and pooled methods on
both datasets. The improvement was particularly large when
the number of triplets was limited (less than 10,000 for the
clustered case). The simple pooled method was the worst on
both datasets. Note that in contrast to the pooled method,
the proposed joint method can choose different embedding
dimension automatically (due to the trace regularization) for
each view while maintaining a shared subspace.
Poses of airplanes
Description
This dataset was constructed from 200 im-
ages of airplanes from the PASCAL VOC dataset (Evering-
ham et al. 2010) which were annotated with 16 landmarks
such as nose tip, wing tips, etc (Bourdev et al. 2010). We
used these landmarks to construct a pose-based similarity.
Given two planes and the positions of landmarks in these
images, pose similarity was deﬁned as the residual error of
alignment between the two sets of landmarks under scaling
and translation. We generated 5 views each of which was
associated with a subset of these landmarks; see supplemen-
tary material for details. Three annotated images from the set
are shown in the left panel of Fig. 2. The planes are highly
diverse ranging from passenger planes to ﬁghter jets, vary-
ing in size and form which results in a slightly different sim-
ilarity between instances for each view. However, there is a
strong correlation between the views because the underlying
set of landmarks are shared.
Results
We used D = 3 and D = 10 as embedding di-
mensions. Figure 3(c) shows the triplet generalization errors
of the three methods. The proposed joint model performed
clearly better than independent. This was not only in av-
erage but also uniformly for each view (see supplementary
material). The pooled method had a slightly larger error than
the proposed joint learning approach but better than the in-
dependent approach.
CUB-200 birds data
Description
We used the dataset (Welinder et al. 2010)
consisting of 200 species of birds and use the annotations
collected using the setup of Wah et al. (2014; 2015). Brieﬂy,
similarity triplets among images of each species were col-
lected in a crowd-sourced manner: every time, a user was
asked to judge the similarity between an image of a bird
from the target specie zi and nine images of birds of different
species {zk}k∈K using the interface of Wilber et al. (2014),
where K is the set of all 200 species. For each display,
the user partitioned these nine images into two sets, Ksim
and Kdissim, with Ksim containing birds considered sim-
ilar to the target and Kdissim having the ones considered
dissimilar. Such a partition was broadcast to an equivalent
set of triplet constraints on associated species, {(i, j, l) |
j ∈Ksim, l ∈Kdissim}. Therefore, for each user response,
|Ksim| |Kdissim| triplet constraints were obtained.
To collect view-speciﬁc triplets, we presented 5 different
cropped versions (e.g. beak, breast, wing) of the bird images
as shown in the right panel of Fig. 2 and used the same pro-
cedure as before to collect triplet comparisons. We obtained
about 100,000 triplets from the uncropped original images
and about 4,000 to 7,000 triplets from the 5 cropped views.
This dataset reﬂects a more realistic situation where not all
triplet relations are available and some of them may be noisy
due to the nature of crowd-sourcing.
In addition to the triplet generalization error, we evaluated
the embeddings in a classiﬁcation task using a biological
taxonomy of the bird species. Note that in Wah et al. (2015)
embeddings were used to interactively categorize images;
here we simplify this process to enable detailed compar-
isons. We manually grouped the 200 classes to get 6 super
classes so that the number of objects in all classes were bal-
anced. These class labels were not used in the training but
allowed us to evaluate the quality of embeddings using the
leave-one-out (LOO) classiﬁcation error. More precisely, at
the test stage, we predict the class label of each embedded
point according to the labels of its 3-nearest-neighbours (3-
NN) in the learned metric.
Finally, since more triplets were available from the ﬁrst
(uncropped) view compared to other views, we ﬁrst sampled
equal numbers of triplets in each view up to a total of 18,000
triplets. Afterwards, we added triplets only to the ﬁrst view.
Results
We used D = 10 and D = 60 as embedding di-
mensions; note that joint learning in 60 dimensions roughly
has the same number of parameters as independent learning
in 10 dimensions. Figures 4 (a) and (b) show the triplet gen-
eralization errors and the LOO 3-NN classiﬁcation errors,
respectively. The solid vertical line shows the point (18,000
triplets) that we start to add training triplets only to the ﬁrst
view. Comparing joint learning in 10 dimensions and 60 di-
mensions, we see that the higher dimension gives the lower
error. The error of joint learning was better than indepen-
dent learning for small number of triplets. Interestingly the
error of joint learning in 60 dimensions coincides with that
of independent learning in 10 dimensions after seeing 6,000
triplets. This can be explained by the fact that with 6 views,
the two models have comparable complexity (see discussion
at the end of the previous section) and thus the same asymp-
totic variance. Our method obtains lower leave-one-out clas-

10
3
10
4
number of training triplets across all views
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
triplet generalization error
joint-10d
ind-10d
pooled-10d
joint-60d
ind-60d
pooled-60d
(a) Triplet generalization error
10
3
10
4
number of training triplets across all views
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LOO 3-NN classification error
joint-10d
ind-10d
pooled-10d
joint-60d
ind-60d
pooled-60d
(b) LOO 3-NN classiﬁcation error
10
2
10
3
number of training triplets from the local view
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
triplet generalization error
joint-10d
ind-10d
(c) Learning a new view
Figure 4: Results on CUB-200 birds dataset. (c) shows the triplet generalization error on the second view.
siﬁcation errors on all views except for the ﬁrst view; see
supplementary material.
Learning a new view
On the CUB-200 birds dataset, we
simulated the situation of learning a new view (or zero-shot
learning). We drew a training set that contains 100–1000
triplets from the second view and 3,000 triplets from all
other 5 views. We investigated how joint learning helps in
estimating a good embedding on a new view with extremely
small number of triplets. The triplet generalization errors of
both approaches are shown in Fig. 4(c). The triplet general-
ization error of the proposed joint learning was lower than
that of the independent learning up to around 700 triplets.
The embedding of the second view learned jointly with other
views was clearly better than that learned independently and
consistent with the quantitative evaluation; see supplemen-
tary material.
Performance gain and triplet consistency
In Fig. 5, we relate the performance gain we obtained for
the joint/pooled learning approaches compared to the inde-
pendent learning approach with the underlying between-task
similarity. The performance gain was measured by the dif-
ference between the area under the triplet generalization er-
rors normalized by that of the independent learning. The
between-task similarity was measured by the triplet consis-
tency between two views averaged over all pairs of views.
For the CUB-200 dataset in which only a subset of valid
triplet constraints are available, we take the independently
learned embeddings with the largest number of triplets and
use those to compute the triplet consistency.
We can see that when the triplet consistency is very high,
pooled learning approach is good enough. However, when
the triplet consistency is not too high, it may harm to pool
the triplets together. The proposed joint learning approach
has the most advantage in this intermediate regime. On the
other hand, the consistency was close to random (0.5) for the
CUB-200 dataset possibly explaining why the performance
gain was not as signiﬁcant as in the other datasets.
Incorporating features and class information
The proposed method can be applied to a more general set-
ting in which each object comes with a feature vector and a
0.53
0.6
0.69
0.85
Triplet consistency
40
20
0
20
40
Performance gain (%)
CUB-200
Synthetic (uniform)
Synthetic (clustered)
Airplanes
Joint
Pooled
Figure 5: Relating the performance gains of joint and pooled
learning with the triplet consistency.
loss function not derived from triplet constraints is used.
As an example, we employ the idea of multi-task
large margin nearest neighbor (MT-LMNN) algorithm
(Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010) and adapt our model
to handle a classiﬁcation problem. The loss function of MT-
LMNN consists of two terms. The ﬁrst term is a hinge loss
for triplet constraints as in (2) but the triplets are derived
from class labels. The second term is the sum of squared dis-
tances between each object and its “target neighbors” which
is also deﬁned based on class labels; see Weinberger et al.
(2006; 2010) for details. The major difference between MT-
LMNN and our model is that MT-LMNN parametrizes a lo-
cal metric as the sum of a global average M 0 and a view-
speciﬁc metric M t as Kt = M 0 + M t; thus the learned
metric is generally full rank. On the other hand, our method
parametrizes it as a product of global transform and local
metric as Kt = LM tL⊤, which allows the local embed-
ding dimension to be controlled by the trace regularization.
We conduct experiments on ISOLET spoken alphabet
recognition dataset (Fanty and Cole 1991) which consists
7797 examples of English alphabets spoken by 150 subjects
and each example is described by a 617 dimension feature
vector. The task is to recognize the letter of each spoken
example as one of the English alphabets. The subjects are
grouped into sets of 30 similar speakers leading to 5 tasks.
We adapt the experimental setting from the work of MT-
LMNN. Data is ﬁrst projected onto its ﬁrst 378 leading PCA
components that capture 99 % of variance. We train our
model in a H = 378 dimensional space with D = 169 and
378, and compare it with a MT-LMNN trained with the code
provided by the authors. In the experiment, each task is ran-

Table 1: Test error rates on ISOLET dataset.
Tested with view-speciﬁc train data
Tested with all train data
Task
MT-LMNN
Proposed method
MT-LMNN
Proposed method
378 dim
D = 169
D = 378
378 dim
D = 169
D = 378
1
4.68
3.78
4.10
4.23
3.46
3.65
2
4.55
3.91
3.52
3.14
3.84
3.40
3
6.28
5.32
5.64
3.52
3.39
3.52
4
7.76
5.83
5.83
4.23
4.10
3.52
5
6.28
5.06
5.19
4.23
3.97
3.97
Avg
5.91
4.78
4.86
3.87
3.76
3.61
domly divided into 60/20/20 subsets for train/validation/test.
We tuned the parameters on the validation sets.
Test error rates of 3-nearest-neighbor (3-NN) classiﬁers
are reported in Table 1. The left panel shows the errors us-
ing only the view-speciﬁc training data for the classiﬁcation.
The right panel shows those using all the training data with
view-speciﬁc distance. Results are averaged over 10 runs.
Simpler baseline methods, such as, euclidean metric and
pooled (single task) learning are not included here because
MT-LMNN already performed better than them. We can see
that the proposed method performed better than MT-LMNN,
while learning in a 378 dimensional space and reducing to a
169 dimensional space led to comparable error rates. A pos-
sible explanation for this mild dependence on the choice of
embedding dimension D could be given by the fact that both
L and M t are regularized and the effective embedding di-
mension is determined by the regularization and not by the
choice of D; see Prop. 1. The averaged error rates reported
in the original paper using 169 PCA dimensions were 5.19
% for the view-speciﬁc case and 4.01 % when all training
data were used; our numbers are still better than theirs.
Related work
Embedding of objects from triplet or paired distance com-
parisons goes back to the work of Shepard (1962a; 1962b)
and Kruskal (1964a; 1964b) and studied extensively (Agar-
wal et al. 2007; Tamuz et al. 2011; McFee and Lanckriet
2009; 2011; van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012) recently.
More recently, triplet embedding / metric learning prob-
lems that involve multiple measures of similarity have been
considered. Parameswaran and Weinberger (2010) aimed at
jointly solving multiple related metric learning problems by
exploiting possible similarities. More speciﬁcally, they mod-
eled the inner product in each view by a sum of shared
global matrix and a view-speciﬁc local matrix. Moreover,
Rai, Lian, and Carin (2014) proposed a Bayesian approach
to multi-task metric learning. Unfortunately, the sum struc-
ture in their work typically do not produce a low-rank met-
ric, which makes it unsuitable for learning view-speciﬁc
embeddings. In contrast, our method models it as a prod-
uct of them allowing the trace norm regularizer to deter-
mine the rank of each local metric. Xie and Xing (2013)
and Yu, Wang, and Tao (2012) studied metric learning prob-
lems with multiple input views. This is different from our
setting in which the notion of similarity varies from view
to view. Amid and Ukkonen (2015) considered the task of
multi-view triplet embedding in which the view is a latent
variable; they proposed a greedy algorithm for ﬁnding the
view membership of each object as well as its embedding.
It could be useful to combine this approach with ours when
we do not have enough resource to collect triplets from all
possible views.
Discussion
We have proposed a model for jointly learning multiple mea-
sures of similarities from multi-view triplet observations.
The proposed model consists of a global transformation,
which represents each object as a ﬁxed dimensional vector,
and local view-speciﬁc metrics.
Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets have
demonstrate that our proposed joint model outperforms in-
dependent and pooled learning approaches in most cases.
Additionally, we have shown that the advantage of our joint
learning approach becomes the most prominent when the
views are similar but not too similar (which can be mea-
sured by triplet consistency). Morevoer, we have extended
our model to incorporate class labels and feature vectors.
The proposed model performed favorably compared to MT-
LMNN on ISOLET dataset. Since in many real applications,
similarity triplets can be expensive to obtain, jointly learning
similarity metrics is preferable as it can recover the underly-
ing structure using relatively small number of triplets.
One way to look at the proposed model is to view the
shared global transformation as controlling the complex-
ity. However our experiments have shown that generally the
higher the dimension, the better the performance (except for
the ISOLET dataset tested with view-speciﬁc training data).
Thus an alternative explanation could be that the regulariza-
tion on both the global transformation L and local metrics
M t is implicitly controlling the embedding dimension.
Future work includes extension of the current model to
other loss functions (e.g., the t-STE loss (van der Maaten
and Weinberger 2012)) and to the setting in which we do not
know which view each triplet came from.
