arXiv:1901.07786v1  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2019
Self-Attentive Model for Headline Generation
Daniil Gavrilov, Pavel Kalaidin, and Valentin Malykh
VK,
191023, Nevsky ave., 28, Saint-Petersburg, Russia

Abstract. Headline generation is a special type of text summarization
task. While the amount of available training data for this task is al-
most unlimited, it still remains challenging, as learning to generate head-
lines for news articles implies that the model has strong reasoning about
natural language. To overcome this issue, we applied recent Universal
Transformer architecture paired with byte-pair encoding technique and
achieved new state-of-the-art results on the New York Times Annotated
corpus with ROUGE-L F1-score 24.84 and ROUGE-2 F1-score 13.48. We
also present the new RIA corpus and reach ROUGE-L F1-score 36.81 and
ROUGE-2 F1-score 22.15 on it.
Keywords: universal transformer · headline generation · BPE · sum-
marization.
1
Introduction
Headline writing style has broader applications than those used purely within the
journalism community. So-called naming is one of the arts of journalism. Just as
natural language processing techniques help people with tasks such as incoming
message classiﬁcation (see [5] or [6]), the naming problem could also be solved
using modern machine learning and, in particular, deep learning techniques. In
the ﬁeld of machine learning, the naming problem is formulated as headline
generation, i.e. given the text it is needed to generate a title.
Headline generation can also be seen as a special type of text summarization.
The aim of summarization is to produce a shorter version of the text that cap-
tures the main idea of the source version. We focus on abstractive summarization
when the summary is generated on the ﬂy, conditioned on the source sentence,
possibly containing novel words not used in the original text.
The downside of traditional summarization is that ﬁnding a source of sum-
maries for a large number of texts is rather costly. The advantage of headline
generation over the traditional approach is that we have an endless supply of
news articles since they are available in every major language and almost always
have a title.
This task could be considered language-independent due to the absence of
the necessity of native speakers for markup and/or model development.
While the task of learning to generate article headlines may seem to be easier
than generating full summaries, it still requires that the learning algorithm be

2
Daniil Gavrilov, Pavel Kalaidin, and Valentin Malykh
able to catch structure dependencies in natural language and therefore could be
an interesting benchmark for testing various approaches.
In this paper, we present a new approach to headline generation based on
Universal Transformer architecture which explicitly learns non-local representa-
tions of the text and seems to be necessary to train summarization model. We
also present the test results of our model on the New York Times Annotated
corpus and the RIA corpus.
2
Related Work
Rush et al. [11] were the ﬁrst to apply an attention mechanism to abstractive
text summarization.
In the recent work of Hayashi [4], an encoder-decoder approach was presented,
where the ﬁrst sentence was reformulated to a headline. Our Encoder-Decoder
baseline (see section 6.1) follows their setup.
The related approach was presented in [10], where the approach of the ﬁrst
sentence was expanded with a so-called topic sentence. The topic sentence is
chosen to be the ﬁrst sentence containing the most important information from
a news article (so called 5W1H information, where 5W1H stands for who, what,
where, when, why, how). Our Encoder-Decoder baseline could be considered to
implement their approach in OF (trained On First sentence) setup.
Tan et al. in [15] present an encoder-decoder approach based on a pregen-
erated summary of the article. The summary is generated using a statistical
summarization approach. The authors mention that the ﬁrst sentence approach
is not enough for New York Times corpora, but they only use a summary for
their approach instead of the whole text, thus relying on external tools of sum-
marization.
3
Background
Consider that we have dataset D = {(titlei, fulltexti)}N
i
of news articles and
their titles. An approach for learning summarization is to deﬁne a conditional
probability P(yt|{y1, ..., yt−1}, X, θ) of some token yt ∈V at time step t ∈N,
with respect to article text X = {x1, ..., xN} (xi ∈V too) and previous tokens
of the title {y1, ..., yt−1}, parameterized by a neural network with parameters θ.
Then model parameters are found as θMLE = argmaxθ
QN
i P(Yi|Xi, θ)
We can then apply two methods for ﬁnding the most probable sentence under
trained model: greedy, decoding token-by-token by ﬁnding the most probable
token at each time step, and beam-search, where we ﬁnd the top-k most probable
tokens at each step. The latter method yields better results though it is more
computationally expensive.
Sutskever et al. [14] proposed a model that deﬁnes P(yt|{y1, ..., yt−1}, X, θ)
by propagating initial sequence X through a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
Then last hidden state of RNN is used as context vector c and is then passed to
the second RNN with y1, ..., yt−1 to obtain distribution over yt.

Self-Attentive Model for Headline Generation
3
RNNs have a commonly known ﬂaw. They rapidly forget earlier timesteps,
e.g. see [2]. To mitigate this issue, attention [1] was introduced to the Encoder-
Decoder architecture. The attention mechanism makes a model able to obtain a
new context vector at every decoding iteration from diﬀerent parts of an encoded
sequence. It helps capture all the relevant information from the input sequence,
removing the bottleneck of the ﬁxed size hidden vector of the decoder’s RNN.
4
Our Approach
4.1
Universal Transformer
While RNNs could be easily used to deﬁne the Encoder-Decoder model, learning
the recurrent model is very expensive from a computation perspective. The other
drawback is that they use only local information while omitting a sequence of
hidden states H = {h1, ..., hN}. I.e. any two vectors from hidden state hi and hj
are connected with j −i RNN computations that makes it hard to catch all the
dependencies in them due to limited capacity. To train a rich model that would
learn complex text structure, we have to deﬁne a model that relies on non-local
dependencies in the data.
In this work, we adopt the Universal Transformer model architecture [3],
which is a modiﬁed version of Transformer [16]. This approach has several bene-
ﬁts over RNNs. First of all, it could be trained in parallel. Furthermore, all input
vectors are connected to every other via the attention mechanism. It implies that
Transformer architecture learns non-local dependencies between tokens regard-
less of the distance between them, and thus it is able to learn a more complex
representation of the text in the article, which proves to be necessary to eﬀec-
tively solve the task of summarization. Also, unlike [4,15], our model is trained
end-to-end using the text and title of each news article.
4.2
Byte Pair Encoding
We also adopt byte-pair encoding (BPE), introduced by Sennrich for the ma-
chine translation task in [13]. BPE is a data compression technique where often
encountered pairs of bytes are replaced by additional extra-alphabet symbols. In
the case of texts, like in the machine translation ﬁeld, the most frequent words
are kept in the vocabulary, while less frequent words are replaced by a sequence
of (typically two) tokens. E.g., for morphologically rich languages, the word end-
ings could be detached since each word form is deﬁnitely less frequent than its
stem. BPE encoding allows us to represent all words, including the ones unseen
during training, with a ﬁxed vocabulary.
5
Experiments
In our experiments, we consider two corpora: one in Russian and another in
English. It is important to mention that we have not done any additional pre-
processing other than lower casing, unlike other approaches [4,10]. We apply

4
Daniil Gavrilov, Pavel Kalaidin, and Valentin Malykh
BPE encoding, which allows us to avoid usage of the < UNK > token for out-
of-vocabulary words. For our experiments, we withheld 20,000 random articles
to form the test set. We have repeated our experiments 5 times with diﬀerent
random seeds and report mean values.
English Dataset We use the New York Times Annotated Corpus (NYT) as
presented by the Linguistic Data Consortium in [12]. This dataset contains 1.8
million news articles from the New York Times news agency, written between
the years 1987 and 2006. For our experiments, we ﬁltered out news articles
containing titles shorter than 3 words or longer than 15 words. We also ﬁltered
articles with a body text shorter than 20 words or longer than 2000 words. In
addition, we skipped obituaries in the dataset. After ﬁltering, we had 1444919
news available to us with a mean title length of 7.9 words and mean text length
of 707.6 words.
Russian Dataset Russian news agency “Rossiya Segodnya” provided us with a
dataset (RIA) for research purposes1. It contains news documents from January,
2010 to December, 2014. In total, there are 1003869 news articles in the provided
corpus with a mean title length 9.5 words and mean text length of 315.6 words.
6
Experiments
6.1
Baseline models
First Sentence This model takes the ﬁrst sentence of an article and uses it
as its hypothesis for an article headline. This is a strong baseline for generating
headlines from news articles.
Encoder-Decoder Following [10], we use the encoder-decoder architecture on
the ﬁrst sentence of an article. The model itself is already described at recent
works section as Seq-To-Seq with RNNs of Sutskever et al. [14]. For this ap-
proach, we use the same preprocessing as we did for our model, including byte
pair encoding.
6.2
Training
For both datasets, NYT and RIA, we used the same set of hyper-parameters
for the models, namely 4 layers in the encoder and decoder with 8 heads of
attention. In addition, we added a Dropout of p = 0.3 before applying Layer
Normalization [8].
The models were trained with the Adam optimizer using a scaled learning
rate, as proposed by the authors of the original Transformer with the number
1 The dataset is available at https://vk.cc/8W0l5P

Self-Attentive Model for Headline Generation
5
of warmout steps equal to 4000 in both cases and β = (0.9, 0.98). Both models
were trained until convergence.
We trained the BPE tokenizator separately on the datasets. NYT data was
tokenized with a vocabulary size of active tokens equal to 40000, while RIA
data was tokenized using 50000 token vocabulary. In addition, we have limited
length of the documents with 3000 BPE tokens and 2000 BPE tokens for RIA
and NYT datasets respectively. Any exceeding tokens were omitted. word2vec
[9] embeddings were trained on each dataset with the size of each embedding
equal to 512. For headline generation, we adopted beam-search size of 10.
7
Results
Model
R-1-f R-1-r R-2-f R-2-r R-L-f R-L-r
New York Times
First Sentence
11.64 34.67 2.28
7.43
7.19 31.39
Encoder-Decoder
23.02 21.90 11.84 11.44 21.23 21.31
summ-hieratt [15]
-
29.60
-
8.17
-
26.05
Universal Transformer w/ smoothing (ours) 25.60 23.90 12.92 12.42 23.66 25.27
Universal Transformer (ours)
26.86 25.33 13.48 13.01 24.84 24.38
Rossiya Segodnya
First Sentence
24.08 45.58 10.57 21.30 16.70 41.67
Encoder-Decoder
39.10 38.31 22.13 21.75 36.34 36.34
Universal Transformer w/ smoothing (ours) 39.31 37.10 21.82 20.66 36.32 35.37
Universal Transformer (ours)
39.75 37.62 22.15 21.04 36.81 35.91
Table 1. ROUGE-1,2,L F1 and recall scores, on NYT corpus and RIA corpus.
In Tab. 1 we present results based on two corpora: the New York Times
Annotated (NYT) corpus for English, and the Rossiya Segodnya (RIA) corpus
for Russian. For the NYT corpus, we reached a new state of the art on ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L F1 scores. For the RIA corpus, since it has no
previous art, we present results for the baselines and our model.2 For our model
we also experimented with label smoothing following [7].
In our experiments, we noticed that some of the generated headlines are
scored low by ROUGE metrics despite seeming reasonable, e.g. top sample in
Tab. 3. This lead us to a new series of experiments. We conducted human evalua-
tion of obtained results for both NYT and RIA corpora. The results are presented
2 We are providing results from Tan et al. [15], which were achieved using the NYT
corpus. Unfortunately, the authors have not published all of their ﬁltering criteria
and seed for random sampling for this corpus, so we could not follow their setup
completely. Therefore, these results are presented here for reference.

6
Daniil Gavrilov, Pavel Kalaidin, and Valentin Malykh
Dataset
User Preference
Human
Tie
Machine
New York Times Annotated
57.4
27.4
15.2
Rossiya Segodnya
54.4
30.6
15.0
Table 2. Human evaluation results for NYT and RIA datasets.
in Tab. 2. 5 annotators marked up 100 randomly sampled articles from a train
set of each corpora. Each number shows the percentage of annotator prefer-
ence over three possible options: original headline (Human), generated headline
(Machine), no preference (Tie).
For the both corpora, we could see that our model is not reaching human
parity yet, having 42.6% and 45.6% of (Machine + Tie) user preference for NYT
and RIA datasets respectively, but this result is already close to human parity
and leaves room for improvement.
Original text, truncated: Unethical and irresponsible as the assertion that antidepressant medication, an ex-
cellent treatment for some forms of depression, will turn a man into a ﬁsh. It does a disservice to psychoanalysis,
which oﬀers rich and valuable insights into the human mind. ... Homosexuality is not an illness by any of the usual
criteria in medicine, such as an increased risk of morbidity or mortality, painful symptoms or social, interpersonal
or occupational dysfunction as a result of homosexuality itself...
Original headline: homosexuality, not an illness, can’t be cured
Generated headline: why we can’t let gay therapy begin
Original text, truncated: southwest airlines said yesterday that it would add 16 ﬂights a day from chicago midway
airport, moving to protect a valuable hub amid the ﬁght breaking out over the assets of ata airlines, the airport’s
biggest carrier. southwest said that beginning in january, it would add the ﬂights to 13 cities that it already served
from midway...
Original headline: southwest is adding ﬂights to protect its chicago hub
Generated headline: southwest airlines to add 16 ﬂights from chicago
Original text, truncated: москва, 1 апр - риа новости. количество сделок продажи элитных квартир в москве
выросло в первом квартале этого года, по сравнению с аналогичным периодом предыдущего, в два раза,
говорится в отчете компании intermarksavill s. при этом, также сообщается в нем, количество заключенных в
столице первичных сделок в сегменте бизнес-класса в первом квартале 2010 года оказалось на 20 выше, чем
в первом квартале прошлого года...
Original headline: продажи элитного жилья в москве увеличились в 1 квартале в два раза
Generated headline: продажи элитных квартир в москве в 1 квартале выросли вдвое
Table 3. Samples of headlines generated by our model.
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we explore the application of Universal Transformer architecture to
the task of abstractive headline generation and outperform the abstractive state-
of-the-art result on the New York Times Annotated corpus. We also present
a newly released Rossiya Segodnya corpus and results achieved by our model
applied to it.
Acknowledgments. Authors are thankful to Alexey Samarin for useful dis-
cussions, David Prince for proofreading, Madina Kabirova for proofreading and
human evaluation organization, Anastasia Semenyuk and Maria Zaharova for
help obtaining the New York Times Annotated corpus, and Alexey Filippovskii
for providing the Rossiya Segodnya corpus.

Self-Attentive Model for Headline Generation
7
