17 
     ISSN 2756-9160 / November 2020. 
      International Conference on Advances in Computing and Technology (ICACT–2020) Proceedings 
The Future of Artificial Intelligence and its Social, Economic 
and Ethical Consequences
Chongomweru Halimu
School of Computing and Informatics, 
Universiti Teknologi Brunei  
Brunei Darussalam 

Abstract—Recent development in AI has enabled the 
expansion of its application to multiple domains. From medical 
treatment, gaming, manufacturing to daily business processes. A 
huge amount of money has been poured into AI research due to 
its exciting discoveries. Technology giants like Google, Facebook, 
Amazon, and Baidu are the driving forces in the field today. But 
the rapid growth and excitement that the technology offers 
obscure us from looking at the impact it brings on our society. 
This short paper gives a brief history of AI and summarizes 
various social, economic and ethical issues that are impacting our 
society today. We hope that this work will provide a useful 
starting point and perhaps reference for newcomers and 
stakeholders of the field. 
Keywords — Artificial intelligence, chatbot, ethics, AI bias 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Although Artificial intelligence (AI) came into existence 
in ancient times, only in 1956 the official name was formally 
given [1]. Since that time AI research has undergone a period 
of optimism and disappointment due to the slow progress 
which was observed. There was a fluctuation in progress made 
until after 1993. Research began to pick up again after that, 
and in 1997, IBM's Deep Blue became the first computer to 
beat a chess champion when it defeated Russian grandmaster 
Garry Kasparov [2]. This was the beginning of a new era in 
the AI field. In the last two decades, much has been done in 
academic research, but AI has been only recently recognized 
as a paradigm shift. A lot of progress is now being made as the 
investment has been going into the field. AI researches highly 
depends on funding since it’s a long-term research field and 
requires an enormous amount of effort and resources. 
AI techniques are being used to predicting deforestation 
before it happens, NASDAQ stock now monitors trades to see 
if insider trading is going on, NASA use AI methods to 
schedule payload operation, diagnosis of acute leukaemia, 
breast, and pancreatic cancer, and also predict patient survival 
with breast cancer, to car automation, and many other areas 
[3]. This application area highlights the importance and the 
benefits that AI technology brings us today. AI or machine 
intelligence can be devoted as an activity of making machine 
intelligent. That intelligence can be seen as the quality that 
enables an entity to function appropriately and with foresight 
in its environment [4]. But AI research defines AI as the study 
of intelligent agents, an agent that can perceive its 
environment and takes an action that maximizes the outcome 
or goal [5]. Advancements in computing power, theoretical 
understanding, and a large amount of data have enabled AI 
techniques to be an essential part of the technological 
revolution and in helping to solve many complex problems of 
our daily life. Take an example of recognizing object from 
images which just seemed like a sci-fi of AI a few years ago 
but now a simple convolutional neural network sits at the back 
and does the work [6]. All this may just be the begging of the 
new era of technological advancement. A huge amount of 
money has been poured into AI research due to its exciting 
discoveries and as the days go on it's getting better and better. 
But perhaps the capabilities that the AI brings obscure us from 
looking at the consequences that come with it. In this paper, 
we try to review the current social, economic, and ethical 
consequences that AI technologies will bring. 
II.
SOCIAL AND ETHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF AI
 
Social consequences involve those effects which the 
technology will directly or indirectly impact our life from an 
individual perspective, community, and society at large. The 
integration of AI is now transforming our daily life inevitably 
[7]. We are using different products powered by AI without 
even noticing. Google Assistant, Amazon's Alexa, Roomba 
vacuum cleaner, chatbots, and many other products in our 
world today are mostly powered by AI technology. The 
popularity of the technology has been assisted by the increase 
in computational power and a sheer increase in the amount of 
data  [8]. The excitement about AI and its future impact on 
health care, our economy, climatic changes, and the education 
system are promising. Despite AI progress, few ethical issues 
have been presented. With the technological approach to be 
human-like, the threats and unpredictable complication cannot 
be overseen [9]. 
III.
UNEMPLOYMENT
 
With the automation of processes dominating the AI field. 
Job displacement is one of the huge consequences that AI will 
have. In the past decade, human has relied on physical work 
and investing their time to earn. With the technology still 
rising and smart intelligent robots have been developed, we 
may see a future where individuals are being paid just for 
being citizens which will be important in helping to combat 
the job-stealing automation [10]. Despite the threat, a look of 
some automation like autonomous vehicles seems like a good 
ethic choice as it will help in a significant reduction of the 
accident if successfully implemented. One study conducted by 
Frey et al. found that 47% of total US employment is at risk of 
being replaced by machines over the next two decades [11]. 
AI-related jobs are now dramatically increasing in demand. 
According to the annual report AI index report [3], the AI 
skills requirements in job-listing have continued to grow 
multiples times from year to year. These statistics indicate the 
increasing need for AI skills to survive in the job market. But 
on the bright side, the replacement of machines could finally 
see humans doing what they like and other non-labour 
activities like family caring, community activities and found 
other new ways to help the society [12]. 
IV.
INEQUALITY
 
Another dramatic effect of AI technology is the widening 
of the wealth gap. As technology cuts off the human workforce 
in different companies, this means the revenue will go to fewer 
people. Hence AI-driven companies will make all the money 
while fewer people will benefit. Although some people argued 
Muhammad Tariq Siddique 
School of Computing and Informatics, 
Universiti Teknologi Brunei   
Brunei Darussalam 

Burhan Rashid Hussein 
Mathematic and Computing Sciences, 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam  
Brunei Darussalam 

18 
                         ISSN 2756-9160 / November 2020. 
      International Conference on Advances in Computing and Technology (ICACT–2020) Proceedings 
that automation won’t be the source of increased 
unemployment still it can destroy middle-range jobs while 
increasing those on the low and high-end jobs. This will 
augment social inequality and amplify the gap between low 
and higher-end job earnings [13]. The AI startups are now 
benefiting from the investments as the potential of the 
technology indicating its potential towards businesses. This 
brings the initiative for the society and their governments to 
create policies that will supervisor and ensure equal 
distribution of wealth among individuals to combat the 
increasing gap. 
V. 
HUMANITY 
 
With the rise of AI bot, modern human interaction is also 
changing. A remarkable AI bot named Eugene Goostman won 
the Turing challenge for the first time [14]. In this challenge, 
the bot interacted with a human in a text input format and the 
user was required to guess whether they were chatting with a 
machine or human. The bot fooled more than half of the 
human raters into thinking they have been talking to their 
fellow human being. Unlike the human nature of being tired 
and changing moods, these machines are more efficient and 
have a wide environment and resources for making 
relationships with humans. The chatbot of today not only can 
answer a variety of human questions but also can establish an 
emotional connection with humans [6],[15].  
We have already started to see the beneficial use of bots. 
One good example is the visabot which help a user better 
understand American immigration laws and apply for the right 
visa based on persons need. The chatbot helps in smoothing 
visa processes, save time, and ensure already filled in visa 
forms1. Another example is a Microsoft chatbot which was 
created to interact with people on social media but ends up 
adopting the bad side of the conversation as they interact [16]. 
This serves as an example of the need for guidance on the 
purpose of the chatbot we are creating. There have been many 
positive stories about and use of chatbots, but the question 
remains will they create a society of its own in the already 
disconnected world of social media or will they help to shape 
up the behaviour of the humans which to some extent has 
already degraded. 
VI. 
ARTIFICIAL STUPIDITY 
With the unpredictable behaviour of humans, learning from 
them can sometimes be difficult. The data that AI technology 
is using to train and learn mostly does not cover all the aspect 
of human behaviour. Intelligence comes from learning, 
whether you’re human or machine. Systems usually have a 
training phase in which they "learn" to detect the right patterns 
and act according to their input. Once a system is fully trained, 
it can then go into the test phase, where it is hit with more 
examples and we see how it performs. The training phase 
cannot cover all possible examples that a system may deal 
with in the real world.  These systems can be fooled in ways 
that humans wouldn't be. For example, random dot patterns 
can lead a machine to “see” things that aren’t there. If we rely 
on AI to bring us into a new world of labour, security, and 
efficiency, we need to ensure that the machine performs as 
planned and that people can’t overpower it to use it for their 
ends. 
___________________________ 
 
 
VII. AI BIAS 
 
For a human to be intelligent they need to learn to do the 
AI systems. But the imperfect nature and of humans creates a 
biased environment when it comes to the dataset the models 
are learning from. One good example could be a criminology 
prediction system which was observed to be biased against 
black people [17]. Although the model proved to be accurate 
still the assessment of the prediction together with the errors 
produced was not assessed enough. Here comes the question 
of the purpose and the impact of technology on people’s lives. 
The analysis and handling of the technology need in-depth 
exploration of the results it produced and not only rely on the 
accuracy. Handling these systems to a non-expert to rely on 
can be more detrimental than it looks. Although the systems 
are building to serve our social progress the bias nature of 
humanity can still be propagated if not handled carefully. In 
another research conducted by the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology together with Stanford University were the team 
examined the three facial recognition systems and broke down 
the accuracy of the result based on gender and race [18]. The 
researchers noted biases in the results produced and noted that 
that classification bias came from the dataset used to train the 
model. So, the researchers in AI argue that the biases in the 
kind of system we produced can be reduced by diversifying 
the workforce that is involved in building the systems or even 
making the researchers aware of the biases that exist in their 
work. 
VIII. SECURITY 
 
Autonomous weapons are now being developed at a rapid 
pace. Powerful nations are battling each other to become the 
leading power in autonomous weapons. From automated 
warfare jets, to robotic soldiers all are already in the ground 
field. The increased power of destruction that the technology 
is adding is far beyond measures. Talking about nuclear, 
aerospace, cybersecurity, and biotechnology these are priority 
areas for the country's national security. For example, 
Cybersecurity is becoming even more important now as the 
fight won't only be on the battleground but the systems we are 
building ourselves. Big countries like the US, China, and 
Russia are racing each other towards the global dominance of 
AI technology. A quote from the Russian president Vladimir 
Putin said, “AI is the future, not only for Russia but for all 
humankind,” Whoever becomes the leader in this sphere will 
become the ruler of the world.” [19]. Countries like China 
have even announced its ambition of becoming the leader in 
AI technology by the year 2030 [20]. This shows the race is 
on and only time can tell the outcome of the system that is 
faster and more capable than humans by order of magnitude. 
IX. 
EVIL GENES 
 
With many unanswered questions within the AI field 
today, new questions and unknowns continue to erupt as the 
technology progresses. The evil within the AI is not what we 
see in Hollywood movies of machines turning against humans, 
but rather is the mechanisms that the AI uses to solve the 
problems which we did not intentionally do that way. An 
interesting example is provided by Julia Bossmann in her 
report where an AI system could provide an answer to 
eliminate all humans as a solution to combat cancer [21]. So 
as useful as it is the technology still needs to understand the 
full context of the environment in which we want to find a 
solution for that. 
https://visabot.co/ 

19 
                         ISSN 2756-9160 / November 2020. 
      International Conference on Advances in Computing and Technology (ICACT–2020) Proceedings 
X. 
THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI 
 
Like in the early days when electricity was discovered and 
brings about the industrial revolution, the same is predicted for 
AI technology to bring another industrial revolution. In an 
article published by Parkes and Wellman, the four sectors that 
will see the tremendous effect of AI technology are the 
Manufacturing industries, Professional services, financial 
services, and wholesale and retail [22]. Some countries are 
already starting to take advantage of the opportunities 
presented by technology today. One of the countries is China 
which has even set its goal to become the global leader in AI 
research by 2030 [20].With a massive population of around 
1.4 billion in which 730 active internet users, the country sees 
its potential in collecting data, and the technology becoming 
more hungry for data. It seems that AI is going to become the 
new powerhouse for the countries and investment in research 
will be crucial for the country to break through and beneficial 
utilization of technology. 
According to research conducted by Accenture, one of the 
leading global technology companies on top twelve global 
economic leaders revealed that AI technology could double 
annual economic growth rates in 2035 by changing the nature 
of the work and creating new relationships between man and 
machine [23]. This indicates an increase in the absorption of 
AI in our economies. The technology will continue to offer 
amplification and transcend of the current capital and labour 
capacity to propel our economic growth. Although the initial 
phase will be more on the industrial and manufacturing side, 
consumers will be the next frontier as a variety of AI products 
will finally be on the market. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
With this exponential increase in AI technology, it is time 
for the people and their governments to embrace technology 
instead of fearing change. It is also clear that the complication 
of the challenges that technology presents is also a concern. 
Governments and other policymakers should collaborate with 
the researchers to try and steer the technology towards serving 
humanity as the impact of the technology spans globally. As 
the computation power advances and more data being 
generated, researchers together with the community should 
focus on making both technology and people working more 
together 
rather 
than 
increasing 
the 
gap. 
Different 
organizations, associations, and individuals are becoming 
global examples in collaborating to take action and measure 
against the challenges that the technology presents. 
Organizations such as Algorithmic Justice League which 
highlights the algorithmic bias and let the people raise their 
concerns and experience to develop best practice and 
accountability. The petition to the UN urging rapid action on 
weaponized AI will help global engagement. The AI4All 
which aims to train a new and more diverse generation of the 
future AI technologist, thinkers, and leaders [3]. The is a need 
for global engagement for AI to stimulate and enforce 
policymakers to take appropriate actions.
