arXiv:1603.01524v3  [cs.GT]  3 Nov 2016
Analyzing Games with Ambiguous Player Types Using
the MINthenMAX Decision Model
(work in progress)
Ilan Nehama
Tel-Aviv University

November 2016
Abstract
In many common interactive scenarios, participants lack information about other
participants, and speciﬁcally about the preferences of other participants. In this work,
we model an extreme case of incomplete information, which we term games with type
ambiguity, where a participant lacks even information enabling him to form a belief
on the preferences of others. Under type ambiguity, one cannot analyze the scenario
using the commonly used Bayesian framework, and therefore one needs to model the
participants using a diﬀerent decision model.
To this end, we present the MINthenMAX decision model under ambiguity. This
model is a reﬁnement of Wald’s MiniMax principle, which we show to be too coarse for
games with type ambiguity. We characterize MINthenMAX as the ﬁnest reﬁnement
of the MiniMax principle that satisﬁes three properties we claim are necessary for
games with type ambiguity. This prior-less approach we present here also follows the
common practice in computer science of worst-case analysis.
Finally, we deﬁne and analyze the corresponding equilibrium concept, when all
players follow MINthenMAX. We demonstrate this equilibrium by applying it to
two common economic scenarios: coordination games and bilateral trade. We show
that in both scenarios, an equilibrium in pure strategies always exists, and we analyze
the equilibria.
Keywords: Decision making under ambiguity, Games with ambiguity, Wald’s MiniMax
principle, MINthenMAX decision model, MINthenMAX equilibrium
This work is supported by ISF grant 1435/14 administered by the Israeli Academy of Sciences and
Israel-USA Binational Science Foundation (BSF) grant 2014389.
This work was carried out primarily when the author was a Ph.D. student at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel.

Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Model
7
3
Axiomatization of MINthenMAX
11
4
Bilateral trade
15
5
Coordination games
18
6
Summary and future directions
23
