Conceptual model of a cognitive system: dynamical system with plastic
self-organizing velocity ﬁeld
Natalia B. Janson∗and Christopher J. Marsden
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK
Spontaneously evolving living systems can be modelled as continuous-time dynamical systems
(DSs), whose evolution rules are determined by their velocity vector ﬁelds.
We point out that
because of their architectural plasticity, biological neural networks belong to a novel type of DSs
whose velocity ﬁeld is plastic, albeit within bounds, and aﬀected by sensory stimuli. We introduce
DSs with fully plastic velocity ﬁelds self-organising under the inﬂuence of stimuli, called self-shaping
DSs, and propose that a system of this class represents a conceptual model of a cognitive system. We
propose a simple phenomenological model that within a single ﬁeld-shaping mechanism carries out
a set of essential cognitive functions without any supervision and online, just like living cognitive
systems do. The performance of this model is illustrated experimentally with musical examples.
Unlike in artiﬁcial neural networks, this mechanism does not produce spurious attractors and in
principle does not limit memory size.
Implementation of this principle could pave the way to
creating artiﬁcial intelligent devices of a new type.
PACS numbers: 05.45.-a,84.35.+i
The working principles of a considerable number of
man-made devices are based on their ability to evolve
spontaneously and their suitable models take the form of
dynamical systems (DSs) [1]. Examples include a pendu-
lum clock [1] and a vacuum-tube circuit producing elec-
tromagnetic oscillations [2]. In addition, in the 20th cen-
tury the dynamical nature of living systems has been ap-
preciated at all levels of their organisation, from a cell to
a population of organisms, meaning that their states are
continually evolving and thus they can also be modelled
as DSs ([3], for a review see [4]).
A DS is a mathematical construct incorporating a vec-
tor x=(x1, . . . , xN) describing the system state at any
time t, and a rule determining how the state evolves in
time. In continuous-time models this rule is usually spec-
iﬁed by a system of ordinary diﬀerential equations
dx1
dt = s1(x1, . . . , xN),
. . . ,
dxN
dt
= sN(x1, . . . , xN),
(1)
or in compact vector notation
dx
dt = s(x).
(2)
Here,
s=(s1, . . . , sN)
is
the
velocity
vector
ﬁeld
(Fig. 1(a)), which can be loosely understood as a “force”
that pushes the state x in a certain direction, and is
generally diﬀerent at diﬀerent points in the phase space.
This ﬁeld determines the observable behavior of the sys-
tem in all feasible situations.
In reality all inanimate and living systems interact with
the environment and experience time-varying perturba-
tions or stimuli. For their description non-autonomous
DSs are usually utilized [5], which diﬀer from (2) in that

their velocity ﬁelds explicitly depend on time, namely,
dx
dt = ˜v(x, t). Since external perturbations are usually
describable as time-varying vectors η(t), the appropriate
models take the form [6]
dx
dt = v(x, η(t)).
(3)
The performance of such systems can be understood as
having every vector of the core velocity ﬁeld v(x, 0) (cor-
responding to the absence of stimulus) forcibly amended
at every time t. Importantly, after the stimulus ceases
(η(t)=0) the ﬁeld v in (3) instantly regains its core form
and keeps no memory of inﬂuence it might have experi-
enced previously. While this feature describes most situa-
tions well enough, there is one type of systems it does not
capture: cognitive systems, including the brain. Namely,
the brain is continually perceiving sensory stimuli and,
remarkably, retains information about them long after
they cease. Moreover, despite sensory stimuli being typi-
cally quite random, the brain accumulates information in
a consistent and orderly manner. Dynamical hypothesis
in cognition suggested that a cognitive system is formed
by cognitive agents, represented as DSs, and looked quite
promising [7, 8]. However, the DS theory has not been
ready to form the foundation for cognitive science and
needed extensions directly relevant to cognitive process-
ing [9]. The purpose of our paper is to extend the DS
theory in order to provide a dynamical basis for the de-
scription of cognition.
In models of biological neural networks (NNs) indi-
vidual neurons are usually described as DSs [10], and
inter-neuron connections are incorporated as some func-
tions of neuron states.
Thus, the model of the whole
NN becomes a DS. It is well appreciated that the unique
learning ability of the brain is thanks to its architectural
plasticity, i.e.
to the fact that inter-neuron (synaptic)
couplings continually evolve in time [11]. We point out
that that the physical plasticity of the brain implies the
arXiv:1602.00265v2  [nlin.AO]  6 Feb 2016

2
1
x2
(a)
= η(   )
= η(   )
= η(   )
1
x
t=t1
t=ti
ti
x
t=ti
ti
x
U(x)
x
(i)
t=t
(ii) 
0
t
(b)
x
FIG. 1.
(a) For a sample two-dimensional dynamical system
the phase trajectory (solid line) is shown being guided by
the velocity vector ﬁeld (arrows), whose features include a
stable ﬁxed point (ﬁlled circle) and a manifold outlining the
boundary of its basin of attraction (dashed line), and a saddle
ﬁxed point (empty circle). (b) Illustration of the idea of the
plastic energy landscape by analogy with memory foam. For a
one-dimensional “foam” stretched in x direction, assume that
initially it is ﬂat and described as U(x, 0)=0 (see t=t0). If the
quicksilver drop lands onto the “foam” at position x=η, the
landscape is deformed: a dent appears, which is the deepest
exactly at x=η, and gets shallower at larger distances from η
(see t=t1). Thus the “foam” will learn about the occurrence
of the drop and of its position.
plasticity of the velocity ﬁeld of its DS. In its turn, con-
tinual reshaping of the velocity ﬁeld implies continual
updating of the rules governing collective neural spiking
and ultimately the behavior. This observation leads us
to propose a conceptual model of a learning system as
a DS with plastic velocity ﬁeld that self-organizes under
the inﬂuence of stimuli. For brevity, we call such systems
self-shaping DSs. We also propose a simple phenomeno-
logical model of a cognitive system carrying out a set of
essential cognitive functions.
Although there seems no doubt that in the brain mem-
ories are stored in synaptic connections [12] and in neu-
ral circuits [13], and formed thanks to synaptic plasticity,
the link from the brain architecture to memory represen-
tation and learning remains to be properly understood
[14]. An elegant mechanism of memory representation
was hypothesized in the theory of artiﬁcial NNs, which
are rough phenomenological models of biological NNs.
Namely, it was proposed that memories could be repre-
sented as attractors arising in the phase space of a NN
as a result of choosing appropriate values of connections,
see review [15] and [16]. However, given that NNs are
strongly non-linear systems, it is generally impossible to
predict or to control where in their phase space the next
attractor appears or disappears as a result of the ad-
justment of connections. Also, the memory capacity of
NNs is inevitably bounded [17] and as a result memories
themselves are short-lived [18, 19]. Moreover, NNs are
prone to the uncontrollable formation of spurious attrac-
tors not representing any valid memories [20]. Finally,
while the values taken by the stimuli can in principle be
unbounded, the states of the NN are principally bounded
by the physical properties of neuron membranes, which
makes it even more diﬃcult to relate the incoming pat-
terns with their representation by the NN.
For our phenomenological model we utilize the idea
of attractor coding a memory, but depart from the NN
paradigm as a collection of rigid units with bounded
states coupled ﬂexibly. Instead, we introduce an idea of a
fully plastic spontaneously evolving velocity ﬁeld directly
amenable to stimulus. In our phenomenological model
we allow every stimulus to leave its trace on the velocity
ﬁeld and to contribute to the formation of attractors and
their basins, and propose a single ﬁeld-shaping mecha-
nism that enables the cognitive system to simultaneously
memorize and categorize the inputs.
We formulate arguably the simplest self-shaping DS,
in which the vector ﬁeld s is the negative of the gradient
∇of a scalar energy function V [21],
dx
dt = −∇V (x, t) = s,
(4)
where x both represents the system state in the N-
dimensional phase space, and codes a certain pattern.
The state point in (4) behaves like a massless particle
placed in a potential energy landscape V (x, t) and moves
towards the relevant local minimum. Gradient systems
can have only attractors of the ﬁxed point type at the
minima of V . We assume that V is plastic and under-
goes continual reshaping.
Below we derive an equation describing the shaping of
the landscape V in response to the random stimulus. To
explain this process, it is helpful to employ a loose anal-
ogy with the “memory foam” often used in orthopedic
mattresses: this foam takes the shape of a body pressed
against it, but slowly regains its original shape after the
pressure is removed. We convey the idea using the land-
scape in a one-dimensional space, but it can be extended
to the space of any dimension. It helps to use an auxiliary
function U(x, t) describing the “foam” proﬁle depending
on a single spatial variable x and time t, as illustrated by
Fig. 1(b). Assume that the landscape is elastic with elas-
ticity factor k that models the capacity of the system to
forget. Here, we make a simpliﬁed assumption that the
deeper the dent at the position x is, the faster the land-
scape tries to come back to U=0. However, the forgetting
term can be modelled in a variety of ways, depending on
what the situation requires.
Let the stimulus act as a sequence of quicksilver drops,
which at consecutive time moments t1, t2, . . . , ti, . . . fall
on the soft surface at positions x=η(ti). Namely, each
drop lands, locally deforms the landscape and slides to-
wards the local minimum while gradually evaporating.
Starting from a ﬂat landscape with no features and thus
free of memories (Fig. 1(b), t=t0), the ﬁrst drop creates a
dent centered at x=η(t1) which becomes the ﬁrst memory
(Fig. 1(b), t=t1). A subsequent drop lands at a diﬀerent
spot x=η(ti) and deforms U in one of two ways. (i) If
η(ti) is suﬃciently close to an earlier stimulus, the drop
amends the respective existing dent (Fig. 1(b), (i) t=ti)
and slides to its bottom. Thus η(ti) both amends the

3
existing memory and is recognised as the one, just like
perception of diﬀerent shades of yellow could form a sin-
gle memory of a yellow color. Alternatively, (ii) if η(ti) is
very distinct from any existing memory, it forms its own
memory (Fig. 1(b), (ii) t=ti), and the drop remains at
the bottom of the respective dent while evaporating. This
process is repeated as more stimuli arrive. This shaping
mechanism reminds the kernel density estimation used in
statistics [22], however, here it is performed in a contin-
uous time domain under more general assumptions.
Consider how U(x, t) changes over a small, but ﬁnite
time interval ∆t:
U(x, t+∆t) = U(x, t)−g(x−η(t))∆t−kU(x, t)∆t, (5)
where g(z) is some non-negative bell-shaped function de-
scribing the shape of a single dent left by the quicksilver
drop, e.g. a Gaussian function
g(z) =
1
p
2πσ2z
exp

−z2
σ2z

.
(6)
In (5) move U(x, t) to the left-hand side, divide both
parts by ∆t, and take the limit as ∆t →0, to obtain
∂U(x, t)
∂t
= −g(x −η(t)) −kU(x, t).
(7)
It can be shown that for some arbitrary η(t) the solution
U(x, t) has a linear trend and tends to −∞, i.e. it behaves
as a linearly decaying function of t with superimposed
ﬂuctuations. We wish to eliminate this trend and see if we
can achieve some sort of stationary behavior of U(x, t).
Assuming that t>0 change variables
V = U
t ,
∂V
∂t = 1
t
∂U
∂t −V

,
∂U
∂t = t∂V
∂t + V,
and rewrite (7) as follows
∂V
∂t = −1
t

V + g(x −η(t))

−kV.
(8)
In an N-dimensional phase space (8) becomes
∂V
∂t = −1
t

V + g(x −η(t))

−kV,
(9)
where x and η(t) are vectors. Within models (8) and
(9) the landscape V and the respective velocity ﬁeld of
Eq. (4) progressively smooth out and stabilize, as illus-
trated in Fig. 2 for a one-dimensional system subjected
to stimulus η(t) with a two-peak distribution. Equations
(4) and (9) form the model of a simple self-shaping DS,
in which every value of η plays two roles: it both deforms
the landscape in (9) and resets initial conditions in (4).
Firstly, we demonstrate the performance of the self-
shaping DS using numerically generated stimuli with dif-
ferent statistical properties.
Fig. 2 shows evolution of
V (x, t) as two kinds of scalar stimuli η(t) are applied to
3.5
−3.5
3.5
−3.5
−1
0
−0.3
0
t
x
(a)
V(x,t)
t
(b)
(c)
(d)
x
x
t
V(x,t)
x
t
FIG. 2.
Evolution of the energy landscape V (x, t) as the
random stimulus is applied by numerically simulating Eq. (8)
with k=0: (a,c) 3D view; (b,d) projection of V (x, t) onto (x, t)
plane shown by color (shade of grey), and the stimulus applied
– by ﬁlled circles. In (a,c) the probability density distribution
of stimulus is given by solid line at the front. In (a,b) the
consecutive values of the stimulus are uncorrelated, and in
(c,d) – correlated.
the one-dimensional system (8) [23]. The values of stim-
uli arriving at consecutive time moments are depicted by
ﬁlled circles in (b) and (d), and their distributions have
similar two-peak shapes shown by the solid lines at the
front of (a,c).
The diﬀerence between the two inputs
is in the amount of temporal correlations in the respec-
tive random processes: in (a,b) two consecutive values
are uncorrelated and in (c,d) correlated. The stimulus
illustrated in Fig. 2 (a,b) is obtained by taking Gaus-
sian white noise and applying a non-linear transforma-
tion that changed its distribution into a two-peak one
shown in (a) by solid line. This way, the consecutive val-
ues of the process remained uncorrelated. The stimulus
in (c,d) is obtained by applying Gaussian white noise to
a diﬀerential equation describing a particle moving in a
non-symmetric double-well potential with large viscosity
[24]. The distribution of the stimulus is shown in (c) by
solid line, and its consecutive values are correlated.
The actual signals applied are shown by ﬁlled circles
in (b,d), and in g(z) described by (6) we used σz=
√
0.1.
One can see that eventually both landscapes shape into
the respective distributions of stimuli, but if the stimulus
values are uncorrelated, the convergence is faster. If the
random process producing the stimulus is not stationary,
V evolves into a time-averaged distribution of the input.
Next, we illustrate how the proposed gradient self-
shaping system automatically discovers and memorises
musical notes and phrases. A children’s song “Mary had
a little lamb” was performed with a ﬂute by an ama-
teur musician six times. The song involves three musical
notes (A, B and G), consists of 32 beats and was chosen
for its simplicity to illustrate the principle. The signal
was recorded as a wave-ﬁle with sampling rate 8kHz. In

4
0
350
550
−0.05
t
t
A4
(a)
B 4
(b)
G4
x
x
V(x,t)
FIG. 3.
(Color online.) Musical note recognition. (a) Evo-
lution of the energy landscape V (x, t) in response to a musi-
cal signal performed by an amateur musician. Local minima
that develop eventually are very close to the frequencies of the
musical notes G4, A4 and B4 that enter the song. (b) Filled
circles show the actual values of the input, and the shade of
the background shows the depth of the energy function.
agreement with what is usually done in speech recogni-
tion [25], the short-time Fourier Transform was applied
[26] to the waveform with a sliding window of duration
τ=0.75 sec, which was roughly equal to the duration of
each note. The highest spectral peak was extracted for
each window, which corresponded to the main frequency
f Hz of the given note. A sequence of frequencies f(t) was
used to stimulate the system (8). Note, that each value
of f(t) was slightly diﬀerent from the exact frequency of
the respective note, because of the natural variability in-
troduced by a human musician, and the signal f(t) was
in fact random, as seen from Fig. 3(b).
Firstly, we illustrate how individual musical notes can
be automatically identiﬁed. A one-dimensional system
(8) received the signal η(t)=f(t), resampled to 8Hz to
save computation time. The function f(t) can be seen as
a realization of a 1st-order stationary and ergodic process
F(t), consisting of inﬁnitely many repetitions of the same
song, which we observe during ﬁnite time. This process
has a one-dimensional distribution pF
1 (f), which does not
change in time. A Gaussian kernel g(z) was used with
σz=
√
5 Hz. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the energy converges
to some distribution (with negative sign) shown by the
solid line. The most probable frequencies are automat-
ically discovered as the energy minima as follows, with
ﬁgures in brackets showing the exact frequencies of the
respective musical notes: 434Hz (440Hz) for A4, 490Hz
(493.88Hz) for B4, and 388Hz (392Hz) for G4.
Secondly, we show how system (9) can discover and
memorize temporal patterns – musical phrases consisting
of four beats.
The 4D “foam” was used, and to each
of its channels the same signal f(t) was applied, but
with a phase shift. Namely, at each time t the system
(9) received a vector stimulus ψ(t)=(f(t), f(t + τ), f(t +
2τ), f(t + 3τ)), τ=0.75 sec. The procedure of creating a
vector with the coordinates made of the delayed versions
of the same signal is called delay embedding [27]. For
the purpose of this part, we can regard ψ(t) as a realiza-
tion of a 4th-order stationary and ergodic vector random
process Ψ(t) (which we observe during ﬁnite time) with
4-dimensional distribution pΨ
4 (f1, f2, f3, f4). We used a
multivariate Gaussian kernel g with σz=
√
5 Hz in all of
2
f1
f3
t
4
f
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
f
4
f
3f
1f
2
f
FIG. 4.
(color online) Automatic discovery and memoriza-
tion of musical phrases. (a) The sight of music: a sequence of
melody pieces represented as polygons (as explained in (b)).
The shade (color online) is only used to enhance visualiza-
tion and carries no additional information. (b) Representing
a four-note phrase with a polygon. (c) The resultant snap-
shot of the four-dimensional landscape V (x, t). The function
V is shown with the smallest values on the top for visual-
ization purposes. The sharp edges on the top represent the
most typical musical patterns. (d) The most typical musical
phrases automatically detected by the system (4), (9).
its four variables.
One cannot visualize evolution of a 4D landscape in
the same way as we did in Figs. 2-3, and we use an alter-
native representation. We take four half-axes and make
their origins coincide (Fig. 4(b)). For each feasible in-
put ψ=(f1, f2, f3, f4) we put 4 points with coordinates
fi on each of half-axes, and connect them by lines. Thus,
any feasible input pattern is represented by a polygon
on a plane [28].
The value of V for each value of ψ
is depicted in Fig. 4(c) as the altitude of the respective
polygon, with the deepest polygons shown on top. Due
to overlapping of polygons it might be diﬃcult to identify
the highest ones, which code the most probable musical
phrases.
However, one can also ﬁnd them by numeri-
cal simulation using the paradigm of a particle in the
4D landscape that will go to one of the local minima.
Five most probable polygons are given in smaller scale
in Fig. 4(d). Recognition of musical phrases is also illus-
trated with the supplementary audio ﬁles [29].
To conclude, our phenomenological model (4), (9) of a
simple cognitive system learns by gradually reﬁning the
structure of its velocity ﬁeld with account of the stream
of incoming data. Namely, in agreement with how hu-
mans are creating new memories, and also altering old
memories each time they recall them [30], it creates new

5
attractors (i.e. memorizes new categories), and alters the
shapes of the existing attractor basins (i.e. the size and
the content of the existing categories) and the attractor
locations (i.e. features of the central category members).
Unlike artiﬁcial NNs, the proposed DSs with fully plas-
tic self-organising velocity ﬁeld have no prototype in the
physical world. However, their operating principle could
epitomize the one of both artiﬁcial and biological NNs.
Namely, we hypothesize that to recognize familiar pat-
terns the NN needs to acquire the velocity ﬁeld of a
certain shape, and to learn continually the NN should
be adjusting this shape in response to the new stimuli.
In other words, self-organization of the velocity ﬁeld is
the purpose of the NN, and the synaptic plasticity is the
means to achieve this goal.
If correct, this hypothesis
could give rise to the top-down approach, which is very
much needed, but currently under-represented in brain
studies [31, 32]. Namely, if one guesses how the velocity
ﬁeld needs to be shaped and amended in a NN forming
and recalling memories, one could deduce how synapses
and parameters of individual neurons could/should be
varying to achieve this, and then verify this deduction
experimentally. Thus, it could be possible to understand
why the laws of synaptic plasticity need to be this way.
Unlike artiﬁcial NNs, our model can in principle keep
an unlimited number of memories because its phase space
is unbounded and its velocity ﬁeld can reshape locally
without destroying the global picture. For the same rea-
son our model does not create spurious memories. Imple-
mentation of these principles in hardware could pave the
way to artiﬁcial intelligent devices of a new type. The
model can be developed further to give rise to attrac-
tors with internal dynamics, i.e. limit cycles, quasiperi-
odic and chaotic attractors, mimicking the performance
of networks of ever-spiking biological neurons.
The authors are grateful to Alexander Balanov for
thorough reading and helpful critical comments on all
drafts of this paper, and to Victoria Marsh for playing
the ﬂute.
[1] A.A. Andronov, A.A. Vitt, and S.E. Khaikin, Theory
of Oscillators
(Pergammon Press, Oxford, New York,
1959/1963/1966).
[2] van der Pol B, Radio Review 1, 701–710, 754-762 (1920).
[3] L. Glass, M.C. Mackey, From Clocks to Chaos:
The
Rhythms of Life (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1988).
[4] N.B. Janson Contemporary Physics 53, 137–168 (2012).
[5] P.E. Kloeden, M. Rasmussen, Nonautonomous Dynamical
Systems (American Mathematical Society, 2011).
[6] M.I. Freidlin, A.D. Wentzell, Random perturbations of dy-
namical systems (Springer-Verlag New York, 1998).
[7] P. Smolensky, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 11, 1-23
(1988).
[8] T. van Gelder Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21, 615–665
(1998).
[9] J.P. Crutchﬁeld Behav. Brain Sci. 21, 635 (1998).
[10] E. Izhikevich, Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The
Geometry of Excitability and Bursting (The MIT Press,
2007).
[11] C.A. Shaw, J. McEachern eds, Toward a Theory of Neu-
roplasticity (Psychology Press, 2001).
[12] T.V. Bliss, G.L. Collingridge, Nature 361, 3139 (1993).
[13] X. Liu, S. Ramirez, T. Pang, C.B. Puryear, A. Govin-
darajan, K. Deisseroth, S. Tonegawa,
Nature 484, 381–
385 (2012).
[14] The HBP Report, The Human Brain Project (2012).
https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/documents/10180/
17648/TheHBPReport_LR.pdf
[15] S. Grossberg, Neural Networks 1, 17–61 (1988).
[16] J.J. Hopﬁeld, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 3088–3092
(1984).
[17] D. Amit, S. Fusi, Networks 3, 443–464 (1992).
[18] S. Fusi, P.J. Drew, L.F. Abbott
Neuron 45, 599–611
(2005).
[19] S. Fusi, L.F. Abbott
Nature Neuroscience 10(4), 485–
493 (2007).
[20] D. Amit, Modeling Brain Function: The World of Attrac-
tor Neural Networks (Cambridge University Press, 1992).
[21] M.W. Hirsch, S. Smale, R. Devaney, Diﬀerential Equa-
tions, Dynamical Systems, and an Introduction to Chaos
3rd Ed. (Academic Press, 2004).
[22] D. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation. Theory, Prac-
tice and Visualization (Wiley, New York, 1992).
[23] See Supplemental Material for the full explanation of how
the simulated stimuli for Fig. 2 were obtained.
[24] A.N. Malakhov, Chaos 7(3), 488-504 (1997) .
[25] J. Flanagan, Speech analysis synthesis and perception
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin - New York, 2nd ed, 1972).
[26] J. Allen
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing ASSP 25(3), 235-238 (1977).
[27] F. Takens, in Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, D.
Rand and L.-S. Young eds (Lecture Notes in Mathematics
898), pp. 366–381 (1981).
[28] The same method can be used to represent on a plane a
vector of any dimension.
[29] See Supplemental Materials for the wave-ﬁles of the in-
put to the systems (8) and (9), and of the automatically
recognized melody.
[30] D. Schiller and E.A. Phelps, Frontiers in Behavioral Neu-
roscience 5, 24 (2011).
[31] A. Abbott, Nature 499, 272–274 (2013) .
[32] S. Arber et al., Cell 155, 265–266 (2013).

1
Supplemental Material
Conceptual model of a cognitive system: dynamical system with plastic
self-organizing velocity ﬁeld
Natalia B. Janson, Christopher J. Marsden
The performance of the one-dimensional self-shaping DS (4) and (8) is illustrated in Fig. 2 using two numerically
simulated examples, and function g(z) was of the form determined by Eq. (6) with σz =
√
0.1. In both examples
random signals η(t) consisted of values from two diﬀerent categories. However, in the ﬁrst example (Fig. 2 (a,b))
the successive values of input are statistically independent of each other (uncorrelated), while in the second example
(Fig. 2 (c,d)) the subsequent values statistically depend on what the previous values were (correlated).
For the ﬁrst example we create signal η(t) by taking Gaussian white noise ξ(t) with zero mean and unit variance
and applying a non-linear zero-memory transformation to it, i.e. η(t) = F(ξ(t)) [S1]. Here F is a non-linear function,
chosen in such a way that the probability density of η(t) becomes pη
1(η)=0.01245η4+0.1065η2+0.0482 with η ∈[−3, 3],
whose negative is shown in Fig. 2(a) by solid line at the front. The two peaks in the density describe two categories
of input values, and the peak tops (well bottoms in Fig. 2(a)) represent the most typical values from each category.
In the resultant signal η(t), whose portion is shown in Fig. 2(b) by ﬁlled circles, the consecutive values are uncor-
related. Evolution of the landscape V (x, t) is illustrated in Fig. 2(a) by a surface, and one can see that with time it
converges to the density pη
1(x) taken with negative sign. Another illustration of the process of shaping is given in
Fig. 2(b) by the shades (color online) of the background, where the darker shade (color) represents a deeper land-
scape. The landscape becomes instantaneously deeper at the spot where the new value of η appears, but progressively
smoothes out.
In the second example, η(t) is the numerical solution of the following stochastic diﬀerential equation
dη
dt = h(η) + 0.5ξ(t),
(S1)
where ξ(t) is Gaussian white noise with zero mean and unit variance, and h(η)=3(η −η3)/5. Eq. (S1) describes a
particle moving in a double-well potential shaped as the negative of an integral of h(η), under the assumption of a
large viscosity, under the action of a stochastic force. The consecutive values of η(t) are correlated [24] as illustrated
in Fig. 2(d) by ﬁlled circles: if at a certain time the input value is from one category, at the next time moment the
input value is more likely to be from the same category, and the switches between diﬀerent categories occur rarely.
The negative of the density pη
1(x), estimated numerically from the realisation of η(t) as a distribution histogram, is
shown by a solid line in Fig. 2(c), and one can see that the landscape V (x, t) approximately tends to this function
as time goes by. The shaping of the same landscape is also illustrated in Fig. 2(d), where the depth of V is shown
against the values of stimulus η.
One can see that eventually both landscapes in Fig. 2 shape into the negatives of the respective densities, but if
the stimulus values are uncorrelated, the convergence is faster.
[S1] R. Stratonovich, Topics in the theory of random noise (Gordon and Breach, 1963).
