Edge AI as a Service with Coordinated Deep
Neural Networks
Alireza Maleki, Hamed Shah-Mansouri, and Babak H. Khalaj
Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran

Abstract—As artificial intelligence (AI) applications continue
to expand in next-generation networks, there is a growing need
for deep neural network (DNN) models. Although DNN models
deployed at the edge are promising for providing AI as a
service with low latency, their cooperation is yet to be explored.
In this paper, we consider that DNN service providers share
their computing resources as well as their models’ parameters
and allow other DNNs to offload their computations without
mirroring. We propose a novel algorithm called coordinated
DNNs on edge (CoDE) that facilitates coordination among DNN
services by establishing new inference paths. CoDE aims to find
the optimal path, which is the path with the highest possible
reward, by creating multi-task DNNs from individual models.
The reward reflects the inference throughput and model accuracy.
With CoDE, DNN models can make new paths for inference by
using their own or other models’ parameters. We then evaluate
the performance of CoDE through numerical experiments. The
results demonstrate a 40% increase in the inference throughput
while degrading the average accuracy by only 2.3%. Experiments
show that CoDE enhances the inference throughput and, achieves
higher precision compared to a state-of-the-art existing method.
Index Terms—AI as a service, computation offloading, network
intelligence, multi-task DNNs, service coordination.
I. INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming next-generation
networks by offering advanced data analytics and intelligent
decision-making capabilities. Network operators can expand
the capabilities of resource-limited devices by providing AI
services, commonly known as AI as a Service (AIaaS). With
the rapid growth of deep neural network (DNN) applications
in the AI era, delivering DNN models as services has become
even more essential. Fig. 1 illustrates a service provider (SP)
which is hosting three DNN services in its server. DNNs power
everything from video analysis and chatbots to autonomous
vehicles, gaming [1], and metaverse [2].
The increasing complexity and computation demands of
DNNs lead to a rising need for additional computing resources.
Cloud computing platforms with their powerful computing
resources [3], edge computing servers located closer to user
devices [4]–[6], and hybrid cloud-edge environments [7], [8]
can provide the high-performance infrastructure required for
intensive DNN computation. Nevertheless, these computing
infrastructures are not capable of meeting the ever-growing
users’ demands. Thus, it has become inevitable to enhance the
capabilities of the DNN services. To scale up DNN services
on both cloud and edge computing architectures, common
techniques such as model distribution, horizontal scaling, and
DNN
Service 1
DNN
APP 1
DNN
Service 3
DNN
APP 3
Server
SP
DNN
Service 2
DNN
APP 2
Fig. 1.
A SP provides one or multiple DNN services on its server, where
each service offers one DNN application (i.e., model).
replication are used [6], [8], [9]. Existing methods isolate DNN
services, requiring dedicated resources and pipelines. This
isolation also necessitates a complete training if services want
to share a model. However, some SPs might have correlated
services that could share models and resources, enhancing
capabilities without significant resource increase. In other
words, a DNN service, which we call the host service, can
use its model parameters and computing resources to perform a
part of the task of another DNN service, referred to as the local
service, as shown in Fig. 2. This sharing can occur within an
SP or across different providers. SPs can create extra inference
paths for their DNN services by using other DNN services’
models while introducing only a small number of learning
parameters. A path is a sequence of neural network blocks,
where the blocks construct the DNN models.
A. Related Work
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a technique in which a shared
model is used to learn multiple tasks simultaneously [10].
MTL leverages task correlations to efficiently share repre-
sentations and process high-level features among multiple
tasks. Neural architecture search methods explore architectural
space to optimize MTL model performance, incorporating
branches, skip-connections [11], model refinements, or build-
ing a model from scratch [12]. Researchers have developed
various techniques for constructing MTL models. In [13],
a feature fusion technique is used to combine two distinct
models to improve the overall performance. BERT models [14]
use adapter modules [15] to adapt pre-trained knowledge to
new tasks and enable task-specificity without modifying the
base models’ parameters. We use this concept to change data
representation when passing data to other inference paths.
Another technique to reduce the computational complexity
of DNN models and improve their efficiencies is the early exits
(EE) method. With this approach, a number of exit branches
are added among the model layers. These EE branches make
alternative pathways for the DNN services and can reduce the
arXiv:2401.00631v2  [cs.NI]  21 Aug 2024

Server 1/ SP1
Server 2/ SP2
DNN APP1
DNN APP2
Neural network layers
Frozen
Split layers into
N blocks
DNN APP1
(a)
(b)
Link
Skip-connection
Cross-connection
Fig. 2. (a) We consider that SP1 provides its DNN model (i.e., APP1) on server 1. We divide it into a number of manageable blocks. By freezing the model’s
parameters, SP1 can keep its model integrity through any further training. (b) In this scenario, SP1 and SP2 provide their services on server1 and server2,
respectively. SP1 aims to offload its tasks to server2, and SP2 generates the relative links (i.e., small NN modules) between its blocks. SP1 does not add any
links unless it uses skip-connections.
computation for each task with the cost of reduced precision
and increased model parameters. Data is routed through the
exit branches when the application is time-sensitive or the
system is under heavy load [5]. Alongside EE branches,
current methods like SPINN [7] employ synergistic approaches
to distribute computation among end devices, edge nodes,
and cloud services. It requires the sharing of DNN models
and increases resource usage for service replication, posing
challenges when computing resources are exhausted.
Instead of offloading entire tasks, we can split models across
several devices. Each device works on a part of the model and
then sends its results to a central unit that combines everything
for the final inference. In [16], data is sent across devices with
smaller models, halting computation upon acceptable certainty
or forwarding outputs to edge nodes. Similarly, in [6], models
are distributed across devices, each performing a portion of
computation and forwarding results to aggregators.
B. Motivation and Contributions
The mentioned studies showcased the effectiveness of par-
titioning and aggregation techniques for distributing DNN
models. Nevertheless, we still need to investigate how models
can collaborate, exchange knowledge, and utilize each other’s
computational resources.
In this paper, we propose a coordinated DNN algorithm at
the edge, namely CoDE, to enhance the services offered by
SPs. CoDE consolidates individual DNN models on a unified
platform by knowledge transferring among them [17] and
enhances DNN services by employing resources from other
DNN services while ensuring the integrity of DNN models.
Our proposed algorithm establishes new computational and
inference paths by linking different DNN models. When SPs
are under heavy load, they can use the paths to reduce their
computation by offloading the tasks. In this way, SPs increase
the system capacity and maintain their quality of services
(QoS) [18]. In our algorithm, DNN services can bypass their
own obstacles using these pathways, as illustrated in Fig. 2b,
while coordinating with other SPs.
Sharing the models may compromise the privacy of SPs. To
address this concern, our proposed algorithm does not require
the SPs to publish their model’s types or parameters. For exam-
ple, host SPs may indicate support for images or text without
revealing task specifics or disclosing model architecture (e.g.,
CNN, Transformer) without exposing parameters.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We introduce coordination among DNN models within or
across SPs to allow task offloading to other DNN models
and provide more service options. We freeze the models’
parameters and split them by a number of blocks. We
add learnable links among the models’ layers to create
new paths for the tasks. Our algorithm reduces redundant
parameters by preventing replication and avoiding EEs.
• We enable the DNN services to either skip their blocks
directly by using skip-connections, or use other services’
blocks by using cross-connections. These connections
help DNN services decrease their local computation.
• We then propose CoDE that facilitates the coordination
of DNN model sharing and SPs’ resource utilization. Our
algorithm obtains the optimal paths when maximizing a
reward function which reflects the model accuracy and the
inference throughput. The algorithm compares the reward
with that of the original model so as to either add the new
path to the system or discard it.
• We conduct four experiments to assess CoDE’s perfor-
mance. Results show CoDE can generate paths with a
slight decrease in precision with no extra local param-
eters. In particular, CoDE increases the local service
throughput by up to 40% while the average accuracy is
reduced by only 2.3%. Compared to the EE method [4],
it achieves superior accuracy with less local computation.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
introduce the system model and the proposed algorithm. In
Section III, we explain the experiments and provide the results.
Section IV concludes the paper.
II. COORDINATED DNN ON EDGE (CODE)
In this section, we first present the system model and linking
blocks. We then propose our coordinated DNNs on edge
algorithm which we call as CoDE.
A. System Model
Each SP offers one or more DNN services, and each DNN
service comprises a DNN model. We split pre-trained DNN

host
local
Fig. 3. The host service reserves s samples of its batch. The total throughput
is the sum of the local and host throughput (i.e., Thp = Thl
p + Thh
p).
models into N DNN blocks, as shown in Fig. 2a. We maintain
model integrity by freezing the parameters of these blocks.
It means that these parameters are not getting updated. Each
block can make connections with either local front blocks or
host blocks with links, as can be seen in Fig. 2b. Links are
small neural network modules with learnable parameters. Two
types of connections are defined as follow:
• Skip-connection: It connects local blocks to blocks
placed ahead in the path with a link, allowing them to
skip over the local blocks in the path.
• Cross-connection: It connects two different DNN models
with links. These links are established between the host
blocks that are included in the generated path. All of the
cross-connection links are located on the host server.
SPs design the links’ architecture for their DNNs based on
preceding and succeeding block sizes and their architectures.
For example, if the SP aims to make skip-connections [11]
for one of its DNNs, it can use any links. Otherwise, if it
aims to use the host blocks, it just sends data to the host
SP, and it takes care of making the new links between the
DNN blocks requested by the local SP. A cross-connection
allows the local service to offload its computation partially on
the host service. On the other hand, a skip-connection can be
established on a single service locally to improve efficiency.
The batch size of the local and host services are denoted as bl
and bh, respectively. The local service offloads s samples of
its batch on the path. To accommodate this offloaded data, the
host service reserves space for these s samples when a new
cross-connection is established, as shown in Fig. 3.
B. Linking Blocks
The local and host SPs partition their models into Nl and
Nh blocks, respectively. Let P denote the set of all possible
paths while p ∈P represents a path. Each path p ∈P is
represented by rp = [loutp, hinp, houtp, linp] where loutp
denotes the local block that connects to the hinp block in
the host app with the corresponding link, as shown in Fig. 2b.
Similarly, the houtp block in the host app connects to the linp
block in the local app. We ensure that 0 ≤loutp < linp < Nl
and 0 ≤hinp ≤houtp < Nh. Alternatively, skip-connections
only involve loutp and linp since the local server does not
communicate with the host. For such cases, we assign hinp =
houtp = Nf, where Nf ≫Nl.
We define the inference throughput as the number of
predictions a model can make in a given time. The local
service has two processing streams: A main stream for its
own workload, and a host stream for the offloaded tasks. It
allows the service to process its own tasks faster by reducing
ReLU
Conv 2D
MaxPool 2D
ReLU
Conv 2D
MaxPool 2D
ReLU
Conv 2D
MaxPool 2D
ReLU
Conv 2D
ReLU
Conv 2D
Input
Output
AdaptiveAvgPool 2D
Linear
ReLU
Linear
Linear
x2
Fig. 4. A sample of a partitioned AlexNet model with N = 6.
computation per batch, resulting in an enhanced throughput.
We define the total throughput as Thp, which is the sum of
the main and host streams throughput as denoted by Thl
p and
Thh
p, respectively. The block processing time allows SPs to
determine the throughput. Also, SPs can simply calculate them
with a test batch. We introduce the average accuracy Aav
p
and
total throughput Thp for each path p ∈P as follows:
Thp = Thl
p + Thh
p
Aav
p = (Thl
pA0 + Thh
pAp)/Thp,
(1)
where Ap and A0 are the accuracy of path p and the main
path, respectively. We define function F(p) for each p ∈P to
represent its reward as below:
F(p) = ξ(Aav
p )ζ(Thp),
(2)
where ξ(Aav
p ) is defined as the accuracy reward function and
ζ(Thp) is the throughput reward function. In order to reward
the desired accuracy range Aav
p > Amin, where Amin is set by
the local SP, we choose ξ(Aav
p ) = Sigmoid(k(Aav
p −Amin)),
where k is a constant. We also define the throughput reward
function ζ(Thp) = Thp −Th0 that shows the additional
throughput path p can provide compared to the original
throughput Th0. The number of the possible paths is O(N 4).
Searching through the entire space would take a long time
since we need to train all the paths. Hence, we employ a
mechanism to predict the accuracy values Ap. We use a multi-
stage optimization algorithm where, at each stage n, we aim
to estimate the optimal path, denoted as pn, using the n −1
previously calculated accuracy values of the paths as denoted
by set Pn−1 = {p1, ..., pn−1}.
We define the distance between pi and pj as dpi,pj = ∥rpi −
rpj∥2. By subtracting rpj from rpi, we can identify the blocks
that exist in only one of the paths pi and pj. We predict the
accuracy of path pn which is shown by Apn with a weighted
average of paths in Pn−1. The predicted value is:
ˆAp = Predn(Ap) =
Pn−1
i=1 wi
pApi
Pn−1
i=1 wip
, wi
p =
(
1
dp,pi ,
p ̸= pi
0,
o.w.
(3)
The weighted approach leverages the correlation between
paths, as closer paths often lead to similar outcomes. Addi-
tionally, we calculate ˆAav
p
similar to (1). Thus, we formulate
the following problem for stage n which aims to maximize
the reward function:
maximize
p
ξ( ˆAav
p )ζ(Thp)
subject to Thp > Th0,
ˆAav
p = (Thl
pA0 + Thh
pAp)/Thp,
p ∈P.
(4)

noend 1 CoDE
Input: k, Nl, Nh, bl, bh, s, Amin, cstop, ϵ
Output: p∗
1: Calculate throughput for all p ∈P
2: P′ = {p|p ∈P, Thp > Th0}
3: q ←0, n ←0, c ←0, qprv ←−1,
Q ←∅
4: while c ̸= cstop do
5:
n ←n + 1
6:
for p ∈P′ do
7:
ˆA ←Predn(Ap)
▷Predict accuracy
8:
ˆAav ←(Thl
pA0 + Thh
p ˆAp)/Thp
9:
Q ←Q ∪ξ( ˆAav
p )ζ(Thp)
10:
end for
11:
p∗←argmax(Q)
12:
Ap∗←Accuracy of the trained p∗
13:
q ←F(p∗)
14:
if q −qprv < ϵ then c ←c + 1 else c ←0 end if
15:
qprv ←q
16:
Pn ←Pn−1 ∪p∗
17: end while
The above problem is a combinatorial optimization problem.
As the number of possible paths increases, the complexity of
solving this problem escalates tremendously. The complexity
of solving such problem would be O(2|P|) in general. Thus,
we propose CoDE, as presented in Algorithm 1, to overcome
the complexity of this problem. At each stage, the algorithm
predicts F(p) for all paths with a total throughput higher
than Th0. Subsequently, it predicts the path with the highest
reward, trains that path, and calculates its actual reward. If the
algorithm fails to achieve higher rewards after cstop stages, it
terminates the search. The desired path will be generated by
linking the blocks of the local and host DNN services. This
algorithm handles both cross- and skip-connections. However,
by adding a skip-connection, we increase the local service’s
parameter count.
By using Algorithm 1, all the links of the cross-connections
are positioned on the host DNN services, and the backpropaga-
tion process terminates after the entry link. This approach al-
lows services to expand their functionalities without additional
parameters on the local device. Generally speaking, it fosters
a more flexible network with enhanced capabilities through
collaboration among DNN services.
III. EXPERIMENTS
We conduct four experiments to evaluate the performance of
our proposed algorithm. Through these experiments, we verify
that our approach greatly enhances the overall performance via
selective offloading and shortcut routes at the cost of a slightly
reduced accuracy, when compared to EE method [4].
A. Experiment 1: AlexNet - AlexNet
In this experiment, both models are AlexNet [19], with a
cross-connection established between them. The objective is to
evaluate cross-connection performance for two DNN services
(a)
65
70
75
80
85
90
Accuracy (%)
AlexNet-CIFAR-10
image-net
food-101
random
hout:2, lin:5
hout:3, lin:5
hout:4, lin:5
hout:2, lin:4
hout:3, lin:4
hout:2, lin:3
hout:5, lin:5
(b)
5 × 104
105
2 × 105
5 × 105
106
Number of parameters
link
added-host
skipped-local
(c)
Fig. 5. (a) The accuracy of generated paths. We set loutp = 0 and hinp = 1.
The local model is AlexNet, and it is optimized for CIFAR-10, and its accuracy
is 86.7%. The host model is also AlexNet, which is optimized for Image-
net and Food-101. We also measure the performance of a random model to
compare with pre-trained models. (b) The number of parameters when we add
a new path. The number of parameters associated with the links is relatively
low, but the number of the local-skipped and host-added parameters (sum of
the links’ and host’s parameters) are higher and change according to the paths.
(c) These DNN models show the related structure for each connection.
with the same architectures but different tasks, depicted in
Figs. 5a and 5b. Fig. 4 shows a 6-block architecture, but we
add another block at the beginning of the model. The local
model is optimized for CIFAR-10, and its accuracy is 86.7%.
On the other hand, the host model is optimized separately for
ImageNet and Food-101 datasets to assess the performance
across different tasks. In addition, to measure the effect of the
models, we use random parameters in another task with the
same setup. We set the loutp and hinp to 0 and 1, respectively,
and conduct the experiments when varying the linp and houtp,
which means that we skip blocks 1 to linp in the local app.
We also vary the number of host blocks from 1 to houtp. All
the links are 2D CNN layers. When the actual output size of
a block is not equal to the input size of the next block of
the path, the transition between the local and the host app or
skip-connections, we use a 2D CNN layer.
Fig. 5 shows the accuracy, number of parameters, and
the model architectures. The results show a considerable
difference between the pre-trained host models and the random
model. With houtp = 2 and linp = 5, we reduce 1.88 million
local parameters, and we achieve an accuracy of 80.2% with
Food-101 and 80% with ImageNet. However, the accuracy for
the random host model is 71.3%. It means that if considering
the random model as the baseline for the accuracy drop, we
can compensate 58% for the accuracy drop with the pre-trained
models. Furthermore, if we consider the skip-connection from
lout:0 to lin:5 with accuracy of 61% as the baseline, then we
can compensate 78%, which is significant.
If we increase the host blocks, we do not necessarily raise
the paths’ precision. For example, when houtp is raised from
4 to 5, the accuracy drops from 83.3% to 82.4%, contradicting

normal
reduced-25
reduced-5
just links
50
60
70
80
90
Accuracy (%)
AlexNet-CIFAR-10
image-net
link params
102
103
2 × 104
2 × 105
Number of parameters
Fig. 6.
Accuracy for different links’ parameters. Reduced-25 and reduced-
5 shrink the link’s parameters by 5 and 25 times, respectively. Just-links
approach measures the impact of the links by removing the host blocks.
assumptions in EE models. In [4], the author used early exit
on VGG-16, which performs more powerfully than AlexNet
on CIFAR-10, but its accuracy is dropped from 93.5% down
to 80%, and even EEs add a large number of parameters in
the local servers. Our method achieves improvements in both
local computation and model accuracy compared to [4].
We also assess the effect of the link size on the path
performance by reducing CNN filter numbers using two CNN
layers. The first layer decreases input layers to either 25
or 5, as shown in Fig. 6, and then the next CNN layer
extends it to the next block’s input size. In these cases, if
we set rp = [0, 1, 4, 5], links shrink by almost 5 and 25
times, respectively. By setting the layer’s filter size to 25, the
accuracy decreases from 82.7% to 81.5%, and if we set it to
5, then the accuracy would be 73.8%. As a result, SPs can
adjust their performance, not just by changing the number of
blocks but also with the link size.
To investigate the host models’ effect on the accuracy, we
then remove the host blocks and just use the relevant links to
measure the effect of the links in the performance alone. The
accuracy is significantly reduced to 58.8% because most of the
links are just bottleneck CNN layers, which cannot effectively
extract the input’s features.
B. Experiment 2: AlexNet - Skip-connection
In this experiment with an AlexNet model, skip-connections
are established between its blocks. Additionally, we investigate
how the number of link parameters affects path performance.
In this experiment, links are either one CNN layer in normal
mode or two CNN layers with one MaxPool layer in reduced
mode. In the normal mode, links are generated in order to
convert the output size of the blocks, but in the reduced mode,
we use two CNN layers to reduce the number of filters.
When we set loutp to 0 for skip-connections, the accuracy
notably decreases. It means that the links cannot be learned
properly. On the other hand, when we set loutp to 1, the
performance rises, and as the gap between loutp and linp
increases, the accuracy drops more.
Fig. 7a shows that if we reduce the link size by 5 times,
it decreases the accuracy slightly. For example, when we set
loutp = 1 and linp = 5, the accuracy would be 83.3% and
80.3% for the normal and reduced mode, respectively. Both
modes have comparatively fewer parameters than the skipped
parameters. Fig. 7b shows the number of the link’s parameters
and the skipped parameters of the main model. All in all, skip-
connection performs less effectively in parameter reduction
compared to cross-connection. With loutp = 1 and linp = 4,
inference time is 1.4ms, 30% faster than the main model’s
inference time of 2ms.
C. Experiment 3: AlexNet - MobileNet
In this experiment, we use MobileNet [20] as the host DNN
service. Fig. 6 shows that we can compensate for the perfor-
mance degradation with a host model, even with a different
architecture. The host model is optimized for ImageNet 1, as
shown in Fig. 7c. In this experiment, loutp, linp, and hinp are
set to 0, 5, and 1, respectively, and houtp is varied from 2 to
5. Here, the accuracy increases monotonically with the rise of
hout, which did not happen in Experiment 1. In this scenario,
again the number of the added-host parameters, which is the
summation of the link’s and the added host’s parameters, is
lower than the skipped-local parameters, as shown in Fig. 7d.
By using MobileNet for ImageNet, we can revive the
accuracy up to 84.5%, which is sufficiently high to serve as a
coordinated model. This means, we reduce local computation
by 75% just by 2% reduction in the overall accuracy.
D. Experiment 4: Selecting paths
We now explore the impact of accuracy and computation
time on path selection. We use two P100 GPUs on the same
machine, where the stream’s delay is negligible. In order to
calculate the throughput of each path, we use the computation
time of each block. We also consider that the host architecture
is AlexNet, and use the proposed algorithm and the reward
function to find a path. For this test, we set bl = bh = 32,
Nl = Nh = 6, s = 8, Amin = 86%, cstop = 3, and ϵ = 0.01.
In this experiment, rp = [0, 1, 4, 5] exhibits the best overall
performance, as can be seen in Fig. 8, with average accuracy
84.4% and Thp/Th0 = 1.4. In simpler terms, this means that
SP1 can generate a path with a 40% increase in throughput
and only a 2.3% decrease in the total accuracy. As a result,
it is highly efficient for SP1 to generate a path with a host
model optimized for ImageNet.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied AIaaS and introduced cooperation
among different SPs as well as their DNN models. SPs
can use other SPs’ resources to offload their computations
without replicating their DNN models on them. The local
and host SPs do not necessarily need to have the same DNN
models and architectures. We first formulated an optimization
problem to find the paths that result in the highest amount
of reward. To solve this problem, we then proposed a task-
offloading approach called CoDE that facilitates collaboration
among the SPs and their DNN models. We further conducted
four different experiments to investigate the performance of
CoDE. The results show that CoDE can significantly increase
the inference throughput compared to the EE methods while
degrading the accuracy by a small amount. In future, we will
investigate how we can manage the traffic flow dynamically
1PyTorch pre-trained model

55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Accuracy (%)
AlexNet-CIFAR-10
(a)
skip
skip-reduced
65
70
75
80
85
90
Accuracy (%)
AlexNet-CIFAR-10
(c)
image-net
hout:0, hin:3
hout:0, hin:4
hout:0, hin:5
hout:1, hin:3
hout:1, hin:4
hout:1, hin:5
5 × 104
105
2 × 105
5 × 105
106
Number of parameters
(b)
link-reduced
link
skipped
hout:2, lin:5
hout:3, lin:5
hout:4, lin:5
hout:5, lin:5
5 × 104
105
2 × 105
5 × 105
106
Number of parameters
(d)
link
added-host
skipped-local
Fig. 7. (a) The accuracy in the skip-connection mode, where the first layers have a greater impact as they calculate the low-level features. (b) The link and
link-reduced show the number of the learnable parameters in the links, and the skipped shows the number of the parameters. (c) Here, we change the host
model architecture to MobileNet. Again, we can revive a decimated performance by using cross-connection. (d) The number of the parameters of the skipped
blocks of the local model and the added parameters from the host model.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a)
80
82
84
86
Accuracy (%)
accuracy
throughput
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
iteration
(b)
0
0.025
0.05
0.075
Reward
1
1.07
1.14
1.28
Relative throughpu
Fig. 8.
(a) Accuracy and relative throughput for different cross-connection
paths between the local and host models. (b) The reward of the paths according
to the proposed setups. In iteration 4 when loutp = 0, hinp = 1, houtp = 4,
and linp = 5 has the highest value.
through the paths based on request characteristics, such as time
sensitivity and inference deadline.
