arXiv:1702.07001v1  [cs.AI]  22 Feb 2017
Thesis for the degree Master of Science
Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of
the Canadian Traveler Problem
Submitted by: Doron Zarchy
Advisor: Prof. Eyal Shimony
Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Science
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
November 16, 2021

Abstract
Devising an optimal strategy for navigation in a partially observable environ-
ment is one of the key objectives in AI. One of the problem in this context is
the Canadian Traveler Problem (CTP). CTP is a navigation problem where
an agent is tasked to travel from source to target in a partially observable
weighted graph, whose edge might be blocked with a certain probability and
observing such blockage occurs only when reaching upon one of the edges
end points. The goal is to ﬁnd a strategy that minimizes the expected travel
cost. The problem is known to be P# hard. In this work we study the CTP
theoretically and empirically. First, we study the Dep-CTP, a CTP variant
we introduce which assumes dependencies between the edges status. We
show that Dep-CTP is intractable, and further we analyze two of its sub-
classes on disjoint paths graph. Second, we develop a general algorithm that
optimally solve the CTP called General Propagating AO* (Gen-PAO). Gen-
PAO is capable of solving two other types of CTP called Sensing-CTP and
Expensive-Edges CTP. Since the CTP is intractable, Gen-PAO use some
pruning methods to reduce the space search for the optimal solution. We
also deﬁne some variants of Gen-PAO, compare their performance and show
some beneﬁts of Gen-PAO over existing work.

Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
6
2.1
Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Value Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
The Canadian Traveler Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
CTP with Dependencies in Disjoint Path Graphs . . .
16
2.4
AND/OR Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.1
AO* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
CTP and AND/OR graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Models for the Canadian Traveler Problem
. . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.1
POMDP for CTP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.2
Belief State for Representing the Environment of CTP
27
2.5.3
Belief MDP for CTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.6
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.6.1
Diﬀerent Variation of CTP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1

2
2.6.2
Disjoint Path Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.6.3
CTP with Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.6.4
Propagating AO* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3
Theoretical Analysis of CTP
39
3.1
CTP with Dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
CTP-Forward-Arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3
CTP-PATH-DEP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.4
Theoretical Properties of Belief-MDP for CTP
. . . . . . . .
65
4
Generalizing PAO*
83
4.1
General Propagation AO* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.1.1
Gen-PAO Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.1.2
Eliminating Duplicate Nodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5
Empirical Results
91
5.1
Varying the Uncertainty of the Graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2
Gen-PAO Heuristic Estimate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2.1
Experimental Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2.2
Varying the Sensing Cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.2.3
Varying the Open Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.3
Value of Clairvoyance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6
Summary
103
6.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

Chapter 1
Introduction
Planning under uncertainty is one of the most investigated problems in AI. In
the real world, eﬃcient navigation requires operation in a partially unknown
or dynamically changing environment. Consider a situation where a taxi
driver wants to reach his destination in the city in the shortest possible
time. The experienced driver knows the road map, and length of each road.
Still, the driver does not necessarily have a complete knowledge of the roads’
current status. Some of the roads may be blocked due to traﬃc jams or police
blockades. The driver needs to devise a strategy to reach the destination in
the shortest expected time.
A formal model for this kind of problem is the Canadian Traveler Prob-
lem (CTP). CTP is a stochastic navigation problem, introduced by [6] where
an agent is aimed to travel in a weighted graph G = (V, E) from a source
vertex s ∈V to a target vertex t ∈V . Each time the agent traverses an
edge it pays a travel cost which is deﬁned by the edge weight. The agent
has complete knowledge of the graph structure and the edge costs. However,
some of the edges may be blocked with a known probability. The agent ob-
3

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
serves such blockage only when the agent physically arrives a vertex that is
incident to that edge. The goal is to ﬁnd a strategy for reaching from s to
t that minimizes the expected cost.
[6] showed that ﬁnding the optimal solution for the Canadian Traveler
Problem was shown to be P# hard . However some special classes of CTP
such as CTP on disjoint path graphs
and CTP on directed acyclic graphs are solvable in polynomial time
[5, 3].
In this work, we explore certain variations of the CTP. The ﬁrst variation
introduced is CTP with Dependencies (Dep-CTP). In the original problem,
the distribution over the edges is independent. Dep-CTP is a generalization
of CTP where we assume that dependencies exist between the status of a
particular edge with the status of other edges. Speciﬁcally, we are given
a Bayesian network that deﬁnes the dependencies between the edges. The
second variant is CTP with remote sensing(CTP with sensing), introduced
by [3]. In CTP with sensing, an agent may perform sensing on any edge,
with a given sensing cost, in order to reveal its status. The third variant is
Expensive-Edge CTP, a variant of CTP in which edges cannot be blocked,
but are expensive and incurs a high travel cost when traversed.
This work contains two diﬀerent approaches for studying the CTP, by
theoretical analysis and by experimental analysis. Regarding the theoretical
aspect, we attempt to classify certain classes of Dep-CTP by their computa-
tional complexity using probabilistic models as belief-MDP and AND/OR
graphs, and we show some general properties for CTP with sensing. Re-
garding the empirical aspect, we introduce the Gen-PAO algorithm, a gen-

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
eralization of PAO* [1] that optimally solves the CTP, CTP with sensing
and Exp-CTP. Gen-PAO uses several pruning methods to reduce the size of
the state space search and running time. In addition, we explore the value
of clairvoyance which represent the value of having full knowledge of the
graph.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Chapter 2 contains
formal deﬁnitions of the Canadian Traveler Problem and its variants. In
addition it contains a background for decision and probabilistic models and
reviews a number of related algorithms. Chapter 3 shows some proofs con-
cerning the hardness of Dep-CTP and for two of its subclasses. In addition,
some theoretical properties concerning the CTP with sensing are shown.
Chapter 4 introduces the Gen-PAO algorithm and some of the pruning meth-
ods it uses. Chapter 5 provides empirical results, comparing the performance
of Gen-PAO and some of its variants. In addition, results concerning the
value of Clairvoyance are presented. Chapter 6 summarizes this work and
discusses possible directions for future research. Appendix A presents some
of the instances in which empirical analysis is used .

Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Markov Decision Process
A Markov Decision Process(MDP) is a framework for sequential stochastic
decision problems with a fully observable environment. Formally, MDP is
deﬁned by the tuple < S, A, T, R >, where
• S is a ﬁnite set of states where s ∈S describes the environment at a
speciﬁc time step.
• A is a set of actions.
• T : (S × A × S) →[0, 1] is the transition function where T(s, a, s′)
specifying the probability of entering a state s′ ∈S given the previous
state s ∈S and the action a ∈A.
• R : (S × A × S) →R is the reward function which specifying the
reward R(s, a, s′) that is received by transitioning from state s ∈S to
state s ∈S′ after performing action a ∈A in s.
6

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
7
At each time step, the agent is state s ∈S chooses an action a ∈A,
reaches the state s′ ∈S with probability T(s,a,s’), and obtain reward
R(s,a,s’).A deterministic variant to MDP deﬁnes deterministic actions, where
each pair of action a and state s speciﬁes deterministically the result state
s′ i.e. There exist a state s′ ∈S in which T(s, a, s′) = 1 and for every ˆs ̸= s
T(s, a, ˆs) = 0. The model assumes that the transitions are Markovian in a
sense that the probability of reaching a state depends only on the previous
state and the action instead of a history of earlier states. The solution of
the MDP is a policy. A policy π : S →A is a mapping from a set of states
to a set of actions. At each time step, a given policy is executed, starting
from an initial state s0. By having a complete policy, the agent will always
know what to do next. However, the stochastic nature of the environment
will lead to a diﬀerent environment history. The decision making problem
may be a ﬁnite horizon or an inﬁnite horizon. A ﬁnite horizon constrains
the time steps that the agent exists (or equivalently, considers the rewards
after time N as zeros). In this case the utility function is usually an additive
reward function:
t=∞
X
t=0
(st, a, st+1) Where a = π(st)
However, in inﬁnite horizon the time sequence is unbounded. In inﬁnite
horizon the utility function is computed with discount rate 0 < γ < 1:
t=∞
X
t=0
γt(st, a, st+1) Where a = π(st)
This utility is called discounted reward.
Usually, the performance of an
agent is the utility of sequence of states, which is measured by the sum

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
8
of rewards for the states visited. The utility of a policy π(s) in state s is
the expected cost over all possible state sequences, starting from s until the
MDP terminates. The utility of a policy π(s) in ﬁnite horizon is computed
using dynamic programming:
Vπ,0(s)
=
R(s, π(s), ´s)
Vπ,n(s)
=
X
´s∈S
T(s, π(s), ´s) · (R(s, π(s), ´s) + γ · Vπ,n−1(´s))
Where the utility of a policy π(s) in ﬁnite horizon is given by,
Vπ(s) =
X
´s∈S
T(s, π(s), ´s) · (R(s, π(s), ´s) + γ · Vπ(´s))
(2.1)
In an inﬁnite horizon we usually have a terminal state. The optimal policy
is a policy that yields the highest expected utility(or lowest, depends on the
speciﬁcation of the problem). Given a policy π, the value of the policy in
state s can be computed by an algorithm called value iteration. The value
iteration algorithm computes the value of every state s under policy π using
a reasoning process that goes backwards in time, from the end, in order to
determine the optimal sequence of actions. Once choosing the last action,
we can determine the best second-last action etc. This process continues
until received a best action for all states. We compute the value of each
state s under the optimal policy π∗using the Bellman equations:
V ∗(s) = MAXπ(s)∈A
X
´s∈S
T(s, π(s), ´s) · (R(s, π(s), ´s) + γ · V ∗(´s))
(2.2)
This is process is iterated until it reaches equilibrium which indicates the

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
9
convergence of the algorithm.
2.1.1
Policy Iteration
Another approach for solving MDP is policy iteration. Policy iteration is a
feedback strategy obtained by iterative search in the space of policies. The
algorithm is based on two steps: The ﬁrst step is the evaluation where the
algorithm evaluate the values of the states given a set of a action for each
state is given by:
V πk
i+1(s) ←
X
s′
T(s, πk(s), s′)[R(s, πk(s), s′) + γV πk
i
(s′)]
this can be done by solving a set of linear equations.
After the values
are computed for the given actions, the algorithm makes the second step:
improvement. The algorithm considers whether it can improve the policy by
choosing a new action for the state. If such action exists, the policy execute
the new action.
πk+1(s) = argmaxa
′
X
s
T(s, a, s′)[R(s, a, s′) + γV πk(s′)]
The algorithm guarantees that each iteration strictly improves the value of
the policy. Therefore, the policy stops when there are no available actions
that improve the policy cost. The number of possible policies cannot be
more than |S||A| where |S| is the number of states and |A| is the number
of actions.
We know that the policy improves at each iteration and the
number of possible policies is |S||A|, thus the algorithm ﬁnds the optimal
policy within no more than |S||A| iterations.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
10
2.2
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) is a generalization
of the standard MDP, such that the environment is not fully observable, and
allows imperfect information about the current state of the environment. In
the real world the input may not always be precise where the data may be
received with a noise. In robot navigation for instance, the robot will receive
its input through sensors which do not describe the environment precisely.
Sonar or voice sensors most of the time will probably be a bit noisy and
digital video lose information by using a discrete presentation to describe a
continuous environment. The POMDP is used as a framework for theoretical
decision making and reasoning under uncertainty. Such problems arise in a
wide range of application domains including assisting technologies, mobile
robotics and preference elicitation. Many of the real POMDP problems are
naturally modeled by a continuous states and observations. For instance, in
a robot navigation task, the state will correspond to the coordinates in the
space and the observations may correspond to the distance measured by the
sonar. A common approach to a continuous model requires of discretization
and approximation the continuous component of the grid.
This usually
leads to an important tradeoﬀbetween complexity and accuracy with the
change of the coarsens of the discretization. On discrete time POMDP, each
time period the agent is in some state s, chooses an action a, and receive
a reward with expected value. Performing the action, the agent makes a
transition to a new state according to some state distribution and observes
the environment with a given probability to each state.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
11
Formally, POMDP is an extension of the MDP deﬁned by the tuple
< S, A, T, Ω, R > where: S is a ﬁnite set of state that represents the current
situation in the environment. A is a set of actions where the agent choose
in each state. T(Transition function) is a function that maps S × A into a
distribution over the states ´S. T(´s|s, a) is the probability to reach ´s where
the agent is at state s and perform action a. R is the reward function. R
maps any S×A× ´S into a number which represents the reward or the penalty.
The observation function Ω(s′, a, o) describes the probability of observation
o given that action a was performed in state s’ was reached.
Generally, in POMDP we do not know the current state.
The only
information that is given on the environment is the observations. Therefore,
POMDP deﬁnes a vector of probabilities b(s) in the size of the state set,
called belief state, which specify for each state s, the probability that the
environment is in s.
Similarly to MDP, The goal of the POMDP is to construct a policy π∗
which maximizes the expected rewards E[PT
t=o γtr(st, at, s′
t)] where T is the
number of time steps left in a ﬁnite horizon, or T = ∞in an inﬁnite horizon.
Since the agent does not know the exact state of the environment, the reward
function is given by the belief state i.e.
R(b, a) = P
s∈S b(s)R(s, a), or
in the case of continuous belief space the sum becomes an integral. The
belief state of the environment is based on the previous belief state of the
environment. Thus, the agent updates the belief b(s’) after being at belief
state b(s),choosing action a and receiving an observation o in the following
way:
P(b′|a, b) =
X
o
P(b′, o|a, b) =
X
o
P(b′|o, a, b)P(o|a, b)

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
12
using the product rule we get
P(o|a, b)
=
X
s∈S
P(o, s′|a, b) =
X
s∈S
P(o|s′a, b)P(s′|a, b)
P(o|s′a, b)
=
P(o|s′, a) = Ω(o, s′, a)
P(s′|a, b)
=
X
s
P(s′, s|a, b)
=
X
s
P(s′|s, a, b)
beliefstatefors
z
}|
{
P(s|a, b)
=
X
s
P(s′|s, a)b(s)
When we put it all together we get:
P(b′|a, b) =
X
o
P(b′|o, a, b)
X
s′
Ω(s′, o, a)
X
P(s′|s, a)b(s)
P(b′|o, a, b) = 1 where P(b′|o, a, b) = forward(o, a, b)
Let L be the number of time P(b′|o, a, b) = 1
Therefore,
P(b′|a, b) = L ·
X
s′
Ω(s′, o, a)
X
s
P(s′|s, a)b(s)
A generalization on the discrete POMDP is where the space of the be-
lief state is continuous. In this case, we still assume the the actions and
observation are discrete, the propagation is deﬁned by the integral
P(s′|a, s) =
Z
s∈S
P(s′|s, a)P(s)ds
2.2.1
Value Iteration
Deﬁning the probability update and the reward function for belief state
we can can transform the POMDP into a belief state MDP by casting the

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
13
POMDP problem into a fully observable MDP, where the belief state of
the POMDP are reduced to simple state of the MDP. The MDP here is
continuous and over |S|-dimensional state space. The transformation allows
applying a value function for each belief state according to the Bellman
equation:
V ∗(b) = MAXa∈A[r(b, a) + γ
X
b∈B
τ(b′, a, b)V (ba
o)]
This means that the value of belief state b is the reward of taking the best
action in b plus the discounted expected reward of the resulting belief state
V (ba
o) where ba
o is the unique belief state computed based on b,a,o as in
equation—. Solving the value iteration by dynamic programing will bring
optimal solution at the limit, however, the space size over all the belief states
that have to be backed up is enormous. Because exact value iteration is
intractable, a lot of work has focused on approximate algorithms. One of the
most promising approaches for ﬁnding an approximate solution point based
value iteration (PBVI). In PBVI instead of optimizing the value function
over the entire belief state, only speciﬁc reachable beliefs are considered.
The belief points are selected heuristically and the values are computed
only for these points. The heuristic simulate trajectories in order to ﬁnd
reachable beliefs.The success of PBVI depends on the selection of the belief
points. In particular the belief points should cover the space as evenly as
possible. The set of belief state is expanded over time in order to cover more
of the reachable belief state. Adding more point increases the accuracy of
the value function.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
14
The key to practical implementation of a dynamic programming algo-
rithm is a piecewise-linear and convex representation of the value function.
The reward function r(b, a) as deﬁned above is linear. The exact solution
of POMDP is based on Smallwood and Sondik(1973) proof which takes
advantage of the fact that the exact solution is piecewise-linear convex func-
tions and can be represented by |S| hyperplanes in the space of beliefs.
Each hyperplane is a value function V over |S| real numbers represented by
V = v1, v2, ..., vk where the value of each belief state is deﬁned as follows:
v(b) = MAX0≤i≤k
X
b(s)vi(s)
Each hyperplane correspond to a single action, and the value iteration up-
dates can be performed directly on these hyperplanes.
2.3
The Canadian Traveler Problem
In the Canadian traveler problem(CTP) [Papadimitriou and Yannakakis,
1991] a traveling agent is given a tuple (G,P,w,s,t) as input where G = (V, E)
connected weighted graph that consists initial source vertex (s ∈V ), and a
target vertex (t ∈V ). The input graph G may undergo changes, that are
not known to the agent, before the agent begins to act, but remains ﬁxed
subsequently. In particular, some of the edges in E may become blocked and
thus untraversable. Each edge e in G has a weight, or cost, w(e), and is
blocked with a probability P(e), where P(e) is known to the agent.1 The
agent can perform move actions along an unblocked edge which incurs a
1Note that it is suﬃcient to deal only with blocking of edges, since a blocked vertex
would have all of its incident edges blocked.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
15
travel cost w(e). Traditionally, the CTP was deﬁned such that the status of
an edge can only be revealed upon arriving at a node incident to that edge,
i.e., only local sensing is allowed. In this paper we call this variant the basic
CTP variant. The task of the agent is to travel from s to t while aiming to
minimize the total travel cost Ctravel. As the exact travel cost is uncertain
until the end, the task is to devise a traveling strategy which yields a small
(ideally optimal) expected travel cost.
A somewhat more general version of CTP is CTP with sensing. CTP
with sensing is a tuple (G, P, SC, w, s, t), where in this variant, in addition
to move actions (and local sensing), an agent situated at a vertex v can also
perform a Sense action and query the status of any edge e ∈G. This action is
denoted sense(v, e), and incurs a cost SC(v, e), or just SC(e) when the cost
does not depend on v. The cost function is domain-dependent, as discussed
below. The task of the agent is to travel to the goal while minimizing a total
cost Ctotal = Ctravel + Csensing.
We further generalize CTP to allow dependencies between edges, and
non-binary edge weight distributions. In this general form, CTP-Gen is a
5-tuple (G, W, SC, s, t) where G = (V, E) is a graph, W is a distribution
over weights of the edges E, SC : V × E →R+ is a sensing cost function,
s, t ∈V are the start and goal vertices, respectively. The distribution model
W is over random variables indexed by the edges in E, abusing notation we
will use the edges in place of the respective random variables. The domain
of these random variables are arbitrary weights or cost sets. W is usually
speciﬁed as a structured distribution model over the random variables e ∈E.
Henceforth we assume that W is speciﬁed as a Bayes network (E, A, P) over

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
16
these random variables, where E is the set of random variables, A is a set
of directed arcs so that (E, A) is a directed acyclic graph, and P are the
conditional probability tables, one for each e ∈E.
We mostly limit ourselves to the binary case where the edges can be
blocked (“inﬁnite weight”) or open (some known weight, possibly diﬀerent
for each edge). In these cases, and to simplify the resentation of the distribu-
tion, we use a uniform binary domain {Blocked, Unblocked} for the edges,
and describe the weight of the (unblocked) edges separately, by a weight
function w : E →R+. In the degenerate binary case where W is a Bayes
network with no arcs (A = ∅), i.e. all random variables are independent,
the problem reduces back to the basic CTP with sensing. In this case we
usually specify the distribution as a function p : E →[0, 1], the probability
that each edge e ∈E is blocked.
2.3.1
CTP with Dependencies in Disjoint Path Graphs
As CTP-Gen is extremely complicated, we focus on some special cases w.r.t.
the topology of the graph G. Speciﬁcally, we examine the basic CTP with
no remote sensing where G is a disjoint-path graph (w.r.t. s, t). As this
case is known to be solvable in closed form in polynomial time, we general-
ize it to the case where edges are dependent, and edge weights are binary
(blocked/unblocked) random variables.
Thus we consider CTP-DEP, de-
ﬁned by the 5-tuple (G, W, w, s, t) where G is an undirected CTP graph, W
is a Bayes network representing the edge blocking distribution model, w is
a function denoting the edge weights (for unblocked edges), and s, t are the
start and goal vertices respectively, as usual.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
17
As we will show, ﬁnding an optimal problem for CTP-DEP is intractable
even for special cases, and we will thus consider cases where W has depen-
dencies only between edges on the same path. Thus the Bayes network W
representing the distribution model has one (or more) unconnected compo-
nent, for each set of edges composing a path. We call this simpliﬁed variant
CTP-PATH-DEP.
In disjoint path graph, we index the edges such that each edges has two
indexes where the ﬁrst index indicates the path and second index indicates
the serial location of vertex in the path. For instance ei,1, ei,2, ...ei,ki are the
edges composing the i’th path. Similarly to edges, we index the vertices
such that the ﬁrst vertex indicates the path and second index indicate the
serial location of the vertex in the path. s, vi,1, vi,2, ...vi,mi, t are the vertices
composing the i’th path. Note that each edge ei,j can be represented by
(vi,j−1, vi,j)
2.4
AND/OR Graphs
Many problems in artiﬁcial intelligence can be formulated as a framework
for problem solving in a state space search. The AND/OR graph is a di-
rected graph that represent a problem solving process.
The solution of
AND/OR is a sub-graph of the AND/OR, called solution graph, that is a
derivation for the optimal solution of the original problem. In this work,
we use the AND/OR graph for ﬁnding optimal solutions to probabilistic
reasoning problems and CTP in particular. With a slight abuse of notation
we use the same notation graph to indicate both CTP graph and AND/OR
graph.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
18
Formally, an AND/OR graph is a tuple GAO = (NAND ∪NOR, E, T, c, p)
deﬁnes as follows:
• N = NAND ∪NOR where NAND, NOR are ﬁnite sets of nodes.
• T ⊂NOR is the set of terminal leaf nodes.
• E ⊂(NAND × NOR) S(NOR × T\NAND) is a set of directed edges
between the nodes.
• c : E ∪T →R is a cost function over the edges and terminal cost.
• The graph associate probabilities p(n, n0) over the edges (n, n0) such
that, for every n ∈NAND
P
⟨n,n′⟩∈E p ⟨n, n′⟩= 1.
The root node of GAO is denoted by n0. A policy graph of the AND/OR
graph is a subgraph H = (NH, EH) of GAO such that
• n0 ∈NH
• If n ∈NH\T is AND node, all its children are in H.
• If n ∈NH is OR node then only one of its children is in H.
• Every leaf node (node with no children) in GAO is terminal.
and,
• If n ∈NH\T is AND node, all outgoing edges are in EH.
• If n ∈NH is OR node, and n′ ∈H is a child of n, then ⟨n, n′⟩∈EH.
Deﬁne subpolicy of node n denoted by SHn to be a subgraph of GAO
that satisﬁes all properties of H except that the root of SHn is an arbitrary
node n instead of n0.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
19
The value of each node n ∈NH is deﬁned as follows:
CH(n) =















c(n)
n ∈T
min
⟨n,n′⟩∈EH
c(⟨n, n′⟩) + CH(n′)
n ∈NOR
P
⟨n,n′⟩∈EH
p(⟨n, n′⟩)(c(⟨n, n′⟩) + CH(n′))
n ∈NAND
The child of OR node with the minimal value is called called preferred son.
The cost of the policy graph is deﬁned as CH(n0).
The policy graph is
optimal if there are no other policy graphs with lower cost.
We deﬁne a policy subgraph to be a subgraph of NH such that
• n0 ∈NH
• If n ∈NH\T is AND node, all its children are in H.
• If n ∈NH is OR node then only one of its children is in H.
We deﬁne policy subgraph Hs to be a subgraph of GAO that satisﬁes all
properties except that the leafs are not necessarily terminal. The cost of the
policy subgraph is deﬁned as CHs(n0). The best policy subgraph is a policy
subgraph with the minimal cost in the AND/OR graph.
2.4.1
AO*
The AO* is an heuristic based search algorithm that performs a search in the
AND/OR graph for ﬁnding the optimal policy graph. The AO* performs a
search in the AND/OR graph, gradually building up a partial policy graph,
assigning heuristic values to the leaves, and propagating the heuristic values
up to the root. The heuristics, used to evaluate the real cost of the nodes in
AND/OR graph, are admissible, and therefore, ﬁnding the optimal solution

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
20
is guaranteed. The AO* is beneﬁcial when solving problems with a large
state space.
The AO* algorithm assumes that the AND/OR graph that
represents the problem is not given, however the algorithm construct the
AND/OR graph by expanding it each iteration, and thereby develop the
optimal policy graph subgraph each iteration. The process ends when all
the leaf nodes of the partial policy graph are terminal.
The AO* takes advantage of the fact that once a node is known to be in the
optimal policy graph it does not required any further expansion. Thus, the
algorithm maintains a boolean parameter called ”SOLVED” for each node
in the AND/OR graph which signs the algorithm if node is a part of the
optimal policy, i.e. a node n is set SOLVED, performed by the operation
MarkSolved(n), if n is known to be in the optimal policy subgraph. Once a
node is SOLVED, it remains SOLVED. A node n is SOLVED if and only if
all the nodes in the subpolicy SHn spanned from n, are solved. Hence, when
a node n is set SOLVED, the subpolicy SHn spanned from this node does
not require any further update or expansion. Implementing the “solving”
process, the AO* performs MarkSolved(n), if node n satisﬁes one of the
following:
• n is a terminal node
• n is an AND node and all its children are are set SOLVED.
• n is an OR node and its preferred son is set SOLVED.
Basically, each iteration of the AO* algorithm has two phases: expansion
and propagation, described as follows:
• Expansion phase:

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
21
1. Trace down the marked edges (directed edges) from n0 and go
downwards until reaching a non-terminal leaf node n and expands
it. (Finding the expansion nodes requires recurrence exploration
through the AND/OR graph since the partial policy graph is
changing each iteration.)
2. For each child ni ∈n1, n2, ..., nk of n, if ni has not been generated,
then add it to the policy graph and assign it admissible heuristic.
If ni is a terminal node then assign 0 to its heuristic value, and
perform MarkSolved(ni).
• propagation phase: In the propagation phase, the heuristic values and
marked edges of the expansion nodes are propagated from the leaves
onward up to the root. The propagation processed as follows:
1 If n is OR node then its heuristic value is updated by,
h(n) = min
i
c(⟨n, ni⟩) + CH(ni)
(2.3)
The marked edge is directed from n to the child ni which achieves
the minimum in equation 2.3, and n is set SOLVED if and only
if ni is set SOLVED.
2 If n is AND node then its heuristic value is updated by,
X
i
p(⟨n, ni⟩)(c(⟨n, ni⟩) + CH(ni))
(2.4)
The node n is set SOLVED if and only if all its children are set
SOLVED.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
22
The procedure of updating the heuristic values and marking the edges
is repeated for all nodes ancestors of n.
Properties of the AO*:
• The heuristic values are optimistic estimations (lower bound) to the
real value of the state, where each update raises up the heuristic value
and reduces its imprecision relatively to the real value.
• The AO* is beneﬁcial when it applied to a large state space.
One
reason for this is that AO* considers only states that are reachable
from the initial state.
Secondly, the informative heuristic function
directs the focus on states that are in the course of a good policy
graph(partial policy graph). As a result, the AO* may ﬁnd an optimal
solution by exploring a small fraction of the entire state space.
2.4.2
CTP and AND/OR graphs
AND/OR graph is a natural structure for representing the state space of
CTP, where the policy of CTP is represented by the policy graph.
The
problem solving process is a search for an optimal policy graph in a policy
graph space. Here, the OR nodes represents the agent’s decision in a current
state out of all its available actions. Where, in basic CTP, the available
actions are all the moves available from a certain vertex, while in Sensing-
CTP, the available actions are all the available remote sensing actions, in
addition to all available moves from a certain vertex(the remote sensing is
deﬁned available if it is performed on an unknown edge). The AND nodes
represent the actions. Since the CTP is a stochastic problem, each action

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
23
Algorithm 2.1 AO*
procedure main(Graph GAO, Node s)
1: if (s is terminal) return GAO;
2: while s is not marked SOLVED do
3:
Trace down the marked edges in GAO from s, until reaching to all the
non terminal leaf node n1, n2, ..., nk;
4:
L ←{n1, n2, ..., nk};
5:
while L ̸= φ do
6:
ni ←Expand(GAO, s)
7:
remove ni form L;
8:
Z ←ExtractAnsectors(ni) ∪ni;
9:
Propagate(GAO,Z)
10:
end while
11: end while
vertex function Expand(Graph GAO, Node s)
1: select ni ∈L expand it and add its children C = {c1, c2, ..., cm} to GAO;
2: for each ci ∈C do
3:
if ci is terminal then
4:
f(ci) ←0;
5:
MarkSolved(ci);
6:
else
7:
f(ci) ←h(ci);
8:
end if
9: end for
10: return ni
procedure Propagate(Graph GAO, NodeSet Z)
1: while Z ̸= φ do
2:
select zi ∈Z such that zi has no children in Z;
3:
if zi is AND node then
4:
f(zi) ←
P
j∈successor(zi)
a=(zi,j)
[tr(zi, a, j)h(j) + c(a)];
5:
if all successors of zi are marked SOLVED then
6:
MarkSolved(zi)
7:
end if
8:
end if
9:
if zi is OR node then
10:
f(zi) ←
min
zj∈successor(zi)
a=(zi,zj)
[tr(zi, a, zj)h(zj) + c(a)];
11:
if zj is marked SOLVED then
12:
mark the edge represents the chosen action a;
13:
MarkSolved(zi);
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
remove zi from Z;
17: end while

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
24
may result several possible states, which is represented by the AND node’s
children. The states of the environment in CTP are represented by the OR
nodes. The states are the belief states of the agent in a current time step,
where each belief state is represented by its form (i.e every belief state b is
represented by the tuple ⟨b⟩= ⟨Loc(b), stb(e, b1), ..., stb(e, bn)⟩). Henceforth,
all functions,predicate and lemmas presented in section 3.4 can be applied to
the states in the AND/OR graph. We call the set of states that appears in
the AND/OR graph the expanded states and denote it by Z. Although the
AND nodes do not represent the states(they are called “semi state”), they
maintain heuristic values as described in AO* algorithm which is speciﬁed
for propagation. Since the environment is static, once an agent observes
an edge, its status is remained unchanged. A terminal state b is a state in
which its location variable is the target(Loc(b) = t). A node is a terminal
leaf node if the state with which it associate is terminal.
Deﬁnition 2.4.1. A belief state b is expanded belief state if there is an OR
node in the AND/OR graph that is associated with b.
2.5
Models for the Canadian Traveler Problem
2.5.1
POMDP for CTP
In this section we show that CTP can be modeled by POMDP. Let I =
(G, P, w, ˆs, ˆt) be an instance of of basic CTP, and I′ = (G, P, w, SC, ˆs, ˆt)
be an instance of CTP-with-sensing, where G = (V, E).
Given POMDP
M = (S, A, Tr, R, Z, O, s0), we show how I and I’ can be modeled by M as
follows:

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
25
Figure 2.1: Demonstration of SIMBlocked
• The state space S. The states space S of I (or I’) represent the possible
environment of the world. Each state s indicates the location of the
agent, and the status of all edges in E. The location of the agent in
state s is denoted by LocS(s) where v = LocS(s) is the vertex that the
agent is situated. Each edge e ∈E is associated with a status variable
ste ∈{Oe, Be} where ste(s) = Oe indicates that e is open in s, and
ste(s) = Blocked indicates that e is blocked in s. Thus, we deﬁne the
state space S to be V × Q
e∈E {Oe, Be}.
• The action set A. In the basic CTP the set of actions A includes only
one type of action a = Move(e) in which agent that performs a, moves
along an edge e ∈E if e is open. While in the CTP-with-sensing, the
set of actions A includes in addition to the Move actions, the sensing

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
26
actions, in which agent that performs a = Sense(e), senses an edge
e ∈E. This action can be performed from any vertex v ∈V .
• The transition function Tr. Given s, s′ ∈S, and a = move(vi, vj), we
deﬁne Tr by the following: Tr(s, a, s′) = 1 if it satisﬁes the following:
– For all edges e ∈E the status of the edge in s is equal to the
state in s’, i.e ste(s) = ste(s′).
– vi = LocS(s) and vj = LocS(s′).
– The edge e=(vi, vj) is open in s, i.e. ste(s) = Oe.
Otherwise Tr(s,a,s’)=0.
If a = Sense(e) where e ∈E we get Tr(s, a, s′) = 1 if and only if s = s′
since the Sense action does not change the state of the environment.
• The reward(cost) function R. Given s, s′ ∈S, we deﬁne R as follows:
In case that a = move(e) then,
R(s, a, s′) =





w(e)
if Tr(s, a, s′) = 1
0
otherwise
In case that a = Sense(e) then,
R(s, a, s′) =





SC(e)
if Tr(s, a, s′) = 1
0
otherwise
Notation 2.5.1. Let X be a set. Denote the power set of X by P(X).
• The observation set Z. Let Z′ = {Oe, Be}E. We deﬁne Z to be the
power set of Z’, Namely Z = P(Z′) .

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
27
• The observation function O. Given s ∈S ,a ∈A and z ∈Z we deﬁne
O as follows: In case that a = move(e) where e = (vi, vj), the only
observation that received are the edges incident to vertex vj, then,
O(s, a, z) =





1
if z = {ste(s)|e ∈Inc(vj)}
0
otherwise
Where in case that a = sense(e), the only observation that received
is the sensed edge e, then,
O(s, a, z) =





1
if z = ste(s)
0
otherwise
• s0 is the initial state.
Notation 2.5.2. The optimal policy of MS is denoted by π∗.
Notation 2.5.3. Let X be a set. Denote the power set of X by P(X).
2.5.2
Belief State for Representing the Environment of CTP
A belief state, which is deﬁned as a distribution over all possible states, is
a representation of the agent’s knowledge about the environment. In CTP,
the belief states can be represented by the location of the agent and the
status of each edge in the graph.
Deﬁnition 2.5.4. We say that status of edge e is:
• “known to be blocked” if e has been already sensed and found to be
blocked.
• “known to be open” if e has been already sensed and found to be open.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
28
• “unknown” if e has not been sensed.
Deﬁnition 2.5.5. Deﬁne stb : E × B →{Open, Blocked, Unkown} as
follows:
stb(e, b) is the edge status of e in belief state b, where
stb(e, b) =











Open
if edge e is known to be Open in b
Blocked
if edge e is known to be Blocked in b
Unknown
otherwise (if the status of edge e is Unknown in b)
Deﬁnition 2.5.6. Deﬁne Loc : B →V as the location of an agent in a
belief state, where Loc(b) outputs the physical location of an agent that is
in belief state b ,i.e. Loc(b) = LocS(s) where s is an arbitrary state s ∈S
which satisﬁes b(s) > 0.
Note that deﬁnition 2.5.6 assumes that there cannot be two state s1, s2
which satisfy b(s1) > 0, b(s2) > 0 such that LocS(s1) ̸= LocS(s2) since
by deﬁnition, the agent always knows its own location, and thus, for every
belief state b, if exists s ∈S in which Loc(b) ̸= LocS(s) then b(s) = 0.
Thus, we can deﬁne an alternative way for representing a belief state,
Deﬁnition 2.5.7. Let n = |E|. The form of b, denoted by ⟨b⟩, is deﬁned to
be the tuple ⟨b⟩= ⟨Loc(b), stb(e1, b), stb(e2, b), ..., , stb(en, b)⟩,
Deﬁnition 2.5.8. Let b be a belief state, we deﬁne the following sets:
1. Unknown(b) is the set of all edges e ∈E in which stb(e, b) = Unknown
2. Blocked(b) is the set of all edges e ∈E in which stb(e, b) = Blocked
3. Open(b) is the set of all edges e ∈E in which stb(e, b) = Open

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
29
Let b be a belief state. Then, there is a mapping from ⟨b⟩to b. Namely,
for every s ∈S there is a mapping from ⟨b⟩= ⟨Loc(b), stb(e1, b), stb(e2, b), ..., , stb(en, b)⟩
to b(s) as follows:
b(s) =







0
if G(e, s, b) = 0
Q
{e∈Unknown(b)|st(e,s)=Blocked}
p(e)
Q
{e∈Unknown(b)|st(e,s)=Open}
1 −p(e)
Otherwise
Where G : E × S × B →{0, 1} is deﬁned as follows:
G(e, s, b) = 0 if one of the following is satisﬁed:
1. st(e, s) = Open, stb(e, b) = Blocked
2. st(e, s) = Blocked, stb(e, b) = Open
3. Loc(b) ̸= LocS(s)
otherwise G(s, b) = 1
Corollary 2.5.9. Since there is a mapping from ⟨b⟩to b, we can use the
form ⟨b⟩instead of the belief state b itself, for representing the belief state of
an agent.
Deﬁnition 2.5.10. Let Pb(e, b) be the probability that edge e is blocked given
that the agent is in belief state b.
Namely Pb(e, b) = P
i b(si) such that
st(e, si) = Blocked.
In the basic variant of CTP, the probabilities associated with the edges
are independent, and hence, as long as stb(e, b) = Unknwon, we have
Pb(e, b) = P(e).

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
30
Corollary 2.5.11. From deﬁnition 2.5.10 we get that the probability that
edge e is blocked given the agent is in belief state b is given by:
Pb(e, b) =











0
if stb(e, b) = Open
1
if stb(e, b) = Blocked
P(e)
if stb(e, b) = Unknwon

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
31
2.5.3
Belief MDP for CTP
Given a POMDP M = (S, A, Tr, R, Z, O, s0) of instance I = (G, P, w, ˆs, ˆt)
of CTP (or I′ = (G, P, w, SC, ˆs, ˆt) of CTP-with sensing).
Let B be the
belief state space of M, we deﬁne a belief MDP MS = (B, A, Tr, R, b0) of I,
based on M, where the states space B is over the state space S. CTP is a
special case of POMDP(called Det-POMDP) where transition function Tr
and reward function R can be simpliﬁed here as follows:
• The transition function Tr. In general belief MDP, given b, b′ ∈B,
a ∈A, Tr is given by:
Tr(b′, a, b) = P(b′|a, b) =
X
z
P(b′, z|a, b) =
X
z
P(b′|z, a, b)P(z|a, b)
Given a = move(vi, vj), we deﬁne ˆE to be the set of all edges incident
to vj that are unknown in b and known in b′ (the edges that are revealed
by the local sensing), i.e.
ˆE = {e ∈E|stb(e, b) = Unknown, stb(e, b′) ̸= Unknown, e ∈Inc(vj), b ∈B, b′ ∈B}
Then Tr(b′, a, b) > 0 if and only if,
– For all e ∈E\ ˆE stb(b, e) = stb(e, b′). The status of the edges do
not change as well as the information about any unraveled edge
that is not sensed.
– vi = Loc(b) and vj = Loc(b′).
– The edge e=(vi, vj) is open in b, i.e. stb(e, b) = Open.The edge
has to be open in order to traverse it.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
32
In this case,
Tr(b′, a, b) =
Y
e∈ˆE,stb(b′,e)=Blocked
p(e)
Y
e∈ˆE,stb(b′,e)=Open
1 −p(e)
Given a = Sense(e′), Tr(b′, a, b) > 0 if and only if,
– stb(b′, e′) ̸= Unknown. The edge e’ is known after the performing
Sense(e’).
– For all e ∈E\e′ stb(b, e) = stb(e, b′). The state is not eﬀected by
Sense action and the only information that received is the status
of e’.
– Loc(b) = Loc(b′). The location is not eﬀected by Sense action.
In this case,
Tr(b′, a, b) =





p(e)
if stb(e, b) = Blocked
1 −p(e)
otherwise
• The reward function R. In general, the reward function is deﬁned by
R(b, a, b) = P
b′∈B b(b′) P
b∈B b(b)R(b, a, b′). Denote the action cost of
a by C(a), where C(a) = w(e) if a = Move(e) and C(a) = SC(e) if
a = Sense(e). Hence,
R(b, a, b′) =





C(a)
if and only if Tr(b, a, b′) > 0
0
otherwise
(2.5)
We deﬁne R(b, a) = P
b′∈B R(b, a, b′)Tr(b, a, b′). Therefore, R(b, a) =
C(a) if there exist b′ ∈B such that Tr(b, a, b′) > 0. Otherwise R(b, a) =

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
33
0. Note that in case that a = Sense(e), there always exist b′ reachable
from b in which Tr(b, a, b′) > 0, thus R(b, a, b′) = SC(e) always holds.
• b0 is the initial belief state.
Deﬁnition 2.5.12. We say that action a can be performed in belief state b
if there is a belief state b′ such that Tr(b, a, b′) > 0
2.6
Related Work
2.6.1
Diﬀerent Variation of CTP
The Canadian traveler problem is known to be p# hard [6]. In the lack of
approximation solutions, diﬀerent versions of special classes of graphs have
been suggested where the exact solution can be found in polynomial time.
[2] have investigated the case of Recoverable CTP , where each vertex is
associated with a speciﬁc recovery time to reopen any blocked edge that is
incident to it. When an agent ﬁnds a blocked edge e it can either traverse
another edge or wait a period of time and check if e has been opened. The
basic CTP is a special case of the Recoverable CTP where all the recovery
times are inﬁnitely large. There are two variation to the Recoverable CTP,
deterministic and stochastic. In the deterministic variation the assumption
is that the number of edges that may be blocked is bounded. In the stochas-
tic variation, each edge is associated with a probability of being blocked
while it assumes that the recovery time is not long relative to the travel
time. The two cases were proved to be polynomial in the number of edges
and vertexes and in the maximal number of blocked edges. [5] investigated
a CTP variant where the environment is dynamic, in a sense that the status

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
34
of each edge e ∈E is generated randomly with a given probability P(e)
whenever the agent reaches an incident vertex of e. This variant can be
modeled by MDP, where the states represent only the current location of
the agent. Since MDP is solvable in polynomial time, this variant is solvable
in polynomial time as well. Notice that basic CTP is much harder to solve,
since the edges status is remained ﬁxed and thus the state space is expo-
nentially larger (in the number of edges). Nikolova et al. have shown that
CTP on directed acyclic graph (DAG) can be solved in polynomial time by
using a dynamic programming.
2.6.2
Disjoint Path Graphs
Disjoint path graph is an undirected graph G = (V, E) with source s ∈V and
destination t ∈V such that all paths p1, ..., pk in G are between s and t, and
these paths are pairwise disjoint. [3] have shown that CTP on disjoint path
graph is solvable in polynomial time. The proof is based on the property the
the optimal policy is committing . This guarantees that whenever an agent
follows a path, the optimal action is to continue the path until reaching the
target unless it hits a blocked edge. The optimal policy of CTP on disjoint
path is to follow the paths by their order of Di (Di is parameter associated
with each path in G) Meaning, the optimal policy is to travel the path with
the minimal Di till reaching the target unless the path is blocked. If the
path is blocked then return to s and travel the path with second minimal
Di and so on. Di is deﬁned as,
Di =
E[BCi]
Prob(path i is traversable) + Wi,ki

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
35
Where BCi denotes the backtracking cost of path i which is the cost of
traversing path i until hitting a blocked edge and then returning back to the
s when the path is not traversable , or 0 when the path is traversable. The
expected cost of BCi is
E[BCi] = 2
ki−1
X
j=2
Wi,j−1p(eij)
j−1
Y
m=1
1 −p(eim)
Where Wi,j = Pm=1
j
w (eim) .
Another variation of CTP on disjoint path graphs is when the edges
cannot be blocked but instead have two possible ﬁnite costs: a cheap and
and expensive [5]. A simple case of this variation is when the value edges is
binary, i.e., 0 or 1. In this case the optimal policy would be to explore all
the edges with cost 0 of each path until it reaches an edge with cost 1 on
the path, and then return to the path with the fewest unexplored edges and
follow it until reaching the target. A more general case of this variation is
when the edges are associated with the cost 1 or K. In this case the optimal
policy has the property that once an edge with cost k has been crossed, it is
optimal to continue along the same path until reaching the target. Taking
advantage of the special structure of the policy induced by this property,
allows to deﬁne an MDP with concise representation that decides in what
order to explore the paths and how many, before committing a path. This
two cases were proved to be solvable in polynomial time.

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
36
2.6.3
CTP with Sensing
The CTP with sensing is a harder problem than the basic CTP since a simple
reduction can be constructed from any instance of CTP: The graph of the
basic CTP is the graph of the CTP with sensing, however, the sensing cost
of all edge are large enough, such that sensing an edge is never worthwhile.
As such, the expected cost of the two optimal policies is equal.
Heuristic search algorithms
In order to facilitate the search for solution of CTP with sensing, some
heuristic based algorithm have been suggested. The algorithms do not pro-
vide an optimal solution, however, they may be much simpler.
[3] have
suggested the FSSN algorithm that is based on the free space assumption
heuristic. The free space assumption [4] assumes that edges are traversable
unless speciﬁcally known otherwise. The FSSN plans a path p from some
vertex v ∈V to t with the shortest path under the free space assumption.
The agent can either attempt to traverse P without sensing or may decide to
interleave sensing actions into the movement actions, according to a sensing
policy that is embedded in the algorithm.
Number of sensing policies to the FSSN have been suggested:
Never Sense is a brute force policy that never senses any remote edge.
This policy never incurs any sensing cost but it may lead to an increase
travel cost.
Always Sense is a brute force policy that senses all the unknown edges
in the path before it moves along it.
Value of information a policy that decides what edges to be sensed ac-

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
37
cording to their value of information.
2.6.4
Propagating AO*
AO* harness the beneﬁts of the heuristic search to avoid searching states
that are undesirable. However, in many situations AO* examines far more
states than necessary. Propagating AO*(PAO*) [1] is an extension of the
AO* that takes one step forward for facilitating the search. PAO* propa-
gates the heuristic values on a larger scale in which minimizes the expansion
of non-terminal nodes. PAO* is based on a speciﬁc variation of the AO*
algorithm; Ferguson et al. constructed an algorithm that solves a variation
of the CTP where most of the graph (edges) is observable such that only
a single unknown edge (called pinch point) can be incident to a vertex (In
the original paper the pinch points are called “faces” ). As such, any chance
node (AND node) has at most two children that represent a traversable edge
and a blocked edge. PAO* is described as follows: The expansion phase is
processed exactly as the AO* where the PAO* grows the best partial policy
graph by expanding the non terminal leaf nodes, and assigning heuristic
values to its children. Similarly to AO*, PAO* propagates the heuristic val-
ues onward up to the root. However, PAO* propagate the heuristic values
sideways and downwards to the children as well.
Furthermore, the algo-
rithm takes advantage of the fact that the AND node has only two children
(traversable and blocked) such that the parent node heuristic value should
never be less than the traversable child value. Thus, PAO* propagate the
heuristic value of the parent to the traversable child if the heuristic value of
the traversable child is higher. Similarly, the heuristic value of the parent

CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
38
should never be greater than the value of the blocked child. Therefore, PAO*
propagate the value to the non-traversable child in case that the heuristic
value of the parent is higher.

Chapter 3
Theoretical Analysis of CTP
3.1
CTP with Dependencies
Theorem 3.1.1. CTP with dependencies is at least as hard as CTP with
sensing.
Proof outline: By reduction from CTP-with-sensing to CTP-with-
dependencies.
Proof:
Proof. Let I=(G,W,C,SC,s,t) be an instance of CTP-with-sensing. We
construct an equivalent instance I’=(G’,W’,C’,s’,t’) of CTP-with-dependencies
and show that there is a one-to one equivalence between I and I’. Construc-
tion of I’ is as follows, G’ contains G entirely, and in addition, each vertex in
G is attached to two-edge dead-end path, that simulate the sensing operation
of I. One path for each possible sensing operation in I.
Formally, the construction of I’ is as follows:
First, we construct ˆG( ˆV , ˆE) by copying the graph G(V,E) using the following
functions:
39

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
40
• gv : V →ˆV is a bijection function that copies V into ˆV such that for
each vi ∈V , gv(vi) is the copied vertex of vi.
• ge : E →ˆE is a bijection function that copies E into ˆE such that for
each ej ∈E, ge(ej) is the copied edge of ej.
Let ˆV be the set of all the vertices that were copied from V, meaning ˆV =
S
1≤i≤n gv(vi). Let ˆE be the set of all the edges that were copied from E,
meaning ˆE = S
1≤j≤m ge(ej).
Notation 3.1.2. ˆvi ∈ˆV denote the copied vertex f(vi).
Notation 3.1.3. ˆei ∈ˆE denote the copied edge ge(ei)
We construct a new graph G’(V’,E’) by extending ˆV and ˆE using the
following functions:
• fv1 : ˆE × ˆV →V and fv2 : ˆE × ˆV →V are one to one functions that
generates a vertex for each element in ˆE × ˆV . Meaning, given vi ∈ˆV
and ei ∈ˆE, fv1(vi, ej) = vij1, fv2(vi, ej) = vij2.
• fe1 : ˆE × ˆV →E and fe2 : ˆE × ˆV →E are one to one functions
that generates an edge for each element in ˆE × ˆV such that given
vi ∈ˆV and ei ∈ˆE, fe1(vi, ej) = eij1, fe2(vi, ej) = eij2 and in addition,
eij1 = (vi, vij1) and eij2 = (vij1, vij2).
Let graph G′(V ′, E′) deﬁned as follows:
V ′
=
n
ˆV ∪V ′
ij1 ∪V ′
ij2
o
E′
=
n
ˆE ∪E′
ij1 ∪E′
ij2
o
(3.1)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
41
where,
V ′
ij1 =
[
1≤i≤n,1≤j≤m
v′
ij1
V ′
ij2 =
[
1≤i≤n,1≤j≤m
v′
ij2
E′
ij1 =
[
1≤i≤n,1≤j≤m
e′
ij2
E′
ij2 =
[
1≤i≤n,1≤j≤m
e′
ij2
(3.2)
Notation 3.1.4. Given eij1 ∈Eij1, eij2 ∈Eij1, we deﬁne a two edge dead
end path pij = ⟨eij1, eij2⟩.
Note that G′(V ′, E′) can be viewed as ”attachment” of paths S
1<j⪕|E| Pij
to each g(vi) ∈ˆV .
W(X, Y ) is the Bayesian network that is associated with edges in G
where X is the set of nodes and Y is the set of arcs. Similarly W ′(X′, Y ′) is
the Bayesian network that is associated with edges in G’ where X’ is the set
of nodes and Y’ is the set of arcs. Let x be a node in X, and x’ be a node
in X’. We deﬁne W’ by W as follows:
• For each x ∈X, x′
ge(ei) = 0 ⇔xei = 0(stei = stge(ei)).
• For each e′
ij1 ∈Eij1, P(x′
e′
ij1 = 0) = 1, i.e. all edges in Eij1 are open.
• For each j, x′
e′
1j2 = 0, x′
e′
2j2 = 0, ..., x′
e′
nj2 = 0 ⇔x′
ge(ej) = 0, i.e. for each
j, all edges e′
ij2 ∈E′
ij2 are open if and only if xge(ej) is open.
The weight function C′ is deﬁned by:
1. ∀ei ∈E, C′(ge(ei)) = C(ei).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
42
2. ∀eij1 ∈E′
ij1, C′(eij1) = SC(ej)
2
where SC(ej) denote the sensing cost
of ej.
3. ∀eij2 ∈E′
ij2, C′(eij2) = ∞.
The computational time that takes to generate this reduction is polyno-
mial, since the size of |E′| = |E′
ij1| + |E′
ij2| + | ˆE|, where |E′
ij1| = |E′
ij2| =
|E| × |V | and | ˆE| = |E|, therefore |E′| = |E| + 2|E| · |V | = |E|(1 + 2|V |).
Furthermore, the size of |X′| is |E′| since each node in X’ is associated with
an edge in E’ , and |Y | = |V ||E| since each node in X’ that is associated
with edge in ˆE is connected to |E| nodes.
Let M1 = (S1, A1, Z1, Tr1, O1, R1) be a POMDP that modes I, where
S1, A1, Z1, Tr1, O1, R1 are ﬁnite sets of states, actions, observations, tran-
sition functions, observation functions and reward functions respectively.
Similarly, let M2 = (S2, A2, Z2, Tr2, O2, R2) be a POMDP that models I’
where Z2 is the set of observations in I’, S2 is special subsets of the states
set in I’, and A2 is a special meta-action set in I’(a set of series of action in
I’) which will be deﬁned later. Tr2, O2, R2 are the transition functions, ob-
servation functions and reward functions in I’. Let π∗
1 be the optimal policy
of I and π
′∗
2 be the optimal policy of I’. In order to prove theorem 3.1.1, it is
suﬃce to show that Exp(π∗
1) = Exp(π∗
2). In the remainder of this proof we
prove this property by showing that M1 is equivalent to M2 and that M2
actually models I’.
We want to deﬁne the subset S2 ⊂S′ that contains all states in which
the agent is located in a ”‘copied”’ vertex. Formally,
Deﬁnition 3.1.5. Given S′, we deﬁne S2 to be the subset of S’ such that

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
43
Figure 3.1: Presented here graph G’(V’,E’) (CTP with dependencies) which
is reduced from from graph G(V,E)(CTP with sensing). Each vertex v′ ∈V ′
is attached to 4 paths which are correlated with each of the 4 preknown
edges. The agent in I’ can ”simulate” the sensing action in I, by moving in
one of these paths. For instance, an agent that simulate a sensing action on
e1 from v3 will perform move(v1, v131) and then move(v131, v1). The indexes
of the V ′
i,j,k, E′
i,j,k on the paths attached to vertexes in ˆV indicates, i: the
vertex that the path is attached to, j: the edge that is correlated with the
path, and k: the id of the vertex/edge, i.e. the ﬁrst vertex/edge in the path
or the second. The dotted arrows indicate the dependency between edges.
si ∈S2 if and only if si ∈S′ and Loc(si) ∈ˆV . Meaning S2 = {si|si ∈
S′, Loc(si) ∈ˆV }.
Lemma 3.1.6. Let ˜V be the location space of S2, (i.e.
˜V
= {v|v =
Loc(s2), s2 ∈S2}) then ˜V = ˆV .
Proof. => ˜V ⊂ˆV .
According to ˜V , for every si ∈S′ Loc(si) ∈˜V if
Loc(si) ∈ˆV .
<= ˆV ⊂˜V .
V’ contains all possible locations that agent can be in G’,

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
44
where ˜V is subset of V’ which contains all possible location in ˆG. Thus
every element in vi ˆV is in ˜V
Corollary 3.1.7. ˆV is the location space of S2.
Now, we want to show that S2 and S1 are equivalent in a sense that
there exist a one-to-one correspondence between S2 and S1 . In order to
show that we need to make the following deﬁnitions and statements,
Deﬁnition 3.1.8. We deﬁne EStatusSet(S) be the set of Estatus(si) of all
elements si ∈S, meaning EstatusSet(S) = {Estatus(si)|si ∈S}.
In fact, EstatusSet(S) is the set of all the possible status vectors of E,
as such EstatusSet(S) = {Open, Blocked}|E|.
Lemma 3.1.9. There exist a one-to-one correspondence between V and ˆV
Proof. Since gv is a bijection, the exist a one to one correspondence between
vi ∈V and gv(vi) ∈ˆV
Lemma 3.1.10. There exists a one-to-one correspondence between EstatusSet(S1)
and EstatusSet(S2).
Proof. There exist a one to one correspondence between EstatusSet(S1) and
EstatusSet(S′) since for all s1 ∈S1, s′ ∈S′, each element Estatus(s1) ∈
EstatusSet(S1) can be mapped into a diﬀerent element Estatus(s′) ∈EstatusSet(S′).
This is due to the following facts:
1 (injective)According to deﬁnition of W’, ∀i x′
ge(ei) = 0 ⇔xei = 0,
in other words every edge ei ∈E has equal status as its copied edge
ge(ei) and thus there exist a one to one correspondence between each

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
45
set of edge status Estatus(s1) and each set of edge status ste( ˆE, s1)
(In fact for each s1 ∈S1 Estatus(s1) = ste( ˆE, s1)). Since for every
s′ ∈S′, ste( ˆE, s′) is a subset of EstatusSet(s′), there exist a one to
one mapping between EstatusSet(S1) and EstatusSet(S′)
2 (surjective) The status of edges ste(E′ −ˆE, s′) is completely deter-
mined and unique, given edges status of edges ste( ˆE, s′),
i.e. ste( ˆE, s′) = {st(ge(e1), s′), st(ge(e2), s′), .., st(ge(en), s′)}. In par-
ticular, there exist exactly one element in EstatusSet(s′) ∈EstatusSet(S′)
with a given edges status ste( ˆE, s′), since each variable associated with
edges in E′
ij2 depends completely on variables associated with edges
in ˆE (∀i, j x′
e′
ij2 = 0 ⇔x′
geej = 0) and the status of all edges in E′
ij1
are predetermined to be open (∀i, j P(x′
e′
ij1 = 0) = 1).
We are left to show that there exist a one to one correspondence between
EstatusSet(S′) and EstatusSet(S2). Since the location of the agent is in-
dependent to the edges status, we can represent S2 as a cartezian prod-
uct S2 = ˆV × EstatusSet(S2) (According to corollary 3.1.7 ˆV is the loca-
tion space of S2) but according to deﬁnition 3.1.5 we can represent S2 as
S2 = ˆV ×EstatusSet(S′), hence EstatusSet(S′) = EstatusSet(S2). There-
fore, there exists a one-to-one correspondence between EstatusSet(S1) and
EstatusSet(S2).
Lemma 3.1.11. There exists one-to-one correspondence between S1 and S2.
Proof. According to lemma 3.1.9, there exist a one-to-one correspondence
between V and ˆV . According to lemma 3.1.10, there exists a one-to-one
correspondence between EstatusSet(S1) and EstatusSet(S2). Since S =

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
46
V × EstatusSet(S1) and S2 = ˜V × EstatusSet(S2), there exists one-to-one
correspondence between S1 and S2.
Deﬁnition 3.1.12. Let vi, vj ∈V , v′
ij1 ∈Vij1, ˆvi, ˆvj ∈ˆV and ej ∈E. We
deﬁne a2 in I’ to be the equivalent meta-action to action a1 ∈A1(a1 ∼a2)
if and only if:
a2 =





move(ˆvi, ˆvj)
if a ∈move(vi, vj)
move(ˆvi, v′
ij1), move(v′
ij1, ˆvi)
if a ∈sense(vi, ej)
Deﬁnition 3.1.13. We deﬁne A2 to be the set of all equivalent actions of
actions in A1. Meaning A2 = {a2|a2 ∼a1, a1 ∈A1}
Deﬁnition 3.1.14. We deﬁne the set ˜stei to be the following:
˜stei =





{Oge(ei), Oe1i2, Oe2i2, ..., Oeni2}
if stei = Oei
{Bge(ei), Be1i2, Be2i2, ..., Beni2}
if stei = Bei
Deﬁnition 3.1.15. Let Z2 be a set of observations in I’ and Z1 be a set
of observations in I. We deﬁne z2 ∈Z2 is the equivalent observation of
z1 ∈Z1(denoted by z1 ∼z2) if and only if:
z2 = { ˜stei1 ∩˜stei2 ∩... ∩˜steim}
if z1 = {stei1, stei2, ..., steim}
(3.3)
Lemma 3.1.16. The cost of action in A1 is equal to the cost of the equiv-
alent meta-action in A2.
Proof.
1 C(move(vi, vj)) = C(move(ˆvi, ˆvj)) (by deﬁnition of the weight func-
tion).
2 C(sense(vi, ej)) = SC(ej), and C(move(ˆvi, v′
ij1)) = C(move(v′
ij1, ˆvi)) =
SC(e′
j)
2
. Therefore, C(sense(vi, ej)) = C(move(ˆvi, v′
ij1))+C(move(ij1, ˆvi))).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
47
Lemma 3.1.17. Given s1 ∈S1, a1 ∈A1, z1 ∈Z1, and s2 ∈S2, a2 ∈A2, z2 ∈
Z2 such that s1 ∼s2, a1 ∼a2, z1 ∼z2, then O1(s1, a1, z1) = O2(s2, a2, z2).
Proof.
1 In case that a1 = move(vj, vi). Let ei1, ei2, ..., ein ∈Evi(the edges inci-
dent to vi) and let ˜Evi = { ˜stei1∩˜stei2∩...∩˜steim}. By deﬁnition of CTP,
if a1 = move(vj, vi) then the agent observes z1 = stei1, stei2, ..., stein
(the pre-known edges incident to vi which are revealed by the action).
Therefore O1(s1, a1, z1) = 1 if z1 = ste(Evi, s1) and O1(s1, a1, z1) = 0
otherwise. The equivalent action of a1 is a2 = move(ˆvi, ˆvj), hence, tak-
ing a2, the agent directly observes stˆei1, stˆei2, ..., stˆein, but in addition,
according to deﬁnition 3.1 x′
e′
1i2 = 0, x′
e′
2i2 = 0, ..., x′
e′
ni2 = 0 ⇔x′
ˆei = 0,
hence the agent also indirectly observes edges e1i2, e2i2, ..., eni2 . Thus,
the agent’s overall observation is z2 = ˜Evi. Since z1 ∼z2, by deﬁnition
3.1.15 if z1 = ste(Evi, s1) then z2 = ˜Evi. Hence O2(s2, a2, z2) = 1 if
z1 = ste(Evi, s1) and O2(s2, a2, z2) = 0 otherwise. Thus, in this case
O1(s1, a1, z1) = O2(s2, a2, z2)
2 In case that a1 = sense(ej) the agent observes z1 = stej therefore
O1(s1, a1, z1) = 1 if z1 = stej and O1(s1, a1, z1) = 0 otherwise. Since
a1 ∼a2, a2 = (move(ˆvi, v′
ij1), move(v′
ij1, ˆvi)) where agent observes stˆej
directly and observes ste1j2, ste2j2, ..., stenj2 indirectly(the same cause
as in case 1). Thus, the agent’s overall observation is z2 = ˜stej. Simi-
larly to case 1, since z1 ∼z2, by deﬁnition 3.1.15 if z1 = stej then z2 =
tildeEvi. Hence O2(s2, a2, z2) = 1 if z1 = stej and O2(s2, a2, z2) = 0
otherwise. Thus, in this case O1(s1, a1, z1) = O2(s2, a2, z2) as well.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
48
Lemma 3.1.18. Given s1a ∈S1, s1b ∈S1, a1 ∈A1, z1 ∈Z1, and s2a ∈
S2, s2b ∈S2, a2 ∈A2, z2 ∈Z2 such that action a1 is taken in s1a and
meta-action a2 is taken in s2a, then if s1a ∼s2a, s1b ∼s2b, a1 ∼a2 then
Tr1(s1a, a1, s1b) = Tr2(s2a, a2, s2b).
Proof. WLOG, let Loc(s1a) = vi, and Loc(s1b) = vj. Since s1a ∼s2a, s1b ∼
s2b we get Loc(s1a) = ˆvi and Loc(s1b) = ˆvj.
• WLOG, in case that a1 = move(vi, vj). If (v1, v2) ∈E we get Tr1(s1b, a, s1a) =
1 otherwise Tr1(s1b, a, s1a) = 0.
Furthermore, if (vi, vj) ∈E then
(gv(vi), gv(vj)) ∈ˆE which incurs Tr2(s2b, a, s2a) = 1, otherwise Tr2(s2b, a, s2a) =
0.
Thus, in case that a1 = move(vi, vj) we get Tr1(s1b, a, s1a) =
Tr2(s2b, a, s1a).
• WLOG, in case that a1 = sense(ej, vi). Since the sense action does
not change the location of the agent we get s1a = s1b. Since a1 ∼a2
a2 = move(ˆvi, vij1), move(vij1, ˆvi). In this case Loc(s2a) = Loc(s2b)
since the agent return to it original location ˆvi. This incurs s2a = s2b
and thus Tr1(s1b, a, s1a) = Tr2(s2b, a, s2a) = 1.
Lemma 3.1.19. Given states s1 ∈S1, s2 ∈S2, a1 ∈A1, a2 ∈A2 then if
s1 ∼s2 and a1 ∼a2 then R1(s1, a1) = R2(s2, a2).
Proof. WLOG, let Loc(s1) = v1. Given that s1 ∼s2 then Loc(s2) = ˆv1.
• In case that a1 = move(vi, vj), R1(s1, a1) = C(move(vi, vj)). If a1 ∼
a2 then a2 = move(ˆvi, ˆvj). Since C(move(vi, vj)) = C(move(ˆvi, ˆvj))
we get R1(s1, a1) = R2(s2, a2).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
49
• In case that a1 = sense(vi, ej), R1(s1, a1) = C(sense(vi, ej)). If a1 ∼
a2 then a2 = move(vi, vij1), move(vij1, vi). Since C(sense(vi, ej)) =
C(move(ˆvi, v′
ij1)) + C(move(v′
ij1, ˆvi))) we get R1(s1, a1) = R2(s2, a2).
Lemma 3.1.20. M1 is equivalent to M2.
Proof. We have shown that there exist a one to one correspondence between
S1 and S2. By deﬁning the set A2 which consist of equivalent action in A1,
and by deﬁning the set Z2 which consist of equivalent observations in Z1,
we have shown that functions Tr1 = Tr2, O1 = O2, and R1 = R2 when
generated on equivalent set of states, observation and actions.
Lemma 3.1.21. M2 models the problem of I’.
Proof. Here we show that although M2 models a subproblem of I’ (M2 is
deﬁned on subsets of states, actions of I’), it actually models the exact
problem of I’. For every state s ∈S′ −S2, Loc(s) = vij1 where vij1 ∈Vij1.
An agent located in vij1 can only move to vi. In addition, in order that
agent would be located in vij1 it has to move from vi. Thus A2 replace the
two move actions in to one meta-action and thus we can reduce the state
set of S’ into the subset S2. Therefore, M2 models I’.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
50
3.2
CTP-Forward-Arcs
Deﬁnition 3.2.1. Let G = (V, E) be a disjoint paths graph of CTP-PATH-
DEP and W = (X, Y ) be its associated Bayesian network. Let xeij, xeik ∈X
be the associated node of edges eij and eik (note that the edges are in the
same path i in G). Then the arc

xei,j, xei,k

∈Y is Forward-Arc if j < k,
i.e. if eij is closer to s than eik.
Deﬁnition 3.2.2. CTP-Forward-Dependency(CTP-FOR-DEP) is a special
case of CTP-PATH-DEP such that all the arcs in W are Forward-Arcs.
Theorem 3.2.3. CTP-FOR-DEP is solvable in polynomial time.
Proof outline. CTP on disjoint paths graph with independent distribu-
tion over the edges(CTP-PATH-IND) is shown to be solvable in polynomial
time [Bnaya, Felner and Shimony, 2009]. We show that we can transform
CTP-FOR-DEP into an instance of CTP-PATH-IND with new distribution
over the edges such that the optimal policy of the new CTP-PATH-IND can
be applied to CTP-FOR-DEP.
Proof. Let I = (G, W, w, s, t) be an instance of CTP-FOR-DEP. We con-
struct a new instance I′ = (G, W ′, w, s, t) of CTP-PATH-IND by construct-
ing a new Bayesian network W’(X’,Y’) of I’ such that
• Y ′ = {}.
In other words W’ is “arc free” where each node is an
independent component in the BN.
• ∀x′
eik ∈X′ P(x′
eik = 1) = P(xeik = 1|xei1 = 0, xei2 = 0, ..., xei(k−1) =
0).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
51
Let M = (B, A, Tr, R) be a belief state MDP of I, where B is the set of belief
states , A is the set of actions, Tr is a set of transition probabilities, R is the
reward function. We construct a new belief state MDP M′ = (B′, A, Tr′, R′)
of I’ where B’ is the set of belief states, A is a set of actions which is common
to the set of action in I (since it refers to the same graph G), Tr’ is a set of
transition probabilities, and R’ is the reward function .
Deﬁnition 3.2.4. Let f : B →B′ be a function deﬁned as follows: Let
b ∈B and b′ ∈B′ such that f(b) = b′ then ⟨b⟩= ⟨b′⟩.
Notice that f(b) is well deﬁned since there is a one to one mapping from
⟨b⟩to b and from ⟨b′⟩to b′.
Lemma 3.2.5. Let b,ˆb be reachable belief states in B and let a ∈A be an
action. Then Tr(ˆb|a, b) = Tr(f(ˆb)|a, f(b))
Proof. Let a = Move(e) where e =

vi(k−1), vi(k)

and let ef = for(e)
1 In case that Tr(ˆb|a, b) = 0 (i.e. action a not performable in b), then
Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)) = 0. If Tr(ˆb|a, b) = 0 then one of the following cases
must satisﬁed:
• Edge e is not adjacent to the location of the agent in b, i.e. e /∈
Inc(LocB(b)).
If e /∈Inc(LocB(b)) then e /∈Inc(LocB(f(b))
since LocB(b) = LocB(f(b)). Thus Tr′(f(ˆb′)|a, f(b)) = 0.
• Edge e is not adjacent to location of the agent in ˆb, i.e.
e /∈
Inc(LocB(ˆb)). If e /∈Inc(LocB(ˆb)) then e /∈Inc(LocB(f(ˆb)),
since LocB(ˆb) = LocB(f(ˆb)). Thus Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)) = 0.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
52
• Edge e is blocked in belief state b, i.e. stb(b, e) = Be. If stb(b, e) =
Be then stb(f(ˆb), e) = Be since stb(b, e) = stb(f(ˆb), e).
Thus
Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)) = 0.
• There exist an edge e′ ̸= For(e) such that stb(b, e′) ̸= stb(ˆb, e′).
Since stb(b, e) = stb(f(b), e) and stb(f(ˆb), e) = stb(ˆb, e) , there
exist an edge e′ ̸= For(e) Since is blocked in belief state b,
i.e. stb(b, e) = Be. If stb(b, e) = Be then stb(ˆb, e) = Be, since
stb(b, e) = stb(f(ˆb), e). Thus Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)) = 0.
2 In case that Tr(ˆb|a, b) > 0 (i.e action a is performable in b) then edge
e has to be open and one of the following cases must satisﬁed:
• Edge ef is Open in b (i.e stb(b, ef) = Oef ). If stb(b, ef) = Oef
then the status of all edges in b must be the same as in ˆb, i.e.
(∀e ∈Estb(e, b) = stb(e,ˆb)) since the agent does not sense any
unknown edge when performing a and hence Tr(ˆb|a, b) = 1. If
stb(b, ef) = Oef then stb(f(b), ef) = Oef and the status of all
edges in b must be the same as in ˆb from the same reasons as
before. Hence Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)) = 1, and we have Tr(ˆb|a, b) =
Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)).
• Edge ef is Unknown in b (i.e stb(b, ef) = Uef ). Since W is the
belief network of CTP-FOR-DEP and b is reachable from b0, the
status of all edge ei1, ei2, ..., eik have to be Open (In order to reach
vik all edges in path i from s to vik must be traversable). Thus,
Tr(ˆb|a, b) = P(xef = 1|xei1 = 0, xei2 = 0, ..., xeik = 0)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
53
In addition stb(f(b), ef) = Uef (since stb(f(b), ef) = stb(b, ef)).
There is no dependencies in W’ (i.e. Y ′ = {}). Therefore,
Tr′(ˆb|a, b)) = P(x′
ef = 1).
However, by deﬁnition of X’ we have,
P(x′
ef = 1) = P(xef = 1|xei1 = 0, xei2 = 0, ..., xeik = 0)
Hence,
Tr(ˆb|a, b) = Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b))
Lemma 3.2.6. Let b,ˆb be reachable belief states in B and let a ∈A be an
action. Then R(b, a,ˆb) = R′(f(b), a, f(ˆb)).
Proof. From deﬁnition 2.5 it follows that:
R(b, a,ˆb) = R′(f(b), a, f(ˆb)) if and only if Tr(ˆb|a, b) = Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b)).
But we proved in lemma 3.2.5 that Tr(ˆb|a, b) = Tr′(f(ˆb)|a, f(b))
Thus, R(b, a,ˆb) = R′(f(b), a, f(ˆb)).
Deﬁnition 3.2.7. We deﬁne the predicate REACHABLE(bn, b0) to be true
if and only if bn is reachable from b0 in belief-MDP M. i.e.
there exist
b1, ..., bn−1 such that
Q
0≤i≤n−1,a∈A
Tr(bi, a, bi+1) > 0
Lemma 3.2.8. Let b ∈B. Then REACHABLE(b, b0) is true if and only
if REACHABLE(f(b), f(b0)) is true.
Proof. Follows from deﬁnition 3.2.7 and lemma 3.2.5.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
54
Deﬁnition 3.2.9. Deﬁne the set Breach ⊂B to be the set of all belief states
b ∈B that satisfy REACHABLE(b, b0). Namely,
Breach = {b|b ∈B, REACHABLE(b, b0)}
Next, we deﬁne an analogue set for B’,
Deﬁnition 3.2.10. Deﬁne the set B′
reach ⊂B to be the set of all belief states
f(b) ∈B′ , for b ∈B, that satisfy REACHABLE(f(b), f(b0)). Namely,
B′
reach = {f(b)|f(b) ∈B′, b ∈B, REACHABLE(f(b), f(b0))}
Let Mr = (Breach, A, Tr, R) be a belief MDP over belief state Breach and
let M′
r = (B′
reach, A, Tr′, R′) be a belief MDP over belief state B′
reach
Lemma 3.2.11. Mr and M′
r are isomorphism.
Proof. Follows from deﬁnition 3.2.7 that F is a bijection over Breach and
B′
reach. In addition, F preserves the function Tr , Tr’ lemma 3.2.5 as well as
R,R’ lemma 3.2.6 .
Corollary 3.2.12. Let π∗be the optimal policy of I, and π′∗be the optimal
policy of I’. Then for every reachable belief state b ∈Breach we have π∗(b) =
π′∗(f(b)).
Proof. Since Mr and M′
r are isomorphism, the problems are equivalent and
their optimal solutions are equivalent.
Therefore, we can transform any instance of CTP-FOR-DEP into an
instance of CTP-PATH-IND, apply the algorithm which solves CTP-PATH-

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
55
IND in polynomial time, and equivalent optimal solution is guaranteed
(corollary 3.2.12).
Now, we show that determining the probability P(xei,k = 1|xei,1 =
0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k−1 = 0) for all nodes can be computed in polynomial
time. We use the Bayesian theorem to get:
P(xei,k = 1|xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k−1 = 0) =
P(xei,k = 1, xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k = 0) · P(xei,k = 1|xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k−1 = 0)
(3.4)
We use the chain rule to get:
P(xei,k = 1, xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k = 0) =
P(xei,k = 1|xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k−1 = 0) · P(xei,k = 1, xei,1 = 0, xei,2 = 0, ..., xei,k−1 = 0)
(3.5)
The variables in the Bayesian network are topologically ordered by their
order in the path and hence each probability P(xeik) can be iteratively
computed given that its ancestors values have already been determined(using
equations 3.4,3.5). Therefore, inferring the probability of each edge takes
linear time and inferring the probability of all edges takes O(|E|2). Thus
computing the optimal policy takes polynomial time.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
56
3.3
CTP-PATH-DEP
Deﬁnition 3.3.1.
CTP-PATH-DEP is a special case of CTP-DEP where the associated
Bayesian network has dependencies only between edges on the same path.
Theorem 3.3.2. CTP-PATH-DEP is NP-hard.
Proof outline By reduction from 3-SAT to CTP-PATH-DEP.
Proof. Let L be a set boolean variables l1, ..., ln. Let the 3CNF formula
F be a conjunction of the clauses C1, C2, ..., Ck where each clause Ci is a
disjunction of three literals l′
i
1, l′
i
2, l′
i
3 and for each literal l′
i
j it holds that
l′
i
j ∈L or ¬l′
i
j ∈L. We construct the instance I = (G, W, w, s, t) of CTP-
PATH-DEP from F, such that F is satisﬁable if and only if the expected
cost of the optimal policy is greater than some given constant. I is deﬁned
as follows: G = (V, E) is a graph consisting two disjoint paths p1, p2, where
1. p1 =

eY , ed1, ..., ed(k−1), ec1, ..., eck, el1, ..., eln, eR

(The edges are or-
dered from the edge incident to s to the edge incident to t). Edges
ec1, ..., eck correspond to clauses C1, ..., Ck respectively, and edges el1, ..., eln
correspond to variable l1, ..., ln respectively. The correspondence will
be deﬁne later in this proof.
2. p2 consist of a single edge eL.
w is the weight function over the edges, is deﬁned by:
• w(eY ) = 1

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
57
• w(eL) = (1 +
k
2n+1 )
• w(e) = 0 for all other edges.
W = (X, Y ) is a Bayesian network.
Deﬁnition 3.3.3. For every edge e ∈E in path p1, we deﬁne the variable
xe ∈X to be the variable corresponded to edge e such that xe = 0 if and
only if e is Open.
The set of node X of W is a union of the following sets:
• XY = xY . XY is a set that contains the single variable xY .
• XR = xR. XR is a set that contains the single variable xR.
• Xl = {xl1, xl2, ..., xln}. Xl is a set that contains all nodes that corre-
spond to variables l1, ..., ln.
• Xc = {xc1, xc2, ..., xck}. Xc is a set that contains all nodes that corre-
spond to variables c1, ..., ck..
• Xd = {xd1, xd2, ..., xdk−1}.
Xc is a set that contains all nodes that
correspond to variables d1, ..., dk−1..
Namely, X = XY ∪XR ∪Xl ∪Xc ∪Xd.
The arcs in Y are deﬁned by the followng sets:
• YRli = {⟨xR, xli⟩}. An arc from node xR to node xli.
• YRci = {⟨xR, xci⟩}. An arc from node xR to node xci.
• YRdi = {⟨xR, xdi⟩}. An arc from node xR to node xdi.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
58
• Yli = {
D
xl1
i , xci
E
,
D
xl2
i , xci
E
,
D
xl3
i , xci
E
}. A set of three arcs from each
variable node xlj
i (for 1 ≤j ≤3) to clause node xci such that lj
i is the
variable corresponding to literal l′
i
j. For instance C5 = {l′
5
1 ∨¬l′
5
2 ∨
¬l′
5
3} then l1
5 = l′
5
1, l′
5
2 = ¬l′
5
2, and l3
5 = ¬l′
5
3.
• ∀1≤i≤k (xci, xdi) ∈Y - Arc from each node xci to a corresponding node
xdi
• ∀1≤i≤k (xdi, xY ) ∈Y - Arc from each node xdi to node xY
The condition probabilities of W are as follows:
1 P(xeR=0) = 0.5 (xR is an independent variable).
2 For every variable node xi it holds that P(xi = 0|xR = 0) = 1, i.e. if
xR = 0 then path p1 is always open with probability 1.
3 Given xR = 1, W is speciﬁed as follows:
(a) xci = 0) ⇔V3
j=1 xlij = 0
(b) xd1 = 0 ⇔xc1 = 0
(c) ∀i > 1 xd(i+1) = 0 ⇔xci = 0, xdi = 0
(d) xY = 1 ⇔V
i xdi = 0
The reduction maps each variable of F to a variable of W such that,
• Each boolean SAT variable li is mapped to a binary variable in the
Bayes network xli, such that xli = 0 if and only if li = T
• Each clause Ci is mapped to binary variable xci such that xci = 0 if
and only if Ci = T.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
59
Figure 3.2: Graph G. An instance I is constructed based on reduction from
formula F = C1 ∧C2 where C1 = l1 ∨l2 ∨l3, C2 = l2 ∨l3 ∨l4. In this case
path p1 = ⟨eY , ed1, ec1, ec2, el1, el2, el3, el4, eR⟩, and path p2 = ⟨eL⟩
Lemma 3.3.4. Given xR = 1, then F is satisﬁable ⇔xY = 0.
Proof. If xR = 1 then F is satisﬁable ⇔C1 = T, C2 = T, ..., Cn = T ⇔xc1 =
0, xc2 = 0, ..., xcn = 0 in addition, xc1 = 0 ⇔xd1 = 0 and ∀i > 1 xd(i+1) =
0 ⇔xci = 0, xdi = 0. Thus, xc1 = 0, xc2 = 0, ..., xcn = 0 ⇔xd1 = 0, xd2 =
0, ..., xdn = 0 ⇔xY = 0
For simplicity w(eY ) is denoted by CY and w(eL) is denoted by CL.
Note that CL > CY .
The construction of the reduction is computable in polynomial time since
the graph G contains O(n) vertices, O(n) edges and the Bayes network W

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
60
Figure 3.3: Bayes network W of instance I based on reduction from formula
F (which presented in ﬁgure 3.2) in which its instantiations are: l1 = T, l2 =
T, l3 = T, l4 = F ⇒C1 = T, C2 = F. In case that xR = 1(presented
in the ﬁgure), variables in W would be as follows: xl1 = 0, xl2 = 0, xl3 =
0, xl4 = 1, xc1 = 0, xc2 = 1, xd1 = 0, xY = 1.
(otherwise if xR = 0 all
variables associated with edges in p1 would have been 0)
contains O(n) nodes and O(n) arcs. In addition, function g, which maps
each variable in F to variable in W, is computable in polynomial time as
well.
The optimal policy is committing in a sense that after the agent chooses
a path, it keeps following this path until reaching t, unless agent hits a
blocked edge. This is caused due to the fact that if agent chooses to traverse
p1 ﬁrst, after traversing the ﬁrst edge eY , it is optimal to keep following p1
toward t since the rest of the edges in p1 are 0, and thus if p1 is traversable,

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
61
no extra travel cost is paid. On the other hand, if p1 is not traversable then
the agent pays extra CY regardless of how many edges did it traversed in p1.
Therefore the decision problem of the optimal policy here is simply whether
to choose p1 as a ﬁrst path to try or p2.
Notation 3.3.5. Let π12 denote a committing policy that chooses p1 as a
ﬁrst path to try, and π21 denote a committing policy that chooses p2 as a
ﬁrst path to try.
Lemma 3.3.6. Let C be a constant, such that 1 +
k
2n+2 < C < 1 +
k
2n+1 ,
where k is the number of models in F and n is the number of boolean-SAT-
variables in F. Let π∗be the optimal policy of I. F is satisﬁable if and only
if Exp(π∗) > C
Proof. => Suppose that F is satisﬁable. The probability that eY is open is
P(xY = 0) = P(xY = 0|xR = 0)P(xR = 0) + P(xY = 0|xR = 1)P(xR = 1)
by construction of W:
P(xY = 0|xR = 0) = 1
P(xR = 0) = P(xR = 1) = 0.5
(3.6)
The probability P(F = True) =
k
2n since there are k sets of literals of F
such that its instantiation gives F=true, and the domain size is the number

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
62
of all possible instantiations to l1, ..., ln, which equals 2n. Thus,
P(xY = 0|xR = 1) = k
2n
(3.7)
=> P(xY = 0) = 0.5 + 0.5 · k
2n .
(3.8)
Let PY denote the probability P(xY = 0).
Now, we want to calculate the probability that path p1 is open given
that ey is open.
P(p1 open|xY = 0) = P(p1 open, xY = 0)
P(xY = 0)
=
P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 0)P(xR = 0) + P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 1)P(xR = 1)
P(xY = 0)
(3.9)
According to W:
P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 0) = 1
(3.10)
if xR = 1 then p1 is blocked
P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 1) = 0
(3.11)
Setting equations 3.8,3.10,3.11 in equation 3.9 gives:
P(p1 open|xY = 0) =
0.5
0.5 + 0.5 · k
2n
=
1
1 + k
2n
= 0.5
PY .
(3.12)
Denote w(p1) to be the sum cost of all edge in p1 and w(p2) to be the sum

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
63
cost of all edge in p2. The expected cost of the policy when choosing ﬁrst
path p1 is
Exp(π12)
=
Ey is open and path p1 is open
z
}|
{
P(p1 open|xY = 0)P(xY = 0) · w(p1)
+
Ey is open and path p1 is blocked
z
}|
{
P(p1 blocked|xY = 0)P(xY = 0) · (2w(p1) + w(p2)) +
Ey is blocked
z
}|
{
P(xY = 1) · w(p2)
=
0.5
PY · PY · w(eY ) + (1 −0.5
PY ) · PY · (2w(eY ) + w(e2)) + (1 −PY ) · w(e2)
=
2PY CY + 0.5(CL −CY )
(3.13)
Note that in case that the agent traverses eY and p1 is blocked, the agent
hits a blocked edge and is forced to pay another CY extra, when the agent
moves backward to s. The expected cost of π21 is simply CL. Since CL <
2PY CY +0.5(CL−CY ), the optimal policy is π21 and Exp(π∗) = CL. It is
given that CL = 1+
k
2n+1 > C, therefore if F is satisﬁable then Exp(π∗) > C.
<= Suppose that F is not satisﬁable. Now, the calculation of the proba-
bility is easier because we know that the only case where eY is open is when
eR = 0.
Therefore,
P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 0) = 1
(3.14)
P(p1 open, xY = 0|xR = 1) = 0
(3.15)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
64
P(xY = 0)
=
P(xY = 0|xR = 0)P(xR = 0) + P(xY = 0|xR = 1)P(xR = 1)
=
1 · 0.5 + 0 · 0.5 = 0.5
(3.16)
According to equations 3.11,3.14,3.15,3.16
P(p1 open|xY = 0) = 1 · 0.5
0.5
= 1
(3.17)
⇒
P(p1 blocked|xY = 0) = 0
(3.18)
Thus if eY is open then p1 is open. The expected cost of π12 is
Exp(π12)
=
Ey is open and path p1 is open
z
}|
{
P(p1 open|xY = 0)P(xY = 0) · w(p1)
+
P
Ey is open and path p1 is blocked
z
}|
{
(p1 blocked|xY = 0)P(xY = 0) · (2w(p1) + w(p2)) +
Ey is blocked
z
}|
{
P(xY = 1) · w(p2)
=
1 · 0.5 · CY + 0 · 0.5 · (2CY + CL) + 0.5 · CL
=
0.5 · (CY + CL)
(3.19)
Again the expected cost of π21 is CL. Since CL > CY ⇒CL > 0.5 · (CY +
CL) the optimal policy is π12 and therefore Exp(π∗) = 0.5 · (CY + CL) =
0.5(1 + 1 +
k
2n+1 ) = 1 +
k
2n+1 . It is given that 1 +
k
2n+1 < C. and thus if F is
not satisﬁable then Exp(π∗) < C

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
65
3.4
Theoretical Properties of Belief-MDP for CTP
In the following section, we are given an instance I = (G, P, w, s, t) of CTP,
where G = (V, E). We construct a belief state MDP MS = (B, A, Tr, R, b0)
of I, where S is the state set of I.
Deﬁnition 3.4.1. Policy π is called ﬁnite if the AO-graph for π is acyclic(DAG).
Notation 3.4.2. Denote the expected cost of the optimal policy of MS in
belief state b as C∗(b); namely, C∗(b) ≡Cπ∗(b).
If the AO-graph for policy π is acyclic then Cπ is ﬁnite [Bonet, 2010].
By deﬁnition, there is a traversable edge ⟨s, t⟩in G. Therefore, there is a
policy π with ﬁnite cost and hence Cπ∗is ﬁnite [Bonet, 2010]. It should be
noted that all policies referred to this section are ﬁnite.
Deﬁnition 3.4.3. The predicate MoreBlocked(b1, b2), deﬁned over b1, b2,
is true if and only if the following properties are satisﬁed:
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2)
2. For all e ∈E,
• stb(e, b1) = Open if and only if stb(e, b2) = Open.
• stb(e, b1) = Blocked if stb(e, b2) = Blocked.
• stb(e, b1) = Unknown if stb(e, b2) = Unknown or if stb(e, b2) =
Blocked.
The predicate MoreBlocked(b1, b2) indicates that “b1 is at least as blocked
as b2”, meaning if the pair b1, b2 satisﬁes MoreBlocked(b1, b2) then Blocked(b1) ⊆
Blocked(b2).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
66
Let E = {e1, e2, e3}. We demonstrate MoreBlocked(b1, b2) by the fol-
lowing table:
⟨b1⟩
⟨b2⟩
MoreBlocked(b1, b2)
Reason
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
TRUE
All properties are satisﬁed
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Be3⟩
TRUE
All properties are satisﬁed
⟨v1, Ue1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
⟨v1, Oe1, Oe2, Be3⟩
FALSE
stb(e1, b1)
=
Unknown
and
stb(e1, b2) = Open
Deﬁnition 3.4.4. Let b1, b2 ∈B. Deﬁne the predicate MoreOpen(b1, b2) to
be true if and only if the following properties are satisﬁed:
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2)
2. For all e ∈E,
• stb(e, b1) = Blocked if and only if stb(e, b2) = Blocked.
• stb(e, b1) = Open if stb(e, b2) = Open.
• stb(e, b1) = Unknown if stb(e, b2) = Unknown or if stb(e, b2) =
Open.
Intuitively, MoreOpen(b1, b2) means that “b2 is at least as open as b1”,
where the set of known open edges in b1 is contained in the set of known
open edges in b2.
We demonstrate MoreOpen(b1, b2) by the following table:
⟨b1⟩
⟨b2⟩
MoreOpen(b1, b2)
Reason
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
TRUE
All properties are satisﬁed
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Ue3⟩
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Oe3⟩
TRUE
All properties are satisﬁed
⟨v1, Ue1, Oe2, Be3⟩
⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Be3⟩
FALSE
stb(e1, b1)
=
Unknown
and
stb(e1, b2) = Blocked

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
67
Deﬁnition 3.4.5. We deﬁne the function BlockEdges : P(E) × B →B
as follows: Let b1, b2 ∈B such that b1 = BlockEdges( ˆE, b2), then ⟨b1⟩is
deﬁned by the following(by its elements):
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2).
2. For all e ∈ˆE stb(e, b1) = Blocked.
3. For all e /∈ˆE stb(e, b1) = stb(e, b2)
Note that by corollary 2.5.9, b1 can be determined from ⟨b1⟩. The func-
tion is called BlockEdges( ˆE, b2) since it “blocks” all the edges in ˆE (i.e. for
every edge e ∈ˆE the function BlockEdges( ˆE, b2) “changes” the status of
edge e in b2 to stb(e, b1) = Blocked) where all the other element in ⟨b2⟩are
remained unchanged in ⟨b1⟩.
For example, we are given belief state b such that ⟨b⟩= ⟨v1, Be1, Ue2, Oe3, Ue4, Ue5⟩
and ˆE = {e2, e4, e5}. Hence, if b′ = BlockEdges(b, ˆE) then ⟨b′⟩= ⟨v1, Be1, Be2, Oe3, Be4, Be5⟩
Property 3.4.6. For every belief state b and a set of edges ˆE ⊂E we have
MoreBlocked( ˆE, BlockEdges( ˆE, b)).
Proof. Follows immediately from deﬁnition 3.4.5.
Deﬁnition 3.4.7. We deﬁne the function OpenEdges : P(E) × B →B
as follows: Let b1, b2 ∈B such that b1 = OpenEdges( ˆE, b2), then ⟨b1⟩is
deﬁned by the following(by its elements):
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2).
2. For all e ∈ˆE stb(e, b1) = Open.
3. For all e /∈ˆE stb(e, b1) = stb(e, b2)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
68
The function is called OpenEdges( ˆE, b2) since it “open” all the edges in
ˆE (i.e. for every edge e ∈ˆE the function OpenEdges( ˆE, b2) “changes” the
status of edge e in b2 to stb(e, b1) = Open) where all the other element in
⟨b2⟩are remained unchanged in ⟨b1⟩.
For example, we are given belief state b such that ⟨b⟩= ⟨v1, Be1, Ue2, Oe3, Ue4, Ue5⟩
and ˆE = {e2, e4, e5}. Hence, if b′ = OpenEdges(b, ˆE) then ⟨b′⟩= ⟨v1, Be1, Oe2, Oe3, Oe4, Oe5⟩
Property 3.4.8. For every belief state b and a set of edges ˆE ⊂E we have
MoreOpen( ˆE, OpenEdges( ˆE, b)).
Proof. Follows immediately from deﬁnition 3.4.7.
Deﬁnition 3.4.9. We deﬁne the function BlockEdges−1 : P(E) × B →
P(B) as follows: B2 = BlockEdges−1( ˆE, b1) is the set of all belief states
b2 ∈B such that b1 = BlockEdges( ˆE, b2). Meaning BlockEdges−1( ˆE, b1) =
{b2|b1 = BlockEdges( ˆE, b2)}.
Note that the function BlockEdges−1 is somehow a generalization of
an inverse function in a way that for every b ∈B and ˆE ∈P(E) we get
b = BlockEdges(BlockEdges−1(b, ˆE), ˆE) .
For instance, let B′ = BlockEdges−1( ˆE, b) where ˆE = {e2} and b ∈B
such that ⟨b⟩= ⟨Oe1, Be2⟩. Then B′ = {b1, b2} such that,
• ⟨b1⟩= ⟨Oe1, Be2⟩
• ⟨b2⟩= ⟨Oe1, Ue2⟩
Deﬁnition 3.4.10. Let ˆE ∈E. The equivalence relation ∼ˆE is deﬁned as
follows:
The belief states b1, b2 satisfy b1 ∼ˆE b2 if and only if MoreBlocked ˆE(b1) =
MoreBlocked ˆE(b2).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
69
Deﬁnition 3.4.11. Let DiffEStatus : B × B →P(E) be a function.
E′ = DiffEStatus(b, b′) is deﬁned to be the set of all edges incident to
Loc(b′) which are unknown in b and known in b′, i.e.
DiffEStatus(b, b′) = {e ∈Inc(Loc(b′))|stb(e, b) = Unknown, stb(e, b′) ̸= Unknown}
Deﬁnition 3.4.12. Let Π be a set of ﬁnite policies over B. We deﬁne
the function SimBlocked : Π × P(E) →Π as follows: For every pair of
belief states b, b′ ∈B such that b′ = BlockEdges(b, E′), the policy π′ =
SimBlocked(π, ˆE) satisﬁes π′(b) = π(b′).
Deﬁnition 3.4.13. We deﬁne the function Next : B × A →P(B) as
follows: B′ = Next(b, a) is the set of all possible belief state that can be
reached from belief state b immediately after taking action a. Meaning
Next(b, a) = {b′ ∈B|Tr(b, π(b), b′) > 0}
Deﬁnition 3.4.14. Let B1 ⊂B and ˆE ⊂E. Deﬁne Set−Blocked ˆE(B1) =
{b2|b2 = BlockEdges( ˆE, b1), b1 ∈B1}
Lemma 3.4.15. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that MoreBlocked(b1, b2). Let b′
1, b′
2 ∈
B, ˆE ⊂E such that b′
2 = BlockEdges( ˆE, b′
1). Let a ∈A such that Tr(b1, a, b′
1) >
0, then Tr(b2, a, b′
2) > 0.
Proof. Let e = ⟨vi, vj⟩. If a = Sense(e) then a can be performed in any belief
state. However, if a = Move(e) then, for every b ∈B, a can be performed
in b if and only if Loc(b) = vi and stb(e, b) = Open. By deﬁnition 3.4.3 we
have Loc(b1) = Loc(b2). All belief state in B are consistent with a given
realization(all belief states in B describes the knowledge about the same
environment), and since e is known in b1(e ∈Inc(vi)), we get st(e, b1) =

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
70
Open if and only if stb(e, b2) = Open. Thus an agent in b1 can perform
a = Move(e) if and only if an agent in b2 can be perform a = Move(e).
But we are given that Tr(b1, a, b′
1) > 0, hence a can be performed in b2 as
well. Let ˆ
E1 = DiffEStatus(b1, b′
1) and let ˆ
E2 = DiffEStatus(b2, b′
2).
We are left to show that the status of all edges in E\ ˆ
E2 is equal in b2 and
in b′
2 i.e. for all e ∈E\ ˆ
E2 stb(e, b2) = stb(e, b′
2). By deﬁnition 3.4.3 we have
UnknownEdges(b′
2) ⊆UnknownEdges(b′
1), and thus ˆ
E2 ⊆ˆ
E1. Thus, by
deﬁnition of DiﬀEStatus, the status of all edges in E\ ˆ
E2, is equal in b2 and
in b′
2. This satisﬁes all conditions for having Tr(b2, a, b′
2) > 0.
Lemma 3.4.16. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that MoreBlocked(b1, b2). Let B1 =
NEXT(b1) and B2 = Set −Blocked ˆE(B1). Let b2i ∈B2 and B′
1 ⊂B1 such
that B′
1 = MoreBlocked−1( ˆE, b2i). Then, Tr(b2, a, b2i) = P
b1i∈B′
1 Tr(b1, a, b1i).
Proof. Let b′
1 ∈B1. By deﬁnition of B1, Tr(b1, a, b′
1) > 0, hence, by lemma
3.4.15, Tr(b2, a, b′
2) > 0.
Let E′ = DiffEStatus(b2, b′
2), we deﬁne the
probability P2E′ by,
P2E′ =
Y
e∈E′,stb(b′
2,e)=Blocked
p(e)
Y
e∈E′,stb(b′
2,e)=Open
1 −p(e)
(3.20)
By deﬁnition of transition function Tr(b2, a, b′
2) = P2E′.
For every 0 ≤
i ≤n, where n = |B′
1|, deﬁne E′′
i = DiffEStatus(b1, b1i). For every i,
UnknownEdges(b′
2) ⊆UnknownEdges(b1i), hence E′ ⊆E′′
i . We deﬁne the
probabilities P1E′, P1E′′
i as follows,
P1E′ =
Q
e∈E′,stb(b1i,e)=Blocked
p(e)
Q
e∈E′,stb(b1i,e)=Open
1 −p(e)
P1E′′
i =
Q
e∈E′′
i \E′,stb(b1i,e)=Blocked
p(e)
Q
e∈E′′
i \E′,stb(b1i,e)=Open
1 −p(e)
(3.21)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
71
By deﬁnition of transition function, Tr(b1, π(b1), b1i) = P1E′P1E′′
i .
Summing up Tr(b1, a, b1i) over all b1i ∈B′
1 gives,
X
b1i∈B′
1
Tr(b1, a, b1i) =
X
b1i∈B′
1
P1E′P1E′′
i
∗
z}|{
= P1E′
X
b1i∈B′
1
P1E′′
i
∗∗
z}|{
= P1E′
* P1E′ is equal for all b1i ∈B′
1.
**
P
b1i∈B′
1
PE′′
i = 1 (The sum of all marginal probabilities equals 1).
For all e ∈E′ we have stb(e, b1i) = stb(e, b′
2), hence P1E′ = P2E′.
Thus,
X
b1i∈B′
1
Tr(b1, a, b1i) = P1E′ = P2E′ = Tr(b2, a, b′
2)
Theorem 3.4.17. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that MoreBlocked(b1, b2).
Then
C∗(b2) ≥C∗(b1).
Proof outline: We prove that for every ﬁnite policy π there is a ﬁnite
policy π′ such that Cπ(b2) = Cπ′(b1).
Proof. By induction. Let ˆE be the subset of all edges e ∈E such that e is
unknown in b1 and blocked in b2. i.e.
ˆE = {e|e ∈E, stb(e, b1) = Unknown, stb(e, b2) = Blocked}
Let B1 = NEXT(b1) and B2 = Set−Blocked ˆE(B1) where B2 = {b21, b22, ..., b2n}.
Let π be a ﬁnite policy and let π′ be a policy deﬁned as follows:
For every belief state b ∈B π′(b) = π(BlockEdges( ˆE, b)).
Meaning, π′
maps every belief state b to an action a by simulating π on belief state
b′ = BlockEdges( ˆE, b) and output a = π(b′). Clearly, an agent acting ac-
cording to π′ will never traverse any edge in ˆE. We show by induction that

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
72
Cπ(b2) = Cπ′(b1) as follows,
• Base case: If b1, b2 are terminal states then Cπ(b2) = Cπ′(b1) ≡0 (by
deﬁnition of terminal states).
• Assume by induction that for every b′
1 ∈B1 and b′
2 ∈B2 we have
Cπ(b′
2) = Cπ′(b′
1). By deﬁnition of π′ we have π′(b1) = π(b2). Let
a = π′(b1). Since π′(b1) = π(b2) we have a = π(b2) Hence, according
to bellman equations,
Cπ′(b1) = R(b1, a) + P
b′
1∈B1 Tr(b1, a, b′
1)Cπ′(b′
1)
Cπ(b2) = R(b2, a) + P
b′
2∈B2 Tr(b2, a, b′
2)Cπ(b′
2)
(3.21)
In order to show that Cπ(b2) = Cπ′(b1) we show the equivalence in
the right sides of the equations above.
Given a = Sense(e) then,
– R(b1, a) = R(b2, a) = SC(e) (action Sense is always performable).
– P
b′
1∈B1 Tr(b1, a, b′
1)Cπ′(b′
1) = P
b′
2∈B2 Tr(b2, a, b′
2)Cπ(b′
2). Let b1B ∈
B1, b2B ∈B2 be the belief states that are reached immediately af-
ter the agent has sensed e in b1, b2 respectively, and e was found to
be blocked. By deﬁnition of transition function, Tr(b1, a, b1B) =
Tr(b2, a, b2B) = p(e). By assumption of induction, Cπ(b1B) =
Cπ′(b2B). Hence, Tr(b1, a, b1B)Cπ(b1B) = Tr(b2, a, b2B)Cπ′(b2B).
Similarly, let b1O ∈B1, b2O ∈B2 be the belief states that are
reached immediately after the agent has sensed e in b1, b2 re-
spectively, and e was found to be open. Then Tr(b1, a, b1O) =
Tr(b2, a, b2O) = 1−p(e). By assumption of induction, Cπ(b1O) =

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
73
Cπ′(b2O). Hence, Tr(b1, a, b1O)Cπ(b1O) = Tr(b2, a, b2O)Cπ′(b2O).
Thus,
X
b′
1∈B1
Tr(b1, a, b′
1)Cπ′(b′
1) =
X
b′
2∈B2
Tr(b2, a, b′
2)Cπ(b′
2) = p(e)VB+(1−p(e))VO
Where VB denotes Cπ′(b1B) and VO denotes Cπ′(b1O)(recall that Cπ′(b1B), Cπ′(b2B)
as well as Cπ′(b1O), Cπ′(b2O) are interchangeable).
Given a = move(e), where e = ⟨vi, vj⟩, then,
– R(b1, a) = R(b2, a). By deﬁnition of reward function, for every
b ∈B R(b, a) > 0 if and only if Tr(b, a) > 0 if and only if
Loc(b) = vi and stb(e, b) = Open. Thus, R(b1, a) = R(b2, a) > 0
if and only if Loc(b1) = Loc(b2) and stb(e, b1) = stb(e, b2) =
Open. From deﬁnition 3.4.3 it follows that Loc(b1) = Loc(b2). In
addition, stb(e, b1) = Open if and only if stb(e, b2) = Open, due
to the following:
1. All belief states reachable from b0, and in particular the belief
states b1, b2, are referred to the same unknown given environ-
ment s. Hence, stb(e, b1) = Open only if stb(e, b2) = Open or
stb(e, b2) = Unknown and similarly stb(e, b2) = Open only if
stb(e, b1) = Open or stb(e, b1) = Unknown.
2. stb(e, b1) ̸= Unknown, stb(e, b2) ̸= Unknown. Since Loc(b1) =
Loc(b2) we have e ∈Inc(Loc(b1)) if and only if e ∈Inc(Loc(b2)).
By deﬁnition, an agent located in vertex v, knows the sta-
tus of all edges incident to v. Thus stb(e, b1) ̸= Unknown,
stb(e, b2) ̸= Unknown.
– P
b′
1∈B1 Tr(b1, a, b′
1)Cπ′(b′
1) = P
b′
2∈B2 Tr(b2, a, b′
2)Cπ(b′
2).
Let B′
1 = {B11, B12, ..., B1n} be a partition of B by the equiv-

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
74
alence relation ≡ˆE such that without loss of generality B1i =
MoreBlocked−1( ˆE, b2i) for every 0 ≤i ≤n. Let Vi = Cπ′(b2i)
for every 0 ≤i ≤n. Then, by assumption of induction, for every
b1i ∈B1i, we have Cπ(b2i) = Cπ′(b1i), hence Vi = Cπ′(b1i) as
well.
According to lemma 3.4.16, summing up Tr(b1, a, b1i) over all
b1i ∈B1i gives,
X
b1i∈B1i
Tr(b1, a, b1i) = Tr(b2, a, b2i)
(3.22)
Hence,
Tr(b2, a, b2i)Cπ(b2i)
=
Tr(b2, a, b2i)Vi
=
Vi
P
b1i∈B1i
Tr(b1, a, b1i)
(by equation 3.22)
=
P
b1i∈B1i
Tr(b1, a, b1i)Vi
(Vi is constant for every b1i ∈B1i)
=
P
b1i∈B1i
Tr(b1, a, b1i)Cπ′(b1i)
(3.23)
Thus, summing up over all transition functions gives,
P
b′
1∈B1
Tr(b1, a, b1′)Cπ′(b1′)
=
P
B1i∈B′
1
P
b1i∈B1i
Tr(b1, a, b1i)Cπ′(b1i)
(B′
1 is a partition of B1)
=
P
b2i∈B2i
Tr(b2, a, b2i)Cπ(b2i)
(by equation 3.23)
=
P
b2′∈B2
Tr(b2, a, b2′)Cπ(b2′)
(without loss of generality b2i = b2′)
(3.24)

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
75
This completes the induction proof.
We have shown that for every ﬁnite policy π we can deﬁne a ﬁnite policy π′
which satisﬁes Cπ(b2) = Cπ′(b1). Since the optimal policy is also ﬁnite, the
equation C∗(b2) = Cπ′(b1) holds. Thus, in general C∗(b2) ≥C∗(b1).
In ﬁgure 3.4, we demonstrate the “simulation” of policy π′ presented
in theorem 3.4.17.
Here, we are given a graph G=(V,E), where V
=
{s, v1, v2, v3, t} (abusing notation, we denote one vertex as s, and one as
t),
E = {(s, v1), (v1, v2), (v1, v3), (v2, v3), (v1, t), (v2, t), (v3, t)}, where w, which
is noted with each edge in the ﬁgure, represents the edge weight. In addi-
tion, two belief states b1, b2 ∈B are given with the following forms:
⟨b1⟩=

s, O(s,v1), B(v1,v2), O(v1,v3), O(v2,v3), O(v1,t), O(v2,t), U(v3,t)

⟨b2⟩=

s, O(s,v1), B(v1,v2), O(v1,v3), O(v2,v3), O(v1,t), O(v2,t), B(v3,t)

.
On the upper left of the ﬁgure, the edges status are based on b1 and on
the upper right the edges status are based on b2 , where the green lines
represent open edges, black lines represent blocked edges, and red lines rep-
resent unknown edges. Notice that b1, b2 satisfy MoreBlocked(b1, b2) and
thus b2 = BlockEdges(b1).
The lower ﬁgures represent the execution of
policy π′ on b1 where π′(b1) = π(b2)) and π∗on b2. We see the equivalence
between the policies(the same sequence of actions). Notice that agent acting
according to π′(as shown by the doted line), does not perform the action
move(v1, t) although it is optimal, since π′ treats all edges in Blocked(b2)
as blocked in b1(edge (v1, t) in this ﬁgure)
Corollary 3.4.18. Suppose that MoreBlocked(b1, b2) is true for b1, b2 ∈B,
then if h(b1) is an admissible heuristic(optimistic) of b1, then h(b1) is an
admissible heuristic of b2 as well.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
76
Figure 3.4: Demonstration of SIMBlocked
Proof. Follows from theorem 3.4.17

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
77
In the following statement, we use theorem 3.4.17 to show that if MoreOpen(b1, b2)
then C∗(b2) is a lower bound of C∗(b1).
Lemma 3.4.19. Let b, bopen ∈B such that MoreOpen(b, bopen).
Then,
C∗(b) ≥C∗(bopen).
Proof. Let b, bopen, bblocked ∈B such that b, bopen, bblocked diﬀers only by the
status of edge ˆe, where ˆe is Unknown in b, Open in bopen and Blocked in
bblocked. We prove that C∗(b) ≥C∗(bopen).
• By the law of total probability we can express C∗(b1) as follows:
C∗(b1) = P(ˆe)C∗(bblocked) + (1 −P(ˆe))C∗(bopen)
(3.25)
From lemma 3.4.3 we get that C∗(b1) ≤C∗(bblocked). Thus, there is
R ≥0 such that,
C∗(bblocked) = C∗(b1) + R
We can express equation 3.25 as follows:
C∗(b1) = p(ˆe)(C∗(b1) + R) + (1 −p(ˆe))C∗(bopen)
Substracting p(ˆe)C∗(b1) from both sides and then dividing both sides
by (1 −p(ˆe)), we get:
C∗(b1) = R
p(ˆe)
1 −p(ˆe) + C∗(bopen)
Since R(
p(ˆe)
1−p(ˆe)) ≥0 we get
C∗(b1) ≥C∗(bopen)
Trivially, it can be shown by induction that C∗(b) ≥C∗(bopen), for

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
78
any set of edges ˆE such that edges in ˆE are unknown in b and open in
bopen.
Corollary 3.4.20. Suppose that b1, b2 satisfy MoreOpen(b1, b2), then if
h(b2) is an admissible heuristic(optimistic) of b2, then h(b2) is an admissible
heuristic of b1 as well.
Proof. Follows immediately from lemma 3.4.19
In the rest of the section we provide some new deﬁnitions and lemmas in
order to prove another lower bound to the cost of optimal policy on belief
state b1 by a cost of the optimal policy on another belief state b2 where, in
contrast to the previous lemmas, the locations of the agents in b1 and in b2
are diﬀerent.
Deﬁnition 3.4.21. Let b1, b2 ∈B. We deﬁne the predicate DiffLoc(b1, b2)
to be true if and only if Loc(b1) ̸= Loc(b2) and for every edge e ∈E
stb(e, b1) = stb(e, b2).
Deﬁnition 3.4.22. Deﬁne the set DB to be the set of all pair b1, b2 ∈B such
that DiffLoc(b1, b2). Meaning DB = {< b1, b2 > |b1, b2 ∈B, DiffLoc(b1, b2)}.
We call DB the DiﬀLoc of B.
Deﬁnition 3.4.23. Deﬁne the set Openb ⊆E to be the set of all edges
that are known to be open in belief state b. Meaning Eb = {e|e ∈E, b ∈
B, stb(e, b) = Open}
Deﬁnition 3.4.24. Let P be the set of all paths in G and let DB be the
DiﬀLoc of B. We deﬁne the function shortestPath : DB →P such that
for < b1, b2 >∈DB p = shortestPath(< b1, b2 >) is the shortest path

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
79
between v1 = Loc(b1) and v2 = Loc(b2) in graph G′ = (V, Eb1).(Note that
G′ = (V, Eb1 is a subgraph of G=(V,E) since Eb1 ⊆E)
Note that Eb1 = Eb2 for every < b1, b2 >∈DB, since the status of edges
speciﬁed by b1 and b2 are equal.
Deﬁnition 3.4.25. Let P be the set of all paths in G. We deﬁne a path cost
function CP : P →R as follows: Let p be a path, then CP (p) = P
e∈p c(e).
Deﬁnition 3.4.26. We deﬁne the set KEb ⊆E to be the set of all known
edges in belief state b. Meaning KEb = {e|e ∈E, b ∈B, stb(e, b) = Open ∨
stb(e, b) = Blocked}. KEb is called the knowledge in b.
Lemma 3.4.27. The value of information in the Canadian Traveler Prob-
lem is never less than zero.
Proof. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that b2 is reached from b1 immediately after
performing SENSE(e) (Suppose hypothetically that an agent in b1 is allowed
to perform action SENSE(e) once, on any edge e ∈E, with no cost) and we
get KEb1 ⊆KEb2. Hence, this lemma is true if and only if C∗(b1) ≥C∗(b2)
(by deﬁnition of value of information). Since KEb1 ⊆KEb2, we can simulate
any policy of b1 on b2 by “ignoring” the information received from SENSE(e)
in b2 and in particular the optimal policy π∗. Therefore, we can deﬁne the
policy π∗
b1 such that π∗
b1(b′
2) = π∗(b′
1) for every belief state b′
1 reachable from
b1 and belief state b′
2 = b1′e=ste where ste = SENSE(e). Since b1 and b2
are referred to the same physical environment, the execution of π∗on b1 will
be equal to the execution of π∗
b1 on b2(will produce the same sequence of
actions). Hence, Cπ∗
b1(b2) = C∗(b1), and in general C∗(b1) ≥C∗(b2).
Lemma 3.4.28. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that < b1, b2 >∈DB, then C∗(b1) +
Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)) ≥C∗(b2).

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
80
Proof outline: In the next lemma we show that C∗(b1)+Cp(shortestPath(<
b1, b2 >)) ≥C∗(b2). This gives us a lower bound to C∗(b1) since C∗(b1) ≥
C∗(b2) −Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)). We show this by deﬁning a policy
ˆπ such that when executing ˆπ on b2 we have the following: An agent under
ˆπ(b2) moves through the shortest path(under assumption that all unknown
edges in b2 are blocked) to the location referred by b1 (Loc(b1)), reaching
belief state b’, and then under ˆπ(b′) the agent is followed by the execution
of the optimal policy π∗.
Proof. Assume(by negation) that
C∗(b1) + Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)) < C∗(b2).
(3.26)
Let v1 = Loc(b1) and v2 = Loc(b2). We deﬁne a new policy ˆπ such that
executing it on b2 gives the following:
1. An agent under ˆπ(b′) traverses the path p = shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)
straightforward from v2 to v1(which is always possible since all edges
in p are open). Let b′ be the belief state that the agent reaches when
arriving v1.
2. Immediately after reaching b′, the agent under ˆπ(b′) acts according to
the optimal policy until reaching t. Meaning, for any belief state b”
reachable from b′ ˆπ(b′′) = π∗(b′′).
Clearly,
C ˆπ(b2) =
Cost of traversing p
z
}|
{
Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)) +
Exp. cost of π∗on b′
z }| {
C∗(b′)
(3.27)
We claim that KEb1 ⊆KEb′. This result from:

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
81
1. KEb1 = KEb2. The knowledge in b1 and b2 is equal by deﬁnition of
element pairs < b1, b2 >∈DB.
2. KEb2 ⊆KEb′. An agent in b2 that follows the shortest path p may
obtain information if a vertex in path p(a vertex that is incident to
two edges in p) is incident to an edge that has not been sensed yet.
Since an agent A1 in b1 and an agent A2 in b′ are at the same physical state
s ∈S, and the knowledge of A1 about s is a subseteq of the knowledge of
A2 about s (KEb1 ⊆KEb′) we get C∗(b′) ≤C∗(b1)(followed by the lemma
of value of information).
Thus,
C∗(b′)+Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)) ≤C∗(b1)+Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >))
(3.28)
by equation 3.27 we get,
C ˆπ(b2) ≤C∗(b1) + Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >))
(3.29)
Following assumption 3.26 we get,
C ˆπ(b2) ≤C∗(b2)
(3.30)
which is a contradiction to the optimality of policy π∗. Hence,
C∗(b1) + Cp(shortestPath(< b1, b2 >)) ≥C∗(b2)
(3.31)
Corollary 3.4.29. Let b1, b2 ∈B such that < b1, b2 >∈DB, then if
h(b1) is a lower bound to C∗(b1), then h(b1) is a lower bound to C∗(b2) +

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CTP
82
C(shortestPath < b1, b2 >) as well.
Proof. Follows immediately from lemma 3.4.28
We want to deﬁne two relations which will be used in the next section:

Chapter 4
Generalizing PAO*
4.1
General Propagation AO*
In many cases, PAO* lowers dramatically the running time by reducing the
state space, however, it assumes that each vertex is connected to at most
one unknown edge, such that each AND node in the AND/OR graph has at
most two successors. We present the generalized propagation AO* algorithm
(Gen-PAO in short), a generalization of PAO*, which does not assume any
preknown knowledge of the graph (except the edges incident to s which are
always deﬁned as Open). Gen-PAO solves the Sensing-CTP as well. Each
sensing action is associated with a sensing AND node, where each sense
node has only two children nodes for the two possible statuses of the sensed
edge (Open/Blocked). This variant is extremely harder than the basic CTP
since the agent can sense any unknown edge in any state and hence, the
branching factor of the OR nodes is signiﬁcantly larger.
83

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
84
4.1.1
Gen-PAO Heuristics
Similarly to AO* and PAO*, each iteration of Gen-PAO is based on two
phases: Expansion and Propagation. Gen-PAO diﬀers from AO* and PAO*
only in the Propagation phase (i.e, the Main and Expand method as pre-
sented in algorithm 2.1 are part of Gen-PAO as well). However, in the prop-
agation phase, Gen-PAO propagates the heuristic values not only upwards
to the ancestors as AO*, but to the entire state space, incorporating three
novel heuristics: HBlocked, HOpen, and HDiﬀLoc (line 13). The heuristic
HBlocked is based on the predicate MoreBlocked (deﬁnition 3.4.3), HOpen
is based on the predicate MoreOpen (deﬁnition 3.4.4), and HDiﬀLoc is based
on the predicate Diﬄoc(deﬁnition 3.4.21). Let Z be the set of belief states
that expanded by Gen-PAO and let b ∈Z. The heuristics are deﬁned as
follows:
• HBlocked(b): If there is a belief state b′ ∈Z that satisﬁes MoreBlocked(b, b′)
and h(b) > h(b′) then h(b′) ←h(b).
• HOpen(b): If there is a belief state b′ ∈Z that satisﬁes MoreOpen(b′, b)
and h(b′) < h(b) then h(b′) ←h(b).
• HDiﬀLoc(b): If there is a belief state b′ ∈Z that satisﬁes DiffLoc(b, b′)
and h(b′) < h(b) −CSP(b, b′) then h(b′) ←h(b) −CSP(b, b′), where
CSP is the cost of the shortest path from b to b’.
Belief states of which values are updated due to propagation from b are
called propagated belief state of b. Notice that HBlocked(b), HOpen(b), and
HDiffLoc(b) always raise up the heuristic value of the propagated belief
states of b. However, due to corollaries 3.4.18, 3.4.20, and 3.4.29 respectively,
heuristics HBlocked(b), HOpen(b), and HDiffLoc(b) are admissible, and
thus they are upper bounded by V ∗(b).

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
85
Figure 4.1: Demonstration of the heuristic methods
Figure 4.1 illustrate an update of belief state b2 by the three heuristic meth-
ods (the the new heuristic values of b2 are notiﬁed in parenthesis)
The heuristic methods are invoked when a value of belief state is up-
dated(procedure Propagate, line 13). The heuristics methods are ineﬀective
on a major part of the expanded states (i.e. most of the expanded states
b′ ∈Z do not satisfy the predicates MoreBlocked(b, b′), MoreOpen(b, b′),
and DiffLoc(b, b′), for a given expanded state b, and their values are not
updated by their compatible heuristic methods).
In order to reduce the
number of expanded states that are checked for update, we use two data
structures: BlockedStructue and OpenStucture. For deﬁning these struc-
tures we deﬁne new equivalence relations: The equivalence relations ≡o and
≡b on belief states b1, b2 are deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 4.1.1. b1 ≡o b2 if and only if:
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2)
2. Open(b1) = Open(b2)
Similarly,

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
86
Algorithm 4.1 Gen-PAO
procedure Propagate(Graph GAO, NodeSet Z)
1: while Z ̸= φ do
2:
select zi ∈Z such that zi has no children in Z;
3:
if zi is AND node then
4:
f(zi) ←
P
zj∈successor(zi)
a=(zi,zj)
[tr(zi, a, zj)h(zj) + c(a)];
5:
if all successors of zi are marked SOLVED then
6:
MarkSolved(zi)
7:
end if
8:
end if
9:
if zi is OR node then
10:
f(zi) ←
min
zj∈successor(zi)
a=(zi,zj)
[tr(zi, a, zj)h(zj) + c(a)];
11:
MarkAction(zi, zj);
12:
if SOLVED(zj) then
13:
MarkSolved(zi);
14:
end if
15:
invokeHeuristics(Graph GAO, Node zi);
16:
end if
17:
remove zi from Z;
18: end while

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
87
Deﬁnition 4.1.2. b1 ≡b b2 if and only if:
1. Loc(b1) = Loc(b2)
2. Blocked(b1) = Blocked(b2)
Each of these structures is a hash table that contains the entire expanded
state space Z (more precisely the hash table refers to Z), where the entires
of each table divide Z into equivalence classes called “buckets”. Namely, the
set of buckets {mo1, ..., mon}, in BlockedStructue, partitions Z in to equiv-
alence classes by the relation ≡o, while the set of buckets {mb1, ..., mbn},
in OpenStucture, partitions Z into equivalence classes by the relation ≡b.
By deﬁnition above, HBlocked(b), never updates the heuristic value h(b′) if
b and b’ do not share the same bucket of BlockedStructue, and similarly,
HOpen(b) never update a value of b’ if b and b’ do not share the same
bucket of OpenStructue.
Procedure propBlocked (Algorithm 4.2) implements the heuristic HBlocked.
classBlocked(b) (line 1) returns the set ZB of all expanded nodes whose be-
lief states are in the same bucket of BlockedStructue as the belief state of
node z. Similarly, procedure propOpen is implementation of the heuristic
HOpen. classOpen(b) (line 1) returns the set of all expanded nodes ZO
whose belief states that are at the same bucket of OpenStructue as the
belief state of node z.
4.1.2
Eliminating Duplicate Nodes
In most cases Gen-PAO expands the same node more than once. This may
lead to a large expense of memory and run time when it is generated on large
graphs. Taking this into consideration, we introduce the Gen-PAO-EDN
(short for Gen-PAO Eliminating Duplicate Nodes) algorithm, a variation of

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
88
Algorithm 4.2 Heuristic methods for Gen-PAO
procedure propBlocked(NodeSet Z, Node z)
1: ZB ←classBlocked(Z);
2: for all (zi ∈ZB|zi ̸= z) do
3:
if MoreBlocked(z, zi) and h(z) > h(zi) then
4:
h(zi) ←h(z);
5:
end if
6: end for
procedure propOpen(NodeSet Z,Node s)
1: ZO ←stateStructureOpen(Z)
2: for all (zi ∈ZO|zi ̸= z) do
3:
if MoreOpen(zi, z) and h(z) > h(zi) then
4:
zi ←z;
5:
end if
6: end for
Gen-PAO, that maintains a single OR node for every state, by eliminating all
duplicate OR nodes (more precisely, preventing the expansion of duplicate
nodes) which shares the same state into one OR node. There are two key
diﬀerences between Gen-PAO-EDN an Gen-PAO:
• Gen-PAO maintains one representative OR node for each state. When
Gen-PAO-EDN expands an AND node, it creates a new OR node
only if its associated state is not represented by any OR node in the
AND/OR graph. Otherwise, if a representative OR node to this state
already exists, then the expanded AND node becomes an additional
parent of the representative OR node.
• The AND/OR graph may contain cycles(not a tree as in AO* and
Gen-PAO). A special type of cycle, called strongly connected (deﬁned
below), induces loops in the propagation phase if the cycle is a sub-
graph of the partial solution.
Deﬁnition 4.1.3. Let AO be an AND/OR graph, A1, ...An ∈AO
be AND nodes, and O1, ..., On ∈AO be OR nodes. A cycle O1−>

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
89
A1−> O2−> A2−> ...−> On−> An−> O1 is strongly connected
if for every 1 ≤i ≤n Ai is the preferred son of Oi.
If the propagate method enters a strongly connected circle C (which
occurs when the propagation goes upwards to the ancestors), the
heuristic values are re-updated every iteration, where each update
raises up a bit the values of the nodes in .
In some point on of the following eventually happens:
1. The value of one of the AND nodes in C is raised up to a level that
it ceased to be the preferred successor of its OR parent. Namely,
in some point in the process of update, there is an AND node n,
with a sibling n′, such that h(n′) < h(n). Then n′ becomes the
preferred son. Hence, the cycle is no longer a strong connected
and the loop ends.
2. The propagation process in C raises up the values of the nodes
in C until the values are converged to a certain ﬁnite limit.
Clearly, if the values of nodes in C are not converged then case 1 must
hold. In case 2, the propagation may enter into an endless loop if the
values are not converged in any ﬁnite iteration. In order to overcome
this, each time the value of a node n ∈Z is updated, we check the
delta ∆(n) = h(n)−hprev(n), and stop the loop if ∆(n) < ǫ, where ǫ is
a small positive constant which is chosen before the run, and hprev(n)
is the value of n before the update. It should be noted that ǫ is deﬁned
to be so small, that it does not change the propagation process(i.e if
case 2 holds then case 1 does not hold even if the loop would have
never been stopped).
As we proposed a unifying approach to Gen-PAO, we now propose

CHAPTER 4. GENERALIZING PAO*
90
a unifying approach to the AO*. The algorithm AO-EDN is an im-
provement of the AO* algorithm in which uniﬁes the OR nodes that
associate with the same state. In fact AO-EDN is the same algorithm
as Gen-PAO-EDN despite that it does not include heuristic HBlocked
and HOpen in the propagation phase.
Figure 4.2: AND/OR graph for G4V 5E

Chapter 5
Empirical Results
In order to evaluate our scheme we implemented alternative algorithms for
the Gen-PAO and compared them by their execution time and by the size of
their generated AND/OR graph (deﬁned as the number of its nodes). Note
that although the size of the AND/OR graph and the run time of Gen-
PAO-EDN may decrease as a result of the heuristic propagation and nodes
uniﬁcation, still the algorithms described in this section requires a time
exponential in the number of unknown edges, which makes this approach
prohibitive for graphs with large sets of unknown edges.
5.1
Varying the Uncertainty of the Graph
In the ﬁrst two experiment we explored how the uncertainty of the graph
aﬀect the performance of AO* (Section 2.4), GenPAO (Section 4.1), and
AO-EDN (Section 4.1.2). The performance of each algorithm was measured
for diﬀerent graph sizes where each graph had diﬀerent number of unknown
edges. To ensure that the experiments could be performed within a reason-
able time frame, the parameters were chosen so that a single run takes no
more than few minutes.
91

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
92
Figure 5.1 compares the performance of the algorithms above on in-
stances of basic-CTP. Figure 5.1a and ﬁgure 5.1b show respectively the
change in the execution time and in the size of AND/OR graph as the
number of unknown edges ascend from 2 to 12. This comparison indicates
that Gen-PAO has a signiﬁcant advantage in execution time over AO* since
the embedded heuristics in Gen-PAO lowers dramatically the size of the
AND/OR graph. Moreover, Gen-PAO has a slight advantage in execution
time over AO-EDN although the size of the AND/OR graph generated by
AO-EDN is smaller than the graph generated by Gen-PAO. The increased
execution time of AO-EDN is incurred by the overhead of the iterative prop-
agation in the redundancy elimination process (Section 4.1.2) in which de-
pends on the value of default edge (default edge cost was chosen to be 100).
2
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
P
Time(sec)
Time
Gen−PAO
AO*
AO−Union
(a) Execution time
2
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
150000
400000
650000
900000
1150000
P
Size(nodes)
Size
Gen−PAO
AO*
AO−Union
(b) AND/OR graph size
Figure 5.1: Performance of AO*, Gen-PAO and AO-EDN on instances of
basic-CTP

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
93
Figure 5.2 shows the comparison between AO-EDN and Gen-PAO on
instances of Sense-CTP (the sensing cost was ﬁxed to 0.5 for all edges).
AO* was discarded from this comparison due to an extremely large execu-
tion time. In contrast to previous comparison, here AO-EDN outperforms
Gen-PAO in AND/OR graph size (ﬁgure 5.2b) as well as in execution time
(ﬁgure 5.2a). The elimination of redundancy nodes provides an advantage
despite the overhead, since the number of expansions saved by the uniﬁca-
tion increases considerably as the number of unknown edges ascends. The
plot does not contain more than 7 unknown edges since Gen-PAO consumes
all the RAM on larger graphs.
2
4
6
7
0
10
25
40
55
70
85
100
115
130
145
P
Time(sec)
Time
AO−Union
Gen−PAO
(a) Execution time of sensing-CTP (SC=0.5)
2
4
6
7
0
100000
250000
400000
550000
700000
P
Size
Size
AO−Union
Gen−PAO
(b) AND/OR graph size of sensing-CTP (SC=0.5)
Figure 5.2: Performance of Gen-PAO and AO-EDN on instances of Sense-
CTP
It should be mentioned that since the performances of Gen-PAO-EDN
(Section 4.1.2) and Gen-PAO are almost identical on instances of basic-CTP
and Sense-CTP, the performance of Gen-PAO-EDN is not presented.

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
94
5.2
Gen-PAO Heuristic Estimate
5.2.1
Experimental Setting
We now deﬁne a variant of the Canadian Traveler Problem called Expensive
Edges CTP (Exp-CTP in short). Exp-CTP is deﬁned as CTP, except that
each edge e ∈E can be expensive/cheap instead of blocked/unblocked.
Formally, Expensive-Edge-CTP is a 6 tuple I = (G, P, w, s, t, DC) where
G = (V, E) is a graph, P and w are respectively the probability and cost
functions over the edges, s, t ∈V are the start and goal vertices, and DC
is a positive real number. P(e) denote the probability that e is cheap and
1 −P(e) denote the probability that e is expensive. An agent can traverse
edge e ∈E whether its cheap or expensive. However, if the agent traverses
e and e is cheap then it pays w(e), and if e is expensive then it pays DC,
where DC (short for Detour cost) is a ﬁxed cost which is higher than any
edge cost(except the cost of the default edge ⟨s, t⟩). In fact Exp-CTP can
be deﬁned as a subclass of CTP as well, where every unknown edge ⟨vi, vj⟩
in G, has a parallel path lij = ⟨⟨vi, vk⟩, ⟨vk, vj⟩⟩called detour path such that
the path cost of lij is DC and lij is always traversable. Namely,
• w(⟨vi, vk⟩) = DC and w(⟨vk, vj⟩) = 0
• P(⟨vi, vk⟩) = 1 and P(⟨vk, vj⟩) = 1
To evaluate the performance of Gen-PAO heuristics we implemented four al-
ternative algorithms for Gen-PAO-EDN, where on each algorithm, diﬀerent
heuristic was embedded in the propagation phase. Since the heuristics has
almost no impact when Gen-PAO-EDN is applied on instances of basic-CTP
and sense-CTP, the algorithms were executed on instances of Exp-CTP. The
implemented algorithms are as follows:

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
95
• PAO-Blocked - Gen-PAO-EDN which propagates the heuristic values
according to HBlocked (Section 4.1).
• PAO-Open - propagates the heuristic values according to HOpen (Sec-
tion 4.1).
• PAO-All - propagates the heuristic values according to HOpen and
HBlocked.
• PAO-None - basic propagation with no heuristic included.
5.2.2
Varying the Sensing Cost
In order to learn the eﬀect of the sensing cost on the algorithms performance
we conducted several runs using diﬀerent ﬁxed sensing cost(the sensing cost
was equal for of all edges) on a graph that consists 8 vertices and 13 edges
(10 edges are unknown). In all experiments, the probability of all unknown
edges was ﬁxed to 0.5. Figure 5.3a shows the change in the size of AND/OR
graph as the sensing cost ascends from 0.1 to 1.1.
This result indicates
that the size of AND/OR graph (generated by all variants of Gen-PAO)
decreases, as the sensing cost increases . We believe that this can be at-
tributed to the increased number of expanded states in the AND/OR graph
incurred by the low sensing cost, in which makes the sensing action worth-
while. In particular, there exists a limit m, such that every sensing cost
below m makes the Sense actions always preferable over the Move actions.
This causes many expansions of Sense nodes and expansion of new belief
state (that are not reachable without preforming Sense) which results in a
large AND/OR graph. The comparison of the algorithms shows that PAO-
None generates a relatively small AND/OR graph for low sensing cost, while
PAO-Blocked and PAO-All has advantage on high sensing cost. This is also

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
96
true for larger graphs that contain larger sets of unknown edges. We believe
that this eﬀect can be explained by the fact that on low levels of sensing cost,
it is worthwhile to sense unknown edges, in which improves the estimate ac-
curacy of the heuristic values(on low cost). The high accuracy level of the
heuristic estimate leads to low rates of pruning since the heuristics HBlocked
and HOpen are based the gap between the real and estimated value, which is
small in this case. Thus, a large AND/OR graph was obtained. A compari-
son of the run time (ﬁgure 5.3b) shows that the run time extends as the size
of the AND/OR graph increases. The reason for this positive correlation is
obvious: the increased size of the graph leads to larger computation time
required for expanding the states, as well as for propagating the heuristic
values to a larger set of states.
0.1
0.6
1.1
NS
1e+03
1e+04
1e+05
1e+06
sensing Cost
number of nodes
Heuristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(a) AND/OR graph size
0.1
0.6
1.1
NS
1e−01
1e+00
1e+01
1e+02
1e+03
1e+04
sensing cost
seconds
Heuristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(b) Execution time
Figure 5.3: Execution time and AND/OR graph size generated by PAO-
Blocked, PAO-Open, PAO-All and PAO-None for diﬀerent values of sensing
cost

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
97
5.2.3
Varying the Open Probability
In this experiment we investigated the eﬀect of distribution over the edges
on the performance of variants of Gen-PAO-EDN (Section 4.1.2). In order
to perform simple experiment that analyzes this eﬀect, we conﬁgured the
graph such that all unknown edges was open with the same value of ﬁxed
probability, called open probability, which is given as an input. Figure 5.4
illustrates the performance of diﬀerent heuristics on a graph that consists
19 unknown edges for DC=7 and DC=9 . Figures 5.4a and 5.4c show the
change in the size of the AND/OR graph size as the open probability ascends
from 0.1 to 0.9. These results indicates that for all algorithms there exists
a certain value of open probability p (p=0.5 on ﬁgure 5.4a and p=0.3 on
ﬁgure 5.4c) such that for any value of open probability p′ (called low open
probability) smaller than p the size of the AND/OR graph increases as p′
rises, while for any value of open probability p′′ larger than p (called high
open probability) the size of the AND/OR graph decreases as the p′′ rises.
We call p′ low open probability and p′′ high open probability
This can be explained by the following reasons(referred to AND/OR
graphs generated by all algorithms):
• On high open probability most of the decision nodes (OR nodes) de-
cides correctly their best action node when ﬁrst expanded without
changing their decision afterwards, and thus, relatively large portion
of the expanded states is also a part of the optimal policy graph and
the AND/OR graph is relatively small. However, as the open prob-
ability lowers, the AND/OR graph size increases since the heuristic
estimates are less accurate and more alternative actions are consid-
ered for the optimal policy. This leads to an excessive expansion of
nodes and a larger AND/OR graph.

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
98
• On low open probability, as the open probability lowers, the graph
becomes “more blocked”, and the default path becomes preferable. In
such cases, all variants of Gen-PAO-EDN tend to prune action nodes
that are not associated with the default path (sensing or traversing
edges that are not in the default path) and, as a result, a smaller
AND/OR graph is obtained.
The comparison between the heuristic of Gen-PAO-ELN shows advantage
of PAO-Blocked and PAO-All on low open probabilities. This is due to the
high pruning rate incurred by HBlocked on low open probability, where the
gap between the heuristic values the real values are high. Again HBlocked
is eﬀective since the chances that heuristic value of diﬀerent belief state will
be updated are high (see conditions of HBlocked in section 4.1).
Figures 5.4b and 5.4d show the time spent by the four algorithms. As in
previous experiments, there is a tight correlation between the execution time
and the AND/OR graph size. The size of the AND/OR graphs generated
by PAO-Blocked and PAO-All are smaller then PAO-None on all levels of
open probability, however, the advantage on runtime of PAO-Blocked and
PAO-All occurs on low open probability.
5.3
Value of Clairvoyance
In order to get some general indication of the total value of information, we
checked the ratio (see Papadimitriou 1991), denoted by RV , on instances of
basic CTP and Exp-CTP. RV is deﬁned as C∗
AS where C∗is the expected cost
of the optimal policy and AS is the expected cost of the optimal policy given
that the graph is fully observable (can be also described as the expected cost
of the policy Always Sense when the sensing cost is 0 (see [Bnaya,Felner and

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
99
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
110000
open probability
graph size
Heuristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(a) AND/OR graph size (DC=7)
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
open probability
seconds
Heuristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(b) Execution time (DC=7)
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0
30000
70000
110000
160000
210000
260000
open probability
graph size
Heruristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(c) AND/OR graph size (DC=9)
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
open probability
seconds
Heuristic
Blocked
Open
All
None
(d) Execution time (DC=9)
Figure 5.4: Execution time and AND/OR graph size generated by PAO-
Blocked, PAO-Open, PAO-All and PAO-None for diﬀerent
Shimony]). Formally, Let l1, l2, ..., ln be the paths in the graph ordered by
their path cost, Pi be the probability that path li is traversable, and Ci be

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
100
the path cost of path li then AS can be described as follows:
AS =
n
X
i=1
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −Pj)PiCi
We performed experiments on instance of basic CTP for diﬀerent values of
open probabilities and values of the default edge. Results for graph 7V11E
(ﬁgure 5.5) shows that RV is relatively high on low values of the default edge
(where default edge cost is 20). This can be explained by the fact that AS
is relatively low since the agent would not traverse the default edge if there
exists an open path to the target (in addition to the default edge) however
C∗is almost high as the cost of default edge since it is usually worthwhile to
traverse the default edge when MaxEdge is low (note that C∗is always lower
than MaxEdge). In addition, RV is high on low open probabilities (i.e. on
p ∈[0.1, 0.3]) , since the the graph “tends” to be blocked and the default
edge is preferable over the “cheap” paths. Tough on extremely high cost of
the default edge (not illustrated in the ﬁgure), i.e. on MaxEdge > 300 , RV
is low even on low open probability (around 1.3), since the agent takes the
default edge only if there is no open path other then the default edge.
An analogue experiment was performed on instanfce of Exp-CTP for the
same graph as used on previous experiment. RV was measured for diﬀerent
values of DC and open probabilities while default edge cost remained ﬁxed
(default edge cost is 200). Figure 5.6 shows that the result is qualitatively
similar to the results of the previous experiment, however lower value of RV
were obtained in all domain. The reason for this similarity is the same as in
the previous experiment, despite that now, the agent prefers to traverse the
detour path instead of the default edge. RV is lower than in previous exper-
iment since the paths cost, on average, is higher (it is sometimes required

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
101
Probability Open
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Max Edge
20
40
60
80
100
RV
1.2
1.3
1.4
Figure 5.5: ratio value for graph 7V11E
to pay DC several times) and thus AS is higher.
Probability Open
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Max Edge
20
40
60
80
100
RV
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.14
Figure 5.6: Ratio RV for graph 7V11E

CHAPTER 5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
102
Figure 5.7: AND/OR graph for Gs
4V 5E

Chapter 6
Summary
6.1
Contributions
In this thesis we explored the Canadian traveler problem theoretically and
empirically. In the context of theoretical analysis the following theorems has
been proved:
• Correlated-CTP is at least as hard as Sensing-CTP.
• CTP-PATH-DEP is NP-hard.
• CTP-FOR-DEP is solvable in polynomial time.
• Properties of Belief MDP for CTP.
The main aspect of the practical analysis is the framework of Gen-PAO,
where its main contributions are:
• Gen-PAO extends the PAO* algorithm such that it is not restricted
to special types of graphs.
• Gen-PAO optimally solves instances Exp-CTP and sensing CTP in
addition to basic CTP.
103

CHAPTER 6. SUMMARY
104
• Two heuristics HBlocked and HOpen have been proposed. HBlocked
and HOpen can be plugged in Gen-PAO and in some cases reduces the
size of the AND/OR graph and the execution time.
In addition, we analyzed the parameter RV for instances of Exp-CTP and
basic CTP and showed its general behivior.
6.2
Future work
There is a lot remained to be done in theoretical analysis of the CTP, and
in particular classifying other subclasses of the CTP. On the practical as-
pect, Gen-PAO can be further modiﬁed to solve other type of CTP such as
Correlated CTP and multi-agent CTP. Moreover, we believe that Gen-PAO
can be further enhanced by aiming it to other type of POMDP problems. It
might be worth consideration to improve the performance of Gen-PAO by
implementing heuristics that specialize in speciﬁc type of graphs.
