Corner Case Data Description and Detection
1st Tinghui Ouyang
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center (AIRC),
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tokyo, Japan

2nd Vicent Sanz Marco
AIRC, AIST, Tokyo, Japan

3rd Yoshinao Isobe
Cyber Physical Security Research Center(CPSRC), AIST, Tsukuba, Japan

4th Hideki Asoh
AIRC, AIST, Tokyo, Japan

5th Yutaka Oiwa
Cyber Physical Security Research Center(CPSRC), AIST, Tsukuba, Japan

6th Yoshiki Seo
AIRC,AIST,Tokyo, Japan

Abstract—As the major factors affecting the safety of deep
learning models, corner cases and related detection are crucial
in AI quality assurance for constructing safety- and security-
critical systems. The generic corner case researches involve two
interesting topics. One is to enhance DL models’ robustness to
corner case data via the adjustment on parameters/structure. The
other is to generate new corner cases for model retraining and
improvement. However, the complex architecture and the huge
amount of parameters make the robust adjustment of DL models
not easy, meanwhile it is not possible to generate all real-world
corner cases for DL training. Therefore, this paper proposes a
simple and novel approach aiming at corner case data detection
via a speciﬁc metric. This metric is developed on surprise
adequacy (SA) which has advantages on capture data behaviors.
Furthermore, targeting at characteristics of corner case data,
three modiﬁcations on distanced-based SA are developed for
classiﬁcation applications in this paper. Consequently, through
the experiment analysis on MNIST data and industrial data, the
feasibility and usefulness of the proposed method on corner case
data detection are veriﬁed.
Index Terms—corner case data detection, surprise adequacy,
modiﬁed distanced-based SA, AI quality testing,
I. INTRODUCTION
As the fast development of machine learning technologies
in the last decade, especially deep learning (DL) based tech-
niques, this makes Artiﬁcial Intelligent (AI) a widely-known
term in both industries and our daily life. However, this
fast development also makes us concerning AI applications,
e.g the safety of DL-based systems [1]. As more complex
architectures of deep neural networks are applied to obtain
high accuracy in applications, the safety becomes more critical
than ever before, especially in life- and property-related ﬁelds,
like medical diagnosis [2], malware detection [3], autonomous
driving [4] and so on. For instances, autonomous driving is
being developed in many big companies, like Tesla, Ford,
Waymo/Google, but several serious accidents have happened
in real-world due to DLs’ safety issues [5], [6]. These ac-
cidents imminently grab scholars’ attention around world on
studies about ﬁnding factors affecting the safety in DL systems
testing and taking measurements to eliminate them.
In both traditional software and DL-based systems, incorrect
or unexpected corner case behaviors are always regarded
to play an important part affecting systems’ safety [7]. For
example, in autonomous driving, many reported real-world
collision cases are related to those rare or previously unseen
corner cases. In [8], a collision between a Tesla car and a
trailer was reported since the Tesla’s DL system failed to deal
with the corner cases of “white color against a brightly lit sky”
and the “high ride height”. Another collision was reported on
a Google self-driving car crashed to a bus since its DL system
made wrong decision on rare conditions (corner cases) [9].
Besides the given two examples, many other wrong decisions
made by AI systems are more or less related to different corner
cases. Therefore, to detect and ﬁx those potential ﬂaws or
undesired corner case behaviors, namely corner case detection,
is surely crucial for system designers to construct safety- and
security-critical DL systems, and it should also be a necessary
part of systematical AI testing.
Currently, many scholars are studying on corner cases and
related AI testing techniques [10], [11]. Firstly, from the per-
spective of concepts, corner cases are namely those erroneous
behaviors in the DL-based software, which are analogous to
bugs in traditional software [12]. Different with traditional
software, corner cases of DL systems pay more attention
on data distribution instead of system architectures. Hence,
traditional software usually aims at patch ﬁxing after bug
detection, DL-based systems need to consider these detected
erroneous corner case data in the AI model retraining process
for improving its robustness on structure and parameters.
Secondly, researches about corner cases study mainly include
the following two parts. One kind of study is to test a given DL
model’s robustness and stability when facing with corner case
data. For example, some adversarial attack strategies, such as
in [13], [14], are applied on the original testing data to generate
adversarial samples which can reﬂect the feature of corner
arXiv:2101.02494v2  [cs.LG]  12 Mar 2021

cases to some extent, then DL model’s accuracy and robustness
are tested. The DeepFool proposed in [15] can also realize the
generation of adversarial corner cases and robustness testing.
The DeepMutation proposed in [16] aimed at mutating DL
models’ structure and parameters directly, and testing the
modiﬁed model’s performance on the original testing data.
Moreover, through this mutation and testing, some undetected
corner cases can be further detected. For example, if a data
point is found erroneous after a small model mutation, it is
possible to be regarded as a potential corner case data due to
its high risk of causing wrong decision. However, considering
current industrial DL systems always having thousands of
neurons and millions of parameters, it is extremely challenging
to detect corner cases via introducing small mutations or
perturbations on models. The other kind of study is to generate
corner case data for retraining and improving DL systems’
performance. For instance, the DeepMutation technique also
proposed some mutation operators on data, and generated
some corner cases for DL model testing. In [17], biased corner
cases were also generated from MNIST dataset based on
the metamorphic testing technique. Moreover, the DeepTest
method proposed in [7] aimed at the autonomous driving
scenario, and generated lots of corner cases by leveraging
image transformation techniques to change the driving condi-
tions, like rain, fog and lighting. Furthermore, the DeepXplore
method [18] proposed an idea of neuron coverage, and made
use of it to iteratively learn erroneous corner cases. There
were thousands of incorrect corner case behaviors generated
in this paper. However, even though companies like Tesla and
Google have developed many effective techniques in corner
case study, it is still hardly possible to generate and consider
all kinds of corner cases in the training process. The only
feasible way would be studying a way for detecting corner
cases as possible in AI testing.
Concerning the mentioned techniques and problems on
corner case study, this paper proposes to develop a novel
corner case data detection method by using modiﬁed distance-
based surprise adequacy (DSA). The idea of surprise adequacy
(SA) was initially proposed by Kim et al [19], which can be
used as a test adequacy tool for DL system testing. SA’s initial
property is to describe the surprise of testing data with respect
to the training data, namely to describe difference/similarity
between testing and training data. In [19], two kinds of SA
are developed, one based on the probability density distribu-
tion, the other based on distance similarity, and they were
furthermore veriﬁed useful in industrial applications [20],
[21]. While, through the review on SA-related literature, two
useful points can be obtained. One is that DSA is speciﬁcally
effective for classiﬁcation applications. The other is that SA
was veriﬁed useful to capture data’s behaviors in DL testing,
namely models’ neuron activation behaviors instead of plain
data distribution, for example, in [20] SA was validated to
correlate with the correctness answers in NLP study. With
consideration of these two points, this paper is inspired
to leverage DSA for corner case detection in classiﬁcation
problems, since SA’s capability on data description can be
used not only on normal data but also on incorrect/erroneous
data (corner case data). Moreover, to enhance DSA’s ability
on capturing behaviors of corner case data, this paper also
proposes three kinds of modiﬁcation on the DSA deﬁnition.
Furthermore, based on the proposed DSA and the corner
case detection method, experiments based on a benchmark
classiﬁcation data (MNIST) [22] and industrial application
data are implemented and studied in this paper. Consequently,
the novelty and contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows:
• SA is applied for data description, especially for corner
case data description. Instead of describing data via
the general plain data distribution directly, SA adapts
neurons activation behaviors with respect to a DL model
to describe data’s characteristics, which can capture pro-
found data behaviors responding to DL models in quality
testing;
• Three kinds of modiﬁcation on DSA deﬁnitions are
developed. First, the capability of DSA on data behaviors
description is inherited. Then, according to the idea that
erroneous corner cases are tightly related to the classiﬁer
boundary, so modiﬁcations on the DSA deﬁnition are
proposed;
• Based on DSA, a novel corner case data detection method
is proposed. Different from most of corner case study, the
proposed method can be utilized as a tool in recognition
of corner case data. In this way, it is possible to detect
any corner case data with no need to generate/learn all
possible corner case data;
• Experiments on MNIST data and industrial data validate
the feasibility of using DSA to describe corner case
data behaviors, and that it is useful to use DSA on
corner case data detection. Moreover, the proposed DSA3
achieve a relatively better performance than others based
on experiment results analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II brieﬂy describes the idea of surprise adequacy and its
related calculation process. Section III gives out three kinds
of modiﬁcation based on corner case deﬁnition and their
characteristics. Section IV implements experiments on the
benchmark MNIST data and an industrial classiﬁcation data,
and analyze the performance of using DSA on corner case
data detection. Finally, Section V concludes the contributions
of this paper, and think about the future work.
II. SURPRISE ADEQUACY
To evaluate the quality of testing data in AI assurance, a
good way is to study neurons behavior in terms of a given
deep learning (DL) model. Generally, the more the diversity
of neuron behaviors, the better the quality of testing data.
There are various methods to describe neuron behaviors in DL
models. For example, neuron coverage was proposed in [18],
and its activation status was taken as the behavior of a testing
data point responding to the DL model. Similarly, values and
signs of neuron outputs can both be used to describe neurons’
activation behaviors in [23].

While, compared with those metrics reﬂecting independent
behaviors of testing and training sets, in [19] an interesting
idea was proposed to describe the difference between the
testing set’s behaviors and that of the whole training set.
To realize this idea, the activation status of neurons in DL
models are still ﬁrstly denoted. Assuming a set of inputs
X = {x1, x2, ...} and a trained DL model M consisted of a set
of neurons N = {n1, n2, ...}. For a given testing data x ∈X
and an ordered (sub)set of neurons N ⊆N, the activation
behavior (namely activation trace) of x on N is expressed by
the vector of activation values and it denoted as
αN(x) = [a1(x), a2(x), ..., a|N|(x)]T
(1)
where each element an(x) corresponds to the activation value
of x with respect to an individual neuron n in N. Hence,
the set of activation traces for X is denoted as AN(X) =
{αN(x) | x ∈X}.
Then, AN(Tr) is calculated based on the training dataset
Tr, which records neurons’ activation behaviors on all samples
in Tr. Subsequently, the activation behavior of testing data Te
is also obtained as AN(Te). Finally, combining AN(Tr) and
AN(Te), surprise adequacy (SA) was deﬁned to describe the
relative novelty of testing inputs with respect to the training
data. It is actually denoted as the quantitative similarity
measure between AN(Tr) and AN(Te) in the following form.
SA = SimilarilryMeasure(AN(Te), AN(Tr))
(2)
In [19], there are two kinds of similarity measurement
proposed to formalize SA. One is the likelihood-based SA
(LSA), and the other one is distance-based SA (DSA). These
two SAs are validated feasible to capture the relative surprise
of testing data in DL systems, and describe testing data’s
behaviors, which implies SAs are useful to evaluate the quality
of testing data.
III. CORNER CASES DETECTION BASED ON SA
A. Denotation of corner cases
As well as the execution of traditional software [24], a
dangerous condition in AI system testing is processing data of
corner cases which generally cause incorrect and unexpected
behaviors. For example, when DL-based autonomous driving
system processes corner cases of rainy weather or strong
reﬂection, an incorrect decision may be made to lead to crash
bringing the loss of life and property. Therefore, detecting
corner-case samples is important in AI testing. According to
the above description of corner case, we can deﬁne the corner
case set as the following form
Corner case set : {x| DL(x + pertubation) ̸= label(x)}
(3)
where, x is denoted as a sample in corner case; its true label
is denoted as label(x); DL(∗) is the output class based on
a given DL model. Through this deﬁnition, we see when a
small perturbation is added into a corner-case data x, where
perturbation is a small value such that 0 < |perturbation| ≤
ε for a constant ε , the class recognized by DL system will
be different with its true label. In this way, a corner case set
can include data samples with both incorrect and unexpected
behaviors, e.g. boundary adversarial data and incorrectly clas-
siﬁed data (outliers), as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Diagram of corner case. Two class of data are colored as blue and red.
Data of corner case is colored as green, which includes incorrectly classiﬁed
data as well as data close to classiﬁcation boundary which is sensitive to cause
unexpected recognition.
B. Distance-based SA and its modiﬁcation
Considering SA can capture the behavior of testing data,
therefore we may think about the possibility of using SA to
describe behaviors of data in corner case. Here, we mainly
consider the distance-based SA (DSA), since it describes the
relation of testing data respect to the classiﬁcation boundary.
According to the DSA deﬁnition in [19], ﬁrstly assuming a DL
model M consisting of a set of neurons N, it is learned based
on a training dataset Tr with C classes. According to the
denotation of SA, the activation traces of Tr can be calculated
as AN(Tr) based on the trained M. Then, for a new testing
input x in the class cx ∈C, its nearest neighbor in cx is
denoted as xa. Finally, the surprise of x respect to class cx
can be calculated as the distance between their activation trace
αN(∗), as the following form
xa =
argmin
xi∈X s.t. cxi=cx
∥αN(x) −αN(xi)∥
(4)
dista = ∥αN(x) −αN(xa)∥
(5)
where, ∥∗∥is the Euclidean distance. Subsequently, taking
xa as the reference point and ﬁnding its nearest neighbor xb
in a class different with cx, then the surprise between xa and
xb is also calculated
xb =
argmin
xi∈X s.t. cxi̸=cx
∥αN(xa) −αN(xi)∥
(6)
distb = ∥αN(xa) −αN(xb)∥
(7)
Combining the above deﬁnitions, the SA of testing data x to
the training data is consequently deﬁned as the ratio between
dista and distb, as below
DSA(x) = dista
distb
(8)

According this deﬁnition, it is seen if the numerator is larger
and the denominator is smaller, the value of DSA will be
larger, implying the testing data x is surprise to data of class
cx in the training set, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Therefore, we
can see that DSA shows a way of describing data’s surprise
to training data by distance, and it is also useful to describe
data’s activation behaviors respect to the given DL model.
While, the above deﬁnition of DSA is simple, it has some
drawbacks to deal with independent data points in extreme
cases. Moreover, to evaluate its capability on detecting data of
corner case, several additional modiﬁcations are also proposed
in this paper to formalize DSA for corner case detection.
(1) Modiﬁcation 1: novelty calculation via testing data itself
In the original DSA deﬁnition, we see that the denominator
is actually to calculate the surprise of xa (the nearest neighbor
of the testing data x in the same class) respect to data of
other different classes. Therefore, DSA can be regarded as
the comparison between x’s novelty in its belonging class
and its class novelty to other classes. This deﬁnition may be
useful to describe the surprise of a testing data to the whole
training data. However, to evaluate if a data sample belongs
to corner case, its own novelty respect to all classes seems
more important. Hence, we modify the original DSA by just
adjusting the deﬁnition of distb as the following form
xb =
argmin
xi∈X s.t. cxi̸=cx
∥αN(x) −αN(xi)∥
(9)
distb = ∥αN(x) −αN(xb)∥
(10)
The calculation of DSA keeps unchanged. This modiﬁcation
makes DSA consider surprises of testing data x to all classes
independently, which may be helpful to reﬂect the behaviors
of data in corner case, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
(2) Modiﬁcation 2: novelty calculation via global data
descriptors
Compared with the original DSA, the ﬁrst modiﬁcation con-
siders surprise of testing data x to data of all classes. While,
these two DSA deﬁnitions may have a common shortage on
processing pair-wise rare data points, especially on describing
behaviors of corner case. For example, assuming the testing
data x is the corner-case data, there happens to exist a neighbor
xa very close to x, namely x ≈xa, since the above DSA
are calculated based on the distance of point-to-point, this
may lead DSA to be a low value due to dista →0. In
this case, the novelty of x respect to training data is regarded
as small based on SA deﬁnition. However, this result causes
the inconsistence of behavior novelty for data in corner case.
Furthermore, this result will be meaningless for corner case
study as well. Therefore, a possible modiﬁcation on the basis
of the ﬁrst modiﬁcation is to select a more general class
descriptor for surprise calculation. In [25], the class centers
were commonly used as feasible global descriptors. Hence,
we can replace the nearest neighbor with the class center in
surprise calculation, and the new equations can be written as
below
dista = ∥αN(x) −αN(ma)∥
(11)
distb = ∥αN(x) −αN(mb)∥
(12)
where ma is the center of the class which x belongs to; mb is
the center of a different class cb (cb ̸= cx) which the closest
point xb to x belongs to. For each s ∈{a, b}, the center point
ms is calculated by
ms =
1
|Xs|
X
xi∈Xs
xi, where Xs = {xi ∈X| cxi = cs}. (13)
Then,
the
newly
modiﬁed
DSA
can
be
calculated
as
dista/distb. Its diagram is shown in Fig. 2(c).
(3) Modiﬁcation 3: novelty calculation via local data de-
scriptors
In the above modiﬁcation of DSA, the characteristic of a
class is simply described by class center. However, corner-
case data usually have some obvious characteristics of clos-
ing to boundary or outlier location. Class centers are good
global descriptors of classes, but not effective to capture local
characteristics, e.g. in reﬂecting the characteristics of corner
case data. In this paper, to modify DSA for corner case data
detection, we propose to replace the global descriptors with
local descriptors, e.g. the center of a nearest neighborhood
shown in Fig. 2(d). The DSA of testing data x can be still
calculated via (11), (12) and (8), while the calculation of the
center ms,δ for each s ∈{a, b} should be modiﬁed as
ms,δ =
1
|Xs,δ|
X
xi∈Xs,δ
xi
(14)
where Xs,δ (⊆Xs) represents the neighborhood set of inputs
included in the hypersphere whose center is xs and radious is
δ, namely several nearest neighbors of xs. Here, two methods
determining the neighborhood set are provided. One kind of
neighborhood is denoted by a given size of Eculidean round
(i.e. the same radius δ for all inputs is used), as follows
Xs,δ = {xi ∈Xs | ∥xi −xs∥< δ}
(15)
where, xa (s = a) and xb (s = b) are inputs explained
in the previous Modiﬁcation 2 and Xs is the set deﬁned in
(13). An alternative deﬁnition of the nearest neighborhood is
determined by k-nearest points [26]. In this case, the radious
δ is given for each xs such that Xs includes only k nearest
neighbors of xs (i.e. |Xs,δ| = k) and therefore
Xs,δ = {xi1, xi2, ..., xik}
(16)
where, xij ∈Xs is the jth nearest point to xs.
C. Corner case data coverage
Based on the above deﬁnitions of DSA, including the
original one and modiﬁcations, the analysis on studying DSA’s
behaviors responding to corner case data can be implemented.
To quantitatively evaluate the capability of DSA in corner case
data detection, here we propose a metric as corner-case data
coverage as the following form
cov(vth) = card({d| d ∈CD, DSA(d) > vth})
|CD|
∗100%
(17)

Fig. 2. Diagram of four types of DSA. (a) the original DSA. (b) modiﬁcation
1. (c) modiﬁcation 2. (d) modiﬁcation 3.
where, vth is a given threshold; CD represents the dataset of
corner case data; |CD| is the cardinality; {d} represents the
set consisting of all detected corner case data which have DSA
values larger than the given threshold. While, considering not
all of data in corner case are detectable, here we only take the
detectable corner-case data into account, namely those data
wrongly recognized by DL. In this way, the proposed corner
case data coverage is actually to evaluate the percentage of
erroneous behaviors of DL systems.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
A. Dataset and the DL system description
To study behaviors of the proposed DSA on corner case
data detection, in this paper we take the MNIST data [22]
as a reference in experiments and analysis. MNIST is a
widely-used dataset in machine learning research, which con-
tains ten classes of images, and dividing as 60,000/10,000
training/testing samples. For recognizing different numbers
in MNIST, we adopt a common-used ﬁve layer Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN), including convolutional, max-
pooling, dropout and full-connection layers. On the other hand,
experiments in this paper are implemented on a machine
equipped with Intel i7-9750 CPU, 32GB RAM, NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 2060, running in Windows 10 Pro 64-bit OS.
Code of this paper is released [27], which is developed from
SADL [28] on Keras, and contains the proposed three kinds
of modiﬁcation of DSA are realized.
B. Qualitative analysis on corner case data detection
Firstly, through training the given CNN architecture above
on MNIST data, we can achieve 99.17% accuracy on the orig-
inal testing set. Then, based on the proposed DSA deﬁnition
and the trained DL model, we can calculate the values of
DSA on each testing sample, and subsequently study DSA’s
behaviors responding to corner case data detection. By sorting
all testing samples as the DSA descending trend, we can
ﬁrst study the inﬂuence of DSA variation on DL model’s
performance. In order to do comparative analysis, four kinds of
DSA are calculated on outputs of three selected layers, such
as the convolutional layer 1 (Layer1), convolutional layer 2
(Layer2) and the ﬁnal full-connection layer (Layer3) of the
given CNN. Results are shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3.
Testing accuracy variation as the descending DSA. (a) Layer1. (b)
Layer2. (c) Layer3.
Fig. 3 shows the curves of accuracy vs. DSA variation.
By assuming the ﬁrst kn samples are taken from the sorted
dataset for testing, then an accuracy value is calculated. As
the value of kn ascends from a small value to 10,000, the
curve of accuracy can be plotted. Here, the beginning point
is kn = 100, where we can see the accuracy is low due to a
certain percentage of erroneous data (corner case data). This
phenomenon can be found in all curves during the beginning
period where testing samples have large DSA values. This
implies that large values of DSA can capture corner case
data to some extent. Then, the ending point is kn = 10, 000
meaning the whole testing dataset, all curves reach the ﬁnal
testing accuracy 99.17%. Moreover, to vividly analyze this
foundation, we can further draw out images of these samples
with the largest DSA values, as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Images with the largest DSA values. (a) DSA0. (b) DSA1. (c) DSA2.
(d) DSA3.
In Fig. 4, images are drawn separately based on four DSA
deﬁnitions, such as DSA0- DSA3 representing the original
DSA and other three modiﬁcations respectively, and DSA3
adopts the second deﬁnition in (16) which is more convenient
in computation (e.g. k=20). From these images, we can see
there are indeed many corner case data, which are caused
by various factors, like unusual writing, thick chirography,

TABLE I
AUC-ROC OF CORNER CASE DATA DETECTION BASED ON DSA
Layer1
Layer2
Layer3
DSA0
0.9422
0.9418
0.9759
DSA1
0.9657
0.9722
0.9833
DSA2
0.9114
0.9662
0.9875
DSA3
0.9814
0.9884
0.9966
large slant, structure disequilibrium and so on. Some of the
samples can be unrecognized by not only AI but also human
beings, however they can have large value of DSA. Therefore,
it illustrates that DSA might be useful to detect corner case
data.
C. Quantitative analysis of DSA behaviors
While, besides the conclusion that DSA can capture ac-
tivation behaviors of data from Fig. 3, there discovers the
other interesting phenomenon, namely DSA3 has relatively
lower accuracy in all these three layers, especially at the
beginning period of curves. This implies DSA3 can capture
more wrongly recognized images to lower the accuracy when
DSA values are selected as a large value, which is also
to say DSA3 has a better capability on corner case data
detection. To verify this conjecture and to quantitatively study
performance of different DSAs on corner case data detection,
the proposed corner-case data coverage is ﬁrstly calculated.
Results of corner-case data coverage based on four DSAs are
shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5.
Corner case data coverage of testing data sorted as the descending
DSA. (a) Layer1. (b) Layer2. (c) Layer3.
In Fig. 5, the testing data is also sorted by the descending
direction of DSA values. For a given DSA threshold vth, the
number of data satisfying DSA(x) > vth is counted. Mean-
while, under this condition the number of wrongly classiﬁed
data is also counted for the calculation of corner-case data
coverage. It is seen from these results, that DSA3 has the
largest corner-case data coverage on the analysis of all three
given layers. On the other hand, we can ignore the selection
of threshold as a concert value, and utilize the measurement
of AUC-ROC [29] on corner case data detection to evaluate
different DSAs’ performance. By assuming to utilize DSA
values directly for distinguish normal data and corner case
data, the AUC value of this binary classiﬁcation process can
be calculated. AUC-ROC values of four DSAs in three given
layers are presented in Table I.
Based on the result in Table I, three conclusions can be
obtained. First, for the constructed CNN model on MNIST,
it indeed achieves good performances by using DSA to guide
corner case data detection since all AUC values are larger
than 0.9. Second, it is found that the deeper the layer is, the
better DSA performs on corner case data detection, seeing
AUC(Layer3) > AUC(Layer2) > AUC(Layer1). Third,
DSA3 can have a relatively better performance when com-
pared to the other DSA deﬁnitions. Therefore, based on these
results, we can consider to choose the proposed DSA3 for
corner case data detection in the further study.
D. Adversarial testing analysis
To further analyze the performance of DSA, as an important
AI testing technique adversarial testing can also be applied
here. Generally, based on the original testing data, small
perturbations imperceptible to humans are added to generate
adversarial samples which will lead the DL model to make
wrong behaviors (outputs). There are many different attack
strategies applied to generate adversarial testing set in liter-
ature. In this paper, we take four widely-studied adversarial
attacks to generate new testing set on MNIST, such as Fast
Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [14], Basic Iterative Method
(BIM) [30], Carlini & Wagner (C&W) [31], and Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [32]. Then, based on these four
adversarial testing datasets, the proposed DSAs are applied
to detect the corner case data, namely misclassiﬁed data.
Similar as the above analysis, we do not care about the exact
selection of DSA threshold, and just utilize the AUC-ROC to
evaluate the performance of using DSA on corner case data
detection. The results of ROC curves of four DSAs on different
adversarial testing sets are depicted in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. ROC of using DSAs on corner case data detection on four adversarial
testing data. (a) FGSM. (b) BIM. (c) CW. (d) PGD.
Fig. 6 shows the ROC curves on corner case data detection,
where X-axis represents the value of FPR, and Y-axis repre-
sents the value of TPR respectively. In details [33], TPR means
true positive rate, also called as sensitivity or recall, which can
be used to reﬂect the test’s ability on correctly detecting corner

TABLE II
AUC-ROC OF DSA-BASED CORNER CASE DATA DETECTION ON
ADVERSARIAL DATA TESTING.
FGSM
BIM
CW
PGD
DSA0
0.8520
0.9510
0.8390
0.9593
DSA1
0.8801
0.9702
0.8931
0.9722
DSA2
0.8812
0.9659
0.8510
0.9696
DSA3
0.9226
0.9915
0.9666
0.9921
case data here; FPR means false positive ratio, also known as
false alarm ratio, which is the probability of falsely rejecting
the null hypothesis for a particular test. Their calculation are
presented as below
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(18)
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(19)
where, TP (True Positive), FP (False Positive), FN (False
Negative), TN (True Negative) are four events in confusion
matrix of corner case data detection. Moreover, based on these
ROC curves, we can quantitatively calculate the values of AUC
as a KPI metric, shown in Table II
According to the results of Table II, the same foundation is
obtained that DSA3 performs relatively better than the other
DSA deﬁnitions on all these four adversarial testing sets.
Therefore, we can make use of DSA3 in the following study
related to corner case data and AI quality assurance.
E. Real-world data analysis
To further study the feasibility and generalization ability of
the proposed method, we also propose to apply the proposed
DSA method to detect corner case data in real-world applica-
tion. Here, the metal casting product image data is taken for
case study, which is applied for industrial quality inspection
in real world [34]. It has totally 6,633 training data images,
and 715 testing images. The objective based on this data is
an identical binary classiﬁcation problem which mainly aims
at automatically recognizing defective metal casting products
and normal ones. Therefore, a general CNN model consisting
of 2 convolutional layers and 2 full-connection layers are
constructed for this issue. After modeling and training, the
ﬁnal testing accuracy can reach 97.90% on this casting data.
Then, according the proposed method on DSA calculation and
corner case data detection, we can also implement related
experiments, such as calculating four kinds of DSA values
on given model layers, e.g. two convolutional layers and
the output layer are considered here and also named as
Layer1, Layer2, Layer3, corner case data coverage analysis,
and performance analysis about using DSA on corner case
data detection. Results of related experiments are presented in
Fig. 7.
In Fig. 7, the corner case data coverage is calculated and
plotted as the descending values of four given DSA. We can
see the proposed DSA3 has relatively larger corner case data
Fig. 7. Corner case data coverage variance as the descending DSA. (a) Layer1.
(b) Layer2. (c) Layer3.
Fig. 8. ROC curves of using DSAs on corner case data detection. (a) Layer1.
(b) Layer2. (c) Layer3.
coverage, namely implying better capability on corner case
capture.
Fig. 8 shows the ROC curves of using DSA on corner case
data detection. It is also found that DSA3 has larger values
of TPR under the same value of FPR than other DSAs, the
similar phenomenon is shown in all three given layers analysis.
For the further quantitative analysis, based on the results of
ROC curves, we also calculate the values of AUC-ROC, as
presented in Table III.
TABLE III
AUC-ROC OF DSA-BASED CORNER CASE DATA DETECTION ON CASTING
DEFECT DATA
Layer1
Layer2
Layer3
DSA0
0.7565
0.7717
0.7990
DSA1
0.7520
0.7612
0.8002
DSA2
0.7584
0.7815
0.9952
DSA3
0.9437
0.9587
0.9908
From results of Table III, we ﬁnd the similar conclusion as
that obtained on MNIST data that the proposed DSA modi-
ﬁcations can improve the capability of the original DSA on
describing corner case data’s behaviors, meanwhile the DSA3
performs relatively better than others. Moreover, as the layer
becomes deeper, the calculated DSA has better performance
on corner case data detection, seeing that AUC(Layer3) >
AUC(Layer2) > AUC(Layer1).
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a novel method based on DSA has been
proposed for corner case data detection which would be useful
in AI quality assurance, such as safety analysis. While, to
improve the capability of the original DSA on capturing behav-
iors of corner case data, three DSA modiﬁcations have been
also developed with the consideration of boundary features,
and validated useful in corner case data detection. Then, based
on the experiments on MNIST which has been regarded as

the benchmark classiﬁcation application, it is seen that large
values of DSA indeed capture many images with abnormal
characteristics with respect to standard numbers, implying
the DSA’s capability on capturing corner cases. Subsequently,
through the quantitative analysis on erroneous corner case
data detection, the modiﬁed DSAs have been found to have
relatively better performance than the original one. Meanwhile,
the proposed DSA3 performs the best on MNIST to some
extent. Moreover, four adversarial testing datasets of MNIST
have been also generated to further verify the feasibility of
using DSA on corner case data detection. On the other hand,
the industrial data based on casting defect application has also
been studied in experiments, and its results further verify the
general feasibility of using the proposed idea on classiﬁcation
problems.
While, besides the obtained conclusions above, more issues
would be still meaningfully developed in the future work. First,
exploring other possible metrics for corner case data detection,
e.g. uncertainty consideration, since the proposed DSAs in
this paper cannot always perform perfectly. Second, studying
the usage of detected corner case data, some possible studies
like AI robustness analysis, stability and dependability in AI
quality assurance, may be able to make use of these corner
case data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is based on results obtained from a project
’JPNP20006’, commissioned by the New Energy and Indus-
trial Technology Development Organization (NEDO)
