arXiv:1602.05828v1  [cs.AI]  18 Feb 2016
A General Modiﬁer-based Framework
for Inconsistency-Tolerant Query Answering
Jean Franc¸ois Baget
INRIA, France

Salem Benferhat
Univ Artois, France

Zied Bouraoui
Univ Aix-Marseille, France

Madalina Croitoru
Univ Montpellier, France

Marie-Laure Mugnier
Univ Montpellier, France

Odile Papini
Univ Aix-Marseille, France

Swan Rocher
Univ Montpellier, France

Karim Tabia
Univ Artois, France

Abstract
We propose a general framework for inconsistency-tolerant
query answering within existential rule setting. This frame-
work uniﬁes the main semantics proposed by the state of art
and introduces new ones based on cardinality and majority
principles. It relies on two key notions: modiﬁers and infer-
ence strategies. An inconsistency-tolerant semantics is seen
as a composite modiﬁer plus an inference strategy. We com-
pare the obtained semantics from a productivity point of view.
Introduction
In this paper we place ourselves in the context of Ontology-
Based Data Access (Poggi et al. 2008) and we address
the problem of query answering when the assertional
base (which stores data) is inconsistent with the ontology
(which represents generic knowledge about a domain).
Existing work in this area studied different inconsistency-
tolerant
inference
relations,
called
semantics,
which
consist of getting rid of inconsistency by ﬁrst comput-
ing a set of consistent subsets of the assertional base,
called repairs, that restore consistency w.r.t the ontology,
then using them to perform query answering. Most of
these proposals, inspired by database approaches e.g.
(Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999)
or
propositional
logic approaches e.g. (Benferhat, Dubois, and Prade 1997),
were introduced for the lightweight description logic
DL-Lite
e.g.
(Lembo et al. 2015).
Other
descrip-
tion logics e.g. (Rosati 2011) or existential rule e.g.
(Lukasiewicz et al. 2015) have also been considered. In this
paper, we use existential rules e.g.(Baget et al. 2011) as
ontology language that generalizes lightweight description
logics.
The main contribution of this paper consists in setting up
a general framework that uniﬁes previous proposals and ex-
tends the state of the art with new semantics. The idea be-
hind our framework is to distinguish between the way data
assertions are virtually distributed (notion of modiﬁers) and
inference strategies. An inconsistency-tolerant semantics is
then naturally deﬁned by a modiﬁer and an inference strat-
egy. We also propose a classiﬁcation of the productivity of
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
hereby obtained semantics by sound and complete condi-
tions relying on modiﬁer inclusion and inference strategy
order. The objective of framework is to establish a method-
ology for inconsistency handling which, by distinguishing
between modiﬁers and strategies, allows not only to cover
existing semantics, but also to easily deﬁne new ones, and to
study different kinds of their properties.
Preliminaries
We consider ﬁrst-order logical languages without functional
symbols, hence a term is a variable or a constant. An atom
is of the form p(t1, . . . , tk) where p is a predicate of arity
k, and the ti are terms. Given an atom or a set of atoms E,
terms(E) denotes the set of terms occurring in E. A (factual)
assertion is an atom without variables.
A conjunctive query is an existentially quantiﬁed con-
junction of atoms. For readability, we restrict our focus to
Boolean conjunctive queries, which are closed formulas.
However the framework and the obtained results can be di-
rectly extended to general conjunctive queries. In the follow-
ing, by query, we mean a Boolean conjunctive query. Given
a set of assertions A and a query q, the answer to q over
A is yes iff A |= q, where |= denotes the standard logical
consequence.
A knowledge base can be seen as a database enhanced
with an ontological component. Since inconsistency-tolerant
query answering has been mostly studied in the context of
description logics (DLs), and especially DL-Lite, we will
use some DL vocabulary, like ABox for the data and TBox
for the ontology. However, our framework is not restricted to
DLs, hence we deﬁne TBoxes and ABoxes in terms of ﬁrst-
order logic. We assume the reader familiar with the basics of
DLs and their logical translation.
An ABox is a set of factual assertions. As a special case
we have DL assertions restricted to unary and binary pred-
icates. A positive axiom is of the form ∀x∀y(B[x, y] →
∃z H[y, z]) where B and H are conjunctions of atoms (in
other words, it is a positive existential rule). As a special
case, we have for instance concept and role inclusions in
DL-LiteR, which are respectively of the form B1 ⊑B2
and S1 ⊑S2, where Bi := A | ∃S and Si := P | P −
(with A an atomic concept, P an atomic role and P −the
inverse of an atomic role). A negative axiom is of the form
∀x(B[x] →⊥) where B is a conjunction of atoms (in other

words, it is a negative constraint). As a special case, we have
for instance disjointness axioms in DL-LiteR, which are in-
clusions of the form B1 ⊑¬B2 and S1 ⊑¬S2, or equiva-
lently B1 ⊓B2 ⊑⊥and S1 ⊓S2 ⊑⊥.
A TBox T = Tp∪Tn is partitioned into a set Tp of positive
axioms and a set Tn of negative axioms. Finally, a knowl-
edge base (KB) is of the form K = ⟨T , A⟩where A is an
ABox and T is a TBox. K is said to be consistent if T ∪A
is satisﬁable, otherwise it is said to be inconsistent. We also
say that A is (in)consistent (with T ), which reﬂects the as-
sumption that the TBox is reliable. The answer to a query q
over a consistent KB K is yes iff ⟨T , A⟩|= q. When K is
inconsistent, standard consequence is not appropriate since
all queries would be positively answered.
A key notion in inconsistency-tolerant query answering is
the one of a repair of the ABox w.r.t. the TBox. A repair is a
subset of the ABox consistent with the TBox and inclusion-
maximal for this property: R ⊆A is a repair of A w.r.t. T
if i) ⟨T , R⟩is consistent, and ii) ∀R′ ⊆A, if R ⊊R′
(R is strictly included in R′) then ⟨T , R′⟩is inconsistent.
We denote by R(A) the set of A’s repairs (for easier read-
ing, we often leave T implicit in our notations). Note that
R(A) = {A} iff A is consistent. The most commonly con-
sidered semantics for inconsistency-tolerant query answer-
ing, inspired from previous work in databases, is the follow-
ing: q is said to be a consistent consequence of K if it is
a standard consequence of each repair of A. Several vari-
ants of this semantics have been proposed, which differ with
respect to their behaviour (in particular they can be more
or less cautious) and their computational complexity. Be-
fore recalling the main semantics studied in the literature,
we need to introduce the notion of the positive closure of
an ABox. The positive closure of A (w.r.t. T ), denoted by
Cl(A), is obtained by adding to A all assertions (built on the
individuals occurring in A) that can be inferred using the
positive axioms of the TBox, namely:
Cl(A)={A atom| ⟨Tp, A⟩|= A and terms(A) ⊆terms(A)}
Note that the set of atomic consequences of a KB K=⟨T , A⟩
may be inﬁnite whereas the positive closure of A is always
ﬁnite since it does not contain new terms. Note also that A
is consistent (with T ) iff Cl(A) is consistent (with T ).
We
now
recall
the
most
well-known
inconsistency-tolerant
semantics
introduced
in
(Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999; Lembo et al. 2010;
Bienvenu 2012).
Given
a
possibly
inconsistent
KB
K=⟨T , A⟩, a query q is said to be:
• a consistent (or AR) consequence of K if ∀R ∈R(A),
⟨T , R⟩|= q;
• a CAR consequence of K if ∀R ∈R(Cl(A)),⟨T , R⟩|=q;
• an IAR consequence of K if
D
T , T
R∈R(A) R
E
|= q;
• an ICAR consequence of K if
D
T , T
R∈Cl(A) R
E
|= q;
• an ICR consequence of K if
D
T , T
R∈R(A) Cl(R)
E
|= q.
A Uniﬁed Framework for
Inconsistency-Tolerant Query Answering
In this section, we deﬁne a uniﬁed framework for
inconsistency-tolerant query answering based on two main
concepts: modiﬁers and inference strategies.
Let us ﬁrst introduce the notion of MBox KBs. While a
standard KB has a single ABox, it is convenient for sub-
sequent deﬁnitions to deﬁne KBs with multiple ABoxes
(“MBoxes”). Formally, an MBox KB is of the form
KM=⟨T , M⟩where T is a TBox and M={A1,. . .,An} is
a set of ABoxes called an MBox. We say that KM is consis-
tent, or M is consistent (with T ) if each Ai in M is consis-
tent (with T ).
In the following, we start with an MBox KB which is
a possibly inconsistent standard KB (namely with a single
ABox in M) and produce a consistent MBox KB, in which
each element reﬂects a virtual reparation of the initial ABox.
We see an inconsistency-tolerant query answering method as
made out of a modiﬁer, which produces a consistent MBox
from the original ABox (and the Tbox), and an inference
strategy, which evaluates queries against the obtained MBox
KB.
Elementary and Composite Modiﬁers
We ﬁrst introduce three classes of elementary modiﬁers,
namely expansion, splitting and selection. For each class,
we consider a ”natural” instantiation, namely positive clo-
sure, splitting into repairs and selecting the largest elements
(i.e., maximal w.r.t. cardinality). Elementary modiﬁers can
be combined to deﬁne composite modiﬁers. Given the three
natural instantiations of these modiﬁers, we show that their
combination yields exactly eight different composite modi-
ﬁers.
Expansion modiﬁers.
The expansion of an MBox con-
sists in explicitly adding some inferred knowledge to its
ABoxes. A natural expansion modiﬁer consists in comput-
ing the positive closure of an MBox, which is deﬁned as
follows:
◦cl(M) = {Cl(Ai)|Ai ∈M}.
Splitting modiﬁers.
A splitting modiﬁer replaces each Ai
of an MBox by one or several of its consistent subsets. A nat-
ural splitting modiﬁer consists of splitting each ABox into
the set of its repairs, which is deﬁned as follows:
◦rep(M) =
[
Ai∈M
{R(Ai)}.
This modiﬁer always produces a consistent MBox.
Selection modiﬁers.
A selection modiﬁer selects some
subsets of an MBox. As a natural selection modiﬁer, we con-
sider the cardinality-based selection modiﬁer, which selects
the largest elements of an MBox:
◦card(M) = {Ai ∈M|∄Aj ∈M s.t |Aj| > |Ai|}.

KM=⟨T , M = {A}⟩
Expansion:
◦cl(M)
Splitting:◦7=
◦rep(◦cl(M))
Selection: ◦8=
◦card(◦rep(◦cl(M)))
Splitting:◦1
=◦rep(M)
Expansion:◦5
=◦cl(◦rep(M))
Selection: ◦6=
◦card(◦cl(◦rep(M)))
Selection: ◦2=
◦card(◦rep(M))
Expansion:◦3=
◦cl(◦card(◦rep(M)))
Selection: ◦4=
◦card(◦cl(◦card(◦rep(M))))
Figure 1: The eight possible combinations of modiﬁers starting
from a single MBox KB KM=⟨T , M = {A}⟩
We call a composite modiﬁer any combination of these
three elementary modiﬁers. We now study the question of
how many different composite modiﬁers yielding consistent
MBoxes exist and how they compare to each other. We begin
with some properties that considerably reduce the number of
combinations to be considered. First, the three modiﬁers are
idempotent. Second, the modiﬁers ◦cl and ◦rep need to be
applied only once.
Lemma 1. For any MBox M, the following holds:
1. ◦cl(◦cl(M))=◦cl(M),
◦rep(◦rep(M))=◦rep(M)
and
◦card(◦card(M)) =◦card(M).
2. Let ◦d be any composite modiﬁer. Then:
(a) ◦cl(◦d(◦cl(M))) = ◦d(◦cl(M)), and
(b) ◦rep(◦d(◦rep(M))) = ◦d(◦rep(M)).
Figure 1 presents the eight different composite modiﬁers
(thanks to Lemma 1) that can be applied to an MBox ini-
tially composed of a single (possibly inconsistent) ABox.
At the beginning, one can perform either an expansion or
a splitting operation (the selection has no effect). Expan-
sion can only be followed by a splitting or a selection op-
eration. From the MBox ◦rep(◦cl(M)) only a selection can
be performed, thanks to Lemma 1. Similarly, if one starts
with a splitting operation followed by a selection operation,
then only an expansion can be done (thanks to Lemma 1
again). From ◦cl(◦card(◦rep(M))) only a selection can be
performed (Lemma 1 again).
To ease reading, we also denote the modiﬁers by short
names reﬂecting the order in which the elementary modiﬁers
are applied, and using the following letters: R for ◦rep, C for
◦cl and M for ◦card as shown in Table 1. For instance, MCR
denotes the modiﬁer that ﬁrst splits the initial ABox into its
set of repairs, then closes these repairs and ﬁnally selects the
maximal-cardinality elements.
Theorem 1. Let KM=⟨T , M = {A}⟩be a possibly incon-
sistent KB. Then for any composite modiﬁer ◦c that can be
obtained by a ﬁnite combination of the elementary modi-
ﬁers ◦rep, ◦card, ◦cl, there exists a composite modiﬁer ◦i
in {◦1 . . . ◦8} (see Table 1) such that ◦c(M)=◦i(M).
Example
1.
Let
KM=⟨T , M⟩
be
an
MBox
DL-
Lite KB where T ={A
⊑¬B, A
⊑¬C, B
⊑¬C,
A ⊑D, B ⊑D, C ⊑D, B ⊑E, C ⊑E} and
M={{A(a), B(a), C(a), A(b)}}. We have
◦1(M)={{A(a), A(b)},{B(a), A(b)},{C(a), A(b)}},
Modiﬁer
Combination
MBox
R
◦1 = ◦rep(.)
M1 = ◦1(M)
MR
◦2 = ◦card(◦rep(.))
M2 = ◦2(M)
CMR
◦3 = ◦cl(◦card(◦rep(.)))
M3 = ◦3(M)
MCMR
◦4 = ◦card(◦cl(◦card(◦rep(.))))
M4 = ◦4(M)
CR
◦5 = ◦cl(◦rep(.))
M5 = ◦5(M)
MCR
◦6 = ◦card(◦cl(◦rep(.)))
M6 = ◦6(M)
RC
◦7 = ◦rep(◦cl(.))
M7 = ◦7(M)
MRC
◦8 = ◦card(◦rep(◦cl(.)))
M8 = ◦8(M)
Table 1: The eight possible composite modiﬁers for an
MBox KM=⟨T , M = {A}⟩
◦5(M)={{A(a), D(a), A(b), D(b)},{B(a), D(a), E(a),
A(b),D(b)}, {C(a), D(a), E(a), A(b), D(b)}}, and
◦6(M)={{B(a), D(a), E(a), A(b), D(b)}, {C(a), D(a),
E(a), A(b), D(b)}}.
The composite modiﬁers can be classiﬁed according to
”inclusion” as depicted in Figure 2. We consider the rela-
tion, denoted by ⊆R, deﬁned as follows: given two mod-
iﬁers X and Y , X⊆RY if, for any MBox M, for each
A∈X(M) there is B∈Y (M) such that A ⊆B. We also
consider two specializations of ⊆R: the true inclusion ⊆
(i.e., X(M) ⊆Y (M)) and the ”closure” inclusion, denoted
by ⊆cl: X⊆clY if Y (M) is the positive closure of X(M)
(then each A ∈X(M) is included in its closure in Y (M)).
In Figure 2, there is an edge from a modiﬁer X to a modiﬁer
Y iff X ⊆R Y . We label each edge by the most speciﬁc in-
clusion relation that holds from X to Y . Transitivity edges
are not represented.
R
CR
RC
MR
CMR
MCMR
MCR
MRC
⊆cl
⊆R
⊆
⊆
⊆
⊆cl
⊆
⊆
Figure 2: Inclusion relations between composite modiﬁers.
With any X and Y
such that X⊆RY , one can natu-
rally associate, for any MBox M, a mapping from Mbox
X(M) to MBox Y (M), which assigns each A∈X(M) to a
B∈Y (M) such that A⊆B. We point out the following use-
ful facts:
Fact 1 The MBox mapping associated with ⊆R is injective
in all our cases.
Fact 2 The MBox mapping associated with ⊆cl is surjective
(hence bijective). The same holds for the mapping from
CR to RC.
Inference Strategies for Querying an MBox
An inference-based strategy takes as input a consistent
MBox KB KM=⟨T , M⟩and a query q and determines if q is
entailed from KM. We consider four main inference strate-
gies: universal (also known as skeptical), safe, majority-
based and existential (also called brave). 1
1Of course, one can consider other inference strategies such as
the argued inference, parametrized inferences, etc. This is left for
future work.

The universal inference strategy states that a conclusion is
valid iff it is entailed from T and every ABox in M. It is a
standard way to derive conclusions from conﬂicting sources,
used for instance in default reasoning (Reiter 1980), where
one only accepts conclusions derived from each extension
of a default theory. The safe inference strategy considers as
valid conclusions those entailed from T and the intersec-
tion of all ABoxes. The safe inference is a very sound and
conservative inference relation since it only considers asser-
tions shared by different ABoxes. The existential inference
strategy (called also brave inference relation) considers as
valid all conclusions entailed from T and at least one ABox.
The existential inference is a very adventurous inference re-
lation and may derive conclusions that are together incon-
sistent with T . It is often considered as undesirable when
the KB represents available knowledge base on some prob-
lem. It only makes sense in some decision problems when
one is only looking for a possible solution of a set of con-
straints or preferences. Finally, the majority-based inference
relation considers as valid all conclusions entailed from T
and the majority of ABoxes. The majority-based inference
can be seen as a good compromise between universal / safe
inference and existential inference.
We formally deﬁne these inference strategies as follows:
• Query q is a universal consequence of KM, denoted by
KM |=∀q iff ∀Ai ∈M,⟨T , Ai⟩|= q.
• Query q is a safe consequence of KM, denoted by
KM |=∩q, iff

T , T
Ai∈M Ai

|= q.
• Query q is a majority-based consequence of KM, denoted
KM |=maj q, iff |Ai:Ai∈M,⟨T ,Ai⟩|=q|
|M|
> 1/2.
• Query q is an existential consequence of KM, denoted by
KM |=∃q iff ∃Ai ∈M, ⟨T , Ai⟩|= q.
Given two inference strategies si and sj, we say that si
is more cautious than sj, denoted si ≤sj, when for any
consistent MBox KM and any query q, if KM|=siq then
KM|=sjq. The considered inference strategies are totally or-
dered by ≤as follows:
∩≤∀≤maj ≤∃
(1)
safe inference
universal inference
majority-based inference
existential inference
Figure 3: Comparison between inference strategies, where
X−→Y means that X ≤Y
Example 2. Let us consider the MBox M1=◦1(M)
given in Example 1. We have T
Ai∈MAi={A(b)}, hence
KM1|=∩D(b). By universal inference, we also have
KM1|=∀D(a). The majority-based inference adds E(a)
as a valid conclusion. Indeed, ⟨T , {B(a), A(b)}⟩|=E(a)
and
⟨T , {C(a), A(b)}⟩|=E(a)
and
|M1|=3,
hence
KM1|=majE(a). Finally, the existential inference adds
A(a) as a valid conclusion.
Inconsistency-Tolerant Semantics = Composite
Modiﬁer + Inference Strategy
We can now deﬁne an inconsistency-tolerant query answer-
ing semantics by a composite modiﬁer and an inference
strategy.
Deﬁnition 1. Let K=⟨T , A⟩be a standard KB, ◦i be a com-
posite modiﬁer and sj be an inference strategy. A query q
is said to be an ⟨◦i, sj⟩-consequence of K, which is de-
noted by K |=⟨◦i,sj⟩q, if it is entailed from the MBox KB
⟨T , ◦i({A})⟩with the inference strategy sj.
This deﬁnition covers the main semantics recalled in Sec-
tion : AR, IAR, CAR, ICAR and ICR semantics respectively
correspond to ⟨◦1, ∀⟩, ⟨◦1, ∩⟩, ⟨◦7, ∀⟩⟨◦7, ∩⟩and ⟨◦5, ∩⟩.
Comparison of Inconsistency-Tolerant
Semantics w.r.t. Productivity
We now compare the obtained semantics with respect to pro-
ductivity, which we formalize as follows.
Deﬁnition 2. Given two semantics ⟨◦i, sk⟩and ⟨◦j, sl⟩, we
say that ⟨◦j, sl⟩is more productive than ⟨◦i, sk⟩, and note
⟨◦i, sk⟩⊑⟨◦j, sl⟩if, for any KB K=⟨T , A⟩and any query
q, if K |=⟨◦i,sk⟩q then K |=⟨◦j,sl⟩q.
We ﬁrst pairwise compare semantics deﬁned with the
same inference strategy. For each inference strategy, we give
necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the comparability of
the associated semantics w.r.t. productivity. These condi-
tions rely on the inclusion relations between modiﬁers (see
Figure 2).
Proposition 1. [Productivity of ∩-semantics] See Figure 4.
It holds that ⟨◦i, ∩⟩⊑⟨◦j, ∩⟩iff ◦j ⊆◦i or ◦i ⊆R ◦j in a
bijective way (see Fact 2).
⟨R, ∩⟩
⟨MR, ∩⟩
⟨CR, ∩⟩
⟨CMR, ∩⟩
⟨MCMR, ∩⟩
⟨MCR, ∩⟩
⟨RC, ∩⟩
⟨MRC, ∩⟩
less productive
more productive
Figure 4: Relationships between ∩-based semantics
Proposition 2. [Productivity of ∀-semantics] See Figure 5.
It holds that ⟨◦i, ∀⟩⊑⟨◦j, ∀⟩iff ◦j ⊆◦i, or ◦i ⊆R ◦j in a
bijective way (see Fact 2) or ◦j ⊆cl ◦i.
Proposition 3. [Productivity of maj-semantics] See Figure
6. It holds that ⟨◦i, maj⟩⊑⟨◦j, maj⟩iff ◦i ⊆R ◦j in a
bijective way (see Fact 2) or ◦j ⊆cl ◦i .
Proposition 4. [Productivity of ∃-semantics] See Figure 7.
It holds that ⟨◦i, ∃⟩⊑⟨◦j, ∃⟩iff ◦i ⊆R ◦j (in particular
◦i ⊆◦j or ◦i ⊆cl ◦j) or ◦j ⊆cl ◦i .

⟨R, ∀⟩≡⟨CR, ∀⟩
⟨MCR, ∀⟩
⟨MR, ∀⟩≡⟨CMR, ∀⟩
⟨MCMR, ∀⟩
⟨RC, ∀⟩
⟨MRC, ∀⟩
less productive
more productive
Figure 5: Relationships between ∀-based semantics
⟨R, maj⟩≡⟨CR, maj⟩
⟨MR, maj⟩≡⟨CMR, maj⟩
⟨MCMR, maj⟩
⟨RC, maj⟩
⟨MRC, maj⟩
⟨MCR, maj⟩
less productive
more productive
Figure 6: Relationships between maj-based semantics
⟨MCMR, ∃⟩
⟨MR, ∃⟩≡⟨CMR, ∃⟩
⟨R, ∃⟩≡⟨CR, ∃⟩
⟨MCR, ∃⟩
⟨RC, ∃⟩
⟨MRC, ∃⟩
less productive
more productive
Figure 7: Relationships between ∃-based semantics
We now extend previous results to any pair of semantics,
possibly based on different inference strategies.
Theorem 2. [Productivity of semantics] The inclusion re-
lation ⊑is the smallest relation that contains the inclusions
⟨◦i, sk⟩⊑⟨◦j, sk⟩deﬁned by Propositions 1-4 and satisfy-
ing the two following conditions:
1. for all sj, sp and oi, if sj ≤sp then ⟨◦i, sj⟩⊑⟨◦i, sp⟩.
2. it is transitive.
Theorem 2 is an important result. It states that the produc-
tivity relation can only be obtained from Figures 4-7 (resp.
Propositions 1-4) and some composition of the relations. No
more inclusion relations hold. In particular when si > sj,
it holds that ∀k, ∀l, ⟨◦k, si⟩̸⊑⟨◦l, sj⟩, which means that
there exist a query q and a KB K such that q is an ⟨◦k, si⟩-
consequence of K but not an ⟨◦l, sj⟩-consequence of K.
Note that this holds already for DL-LiteR KBs.
Proof:[Sketch] Condition 1 holds by deﬁnition of ≤. Tran-
sitivity holds by deﬁnition of ⊑. To show that there are no
other inclusions, we prove two lemmas: for all ⟨◦i, sj⟩and
⟨◦k, sp⟩, (1) if sp < sj then ⟨◦i, sj⟩̸⊑⟨◦k, sp⟩; and (2) if
⟨◦i, sj⟩⊑⟨◦k, sp⟩and sj < sp, then ⟨◦i, sp⟩⊑⟨◦k, sp⟩. □
Lastly, it is important to note that when the initial KB is
consistent, all semantics collapse with standard entailment,
namely:
Proposition 5. Let K be a consistent standard KB. Then:
∀s∈{∩,∀,maj, ∃}, ∀i : 1, ..., 8, K|=⟨◦i,s⟩q iff K |= q.
Conclusion
This paper provides a general and unifying framework for
inconsistency-tolerant query answering. On the one hand,
our logical setting based on existential rules includes pre-
viously considered languages. On the other hand, viewing
an inconsistency-tolerant semantics as a pair composed of a
modiﬁer and an inference strategy allows us to include the
main known semantics and to consider new ones. We be-
lieve that the choice of semantics depends on the applica-
tive context, namely the features of the semantics, i.e ratio-
nality properties, complexity (which we have studied, but
not presented in this paper) and productivity with respect to
the applicative context. In particular, cardinality-based se-
lection allows us to counter troublesome assertions that con-
ﬂict with many others. In some contexts, requiring to ﬁnd an
answer in all selected repairs can be too restrictive, hence the
interest of majority-based semantics, which are more pro-
ductive than universal semantics, without being as produc-
tive as the adventurous existential semantics. As for future
work, we plan consider other inference strategies such as
the argued inference, parametrized inferences, etc. We also
want to adapt the framework to belief change problems, like
merging or revision.
Acknowledgment
This work has been supported by the French National Re-
search Agency. ASPIQ project ANR-12-BS02-0003.
