arXiv:1301.2678v2  [cs.MA]  22 Jan 2013
Veriﬁcation of Agent-Based Artifact Systems
Francesco Belardinelli

Laboratoire Ibisc, Universit´e d’Evry, France
Alessio Lomuscio

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
Fabio Patrizi

Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica, Automatica e Gestionale “A. Ruberti”
Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza”, Italy
Abstract
Artifact systems are a novel paradigm for specifying and implementing business processes
described in terms of interacting modules called artifacts. Artifacts consist of data and lifecy-
cles, accounting respectively for the relational structure of the artifacts’ states and their possible
evolutions over time. In this paper we put forward artifact-centric multi-agent systems, a novel for-
malisation of artifact systems in the context of multi-agent systems operating on them. Differently
from the usual process-based models of services, the semantics we give explicitly accounts for the
data structures on which artifact systems are deﬁned.
We study the model checking problem for artifact-centric multi-agent systems against speci-
ﬁcations written in a quantiﬁed version of temporal-epistemic logic expressing the knowledge of
the agents in the exchange. We begin by noting that the problem is undecidable in general. We
then identify two noteworthy restrictions, one syntactical and one semantical, that enable us to ﬁnd
bisimilar ﬁnite abstractions and therefore reduce the model checking problem to the instance on ﬁ-
nite models. Under these assumptions we show that the model checking problem for these systems
is EXPSPACE-complete. We then introduce artifact-centric programs, compact and declarative
representations of the programs governing both the artifact system and the agents. We show that,
while these in principle generate inﬁnite-state systems, under natural conditions their veriﬁcation
problem can be solved on ﬁnite abstractions that can be effectively computed from the programs.
Finally we exemplify the theoretical results of the paper through a mainstream procurement sce-
nario from the artifact systems literature.
1. Introduction
Much of the work in the area of reasoning about knowledge involves the development of formal
techniques for the representation of epistemic properties of rational actors, or agents, in a multi-
agent system (MAS). The approaches based on modal logic are often rooted on interpreted sys-
tems (Parikh & Ramanujam, 1985), a computationally grounded semantics (Wooldridge, 2000) used
for the interpretation of several temporal-epistemic logics. This line of research was thoroughly ex-
plored in the 1990s leading to a signiﬁcant body of work (Fagin, Halpern, Moses, & Vardi, 1995).
Further signiﬁcant explorations have been conducted since then; a recent topic of interest has fo-
cused on the development of automatic techniques, including model checking (Clarke, Grumberg, &
Peled, 1999), for the veriﬁcation of temporal-epistemic speciﬁcations for the autonomous agents in
a MAS (Gammie & van der Meyden, 2004; Kacprzak, Nabialek, Niewiadomski, Penczek, P´olrola,
Szreter, Wozna, & Zbrzezny, 2008; Lomuscio, Qu, & Raimondi, 2009). This has led to develop-
ments in a number of areas traditionally outside artiﬁcial intelligence, knowledge representation
1

and MAS, including security (Dechesne & Wang, 2010; Ciobaca, Delaune, & Kremer, 2012), web-
services (Lomuscio, Solanki, Penczek, & Szreter, 2010) and cache-coherence protocols in hardware
design (Baukus & van der Meyden, 2004). The ambition of the present paper is to offer a simi-
lar change of perspective in the area of artifact systems (Cohn & Hull, 2009), a growing topic in
Service-Oriented Computing (SOC).
Artifacts are structures that “combine data and process in an holistic manner as the basic building
block[s]” (Cohn & Hull, 2009) of systems’ descriptions. Artifact systems are services constituted by
complex workﬂow schemes based on artifacts which the agents interact with. The data component
is given by the relational databases underpinning the artifacts in a system, whereas the workﬂows
are described by “lifecycles” associated with each artifact schema. While in the standard services
paradigm services are made public by exposing their processes interface, in artifact systems both
the data structures and the lifecycles are advertised. Services are composed in a “hub” where op-
erations on the artifacts are executed. Implementations of artifact systems, such as the IBM engine
BARCELONA (Heath, Hull, & Vacul´ın, 2011), provide a hub where the service choreography and
service orchestratation (Alonso, Casati, Kuno, & Machiraju, 2004) are carried out.
While artifact systems are beginning to drive new application areas, such as case management
systems (Marin, Hull, & Vacul´ın, 2012), we identify two shortcomings in the present state-of-the-
art. Firstly, the artifact systems literature (Bhattacharya, Gerede, Hull, Liu, & Su, 2007; Deutsch,
Hull, Patrizi, & Vianu, 2009; Hull, 2008; Nooijen, Fahland, & Dongen, 2012) focuses exclusively
on the artifacts themselves. While there is obviously a need to model and implement the artifact
infrastructure, importantly we also need to account for the agents implementing the services acting
on the artifact system. This is of particular relevance given that artifact systems are envisaged to play
a leading role in information systems. We need to be able to reason not just about the artifact states
but also about what actions speciﬁc participants are allowed and not allowed to do, what knowledge
they can or cannot derive in a system run, what system state they can achieve in coordination with
their peers, etc. In other words, we need to move from the description of the artifact infrastructure
to one that encompasses both the agents and the infrastructure.
Secondly, there is a pressing demand to provide the hub with automatic choreography and or-
chestration capabilities. It is well-known that choreography techniques can be leveraged on auto-
matic model checking techniques; orchestration can be recast as a synthesis problem, which, in
turn, can also beneﬁt from model checking technology. However, while model checking and its
applications are relatively well-understood in the plain process-based modelling, the presence of
data makes these problems much harder and virtually unexplored. Additionally, inﬁnite domains
in the underlying databases lead to inﬁnite state-spaces and undecidability of the model checking
problem.
The aim of this paper is to make a concerted contribution to both problems above. Firstly,
we provide a computationally grounded semantics to systems comprising the artifact infrastructure
and the agents operating on it. We use this semantics to interpret a temporal-epistemic language
with ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers to reason about the evolution of the hub as well as the knowledge of the
agents in the presence of evolving, structured data. We observe that the model checking problem
for these structures is undecidable in general and analyse two notable decidable fragments. In this
context, a contribution we make is to provide ﬁnite abstractions to inﬁnite-state artifact systems,
thereby presenting a technique for their effective veriﬁcation for a class of declarative agent-based,
artifact-centric programs that we here deﬁne. We evaluate this methodology by studying its compu-
2

tational complexity and by demonstrating its use on a well-known scenario from the artifact systems
literature.
1.1 Artifact-Centric Systems
Service-oriented computing is concerned with the study and development of distributed applica-
tions that can be automatically discovered and composed by means of remote interfaces. A point of
distinction over more traditional distributed systems is the interoperability and connectedness of ser-
vices and the shared format for both data and remote procedure calls. Two technology-independent
concepts permeate the service-oriented literature: orchestration and choreography (Alonso et al.,
2004; Singh & Huhns, 2005). Orchestration involves the ordering of actions of possibly different
services, facilitated by a controller or orchestrator, to achieve a certain overall goal. Choreogra-
phy concerns the distributed coordination of different actions through publicly observable events to
achieve a certain goal. A MAS perspective (Wooldridge, 2001) is known to be particularly helpful
in service-oriented computing in that it allows us to ascribe information states and private or com-
mon goals to the various services. Under this view the agents of the system implement the services
and interact with one another in a shared infrastructure or environment.
A key theoretical problem in SOC is to devise effective mechanisms to verify that service com-
position is correct according to some speciﬁcation. Techniques based on model checking (Clarke
et al., 1999) and synthesis (Berardi, Cheikh, Giacomo, & Patrizi, 2008) have been put forward
to solve the composition and orchestration problem for services described and advertised at inter-
face level through ﬁnite state machines (Calvanese, Giacomo, Lenzerini, Mecella, & Patrizi, 2008).
More recently, attention has turned to services described by languages such as WS-BPEL (Alves
et al., 2007), which provide potentially unbounded variables in the description of the service pro-
cess. Again, model checking approaches have successfully been used to verify complex service
compositions (Bertoli, Pistore, & Traverso, 2010; Lomuscio, Qu, & Solanki, 2012).
While WS-BPEL provides a model for services with variables, the data referenced by them is
non-permanent. The area of data-centric workﬂows (Hull, Narendra, & Nigam, 2009; Nigam &
Caswell, 2003) evolved as an attempt to provide support for permanent data, typically present in
the form of underlying databases. Although usually abstracted away, permanent data is of central
importance to services, which typically query data sources and are driven by the answers they
obtain; see, e.g., (Berardi, Calvanese, Giacomo, Hull, & Mecella, 2005). Therefore, a faithful model
of a service behavior cannot, in general, disregard this component. In response to this, proposals
have been made in the workﬂows and service communities in terms of declarative speciﬁcations
of data-centric services that are advertised for automatic discovery and composition. The artifact-
centric approach (Cohn & Hull, 2009) is now one of the leading emerging paradigms in the area. As
described in (Hull, 2008; Hull, Damaggio, De Masellis, Fournier, Gupta, Heath, Hobson, Linehan,
Maradugu, Nigam, Sukaviriya, & Vaculin, 2011) artifact-centric systems can be presented along
four dimensions.
Artifacts are the holders of all structured information available in the system. In a business-
oriented scenario this may include purchase orders, invoices, payment records, etc. Artifacts may
be created, amended, and destroyed at run time; however, abstract artifact schemas are provided
at design time to deﬁne the structure of all artifacts to be manipulated in the system. Intuitively,
external events cause changes in the system, including in the value of artifact attributes.
3

The evolution of artifacts is governed by lifecycles. These capture the changes that an artifact
may go through from creation to deletion. Intuitively, a purchase order may be created, amended
and operated on by several events before it is fullﬁlled and its existence in the system terminated: a
lifecycle associated with a purchase order artifact formalises these transitions.
Services are seen as the actors operating on the artifact system. They represent both human and
software actors, possibly distributed, that generate events on the artifact system. Some services may
“own” artifacts, and some artifacts may be shared by several services. However, not all artifacts, or
parts of artifacts, are visible to all services. Views and windows respectively determine which parts
of artifacts and which artifact instances are visible to which service. An artifact hub is a system that
maintains the artifact system and processes the events generated by the services.
Services generate events on the artifact system according to associations. Typically these are
declarative descriptions providing the precondition and postconditions for the generation of events.
These generate changes in the artifact system according to the artifact lifecycles. Since events may
trigger changes in several artifacts in the system, events are processed by a well-deﬁned seman-
tics (Damaggio, Hull, & Vacul´ın, 2011; Hull et al., 2011) that governs the sequence of changes
an artifact-system may undertake upon consumption of an event. Such a semantics, based on the
use of Prerequisite-Antecedent-Consequent (PAC) rules, ensures acyclicity and full determinism
in the updates on the artifact system. GSM is a declarative language that can be used to describe
artifact systems. BARCELONA is an engine that can be used to run a GSM-based artifact-centric
system (Heath et al., 2011).
The above is a partial and incomplete description of the artifact paradigm. We refer to (Cohn
& Hull, 2009; Hull, 2008; Hull et al., 2011) for more details.
As it will be clear in the next section, in line with the agent-based approach to services, we will
use agent-based concepts to model services. The artifact-system will be represented as an environ-
ment, constituted by evolving databases, upon which the agents operate; lifecycles and associations
will be modelled by local and global transition functions. The model is intended to incorporate all
artifact-related concepts including views and windows.
In view of the above in this paper we address the following questions. How can we give a
transition-based semantics for artifacts and agents operating on them? What syntax should we use
to specify properties of the agents and the artifacts themselves? Can we verify that an artifact system
satisﬁes certain properties? As this will be shown to be undecidable, can we ﬁnd suitable fragments
on which this can actually be carried out? If so, what is the resulting complexity? Lastly, can we
provide declarative speciﬁcations for the agent programs so that these can be veriﬁed by model
checking? Can this technique be used on mainstream scenarios from the SOC literature?
This paper intends to contribute answering these questions.
1.2 Related Work
As stated above, virtually all current literature on artifact-centric systems focuses on properties and
implementations of the artifact-system as such. Little or no attention is given to the actors on the
system, whether they are human or artiﬁcial agents. A few formal techniques have, however, been
put forward to verify the core, non-agent aspects of the system; in the following we brieﬂy compare
these to this contribution.
To our knowledge the veriﬁcation of artifact-centric business processes was ﬁrst discussed
in (Bhattacharya et al., 2007), where reachability and deadlocks are phrased in the context of
4

artifact-centric systems and complexity results for the veriﬁcation problem are given. The present
contribution differs markedly from (Bhattacharya et al., 2007) by employing a more expressive
speciﬁcation language, even if the agent-related aspects are not considered, and by putting forward
effective abstraction procedures for veriﬁcation.
In (Gerede & Su, 2007) a veriﬁcation technique for artifact-centric systems against a variant of
computation-tree logic is put forward. The decidability of the veriﬁcation problem is proven for the
language considered under the assumption that the interpretation domain is bounded. Decidability
is also shown for the unbounded case by making restrictions on the values that quantiﬁed variables
can range over. In the work here presented we also work on unbounded domains, but do not require
the restrictions present in (Gerede & Su, 2007): we only insist on the fact that the number of distinct
values in the system does not exceed a given threshold at any point in any run. Most importantly, the
interplay between quantiﬁcation and modalities here considered allows us to bind and use variables
in different states. This is a major difference as this feature is very expressive and known to lead to
undecidability.
A related line of research is followed in (Deutsch et al., 2009; Damaggio, Deutsch, & Vianu,
2012), where the veriﬁcation problem for artifact systems against two variants of ﬁrst-order linear-
time temporal logic is considered. Decidability of the veriﬁcation problem is retained by imposing
syntactic restrictions on both the system descriptions and the speciﬁcations to check. This effec-
tively limits the way in which new values introduced at every computational step can be used by the
system. Properties based on arithmetic operators are considered in (Damaggio et al., 2012). While
there are elements of similarity between these approaches and the one we put forward here, includ-
ing the fact that the concrete interpretation domain is replaced by an abstract one, the contribution
here presented has signiﬁcant differences from these. Firstly, our setting is branching-time and not
linear-time thereby resulting in different expressive power. Secondly, differently from (Deutsch
et al., 2009; Damaggio et al., 2012), we impose no constraints on nested quantiﬁers. In contrast,
(Damaggio et al., 2012) admits only universal quantiﬁcation over combinations of quantiﬁer-free
ﬁrst-order formulas. Thirdly, the abstraction results we present here are given in general terms on
the semantics of declarative programs and do not depend on a particular presentation of the system.
More closely related to the present contribution is (Hariri, Calvanese, Giacomo, Deutsch, &
Montali, 2012), where conditions for the decidability of the model checking problem for data-
centric dynamic systems, e.g., dynamic systems with relational states, are given. In this case the
speciﬁcation language used is a ﬁrst-order version of the µ-calculus. While our temporal fragment
is subsumed by the µ-calculus, since we use indexed epistemic modalities as well as a common
knowledge operator, the two speciﬁcation languages have different expressive power. To retain
decidability, like we do here, the authors assume a constraint on the size of the states. However,
differently from the contribution here presented, (Hariri et al., 2012) assume limited forms of quan-
tiﬁcation whereby only individuals persisting in the system evolution can be quantiﬁed over. In this
contribution we do not make this restriction.
Irrespective of what above, the most important feature that characterises our work is that the
set-up is entirely based on epistemic logic and multi-agent systems. We use agents to represent
the autonomous services operating in the system and agent-based concepts play a key role in the
modelling, the speciﬁcations, and the veriﬁcation techniques put forward. Differently from all ap-
proaches presented above we are not only concerned with whether the artifact-system meets a par-
ticular speciﬁcation. Instead, we also wish to consider what knowledge the agents in the system
acquire by interacting among themselves and with the artifact-system during a system run. Ad-
5

ditionally, the abstraction methodology put forward is modular with respect to the agents in the
system. These features enable us to give constructive procedures for the generation of ﬁnite abstrac-
tions for artifact-centric programs associated with inﬁnite models. We are not aware of any work in
the literature tackling any of these aspects.
Relation to previous work by the authors. This paper combines and expands preliminary
results originally discussed in (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, & Patrizi, 2011a), (Belardinelli, Lomuscio,
& Patrizi, 2011b), (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, & Patrizi, 2012a), and (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, & Pa-
trizi, 2012b). In particular, the technical set up of artifacts and agents is different from that of our
preliminary studies and makes it more natural to express artifact-centric concepts such as views.
Differently from our previous attempts we here incorporate an operator for common knowledge and
provide constructive methods to deﬁne abstractions for all notions of bisimulation. We also con-
sider the complexity of the veriﬁcation problem, previously unexplored, and evaluate the technique
in detail on a case study.
1.3 Scheme of the Paper
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we introduce Artifact-centric Multi-
Agent Systems (ACMAS), the semantics we will be using throughout the paper to describe agents
operating on an artifact system. In the same section we put forward FO-CTLK, a ﬁrst-order logic
with knowledge and time to reason about the evolution of the knowledge of the agents and the
artifact system. This enables us to propose a satisfaction relation based on the notion of bounded
quantiﬁcation, deﬁne the model checking problem, and highlight some properties of isomorphic
states.
An immediate result we will explore concerns the undecidability of the model checking problem
for ACMAS in their general setting. Section 3 is concerned with synctactical restrictions on FO-
CTLK that enable us to guarantee the existence of ﬁnite abstractions of inﬁnite-state ACMAS,
thereby making the model checking problem feasible by means of standard techniques.
Section 4 tackles restrictions orthogonal to those of Section 3 by focusing on a subclass of
ACMAS that admits a decidable model checking problem when considering full FO-CTLK speciﬁ-
cations. The key ﬁnding here is that bounded and uniform ACMAS, a class identiﬁed by studying a
strong bisimulation relation, admit ﬁnite abstractions for any FO-CTLK speciﬁcation. The section
concludes by showing that under these restrictions the model checking problem is EXPSPACE-
complete.
We turn our attention to artifact programs in Section 6 by deﬁning the concept of artifact-centric
programs. We deﬁne them through natural, ﬁrst-order preconditions and postconditions in line with
the artifact-centric approach. We give a semantics to them in terms of ACMAS and show that their
generated models are precisely those uniform ACMAS studied earlier in the paper. It follows that,
under some boundedness conditions, which can be naturally expressed, the model checking problem
for artifact-centric programs is decidable and can be executed on ﬁnite models.
Section 7 reports a scenario from the artifact systems literature. This is used to exemplify the
technique by providing ﬁnite abstractions that can be effectively veriﬁed.
We conclude in Section 8 where we consider the limitations of the approach and point to further
work.
6

2. Artifact-Centric Multi-Agent Systems
In this section we formalise artifact-centric systems and state their veriﬁcation problem. As data and
databases are important constituents of artifact systems, our formalisation of artifacts relies on them
as underpinning concepts. However, as discussed in the previous section, we here give prominence
to agent-based concepts. As such, we deﬁne our systems as comprising both the artifacts in the
system as well as the agents that interact with the system.
A standard paradigm for logic-based reasoning about agent systems is interpreted systems (Parikh
& Ramanujam, 1985; Fagin et al., 1995). In this setting agents are endowed with private local states
and evolve by performing actions according to an individual protocol. As data play a key part, as
well as to allow us to specify properties of the artifact system, we will deﬁne the agents’ local states
as evolving database instances. We call this formalisation artifact-centric multi-agent systems (AC-
MAS). AC-MAS enable us to represent naturally and concisely concepts much used in the artifact
paradigm such as the one of view discussed earlier.
Our speciﬁcation language will include temporal-epistemic logic but also quantiﬁcation over a
domain so as to represent the data. This is an usual veriﬁcation setting, so we will formally deﬁne
the model checking problem for this set up.
2.1 Databases and First-Order Logic
As discussed above, we use databases as the basic building blocks for deﬁning the states of the
agents and the artifact system. We here ﬁx the notation and terminology used. We refer to (Abite-
boul, Hull, & Vianu, 1995) for more details on databases.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Database Schemas) A (relational) database schema is a set D = {P1/q1, . . . , Pn/qn}
of relation symbols Pi, each associated with its arity qi ∈N.
Instances of database schemas are deﬁned over interpretation domains.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Database Instances) Given an interpretation domain U and a database schema D,
a D-instance over U is a mapping D associating each relation symbol Pi ∈D with a ﬁnite qi-ary
relation over U, i.e., D(Pi) ⊆U qi.
The set of all D-instances over an interpretation domain U is denoted by D(U). We simply refer
to “instances” whenever the database schema D is clear by the context. The active domain of an
instance D, denoted as adom(D), is the set of all individuals in U occurring in some tuple of some
predicate interpretation D(Pi). Observe that, since D contains a ﬁnite number of relation symbols
and each D(Pi) is ﬁnite, so is adom(D).
To ﬁx the notation, we recall the syntax of ﬁrst-order formulas with equality and no function
symbols. Let V ar be a countable set of individual variables and C be a ﬁnite set of individual
constants. A term is any element t ∈V ar ∪C.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (FO-formulas over D) Given a database schema D, the formulas ϕ of the ﬁrst-
order language LD are deﬁned by the following BNF grammar:
ϕ
::=
t = t′ | Pi(t1, . . . , tqi) | ¬ϕ | ϕ →ϕ | ∀xϕ
where Pi ∈D, t1, . . . , tqi is a qi-tuple of terms and t, t′ are terms.
7

We assume “=” to be a special binary predicate with ﬁxed obvious interpretation. To summarise,
LD is a ﬁrst-order language with equality over the relational vocabulary D with no function symbols
and with ﬁnitely many constant symbols from C. Observe that considering a ﬁnite set of constants
is not a limitation. Indeed, since we will be working with ﬁnite sets of formulas, C can always be
deﬁned so as to be able to express any formula of interest.
In the following we use the standard abbreviations ∃, ∧, ∨, and ̸=. Also, free and bound
variables are deﬁned as standard. For a formula ϕ we denote the set of its variables as vars(ϕ), the
set of its free variables as free(ϕ), and the set of its constants as const(ϕ). We write ϕ(⃗x) to list
explicitly in arbitrary order all the free variables x1, . . . , xℓof ϕ. By slight abuse of notation, we
treat ⃗x as a set, thus we write ⃗x = free(ϕ). A sentence is a formula with no free variables.
Given an interpretation domain U such that C ⊆U, an assignment is a function σ : V ar 7→U.
For an assignment σ, we denote by σ
 x
u

the assignment such that: (i) σ
 x
u

(x) = u; and (ii)
σ
 x
u

(x′) = σ(x′), for every x′ ∈V ar different from x. For convenience, we extend assignments
to constants so that σ(t) = t, if t ∈C; that is, we assume a Herbrand interpretation of constants.
We can now deﬁne the semantics of LD.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Satisfaction of FO-formulas) Given a D-instance D, an assignment σ, and an
FO-formula ϕ ∈LD, we inductively deﬁne whether D satisﬁes ϕ under σ, written (D, σ) |= ϕ, as
follows:
(D, σ) |= Pi(t1, . . . , tqi)
iff
⟨σ(t1), . . . , σ(tqi)⟩∈D(Pi)
(D, σ) |= t = t′
iff
σ(t) = σ(t′)
(D, σ) |= ¬ϕ
iff
it is not the case that (D, σ) |= ϕ
(D, σ) |= ϕ →ψ
iff
(D, σ) |= ¬ϕ or (D, σ) |= ψ
(D, σ) |= ∀xϕ
iff
for all u ∈adom(D), we have that (D, σ
 x
u

) |= ϕ
A formula ϕ is true in D, written D |= ϕ, iff (D, σ) |= ϕ, for all assignments σ.
Observe that we adopt an active-domain semantics, that is, quantiﬁed variables range only over
the active domain of D. Also notice that constants are interpreted rigidly; so, two constants are
equal if and only if they are syntactically the same. In the rest of the paper, we assume that every
interpretation domain includes C. Also, as a usual shortcut, we write (D, σ) ̸|= ϕ to express that it
is not the case that (D, σ) |= ϕ.
Finally, we introduce the ⊕operator on D-instances that will be used later in the paper. Let the
primed version of a database schema D be the schema D′ = {P ′
1/q1, . . . , P ′
n/qn} obtained from D
by syntactically replacing each predicate symbol Pi with its primed version P ′
i of the same arity.
Deﬁnition 2.5 (⊕Operator) Given two D-instances D and D′, we deﬁne D ⊕D′ as the (D ∪D′)-
instance such that D ⊕D′(Pi) = D(Pi) and D ⊕D′(P ′
i) = D′(Pi).
Intuitively, the ⊕operator deﬁnes a disjunctive join of the two instances, where relation symbols in
D are interpreted according to D, while their primed versions are interpreted according to D′.
2.2 Artifact-Centric Multi-Agent Systems
In the following we introduce the semantic structures that we will use throughout the paper. We
deﬁne an artifact-centric multi-agent system as a system comprising an environment representing
all interacting artifacts in the system and a ﬁnite set of agents interacting with such environment.
8

As agents have views of the artifact state, i.e., projections of the status of particular artifacts, we
assume the building blocks of their private local states also to be modelled as database instances. In
line with the interpreted systems semantics (Fagin et al., 1995) not everything in the agents’ states
needs to be present in the environment; a portion of it may be entirely private and not replicated in
other agents’ states. So, we start by introducing the notion of agent.
Deﬁnition 2.6 (Agent) Given an interpretation domain U, an agent is a tuple A = ⟨D, L, Act, Pr⟩,
where:
• D is the local database schema;
• L ⊆D(U) is the set of local states;
• Act is the ﬁnite set of action types of the form α(⃗p), where ⃗p is the tuple of abstract parame-
ters;
• Pr : L 7→2Act(U) is the local protocol function, where Act(U) is the set of ground actions
of the form α(⃗u) where α(⃗p) ∈Act and ⃗u ∈U |⃗p| is a tuple of ground parameters.
Intuitively, at a given time each agent A is in some local state l ∈D(U) that represents all the
information agent A has at its disposal. In this sense we follow (Fagin et al., 1995) but require that
this information is structured as a database. Again, following standard literature we assume that
the agents are autonomous and proactive and perform the actions in Act according to the protocol
function Pr. In the deﬁnition above we distinguish between “abstract parameters” to denote the
language in which particular action parameters are given, and their concrete values or “ground
parameters”.
We assume that the agents interact among themselves and with an environment comprising all
artifacts in the system. As artifacts are entities involving both data and process, we can see them
as collections of database instances paired with actions and governed by special protocols. Without
loss of generality we can assume the environment state to be a single database instance including
all artifacts in the system. From a purely formal point of view this allows us to represent the
environment as a special agent. Of course, in any speciﬁc instantiation the environment and the
agents will be rather different, exactly in line with the standard propositional version of interpreted
systems.
We can therefore deﬁne the synchronous composition of agents with the environment.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (Artifact-Centric Multi-Agent Systems) Given an interpretation domain U and a
set Ag = {A0, . . . , An} of agents Ai = ⟨Di, Li, Acti, Pri⟩deﬁned on U, an artifact-centric multi-
agent system (or AC-MAS) is a tuple P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩where:
• S ⊆L0 × · · · × Ln is the set of reachable global states;
• U is the interpretation domain;
• s0 ∈S is the initial global state;
• τ : S × Act(U) 7→2S is the global transition function, where Act(U) = Act0(U) × · · · ×
Actn(U) is the set of global (ground) actions, and τ(⟨l0, . . . , ln⟩, ⟨α0(⃗u0), . . . , αn(⃗un)⟩) is
deﬁned iff αi(⃗ui) ∈Pri(li) for every i ≤n.
9

As we will see in later sections, AC-MAS are the natural extension of interpreted systems to
the ﬁrst order to account for environments constituted of artifact-centric systems. They can be seen
as a specialisation of quantiﬁed interpreted systems (Belardinelli & Lomuscio, 2012), a general
extension of interpreted systems to the ﬁrst-order case.
In the formalisation above the agent A0 is referred to as the environment E. The environment
includes all artifacts in the system as well as additional information to facilitate communication
between the agents and the hub, e.g., messages in transit etc. At any given time an AC-MAS is
described by a tuple of database instances, representing all the agents in the system as well as the
artifact system. A single interpretation domain for all database schemas is given. Note that this
does not break the generality of the representation as we can always extend the domain of all agents
and the environment before composing them into a single AC-MAS. The global transition function
deﬁnes the evolution of the system through synchronous composition of actions for the environment
and all agents in the system.
Much of the interaction we are interested in modelling involves message exchanges with pay-
load, hence the action parameters, between agents and the environment, i.e., agents operating on the
artifacts. However, note that the formalisation above does not preclude us from modelling agent-to-
agent interactions, as the global transition function does not rule out successors in which only some
agents change their local state following some actions. Also observe that essential concepts such as
views are naturally expressed in AC-MAS by insisting that the local state of an agent includes part
of the environment’s, i.e., the artifacts the agent has access to. Not all AC-MAS need to have views
deﬁned, so it is also possible for the views to be empty.
Other artifact-based concepts such as lifecycles are naturally expressed in AC-MAS. As artifacts
are modelled as part of the environment, a lifecycle is naturally encoded in AC-MAS simply as
the sequence of changes induced by the transition function τ on the fragment of the environment
representing the lifecycle in question. We will show an example of this in Section 7.
Some technical remarks now follow. To simplify the notation, we denote a global ground action
as ⃗α(⃗u), where ⃗α = ⟨α0(p0), . . . , αn(pn)⟩and ⃗u = ⟨⃗u0, . . . , ⃗un⟩, with each ⃗ui of appropriate
size. We deﬁne the transition relation →on S × S such that s →s′ if and only if there exists a
⃗α(⃗u) ∈Act(U) such that s′ ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)). If s →s′, we say that s′ is a successor of s. A run r
from s ∈S is an inﬁnite sequence s0 →s1 →· · · , with s0 = s. For n ∈N, we take r(n) .= sn. A
state s′ is reachable from s if there exists a run r from the global state r(0) = s such that r(i) = s′,
for some i ≥0. We assume that the relation →is serial. This can be easily obtained by assuming
that each agent has a skip action enabled at each local state and that performing skip induces no
changes in any of the local states. We consider S to be the set of states reachable from the initial
state s0. For convenience we will use also the concept of temporal-epistemic (t.e., for short) run.
Formally a t.e. run r from a state s ∈S is an inﬁnite sequence s0 ❀s1 ❀. . . such that s0 = s
and si →si+1 or si ∼k si+1, for some k ∈Ag. A state s′ is said to be temporally-epistemically
reachable (t.e. reachable, for short) from s if there exists a t.e. run r from the global state r(0) = s
such that for some i ≥0 we have that r(i) = s′. Obviously, temporal-epistemic runs include purely
temporal runs as a special case.
As in plain interpreted systems (Fagin et al., 1995), we say that two global states s = ⟨l0, . . . , ln⟩
and s′ = ⟨l′
0, . . . , l′
n⟩are epistemically indistinguishable for agent Ai, written s ∼i s′, if li = l′
i.
Differently from interpreted systems the local equality is evaluated on database instances. Also,
notice that we admit U to be inﬁnite, thereby allowing the possibility of the set of states S to be
10

inﬁnite. Indeed, unless we specify otherwise, we will assume to be working with inﬁnite-state
AC-MAS.
Finally, for technical reasons it is useful to refer to a global database schema D = D0 ∪· · ·∪Dn
of an AC-MAS. Every global state s = ⟨l0, . . . , ln⟩is associated with the (global) D-instance
Ds ∈D(U) such that Ds(Pi) = S
j∈Ag lj(Pi), for Pi ∈D. We omit the subscript s when s is
clear from the context and we write adom(s) for adom(Ds). Notice that for every s ∈S, the Ds
associated with s is unique, while the converse is not true in general.
2.3 Model Checking
We now deﬁne the problem of verifying an artifact-centric multi-agent system against a speciﬁcation
of interest. By following the artifact-centric model, we wish to give data the same prominence as
processes. To deal with data and the underlying database instances, our speciﬁcation language needs
to include ﬁrst-order logic. Further, we require temporal logic to describe the system execution.
Lastly, we use epistemic logic to express the information the agents have at their disposal. Hence,
we deﬁne a ﬁrst-order temporal epistemic speciﬁcation language to be interpreted on AC-MAS. The
speciﬁcation language will be used in Section 6 to formalise properties of artifact-centric programs.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (The Logic FO-CTLK) The ﬁrst-order CTLK (or FO-CTLK) formulas ϕ over a
database schema D are inductively deﬁned by the following BNF:
ϕ
::=
φ | ¬ϕ | ϕ →ϕ | ∀xϕ | AXϕ | AϕUϕ | EϕUϕ | Kiϕ | Cϕ
where φ ∈LD and 0 < i ≤n.
The notions of free and bound variables for FO-CTLK extend straightforwardly from LD, as well as
functions vars, free, and const. As usual, the temporal formulas AXϕ and AϕUϕ′ (resp. EϕUϕ′)
are read as “for all runs, at the next step ϕ” and “for all runs (resp. some run), ϕ until ϕ′”. The
epistemic formulas Kiϕ and Cϕ intuitively mean that “agent Ai knows ϕ” and “it is common
knowledge among all agents that ϕ” respectively. We use the abbreviations EXϕ, AFϕ, AGϕ,
EFϕ, and EGϕ as standard. Observe that free variables can occur within the scope of modal op-
erators, thus allowing for the unconstrained alternation of quantiﬁers and modal operators, thereby
allowing us to refer to elements in different modal contexts. We consider also a number of frag-
ments of FO-CTLK. The sentence atomic version of FO-CTLK without epistemic modalities, or
SA-FO-CTL, is the language obtained from Deﬁnition 2.8 by removing the clauses for epistemic
operators and restricting atomic formulas to ﬁrst-order sentences, so that no variable appears free in
the scope of a modal operator:
ϕ
::=
φ | ¬ϕ | ϕ →ϕ | AXϕ | AϕUϕ | EϕUϕ
where φ ∈LD is a sentence.
We will consider also the language FO-ECTLK, i.e., the existential fragments of FO-CTLK,
deﬁned as follows:
ϕ
::=
φ | ϕ ∧ϕ | ϕ ∨ϕ | ∀xϕ | ∃xϕ | EXϕ | EϕUϕ | ¯Kiϕ | ¯Cϕ,
where φ ∈LD, with ∧and ∨the standard abbreviations, ¯Kiϕ ≡¬Ki¬ϕ, and ¯Cϕ ≡¬C¬ϕ.
The semantics of FO-CTLK formulas is deﬁned as follows.
11

Deﬁnition 2.9 (Satisfaction for FO-CTLK) Consider an AC-MAS P, an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, a
state s ∈P, and an assignment σ. We inductively deﬁne whether P satisﬁes ϕ in s under σ, written
(P, s, σ) |= ϕ, as follows:
(P, s, σ) |= ϕ
iff
(Ds, σ) |= ϕ, if ϕ is an FO-formula
(P, s, σ) |= ¬ϕ
iff
it is not the case that (P, s, σ) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= ϕ →ϕ′
iff
(P, s, σ) |= ¬ϕ or (P, s, σ) |= ϕ′
(P, s, σ) |= ∀xϕ
iff
for all u ∈adom(s), (P, s, σ
 x
u

) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= AXϕ
iff
for all runs r, if r(0) = s, then (P, r(1), σ) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= AϕUϕ′
iff
for all runs r, if r(0) = s, then there is k ≥0 s.t. (P, r(k), σ) |= ϕ′,
and for all j, 0 ≤j < k implies (P, r(j), σ) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= EϕUϕ′
iff
for some run r, r(0) = s and there is k ≥0 s.t. (P, r(k), σ) |= ϕ′,
and for all j, 0 ≤j < k implies (P, r(j), σ) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= Kiϕ
iff
for all s′, s ∼i s′ implies (P, s′, σ) |= ϕ
(P, s, σ) |= Cϕ
iff
for all s′, s ∼s′ implies (P, s′, σ) |= ϕ
where ∼is the transitive closure of S
1...n ∼i.
A formula ϕ is said to be true at a state s, written (P, s) |= ϕ, if (P, s, σ) |= ϕ for all assignments
σ. Moreover, ϕ is said to be true in P, written P |= ϕ, if (P, s0) |= ϕ.
A key concern in this paper is to explore the model checking of AC-MAS against ﬁrst-order
temporal-epistemic speciﬁcations.
Deﬁnition 2.10 (Model Checking) Model checking an AC-MAS P against an FO-CTLK formula
ϕ amounts to ﬁnding an assignment σ such that (P, s0, σ) |= ϕ.
It is easy to see that whenever U is ﬁnite the model checking problem is decidable as P is a ﬁnite-
state system. In general this is not the case.
Theorem 2.11 The model checking problem for AC-MAS w.r.t. FO-CTLK is undecidable.
Proof (sketch). This can be proved by showing that every Turing machine T whose tape contains
an initial input I can be simulated by an artifact system PT,I. The problem of checking whether T
terminates on that particular input can be reduced to checking whether PT,I |= ϕ, where ϕ encodes
the termination condition. The detailed construction is similar to that of Theorem 4.10 of (Deutsch,
Sui, & Vianu, 2007).
Given the general setting in which the model checking problem is deﬁned above, the negative result
is not surprising. In the following we identify syntactic and semantic restrictions for which the
problem is decidable.
2.4 Isomorphisms
We now investigate the concept of isomorphism on AC-MAS. This will be needed in later sections
to produce ﬁnite abstractions of inﬁnite-state AC-MAS. In what follows let P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩and
P′ = ⟨S′, U ′, s′
0, τ⟩be two AC-MAS.
Deﬁnition 2.12 (Isomorphism) Two local states l, l′ ∈D(U) are isomorphic, written l ≃l′, iff
there exists a bijection ι : adom(l) ∪C 7→adom(l′) ∪C such that:
12

l(P1)
a
b
b
d
l(P2)
a
l′(P1)
c
b
b
e
l′(P2)
c
l′′(P1)
f
d
d
e
l′′(P2)
f
Figure 1: Examples of isomorphic and non-isomorphic local states.
(i) ι is the identity on C;
(ii) for every Pi ∈D, ⃗u ∈U qi, we have that ⃗u ∈l(Pi) iff ι(⃗u) ∈l′(Pi).
When this is the case, we say that ι is a witness for l ≃l′.
Two global states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ are isomorphic, written s ≃s′, iff there exists a bijection
ι : adom(s) ∪C 7→adom(s′) ∪C such that for every j ∈Ag, ι is a witness for lj ≃l′
j.
Notice that isomorphisms preserve the constants in C as well as predicates in the local states up
to renaming of the corresponding terms. Any function ι as above is called a witness for s ≃s′.
Obviously, the relation ≃is an equivalence relation. Given a function f : U 7→U ′ deﬁned on
adom(s), f(s) denotes the interpretation in D(U ′) obtained from s by renaming each u ∈adom(s)
as f(u). If f is also injective (thus invertible) and the identity on C, then f(s) ≃s.
Example. For an example of isomorphic states, consider an agent with local database schema
D = {P1/2, P2/1}, let U = {a, b, c, . . .} be an interpretation domain, and ﬁx the set C = {b} of
constants. Let l be the local state such that l(P1) = {⟨a, b⟩, ⟨b, d⟩} and l(P2) = {a} (see Figure 1).
Then, the local state l′ such that l′(P1) = {⟨c, b⟩, ⟨b, e⟩} and l′(P2) = {c} is isomorphic to l. This
can be easily seen by considering the isomorphism ι, where: ι(a) = c, ι(b) = b, and ι(d) = e. On
the other hand, the state l′′ where l′′(P1) = {⟨f, d⟩, ⟨d, e⟩} and l′′(P2) = {f} is not isomorphic to
l. Indeed, although a bijection exists that “transforms” l into l′′, it is easy to see that none can be
such that ι′(b) = b.
Note that, while isomorphic states have the same relational structure, two isomorphic states do
not necessarily satisfy the same FO-formulas as satisfaction depends also on the values assigned to
free variables. To account for this, we introduce the following notion.
Deﬁnition 2.13 (Equivalent assignments) Given two states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′, and a set of vari-
ables V ⊆V ar, two assignments σ : V ar 7→U and σ′ : V ar 7→U ′ are equivalent for V w.r.t. s
and s′ iff there exists a bijection γ : adom(s) ∪C ∪σ(V ) 7→adom(s′) ∪C ∪σ′(V ) such that:
(i) γ|adom(s)∪C is a witness for s ≃s′;
(ii) σ′|V = γ ◦σ|V .
Intuitively, equivalent assignments preserve both the (in)equalities of the variables in V and the
constants in s, s′ up to renaming. Note that, by deﬁnition, the above implies that s, s′ are isomorphic.
We say that two assignments are equivalent for an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, omitting the states s and
s′ when it is clear from the context, if these are equivalent for free(ϕ).
We can now show that isomorphic states satisfy exactly the same FO-formulas.
Proposition 2.14 Given two isomorphic states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′, an FO-formula ϕ, and two
assignments σ and σ′ equivalent for ϕ, we have that
(Ds, σ) |= ϕ
iff
(Ds′, σ′) |= ϕ
13

Proof. The proof is by induction on the structure of ϕ. Consider the base case for the atomic
formula ϕ ≡P(t1, . . . , tk). Then (Ds, σ) |= ϕ iff ⟨σ(t1), . . . , σ(tk)⟩∈Ds(P). Since σ and
σ′ are equivalent for ϕ, and s ≃s′, this is the case iff ⟨σ′(t1), . . . , σ′(tk)⟩∈Ds′(P), that is,
(Ds′, σ′) |= ϕ. The base case for ϕ ≡t = t′ is proved similarly, by observing that the satisfaction
of ϕ depends only on the assignments, and that the function γ of Def. 2.13 is a bijection, thus
all the (in)equalities between the values assigned by σ and σ′ are preserved. This is sufﬁcient to
guarantee that σ(t) = σ(t′) iff σ′(t) = σ′(t′). The inductive step for the propositional connectives
is straightforward. Finally, if ϕ ≡∀yψ, then (Ds, σ) |= ϕ iff for all u ∈adom(s), (Ds, σ
 y
u

) |= ψ.
Now consider the witness ι = γ|adom(s)∪C for s ≃s′, where γ is as in Def. 2.13. We have that σ
 y
u

and σ′  y
ι(u)

are equivalent for ψ. By induction hypothesis (Ds, σ
 y
u

) |= ψ iff (Ds′, σ′  y
ι(u)

) |= ψ.
Since ι is a bijection, this is the case iff for all u′ ∈adom(s′), (Ds′, σ′  y
u′

) |= ψ, i.e., (Ds′, σ′) |= ϕ.
This leads us to the following result.
Corollary 2.15 Given two isomorphic states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ and an FO-sentence ϕ, we have
that
Ds |= ϕ
iff
Ds′ |= ϕ
Proof.
From right to left. Suppose, by contradiction, that Ds ̸|= ϕ. Then there exists an
assignment σ s.t. (Ds, σ) ̸|= ϕ. Since free(ϕ) = ∅, if ι is a witness for s ≃s′, then the assignment
σ′ = ι ◦σ is equivalent to σ for s and s′. By Proposition 2.14 we have that (Ds′, σ′) ̸|= ϕ, that is,
Ds′ ̸|= ϕ. The case from left to right can be shown similarly.
Thus, isomorphic states cannot be distinguished by FO-sentences. This enables us to use this
notion when deﬁning simulations as we will see in the next section.
3. Abstractions for Sentence Atomic FO-CTL
In the previous section we have observed that model checking AC-MAS against FO-CTLK is un-
decidable in general. So, it is clearly of interest to identify decidable settings. In what follows
we introduce two main results. The ﬁrst, presented in this section, identiﬁes restrictions on the
language; the second, presented in the next section, focuses on semantic constraints. While these
cases are in some sense orthogonal to each other, we show that they both lead to decidable model
checking problems. They are also both carried out on a rather natural subclass of AC-MAS that
we call bounded, which we identify below. Our goal for proceeding in this manner is to identify
ﬁnite abstractions of inﬁnite-state AC-MAS so that veriﬁcation of programs, that admit AC-MAS as
models, can be conducted on them, rather than on inﬁnite-state AC-MAS. We will see this in detail
in Section 6.
Given our aims we begin by deﬁning a ﬁrst notion of bisimulation in the context of AC-MAS.
Bisimulations will be used to show that all bounded AC-MAS admit a ﬁnite, bisimilar, abstraction
that satisiﬁes the same SA-FO-CTL speciﬁcations as the original AC-MAS. Also in what follows
we assume that P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩and P′ = ⟨S′, U ′, s′
0, τ ′⟩.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Simulation) A relation R ⊆S × S′ is a simulation iff ⟨s, s′⟩∈R implies:
1. s ≃s′;
14

2. for every t ∈S, if s →t then there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ →t′ and ⟨t, t′⟩∈R.
Deﬁnition 3.1 presents the standard notion of simulation applied to the case of AC-MAS. The dif-
ference from the propositional case is that we here insist on the states being isomorphic, a generali-
sation from the usual requirement for propositional valuations to be equal (Blackburn, de Rijke, &
Venema, 2001). As in the standard case, two states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ are said to be similar, written
s ⪯s′, if there exists a simulation relation R s.t. ⟨s, s′⟩∈R. It can be proven that the similarity
relation ⪯is a simulation itself, and in particular the largest one w.r.t. set inclusion, and that it is
transitive and reﬂexive. Finally, we say that P′ simulates P, written P ⪯P′, if s0 ⪯s′
0. We extend
the above to bisimulations.
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Bisimulation) A relation B ⊆S × S′ is a bisimulation iff both B and B−1 =
{⟨s′, s⟩| ⟨s, s′⟩∈B} are simulations.
We say that two states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ are bisimilar, written s ≈s′, if there exists a bisimulation
B s.t. ⟨s, s′⟩∈B. Similarly to simulations, it can be proven that the bisimilarity relation ≈is the
largest bismulation. Further, it is an equivalence relation. Finally, P and P′ are said to be bisimilar,
written P ≈P′, if s0 ≈s′
0.
Since, as shown in Proposition 2.15, the satisfaction of FO-sentences is invariant under iso-
morphisms, we can now extend the usual bisimulation result from the propositional case to that of
SA-FO-CTL. We begin by showing a result on bisimilar runs.
Proposition 3.3 Consider two AC-MAS P and P′ such that P ≈P′, s ≈s′, for some s ∈S, s′ ∈
S′, and a run r of P such that r(0) = s. Then there exists a run r′ of P′ such that:
(i) r′(0) = s′;
(ii) for all i ≥0, r(i) ≈r′(i).
Proof. We show by induction that such run r′ in P′ exists. For i = 0, let r′(0) = s′. Obviously,
r(0) ≈r′(0). Now, assume, by induction hypothesis, that r(i) ≈r′(i). Let r(i) →r(i + 1).
Since r(i) ≈r′(i), by Def. 3.1, there exists t′ ∈S′ such that r′(i) →t′ and r(i + 1) ≈t′. Let
r′(i + 1) = t′; hence we obtain r(i + 1) ≈r′(i + 1). By deﬁnition r′ is a run of P′.
This enables us to show that bisimilar AC-MAS preserve SA-FO-CTL formulas. This is an
extension of analogous results on propositional CTL.
Lemma 3.4 Consider the AC-MAS P and P′ such that P ≈P′, s ≈s′, for some s ∈S, s′ ∈S′
and an SA-FO-CTL formula ϕ. Then,
(P, s) |= ϕ
iff
(P′, s′) |= ϕ
Proof. The proof is by induction on the structure of ϕ. Observe ﬁrst that since ϕ is sentence-
atomic, its satisfaction does not depend on assignments. We report the proof for the left-to-right
part of the implication; the converse can be shown similarly.
The base case for an FO-sentence ϕ follows from Prop. 2.15. The inductive cases for proposi-
tional connectives are straightforward.
15

For ϕ ≡AXψ, assume for contradiction that (P, s) |= ϕ and (P′, s′) ̸|= ϕ. Then, there exists
a run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′ and (P′, r′(1)) ̸|= ψ. By Def. 3.2 and 3.1 there exists a t ∈S s.t. s →t and
t ≈r′(1). Further, by seriality of →, s →t can be extended to a run r s.t. r(0) = s and r(1) = t.
By the induction hypothesis we obtain that (P, r(1)) ̸|= ψ. Hence, (P, r(0)) ̸|= AXψ, which is a
contradiction.
For ϕ ≡EψUφ, let r be a run with r(0) = s such that there exists k ≥0 such that (P, r(k)) |=
φ, and for every j, 0 ≤j < k implies (P, r(j)) |= ψ. By Prop. 3.3 there exists a run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′
and for all i ≥0, r′(i) ≈r(i). By the induction hypothesis we have that for each i ∈N, (P, r(i)) |=
ψ iff (P′, r′(i)) |= ψ, and (P, r(i)) |= φ iff (P′, r′(i)) |= φ. Therefore, r′ is a run s.t. r′(0) = s′,
(P′, r′(k)) |= φ, and for every j, 0 ≤j < k implies (P′, r′(j)) |= ψ, i.e., (P′, s′) |= EψUφ.
For ϕ ≡AψUφ, assume for contradiction that (P, s) |= ϕ and (P′, s′) ̸|= ϕ. Then, there exists
a run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′ and for every k ≥0, if (P′, r′(k)) |= φ, then there exists j s.t. 0 ≤j < k
and (P′, r′(j)) ̸|= ψ. By Prop. 3.3 there exists a run r s.t. r(0) = s and for all i ≥0, r(i) ≈r′(i).
Further, by the induction hypothesis we have that (P, r(i)) |= ψ iff (P′, r′(i)) |= ψ and (P, r(i)) |=
φ iff (P′, r′(i)) |= φ. But then r is s.t. r(0) = s and for every k ≥0, if (P, r(k)) |= φ, then there
exists j s.t. 0 ≤j < k and (P, r(j)) ̸|= ψ. That is, (P, s) ̸|= AψUφ, which is a contradiction.
By applying the result above to the case of s = s0 and s′ = s′
0, we obtain the following.
Theorem 3.5 Consider the AC-MAS P and P′ such that P ≈P′, and an SA-FO-CTL formula ϕ.
We have
P |= ϕ
iff
P′ |= ϕ
In summary we have proved that bisimilar AC-MAS validate the same SA-FO-CTL formulas.
In the next section we use this result to reduce, under additional assumptions, the veriﬁcation of an
inﬁnite-state AC-MAS to that of a ﬁnite-state one.
3.1 Finite Abstractions of Bisimilar AC-MAS
We now deﬁne a notion of ﬁnite abstraction for AC-MAS. We prove that abstractions are bisimilar
to the corresponding concrete model. We are particularly interested in ﬁnite abstraction; so we
operate on a special class of inﬁnite models that we call bounded.
Deﬁnition 3.6 (Bounded AC-MAS) An AC-MAS P is b-bounded, for b ∈N, if for all s ∈S,
|adom(s)| ≤b.
An AC-MAS is b-bounded if none of its reachable states contains more than b distinct elements.
Observe that bounded AC-MAS may be deﬁned on inﬁnite domains U. Furthermore, note that a b-
bounded AC-MAS may contain inﬁnitely many states, all bounded by b. So b-bounded systems are
inﬁnite-state in general. Notice also that the value b bounds only the number of distinct individuals
in a state, not the size of the state itself, i.e., the amount of memory required to accommodate the
individuals. Indeed, the inﬁnitely many elements of U need an unbounded number of bits to be
represented (e.g., as ﬁnite strings), so, even though each state is guaranteed to contain at most b
distinct elements, nothing can be said about how large the actual space required by such elements
is. On the other hand, it should be clear that memory-bounded AC-MAS are ﬁnite-state (hence
b-bounded, for some b).
16

Thus, seen as programs, b-bounded AC-MAS are in general memory-unbounded. Therefore,
for the purpose of veriﬁcation, they cannot be trivially checked by generating all their executions
–as it would be the case if they were memory-bounded– like standard model checking techniques
typically do. However, we will show later that any b-bounded inﬁnite-state ACMAS admits a ﬁnite
abstraction which can be used to verify it.
We now introduce abstractions in a modular manner by ﬁrst introducing a set of abstract agents
from a concrete AC-MAS.
Deﬁnition 3.7 (Abstract agent) Let A = ⟨D, L, Act, Pr⟩be an agent deﬁned on the interpretation
domain U. Given a set U ′ of individuals, we deﬁne the abstract agent A′ = ⟨D′, L′, Act′, Pr′⟩on
U ′ such that:
1. D′
i = Di;
2. L′
i ⊆D′
i(U ′);
3. Act′
i = Acti;
4. α(⃗u′) ∈Pr′
i(l′
i) iff there exist li ∈Li and α(⃗u) ∈Pri(li) s.t. l′
i ≃li, for some witness ι, and
⃗u′ = ι′(⃗u), for some bijection ι′ extending ι to ⃗u.
Given a set Ag of agents deﬁned on U, let Ag′ be the set of the corresponding abstract agents
on U ′.
We remark that A′, as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.7, is indeed an agent and complies with Deﬁni-
tion 2.6. Notice that the protocol of A′ is deﬁned on the basis of its corresponding concrete agent
A and requires the existence of a bijection between the elements in the local states and the action
parameters. Thus, in order for a ground action of A to have a counterpart in A′, the last requirement
of Deﬁnition 3.7 constrains U ′ to contain a sufﬁcient number of distinct values. As it will become
apparent later, the size of U ′ determines how closely an abstract system can simulate its concrete
counterpart.
We can now formalize the notion of abstraction that we will use in this section.
Deﬁnition 3.8 (Abstraction) Let P be an AC-MAS over Ag and Ag′ the set of agents obtained as
in Deﬁnition 3.7, for some U ′. The AC-MAS P′ deﬁned over Ag′ is said to be an abstraction of P
iff:
• s′
0 ≃s0;
• t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)) for some ⃗α(⃗u′) ∈Act(U ′) iff there exist s, t ∈S and ⃗α(⃗u) ∈Act(U), such
that t ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)), s ≃s′ and t ≃t′ for some witness ι, and ⃗u′ = ι′(⃗u) for some ι′ extending
ι.
Notice that abstractions have initial states isomorphic to their concrete counterparts. The con-
dition in Deﬁnition 3.8 means that whenever s ≃s′ for some witness ι, ⃗u′ = ι(⃗u), t ∈τ(s, α(⃗u))
and t′ ∈τ(s′, α(⃗u′)), then t ≃t′. This constraint means that action are data-independent. So, for
example, a copy action in the concrete model has a corresponding copy action in the abstract model
regardless of the data that are copied. Crucially, this condition requires that the domain U ′ contains
enough elements to simulate the concrete states and action effects as the following result makes
precise. In what follows we take NAg = NAg′ = P
Ai∈Ag maxα(⃗p)∈Acti{|⃗p|}, i.e., NAg is the sum
of the maximum numbers of parameters contained in the action types of each agent in Ag.
17

Theorem 3.9 Consider a b-bounded AC-MAS P over an inﬁnite interpretation domain U, an SA-
FO-CTLK formula ϕ, and a ﬁnite interpretation domain U ′ such that C ⊆U ′ and |U ′| ≥b + |C| +
NAg. Any abstraction P′ of P is bisimilar to P.
Proof.
Deﬁne a relation R as R = {⟨s, s′⟩∈S × S′ | s ≃s′}. We show that R is a
bisimulation such that ⟨s0, s′
0⟩∈R. Observe ﬁrst that s′
0 ≃s0, so ⟨s0, s′
0⟩∈R. Next, consider
s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ such that s ≃s′ (i.e., ⟨s, s′⟩∈R), and assume that s →t, for some t ∈S. Then,
there exists α(⃗u) ∈Act(U) s.t. t ∈τ(s, α(⃗u)). We show next that there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ →t′
and t ≃t′. To this end, observe that, since |U ′| ≥b + |C| and |adom(t)| ≤b, we can deﬁne an
injective function f : adom(t) ∪C 7→U ′ such that f(t) ≃t. We take t′ = f(t); it remains to
prove that s′ →t′. By the condition on the cardinality of U ′ we can extend f to ⃗u as well, and set
⃗u′ = f(⃗u). Then, by the deﬁnition of P′ we have that t′ ∈τ ′(s′, α(⃗u′)). Hence, s′ →t′. So, R
is a simulation relation between P and P′. Since R−1 can similarly be shown to be a simulation, it
follows that P and P′ are bisimilar.
By combining this result with Lemma 3.4, we can easily derive the main result of this section.
Theorem 3.10 If P is a b-bounded AC-MAS over an inﬁnite interpretation domain U, and P′ an
abstraction of P over a ﬁnite interpretation domain U ′ such that C ⊆U ′ and |U ′| ≥b+|C|+NAg,
then for every SA-FO-CTLK formula ϕ, we have that
P |= ϕ
iff
P′ |= ϕ.
This result states that we can reduce the veriﬁcation of an inﬁnite AC-MAS to the veriﬁcation of
a ﬁnite one. Given the fact that checking a ﬁnite AC-MAS is decidable, this is a noteworthy result.
Note, however, that we do not have a constructive deﬁnition for the construction of an abstract
AC-MAS P′ from a concrete AC-MAS P. This is of no consequence though, as in practice any
concrete artifact-system will be deﬁned by a program, e.g., in the language GSM, as discussed
in the introduction. Of importance, instead, is to be able to derive ﬁnite abstractions not just for
arbitrary AC-MAS but for those that are models of concrete programs. We will do this in Section 6
where we will use the result above.
Observe that an abstract AC-MAS as in Deﬁnition 3.8 depends on the set Ag′ of abstract agents
deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.7. However, other abstract AC-MAS deﬁned on different sets of agents,
exist. This is a standard outcome when deﬁning modular abstractions, as the same system can be
obtained by considering different agent components.
4. Abstractions for FO-CTLK
In the previous section we showed that syntactical restrictions on the speciﬁcation language lead to
ﬁnite abstractions for bounded AC-MAS. A natural question that arises is whether the limitation to
sentence-atomic speciﬁcations can be removed. Doing so would enable us to check any agent-based
FO-CTLK speciﬁcation not on an inﬁnite-state AC-MAS, but on its ﬁnite abstraction.
The key concept we identify in this section that enables us to achieve the above is that of unifor-
mity. As we will see later uniform AC-MAS are systems for which the behaviour does not depend
on the actual data present in the states. This means that the system contains all possible transitions
that are enabled according to parametric action rules, thereby resulting in a rather “full” transition
18

relation. This notion corresponds to that of genericity in databases (Abiteboul et al., 1995). We use
the term “uniformity” as we refer to transition systems and not databases.
To achieve ﬁnite abstractions we proceed as follows. We ﬁrst introduce a notion of bisimulation
stronger than the one discussed in the previous section. In Subsection 4.1 we show that this new
bisimulation relation guarantees that uniform AC-MAS satisfy the same formulas in FO-CTLK. We
use this result to show that bounded, uniform systems admit ﬁnite abstractions (Subsection 4.2).
In the rest of the section we let P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩and P′ = ⟨S′, U ′, s′
0, τ ′⟩be two AC-MAS
and assume, unless stated differently, that s = ⟨l0, . . . , ln⟩∈S, and s′ = ⟨l′
0, . . . , l′
n⟩∈S′.
4.1 ⊕-Bisimulation
Plain bisimulations are known to be satisfaction preserving in a modal propositional setting (Black-
burn et al., 2001). In the following we explore the conditions under which this applies to AC-MAS
as well. We begin by using a notion of bisimulation which is also based on isomorphism, but it is
stronger than the one discussed in Section 3 and later explore its properties in the context of uniform
AC-MAS.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (⊕-Simulation) A relation R on S × S′ is a ⊕-simulation if ⟨s, s′⟩∈R implies:
1. s ≃s′;
2. for every t ∈S, if s →t then there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ →t′, s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, and ⟨t, t′⟩∈R;
3. for every t ∈S, for every 0 < i ≤n, if s ∼i t then there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. t ∼i t′,
s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, and ⟨t, t′⟩∈R.
Observe that Deﬁnition 4.1 differs from Deﬁnition 3.1 not only by adding a condition for the epis-
temic relation, but also by insisting that s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′. This condition ensures that the ⊕-similar
transitions in AC-MAS have isomorphic disjoint unions. Two states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ are said
to be ⊕-similar, iff there exists an ⊕-simulation R s.t. ⟨s, s′⟩∈R. Note that all ⊕-similar states
are isomorphic as condition 2. above ensures that t ≃t′. We use the symbol ⪯both for similarity
and ⊕-similarity, as the context will disambiguate. Also ⊕-similarity can be shown to be the largest
⊕-simulation, reﬂexive, and transitive. Further, we say that P′ ⊕-simulates P if s0 ⪯s′
0.
⊕-simulations can naturally be extended to ⊕-bisimulations.
Deﬁnition 4.2 (⊕-Bisimulation) A relation B on S ×S′ is a ⊕-bisimulation iff both B and B−1 =
{⟨s′, s⟩| ⟨s, s′⟩∈B} are ⊕-simulations.
Two states s ∈S and s′ ∈S′ are said to be ⊕-bisimilar iff there exists an ⊕-bisimulation B such
that ⟨s, s′⟩∈B. Also for bisimilarity and ⊕-bisimilarity, we use the same symbol, ≈, and can
prove that ≈is the largest ⊕-bisimulation, and an equivalence relation. We say that P and P′ are
⊕-bisimilar, written P ≈P′ iff so are s0 and s′
0.
While we observed in the previous section that bisimilar, hence isomorphic, states in bisimilar
systems preserve sentence atomic formulas, it is instructive to note that this is not the case when full
FO-CTLK formulas are considered.
Example. Consider Figure 2, where C = ∅and P and P′ are given as follows. For the number
n of agents equal to 1, we deﬁne D = D′ = {P/1} and U = N; s0(P) = s′
0(P) = {1};
19

1
2
3
4
5
P
1
2
P′
Figure 2: ⊕-Bisimilar AC-MAS not satisfying the same FO-CTLK formulas.
τ = {⟨s, s′⟩| s(P) = {i}, s′(P) = {i + 1}}; τ ′ = {⟨s, s′⟩| s(P) = {i}, s′(P) = {(i + 1)
mod 2}}. Notice that S ⊆D(N) and S′ ⊆D(N). Clearly we have that P ≈P′. Now, consider the
constant-free FO-CTLK formula ϕ = AG(∀x(P(x) →AXAG¬P(x))). It can be easily seen that
P |= ϕ while P′ ̸|= ϕ.
The above shows that ⊕-bisimilarity is not a sufﬁcient condition to guarantee preservation of
the satisfaction of FO-CTLK formulas. Intuitively, this is a consequence of the fact that ⊕-bisimilar
AC-MAS do not preserve value associations along runs. For instance, the value 1 in P′ is inﬁnitely
many times associated with the odd values occurring in P. By quantifying across states we are able
to express this fact and are therefore able to distinguish the two structures. This is a difﬁculty as,
intuitively, we would like to use ⊕-bisimulations to demonstrate the existence of ﬁnite abstractions.
Indeed, as we will show later, this happens for the class of uniform AC-MAS, deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 4.3 (Uniformity) An AC-MAS P is said to be uniform iff for every s, t, s′ ∈S, t′ ∈
D(U),
1. if t ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)) and s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′ for some witness ι, then for every constant-preserving
bijection ι′ that extends ι to ⃗u, we have that t′ ∈τ(s′, ⃗α(ι′(⃗u)));
2. if s ∼i t and s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, then s′ ∼i t′.
This deﬁnition captures the idea that actions take into account and operate only on the relational
structure of states and action parameters, irrespectively of the actual data they contain (apart from a
ﬁnite set of constants). Intuitively, it says that if t can be obtained by executing α(⃗u) in s, and we
replace in s, ⃗u and t, the same element v with v′, obtaining, say, s′, ⃗u′ and t′, then t′ can be obtained
by executing α(⃗u′) in s′. In terms of the underlying Kripke structures this means that the systems
are “full” up to ⊕, i.e., in all uniform AC-MAS the points t′ identiﬁed above are indeed part of the
system and reachable from s′. A similar condition is required on the epistemic relation. A useful
property of uniform systems is the fact that the latter requirement is implied by the former, as shown
by the following result.
Proposition 4.4 If an AC-MAS P satisﬁes req. 1 in Def. 4.3 and adom(s0) ⊆C, then req. 2 is also
satisﬁed.
Proof. If s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, then there is a witness ι : adom(s) ∪adom(t) ∪C 7→adom(s′) ∪
adom(t′) ∪C that is the identity on C (hence on adom(s0)). Assume s ∼i t, thus li(s) = li(t),
and li(s′) = ι(li(s)) = ι(li(t)) = li(t′).
Notice that this does not guarantee that s′ ∼i t′,
20

as we need to prove that t′ ∈S. This can be done by showing that t′ is reachable from s0.
Since t is reachable from s0, there exists a run s0 →s1 →. . . →sk s.t. sk = t. Extend
now ι to a total and injective function ι′ : adom(s0) ∪· · · ∪adom(sk) ∪C 7→U. This can
always be done because |U| ≥|adom(s0) ∪· · · ∪adom(sk) ∪C|. Now consider the sequence
ι′(s0), ι′(s1), . . . , ι′(sk). Since adom(s0) ⊆C then ι(s0) = s0 and, because ι′ extends ι, we have
that ι′(s0) = ι(s0) = s0. Further, ι′(sk) = ι(t) = t′. By repeated applications of req. 1 we can
show that ι′(sm+1) ∈τ(ι′(sm), ⃗α(ι′(⃗u))) whenever sm+1 ∈τ(sm, ⃗α(⃗u)), for m < k. Hence, the
sequence is actually a run from s0 to t′. Thus, t′ ∈S, and s′ ∼i t′.
Thus, as long as adom(s0) ⊆C, to check whether an AC-MAS is uniform, it is sufﬁcient to
take into account only the transition function.
A further distinctive feature of uniform systems is that all isomorphic states are ⊕-bisimilar.
Proposition 4.5 If an AC-MAS P is uniform, then for every s, s′ ∈S, s ≃s′ implies s ≈s′.
Proof. We prove that B = {⟨s, s′⟩∈S × S | s ≃s′} is a ⊕-bisimulation. Observe that since
≃is an equivalence relation, so is B. Thus B is symmetric and B = B−1. Therefore, proving
that B is a ⊕-simulation proves also that B−1 is a ⊕-simulation; hence, that B is a ⊕-bisimulation.
To this end, let ⟨s, s′⟩∈B, and assume s →t for some t ∈S. Then, t ∈τ(s, α(⃗u)) for some
α(⃗u) ∈Act(U). Consider a witness ι for s ≃s′. By cardinality considerations ι can be extended to
a total and injective function ι′ : adom(s)∪adom(t)∪{⃗u}∪C 7→U. Consider ι′(t) = t′; it follows
that ι′ is a witness for s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′. Since P is uniform, t′ ∈τ(s′, α(ι′(⃗u))), that is, s′ →t′.
Moreover, ι′ is a witness for t ≃t′, thus ⟨t, t′⟩∈B. Next assume that ⟨s, s′⟩∈B and s ∼i t, for
some t ∈S. By reasoning as above we can ﬁnd a witness ι for s ≃s′, and an extension ι′ of ι
s.t. t′ = ι′(t) and ι′ is a witness for s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′. Since P is uniform, s′ ∼i t′ and ⟨t, t′⟩∈B.
This result intuitively means that submodels generated by isomorphic states are ⊕-bisimilar.
Next we prove some partial results, which will be useful in proving our main preservation theo-
rem. The ﬁrst two results guarantee that under appropriate cardinality constraints the ⊕-bisimulation
preserves the equivalence of assignments w.r.t. a given FO-CTLK formula.
Lemma 4.6 Consider two ⊕-bisimilar and uniform AC-MAS P and P′, two ⊕-bisimilar states
s ∈S and s′ ∈S′, and an FO-CTLK formula ϕ. For every assignments σ and σ′ equivalent for ϕ
w.r.t. s and s′, we have that:
1. for every t ∈S s.t. s →t, if |U ′| ≥|adom(s) ∪adom(t) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))|, then there exists
t′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ →t′, t ≈t′, and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. t and t′.
2. for every t ∈S s.t. s ∼i t, if |U ′| ≥|adom(s) ∪adom(t) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))|, then there exists
t′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ ∼i t′, t ≈t′, and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. t and t′.
Proof. To prove (1), let γ be a bijection witnessing that σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. s and s′.
Suppose that s →t. Since s ≈s′, by deﬁnition of ⊕-bisimulation there exists t′′ ∈S′ s.t. s′ →t′′,
s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′′, and t ≈t′′. Now, deﬁne Domj .= adom(s) ∪adom(t) ∪C, and partition it into:
• Domγ .= adom(s) ∪C ∪(adom(t) ∩σ(free(ϕ));
• Domι′ .= adom(t) \ Domγ.
21

Let ι′ : Domι′ 7→U ′ \ Im(γ) be an invertible (total) function. Observe that |Im(γ)| =
|adom(s′) ∪C ∪σ′(free(ϕ))| = |adom(s) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))|, thus from the fact that |U ′| ≥
|adom(s) ∪adom(t) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))| we have |U ′ \ Im(γ)| ≥|Dom(ι′)|, which guarantees the
existence of ι′.
Next, deﬁne j : Domj 7→U ′ as follows:
j(u) =
 γ(u), if u ∈Domγ
ι′(u), if u ∈Domι′
Obviously, j is invertible. Thus, j is a witness for s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, where t′ = j(t). Since
s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′′ and ≃is an equivalence relation, s′ ⊕t′ ≃s′ ⊕t′′. Thus, s′ →t′, as P′ is uniform.
Moreover, σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. t and t′, by construction of t′. To check that t ≈t′,
observe that, since t′ ≃t′′ and P′ is uniform, by Prop. 4.5 it follows that t′ ≈t′′. Thus, since
t ≈t′′ and ≈is transitive, we obtain that t ≈t′. The proof for (2) has an analogous structure and is
omitted.
It can be proven that this result is tight, i.e., that if the cardinality requirement is violated, there
exist cases where assignment equivalence is not preserved along temporal or epistemic transitions.
Lemma 4.6 easily generalizes to t.e. runs.
Lemma 4.7 Consider two ⊕-bisimilar and uniform AC-MAS P and P′, two ⊕-bisimilar states
s ∈S and s′ ∈S′, an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, and two assignments σ and σ′ equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. s
and s′. For every t.e. run r of P, if r(0) = s and for all i ≥0, |U ′| ≥|adom(r(i)) ∪adom(r(i +
1)) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))|, then there exists a t.e. run r′ of P′ s.t. for all i ≥0:
(i) r′(0) = s′;
(ii) r(i) ≈r′(i);
(iii) σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r(i) and r′(i).
(iv) for every i ≥0, if r(i) →r(i + 1) then r′(i) →r′(i + 1), and if r(i) ∼j r(i + 1), for some
j, then r′(i) ∼j r′(i + 1).
Proof.
Let r be a t.e. run s.t. |U ′| ≥|adom(r(i)) ∪adom(r(i + 1)) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))| for
all i ≥0. We inductively build r′ and show that the conditions above are satisﬁed. For i = 0, let
r′(0) = s′. By hypothesis, r is s.t. |U ′| ≥|adom(r(0)) ∪adom(r(1)) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))|. Thus,
since r(0) ❀r(1), by Lemma 4.6 there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. r′(0) ❀t′, r(1) ≈t′, and σ and σ′
are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r(1) and t′. Let r′(1) = t′. Lemma 4.6 guarantees that the transitions
r′(0) ❀t′ and r(0) ❀r(1) can be chosen so that they are either both temporal or both epistemic
with the same index.
The case for i > 0 is similar. Assume that r(i) ≈r′(i) and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ
w.r.t. r(i) and r′(i). Since r(i) ❀r(i+1) and |U ′| ≥|adom(r(i))∪adom(r(i+1))∪C∪σ(free(ϕ))|,
by Lemma 4.6 there exists t′ ∈S′ s.t. r′(i) ❀t′, σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r(i + 1) and t′,
and r(i + 1) ≈t′. Let r′(i + 1) = t′. It is clear that r′ is a t.e. run in P′, and that, by Lemma 4.6,
the transitions of r′ can be chosen so as to fulﬁll requirement (iv).
We can now prove the following result, which states that FO-CTLK formulas cannot distin-
guish ⊕-bisimilar and uniform AC-MAS. This is in marked contrast with the earlier example in this
section which operated on ⊕-bisimilar but non-uniform AC-MAS.
22

Theorem 4.8 Consider two ⊕-bisimilar and uniform AC-MAS P and P′, two ⊕-bisimilar states
s ∈S and s′ ∈S′, an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, and two assignments σ and σ′ equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. s
and s′.
If
1. for every t.e. run r s.t. r(0) = s, for all k ≥0 we have |U ′| ≥|adom(r(k)) ∪adom(r(k +
1)) ∪C ∪σ(free(ϕ))| + |vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)|; and
2. for every t.e. run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′, for all k ≥0 we have |U| ≥|adom(r′(k)) ∪adom(r′(k +
1)) ∪C ∪σ′(free(ϕ))| + |vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)|;
then
(P, s, σ) |= ϕ
iff
(P′, s′, σ′) |= ϕ.
Proof.
The proof is by induction on the structure of ϕ. We prove that if (P, s, σ) |= ϕ then
(P′, s′, σ′) |= ϕ. The other direction can be proved analogously. The base case for atomic formulas
follows from Prop. 2.14. The inductive cases for propositional connectives are straightforward.
For ϕ ≡∀xψ, assume that x ∈free(ψ) (otherwise consider ψ, and the corresponding case),
and no variable is quantiﬁed more than once (otherwise rename the other variables). Let γ be a
bijection witnessing that σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. s and s′. For u ∈adom(s), consider the
assignment σ
 x
u

. By deﬁnition, γ(u) ∈adom(s′), and σ′  x
γ(u)

is well-deﬁned. Note that free(ψ) =
free(ϕ)∪{x}; so σ
 x
u

and σ′  x
γ(u)

are equivalent for ψ w.r.t. s and s′. Moreover, |σ
 x
u

(free(ψ))| ≤
|σ(free(ϕ))| + 1, as u may not occur in σ(free(ϕ)). The same considerations apply to σ′. Further,
|vars(ψ) \ free(ψ)| = |vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)| −1, as vars(ψ) = vars(ϕ), free(ψ) = free(ϕ) ∪{x},
and x /∈free(ϕ). Thus, both hypotheses 1. and 2. remain satisﬁed if we replace ϕ with ψ, σ
with σ
 x
u

, and σ′ with σ′  x
γ(u)

. Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, if (P, s, σ
 x
u

) |= ψ then
(P′, s′, σ′  x
γ(u)

) |= ψ. Since u ∈adom(s) is generic and γ is a bijection, the result follows.
For ϕ ≡AXψ, assume by contradiction that (P, s, σ) |= ϕ but (P′, s′, σ′) ̸|= ϕ. Then,
there exists a run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′ and (P′, r′(1), σ′) ̸|= ψ. By Lemma 4.7, which applies as
|vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)| ≥0, there exists a run r s.t. r(0) = s, for all i ≥0, r(i) ≈r′(i) and σ and
σ′ are equivalent for ψ w.r.t. r(i) and r′(i). Since r is a run s.t. r(0) = s, it satisﬁes hypothesis 1.
Moreover, the same hypothesis is necessarily satisﬁed by all the t.e. runs r′′ s.t., , for some i ≥0,
r′′(0) = r(i) (otherwise, the t.e. run r(0) · · · r(i)r′′(1)r′′(2) · · · would not satisfy the hypothesis);
the same considerations apply w.r.t hypothesis 2 and for all the t.e. runs r′′′ s.t. r′′′(0) = r′(i), for
some i ≥0. In particular, these hold for i = 1. Thus, we can inductively apply the Lemma, by
replacing s with r(1), s′ with r′(1), and ϕ with ψ (observe that vars(ϕ) = vars(ψ) and free(ϕ) =
free(ψ)). But then we obtain (P, r(1), σ) ̸|= ψ, thus (P, r(0), σ) ̸|= AXψ. This is a contradiction.
For ϕ ≡EψUφ, assume that the only variables common to ψ and φ occur free in both formulas
(otherwise rename the quantiﬁed variables). Let r be a run s.t. r(0) = s, and there exists k ≥0
s.t. (P, r(k), σ) |= φ, and (P, r(j), σ) |= ψ for 0 ≤j < k. By Lemma 4.7 there exists a run r′
s.t. r′(0) = s′, and for all i ≥0, r′(i) ≈r(i), and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r′(i) and
r(i). From each bijection γi witnessing that σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r′(i) and r(i), deﬁne
the bijections γi,ψ = γi|adom(r(i))∪C∪σ(free(ψ)) and γi,φ = γi|adom(r(i))∪C∪σ(free(φ)). Since free(ψ) ⊆
free(ϕ), free(φ) ⊆free(ϕ), it can be seen that γi,ψ and γi,φ witness that σ and σ′ are equivalent
for respectively ψ and φ w.r.t. r′(i) and r(i). By the same argument used for the AX case above,
23

hypothesis 1 holds for all the t.e. runs r′′ s.t. r′′(0) = r(i), for some i ≥0, and hypothesis 2 holds for
all the t.e. runs r′′′ s.t. r′′′(0) = r′(i). Now observe that |σ(free(φ))|, |σ(free(ψ))| ≤|σ(free(ϕ))|.
Moreover, by the assumption on the common variables of ψ and φ, (vars(ϕ)\free(ϕ)) = (vars(ψ)\
free(ψ))⊎(vars(φ)\free(φ)), thus |vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)| = |(vars(ψ) \ free(ψ)|+|(vars(φ) \ free(φ)|,
hence |(vars(ψ) \ free(ψ)|, |(vars(φ) \ free(φ)| ≤|vars(ϕ) \ free(ϕ)|. Therefore hypotheses 1 and
2 hold also with ϕ uniformly replaced by ψ or φ. Then, the induction hypothesis applies for each
i, by replacing s with r(i), s′ with r′(i), and ϕ with either ψ or φ. Thus, for each i, (P, r(i), σ) |=
ψ iff (P′, r′(i), σ′) |= ψ, and (P, r(i), σ) |= φ iff (P′, r′(i), σ′) |= φ. Therefore, r′ is a run
s.t. r′(0) = s′, (P′, r′(k), σ′) |= φ, and for every j, 0 ≤j < k implies (P′, r′(j), σ′) |= ψ, i.e.,
(P′, s′, σ′) |= EψUφ.
For ϕ ≡AψUφ, assume by contradiction that (P, s, σ) |= ϕ but (P′, s′, σ′) ̸|= ϕ. Then, there
exists a run r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′ and for every k ≥0, either (P′, r′(k), σ′) ̸|= φ or there exists j
s.t. 0 ≤j < k and (P′, r′(j), σ′) ̸|= ψ. By Lemma 4.7 there exists a run r s.t. r(0) = s, and for
all i ≥0, r(i) ≈r′(i) and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ϕ w.r.t. r(i) and r′(i). Similarly to the case
of EψUφ, it can be shown that σ and σ′ are equivalent for ψ and φ w.r.t. r(i) and r′(i), for all
i ≥0. Further, assuming w.l.o.g. that all variables common to ψ and φ occur free in both formulas,
it can be shown, as in the case of EψUφ, that the induction hypothesis holds on every pair of runs
obtained as sufﬁxes of r and r′, starting from their i-th state, for every i ≥0. Thus, (P, r(i), σ) |= ψ
iff (P′, r′(i), σ′) |= ψ, and (P, r(i), σ) |= φ iff (P′, r′(i), σ′) |= φ. But then r is s.t. r(0) = s and
for every k ≥0, either (P, r(k), σ) ̸|= φ or there exists j s.t. 0 ≤j < k and (P, r(j), σ) ̸|= ψ, that
is, (P, s, σ) ̸|= AψUφ. This is a contradiction.
For ϕ ≡Kiψ, assume by contradiction that (P, s, σ) |= ϕ but (P′, s′, σ′) ̸|= ϕ. Then, there
exists s′′ s.t. s′ ∼i s′′ and (P′, s′′, σ′) ̸|= ψ. By Lemma 4.7 there exists s′′′ s.t. s′′′ ≈s′′, s ∼i s′′′,
and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ψ w.r.t. s′′ and s′′′. Thus, by an argument analogous to that used
for the case of AX, we can apply the induction hypothesis, obtaining (P, s′′′, σ) ̸|= ψ. But then
(P, s, σ) ̸|= Kiψ, which is a contradiction.
Finally, for ϕ ≡Cψ, assume by contradiction that (P, s, σ) |= ϕ but (P′, s′, σ′) ̸|= ϕ. Then,
there exists an s′′ s.t. s′ ∼s′′ and (P′, s′′, σ′) ̸|= ψ. Again by Lemma 4.7 there exists s′′′ s.t. s′′′ ≈
s′′, s ∼s′′′, and σ and σ′ are equivalent for ψ w.r.t. s′′ and s′′′. Thus, by an argument analogous to
that used for the case of Ki, we can apply the induction hypothesis, obtaining (P, s′′′, σ) ̸|= ψ. But
then (P, s, σ) ̸|= Cψ, which is a contradiction.
We can now easily extend the above result to the model checking problem for AC-MAS.
Theorem 4.9 Consider two ⊕-bisimilar and uniform AC-MAS P and P′, and an FO-CTLK formula
ϕ.
If
1. for all t.e. runs r s.t. r(0) = s0, and for all k ≥0, |U ′| ≥|adom(r(k)) ∪adom(r(k + 1)) ∪
C| + |vars(ϕ)|, and
2. for all t.e. runs r′ s.t. r′(0) = s′
0, and for all k ≥0, |U| ≥|adom(r′(k)) ∪adom(r′(k + 1)) ∪
C| + |vars(ϕ)|
then
P |= ϕ
iff
P′ |= ϕ.
24

Proof. Equivalently, we prove that if (P, s0, σ) ̸|= ϕ for some σ, then there exists a σ′ such that
(P′, s′
0, σ′) ̸|= ϕ, and viceversa. To this end, observe that hypotheses 1. and 2. imply, respectively,
hypotheses 1. and 2. of Theorem 4.8. Further, notice that, by cardinality considerations, given the
assignment σ : V ar 7→U, there exists an assignment σ′ : V ar 7→U ′ s.t. σ and σ′ are equivalent
for ϕ w.r.t. s0 and s′
0. Thus, by applying Theorem 4.8 we have that if there exists an assignment σ
s.t. (P, s0, σ) ̸|= ϕ, then there exists an assignment σ′ s.t. (P′, s′
0, σ′) ̸|= ϕ. The converse can be
proved analogously, as the hypotheses are symmetric.
This result shows that uniform AC-MAS can in principle be veriﬁed by model checking a ⊕-
bisimilar one. Note that this applies to inﬁnite AC-MAS P as well. In this case the results above
enable us to show that the veriﬁcation question can be posed on the corresponding, possibly ﬁnite,
P′ as long as U ′, as deﬁned above, is sufﬁciently large for P′ to ⊕-bisimulate P. A noteworthy class
of inﬁnite systems for which these results prove particularly powerful is that of bounded AC-MAS,
which, as discussed in the next subsection, always admit a ﬁnite abstraction.
4.2 Finite Abstractions
We now combine the notion of uniformity explored so far in this section with the assumption on
boundedness made in Section 3.1. Our aim remains to identify conditions under which the veriﬁ-
cation of an inﬁnite AC-MAS can be reduced to the veriﬁcation of a ﬁnite one. Differently from
Section 3.1 we here operate on the full FO-CTLK speciﬁcation language. The main result here is
given by Corollary 4.14 which guarantees that, in the context of bounded AC-MAS, uniformity is a
sufﬁcient condition for ⊕-bisimilar ﬁnite abstractions to be satisfaction preserving.
In the following we assume that any AC-MAS P is such that adom(s0) ⊆C. If this is not the
case, C can be extended so as to include all the (ﬁnitely many) elements in adom(s0). Further, we
recall that NAg is the sum of the maximum numbers of parameters contained in the action types of
each agent in Ag, i.e., NAg = P
Ai∈Ag maxα(⃗x)∈Acti{|⃗x|}.
We start by formalizing the notion of ⊕-abstraction.
Deﬁnition 4.10 (⊕-Abstraction) Let P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩be an AC-MAS over Ag, and Ag′ the
set of abstract agents obtained as in Deﬁnition 3.7, for some domain U ′. The AC-MAS P′ =
⟨S′, U ′, s′
0, τ ′⟩over Ag′ is said to be an ⊕-abstraction of P iff:
• s′
0 = s0;
• t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)) iff there exist s, t ∈S and ⃗α(⃗u) ∈Act(U), such that s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, for
some witness ι, t ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)), and ⃗u′ = ι′(⃗u) for some bijection ι′ extending ι to ⃗u.
Notice that P′ is indeed an AC-MAS as it satisﬁes the relevant conditions on protocols and
transitions in Deﬁnition 2.7. Indeed, if t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)), then there exist s, t ∈S, and ⃗α(⃗u) such
that t ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)), s⊕t ≃s′⊕t′ for some witness ι, and ⃗u = ι′(⃗u′) for some bijection ι′ extending
ι. This means that αi(⃗ui) ∈Pri(li) for i ≤n. By deﬁnition of Pr′
i we have that αi(⃗u′
i) ∈Pr′
i(l′
i)
for i ≤n. Further, if U ′ has ﬁnitely many elements, then S′ has ﬁnitely many states. Observe that
by varying U ′ we obtain different ⊕-abstractions.
Next, we investigate the relationship between an AC-MAS and its ⊕-abstractions. A ﬁrst useful
result states that every ﬁnite ⊕-abstraction is uniform, independently of the properties of the AC-
MAS they abstract.
25

Lemma 4.11 Every ⊕-abstraction P′ of an AC-MAS P is uniform.
Proof.
Consider s, t, s′ ∈S′, t′ ∈D(U ′), and ⃗α(⃗u) ∈Act′(U ′) s.t. t ∈τ ′(s, ⃗α(⃗u)) and
s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, for some witness ζ. We need to show that P′ admits a transition from s′ to t′. Since
P′ is an ⊕-abstraction of P, given the deﬁnition of τ ′, there exist s′′, t′′ ∈S and ⃗α(⃗u′′) ∈Act(U)
s.t. t′′ ∈τ(s′′, ⃗α(⃗u′′)), s′′ ⊕t′′ ≃s ⊕t, for some witness ι, and ⃗u = ι′(⃗u′′), for some constant-
preserving bijection ι′ extending ι to ⃗u′′. Consider ⃗u′ ∈U ′|⃗u| such that ⃗u′ = ζ′(⃗u), for some
constant-preserving bijection ζ′ extending ζ to ⃗u. Obviously, the composition ζ′ ◦ι′ is a constant-
preserving bijection such that ⃗u′ = ζ′(ι′(⃗u′′)). Moreover, it can be easily restricted to a witness for
s′′ ⊕t′′ ≃s′ ⊕t′. But then, since P′ is an ⊕-abstraction of P, this implies that t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)).
Thus, P′ is uniform.
The second result below guarantees that every b-bounded AC-MAS is bisimilar to any of its
⊕-abstractions, provided these are built over a sufﬁciently large interpretation domain.
Lemma 4.12 Consider a uniform, b-bounded AC-MAS P over an inﬁnite interpretation domain
U, and an interpretation domain U ′ such that C ⊆U ′. If |U ′| ≥2b + |C| + NAg, then any
⊕-abstraction P′ of P over U ′ is bisimilar to P.
Proof. Let B = {⟨s, s′⟩∈S × S′ | s ≃s′}. We prove that B is a ⊕-bisimulation such that
⟨s0, s′
0⟩∈B. We start by proving that B is a ⊕-simulation relation. To this end, observe that since
s0 = s′
0, then s0 ≃s′
0, and ⟨s0, s′
0⟩∈B. Next, consider ⟨s, s′⟩∈B, thus s ≃s′. Assume that
s →t, for some t ∈S. Then, there must exist ⃗α(⃗u) ∈Act(U) such that t ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)). Moreover,
since |U ′| ≥2b + |C| + NAg, P
Ai∈Ag |⃗ui| ≤NAg, and |adom(s) ∪adom(t)| ≤2b, the witness
ι for s ≃s′ can be extended to S
Ai∈Ag ⃗ui as a bijection ι′. Now let t′ = ι′(t). By the way ι′ has
been deﬁned, it can be seen that s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′. Further, since P′ is an ⊕-abstraction of P, we have
that t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)) for ⃗u′ = ι′(⃗u), that is, s′ →t′ in P′. Therefore, there exists t′ ∈S′ such
that s′ →t′, s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, and ⟨t, t′⟩∈B. As regards the epistemic relation, assume s ∼i t for
some i ∈{1, . . . , n} and t ∈S. By deﬁnition of ∼i, li(s) = li(t). Since |U ′| ≥2b + |C|, any
witness ι for s ≃s′ can be extended to a witness ι′ for s ⊕t ≃s′ ⊕t′, where t′ = ι′(t). Obviously,
li(s′) = li(t′). Thus, to prove that s′ ∼i t′, we need to show that t′ ∈S′, i.e., that t′ is reachable
in P′ from s′
0 = s0. To this end, observe that since t ∈S, there exists a purely temporal run r
such that r(0) = s0 and r(k) = t, for some k ≥0. Thus, there exist also ⃗α1(⃗u1) . . . , ⃗αk(⃗uk) such
that r(j + 1) ∈τ(r(j), ⃗αj+1(⃗uj+1)), for 0 ≤j < k. Since |U ′| ≥2b + |C|, we can deﬁne, for
0 ≤j < k, a function ιj that is a witness for r(j)⊕r(j +1) ≃ιj(r(j))⊕ιj(r(j +1)). In particular,
this can be done starting from j = k −1, deﬁning ιk−1 so that ιk−1(r(k)) = ιk−1(t) = t′, and
proceeding backward to j = 0, guaranteeing that, for 0 ≤j < k, ιj(r(j + 1)) = ιj+1(r(j + 1)).
Observe that since adom(s0) ⊆C, necessarily i0(r(0)) = i0(s0) = s0 = s′
0. Moreover, as
|U ′| ≥2b + |C| + NAg, each ιj can be extended to a bijection ι′
j, to the elements occurring in
⃗uj+1. Thus, given that P′ is an ⊕-abstraction of P, for 0 ≤j < k, we have that ι′
j(r(j + 1)) ∈
τ(ι′
j(r(j)), ⃗α(ι′
j(⃗uj+1))). Hence, the sequence ι′
0(r(0)) →· · · →ι′
k−1(r(k)) is a run of P′, and,
since t′ = ι′
k−1(r(k)), t′ is reachable in P′. Therefore s′ ∼i t′. Further, since t ≃t′, by deﬁnition
of B, it is the case that ⟨t, t′⟩∈B, hence B is a ⊕-simulation.
To prove that B−1 is a ⊕-simulation, given ⟨s, s′⟩∈B (thus s ≃s′), assume that s′ →t′, for
some t′ ∈S′. Obviously, there exists ⃗α(⃗u′) ∈Act(U ′) such that t′ ∈τ ′(s′, ⃗α(⃗u′)). Because P′ is
an ⊕-abstraction of P, there exist s′′, t′′ ∈S and ⃗α(⃗u′′) ∈Act(U) such that s′′ ⊕t′′ ≃s′ ⊕t′, for
some witness ι, and t′′ ∈τ(s′′, α(⃗u′′)), with ⃗u′′ = ι′(⃗u′), for some bijection ι′ extending ι to ⃗u′.
26

Observe that s′ ≃s′′, thus, by transitivity of ≃, we have s ≃s′′. The fact that there exists t ∈S
such that s →t easily follows from the uniformity of P. Thus, since t′ ≃t, we have ⟨t, t′⟩∈B.
For the epistemic relation, assume s′ ∼i t′, for some t′ ∈S′ and 0 < i ≤n. Let ι be a witness
for s′ ≃s, and let ι′ be an extension of ι that is a witness for s′ ⊕t′ ≃s ⊕t. For t = ι′(t′), it
can be seen that li(s) = li(t). Observe that t′ ∈S′. Using an argument essentially analogous to
the one above, but exploiting the fact that P is uniform, that P′ is certainly b-bounded, and that
|U| > 2b + |C| + NAg as U is inﬁnite, we show that t ∈S by constructing a run r of P such that
r(k) = t, for some k ≥0. Then s ∼i t. Further, since t′ ≃t, we have ⟨t, t′⟩∈B. Therefore, B−1
is a ⊕-simulation. So, P and P′ are bisimilar.
This result allows us to prove our main abstraction theorem.
Theorem 4.13 Consider a b-bounded and uniform AC-MAS P over an inﬁnite interpretation do-
main U, an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, and an interpretation domain U ′ such that C ⊆U ′. If |U ′| ≥
2b + |C| + max{|vars(ϕ)|, NAg}, then for any ⊕-abstraction P′ of P over U ′, we have that:
P |= ϕ
iff
P′ |= ϕ.
Proof. By Lemma 4.11, P′ is uniform. Thus, by the hypothesis on the cardinalities of U and U ′,
Lemma 4.12 applies, so P and P′ are bisimilar. Obviously, also P′ is b-bounded. Thus, since P
and P′ are b-bounded, and by the cardinality hypothesis on U and U ′, Theorem 4.9 applies. In
particular, notice that for every temporal-epistemic run r s.t. r(0) = s0, and for all k ≥0, we have
that |U ′| ≥|adom(r(k))∪adom(r(k+1))∪C|+|vars(ϕ)|, as |adom(r(k))| ≤b, by b-boundedness.
Therefore, P |= ϕ iff P′ |= ϕ.
Note that the theorem above does not require U ′ to be inﬁnite. So, by using a sufﬁcient number
of abstract values in U ′, we can in principle reduce the veriﬁcation of an inﬁnite, bounded, and
uniform AC-MAS to the veriﬁcation of a ﬁnite one. The following corollary to Theorem 4.13 states
this clearly.
Corollary 4.14 Given a b-bounded and uniform AC-MAS P over an inﬁnite interpretation domain
U, and an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, there exists an AC-MAS P′ over a ﬁnite interpretation domain U ′
such that P |= ϕ iff P′ |= ϕ.
It should also be noted that U ′ can simply be taken to be any ﬁnite subset of U satisfying the
cardinality requirement above. By doing so, the ﬁnite ⊕-abstraction P′ can be deﬁned simply as the
restriction of P to U ′. Thus, every inﬁnite, b-bounded and uniform AC-MAS is bisimilar to a ﬁnite
subsystem which satisﬁes the same formulas.
Note that, similarly to what noted at page 18 we are not concerned in the actual construction
of the ﬁnite abstraction. This is because we intend to construct it directly from an artifact-centric
program, as we will do in Section 6. Before that we explore the complexity of the model checking
problem.
5. The Complexity of Model Checking Finite AC-MAS against FO-CTLK
Speciﬁcations
We now analyse the complexity of the model checking problem for ﬁnite AC-MAS with respect to
FO-CTLK speciﬁcations. The input of the problem consists of an AC-MAS P on a ﬁnite domain U
27

and an FO-CTLK formula ϕ; the solution is an assignment σ such that (P, s0, σ) |= ϕ. Hereafter
we follow (Grohe, 2001) for basic notions and deﬁnitions. To encode an AC-MAS P we use a
tuple EP = ⟨U, D, s0, Φτ⟩, where U is the (ﬁnite) interpretation domain, D is the global database
schema, s0 is the initial state, and Φτ = {φα1, . . . , φαm} is a set of FO-formulas, each capturing
the transitions associated with a ground action αi. Since U is ﬁnite, so is the set of ground actions,
thus Φτ. Each ϕαi is a FO-formula over local predicate symbols, in both normal and “primed”
form, that is, φα can mention both P and P ′. For the semantics of Φτ, we have that s′ ∈τ(s, α) iff
s ⊕s′ |= φα, for s, s′ ∈D(U). It can be proved that every transition relation τ can be represented
in this way, and that, given EP, the size ||P|| .= |S| + |τ| of the corresponding AC-MAS P is at
most doubly exponential in ||EP|| .= |U| + ||D|| + |Φτ|, where ||D|| = P
Pk∈D qk, for qk the arity
of Pk. In particular, ||P|| = |S| + |τ| ≤23·2||EP ||4
.
We consider the combined complexity of the input, that is, ||EP|| + ||ϕ||. In particular, we say
that the combined complexity of model checking ﬁnite AC-MAS against FO-CTLK speciﬁcations
is EXPSPACE-complete if the problem is in EXPSPACE, i.e., there is a polynomial p(x) and an
algorithm solving the problem in space bound by 2p(||EP||+||ϕ||). We say it is EXPSPACE-hard if
every EXPSPACE problem can be reduced to model checking ﬁnite AC-MAS against FO-CTLK
speciﬁcations. We now state the following complexity result.
Theorem 5.1 The complexity of the model checking problem for ﬁnite AC-MAS against FO-CTLK
speciﬁcations is EXPSPACE-complete.
Proof. To show that the problem is in EXPSPACE, recall that ||P|| is at most doubly exponential
w.r.t. the size of the input, thus so is |S|. We describe an algorithm that works in NEXPSPACE,
which combines the algorithm for model checking the ﬁrst-order fragment of FO-CTLK and the
temporal epistemic fragment. Since NEXPSPACE = EXPSPACE, the result follows. Given an AC-
MAS P and an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, we guess an assignment σ. Given such σ, we check whether
(P, s0, σ) |= ϕ. This can be done by induction according to the structure of ϕ. If ϕ is atomic, this
check can be done in polynomial time w.r.t. the size of the state it is evaluated on, that is exponential
time w.r.t. ||EP||. If ϕ is of the form ∀xψ, then we can apply the algorithm for model checking ﬁrst-
order (non-modal) logic, which works in PSPACE. Finally, if the outmost operator in ϕ is either a
temporal or epistemic modality, then we can extend the automata-based algorithm to model check
propositional CTL in (Kupferman, Vardi, & Wolper, 2000), which works in logarithmic space in |S|.
However, we remarked above that |S| is generally doubly exponential in ||EP||. Thus, if the main
operator in ϕ is either a temporal or epistemic modality, then this step can be performed in space
singly exponential in ||EP||. All these steps can be performed in time polynomial in the size of ϕ.
As a result, the total combined complexity of model checking ﬁnite AC-MAS is in NEXPSPACE =
EXPSPACE.
To prove that the problem is EXPSPACE-hard we show a reduction from any problem in
EXPSPACE. We assume standard deﬁnitions of Turing machines and reductions (Papadimitriou,
1994). If A is a problem in EXPSPACE, then there exists a deterministic Turing machine TA =
⟨Q, Σ, q0, F, δ⟩, where Q is the ﬁnite set of states, Σ the machine alphabet, q0 ∈Q the initial state,
F the set of accepting states, and δ the transition function, that solves A using at most space 2p(|in|)
on a given input in, for some polynomial function p. As standard, we assume δ to be a relation on
(Q×Σ×Q×Σ×D), with D = {L, R}, and ⟨q, c, q′, c′, d⟩∈δ representing a transition from state
q to state q′, with characters c and c′ read and written respectively , and head direction d ((L)eft and
(R)ight). Without loss of generality, we assume that TA uses only the righthand half of the tape.
28

From TA and in, we build an encoding EP = ⟨D, U, s0, Φτ⟩of an AC-MAS P induced by a
single (environment) agent AE = ⟨DE, LE, ActE, PrE⟩deﬁned on U = Σ ∪Q ∪{0, 1}, where:
(i) DE = {P/p(|in|) + 1, Q/1, H/p(|in|), F/1}; (ii) LE = DE(U); (iii) ActE is the singleton
{αE}, with αE parameter-free; (iv) αE ∈PrE(lE) for every lE ∈D(U). Intuitively, the states
of P correspond to conﬁgurations of TA, while τ mimics δ. To deﬁne EP, we let D = DE. The
intended meaning of the predicates in D is as follows: the ﬁrst p(|in|) elements of a P-tuple encode
(in binaries) the position of a non-blank cell, and the (p(|in|) + 1)-th element contains the symbol
appearing in that cell; Q contains the current state q of TA; H contains the position of the cell the
head is currently on; F contains the ﬁnal states of TA, i.e., F = F. The initial state s0 represents the
initial conﬁguration of TA, that is, for in = in0 · · · inℓ: s(Q) = {q0}; s(H) = {⟨0, . . . , 0⟩}; and
s(P) = {⟨BIN(i), ini⟩| i ∈{0, . . . , ℓ}}, where BIN(i) stands for the binary encoding in p(|in|)
bits of the integer i. Observe that p(|in|) bits are enough to index the (at most) 2p(|in|) cells used by
TA.
As to the transition relation, we deﬁne Φτ = {φαE}, where:
φαE=
_
⟨q,c,q′,c′,d⟩∈δ
(∀xF(x) ↔F ′(x)) ∧
Q(q) ∧(∀xQ(x) →x = q) ∧Q′(q′) ∧(∀xQ′(x) →x = q′) ∧
∃⃗p(H(⃗p) ∧(∀xH(x) →x = ⃗p) ∧(P(⃗p, c) ∨(c = ✷∧¬∃xP(⃗p, x)))) ∧
∃⃗p′(d = R →SUCC(⃗p, ⃗p′)) ∧(d = L →SUCC(⃗p′, ⃗p)) ∧H′(⃗p′) ∧(∀xH′(x) →x = ⃗p′) ∧
(P ′(⃗p, c′) ↔(c′ ̸= ✷)) ∧(∀xP ′(⃗p, x) →x = c′) ∧
(∀⃗x, y(P(⃗x, y) ∧(⃗x ̸= ⃗p) →P ′(⃗x, y)) ∧(∀⃗x, yP ′(⃗x, y) →(P(⃗x, y) ∨(⃗x = ⃗p ∧y = c′))))
The symbol ✷represents the content of blank cells, while SUCC(⃗x, ⃗x′) = Vp(|in|)
i=1
(x′
i = 0∨x′
i =
1) ∧(x′
i = 1 ↔((x′
i = 0 ∧Vi−1
j=1 xj = 1) ∨(x′
i = 1 ∧¬ Vi−1
j=1 xj = 1))) is a formula capturing that
⃗x′ is the successor of ⃗x, for ⃗x and ⃗x′ interpreted as p(|in|)-bit binary encodings of integers (observe
that {0, 1} ∈U). Such a formula can obviously be written in polynomial time w.r.t. p(|in|), as well
as EP, and in particular s0 and φαE.
As it can be seen by analyzing Φτ, the obtained transition function is such that τ(s, αE) = s′ iff,
for δ(q, c) = (q′, c′, d) in TA, we have that: s′(P) is obtained from s(P) by overwriting with c′ (if
not blank) the symbol in position (p(|in|) + 1) of the tuple in s(P) beginning with the p(|in|)-tuple
s(H) (that is, c by deﬁnition of φαE); by updating s(H) according to d, that is by increasing or
decreasing the value it contains; and by setting s′(Q) = {q′}. The predicate F does not change.
Observe that cells not occurring in P are interpreted as if containing ✷and that when ✷is to be
written on a cell, the cell is simply removed from P.
It can be checked that, starting with s = s0, by iteratively generating the successor state s′
according to Φτ, i.e., s′ s.t. s ⊕s′ |= φαE, one obtains a (single) P-run that is a representation of
the computation of TA on in, where each pair of consecutive P-states corresponds to a computation
step. In particular, at each state, Q contains the current state of TA. It should be clear that ϕ =
EF(∃xQ(x) ∧F(x)) holds in P iff TA accepts in. Thus, by checking ϕ, we can check whether TA
accepts in. This completes the proof of EXPSPACE-hardness.
29

Note that the result above is given in terms of the “data structures” in the model, i.e., U and D,
and not the state space S itself. This accounts for the high complexity of model checking AC-MAS,
as the state space is doubly exponential in the size of data.
While EXPSPACE-hardness indicates intractability, we note that this is to be expected given
that we are dealing with quantiﬁed structures which are in principle prone to undecidability. Recall
also from Section 4.2 that the size of the interpretation domain U ′ of the abstraction P′ is linear
in the bound b, the number of constants in C, the size of φ, and NAg. Hence, model checking
bounded and uniform AC-MAS is EXPSPACE-complete with respect to these elements, whose size
will generally be small. Thus, we believe than in several cases of practical interest model checking
AC-MAS may be entirely feasible.
We now conclude the section with some observations on the veriﬁcation of bounded and un-
bounded systems. Observe that the results presented in Sections 3.1 and 4.2 apply to inﬁnite but
bounded AC-MAS, i.e., whose global states never exceed a certain size in any run. It is however
worth noting that existential fragments of the speciﬁcation languages considered so far need not
be examined with respect to the whole AC-MAS. Indeed in bounded model checking for CTLK
submodels are iteratively explored until a witness for an existential speciﬁcation is found (Penczek
& Lomuscio, 2003). If that happens, we can deduce that the existential speciﬁcation holds on the
full model as well. As we show below, we can extend these result to the case of inﬁnite AC-MAS.
To begin, deﬁne the b-restriction Pb of an AC-MAS P as follows.
Deﬁnition 5.2 (b-Restriction) Given an AC-MAS P = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩and b ∈N such that b ≥
|adom(s0) ∪C|, the b-restriction Pb = ⟨Sb, U, s0, τb⟩of P is such that
• Sb = {s ∈S | |adom(s)| ≤b};
• s′ ∈τb(s, α(⃗u)) iff s′ ∈τ(s, α(⃗u)) and s, s′ ∈Sb.
Notice that s0 ∈Sb by construction and τb is the restriction of τ to Sb; the interpretation domain
U is the same in P and Pb. The result below demonstrates that if a FO-ECTLK formula holds on
the b-restriction, then the formula holds on the whole AC-MAS.
Theorem 5.3 Consider an AC-MAS P and its b-restriction Pb, for b ∈N. For any formula φ in
FO-ECTLK, we have that:
Pb |= φ
⇒
P |= φ
Proof.
By induction on the construction of φ. The base case for atomic formulas and the
inductive cases for propositional connectives are trivial, as the interpretation of relation symbols for
states in Sb is the same as in S. As to the existential operators EX and EU, it sufﬁces to remark that
if r is a run in Pb satisfying either EXψ or EψUψ′, then r belongs to P as well by deﬁnition of Pb.
The cases for the epistemic modalities ¯Ki and ¯C are similar: if (Pb, s, σ) |= ¯Kiφ, then there exists
s′ ∈Sb such that s ∼i s′ and (Pb, s′, σ) |= φ. In particular, s′ ∈S and therefore (P, s, σ) |= ¯Kiφ.
For ¯Cφ the proof is similar by considering the transitive closure of the epistemic relations. Finally,
the case of quantiﬁers follows from the fact that the active domain for each state is the same in P
and Pb.
Observe that there are speciﬁcations in FO-CTLK that are not preserved from Pb to P. For
instance, consider the speciﬁcation ϕb = AG∀x1, . . . , xb+1
W
i̸=j(xi = xj) in SA-FO-CTL, which
30

expresses the fact that every state in every run contains at most b distinct elements. The formula ϕb
is clearly satisﬁed by Pb but not in P, whenever P is unbounded.
Theorem 5.3 can in principle form the basis for an incremental iterative procedure for checking
an existential speciﬁcation φ on an inﬁnite AC-MAS P. We can begin by taking a reasonable bound
b and check Pb |= φ. If that holds we can deduce P |= φ; if not we can increase the bound and
repeat. The procedure is sound but clearly not complete. As mentioned earlier, this is in spirit of
bounded model checking (Biere, Cimatti, Clarke, Strichman, & Zhu, 2003). Here, however, the
bound is on the size of the states, rather than the length of the runs.
6. Model Checking Artifact-Centric Programs
We have so far developed a formalism that can be used to specify and reason about temporal-
epistemic properties of models representing artifact-centric systems. We have identiﬁed two notable
classes that admit ﬁnite abstractions. As we remarked in the introduction, however, artifact-centric
systems are typically implemented through declarative languages such as GSM (Hull et al., 2011).
It is therefore of paramount interest to investigate the veriﬁcation problem, not just on a Kripke
semantics such as AC-MAS, but on concrete programs. As discussed, while GSM is a mainstream
declarative language for artifact-centric environments, alternative declarative approaches exist. In
what follows for the sake of generality we ground our discussion on a very wide class of declarative
languages and deﬁne the notion of artifact-centric program. Intuitively, an artifact-centric program
(or AC program) is a declarative description of a whole multi-agent system, i.e., a set of services,
that interact with the artifact system (see discussion in the Introduction). Since artifact systems are
also typically implemented declaratively (see (Heath et al., 2011)) in what follows AC programs
will be used to encode both the artifact system itself and the agents in the system. This also enables
us to import into the formalism the previously discussed features of views and windows typical in
GSM and other languages.
This section is organised as follows. Firstly, we deﬁne AC programs and give their semantics
in terms of AC-MAS. Secondly, we show that any AC-MAS that results from an AC program is
uniform. This enables us to state that, as long as the generated AC-MAS is bounded, any AC
program admits an AC-MAS as its ﬁnite model. In this context it is actually important to give
constructive procedures for the generation of the ﬁnite abstraction; we provide such a procedure
here. This enables us to state that, under the assumptions we identify, AC programs admit decidable
veriﬁcation by means of model checking their ﬁnite model.
We start by deﬁning the abstract syntax of AC programs.
Deﬁnition 6.1 (AC Program) An artifact-centric program (or AC program) is a tuple ACP =
⟨D, U, Σ⟩, where:
• D is the program’s database schema;
• U is the program’s interpretation domain;
• Σ = {Σ0, . . . , Σn} is the set of agent programs Σi = ⟨Di, li0, Ωi⟩, where:
– Di ⊆D is agent i’s database schema, s.t. Di ∩Dj = ∅, for i ̸= j;
– li0 ∈Di(U) is agent i’s initial state (as a database instance);
31

– Ωi is the set of local action descriptions in terms of preconditions and postconditions of
the form α(⃗x) .= ⟨π(⃗y), ψ(⃗z)⟩, where:
∗α(⃗x) is the action signature and ⃗x = ⃗y ∪⃗z is the set of its parameters;
∗π(⃗y) is the action precondition, i.e., an FO-formula over Di;
∗ψ(⃗z) is the action postcondition, i.e., an FO-formula over D ∪D′.
Recall that local database schemas and instances were introduced in Deﬁnition 2.6. Observe
that AC programs are deﬁned modularly by giving the agents’ programs including preconditions
and postconditions as well as those of the environment.
Notice that preconditions use relation symbols from the local database only, while postcondi-
tions can use any symbol from the whole D. This accounts for the intuition formalised in AC-MAS
as well as present in temporal-epistemic logic literature that agents’ actions may change the envi-
ronment and the state of other agents. For an action α(⃗x), we let const(α) = const(π) ∪const(ψ),
vars(α) = vars(π) ∪vars(ψ), and free(α) = ⃗x. An execution of α(⃗x) with ground parameters
⃗u ∈U |⃗x| is the ground action α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩, where ⃗v (resp. ⃗w) is obtained by replacing
each yi (resp. zi) with the value occurring in ⃗u at the same position as yi (resp. zi) in ⃗x. Such
replacements make both π(⃗v) and ψ(⃗w) ground. Finally, we deﬁne the set CACP of all constants
mentioned in ACP, i.e., CACP = Sn
i=1
 adom(Di0) ∪S
α∈Ωi const(α)

.
The semantics of a program is given in terms of the AC-MAS induced by the agents that the
program implicitly deﬁnes. Formally, this is captured by the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 6.2 (Induced Agents) Given an AC program ACP = ⟨D, U, Σ⟩, an agent induced by
ACP is a tuple Ai = ⟨Di, Li, Acti, Pri⟩on the interpretation domain U such that, for Σi =
⟨Di, li0, Ωi⟩:
• Li ⊆Di(U) is the set of the agent’s local states;
• Acti = {α(⃗x) | α(⃗x) ∈Ωi} is the set of local actions;
• The protocol Pri(li) is deﬁned by α(⃗u) ∈Pri(li) iff li |= π(⃗v) for α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩.
Note that the deﬁnition of induced agent is in line with the deﬁnition of Agents (Deﬁnition 2.6).
Agents induced as above are composed to give an AC-MAS associated with an AC program.
Deﬁnition 6.3 (Induced AC-MAS) Given an AC program ACP and the set Ag = {A0, . . . , An}
of agents induced by ACP, the AC-MAS induced by ACP is the tuple PACP = ⟨S, U, s0, τ⟩,
where:
• S ⊆L0 × · · · × Ln is the set of reachable states;
• s0 = ⟨l00, . . . , ln0⟩is the initial global state;
• U is the interpretation domain;
• τ is the global transition function deﬁned by the following condition: s′ ∈τ(s, ⟨α1(⃗u1), . . . ,
αn(⃗un)⟩), with s = ⟨l0, . . . , ln⟩and αi(⃗ui) = ⟨πi(⃗vi), ψi(⃗wi)⟩(i ∈{0, . . . , n}), iff the
following conditions are satisﬁed:
– for every i ∈{0, . . . , n}, li |= πi(⃗vi);
32

– adom(s′) ⊆adom(s) ∪S
i=0,...,n ⃗wi ∪const(ψi);
– Ds ⊕Ds′ |= ψi(⃗wi), where Ds and Ds′ are obtained from s and s′ as discussed on
p. 11.
Given an AC program, the induced AC-MAS is the Kripke model representing the whole execution
tree for the AC program and representing all the data in the system. Observe that all actions per-
formed are enabled by the respective protocols and that transitions can introduce only a bounded
number of new elements in the active domain, those bound to the action parameters. It follows
from the above that AC programs are parametric with respect to the interpretation domain, i.e., by
replacing the interpretation domain we obtain a different AC-MAS. For simplicity, we assume that
for every postcondition ψ in a program, if a predicate does not occur in the postcondition, it is left
unchanged by the relevant transitions. Formally, this means that we implicitly add a conjunct of the
form ∀⃗xP(⃗x) ↔P ′(⃗x) (∗) to the postcondition whenever P is not mentioned in ψ. Further, we
assume that every program induces an AC-MAS whose transition relation is serial, i.e., AC-MAS
states always have successors. These are basic requirements that can be easily fulﬁlled, for instance,
by assuming that each agent has a skip action with an empty precondition and a postcondition of
the form (∗) for every P ∈D. In the next section we present an example of one such program.
A signiﬁcant feature of AC programs is that they induce uniform AC-MAS.
Lemma 6.4 Every AC-MAS P induced by an AC program ACP is uniform.
Proof.
By Prop. 4.4, it is sufﬁcient to consider only the temporal transition relation →, as
adom(s0) ⊆CACP. Consider s, s′, s′′ ∈S and s′′′ ∈L0 × · · · × Ln, such that s ⊕s′ ≃s′′ ⊕s′′′
for some witness ι. Also, assume that there exists ⃗α(⃗u) = ⟨α1(⃗u1), . . . , αn(⃗un)⟩∈Act(U) such
that s′ ∈τ(s, ⃗α(⃗u)). We need to prove that for every constant-preserving bijection ι′ that extends
ι to ⃗u, we have that s′′′ ∈τ(s′′, ⃗α(ι′(⃗u))). To this end, we remark that any witness ι for s ⊕s′ ≃
s′′ ⊕s′′′ can be extended to an injective function ι′ on S
i∈Ag ⃗ui. Obviously, U contains enough
distinct elements for ι′ to exist, as every ⃗ui takes values from U. Now, by an argument analogous
to that of Proposition 2.14, it can be seen that for any FO-formula ϕ and equivalent assignments
σ and σ′, we have that (s ⊕s′, σ) |= ϕ iff (s′′ ⊕s′′′, σ′) |= ϕ. But then, this holds, in particular,
for σ′ obtained from σ by applying ι′ to the values assigned to each parameter, i.e., ι′(⃗u), and
for the pre- and postconditions of all actions involved in the transition s
α(⃗u)
−−−→s′. Thus, we have
s′′′ ∈τ(s′′, ⃗α(ι′(⃗u))), i.e., P is uniform.
We can now deﬁne what it means for an AC program to satisfy a speciﬁcation, by referring to
its induced AC-MAS.
Deﬁnition 6.5 Given an AC program ACP, a FO-CTLK formula ϕ, and an assignment σ, we say
that ACP satisﬁes ϕ under σ, written (ACP, σ) |= ϕ, iff (PACP , s0, σ) |= ϕ.
It follows that the model checking problem for an AC program against a speciﬁcation φ is deﬁned
in terms of the model checking problem for the AC-MAS PACP against φ.
The following result allows us to reduce the veriﬁcation of any AC program with an inﬁnite
interpretation domain U1, that induces a b-bounded AC-MAS, to the veriﬁcation of an AC program
over a ﬁnite U2. To show how it can be done, we let NACP = P
i∈{1,...,n} maxα(⃗x)∈Ωi{|⃗x|} be the
maximum number of different parameters that can occur in a joint action of ACP.
33

Lemma 6.6 Consider an AC program ACP1 = ⟨D, U1, Σ⟩operating on an inﬁnite interpretation
domain U1 and assume its induced AC-MAS PACP1 = ⟨S1, U1, s10, τ1⟩is b-bounded. Consider a
ﬁnite interpretation domain U2 such that CACP1 ⊆U2 and |U2| ≥2b + |CACP1| + NACP1 and the
AC program ACP2 = ⟨D, U2, Σ⟩. Then, the AC-MAS PACP2 = ⟨S2, U2, s20, τ2⟩induced by ACP2
is a ﬁnite abstraction of PACP1.
Proof. Let Ag1 and Ag2 be the set of agents induced respectively by ACP1 and ACP2, according
to Def. 6.2. First, we prove that the set of agents Ag1 and Ag2 satisfy Def. 3.7, for Ag = Ag1
and Ag′ = Ag2. To this end, observe that because ACP1 and ACP2 differ only in U, by Def. 6.2,
D = D′, L′
i ⊆D′
i(U ′), and Act′ = Act. Thus, only requirement 4 of Def. 3.7 still needs to be
proved. To see it, ﬁx i ∈{1, . . . , n} and assume that α(⃗u) ∈Pri(li). By Def. 6.2, we have that
li |= π(⃗v), for α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩. By the assumption on |U2|, since const(α) ⊆CACP1 ⊆U2,
|⃗u| ≤NACP1, and |adom(li)| ≤b, we can deﬁne an injective function ι : adom(li) ∪⃗u ∪CACP1 7→
U2 that is the identity on CACP1. Thus, for l′
i = ι(li), we can easily extract from ι a witness for
li ≃l′
i. Moreover, it can be seen that ⃗v and ⃗v′ are equivalent for π. Then, by applying Prop. 2.14 to
li and l′
i, we conclude that l′
i |= π(⃗v′), for ⃗v′ = ι(⃗v). Hence, by Def. 6.2, α(⃗u′) ∈Pr′
i(l′
i). So, we
have shown the right-to-left part of requirement 4. The left-to-right part can be shown similarly and
in a simpliﬁed way as U1 is inﬁnite.
Thus, we have proven that Ag = Ag1 and Ag′ = Ag2 are obtained as in Def. 3.7. Hence,
the assumption on Ag and Ag′ in Def. 4.10 is fulﬁlled. We prove next that also the remaining
requirements of Def. 4.10 are satisﬁed. Obviously, since Σ is the same for ACP1 and ACP2,
by Def. 6.3, s10 = s20, so the initial states of PACP1 and PACP2 are the same. It remains to
show that the requirements on τ1 and τ2 are satisﬁed. We prove the right-to-left part. To this
end, take two states s1 = ⟨l10, . . . , l1n⟩, s′
1 = ⟨l′
10, . . . , l′
1n⟩in S1 and a joint action ⃗α(⃗u) =
⟨α0(⃗u0), . . . , αn(⃗un)⟩∈Act(U) such that s′
1 ∈τ1(s1, ⃗α(⃗u)). Consider s1⊕s′
1. By the assumptions
on U2, there exists an injective function ι : adom(s1) ∪adom(s′
1) ∪⃗u ∪CACP1 7→U2 that is the
identity on CACP1 (recall that |adom(s1)|, |adom(s′
1)| ≤b). Then, for s2 = ⟨ι(l10), . . . , ι(l1n)⟩,
s′
2 = ⟨ι(l′
10), . . . , ι(l′
1n)⟩in S2, we can extract, from ι, a witness for s1 ⊕s′
1 ≃s2 ⊕s′
2. Moreover,
it can be seen that for every πi and ψi in ⃗αi(⃗xi) = ⟨πi(⃗yi), ψi(⃗zi)⟩, ⃗u and ⃗u′ = ι(⃗u) are equivalent
with respect to s1 ⊕s′
1 and s2 ⊕s′
2. Now, consider Def. 6.3 and recall that both PACP1 and PACP2
are AC-MAS induced by ACP1, ACP2, respectively. By applying Prop. 2.14, we have that, for
i ∈{0, . . . , n}: ι(l1i) |= πi(ι(⃗vi)) iff l1i |= πi(⃗vi); Ds2⊕Ds′
2 |= ψi(ι(⃗wi)) iff Ds1⊕Ds′
1 |= ψi(⃗wi).
In addition, by the deﬁnition of ι, adom(s′
1) ⊆adom(s1)∪S
i=0,...,n ⃗wi ∪const(ψi) iff adom(s′
2) ⊆
adom(s2)∪S
i=0,...,n ι(⃗wi)∪const(ψi). But then, it is the case that s′
2 ∈τ2(s′
2, ⃗α(ι(⃗u0), . . . , ι(⃗un))).
So we have proved the right-to-left part of the second requirement of Def. 4.10. The other direction
follows similarly. Therefore, PACP2 is an abstraction of PACP1.
Intuitively, Lemma 6.6 shows that the following diagram commutes, where [U1/U2] stands for
the replacement of U1 by U2 in the deﬁnition of ACP1. Observe that since U2 is ﬁnite, one can
actually apply Def. 6.3 to obtain PACP2, while this cannot be done for ACP1, as U1 is inﬁnite.
ACP1
Def. 6.3
/
[U1/U2]

PACP1
Def. 4.10

ACP2
Def. 6.3
/ PACP2
34

The following result, a direct consequence of Lemma 4.12 and Lemma 6.6, is the key conclusion
of this section.
Theorem 6.7 Consider an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, an AC program ACP1 operating on an inﬁnite
interpretation domain U1 and assume its induced AC-MAS PACP1 is b-bounded. Consider a ﬁnite
interpretation domain U2 such that CACP1 ⊆U2 and |U2| ≥2b+|CACP |+max{NACP , |vars(ϕ)|},
and the AC program ACP2 = ⟨D, U2, Σ⟩. Then we have that:
ACP1 |= ϕ
iff
ACP2 |= ϕ.
Proof. By Lemma 6.6 PACP2 is a ﬁnite abstraction of PACP1. Moreover, |U2| ≥2b + |CACP| +
max{NACP , |vars(ϕ)|} implies |U2| ≥2b+|CACP |+|vars(ϕ)|. Hence, we can apply Lemma 4.12
and the result follows.
The above is the key result in this section. It shows that if the generated AC-MAS model is
bounded, then any AC program can be veriﬁed by model checking its ﬁnite ⊕-abstraction, i.e., a
⊕-bisimilar AC-MAS deﬁned on a ﬁnite interpretation domain. Note that in this case the procedure
is entirely constructive: given an AC program ACP1 = ⟨D, U1, Σ⟩on an inﬁnite domain U1 and
an FO-CTLK formula ϕ, to check whether ACP1 satisﬁes the speciﬁcation ϕ, we ﬁrst consider the
ﬁnite “abstraction” ACP2 = ⟨D, U2, Σ⟩deﬁned on a ﬁnite domain U2 satisfying the requirement
on cardinality in Theorem 6.7. Since U2 is ﬁnite, also the induced AC-MAS PACP2 is ﬁnite, hence
we can apply standard model checking techniques to verify whether PACP2 satisﬁes ϕ. Finally, by
deﬁnition of satisfaction for AC programs and Theorem 6.7, we can transfer the result obtained to
decide the model checking problem for the original inﬁnite AC program ACP1 and ϕ.
Also observe that in the ﬁnite abstraction considered above the abstract interpretation domain
U2, depends on the number of distinct variables that the speciﬁcation ϕ contains. Thus, in principle,
to check the same AS program against a different speciﬁcation ϕ′, one should construct a new
abstraction PACP ′
2 using a different interpretation domain U ′
2, and then check ϕ′ against it. However,
it can be seen that if the number of distinct variables of ϕ′ does not exceed that of ϕ, the abstraction
PACP2, used to check ϕ, can be re-used for ϕ′. Formally, let FO-CTLKk be the set of all FO-CTLK
formulas containing at most k distinct variables. We have the following corollary to Theorem 6.7.
Corollary 6.8 If |U2| ≥2b + |CACP| + max{NACP , k}, then, for every FO-CTLKk formula ϕ,
ACP1 |= ϕ iff ACP2 |= ϕ.
This result holds in particular for k = NACP ; thus for FO-CTLKNACP formulas, we have an
abstraction procedure that is speciﬁcation-independent.
Theorem 6.7 requires the induced AC-MAS to be bounded, which may seem a difﬁcult condition
to check a priori. Note however that AC programs are declarative. As such it is straightforward to
give postconditions that enforce that no transition will generate states violating the boundedness
requirement. The scenario in the next section will exemplify this.
7. The Order-to-Cash Scenario
In this section we exemplify the methodology presented so far in the context of a business process
inspired by an IBM customer use-case (Hull et al., 2011). The order-to-cash scenario describes
the actions performed by a number of agents in an e-commerce situation relating to the purchase
35

prepared
pending
paid
shipped
createP O
submitP O
pay
shipP O
deleteP O
(a) Purchase Order lifecyle
preparation
submitted
accepted
shipped
rejected
createMO
doneMO
acceptMO
rejectMO
shipMO
deleteMO
deleteMO
(b) Material Order lifecyle
Figure 3: Lifecycles of the artifacts involved in the order-to-cash scenario.
and delivery of a product. The agents in the system consist of a manufacturer, some customers,
and some suppliers. The process begins when a customer prepares and submits a purchase order
(PO), i.e., a list of products the customer requires, to the manufacturer. Upon receiving a PO,
the manufacturer prepares a material order (MO), i.e., a list of components needed to assemble
the requested products. The manufacturer then selects a supplier and forwards him the relevant
material order. Upon receipt a supplier can either accept or reject a MO. In the former case he then
proceeds to deliver the requested components to the manufacturer. In the latter case he notiﬁes the
manufacturer of his rejection. If an MO is rejected, the manufacturer can delete it and then prepare
and submit new MOs. When the components required have been delivered to the manufacturer, he
assembles the product and, provided the order has been paid for, he delivers it to the customer. Any
order which is directly on indirectly related to a PO can be deleted only after the PO is deleted.
We can encode the order-to-cash business process as an artifact-centric program ACPotc, where
the artifact data models are represented as database schemas and its evolution is characterised by
an appropriate set of operations. It is natural to identify 2 classes of artifacts, representing the PO
and the MO, each corresponding to the respective orders by the agents. An intuitive representation
of the artifact lifecycles, i.e., the evolution of some key records in the artifacts’ states, capturing
only the dependence of actions from the artifact statuses, is shown in Fig. 3. Note that this is an
incomplete representation of the business process, as the interaction between actions and the artifact
data content is not represented.
Next, we encode the whole system as an AC program, where the artifact data models are repre-
sented as a relational database schema, and the corresponding lifecycles are formally characterised
by an appropriate set of actions. We reserve a distinguished relation for each artifact class. In
addition, we introduce static relations to store product and material information. For the sake of
presentation we assume to be dealing with three agents only: one customer c, one manufacturer m
and one supplier s. The database schema Di for each agent i ∈{c, m, s} can therefore be given as:
• Customer c: Dc = {Products(prod code, budget), PO(id, prod code, oﬀer, status)};
• Manufacturer m: Dm = {PO(id, prod code, oﬀer, status), MO(id, prod code, price, status)};
• Supplier s: Ds = {Materials(mat code, cost), MO(id, prod code, price, status)}.
The relations Products and Materials, as well as PO and MO are self-explanatory. Note the
presence of the attribute status in the relations corresponding to artifacts.
36

As interpretation domain, we consider the inﬁnite set Uotc of alphanumeric strings. Also, we
assume that in the initial state the only non-empty relations are Products and Materials, which
contain background information, such as the catalogue of available products.
Hence, the artifact-centric program ACPotc corresponding to the order-to-cash scenario can be
given formally as follows:
Deﬁnition 7.1 The artifact-centric program ACPotc is a tuple ⟨Dotc, Uotc, Σotc⟩, where:
• the program’s database schema Dotc and interpretation domain Uotc are introduced as above,
i.e., Dotc = Dc ∪Dm ∪Ds = {Products/2, PO/4, MO/4, Materials/2} and Uotc is the set
of all alphanumeric strings.
• Σ = {Σc, Σm, Σs} is the set of agent speciﬁcations for the customer c, the manufacturer m
and the supplier s. Speciﬁcally, for each i ∈{c, m, s}, Σi = ⟨Di, li0, Ωi⟩is such that:
– Di ⊆D is agent i’s database schema as detailed above, i.e., Dc = {Products/2, PO/4},
Dm = {PO/4, MO/4}, and Ds = {MO/4, Materials/2}.
– lc0, lm0, and ls0 are database instances in Dc(Uotc), Dm(Uotc), and Ds(Uotc) respec-
tively s.t. lc0(Products) and ls0(Materials) are not empty, i.e., they contain some back-
ground information, while lc0(PO), lm0(PO), lm0(MO) and ls0(MO) are empty.
– We assume that Ωc contains the actions createPO(prod code,offer), submitPO(po id),
pay(po id), deletePO(po id). Similarly, Ωm = {createMO(po id, price),
doneMO(mo id), shipPO(po id), deleteMO(mo id)} and Ωs = {acceptMO(mo id),
rejectMO(mo id), shipMO(mo id)}.
System actions capture legal operations on the underlying database and, thus, on artifacts. In
Table 1 we report some of their speciﬁcations. Variables (from V ) and constants (from U) are
distinguished by fonts v and c, respectively. From Section 6 we adopt the convention that an action
affects only those relations whose name occurs in ψ.
Consider, for instance, the action createPO performed by the customer c, whose purpose is
the creation of a PO artifact instance related to a given prod code. Its precondition requires that
the action parameter prod code refers to an actual product in the Products database; while the
postcondition guarantees that the offer value in PO is set equal to budget as well as the id of the
new PO is unique. As regards the action createMO, performed by the manufacturer m and meant to
create instances of MO artifacts, its precondition requires that po id is the identiﬁer of some existing
PO. Its postcondition states that, upon execution, the MO relation contains exactly one additional
tuple, with identiﬁer attribute set to id, with attribute status set to preparation and asking price
set to price. As an example of action triggering an artifact’s status transition, consider the action
doneMO performed also by the manufacturer m. doneMO is executable only if the MO artifact is
in status preparation; its effect is to set the status attribute to submitted. Finally, as an example
of an action triggered by a choice, consider the action acceptMO performed by the supplier s. It
is triggered only if the entries for the product code pc and the price p have matching values in the
Materials database. The action outcome is to set the status attribute to accepted.
Notice that although actions are typically conceived to manipulate artifacts of a speciﬁc class
their preconditions and postconditions may depend on artifact instances of different classes. For
example note that the action createMO manipulates MO artifacts, but its preconditions and post-
conditions may depend on artifact instances originating from different classes (e.g. createMO’s
37

Table 1: Speciﬁcation of the actions affecting the artifacts PO and MO in the order-to-cash scenario.
• createPO(prod code) = ⟨π(prod code), ψ(prod code)⟩, where:
– π(prod code) ≡∃b Products(prod code, b)
– ψ(prod code) ≡∃id, b (PO′(id, prod code, b, prepared)∧
Products(prod code, b)∧
∀id′, pc, o, s (PO(id′, pc, o, s) →id ̸= id′))
• createMO(po id, price) = ⟨π(po id, price), ψ(po id, price)⟩, where:
– π(po id, price) ≡∃pc, o (PO(po id, pc, o, prepared)
– ψ(po id, price) ≡(MO′(po id, pc, price, preparation)∧
∃oPO(po id, pc, o, prepared)∧
∀id′, pc, pr, s (MO(id′, pc, pr, s) →id ̸= id′))
• doneMO(mo id) = ⟨π(mo id), ψ(mo id)⟩, where:
– π(mo id) ≡∃pc, p MO(mo id, pc, pr, preparation)
– ψ(mo id) ≡∀w, pc, p, s
 (w ̸= mo id →(MO(w, pc, p, s) ↔MO′(w, pc, p, s)))∧
(MO(mo id, pc, p, s) →(MO′(mo id, pc, p, submitted)∧
(s ̸= submitted →¬MO′(mo id, pc, p, s))))

• acceptMO(mo id) = ⟨π(mo id), ψ(mo id)⟩, where:
– π(mo id) ≡∃mo id, pc, p MO(mo id, pc, pr, submitted) ∧Material(pc, p)
– ψ(mo id) ≡∀w, pc, p, s
 (w ̸= mo id →(MO(w, pc, p, s) ↔MO′(w, pc, p, s)))∧
(MO(mo id, pc, p, s) →(MO′(mo id, pc, p, accepted)∧
(s ̸= accepted →¬MO′(mo id, pc, p, s))))

38

precondition depends on PO artifacts). We stress that action executability depends not only on the
status attribute of an artifact, but on the data content of the whole database, i.e., of all other artifacts.
Similarly, action executions affect not only status attributes. Most importantly, by using ﬁrst-order
formulas such as φb = ∀x1, . . . , xb+1
W
i̸=j(xi = xj) in the postcondition ψ, we can guarantee that
the AC program in question is bounded and is therefore amenable to the abstraction methodology
of Section 6.
We now deﬁne the agents induced by the AC program ACPotc given above according to Deﬁ-
nition 6.2.
Deﬁnition 7.2 Given the AC program ACPotc = ⟨Dotc, Uotc, Σotc⟩, the agents Ac, Am and As
induced by ACPotc are deﬁned as follows:
• Ac = ⟨Dc, Lc, Actc, Prc⟩, where (i) Dc is as above; (ii) Lc = Dc(Uotc); (iii) Actc = Ωc =
{createPO(prod code, oﬀer), submitPO(po id), pay(po id), deletePO(po id)}; and (iv)
α(⃗u) ∈Prc(lc) iff lc |= π(⃗v) for α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩.
• Am = ⟨Dm, Lm, Actm, Prm⟩, where (i) Dm is as above; (ii) Lm = Dm(Uotc); (iii) Actm =
Ωm = {createMO(po id, price), doneMO(mo id), shipPO(po id), deleteMO(mo id)};
and (iv) α(⃗u) ∈Prm(lm) iff lm |= π(⃗v) for α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩.
• As = ⟨Ds, Ls, Acts, Prs⟩, where (i) Ds is as above; (ii) Ls = Ds(Uotc); (iii) Acts =
Ωs = {acceptMO(mo id), rejectMO(mo id), shipMO(mo id)}; and (iv) α(⃗u) ∈Prs(ls)
iff lm |= π(⃗v) for α(⃗u) = ⟨π(⃗v), ψ(⃗w)⟩.
By the deﬁnition of Am we can see that createMO(po id, price) ∈Prm(lm) if and only if the
interpretation lm(PO) of the relation PO in the local state lm contains a tuple ⟨po id, pc, o, prepared⟩
for some product pc and offer o; while doneMO(mo id) ∈Prm(lm) iff lm(MO) contains a tuple
in the interpretation lm(MO) with id mo id and status preparation. It can also be checked that,
in line with our discussion in Section 2, a full version of the function τotc given above can easily
encode the artifacts’ lifecycles as given in Figure 3.
We can now deﬁne the AC-MAS generated by the set of agents {Ac, Am, As} according to
Deﬁnition 6.3.
Deﬁnition 7.3 Given the AC program ACPotc and the set Ag = {Ac, Am, As} of agents induced
by ACPotc, the AC-MAS induced by ACPotc is the tuple Potc = ⟨Sotc, Uotc, s0
otc, τotc⟩, where:
• Sotc ⊆Lc × Lm × Ls is the set of reachable states;
• Uotc is the interpretation domain;
• s0
otc = ⟨lc0, lm0, ls0⟩is the initial global state, where the only non-empty relation are Products
and Materials;
• τotc is the global transition function deﬁned according to Def. 6.3.
As an example we give a snippet of the transition function τotc by considering the global action
α(⃗u) = ⟨createPO(pc), doneMO(m), acceptMO(m′)⟩enabled by the respective protocols in a
global state s. By the deﬁnition of the actions createPO(pc), doneMO(m), and acceptMO(m′)
39

we have that li(s) ∈Pri for i ∈{c, m, s} implies that the Products relation contains infor-
mation about the product pc.
Also, the interpretation of the relation MO contains the tuples
⟨m, p, pr, preparation⟩and ⟨m′, p′, pr′, submitted⟩for some products p and p′.
By the deﬁnition of τotc it follows that for every s′ ∈Sotc, s
α(⃗u)
−−−→s′ implies that Ds ⊕Ds′ |=
ψcreateP O(pc) ∧ψdoneMO(m) ∧ψacceptMO(m′), that is,
Ds ⊕Ds′
|=
∃id, b (PO′(id, pc, b, prepared) ∧Products(pc, b) ∧
∀id′, p, o, s (PO(id′, p, o, s) →id ̸= id′)) ∧
∀w, p, pr, s
 (w ̸= m →(MO(w, p, pr, s) ↔MO′(w, p, pr, s))) ∧
(MO(m, p, pr, s) →(MO′(m, p, pr, submitted) ∧
(s ̸= submitted →¬MO′(m, p, pr, s))))

∧
∀w, p, pr, s
 (w ̸= m′ →(MO(w, p, pr, s) ↔MO′(w, p, pr, s))) ∧
(MO(m′, p, pr, s) →(MO′(m′, p, pr, accepted) ∧
(s ̸= accepted →¬MO′(m′, p, pr, s))))

Hence, the interpretation of the relation PO in Ds′ extends Ds(PO) with the tuple ⟨id, pc, b, prepared⟩,
where id is a fresh id. The tuples for the material orders m and m′ are updated in Ds′(MO) by
becoming ⟨m, p, pr, submitted⟩and ⟨m′, p′, pr′, accepted⟩, respectively. In view of the second
condition on τotc in Deﬁnition 6.3, no other elements are changed in the transition. Finally, notice
that these extensions are indeed the interpretations of PO and MO in Ds′. Thus, the operational
semantics satisﬁes the intended meaning of actions.
We can now investigate properties of the AC program ACPotc by using speciﬁcations in FO-
CTLK. For instance, the following formula speciﬁes that the manufacturer m knows that each ma-
terial order MO has to match a corresponding purchase order PO:
ϕmatch
=
AG ∀id, pc (∃pr, s MO(id, pc, pr, s) →Km∃o, s′PO(id, pc, o, s′))
The next speciﬁcation states that given a material order MO, the customer will eventually know
that the corresponding PO will be shipped.
ϕfulﬁl
=
AG ∀id, pc (∃pr, s MO(id, pc, pr, s) →EF Kc∃o PO(id, pc, o, shipped))
Further, we may be interested in checking whether budget and costs are always kept secret from
the supplier s and the customer c respectively, and whether the customer (resp., the supplier) knows
this fact:
ϕbudget
=
Kc ∀pc AG ¬∃b Ks Products(pc, b)
ϕcost
=
Ks ∀mc AG ¬∃c Kc Materials(mc, c)
Other interesting speciﬁcations describing properties of the artifact system and the agents oper-
ating in it can be similarly formalised in FO-CTLK, thereby providing the engineer with a valuable
tool to assess the implementation.
We now proceed to exploit the methodology of Section 6 to verify the AC program ACPotp.
We use ϕmatch as an example speciﬁcation; analogous results can be obtained for other formulas.
Observe that according to Deﬁnition 6.3 the AC-MAS induced by ACPotp has inﬁnitely many
states.
40

We assume two interpretations for the relations Products and Materials, which determine an
initial state D0. Consider the maximum number max of parameters and the constants CΩin the
operations in Ωc, Ωm and Ωs. In the case under analysis we have that max = 2. We earlier remarked
that formulas such as φb in the postcondition of actions force the AC-MAS Potc corresponding to
ACPotc is bounded. Here we have that Potc is b-bounded. According to Corollary 4.14, we can
therefore consider a ﬁnite domain U ′ such that
U ′
⊇
D0 ∪CΩ∪const(ϕmatch)
D0(Products) ∪D0(Materials) ∪CΩ
and such that
|U ′|
≥
2b + |D0| + |CΩ| + |const(ϕmatch)| + max
=
2b + |D0| + |CΩ| + 2
For instance, we can consider any subset U ′ of Uotc satisfying the conditions above. Given that U ′
satisﬁes the hypothesis of Theorem 6.7, it follows that the AC program ACPotc over Uotc satisﬁes
ϕmatch if and only if ACPotc over U ′ does. But the AC-MAS induced by the latter is a ﬁnite-state
system, which can be constructively built by running the AC program ACPotc on the elements in
U ′. Thus, ACPotc |= ϕmatch is a decidable instance of model checking that can be therefore solved
by means of standard techniques.
A manual check on the ﬁnite model indeed reveals that ϕmatch, ϕbudget and ϕcost are satisﬁed
in the ﬁnite model, whereas ϕfulﬁl is not. By Corollary 4.14 the AC-MAS Potc induced by ACPotp
satisﬁes the same speciﬁcations. Hence, in view of Deﬁnition 6.5, we conclude that the artifact-
centric program ACPotp satisﬁes ϕmatch, ϕbudget and ϕcost but does not satisfy ϕfulﬁl. This is
entirely in line with our intuitions of the scenario.
8. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we put forward a methodology for verifying agent-based artifact-centric systems. We
proposed AC-MAS, a novel semantics incorporating ﬁrst-order features, that can be used to rea-
son about multi-agent systems in an artifact-centric setting. We observed that the model checking
problem for these structures against speciﬁcations given in a ﬁrst-order temporal-epistemic logic is
undecidable and proceeded to identify suitable fragments for which decidability can be retained.
We identiﬁed two orthogonal solutions to this issue. In the former we operated a restriction
to the speciﬁcation language and showed that, by limiting ourselves to sentence-atomic temporal-
epistemic speciﬁcations, inﬁnite-state, bounded AC-MAS admit ﬁnite abstractions. In the latter we
kept the full ﬁrst-order temporal-epistemic logic but identiﬁed the noteworthy subset of uniform
AC-MAS. In this setting we showed that bounded uniform AC-MAS admit ﬁnite abstractions. The
abstractions we identiﬁed in each setting depend on novel notions of bisimulation at ﬁrst-order that
we proposed.
We explored the complexity of the model checking problem in this context and showed this to
be EXPSPACE-complete. While this is obviously a hard problem, we need to consider that these
are ﬁrst-order structures which normally lead to undecidable problems. We were also reassured by
the fact that the abstract interpretation domain is actually linear in the size of the bound considered.
41

Mindful of the practical needs for veriﬁcation in artifact-centric systems, we then explored how
ﬁnite abstractions can actually be built. To this end, rather than investigating one speciﬁc data-
centric language, we deﬁned a general class of declarative artifact-centric programs. We showed
that these systems admit uniform AC-MAS as their semantics. Under the assumption of bounded
systems we showed that model checking these multi-agent system programs is decidable and gave
a constructive procedure operating on bisimilar, ﬁnite models. While the results are general, they
can be instantiated for various artifact-centric languages. For instance (Belardinelli et al., 2012b)
explores ﬁnite abstractions of GSM programs by using these results.
We exempliﬁed the methodology put forward on a use-case consisting of several agents pur-
chasing and delivering products. While the system has inﬁnitely many states we showed it admits a
ﬁnite abstraction that can be used to verify a variety of speciﬁcations on the system.
A question left open in the present paper is whether the uniform condition we provided is tight.
While we showed this to be a sufﬁcient condition, we did not explore whether this is necessary for
ﬁnite abstractions or whether more general properties can be given. In this context it is of interest
that artifact-centric programs generate uniform structures. Also, it will be worthwhile to explore
whether a notion related to uniformity can be applied to other domains in AI, for example to retain
decidability of speciﬁc calculi. This would appear to be the case as preliminary studies in the
Situation Calculus demonstrate (De Giacomo, Lesp´erance, & Patrizi, 2012).
On the application side, we are also interested in exploring ways to use the results of this paper
to build a model checker for artifact-centric MAS. Previous efforts in this area, including (Gonzalez,
Griesmayer, & Lomuscio, 2012), are limited to ﬁnite state systems. It would therefore be of great
interest to construct ﬁnite abstractions on the ﬂy to check practical e-commerce scenarios such as
the one here discussed.
