Recurrent Control Nets as Central Pattern Generators
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Vincent Liu†
Ademi Adeniji†,∗
Nathaniel Lee†,∗
Jason Zhao†,∗

Mario Srouji†

†Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
∗Equal Contribution
Abstract
Central Pattern Generators (CPGs) are biological neu-
ral circuits capable of producing coordinated rhythmic out-
puts in the absence of rhythmic input. As a result, they are
responsible for most rhythmic motion in living organisms.
This rhythmic control is broadly applicable to ﬁelds such
as locomotive robotics and medical devices. In this paper,
we explore the possibility of creating a self-sustaining CPG
network for reinforcement learning that learns rhythmic
motion more efﬁciently and across more general environ-
ments than the current multilayer perceptron (MLP) base-
line models. Recent work introduces the Structured Con-
trol Net (SCN), which maintains linear and nonlinear mod-
ules for local and global control, respectively [12]. Here,
we show that time-sequence architectures such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) model CPGs effectively. Com-
bining previous work with RNNs and SCNs, we introduce
the Recurrent Control Net (RCN), which adds a linear com-
ponent to the, RCNs match and exceed the performance of
baseline MLPs and SCNs across all environment tasks. Our
ﬁndings conﬁrm existing intuitions for RNNs on reinforce-
ment learning tasks, and demonstrate promise of SCN-like
structures in reinforcement learning.
1
Introduction
The ability to model rhythmic outputs given arrhyth-
mic inputs has signiﬁcant implications in neuroscience,
robotics, and medicine.
CPG-modeling networks are a
vastly important yet little understood region of reinforce-
ment learning. Existing baselines for locomotive tasks fail
Figure 1: Structured Control Net architecture
to provide rhythmic intuitions to reinforcement learning
agents, although its incorporation demonstrate training and
reward improvements over previous baselines [12].
In reinforcement learning, the agent makes decisions
based off a policy, which is a mapping from each state to
an action. The model, during training, learns the mapping
that will maximize reward. The standard policy network
used when modeling locomotive tasks is the multilayer per-
ceptrons [7, 9, 10]. OpenAI uses an MLP of 2 hidden lay-
ers and 64 hidden units as its baseline model (MLP-64).
This simple neural network learns to model tasks of moder-
ate complexity, but fail to generate rhythmic output without
rhythmic input [12].
Instead, recent papers propose architectures which split
the policy network into linear and nonlinear components
[5, 12]. [12] introduces the Structured Control Net, which
performs better than the standard MLP across many envi-
ronments. The SCN architecture is comprised of a linear
module for local control and a nonlinear module for global
control (in [12], an MLP-16), the outputs of which sum to
produce the policy action. We use this baseline (SCN-16)
for our benchmarks.
There exists literature that explores the possibility of ap-
arXiv:1901.01994v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2019

plying Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to the central
pattern generation task [15, 16]. RNNs maintain a hidden
state that is updated at each timestep, which allows RNNs
to produce context-informed predictions based on previous
inputs from past sequences [6]. The simplest (vanilla) RNN
allows inputs and previous hidden states to ﬂow between
time-states freely and can provide more context to the ac-
tion policy at the current timestep. The RNN itself has many
limitations, including loss of information to long time se-
quences, vanishing and exploding gradients, and complex-
ity of paralleliztion. [6]. We also explore the efﬁcacy of
variations to the vanilla RNN intended to mitigate these
shortcomings including Long Short-Term Memory RNNs
[3, 8] and Gated Recurrent Units [17] and provide results
on the detrimental effect of RNN complexity on our RL en-
vironments.
In this paper, we combine the intuition behind SCNs and
RNNs.
We adopt the separation of linear and nonlinear
modules, which has been shown to improve performance
by learning local and global interactions with RNNs as our
nonlinearity. We experimentally demonstrate that this ar-
chitecture brings together the beneﬁts of both linear, non-
linear, and recurrent policies by improving training sam-
pling efﬁciency, ﬁnal episodic reward, and generalization of
learned policy, while learning to generate actions based on
prior observations. We further validate our architecture with
competitive results on simulations from OpenAI MuJoCo,
trained with the Evolutionary Strategies [9, 13, 4] optimiza-
tion algorithm.
2
Related Work
MLPs have previously been used to attempt RL model-
ing of rhythmic control tasks. The intuition is that the non-
linear fully-connected architecture is an effective function
approximation. Although MLPs are able to generate high
episodic rewards on many OpenAI tasks, they converge to
locomotive behaviors that are jerky and unintiutive to mo-
tion.
2.1
Structured Control Nets
[12] provides evidence that locomotion speciﬁc struc-
tures than general purpose MLPs can provide motion in-
tuitions to RL environments. Brielfy, the SCN architecture
is to separately learn local and global control. These are
speciﬁc to locomotion tasks: the agent needs to learn global
interactions and general patterns of movements speciﬁc to
a task. [12] demonstrates improvements only using a MLP
nonlinear module. These SCN results follow network in-
tuitions, that since locomotive actions are also heavily de-
pendent on immediate prior actions learning local interac-
tions gives local context necessary to generate subsequent
actions. Still, the SCN learns cyclic actions very weakly,
Figure 2: Recurrent Neural Network architecture
as it produces outputs from current observations only. The
Recurrent Control Net instead provides deeper context from
previous states that better provides context for these loco-
motive RL policies, allowing the possibility of cyclic policy
functions.
2.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
RNNs model time-sequences well by maintaining a hid-
den state as a function of priors [6].
Previously, RNNs
have been intensively used in natural language processing
because sequence prediction is best modeled by including
previous context.
Therefore, to leverage the added con-
text, RNNs has also been explored loosely in reinforcement
learning for quadruped environments.
However, RNNs
have not been generalized to general locomotive tasks and
still remain relatively speciﬁc to these quadruped based lo-
comotion tasks [16, 15]. Instead of RNNs as policy net-
works, inclusion of linear-global dynamics by adopting
simple RNN as a nonlinearity in SCNs have the potential to
exceed existing SCN/MLP Baselines (See Appendix for a
comprehensive description of effective RNN architectures).
3
Experimental Setup
To work with locomotive tasks, we use OpenAI Gym
[2], a physics environment for reinforcement learning, and
run our models on Multi-Joint dynamics with Contact (Mu-
JoCo) tasks [14]. The Gym environment effectively serves
as a wrapper to the MuJoCo tasks.
At each timestep, the Gym environment returns an ob-
servation, which encodes the agent’s state (i.e. joint angles,
joint velocities, environment state). The policy takes this
observation as input and effects an action back into the en-
vironment. In cyclic fashion, the environment returns to the
policy the action reward and subsequent observation. Over
many episodes and timesteps, the policy learns how to tra-
verse the environment by maximizing the rewards of its ac-
tions.
4
Recurrent Control Net
We utilize the ﬁndings from [12] of separate linear and
nonlinear modules and design our Recurrent Control Net
2

Figure 3: Episodic rewards for MuJoCo environments on baselines MLP-64, SCN-16, RNN-32, and RCN-32 using ES
optimization. Average of 5 median trials from 10 total trials.
Figure 4: Episodic rewards on MuJoCo environments with
RCN-32, with and without bias vectors using ES optimiza-
tion. Average of 5 median trials from 10 total trials.
(RCN) in a similar fashion. The linear module is identical
to that of the SCN [12], but the nonlinear module is a stan-
dard vanilla RNN with hidden size 32. Intuitively, the linear
module provides local control while the nonlinear module
provides global control. However, unlike the MLP used in
SCN-16 [12], the RNN learns global control with access to
prior information. We use this architecture (RCN-32) as our
baseline in experiments.
In our experiments, we compare the RCN-32 to a vanilla
RNN of hidden size 32 (RNN-32) to test the efﬁcacy of the
extra linear module. To reduce the number of trainable pa-
rameters for ES, we remove all bias vectors in all models.
5
Evaluation
We use OpenAI’s MLP-64 model and the SCN-16 out-
lined in [12] as the baseline for comparison. We evaluate
a model’s efﬁcacy by its ﬁnal reward after 10M timesteps,
not by the training curve (rate of convergence). Across all
MuJoCo environments, we ﬁnd that the RNN-32 matches or
exceeds both baselines (see Figure 3). We also notice that
the RCN-32 consistently improves upon the RNN-32.
Figure 5: Episodic rewards on MuJoCo environments with
RNN-32, GRU-32, and LSTM-32 using ES optimization.
Average of 5 median trials from 10 total trials.
From our experimentation with various recurrent struc-
tures, we can make several interesting observations. The re-
current structure seems to be inherently conducive to mod-
eling locomotive tasks because its hidden state explicitly
encodes past observations, whereas a multilayer perceptron
does so implicitly. We also ﬁnd that the increase in model
complexity past a certain threshold is detrimental to ES’s
randomized training process. Additionally, explicit model-
ing of linear and global interactions with linear and nonlin-
ear modules consistently improves model performance.
5.1
Gated Information Flow
In all our trials with ES optimization, we notice that re-
current architectures with gated information ﬂow (GRUs,
LSTMs) struggle in training. We believe that since ES is
a random optimizer, it struggles to optimize models with
more parameters (see Figure 5). A more complex model
introduces more local optima, which may cause ES to con-
verge earlier.
Additionally, since MuJoCo tasks are rel-
atively simple and low-dimensional, enhanced memory is
unnecessary and learning gates in training only burdens the
model.
3

The ES algorithm is inherently hampered by its gradient-
free approach.
Because it updates weights with random
noise, even slightly more complex models suffer in train-
ing. However, with simple architectures, we see early con-
vergence in episodic reward (compared to the same models
trained with different algorithms). As is such, we antic-
ipate that GRUs and LSTMs may achieve higher rewards
with an optimization algorithm like PPO (Proximal Policy
Optimization, a gradient based optimizer that updates pa-
rameters through gradient ascent [11]).
5.2
Linear Control
We notice that the RCN-32 consistently outperforms the
RNN-32. This ﬁnding is consistent with the proposal in
[12], which shows the efﬁcacy of introducing a linear com-
ponent in addition to the nonlinear component (see Fig-
ure 3). Intuitively, the linear module learns local interac-
tions while the nonlinear module learns global interactions.
As the RNN is a nonlinear network with a layer activa-
tion after the hidden state update, the addition of the lin-
ear module to the architecture allows it to learn local and
global interactions. While the increase in performance is
marginal at times, the SCN-16 improves the MLP-64 by
similar amounts.
5.3
Incorporating Biases
We also experiment with adding biases into the RCN.
Doing so immediately decreases performance across all
tasks, even dropping performance to below those of the
baselines (see Figure 4). We believe that this is because the
inclusion of biases burdens the optimizer in training without
providing any real value to what the model learns.
6
Conclusion
We conclude that RNNs model locomotive tasks well.
Furthermore, we also conclude that the separation of lin-
ear and nonlinear control modules improves performance.
The RCN thus learns local and global control while learning
patterns from prior sequences. We also note the detriment
of increasing model complexity with information gates,
though this is probably due to MuJoCo task simplicity and
the ES training algorithm. Because ES updates weights ran-
domly, additional gates create more local optima that ES
struggles to overcome.
As we only train with the ES algorithm, it would be in-
teresting to explore the performance of RCNs with an al-
gorithm such as Proximal Policy Gradient. Additionally,
recent practices in natural language processing stray away
replace recurrent layers and with convolutional layers [1].
It would be interesting to see if convolution could replace
the RNN module. We hope that this opens up further inves-
tigation into the usage of RCNs in these tasks.
7
Appendix: Recurrent Architectures
For more context, this section will cover in depth the ar-
chitectures of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Gated
Recurrent Units (GRUs) and Long Short-Term Memories
(LSTMs).
7.1
Recurrent Neural Network
The vanilla RNN maintains an internal hidden state to
compute future actions, which serves as a memory of past
observations. This simple architecture allows all inputs and
hidden states to ﬂow freely between timesteps. Standard
RNN update equations are below1.
h(t) = tanh(Whh(t−1) + Wxx(t) + bh)
o(t) = Woh(t) + bo
7.2
Gated Recurrent Unit
A GRU improves upon the vanilla RNN by learning to
retain context for the next action by controlling how much
of the inputs and previous hidden state to allow between
timesteps [17]. GRUs have a reset gate r after the previous
activation to forget part of the previous state and an update
gate u decides how much of the next activation to use for
updating1.
u(t) = σ(Wu,xx(t) + Wu,hh(t−1) + bu)
r(t) = σ(Wr,xx(t) + Wr,hh(t−1) + br)
h(t) = u(t) ◦h(t−1) + (⃗1 −u(t))
◦tanh(Wh,xx(t) + Wh,hh(t−1) + bh)
o(t) = Wo,hh(t) + bo
7.3
Long Short-Term Memory
An LSTM learns a ”memory” of important locomotion
context via input, forget, and output gates [3, 8]. The input
gate i regulates how much of the new cell state to keep, the
forget gate f regulates how much of the existing memory to
forget, and the output gate o regulates how much of the cell
state should be exposed to the next layers of the network2.
f (t) = σ(Wf,xx(t) + Wf,hh(t−1) + bf)
i(t) = σ(Wi,xx(t) + Wi,hh(t−1) + bi)
o(t) = σ(Wo,xx(t) + Wo,hh(t−1) + bo)
c(t) = f (t) ◦c(t−1) + i(t)
◦tanh(Wc,xx(t) + Wc,hh(t−1) + bc)
h(t) = o(t) ◦σ(c(t))
1h(t), o(t), x(t) denote the hidden state, output (action), and input
(observation) vectors, respectively, at timestep t.
2h(t), c(t), and x(t) denote the hidden state, cell state, and input (ob-
servation) vectors, respectively, at timestep t. The output is produced with
a linear mapping of h(t) to the output (action) vector.
4

8
