INCREMENTAL FASTPITCH: CHUNK-BASED HIGH QUALITY TEXT TO SPEECH
Muyang Du1, Chuan Liu1, Junjie Lai1
1NVIDIA Corporation
ABSTRACT
Parallel text-to-speech models have been widely applied for
real-time speech synthesis, and they offer more controllabil-
ity and a much faster synthesis process compared with con-
ventional auto-regressive models. Although parallel models
have benefits in many aspects, they become naturally unfit for
incremental synthesis due to their fully parallel architecture
such as transformer. In this work, we propose Incremental
FastPitch, a novel FastPitch variant capable of incrementally
producing high-quality Mel chunks by improving the archi-
tecture with chunk-based FFT blocks, training with receptive-
field constrained chunk attention masks, and inference with
fixed size past model states. Experimental results show that
our proposal can produce speech quality comparable to the
parallel FastPitch, with a significant lower latency that allows
even lower response time for real-time speech applications.
Index Terms— text-to-speech, speech synthesis, real-
time, low-latency, streaming tts
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Text-to-Speech (TTS) technology has wit-
nessed remarkable advancements, enabling the generation of
natural and expressive speech from text inputs. Neural TTS
system primarily contains an acoustic model and a vocoder.
It involves first converting the texts to Mel-spectrogram
by acoustic models such as Tacotron 2[1], FastSpeech[2],
FastPitch[3], GlowTTS[4], then converting the Mel feature to
waveform by vocoders such as WaveNet[5], WaveRNN[6, 7],
WaveGlow[8], and HiF-GAN[9]. Moreover, with the boost
of real-time and streaming applications, there is an increasing
demand for TTS systems capable of producing speech in-
crementally, also known as streaming TTS, to provide lower
response latency for better user experience.
For example,
Samsung[10] proposed a low-latency streaming TTS sys-
tem running on CPUs based on Tacotron 2 and LPCNet[11].
NVIDIA[12] also proposed a highly efficient streaming TTS
pipeline running on GPUs based on BERT[13], Tacotron 2
and HiFi-GAN. Both of them uses auto-regressive acoustic
model for incremental Mel generation.
Auto-regressive acoustic models such as Tacotron 2 is
capable of producing natural speech by leveraging sequen-
tial generation to capture prosody and contextual depen-
Fig. 1: Incremental FastPitch, Chunk-based FFT Block, and
Chunk Mask for Receptive-Filed Constrained Training
dencies.
However, it suffers from slow inference due to
the frame-by-frame generation process and susceptibility
to over-generation and word-repeating artifacts due to un-
stable alignment learned between the input phonemes and
output frames. In contrast, parallel acoustic models like such
as FastPitch offers a faster inference process by producing
complete Mel-spectrogram in one step. Additionally, it also
shows benefits in providing the flexibility to manipulate pitch,
duration, and speed of the synthetic speech as those metadata
are pre-generated before decoding.
Although parallel acoustic models offer many advan-
tages, their model structure poses challenges for their use in
incremental speech synthesis. For instance, FastPitch utilizes
a transformer[14] decoder, wherein attention is computed
across the entire encoded feature sequence to generate the
Mel-spectrogram output. A straightforward method is to slice
the encoded feature sequence into chunks and then decode
each chunk into a corresponding Mel chunk. However, this
approach compels the decoder to focus only on a chunk, re-
arXiv:2401.01755v1  [cs.SD]  3 Jan 2024

sulting in audible discontinuity at the edges of Mel chunks,
even when overlapping between chunks is used. An alterna-
tive approach is to modify the model to use an auto-regressive
decoder. However, this fails back to frame-by-frame genera-
tion, sacrificing the parallelism advantage. Therefore, an ideal
decoder for incremental TTS should be able to incrementally
generate Mel chunks while maintaining parallelism during
the chunk generation process and keeping the computational
complexity of each chunk consistent in the meantime.
Based on the above considerations, we present Incremen-
tal FastPitch, capable of producing high-quality Mel chunks
while maintaining chunk generation parallelism and provid-
ing low response latency. We incorporate chunk-based FFT
blocks with fixed-size attention state caching, which is cru-
cial for transformer-based incremental TTS to avoid the com-
putational complexity increases with synthetic length.
We
also utilize receptive-filed constrained training and investigate
both the static and dynamic chunk masks, which is vital to
align the model with limited receptive-filed inference.
2. METHOD
2.1. Incremental FastPitch
Figure 1A depicts the proposed Incremental FastPitch model,
a variant of the parallel FastPitch.
It takes a complete
phoneme sequence as input and generates Mel-spectrogram
incrementally, chunk-by-chunk, with each chunk contains
a fixed number of Mel frames.
Incremental FastPitch is
equipped with the same encoder, energy predictor, pitch pre-
dictor, and duration predictor as the parallel FastPitch. How-
ever, the decoder of Incremental FastPitch is composed of a
stack of chunk-based FFT blocks. In contrast to the decoder
of parallel FastPitch that takes the entire upsampled unified
feature ¯u as input and generate the entire Mel-spectrogram at
once, The decoder of Incremental FastPitch first divide the ¯u
to N chunks [¯u1, ¯u2, ..., ¯uN], then convert one chunk ¯ui at a
time to a chunk of Mel ¯yi. During training, we apply a chunk-
based attention mask on the decoder to help it adjust to the
constrained receptive field in incremental inference, which
we term it as the Receptive Field-Constrained Training.
2.2. Chunk-based FFT Block
Figure 1B illustrates the chunk-based FFT block, which con-
tains a stack of a multi-head attention (MHA) block and a
position-wise causal convolutional feed forward block. Com-
pare with parallel FastPitch, the MHA block in the chunk-
based FFT block requires two additional inputs: past key and
past value, produced by itself during previous chunk gener-
ation. Instead of utilizing all the accumulated historical past
keys and values from prior chunks, we employ fixed-size past
key and value for inference by retaining only their tails. The
past size maintains consistent throughout incremental genera-
tion, preventing an increase in computational complexity with
the number of chunks. Although we impose an explicit past
size limit, experiments shows that it is capable of encoding
sufficient historical information for generating high-quality
Mel. The calculation of MHA is defined as:
kt
i = concat(pkt−1
i
, KW K
i )
vt
i = concat(pvt−1
i
, V W V
i )
ot
i = attention(kt
i, vt, QW Q
i )
ot
M = concat(ot
1, ..., ot
h)W O
pkt
i = tail slice(kt
i, Sp)
pvt
i = tail slice(vt
i, Sp)
(1)
where pkt−1
i
and pvt−1
i
are the past K and past V of head
i from chunk t−1. kt
i and vt
i are the embedded K and V with
the past concatenated along the time dimension for attention
computation of head i at chunk t. ot
M is the output of MHA
block at chunk t. W K
i , W V
i , W Q
i , and W O are the trainable
weights. Sp is the configurable fixed size of the past. pkt
i and
pvt
i are obtained by slicing size Sp from the tail of kt
i and vt
i
along the time dimension.
Similarly, the calculation of position-wise causal convo-
lution feed forward block is defined as:
ct
1 = concat(pct−1
1
, ot
M)
ot
c1 = relu(causal conv(ct
1))
ct
2 = concat(pct−1
2
, ot
c1)
ot
c2 = relu(causal conv(ct
2))
pct
1 = tail slice(ct
1, Sc1)
pct
2 = tail slice(ct
2, Sc2)
(2)
where pct−1
1
and pct−1
2
are the past states of the two causal
convolutional layers. Starting with pct−1
1
, it’s concatenated
with ot
M to yield ct
1, serving as input for the first causal conv
layer. Next, ot
c1, the output from the first causal conv layer,
is concatenated with pct−1
2
to generate ct
2. This is then input
to the second causal conv layer, resulting in the final output
ot
c2. Lastly, pct
1 and pct
2 are extracted by slicing sizes Sc1 and
Sc2 from the tail of ct
1 and pct
2 along the time dimension, re-
spectively. Unlike the configurable Sp, we set Sc1 and Sc2 to
their respective conv kernel sizes minus 1, which is adequate
to attain equivalence with parallel inference.
2.3. Decoder Receptive Field Analysis
Figure 2 demonstrates the receptive filed of the proposed
chunk-based decoder. For better visualization, we omit the
positional-wise convolutional feed-forward blocks. The or-
ange block at the top-right corner represents the final FFT
output Ot of chunk t. The dark green MHA blocks are those
whose multi-head attention, past key, and past value outputs
contribute to Ot.
The light green MHA blocks are those

MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
t
t-1
t-2
t-3
t-4
t-5
t-6
1
2
3
4
5
6
layers
chunks
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
MHA
Fig. 2: Chunk-based decoder receptive field visualization.
whose past key and past value outputs contribute to Ot. Sim-
ilarly, the blue blocks (past keys and past values) and the
yellow blocks (inputs of green MHA blocks) are those who
contribute to Ot. By feeding the fixed size past key and past
value of chunk t −1 to each MHA block during chunk t
generation, we can expand the receptive field of chunk t to
several of its previous chunks without the need to explicitly
feed those previous chunks as decoder input.
The receptive field R depends on the number of decoder
layers and the size of past keys and past values, as given by:
R = (Nd + ⌊Sp/Sc⌋+ 1) · Sc
(3)
where Nd is the number of decoder layers, Sp is the size
of past keys and past values, and Sc is the size of the chunk.
The unit of R is the number of decoder frames. If Sp is less
than or equal to Sc, then the past key and past value output by
a MHA block only depends on the input of that MHA block,
thus R simply equals to (Nd+1)·Sc, same as shown in figure
2, whereas if Sp is greater than Sc, then the past key and past
value of a MHA block at chunk t will also depends on the
past keys and values of that MHA block at previous chunks,
resulting in R grows linearly with the floor of Sp/Sc.
2.4. Receptive Field-Constrained Training
Given a limited decoder receptive field during inference, it
becomes vital to align the decoder with this constraint during
training. Therefore, we use the Receptive Field-Constrained
Training by applying chunk-based attention mask to all the
decoder layers. Figure 1C visualizes various attention masks
with a given chunk size (dark grey) and different past sizes
(light grey). An intuitive approach is to randomly select a
chunk size and past size for dynamic mask creation for each
text-audio training data pair within a batch. This approach is
similar to the masks used in the WeNet[15, 16] ASR encoder.
The dynamic mask can help the decoder generalize to diverse
chunk and past sizes. However, most of the incremental sys-
tem TTS employs a fixed chunk size for inference. Using a
dynamic mask for training may potentially introduce a gap
between training and inference. Therefore, we also investi-
gate training with static masks that constructed using a fixed
chunk size and past size during the training process.
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Experimental Setup
Dataset. The Chinese Standard Mandarin Speech Corpus[17]
released by DataBaker is used for both training and evalua-
tion. It contains 10,000 48kHz 16bit audio clips of a single
Mandarin female speaker and has a total of 12 hours with
each audio clip contains a short sentence of 4.27 seconds on
average. In our experiments, we downsample the corpus to
22.05kHz and 100 audio clips are reserved for evaluation.
Model & Acoustic Specifications. The proposed model pa-
rameters follow the open-source FastPitch implementation[18],
except that we use causal convolution in the position-wise
feed forward layers.
The decoder is used to predict Mel-
spectrogram with 80 frequency bins. It is generated through
an FFT size of 1024, a hop length of 256 and a window
length of 1024, applied to the normalized waveform. To en-
hance convergence speed and stability, the Mel values are
standardized within a symmetrical range from -4 to 4.
Training & Evaluation. Our models are trained using the
Adam optimizer[19] with batch size 8, initializing with a
learning rate of 1e-4 and a weight decay of 1e-6. The ex-
periments are performed on an NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPU,
utilizing single precision and applying gradient clipping[20].
We use Mel-spectrogram distance (MSD) and mean opin-
ion score (MOS) to measure the speech quality. To ensure
the Mel-spectrograms of two audios are properly aligned for
MSD calculation, we first use a trained parallel FastPitch to
produce unified duration, pitch, and energy values for evalua-
tion texts, then use these values to process the output feature
of Incremental FastPitch encoder. Regarding the MOS, we
synthesize waveform for evaluation with HiFi-GAN trained
using the same dataset as FastPitch.
Since we focus on
optimizing acoustic model for incremental TTS, the vocod-
ing process is non-incremental. For Incremental FastPitch,
we concatenate all the Mel chunks to the complete Mel for
vocoding. The MOS scores are collected through the assess-
ment of 20 evaluation samples for each configuration by 10
Amazon MTurk listeners, who assign scores ranging from 1
to 5. For audio samples, please refer to GitHub page1.
3.2. Discussion
3.2.1. Comparison of Static and Dynamic Chunk Masks
Figure 3 shows the Mel-spectrogram distance between the In-
cremental FastPitch and the parallel FastPitch. During infer-
ence, we use a fixed chunk size 30 for all the models. In the
sub-figure A, the models are train with static chunk masks.
The chunk sizes are fixed to 30 and past sizes are set to 0, 5,
15, 30, 60, 90, and all. We can observe that the smallest MSD
of each model is often achieved when we use the same (or
similar) chunk size and past size for training and inference.
1https://muyangdu.github.io/incremental-fastpitch

30, All
30, 90
30, 60
30, 30
30, 15
30, 5
1-50, All
1-50, 3x
1-50, 2x
1-50, 1x
1-50, 0.5x 1-50, 0.25x
30, 5
30, 15
30, 30
30, 60
30, 90
Chunk Size, Past Size (Inference) :
Static Chunk Size, Static Past Size (Training)
Dynamic Chunk Size, Dynamic Past Size (Training)
0.090
0.085
0.080
0.075
0.070
0.065
0.060
0.055
0.090
0.085
0.080
0.075
0.070
0.065
0.060
0.055
B
A
Fig. 3: MSD between the parallel FastPitch and the Incre-
mental FastPitch trained with different types of masks, then
inference with different chunk and past sizes. Each bar in the
figure represents a specific (chunk size, past size) for infer-
ence. The horizontal axis describes the (chunk size, past size)
used for training. A. Static Mask. B. Dynamic Mask.
The smallest MSD is achieved with past size 5 (red marked).
Specifically, we find that if the model is trained with a small
past size such as 5, it has a high MSD when inference with
a big past size such as 90. On the contrary, if the model is
trained with a big past size, it has a more stable MSD when
inference with small past sizes. This observation suggests that
even if the model is trained with a larger past context, it still
learns to generate Mel chunk condition on nearby past con-
texts, rather than those far from the current chunk.
In the sub-figure B, the models are trained with dynamic
chunk masks. The chunk sizes are randomly selected from
range 1 to 50, and the past sizes are set to 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1,
2, 3 times of the selected chunk size and all. We observe
that the MSD are more stable and similar if the inference past
size changes, compared with static mask. The smallest MSD
is achieved when we use 2 times of the randomly selected
chunk size as the past size. However, the MSD of the dynamic
chunk mask models are generally higher than the static chunk
mask models. This observation confirms our suspicion raised
in subsection 2.4 that dynamic mask training can introduce
a training inference mismatch. Based on the above analysis,
it is suggested to use a static mask for the best quality if the
inference chunk and past sizes can be known in advance.
3.2.2. Visualized Ablation Study
We perform visualized ablation study to investigate the ne-
cessity of using past key value and past conv state. Figure
4 shows the synthetic Mel-spectrograms of parallel FastPitch
and Incremental FastPitch. We can observe that the Incre-
mental FastPitch can generate Mel with almost no observable
difference compared with parallel FastPitch. However, if ei-
ther the past key value or the conv state is removed, apparent
discontinuation can be found between adjacent Mel chunks.
FastPitch
Fully Parallel
A
Incremental FastPitch
wo past conv states
C
Incremental FastPitch 
w past conv states, key_values
B
Incremental FastPitch
wo past key_values
D
Fig. 4: Mel-spectrogram Visualization.
3.2.3. Evaluation of Speech Quality and Performance
To study the audible speech quality of both the static (S) and
dynamic (D) mask trained Incremental FastPitch, we perform
listening tests on the best S and D models selected based on
the MSD analysis (marked as red in figure 3).
As shown
in table 1, we find that Incremental FastPitch is capable of
producing high quality speech comparable with the parallel
FastPitch. Furthermore, the score of D model is only slightly
lower than the S model, although the D model has a 8.3%
higher MSD compared with the S model. This result shows
that the audible difference of the S and D model is barely no-
ticeable, especially with the compensation of vocoder.
Table 1: Mean opinion score (MOS) with 95% CI, real time
factor (RTF), and latency (ms) comparison on evaluation set.
Model
MOS
Latency
RTF
Par. FastPitch
4.185 ± 0.043
125.77
0.029
Inc. FastPitch (S)
4.178 ± 0.047
30.35
0.045
Inc. FastPitch (D)
4.145 ± 0.052
Ground Truth
4.545 ± 0.039
-
-
Table 1 also displays RTF and latency. For Incremental
FastPitch, RTF is defined as dividing the last chunk’s latency
by the audio duration, and latency corresponds to the first
chunk’s latency. The S and D model shares the same infer-
ence process. We find that Incremental FastPitch has a higher
RTF but is still able to achieve around 22× real-time as it
maintains the parallelism of chunk generation. Notably, it has
a significantly lower latency compared to parallel FastPitch.
4. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we propose Incremental FastPitch, capable of
incrementally generating high-quality Mel chunks with low
latency while maintaining chunk generation parallelism and
consistent computation complexity. We improve the decoder
with chunk-based FFT blocks that use fixed size state caching
to maintain Mel continuity across chunks. We further experi-
ment with multiple masking configurations of receptive-filed
constrained training for adapting model to limited receptive
filed inference. Experiments show that our proposal can pro-
duce speech quality comparable to the parallel baseline, with
a significant lower latency that allows even lower response
time for real-time speech synthesis.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike
Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng
Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, et al.,
“Natural tts synthesis by conditioning wavenet on mel
spectrogram predictions,” in 2018 IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, 2018, pp. 4779–4783.
[2] Yi Ren, Yangjun Ruan, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao,
Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu, “Fastspeech: Fast, robust
and controllable text to speech,”
Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[3] Adrian La´ncucki,
“Fastpitch: Parallel text-to-speech
with pitch prediction,” in ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2021, pp. 6588–6592.
[4] Jaehyeon Kim, Sungwon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Sun-
groh Yoon, “Glow-tts: A generative flow for text-to-
speech via monotonic alignment search,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp.
8067–8077, 2020.
[5] A van den Oord, S Dieleman, H Zen, K Simonyan,
O Vinyals, A Graves, N Kalchbrenner, AW Senior, and
K Kavukcuoglu, “Wavenet: A generative model for raw
audio, corr, vol. abs/1609.03499,” 2017.
[6] Nal Kalchbrenner, Erich Elsen, Karen Simonyan, Seb
Noury, Norman Casagrande, Edward Lockhart, Florian
Stimberg, Aaron Oord, Sander Dieleman, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu, “Efficient neural audio synthesis,” in In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
2018, pp. 2410–2419.
[7] Muyang Du, Chuan Liu, Jiaxing Qi, and Junjie Lai, “Im-
proving WaveRNN with Heuristic Dynamic Blending
for Fast and High-Quality GPU Vocoding,” in Proc. IN-
TERSPEECH 2023, 2023, pp. 4344–4348.
[8] Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro,
“Waveglow:
A flow-based generative network for
speech synthesis,” in ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2019, pp. 3617–3621.
[9] Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae, “Hifi-
gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and
high fidelity speech synthesis,”
Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 17022–
17033, 2020.
[10] Nikolaos Ellinas, Georgios Vamvoukakis, Konstantinos
Markopoulos, Aimilios Chalamandaris, Georgia Ma-
niati, Panos Kakoulidis, Spyros Raptis, June Sig Sung,
Hyoungmin Park, and Pirros Tsiakoulis, “High quality
streaming speech synthesis with low, sentence-length-
independent latency,” pp. 2022–2026, ISCA.
[11] Jean-Marc Valin and Jan Skoglund, “Lpcnet: Improv-
ing neural speech synthesis through linear prediction,”
in ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 5891–5895.
[12] Muyang Du, Chuan Liu, Jiaxing Qi, and Junjie Lai, “Ef-
ficient incremental text-to-speech on gpus,”
in 2023
Asia Pacific Signal and Information Processing Asso-
ciation Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1422–1428.
[13] Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina
Toutanova,
“Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding,” in Proceed-
ings of naacL-HLT, 2019, vol. 1, p. 2.
[14] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, vol.
30, 2017.
[15] Zhuoyuan Yao, Di Wu, Xiong Wang, Binbin Zhang, Fan
Yu, Chao Yang, Zhendong Peng, Xiaoyu Chen, Lei Xie,
and Xin Lei,
“WeNet: Production Oriented Stream-
ing and Non-Streaming End-to-End Speech Recognition
Toolkit,” in Proc. Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp. 4054–
4058.
[16] Binbin Zhang, Di Wu, Zhendong Peng, Xingchen Song,
Zhuoyuan Yao, Hang Lv, Lei Xie, Chao Yang, Fuping
Pan, and Jianwei Niu, “WeNet 2.0: More Productive
End-to-End Speech Recognition Toolkit,” in Proc. In-
terspeech 2022, 2022, pp. 1661–1665.
[17] Databaker,
“Chinese standard mandarin speech cor-
pus,”
https://www.data-baker.com/open_
source.html, 2023, Accessed: September 3, 2023.
[18] NVIDIA,
“Fastpitch,” https://github.com/
NVIDIA/DeepLearningExamples/tree/
master/PyTorch/SpeechSynthesis/
FastPitch, 2023, Accessed: September 3, 2023.
[19] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization,” in 3rd International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San
Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Pro-
ceedings, Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, Eds., 2015.
[20] Xiangyi Chen, Steven Z Wu, and Mingyi Hong, “Under-
standing gradient clipping in private sgd: A geometric
perspective,” Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 13773–13782, 2020.
