Published as a conference paper at 2018 IEEE Winter Conf. on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV’2018)
Object-based reasoning in VQA
Mikyas T. Desta
IBM Research, Almaden

Larry Chen∗
University of Chicago

Tomasz Kornuta
IBM Research, Almaden

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a novel problem do-
main where multi-modal inputs must be processed in order
to solve the task given in the form of a natural language. As
the solutions inherently require to combine visual and natu-
ral language processing with abstract reasoning, the prob-
lem is considered as AI-complete. Recent advances indicate
that using high-level, abstract facts extracted from the in-
puts might facilitate reasoning. Following that direction we
decided to develop a solution combining state-of-the-art ob-
ject detection and reasoning modules. The results, achieved
on the well-balanced CLEVR dataset, conﬁrm the promises
and show signiﬁcant, few percent improvements of accuracy
on the complex ”counting” task.
1. Introduction
Due to successful application of machine learning, and
deep learning [24] in particular, we have lately observed
great progress in traditional Computer Vision (CV) tasks
such as image classiﬁcation [23], object detection and im-
age segmentation [10]. These advances have pushed re-
searchers towards more complex tasks such as image cap-
tion generation [21] and VQA [4, 28]. Both of those tasks
combine Computer Vision with Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) and high-level reasoning, thus require utiliza-
tion of multi-modal knowledge beyond a single sub-domain
(such as CV). In the case of caption generation, however,
there may be several valid captions describing a given im-
age. Thus, it is hard to deﬁne a quantitative evaluation met-
ric to track the progress. In contrast, in VQA the image
and question pairs might come with the ground-truth an-
swers, enabling to measure the system accuracy. Moreover,
as there might be many questions referring to the same im-
age, the system is in fact forced to learn various reasoning
types depending on the type of question. For those reasons
VQA is considered to be AI complete [4] and renews the
∗Work done during an internship at IBM Research, Almaden.
hope of building machines that could pass the Turing test in
open domains [28].
During the last three years several complex VQA
datasets have been introduced, however, many of the so-
lutions show only marginal improvements over the strong
baselines. As there are many inﬂuencing factors it is often
hard to tell which modules of the system are working prop-
erly and why. The CLEVR dataset [18] was created with
aim of pushing forward the progress on VQA in a more sys-
tematic manner, with the main focus put on the validation
of reasoning skills. The dataset delivers a well-balanced set
of images and questions, where the information associated
with each image is complete and exclusive. Along with the
dataset the authors provided several, sometimes quite so-
phisticated baselines, and concluded that those models have
not learned the semantics of spatial reasoning at all.
In this paper we decided to focus on that aspect of
the problem, i.e.
spatial reasoning.The hypothesis we
would like to validate is whether the operation on high-
level and abstract facts extracted from the image might im-
prove the accuracy of the system (as suggested e.g. in [2]).
For that reason, we developed a solution operating on
object-relation-object triplets [7], similar to relational net-
work [35], however, instead of using features extracted from
the images, we rely on the information associated with the
objects detected in the image. The achieved results are com-
parable with current state-of-the-art solutions in terms of
overall accuracy and show signiﬁcant improvement on the
counting task.
2. Related work
Research on VQA has resulted in many interesting solu-
tions. Those, however, could not have been developed with-
out the existence of proper datasets and metrics for evalua-
tion and comparison of the results.
From the historical perspective, the ﬁrst dataset designed
as a benchmark for the VQA task was DAQUAR (DAtaset
for QUestion Answering on Real-world images) [27]. The
dataset contains 1.5k RGB-D images of indoor scenes from
arXiv:1801.09718v1  [cs.CV]  29 Jan 2018

NYU-Depth v2 dataset [37], with annotated semantic seg-
mentations and question/answer pairs of two types: syn-
thetic questions/answers generated automatically on the ba-
sis of NYU annotations and human question/answers col-
lected from 5 annotators. The limitations of DAQUAR (i.e.
restriction of answers to a predeﬁned set and strong bias
in human annotations) resulted in releases of several other
datasets, most prominently: COCO-QA [33] (based on im-
ages from MS COCO dataset [25], where substantial effort
was made in order to increase the scale of training data),
VQA [4, 11] (consisting of two sets, VQA-real with natu-
ral images, and VQA-abstract with cartoon images, and pro-
viding 17 additional (incorrect) candidate answers for each
question) and Visual Genome [22] (currently the largest
VQA dataset, with 1.7 million question/answer pairs and
with images contents additionally described by structured
annotations in the form of scene graphs).
The paper which introduced DAQUAR [27] also laid
the foundations for evaluation of the system accuracy, and
in consequence, monitoring the overall progress in the
ﬁeld. The authors proposed two basic evaluation metrics.
First, by simply measuring the accuracy with respect to the
ground truth answer using string matching. Second, by us-
ing the Wu-Palmer Similarity (WUPS), enabling to evaluate
the similarity between common objects by their distance in
a taxonomy tree. Other evaluation methods include the pre-
viously mentioned one in a multiple-choice settings [4] or
the ”ﬁll in the blanks” approach proposed along with the
Visual Madlibs dataset [48]. As the ﬁeld started to mature,
researchers discovered the importance of biasses in the im-
ages and questions, which triggered the release of more bal-
anced datasets (such as VQA v2 [11] and CLEVR [18]). It
also led to the analysis of the importance of the common-
sense knowledge required to solve a given task, which in
turn resulted in efforts towards delivering ground truth con-
taining rich description of the scene, facilitating both train-
ing and evaluation (e.g. Visual Genome [22]).
However, the most interesting achievements in the VQA
ﬁeld are the novel algorithms and neural architectures.
In [43] the authors proposed to distinguish four categories:
joint embedding approaches, attention mechanisms, com-
positional models and models using external knowledge
bases, which also summarizes the four main research di-
rections in VQA.
The efforts in joint embedding focus on the methods
for combining multi-modal representations.
As in VQA
there are two distinct input modalities (image and text),
which makes this problem similar to the problems found
in other multi-modal domains. For example the projection
of user and item embeddings into the common representa-
tion space in neural recommender systems [15]. Exemplary
approaches developed for the VQA problem domain in-
clude e.g. Multimodal Compact Bilinear pooling (MCB) [9]
method that performed joint embedding of visual and text
features, or Relational Networks (RN) [35] where embed-
ded question was concatenated with features extracted from
pairs of image regions, enabling the system to reason about
the relation between objects being present in those regions.
As some questions might require more than one reason-
ing step, a lot of researchers focused on attention mecha-
nisms, which were initially introduced for neural transla-
tion [5], and later on adapted to the Question-Answering
problem [42]. In [36] the authors introduced a simple atten-
tion model, where an embedded question was used for the
generation of an attention mask (called region-question rel-
evance), which was subsequently used for the calculation of
a weighted vector of concatenated question and image fea-
tures. Yang et al. [47] introduced Stacked Attention Net-
works, which are able to infer the answer iteratively. This
architecture includes two attention layers, enabling two rea-
soning steps (in [42] called ”hops”), each driven by a differ-
ent attention mask over the image features. The inﬂuence
of number of hops was analysed in [46], where the authors
introduced a spatial attention-based model called Spatial
Memory Network. Here, the model uses each word embed-
ding to capture a ﬁne-grained alignment between the image
and the question. The results indicated the superiority of
the two-hop model over the model with a single hop. The
described methods above focused only on visual attention
driven by the question. In contrast to those ideas, a major
innovation was proposed in [26], where Hierarchical Co-
Attention (HieCoAtt) model processed image and question
symmetrically, with the image guiding the attention over the
question and vice versa. In a quest to assess the quality of
the attention models, in more recent works researchers have
tried to validate whether the attention models learned by
neural models focus on the same image regions as humans
do [8].
The third direction results from the observation that dif-
ferent tasks might require totally different reasoning pro-
cesses. For example in the ”query attribute” task the system
should focus its attention on a single aspect of the scene,
whereas in ”counting” it should perform a sequence of ac-
tions, focusing on the objects of interest one by one. This
observation led to the development of Neural Module Net-
works [3], where semantic parsers (e.g. Stanford Parser)
were used for question-driven dynamic assembly of the in-
ternal structure of the system, which is different for every
type of question. Most recent advances include program-
induction [19] consisting of a program generator and pro-
gram executor, where the former is a sequence-to-sequence
model (a pair of LSTMs, i.e. Long Short Term Memory re-
current neural nets [16]) responsible for constructing of an
internal representation of the reasoning process to be per-
formed, whereas the latter is responsible for execution of
the resulting program in order to produce the answer.

What is the size of
the object left of the
brown cylinder?
Image encoder
Question encoder
Semantic embedding
Answer
decoder
...
large
Image
Question
Answer
...
Object
detection
(Faster R-CNN)
Word
embedding
(GLOVE)
Object
Encoding
Aggregation
MLP
(Softmax)
MLP
MLP
MLP
Sentence
encoding
(LSTM)
Figure 1: General architecture of the proposed system
The last direction includes research on models using ex-
ternal knowledge bases (i.e. external sources of data) for
answering the question. One such solution is proposed in
[44], where the authors developed a framework that extracts
image-related information from the DBpedia knowledge
base, enabling it to answer a broad range of questions, of-
ten requiring knowledge that could not be inferred directly
from the image.
The improvements achieved by results
e.g. in the paper proposing the FVQA dataset [40] strongly
indicate that utilization of supporting-facts extracted from
large-scale structured knowledge bases might be the key in-
gredient for solving the Visual Turing test. As there are
other ﬁndings that also suggest the need for operation on
high-level, abstract facts extracted from the image (e.g. [2]),
we decided to investigate that direction further.
3. Our solution
Architecture of our system is presented in Fig. 1. It ex-
tends the Encoder-Decoder [6] architecture, which origi-
nally consisted of two RNNs, the ﬁrst one used for encoding
a sequence of input symbols into a ﬁxed length represen-
tation, and the other for decoding that representation into
another sequence of output symbols.
In VQA there are two input channels with different
modalities, thus we need two types of encoders and an in-
termediate module responsible for projection of both the vi-
sual and language representations into a common semantic
embedding space. Following that scheme, Xiao et al. [45]
adopted the convolutional layers of the VGG network fol-
lowed by an average pooling across the output features as
the ”visual” encoder and used a two-layer stacked LSTM
network as the ”language” encoder. The authors assumed
that the output of the language encoder is already in the
semantic space and they used a two-layer-perceptron to
project the output of the visual encoder into the same space.
Similarly, the Reﬁned Ask Your Neurons architec-
ture [29] consisted of a visual encoder, question encoder,
a multimodal embedding module combining both encod-
ings into a joint space, and an answer decoder. The authors
compared results achieved for several combinations of dif-
ferent question (e.g. BoW, CNN, GRU and LSTM) and
visual (several classical architectures including AlexNet,
GoogLeNet, VGG-19, ResNet-152) encoders.
3.1. Image encoder
In our system the image encoder realizes two major op-
erations: object detection (OD) and object encoding. The
diagram for object detection is shown in Fig. 2. In a given
t-th image It we detect a set of N objects:
dOt = [dot
0, dot
1, . . . , ddt
N−1],
(1)
each deﬁned as dot
n =<d it
n, dbt
n >, where dit
n denotes the
class identiﬁer (1 to 96) of the object and dbt
n contain four
parameters deﬁning the object bounding box. We decided to
use Faster R-CNN [34] with ResNet-101 [14] pre-trained on
COCO dataset, since it is one of the most reliable methods
for object detection currently available.
In the next step (presented in Fig. 3) we decode each
object dot
n and retrieve set of its attributes:
aot
n =< ct
n, mt
n, st
n, f t
n, xt
n, yt
n >,
(2)

Object
detection
It
dOt
Figure 2: Dataﬂow diagram of object detection
where ct
n is the object color, mt
n represents material it is
made from, st
n indicates size, f t
n represents its shape (form)
and xt
n and yt
n describe its position in the image. Simple en-
codings of each of those attributes (we used one-hot in case
of the former four and bucketing in the case of positional ar-
guments, as explained in sec. 4.4) and concatenation of the
resulting vectors form the encoded object description eot
n.
Attribute
extraction
aOt
dOt
< ct
0, mt
0, st
0, f t
0, xt
0, yt
0 >
...
Attribute
embedding
eOt
< ct
1, mt
1, st
1, f t
1, xt
1, yt
1 >
< ct
5, mt
5, st
5, f t
5, xt
5, yt
5 >
Figure 3: Dataﬂow diagram of object encoding
3.2. Question encoder
The diagram for question processing is shown in Fig. 4.
We start with the question consisting of several words:
Qt = [qt
0, qt
1, . . . , qt
W −1],
(3)
where W denotes the number of words constituting a
given question.
Next, we use the GloVe word em-
bedding model [32] to encode question words:
eQt =
[eqt
0, eqt
1, . . . , eqt
W −1]. Finally, we pass the encoded words
one by one as inputs to the LSTM [16] to produce a list of
encoded output:
sQt = [sqt
0, sqt
1, . . . , sqt
W −1].
(4)
Word
embedding
wQt
Qt
Sequence
embedding
sQt
What
is
the
object
...
Figure 4: Dataﬂow diagram of question encoding
3.3. Semantic embedding
There are many ways for combining image and question
features [38], such as concatenation, element-wise product
or bilinear operation. In our solution, similar to the rela-
tional network module reported in [35], we form a set of
feature vectors by concatenating pairs of vectors represent-
ing two objects with the encoded question, i.e. the last out-
put of LSTM (sqt
W −1). This approach is somehow similar
to object-object-relation triplets used in [7].
Object relation
MLP
rt
0,1
Relation
aggregation
eot
0
...
sqt
W−1
eot
0
Object relation
MLP
Object relation
MLP
...
rt
0,2
...
rt
N−1,N−2
eot
0
eot
1
sqt
W−1
eot
N−1 eot
N−1 sqt
W−1
art
Figure 5: Dataﬂow diagram of semantic embedding
Then, individual triplets are passed through a four layer
MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron), each with 512 units and
ReLU non-linearities, which results in a vector of relations:
Rt = [rt
0,1, rt
0,1, . . . , rt
N−1,N−1].
(5)
Those relations are further aggregated into art. We in-
vestigated several aggregation methods, but simple sum-
mation appeared to give the best results – please refer to
sec. 4.3.
3.4. Answer decoder
Finally, we cast the answering problem as a classiﬁca-
tion task and pass the aggregated relation art through three
MLP layers consisting of 512, 1024, and 29 units. A 2%
dropout layer was added before the last MLP layer. ReLU
non-linearities were added in each layer except the last one,
where we applied the softmax function. The result from the
softmax was ﬁnally decoded using the word dictionary used
for initial word embeddings in Question encoder (Fig. 6).
art
at
MLP
(Softmax)
yt
Word
decoding
Figure 6: Dataﬂow diagram of answer decoding
4. Analysis of the results
4.1. Question encoding
We have pretrained the GloVe word embedding model
on the Google News corpus [30] (3 billion running words)
word vector model and then generated embeddings for the
dictionary formed on the basis of 93 words present in
CLEVR questions and answers.
4.2. Image encoding
Utilization of object detector required its prior training
on images with ground truth bounding boxes and object

Figure 7: Exemplary CLEVR scene with objects detected
with our trained object detector
classes. Since scene descriptions in the CLEVR dataset do
not provide bounding boxes, we wrote a program for their
generation. We calculated the bounding boxes for every
object present in the scene relying on the associated meta-
data from the scene description, i.e. using object position
in the image (2d pixel coordinates and rotation), its posi-
tion in the Cartesian space (3d coordinates) along with its
size and shape. In addition, we have assigned each object
a class identiﬁer taking into account the possible combina-
tions of object attributes as deﬁned in (2), which resulted in
96 unique classes.
An exemplary scene is presented in Fig. 7. We compared
the reconstructed scene from the OD and the ground truth
scene from the scene description to check how accurately
the OD network is predicting the scenes. We were able to
get a precision of 0.99 and a recall of 0.99, thus we ﬁnd the
results satisfactory.
4.3. Comparison with CLEVR baselines
We have reproduced the majority of baselines from
the original CLEVR paper [18], achieving similar results.
In our implementations we used the TensorFlow frame-
work [1] and the associated object detection API [17]. As
Figure 8: The comparison of accuracy of our solution in
Count and Exist tasks with the CLEVR baselines
Figure 9: The comparison of accuracy of our solution with
the CLEVR baselines in Query Attribute task
Figure 10: The comparison of accuracy of our solution with
the CLEVR baselines in Compare Integer task
Figure 11: The comparison of accuracy of our solution with
the CLEVR baselines in Compare Attribute task
CLEVR does not provide ground truth for the test set, we
are reporting the results achieved on the validation set. Dur-
ing training we have used a learning rate of 1.0e−4. In the
last step of Semantic embedding we have tried several ag-
gregation methods, including simple concatenation of acti-
vations of Object relation MLPs, using mean values of those

(a) Question: what number of objects are
small cyan objects that are in front of the gray
object or big things that are in front of the big
rubber block ?
Predicted Answer: 3
Ground Truth: 3
(b) Question: how many balls are either big
blue matte objects or small red things ?
Predicted Answer: 1
Ground Truth: 1
(c) Question: what number of things are ei-
ther small shiny objects that are behind the
purple metallic cylinder or tiny purple metal-
lic balls ?
Predicted Answer: 2
Ground Truth: 2
Figure 12: Exemplary result on counting with heavily occluded object
activations and their sum. The experiments have shown that
summation of those activations gives the best results (ac-
curacy of 94.6% in comparison to e.g. 92.9% in the case
of using mean value). The simple explanation is that sum-
mation ensures the invariance with respect to the order of
objects [35].
We have analyzed the results using the same task-
oriented criteria as the original paper did. The accuracy
on ”exist” and ”count” tasks is presented in Fig. 8, where
the existence questions ask whether a certain type of ob-
ject is present, while the count questions ask for the number
of objects fulﬁlling some conditions. The Query Attribute
task contains questions asking about an attribute of a par-
ticular object (Fig. 9). The Compare Integer questions ask
which of two object sets fulﬁlling given conditions is larger
(Fig. 10). Results for Attribute Comparison task, where
questions ask whether two objects have the same value for
a given attribute, are presented in Fig. 11.
Finally, we present the comparison of the overall accu-
racy of our solution against all the CLEVR baselines in
Figure 13: The comparison of overall accuracy of our solu-
tion with CLEVR baselines
Fig. 13. Our solution has shown major improvement over
all the baselines, including the human accuracy collected
using Mechanical Turk.
4.4. Comparison with results from RN
In Fig. 14 we present the comparison of our results
(shown in orange) with the results reported in [35] (shown
in blue).
As one might notice, our overall accuracy is
slightly, by around 1%, lower. However, interestingly our
solution seems to give more consistent results for different
tasks and achieves better results in 2 out of 5 tasks. In par-
ticular, we achieved much better accuracy (by almost 5%)
in the counting task, which is currently considered to be
one of the hardest tasks in VQA (e.g. [39]). In order to re-
alize the counting task, the system is supposed to perform
several quite different operations, i.e. understanding what
type of objects to focus on, ﬁnding those objects in the im-
age and ﬁnally counting the instances. Our results indicate
Figure 14: Comparison of our approach with results re-
ported in the paper on Relational Networks

What is the size of
the object left of the
brown cylinder?
Question encoder
Semantic embedding
Answer
decoder
...
large
Question
Answer
...
Word
embedding
(GLOVE)
Aggregation
MLP
(Softmax)
MLP
MLP
MLP
Sentence
encoding
(LSTM)
Scene encoder
Scene description
Scene
description
encoding
{"color": "blue", "size": "large", "rotation":
269.8517172617167, "shape": "cube",
"3d_coords": [-1.3705521821975708,
2.0794010162353516, 0.699999988079071],
"material": "rubber", "pixel_coords": [269, 88,
12.661545753479004]}, ...
Figure 15: The architecture of the system with scene description as input used for comparison with the CLEVR with state
description baseline from [35]
that a prior object detection naturally facilitates counting,
which we treat as support for our hypothesis that operation
on more abstract facts facilitates reasoning in general. In
Fig. 12 we present a few hard cases, where our system was
able to provide the correct answer. In particular, it managed
to properly answer questions about the scenes presented in
Fig. 12b and Fig. 12c despite the heavy occlusions of the
objects of interest, which in [35] was suggested to be the
main reason for failures in CLEVR.
We further investigated why our solution does not im-
prove in the other three tasks. After validating the accuracy
of object detection module (as reported in Sec. 4.2) we de-
cided to reproduce the experiments from [35] in which the
Image encoder was replaced by the information retrieved
straight from the scene description.
The architecture of
the resulting system is presented in Fig. 15. Despite using
the same learning hyperparameters for relational MLPs we
achieved the overall accuracy of 94.5%, which is almost 2%
worse from the accuracy of 96.4% reported for that setting
in the paper [35]. However, as the authors did not report
how they encoded the scene, we decided to further investi-
gate that research direction. As the object attributes form
small dictionaries, we assumed that simple one-hot encod-
ing is sufﬁcient. However, the object position expressed
in pixel coordinates in the images (xt
n and yt
n) might be
encoded in several different ways, which in turn might in-
ﬂuence the ﬁnal accuracy. Therefore, we have performed
several experiments with different methods of encoding the
object positions, brieﬂy explained below.
4.4.1
One-hot encoding
In this approach we simply converted the object xt
n and yt
n
pixel coordinates into two separate vectors using one-hot
encoding and concatenated them into one vector of length
800 (as we have 480 possible values for xt
n and 320 for
yt
n). As can be seen from tab. 1 this method was not able to
generalize as well as the others.
4.4.2
Bucketing
Here we grouped n consecutive pixels to buckets along the x
and y axes separately, which resulted in a number of buckets
for x and y. We did experiments on three different bucket
sizes, i.e. 15, 20, and 30, which resulted in 32, 24, and 16
buckets for the x component and 22, 16, and 11 buckets for
the y component respectively. When given the object posi-
tion coordinate xt
n belongs to a range of a given bucket we
convert the bucket number to vector using one hot encoding.
We perform the same for yt
n and concatenate both results. It
can be observed in tab. 1 that the solution generalizes better
when the bucket size is chosen to be 20.
4.4.3
Object enumeration
In this method, instead of relying on the pixel coordinates
we move to a more abstract representation and encoded the
position of the object in relation to the positions of other
objects in the scene. For x and y axes we form two sep-
arate lists, representing the order of the objects according
that axis. For instance, for three objects in a scene, the very

Encoding
Bucket
Overall
Count
Exist
Compare
Query
Compare
size
numbers
attribute
attribute
One hot
–
89.8
90.5
89.7
89.5
90.6
88.5
Bucketing
15
93.9
93.9
93.7
93.6
94.6
93.5
Bucketing
20
94.5
93.6
94.7
93.3
95.2
94.4
Bucketing
30
93.6
93.4
93.1
93.2
94.9
93.4
Enumeration
–
93.3
93.2
93.7
92.9
93.5
93.1
Results from [35]
–
96.4
–
–
–
–
–
Table 1: Results on different position encodings for solution with Image encoder replaced by the information retrieved
straight from the scene description
top object out of the three will have a value of one and the
bottom object will have a value of three. Finally, we en-
coded such represented positions using one hot encoding
and concatenated both encoded coordinates for every ob-
ject.
Results of all the above mentioned experiments are pre-
sented in Tab. 1. The main ﬁnding is that our model was
able to generalize well when we grouped twenty pixel val-
ues into one bucket. Unfortunately, these experiments did
not improve the accuracy to the level reported in [35].
5. Conclusions
In this paper we have focused on reasoning using high-
level abstract facts. For that purpose, instead of relying on
features extracted from the images, we used facts in the
form of encoded objects detected by the Faster R-CNN de-
tector. Those abstract facts were next passed to a reasoning
module, developed with the aim of learning object-object
relations. The achieved overall accuracy is comparable with
the current state-of-the-art results. Analysis of the results
unveiled that the proposed solution gives more stable re-
sults for different tasks, and, moreover, shows improvement
in 2 out of 5 CLEVR tasks. In particular, it gives signiﬁ-
cant, few percent improvement in the Counting task, which
is currently considered as one of the most complex tasks in
VQA and is gaining more and more attention, e.g. in [39]
the authors proposed a new dataset called HowMany-QA,
devoted only to that speciﬁc problem.
The detailed analysis of the operation of components of
our system has proven that OD is working properly, whereas
difference in accuracy comes from the Relational Network
module. According to the results reported in [35] the RN
module working in separation is supposed to give around
2% better overall accuracy than the accuracy that we have
managed to achieve. We treat that as a general promise that
RN operating on more abstract features should be able to
achieve even better results.
As the used reasoning module is the bottle-neck of the
system, in our future works we want to focus on this part
of the system and experiment with other approaches. The
most important research directions, aiming at improvement
of our system and overcoming its limitations, are as follows.
The ﬁrst limitation is the used aggregation of relations de-
tected by MLPs – as the number of objects in scenes might
vary, utilization of recurrent neural net seems to be natural.
An interesting solution to that problem was recently pro-
posed in [31], where the authors developed a novel neural-
based message passing mechanism called Recurrent Rela-
tional Networks and have shown its superiority on Sudoku
puzzles and the BaBi textual QA. Second limitation of our
system is that the reasoning performed in the Semantic Em-
bedding module is strictly sequential, with hardcoded num-
ber of reasoning steps, whereas number of reasoning steps
should in fact vary, depending on the task given. One of the
possible solutions addressing that problem is to employ the
Adaptive Computation Time (ACT) mechanism proposed in
[12]. Yet another promising direction is utilization of exter-
nal memory (i.e. memory augmented neural networks such
as Neural Turing Machine [13]) for learning more complex
reasoning schemes and memorization of the abstract, graph
like representation of the observed scene before generating
the ﬁnal answer. The latter is a natural extension for reason-
ing over explicit high-level representations of the contents
of the image and shows very good results as reported e.g.
in [41]. Finally, we also want to improve our model by
training it jointly on several tasks (e.g. word-level model-
ing, object detection and VQA) – it was recently shown e.g.
in [20] that such a multi-task learning enables the model to
develop uniﬁed representation and results in improved over-
all accuracy.
