arXiv:2301.00561v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2023
Local Differential Privacy for Sequential Decision Making in a Changing
Environment
Pratik Gajane
Eindhoven University of Technology

Abstract
We study the problem of preserving privacy while still pro-
viding high utility in sequential decision making scenarios
in a changing environment. We consider abruptly changing
environment: the environment remains constant during peri-
ods and it changes at unknown time instants. To formulate
this problem, we propose a variant of multi-armed bandits
called non-stationary stochastic corrupt bandits. We construct
an algorithm called SW-KLUCB-CF and prove an upper
bound on its utility using the performance measure of regret.
The proven regret upper bound for SW-KLUCB-CF is near-
optimal in the number of time steps and matches the best
known bound for analogous problems in terms of the num-
ber of time steps and the number of changes. Moreover, we
present a provably optimal mechanism which can guarantee
the desired level of local differential privacy while providing
high utility.
Introduction
Several practically relevant applications including recom-
mender systems, Internet advertising have been formulated
as sequential decision making problems using the frame-
work of multi-armed bandits. The importance of privacy in
such sequential decision making problems has been exten-
sively discussed in the literature (see for example, Thakurta
and Smith (2013); Mishra and Thakurta (2015); Tossou and
Dimitrakakis (2016)).
Differential privacy, introduced by Dwork et al. (2006),
is one of the popular approaches to address such privacy
concerns. In sequential decision making problems, algo-
rithms providing differential privacy preserve data privacy
by adding appropriate statistical noise to the data. Duchi,
Jordan, and Wainwright (2014) extend this notion to local
differential privacy in which data remains private even from
the algorithm. The main difference between global and local
differential privacy is whether privacy is to be maintained
from the algorithm or the (possibly unintended) recipient of
the output of the algorithm. In global differential privacy,
noise is added by the algorithm so the output does not re-
veal private information about the input. In local differential
privacy, noise is added to the input of the algorithm so that
privacy is maintained even from the algorithm.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
To understand the motivation for local differential privacy,
let us consider the practical application of Internet adver-
tising 1. An advertising system receives, as input, feedback
from the users which may reveal private information about
them. The advertising system employs a suitable learning
algorithm and selects ads for the users tailored to the feed-
back given by them. These selected ads are then given to
the advertisers as output. While using global differential pri-
vacy, privacy is maintained from the advertisers by ensuring
that the output of the learning algorithms does not reveal in-
formation about the input (i.e., user information). Typically,
advertising systems are established by leading social me-
dia networks, web browsers and other popular websites. Ko-
rolova (2010); Kosinski, Stillwell, and Graepel (2013) show
that it is possible to accurately predict a range of highly sen-
sitive personal attributes including age, sexual orientation,
relationship status, political and religious afﬁliation using
the feedback available to the advertising systems. Such pos-
sible breach of privacy necessitates us to protect personal
user information not only from the advertisers but also from
the advertising systems. Local differential privacy is able to
achieve this objective unlike global differential privacy.
In this article, we propose to use low privacy regime using
local differential privacy. In low privacy regime, the noise
added to the data is small and the aim of the privacy mecha-
nism is to send as much information about data as allowed,
but no more (Kairouz, Oh, and Viswanath 2014). This is in
alignment with our dual goal of using privacy in recommen-
dation systems or Internet advertising, and other similar ap-
plications: provide useful recommendations/ads to the users
while respecting their privacy as much as possible.
We measure the utility of our proposed algorithm using
regret which is a measure of the total mistake cost (precise
deﬁnitions will follow in the next Section). When rewards
are bounded (as assumed in most works in the literature),
the regret of any algorithm is trivially bounded linearly in the
number of time steps T . An algorithm is said to be learning
if its regret is bounded sub-linearly in T .
Main Contributions
1. We propose non-stationary stochastic corrupt bandits, a
novel formulation which aims to preserve local differen-
1We consider a simplistic scenario for illustrative purposes.

tial privacy while still providing high utility for sequen-
tial decision making in a non-stationary environment.
2. We construct an algorithm called SW-KLUCB-CF for
the considered problem.
3. We prove an upper bound on the utility of SW-KLUCB-
CF in terms of its regret. This upper bound is near-
optimal in terms of the number of time steps and matches
the best known bound for analogous problems in terms of
the number of time steps and the number of changes.
4. We provide an optimal mechanism to achieve a desired
level of local differential privacy while achieving high
utility.
This work is an extension of Gajane, Urvoy, and Kauf-
mann (2018) to non-stationary environments and reuses
some of the concepts used there. However, it should be noted
that the algorithms proposed in Gajane, Urvoy, and Kauf-
mann (2018) will not be able to solve the problem con-
sidered in this article. In fact, it is easy to construct non-
stationary environments for which the algorithms proposed
in Gajane, Urvoy, and Kaufmann (2018) (and all other dif-
ferentially private algorithms designed for stationary envi-
ronment) will suffer regret linear in the number of time steps
T . On the other hand, the algorithm proposed in this article
can guarantee regret sub-linear in T in such scenarios. Fur-
thermore, due to the changing environment and the use of
a sliding window, the regret analysis in our article presents
challenges not encountered in stationary settings.
Our extension to non-stationary environments is practi-
cally relevant as the assumption of stationarity is some-
times unrealistic in real-world applications. Such an exten-
sion providing local differential privacy in non-stationary
environments for the problem of data collection is given by
Joseph et al. (2018). Our problem is different than Joseph
et al. (2018) as we study learning to make optimal sequen-
tial decisions in a non-stationary environment while provid-
ing local differential privacy. Note that a naive strategy of
restarting an algorithm (designed for a stationary environ-
ment) after each change is not possible in the problem con-
sidered here as the time instants at which the changes occur
are unknown.
Related Work
In the context of sequential decision-
making, global differential privacy has been studied in
various settings including stochastic bandits (Mishra and
Thakurta 2015; Tossou and Dimitrakakis 2016), adversar-
ial bandits (Thakurta and Smith 2013; Tossou and Dimi-
trakakis 2017) and collaborative bandits (Wang et al. 2020).
In the context of sequential decision-making, local differ-
ential privacy has been considered in stochastic bandit set-
ting (Gajane, Urvoy, and Kaufmann 2018; Tao et al. 2022),
contextual bandits (Zheng et al. 2020), collaborative bandits
(Wang et al. 2020) and Markov decision processes (Chowd-
hury and Zhou 2022; Garcelon et al. 2020). For a compre-
hensive overview of differential privacy and its application
to other problems, see Dwork and Roth (2014).
The notion of using a sliding window mechanism (as we
do in our proposed algorithm) to deal with a non-stationary
environment has been employed in classical bandits (Gariv-
ier and Moulines 2011) as well as Markov decision pro-
cesses (Gajane, Ortner, and Auer 2018).
Non-Stationary Stochastic Corrupt Bandits
A non-stationary stochastic corrupt bandits problem is for-
mally characterized by a set of arms A = {1, . . ., K}
on which are indexed a list of unknown sub-Gaussian
reward distributions {νa(1)}a∈A, . . . , {νa(LT )}a∈A,
a
list
of
unknown
sub-Gaussian
feedback
distributions
{ςa(1)}a∈A, . . . , {ςa(LT )}a∈A, and a list of known mean-
corruption functions {ga}a∈A. Here, the total number of
time steps (i.e., the horizon) is indicated as T . The environ-
ment undergoes LT abrupt changes at unknown time steps
called as breakpoints and it remains constant in the intervals
between two successive breakpoints.
For notational convenience, we assume that the ﬁrst
breakpoint occurs at t = 1. From ith breakpoint till the
subsequent breakpoint (or the horizon, in case of the last
breakpoint), if the learner pulls an arm a ∈A at time t,
they receive a (hidden) reward Rt drawn from the distri-
bution νa(i) with mean µa(i) and observe a feedback Ft
drawn from the distribution ςa(i) with mean λa(i). We as-
sume that, for each arm, there exists a loose link between the
reward and the feedback through a known corruption func-
tion ga which maps the mean of the reward distribution to the
mean of the feedback distribution : ga(µa(i)) = λa(i), ∀a ∈
A and 1 ≤i ≤LT . Our proposed algorithm and the proven
regret bound also work if the corruption function for an arm
changes across time as long as the current corruption func-
tion is known.
Note that these ga functions may be completely different
from one arm to another. For Bernoulli distributions, the re-
ward distributions and the feedback distributions are in [0, 1]
for all a ∈A and we assume all the corruption functions
{ga}a∈A to be continuous in this interval. We also assume
the corruption functions {ga}a∈A to be strictly monotonic
and denote the corresponding inverse functions by g−1
a . The
assumption of monotonicity is required for efﬁcient learning
as proved in Gajane, Urvoy, and Kaufmann (2018).
Another way to deﬁne the link between the reward and
the feedback is to provide a corruption scheme operator ˜ga
which maps the rewards into feedback distributions.
Randomized Response
Randomized response (a privacy
protection technique introduced by (Warner 1965)) can also
be simulated by a Bernoulli corrupt bandits problem and the
corresponding corruption scheme ˜ga is encoded as:
Ma :=

0
1
0
p00(a)
1 −p11(a)
1
1 −p00(a)
p11(a)

(1)
Each item in Ma denotes the probability of observing a par-
ticular feedback for a particular reward i.e., Ma(y, x) :=
P
 Feedback from arm a = y | Reward from arm a = x

.
The corresponding corruption function is ga(x) = 1 −
p00(a) + [p00(a) + p11(a) −1] · x.
To measure the utility of an algorithm for this problem,
we deﬁne the notion of regret in the following. Let us de-
note the mean reward of arm a at time step t as µa,t.

The objective of an algorithm, which chooses the arm ˆat
at time t based only on the previously observed feedback,
F1, . . . , Ft−1, is to maximize the expected sum of rewards
i.e., to achieve high utility. This is equivalent to minimiz-
ing the regret, Regret(T ) := PT
t=1 µ∗,t −E
hPT
t=1 µˆat,t
i
,
where µ∗,t := maxa∈A µa,t. Regret measures the perfor-
mance of the algorithm against an omniscient policy that at
each time step chooses the arm with the maximal mean re-
ward. Thus, low regret translates to achieving high utility.
The Proposed Algorithm
To solve the problem at hand, we propose SW-KLUCB-
CF, an adaptation of the kl-UCB algorithm of Capp´e et al.
(2013). The algorithm takes as input: the window size w,
a non-decreasing function f, the horizon T and the corrup-
tions functions g1, . . . , gK. We assume that the horizon T
is known; an unknown T can be handled using the doubling
trick (Besson and Kaufmann 2018). We use d(x, y) to denote
the Kullback–Leibler divergence between two Bernoulli dis-
tributions with mean x and y. We also use a shorthand of
x ∧y to denote min(x, y).
At each time time step t, the algorithm computes an
Indexa(t), which is an upper-conﬁdence bound on µa,t
built from a conﬁdence interval on λa,t based on the KL-
divergence. The quantity Na(t, w) denotes the number of
times arm a was chosen in the last w time steps until time t.
Correspondingly, ˆλa(t, w) denotes the empirical mean of the
feedback observed from arm a in the last w time steps until
time t: ˆλa(t, w) :=
1
Na(t,w)
Pt
s=min{1,t−w+1} Fs · 1(ˆas=a).
Theorem 1 gives an upper bound on the regret of SW-
KLUCB-CF. A more explicit bound is proved in the Ap-
pendix.
Theorem 1 The regret of SW-KLUCB-CF using f(x) :=
log(x) + 3 log(log(x)) and w =
q
4eT
LT +4 on a Bernoulli
non-stationary stochastic corrupt bandits problem with
strictly monotonic and continuous corruption functions
{ga}a∈A at time T is upper-bounded by 2
˜O

X
a∈A
p
LT T +
LT
X
i=1
X
a̸=a∗(i)
log
q
T
LT

d(λa(i), ga(µ∗(i))

,
where a∗(i) and µ∗(i) are the optimum arm and the cor-
responding optimal mean respectively after ith change and
before the subsequent change.
The lower bound on regret in terms T for classical
non-stationary stochastic bandits is Ω(
√
T) (Garivier and
Moulines 2011). Theorem 1 matches the lower bound up to
logarithmic factors, so SW-KLUCB-CF has near-optimal
regret guarantees in terms of the time horizon T . The
best known regret upper bounds for classical non-stationary
stochastic bandits (e.g., Auer, Gajane, and Ortner (2019))
also feature logarithmic terms besides the lower bound,
hence our regret bound is in line with the best known results
2 ˜O ignores logarithmic factors and constants.
Algorithm 1: Sliding Window KLUCB for Non-Stationary
Stochastic Corrupt Bandits (SW-KLUCB-CF)
Input: Window size w, a non-decreasing function
f : N →R, T , monotonic and continuous corruption
functions g1, . . . , gK and d(x, y) := KL(B(x), B(y)),
1. Initialization: Pull each arm once.
2. for time t = K, . . . , T −1 do
(a) Compute for each arm a ∈A the quantity
Indexa(t)
:= max
n
q : Na(t, w) · d(ˆλa(t, w), ga(q)) ≤f (t ∧w)
o
(b) Pull arm ˆat+1 := argmax
a∈A
Indexa(t) and observe the
feedback Ft+1.
end for
for analogous problems. Moreover, the bound in Theorem 1
also matches the best known regret bound in terms of LT for
classical non-stationary stochastic bandits which is O√LT .
We can use SW-KLUCB-CF on non-stationary stochas-
tic corrupts bandits where the corruption is done via random-
ized response. The following corollary bounds the resulting
regret.
Corollary 1 The regret of SW-KLUCB-CF on a Bernoulli
non-stationary stochastic corrupt bandits problem with ran-
domized response using corruption matrices {M}a∈A at
time T is upper-bounded by
˜O

X
a∈A
p
LT T +
LT
X
i=1
X
a̸=a∗(i)
log
q
T
LT

(p00(a) + p11(a) −1)2

.
This corollary follows from Theorem 1 and Pinsker’s in-
equality: d(x, y) > 2(x−y)2. The term (p00(a)+p11(a)−1)
can be understood as the slope of the corruption function ga.
Corruption Mechanism to Preserve Local
Privacy in Non-Stationary Environment
First, let us formally deﬁne local differential privacy.
Deﬁnition 1 (Locally differentially private mechanism) Any
randomized mechanism M is ǫ-locally differentially private
for ǫ ≥0, if for all d1, d2 ∈Domain(M) and for all S ⊂
Range(M),
P[M(d1) ∈S] ≤eǫ · P[M(d2) ∈S].
As done in Gajane, Urvoy, and Kaufmann (2018), a straight-
forward approach to achieve local differential privacy us-
ing corrupt bandits is to employ a corruption scheme on the
user feedback. This is similar to how randomized response
is used in data collection by Wang, Wu, and Hu (2016).
Deﬁnition 2 (ǫ-locally differentially private bandit feed-
back corruption scheme) A bandit feedback corruption
scheme ˜g is ǫ-locally differentially private for ǫ ≥0, if for

all reward sequences Rt1, . . . , Rt2 and R′
t1 . . . , R′
t2, and for
all S ⊂Range(˜g),
P[˜g(Rt1, . . . , Rt2) ∈S] ≤eǫ · P[˜g(R′
t1, . . . , R′
t2) ∈S].
When
corruption
is
done
by
randomized
re-
sponse,
local
differential
privacy
requires
that
max1≤a≤K

p00(a)
1−p11(a),
p11(a)
1−p00(a)

≤eǫ. From Corollary 1,
we can see that to achieve lower regret, p00(a) + p11(a) is
to be maximized for all a ∈A. Using Wang, Wu, and Hu
(2016, Result 1), we can state that, in order to achieve ǫ-local
differential privacy while maximizing p00(a) + p11(a),
Ma =
"
0
1
0
eǫ
1+eǫ
1
1+eǫ
1
1
1+eǫ
eǫ
1+eǫ
#
.
(2)
As it turns out, this is equivalent to the staircase mechanism
for local privacy which is the optimal local differential pri-
vacy mechanism for low privacy regime (Kairouz, Oh, and
Viswanath 2016, Theorem 14). The trade-off between utility
and privacy is controlled by ǫ.
Using the corruption parameters from Eq. (2) with Corol-
lary 1, we arrive at the following upper bound.
Corollary 2 At time T , the regret of
SW-KLUCB-
CF
with
ǫ-locally
differentially
private
bandit
feedback
corruption
scheme
given
by
Eq.
(2)
is
˜O
 
P
a∈A
√LTT + PLT
i=1
P
a̸=a∗(i)
log
q
T
LT

( eǫ−1
eǫ+1)
2
!
.
The term
  eǫ−1
eǫ+1
2 in the above expression conveys the rela-
tionship of the regret with the level of local differential pri-
vacy symbolized by ǫ. For low values of ǫ,
  eǫ−1
eǫ+1

≈ǫ/2.
This is in line with other bandit algorithms providing differ-
ential privacy (e.g., Mishra and Thakurta (2015)).
Elements of Mathematical Analysis
Here, we provide a proof outline for Theorem 1. Please refer
to the Appendix for the complete proof.
We start by bounding the expected number of times a sub-
optimal arm (i.e., an arm other than the optimal arm at the
time of selection) is pulled by the algorithm till horizon T .
Recall that, at any time step t, SW-KLUCB-CF pulls an
arm maximizing an index deﬁned as
Indexa(t)
:= max
n
q : Na(t, w) · d

ˆλa(t, w), ga(q)

≤f (t ∧w)
o
= max g−1
a
n
q : Na(t, w) · d

ˆλa(t, w), q

≤f (t ∧w)
o
.
We further decompose the computation of index as follows,
Indexa(t) :=
g−1
a (ℓa(t))
if ga is decreasing,
g−1
a (ua(t))
if ga is increasing
where,
ℓa(t) := min
n
q : Na(t, w) · d

ˆλa(t, w), q

≤f (t ∧w)
o
,
ua(t) := max
n
q : Na(t, w) · d

ˆλa(t, w), q

≤f (t ∧w)
o
.
The interval [ℓa(t), ua(t)] is a KL-based conﬁdence in-
terval on the mean feedback λa,t of arm a at time t. This
is in contrast to kl-UCB (Capp´e et al. 2013) where a con-
ﬁdence interval is placed on the mean reward. Furthermore,
This differs from kl-UCB-CF (Gajane, Urvoy, and Kauf-
mann 2018) where the mean feedback of an arm remains the
same for all the time steps and f does not feature w.
In our analysis, we use the fact that when an arm a is
picked at time t+1 by SW-KLUCB-CF, one of the follow-
ing is true: Either the mean feedback of the optimal arm a∗,t
with mean reward µ∗,t is outside its conﬁdence interval (i.e.,
ga∗,t(µ∗,t) < ℓa∗,t(t) or ga∗,t(µ∗,t) > ua∗,t(t)) which is
unlikely. Or, the mean feedback of the optimal arm is where
it should be, and then the fact that arm a is selected indicates
that the conﬁdence interval on λa cannot be too small as ei-
ther (ua(t) ≥ga(µ∗,t)) or (ℓa(t) ≤ga(µ∗,t)). The previous
statement follows from considering various cases depending
on whether the corruption functions ga and ga∗,t are increas-
ing or decreasing. We then need to control the two terms in
the decomposition of the expected number of draws of arm
a. The term regarding the “unlikely” event, is bounded using
the same technique as in the kl-UCB analysis, however with
some added challenges due to the use of a sliding window. In
particular, the analysis of a typical upper conﬁdence bound
algorithm for bandits relies on the fact that the conﬁdence
interval for any arm is always non-increasing, however this
is not true while using a sliding window. To control the sec-
ond term, depending on the monotonicity of the corruption
functions ga and ga∗,t, we need to meticulously adapt the
arguments in Capp´e et al. (2013) to control the number of
draws of a suboptimal arm, as can be seen in the Appendix.
Concluding Remarks
In this work, we proposed the setting of non-stationary
stochastic corrupt bandits for preserving privacy while still
maintaining high utility in sequential decision making in a
changing environment. We devised an algorithm called SW-
KLUCB-CF and proved its regret upper bound which is
near-optimal in the number of time steps and matches the
best known bound for analogous problems in terms of the
number of time steps and the number of changes. Moreover,
we provided an optimal corruption scheme to be used with
our algorithm in order to attain the dual goal of achieving
high utility while maintaining the desired level of privacy.
Interesting directions for future work include:
1. Complete an empirical evaluation of the proposed algo-
rithm on simulated as well as real-life data.
2. Characterize the changes in the environment by a varia-
tion budget (as done in Besbes, Gur, and Zeevi (2014) for
classical bandits) instead of the number of changes.
3. Incorporate contextual information in the learning pro-
cess.
4. Propose a Bayesian algorithm for non-stationary stochas-
tic corrupt bandits.
5. Propose a (near-)optimal differentially private algorithm
which does not need to know the number of changes.
