XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©2022 IEEE 
Multimodal Lyrics-Rhythm Matching 
Callie C. Liao  
McLean High School 
McLean, USA 

 
 
Duoduo Liao 
School of Computing 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, USA 

 
Jesse Guessford 
School of Music 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, USA 

 
Abstract—Despite the recent increase in research on artificial 
intelligence for music, prominent correlations between key 
components of lyrics and rhythm such as keywords, stressed 
syllables, and strong beats are not frequently studied. This is likely 
due to challenges such as audio misalignment, inaccuracies in 
syllabic identification, and most importantly, the need for cross-
disciplinary knowledge. To address this lack of research, we 
propose a novel multimodal lyrics-rhythm matching approach in 
this paper that specifically matches key components of lyrics and 
music with each other without any language limitations. We use 
audio instead of sheet music with readily available metadata, 
which creates more challenges yet increases the application 
flexibility of our method. Furthermore, our approach creatively 
generates several patterns involving various multimodalities, 
including music strong beats, lyrical syllables, auditory changes in 
a singer’s pronunciation, and especially lyrical keywords, which 
are utilized for matching key lyrical elements with key rhythmic 
elements. This advantageous approach not only provides a unique 
way to study auditory lyrics-rhythm correlations including 
efficient rhythm-based audio alignment algorithms, but also 
bridges computational linguistics with music as well as music 
cognition. Our experimental results reveal an 0.81 probability of 
matching on average, and around 30% of the songs have a 
probability of 0.9 or higher of keywords landing on strong beats, 
including 12% of the songs with a perfect landing. Also, the 
similarity metrics are used to evaluate the correlation between 
lyrics and rhythm. It shows that nearly 50% of the songs have 0.70 
similarity or higher. In conclusion, our approach contributes 
significantly to the lyrics-rhythm relationship by computationally 
unveiling insightful correlations. 
Keywords—multimodal analysis, audio alignment, keyword 
extraction, music information retrieval, natural language processing 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In recent years, research interest has increased in utilizing 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies for music. Even though 
there is heightened attention, songwriters and composers’ 
music cognition and intuition are often overlooked in AI music 
research. In music, there is a variety of musical elements—
rhythm, melody, harmony, lyrics, dynamics, instrumentation, 
timbre, etc.—that are combined to create compelling music. In 
particular, lyrics, through the art of literature and the diction of 
a vocal performance, can express emotion to the listener. When 
examining lyrics, keywords (important words within the text) 
and musically stressed syllables (syllables that the composer 
has emphasized) help establish musical understanding. 
Musically stressed syllables may differ from dictionary-defined 
stressed  syllables.   Additionally,   some   languages   such  as  
 
 
Fig. 1. The multimodal lyrics-rhythm matching. The first plot is a song’s 
waveform. The second plot shows the first music strong beats (i.e., downbeats) 
in red and all other beats in gray over the piano roll where both include the rest 
period. The third plot indicates the matched keyword-strong-beat pairs in red 
over the waveform where the strong beats in gray color include the rest period. 
Chinese, Japanese, and Korean lack stress [1].  Thus, in our 
view, keywords are preferred over stressed syllables because 
they encompass more forms of literary expression, which aids 
musical creativity and analytics.  
 
When the lyrics are mapped onto a rhythm, the significance 
of keywords is reflected. Rhythm is defined as “the 
organization of musical events in time” [2] and creates 
musically metrical stress. In Fig. 2, the beats within the music 
measure are split into a group receiving metrical stress (strong 
beats) and a group not receiving metrical stress (weak beats). 
Strong beats usually indicate the beginning of a measure or 
phrase and convey the forward energy of musical emotion, 
although some time signatures, such as 4/4, have 2 or more 
strong beats within a measure. Since lyrics and rhythm work 
together to create musical meaning, studying the correlation 
between the two can serve as groundwork for further 
multimodal AI music research. So, we investigate the potential 
correlation between lyrical keywords and musical strong beats 
as well as between non-keywords and weak beats through audio 
with lyrics, which has not been studied in quantitative analytics. 
 
There are challenges along the way, however. Misalignment 
between the music beats and lyrical syllables becomes 
unavoidable because music is often produced by humans. A 
singer sometimes does not perform the rhythm mechanically, 
which creates challenges when aligning the audio to Musical 
Digital Instrument Interface (MIDI1) files or other digital sheet 
music files. Moreover, some current dictionaries for splitting 
words into syllables are occasionally unable to produce correct 
1https://www.midi.org/specifications 

syllables, and some do not produce any corresponding syllables 
for words unknown to the dictionaries (both new and existing). 
In particular, new words are a challenge since they are being 
invented at a fast-growing rate as technology escalates. 
Furthermore, lyrics are a type of free-form figurative language 
that contain hidden connotations and potential keywords that 
are difficult to determine in the text. Therefore, in general, it is 
challenging for current Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
techniques to process lyrics successfully.  
 
Fig. 2. Demonstrations of strong beats in music. (a) The downbeats (i.e., first 
strong beats) in “A Little Bird” [3] in 2/4 time signature. The downbeats are 
noted as 1 in red, and the weak beats are noted as 2. (b) The first and second 
strong beats in “Birds are Flying” [4] in 4/4 time signature. The downbeats 
are noted as 1 in red, and the second strong beats are noted as 3 in blue. The 
weak beats are noted as 2 and 4. 
 
Above all, to conduct successful AI music research, 
computing technologies as well as deep knowledge and 
familiarity with music, literature, linguistics, and cognitive 
science are required. This is perhaps the most critical challenge 
for researchers. Therefore, making breakthroughs in any of 
these challenges will contribute to AI music fields. 
We propose an innovative multimodal lyrics-rhythm 
matching approach. Our main contributions are as follows: 
• 
Our 
approach 
computationally 
unveils 
strong, 
insightful correlations between lyrics and rhythm 
through data analytics. 
• 
Our approach is a generalized method that determines 
lyrics-rhythm matching based on keywords without any 
language limitations. It indicates that keywords have 
stronger associations with strong beats. This can be 
employed in any language including some that lack 
stressed syllables.  
• 
Creatively patterning lyrics-music multimodalities and 
using various metrics to measure their relationships in 
our approach can expand horizons in music cognition 
and computational analysis. 
• 
Our approach enhances the syllabication and syllabic 
stress pattern identification for unknown words, which 
helps computational linguistics. 
• 
Audio alignment in music continues to pose many 
challenges. Our research contributes to the area through 
the development of several novel, efficient rhythm-
based audio alignment algorithms.  
• 
Our research uses challenging audio instead of sheet 
music, which makes our solutions more flexible and 
more applicable to AI music research. 
• 
Our research can serve as a basic building block for AI 
music technologies, including song identification, 
singing voice analysis, music structure analysis, etc. 
• 
Our research can inspire connections between 
languages of music and linguistic representations in 
neuroscientific research, which are perhaps some of the 
most important interactions between language and 
music. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Research on the computational analysis of music cognition 
and musicology are not addressed unlike other papers in Music 
Information Retrieval (MIR) [5]. As the Linguistic Stress Rule 
states, composers prefer to align strong beats with stressed 
syllables of text [1][6]. However, surprisingly few quantitative 
analyses can be found to support it. A few researchers 
conducted some basic statistical analysis and concluded that 
stressed syllables tend to fall on relatively strong beats of the 
meter in vocal music for languages with lexical stress such as 
English and German [7]. Another study on corpora of vocal 
French music has shown a strong correlation between the stress 
levels of syllables and their metrical strength [8]. The paper [9] 
presents an observational study for English popular music that 
performs minimal preprocessing on MusicXML2 sheets, 
including monosyllabic stopwords [10] removal. It draws 
conclusions based on various correlations between categorical 
variables such as syllable stress, metric position (i.e., types of 
beats), and stopwords. It also helps provide fundamental 
statistical support to musicology and music-cognition research 
as well as a quantitative correlation between lyrics and 
melodies. However, this paper has some limitations. Firstly, it 
utilizes MusicXML files, so beat, lyrical syllable, rhythm, and 
pitch information have already been stored inside of the files; 
thus, extra processing is not needed, which causes additional 
limitations on the scope of its research. Secondly, the paper 
seeks for a general association between musically accented 
notes and stressed syllables. Thirdly, just monosyllabic 
stopwords removal is performed on its data to find the 
correlation between stopwords and non-salient notes. And 
fourthly, it lacks consideration for a variety of time signatures 
in their methods other than 4/4.  
Additionally, audio alignments are among the most 
important steps in audio processing for MIR. Audio alignment 
has several distinct types, including audio-to-audio, lyrics-to-
audio, audio-to-score, audio-to-visual, etc. Many researchers 
have conducted relevant studies in this field [11][12], including 
deep learning [13] based audio alignment in [14][15]. Yet, there 
are very few people involved in rhythm-based audio-to-audio 
alignment and lyrics-to-audio alignment, which are all under 
rhythm alignment. The paper [16] proposes a multi-task 
learning approach for lyrics alignment that improves the 
alignment accuracy through the incorporation of pitch and the 
integration of boundary detection in the forced-alignment 
algorithm. However, their performance was improved at the 
cost of efficiency. Another paper [17] utilizes a multi-scale 
neural network based on end-to-end audio-to-character 
architecture. It improves the alignment accuracy by predicting 
the character probabilities end-to-end from raw audio but only 
if such large datasets are available. In fact, most deep learning 
technologies (including the mentioned above) need large 
datasets for sufficient training.  
1     2     3     4 
1            2 
2https://www.musicxml.com/ 
1     2     3     4 
1     2     3     4 
1     2     3           4 
1               2 
1               2 
1                2 

Our approach resolves the above limitations and expands 
the scope by using multimodal data such as music 
accompaniment audio, singing vocal audio, and separate lyrics 
text data. We perform simple, efficient, and accurate audio 
processing based on multimodal data, including rhythm-based 
audio-to-MIDI alignment and lyrics-to-audio alignment, 
without the use of deep learning techniques and the need for big 
training datasets. Most importantly, we investigate a correlation 
between the keywords and music strong beats due to the 
keywords’ heightened significance when compared to other 
words. This correlation is applicable to other languages as well, 
including any language that lacks stressed syllables. Although 
some researchers have mentioned the lack of stressed syllables 
in particular languages [1], the importance of keywords in 
songs was not highlighted. Moreover, we use customized word 
syllabication and keywords extraction methods as well and 
consider all time signatures, including simple, compound, and 
asymmetric. Thus, our research places emphasis on the impact 
of lyrical keywords in music, making ours different from 
current related work.  
III. 
THE METHODS  
The proposed approach aims to investigate positive 
connections between lyrics and rhythm. In this study, we focus 
on studying correlations among lyrical keywords and music 
strong beats as well as non-keywords and weak beats, and 
comparing the keywords approach to the stressed syllables 
approach to provide further insights into composers’ thought 
processes. The architectural framework of the lyrics-rhythm 
matching approach is illustrated in Fig. 3. The highlighted 
framework is demonstrated in Fig. 1. The framework consists 
of three major components: music pronunable patterning, 
lyrical syllabic patterning, and lyrics-rhythm matching. Since 
each vocal “syllable” is recorded as a change in pronunciation, 
we denote each vocal “syllable” as a pronunable in this study.  
In the framework, the first component consists of data input, 
beat tracking and patterning, rhythm alignment, pronunable 
(i.e., singing vocal “syllable”) locating, and patterning with 
music strong beats. The second component contains syllable 
splitting, syllabic stress pattern identification, pronunable and 
lyrical syllable matching, keyword extraction, and keyword 
patterning. The third component targets to match keywords and 
strong beats and seek insights through data analytics. 
The system receives lyrical texts and audio containing the 
singing voice and music accompaniment as input. Then, all 
vocal and music beats are tracked and aligned with each other. 
Pronunables are retrieved from the singing vocal audio and then 
patterned with the strong-beats based on rhythm. The keywords 
and syllabic stress patterns are extracted from the lyrics 
afterwards. The lyrical syllables need to match with the 
retrieved pronunables to bridge the lyrics and the beat 
information. Finally, the keyword strong-beat matching and 
overall lyrics-rhythm matching are checked using the keyword 
pattern and the strong-beat pattern of each pronunable 
associated with a word. 
Syllable Splitting 
Syllabic Stress Pattern 
Identification 
Pronunable-Syllable Matching 
Keyword Extraction 
Keyword Patterning 
Audio & Lyrics Data Input 
Beat Tracking & Patterning 
Rhythm Alignment 
Pronunable Locating 
Pronunable Strong-beat  
Patterning 
Data Analytics 
Non-Keyword Weak Matching 
Music Pronunable Patterning 
Lyrics Syllabic Patterning 
Lyrics-Rhythm Matching 
Keyword Strong-Beat Matching 
Word-based Pronunable Strong-beat Pattern (WPSP) 
Keyword Pattern (KP) 
Stressed 
Syllables and 
Strong Beat 
Matching 
Pronunable Strong-beat Pattern (PSP) 
Pronunable-
Word 
Conversion 
Fig. 3. The framework of Keyword Strong-Beat Matching 

In the following subsections, we explain the components of 
the architecture in greater detail. 
A. Music Pronunable Patterning 
1) Beat Tracking and Strong Beat Patterning 
In this framework, the input audio pair has two separate 
forms: a solo-singing vocal audio and an accompaniment MIDI. 
Singing vocal beats and music beats are tracked from these two 
data files, respectively. That is, two time series record onset 
locations (i.e., timestamps) of all tracked beats for vocal and 
music audios, respectively. Beat tracking is the task of 
identifying and synchronizing with the basic rhythmic pulse of 
a piece of music [18]. It has been extensively studied in MIR. 
Since our research focuses on lyrics-rhythm correlation 
findings, some existing music tools, such as Librosa3, are used 
for beat tracking in this study.  
After beat tracking, a Strong-beat Pattern (SP) list with its 
length as the total number of music beats is created to store the 
flags of the corresponding strong music beat locations. If a beat 
is a strong beat, the flag is set to 1. Otherwise, the flag is set to 
0. The number of strong beats and their positions in one measure 
can be deduced from the time signature. Our methods can 
calculate the numbers for all distinct types of beats and their 
positions based on time signatures.  
2) Rhythm Alignment  
In this study, rhythm alignment includes rhythm-based audio 
to-MIDI alignment and lyrics-to-MIDI alignment (i.e., lyrics-to-
accompaniment-audio alignment).  
Due to the unavoidable imperfections of a human singer, 
which causes delays or early starts, the vocal rhythm of the 
singing audio needs to be aligned with the music rhythm of the 
accompaniment MIDI, which is the audio-to-MIDI alignment. 
More specifically, the audio-to-MIDI alignment is based on two 
sequences, the vocal audio and music audio sequences, and uses 
a timing threshold or margin of error, which is set based on the 
tempo and time signature from the vocal audio. Additionally, the 
length of tracked vocal beats may be different from the length of 
tracked music beats. This could be due to the possibility of 
unmatched or missing beats. These types of beats are handled 
using linear interpolation. After alignments, an index list of 
vocal beats aligned with music beats is generated. 
As for the rhythm-based lyrics-to-MIDI alignment approach, 
it is more complicated and consists of several steps: pronunable 
retrieval and locating, pronunable-beat patterning, syllable 
pattern identification, syllable pronunable matching, and lyrics-
to-rhythm matching. These steps will be discussed further in the 
following sections. This approach, the rhythm-based lyrics-to-
audio alignment, can be applied to any audio other than MIDI.  
 
3) Pronunable Retrieval and Locating 
In the vocal audio, pronunables represent every change in 
pronunciation regardless of whether it is an actual syllable of a 
word. This includes singing words such as “woah”, “nei”, etc., 
as well as words with multiple syllables pronounced as one such 
as “o’er”, which represents “over”. Such cases present 
challenges for lyrical analytics, as lyrics differ from speech and 
other forms of literature. For this study, we only focus on 
retrieving the location (i.e., start time and end time) of each 
pronunable instead of recognizing syllables or words.  
To retrieve pronunables on music beats, the pronunables 
associated with vocal beats are first retrieved from the vocal 
audio. Once all pronunables’ locations are retrieved, the vocal 
beats need to align with the corresponding music beats in the 
accompaniment audio through the use of pronunables. The 
algorithm of pronunable locating is shown in Algorithm 1. 
Since the music and voice audio do not match precisely, a 
time buffer or margin for error is needed for alignment. If the 
music beats are within the time buffer, then the beats and the 
beat indices are stored accordingly. Moreover, to optimize the 
algorithms, vocal-audio-to-MIDI alignment is processed at the 
same time with pronunable locating on music beats. 
Specifically, for each time t1 in the pronunable time series T1, the 
times within the dynamic buffer are sought in the music beat 
time series T2 and then stored into a list Ts. Their corresponding 
indices are collected into another list Ls. In the time list Ts, for 
each time t, a certain distance function (e.g., Euclidean distance) 
is employed to calculate the distance between t and t1. Once 
distance calculations for all the times in Ts are complete, the 
minimum distance t* is selected. Then, the corresponding index 
i* of t* is used to point to the corresponding music beat index ip 
for the pronunable. ip is inserted into the output index list L of 
music beats aligned with pronunables. If no beat is found, the 
corresponding beat is likely unmatched or missing, so the beat 
is linearly interpolated.  
 
Algorithm 1: Pronunable Locating 
 
Input: a vocal pronunable time series T1,  
 
  a vocal beat time series T2,  
 
  a vocal-music alignment index list La, 
 
  a time buffer dt. 
Output: an index list of music beats aligned with pronunables. 
1: Initialize L as an empty list. 
2: for each t1 in T1 do 
3:      (Ts, Ls ) = Search(t1, dt, T2)    
4: 
if Ts is not empty Then  
5: 
      for i =0, 1, …, length(Ts) do  
6:                 D[i] = Distance(t1, Ts[i]) 
7: 
      end for  
8:            t* = min(D[i]) where i =0, 1, …, length(Ts) 
9: 
     Get corresponding index i* of t* 
10:         if La is not empty and i*∈ [0, length( La)-1] Then  
11: 
          ip = La [i*] 
13:        else  // unmatched or missing 
14: 
         ip = LinearInterpolation(i) 
15: 
   end if     
16: 
   Insert ip into L 
17:    end if     
18: end for 
19: return L 
 
 
To be more mathematically specific, the target is to find the 
music beat that minimizes the distance from the pronunable 
location to match the pronunable with the closest music beat: 
                        argmin
𝑡𝑠∈𝑇𝑠
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 (𝑡1, 𝑡𝑠)                            (1) 
3https://librosa.org/ 

Several different distance functions can be used to calculate 
D[i], where i = 0, 1, …, length(Ts). In this study, the Manhattan 
distance is selected for the implementation of Algorithm 1.  
Given two points A and B in n-dimensional space such that 
A = (a1, a2, …, an) and B = (b1, b2, …, bn), the Manhattan 
distance between A and B is defined as: 
               𝐷 (𝐴, 𝐵) = ||𝐴−𝐵|| = ∑
|𝑎𝑖−
𝑛
𝑖=1
𝑏𝑖|              (2) 
Since the beat time series is a sorted time sequence, many 
search algorithms such as binary search [19] can be applied in 
Algorithm 1. Finally, a time series representing locations of 
aligned pronunables is generated accordingly. 
4) Pronunable Strong-Beat Patterning  
Upon the completion of rhythm alignment and pronunable 
locating on music beats, the output list contains all the beat 
indices where the pronunables are located. Based on this index 
list and the SP list created through the music strong beats, a new 
patterned list is created to store the Pronunable Strong-beat 
Pattern (PSP). The PSP contains the noted locations of all the 
pronunables on a strong beat. If a pronunable has the same 
location as a strong beat, it is set to 1 in the PSP; otherwise, it 
is set to 0. 
B. Lyrical Syllable Patterning 
In this component, we utilize customized word syllabication 
and keywords extraction methods to find more lyrical keywords.  
1) Syllable Splitting and Stress Pattern Identification  
Firstly, special preprocessing for lyrics is conducted due to 
the potential occurrence of cases similar to pronunables. 
Moreover, some additional critical cases also impact the 
splitting of syllables. For example, despite having no syllabic 
contributions, the parts after the apostrophe in contractions such 
as “re” in “they’re” and “t” in “don’t” are still assigned a 
syllable by pronouncing dictionaries (e.g., the Carnegie Mellon 
University (CMU) pronouncing dictionary4). As a result, a 
customized list of words and/or letters for lyrics preprocessing 
is created for these types of situations. Then, utilizing a 
pronouncing dictionary produces one or more variants of a 
word’s stress pattern consisting of flags. For example, in the 
CMU dictionary, the stress pattern is expressed through 0s and 
1s. The 1s represent the stressed syllables, whereas the 0s 
represent the unstressed. To simplify the process in this study, 
only the first most common variant is appended to a list 
containing all the words’ stress patterns. Occasionally, the 
dictionary may not recognize certain vocabulary and newly 
created words. It also may create an incorrect syllable split or 
stress pattern. Thus, after performing a basic stemming [20] for 
words such as ones that end in “ed”, words are split into 
syllables through vowel consideration instead. As a result, 
stress patterns are created for such words.  
The syllabic stress patterns are identified. The algorithm of 
syllabic stress pattern identification is shown in Algorithm 2. 
The output of the algorithm is a string list of stress patterns with 
each stress pattern being composed of 0s and/or 1s.  
2) Pronunable-Syllable Matching 
The syllable-pronunable matching is then conducted. The 
total number of lyrical syllables is counted by adding up each 
stress pattern’s length. Each syllable cannot be individually 
compared to the pronunables, because each pronunable 
expresses every change in the singer’s pronunciation in the 
most pronounceable way. As a result, the spelling of 
pronunables may vary drastically for each syllable. For 
example, the syllables of “very” are “ve” and “ry”. However, 
“ry” can be pronounced as “ree” and “rye”, which both are 
pronunables. In this case, the pronunable for “ry” in “very” is 
“ree”, yet if “ree” and “ry” are compared to each other, the two 
will not match. Thus, comparing the total number of syllables 
in the lyrics to the actual number of pronunables in a song is 
more accurate for the matching between pronunables and 
lyrical syllables. This is the key step in rhythm-based lyrics-to-
audio alignment as mentioned in Section A Rhythm Alignment.  
 
 
Algorithm 2: Syllabic Stress Pattern Identification 
 
Input: Lyrics text S. 
Output: A string list of stress patterns. 
1: Initialize L as an empty list.  
2: S’ = Preprocessed S with the special lyrics cases. 
3: A list T = Tokenize(RemovePunctuation(S’))  
4: for each token in T do 
5:       Get token’s stress pattern from the dictionary D 
6: 
 if stress pattern exists Then 
7: 
      Append 1st stress variant as a string to L 
 
8: 
 else 
9: 
      if token’s end has no syllabic meaning Then 
10: 
 
Stem the token 
 
 
11: 
      end if 
12:           A list Ls = WordSyllabication(token) 
       
13: 
      Set the first syllable pattern s to 1 
 
14: 
     Append s to L 
15: 
 end if          
16: end for 
17: return L 
 
  
3) Keyword Extraction and Patterning 
The lyrical keywords in the text are extracted through NLP 
techniques. Additionally, the patterns of the keywords are 
identified and used to build the Keyword Pattern (KP) flag list. 
Since KP is now word-based yet PSP is still pronunable-based, 
PSP needs to be converted to a word-based pattern, i.e., Word-
based Pronunable Strong-beat Pattern (WPSP). WPSP is then 
used to compare with KP. This is one of the key components 
for finding the correlation between the keywords and strong 
beats, not the stressed syllables. 
C. Lyrics-Rhythm Matching 
Finally, two patterns, WPSP and KP as shown in Fig. 3, are 
checked for whether the lyrics match the rhythm, including 
whether keywords land on strong beats, etc. There are multiple 
ways to find whether the lyrics match the rhythm, including the 
utilization of time series similarity and conditional probability. 
1) Conditional probability 
Clearly, the conditional probability [21] can be used for 
checking the matching probability of lyrics and rhythm. For 
example, to check if keywords land on strong beats, let A 
represent the keywords, let B represent the strong beats, 
let 𝑃(𝐴∩𝐵)  represent the probability of overall keywords 
4http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict 

landing on strong beats, let 𝑃(𝐵) represent the probability of 
strong beats occurring out of all beats, and let 𝑃(𝐴 | 𝐵) 
represent the likelihood of keywords occurring on the 
occurrence of strong beats. According to the conditional 
probability formula, 𝑃(𝐴 | 𝐵) can be calculated as 
                                𝑃(𝐴 | 𝐵) =
𝑃(𝐴 ∩ 𝐵)
𝑃(𝐵)  .                               (3) 
2) Cosine Similarity 
Cosine similarity [22] is one of the similarity measures for 
a vector space model.  It measures the cosine of an angle formed 
by the projection of two vectors in a multi-dimensional space. 
To be more specific, given two vectors, A and B, representing 
two binary patterns, such as KP and WPSP, respectively, the 
cosine similarity is utilized to measure the similarity of two 
patterns as shown in the following formula:   
                  𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦= 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃) =
𝐴⋅𝐵
 ||𝐴|| ||𝐵||                       (4) 
In Equation (4), ||𝐴|| is the Euclidean norm of vector A = 
(a1, a2, …, an), defined as √𝑎12 + 𝑎22 + ⋯+ 𝑎𝑛2 . 
Conceptually, it is the length of the vector. Similarly,  ||𝐵|| is 
the Euclidean norm of vector B. 
The cosine similarity is a real number between 0.0 and 1.0. 
The higher the similarity, the smaller the angle is between two 
vectors, A and B, in the vector space. That is, the closer the two 
vectors are, the better the match. Otherwise, a lower similarity 
represents a lower chance of being matched with each other. 
Unlike conditional probability, cosine similarity is an 
overall matching check. It can check both whether keywords 
land on strong beats as well as whether non-keywords and weak 
beats match at the same time.  In this paper, we use both 
matching methods for the experiments. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  
This study examines lyrics-rhythm matching in using 
quantitative data gathered from a systematically selected 
dataset of songs. Our system is scalable and can be used for 
large datasets.  
In this experiment, we use the Children’s Song Dataset 
(CSD) [23] to pilot our study. This dataset consists of 50 
English songs and 50 Korean songs. Each song is sung in two 
different keys by a professional female singer stored in .wav 
file format, and each also includes a MIDI piano file, an English 
lyrics text file, and text annotations in .csv file format. For 
English songs, there are 100 MIDI and 100 .wav files in total. 
The text annotations record every change in the singer’s 
pronunciation (i.e., pronunables) using the Korean grapheme 
system, which differs from both the English grapheme system 
and the English syllabic system. This is the reason behind our 
introduction of pronunables. Additionally, each song contains a 
silence interval.  
The tempo and time signature are retrieved from the 
metadata of vocal files beforehand since it is already noted. 
From the MIDI files, only the beats are utilized. We use Pretty 
MIDI5 to process the MIDI data.  
 
 
Fig. 4. The plot of beat locations over the waveform after beat tracking 
Fig. 4 shows the tracked beats that are distributed over the 
waveform. In this example of the song file, the graph’s 
amplitude range is (-1.0, 1.0), and the time spans over one 
minute. The gray lines represent every identified beat in the 
singing vocal audio. Based on the gray lines, some of the beats 
at the end are not tracked, which can be due to the duration of 
the last note. This does not affect our study. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Beat tracking for the music MIDI and visualization with the piano roll 
of notes and the song’s strong beats 
 
Likewise, beat tracking is applied to the accompaniment 
music MIDI file separately as shown in Fig. 5. The note range 
span an octave (from C4 to C5) [2]. The red lines represent the 
first strong beats (i.e., downbeats) from each measure and the 
gray lines represent all other beats. Both lines include the rest 
period. All the beats are perfectly aligned, which is because 
computer-generated MIDI files are error-free. 
 
Fig. 6. The piano roll of notes and all unaligned vocal beats 
 
In Fig. 6, both vocal beats and music beats are drawn on the 
same piano roll graph, which also includes the rest period. It 
clearly indicates that the aqua-colored beat lines appear to be 
misaligned with the music beats in some areas, particularly 
during the silent interval in this example. This shows that each 
slight delay in the singer’s voice accumulates over time, 
resulting in larger misalignments until the singer is onbeat again.    
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 7. Rhythm alignment. The music beats are in gray, and the unaligned vocal 
beats are in aqua in (a). Aligned vocal beats are in orange in (b). 
 
In Fig. 7, (a) displays the unaligned vocal beats with music 
beats in the waveform and (b) shows the aligned vocal beats 
with music beats after rhythm alignment (i.e., rhythm-based 
audio-to-MIDI alignment). From the figures, our alignment 
algorithm has demonstrated a high accuracy. 
5https://github.com/craffel/pretty-midi 

In Fig. 8 (a), it indicates the original vocal beats and original 
pronunable locations on the singing vocal wave. The 
misalignment and early cutoff are still shown through the gray 
lines as they are from the singing vocal file. Upon completion 
of pronunable locating in Fig. 8 (b), the pronunable beats are 
matched with the music beats since every vocal beat is perfectly 
aligned with the music strong beats. Fig. 8 (c) further visualizes 
the aligned and matched pronunable beats on the piano roll with 
notes. The red lines indicate the first and second strong beats 
from the MIDI file and the gray lines indicate all the strong 
beats from the MIDI file, including places where no note is 
plotted, such as the rest period. On the other hand, the red lines 
only show the beats which pronunables are aligned with and 
therefore do not include the rest period.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
    
 
(c) 
 
Fig. 8. Pronunable locating.  
(a) The original unaligned vocal beats (gray) and pronunable beats (orange).  
(b) Aligned and matched pronunable beats with music strong beats (orange).  
(c) Aligned pronunable beats and all matched corresponding music strong beats 
(red) on the piano roll of notes. 
 
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show various conditional probabilities 
given strong beats in several cases. Only the first key is marked, 
but there are 100 songs displayed in the graph. Fig. 9 describes 
the likelihood of the keywords occurring on the occurrence of 
strong beats. The bar chart compares the probabilities of each 
song with each other. The scatter plot presents a distribution of 
the probabilities over all of the song indices. The histogram 
displays the count of each probability range. To compare with 
the paper [9], we also performed a general association between 
musically accented notes and stressed syllables using the same 
dataset. Fig. 10 indicates such likelihood of the stressed 
syllables landing on strong beats.  
More specifically, in Fig. 9 (a), based on the bar chart (a) 
and scatter chart (b), most of the probabilities concentrated in 
two clusters: Cluster 1, which is between 0.7 and 0.8, and 
Cluster 2, which is between 0.9 and 1.0. Additionally, Fig. 9 (c) 
indicates that around 12% of songs have 1.0 matching 
probability (i.e., all keywords landing on strong beats) and 
around 30% of songs have 0.9 or higher matching probabilities. 
Thus, it can be concluded that keywords are frequently 
associated with strong beats and that strong beats help 
emphasize keywords.  
By comparing with keyword-strong-beat matching as 
shown in Fig. 9, Fig. 10 indicates there are two probability 
concentrations for stressed syllables landing on strong beats: 
Cluster 1, which is between 0.6 and 0.7, and Cluster 2, which is 
between 0.75 and 0.85. Additionally, around 20% of songs have 
0.9 or higher matching probabilities. Likewise, it shows that 
stressed syllables are also frequently associated with strong 
beats and that strong beats help emphasize stressed syllables.  
However, it is evident that keywords have stronger 
associations with Strong Beats (SB) than stressed syllables with 
strong beats as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 as well as 
summarized in Table I. This is because in many pieces of music, 
there are instances where the keyword lands on a strong beat, 
yet certain stressed syllables do not. 
Our experimental results reveal an average of an 0.81 
matching probability for our proposed approach, and around 30% 
of the songs have a match between keywords and strong beats 
that is at least 0.9, including 12% songs with all keywords 
landing on strong beats (probability = 1.0). Regarding the 
strong beat matching probability of 0.65 or lower, only 8% of 
the songs are under this probability for keywords, whereas for 
stressed syllables, it is 18%. We appreciate the CSD dataset, but 
it still has some limitations. There are occasional typos and 
mispronunciations in the lyrics, so our methods are sometimes 
unable to recognize these differences, which affects the 
matching accuracy. 
To compare both cases for overall matching, cosine 
similarity in Formula 4 is utilized in this study. Fig. 11 (a) 
shows the overall similarity histogram for two patterns, WPSP 
and KP, related to keywords. Since each pattern only includes 
1 or 0, it can be considered as a binary vector. 1 in the WPSP 
means that at least one of the pronunables of a word land on a 
strong beat while 0 means that all of the pronunables of a word 
land on at least one weak beat. But as for KP, 1 represents a 
keyword while 0 represents a non-keyword. In Table II and Fig. 
11 (a), it clearly indicates that 46% of songs have 0.70 or higher 
similarity between WPSP and KP. That is, keywords tend to 
land on strong beats and non-keywords tend to land on weak 
beats for overall matching. Additionally, only around 7% of the 
songs have 0.55 or lower similarity between WPSP and KP, 
which reinforces the strong overall matching tendency. 
Fig. 11 (b) shows the similarity histogram for two patterns, 
PSP and the Stressed Syllable Strong-beat Pattern (SSSP). Both 
are binary vectors. 1 in the stressed syllable pattern means a 
stressed syllable landing on a strong beat while 0 means 
unstressed syllable landing on a certain beat (a strong or weak 
beat). In the figure, it shows that 21% of the songs have 0.70 or 
higher similarity between two patterns. Furthermore, from 
Table II, about 28% of songs have 0.55 or lower similarity 
between PSP and SSSP. In comparison with Fig. 10, it can be 
further concluded that keywords have a stronger association 
with strong beats than stressed syllables. 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposes a novel multimodal lyrics-rhythm 
matching approach that uses creative and efficient rhythm 
alignment, pronunable locating, syllabic stress identification, 
lyrical keyword extraction, and various patterning methods to 
computationally unveil strong correlations between lyrics and 
rhythm. Our approach can be applied to any language without 
limitations because we place emphasis on keywords, not 

TABLE II. SIMILARITY COMPARISONS BETWEEN KEYWORDS AND STRESSED 
SYLLABLES LANDING ON STRONG BEATS 
Similarity 
Keywords w/ SBs 
Stressed Syllables w/ SBs 
Average 
0.68 
0.62 
<= 0.55 
7% 
28% 
>= 0.70 
46% 
21% 
>= 0.80 
7% 
4% 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
Fig. 10. The probabilities of stressed syllables landing on strong beats  
(a) The probabilities of stressed syllables landing on strong beats 
(b) The probability distribution of stressed syllables landing on SBs 
(c) The probability histogram of stressed syllables landing on SBs 
 
TABLE I. PROBABILITY COMPARISONS BETWEEN KEYWORDS AND STRESSED 
SYLLABLES LANDING ON STRONG BEATS 
Probability 
Keywords w/ SBs 
Stressed Syllables w/ SBs 
Average 
0.81 
0.77 
Cluster 1 
0.70 - 0.80 
0.60 - 0.70 
Cluster 2 
0.90 - 1.0 
0.75 - 0.85 
>= 0.90 
27% of songs 
20% of songs 
< 0.65 
8% of songs 
18% of songs 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
 (c) 
 
Fig. 9. The probabilities of keywords landing on strong beats (100 songs) 
     (a) The probabilities of keywords landing on strong beats  
     (b) The probability distribution of keywords landing on strong beats  
     (c) The probability histogram of keywords landing on strong beats  
 
           
                                  
 
                                                    (a)                                                                                                                             (b) 
Fig. 11. The similarity histograms of KP and SSSP for all songs 
(a) The similarity histogram of keywords landing on strong beats 
            (b) The similarity histogram of stressed syllables landing on strong beats 
 

stressed syllables. Moreover, our experimental results show 
that both stressed syllables and keywords tend to land on strong 
beats, with the matching between keywords and strong beats 
having a higher probability. But most importantly, our method 
uses audio instead of sheet music (e.g. MusicXML) with 
metadata, which is more challenging because information is not 
readily available. Using audio broadens our impact and extends 
our method to many more horizons and opportunities that are 
yet to be explored. 
There are some limitations on our study, however. One 
limitation is our reliability on other libraries and dictionaries for 
some aspects of our study such as beat tracking and 
syllabication. In addition, there is a lack of similar audio 
datasets with pronunable annotations, so the size of the data 
used for this study is small even though our system is designed 
to fit the large datasets. Thus, future work includes adding 
singing 
audio 
recognition 
and 
automatic 
pronunable 
annotations to expand the method’s use to larger and more 
different datasets, which reduces the overall human error as 
well. Furthermore, we will work on lessening and eventually 
completely eliminating the reliance on other libraries or 
dictionaries. This approach may also be used to generate more 
accurate music scores from singing audio because in our study, 
the results have shown that our establishment of a precise 
connection between the lyrical keywords and strong beats is 
accurate. Moreover, our methods can be improved upon in the 
future to determine the more appropriate syllabic stress pattern 
variant for various situations based on part-of-speech tagging 
using NLP techniques, as there may be multiple stress patterns 
for one word.
