Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
EVOLVING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
ALGORITHMS
John D. Co-Reyes, Yingjie Miao, Daiyi Peng, Esteban Real,
Sergey Levine, Quoc V. Le, Honglak Lee, Aleksandra Faust∗
Research at Google, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
ABSTRACT
We propose a method for meta-learning reinforcement learning algorithms by
searching over the space of computational graphs which compute the loss function
for a value-based model-free RL agent to optimize. The learned algorithms are
domain-agnostic and can generalize to new environments not seen during train-
ing. Our method can both learn from scratch and bootstrap off known existing
algorithms, like DQN, enabling interpretable modiﬁcations which improve perfor-
mance. Learning from scratch on simple classical control and gridworld tasks, our
method rediscovers the temporal-difference (TD) algorithm. Bootstrapped from
DQN, we highlight two learned algorithms which obtain good generalization per-
formance over other classical control tasks, gridworld type tasks, and Atari games.
The analysis of the learned algorithm behavior shows resemblance to recently pro-
posed RL algorithms that address overestimation in value-based methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
Designing new deep reinforcement learning algorithms that can efﬁciently solve across a wide va-
riety of problems generally requires a tremendous amount of manual effort. Learning to design
reinforcement learning algorithms or even small sub-components of algorithms would help ease this
burden and could result in better algorithms than researchers could design manually. Our work might
then shift from designing these algorithms manually into designing the language and optimization
methods for developing these algorithms automatically.
Reinforcement learning algorithms can be viewed as a procedure that maps an agent’s experience to
a policy that obtains high cumulative reward over the course of training. We formulate the problem
of training an agent as one of meta-learning: an outer loop searches over the space of computational
graphs or programs that compute the objective function for the agent to minimize and an inner loop
performs the updates using the learned loss function. The objective of the outer loop is to maximize
the training return of the inner loop algorithm.
Our learned loss function should generalize across many different environments, instead of being
speciﬁc to a particular domain. Thus, we design a search language based on genetic programming
(Koza, 1993) that can express general symbolic loss functions which can be applied to any envi-
ronment. Data typing and a generic interface to variables in the MDP allow the learned program to
be domain agnostic. This language also supports the use of neural network modules as subcompo-
nents of the program, so that more complex neural network architectures can be realized. Efﬁciently
searching over the space of useful programs is generally difﬁcult. For the outer loop optimization,
we use regularized evolution (Real et al., 2019), a recent variant of classic evolutionary algorithms
that employ tournament selection (Goldberg & Deb, 1991). This approach can scale with the num-
ber of compute nodes and has been shown to work for designing algorithms for supervised learning
(Real et al., 2020). We adapt this method to automatically design algorithms for reinforcement
learning.
While learning from scratch is generally less biased, encoding existing human knowledge into the
learning process can speed up the optimization and also make the learned algorithm more inter-
pretable. Because our search language expresses algorithms as a generalized computation graph, we

1
arXiv:2101.03958v6  [cs.LG]  10 Nov 2022

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 1: Method overview. We use regularized evolution to evolve a population of RL algorithms. A mutator
alters top performing algorithms to produce a new algorithm. The performance of the algorithm is evaluated
over a set of training environments and the population is updated. Our method can incorporating existing
knowledge by starting the population from known RL algorithms instead of purely from scratch.
can embed known RL algorithms in the graphs of the starting population of programs. We compare
starting from scratch with bootstrapping off existing algorithms and ﬁnd that while starting from
scratch can learn existing algorithms, starting from existing knowledge leads to new RL algorithms
which can outperform the initial programs.
We learn two new RL algorithms which outperform existing algorithms in both sample efﬁciency
and ﬁnal performance on the training and test environments. The learned algorithms are domain
agnostic and generalize to new environments. Importantly, the training environments consist of
a suite of discrete action classical control tasks and gridworld style environments while the test
environments include Atari games and are unlike anything seen during training.
The contribution of this paper is a method for searching over the space of RL algorithms, which we
instantiate by developing a formal language that describes a broad class of value-based model-free
reinforcement learning methods. Our search language enables us to embed existing algorithms into
the starting graphs which leads to faster learning and interpretable algorithms. We highlight two
learned algorithms which generalize to completely new environments. Our analysis of the meta-
learned programs shows that our method automatically discovers algorithms that share structure to
recently proposed RL innovations, and empirically attain better performance than deep Q-learning
methods.
2
RELATED WORK
Learning to learn is an established idea in in supervised learning, including meta-learning with
genetic programming (Schmidhuber, 1987; Holland, 1975; Koza, 1993), learning a neural network
update rule (Bengio et al., 1991), and self modifying RNNs (Schmidhuber, 1993). Genetic program-
ming has been used to ﬁnd new loss functions (Bengio et al., 1994; Trujillo & Olague, 2006). More
recently, AutoML (Hutter et al., 2018) aims to automate the machine learning training process. Au-
tomated neural network architecture search (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002; Real et al., 2017; 2019;
Liu et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2016; Elsken et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018) has made large improve-
ments in image classiﬁcation. Instead of learning the architecture, AutoML-Zero (Real et al., 2020)
learns the algorithm from scratch using basic mathematical operations. Our work shares similar
ideas, but is applied to the RL setting and assumes additional primitives such as neural network
modules. In contrast to AutoML-Zero, we learn computational graphs with the goal of automating
RL algorithm design. Our learned RL algorithms generalize to new problems, not seen in training.
Automating RL. While RL is used for AutoML (Zoph & Le, 2016; Zoph et al., 2018; Cai et al.,
2018; Bello et al., 2017), automating RL itself has been somewhat limited. RL requires different
design choices compared to supervised learning, including the formulation of reward and policy
update rules. All of which affect learning and performance, and are usually chosen through trial and
error. AutoRL addresses the gap by applying the AutoML framework from supervised learning to
the MDP setting in RL. For example, evolutionary algorithms are used to mutate the value or actor
network weights (Whiteson & Stone, 2006; Khadka & Tumer, 2018), learn task reward (Faust et al.,
2019), tune hyperparameters (Tang & Choromanski, 2020; Franke et al., 2020), or search for a neural
network architecture (Song et al., 2020; Franke et al., 2020). This paper focuses on task-agnostic
RL update rules in the value-based RL setting which are both interpretable and generalizable.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Meta-learning in RL. Recent work has focused on few-shot task adaptation. Finn et al. (2017);
Finn & Levine (2018) meta-learns initial parameters which can quickly adapt to new tasks, while
RL2 (Duan et al., 2016) and concurrent work (Wang et al., 2017), formulates RL itself as a learning
problem that is learned with an RNN. The meta-learned component of these works is tuned to a par-
ticular domain or environment, in the form of NN weights which cannot be used for completely new
domains with potentially different sized inputs. Neural Programmer-Interpreters (Reed & De Fre-
itas, 2015; Pierrot et al., 2019) overcome the environment generalization challenge by learning hi-
erarchical neural programs with domain-speciﬁc encoders for different environments. Here, the
computational graph has a ﬂexible architecture and generalizes across different environments.
Learning RL algorithms or their components, such as a reward bonus or value update function, has
been studied previously with meta-gradients (Kirsch et al., 2020; Chebotar et al., 2019; Oh et al.,
2020), evolutionary strategies (Houthooft et al., 2018), and RNNs (Duan et al., 2016). Although
our work also learns RL algorithms, the update rule is represented as a computation graph which
includes both neural network modules and symbolic operators. One key beneﬁt is that the resulting
graph can be interpreted analytically and can optionally be initialized from known existing algo-
rithms. Prior work that focuses on learning RL losses, generalizes to different goals and initial
conditions within a single environment (Houthooft et al., 2018), or learns a domain invariant policy
update rule that can generalize to new environments (Kirsch et al., 2020). Another approach searches
over the space of curiosity programs using a similar language of DAGs with neural network modules
(Alet et al., 2020a) and performs the meta-training on a single environment. In contrast, our method
is applied to learn general RL update rules and meta-trained over a diverse set of environments.
3
LEARNING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHMS
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the problem setup. An inner loop method Eval(L, E) evaluates a
learned RL algorithm L on a given environment E. Given access to this procedure, the goal for the
outer loop optimization is to learn a RL algorithm with high training return over a set of training
environments. We then describe the search language which enables the learning of general loss
functions and the outer loop method which can efﬁciently search over this space.
3.1
PROBLEM SETUP
Figure 2:
Visualization of a RL algorithm,
DQN, as a computational graph which com-
putes the loss L
=
(Q(st, at) −(rt + γ ∗
maxa Qtarg(st+1, a)))2. Input nodes are in blue,
parameter nodes in gray, operation nodes in or-
ange, and output in green.
We assume that the agent parameterized with
policy πθ(at|st) outputs actions at at each
time step to an environment E and receives re-
ward rt and next state st+1.
Since we are
focusing on discrete action value-based RL
methods, θ will be the parameters for a Q-
value function and the policy is obtained from
the Q-value function using an ϵ-greedy strat-
egy. The agent saves this stream of transitions
(st, st+1, at, rt) to a replay buffer and contin-
ually updates the policy by minimizing a loss
function L(st, at, rt, st+1, θ, γ) over these tran-
sitions with gradient descent. Training will oc-
cur for a ﬁxed number of M training episodes
where in each episode m, the agent earns
episode return Rm = PT
t=0 rt. The perfor-
mance of an algorithm for a given environment
is summarized by the normalized average train-
ing return, 1
M
PM
m=1
Ri−Rmin
Rmax−Rmin , where Rmin
and Rmax are the minimum and maximum re-
turn for that environment. We assume these are known ahead of time. This inner loop evaluation
procedure Eval(L, E) is outlined in Algorithm 1. To score an algorithm, we use the normalized av-
erage training return instead of the ﬁnal behavior policy return because the former metric will factor
in sample efﬁciency as well.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
The goal of the meta-learner is to ﬁnd the optimal loss function L(st, at, rt, st+1, θ, γ) to optimize
πθ with maximal normalized average training return over the set of training environments. The full
objective for the meta-learner is:
L∗= arg max
L
"X
E
Eval(L, E)
#
L is represented as a computational graph which we describe in the next section.
3.2
SEARCH LANGUAGE
Our search language for the algorithm L should be expressive enough to represent existing algo-
rithms while enabling the learning of new algorithms which can obtain good generalization perfor-
mance across a wide range of environments. Similar to Alet et al. (2020a), we describe the RL
algorithm as general programs with a domain speciﬁc language, but we target updates to the policy
rather than reward bonuses for exploration. Algorithms will map transitions (st, at, st+1, rt), policy
parameters θ, and discount factor γ into a scalar loss to be optimized with gradient descent. We
express L as a computational graph or directed acyclic graph (DAG) of nodes with typed inputs and
outputs. See Figure 2 for a visualization of DQN expressed in this form. Nodes are of several types:
Input nodes represent inputs to the program, and include elements from transitions (st, at, st+1, rt)
and constants, such as the discount factor γ.
Parameter nodes are neural network weights, which can map between various data types. For
example, the weights for the Q-value network will map an input node with state data type to a list of
real numbers for each action.
Operation nodes compute outputs given inputs from parent nodes. This includes applying param-
eter nodes, as well as basic math operators from linear algebra, probability, and statistics. A full
list of operation nodes is provided in Appendix A. By default, we set the last node in the graph to
compute the output of the program which is the scalar loss function to be optimized. Importantly,
the inputs and outputs of nodes are typed among (state, action, vector, ﬂoat, list, probability). This
typing allows for programs to be applied to any domain. It also restricts the space of programs to
ones with valid typing which reduces the search space.
Algorithm 1 Algorithm Evaluation, Eval(L, E)
1: Input: RL Algorithm L, Environment E, training episodes M
2: Initialize: Q-value parameters θ, target parameters θ′ empty replay
buffer D
3: for i = 1 to M do
4:
for t = 0 to T do
5:
With probability ϵ, select a random action at,
6:
otherwise select at = arg maxa Q(st, a)
7:
Step environment st+1, rt ∼E(at, st)
8:
D ←D ∪{st, at, rt, st+1}
9:
Update parameters θ ←θ −∇θL(st, at, rt, st+1, θ, γ)
10:
Update target θ′ ←θ
11:
end for
12:
Compute episode return Rm = PT
t=0 rt
13: end for
14: Output:
15:
Normalized training performance
1
M
PM
m=1
Rm−Rmin
Rmax−Rmin
Algorithm 2 Evolving RL Algorithms
1: Input: Training environments {E}, hurdle environment Eh, hurdle
threshold α, optional existing algorithm A
2: Initialize: Population P of RL algorithms {L}, history H, random-
ized inputs I. If bootstrapping, initialize P with A.
3: Score each L in P with H[L].score ←P
E Eval(L, E)
4: for c = 0 to C do
5:
Sample tournament T ∼Uniform(P)
6:
Parent algorithm L ←highest score algorithm in T
7:
Child algorithm L′ ←Mutate(L)
8:
H[L′].hash ←Hash(L′(I))
9:
if H[L′].hash was new and Eval(L′, Eh) > α then
10:
H[L′].score ←P
E Eval(L′, E)
11:
end if
12:
Add L′ to population P
13:
Remove oldest L from population
14: end for
15: Output: Algorithm L with highest score
3.3
EVOLUTIONARY SEARCH METHOD
Evaluating thousands of programs over a range of complex environments is prohibitively expensive,
especially if done serially. We adapt a genetic programming (Koza, 1993) method for the search
method and use regularized evolution (Real et al., 2019), a variant of classic evolutionary algo-
rithms that employ tournament selection (Goldberg & Deb, 1991). Regularized evolution has been
shown to work for learning supervised learning algorithms (Real et al., 2020) and can be parallelized
across compute nodes. Tournament selection keeps a population of P algorithms and improves the
population through cycles. Each cycle picks a tournament of T < P algorithms at random and
selects the best algorithm in the tournament as a parent. The parent is mutated into a child algorithm
which gets added to the population while the oldest algorithm in the population is removed. We use
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
a single type of mutation which ﬁrst chooses which node in the graph to mutate and then replaces it
with a random operation node with inputs drawn uniformly from all possible inputs.
There exists a combinatorially large number of graph conﬁgurations. Furthermore, evaluating a sin-
gle graph, which means training the full inner loop RL algorithm, can take up a large amount of time
compared to the supervised learning setting. Speeding up the search and avoiding needless compu-
tation are needed to make the problem more tractable. We extend regularized evolution with several
techniques, detailed below, to make the optimization more efﬁcient. The full training procedure is
outlined in Algorithm 2.
Functional equivalence check (Real et al., 2020; Alet et al., 2020b). Before evaluating a program,
we check if it is functionally equivalent to any previously evaluated program. This check is done by
hashing the concatenated output of the program for 10 values of randomized inputs. If a mutated
program is functionally equivalent to an older program, we still add it to the population, but use the
saved score of the older program. Since some nodes of the graph do not always contribute to the
output, parts of the mutated program may eventually contribute to a functionally different program.
Early hurdles (So et al., 2019). We want poor performing programs to terminate early so that we
can avoid unneeded computation. We use the CartPole environment as an early hurdle environment
Eh by training a program for a ﬁxed number of episodes. If an algorithm performs poorly, then
episodes will terminate in a short number of steps (as the pole falls rapidly) which quickly exhausts
the number of training episodes. We use Eval(L, Eh) < α as the threshold for poor performance
with α chosen empirically.
Program checks. We perform basic checks to rule out and skip training invalid programs. The loss
function needs to be a scalar value so we check if the program output type is a ﬂoat (type(L) = R).
Additionally, we check if each program is differentiable with respect to the policy parameters by
checking if a path exists in the graph between the output and the policy parameter node.
Learning from Scratch and Bootstrapping. Our method enables both learning from scratch and
learning from existing knowledge by bootstrapping the initial algorithm population with existing
algorithms. We learn algorithms from scratch by initializing the population of algorithms randomly.
An algorithm is sampled by sampling each operation node sequentially in the DAG. For each node,
an operation and valid inputs to that operation are sampled uniformly over all possible options.
While learning from scratch might uncover completely new algorithms that differ substantially from
the existing methods, this method can take longer to converge to a reasonable algorithm. We would
like to incorporate the knowledge we do have of good algorithms to bootstrap our search from a
better starting point. We initialize our graph with the loss function of DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) so
that the ﬁrst 7 nodes represent the standard DQN loss, while the remaining nodes are initialized
randomly. During regularized evolution, the nodes are not frozen, such that it is possible for the
existing sub-graph to be completely replaced if a better solution is found.
4
LEARNED RL ALGORITHM RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
We discuss the training setup and results of our experiments. We highlight two learned algorithms
with good generalization performance, DQNClipped and DQNReg, and analyze their structure. Ad-
ditional details are available at https://sites.google.com/view/evolvingrl and code is at
https://github.com/google/brain_autorl/tree/main/evolving_rl.
4.1
TRAINING SETUP
Meta-Training details: We search over programs with maximum 20 nodes, not including inputs or parameter
nodes. A full list of node types is provided in Appendix A. We use a population size of 300, tournament size of
25, and choose these parameters based on the ones used in (Real et al., 2019). Mutations occur with probability
0.95. Otherwise a new random program is sampled. The search is done over 300 CPUs and run for roughly
72 hours, at which point around 20, 000 programs have been evaluated. The search is distributed such that any
free CPU is allocated to a proposed individual such that there are no idle CPUs. Further meta-training details
are in Appendix B.
Training environments: The choice of training environments greatly affects the learned algorithms and their
generalization performance. At the same time, our training environments should be not too computationally
expensive to run as we will be evaluating thousands of RL algorithms. We use a range of 4 classical control
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
(a) Learning curve
(b) Performance histogram
Figure 3: Left: Meta-training performance over different number of environments from scratch, and boot-
strapping. Plotted as RL evaluation performance (sum of normalized training return across the training en-
vironments) over the number of candidate algorithms. Shaded region represents one standard deviation over
10 random seeds. More training environments leads to better algorithms. Bootstrapping from DQN speeds
up convergence and higher ﬁnal performance. Right: Meta-training performance histogram for bootstrapped
training. Many of the top programs have similar structure (Appendix D).
tasks (CartPole, Acrobat, MountainCar, LunarLander) and a set of 12 multitask gridworld style environments
from MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018). These environments are computationally cheap to run but also
chosen to cover a diverse set of situations. This includes dense and sparse reward, long time horizon, and tasks
requiring solving a sequence of subgoals such as picking up a key and unlocking a door. More details are in
Appendix C.
The training environments always include CartPole as an initial hurdle. If an algorithm succeeds on CartPole
(normalized training performance greater than 0.6), it then proceeds to a harder set of training environments.
For our experiments, we choose these training environments by sampling a set of 3 environments and leave
the rest as test environments. For learning from scratch we also compare the effect of number of training
environments on the learned algorithm by comparing training on just CartPole versus training on CartPole and
LunarLander.
RL Training details: For training the RL agent, we use the same hyperparameters across all training and test
environments except as noted. All neural networks are MLPs of size (256, 256) with ReLU activations. We use
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001. ϵ is decayed linearly from 1 to 0.05 over 1e3 steps for the
classical control tasks and over 1e5 steps for the MiniGrid tasks.
4.2
LEARNING CONVERGENCE
Figure 3a shows convergence over several training conﬁgurations. We ﬁnd that at the end of training roughly
70% of proposed algorithms are functionally equivalent to a previously evaluated program, while early hurdles
cut roughly another 40% of proposed non-duplicate programs.
Varying number of training environments: We compare learning from scratch with a single training environ-
ment (CartPole) versus with two training environments (CartPole and LunarLander). While both experiments
reach the maximum performance on these environments (Figure 3a), the learned algorithms are different. The
two-environment training setup learns the known TD loss
LDQN = (Q(st, at) −(rt + γ ∗max
a
Qtarg(st+1, a)))2
while the single-environment training setup learns a slight variation L
=
(Q(st, at) −(rt +
maxa Qtarg(st+1, a)))2 that does not use the discount, indicating that the range of difﬁculty on the training
environments is important for learning algorithms which can generalize.
Learning from scratch versus bootstrapping: In Figure 3a, we compare training from scratch versus train-
ing from bootstrapping on ﬁve training environments (CartPole, KeyCorridorS3R1, DynamicObstacle-6x6,
DoorKey-5x5, MiniGrid-FourRooms-v0). The training performance does not saturate, leaving room for im-
provement. Bootstrapping from DQN signiﬁcantly improves both the convergence and performance of the
meta-training, resulting in a 40% increase in ﬁnal training performance.
4.3
LEARNED RL ALGORITHMS: DQNCLIPPED AND DQNREG
In this section, we discuss two particularly interesting loss functions that were learned by our method, and that
have good generalization performance on the test environments. Let
Yt = rt + γ ∗max
a
Qtarg(st+1, a), and δ = Q(st, at) −Yt.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
The ﬁrst loss function DQNClipped is
LDQNClipped = max

Q(st, at), δ2 + Yt

+ max
h
Q(st, at) −Yt, γ(max
a
Qtarg(st+1, a))2i
.
LDQNClipped was trained from bootstrapping off DQN using three training environments (LunarLander,
MiniGrid-Dynamic-Obstacles-5x5, MiniGrid-LavaGapS5). It outperforms DQN and double-DQN, DDQN,
(van Hasselt et al., 2015) on both the training and unseen environments (Figure 4). The intuition behind this
loss function is that, if the Q-values become too large (when Q(st, at) > δ2 +Yt), the loss will act to minimize
Q(st, at) instead of the normal δ2 loss. Alternatively, we can view this condition as δ = Q(st, at) −Yt > δ2.
This means when δ is small enough then Q(st, at) are relatively close and the loss is just to minimize Q(st, at).
Figure 4: Performance of learned algorithms (DQNClipped and DQNReg) versus baselines (DQN and DDQN)
on training and test environments as measured by episode return over 10 training seeds. A dashed line indi-
cates that the algorithm was meta-trained on that environment while a solid line indicates a test environment.
DQNReg can match or outperform the baselines on almost all the training and test environments. Shaded
regions correspond to 1 standard deviation.
The second learned loss function, which we call DQNReg, is given by
LDQNReg = 0.1 ∗Q(st, at) + δ2.
DQNReg was trained from bootstrapping off DQN using three training environments (KeyCorridorS3R1,
Dynamic-Obstacles-6x6, DoorKey-5x5). In comparison to DQNClipped, DQNReg directly regularizes the
Q values with a weighted term that is always active. We note that both of these loss functions modify the
original DQN loss function to regularize the Q-values to be lower in value. While DQNReg is quite simple,
it matches or outperforms the baselines on all training and test environments including from classical con-
trol and Minigrid. It does particularly well on a few test environments (SimpleCrossingS9N1, DoorKey-6x6,
and Unlock) and solves the tasks when other methods fail to attain any reward. It is also much more stable
with lower variance between seeds, and more sample efﬁcient on test environments (LavaGapS5, Empty-6x6,
Empty-Random-5x5).
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Env
DQN
DDQN
PPO
DQNReg
Asteroid
1364.5
734.7
2097.5
2390.4
Bowling
50.4
68.1
40.1
80.5
Boxing
88.0
91.6
94.6
100.0
RoadRunner
39544.0
44127.0
35466.0
65516.0
Table 1:
Performance of learned algorithm
DQNReg against baselines on several Atari games.
Baseline numbers taken from reported papers.
In Table 1, we evaluate DQNReg on a set of Atari
games. We use the same architecture as in DQN (Mnih
et al., 2013) and use the same no-op evaluation procedure
which evaluates a trained policy every 1 million training
steps over 200 test episodes. Even though meta-training
was on computationally simple, non-image based en-
vironments, we ﬁnd that DQNReg can generalize to
image-based environments and outperform baselines.
The results for the baselines are taken from their respec-
tive papers (Mnih et al., 2013; van Hasselt et al., 2015;
Schulman et al., 2017).
These algorithms are related to recently proposed RL algorithms, conservative Q-learning (CQL) (Kumar et al.,
2020) and M-DQN (Vieillard et al., 2020). CQL learns a conservative Q-function by augmenting the standard
Bellman error objective with a simple Q-value regularizer: log P
a exp (Q(st, a)) −Q(st, at) which encour-
ages the agent to stay close to the data distribution while maintaining a maximum entropy policy. DQNReg
similarly augments the standard objective with a Q-value regularizer although does so in a different direction
by preventing overestimation. M-DQN modiﬁes DQN by adding the scaled log-policy (using the softmax Q-
values) to the immediate reward. Both of these methods can be seen as ways to regularize a value-based policy.
This resemblance indicates that our method can ﬁnd useful structures automatically that are currently being
explored manually, and could be used to propose new areas for researchers to explore.
We discover that the best performing algorithms from the experiment which learned DQNReg are consistent,
and in the form L = δ2 + k ∗Q(st, at). This loss could use further analysis and investigation, possibly
environment-speciﬁc tuning of the parameter k. See Appendix 3 for details.
4.4
ANALYSIS OF LEARNED ALGORITHMS
Figure 5: Overestimated value estimates is generally problematic in value-based RL. Our method learns algo-
rithms which regularize the Q-values helping with overestimation. We compare the estimated Q-values for our
learned algorithms and baselines with the optimal ground truth Q-values across several environments during
training. Estimate is for taking action zero from the initial state of the environment. While DQN overestimates
the Q-values, our learned algorithms DQNClipped and DQNReg underestimate the Q-values.
We analyze the learned algorithms to understand their beneﬁcial effect on performance. In Figure 5, we com-
pare the estimated Q-values for each algorithm. We see that DQN frequently overestimates the Q values while
DDQN consistently underestimates the Q values before converging to the ground truth Q value which are com-
puted with a manually designed optimal policy. DQNClipped has similar performance to DDQN, in that it
also consistently underestimates the Q values and does so slightly more aggressively than DDQN. DQNReg
signiﬁcantly undershoots the Q values and does not converge to the ground truth. Various works (van Hasselt
et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018) have shown that overestimated value estimates is
problematic and restricting the overestimation improves performance.
The loss function in DQNClipped is composed of the sum of two max operations, and so we can analyze when
each update rule is active. We interpret DQNClipped as max(v1, v2)+max(v2, v3) with four cases: 1) v1 > v2
and v3 > v4 2) v1 > v2 and v3 < v4 3) v1 < v2 and v3 < v4 4) v1 < v2 and v3 > v4. Case 2 corresponds to
minimizing the Q values. Case 3 would correspond to the normal DQN loss of δ2 since the parameters of Qtarg
are not updated during gradient descent. In Figure 6, we plot the proportion of when each case is active during
training. We see that usually case 3 is generally the most active with a small dip in the beginning but then stays
around 95%. Meanwhile, case 2, which regularizes the Q-values, has a small increase in the beginning and then
decreases later, matching with our analysis in Figure 6, which shows that DQNClipped strongly underestimates
the Q-values in the beginning of training. This can be seen as a constrained optimization where the amount of
Q-value regularization is tuned accordingly. The regularization is stronger in the beginning of training when
overestimation is problematic (Q(st, at) > δ2 + Yt) and gets weaker as δ2 gets smaller.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 6: Our learned algorithm, DQNClipped, can be broken down into four update rules where each rule
is active under certain conditions. Case 3 corresponds to normal TD learning while case 2 corresponds to
minimizing the Q-values. Case 2 is more active in the beginning when value overestimation is a problem and
then becomes less active as it is no longer needed.
5
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have presented a method for learning reinforcement learning algorithms. We design a general
language for representing algorithms which compute the loss function for value-based model-free RL agents to
optimize. We highlight two learned algorithms which although relatively simple, can obtain good generalization
performance over a wide range of environments. Our analysis of the learned algorithms sheds insight on their
beneﬁt as regularization terms which are similar to recently proposed algorithms. Our work is limited to
discrete action and value-based RL algorithms that are close to DQN, but could easily be expanded to express
more general RL algorithms such as actor-critic or policy gradient methods. How actions are sampled from the
policy could also be part of the search space. The set of environments we use for both training and testing could
also be expanded to include a more diverse set of problem types. We leave these problems for future work.
