The Real-World-Weight Cross-Entropy Loss 
Function: Modeling the Costs of Mislabeling 
Yaoshiang Ho, Samuel Wookey 
Thinky.AI Research, Los Angeles, CA 90027 USA 

 
ABSTRACT In this paper, we propose a new metric to measure goodness-of-fit for classifiers: the Real 
World Cost function. This metric factors in information about a real world problem, such as financial impact, 
that other measures like accuracy or F1 do not. This metric is also more directly interpretable for users. To 
optimize for this metric, we introduce the Real-World-Weight Cross-Entropy loss function, in both binary 
classification and single-label multiclass classification variants. Both variants allow direct input of real world 
costs as weights. For single-label, multiclass classification, our loss function also allows direct penalization 
of probabilistic false positives, weighted by label, during the training of a machine learning model. We 
compare the design of our loss function to the binary cross-entropy and categorical cross-entropy functions, 
as well as their weighted variants, to discuss the potential for improvement in handling a variety of known 
shortcomings of machine learning, ranging from imbalanced classes to medical diagnostic error to 
reinforcement of social bias. We create scenarios that emulate those issues using the MNIST data set and 
demonstrate empirical results of our new loss function. Finally, we discuss our intuition about why this 
approach works and sketch a proof based on Maximum Likelihood Estimation.  
INDEX TERMS machine learning, class imbalance, oversampling, undersampling, ethnic stereotypes, social 
bias, maximum likelihood estimation, cross-entropy, softmax 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Over the past several years, deep learning has achieved 
dramatic success in areas ranging from image recognition to 
speech recognition and decision making. As deep learning 
has been rapidly commercialized, issues have arisen.  
First, machine learning has shortcomings when analyzing 
imbalanced classes [1]. A simple and well-known thought 
experiment motivates the problem: when seeking to identify 
an uncommon disease with say a 1% occurrence, a trivial 
classifier that never predicts that disease is 99% accurate. 
Measures such as recall, precision, and F1 score are 
sometimes used as alternative measures of goodness-of-fit. 
Practitioners 
have 
also 
introduced 
heuristics 
like 
oversampling, undersampling, and weighted labels [2].  
Second, the approach of using softmax and its associated 
loss function for single-label, multiclass classification means 
that probabilistic false negatives are not directly penalized 
during training. This limits the ability to solve a variety of 
issues, ranging from reinforcement of social bias [3] to 
medical diagnostic errors that deserve extra scrutiny [4].  
In this paper, we propose a new metric for classifiers: the 
Real World Cost. This metric is more comprehensive than 
accuracy or F1 because it applies weights to each error based 
on an estimate of its impact in the real world, such as 
financial cost. The result is a metric that will be more familiar 
for some end users, compared to abstract concepts like F1 or 
overly simplistic measures like accuracy.  
We also describe and build an efficient implementation of 
a new loss function we call the “Real-World-Weight Cross-
Entropy” (RWWCE), which is designed to optimize for the 
Real World Cost. We find that RWWCE is a generalization 
of binary cross-entropy and softmax cross-entropy (which is 
also 
called 
categorical 
cross-entropy). 
Specifically, 
RWWCE adds weights to address false positives.  
Furthermore, we introduce a framework to set these 
weights based on factors that exist in the dataset or 
underlying problem to be solved. The framework is 
grounded in underlying costs of the real world problem, 
which means they should be discovered and set only once. 
These weights are not a machine learning model’s 
hyperparameters, which would require repeated adjustments 
based on heuristics.  
We apply the RWWCE loss function against binary 
imbalanced data to demonstrate improvements in Real 
World Cost. Our control group includes the approach of 
training a binary classifier neural network for accuracy, but 
then after training, tuning one of the hyperparameters 
(threshold) to optimize F1. We then discuss the similarities 

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
and differences between the RWWCE loss function and the 
heuristics of oversampling, undersampling, and weighted 
labels.  
Subsequently, we apply our RWWCE loss function 
towards single-label, multiclass classification, activated by 
softmax. We choose specific combinations of target label 
and possible incorrect predicted label to represent high 
expense or socially unacceptable mistakes. We demonstrate 
a reduction in these specific mislabeling errors and a 
reduction in Real World Cost. We also analyze the design of 
the softmax cross-entropy loss function to identify the 
specific additional capabilities of the RWWCE loss function. 
Finally, we sketch the outline of a proof, based on the 
underlying concepts of Maximum Likelihood Estimation, 
and conclude with future directions.  
 
II. RELATED WORK 
Widely available machine learning libraries like TensorFlow 
support weighting of the loss function [5]. For binary 
classification, the binary cross-entropy loss function can have 
a weight applied to the probabilistic false negative case. 
Setting this value greater than one increases the penalty for 
probabilistic false negatives during training. The value can be 
set to less than one to decrease the penalty for probabilistic 
false negatives. For multi-class classification, the categorical 
cross-entropy loss function can be weighted by class, 
increasing or decreasing the relative penalty of a probabilistic 
false negative for an individual class. Class-Balanced Loss 
sets these weights in proportion to the inverse of the number 
of samples per class [6].  
Focal Loss sets weights based on class and difficulty of 
classification. Easy to classify examples are given less 
weight [7].   
The idea of adding weights to increase the cost of specific 
combinations of targeted and predicted class in single-label, 
multiclass classification is described in [8]. 
Oversampling synthetically creates additional minority 
examples by replicating data points from a minority class. 
Undersampling removes some amount training data from the 
majority class. This has the added benefit of reducing the size 
of the training data. Both techniques and their extensions are 
surveyed in [9]. 
The Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique 
(SMOTE) creates synthetic training data in a more 
sophisticated way than plain oversampling [10]. Applied to 
a minority class, it synthesizes additional training data by 
interpolating between existing data points.  
Techniques have been developed to reduce social bias in 
some neural networks designs such as adjusting the high 
dimensional vectors representing individual words to 
remove differences in the distance from the concepts of male 
and female in word2vec [11] and the Seldonian approach of 
describing and regulating undesirable behavior [12].  
For pairs of a false negative and false positive that 
reference racist tropes, a high profile problem was reduced 
by eliminating the label entirely, an extreme version of a 
more general practice of ignoring the outputs from a machine 
learning model when confidence is below a certain threshold 
[13].  
Weighted maximum likelihood estimators [14] address 
the challenges of imbalanced classes from the perspective of 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation [15]. We address this 
further in the sketch of the proof of our RWWCE. 
In the case of binary classification, F1 is a common 
measure of goodness-of-fit for imbalanced classes. Weighted 
Maximum Likelihood was applied to optimize F1 score in 
[16], and, loss functions have been developed to allow a 
machine learning model to directly optimize F1 score [17].   
 
III. REAL-WORLD-WEIGHT CROSS-ENTROPY LOSS 
FUNCTION 
During neural network training, the cost function is the key 
to adjusting a neural network’s weights to create a better 
fitting machine learning model. Specifically, during forward 
propagation, the neural network is run on training set data, 
and outputs are generated which in the case of classification 
indicate the probability or confidence in possible labels. 
These probabilities are compared to the target labels, and, the 
loss function calculates a penalty for any deviation between 
the target label and the neural network’s outputs. During 
backpropagation the partial derivative of the loss function is 
calculated for each trainable weight of the neural network. 
The weights are adjusted by these partial derivatives. Under 
normal conditions, backpropagation iteratively adjusts the 
trainable weights of a neural network to produce a model 
with lower loss.  
The standard binary cross-entropy loss function is given 
by: 
 
𝐽"#$ = −1
𝑀)*𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7
8
,9:
+ (1 −𝑦,) × log11 −ℎ3(𝑥,)7<     (1) 
where 
M 
number of training examples 
𝑦,  
target label for training example m 
𝑥,  input for training example m 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃  
 
The first term, 𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7 , disincentivizes 
probabilistic false negatives during training. For example, 
suppose a training example has target 1, the output of the 
machine learning model is 0.6. We say that there is 
a probabilistic false negative of 40%. In other words, from a 
Bayesian perspective, the model has 40% confidence in the 
wrong result. Or from a Frequentist perspective, the model 
will be wrong 40% of the time. The loss function penalizes 
this 40% by returning the value -log(0.6) = 0.22. In the 
perfect case, if the binary classifier outputs 1, then it is 
completely accurate for the training example and the loss is 

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
-log(1) = 0. The same logic applies for the second term and 
probabilistic false positives.  
The standard weighted binary cross-entropy loss function 
is given by: 
𝐽?"#$ = −1
𝑀)*𝑤× 𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7
8
,9:
+ (1 −𝑦,) × log11 −ℎ3(𝑥,)7<       (2) 
where 
M 
number of training examples 
w  
weight 
𝑦,  
target label for training example m 
𝑥,  input for training example m 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃  
 
The additional weight can be set to adjust the importance 
of the positive labels. A common use is to give more weight 
to minority classes.  
For the case of single-label, categorical classification (i.e. 
softmax activation) the standard categorical cross-entropy 
loss is given by:  
 
𝐽##$ = −1
𝑀) ) 𝑦,
B × log1ℎ3(𝑥,, 𝑘)7
8
,9:
E
B9:
            (3) 
where 
M 
number of training examples 
K 
number of classes 
𝑦,
B  
target label for training example m for class k 
𝑥  
input for training example m 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃  
 
The standard weighted categorical cross-entropy loss is 
given by:  
 
𝐽?##$ = −1
𝑀) ) 𝑤B × 𝑦,
B × log1ℎ3(𝑥,, 𝑘)7
8
,9:
E
B9:
       (4) 
where 
M 
number of training examples 
K 
number of classes 
𝑤B  
weight for class k 
𝑦,
B  
target label for training example m for class k 
𝑥,  input for training example m 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃 
 
The Real-World-Weight Cross-Entropy (RWWCE) loss 
function introduces weights on the cost of missing a 
positive, and a separate weight for missing a negative. For 
binary classification, RWWCE loss function is given by: 
 
𝐽"H??#$ = −1
𝑀)*𝑤,#IJ × 𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7
8
,9:
+ 𝑤,#IK × (1 −𝑦,) × log11 −ℎ3(𝑥,)7< 
(5) 
where  
M 
number of training examples 
𝑤,#IJ marginal cost of a false negative over true positive 
𝑤,#IK marginal cost of a false positive over true negative 
𝑦,  
target label for training example m 
𝑥,  input for training example m 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃  
 
For the single-label, categorical classification, the 
RWWCE is given by: 
 
𝐽#H??#$ = −1
𝑀) ) L𝑤𝑚𝑐𝑓𝑛
𝑘
× 𝑦,
B × log1ℎ3(𝑥,, 𝑘)7
8
,9:
E
B9:
+ ) 𝑤,#IK
B,B′ × 𝑦,
B
E
B′9:
× log Q1 −ℎ31𝑥,, 𝑘′7RS 
   s.t. 
 
𝑘′ ≠𝑘 
(6) 
where 
M 
number of training examples 
K  
number of classes 
𝑦,
B  
target label for training example m for class k 
ℎ3  
model with neural network weights 𝜃  
𝑥, 
input for training example m 
𝑤,#IJ
B
marginal cost of a false negative over a true 
positive  
𝑤,#IK
B,B′marginal cost of a false positive of class k’ over a 
true negative, when the true positive is k 
 
The false positive matrix wVWXY has unused values along 
the main diagonal, because they represent true negatives, 
not false positives. This matrix and its associated triple 
summation in the loss function is the essence of modeling 
additional loss in the case of probabilistic false positives.  
In future work, we will explore multilabel, multiclass 
categorization. With k labels, the weight matrix could be as 
large as 2B by 2B. Unlike RWWCE for binary and single-
label, multiclass categorization, we have not developed an 
efficient implementation of a multilabel, multiclass 
RWWCE loss function.  
IV. BINARY CLASSIFICATION OF IMBALANCED 
CLASSES 
We tested the RWWCE loss function against imbalanced 
classes for binary classification.  
We created 100 data sets based on MNIST. MNIST is a 
widely used data set for neural network training consisting of 
70,000 examples of images of hand written Arabic numerals 
along with labels (targets). Each example is a 28 by 28 pixel 
image, which we flattened to 784 pixels in a single vector.  

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
For each of the 10 possible digits, there are roughly 7,000 
examples.  
For the first data set, we took the first 630 examples of the 
numeral “0” and labeled them to 1 (true). We took the 63,000 
examples not labeled with the digit “0” and labeled them to 0 
(false). This was our first data set. We divided up this data set 
into 67.5% training, 7.5% validation, and 25% test.  
Our second through tenth data sets repeated the above 
procedure but with the second through tenth batches of 630 
examples of the number “0”.  
We repeated the above 10 steps for the remaining digits “1” 
through “9” for a total of 100 data sets.  
We trained 100 control neural networks and 100 
experimental neural networks. Their only difference was the 
loss function. All were trained with 10 epochs and a batch size 
of 100. All took 784 inputs and then a penultimate dense layer 
of 10, activated by ReLU.  The final layer was a dense layer 
of 1 with a sigmoid activation, the standard technique for 
binary classification. All were implemented with the same 
Keras library using TensorFlow as the backend. All were run 
on the Google Colaboratory platform. The code is available at 
https://github.com/yaoshiang/The-Real-World-Weight-
Crossentropy-Loss-Function. 
The control neural networks used the standard Keras binary 
cross-entropy loss function, which wraps the TensorFlow 
implementation. The experimental neural networks used the 
custom RWWCE loss function with weights described below.  
We created a second set of 100 control neural networks. We 
took the first 100 control neural networks and without 
adjusting any of their weights, used the method of searching 
across all possible thresholds to maximize F1 [15]. In other 
words, instead of treating an output greater than the threshold 
of 0.5 as a prediction of true, we searched for a different 
threshold to use as the prediction of true. 
For our experimental neural networks, we set the marginal 
cost of not identifying a positive (marginal cost of FN) at 2,000 
(e.g. for the first three data sets, imagining the label “0” to 
represent a rare but expensive disease that if missed, costs 
$2,000 in future medical treatment and pain and suffering). 
We also set the marginal cost of a false positive at 100 (e.g. 
representing a $100 cost of a retest).  
We define the Real World Cost as the sum of the marginal 
cost of a false negative multiplied by the number of false 
negatives and the marginal cost of a false positive multiplied 
by the number of false positives, divided by the total number 
of samples. Real World Cost represents deviation from the 
value of a perfect classifier.  
The results are summarized below. The test model has fewer 
false negatives but even more false positives than either 
control model, leading to an increase in top-1 error. This is 
expected, because the real world cost of a false positive is far 
less than the real world cost of a false negative. Crucially, our 
Real World Cost measure indicates that our test would deliver 
lower real world costs. The p-values are calculated using the 
pairwise t-test. 
TABLE I 
RESULTS OF RWWCE LOSS FUNCTION FOR BINARY CLASSIFICATION 
Model 
Mean 
FN 
Mean 
FP 
Mean 
Top-1 
Error 
Mean 
Real 
World 
Cost 
Control 1 
(n=100) 
 
Control 2 
(n=100) 
 
Test 
(n=100) 
 
p-value 
(Control 1 
vs Test) 
 
p-value 
(Control 2 
vs Test) 
45.4 
 
 
31.7 
 
 
16.1 
 
 
1.2x10-21 
 
 
 
2.7x10-35 
 
 
 
12.7 
 
 
20.3 
 
 
127.2 
 
 
3.1x10-28 
 
 
 
2.5x10-28 
 
0.37% 
 
 
0.33% 
 
 
0.91% 
 
 
3.0x10-24 
 
 
 
1.8x10-25 
$5.78 
 
 
$4.11 
 
 
$2.81 
 
 
2.3x10-18 
 
 
 
3.1x10-27 
 
A.  COMPARING REAL WORLD COST TO F1 
We argue that optimizing for Real World Cost can be superior 
to F1 based approaches.  
First, training a neural network for one goal, accuracy, then 
performing an exhaustive search across all possible thresholds 
to optimize a second measure, F1, is a two step process that 
does not allow the weights of the neural network to adapt to 
the real goal, the F1 score. That said, there has been recent 
work to develop a loss function to directly optimize F1 and 
related scores [14].  
Second, when a machine learning model is being applied to 
make decisions in the real world, the costs and benefits of real 
world outcomes comprise additional information to apply 
when training a machine learning model. The F1 score does 
not factor in this additional information.  
Finally, the F1 score is mathematically focused on 
infrequent positives. In cases where positives are frequent, the 
F1 score can be high from a trivial classifier. 
B.  COMPARING RWWCE TO HEURISTICS IN BINARY 
CLASSIFICATION 
In the binary classification case, RWWCE is mathematically 
equivalent to the widely available weighted binary cross-
entropy. (As we will see, in the categorical case RWWCE is 
more expressive than the weighted categorical cross-entropy 
function). RWWCE allows direct application of costs for 
false positives and false negatives, whereas weighted binary 
cross-entropy allows one weight via a single parameter apply 
to false negatives. Setting this weight to the ratio of 
RWWCE’s marginal false negative cost and marginal false 
positive cost creates equivalent behavior.  
For binary classification, the main contribution of 
RWWCE is a framework to decide its two weights. Starting 
with the principle that training of a neural network should 
use the loss function that represents the goal of the end user, 
RWWCE’s two weights, the marginal cost of a false negative 
and marginal cost of a false positive, should be set at the 
estimated real world values. For example, if the marginal 

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
cost of missing a disease (a false negative) is $2,000 in 
estimated future medical care and pain and suffering, and a 
false positive costs $100 in unnecessary testing, the 
RWWCE’s marginal false negative weight and marginal 
false positive weight should be set at 2000 and 100 
respectively. In the case of imbalanced classes, false 
negatives are often the bigger issue. However, it could also 
be the case that a false positive has a high cost - perhaps a 
false positive triggers expensive, unnecessary treatments and 
loss of confidence in the test. The estimation of these values 
should come from domain experts. The RWWCE’s weights 
should be set once and only adjusted when domain experts 
believe they have better estimates, or the world has changed. 
These weights are not hyperparameters of the neural network 
for machine learning practitioners to constantly tune (such as 
the number of layers, optimizer, or learning rate).  
Oversampling and undersampling are also heuristics 
applied to imbalanced classes. Oversampling introduces 
additional computational complexity better solved with 
adding weights on the less frequent class (either with out of 
the box weighted binary cross-entropy loss function or 
RWWCE loss function). Undersampling loses information 
from the training set. And setting the degree of 
undersampling while maintaining sufficient data becomes 
yet another hyperparameter to estimate and tune.  
V. FALSE NEGATIVES IN SINGLE-LABEL, MULTICLASS 
CLASSIFICATION  
We tested the RWWCE in a scenario designed to 
demonstrate a high cost mistake in a single-label, multiclass 
classification problem. Examples of this type of mistake 
include misclassifications considered racist, and expensive 
diagnostic error in a medical context.  
We again used the MNIST data set. We again divided up 
our data set into 67.5% training, 7.5% validation, and 25% 
test. 
We trained 90 control neural networks and 90 
experimental neural networks. Their only difference was loss 
function. All were trained with 10 epochs and a batch size of 
100 with the Adam optimizer. All took 784 inputs, then a 
dense layer of 50 and a penultimate dense layer of 20. All 
layers except the final layer were activated with ReLU. The 
final layer was a dense layer of 10, activated with softmax, 
representing the prediction for each of 10 possible classes 
(e.g. odds of a digit “0”, “1”, “2”,…, “9”). Softmax is the 
standard activation for single-label, multiclass classification. 
All were implemented with the same Keras library using 
TensorFlow as the backend.  
For each pair of control and experimental model, the pair 
was created, trained, and tested together for a total of 90 runs. 
Each of the 90 runs used a different high-cost combination 
of false negative and false positive labels, e.g., (1, 2) means 
that mislabeling an image of a “1” as a “2” would incur extra 
penalty. Within a run, the control and experimental models 
were analyzed on the same pair of false negative and false 
positive. There are 90 possible combinations of (false 
negative, false positive), so the 90 experimental neural 
networks represent all possible mislabeling mistakes.  
The 90 experimental neural networks were trained using 
the RWWCE loss function. For each, the specific high cost 
combination of false negative and false positive was set at a 
cost of 19, and the other false negative costs left at 1. This 
represents a domain expert estimating the marginal cost of a 
false negative in most cases at $1, but the marginal cost of a 
specific false negative, false positive pair at $20, perhaps due 
to the social cost of reinforcing a social bias or mistakenly 
predicting a lower acuity disease when a higher acuity 
disease is present.  
The results demonstrate a reduction in the number of 
mislabeled digits as well as Real World Cost. There is an 
increase in top-1 error, which is expected. The neural 
network training step no longer maximizes overall accuracy 
but rather minimizes Real World Cost, which is reflected in 
the reduction in high cost mistakes. The p-values are 
calculated using the pairwise t-test.  
 
TABLE II 
RESULTS OF RWWCE LOSS FUNCTION FOR  
SINGLE-LABEL, MULTICLASS CLASSIFICATION 
Model 
Mean number 
of high cost 
(FN,FP) 
Top-1 
Error 
Real World 
Cost 
Control 
(n=90) 
 
Experimental 
(n=90) 
 
p-value 
6.67 
 
 
2.57 
 
 
1.2x10-11 
 
3.56% 
 
 
3.62% 
 
 
1.1x10-2 
$0.0428 
 
 
$0.0390 
 
 
4.5x10-8 
VI. SOFTMAX 
We review the design of softmax [19] and its associated loss 
function, categorical cross-entropy loss function from 
Equation (3). When activating a layer with softmax, the 
outputs sum to 1 and the interpretation is that each of the k 
outputs estimates the probability or confidence that the class 
is present. For example, suppose there are three classes of 
images: dogs, trees, and everything else. An output of [0.6, 
0.3, 0.1] is interpreted to mean there is a 60% chance of a 
dog, 30% chance of a tree, and a 10% chance of something 
else. However, the categorical cross-entropy loss function 
only penalizes the 40% confidence that the image does not 
show a dog (a probabilistic false negative). It does not 
penalize the 30% chance of a tree (a probabilistic false 
positive).  
An argument in favor of this design is that because the 
negative log loss function is concave, a weighting of [0.6, 0.3, 
0.1] has a higher loss than [0.6, 0.2, 0.2], despite both results 
being identical. Therefore, the probabilistic false negatives 
should be ignored so that the losses are identical. Essentially, 
the loss function says, “I don’t care what softmax predicts on 
the negative classes, I only care that it predicts 60% on the 
positive class”. The consequence of his design is that the 
typical loss function applied to softmax is unable to directly 
penalize probabilistic false positives. The RWWCE was 

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
designed specifically to provide the ability to increase the 
penalty of specific probabilistic false negatives for specific 
target labels.  
Softmax is a generalization of binary classification, 
however, the implementation details differ. In binary 
classification, there is typically only one output that predicts 
the probability of a positive. There is not a second output that 
predicts the probability of a negative. This means that the 
binary cross-entropy loss function, Equation (1), must 
impute negatives via the right hand side of the expression 
being summed: 
 
𝐽"#$ = −1
𝑀)*𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7
8
,9:
+ (1 −𝑦,) × log11 −ℎ3(𝑥,)7<      
 
In recent work that showed an unexpected benefit of the 
categorical cross-entropy function, Mahajan et al. recently 
found that it worked better than binary cross-entropy in the 
case of a multilabel problem [20]. This was unexpected 
because binary cross-entropy is the theoretically preferred 
approach for multilabel categorization, such as when images 
could include both a cat and a dog. Our observation is that 
each class was very imbalanced, with most images labeled 
with two hashtags (i.e. labels) among thousands of possible 
labels. For any single label, a binary cross-entropy loss 
function would suffer from the classic problem of 
imbalanced classes: there would be far more true negatives 
than true positives. The classifier could achieve high 
accuracy by simply never predicting any hashtag, directly 
analogous to our initial thought experiment. Mahajan et al. 
found that applying the categorical cross-entropy loss 
function against only the limited number of positive target 
labels performed better, which we believe is the result of the 
categorical cross-entropy loss function focusing on 
penalizing probabilistic false negatives rather than 
probabilistic false positives during training. In future work, 
we will test the performance of the binary RWWCE loss 
function against the results of Mahajan et al.  
VII.  CONNECTION TO MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD 
ESTIMATION 
Suppose a binary classification scenario in which incorrectly 
missing a disease costs $100 of future healthcare expenditure 
and patient pain and suffering, and a false positive costs $5 
in retesting and loss of credibility. Intuitively, the false 
negative should be weighted 20 times more: one false 
negative costs the same as 20 false positives. During neural 
network training, the binary RWWCE loss function is given 
by Equation (5):  
  
𝐽"H??#$ = −1
𝑀)*100 × 𝑦, × log1ℎ3(𝑥,)7
8
,9:
+ 5 × (1 −𝑦,) × log11 −ℎ3(𝑥,)7< 
                             
This can be rewritten as: 
 
= −1
𝑀) \𝑦, × log Qℎ3
:]](𝑥,)R
8
,9:
+ (1 −𝑦,) × log((1 −ℎ3(𝑥,))^)_ 
 
Because the exp and log functions are monotonic, y only 
takes on the values of zero or one, and the 1/M factor is a 
constant; minimizing for the above is equivalent to 
maximizing for:  
 
= ` 𝑦, × ℎ3
:]](𝑥,) + (1 −𝑦,) × (1 −ℎ3(𝑥,))^
8
,9:
 
 
The 𝑦,  and 1 - 𝑦,  terms are essentially a conditional 
statement embedded in an equation. The ℎ3(𝑥,) and 1 −
ℎ3(𝑥,)  terms comprise the probability of predicting the 
target. Based on those terms, we can easily define a 
probability function f(y|x), the probability of a machine 
learning model predicting y given inputs x. We also add the 
condition theta to make explicit the trainable weights of the 
neural network. We then express the above as:  
                        
= ` 𝑓a(𝑦, | 𝑥,, 𝜃)
8
,9:
                                 (7) 
where X = 100 if y is one and X = 5 if y is zero.  
Under the assumption of an independently drawn and 
identically distributed training set (i.i.d.), this is also the joint 
probability. In future work, we will explore whether the i.i.d. 
assumption indeed holds.  
 
=   f(𝑦:, … , 𝑦:, 𝑦f, … , 𝑦f, . . , 𝑦,, … , 𝑦, | 𝑥:, . . . , 𝑥,, 𝜃) 
where 𝑦,is repeated 100 times if equal to 1 or repeated 5 
times if equal to 0. 
 We have just tied our loss function backwards towards 
the form of Maximum Likelihood Estimation, the principle 
that the parameters theta (weights of a neural network 
machine learning model) that have the highest probability of 
predicting the observed data also have the maximum 
likelihood of being the correct thetas given the observed data. 
As is conventional, we reverse the observations and the 
thetas vector to make explicit that we are searching over the 
space of theta based on fixed observations to maximize 
likelihood of the correct thetas.   
 
= ℒ(𝜃|𝑦:, … , 𝑦:, 𝑦f, … , 𝑦f, . . , 𝑦,, … , 𝑦,, 𝑥:, . . . , 𝑥,) 
 
 
where 𝑦,is repeated 100 times if equal to 1 or repeated 5 
times if equal to 0. Effectively, each time our training data 
has target 1, we are asking to optimize thetas as if it has 
seen 100 occurrences (or if target zero, five occurrences). In 
fact, Equation (7) is the form of the weighted likelihood 
estimator of Hu and Zidek as seen in [8, Def. 2, Ex. 2].  

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
An example is to consider the simple problem of a 
Bernoulli Trial with real world costs.  
Suppose a game is played at an amusement park: predict 
a coin flip. When a head is correctly predicted, the observer 
wins 9 stickers. Tails, she wins 1 toy.  A wrong prediction 
wins nothing. At the end of the game, what will be the ratio 
of stickers to toys?  
The observer builds a binary classifier that takes no inputs 
and outputs a single value, p, which is typically interpreted 
as the probability of heads but as we will soon see may have 
a better interpretation. This value is both the output and the 
sole trainable weight of the neural network (or theta value). 
The RWWCE loss function is used with the cost of a 
marginal false negative at 9 and marginal cost of false 
positive at 1. Again, a false negative is a prediction of tails 
when the outcome is heads, losing the opportunity to win 9 
stickers. A false positive is predicting heads when the 
outcome is tails. We train on 2 randomized examples, with 1 
head and 1 tail.  
The cost function is plotted below. The goal of gradient 
descent while training the machine learning model is to 
approximate the minimum located near p=0.9. We prove that 
the minimum is indeed p=0.9. From Equation (1), where 
𝑝= ℎ3(𝑥,), the loss is given by: 
 
𝐽"#$ = −1
10 [log(𝑝) + log(𝑝) + log(𝑝) + log(𝑝) + log(𝑝)
+ log(𝑝) + log(𝑝) + log(𝑝) + log(𝑝)
+ log(1 −𝑝)] 
 
The minimum is found where the first derivative is zero. 
We eliminate the -1/10 term.  
0 = 𝑑𝐽"#$
𝑑𝑝 
 
0 = [log(𝑝) × 9 + log(1 −𝑝)] ′ 
 
0 = 9
𝑝−
1
1 −𝑝 
 
 9
𝑝=
1
1 −𝑝 
 
 𝑝
9 = 1 −𝑝
1
 
 
𝑝= 9 −9𝑝 
 
10𝑝= 9 
 
𝑝= 0.9 
 
 
 
This number can be used to correctly predict the ratio of 
stickers to toys (observe that the 1-p equals 0.1, so the ratio 
is 0.9:0.1 or 9:1).  
 
FIGURE 1.  Value of loss function J at various values of p for scenario 
 
To confirm the identicalness of gradient descent to 
weighted maximum likelihood estimation, the task is to 
calculate the parameter p that maximizes the joint probability 
of predicting the output (1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0). Equation (7) 
gives 
 
ℒ(𝜃|1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0) 
  
= 𝑓(1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0|𝜃) 
 
= 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× 𝑝× (1 −𝑝) 
 
= 𝑝n −𝑝:] 
 
The maximum value of ℒ is found where the first 
derivative is zero: 
 
0 = 9𝑝o −10𝑝n 
9 = 10𝑝 
0.9 = p 
 
The equivalence of the results demonstrates that for this 
example, gradient descent with a binary RWWCE loss 
function is equivalent to Maximum Likelihood Estimation 
on imputed observations of real world outcomes (stickers 
and toys), which are imputed from actual observations 
(heads and tails) and knowledge about how those actual 
observations drive real world outcomes. 
This leads us to our intuition on why the RWWCE works.  
As previously mentioned, the value p is obviously is not the 
odds of a head, which is still 0.5. Our interpretation is that 
the value p is a prediction about real world outcomes, namely, 
the odds of receiving a sticker (0.9) versus a toy (0.1) as the 
next prize. We believe that the RWWCE cost function is 

 
VOLUME XX, 2017 
9 
allowing direct optimization of real world outcomes. It does 
so in a manner that is equivalent to imputing observations of 
real world outcomes and then applying Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation on those imputed observations.  
In a sense, the Real World Cost metric is a transformation 
of the observed values (heads or tails or disease present) to 
relevant imputed real world values (stickers or toys or 
dollars). The RWWCE then optimizes for the imputed real 
world values.   
So far, we have only analyzed Maximum Likelihood 
Estimation in the case of a binary classifier that does not take 
any inputs. In future work, we will analyze Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation in the context of single-label, 
multiclass classifiers that are conditional on inputs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge an unknown person. In 2016, a user with 
the id ayalalazoro correctly posed the problem of how to 
differentially weight false negatives and false positives by 
class on the Keras github website [21].  
We also acknowledge Israel Niezen and Bjorn Eriksson 
for encouraging research into this area of machine learning; 
Chiara Cerini for her guidance on statistics and research; and 
Andrew Ng, Geoffrey Hinton, and Ian Goodfellow for their 
online courses and books, which we referred to as we 
explored the mathematical underpinnings of machine 
learning.
