U-Sem: Semantic Enrichment, User Modeling and Mining
of Usage Data on the Social Web
Fabian Abel, Ilknur Celik, Claudia Hauff, Laura Hollink, Geert-Jan Houben
Web Information Systems, TU Delft
Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD Delft, the Netherlands

ABSTRACT
With the growing popularity of Social Web applications,
more and more user data is published on the Web everyday.
Our research focuses on investigating ways of mining data
from such platforms that can be used for modeling users and
for semantically augmenting user proﬁles. This process can
enhance adaptation and personalization in various adaptive
Web-based systems. In this paper, we present the U-Sem
people modeling service, a framework for the semantic en-
richment and mining of people’s proﬁles from usage data on
the Social Web.
We explain the architecture of our peo-
ple modeling service and describe its application in an adult
e-learning context as an example.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Social Web stands for a new culture of participation on the
Web. In the last decade, people got more and more involved
into contributing and shaping content on the Web. People
share their thoughts on microblogging systems like Twitter,
proﬁle themselves on websites like LinkedIn, publish their
bookmarks on Delicious or use services like CiteULike to or-
ganize scientiﬁc publications they are interested in1. Hence,
they leave a variety of data traces on the Web [2]. Exploiting
these traces promises to be very beneﬁcial for various appli-
cations that aim for adaptation and personalization [6].
In this paper, we present ongoing work on the U-Sem peo-
ple modeling service, a framework for the semantic enrich-
ment and mining of people’s proﬁles from usage data on
the Social Web. We explain the architecture of our people
modeling service and give examples of how U-Sem will be
applied to one particular domain, namely e-learning, in the
context of the European project ImREAL2. Platforms that
facilitate e-learning have become increasingly prevalent in
recent years. Web-based e-learning systems are particularly
attractive, as they allow learning at any time, at any place
1http://{twitter,linkedin,delicious,citeulike}.com
2http://www.imreal-project.eu/
and at any pace. One aspect in e-learning that is not suf-
ﬁciently addressed yet is the ability of systems to adapt to
each individual learner [7, 8]. Learners who already know a
part of the curriculum can easily become bored if the system
does not take their knowledge level into account and adapts
the learning units appropriately. On the other end of the
spectrum, a system should be able to recognize if a learner
is overwhelmed with the curriculum and adapt the learn-
ing units accordingly, for example, by oﬀering additional
introductory material. E-learning environments, while also
being increasingly introduced at schools and universities to
aid classroom learning, are especially well suited for adults
who often have very limited amount of time. In adult learn-
ing systems that aim to teach skills relevant to the work
place, the learners’ individual professional tasks should also
be taken into account, such that the system can place par-
ticular emphasis on aspects that are relevant to their work.
The overall goal of ImREAL is to improve virtual training of
adults by aligning the learning experience in the virtual envi-
ronment with real-world context and real-world job-related
experiences.
Adaptation and personalization of an e-learning system
requires user proﬁling, that is, the collection of data and
information about a user [7].
This process can either be
performed explicitly by asking the users a series of ques-
tions about their knowledge levels, skills, etc. or implicitly
by deriving a user proﬁle from already existing data. In the
ImREAL project, we focus on the latter case, speciﬁcally,
we investigate how to derive user proﬁles for adult e-learning
from the Social Web. The motivation for this work stems
from the fact that Social Web services such as Twitter, De-
licious or CiteULike are becoming increasingly popular. It
is not unlikely that a user of an e-learning system is using
one or even several of these Social Web services. Moreover,
since this type of data is publicly available on the Web, there
will be few privacy concerns for the users. Consequently, we
only require the learner’s username in one or more Social
Web services as input to the user proﬁling module; only
publicly accessible data will be utilized to build the proﬁle.
This general idea leads to several research questions that
we would like to answer with U-Sem, namely:
• How can user proﬁles, in particular proﬁles describing
interests and knowledge levels of users, be built from
Social Web data?
• Which Social Web services are most suitable to derive
user proﬁles for various application domains such as
e-learning or recommender systems?
arXiv:1104.0126v1  [cs.IR]  1 Apr 2011

U-Sem 
domain knowledge 
observations 
user characteristics 
user profiles 
Semantic Enrichment, Linkage, 
and Alignment 
data aggregation 
entity extraction 
ontology alignment 
entity identification 
topic detection 
… 
Analysis and 
User Modeling 
profile generation 
rule-based reasoning 
conflict resolution 
temporal reasoning 
knowledge discovery 
… 
Figure 1:
Conceptual architecture of the U-Sem
people modeling service.
• How can data of several Social Web services be aggre-
gated to generate better user proﬁles?
The focus of our work is on the question of how to extract
user proﬁles from Social Web data. The problem here is the
unstructured nature of the Social Web data as well as the
fact that users do not only tweet or bookmark Web pages
related to their work and professional knowledge, but that
a large amount of data is often about their social life, their
interests or focused on current news stories. While we focus
on the e-learning domain as part of the ImREAL project,
we note that U-Sem has a much wider applicability and is
not restricted to this particular domain.
2.
U-SEM: PEOPLE MODELING SERVICE
With the advent of the Semantic Web, generic user mod-
eling formats like GUMO [9] or Grapple Core3 and speciﬁc
proﬁle description vocabularies such as FOAF4 or SIOC5,
the re-use of usage and user proﬁle data in diﬀerent appli-
cation contexts is becoming feasible nowadays. Building on
results from previous research on user modeling services [10,
4, 1], on mediating user models [5] as well as on cross-system
user modeling and personalization [2, 11], with U-Sem we
contribute to a recent line of research which leverages generic
user modeling in today’s Social Web sphere.
U-Sem is a Semantic Web service for enriching and mining
usage and user data. Figure 1 shows the architecture of the
U-Sem people modeling service. Given data about people as
well as domain knowledge, U-Sem aims to infer and output
user proﬁles to support personalization in other applications.
We distinguish three types of input data:
Observations By observation we refer to usage data or
events that give us rather implicit user data such as
clicks, tagging activities, bookmarking actions or posts
on Twitter. We model observations in RDF, re-using
the Grapple Core ontology (namespace abbreviation:
gc). A (gc:Observation) has the following properties:
3http://wis.ewi.tudelft.nl/rdf/grapple-core.owl
4http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
5http://rdfs.org/sioc/spec/
1. gc:user extends rdf:subject and identiﬁes the user
who performed an activity that was observed.
2. usem:what extends gc:predicate. It refers to the
type of activity that was observed (e.g. clicked,
posted).
3. rdf:object points to the RDF resource that the
user interacted with. For example, the resource
on which the user clicked or a Twitter message
which the user published.
4. usem:when extends dc:created from the Dublin
Core metadata terms6 and depicts the time when
an observation was done.
5. Moreover, it is possible to attach further infor-
mation to an observation such as the URI of the
application that did the observation (gc:creator)
or other provenance information.
User characteristics U-Sem also allows for rather explicit
inputs from users about their characteristics. For ex-
ample, properties like the name, homepage or date of
birth can be inputted into U-Sem as well using vocab-
ularies such as FOAF. For selected Social Web services
like Facebook or LinkedIn, we also foresee automatic
data aggregation modules.
Domain knowledge In order to infer user proﬁles that
support certain application domains, U-Sem requires
domain knowledge. This domain knowledge can be in-
put via plain RDF statements and is to some extent
automatically obtained from the Web of Data.
Given these three types of input data, U-Sem features a
variety of plug-ins and components that support the gener-
ation of semantically rich user proﬁles. These components
can be grouped into two categories.
Semantic enrichment, Linkage and Alignment The se-
mantic enrichment layer provides functionality for ag-
gregating and linking user data from Social Web sys-
tems like Facebook or Twitter as well as integration
and alignment of RDF data from Linked Data services
such as DBpedia7. Entity extraction, entity identiﬁ-
cation and topic detection modules can process text
that is referenced from observations, user character-
istics or domain knowledge to make semantics more
explicit and usable for reasoning modules. For exam-
ple, given the observation that a user posted a Twit-
ter message, U-Sem aims to link the Twitter message
to DBpedia concepts and categorizes the message into
broad topics such as sports or politics.
Based on the enriched user and usage data, U-Sem also
foresees to enrich the domain knowledge by discovering
further knowledge such as additional SKOS relations8
that were not yet explicitly speciﬁed.
Analysis and User modeling Given the enriched data,
the analysis and user modeling layer allows for gen-
erating user proﬁles that describe interests, knowledge
and other characteristics of the users.
Therefore, it
6http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/
7http://dbpedia.org/
8http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/

provides rule-based reasoning as well as data mining
functionality and moreover aims to leverage temporal
dynamics in the data to, for example, infer current
interests of a user or behavioral patterns related to
some temporal context. Conﬂict resolution techniques
are required to resolve contradicting statements about
users as well as other inconsistencies.
The user proﬁles that are delivered by U-Sem describe
users’ characteristics like names, locations or date of birth
as well as interests or knowledge regarding certain topics.
U-Sem proﬁles are based on FOAF (namespace: foaf ) and
the Weighted Interest Vocabulary9 (namespaces: wi, wo).
Furthermore, we extend these vocabularies to express users’
knowledge or opinion regarding speciﬁc concepts (names-
pace: usem). For example, the following RDF/Turtle10 rep-
resentation speciﬁes to what degree a user (http://bob.my-
openid.com) has knowledge about a certain topic (dbpedia:
Psychology). The meaning of the weight (wo:weight value)
is deﬁned via a scale (ex:AScale) that is referenced from the
usem:WeightedKnowledge instance.
<http://bob.myopenid.com>
a foaf:Person ;
foaf:name "Bob";
usem:knowledge [
a usem:WeightedKnowledge ;
wi:topic dbpedia:Psychology ;
wo:weight [
a wo:Weight ;
wo:weight_value 10.0 ;
wo:scale ex:AScale
]
.
From a technical point of view, U-Sem accepts data in
RDF format and allows for querying by means of SPARQL11.
To facilitate the retrieval of certain types of proﬁles, we plan
to complement SPARQL with further operators. For exam-
ple, as U-Sem aggregates user data from diﬀerent Social Web
services, there is a demand for operators that allow to spec-
ify how user data should be combined to prioritize certain
sources and resolve possible conﬂicts.
3.
APPLICATION SCENARIO
Given the architecture described in the previous section,
U-Sem coordinates input from various sources to enrich user
proﬁles as well as domain knowledge for enhancing person-
alization. In this section, we present an example scenario
within the context of ImREAL, where the U-Sem frame-
work will be used with a training simulator in the medical
domain. The ﬂow of data will be as follows: this simula-
tor gathers a set of basic user characteristics and click data
that are fed to the U-Sem framework together with domain
information; U-Sem performs semantic enrichment and user
modeling via a number of modules in order to provide en-
riched user proﬁles and domain knowledge, which are fed
back to the simulator for improved adaptation.
3.1
Semantic Enrichment
U-Sem adds context and semantics to the observations
(e.g. click data) made in an application, in order to infer
user knowledge levels or interests for a given topic. In the
context of ImREAL U-Sem may, for example, retrieve the
following click observation.
9http://purl.org/ontology/wi/core#
10http://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/turtle/
11http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
<http://imreal-project.eu/observation/1>
gc:user <http://bob.myopenid.com>;
gc:predicate imreal:accessed;
gc:object <http://imreal-project.eu/resource/1234567>
gc:created "2011-02-15 20:10:30" .
Given this observation, U-Sem extracts and identiﬁes con-
cepts that are mentioned in or related to the resource (http:/
/imreal-project.eu/resource/1234567) the user accessed. The
U-Sem topic detection module allows for automatic classiﬁ-
cation of resources. The concepts and topics extracted from
click data are also linked to related Linked Data vocabu-
laries, such as MeSH12 and DBpedia. Such linkage makes
the semantic meaning of observations explicit and aligns the
knowledge embodied in observations that are possibly done
in diﬀerent applications. For example, the above resource
may be linked to dbpedia:Psychology and may allow the anal-
ysis and user modeling layer to infer Bob’s knowledge level
regarding this concept (see the example user proﬁle listed in
Section 2).
The U-Sem data aggregation modules (see Figure 1) allow
for automatic integration of user characteristics and user ac-
tivities from selected Social Web applications. For instance,
U-Sem exploits social networking services such as LinkedIn
or Facebook to gather user characteristics, social bookmark-
ing services such as CiteULike to monitor documents that
people are interested in and blogging services such as Twit-
ter to complement information about users with their opin-
ions and thoughts on certain topics. For example, U-Sem
may retrieve the following three observations from LinkedIn,
CiteULike and Twitter respectively:
<http://linkedin.com/bob>
a foaf:Person ;
foaf:name "Bob";
foaf:workplaceHomepage <http://mh-hannover.de/> .
<http://imreal-project.eu/observation/3>
gc:user <http://citeulike.org/bob>;
gc:predicate imreal:bookmarked;
gc:object <http://www.citeulike.org/article/67893712>
gc:created "2011-02-15 22:05:00" .
<http://imreal-project.eu/observation/4>
gc:user <http://twitter.com/bob>;
gc:predicate imreal:posted;
gc:object <http://imreal-project.eu/resource/twitter/1234567>
gc:created "2011-02-15 22:00:00" .
<http://imreal-project.eu/resource/twitter/1234567>
tw:id 1234567;
tw:username <http://twitter.com/bob>
tw:content "Interesting article on Chopin’s #hallucinations:
http://bit.ly/y4Gfs5";
tw:creationTime "2011-02-15 21:45:00" .
Information about the users’ current and previous jobs,
interests or knowledge in certain topics, and professional
groups, can be extracted from their public LinkedIn pro-
ﬁles. Extracting a user’s professional web pages is shown
above as an example. Such observations are then used to
supplement the given basic user characteristics.
Similarly, users’ professional interests and knowledge can
be extracted from services like CiteULike where users tag ar-
ticles as shown in the example above. The articles (http://ww
w.citeulike.org/article/67893712) are analyzed by the topic
detection module of U-Sem to extract the concepts covered,
such as “diagnosis”, “symptoms”, “psychosis” and “mania”,
which are then linked to rich vocabularies such as DBpedia
and MeSH for enrichment. We will also investigate if and
12http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh

how we can infer users’ knowledge of related concepts by
traversing the nodes of the vocabulary or by using a seman-
tic similarity measure such as [3].
Additionally, U-Sem employs modules to monitor user ac-
tivities in popular real-time microblogging sites like Twitter
as given in the example observation above. Thus, when the
user posts a tweet (http://imreal-project.eu/resource/twitter
/1234567), the entity identiﬁcation module identiﬁes and
extracts entities both from the content of the tweet (“Interes-
ting article on Chopin’s #hallucinations: http://bit.ly/y4Gfs
5”) and from the destination of the URL referenced in the
content (http://bit.ly/y4Gfs5). These are then linked to the
corresponding concepts in, for example, DBpedia, and ap-
pended to the set of user characteristics as weighted inter-
est of the user in the given concepts.
Other user actions
such as bookmarking in Delicious or tagging in Flickr are
treated as observations in a similar manner where extracted
entities are assigned weighted knowledge and interest levels,
and then attached to the set of user characteristics.
3.2
User Modeling
U-Sem utilizes a variety of modules to reason, infer, gen-
erate and aggregate user proﬁles from the available enriched
usage and user data. For instance, given the Twitter ob-
servation before, the reasoning module considers all entities
extracted both from the text of the Twitter message and
the content of the URL mentioned in the tweet. The mod-
ule deduces that the user is interested in “Frederic Chopin”
and reads about “Hallucinations” and “Epilepsy”. Based on
the fact that both concepts,“Hallucinations”and“Epilepsy”,
are in the “diseases” category in the DBpedia hierarchy, this
module can reason that this user has knowledge about dis-
eases and can adjust the knowledge level in these concepts
accordingly.
Since U-Sem gathers data from diﬀerent sources, a dedi-
cated component is required to oversee data aggregation and
possible conﬂict resolutions. When similar user characteris-
tics are extracted from diﬀerent sources with conﬂicting val-
ues, this module decides on how to determine the ﬁnal value
depending on the reliability of the sources, by checking the
internally assigned trust values of the sources, and the times-
tamps of the observations. For instance, during the data ag-
gregation phase, U-Sem receives two observations for a user:
one click data observation which mentions the user answered
a question related to “diagnosing psychotic symptoms” in-
correctly, and another one from CiteULike two hours later
which states that the user tagged an article on “The art
of distinguishing anxiety and psychotic symptoms in diag-
nosing Mania”, where the user identiﬁcation module maps
(http://citeulike.org/bob) and (http://bob.myopenid.com) to
the same user, Bob. Although the usage data suggests that
the user’s knowledge levels in“diagnosis”, “symptoms”, “psy-
chotic” and “mania” are low, the user’s CiteULike activity
shows that the user recently read up on these concepts and
therefore the knowledge levels in these concepts should be
increased.
The ﬁnal step in this application scenario would be to
feed back to the simulator application all the above men-
tioned extracted and inferred user characteristics and in-
terest/knowledge levels, represented as a (extended) FOAF
proﬁle. For example, Bob’s user proﬁle given at the end of
Section 2 would be extended to include also his usem:Weighted-
Knowledge of dbpedia:Hallucination, dbpedia:Epilepsy and
dbpedia:Diseases in general, as well as user characteristics
such as his work home page extracted from LinkedIn.
4.
OUTLOOK
In this paper, we have introduced U-Sem, a generic frame-
work for enriching, modeling and mining proﬁle and usage
data available on the Web. U-Sem supports Web-based sys-
tems that require user proﬁle information and aim for per-
sonalization. In particular, we have shown examples of how
we envision it to function in the context of e-learning. Cur-
rently, we investigate the extraction of user proﬁles from
Twitter that model the users’ interests and evaluate them
in the context of news recommender systems. This line of
work has already resulted in the development of the entity
extraction, the entity identiﬁcation and the topic detection
modules. We have also started to conduct ﬁrst experiments
in the extraction of user proﬁles that model the users’ knowl-
edge levels. Here, we rely on social bookmarking services
that are designed for scholarly works, speciﬁcally CiteULike
and Bibsonomy. The next steps of our work will focus on the
exploitation of observations from applications (click data,
potentially eye tracking) for the user model as well as on
the question of how to semantically enrich these observa-
tions depending on the demanded types of proﬁles.
Acknowledgements. This work is partially sponsored
by the EU FP7 project ImREAL (http://imreal-project.eu).
5.
