Who Will Win Practical Artificial Intelligence? AI Engineerings in China 
Authors:  Huai-Yu Wu1, Feiyue Wang2, Chunhong Pan1 
Affiliations: 
1 National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P.R. China. 
2 The State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P.R. China. 
Running Head: AI has become one of the most popular focus in China. 
Abstract: Currently, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has won unprecedented attention and is 
becoming the increasingly popular focus in China. This change can be judged by the impressive 
record of academic publications, the amount of state-level investment and the presence of nation-
wide participation and devotion. In this paper, we place emphasis on discussing the progress of 
artificial intelligence engineerings in China. We first introduce the focus on AI in Chinese 
academia, including the supercomputing brain system, Cambrian Period supercomputer of neural 
networks, and biometric systems. Then, the development of AI in industrial circles and the latest 
layout of AI products in companies, such as Baidu, Tencent, and Alibaba, are introduced. Last, 
we bring in the opinions and arguments of the main intelligentsia of China about the future 
development of AI, including how to examine the relationship between humanity on one side 
and science and technology on the other. 
 
Main Text:  
Although there were ups and downs for AI throughout its history1, in recent years, many 
breakthroughs in AI research have been achieved worldwide, from the Watson system of IBM, to 
Siri of Apple Inc., and to Google Brain. In 2016, an AI program named AlphaGo2 had defeated 
professional human champion of Chinese Go which was developed by Deepmind, a Google AI 
team. Such achievements have primarily displayed a brain-like intelligence trend with a focus on 
self-learning.  
There are several main factors driving AI field to current level. Firstly, thanks to the great 
decreases of computing cost. Inexpensive parallel computing allows the connection numbers of 
neural network nodes to be of hundreds of millions. Secondly, it’s because of the emergence of 
big data. Every kind of AI needs enough samples for education. As estimated, the total data 
amount generated in 2015 worldwide is more than 20 times than it was 10 years ago. Such great 
amount of data will provide enough materials for machine to learn. Another more important 
reason is the progress of the algorithms. Currently, the most advanced technologies in AI field 
are Deep Neural Networks (Deep Learning). The deep learning algorithm models also have went 
through a fast iteration period: Deep Belief Network, Sparse Coding, Recursive Neural Network, 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), and more.  
For the moment, those kinds of companies focusing on specific application for deep 
learning or machine learning are the largest in quantity, then the following are those kinds of 
natural language processing companies which focus on voice recognition, as well as computer 
vision companies. Major big companies like Facebook, Google, Yahoo and Baidu are all trying 

to apply deep learning algorithms into their product development, in the purpose of making the 
product more intelligent, and enhancing user experience. Participators who are willing to work in 
AI field must think carefully about two factors, which are also the main basis for this article to 
select those AI projects. Firstly, what does AI change? Great products or technologies must have 
the ability to shift the customers’ behaviors in some circumstances, otherwise a product does not 
provide enough reason for customers to choose if it does not matter too much to own it or not. If 
a product’s core competitive force is AI, it should match perfectly with the scenario. The core of 
AI related products lies in to how much level it can substitute for mankind functionalities or 
enhance working efficiency. For example, a radiologist can get a job offer of 300 thousand US 
dollars annually in the United States after receiving 13 years’ education and training. While the 
latest pattern recognition software can finish the majority of the work but with a cost of only 
1/100. This kind of example also applies to layers, bank employees, website editors and drivers, 
to name a few.  
Secondly, whether the AI technology in the chosen direction is practically possible. Many 
AI technologies have not been very mature yet, it’s impractical to try to solve all the problems 
only by pursuing technology breakthroughs. Instead, we could start by working on some specific 
scenarios if it is not working in a generic scenario. We could start by doing a product which is 
possible if a universal product is not possible yet to have. 
AI contains many advanced technologies and branches; it is hard to define it within one 
sentence. And it is developing all the time, for example some so-called AI stuffs in the old times 
now are just simple mechanical repetitions from current perspective, like automatic washing 
machine and automatic door, etc. Actually, for the moment the effects caused by AI revolution to 
white-collars, like website editors, are just like the effects caused by machine technologies to 
blur-collars, like textile workers in the old times. Generally speaking, the nature and the goal of 
AI do not change too much all the time, which is to help mankind to finish partially intellectual 
work/task. In this sense, AI is more like an engineering issue, not simply a scientific issue. It is 
very important to understand this point, which is also the reason why this article brings the view 
into China. As we all know, China is still not in the same level in science field comparing with 
western countries, but in engineering field it is starting to rank tops in the world and is becoming 
the world biggest factory, for example in the aspects of high speed train, aerospace and mobile 
internet. In fact, speaking from the national level, AI is a very suitable giant project to a country, 
especially in those aspects like high-performance computing, big data, labor cost, which is good 
to receive national resources for supporting, so from this point of view, it is particularly suitable 
for China.  
Artificial Intelligence Engineerings in China 
As a developing country, China is still a follower in the field of AI science, but it does 
not mean China is behind western countries in the field of AI engineerings. In fact, China has a 
good faith in Pragmatism, who is good at utilizing western countries’ AI science into a very deep 
level on engineerings. Although these kinds of AI projects own seemly ordinary theoretical 
frameworks, but the success or failure of an AI project usually lies in the details of engineering’s 
(such as the layers of neural networks, the selection of the parameters, and the combinative mode 
of varied methods). Chinese people are really good at building a new hybrid engineering 
framework after a full analysis of different theoretical frameworks’ merits and faults, in order to 
have a better performance.  An interesting case, there is a Hollywood movie named 2012, in 
which people need to build giant Noah’s arks to escape from the doomsday. These arks are 

finally built by Chinese people, because only Chinese people can make it possible to finish such 
a huge and complicated project within a short time. 
In recent years, in the development of its economy, China keeps investing more into the 
field of scientific technology to achieve industrial transformation, i.e., from “Made in China” to 
“Intellectually Made in China”. Following the introduction of big data, cloud computing, Internet 
and mobile networks, AI has become the new flash point in China. Chinese President Xi Jinping 
emphasized that the robot revolution will be an important starting point of the Third Industrial 
Revolution3. Premier Li Keqiang further proposed the concept of Internet + in his government 
work report4. And the Chinese government has formally approved the “China Brain” plan and 
regards it as one of the major projects concerning the future of Chinese development.  
“Whoever wins AI, will own the future”, said Dr. Andrew Ng, the leader of the original 
“Google Brain” project, now the leader of the “Baidu Brain” project. In this paper, we will 
emphasize China’s focus on AI and some arguments in the industry. 
Supercomputing Brain System 
The Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), which was 
established in Beijing in October 1956, is the top research institution in China in the field of 
intelligent information processing. CASIA founded the “General Department of Supercomputing 
Brain System” in 2012 and further founded “Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence” in 
2015, triggering research on human-like brain engineering. This research mainly focuses on three 
areas: the atlas of the brain network, brain simulation, and brain-like computing systems. This 
department has been engaged in cooperation with Tsinghua University, Xi'an Jiao Tong 
University (XJTU) and several other top universities in China to jointly persuade the government 
to launch the “China Brain” project, which will be a research plan that receives financial aid, as 
much as 1 billion USD.  
“In the aspect of multi-dimensional simulation6, especially the multi-encephalic region 
and multi-channel coordination simulation, our research work should be distinctive. And I hope 
in the near future it would become the representative technology for China, able to compete with 
brain simulators from Canada and EU,” said Prof. Zeng Yi, the leader of the team. In practice, 
the team also paid much attention to international cooperation with related units of other 
international brain plans. For example, the deep cooperative efforts with Professor Wang Yun 
from the EU Human Brain Project (HBP) team, especially the cooperative research results in the 
field of morphology repair of nerve fibers, were not only jointly published in the literature but 
were also prepared to be included in an application for the HBP project. 

 
Fig. 1. Brain simulation and calculation: composition of each encephalic region of the 
mouse brain (left); morphology of the hippocampus of the mouse brain (upper right) when the 
hippocampus of the mouse brain implements the task of memory; the condition in which the 
neuron network gives off electricity is shown in the picture (lower right). 
At the same time, the Brainnetome Center is a brain-net research team that aims to 
analyze the fine divisions, connecting modes and functions of different encephalic regions, 
particularly the dynamic evolution rules of the brain network. “The brain function is not 
completed independently by a single neuron or just one encephalic region, but realized thought 
the interactive function of the neuron body (group) within the neural circuit, functional column 
or encephalic region,” emphasized Prof. Jiang Tianzi, the director of the center. In 2010, his team 
proposed the brain-connecting group / net group plan10 (corresponding to the plan of the gene 
group in 1990, and the plan of the protein group in 2001) for the first time in the world. Now, 
they have finished the new atlas of the brain, the Brainnetome Atlas, which includes the division 
into sub-regions of the encephalic region functions in the dimension of the whole brain and in 
terms of multi-mode connectivity5. 
Cambrian Period Supercomputer of Neural Networks 
To achieve “ubiquitous” AI, besides an effective algorithm, the support of portable 
hardware with high performance and low energy consumption is needed as well. The Future 
Computing Team of the State Key Lab of Computer Architecture, which is affiliated with 
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, led by Professor Chen Yunji, 
optimizes the structure of processors by making use of machine learning and evolutionary 
algorithms; this team has developed a type of machine learning and arithmetic device by 
adopting the artificial architecture of a neural network – a Cambrian Period neural network 
computer. This computer can process a neural network of any scale and depth at high efficiency 
and has reached a processing speed for the neural network that is as fast as 100 times the 
previous registered speed in only less than 1/10 of the space and power consumption of the 
traditional processors. Both the performance and power ratio were enhanced 1,000 times 

compared with earlier technology. The Cambrian Period No.1 (English name: DianNao) was 
awarded the Best Paper Prize of ASPLOS 20147 − the top conference in the field of computer 
architecture. 
Furthermore, the deep learning and processing speed of the Cambrian Period No.2 
processor is 21.38 times as fast as the mainstream GPU (NVidia K20M), becoming the quickest 
deep learning chip in the world with less than 1/330 the GPU power consumption8. 
Besides portable devices, it is worth to mention that according to the TOP500 ranking list 
of supercomputers14, “Sunway TaihuLight” developed by China had reached the peak speed of 
125,436 TFlop/s which was the supercomputer of the most powerful performance across the 
world. It is possible that such supercomputers can become applicable in future AI calculations on 
a very large scale.  
Biometric Systems 
The vice President of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Professor Tan Tieniu think that 
biometrics will be the key techniques in the intelligent time. In September 2012, Science 
magazine published China’s Sharp Focus On Biometrics9, which used pictures to explain the text 
on the contents page and briefed the reader on the development of China’s biometric system with 
respect to the international frontier. This article used a large amount of space to introduce the 
research on video data analysis conducted by NLPR (National Laboratory of Pattern 
Recognition) and its application in public security. The core of the innovation is human face 
recognition by near-infrared and multispectral technology, which can be used to solve the 
difficult problems of varying illumination and anti-faking of the human face. In that volume of 
Science magazine, it concluded: “The leading Chinese image-processing and machine-learning 
labs now compete with the top institutions in the U.S.”.  
Focus on AI in Industry 
The area of “big data” plays an important role in improving the performance of machine 
learning and algorithms. In today’s China, the three largest internet enterprises, Baidu, Alibaba 
and Tencent, are called BAT. Such internet enterprises were born with advantages in obtaining 
“big data”. 
Baidu invited Dr. Andrew Ng to join. Once an Associate Professor of Stanford 
University, he also led the “Google Brain” project and now works as the chief scientist leading 
the Baidu Research Institute. The reason that Andrew Ng joined Baidu was that he valued the 
ambition of Baidu toward developing deep learning, and deep learning was regarded as the best 
method to absorb and analyze “big data”. Until now, there was no other company that could 
launch a product on deep learning faster than Baidu. The computing speed of the “Baidu Brain” 
will be 100 times as fast as the speed that “Google Brain” was in 2012. Baidu has established the 
largest deep neural network in the world, with 20 billion parameters, and adopted the method of 
deep learning in 2013, aiming to improve the ranking quality of webpage searching to the 
greatest extent. Andrew Ng hoped to utilize the big data of Baidu to overcome problems such as 
unsupervised recognition of massive objects and the understanding of natural languages. For 
example, Baidu launched a product to identify pictures, which was called “Baidu picture-
reading”. Users only needed to take a photo of any object (e.g., a handbag of an unknown brand 
or an unheard-of plant), and, using their mobile phone, Baidu would return detailed information 
on the item, where to buy it and the prices.  

As a Chinese company listed on the NYSE, Alibaba had over 100 PB of data, including 
the users and commodities data, which is equivalent to 4 Seattle Central Libraries. Alibaba also 
actively applied machine learning methods to optimize the searching and advertisement system, 
CTR estimation, webpage ranking of the searching results and personalized system to enhance 
BI (Business Intelligence). Currently, Tencent, China’s largest instant messaging software 
company, has released a platform for deep learning − Mariana. Tencent has over 848 million 
monthly active users; social data in such large amounts could be used to analyze and learn 
human emotions − joy, anger, sorrow and happiness, and could be developed to correspond to 
the human EQ. 
In one of China’s most famous IT companies, Huawei, the director of its Noah’s Ark 
Laboratory, Yang Qiang, a Professor from the Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, unveiled the research achievement of the lab for the first time on October 2014 − an 
AI system called MoKA. Transferring the experience and knowledge of the past to learning in 
the present using a computer would become the “soul mate” of self-learning that could 
accompany humans all of their lives. In addition, another speech recognition company worth 
mentioning is iFLYTEK; the capacity for speech recognition in the Chinese language, as 
developed by this company, has surpassed major international companies, for example, that of 
Siri of Apple Inc. 
It is worth to mention that Microsoft China located in Beijing also plays an important role 
in the development of Chinese AI Industry. In the 2015 ImageNet challenge, Microsoft Research 
Asia (MSRA) researchers announced a major advance in technology designed to identify the 
objects in a photograph or video, showcasing a system whose accuracy meets and sometimes 
exceeds human-level performance12. Their system was very effective because it allowed them to 
use extremely deep neural nets with 152 layers, which are as much as five times deeper than any 
previously used. Moreover, in 2014, Microsoft STC produced an AI chat robot, called Microsoft 
Xiaoice13, who has accomplishing 600 million conversations with 37 million Chinese peoples via 
Internet until now. 
Exploitation of AI in China 
The application threshold of AI technology is high. For example, the development of AI 
requires professional background knowledge and the ability to address the difficulty of 
performing calculations on large amounts of big data. Therefore, it is still difficult to obtain a 
broad application in the market, and many AI research projects are financially assisted by the 
government and are directed by the government. For the processing of natural language, state-
run research institutes cooperate with the Sina Weibo and Tencent Wechat, which are the 
Chinese versions of Twitter and WhatsApp, respectively, conducting assessments of users’ credit 
and performing analyses on public opinions in the context of social networking to regulate the 
environment of public opinion on a social network platform.  
At the same time, many of the AI research projects could also be used for military 
purposes. Using the four-foot robot development as an example, the Center for Robotics, 
Shandong University and the National University of Defense Technology have both been close 
to reaching the technical level of the BigDog robot of the American military industry. Moreover, 
the research on a simulated robot-fish in China has been implemented over the past ten years15. 
The designed robot-fish can implement high-mobility controls, such as pitching, snorkeling, 
turn-back, quick-start, changing speed and direction during movement, inverse swimming, 
depth-keeping and braking. Such research focuses on high-mobility and high speed indexes and, 

for the first time, has been able to realize a jumping-over-water action, as performed by a 
machine-dolphin. The simulated robot-fish has an important application in the military 
reconnaissance field, for example, the ability to quietly get close to offshore aircraft carrier 
formations. 
To promote the application and popularization of AI in China, the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China initiated and hosted the “China Intelligent Vehicle Future 
Competition”. The road conditions in the competition were very close to those of an actual traffic 
scene. The 7th competition, held in 2015, attracted 12 research institutes, such as the National 
University of Defense Technology, Tsinghua University and the Military Transportation 
University. The number of vehicles that joined in the competition was as high as 20. According 
to the introduction of the person who was responsible for the challenge, Professor Wang Feiyue, 
China has been the country that manufactures and sells the largest number of cars in the world 
for the past 5 years. Last year, the number of newly manufactured cars even broke the previous 
record and reached 20 million, and the vast popularization of “intelligent traffic” technology is 
expected to quickly open an AI civil market, with a value reaching hundreds of billions of RMB. 
 
Fig. 2. China Intelligent Vehicle Future Competition. 
 
Inspiration of AI in China 
The AI epidemic has triggered a heated discussion among China’s intelligentsia. Wu 
Gansha, former president of the Intel China Research Center, wrote a paper entitled Race with 
the Machine: Win or Die, sharing his opinion that the intelligence of machines would finally 
surpass human beings, but he thought that it was important to adopt an attitude of prediction but 
not forecasting. Yu Kai, former vice-president of the Baidu Research Institute, thought that there 
must be a clear direction for the development of technology. If humans do not take any control 
over technology, then AI will turn into an evil thing. However, if humans assume sensible 
control, then AI will actually represent humanity. Professor and Executive Director from the 

School of Software of the Nankai University, Li Qingcheng, who translated the book The 
Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology into Chinese, further thought that 
humanity should guide the development of scientific technology and that the binding of the robot 
to Asimov’s three laws of robotics was not reliable; therefore, it would be necessary to constrain 
the creators of the robot-humans. At the same time, China’s traditional culture stressed the 
human factors more. 
Although current AI has aroused fresh interest around the world, China’s industry 
insiders have a calm understanding. According to the opinion of the president of Microsoft 
Research Asia, Hong Xiaowen, it was first necessary to make the differences between 
Intelligence, Intellect and Wisdom clear, while the machine was still at the stage of intelligence. 
Professor Zhou Zhihua from the Nanjing University simply divided AI into strong AI and weak 
AI, and holds that the current scientific research is mainly in the area of weak AI. Professor 
Zhang Changshui from Tsinghua University considers11 that even for weak AI, current machine-
learning methods still faces some challenges, including problems of high-dimensional space, 
difficulty in seeking the best solution and poor interpretability. 
In conclusion, it is very important for us to regard AI as a huge and complicated 
engineering subject (not simply as a pure scientific subject) formed by many scientific theories, 
which will have a great influence for AI to be practically possible. From an overall perspective, 
China is still a follower in the field of AI science. However, from the impressive record of 
academic publications, state-level investment and the broad participation and support of the 
whole society, China could catch up quickly in multiple aspects. There are plenty of reasons to 
believe that, based on centralized support by the national resources in computing ability, big 
data, labor cost, China will achieve top rankings in AI engineerings soon.  China will do a very 
good job by applying AI in engineerings with the faith of Pragmatic. Moreover, under the 
influence of the Confucian school of thought’s golden mean and harmony over the past 
thousands of years, human intelligence based on carbon and AI based on silicon could coexist in 
China, with neither replacing the other. In the future, they will mix and evolve into a new form 
of intelligence. Such intelligence would not only give play to the powerful ability of memory, 
computing and recognition but would also develop and evolve toward people and foremost 
toward humanism. 
 
References and Notes: 
1. Kai Wu. Ten years of artificial intelligence: the wind starts at the end of lily pads. Netease 
scientific report, (2015) 
2. AlphaGo: http://deepmind.com/alpha-go.html (2016). 
3. Haibin Yu. Prepared For The Robot Revolution. Guangming Daily. 
http://epaper.gmw.cn/gmrb/html/2014-09/11/nw.D110000gmrb_20140911_1-16.htm (2014). 
4. Keqiang Li. Government Work Report from the State Council of the PRC (2015). 
5. Brainnetome Atlas: http://atlas.brainnetome.org (2015). 
6. CASIA Brain Simulation System: http://brain-eng.ia.ac.cn (2015). 
7. Chen T.S. et al. DianNao: A Small-Footprint High-Throughput Accelerator for Ubiquitous 
Machine-Learning. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on 
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (2014). 

8. Chen Y.J. et al. DaDianNao: A Machine-Learning Supercomputer. In Proceedings of the 
47th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (2014). 
9. Hvistendahl M. China’s Sharp Focus On Biometrics. Science 337, 1448-1449 (2012). 
10. Jiang T.Z. A new-ome to understand the brain and its disorders. NeuroImage 80, 263-272 
(2013). 
11. Zhang C.S. Challenges in machine learning. Science China 43, 1612-1623 (2013). 
12. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image 
Recognition. arXiv:1512.03385 (2015) 
13. Microsoft Xiaoice: http://www.msxiaoice.com (2015). 
14. TOP500 Supercomputer Sites: http://www.top500.org (2016). 
15. Chao Zhou, Zeng-Guang Hou, Zhiqiang Cao, Shuo Wang, Min Tan. Motion modeling and 
neural networks based yaw control of a biomimetic robotic fish. Information Sciences 237, 
39-48 (2013) 
 
 
Acknowledgments: This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(NSFC No. 61272049), and the joint research fund for UCAS and CAS institute 
(Y55201TY00). 
 
Huai-Yu Wu is an Associate Professor in the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, 
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests fall in the fields of 
pattern recognition and intelligent systems, 3D visual computing, shape perception and analysis. 
 
Feiyue Wang is currently a Professor and Director in the State Key Laboratory of Management 
and Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is 
a member of Sigma Xi and an Elected Fellow of IEEE, INCOSE, IFAC, ASME, and AAAS. 
 
Chunhong Pan is a Professor in the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include computer 
vision, image processing, computer graphics, and remote sensing.
