Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Benchmarks and Algorithms for Oﬄine Preference-Based
Reward Learning
Daniel Shin

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Anca D. Dragan

EECS Department
University of California, Berkeley
Daniel S. Brown

School of Computing
University of Utah
Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= TGuXXlbKsn
Abstract
Learning a reward function from human preferences is challenging as it typically requires
having a high-ﬁdelity simulator or using expensive and potentially unsafe actual physical
rollouts in the environment. However, in many tasks the agent might have access to oﬄine
data from related tasks in the same target environment. While oﬄine data is increasingly
being used to aid policy optimization via oﬄine RL, our observation is that it can be
a surprisingly rich source of information for preference learning as well. We propose an
approach that uses an oﬄine dataset to craft preference queries via pool-based active learning,
learns a distribution over reward functions, and optimizes a corresponding policy via oﬄine
RL. Crucially, our proposed approach does not require actual physical rollouts or an accurate
simulator for either the reward learning or policy optimization steps. To test our approach,
we ﬁrst evaluate existing oﬄine RL benchmarks for their suitability for oﬄine reward learning.
Surprisingly, for many oﬄine RL domains, we ﬁnd that simply using a trivial reward function
results in good policy performance, making these domains ill-suited for evaluating learned
rewards (even those learned by non preference-based methods). To address this, we identify
a subset of existing oﬄine RL benchmarks that are well suited for reward learning and also
propose new oﬄine reward learning benchmarks which allow for more open-ended behaviors
allowing us to better test oﬄine reward learning from preferences. When evaluated on
this curated set of domains, our empirical results suggest that combining oﬄine RL with
learned human preferences can enable an agent to learn to perform novel tasks that were not
explicitly shown in the oﬄine data.
1
Introduction
For automated sequential decision making systems to eﬀectively interact with humans in the real world, these
systems need to be able to safely and eﬃciently adapt to and learn from diﬀerent users. Apprenticeship
learning (Abbeel & Ng, 2004)—also called learning from demonstrations (Argall et al., 2009) or imitation
learning (Osa et al., 2018)—seeks to allow robots and other autonomous systems to learn how to perform a
task through human feedback. Even though traditional apprenticeship learning uses expert demonstrations
(Argall et al., 2009; Osa et al., 2018; Arora & Doshi, 2021), preference queries—where a user is asked to
compare two trajectory segments—have been shown to more accurately identify the reward (Jeon et al., 2020)
while reducing the burden on the user to generate near-optimal actions (Wirth et al., 2017; Christiano et al.,
1
arXiv:2301.01392v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2023

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Reward Learning
Collect
Preference 
Labels
Oﬄine Dataset
RL Policy
Figure 1: Oﬄine Preference-Based Reward Learning (OPRL) enables safe and eﬃcient preference-based policy
customization without any environmental interactions. Given an oﬄine database consisting of trajectories,
OPRL queries for pairwise preference labels over trajectory segments from the database, learns a reward
function from these preference labels, and then performs oﬄine RL using the learned reward function.
2017). However, one challenge is that asking these queries requires either executing them in the physical world
(which can be unsafe), or executing them in a simulator and showing them to the human (which requires
simulating the world with high enough ﬁdelity).
Learning a policy via RL has the same challenges of needing a simulator or physical rollouts (Sutton & Barto,
2018). To deal with these problems, oﬄine RL has emerged as a promising way to do policy optimization
with access to oﬄine data only (Levine et al., 2020). Our key observation in this paper is that an analogous
approach can be applied to reward learning: rather than synthesizing and executing preference queries
in a simulator or in the physical world, we draw on an oﬄine dataset to extract segments that would be
informative for the user to compare. Since these segments have already been executed and recorded by the
agent, all we need to do is replay them to the human, and ask for a comparison.
We call this approach Oﬄine Preference-based Reward Learning (OPRL), a novel approach that consists of
oﬄine preference-based reward learning combined with oﬄine RL. Our approach is summarized in Figure 1.
OPRL has two appealing and desirable properties: safety and eﬃciency. No interactions with the environment
are needed for either reward learning or policy learning, removing the sample complexity and safety concerns
that come from trial and error learning in the environment.
Although the individual components of our framework are not novel by themselves, our novel contribution lies
in the fundamentally new and unexplored capability of learning unseen tasks during test time. For example
as seen in Figure 2, even if all demonstrations are short segments of random point to point navigation, we
demonstrate that OPRL can recover a policy that is able to go in a counter-clockwise orbit around the entire
maze inﬁnitely. The key to achieving this is the ability to stitch together incomplete segments from the
original dataset to create one long trajectory for a new task during test time.
By actively querying for comparisons between segments (or snippets) from a variety of diﬀerent rollouts, the
agent can gain valuable information about how to customize it’s behavior based on a user’s preferences. This
is true even when none of the data in the oﬄine dataset explicitly demonstrates the desired behavior. For
example, in Figure 2, an agent learns an orbiting behavior from human preferences, despite never having seen
a complete orbit in the oﬄine data.
To eﬀectively study oﬄine reward learning, we require a set of benchmark domains to evaluate diﬀerent
approaches. However, while there are many standard RL benchmarks, there are fewer benchmarks for reward
learning or even imitation learning more broadly. Recent work has shown that simply using standard RL
benchmarks and masking the rewards is not suﬃciently challenging since often learning a +1 or -1 reward
everywhere is suﬃcient for imitating RL policies (Freire et al., 2020). While there has been progress in
developing imitation learning benchmarks (Toyer et al., 2020; Freire et al., 2020), existing domains assume an
online reward learning and policy optimization setting, with full access to the environment, which is only
realistic in simulation due to eﬃciency and safety concerns.
2

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Samples from oﬄine 
data distribution
Examples of pairwise preference 
queries selected from oﬄine data
States (position & velocity) 
with highest learned reward.
Trajectories from 
learned policy
Figure 2: OPRL selects active queries from an oﬄine dataset consisting of random point to point navigation.
These active queries elicit preferences about a human’s preferences (the human wants the robot to perform
counter-clockwise orbits and prefers blue over red trajectories). Note that none of the segments in the oﬄine
dataset consists of a complete counter-clockwise orbit. However, OPRL is able to recover a counter-clockwise
orbiting policy given human preferences. The learned reward function matches the human’s preferences and,
when combined with oﬄine RL, leads to an appropriate policy that looks signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
original oﬄine data distribution. Because oﬄine data is often not collected for the speciﬁc task a human
wants, but for other tasks, being able to repurpose data from a variety of sources is important for generalizing
to diﬀerent user preferences in oﬄine settings where we cannot easily just gather lots of new online data.
One of our contributions is to evaluate a variety of existing oﬄine RL benchmarks (Fu et al., 2020) in
the oﬄine reward learning setting, where we remove access to the true reward function. Surprisingly, we
ﬁnd that many oﬄine RL benchmarks are ill-suited for studying and comparing diﬀerent reward learning
approaches—simply replacing all actual rewards in the oﬄine dataset with zeros, or a constant, results
in performance similar to, or better than, the performance obtained using the true rewards!
This is
problematic since it means that high performance in these domains is not always indicative of a better learned
reward—rather it appears that performance in many domains in mainly aﬀected by the quality of the data
(expert vs suboptimal) and the actual reward value has little impact on oﬄine RL.
To better isolate and study the eﬀect of diﬀerent reward learning approaches, we identify a subset of
environments where simply using a trivial reward function guess results in signiﬁcant degradation in policy
performance, motivating the use of these environments when evaluating reward learning methods. We identify
high oﬄine data variability and multi-task data as two settings where reward learning is necessary for good
policy learning.
Because most existing oﬄine RL domains are not suitable for studying the eﬀects of reward learning, we
also propose several new tasks designed for open-ended reward learning in oﬄine settings. Figure 2 shows
an example from our experiments where the learning agent has access to a dataset composed of trajectories
generated oﬄine by a force-controlled pointmass robot navigating between random start and goal locations
chosen along a 5x3 discrete grid. OPRL uses this dataset to learn to perform counter-clockwise orbits, a
behavior never explicitly seen in the oﬄine data. Figure 2 shows a sequence of active queries over trajectory
snippets taken from the oﬄine dataset. The blue trajectories were labeled by the human as preferable to
the red trajectories. We also visualize the learned reward function. Using a small number of queries and a
dataset generated by a very diﬀerent process than the desired task, we are able to learn the novel orbiting
behavior in a completely oﬄine manner.
We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
1. We propose and formalize the novel problem of oﬄine preference-based reward learning.
2. We evaluate a large set of existing oﬄine RL benchmarks, identify a subset that is well-suited for
evaluating oﬄine reward learning, and propose new benchmarks that allow for more open-ended
behavior.
3. We perform an empirical evaluation of OPRL, comparing diﬀerent methods for maintaining uncertainty
and comparing diﬀerent acquisition functions that use the uncertainty estimates to actively select
3

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
informative queries. We provide evidence that ensemble-based disagreement queries outperform other
approaches.
4. Our results suggest that there is surprising value in oﬄine datasets. The combination of oﬄine
reward learning and oﬄine RL leads to highly eﬃcient reward inference and enables agents to learn
to perform tasks not explicitly demonstrated in the oﬄine dataset.
2
Related Work
Prior work on preference-based reward learning typically focuses on online methods that require actual
rollouts in the environment or access to an accurate simulator or model (Wirth et al., 2017; Christiano et al.,
2017; Sadigh et al., 2017; Biyik & Sadigh, 2018; Brown et al., 2019; 2020b; Lee et al., 2021). However, accurate
simulations and model-based planning are often not possible. Furthermore, even when an accurate simulator
or model is available, there is the added burden of solving a diﬃcult sim-to-real transfer problem (Tobin
et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018; Chebotar et al., 2019). In most real-world scenarios, the standard preference
learning approach involving many episodes of trial and error in the environment is likely to be unacceptable
due to safety and eﬃciency concerns.
Prior work on safe apprenticeship learning either enables learners to estimate risky actions (Zhang & Cho,
2016) and request human assistance (Hoque et al., 2021), optimizes policies for tail risk rather than expected
return (Lacotte et al., 2019; Javed et al., 2021), or provides high-conﬁdence bounds on the performance of the
agent’s policy when learning from demonstrations (Brown & Niekum, 2018; Brown et al., 2020a); however,
these methods all rely on either an accurate dynamics model or direct interactions with the environment. By
contrast, our approach towards safety is to develop a fully oﬄine apprenticeship learning algorithm to avoid
costly and potentially unsafe physical data collection during reward and policy learning.
While there has been some work on oﬄine apprenticeship learning, prior work focuses on simple environments
with discrete actions and hand-crafted reward features (Klein et al., 2011; Bica et al., 2021) and requires
datasets that consist of expert demonstrations that are optimal for a particular task (Lee et al., 2019). Other
work has considered higher-dimensional continuous tasks, but assumes access to expert demonstrations or
requires experts to label trajectories with explicit reward values (Cabi et al., 2019; Zolna et al., 2020). By
contrast, we focus on fully oﬄine reward learning via small numbers of qualitative preference queries which are
known to be much easier to provide than ﬁne-grained reward labels or near-optimal demonstrations (Kendall,
1948; Stewart et al., 2005; Saaty, 2008; Wirth et al., 2017).
Prior work by Castro et al. (2019) is similar to
ours in that they learn a reward function from oﬄine ranked demonstrations of varying qualities. However,
their proposed approach is only evaluated on MDPs with ﬁnite state spaces where they learn a unique
reward for each state by solving a quadratic program. By contrast, our approach learns reward features from
low-level, continuous state information and uses a diﬀerentiable pairwise preference loss function rather than
quadratic programming.
Other prior work has considered oﬄine imitation learning. Methods such as behavioral cloning are trained
on oﬄine expert demonstrations, but suﬀer from compounding errors (Pomerleau, 1988). DemoDICE (Kim
et al., 2021) seeks to imitate expert demonstrations that are provided oﬄine and improves stability by
also leveraging a dataset of suboptimal demonstrations. By contrast, our approach does not require expert
demonstrations, just an oﬄine dataset of state transitions and learns an explicit reward function from
preferences. IQ-Learn (Garg et al., 2021) is capable of both oﬄine and online imitation learning. Rather
than learning a reward function, they learn a parameterized Q-function. Similar to DemoDICE, IQ-Learn
requires access to expert demonstrations, whereas we only require human preference labels over oﬄine data
of any quality—some of our experiments use data generated from a completely random policy. The main
downside to imitation learning methods like DemoDICE and IQ-Learn is the requirement of having expert
demonstrations. We avoid this problem by learning rewards from preference labels over pairs of trajectory
segments, something that is easily provided, even for humans who cannot provide expert demonstrations.
There has also been previous work that focused on apprenticeship learning from heterogeneous human
demonstrations in resource scheduling and coordination problems (Paleja et al., 2019). Our approach also
4

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
works by learning from heterogeneous data, but uses preference queries to learn a reward function which is
then used for oﬄine RL algorithms rather than learning a scheduling algorithm from human demonstrations.
3
Problem Deﬁnition
We model our problem as a Markov decision process (MDP), deﬁned by the tuple (S, A, r, P, ρ0, γ), where S
denotes the state space, A denotes the action space, r : S × A →R denotes the reward, P(s′|s, a) denotes the
transition dynamics, ρ0(s) denotes the initial state distribution, and γ ∈(0, 1) denotes the discount factor.
In contrast to standard RL, we do not assume access to the reward function r. Furthermore, we do not
assume access to the MDP during training. Instead, we are provided a static dataset, D, consisting of
trajectories, D = {τ0, ..., τN}, where each trajectory τi consists of a contiguous sequence of state, action,
next-state transitions tuples τi = {(si,0, ai,0, s′
i,0), ..., (si,M, ai,M, s′
i,M)}. Unlike imitation learning, we do not
assume that this dataset comes from a single expert attempting to optimize a speciﬁc reward function r(s, a).
Instead, the dataset D may contain data collected randomly, data collected from a variety of policies, or even
from a variety of demonstrations for a variety of tasks.
Instead of having access to the reward function, r, we assume access to an expert that can provide a small
number of pairwise preferences over trajectory snippets from an oﬄine dataset D. Given these preferences,
the goal is to ﬁnd a policy π(a|s) that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted rewards (also known as
the discounted returns), J(π) = Eπ,P,ρ0 [P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at)], under the unknown true reward function r in a
fully oﬄine fashion—we assume no access to the MDP other than the oﬄine trajectories contained in D.
4
Oﬄine Preference-Based Reward Learning
We now discuss our proposed algorithm, Oﬄine Preference-based Reward Learning (OPRL). OPRL is an
oﬄine, active preference-based learning approach which ﬁrst searches over an oﬄine dataset of trajectories and
sequentially selects new queries to be labeled by the human expert in order to learn a reward function that
models the user’s preferences and can be used to generate a customized policy based on a user’s preferences
via oﬄine RL.
As established by a large body of prior work (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2019;
Palan et al., 2019), the Bradley-Terry pairwise preference model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) is an appropriate
model for learning reward functions from user preferences over trajectories. Given a preference over trajectories,
τi ≺τj, we seek to maximize the probability of the preference label:
P
 τi ≺τj | θ) =
exp
X
s∈τj
ˆrθ(s)
exp
X
s∈τi
ˆrθ(s) + exp
X
s∈τj
ˆrθ(s)
,
(1)
by approximating the reward at state s using a neural network, ˆrθ(s), such that P
s∈τi ˆrθ(s) < P
s∈τj ˆrθ(s)
when τi ≺τj.
OPRL actively queries to obtain informative preference labels over trajectory snippets sampled from the
oﬄine dataset.
In order to perform active learning, OPRL needs a way to estimate the uncertainty over the
predicted preference label for unlabeled trajectory pairs, in order to determine which queries would be most
informative (result in the largest reduction in uncertainty over the true reward function). In this paper, we
investigate two diﬀerent methods to represent uncertainty (ensembles and Bayesian dropout) along with two
diﬀerent acquisition functions (disagreement and information gain). We describe these approaches below.
4.1
Representing Reward Uncertainty
We compare two of the most popular methods for obtaining uncertainty estimates when using deep learning:
ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2016) and Bayesian dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). On line 4 of
5

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Algorithm 1, we initialize an ensemble of reward models for ensemble queries or a single reward model for
Bayesian dropout.
Ensemble Queries
Following work on online active preference learning work by Christiano et al. (2017), we
test the eﬀectiveness of training an ensemble of reward models to approximate the reward function posterior
using the Bradley-Terry preference model. Similar to prior work (Christiano et al., 2017; Reddy et al., 2020),
we found that initializing the ensemble networks with diﬀerent seeds was suﬃcient to produce a diverse set of
reward functions.
Bayesian Dropout
We also test the eﬀectiveness of using dropout to approximate the reward function
posterior. As proposed by Gal & Ghahramani (2016), we train a reward network using pairwise preferences
and apply dropout to the last layer of the network during training. To predict a return distribution over
candidate pairs of trajectories, we still apply dropout and pass each trajectory through the network multiple
times to obtain a distribution over the returns.
4.2
Active Learning Query Selection
In contrast to prior work on active preference learning, we do not require on-policy rollouts in the environ-
ment (Christiano et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021) nor require synthesizing queries using a model (Sadigh et al.,
2017). Instead, we generate candidate queries by searching over randomly chosen pairs of sub-trajectories
obtained from the oﬄine dataset. Given a distribution over likely returns for each trajectory snippet in
a candidate preference query, we estimate the value of obtaining a label for this candidate query. We
consider two methods for computing the value of a query: disagreement and information gain. We then take
the trajectory pair with the highest predicted value and ask for a pairwise preference label. On line 6 of
Algorithm 1, we can either use disagreement or information gain as the estimated value of information (VOI).
Disagreement
When using disagreement to select active queries, we select pairs with the highest ensemble
disagreement among the diﬀerent return estimates obtained from either ensembling or Bayesian dropout.
Following Christiano et al. (2017), we calculate disagreement as the variance in the binary comparison
predictions: if fraction p of the posterior samples predict τi ≻τj while the other 1 −p ensemble models
predict τi ⪯τj, then the variance of the query pair (τi, τj) is p(1 −p).
Information Gain Queries
As an alternative to disagreement, we also consider the expected information
gain (Cover, 1999) between the reward function parameters θ and the outcome Y of querying the human
for a preference. We model our uncertainty using an approximate posterior p(θ | D), given by training an
ensemble or dropout network on our oﬄine dataset D. Houlsby et al. (2011) show that the information gain
of a potential query can be formulated as:
I(θ; Y | D) = H(Y | D) −Eθ∼p(θ|D)[H(Y | θ, D)].
(2)
Intuitively, the information gain will be maximized when the ﬁrst term is high, meaning that the overall
model has high entropy, but the second term is low, meaning that each individual hypothesis θ from the
posterior assigns low entropy to the outcome Y . This will happen when the individual hypotheses strongly
disagree with each other and there is no clear majority. We approximate both terms in the information gain
equation with samples obtained via ensemble or dropout. See Appendix D for further details.
Searching the Oﬄine Dataset for Informative Queries
We note that this process of searching for
informative queries can be performed quite eﬃciently since the information gain or ensemble disagreement
for each candidate query can be computed in parallel. Furthermore, we can leverage GPU parallelization by
feeding all of the states in one or more trajectories into the reward function network as a batch. Finally, we
note that searching for the next active query can be formulated as an any-time algorithm—we can continue
to sample random pairs of trajectories from the oﬄine dataset to evaluate and when a particular time or
computation limit is reached and then simply return the most informative query found so far.
6

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Algorithm 1 OPRL
1: Require: A dataset D = {τ0, ..., τN}, where each trajectory τi consists of τi = {(si,0, ai,0, s′
i,0), ...,
(si,M, ai,M, s′
i,M)}.
2: // REWARD LEARNING
3: Generate dataset of pairs of snippets Dsnip
4: Initialize reward model ˆrψ
5: for each iteration do
6:
Compute estimate of VOI across all pairs in Dsnip
7:
Find snippet pair (τs,1, τs,2) with highest estimated VOI
8:
Query preference label y
9:
Store query pair and label Drew ←(τs,1, τs,2, y)
10:
Train reward model with updated Drew
11: end for
12: Label transitions in D with ˆrψ
13: // POLICY LEARNING
14: Run selected oﬄine RL algorithm on D
4.3
Policy Optimization
Given a learned reward function obtained via preference-learning, we can then use any existing oﬄine or
batch RL algorithm (Levine et al., 2020) to learn a policy without requiring knowledge of the transition
dynamics or rollouts in the actual environment. The entire OPRL pipeline is summarized in Algorithm 1.
5
Experiments and Results
We ﬁrst evaluate a variety of popular oﬄine RL benchmarks from D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) to determine which
domains are most suited for evaluating oﬄine reward learning. Prior work on reward learning has shown that
simply showing good imitation learning performance on an RL benchmark is not suﬃcient to demonstrate
good reward learning (Freire et al., 2020). In particular, we seek domains where simply using an all zero
or constant reward does not result in good performance. After isolating several domains where learning a
shaped reward actually matters (Section 5.1), we evaluate OPRL on these selected benchmark domains and
investigate the performance of diﬀerent active query strategies (Section 5.2). Finally, we propose and evaluate
several tasks speciﬁcally designed for oﬄine reward learning (Section 5.3). To further analyze our method,
we include sensitivity analyses on the number of initial queries, queries per round, ensemble models, and
dropout samples (Appendix B, C)
Videos of learned behavior and code is available in the Supplement.
5.1
Evaluating Oﬄine RL Benchmarks
An important assumption made in our problem statement is that we do not have access to the reward function.
Before describing our approach for reward learning, we ﬁrst investigate in what cases we actually need to
learn a reward function. We study a set of popular benchmarks used for oﬄine RL (Fu et al., 2020). To test
the sensitivity of these methods to the reward function, we evaluate the performance of oﬄine RL algorithms
on these benchmarks when we set the reward equal to zero for each transition in the oﬄine dataset and when
we set all the rewards equal to a constant (the average reward over the entire dataset).
We evaluated four of the most commonly used oﬄine RL algorithms: Advantage Weighted Regression
(AWR) (Peng et al., 2019), Batch-Constrained deep Q-learning (BCQ) (Fujimoto et al., 2019), Bootstrapping
Error Accumulation Reduction (BEAR) (Kumar et al., 2019), and Conservative Q-Learning (CQL) (Kumar
et al., 2020). Table 1 shows the resulting performance across a large number of tasks from the D4RL
benchmarks (Fu et al., 2020).
7

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Table 1: Oﬄine RL performance on D4RL benchmark tasks comparing the performance with the true reward
to performance using a constant reward equal to the average reward over the dataset (Avg) and zero rewards
everywhere (Zero). Even when all the rewards are set to the average or to zero, many oﬄine RL algorithms
still perform surprisingly well. In this table, we present the experiments ran with AWR. Results are averages
over three random seeds. Bolded environments are ones where we ﬁnd the degradation percentage to be over
a chosen threshold and are used for later experiments with OPRL. The degradation percentage is calculated
as max(GT−max(AVG,ZERO,RANDOM),0)
GT−min(AVG,ZERO,RANDOM)
× 100% and the threshold is set to 20%. The degradation percentage is
used to determine domains where trivial reward functions do not lead to good performance to isolate the
eﬀect of reward learning in later experiments.
Task
GT
Avg
Zero
Random
Degradation %
flow-ring-random
-42.5
-42.9
-44.3
-166.2
0.3
FLOW-MERGE-RANDOM
160.3
85.2
85.6
117.0
57.7
MAZE2D-UMAZE
104.4
56.5
55.0
49.5
87.3
MAZE2D-MEDIUM
134.6
30.5
34.5
44.8
86.3
HALFCHEETAH-RANDOM
11.0
-49.4
-48.3
-285.8
20.0
halfcheetah-medium-replay
4138.2
3934.7
3830.2
-285.8
4.6
halfcheetah-medium
4096.0
3984.4
3898.3
-285.8
2.5
halfcheetah-medium-expert
669.9
401.7
560.5
-285.8
11.4
halfcheetah-expert
467.8
511.1
493.1
-285.8
0.0
hopper-random
123.3
129.8
29.1
18.3
0.0
hopper-medium-replay
1045.6
1127.4
954.6
18.3
0.0
hopper-medium
1152.1
1192.8
963.6
18.3
0.0
hopper-medium-expert
623
615.8
587.3
18.3
1.2
hopper-expert
571.7
617.2
427.6
18.3
0.0
KITCHEN-COMPLETE
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.0
25.0
kitchen-mixed
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.0
16.7
kitchen-partial
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
We ﬁnd that for tasks with only expert data, there is no need to learn a reward function since using a
trivial reward function often leads to expert performance. We attribute this to the fact that many oﬄine
RL algorithms are similar to behavioral cloning (Levine et al., 2020). Thus, when an oﬄine RL benchmarks
consists of only expert data, oﬄine RL algorithms do not need reward information to perform well. In
Appendix E we show that AWR reduces to behavioral cloning in the case of an all zero reward function.
Conversely, when the oﬄine dataset contains a wide variety of data that is either random or multi-task
(e.g. the Maze2D environment consists of an agent traveling to randomly generated goal locations), we ﬁnd
that running oﬄine RL algorithms on the dataset with an all zero or constant reward function signiﬁcantly
degrades performance.
5.2
Reward Learning on a Subset of D4RL
To evaluate the beneﬁt of oﬄine reward learning, we focus our attention on the D4RL benchmark domains
shown in Figure 3 which showed signiﬁcant degradation in Table 1 since these are domains where we can be
conﬁdent that good performance is due to learning a good reward function. We deﬁne signiﬁcant degradation
to be degradation percentage over 20%, which was chosen to give enough room for OPRL to improve on in
comparison to uninformative rewards like avg or zero masking. We selected both of the Maze environments,
the Flow Merge traﬃc simulation, the Halfcheetah random environment, and the Franka Kitchen-Complete
environment. To facilitate a better comparison across diﬀerent methods for active learning, we use oracle
preference labels, where one trajectory sequence is preferred over another if it has higher ground-truth return.
We report the performance of OPRL using AWR (Peng et al., 2019), which we empirically found to work for
8

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
(a) U-Maze
(b) Medium Maze
(c) Flow Merge
(d) Halfcheetah
(e) Franka Kitchen
Figure 3: Experimental domains chosen from D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) for use in oﬄine preference-based reward
learning.
(a) Maze2D-Umaze
(b) Maze2D-Medium
(c) Half-Cheetah-v2
Figure 4: (a) Ensemble disagreement after 10 rounds of active queries (1 query per round) in Maze2d-Umaze.
(b) Ensemble disagreement after 10 rounds of active queries (1 query per round) in Maze2d-Medium. (c)
Ensemble disagreement after 10 rounds of active queries (10 queries per round) in Halfcheetah.
policy optimization across the diﬀerent tasks. In the appendix we also report results when using CQL (Kumar
et al., 2020) for policy optimization.
5.2.1
Maze Navigation
We ﬁrst consider the Maze2d domain (Fu et al., 2020), which involves moving a force-actuated ball (along
the X and Y axis) to a ﬁxed target location. The observation is 4 dimensional, which consists of the (x, y)
location and velocities. The oﬄine dataset consists of one continuous trajectory of the agent navigation to
random intermediate goal locations. The true reward, which we only use for providing synthetic preference
labels, is the negative exponentiated distance to a held-out goal location.
For our experimental setup, we ﬁrst randomly select 5 pairs of trajectory snippets and train 5 epochs with
our models. After this initial training process, for each round, one additional pair of trajectories is queried to
be added to the training set and we train one more epoch on this augmented dataset. The learned reward
model is then used to predict the reward labels for all the state transitions in the oﬄine dataset, which is
then used to train a policy via oﬄine RL (e.g. AWR (Peng et al., 2019)). As a baseline, we also compare
against a random, non-active query baseline.
The results are provided in Table 2. We found that ensemble disagreement is the best performing approach
for both Maze2D-Umaze and Maze2D-Medium and outperforms T-REX. The oﬄine RL performance for
ensemble disagreement are shown in Figure 4. We ﬁnd that ensemble disagreement on Maze2D-Umaze is able
to quickly approach the performance when using the ground-truth reward function on the full dataset of 1
million state transitions after only 15 preference queries (5 initial + 10 active). Maze2D-Medium is more
diﬃcult and we ﬁnd that 15 preference queries is unable to recover a policy on par with the policy trained
with ground truth rewards. We hypothesize that this is due to the fact that Maze2D is goal oriented and
learning a reward with trajectory comparisons might be diﬃcult since the destination matters more than the
path.
9

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Table 2: OPRL Performance Using Reward Predicted After N Rounds of Querying: Oﬄine RL
performance using rewards predicted either using a static number of randomly selected pairwise preferences (T-
REX) (Brown et al., 2019), or active queries using Ensemble Disagreement(EnsemDis), Ensemble Information
Gain (EnsemInfo), Dropout Disagreement (DropDis), and Dropout Information Gain (DropInfo). N is set
to 5 for Maze2D-Umaze, 10 for Maze2d-Medium and ﬂow-merge-random, 15 for Halfcheetah. N is selected
based on the size of the dimension of observation space and the complexity of the environment. Results are
averages over three random seeds and are normalized so the performance of oﬄine RL using the ground-truth
rewards is 100.0 and performance of a random policy is 0.0. The results provide evidence that Ensembles are
at least as good and often much better than random queries and that Dropout often fails to perform as well
as random queries.
Query Aquisition Method
Random
EnsemDis
EnsemInfo
DropDis
DropInfo
maze2d-umaze
78.2
93.5
89.2
88.0
61.3
maze2d-medium
71.6
86.4
71.0
52.6
44.4
halfcheetah-random
96.1
113.7
100.6
84.4
91.7
flow-merge-random
110.1
89.0
92.1
86.2
84.2
kitchen-complete
79.6
105.0
158.8
48.5
65.4
halfcheetah-medium-replay
98.8
100.0
99.7
96.2
94.0
halfcheetah-medium
102.2
103.0
100.7
94.4
99.1
halfcheetah-medium-expert
111.4
91.0
112.8
86.0
113.9
halfcheetah-expert
104.3
176.4
124.6
86.0
129.3
hopper-random
81.9
86.7
64.7
72.0
75.1
hopper-medium-replay
97.8
98.4
103.5
94.6
97.3
hopper-medium
90.4
93.6
91.7
89.4
92.0
hopper-medium-expert
81.2
81.4
81.0
90.0
84.3
hopper-expert
69.0
93.2
122.4
94.0
100.4
kitchen-mixed
110.0
120.0
96.7
110.0
90.0
kitchen-partial
91.2
111.8
117.6
126.5
97.1
5.2.2
MuJoCo Tasks
We next tested OPRL on the MuJoCo environment Halfcheetah-v2. For the tasks, the agent is rewarded
for making the Halfcheetah move forward as fast as possible. The MuJoCo tasks presents an additional
challenge in comparison to the Maze2d domain since they have higher dimensional observations spaces, 17 for
Halfcheetah-v2. The dataset contains 1 million transitions obtained by rolling out a random policy. Our
experimental setup is similar to Maze2D, except we start with 50 pairs of trajectories instead of 5 and we
add 10 trajectories per round of active queries instead of 1 query per round. We found that increasing the
number of queries was helpful due to the fact that MuJoCo tasks have higher dimensional observational
spaces, which requires more data points to learn an accurate reward function. The learning curve is shown in
Figure 4 (c). We found ensemble disagreement to be the best performing approach for the Halfcheetah task.
We see a noticeable improvement as the number of active queries increases, however, 10 rounds of active
queries is not suﬃcient to reach the same performance as the policy learned with the ground truth reward.
5.2.3
Flow Merge
The Flow Merge environment involves directing traﬃc such that the ﬂow of traﬃc is maximized in a highway
merging scenario. Results are shown in Table 2. Random queries achieved the best performance, but all
query methods were able to recover near ground truth performance.
5.2.4
Robotic Manipulation
The Franka Kitchen domain involves interacting with various objects in the kitchen to reach a certain state
conﬁguration. The objects you can interact with include a water kettle, a light switch, a microwave, and
10

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Figure 5: Constrained Goal Navigation. The highlighted yellow region represents a constraint region
that the human prefers the agent to avoid while also traveling to the goal position shown in red. OPRL
produces trajectories that match this preference by taking a more round-about, but more preferred, path to
the goal.
cabinets. Our results in Table 1 show that setting the reward to all zero or a constant reward causes the
performance to degrade signiﬁcantly. Interestingly, the results in Table 2 show that OPRL using Ensemble
Disagreement and Ensemble InfoGain are able to shape the reward in a way that actually leads to better
performance than using the ground-truth reward for the task. In the appendix, we plot the learning curves
and ﬁnd that OPRL also converges to a better performance faster.
5.3
New Oﬄine Preference-Based Reward Learning Tasks
To explore the full beneﬁts of learning a reward function from preferences, we propose and study several
new tasks to highlight the need for a shaped reward function, rather than simply a goal indicator. To create
these environments we adapted common gym environments including several that are in the D4RL set of
benchmarks. The following section shows that OPRL can learn novel behaviors despite the oﬄine data never
containing successful or complete examples of these behaviors. We believe this is an exciting result that has
not been previously demonstrated or recognized as possible in prior preference learning work.
5.3.1
Maze Navigation with Constraint Region
We created a new variant of the Maze2d-Medium task where there is a constraint region in the middle of the
maze that the supervisor does not want the robot to enter. Figure 5 shows this scenario where entering the
highlighted yellow region is undesirable. After only 25 active queries using ensemble disagreement, we obtain
the behavior shown in Figure 5 where the oﬄine RL policy has learned to reach the goal while avoiding the
constraint region.
5.3.2
Open Maze Behaviors
Next, we took the D4RL Open Maze environment and dataset and used it to teach an agent to patrol the
domain in counter-clockwise orbits, clockwise orbits, approximating a digital 2 shape, preferring to stay at
the top, and approximating a "Z" shape. The open maze counter-clockwise orbiting uses human preferences
provided by one of the authors by showing the human user trajectory snippets visualized as in 2 and querying
preferences. The dataset only contains the agent moving to randomly chosen goal locations, thus this domain
highlights the beneﬁts of stitching together data from an oﬄine database as well as the beneﬁts of learning a
shaped reward function rather than simply using a goal classiﬁer to use as the reward function which has
been used in prior work on oﬄine RL work (Eysenbach et al., 2021). The original data distribution, samples
of the preference queries, and the resulting learned policies are shown in ﬁgures 2 and 6. Our results involving
the open maze behaviors in Figure 6 and our work on constrained maze in Figure 5 can be seen as a mixture
of experts since the data consists of a mixture of demonstrations for a variety of starts and goals. OPRL
can leverage diverse data to achieve diﬀerent preferences (including ones not explicitly demonstrated), such
as taking a longer rather than shorter path to a goal because of a speciﬁc user constraint preference in the
medium maze, or various behaviors in the open maze.
11

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
Figure 6: Learned “Shape" Policies adapt to particular user’s preferences to learn counterclockwise orbits,
a digital 2 shape, preferring to stay at the top, and a “Z" shape, respectively. Green circles represent random
initial states and red circles represent the position of the agent at the end of a rollout.
Table 3: Quantitative Results for Open Ended Cartpole Behaviors: We evaluated the trained OPRL
policies to calculate how often the pole was balanced (θ ≤±24◦) and in view (cart position in [-2.4,2.4]) or in
view and windmilling clockwise or counter-clockwise (by looking at the sign of the angular velocity). This
table contains results showing the average (standard error of the mean) number of time steps in a 200-length
trajectory that the diﬀerent behaviors are exhibited in the randomly collected Oﬄine Data (ﬁrst row) and
when rolling out the trained OPRL policy (second row).
Balance
Windmill (CW)
Windmill (CCW)
Avg. Steps
SE
Avg. Steps
SE
Avg. Steps
SE
Offline Data
23.07
(0.37)
71.39
(2.01)
72.12
(2.06)
OPRL
111.35
(3.36)
128.20
(0.14)
190.37
(1.43)
5.3.3
Open-Ended CartPole Behaviors
We created an oﬄine dataset of 1,000 random trajectories of length 200 in a modiﬁed CartPole domain where
the trajectories only terminate at the end of 200 timesteps—this allows the pole to swing below the track
and also allows the cart to move oﬀthe visible track to the left or right. Given this dataset of behavior
agnostic data, we wanted to see whether we could optimize diﬀerent policies, corresponding to diﬀerent human
preferences. We can also see this data from a random controller as highly suboptimal data for the following
tasks. We optimized the following policies: balance, where the supervisor prefers the pole to be balanced
upright and prefers the cart to stay in the middle of the track; clockwise windmill, where the supervisor
prefers the cart to stay in the middle of the track but prefers the pole to swing around as fast as possible in
the clockwise direction; and counter-clockwise windmill, which is identical to clockwise windmill except the
preference is for the pole to swing in the counter-clockwise direction. OPRL is able to learn policies for all
three behaviors. See the supplementary video for examples of the learned behaviors.
To quantitatively evaluate OPRL on these open-ended behaviors, we measure the average number of steps
that OPRL policy is performing the task (e.g. balanced, windmill clockwise, windmill counter-clockwise)
compared to the average number of steps these behavior appear in the original dataset as seen in Table 3. We
see that OPRL is able to perform the task about 5 times more frequently for the balance task and around 2
times more frequently for the windmill tasks when compared to the original dataset. This gives evidence that
OPRL is able to leverage oﬄine data to optimize tasks not explicitly shown in the data.
5.3.4
Pilot User Study
We ran a small user study where we recruited 6 participants and asked them to give pairwise preference labels
to teach an agent a goal location in Medium-Maze (Fig 3(b)) and a counter-clockwise orbiting behavior in
OpenMaze (Sec 5.3.2). For Medium-Maze we quantitatively evaluated the performance of OPRL with respect
to the GT reward from D4RL. Similar to our simulation results, we found that EnsemDis version of OPRL
12

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (01/2023)
performed the best, achieving scores of 122.6 compared to GT performance of 134.6 and the remaining results
are included in Table 10. All users were able to successfully use OPRL to teach an orbiting behavior nearly
identical to Fig 6 (left) as shown in Fig 9 in the Appendix. In Table 10 we show results per user as well as
results when aggregating all user preferences labels. We ﬁnd that the combined data set (POOLED) achieved
performance better than most of the individual users. We hypothesize this is because each user only answered
100 random queries which were used to create the pool for active learning. The POOLED results show the
beneﬁt of having a large-enough active learning pool when performing oﬄine preference learning. Overall, we
found that users were able to provide preference labels that enable oﬄine RL to generate behaviors aligned
with human users.
6
Discussion and Future Work
Our goal is to learn a policy from user preferences without requiring access to a model, simulator, or
interactions with the environment. Toward this goal, we propose OPRL: Oﬄine Preference-based Reward
Learning. We evaluate several diﬀerent oﬄine RL benchmarks and ﬁnd that those that contain mainly random
data or multi-task data are best suited for reward inference. While most prior work on reward learning
has focused on learning from expert demonstrations, preference-based reward learning enables us to learn a
user’s intent even from random datasets by selecting informative sub-sequences of transitions and requesting
pairwise preferences over these sub-sequences. Our results suggest that using ensemble disagreement as an
acquisition function is the best choice since it leads to the best performance for 3 out of the 5 tasks and
outperforms the random baseline for all 5 tasks. Additionally, using ensemble disagreement with only 10-15
preference queries we are able to learn policies with similar performance to policies trained with full access to
tens of thousands of ground-truth reward samples. Finally, our results suggest there is surprising value in
oﬄine datasets even if the datasets do not explicitly contain data that matches a user’s preferences or if the
datasets contain suboptimal data. We are excited about the potential of oﬄine reward and policy learning
and believe that our work provides a stepping stone towards safer and more eﬃcient autonomous systems
that can better learn from and interact with humans. Preference-learning enables users to teach a system
without needing to be able to directly control the system or demonstrate optimal behavior. We believe this
makes preferences ideally suited for many tasks in as healthcare, ﬁnance, or robotics. Future work includes
developing more complex and realistic datasets and benchmarks and developing oﬄine RL algorithms and
active query strategies that are well-suited for reward inference and oﬄine RL.
