arXiv:1801.08365v1  [cs.AI]  25 Jan 2018
Probabilistic Planning by Probabilistic Programming
Vaishak Belle
University of Edinburgh & Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Automated planning is a major topic of research in artiﬁcial
intelligence, and enjoys a long and distinguished history. The
classical paradigm assumes a distinguished initial state, com-
prised of a set of facts, and is deﬁned over a set of actions
which change that state in one way or another. Planning in
many real-world settings, however, is much more involved: an
agent’s knowledge is almost never simply a set of facts that
are true, and actions that the agent intends to execute never
operate the way they are supposed to. Thus, probabilistic
planning attempts to incorporate stochastic models directly
into the planning process. In this article, we brieﬂy report on
probabilistic planning through the lens of probabilistic pro-
gramming: a programming paradigm that aims to ease the
speciﬁcation of structured probability distributions. In partic-
ular, we provide an overview of the features of two systems,
HYPE and ALLEGRO, which emphasise different strengths
of probabilistic programming that are particularly useful for
complex modelling issues raised in probabilistic planning.
Among other things, with these systems, one can instantiate
planning problems with growing and shrinking state spaces,
discrete and continuous probability distributions, and non-
unique prior distributions in a ﬁrst-order setting.
Introduction
Automated planning is a major topic of research in artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, and enjoys a long and distinguished history
(Fikes and Nilsson 1971). The classical paradigm assumes a
distinguished initial state, comprised of a set of facts, and is
deﬁned over a set of actions which change that state in one
way or another. Actions are further characterised in terms
of their applicability conditions, that is, things that must be
true for the agent to be able to execute it, and effects, which
procedurally amounts to adding new facts to a state while
removing others. The scientiﬁc agenda is then to design al-
gorithms that synthesise a sequence of actions that takes the
agent from an initial state to a desired goal state.
From the early days, automated planning was motivated
by robotics applications. But it was observed that the real
world – or more precisely, the robot’s knowledge about the
world – is almost never simply a set of facts that are true,
and actions that the agent intends to execute never operate
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
the way they are supposed to. One way to make sense of this
complication is to separate the “high-level reasoning,” in our
case the planner’s search space, from the low-level sensor-
motor details. On the positive side, such a move allows the
plan representation to be ﬁnite, discrete and simple. On the
negative side, signiﬁcant expert knowledge has to go into
materialising this separation of concerns, possibly at the loss
of clarity on the behaviour of the system as a whole.
Incidentally, by testing the robot’s effectors repeatedly
in a controlled environment, one can approximate the
uncertain effects of an action in terms of a probability
distribution. Similarly, based on minimalistic assumptions
about the environment, expressed as a probabilistic prior,
by repeated sampling, the robot can update its prior to
converge on a reasonable posterior that approximates
the environment (Thrun, Burgard, and Fox 2005). To that
end, probabilistic planning attempts to incorporate such
models directly into the planning process. There are to-date
numerous languages and algorithmic frameworks for proba-
bilistic
planning,
e.g.,
(Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007;
Boutilier, Dean, and Hanks 1999;
Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998; Ong et al. 2010).
In this article, we brieﬂy report on probabilistic plan-
ning
through the
lens
of
probabilistic programming
(Gordon et al. 2014). Probabilistic programming is a pro-
gramming paradigm that aims to ease the speciﬁcation of
structured probability distributions; these languages are de-
veloped so as to enable modularity and re-use in proba-
bilistic machine learning applications. Their atomic build-
ing blocks incorporate stochastic primitives, and the formal
representation also allows for compositionality. Here, we
speciﬁcally provide an overview of the features of two kinds
of systems, both of which have their roots in logic program-
ming:
• HYPE
(Nitti, Belle, and Raedt 2015):
a
plan-
ning
framework
based
on
distributional
clauses
(Gutmann et al. 2011); and
• ALLEGRO (Belle and Levesque 2015): a high-level con-
trol programming framework that extends GOLOG
(Reiter 2001).
These two systems emphasise different strengths of
probabilistic programming, which we think are par-
ticularly useful for complex modelling issues raised

in probabilistic planning. HYPE can easily describe
growing and shrinking state spaces owing to uncer-
tainty
about
the
existence
of
objects,
and
thus
is
closely
related
to
BLOG
models
(Milch et al. 2007;
Srivastava et al. 2014). Since HYPE is an extension of
PROBLOG (Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen 2007), it stands
to beneﬁt from a wide range of applications and machine
learning models explored with PROBLOG.1 The dynamical
aspects of the domain are instantiated by reifying time as
an argument in the predicates, and so it is perhaps most
appropriate for ﬁnite horizon planning problems.
ALLEGRO treats actions as ﬁrst-class citizens and
is built on a rich model of dynamics and subjec-
tive probabilities, which allows it to handle context-
sensitive effect axioms, and non-unique probability mea-
sures placed on ﬁrst-order formulas. GOLOG has also
been widely used for a range of applications that ap-
ply structured knowledge (e.g., ontologies) in dynami-
cal settings (Lakemeyer and Levesque 2007), and ALLE-
GRO stands to inherit these developments. GOLOG has
also been shown as a way to structure search in large
plan spaces (Baier, Fritz, and McIlraith 2007). Finally, since
there are constructs for iteration and loops, such programs
are most appropriate for modelling non-terminating be-
haviour (Claßen and Lakemeyer 2008).
In the sequel, we describe the essential formal and al-
gorithmic contributions of these systems before concluding
with open computational issues.
HYPE
PROBLOG aims to unify logic programming and proba-
bilistic speciﬁcations, in the sense of providing a language to
specify distributions together with the means to query about
the probabilities of events. As a very simple example, to ex-
press that the object c is on the table with a certain proba-
bility, and that all objects on the table are also in the room,
we would write (free variables are assumed to be quantiﬁed
from the outside):
.6 :: onTable(c).
inRoom(x) ←onTable(x).
This then allows us to query the probability of atoms such
inRoom(c).
A more recent extension (Gutmann et al. 2011) geared for
continuous distributions and other inﬁnite event-space distri-
butions allows the head atom of a logical rule to be drawn
from a distribution directly, by means of the following syn-
tax:
h ∼D ←b1, . . . , bn.
For example, suppose there is an urn with an unknown
number of balls (Milch et al. 2007). Suppose we pull a ball
at a time and put it back in the urn, and repeat these steps
(say) 6 times. Suppose further we have no means of iden-
tifying if the balls drawn were distinct from each other. A
probabilistic program for this situation might be as follows:
1dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/problog
n ∼poisson(6).
pos(x) ∼uni f orm(1, 10) ←between(1, ≃(n), x).
For simplicity, we assume here that the physical form of
the urn is a straight line of length 10, and the position of a
ball is assumed to be anywhere along this line.
HYPE is based on a dynamic extension that allows us to
temporally index the truth of atoms, and so can be used to
reason about actions. For example, the program:
numBehind(x, t + 1) ∼poisson(1) ←removeObj(x, t).
says that on removing the object x at t, we may assume
that there are objects – typically one such object – behind x.
Such programs can be used in object tracking applications
to reason about occluded objects (Nitti 2016).
A common declaration in many robotics applications
(Thrun, Burgard, and Fox 2005) is to deﬁne actions and sen-
sors with an error proﬁle, such as a Gaussian noise model.
These can be instantiated in HYPE using:
pos(x, t + 1) ∼gaussian(≃(pos(x, t)) + 1, var)
←move(x, t).
obs(x, t + 1) ∼gaussian(≃(pos(x, t)), var).
The ﬁrst rule says that the position of x on doing a move
action is drawn from a normal distribution whose mean is x’s
current position incremented by one. The second one says
that observing the current position of x is subject to additive
Gaussian noise.
As an automated planning system, HYPE instantiates a
Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman 1994). Recall
that MDPs are deﬁned in terms of states, actions, stochas-
tic transitions and reward functions, which can be realised
in the above syntax using rules such as:
poss(act, t) ←conditions(t).
reward(num, t) ←conditions(t).
To compute a policy, which is a mapping from states and
time points to actions, HYPE combines importance sam-
pling and SLD resolution to effectively bridge the high-
level symbolic speciﬁcation and the probabilistic compo-
nents of the programming model. HYPE allows states and
actions to be discrete or continuous, yielding a very gen-
eral planning system. Empirical evaluations are reported in
(Nitti, Belle, and Raedt 2015) and (Nitti et al. 2017).
ALLEGRO
The GOLOG language has been successfully used in a
wide range of applications involving control and planning
(Lakemeyer and Levesque 2007), and is based on a simple
ontology that all changes are a result of named actions
(Reiter 2001). An initial state describes the truth values of
properties, and actions may affect these values in non-trivial

context-sensitive ways. In particular, GOLOG is a program-
ming model where executing actions are the simplest in-
structions in the program, upon which more involved con-
structions for iteration and loops are deﬁned. For example, a
program to clear a table containing an unknown number of
blocks would be as follows:
([πx onTable(x)?; removeObj(x)])∗; ¬∃x onTable(x)?
Here, π is the non-deterministic choice of argument, semi-
colon denotes sequence, ? allows for test conditions, and ∗
is unbounded iteration. The program terminates successfully
because the sub-program before the ﬁnal test condition re-
moves every object from the table.
As argued in (Lakemeyer and Levesque 2007), the rich
syntax of GOLOG allows us, on the one hand, to represent
policies and plans in an obvious fashion; for example:
a1; . . . ; an; P?
ensures that the goal P is true on executing the sequence of
actions. However, the syntax also allows open-ended search;
for example:
while ¬P πa. a
tries actions until P is made true. The beneﬁt of GOLOG
then is that it allows us to explore plan formulations between
these two extremes, including partially speciﬁed programs
that are completed by a meta-language planner.
ALLEGRO augments the underlying ontology to rea-
son about probability distributions over state properties,
and allow actions with uncertain (stochastic) effects. In
logical terms, the semantical foundations rests on a rich
logic of belief and actions. Consequently, it can handle
partial probabilistic speciﬁcations. For example, one can
say c is on the table with a certain probability as before:
pr(onTable(c)) = .6, but it is also possible to express
the probability that there is an object on the table without
knowing which one: pr(∃x onTable(x)) = .6. We can
go further and simply say that there is a non-zero proba-
bility of that statement: pr(∃x onTable(x)) > 0, which
means that any distribution satisfying the formula is admis-
sible. Such a feature can be very useful: for example, in
(Kaelbling and Lozano-P´erez 2013), it is argued that when
planning in highly stochastic environments, it is useful to al-
low a margin of error in the probability distributions deﬁned
over state properties.
To model the case of Gaussian error models, actions with
uncertain effects are given a general treatment. For one
thing, the effects of actions are axiomatised using the notion
of successor state axioms which incorporate Reiter’s solu-
tion to the frame problem (Reiter 2001). So, for example,
changing the position of an object using a move action can
be expressed as:
pos(x, do(a, s)) = u ≡
(a = move(x, y) ∧pos(x, s) = u + y)
∨(a ̸= move(x, y) ∧pos(x, s) = u)
This says that if the action of moving x was executed, its
position (along a straight line) is decremented by y units, and
for all other actions, the position is unaffected. To deal with
uncertain effects, we will distinguish between what the agent
intends and what actually happens. That is, let move(x, y, z)
be a new action type, where y is what the agent intends,
and z is what happens. Then, the successor state axiom is
rewritten as follows:
pos(x, do(a, s)) = u ≡
(a = move(x, y, z) ∧pos(x, s) = u + z)
∨(a ̸= move(x, y, z) ∧pos(x, s) = u)
The story remains essentially the same, except that z deter-
mines the actual position in the successor state, but it is not
in control of the agent. A Gaussian error proﬁle can be ac-
corded to this action by means:
l(move(x, y, z), s) = gaussian(z; y, var)
That is, the actual value is drawn from a Gaussian whose
mean is the intended argument y. Analogously, attributing
additive Gaussian noise in a sensor for observing the posi-
tion is deﬁned using:
l(obs(x, z), s) = gaussian(z; pos(x, s), var)
That is, the observation z is drawn from a Gaussian whose
mean is the actual position of the object x.
As hinted above, as an extension to GOLOG, the syntax
of ALLEGRO is designed to compactly represent full or par-
tial plans and policies in a general way, and on termination,
ALLEGRO programs can be tested for any probabilistic or
expectation-based criteria. The foundations of ALLEGRO
was established in (Belle and Levesque 2015) with a discus-
sion on its empirical behaviour against a predecessor based
on goal regression.
Conclusions
Automated planning is often deployed in an application
context, and in highly stochastic and uncertain domains,
the planning model may be derived from a complex learn-
ing and reasoning pipeline, or otherwise deﬁned over non-
trivial state spaces with unknowns. In this article, we re-
ported on two probabilistic programming systems to realise
such pipelines. Indeed, combining automated planning and
probabilistic programming is receiving considerable atten-
tion recently, e.g., (Srivastava et al. 2014). These languages
are general purpose, and their ﬁrst-order expressiveness can
not only enable a compact codiﬁcation of the domain but
also achieve computational leverage.
One of the key concerns with the use of probabilistic
programming and stochastic speciﬁcations generally is
that most systems perform inference by Monte Carlo
sampling. As is well-known, one is able to only ob-
tain
asymptotic
guarantees
with
such
methods,
and
moreover, handling low-probability observations can be
challenging. In that regard, there have been recent logical

approaches for inferring in mixed discrete-continuous
probability spaces with tight bounds on the computed
answers
(Belle, Van den Broeck, and Passerini 2015;
Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck 2015;
Chistikov, Dimitrova, and Majumdar 2015). Since HYPE,
ALLEGRO and many such systems use probabilistic
inference as a fundamental computational backbone, the
question then is whether the aforementioned approaches
can enable robust planning and programming frameworks
in stochastic domains.
