Graph-of-Tweets: A Graph Merging Approach to
Sub-event Identiﬁcation
Xiaonan Jing
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Julia Taylor Rayz
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Abstract—Graph structures are powerful tools for modeling
the relationships between textual elements. Graph-of-Words
(GoW) has been adopted in many Natural Language tasks to
encode the association between terms. However, GoW provides
few document-level relationships in cases when the connections
between documents are also essential. For identifying sub-events
on social media like Twitter, features from both word- and
document-level can be useful as they supply different information
of the event. We propose a hybrid Graph-of-Tweets (GoT) model
which combines the word- and document-level structures for
modeling Tweets. To compress large amount of raw data, we
propose a graph merging method which utilizes FastText word
embeddings to reduce the GoW. Furthermore, we present a novel
method to construct GoT with the reduced GoW and a Mutual
Information (MI) measure. Finally, we identify maximal cliques
to extract popular sub-events. Our model showed promising
results on condensing lexical-level information and capturing
keywords of sub-events.
Index
Terms—Twitter,
event
detection,
word
embedding,
graph, mutual information.
I. INTRODUCTION
With Twitter and other types of social networks being the
mainstream platform of information sharing, an innumerable
amount of textual data is generated every day. Social networks
driven communication has made it easier to learn user interests
and discover popular topics. An event on Twitter can be
viewed as a collection of sub-events as users update new posts
through time. Trending sub-events can provide information
on group interests, which can assist with learning group
behaviours. Previously, a Twitter event has been described as
a collection of hashtags [1], [2], a (set of) named entity [3],
a Knowledge Graph (KG) triplet [4], or a tweet embedding
[5]. While these representations can illustrate the same Twitter
event from various aspects, it can be argued that a KG triplet,
which utilizes a graph structure, exhibits richer features than
the other representations. In other words, the graph structure
allows more semantic relationships between entities to be
preserved. Besides KG, other NLP tasks such as word disam-
biguation [6], [7], text classiﬁcation [8], [9], summarization
[10], [11], and event identiﬁcation [12], [13] have also widely
adopted graph structures. A graph G = (V, E) typically
consists of a set of vertices V and a set of edges E which
describes the relations between the vertices. The main beneﬁt
of a graph structure lies in its ﬂexibility to model a variety
of linguistic elements. Depending on the needs, ”the graph
itself can represent different entities, such as a sentence,
a single document, multiple documents or even the entire
document collection. Furthermore, the edges on the graphs can
be directed or undirected, as well as associated with weights or
not” [14]. Following this line of reasoning, we utilize a graph
structure to combine both token- and tweet-level associations
in modeling Twitter events.
Graph-of-Words (GoW) is a common method inspired by
the traditional Bag-of-Words (BoW) representation. Typically,
the vertices in a GoW represent the BoW from a corpus.
In addition, the edges encode the co-occurrence association
(i.e. the co-occurrence frequency) between the words in BoW.
Although the traditional GoW improved upon BoW to include
word association information, it still fails to incorporate se-
mantic information. One may argue that, as previously men-
tioned, using a KG can effectively incorporate both semantic
information and corpus level associations into the graph.
However, any pre-existing KG, such as WordNet [15] and
FreeBase [16], cannot guarantee an up-to-date lexicon/entity
collection. Therefore, we propose a novel vocabulary rich
graph structure to cope with the constantly changing real-time
event modeling.
In this paper, we employ a graph structure to model tokens,
tweets, and their relationships. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst work to represent document level graphs
with token level graphs in tweet representation. Our main
contributions are the developments of 1) a novel GoT; 2) an
unsupervised graph merging algorithm to condense token-level
information; 3) an adjusted mutual information (MI) measure
for conceptualized tweet similarities.
II. RELATED WORK
Various studies have adopted graph structures to assist with
unsupervised modeling of the diverse entity relationships.
Event Clustering. Jin and Bai [17] utilized a directed GoW
for long documents clustering. Each document was converted
to a graph with nodes, edges, edge weights representing word
features, co-occurrence, and co-occurrence frequencies respec-
tively. The similarity between documents was subsequently
converted to the similarity between the maximum common
sub-graphs. With the graph similarity as a metric, K-means
arXiv:2101.03208v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2021

clustering was applied to maximum common document graphs
to generate the clusters. Jinarat et al. [18] proposed a pretrained
Word2Vec embedding [19] based GoW edge removal approach
for tweet clustering. They constructed an undirected graph
with nodes being the unique words in all tweets and edges
being the similarity between the words. Token and tweet
clusters were created by removing edges below a certain
similarity value. However, pretrained embeddings can be prone
to rare words in tweets, where abbreviations and tags are a
popular means for delivering information.
Event stream detection. Meladianos et al. [20] presented a
similar graph of words approach in identifying sub-events of
a World Cup match on Twitter. They improved edge weight
metric by incorporating tweet length to global co-occurrence
frequency. The sub-events were generated by selecting tweets
which contains the top k-degenerate subgraphs. Another effort
by Fedoryszak et al. [13] considered an event stream as a
cluster chain consisting of trending Twitter entities in time
order. The clusters were treated as nodes and the similarities
between them were labeled as edge weights. While a common
issue in entity comparison may be raised for the lack of
coverage limitation [3], Fedoryszak et al. [13] were able to
overcome this issue through the help of an internal Twitter
KG. However, potential synonyms were not taken into account
in the weights assignment.
Summarization. Parveen and Strube [21] proposed an
entity and sentence based bipartite graph for multi-document
summarization, which utilized a Hyperlink-Induced Topic
Search algorithm [22]. However, they only considered nouns
in the graph and ignored other parts-of-speech from the docu-
ments. In another attempt, Nayeem and Chali [10] adopted the
TextRank algorithm [23] which employs a graph of sentences
to rank similar sentence clusters. To improve from the crisp
token matching metric used by the algorithm, Nayeem and
Chali [10] instead used the pretrained Word2Vec embeddings
[19] for sentence similarities.
Graph Construction. Glavas et al. [24] built a semantic
relatedness graph for text segmentation where the nodes
and edges denote sentences and relatedness of the sentences
respectively. They showed that extracting maximal cliques
was effective in exploiting structures of semantic relatedness
graphs. In an attempt of automated KG completion, Szubert
and Steedman [25] proposed a word embedding based graph
merging method in improvements of AskNET [26]. Similar to
our merging approach, tokens were merged incrementally into
a pre-constructed KG based on word embedding similarities.
The difference is that AskNET used a graph-level global
ranking mechanism while our approach considers a neighbor-
level local ranking for the tokens. Additionally, Szubert and
Steedman limited their scope to only named entity related
relations during the graph construction.
Evaluations of Event Identiﬁcation. It should be noted
that there is no benchmark dataset for event identiﬁcation
evaluation, as many event identiﬁcation approaches are un-
supervised and that the event dataset varies by the research of
interests. Among the previously mentioned studies, Jin and Bai
[17] conducted their clustering on dataset with category labels
which allowed their unsupervised approach to be evaluated
with precision, recall, and F-scores. Meladianos et al. [20] was
able to generate labels through a sport highlight website ESPN
as the sub-events contained in a soccer game exhibit simpler
structure than most real-life events. Fedoryszak et al. [13]
created a evaluation subset from scratch with the help of the
Twitter internal KG and manually examined their clustering
results. Both of the event summarization approaches adopted
the classic metric ROUGE [27] score as well as the bench-
marking dataset DUC.
III. METHODOLOGY
We propose the following (1) −(8) steps for sub-event
identiﬁcation (Figure 1). The dataset used in this paper was
collected from Twitter for a particular event (Section III-A).
Step (1) includes tokenization and lemmatization with Stan-
ford CoreNLP and NLTK toolkit
1, as well as removing

texts are converted to lowercase. Steps (2) - (3) contribute
to GoW construction (Section III-B). Step 4 performs our
proposed GoW reduction method (Section III-C). Step (5)
elaborates on Graph-of-Tweets (GoT) construction using MI
(Section III-D). Steps (6) - (8) ﬁnalize the subevents extraction
from the GoT (Section III-E).
(1) Process
Raw Tweets
(2) Train
FastText
Model
(3) Construct
Token Graph
(4) Reduce
Token Graph
(5) Construct
Tweet Graph
(6) Extract
Top MI
Subgraph
(7) Identify
Maximal
Cliques
(8) Identify
Sub-events
Fig. 1: 8-Step Framework Used in This Paper
A. Dataset
Following a recent trend on social media, we collected data
on ”COVID-19” from Twitter as our dataset. We deﬁne tweets
containing the case-insensitive keywords {”covid”, ”corona”}
as information related to the ”COVID-19” event. We fetched
500,000 random tweets containing one of the keywords every
day in the one month period from Feb 25 to Mar 25 and
kept only original tweets as our dataset. More speciﬁcally,
retweets and quoted tweets were ﬁltered out during the data
cleaning process. The statistics of the processed dataset used
for FastText model training can be found in Table I. Besides
FastText training, which requires a large corpus to achieve
accurate vector representations, we focused on a single day of
data, the Feb 25 subset, for the rest of our experiment in this
paper.
1Stanford CoreNLP ver. 3.9.2; NLTK ver. 3.4.5

TABLE I: Statistics of the dataset on COVID-19 from Feb 25
- Mar 25
number of tweets
1,289,004
number of unique tokens
337,365
number of tweets (Feb 25)
38,508
number of unique tokens (Feb 25)
29,493
average tokens per tweet
12.85
standard deviation on tokens per tweet
6.89
B. Graph-of-Words Construction
We trained a word embedding model on the large 30-
day dataset as our word-level similarity measure in GoW
construction. Pretrained Word2Vec models [19] have been
applied previously to graphs as edge weights [8], [11], [18].
Trained on Google News corpus, Word2Vec is powerful in
ﬁnding context based word associations. Words appearing in
similar contexts will receive a higher cosine similarity score
based on the hypothesis that ”a word is characterized by the
company it keeps” [28]. However, the pretrained Word2Vec
model can only handle words within its vocabulary coverage.
In other words, if any low frequency words are ignored during
the training, they will not be captured in the model. In our
case, the Twitter data contain many informal words, spelling
mistakes, and new COVID-19 related words, which make pre-
trained model not suitable for our task. On the other hand,
FastText model [29] uses character n-grams to enrich word
representations when learning the word embeddings. Informal
words such as ”likeee” can be denoted as a combination
of {”like”, ”ikee”, ”keee”} (4-gram), which its vector rep-
resentation, after concatenating the subword vectors, will be
closer to the intended word ”like” given that both words
were used in similar contexts. Thus, we employ the FastText
word embeddings as the word-level similarity measure in
our GoW construction. A skip-gram model with the Gensim
implementation 2 was trained on the large 30-day dataset.
For the basic structure of the GoW, we adopt the approach
from Meladianos et al. [20] where the vertices V represent the
tokens and the edges Eco represent the co-occurrence of two
tokens in a tweet. For k tweets in the corpus T : {t1, t2, ..., tk},
the co-occurrence weight wco between the unique tokens v1
and v2 is computed as:
wco =
k
X
i=1
1
ni −1
(1)
where ni(ni > 1) denotes the number of unique tokens in
tweet ti that contains both token v1 and v2. An edge eco is only
drawn when the token pair co-occur at least once. In addition
to the base graph, we add another set of edges Es denoting the
cosine similarity ws between the token embeddings obtained
from FastText. Figure 2 illustrates an example GoW for two
processed tweets.
2Gensim ver. 3.8.1; hyperparameters (that differ from default): size: 300d,
alpha: 0.05, min alpha=0.0005, epoch: 30
”positive”(a)
”test”(b)
”virus”(c)
”corona”(d)
wco bc
wco bd
ws bc
ws bd
Fig. 2: An example GoW for the processed tweets {”virus”,
”test”, ”positive”} and {”corona”, ”test”}. Solid and dotted
edges denote Eco and Es respectively.
C. Graph-of-Words Reduction
A raw GoW constructed directly from the dataset often
contains a large number of nodes. Many of these nodes
carry repeating information, which increases the difﬁculties
of the subsequent tasks. To condense the amount of nodes,
we propose a two-phase node merging method to reduce the
proposed GoW:
• Phase I: Linear reduction by node merging based on word
occurrence frequency.
• Phase II: Semantic reduction by node merging based on
token similarity.
Phase I. The goal of this phase is to reduce the number
of nodes in the raw graph in a fast and efﬁcient manner. For
tokens that occur in less than 5 tweets, we merge them to its
top similar token node in the graph. This phase is performed
on nodes in the order of least frequently appearing to most
frequently appearing nodes.
Phase II. The goal of this phase is to combine frequent
tokens in the graph. Algorithm 1 describes this process. For
Algorithm 1 Semantic Node Collapse
for node vi ∈V : {v1, v2, ..., vm} do
degree di = Pm
1 wco ij
end for
V = sort asc(V, key = di)
for vi ∈V do
sim neighbors = list()
neighbors(vi) = Bi : {vi1, ..., viz}
neighbor weights(vi) = Wi : {wco i1, ..., wco iz}
Bi = sort asc(Bi, key = wco ij)
for vij ∈Bi do
sim token = fasttext.most similar(vij, top n)
if any other neighbor vik ∈sim token then
sim neighbors.insert((vik, sim val))
end if
parent = max(sim neighbors, key = sim val)
node merge(src = vij, dst = parent)
end for
end for
a node in the GoW, we merge its lower weighed neighbor
into another neighbor if the top N similar token of the lower
weighed neighbor contains another neighbor. It should be
addressed that the ordering of the node and the direction of

merging matters in this process. For token nodes in the GoW,
we perform this phase on nodes in the order of lowest degree
to highest degree; and for neighbors of the same node, we
perform the phase on neighbors in the order of lowest weight
to highest weight. When the top N similar token contains more
than one other neighbors, we select the node with the highest
similarity value as the parent node.
The node merging process consists of removing original
nodes, reconnecting edges between neighbors, and migrating
co-occurrence weights wco and merged tokens. Essentially, if a
target node is merged into a parent node, the target node will
be removed from the graph and the neighbors of the target
node will be reconnected to the parent. It should be noted that
when migrating neighbors and weights, we only consider the
co-occurrence edge Es and only increment the weights wco
into the edges of the parent node, while ws remains the same
as determined by the leading token of the merged nodes. For
a merged node with multiple tokens, we deﬁne the leading
token as a single token that is carried by the original GoW.
More precisely, suppose the target node ”corona” 3 is to
be merged into the parent node ”virus” in Figure 2. Since
node ”corona” is only neighboring with node ”test”, we add
the weights together so that the new weight between node
”test” and ”virus” is wco bc = wco bd + wco bc, and remove
node ”corona” from the graph. Furthermore, for the new
node ”virus” containing both tokens ”virus” and ”corona”,
the leading token is ”virus”, and the weight ws bc remains the
same as the cosine similarity between the word vectors ”virus”
and ”test”.
D. Graph-of-Tweets Construction with Normalized Mutual
Information As Graph Edges
Similar to GoW, we introduce a novel GoT which maps
tweets to nodes. In addition, to compare the shared information
between the tweet nodes, we construct the edges with an ad-
justed MI metric. Each tweet is represented as a set of unique
merged nodes obtained from the previous two-phase GoW
reduction, and tweets with identical token node representation
are treated as one node. For instance, after merging token
node ”corona” into ”virus” in Figure 2, a processed tweet
{”corona”, ”virus”, ”positive”, ”test”} can be represented as a
tweet node t : {”virus”, ”positive”, ”test”} which contains
the set of unique merged token nodes ”virus”, ”positive”,
and ”test”.
Originally from Information Theory, MI is used to measure
the information overlap between two random variables X and
Y . Pointwise MI (PMI) [30] in Equation 2 was introduced to
computational linguistics to measure the associations between
bigrams / n-grams. PMI uses unigram frequencies and co-
occurrence frequencies to compute the marginal and joint
probabilities respectively (Equation 3), in which W denotes
3in this paper, we will use the italic ”leading token” to represent a token
node, and the normal ”text” to represent plain text.
the total number of words in a corpus where word x and y
co-occur.
i(x, y) = log p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
(2)
p(x) = f(x)
W ,
p(y) = f(y)
W ,
p(x, y) = f(x, y)
W
(3)
The drawbacks of PMI are: 1) low frequency word pairs tend
to receive relatively higher scores; 2) PMI suffers from the
absence of boundaries in comparison tasks [31]. In an extreme
case when x and y are perfectly correlated, the marginal
probabilities p(x) and p(y) will take the same value as the
joint probability p(x, y). In other words, when x and y only
occur together, p(x, y) = p(x) = p(y), which will result
i(x, y) in Equation 2 to take −log p(x, y). Therefore, with
W remaining the same, a lower f(x, y) will result in higher
PMI value. Additionally, it can be noted that PMI in Equation
2 suffers from the absence of boundaries when applied for
comparisons between word pairs [31]. To mitigate the scoring
bias and the comparison difﬁculty, a common solution is to
normalize the PMI values with −log p(x, y) or a combination
of −log p(x) and −log p(y) to the range [−1, 1] to smooth
the overall distribution.
Apart from measuring word associations, MI is also widely
applied in clustering evaluations. In the case when the ground
truth clusters are known, MI can be used to score the
”similarity” between the predicted clusters and the labels. A
contingency table (Figure 3) is used to illustrate the number
of overlapping elements between the predicted clusterings A
and ground truth clusterings B. One disadvantage of using
Fig. 3: Contingency Table Between Clusterings A and B [32]
MI for clustering evaluation is the existence of selection bias,
which Romano et al. [33] described as ”the tendency to
choose inappropriate clustering solutions with more clusters
or induced with fewer data points.” However, normalization
can effectively reduce the bias as well as adding an upper
bound for easier comparison. Romano et al. [33] proposed a
variance and expectation based normalization method. Other
popular normalization methods include using the joint entropy
of A and B or some combinations of the entropies of A and
B as the denominator [32].
In our GoT case, since tweet nodes are represented by
different sets of token nodes, we can treat the tweet nodes
as clusters which allow repeating elements. Thus, the total
number of elements is the number of token nodes obtained

from the reduced GoW. Correspondingly, the intersection be-
tween two tweet nodes can be represented by the overlapping
elements (token nodes). Following this line of logic, we deﬁne
the normalized MI between two tweets in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Normalized MI (NMI) Between Tweet Nodes
Let T : {t1, t2, ..., tk} be the set of tweets in the GoT.
Let V : {v1, v2, ..., vm} be the m token nodes in the reduced
GoW. For tweets ti : {vi1, ..., vix} and tj : {vj1, ..., vjy},
the MI is deﬁned as:
MI(ti, tj) = log
p(ti,tj)
p(ti)p(tj) ,
where p(ti) and p(tj) are the probabilities of token nodes
containing an individual tweet with respect of total number
of token nodes m, with p(ti) = x
m and p(tj) = y
m.
The joint probability p(ti, tj) represents the intersection
of token nodes between the two tweets, with p(ti, tj) =
count(ti∩tj)
m
.
To normalize MI to the range [−1, 1], we use a normaliza-
tion denominator:
norm = max[−log p(ti), −log p(tj)] ,
Thus, NMI =
MI
norm .
Note that when p(ti, tj) = 0 (indicating no intersection),
NMI will take boundary value −1.
It should be noted that as the fetching keywords {”corona”,
”covid”} appear in every tweet in the dataset, tokens contain-
ing these words are removed when the GoT is constructed.
Consequently, two tweet nodes with only ”corona” or ”covid”
in common will result in an NMI value of -1, while the out-
comes of sub-event identiﬁcation are not affected by removing
the main event ”COVID-19”.
E. Sub-event Extraction From Graph-of-Tweets
We hypothesize that popular sub-events are included within
a subgraph of GoT which are fully connected and highly
similar in content. Following this assumption, we extract a
GoT subgraph with only the tweet nodes included in the top n
NMI values. Subsequently, we identify all maximal cliques of
size greater than 2 from the subgraph for further analysis. As
cliques obtained this way consist of only nodes with large NMI
values, which indicates that the tweet nodes are highly similar,
the clique can be represented by the token nodes included
in the tweet nodes. Thus, we treat a clique as a set of all
token nodes contained in the tweet nodes and that each clique
represents a popular sub-event.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To summarize, the raw GoW consisted of 29,493 unique
token nodes for tweets from the Feb 25 data division. The
two-phase GoW reduction reduced the graph by 83.8%, with
24,711 nodes merged and 4,782 token nodes left in the GoW.
On the other hand, the raw GoT consisted of 31,383 unique
tweet nodes. The extracted subgraph of the top 1000 MI values
consisted of 1,259 tweet nodes. Finally, 83 maximal cliques
were identiﬁed from the subgraph.
A. Graph-of-Words Reduction
Phase I reduction merged 19,663 token nodes that appeared
in less than 5 tweets, which is roughly 66.7% of all to-
ken nodes contained in the raw GoW. This phase primarily
contributes to reducing uncommon words within the corpus.
It can be argued that rare words may provide non-trivial
information. However, because our goal is to identify popular
sub-events, the information loss brought by rare words does
not heavily affect the results. Furthermore, word similarity
provided by FastText can effectively map the rare terms to the
more common words with a similar meaning. For instance,
in our FastText model, the rare word ”ﬂoridah” has its most
similar word as the intended word ”ﬂorida”. Another fun fact
is that the emoji ”
” was merged into the node ”coffee”.
There were 5,048 token nodes merged during Phase II
reduction. This phase mainly contributes to information com-
pression within common tokens. By merging the neighbors
that carry similar information, the same target node can appear
in a less complex network without information loss. Table
II presents statistics of the resulting GoW. Table III shows
some example merged nodes from the reduced GoW 4. The
largest node (248 tokens) is not shown here as it contains many
expletives. The second largest node ”lmaoooo” (221 tokens)
contains mostly informal terms like ”omgggg” and emojis.
TABLE II: Reduced GoW Statistics
single / merged token nodes count
2,119 / 2,663
max / min node size
248 / 2
avg / std node size
10.28 / 16.56
max / min within merged node similarity
0.9672 / 0.1337
avg / std within merged node similarity
0.4074 / 0.1544
TABLE III: Some Example Merged Nodes After Reduction
leading token
merged tokens
airline
frontier, iata, swoop, airliner, pilot, delta, piloting
cdc
wcdc, cdcS, cdcwho, cdcas, lrts, rts, lrt, #lrt, cdcgov,
cdcgovs, #cdcgov, cdcemergencys, mmwr, #mmwr,
nih, cdcnih, #nih, #nihonbuyo, 514v
expects
warns, #warns, expected, expecting, expectin, brace,
expect, therell
We identify roughly three patterns of merge, namely 1)
words with same stem or synonym merge, 2) common bi-gram
or ﬁx-ed expression merge, and 3) words of topical related
but semantically different merge during Phase II reduction.
Table IV illustrates some example merges from source node
to destination node, with the green , blue, and red columns
correspond to type-1, type-2 and type-3 respectively. Among
type-1 merge (green), it can be seen that common abbrevi-
ations such as ”btc” as ”bitcoin” are also captured in the
merging process. In type-2 merge (blue), the examples such
as ”test positive” and ”health department” are frequent bi-
grams in the context of our data; and other examples such
as ”silicon valley” and ”long term” are ﬁxed expressions. One
4The full reduced Graph-of-Words (4,728 token nodes) can be found at:
https://github.com/lostkuma/GraphOfTweets

TABLE IV: Some example merges in Phase II reduction
src node
dst node
src node
dst node
src node
dst node
covid19
covid
positive
test
buy
sell
covid
coronavirus
department
health
always
never
#iphone
#apple
cruise
ship
masked
unmasked
complains
complaint
valley
silicon
men
woman
btc
bitcoin
long
term
latter
splatter
dead
death
conspiracy
theory
undo
mundo
general drawback of word embedding models is that instead
of semantic similarity, words with frequent occurrence will
be considered as very similar as noted in the distributional
hypothesis [28]. An improvement can be made by combining
named entities, ﬁxed expressions, and frequent bi-grams in
the data processing stage so that a node can also represents a
concept in the GoW. Finally, type-3 merge (red) is also suffers
from the drawback of word embedding models. Word pairs
like ”buy” and ”sell”, ”always” and ”never”, ”masked” and
”unmasked” are antonyms/reversives in meaning. However,
these word pairs tend to be used in the same context so they are
considered highly similar during the merging process. Word
pairs like ”latter” and ”sp[latter]”, ”undo” and ”m[undo]”
(means ”world” in Spanish) are subwords of each other. Recall
that FastText model uses character n-grams in the training. The
subword mechanism leads the rare words to be considered
as similar to the common words which share a part with
them. It should be noted that in Phase II, the merging is
performed from the lower weighed neighbors to the higher
weighed neighbors and from lower degree nodes to higher
degree nodes. It is plausible that a common word like ”undo”
is a lower weighed neighbor as compared to the uncommon
word ”mundo” if the target token is also a rare word in Spanish
and that ”undo” does not co-occur frequently with the target
token.
B. Graph-of-Tweets and Sub-events Extraction
Using the reduced GoW, we constructed a GoT, where
each tweet node was represented as a set of leading tokens
from the token nodes. Of the original 38,508 tweets, 31,383
tweets were represented as unique tweet nodes. Take the tweet
node tweet 18736, which repeated the most times with a
frequency of 221 times, as an example. The original text of
tweet 18736 says ”US CDC warns of disruption to everyday
life’ with spread of coronavirus https://t.co/zO2IovjJlq”, which
is an event created by Twitter on Feb 25. After preprocessing,
we obtained {”u”, ”cdc”, ”warns”, ”disruption”, ”everyday”,
”life”, ”spread”, ”coronavirus”}. Finally, the GoW leading to-
ken represented tweet node became {”probably”, ”cdc”, ”ex-
pects”, ”destroy”, ”risking”, ”spreading”, ”coronavirus”},
with both ”everyday” and ”life” merged to ”risking”. One
may notice that the word ”US” is converted to ”u” after pre-
processing, which consecutively affected the FastText training,
the GoW reduction and the GoT representation. This is due
to a limitation from the WordNet lemmatizer that mapping
the lower case ”us” to ”u”. We would consider keeping the
uncased texts and employ named entity recognition to identify
cases like this to preserve the correct word in future work.
Subsequently, tweet nodes constituting the top 1000 NMI
weights were extracted to construct a new GoT subgraph for
further analysis. The 1000 NMI subgraph contained 1,259
tweet nodes, which consisted of 1,024 token nodes. The
minimum NMI value within the subgraph was 0.9769. In
Figure 4, edges are only drawn between node pairs with
intersecting token nodes. The edges with an NMI value of
-1 are not shown in the ﬁgure. It should be noted that if all
the tweet node pairs extracted from the top 1000 MI edges are
unique, there would be 2,000 nodes in the subgraph.
Fig. 4: GoT subgraph for the top 1000 MI edges with 1,259
tweet nodes and their edges (top 1000 MI edges and 397,849
other edges). The red edges represent the top 1000 MI edges
and the gray edges represent other MI edges. Nodes with
higher saturation contains more leading tokens. Similarly,
edges with higher saturation indicate larger MI weights.
After examining the tweet nodes with top 10 total de-
grees (the sum of all MI weights between the node and
its neighbors), we found that some of the nodes are sub-
sets of each other. For instance, tweet 23146 is represented
as: {”news”, ”epidemiologist”, ”nation”, ”probably”, ”con-
ﬁrmed”, ”know”, ”spreading”, ”humping”, ”#mopolitics”,
”center”, ”kudla”, ”called”, ”contagious”, ”#sarscov2”,
”#health”, ”govt”, ”friday”, ”#prevention”, ”update”, ”ex-
pects”, ”rrb”}, of which two other tweets tweet 20023 and
tweet 11475 are subsets with 2 and 1 token node(s) dif-
ferences. Further statistics on the associations between total
node degrees, average node degrees, and node size (number
of leading tokens) are shown in Figure 5. It can be seen in
Figure 5a that total node degree is positively correlated with
the number of neighbors. We also examined the correlation
between total node degree and average neighbor degree (aver-
age NMI weights of all neighbors), but found no correlation.
On the other hand, in Figure 5b, the average neighbor degree
is negatively correlated with the number of leading tokens
in a tweet node. This indicates that NMI relatively favors

(a) total degrees (top) and num-
ber of neighbors (bottom) of
tweet nodes ordered by total de-
grees descendingly.
(b)
average
neighbor
degrees
(top) and number of leading to-
kens of tweet nodes ordered by
average degrees descendingly.
Fig. 5: Node degree distribution for top 1000 MI subgraph.
tweets with less elements. Imagine a random case where only
independent tokens are present in a tweet node. Larger nodes
(have more tokens) have less chances to share information
with other nodes. More precisely, for two pairs of tweets that
both share the same intersection size, the size of the tweets
will determine the NMI values. For instance, t1 (5 elements)
and t2 (5 elements) share 3 elements, while t1 and t3 (10
elements) also share 3 elements. Assuming there are a total of
m = 100 elements, the NMI values as deﬁned in Algorithm
2 are NMIt1,t2 = 0.829 and NMIt1,t3 = 0.598. It should
be noted that different normalization methods can cause the
NMI values to vary. The normalization metric we chose largely
normalizes the upper bound of the MI values. When a different
normalization metric is applied, for example, using the joint
probability, both the upper and lower bounds of the MI values
can be normalized.
Finally, we identiﬁed 83 maximal cliques of size greater
than 2 from the top 1000 NMI subgraph. While the largest
clique contained 14 tweet nodes, there were 21 cliques con-
sisting of 4 to 6 tweet nodes, and the rests contained 3 tweet
nodes. We observed that the tweet nodes contained in the same
clique shared highly similar content. Table V illustrates the
shared token nodes in all 14 tweet nodes from the largest
clique. We can derive the information contained in this clique
as ”the stock and/or bitcoin market has a crash/slide”. Further
TABLE V: Token Nodes Shared Between Tweet Nodes in the
Extracted Cliques
Shared token nodes in all
14 tweet nodes of a strong
representative clique
#bitcoinprice,
#stockmarket,
best,
crashing,
gdx,
history,
probably, slide
shared token nodes in all 4
tweet nodes of a somewhat
representative clique
probably, hhs, open, immediate,
likelihood, know, american
investigation indicated that nodes in this clique are associated
with the same tweet: ”The Dow just logged its worst 2-
day point slide in history — here are 5 reasons the stock
market is tanking, and only one of them is the coronavirus”,
which elaborates on the stock market dropping. We marked
this type of clique to be ”strong representative” of the sub-
event. However, not all cliques represented the original tweet
contents well. Another clique in Table V that contained the
tweets regarding ”US HHS says there’s ‘low immediate risk’
of coronavirus for Americans” only suggested the ”likelihood
of” the main ”COVID-19” event. We marked this type of
clique as ”somewhat representative” of the sub-event. Other
types of cliques are marked as ”not representative”. Table
VI shows the content validity evaluation on 83 maximal
cliques. It should be noted that the labels are annotated in
acknowledgement of the meaningful token nodes, which on
average takes 64.3% of each clique. We also analyzed the
event categories among the generated cliques and manually
annotated the clique with type labels. Figure 6 shows the
content validity distribution by different event types. We
can see that our proposed model performed very well on
generating meaningful clique content on the categories ”health
department announcement” and ”stock, economy”; and not
very well on ”politics related” category. The difference in
performance may be due to the variation of the amount of
information contained in the described events.
TABLE VI: Content Validation of 83 Maximal Cliques
strong
somewhat
not
representative
representative
representative
42 (50.60%)
33 (39.76%)
8 (9.64%)
Fig. 6: Clique validity distribution by manually labeled event
type categories. Deep blue, light blue, and grey correspond to
”strong representative”, ”somewhat representative”, and ”not
representative” categories respectively.
It should be addressed that the dataset used in this paper was
collected directly from Twitter and that the approach proposed
in this paper was fully automated and unsupervised. As we
mentioned previously there is no bench-marking dataset for
event identiﬁcation, and the absence of gold standard makes
it difﬁcult to conduct quantitative evaluations on the results.
Our best effort, as presented in Table VI and Figure 6, was
to manually analyzed the content of the generated cliques for
validation.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a hybrid graph model which
uses conceptualized GoW nodes to represent tweet nodes for
sub-events identiﬁcation. We developed an incremental graph
merging approach to condense raw GoW leveraging word
embeddings. In addition, we outlined how the reduced GoW
is connected to GoT and developed an adjusted NMI metric
to measure nodes similarity in GoT. Finally, we utilized the
fundamental graph structure, cliques, to assist with identify-
ing sub-events. Our approach showed promising results on
identifying popular sub-events in a fully unsupervised manner
on real-world data. There remain adjustments that can be
made to the GoT to improve the robustness of the model
so more detailed and less noisy events can be captured. In
the future, we plan to employ named entity recognition in
raw data processing to identify key concepts. Additionally,
frequent bi-grams/n-grams will be examined and combined
prior to FastText training to improve the similarity metrics
from word embeddings. We will also compare different MI
normalization methods to neutralize the bias from sequence
length. Finally, we plan to improve the conceptualization
method of the token nodes so instead of the leading token,
a node can be represented by the concept it is associated to.
