8th EC-GI & GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002
Quality of Geographic Information: Ontological approach and Artificial
Intelligence Tools in the REV!GIS project
Author: Robert Jeansoulin(1)
(1) LSIS/CMI, Université de Provence, 39 rue Joliot Curie, 13453 Marseille Cedex 13, France

Abstract:
The objective is to present one important aspect of the European IST-FET project "REV!GIS"1: the
methodology which has been developped for the translation (interpretation) of the quality of the data
into a "fitness for use" information, that we can confront to the user needs in its application.
This methodology is based upon the notion of "ontologies" as a conceptual framework able to capture
the explicit and implicit knowledge involved in the application. We do not address the general
problem of formalizing such ontologies, instead, we rather try to illustrate this with three applications
which are particular cases of the more general "data fusion" problem. In each application, we show
how to deploy our methodology, by comparing several possible solutions, and we try to enlighten
where are the quality issues, and what kind of solution to privilegy, even at the expense of a highly
complex computational appraoch. The expectation of the REV!GIS project is that computationally
tractable solutions will be available among the next generation AI tools.
Key-words:
Quality of geographic information, application ontologies, quality metadata, fitness for use
1. 
Introduction
The objective of the REV!GIS European project is to improve the use of the geographic
information, in particular, uncertain, imprecise and incomplete information, by taking
advantage of any kind of knowledge about data specifications and limits, and demonstrating
that it is important to raise awareness on the information quality.
A commonly shared feeling is that the "metadata" delivered by the data producers are not
useful for answering the question of the "fitness for use" of the data. Two major results of the
project are: (1) the description and distinction of the data specifications and of the user
requirements into separate ontologies greatly helps to understand the respective roles of the
metadata and the user-required qualities; (2) Artificial Intelligence provides potential and
sometimes effective tools, to manage the quality, and perhaps to "revise" parts of the
geographic information detected as probably incorrect.
In any GIS application the user (the "modeller") constructs a reasoning model to interpret
parts of the Real World, based on the concepts she wants to represent, and how she
understands them, in order to solve her problem: let's name this the " Problem Ontology". But
she also uses one or more data sets, which have different ontologies, that we may call
"Product Ontologies". The correspondences between these ontologies may well be less than
straight-forward. For example, different land-cover maps might use the same term ‘bog’ to
represent one of their classes, but the precise meaning of this class will differ according to the
product ontology: if it was based on satellite data, or a field survey, what algorithms were
                                                 
1 Website: http://www.cmi.univ-mrs.fr/REVIGIS/Full/

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
2
used, what training data etc. To be able to say something sensible about data quality one must
understand something of the relationships between these ontologies.
Ideally we’d like to embed metadata on data quality and quality of correspondences between
concepts in a formal language: essentially generating a formal combined ontology. The
assumptions of the reasoning model could then be made explicit. It also allows reasoning
about the assumptions made by the data producer and the modeller, and may make it possible,
for example, to retract the least plausible assumption(s) in the case of inconsistent data, using
standard theories of belief revision, non-monotonic reasoning, or other uncertainty
formalisms.
Formally if the product ontology can be expressed in terms of one logical language with
meaning defined in terms of set of possible worlds M, and the problem ontology in another
language with set of possible worlds M', then the relationship between the two languages is
determined by a relation between M and M'. This allows imprecision in the translation
between the ontologies. Furthermore, different assumptions about correspondences will lead
to different such relations. These assumptions may be labelled simply with terms such as
‘very reliable’, ‘reliable’; ‘tentative’, with totally ordered grades such as these, we get a
‘fuzzy’ relation between M and M', and it can be viewed in terms of possibility theory.
Alternatively, a more sophisticated lattice-based representation for grades might be used,
allowing grades of quality to be partially-ordered (e.g., if we do not know which assumption
is more reliable).
The present status of the project is illustrated by experiments on real scale applications.
2. 
The place of ontologies in geographic information
In the context of the European project REV!GIS, we are faced with recurrent problems raised
by many geographic applications, such as:
-the multi-sources integration problem;
-the land cover change detection problem;
-the extrapolation of incomplete data under propagation constraints.
Actually these are subcases of the "data fusion" problem, as it is often named, and actually, it
is a particular case of the "knowledge fusion" problem, as it should be named if it is studied
from an artificial intelligence viewpoint (see: [1]).
Let's detail further this fusion problem: the common background is that we are looking at a
same portion of the geographical space (a region), with the help of two (or more, but two are
sufficient for our purpose) datasets. Each dataset carries along its own "understanding" of this
region, and the observations on which it is based are acquired at a certain scale level (both in
space and time), and for a certain purpose in mind. These elements of understanding can be
merged into a framework called an ontology (see: [2]).
Consequently any "perceived differences" between the datasets can have several causes:
(1) a perceived difference relates two "objects" of the region, that we can reasonably
assume being the same entity of the Real World, and the perceived difference can an
error on at least one dataset if we don't expect such difference: if one dataset is more
trustworthy than the other, we can decide to "revise" this probable error ;

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
3
(2) a perceived difference relates two "objects" of the region, that we can reasonably
assume being the same entity of the Real World, and if we assume also that there is a
significant time gap between the two datasets, then the perceived difference denotes a
true "change" during this gap;
(3) a perceived difference relates two "objects" which have not exactly the same definition,
and we are perceiving this difference (see: [3]);
Let's name (1) the "error", (2) the "change", (3) the "ontological difference".
Very often, it is probably a mix of the three, but we expect always to have one cause being the
most important.
Then, the above problems can be reformulated this way:
- the multi-sources integration: we want two build a single dataset by keeping the "best"
information from the two sources, hence we are seeking "true errors", which are neither
change nor ontological differences ;
- the land cover change detection: we want to collect all the "true changes", which are
neither errors, nor ontological differences;
- extrapolation under constraints: we want to fill the incomplete dataset by computing
some new data which comply with the previous semantics of the original data and are
consistant with the constraints.
Conclusion, the ability to discern ontological differences is mandatory for this kind of
geographical applications.
The approach chosen by the REV!GIS consortium to handle this issue is to handle the
underlying data management problem as an integration of both the data and their semantics,
within a common reasoning framework. This is often refered to as an "interoperability"
problem, but the literature in this field sometimes splits this problem into: "data
interoperability" and "process interoperability". Our purpose is concerned by this distinction,
and put the focus on a special topic, the "quality", which is rarely addressed in such designs.
Our "ontological approach" privilegies a separation between the data as a "product output",
and the data as a "problem input", hence the use of two different kinds of ontologies: the
" Product Ontologies " and the " Problem Ontologies ".
Theory
Model = dataset
"Product Ontology":
data specifications, quality
… =
product metadata
"Problem Ontology":
object definitions,
constraints, … =
application metadata
User Theory
Application expected data
fits?
complies?
product output
problem input
Figure 1: ontological separation: two non-crossing visions of the World for the same data
What we mean by " Product Ontologies " is any kind of information, and as many as possible,
on all the concepts that a specific product carries:
- explicitely available: sometimes the source metadata can provide a detailed and
important part of it, sometimes it is present through various written documents ;

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
4
- implicitely: either it belongs to a more general ontology, not given because of its
alleged obviousness, or simply it's forgotten.
We can predict that the collection of this information will be always incomplete, but we are
presently trying to collect and formalize within a logical framework (a Prolog set of clauses)
the "ontologies" of some very well documented datasets, provided by some major mapping
agencies. Of course, the "quality information" is part of the product ontology. Examples are
given in section 6.
What we mean by " Problem Ontologies " is all the "relevant information" for the problem
raised in the context of the application. Of course the user cannot provide a priori all the
knowledge he expects that will be relevant, but we assume that he should be able to say
explicitely if some specified information is or is not relevant, or to some extent, and this
"relevance grade" is part of the problem ontology. This describes the "virtual dataset" that the
user would like to use, instead of the "actual dataset". Examples are given in section 6.
Finally, -and this is the core of the project REV!GIS-, the conflation of the two ontologies
should help us to measure, or at least to roughly figure out, if the quality of the product fits
with the problem relevance.
Conclusion: to answer the question of the "fitness for use" of datasets in applications, we need
first to integrate ontologies, because the "fitness" is a semantical notion.
3. 
The Spatial Extrapolation Problem
This problem has been studied through a simple but didactic application: the flooding of
the river Herault, in 1994, such as reported and investigated by the Cemagref (see: [4]).
data: one digital map of the "parcels" (First), interpreted from aerial pictures and completed
by terrain observations and measurements, gives the topography, the land structure delimited
by physical limits which are relevant for the water flooding: hedges, drains … plus the
"visibility of the vegetation" (even/over/under water), and the collection of the visible "flows"
(Second), associated to the above limits ;
processing: the geometric registration and the terrain elevation are assumed to be perfect, but
the translation of the visibility of the vegetation into interval bounds for the height of the
water, is rather uncertain; on the contrary, the flow direction is certain, when visible, but this
information is rather incomplete;
problem: let's combine the two products, and extrapolate into a "more" complete map: Third.
How to perform this "extrapolation" ?

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
5
?
 0-20
10-30
10-40
40-80
=
?
Figure 2: the relationship between flows and water-height intervals, in the flooding application
The solutions
(a) Numerical Interpolation:
let's assume that we can observe (Figure 2: left) the vegetation-to-water relation for several
parcels, and provide some min-max intervals assessments (right). We may try to
interpolate, by some numerical computation, a possible value for the parcel with the
question mark.
This interpolation takes into account the neighbouring intervals, but not the orientations of
the known flows: a possible computed value may be: 15-40. We can say that a part of
the application data (the flows) and of the associated knowledge (water flows down), is
not used by the interpolation process.
AVOID THIS SOLUTION
 (b) Interval Constraints Propagation:
to combine (to merge) the two informations (known intervals and known flows) is a good
means to compute missing values, while preserving the "water flows down" rule. The
counterpart is that some original interval values may not comply the rule. Hence, what to do ?
An experimentation based on this solution is presented in: [5].
PREFER THIS SOLUTION, BUT: NEEDS CONSISTENCY CHECKING AND
REVISION
4. 
The Spatial Data Fusion Problem
Let's consider a simple case of "data fusion":
data: two digital maps, from two different products or even two producers, of the same
geographical region, one recording the streams (First), one recording the roads (Second) ;
processing: the geometric registration is assumed to be perfect, but the two kinds of features
have different qualities, i.e. they depart differently from the "real features" ;
problem: let's combine the two products into a "more" informative map: Third. How to
perform this "fusion" ?

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
6
Figure 3: the impact of the quality on the data fusion
The solutions
 (a) Set Theoretic Union:
To perform the mere 'set theoretic union' of the two datasets: each original one is strictly
included in the union: is this order relation 'mappable' to the respective qualities ? The
new map is expected to be better than the other two, but: Is its quality better everywhere
? How much it departs from the real features ?
Let's consider this simple constraint: « a road and a stream intersect at a bridge ». Hence
there must be a bijection between bridges and intersections. Let v(i,j) be the property of
the point (i,j), if: v(i,j) ∈ First, and v(i,j) ∈ Second, then this is an intersection point and
the predicate "bridge(i,j)" must hold.
Now let's have a look to actual data: the left part of the Figure 3 is the mere union of
streams (dot-dashed lines) and roads. The right figure overlays a new 'Second' data
(thick line), which is a different version of the same stream, supposedly more accurate
(larger scale) and several problems can be noticed: we can list them and consider which
quality parameters are addressed for each one, these "quality parameters" being chosen
among the classical list of 5 (or 7) parameters present in the specialized literature.
--Displacement only modifications (top right): the associated quality parameter is "geometric
accuracy";
--Complex modifications: two bridges are mixed into one, and several quality parameters may
be associated, such as: commission error value for the "thematic accuracy", topological
consistency value for the "logical consistency", and again the "geometric accuracy";
--Cardinality modifications (bottom), …

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
7
Depending on the user needs (contained in its ontology) some errors are more significant
than other and this is what decides about the "fitness for use" of the data:
--from a navigation viewpoint, the topological consistency is the most important: eg. "pass
the bridge, then turn right" relies fully on topology, and does not pay attention to the
geometric accuracy;
--from a damage assessment viewpoint, the geometry can be more important: eg. "all
bridges within 1km range from the earthquake center must be controlled".
Conclusion: the simple union of two dataset is a sound algebraic operation, but it does not
reflect the implicit knowledge (semantical), associated to the data.
AVOID THIS SOLUTION
(b) Knowledge Fusion:
This second solution means that the information compounds both data and possibly
inference rules, hence the logical closure of these rules. Therefore, the chosen set of
rules will decide about the quality: eg. a simple coordinate shift can be ignored, but a
difference in the total number of bridges can be a direct inconsistency.
The importance given to the rules by one user has a direct impact on the importance of one
parameter of the quality (geometric accuracy, preservation of the topology, preservation
of cardinalities …).
Conclusion: the "quality" is a semantical notion, not just a number or a probability, and it
depends on the user needs and objectives. It is an "ontological issue". Moreover, the
tasks of checking the inconsistencies, then to build possible solutions, and finally to find
the "optimal" or "best" solution, are computationally difficult tasks (non polynomial).
PREFER THIS SOLUTION, EVEN IF IT IS HARDLY TRACTABLE (!)
5. 
The Land Cover Change Problem
Let's consider a simple case of "change detection":
data: two satellite images, from the same sensor, of the same geographical region but taken at
two different dates ;
processing: the geometric registration is assumed to be perfect, but the images have been
interpreted, pixel by pixel, according to two slightly different sets of classes: First & Second ;
problem: a same pixel (i,j) gives two values: v(i,j)=first ∈ First, and v(i,j)= second ∈ Second.
How may we compare these two values ?
The solutions
(a) Numerical Difference:
all the values are numerical, for instance in the "radiometry" (reflectance or emitted
energy) domain, and those numbers are "comparable" as such. There is no "semantics"
at all, excepting the semantics of arithmetics, but the arithmetic operators have algebraic
properties and we can compute anything … or nothing at all. Even the (numerical)
equality has no semantics: eg. if first = second, does it means that there is "no change" ?
Of course not, it may depend on several more assumptions. The same question raises
with any distance such as the quantity | second-first |: what does it measure ? Easy to
compute (just numbers), hard to answer (no semantics).

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
8
AVOID this solution.
(b) Contextual Comparison:
the sets First and Second are similar enough to be considered equal and renamed Set, hence
the comparison between first(i,j) and second(i,j) depends on the existence of a
comparison operator within this common Set. For instance, let's consider a possible
"equal" operator, as a mere "string" comparator: if string( 'first' ) = string( 'second' ),
then we can conclude that there is "no change" … excepting if: the assumption of the
equivalence of First and Second is not fully acceptable, or if 'first' is dynamical by
nature, such as a "cultivated land": does it means that there is no change in land cover or
in land use ? (an agronom and a land surveyor will answer differently). About distances:
the coding into 'first' and 'second' cannot lead directly to a distance computation, unless
you provide it explicitely within a 2-dimension table, such as a "look-up table" (LUT).
But what is the domain in which the distance holds: the one of the agronom, or the one
of the land surveyor ? Again a semantics question.
BE CAREFUL with this solution.
(c) Ontological Comparison:
the sets First and Second are defined within two different ontologies (see: [6]) whose
semantics are still similar but slightly different: the formal description of the two
ontologies can help to understand these differences, and it already improves the
previous solution (actually it is the way the "experts" follow, even without using the
word ontology). But what is the status of the comparison: can we decide to perform it
within First ?, or Second ?, or within a Third domain ? This last one is what we propose,
because it subsumes the other two anyway and provides a formal description of a new
ontology, to which Third belongs. In this solution, you know in which space you can
build a distance.
PREFER this solution:
- 
it is more complex,
- 
it needs to explicit the differences between the original datasets and their respective
interpretation processes,
- 
it needs to make the final intension explicit, by specifying the ontology in which the
change detection must be assessed,
but
- 
it provides a full semantics to the change detection operator: First x Second → Third ,
either as a boolean or as a distance operator.
The expert approach in the British "Land Cover Map" experiment:
The countryside survey (CS) has been performed in Great Britain in 1990, and was used
for instance for deriving the Corine Land-Cover data. A second CS has been done in 2000,
following several recommendations: some of these are easier to address than others, such as
the timing of data capture. However, the other differences are fundamental to each technique
and their integration may be irreconcilable, from the thematic perspective of land cover
reporting. Examination of the definitions of the Broad Habitat classes used by each approach
shows that the classes are described similarly, principally on their botanical and bio-
geographic properties. Descriptions can be found at: http://www.ceh.ac.uk/data/lcm and
http://www.cs2000.org.uk/ .

8th EC-GIS Workshop, Dublin 3-5 July 2002.    Jeansoulin, R. & Wilson, N.
9
This problem of relating data of different pedigrees has been described and analysed in
much work. The various solutions have in common some form of translation mechanism
between the concepts from one dataset to those of another. The origins of the translation
obviously depend upon the context (national, agency, discilinary) in which the designer
constructs the ontologies.
We are concerned with the general problem of revision, because we have to construct and
then revise a translation  between different conceptualisations (belief revision). It is expected
that for some object, by their (physical) nature, the translation from Dataset1 to its as yet
unknown equivalent classes in Dataset2, will be less problematic for some classes. In this
sense the translation of such a class requires less revision than other classes. We illustrate an
outline approach for this revision, using an example from the land cover classifications (see:
Table 1 to Table 4 in Annexes).
Dataset1: LCMGB90 http://www.ceh.ac.uk/data/lcm/lcmleaflet2000/leaflet3.pdf
– Coniferous / evergreen woodland (label '16' in the 25 'target' class 1990 dataset).
– Bog (herbaceous): Lowland bog ( label '24')
– Bog (herbaceous): Upland bog (label '17').
Dataset2: LCM2000
- 
Coniferous woodland (alpha-code: C)
- 
Bog (alpha-code: B)
In terms of Metadata, we can record a 'strong' value for the level 'class quality' when its class
value is 'coniferous' and a 'weak' for 'bog'.
6. 
Conclusion
The most important key word is: "semantics" ! We do need to take the semantics into account,
even if many operations can be performed on a computer, at a simple algebraic level. This is
obvious in particular with raster data, where the pixels can be used as numerical inputs of an
infinity of simple to complex models ! It is not enough to try to make sophisticated models,
the semantics of the data must be present at a higher level: before calling such or such
numerical model (and then you know why this one, what are its limits, …), and when
considering the results (how they relate really to the expected variable, how the quality of the
computation, and of any preprocessing, impacts on the fitness of this result for its use, …).
The exclamation mark in the name of the project REV!GIS has the same meaning as the
conclusion of this paper: beware of the semantics of the data and you will be able to interpret
their quality for your purpose !
7.
