Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in
Voice-driven Services
Yangyong Zhang1, Maliheh Shirvanian2, Sunpreet S. Arora2, Jianwei Huang1,
and Guofei Gu1
1 Texas A&M University, College Station TX 77843, USA

2 Visa Research, Palo Alto CA 94306, USA

Abstract. Voice-driven services (VDS) are being used in a variety of
applications ranging from smart home control to payments using digital
assistants. The input to such services is often captured via an open voice
channel, e.g., using a microphone, in an unsupervised setting. One of the
key operational security requirements in such setting is the freshness of
the input speech. We present AEOLUS, a security overlay that proactively
embeds a dynamic acoustic nonce at the time of user interaction, and
detects the presence of the embedded nonce in the recorded speech to
ensure freshness. We demonstrate that acoustic nonce can (i) be reliably
embedded and retrieved, and (ii) be non-disruptive (and even impercep-
tible) to a VDS user. Optimal parameters (acoustic nonce’s operating
frequency, amplitude, and bitrate) are determined for (i) and (ii) from a
practical perspective. Experimental results show that AEOLUS yields 0.5%
FRR at 0% FAR for speech re-use prevention upto a distance of 4 meters
in three real-world environments with diﬀerent background noise levels.
We also conduct a user study with 120 participants, which shows that
the acoustic nonce does not degrade overall user experience for 94.16% of
speech samples, on average, in these environments. AEOLUS can therefore
be used in practice to prevent speech re-use and ensure the freshness of
speech input.
1
Introduction
Voice-driven services (VDS) are widely deployed in commercial products to en-
able personalized and convenient experiences for consumers. Examples include
digital assistants from Amazon, Apple and Google for performing tasks like smart
home control and online commerce in a hands-free manner, and automated and
human-assisted voice response systems for customer support. While this increas-
ing ubiquity can be primarily attributed to improved real world performance of
deep learning driven speech and speaker recognition, security is an equally im-
portant consideration in operational settings. To secure VDS in practice, one of
the common security mechanisms used is “voice password”. For example, appli-
cations such as Samsung Bixby, Wechat and others [15,16,14] prompt users to
arXiv:2101.04773v1  [cs.SD]  12 Jan 2021

2
Y. Zhang et al.
User interaction with 
VDS A
User
VDS A
Adversary
Captured over-
the-air
(a) Record
Recorded interaction 
with VDS A
VDS A
Adversary
(b) Re-use
Recorded interaction 
with VDS A
VDS A’
Adversary
(c) Replay
Unlock my Device,
#Voice Password
Fig. 1: Diﬀerence between re-use and replay attacks. In both cases, an adversary
records a user’s interaction with a voice driven service (VDS) “A”, over-the-air as
shown in (a). In case of re-use (b), the recorded interaction is used to attack the same
type of VDS A, while in case of replay (c), the interaction can be used to attack the
same or diﬀerent type of VDS A’.
speak a password and perform two factor authentication by checking (i) if the
spoken passphrase is correct, and (ii) it was spoken by the authorized user.
Voice passwords, however, do not provide security against voice spooﬁng
techniques such as speech replays [31,40,37] and synthesis [4]. While there are
known practical limitations in conducting speech synthesis attacks (e.g., the at-
tack proposed in [4] requires 24 hours of high quality training data), it is easier
to conduct replay attacks in practice. Broadly, there are two categories of de-
fense mechanisms that aim to prevent speech replays. The ﬁrst class of methods
use machine learning to determine whether a speech sample is produced by a
human or replayed using a playback device [24,49]. The second category of tech-
niques use external devices (e.g., a vibration sensor) to check if the speech is
produced by a human in real-time [30]. For machine learning techniques, real
world performance usually depends on training data and its relevance to the
test environment. A state-of-the-art method Void [20], as an example, has signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent equal error rates (EER), 0.3% and 11.6%, on two speech datasets
collected in two diﬀerent environments. Another practical limitation is unreli-
ability of playback device signatures used by machine learning techniques [49].
In addition, for methods that use extra hardware, there are usability and cost
implications for practical deployment.
In this work, we aim to address a subset of replay attacks, called speech re-use
attacks. We deﬁne speech re-use attacks to be speciﬁc to a certain type of VDS.
As shown in Figure 1, let A and A’ be the VDS types for the capture and attack
steps, respectively. Replay attacks typically consider a variety of VDS types for
capture and attack steps (A = A’ and A ̸= A’), while re-use attacks are a subset
of replay attacks where the VDS types in consideration for the capture and
attack steps is similar (A = A’). The proposed security overlay prevents re-use
attacks on protected VDS. For example, if the security overlay is integrated with
each Alexa’s VDS, it can prevent speech captured from user interaction with one
Alexa’s VDS from being re-used on another Alexa’s VDS. This is similar to the

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
3
(a)
(b)
Apple 
iPhone
User
Random IR pattern 
projection
Digital 
assistant
User
Random 
acoustic nonce
“Hey 
Assistant”
Fig. 2: (a) Face ID’s device-speciﬁc random IR pattern projection at the time of user
authentication for preventing re-use [6]. Analogous to (a), the proposed security overlay
(b) uses a random acoustic nonce at the time of user interaction to prevent speech re-use
in voice-driven systems.
device speciﬁc random pattern used in Face ID to counter digital and physical
spoofs [6] (see Figure 2).
We present AEOLUS3, a security overlay that proactively embeds a dynamic
acoustic nonce in the voice channel via the microphone at the time of user inter-
action, and detects the presence of the embedded nonce in the speech recorded
by the speaker to ensure speech freshness. AEOLUS is designed as a software solu-
tion, and can be integrated by a vendor with any closed-loop VDS that involves
real-time user interaction. It is useful for providing additional security in crit-
ical applications such as user authentication and payments. AEOLUS does not
require any extra hardware and works with in-built speaker and microphone
in consumer products. AEOLUS is secure by design against attacks that remove
the embedded nonce for speech re-use. It uses Frequency-hopping spread spec-
trum (FHSS) [27] [28] technique for dynamic acoustic nonce embedding. Similar
techniques have been previously used to watermark audio recordings for copy-
right purposes [45] [21]. However, their application in oﬄine audio watermarking
is fundamentally diﬀerent from VDS operational setting where the length and
content of the input speech is unknown apriori. AEOLUS is designed for real-time
over-the-air use without prior knowledge of the input speech.
AEOLUS addresses two key practical challenges. The ﬁrst challenge is to reli-
ably embed an acoustic nonce over-the-air and retrieve it successfully from the
recorded speech. Over-the-air acoustic nonce propagation is aﬀected by factors
such as background noise and distance between microphone and loudspeaker [25].
The latter, for instance, results in distorted and attenuated speech signal which
increases the likelihood of errors while extracting the embedded acoustic nonce.
The second challenge is to embed the acoustic nonce such that it is impercepti-
ble to a VDS user. Achieving imperceptibility is non-trivial in light of the ﬁrst
challenge. This is because an important consideration for reliability is embed-
ding acoustic nonce of certain strength which, in turn, makes the acoustic nonce
perceptible. Therefore, we model acoustic nonce generation as an optimization
problem and compute the set of optimal parameters, e.g., nonce’s operating fre-
quency, amplitude, bitrate in diﬀerent environments using diﬀerential evolution.
3 Named after Aelous, the ”Keeper of the Winds” in Greek mythology.

4
Y. Zhang et al.
We evaluate AEOLUS in three diﬀerent environments and show that it works
reliably upto a range of 4 m. Additionally, we conduct a user study involving 120
subjects (approved by the institutional human study review board) to evaluate
the imperceptibility of the embedded nonce. The results of the study show that
majority of users ﬁnd the embedded acoustic nonce to be either imperceptible
or non-disruptive.
In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows:
– Design of a VDS security overlay called AEOLUS to ensure freshness of input
speech without any extra hardware dependency.
– Modeling acoustic nonce propagation as an optimization problem to address
i) reliability, i.e. ensuring successful embedding and retrieval of dynamic
acoustic nonce without impacting VDS functionality, and (ii) imperceptibil-
ity, i.e. to have minimal impact on VDS users’ experience.
– Comprehensive real-world evaluation to show that AEOLUS can work eﬀec-
tively (0.5% false reject rate (FRR) and 0% false accept rate (FAR) in detect-
ing speech re-use) up to a range of 4 meters in three diﬀerent environments.
– User study with 120 subjects to demonstrate that the embedded acoustic
nonce does not degrade user experience.
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Example Use Cases
Voice-driven Payments. Voice-driven services are being increasingly used for
payments, especially in retail environments [17]. Amazon and Exxon recently
announced voice-driven payments at over 11,500 gas stations in the US [3]. A
recent user study [12] indicates that while most users are comfortable conduct-
ing low-value purchases such as ordering a meal and shopping for groceries using
voice-driven payment services, the majority of them do not have suﬃcient con-
ﬁdence in conducting high value purchases due to security concerns.
Most voice-driven payment services authenticate users through speaker veriﬁ-
cation. However, they often lack adequate protection mechanisms against speech
re-use attacks where an attacker records a user interaction and re-uses it to attack
the service either on-site or remotely. This is analogous to card skimming [41]
where an attacker re-uses a victim’s credit card information. AEOLUS can be
deployed to prevent speech re-use attacks in voice-driven payments.
Workplace Automation. A variety of digital assistants are being used for
unsupervised or semi-supervised interactions in workplace environments [1]. In
addition to accurate speaker recognition (identiﬁcation and/or veriﬁcation), it
is important to have adequate protection mechanisms against speech re-use to
protect sensitive resources in such environments [18]. AEOLUS can be incorporated
in workplace digital assistants for this purpose.

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
5
2.2
Related Work
Speech Replay Detection Existing research related to speech replay detec-
tion can be classiﬁed into two categories, software-based and hardware-based
methods. Software-based methods use machine learning to determine whether
the input speech is produced by a human or replayed using a recording de-
vice [24] [20] [34]. Chen et al. [24] present a method that obtains 0% EER for
distance (between user and VDS input device) of only a few centimeters which
limits its applicability in practice. Ahmed et al. [20]’s method, on the other hand,
is reported to work well upto a distance of 2.6 meters. However, the EER varies
signiﬁcantly in diﬀerent environments with it being as low as 11.6%. One of the
best performing methods [34] reports EER of 6.7% on ASVSpoof 17 database.
A caveat, however, is that these methods aim to address general replay attacks.
In contrast, AEOLUS aims to prevent speech re-use and obtains 0% EER upto a
distance of 4 meters in three diﬀerent environments.
The second category of approaches use additional hardware (e.g., a vibra-
tion sensor on user’s neck) to check that speech is produced in real-time by a
user [30] [40]. Such approaches, in general, outperform machine learning-based
methods. For example, Feng et al. [30] report 97% successful detection rate, on
average, with no strict assumption on distance. However, there are two major
practical limitations using the aforementioned approaches for detecting speech
re-use, (i) requirement of extra hardware which has cost implications, and (ii)
inconvenience to users. AEOLUS only uses the built-in speaker and microphone in
smart devices yet achieves high speech re-use detection rate.
Audio Watermarking. Audio watermarking is widely used for multimedia
copyright protection [45,42]. Both time domain [21] and frequency domain [26,38]
watermarking techniques have been proposed in the literature. Typically, audio
watermark embedding and detection is self-synchronized [51]. Advanced water-
marking methods use spread-spectrum modulation [45] to prevent watermark re-
moval and provide imperceptibility [26,35]. While useful, these techniques cannot
be directly used in VDS operational setting. They are designed for ﬁxed length
oﬄine audio ﬁles, e.g., music recordings in CDs [45], and do not consider the
impact of environmental factors, e.g., bitrate variability and background noise,
in over-the-air transmission. Such environmental factors result in a dynamic and
lossy acoustic environment in turn making watermark embedding and retrieval
signiﬁcantly challenging. Further, they are not designed for real-time speech and
speaker recognition systems where input speech is unknown apriori and can be
of variable length. AEOLUS is designed to take these pragmatic considerations
into account. It is able to successfully embed and retrieve acoustic nonce in the
voice channel without degrading user experience in practice.

6
Y. Zhang et al.
User
VDS
Mix(nonce, speech)
Response 
Acoustic Nonce
Detection
Session Start 
Nonce Begin
Acoustic Nonce
Generation
Nonce End
Acoustic Nonce
Embedding
Session End 
⋮
“Alexa,         confirm my payment.”
Wake-up
Word  
Protected voice 
command
⋮
VDS
Process
(a)
Nonce
Embedding
Nonce 
Generation
Playback 
Device
Microphone
/Triggers
Backend 
Processing
Nonce 
Detection
Initialization
Optimization
①
②
③
④
⑥
AEOLUS
VDS
⑤
Speech & Speaker
Recognition
(b)
Fig. 3: Use of the proposed security overlay to prevent speech re-use in voice-driven
services. (a) At the time of user interaction, an acoustic nonce is generated and em-
bedded in over-the-air channel, and its presence is detected in the recorded speech to
ensure speech freshness. (b) AEOLUS-enabled VDS components with the associated data
ﬂows. Shown in blue and grey are the components used to prevent speech re-use.
3
Proposed Security Overlay
3.1
Threat Model
The following assumptions are made while designing AEOLUS to address the
speech re-use attack scenario. The hardware device (loudspeaker and micro-
phone) that is used by a user to interact with VDS is trusted and secure, and an
adversary cannot disable the speaker or the microphone. The proposed overlay
can be used by a VDS to generate, embed, and detect acoustic nonce. At the time
of user interaction, the method used to trigger a VDS, e.g., words or phrases like
“Alexa” and “Hey, Siri” are not protected but can initiate the proposed overlay
to prevent re-use of voice commands and conﬁdential passphrases. For example,
to prevent re-use of a user’s voice password to access recent account transactions
when the user is interacting with a voice banking VDS [11].
An adversary can use a commodity recording device to record prior user in-
teractions with “any” AEOLUS-enabled VDS, and re-use the recorded interaction
to attack any AEOLUS-enabled VDS. Attack scenarios where an adversary can
record or access clean user speech samples (i.e., recordings without embedded
acoustic nonce) to launch replay or speech synthesis attacks are considered out
of scope and are not addressed. The key underlying assumptions are that (i)
users typically interact with VDS using speciﬁc commands (e.g., a user-deﬁned
passphrase [15]) and these commands can be protected with the proposed over-
lay, and (ii) it is diﬃcult to record clean samples of these commands from inter-
action with unprotected devices or in human conversations. However, this does
not limit the use of AEOLUS in conjunction with other defense mechanisms for
replay or speech synthesis attacks.

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
7
3.2
Core Components
To prevent speech re-use in VDS, AEOLUS uses three core components, nonce
generation, nonce embedding and nonce detection.
Nonce Generation. The nonce generation module is invoked upon initiation
of a new user interaction session (see Figure 3b 1
○). Akin to nonce-based au-
thentication [47,22], the module generates a digital nonce (a random number
of a length L) that is valid for the current session. Nonce length L should be
suﬃciently large to prevent use of duplicate nonces in diﬀerent sessions. Given
limited bandwidth of over-the-air channel and estimated user base for popular
VDS (e.g., Alexa skill has 300,000 daily users [2]), the minimum permitted value
of L is set to 32 bits. 32-bit long nonce is suﬃcient to protect short speech
samples (e.g., a voice passphrase) in a particular session. Nonce repetition is
permitted to protect longer speech samples during the session. The nonce δ for
session S is stored in a set Sset. Sset is subsequently used by the nonce detection
module to determine if the embedded nonce is current.
Nonce Embedding. Post nonce generation, an encoding algorithm, Binary
Frequency Shift Keying (BFSK) [39,46], is used to encode the generated digital
nonce as an acoustic nonce. Each bit is independently encoded as a cosine wave
ωi. Bit “0” is encoded as a 1kHz cosine wave, and bit “1” as a 5 kHz cosine
wave. All cosine waves in the set ω are concatenated to yield the acoustic nonce
δ. The acoustic nonce δ is embedded in over-the-air channel using VDS play-
back device ( Figure 3b 2
○). An important parameter for nonce embedding is
the time duration of the embedded acoustic nonce relative to the time duration
of user interaction. Using a real-world dataset with 27,000 samples [32], we esti-
mate that the average user interaction is 3 sec. As an example, let the minimum
duration of embedded nonce be half of the average user interaction. In this case,
the acoustic nonce embedding would require a bitrate of 14 bits/sec, and the
maximum duration of each component cosine wave wi can be 42 ms. Note that
this estimate does not consider the idle time in user interaction. Additionally, to
prevent an adversary from obtaining clean speech sample by removing the em-
bedded nonce, the nonce embedding module leverages Frequency-hopping Spread
Spectrum (FHSS) [28,27]. FHSS is a well-known technique that provides high
robustness against standard embedded signal removal attacks. For high robust-
ness, the module uses FHSS with a set of diﬀerent frequencies and periodically
selects the operating frequency at random.
Nonce Detection. Once user interaction ends, the recorded audio is processed
using the nonce detection module (Figure 3b 3
○). The module decodes the acous-
tic nonce using BFSK, and checks that (i) the nonce is completely decoded, and
(ii) the decoded nonce is current. The recorded speech is subsequently processed
using standard VDS modules (Figure 3b 4
○). If nonce detection fails or if the
decoded nonce has a high Bit Error Rate (BER), a recourse action (e.g. a retry
or reject) can be taken. Furthermore, if speech is reused by an adversary and
both the current nonce and the obsolete nonce from re-used speech are detected,
information about re-used speech such as when and where it was recorded can be

8
Y. Zhang et al.
determined from Sset. Another scenario can be signal interference between the
current and obsolete nonce resulting in inappropriate decoding result. In such
case, pertinent recourse action can be taken.
4
Practical Realization
4.1
Challenges
In this section, we discuss the two key challenges while implementing AEOLUS in
practice: reliability and imperceptibility.
Reliability. The ﬁrst challenge is to reliably embed an acoustic nonce in over-
the-air channel, as well as to accurately detect nonce from the recorded speech.
Because over-the-air acoustic nonce transmission is impacted by factors such as
background noise and distance between microphone and playback device, it is
diﬃcult to achieve this in operational settings. It is also important to determine
if any previously embedded acoustic nonce is present in the recorded speech to
ascertain speech re-use. The metric used to measure reliability is the bit error
rate (BER) between the embedded and detected nonce. Recall that BFSK is
used for acoustic nonce embedding and detection. Under the assumption that
only additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is present in over-the-air channel,
BER can be computed using the complimentary error function erfc() [36] as
follows:
BER = 1
2erfc(
p
Eb/N0)
(1)
Note that BER computation in Eqn. 1 involves the normalized per bit signal-to-
noise ratio Eb/N0 [33] which depends on the frequency f and amplitude α of the
carrier wave. However, other types of noises besides AWGN are typically present
in over-the-air channel. Hence, we conduct Room Impulse Response (RIR) simu-
lation experiments to study the impact of carrier wave amplitude and frequency
on BER.
Imperceptibility. The second challenge is to ensure that the embedded acous-
tic nonce does not degrade VDS user experience. For this, the acoustic nonce
should be as imperceptible as possible to a VDS user. The nonce embedding and
generation modules presented earlier do not adequately address this challenge
because (i) they do not optimize any objective metric for imperceptibility, and
(ii) they do not account for dynamic and noisy environments where it is diﬃcult
to achieve both reliability and imperceptibility simultaneously. For measuring
imperceptibility, Sound Pressure Level (SPL) is computed using the following
equation:
SPL = 2π2f 2α2ρc/v
(2)
Here, f represents the frequency and α is the amplitude of the carrier wave. ρ
represents the density of the transmission channel (e.g., over-the-air channel),
and c denotes the speed of acoustic transmission. Given that the average SPL

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Amplitude (normalized)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bit Error Rate (%)
Eb/N0 = 0.1
Eb/N0 = 0.5
Eb/N0 = 1
Eb/N0 = 2
(a)
Frequency-range=4-
5kHz, hopping = 2, bi-
trate = 30 bits/sec
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bitrate (bit/sec)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bit Error Rate (%)
Eb/N0 = 10
Eb/N0 = 2
Eb/N0 = 1
Eb/N0 = 0.5
(b)
Frequency-range=4-
5kHz, hopping=2, ampli-
tude = 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
N0 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bit Error Rate (%)
(c)
Freq-range=4-5kHz,
hopping=2,
bitrate=30
bits/sec, amplitude=1
Fig. 4: Variation of bit error rate (%) with: (a) amplitude of carrier wave, (b) bitrate
used for encoding acoustic nonce, (c) background noise levels when embedding the
acoustic nonce. Eb/N0 is calculated in decibels. The distance between user (simulated
using a speaker) and the microphone is set to 1 m.
for human speech is 60dBm [13], f and α should ideally ensure that SPL is
below this threshold for imperceptibility. Like Equation 1, while this equation
provides a theoretical basis to understand SPL, we study how the aforementioned
parameters impact SPL using RIR simulation.
4.2
Key Parameters
There are two key parameters that impact reliability and imperceptibility: (i)
acoustic nonce generation and embedding parameters that include frequency and
amplitude of the carrier wave used for acoustic nonce generation and bitrate used
for acoustic nonce encoding, and (ii) environmental parameters that include the
distance between the microphone and user, the room size, and background noise
among others. To understand the impact of the these parameters on reliability
and imperceptibility, we implement AEOLUS as a prototype and setup an RIR
environment called MCRoomSim in MATLAB [48]. RIR is a commonly used
tool for estimating the performance of signal processing applications in over-
the-air channel [25,19].
Nonce Generation and Embedding Parameters
Amplitude. According to RIR simulation, a lower amplitude yields lower Eb/N0
ratio and consequently, higher BER (see Figure 4a). This is consistent with
Equation 1. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 5, SPL is proportional to the
amplitude of the carrier wave.
Frequency. BER and SPL are evaluated in the frequency range at which typical
speaker recognition systems operate (5 Hz - 8 kHz; sampling rate = 500 Hz).
The other parameters are ﬁxed as follows: Eb/N0 = 1, frequency hopping = 2,
amplitude (normalized) = 1, bitrate = 30 bits/sec, distance = 1 meter. It is
observed that the carrier wave frequency neither impacts BER nor SPL. The
later is in contrast to existing research [44,5] which shows that the frequency

10
Y. Zhang et al.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Amplitude (normalized)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sound Pressure Level (dBm)
After Nonce Embedded
Background Noise Only
Nonce Only
(a) Eb/N0 = 1, carrier frequency
range = 4-5kHz, hopping=2, bi-
trate = 30 bits/sec, distance = 1m
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance (Meter)
75
80
85
90
95
100
Sound Pressure Level (dBm)
(b) Eb/N0 = 1, carrier frequency range
= 4-5kHz, hopping=2, bitrate = 30
bits/sec, Amplitude (normalized) = 1
Fig. 5: Variation of sound pressure level (dBm) with (a) amplitude of carrier wave,
and (b) distance between user (simulated using a speaker) and the microphone.
of an acoustic wave aﬀects the loudness as perceived by humans in a non-linear
manner. Hence, the frequency to SPL mapping from IoSR toolkit [7] is used as
reference.
Bitrate. Figure 4b shows the impact of acoustic nonce bitrate on BER. BER
increases signiﬁcantly as bitrate increases beyond 20 bits/sec. One of the causes
is asynchronous signal overlapping in the time domain when two bits are trans-
mitted too close to each other.
Environmental Parameters
Frequency Shifting. Over-the-air acoustic nonce transmission induces diﬀerences
in the received frequencies and the transmitted frequencies called frequency shift-
ing. Frequency shifting can also occur because of hardware limitations, e.g., a
microphone with a 1.8 kHz frequency limit being used to capture a 2 kHz wave.
Since the received frequency is used to decode the acoustic nonce, frequency
shifting needs to be accounted for by AEOLUS. We investigate frequency shifting
in the simulation setting (operating frequency range: 500 Hz-8 kHz, cardioid
loudspeaker type, dipole microphone type) and determine the frequency shifting
range to be +/- 15 Hz.
Distance. Distance between a VDS user and VDS input impacts impercepti-
bility of the acoustic nonce. Figure 5b indicates that this distance is inversely
proportional to SPL.
Background Noise. Figure 4c and Equation 1 suggest that the background noise
is proportional to BER. In an environment with high background noise, the nonce
generation and embedding parameters need to be conﬁgured appropriately (e.g.,
decrease bitrate, increase amplitude) to limit the BER.

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
11
4.3
Mathematical Formulation
To address reliability and imperceptibility simultaneously, we model over-the-
air acoustic nonce transmission as an optimization problem. Let a user’s recited
speech be denoted by x, and the acoustic nonce embedded by AEOLUS be δ. Also,
let the function that accounts for variations induced by over-the-air channel, e.g.,
due to acoustic signal air absorption and distance, be h(·). The speech recorded
by the microphone is thus represented as h(x). When δ is embedded at the time
of user interaction with the VDS, x mixes with δ. As a result, the microphone
records h(x ∗δ), where ∗denotes signal convolution between x and δ.
Assume that AEOLUS detects nonce δ′ in h(x ∗δ). Let us deﬁne an objective
function f(·) denoting BER that takes the parameter set P = {< f, α, τ >, ...}
as input, and a function g(·) denoting SPL. The goal is to ﬁnd the optimal
parameter set P that minimizes f (for reliability) subject to the constraint that
the SPL diﬀerence between speech with and without embedded nonce is less
than or equal to a threshold θ (for imperceptibility):
arg min
P f(P) subject to g(h(x ∗δ)) −g(h(x)) ≤θ
(3)
4.4
Computing Optimal Parameters
Initialization. The environmental parameters are ﬁrst initialized (Figure 3b 5
○)
using the VDS input. The background noise energy is calculated by inspecting
the ambient sound. Frequency shifting is calculated by transmitting and decoding
a nonce that covers the working frequency range (500 - 8 kHz, sampled every
500 Hz). It is assumed that the distance between the user and VDS input device
is set by the VDS device vendor.
Optimization. Computing the gradients of the optimization parameters di-
rectly using gradient-based methods is ineﬃcient [23]. This is because the VDS’s
acoustic environment is dynamic (e.g., due to occlusions and varying background
noise levels). In addition, the formulated optimization is a multi-dimensional
problem with considerations of both reliability and imperceptibility. Hence, we
use diﬀerential evolution (DE) [29,43] which is a gradient-free method. DE gener-
ates diverse candidate solutions in each iteration which avoids local minima and
aids in convergence to a global minima. It does not require apriori knowledge of
the underlying acoustic encoding method or acoustic environment. Algorithm 1
summarizes the use of DE for obtaining optimal parameters. The initial set of
candidate parameters P includes feasible frequency f, amplitude α, and bitrate
τ, estimated using RIR simulation. Once AEOLUS is deployed, the initialization
module ﬁrst estimates the environmental parameters, e.g., N0 and d. Subse-
quently, the optimization module uses the pre-calculated RIR parameters for
eﬃcient convergence to optimal parameters (see Section 5.1).

12
Y. Zhang et al.
Algorithm 1: Computing Optimal Parameters
initialization:
1. Create candidate population:P = {P < f, α, τ >, ...}
2. Initialize: Poutput = {}, i = 0, MAXi = 100, MAXoutput = 20, β = 0.5
2. Acquire environmental parameters: d, N0
3. Set up Goals:BER < 10−9, SPL
′ −SPL ≤θ
optimization:
while i <= MAXi, Poutput.Size <= MAXoutput do
foreach individual Pi(i = 1, ...) ∈P do
if Pi satisﬁes the Goals then
Poutput ←Pi
end
Create candidate C from parent Pi, d, N0.
if the candidate is better than the parent then
Pfeasible ←Candidate C
Candidate C replaces the parent
else
the candidate is discarded
end
end
Randomly select next P in P.
end
output: Poutput
Candidate Creation:
input : Parent Ppar, d, N0, β
Randomly select individuals P1 , P2 from P
Calculate candidate C as C = Ppar + β(P1 −P2),
where β is a scaling parameter decided by d and N0.
output: Candidate C
5
Experimental Evaluation
AEOLUS is implemented as a prototype in MATLAB and evaluated in three dif-
ferent environments: (i) a conference room (approx. 5.5 m by 4 m) selected as
a reference for a semi-public indoor environment, (ii) a campus dining area (ap-
prox. 25m by 50m) chosen to mimic a noisy indoor public area, and (iii) inside a
car parked at a gas station to simulate the use case of voice-driven payments at
gas stations [3]. For (i) and (ii), a FIFINE K669B microphone is used to record
speech, and a Logitech S120 Speaker System is used as playback device to simu-
late users. The evaluation is performed at diﬀerent distances (0.5-4 m) between
the microphone and playback device. For (iii), the microphone is identical but
the car’s in-built speakers are used instead of the Logitech speakers. Also, the
evaluation is performed at two diﬀerent distances 0.5 and 0.7 m.
AEOLUS is evaluated both on speech data captured from live participants in
ReMASC dataset [32] and synthesized speech from Amazon Polly. A total of
ten diﬀerent speaker proﬁles are used (four of which are synthesized). For each

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
13
(a) Conference Room.
(b) Dining Hall
(c) Gas Station (Car). (d) Setup in the Car.
Fig. 6: Experimental setup to evaluate AEOLUS in diﬀerent environments.
Table 1: Optimal parameters for achieving reliability and imperceptibility at a distance
of 0.5 m between the microphone and user in diﬀerent environments: (a) conference
room, (b) dining hall, and (c) in a car parked at a gas station.
Location
SPL (dB-A) Frequency
(± 200 Hz)
Amplitude
(normalized)
Bitrate
(bits/sec)
Conference Room
41
4000 Hz
0.52
35
Dining Hall
58
5200 Hz
1
25
Gas Station (Car)
47
4800 Hz
0.61
33
proﬁle, three diﬀerent speech samples are used. Microsoft Azure’s speech and
speaker recognition services [9] are used for speech-to-text and speaker recogni-
tion. Text-independent speaker veriﬁcation service [8] is used for speaker veriﬁ-
cation experiments. Each speaker’s proﬁle is ﬁrst enrolled using a speech sample
longer than 20 seconds. Veriﬁcation is performed using the speaker’s speech sam-
ples with and without acoustic nonce, and yields one of the following outputs:
acceptance with “high”, “normal”, or “low” conﬁdence, or a rejection.
5.1
Performance
Optimal Parameters. First, we estimate optimal parameters for achieving
reliability and imperceptibility simultaneously in a given environment using Al-
gorithm 1. The frequency step size is set to 200 Hz and θ is set as 0.1 to ensure
that the generated nonce is below the average human speech SPL of 60 db. It
is observed that lower amplitudes and frequencies and higher bitrates are com-
paratively optimal for acoustic nonce embedding in low noise environments, e.g.,
conference room (see Table 1). Relatively higher amplitudes and frequencies, and
lower bitrates are more optimal in environments with higher noise, such as the
dining hall. This is because the background noise in such environments typically
vests as a low amplitude low frequency noise.
Computational Overhead. Algorithm 1 iteratively optimizes the parameter
set P for the given environment. For conference room, a single iteration is suf-
ﬁcient. However, for dining hall and gas station environments, a few iterations
(< 10) are required and the computation takes a few seconds. This does not
cause a delay at the time of user interaction because it overlaps with the time

14
Y. Zhang et al.
Table 2: Acoustic nonce recovery bit error rate (BER) and speech re-use detection
performance (FAR and FRR) at diﬀerent distances in the three environments.
Location
Dis.
BER/FAR/FRR Location Dis.
BER/FAR/FRR Location Dis.
BER/FAR/FRR
Conference
Room
0.5m 0%/0%/0%
Dining
Hall
0.5m
0.2%/0%/0.5%
Gas
Station
(Car)
0.5m
0%/0%/0%
1m
0%/0%/0%
1m
1.2%/0%/ 1%
0.7m
0.5%0%0.5%
4m
1.2%/0%/0.5%
2m
75%/0% /78%
a user typically takes to set up a VDS. The acoustic nonce embedding and de-
coding process occurs while user is interacting with VDS. The computational
overhead is negligible because the nonce size is small, and the playback device
is used only when the user is speaking.
Reliability Next, we measure the reliability of embedding and retrieving acous-
tic nonce in the three environments. For this, we compute the average BER over
5 independent trials at diﬀerent distances between the VDS input device (micro-
phone) and user. Figure 7 shows that in all three environments, the average BER
upto a distance of 1.5 m is 0%. Note, however that BER increases signiﬁcantly
beyond 1.5m in dining hall because the environment is relatively noisy.
Speech Re-use Detection. In this experiment, we measure the eﬃcacy of
AEOLUS in detecting speech re-use (see Table 2). The input speech is considered
re-used if (i) the current nonce is not decoded correctly, and (ii) if any trace of
an obsolete nonce is detected. FRR indicates the proportion of falsely rejected
samples because of incorrect nonce decoding or because the detected nonce is
obsolete. FAR indicates how many re-used speech samples with obsolete nonces
are falsely accepted. AEOLUS achieves 0.5% FRR at 0% FAR for speech re-use
prevention upto a distance of 4 meters in the three environments.
5.2
Robustness
Impact on Speaker and Speech Recognition. The goal of this experiment
is to assess the impact of acoustic nonce embedding and decoding on the perfor-
mance of a commercial speaker and speech recognition system (Microsoft Azure).
The results show that there is limited impact on the performance of the speaker
recognition system for the conference room and dining hall environments upto
a distance of 1.5 m (see Appendix Figure 8a). The embedded nonce marginally
increases the average word error rate (WER) of the speech recognition system to
4.4%. The WER is close to the reported average WER of 5.1% for the same sys-
tem in the NIST 2000 Switchboard test set [52]. Manually reviewing the results
indicates that most errors are related to incorrect suﬃx “-ing”. A few errors are
due to small word omissions such as “an” and “a”. Relatively more errors occur
in the dining hall environment due to the background noise.
Acoustic Nonce Removal. An adversary may attempt to remove the em-
bedded acoustic nonce and obtain a “clean” speech sample to conduct re-use

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
15
Table 3: Performance of Microsoft Azure speaker recognition system (similarity score
0 - 1) and speech recognition system (WER) after nonce removal using two diﬀerent
FHSS schemes. Without nonce removal, the respective average similarity score and
WER of the two systems are 0.897 and 5.1% [52]. Lossy compression and equalization
nonce removal techniques failed to remove the nonce and the speech samples were
rejected by AEOLUS.
Removal Technique
4-5kHz, 2 Hop., Avg. of 30 samples 1-8kHz, 10 Hop., Avg. of 30 samples
Speaker
Veriﬁcation
(Score, 0-1)
Speech
Recognition
(WER %)
Speaker
Veriﬁcation
(Score, 0-1)
Speech
Recognition
(WER %)
Resampling
0.233
29.73%
0.170
91.83%
Amplitude Compression
0.217
34.31%
0.184
63.4%
Filtering
0.623
17.12%
0.319
62.21%
Additive Noise
0.318
53.13%
0.192
96.34%
Lossy Compression
Reject
Reject
Reject
Reject
Equalization
Reject
Reject
Reject
Reject
attacks. To test the robustness of AEOLUS in this adversarial setting, we use 6
common audio watermark removal techniques [51] (see Appendix B for details).
Each technique is iteratively used until the acoustic nonce cannot be detected
in a speech sample. The removal attempts are repeated for all speech samples
in the dataset mentioned above. Table 3 shows that nonce removal techniques
reduced the average recognition performance of the commercial speaker recogni-
tion system by 79.52%, and increased the average word error rate of the speech
recognition system by 33.57%.
5.3
Human Perception
Empirical Measurement. In this experiment, we empirically measure the
change in SPL due to the embedded nonce. The distance between VDS output
and the recording device is 1 m in dining hall and conference room, and 0.7 m
in the car. The results (see Appendix Figure 9) show that the average SPL dif-
ference in each environment is less than 1.4%. Non-parametric Wilcoxon Signed
Rank test [50] (at 95% conﬁdence level) is used to measure the statistical signif-
icance of the diﬀerence in SPL before and after acoustic nonce embedding. The
results indicate that the diﬀerences are statistically insigniﬁcant.
User Study. Next, we study the impact of AEOLUS on VDS usability. For this,
120 participants (with prior experience using a VDS) from various demograph-
ics (age groups, gender shown in Appendix Table 6) are recruited on Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Each participant is presented with a survey that takes approx-
imately 10 minutes to complete. Post completion of the survey, a participant is
paid 4 USD as incentive. The survey questions are designed to ensure bias is not
introduced in the results (no leading questions).
Each participant is asked to enter their demographic information. The par-
ticipant is then instructed to play a test sample and adjust the playback volume
to a comfortable level. Following this, the participant is presented with a survey

16
Y. Zhang et al.
with ﬁve speech samples and follow up questions. Included in the ﬁve samples
is one sample with only background noise (and no speech) to check if the par-
ticipant is attentive. The participants are asked to provide speech transcriptions
for all samples and the provided transcriptions are used to check the partici-
pants’ attentiveness. Eleven participants failed to pass this test and hence were
excluded.
The test samples are uniformly selected at random from a dataset of 24
speech recordings, 12 recordings each with and without embedded nonce from
the three environments. The average length of the speech samples is 6.4 seconds.
To ensure the user study is unbiased, all samples presented to a participant are
from the same speaker and pertain to the same voice command. After listening to
a speech sample, a participant is asked to rate the noise level of the speech sample
on a scale of 0 - 10 (10 being the highest noise level). The participant is also
instructed to report any noticeable noise source that aﬀects their experience,
and to specify the characteristic of the noise that resulted in this disruption
(e.g., human conversation, train or car noise). The answer is used to ascertain
the source of noise that impacted the usability (e.g., the embedded nonce).
Results. Table 4 reports the average human perception ratings. The acoustic
nonce does not degrade overall user experience for 94.16% of speech samples, on
average, in the three environments. Since this does not adequately measure the
participant’s perception of nonce embedding for each sample, per speech sample
perception is also reported. No speech sample with embedded nonce is perceived
to be disruptive by the majority of participants.
Perceived Noise Level. Table 5 shows that the speech samples containing
the acoustic nonce are perceived to have a higher noise level. The dependent
samples paired t-test (at 95% conﬁdence) indicates a statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerence (between samples with and without nonce) in the conference room
and car. However, this diﬀerence is statistically insigniﬁcant in the dining hall
due to higher background noise level compared to the conference room and car.
Despite perceiving higher noise level, the majority of participants do not perceive
any speech sample to be disruptive (see Table 4).
Table 4: Perception of speech samples. Overall (%) is the proportion of participants
that label speech samples as imperceptible, non-disruptive, or disruptive. Sample (%) is
the proportion of speech samples (with nonce) that are determined to be imperceptible,
non-disruptive, or disruptive by the majority of participants.
Location
Imperceptible
(Overall/Sample%)
Non-disruptive
(Overall/Sample%)
Disruptive, Nonce-caused
(Overall/Sample%)
Conference Room
34.87%/50%
50%/50%
1.31%/0%
Dining Hall
32.64%/25%
41.67%/75%
7.64%/0%
Gas Station (Car)
32.14%/25%
42.86%/75%
8.57%/0%

Practical Speech Re-use Prevention in Voice-driven Services
17
Table 5: Average perceived noise (on a scale of 0-10) in speech samples with and
without acoustic nonce collected in the three environments.
Location
w/o Nonce
w/ Nonce
t-test, α = 0.05
Statistically Signiﬁcant
Conference Room
3.8
4.8
t = 4.2022, p = 0.0001489
Yes
Dining Hall
5.7
6.1
t = 1.4595, p = 0.1524
No
Gas Station (Car)
5
5.6
t = 3.0697, p = 0.00389
Yes
6
Summary and Future Work
In this work, we present a security overlay called AEOLUS that can be integrated
with any voice-driven service to prevent speech re-use. AEOLUS reliably embeds
a dynamic acoustic nonce that is non-disruptive to a VDS user, and detects the
embedded nonce from the recorded user speech. AEOLUS can be combined with
other defense mechanisms to further enhance VDS security. As an example, it
can be used alongside a dynamic challenge-response method where in each inter-
action, the user is expected to respond to a fresh challenge (e.g., repeat a phrase).
The acoustic nonce can be embedded in each challenge, and can be detected us-
ing AEOLUS. Experiments conducted in three diﬀerent environments show that
AEOLUS can be used in operational VDS scenarios with minimal overhead. In
future, we plan to conduct in-depth investigation of methods for generation and
encoding of acoustic nonce, e.g., using variations of music or other forms of sound
along with diﬀerent encoding schemes. We also plan to conduct large-scale live
subject testing to further evaluate reliability and imperceptibility.
