Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
Kostas Patroumpas · Elias Alevizos ·
Alexander Artikis · Marios Vodas · Nikos
Pelekis · Yannis Theodoridis
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract We present a system for online monitoring of maritime activity over stream-
ing positions from numerous vessels sailing at sea. It employs an online tracking
module for detecting important changes in the evolving trajectory of each vessel
across time, and thus can incrementally retain concise, yet reliable summaries of its
recent movement. In addition, thanks to its complex event recognition module, this
system can also offer instant notiﬁcation to marine authorities regarding emergency
situations, such as risk of collisions, suspicious moves in protected zones, or pack-
age picking at open sea. Not only did our extensive tests validate the performance,
efﬁciency, and robustness of the system against scalable volumes of real-world and
synthetically enlarged datasets, but its deployment against online feeds from vessels
has also conﬁrmed its capabilities for effective, real-time maritime surveillance.
Keywords AIS · event recognition · geostreaming · moving objects · trajectory
K. Patroumpas
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Greece

E. Alevizos
Institute of Informatics & Telecommunications, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece

A. Artikis
Department of Maritime Studies, University of Piraeus, Greece
Institute of Informatics & Telecommunications, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece

M. Vodas
Department of Informatics, University of Piraeus, Greece

N. Pelekis
Department of Statistics & Insurance Science, University of Piraeus, Greece

Y. Theodoridis
Department of Informatics, University of Piraeus, Greece

arXiv:1601.06041v1  [cs.CV]  22 Jan 2016

2
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
1 Introduction
Maritime surveillance systems have been attracting considerable attention for eco-
nomic as well as environmental reasons [17, 40, 39]. For instance, accidents at sea
may cause ecological disasters (e.g., oil spill) and shipping companies may be ﬁned
to pay billions of dollars. In the past decade, monitoring vessel activity has emerged
as a precious tool for preventing such risks, thanks to the Automatic Identiﬁcation
System (AIS)1. By integrating a VHF transceiver with positioning and navigational
devices (e.g., GPS, gyrocompass), AIS can be used to track vessels at sea in real-time
through data exchange with other ships nearby, coastal stations, or even satellites.
The initial purpose of AIS was to prevent collisions; yet, the amount and precision of
the collected data and its real-time availability can be used by a broader spectrum of
maritime monitoring applications. International regulations require AIS to be aboard
cargo ships of at least 300 gross tonnage, as well as all passenger ships, regardless
of size. Considering that AIS data is continuously emitted from over 580,000 vessels
worldwide2, maritime surveillance systems certainly demand capabilities of highly
scalable, continuous, spatiotemporal processing over massive data streams.
To address this requirement, we have been developing a maritime surveillance
system that consists of two main components. A trajectory detection component
accepts a positional stream of AIS messages and tracks major changes along each
vessel’s movement. Given that vessels normally follow planned routes (except for
accidents, storms, etc.), this process can instantly identify “critical points” along its
trajectory, such as a stop, a sudden turn, or slow motion. Therefore, we may discard
redundant locations along a “normal” course, and approximately reconstruct each
vessel’s trajectory from the sequence of its critical points only. This online summa-
rization achieves data compression close to 98%, with negligible loss in approxima-
tion quality. But, apart from archiving or displaying it on maps, this derived stream of
critical points is mostly useful in recognizing complex maritime phenomena that in-
volve interaction among vessels or spatiotemporal relationships between vessels and
geographical areas of interest. This is handled by our complex event recognition com-
ponent, which can efﬁciently detect suspicious or potentially dangerous situations,
such as fast approaching vessels or package picking at open sea, and accordingly
issue alert notiﬁcations to marine authorities.
Of course, several platforms and monitoring applications have been proposed for
managing and analyzing data streams. For instance, the system in [10] focuses on
recency-probing pattern queries against both live and archived streams. UpStream
platform [28] offers low latency response to continuous queries over massively up-
dated data, but it lacks support for the speciﬁc demands of trajectory detection. Be-
sides, automating ingestion of streaming data feeds from various sources into a data
warehouse is also important [16], but does not pay attention to complex event recogni-
tion. Our particular interest is on geostreaming data [20] from sailing vessels acquired
continuously over time, which must be processed on-the-ﬂy in order to recognize im-
portant phenomena regarding their movement and their interaction with the maritime
1 http://www.imo.org/OurWork/Safety/Navigation/Pages/AIS.aspx
2 https://www.vesselfinder.com

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
3
environment. In [37] an approach for anomaly detection and classiﬁcation of ves-
sel interactions is presented. Patterns of interest are expressed as left-to-right Hidden
Markov Models and classiﬁed using Support Vector Machines, also taking into ac-
count contextual information via ﬁrst-order logic rules. However, this work focuses
more on predictive accuracy rather than real-time performance in a streaming sce-
nario. To the best of our knowledge, no streaming framework has been speciﬁcally
tailored for maritime surveillance over ﬂuctuating, noisy, intermittent, geostreaming
AIS messages from large ﬂeets, as the one we present in this work.
This paper is an extended and revised version of previous works presented in [33,
2], and developed in the context of the AMINESS project3. It now offers heuristics
for coping with noisy situations, improved algorithms for better capturing important
events related to vessel mobility and interaction, as well as a more thorough empirical
validation. In particular, our contributions are:
– We introduce single-pass heuristics to drastically reduce noisy AIS positions,
much to the beneﬁt of the resulting trajectory synopses (in size and quality).
– We provide a detailed account of online spatiotemporal ﬁlters that can detect im-
portant changes in each vessel’s mobility and also incrementally maintain suc-
cinct, reliable representations of their evolving trajectories.
– We analyze in depth several rules and conditions for efﬁciently recognizing com-
plex maritime events, which may also involve topological relationships between
vessels and geographical zones of interest.
– We empirically validate our methodology in terms of performance and quality
of results against a large AIS dataset of real vessel traces. Moreover, we exten-
sively investigate the robustness, efﬁciency, and timeliness of the system against
scalable volumes of synthetically enlarged datasets, as well as its capacity to rec-
ognize complex events related to sensitive environmental zones.
– Finally, we outline a deployment of the system in a real-world scenario, against
streaming AIS data feeds that are being collected across the Aegean Sea.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the
architecture of the proposed maritime surveillance system. Sections 3 and 4 respec-
tively present the two main components for online trajectory detection and complex
event recognition, respectively. Experimental results are reported in Section 5. In Sec-
tion 6, we discuss a deployment of this system against real-time AIS data. Finally, in
Section 7 we summarize our approach and outline directions for future work.
2 System Architecture
Next, we outline the processing ﬂow of the proposed maritime surveillance system.
As illustrated in Figure 1, this system consumes a geospatial stream of AIS tracking
messages from vessels, continuously detects important features that characterize their
movement and recognizes complex events such as suspicious vessel activity.
In order to meet the real-time requirements of the geostreaming paradigm [20],
this online process necessitates the use of a sliding window [22, 34]. Typically, such
3 http://www.aminess.eu/

4
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
Fig. 1 Processing ﬂow of streaming AIS data for online maritime surveillance.
a window abstracts the time period of interest by focusing only on phenomena that
occurred in a recent range ω (e.g., positions received during past 10 minutes). This
window slides forward to keep in pace with newly arrived stream tuples, so it gets
refreshed at a speciﬁc slide step every β units (e.g., each minute). For instance, an
aggregate query could report at every minute (β) the distance traveled by a ship over
the past 10 minutes (ω). Typically, β < ω, hence successive window instantiations
may share positional tuples over their partially overlapping ranges across time.
As input, we consider particular AIS messages (speciﬁcally, of types 1, 2, 3, 18, or
19 according to AIS regulations) and extract position updates. Each message speciﬁes
the MMSI (Maritime Mobile Service Identity) of the reporting vessel. For a given
MMSI , each of its successive positional samples p consists of geographical coordi-
nates (Lon, Lat) observed at discrete, totally ordered timestamps τ (e.g., at the gran-
ularity of seconds). Without loss of generality, we abstract vessels as 2-dimensional
point entities moving across time, because our primary concern is to capture their mo-
tion features. By monitoring the timestamped locations from a large ﬂeet of N ves-
sels, the system must deal with a positional stream of tuples ⟨MMSI , Lon, Lat, τ⟩. A
Data Scanner decodes each AIS message, identiﬁes those four attributes (the rest are
ignored in our analysis), and cleans them from distortions caused during transmission
(e.g., discard corrupt messages with bad checksum). This constitutes an append-only
data stream, as no deletions or updates are allowed to already received locations.
But it is the sequential nature of each vessel’s trace that mostly matters for cap-
turing movement patterns en route (e.g., a slow turn), as well as spatiotemporal in-
teractions (e.g., ships traveling together). Such a trajectory is approximated as an
evolving sequence of successive point samples that locate this vessel at distinct times-
tamps (e.g., every few seconds). Our system accounts for stream imperfections, i.e.,
the noise inherent in vessel positions due to sea drift, delayed arrival of messages, or
discrepancies in GPS signals. Indeed, prior to any processing, all incoming AIS posi-
tions are ﬁltered through the Noise Reduction module by applying heuristics against a
velocity vector maintained per vessel4. Afterwards, the Mobility Tracker module ac-
cepts clean data and checks when and how velocity changes with time. Working en-
4 Typically for trajectories [7], linear interpolation is applied between each pair of successive measurements (pi, τi)
and (pi+1, τi+1). For simplicity, we assume that this also holds in the case of vessels. With the exception of intermittent
signals, their course between any two consecutive positions practically evolves in a very small area, which can be locally
approximated with a Euclidean plane using Haversine distances.

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
5
tirely in main memory and without any index support, it can detect trajectory events,
either instantaneous (e.g., a sudden turn) or of longer duration (e.g., a smooth turn).
At each window slide, those events are compiled by a Compressor and a sequence of
“critical” points (such as a stop) are emitted, which are much fewer compared to the
originally relayed positions. Accordingly, the current vessel motion can be charac-
terized in real time with particular annotations (e.g., stop, turn). Once new trajectory
events are detected per vessel upon each window slide, the annotated critical points
can be readily emitted and visualized on maps through a Trajectory Exporter, e.g., as
KML polylines (for trajectories) and placemarks (for vessel locations).
Not surprisingly, detecting trajectory events from positional streams essentially
performs a kind of path simpliﬁcation. In the literature, some strategies like [7, 24, 26]
specify an error tolerance for the resulting approximation. The memory footprint oc-
cupied by the compressed trajectory may also be a constraint in a single-pass evalu-
ation [35]. Mainly focusing on savings in communication cost, dead-reckoning poli-
cies like [41] may be employed on board of the moving objects to relay positional
updates only upon signiﬁcant deviation from the course already known to a central-
ized server. However, this does not hold for AIS data, as maritime control centers
wish to locate ships as frequently as possible. Most importantly, a major advantage
of our proposed scheme is that it annotates the simpliﬁed representations according
to particular trajectory events (turn, stop, etc.), thus adding rich semantic information
all along each compressed trace.
Moreover, the derived critical points are propagated to the Complex Event Recog-
nition module, which combines this event stream with static geographical data, such
as protected areas. The objective of this process is to detect potentially suspicious or
dangerous situations, such as loitering and vessel pursuit. The recognized complex
events are pushed in real-time to the marine authorities for decision-making.
3 Detecting Trajectory Events
As illustrated in Figure 1, the system accepts fresh AIS messages from ships and
extracts positional tuples ⟨MMSI , Lon, Lat, τ⟩. With the possible exception of lo-
cal manoeuvres near ports, marine regulations, or harsh weather conditions, vessels
are normally expected to follow almost straight, predictable routes. In terms of ves-
sel mobility, what matters most is to detect when and how the general course has
changed, e.g., identify a stop, a turning point, or slow motion. Such trajectory move-
ment events (ME) sufﬁce to indicate “critical points” along the trace of each vessel
and thus offer a concise, yet quite reliable representation of its course.
In order to identify signiﬁcant changes in movement, we employ an instantaneous
velocity vector −→v now computed from the two most recent positions reported by each
vessel MMSI . In addition, we maintain the mean velocity −→
vm per ship over its pre-
vious m positions (m is a small integer) so as to abstract its short-term course. With
our heuristics, it turns out that a large portion of the raw positional reports can be
suppressed with minimal loss in accuracy, as they hardly contribute any additional
knowledge. We distinguish two kinds of trajectory events:

6
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
– Instantaneous trajectory events involve individual time points per route, by sim-
ply checking potentially important changes with respect to the previously re-
ported location (e.g., a sharp change in heading).
– Long-lasting trajectory events are deduced after examining a sequence of instan-
taneous events over a longer (yet bounded) time period in order to identify evolv-
ing motion changes. For example, a few consecutive changes in heading may be
very small if each is examined in isolation from the rest, but cumulatively they
could signify a notable change in the overall direction.
In this Section, we ﬁrst present simple, yet quite effective ﬁlters as a means of
eliminating noise inherent in the streaming AIS data. Next, we describe how the
sequence of vessel positions can be processed online in order to detect trajectory
movement events and thus maintain a lightweight synopsis of each vessel’s course.
3.1 Online Noise Reduction
Despite its high value in maritime surveillance, AIS data is not error-free. In fact,
there are several sources of error that render a portion of this data noisy and inade-
quate for monitoring. First, no precise timestamp value is present in AIS messages
relayed by the transponders on board; instead, they only report a lag value (in sec-
onds) from the previously transmitted message. Obviously, this value cannot be used
for establishing a temporal order, since positional updates from a single vessel may
come from a series of base stations (those within range of its antenna along the route).
Therefore, a transaction timestamp marking the arrival of each AIS message at a
station has to be used instead. Inevitably, transmission delays may frequently occur
between the original message and its arrival. Successive positional messages from
a single vessel may often arrive intermingled at a distorted order. Figure 2(a) illus-
trates such out-of-sequence messages, where numbers signify timestamp values since
the beginning of this trajectory. Had those positions been retained according to their
order of arrival, the vessel would occasionally appear in a state of sudden agility,
moving back and forth very rapidly at a quite unusual speed. To make matters worse,
AIS networks do not have synchronized clocks. Hence, if a vessel is within range
of two stations, then a broadcasted message may be received by each one and pos-
sibly assigned with a different transaction timestamp. It may also happen that the
same timestamp is assigned to different locations (maybe of considerable distance)
of the same vessel. Therefore, duplicate or contradicting positions of a vessel may be
present in the collected data. Noise might not always be caused by technical issues or
the inherent errors and discrepancies in the GPS positions. It may be also due to de-
liberate, suspicious actions, e.g., switching off the transponder or emitting “spoofed”
coordinates in order to avoid surveillance in a sensitive area. To the extent possible,
such intermittent or falsiﬁed positions should be detected and cleared.
Coping with noisy situations over AIS data is particularly challenging and has at-
tracted signiﬁcant research interest. As argued in [30], noise reduction should not be
confused with anomaly detection, because data must be cleaned in advance, before
performing any analysis. In that particular work, the well-known DBSCAN cluster-
ing algorithm [14] was used to identify outlier positions, which could then be re-

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
7
(a) Out-of-sequence
(b) Off-course position
(c) Zig-zag movement
Fig. 2 Noise-related situations along a vessel’s course.
moved from the dataset. With respect to time delays, an adaptive ﬁltering strategy
was suggested in [27], which employed Kalman ﬁlters and Monte-Carlo simulations
to sequentially detect such delays and probabilistically rearrange a “correct” times-
tamp order. Besides, a stochastic method can be used to cope with position spooﬁng
[18] by exploiting auxiliary data from radars or comparing it with previously tracked
information. A common characteristic of all such methods is that they work in ofﬂine
fashion employing expensive, iterative ﬁlters over archived AIS datasets.
In contrast, in this work we wish to apply online, single-pass ﬁlters over the in-
coming stream of AIS positions. Besides, given that trajectory compression is one of
our principal objectives, we can afford to lose garbled, out-of-sequence positions and
not consider correcting their timestamps. After all, unless in cases of malicious activ-
ity, a fresh noise-free location will be soon received from a vessel, effectively com-
pensating for the removal of any erroneous preceding one(s). In order to effectively
and efﬁciently eliminate noise in timestamped AIS positions, we resort to applying
a series of simple heuristics that examine the instantaneous velocity vector −→v now of
each vessel as computed by its two most recent observations. A noisy situation is
identiﬁed if at least one of the following conditions apply:
– Off-course positions incur an abrupt change both in speed and heading of velocity
−→v now. Such an outlier can be easily detected since it signiﬁes an abnormal, yet
only temporary, deviation from the known course as abstracted by mean velocity
−→
vm of the ship over its previous m positions. Figure 2(b) illustrates such a case
with a vessel that is unexpectedly located far away from its anticipated route.
– When vessels are on the move, they normally take their turns very smoothly (es-
pecially larger ships), so a series of AIS locations are transmitted, each marking
a small change in heading as in Figure 3(f). However, if the latest position up-
date indicates that a vessel has suddenly made a very abrupt turn (e.g., over 60o)
with respect to its known course (even though its speed may not be altered signiﬁ-
cantly), then this message should better be ignored altogether. Note that in case of
adverse weather conditions (e.g., a storm) a vessel’s route may appear as a ‘zig-
zag’ polyline with a series of such abrupt turns as shown in Figure 2(c). Dropping
those consecutive points as noise is not typically correct; yet, in terms of data
reduction this is quite desirable, as the vessel does not make any intentional turn
and generally follows its planned course.

8
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
– When a vessel appears to accelerate too much, i.e., at a rate that it is not usual
for a ship, this is another indication of noise. This is typical for out-of-sequence
messages with twisted timestamps, as the three red spots in Figure 2(a). Each of
these three locations is along the course of the ship, but due to their late arrival to
the base station, the vessel is seen as retracting backwards suddenly. The location
at timestamp t = 438 seconds is 270 meters back from the position at t = 433
seconds, resulting in a speed of 105 knots, quite unrealistic for any vessel.
– If an identical location from the same vessel has been already recorded before,
then this might be a sign of error. Note that even if a vessel remains anchored, its
successive GPS measurements usually differ by a few meters. In that case, instan-
taneous velocity −→v now is inﬁnitesimal, but not exactly zero; instead, coincidental
coordinates in succession should be deemed as almost certain duplicates.
– A similar problem occurs with conﬂicts in timestamping, when the same times-
tamp is assigned to two distinct messages from a given vessel, even though they
may be probably reporting different coordinates. In this case, instantaneous veloc-
ity −→v now cannot be computed, signifying that these messages are contradictory
(if not violating previous rules, we arbitrarily retain the latest one).
As we experimentally veriﬁed (cf. Section 5), as much as 20% of the raw AIS po-
sitions may be qualifying as noise, falling in one of the aforementioned cases. Most
importantly, accepting noisy positions would drastically distort the resulting trajec-
tory synopsis, as the red dashed line in Figure 2(b) illustrates. Even worse, noise may
affect proper detection of movement events, as we will discuss next. Hence, although
based in empirical heuristics, such noise reduction has proven certainly beneﬁcial in
terms of performance without sacriﬁcing accuracy in the resulting approximation.
3.2 Online Tracking of Moving Vessels
Once potentially noisy positions are cleared, the mobility tracker can instantly deduce
a variety of instantaneous events by examining the trace of each vessel alone:
i) Pause indicates that a vessel is temporarily halted, once its instantaneous speed
vnow is below a suitable threshold vmin. For example, if vnow is currently less
than vmin = 1 knot, then the ship seems idle. For the vessel shown in Figure 3(a),
the red bullets indicate several pause events; apparently, the ship is anchored at
the port and such small displacements may be due to GPS errors or sea drift.
ii) Speed change occurs once current vnow deviates by more than α% from the previ-
ously observed speed vprev. Given a threshold α, the formula | vnow−vprev
vnow
| >
α
100
indicates whether the vessel has just decelerated or accelerated. This normally
happens when approaching to or departing from a port, as depicted in Figure 3(b).
iii) Turn is spotted when heading in −→v now has just changed by more than a given
angle ∆θ; e.g., there is a difference of ≥15o from the previous direction.
No critical point gets immediately issued upon detection of any such simple
events. An instantaneous pause or turn may be serendipitous and is not meaning-
ful out of context, because a series of such events may signify that the ship is stopped

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
9
(a) Pause
(b) Change in speed
(c) Gap in reporting
(d) Long-term stop
(e) Slow motion
(f) Smooth turn
Fig. 3 Instantaneous and long-lasting trajectory events.
for some time. To avoid iteratively probing these locations later, we simply attach a
bitmap to each stream tuple, using one bit for each particular instantaneous event.
Note that multiple bits may be set at each location; e.g., the vessel may have just
taken a sudden turn and also changed its speed above the respective thresholds, hence
two distinct bits must be set to 1.
By buffering these instantaneous events within the window, we then can detect
spatiotemporal phenomena of some duration. Examination of such long-lasting tra-
jectory events is carried out in the following order. Note that if a certain long-lasting
event has just been detected at a location, then checking if it also qualiﬁes for another
event is skipped altogether.
1. Gap in reporting is examined ﬁrst. This event is spotted when a vessel has not
emitted a message for a time period ∆T, e.g., over the past 10 minutes. This may
occur when the vessel sails in an area with no AIS receiving station nearby, or
because the transmission power of its transponder allows broadcasting in a shorter
range. Then, its course is unknown during this period, as it occurs between the two
red bullets in Figure 3(c). Reporting that contact was lost is important not only
for online monitoring, but also for safety reasons, e.g., a suspicious move near
maritime boundaries, or a potential intrusion of a tanker into a marine park. A pair
of critical points signify when contact was lost (gapStart annotates the previously
reported location) and when it was restored (gapEnd for current location).
2. Checking for a long-term stop is only ﬁred if the vessel is noticed to move
(vnow > vmin) just after a pause. If current location is preceded by at least m con-
secutive instantaneous pause or turn events in the buffer, and they are all within

10
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
a predeﬁned radius r (e.g., 250 meters), then a long-term stop is identiﬁed. In
Figure 3(d), the red points inside the circle succeed one another and indicate such
immobility, so they are collectively approximated by a single critical point (their
centroid) annotated as stopped with their total duration.
3. Slow motion means that a vessel consistently moves at very low speed (≤vmin)
over its m most recent messages, as in Figure 3(e). If those buffered positions
have not already qualiﬁed as a long-term stop by the previous rule (because they
did not fall inside a small circle), then they probably succeed each other slowly
along a path. The ﬁrst and the last of these positions are both reported as critical,
respectively annotated as lowSpeedStart and lowSpeedEnd.
4. Smooth turns are examined last. Due to their large size and maritime regulations,
vessels normally report a series of locations when they change course. By check-
ing whether the cumulative change in heading over buffered previous positions
exceeds a given angle ∆θ, a series of such critical turning points may be emitted,
as illustrated with the red points in Figure 3(f).
Thus, critical points are emitted from each detected long-lasting trajectory event,
and this relies heavily on efﬁcient noise reduction (cf. Section 3.1. For instance, an
outlier breaking the subsequence of instantaneous pause events could prevent charac-
terization of a long-term stop, and instead yield two successive such stops very close
to each other. Moreover, in case that no long-lasting trajectory event was identiﬁed at
this location, we check its associated bitmap with these additional rules:
5. If the bit for ‘turn’ is set, we check whether the current heading in −→v now also
deviates more than ∆θ from mean velocity −→v m of the vessel. If true, we emit a
critical turning point. Note that this could possibly affect only raw AIS locations
that are not qualiﬁed as erroneous. In fact, noisy positions as those in Figure 2(c)
have already been discarded by the Noise Reduction module.
6. If the bit for ‘speed change’ is set (Figure 3(b)) and current speed vnow also de-
viates by more than α% from the mean speed vm of this vessel, then a critical
point must be emitted and annotated as speedChange. It signiﬁes that this in-
stantaneous event was not caused by ﬂuctuations in the measured speed due to
delayed messages, but that such change in speed is probably valid.
Clearly, this detection process can only lead to a single annotation for each critical
point. For instance, if a vessel disappeared for long and is suddenly found anchored
somewhere, this event will be spotted either as a gap or a stop, but not both. We have
deliberately chosen such a ‘crisp’ classiﬁcation allowing a single characterization per
detected point, as our goal is to achieve a concise trajectory representation, by drop-
ping superﬂuous locations. In future work, we plan to introduce a fuzzy, probabilistic
scheme of multiple annotations per critical point at diverse conﬁdence margins.
Each critical point is issued along with a velocity vector (comprising instanta-
neous speed and heading), as an indicator of the short-term course of that particular
vessel. This measurement may be useful for further analysis, e.g., in order to identify
complex maritime events as explained in Section 4.
The example trajectory in Figure 4 illustrates the data compression gains achieved
when retaining critical points only. Obviously, such ﬁltering greatly depends on proper

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
11
Fig. 4 Critical points identiﬁed along a vessel trajectory (raw AIS positions are shown as blue dots).
choice of parameter values, which is a trade-off between reduction efﬁciency and
approximation accuracy. For a suitable calibration of these parameters, apart from
consulting maritime domain experts (our partners in the AMINESS project), we have
also conducted several exploratory tests on randomly chosen vessels from AIS data
in the Aegean Sea. For instance, setting ∆θ = 5o instead of ∆θ = 15o may even dou-
ble the amount of critical points, because more raw AIS locations would qualify as
turning points due to sea drift and discrepancies in GPS signals. Since our analysis is
mostly geared towards data reduction, for our empirical study (Section 5.1) we have
chosen an aggressive parametrization (values listed in bold in Table 3), which yields
quite tolerable accuracy. With more relaxed parameter values, additional events can
be detected, capturing slighter changes along each trajectory.
The complexity for detecting instantaneous events and communication gaps is
O(1) per incoming positional tuple, since only the two latest locations are examined
per vessel. The cost for the remaining long-lasting events is O(b), where b is the
number of buffered positions that need inspection by each such rule. This may involve
just a few points in case of smooth turns, but b may be higher (sometimes, a few
hundred) if a series of positions qualify for a stop or slow motion. However, we stress
that checks for stop of slow motion are ﬁred rather infrequently, only once a vessel
starts moving after a certain period of idleness. Thus, the overall cost is more than
affordable and detection is near real-time, as we empirically veriﬁed (Section 5.1).
By taking advantage of those online annotations at critical points along trajecto-
ries, lightweight, succinct synopses can be retained per vessel over the recent past.
Then, the compressor module simply evicts point locations that have not been de-
tected as critical. Instead of resorting to a costly simpliﬁcation algorithm, we opt to
reconstruct vessel traces approximately from already available critical points. This
summarization depends on the annotation of detected trajectory events (stop, turn,
gap, etc.), so as to refresh each trajectory accordingly. This main-memory process
affects trajectory portions currently within the sliding window. Of course, resulting
synopses may be also archived via the Trajectory Exporter module for ofﬂine use as

12
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
ﬁles (e.g., KML, CSV) or in a database by incrementally emitting “delta” batches of
critical points as they get identiﬁed at each slide of the window.
The aforementioned rules for detecting trajectory events are suitably deﬁned in
the mobility tracker, which allows fast, in-memory maintenance of movement fea-
tures. Note that additional events can be detected by simply enhancing the mobility
tracker with extra conditions. In future work, we plan to complement this methodol-
ogy so as to capture more features, such as traveled distance from a given origin (e.g.,
a port). Nonetheless, even with this set of ﬁlters, we can ﬁgure out the mutability in
each trajectory and distinctly characterize its course across time. Most importantly,
these spatiotemporal features can serve as a basis to recognize more complex mar-
itime events, as we discuss next.
4 Complex Event Recognition
The trajectory detection module compresses a vessel position stream to a stream of
critical events, including the instantaneous events gapStart and gapEnd, indicating
communication gaps, lowSpeedStart, lowSpeedEnd, speedChange and turn, and
the durative event stopped. Each such event is accompanied by the coordinates and
velocity (speed and heading) of the corresponding vessel. This data stream, hereafter
Movement Event (ME) stream, is transmitted to the complex event (CE) recognition
module, which combines it with the locations of ports and protected areas, in order
to recognize potentially suspicious or dangerous maritime situations, for the beneﬁt
of marine authorities.
The CE recognition module is based on the ‘Event Calculus for Run-Time reason-
ing’ (RTEC) [4]. The Event Calculus [21] is a logic programming action language.
RTEC has a formal, declarative semantics—CE patterns in RTEC are (locally) strati-
ﬁed logic programs [36]. In contrast, almost all complex event processing languages,
including [6, 25, 1], and several data stream processing languages, such as ESL [5]
that extends CQL [3], lack a rigorous, formal semantics [9]. Reliance on informal se-
mantics constitutes a serious limitation for maritime monitoring, where validation and
traceability of the effects of events are crucial. Moreover, the semantics of event query
languages and production rule languages often have an algebraic and less declarative
ﬂavor [13, 32]. In the following sections we present RTEC and illustrate its use for
maritime monitoring.
4.1 Event Calculus for Run-Time reasoning
RTEC has a linear temporal model including integer time-points. Following Prolog’s
convention, variables start with an upper-case letter, while predicates and constants
start with a lower-case letter. For a ﬂuent F—a property that is allowed to have dif-
ferent values at different points in time—the term F = V denotes that ﬂuent F has
value V . holdsFor(F = V, I) denotes that I is the list of the maximal intervals for which
F = V holds continuously. RTEC is interval-based and thus avoids the related logical
problems of time-point-based event processing approaches (see [31] for a discussion

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
13
Table 1 RTEC Predicates.
Predicate
Meaning
holdsAt(F = V, T)
The value of ﬂuent F is V at time T
holdsFor(F = V, I)
I is the list of the maximal intervals for which F = V holds continuously
happensAt(E, T)
Event E occurs at time T
initiatedAt(F = V, T)
At time T a period of time for which F = V is initiated
terminatedAt(F = V, T)
At time T a period of time for which F = V is terminated
intersect all(L, I )
I is the list of maximal intervals produced by the intersection of
the lists of maximal intervals of list L
of these problems). holdsAt(F = V, T) represents that ﬂuent F has value V at some
time-point T. holdsAt and holdsFor are deﬁned in such a way that, for any ﬂuent F,
holdsAt(F = V, T) if and only if T belongs to one of the maximal intervals of I for
which holdsFor(F = V, I).
An event description in RTEC includes rules that deﬁne the event instances with
the use of the happensAt predicate, the effects of events with the use of the initiatedAt and
terminatedAt predicates, and the ﬂuent values with the use of the holdsAt and holdsFor pred-
icates, as well as other, possibly atemporal, constraints. Table 1 presents a fragment
of the predicates available to the event description developer.
For a ﬂuent F, F = V holds at a particular time-point T if F = V has been initi-
ated by an event that has occurred at some time-point earlier than T, and has not been
terminated at some other time-point in the meantime. This is an implementation of
the law of inertia. To compute the intervals I for which F = V , i.e. holdsFor(F = V, I),
we ﬁnd all time-points Ts at which F = V is initiated, and then, for each Ts, we com-
pute the ﬁrst time-point Tf after Ts at which F = V is terminated. As an example,
consider the formulation below:
initiatedAt(gap(Vessel) = true, T) ←
happensAt(gapStart(Vessel), T),
holdsAt(coord(Vessel) =(Lon, Lat), T),
not nearPorts(Lon, Lat)
terminatedAt(gap(Vessel) = true, T) ←
happensAt(gapEnd(Vessel), T)
(1)
gap(Vessel) is a Boolean ﬂuent denoting a communication gap for some Vessel,
i.e. the Vessel stops transmitting AIS messages. In some cases, the absence of AIS
messages is suspicious and thus we need to record it. gapStart(Vessel) and
gapEnd(Vessel) are instantaneous MEs indicating, respectively, the time-points in
which a Vessel stops and resumes sending AIS messages. coord is a ﬂuent report-
ing the coordinates of a vessel. Like MEs, this type of information is provided by
the trajectory detection module. nearPorts(Lon, Lat) is an atemporal predicate that
becomes true when the point (Lon, Lat) is close to a port. ‘not’ is negation-by-failure
[8]. Rule-set (1) states that gap(Vessel) = true is initiated if the trajectory detection
module reports a gapStart ME for the Vessel, and the Vessel is far from the ports of
the area under surveillance. Given rule-set (1), RTEC computes the list of maximal
intervals during which gap(Vessel) = true holds continuously.

14
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
Fig. 5 Grid partitioning: different polygon types indicate different types of (overlapping) area of interest.
4.2 Spatial Indexing
CE recognition for maritime surveillance requires various types of spatial operation
[15, 23]. For instance, we need to determine whether a point—a vessel’s location—
lies inside a polygon indicating an area of interest, such as a protected area, or whether
it is near another point, such as a port. Moreover, we need to detect the vessels that are
in close proximity (heading towards each other). In our approach to CE recognition,
the availability of the full power of logic programming is one of the main attrac-
tions of employing RTEC as the temporal formalism. It allows CE patterns to in-
clude not only temporal constraints but also (complex) atemporal constraints. Recall
e.g. the use of the atemporal predicate nearPorts in the speciﬁcation of communica-
tion gap in rule-set (1). This is in contrast to various state-of-the-art CE recognition
approaches, such as [11, 22, 9, 42], which support very limited atemporal reasoning,
thus being unsuitable for maritime monitoring.
For efﬁcient spatial reasoning, we adopt a grid partitioning scheme which divides
the surveillance area into equally sized cells (see Figure 5). Each area of interest
and port is assigned only to those cells with which it overlaps. This assignment is
performed off-line and provided as background knowledge to RTEC. The use of a
grid enables us to quickly determine, through a simple calculation on the coordinates,
the cell inside which a vessel is located. The task of determining each vessel’s cell is
performed before each CE recognition query. This way, we can efﬁciently compute
the number of vessels in close proximity and check whether a vessel is inside an area
of interest, by performing calculations (e.g. using the ray crossings algorithm [29] for
determining whether a point lies inside a polygon) only for those vessels/areas in the
same or adjacent cells.
4.3 Specifying Complex Maritime Events
Given the critical ME stream produced by the trajectory detection module, and a set of
protected areas, RTEC recognizes a set of CEs for the beneﬁt of maritime authorities.
The choice of CEs and their patterns were speciﬁed in collaboration with the domain

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
15
experts of the AMINESS project. Below we present a fragment of our CE patterns.
The complete list may be found in [2].
Suspicious Vessel Delay. Some vessels, such as those passing through protected
areas in order to minimize trip length and fuel consumption, switch off their trans-
mitters and stop sending position signals. But sailing through a protected area is not
the only reason for switching off an AIS transmitter. To investigate the behavior of
vessels during a communication gap, we formulated the CE below:
holdsFor(suspiciousDelay(Vessel) = true, I ) ←
holdsFor(gap(Vessel) = true, Igap),
extendedDelays(Vessel, Igap, I )
(2)
Recall that I in holdsFor(F = V, I) is the list of the maximal intervals for which F = V
holds continuously (see Table 1). Igap in holdsFor(gap(Vessel) = true, Igap), therefore,
is the list of maximal intervals during which a Vessel stops transmitting AIS signals
while at open sea (see rule-set (1) for the gap ﬂuent). extendedDelays(Vessel, I ′, I )
selects the maximal intervals I of the list I ′ for which the highest possible speed of
the Vessel is below a threshold. We estimate the highest possible speed of a vessel
in a simpliﬁed way: we assume that the vessel moved along a straight line from
the point of gapStart to that of gapEnd. Under this assumption, its speed cannot
have been greater than the one determined by dividing this shortest path by the time
spent to travel it. Rule (2) thus states that a very low vessel speed combined with a
communication gap occurring at open sea is to be treated as a suspicious delay.
A more reﬁned implementation would estimate the highest possible speed of a
vessel during a communication gap even when it is impossible (due to e.g. terrestrial
areas) or unlikely (due to weather conditions) to sail along a straight line.
Vessel Rendezvous. ‘Suspicious delay’ allows us to deﬁne additional types of
suspicious activity; consider the rule below:
holdsFor(possibleRendezvous(Vessel1, Vessel2) = true, I ) ←
holdsFor(in(Vessel1, Cell) = true, I1),
holdsFor(in(Vessel2, Cell) = true, I2),
holdsFor(suspiciousDelay(Vessel1) = true, I3),
holdsFor(suspiciousDelay(Vessel2) = true, I4),
intersect all([I1, I2, I3, I4], I )
(3)
in(Vessel, Cell) indicates the Cell of the grid in which the Vessel is located. The
value of this ﬂuent is set prior to each CE recognition query, as described in Section
4.2. intersect all is a built-in RTEC predicate which calculates the intersection of a list
of lists of maximal intervals (see Table 1). According to rule (3), if two vessels si-
multaneously exhibit a suspiciousDelay and are located in the same area, then this
could indicate that they had arranged for a rendezvous. Note that, since we do not
have information about the vessels’ locations during communication gaps, the above
rule cannot capture the precise place and time of the rendezvous, if any.
Maritime activities form hierarchies, in the sense that the formulation of one ac-
tivity is also used to deﬁne other, higher-level activities. E.g. vessel rendezvous is
speciﬁed in terms of suspicious vessel delay. In contrast to many state-of-the-art CE

16
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
recognition systems, such as Esper5 and SASE6, RTEC can naturally express hierar-
chical knowledge by means of well-structured speciﬁcations.
Fast Approach. Another dangerous situation may arise when a vessel is rapidly
moving towards some other vessel(s). Such a behavior could indicate a vessel pursuit
or even imminent collision. Consider the formalization below:
happensAt(fastApproach(Vessel), T) ←
happensAt(speedChange(Vessel), T),
holdsAt(velocity(Vessel) = Speed, T),
Speed > 20 knots,
holdsAt(coord(Vessel) =(Lon, Lat), T),
not nearPorts(Lon, Lat),
holdsAt(headingToVessels(Vessel) = true, T)
(4)
fastApproach(Vessel) and speedChange(Vessel) are instantaneous CE and ME re-
spectively. velocity is a ﬂuent indicating the speed of a vessel. This information, as
well as a vessel’s heading, is provided by the trajectory detection module and accom-
panies every detected ME. headingToVessels(Vessel) is a ﬂuent that becomes true
whenever a Vessel’s direction of movement is towards at least one nearby vessel. Ac-
cording to rule (4), a ‘fast approach’ is recognized when a Vessel changes its speed
at open sea, the new speed is above 20 knots, and there is at least one other nearby
vessel towards which it is heading. The value of 20 knots was chosen by domain
experts.
Package Picking. Another possible interaction between two vessels is when one
of them drops a package at some area and another vessel appears later in order to pick
it up. One way of formulating this type of interaction is the following:
happensAt(possiblePicking(Vessel1, Vessel2), Tpick) ←
happensAt(end(stopped(Vessel1) = true), Tdrop),
holdsAt(in(Vessel1) = Cell, Tdrop),
happensAt(start(stopped(Vessel2) = true), Tpick),
holdsAt(in(Vessel2) = Cell, Tpick),
Tpick −Tdrop < 1 hour,
holdsAt(coord(Vessel1) =(Lon1, Lat1), Tdrop),
holdsAt(coord(Vessel2) =(Lon2, Lat2), Tpick),
distance((Lon1, Lat1), (Lon2, Lat2), Dist),
Dist < 0.5 km
(5)
stopped(Vessel) is a Boolean ﬂuent indicating that a Vessel has stopped at open sea.
The deﬁnition of this ﬂuent is based on the information provided by the trajectory
detection module, which reports the list of maximal intervals during which a ves-
sel has stopped. From this list, we keep only those intervals where the vessel is not
in any port. start(F = V ) (respectively end(F = V )) is a built-in RTEC event taking
place at each starting (ending) point of each maximal interval for which F = V holds
continuously. Thus e.g. start(stopped(Vessel) = true) takes place at the starting point
5 http://www.espertech.com/esper/
6 http://sase.cs.umass.edu/

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
17
time
Q136
Q138
Q137
Window ω 
Q139
Fig. 6 CE recognition in RTEC.
of each maximal interval for which the Vessel has stopped at at open sea. Rule (5)
describes a scenario where a vessel had stopped at some area and started moving at
time Tdrop, then, after no more than an hour, another vessel arrived and stopped at the
same area, and the Haversine distance between the two stop locations, as calculated
by the distance predicate, was no more than half a kilometer.
4.4 Recognizing Complex Maritime Events
RTEC performs CE recognition by means of continuous query computation. At each
query time Qi, the MEs that fall within a speciﬁed sliding window ω are taken into
consideration. All MEs that took place before or at Qi−ω are discarded. At Qi, the
CE intervals computed by RTEC are those that can be derived from MEs that occurred
in the interval (Qi−ω, Qi], as recorded at time Qi. When the range ω is longer than
the slide step β, it is possible that an ME occurs in the interval (Qi−ω, Qi−1] but
arrives at RTEC only after Qi−1; its effects are taken into account at query time Qi.
This is illustrated in Figure 6. Occurrences of MEs are displayed as dots line seg-
ments. For CE recognition at Q138, only the events marked in black are considered,
whereas the greyed out events are neglected. Assume that all events marked in bold
arrived only after Q137. Then, we observe that two MEs were delayed, i.e., they oc-
curred before Q137, but arrived only after Q137. In our setting, the window range ω
is larger than the slide step. Hence, these events are not lost but considered as part of
the recognition process at Q138. Further details about the reasoning engine of RTEC
may be found at [4].
5 Empirical Evaluation
Our maritime surveillance system has a modular design with loosely coupled com-
ponents. The mobility tracker for online trajectory detection7 is developed in GNU
C++ and runs entirely on main memory for efﬁciently coping with massive, volatile,
streaming locations. RTEC8, the complex event (CE) recognition component, is im-
plemented in Prolog9.
We conducted experiments against a real AIS dataset containing 23GB of AIS
messages spanning from 1 June 2009 to 31 August 2009 for N = 6,425 vessels in the
Aegean, the Ionian, and part of the Mediterranean Sea. Not all vessels were actually
7 Source code is publicly available at http://www.dblab.ece.ntua.gr/˜kpatro/tools/streamAIS/.
8 https://github.com/aartikis/RTEC.
9 The patterns of the complex maritime events are available at http://users.iit.demokritos.gr/˜a.
artikis/aminess.tar.gz.

18
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
Table 2 Experimental settings.
Parameter
Value
Vessel count N
6,425; 128,000; 1,280,000
Window range ω
10min; 1h; 2h; 6h; 9h; 24h
Window slide β
1min; 5min; 10min; 15min;
20min; 30min; 1h; 90min; 2h; 4h
Position stream rate ρ (positions/sec)
original; 1K; 2K; 5K; 10K
Protected areas
3,966 polygons with 78,418 edges
Table 3 Mobility tracking parameters.
Parameter
Value
Minimum speed vmin for asserting movement
1 knot (∼
=1.852 km/h)
Maximum rate α of speed change between successive locations
25%
Minimum gap period ∆T (minutes)
5; 10; 15; 30 ; 60
Turn threshold ∆θ (degrees)
2o; 3o; 5o; 10o; 15o; 20o
Radius r to determine long-term stops
250 meters
Minimal number m of inspected positions
10
on the move at all times, since a considerable part (chieﬂy cargo ships) were just
passing by, and thus tracked for a limited period (days or even hours). But most
vessels were frequently sailing, e.g., passenger ships or ferries to the islands. When
decoded and cleaned from corrupt messages, the dataset yielded 168,240,595 raw
timestamped positions10.
We simulated a streaming behavior by consuming this positional data little by
little, i.e., reading small chunks periodically according to window speciﬁcations. We
examine sliding windows with varying ranges ω and slide steps β based on times-
tamps from the original AIS messages. Thus, we replay this stream and the window
keeps in pace with the reported timestamps and not the actual time of each simulation.
The arrival rate of positions is ﬂuctuating throughout this 3-month period and varies
widely among vessels; none of them reports at a ﬁxed frequency, whereas there are
ships inactive for large intervals. If we only consider the activity period of each ves-
sel (i.e., when it actually relays positions, either moving or not), then it reports every
two minutes on average, which translates into a mean arrival rate ρ ≈50 positions/sec
from the entire ﬂeet. For consistency with the real-world scenario, we consume the
original stream “as is” in some simulations, even though this is a very low rate for a
streaming application. Moreover, we performed additional experiments at artiﬁcially
increased rates so as to stress test our system and verify its efﬁciency and robustness.
For the CE recognition component, the artiﬁcially enlarged datasets include 1,2M
vessels and 3,2B MEs. The simulation settings are listed in Table 2, whereas the cal-
ibrated settings for online mobility tracking are given in Table 3; default values are
shown in bold.
Next, we report indicative results from these experiments. The trajectory event de-
tection component operated on a server running Debian Linux “Wheezy” 7.5 amd64
with 48GB of RAM and two Intel Xeon X5675 processors at 3.07GHz. The CE
recognition component RTEC operated on a computer with Intel Xeon CPU E5-2630
10 This anonymized dataset (for privacy, each original MMSI has been replaced by a sequence number) is publicly
available at http://chorochronos.datastories.org/?q=content/imis-3months

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
19
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Online tracking cost (sec)
 
 
window range
5
10
15
20
30
0
1
2
3
4
5x 10
4
slide β (minutes)
# tuples in batch
 
 
ω=1h
ω=2h
raw locations
(a) Small window ranges
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Online tracking cost (sec)
 
 x105
window range
0.5
1
1.5
2
4
1
2
3
slide β (hours)
# tuples in batch
 
 
ω=6h
ω=24h
raw locations
(b) Large window ranges
Fig. 7 Online mobility tracking cost per window slide.

SWI Prolog 7.2.1.
5.1 Assessment of Trajectory Detection
5.1.1 Performance of online mobility tracking
First, we examine performance of online detection concerning trajectory movement
events using simulations at the original arrival rate. These experiments have been
performed employing window speciﬁcations with varying ranges ω and slide steps
β, and we measure the total time it takes to update a window with a fresh batch
of raw AIS locations, evict expired ones, detect trajectory events, and report critical
points. Then, we calculate averages of these time values over the total count of win-
dow instantiations, hence obtaining the per slide cost for window maintenance and
identiﬁcation of any trajectory events therein. Figure 7 plots this average execution
cost per window for monitoring the entire ﬂeet.
From Figure 7(a) it turns out that our mobility tracker provides results instantly
for smaller ω up to 2 hours. In the worst case, it takes less than 150ms to track down
any critical points per incoming batch of raw positional tuples. Quite expectedly, the
cost grows linearly with an increasing slide β, as the window slides forward less often
and thus each batch contains more input locations (illustrated with bars in this plot)
directly proportional to the sliding step β.
For larger windows with range ω up to 24 hours shown in Figure 7(b), the cost is
greater. Increased by almost an order of magnitude compared to the execution times
in Figure 7(a), the cost still remains linear with the size of wider sliding steps. Again,
this is due to the larger amount of accumulated raw locations per batch (depicted
with the bar plots). For the larger window tested (ω = 24 hours and β = 4 hours),
critical points can be reported in less than 2 seconds per batch, even though the mo-
bility tracker has to validate almost 30,000 fresh raw positions each time. This clearly
testiﬁes the robustness and timeliness of the online tracking process.

20
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
1
2
6
24
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 x 10
4
range ω (hours)
# critical points in window
 
 
critical points
Fig. 8 Window states for varying ranges.
1
2
5
10
0
5
10
15
ρ (K positions/sec)
Online tracking time (sec)
ω=10min 
 β=1min
1 thread
2 threads
5 threads
11 threads
23 threads
Fig. 9 Parallelized online detection.
We should also stress that these execution costs are drastically reduced compared
to our previous performance study in [33]. Apart from better memory management
in the implementation of the method, this improvement should be also attributed to
the extra module for noise reduction. Since each position qualiﬁed as noise is ﬁltered
out without further processing, this incurs no more checks against the rest of the
positions reported per vessel. Moreover, it reduces the size of the trajectory synopsis
(i.e., critical points retained out of the raw positions per vessel), since such erroneous
deviations from the known course are suppressed. Figure 8 plots the average amount
of critical points retained per window state for several window ranges ω. It is no
wonder that the number of critical points in window are proportional to its range, as
this is actually the memory footprint of the maintained trajectory synopses. Space
consumption is provably lightweight, since the trajectories of all vessels within the
latest ω = 24 hours can be approximately reconstructed from the almost 52,000
critical point locations maintained in the respective window state.
5.1.2 Performance under varying arrival rates
Admittedly, such swift processing of raw positions is largely due to the low arrival
rate of the original AIS stream (on average ρ ≈50 positions/sec). Hence, for a more
stringent assessment of the online mobility tracking module, we performed some
extra simulations, by admitting bigger chunks of data for processing at considerably
increased arrival rates up to ρ =10,000 positions/sec. Then, given the ﬂeet size N,
every ship appears as reporting almost twice per second; although quite improbable
in practice, this makes sense as a stress test.
As our objective is timeliness, the window for the simulations in Figure 9 was set
with range ω = 10 minutes and slide β = 1 minute. We ﬁrst discuss performance
when employing a single processor to tackle the entire trajectory detection process.
Observe that critical points are still issued promptly for ρ = 1, 000 positions/sec, but
the latency grows with increasing rates. Note that this cost includes reporting time for
the resulting critical points (i.e., after detection), and this adds a signiﬁcant overhead
at higher arrival rates, as greater chunks of AIS updates inevitably generate more
critical points. In the worst case tested with ρ = 10, 000 positions/sec, the online

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
21
mobility tracker accepts 600,000 fresh raw positions every minute; yet, it can output
results in less than 13 seconds, well before the next window slide.
The fact that the mobility tracker updates and maintains each trajectory in isola-
tion from the rest, offers great opportunities for more advanced scalability. Indeed,
the trajectory detection process can be parallelized by using multiple processors: each
one is responsible to monitor a distinct subset of vessels. In future work, we plan to
study advanced parallelization schemes for trajectory detection. However, as a proof
of concept, we implemented a simple scheme with a varying number of concurrent
threads for the mobility tracker. Each thread consumes a substream of the incoming
raw positions that correspond to the particular vessels it has been assigned to monitor.
For simplicity, this subdivision is based on simple hashing over the MMSI identi-
ﬁer of the vessel, such that its positions are always propagated to the same thread to
establish consistency in trajectory maintenance. The system load may not be evenly
balanced among the threads and cannot account to ﬂuctuations in the arrival rate, but
still the burden of processing can be shared and thus boost performance. In this case,
the overall tracking cost per window is considered the maximum of costs incurred
by each of the concurrent threads in order to emit results. Obviously, this cost differs
depending on the size of the incoming batch consumed by a thread in each window
instantiation. Figure 9 plots the average tracking cost per window slide when multi-
ple threads are used (due to hashing, a prime number of threads was speciﬁed). There
are signiﬁcant savings even when employing two threads only; the original stream is
halved into two substreams, but the cost drops by almost two thirds as each thread
exploits better the available system resources. With more threads the cost still drops,
although at a lower pace due to the overhead from context switching and contention
for system resources. Overall, even this simpliﬁed approach conﬁrms that the trajec-
tory detection process is capable of handling scalable volumes of streaming vessel
positions and has great potential for parallelization and advanced load balancing.
5.1.3 Approximation error
Preserving only critical points incurs a lossy approximation in trajectory represen-
tations. To assess the quality of those compressed trajectories, we estimated their
deviation from the original ones (i.e., without discarding any raw positions except
for those qualiﬁed as noise). Deviation can be computed from the pairwise distance
between synchronized locations from the original and the compressed trajectory. If an
original AIS point pi at time ti has been evicted as non-critical, then its corresponding
time-aligned p′
i in the compressed trace can be estimated using linear interpolation
along the path that connects the two critical points before and after ti. For each vessel
that has reported M raw positions, we estimated the root mean square error (RMSE)
between its original and synchronized sequences of its locations as:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
M ·
M
X
i=1
(H(pi, p′
i))2
which returns one RMSE estimate (in meters) per vessel trajectory and employs
Haversine distance H between geographic coordinates. Figure 10 illustrates the num-

22
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
10
25
50
100
150
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
RMSE (meters)
# Vessels
ω=6h
β=1h
∆θ=15o
Fig. 10 Breakdown of RMSE for ∆θ = 15o.
2 3
5
10
15
20
25
50
75
100
125
150
∆θ (degrees)
RMSE (meters)
 
 
maxRMSE
avgRMSE
Fig. 11 Trajectory approximation quality.
ber of vessel trajectories for certain intervals of these RMSE estimates. For example,
RMSE is between 10 and 25 meters for trajectories of 3093 vessels (almost half of the
ﬂeet), whereas RMSE less than 10 meters occurs for another 1428 vessels. In contrast,
only 3 vessels were found with RMSE above 100 meters. Although parametrization
of the mobility tracker is common for all vessels, this result proves that it can offer a
correct (or at least fairly trustful) approximation in almost all cases.
Figure 11 plots the average and maximum RMSE over the entire ﬂeet for several
values of turn threshold ∆θ, which is used to recognize signiﬁcant changes in head-
ing. As discussed in Section 3.2, the degree of trajectory approximation is mostly
sensitive to parameter ∆θ compared to the rest in Table 3 and this is reﬂected on the
plot. Both error estimates escalate as this angle tolerance gets more relaxed. In the
worst case for ∆θ = 20o, average RMSE is only 22 meters and the maximum RMSE
ever observed is 133 meters, which are negligible compared to the much larger size of
open-sea vessels, and also considering the discrepancies inherent in GPS positioning
and AIS transmissions. In practice, a moderate threshold of 10o or 15o may be ade-
quate for balancing compression efﬁciency without losing important details in vessel
mobility. Therefore, the suggested method can provide quite acceptable accuracy and
can capture most, if not all, critical changes along each vessel’s course.
5.1.4 Compression efﬁciency
In this experiment, we examine the efﬁciency of our prototype in keeping only ma-
jor trajectory characteristics as critical points and discard the rest. In order to mea-
sure the compression ratio accomplished by online trajectory tracking, we compared
the amount of discarded points against the originally relayed locations per vessel. A
compression ratio close to 1 signiﬁes stronger data reduction, as the vast majority of
original locations are dropped. The red line plot in Figure 12 depicts measurements
of this ratio with varying tolerance angles for detecting changes in heading. With a
lower ∆θ, even slight deviations in vessel direction can be spotted, and thus extra
critical points get reported. Bar charts in Figure 12 illustrate the amount of critical
points in each class (gap, low speed, speed change, stop, turn) retained from the en-

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
23
2
3
5
10
15
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x 10
6
∆θ (degrees)
# critical points
 
 
ω=6h
β=1h
∆T=10min
0.75
0.9
0.95
0.98
1
Compression ratio
 
 
compression ratio
gap
low speed
speed change
stop
turn
Fig. 12 Compression for varying ∆θ.
5
10
15
30
60
0
2
4
6
x 10
6
∆T (minutes)
# critical points
 
 
ω=6h
β=1h
∆θ=15o
0.75
0.9
0.95
0.98
1
Compression ratio
 
 
compression ratio
gap
low speed
speed change
stop
turn
Fig. 13 Compression for varying period ∆T.
tire dataset. Clearly, every further increase in threshold ∆θ suppresses more and more
turning points and only marginally affects the share of other classes, incurring extra
reduction in the total amount of emitted critical points. Hence, relaxing this param-
eter value leads to a more intense compression. Most importantly, compression ratio
always remains above 92%, and with a more relaxed ∆θ it reaches as much as 98%.
In this latter case, only 2% of the original locations survive as critical, mostly by
eliminating local manoeuvres of little impact on vessel’s course. Eliminating noise
also plays an important role in data reduction, as erroneous deviations are dropped
and no points need be retained.
A similar pattern regarding reduction efﬁciency can be observed in Figure 13 with
respect to varying periods ∆T for detecting gaps in communication. Not surprisingly,
it is the amount of critical points marking those gap periods that gets reduced with
increasing thresholds ∆T. This time, reduction ratio is never below 96%, even though
many more points are required to keep track that contact was lost even for 5 minutes.
In a streaming context, such high compression ratios may lead to reduced system load
in subsequent stages of the analysis, without sacriﬁcing quality, as discussed earlier.
5.1.5 Quality of synopses
As raw AIS locations pass through the trajectory detection module in successive win-
dow instantiations, they get characterized according to their signiﬁcance on vessel
mobility. Figure 14 illustrates a breakdown of the resulting classiﬁcations after the in-
put stream was exhausted and all critical points were detected for the entire 3-month
period. More than half of the relayed raw positions indicate a “normal” course, i.e.,
a vessel moves according to its known velocity vector with a steady speed and head-
ing. Thus, apart from notifying on the current position of each vessel, such points
practically do not alter its trajectory and can be safely discarded without any further
consideration. In addition, almost one out of ﬁve original positions is classiﬁed as
noise for reasons explained in Section 3.1. It must be stressed that the vast major-
ity of such points are not really “off-course” positions from the reporting vessel, but
they actually fall along its route. However, due to their delayed arrival, these locations

24
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
normal: 51.3%
gap: 0.8%
stopped: 27%
speed change: 0.1%
turn: 1.5%
noise: 19.3%
low speed: < 0.01%
Fig. 14 Classiﬁed raw locations of all vessels.
turn: 60%
speed change: 3.5%
stopped: 4.5%
low speed: < 0.1%
gap: 32%
Fig. 15 Characterization of critical points.
falsely indicate the vessel as moving back and forth in an agitating manner with no
obvious reason, hence they should be purged altogether.
But it is the remaining vessel locations, after eliminating redundancy and noise,
which get actually classiﬁed as critical points and can be used in trajectory summa-
rization. As Figure 14 testiﬁes, there are relatively very few cases (about 0.1% of
the raw data) in which vessels either move at low speed or they change their speed
considerably. This is to be expected, since vessels usually follow their planned course
and they typically manoeuvre when arriving to or departing from ports. Gaps in com-
munication account for about 0.8% of the raw data. Although we observed that this
phenomenon is rather frequent in practice, we note that at most two points are used
to delimit this period and thus indicate the loss of contact with the respective ves-
sel. Locations indicating turns are very important and must be certainly considered
in trajectory representation. In fact, these points are roughly 1.5% of the total, since
only signiﬁcant deviations (over 15o) from the known course qualify for a turn, even
though possibly emitting a series of such critical points in case of smooth turns as
depicted in Figure 3(b). Finally, about 27% of the raw positions are emitted when
vessels are idle, most usually when anchored in a port. As discussed in Section 3,
instead of keeping all these points, we collect successive “pause” events occurring
within a small distance and merge them into a collective “stop” event located at their
centroid. This incurs huge savings in the resulting synopses, leading into much more
concise trajectory representations that can be highly usable in subsequent query pro-
cessing and ofﬂine analytics.
This dramatic effect on summarization is much more evident in Figure 15, which
plots a breakdown of the accumulated critical points after processing the entire dataset.
The resulting trajectories mainly consist of turning points between stops with some
occasional changes in speed, but rather frequent communication gaps. Indeed, 60%
of critical points are turning points, which are only 1.5% of the original AIS locations
(Fig. 14). Points indicating gap periods are almost 32% of the critical points, testi-
fying the frequent loss of contact with vessels on the move. In contrast, long-term
stops comprise a meagre 4.5% in the resulting trajectory synopses, since locations
that belong to the same stop event are compressed into a single centroid that sufﬁces
to designate that the vessel is idle during this period. Apart from redundant “normal”
points and eliminating the inherent noise, condensing these stops really adds much to
the reduction efﬁcacy of the trajectory detection module, offering a valuable semantic
interpretation of the motion features.

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
25
Table 4 Statistics from post-processing of compressed trajectories.
Critical points in reconstructed trips
3,895,112
Critical points in open-ended trips
196,131
Average trips per vessel
20
Average number of critical points per trip
48
Average travel time per trip
07:24:48
Average traveled distance per trip
131.513km
As an ofﬂine, post-processing step, we have reconstructed trajectories from the
entire sequence of critical points accumulated per vessel. In effect, the long motion
history of a ship can be broken up into shorter “trips” between identiﬁed stop points,
which usually indicate anchorage at ports. Table 4 lists representative statistics from
these approximate trajectories, and offers insight on a possible ofﬂine usage of the
results from trajectory summarization. It turns out that a typical trip spanning several
hours over a long distance (more than 131km) can be approximated with 48 points
only; once more, this conﬁrms the strong reduction effect of the method. Note that
almost 5% of the detected critical points belong to “open-ended” trips, as certain
vessels were only spotted while traversing the Aegean without anchoring there.
5.2 Assessment of Complex Event Recognition
The trajectory detection module compresses a vessel position stream to a stream of
critical movement events (ME)s. Each such event is represented by predicates ex-
pressing the activity of the vessel, its coordinates and its velocity (see Section 4).
This way, the ME stream given to RTEC includes 15,884,253 predicates. In addi-
tion to this stream, RTEC makes use of real data consisting of protected areas, such
as NATURA areas, represented as polygons, and ports, represented as points, across
the Greek seas. The dataset has 3,966 protected areas with a total of 78,418 edges,
and 64 ports. The size of the grid is 720×900 km2. Given this combination of event
stream and static geographical information, RTEC recognizes the following CEs: il-
legal shipping, suspicious vessel delay, vessel rendezvous, suspicious areas, vessel
pursuit, and package picking.
5.2.1 Grid partitioning
Figure 16 shows the results from a ﬁrst set of experiments in which we attempted to
determine the optimal grid granularity/cell size. Starting with a grid having
5×5 = 25 cells (with a cell size of 138×170 km2), we increased the number of cells
along each dimension, up to 90×90 = 8,100 cells (each cell being 9×11 km2 wide).
Figure 16(a) shows the average CE recognition times in CPU seconds for each dif-
ferent grid. Both the window ω and the slide β are set to 1 hour. The worst grid
conﬁguration (90×90) is almost two times slower than the best (10×10), but in all
cases the average time is within the same order of magnitude (and less than 3 sec-
onds). Figure 16(b) shows the average number of recognized CEs for each different
grid as a stack plot. The number of recognized CEs shows a decreasing trend ini-
tially, with a tendency to stabilize after grid conﬁguration 30×30. The reason for

26
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
(a) Average CE recognition times.
(b) Average number of CEs.
Fig. 16 CE recognition for different grid cell sizes.
the difference in the number of detected CEs lies in the way the respective patterns
are deﬁned. Most of the CE patterns are grid-independent. Therefore, the number
of recognized CEs remains stable across all grid conﬁgurations. On the other hand,
possibleRendezvous, as deﬁned by rule (3), depends on the size of the grid cells.
Recall that the place of vessel rendezvous cannot be determined precisely, since ves-
sels stop transmitting AIS signals during the time of the meeting. Therefore, we can
only deﬁne possibleRendezvous in terms of the cells in which the vessels in question
stopped (respectively resumed) transmitting AIS signals. As a result, when the size
of the cells increases, more possibleRendezvous CEs are being recognized. For this
reason, instead of choosing the 10×10 grid for the remaining experiments, we opted
for the 30×30 one, which has comparable time performance and a stable number of
detected CEs.
5.2.2 Performance under varying window sizes and distributed conﬁgurations
Next, we proceed with a more thorough analysis of the performance of RTEC. Fig-
ure 17 shows the results of experiments under various window sizes and distributed
conﬁgurations. First, we used a single processor to perform CE recognition for all
6,425 vessels, 3,966 areas and 64 ports. We subsequently employed multiple proces-
sors on which RTEC operated in parallel, by following a data partitioning scheme.
We divided the grid covering the surveillance area into multiple sub-grids (groups
of adjacent cells) whose number was equal to that of the processors used in parallel.
Each processor was responsible for the areas and ports located in, and the vessels
passing through its assigned sub-grid. We used three distributed settings: performing
CE recognition on two, four and twelve processors. We made an attempt to evenly
distribute the load of MEs among the different processors, by exhaustively searching
for the best conﬁguration. The different sub-grids were required to be compact rect-
angles without dispersed cells. As a result, we did not take into account solutions with
sub-grids of arbitrary shapes and the load distribution was thus not the best possible.
This is an off-line process that takes place only once.

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
27
(a)
Average
CE
recognition
times.
(b) Average number of MEs.
(c) Average number of CEs.
Fig. 17 CE recognition under varying window sizes and distributed conﬁgurations.
Figure 17(a) shows the average CE recognition times, including the time taken for
spatial indexing (see Section 4.2). The slide β is 1 hour while the window ω ranges
from 1 hour to 24 hours. Figure 17(b) shows the average number of MEs for each
setting. In the case of a single processor, the window ranges from ≈7,200 MEs (1
hour) to 175,000 MEs (24 hours). In the distributed settings—two, four and twelve
processors for CE recognition— the input MEs are forwarded to the appropriate pro-
cessor according to vessel location. For instance, when twelve processors are used in
parallel, each one of them processes ≈700 MEs for the 1 hour window, and 17,000
MEs for the 24 hour window. Figure 17(c) shows the average number of CEs for
each setting. This number also depends on the window size. In the case of a single
processor, e.g., for 1 hour windows approximately 150 CEs are recognized, while
for 24 hour windows RTEC recognizes around 2,900 CEs. We do not show memory
consumption ﬁgures because memory usage is negligible and stable.
Figure 17(a) shows that we can achieve a signiﬁcant performance gain by run-
ning RTEC in parallel. As the window size increases, the gain becomes more pro-
nounced. Furthermore, Figure 17(a) shows that RTEC supports real-time CE recog-
nition. E.g. for a window of 6 hours, RTEC recognizes all CEs in 14 sec when a single
processor is used, and in 0.4 sec when twelve processors are used in parallel.
5.2.3 Tolerance to irrelevant events
In the experiments presented so far, the input stream consisted of critical MEs, i.e. all
events of the input stream were part of the CE patterns and thus activated the recogni-
tion process. In several applications, however, the CE recognition module has to deal
with input streams including several events that are irrelevant to CE pattern matching.
To test the tolerance of RTEC to irrelevant input events, we performed experiments in
which, in addition to the critical MEs, we retained a percentage of the normal events,
i.e. the ones not annotated as critical by the trajectory detection module. In these ex-
periments, RTEC has to skip over the normal events in order to ﬁnd the critical MEs
expressing the CE patterns. Figures 18 and 19 shows the results from this set of ex-

28
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
(a) Average CE recognition times and memory us-
age.
(b) Average number of input (critical and normal)
events and CEs.
Fig. 18 CE recognition on 16M critical MEs and 79M–262M normal events.
periments; the percentage of normal events ranges from 0% (the input stream consists
only of the 16M critical MEs) to 100% (the input stream consists of all 262M normal
events and the 16M critical MEs). Both the window ω and the slide β are set to 1
hour. The system performance, both with respect to CE recognition times and mem-
ory usage is quite robust (see Figure 18(a)), even though the average number of input
events, as shown in Figure 18(b), increases linearly. Predictably, the average number
of recognized CEs remains the same. These experiments were run on twelve cores.
Figures 19(a)–(b) show the actual number of input events and recognized CEs
respectively, for four of the twelve cores. As already mentioned, the grid partitioning
is not perfectly balanced, and thus some cores have a higher load in terms of input
events. Figure 19(b) shows that the number of recognized CEs does not depend only
on the number of input events. For example, the top right core produces consistently
more CEs, although it accepts more or less the same number of critical MEs as the
top left and the bottom left cores. More importantly, Figure 19(a) illustrates the ef-
fect of the compression achieved by the trajectory detection module. Without this
compression, RTEC would have to treat each incoming event as potentially critical,
thus taking into consideration all input events shown in this ﬁgure (see the 100% set-
ting), as opposed to just considering the events annotated as critical by the trajectory
detection module (see the 0% setting).
5.2.4 Artiﬁcially enlarged data streams
To test further the performance of RTEC, we created enlarged data streams by in-
serting extra critical MEs to the real dataset. No normal events were added for these
experiments. For each vessel, we replicated its trajectories by a speciﬁed number of
times (increase factor). The replicated trajectories were assigned to new vessels which
do not exist in the original dataset, thus adding more vessels as well. An increase
factor X implies that we have exactly X times as many critical MEs and X times as
many vessels, compared to the original dataset of ≈16,000,000 MEs and ≈6,500 ves-
sels. We varied the increase factor from 20, producing datasets of ≈128,000 vessels

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
29
(a) Number of input (critical and normal) events at each recognition step.
(b) Number of CEs at each recognition step.
Fig. 19 CE recognition on four out of twelve cores in the presence of irrelevant input.
and 320,000,000 MEs, to 200, creating data of ≈1,280,000 vessels and 3,200,000,000
MEs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive evaluation of CE
recognition techniques in the maritime domain. Compared to e.g. [40], our surveil-
lance area, number of vessels and data volume are substantially larger. Moreover, CE
recognition needs to consider (a large number of) protected areas.
Figure 20 displays the experimental results. Twelve processors are used in paral-
lel, the slide β is set to 1 min, and the window sizes ω are 60 min (1 hour) and 10
min. We set two ‘response limits’ to 10 sec and 60 sec—we stopped performing tests
once the response limit of 60 sec was exceeded.

30
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
(a) Average CE recognition times.
(b) Average memory usage.
(c) Average number of MEs.
(d) Average number of CEs.
(e) CEs/MEs Ratio.
(f) Average number of internal list instances.
Fig. 20 CE recognition for approximately 128K–1,28M vessels and 320M–3,2B MEs. Response limits
are indicated with lines in Figure 20(a) and with points in Figures 20(b)–(d).

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
31
Figure 20(a) shows the average CE recognition times while Figure 20(b) the aver-
age memory usage. As expected, a smaller window produces both lower recognition
times and lower memory usage. Figures 20(c) and 20(d) display respectively the av-
erage number of MEs and CEs. We also show how RTEC performs with respect to
the two response limits of 10 and 60 sec. Assume, e.g. that we want to guarantee that
RTEC responds within 60 sec. In this case, for a window of 60 min, RTEC can handle
data streams that are ≈70 times larger (≈450,000 vessels) than the original one (see
Figure 20(a)). This means that a window may include up to approximately 400,000
MEs, while recognizing around 105,000 CEs (see the 60 sec response limit mark-
ers on the 60 min window lines in Figures 20(c) and 20(d) respectively). Memory
consumption is 4,9 GB (see the 60 sec response limit marker on the 60 min window
line in Figure 20(b)). Similarly, for a window of 10 min, RTEC is guaranteed to re-
spond within 60 sec even in data streams that are 160 times larger than the original
(≈1,000,000 vessels).
Comparing the 60 min window/80 increase factor setting against the 10 min win-
dow/200 increase factor setting, we see that the latter has fewer MEs and CEs (see
the right-most marks of the window lines in Figures 20(c) and 20(d)). However, both
the CE recognition times and memory usage are higher (see the right-most marks of
the window lines in Figures 20(a) and 20(b)). One reason for this behavior is that the
complexity of the recognition task is higher in the 10 min window/200 increase fac-
tor setting. A simple measure of complexity in CE recognition is the ratio of CEs to
MEs. This ratio is depicted in Figure 20(e).
As a further step towards understanding RTEC’s behavior, we investigated how
it stores some of its internal structures. During CE recognition, RTEC maintains sev-
eral lists of time intervals for different types of event and ﬂuent. In Figure 20(f), we
plot the average number of instances of these lists. The results show that these lists
are mostly responsible for the increased recognition times and memory usage, as the
increase factor grows. More speciﬁcally, the lists concerning possibleRendezvous
and possiblePicking event (see rules (3) and (5) respectively), require that all com-
binations of vessels within some area are checked. Therefore, when the number of
vessels increases, as is the case with replicated trajectories, the number of possible
combinations is increased by the square of the number of vessels, hence the parabolic
lines in Figure 20(f). On the other hand, a window increase does not result in many
more vessels being considered. Many of the added MEs may refer to extra messages
transmitted by the same vessel over the longer duration of a larger window. Note that
this is a different kind of complexity than the one reﬂected in the ratio of CEs to MEs.
In the case where we have more combinations to check, this does not necessarily im-
ply that proportionally more CEs will be recognized, since their deﬁnitions might not
be satisﬁed. RTEC has to check all possible combinations though, thus incurring a
higher latency and memory consumption.
6 System Deployment
In order to verify its operational capabilities, we have set up our system to monitor
live AIS feeds from vessels across the Aegean Sea. Fresh positions are periodically

32
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
Fig. 21 Monitoring real-time AIS positions and vessel trajectories in the Aegean.
fetched from a database (maintained by the University of the Aegean) that receives
any transmitted AIS messages. Each retrieved record only includes vessel identiﬁ-
cation, geographic position, and a timestamp. Currently, fresh input is fetched every
hour (the sliding step β of the window employed in this instance), although a different
period may be chosen. Typically, we observed that up to 40,000 fresh records can be
fetched per hour, which is a rather moderate amount of geostreaming data compared
with the arrival rates simulated in our empirical validation (cf. Section 5).
Once each batch of fresh data arrives, it is being consumed by the online mobility
tracker in order to identify any critical points in each vessel’s course. The resulting
points with their annotations (turn, stop, etc.) are then archived into a PostgreSQL
database. But the Trajectory Exporter module also converts them into KML ﬁles for
map visualization in a web application, as illustrated in Figure 21. Critical points
may be exported upon detection, but in order to avoid duplication of data across
the modules, we opt to export them once they get evicted from the sliding window
(currently set to a range of ω =6 hours). Hence, exported results currently have a lag
of 6 hours from the current time, but this is only a conﬁguration parameter.
This deployment against real-time AIS messages collected across the Aegean has
been activated since April 2015. This conﬁrms that our system can integrate with a
precious source of online data, offering to marine experts and authorities the means
to instantly locate, recognize, and correlate events from real-time vessel traces.

Online Event Recognition from Moving Vessel Trajectories
33
7 Summary & Future Work
In this paper, we introduced a system that monitors activity of thousands of vessels
and can instantly recognize events with a potentially serious impact on the environ-
ment and on safe navigation at sea. The system can sustain massive streaming mes-
sages from vessels and can ﬁlter out noise and redundant positions along their course.
Hence, it can retain only succinct synopses of vessel trajectories, drastically reduc-
ing the original path into few critical points that convey major motion features. As
empirically validated, with a proper parametrization our suggested trajectory sum-
marization may incur a compression ratio of almost 98%, with tolerable error in the
resulting approximation. Moreover, trajectory detection is highly scalable and can
be easily parallelized in order to sustain very high arrival rates in the input stream.
Furthermore, this reduced information may be readily analyzed online for Complex
Event (CE) recognition. Equipped with efﬁcient pattern matching algorithms, this
module correlates critical trajectory positions with static geographical data, and de-
tects suspicious or dangerous situations, such as illegal shipping, suspicious vessel
delay, vessel rendezvous, suspicious area, vessel pursuit and package picking. We
showed that the CE recognition module performs in real-time using real data as well
as synthetically enlarged datasets that include up to 1,28M vessels and 3,2B critical
positions.
We plan further extensions and improvements in the existing implementation.
First, since trajectory detection may be sensitive to parameters, we intend to study
advanced methods for adaptive, auto-calibrated parameterization depending on the
size, the type, and the motion patterns of vessels. Also, creating CE patterns manually
is painstaking and error-prone. To facilitate the process of CE pattern construction,
we plan to employ a recent framework for incremental structure learning that takes
advantage of Big Data in order to construct Event Calculus programs [19]. Besides,
maritime surveillance exhibits various types of uncertainty [39]. AIS messages are
often corrupt, with incorrect or missing ﬁelds. Furthermore, maritime CE patterns do
not account for all possible situations. To deal with these issues, we have been devel-
oping an Event Calculus dialect for Markov Logic Networks [38]. This way, we can
use weight learning techniques [12] for estimating the conﬁdence values of CE pat-
terns, and subsequently perform probabilistic inference. Maritime surveillance may
also beneﬁt from combining multiple data sources. For example, the use of heteroge-
neous data sources, as in [40], can help in constructing more reﬁned CE patterns. We
aim to increase our data sources in order to improve monitoring quality and possibly
recognize additional events. Last, but not least, it would be challenging to apply ideas
from our methodology against other sources of big geostreaming mobility data, e.g.,
traces of aircrafts or vehicles. Although the particular deﬁnitions of events may differ,
as well as their conﬁgurations, we expect that our methodology may still be valid.
Acknowledgements This work was funded partly by the “AMINESS: Analysis of Marine INformation
for Environmentally Safe Shipping” project, which was co-ﬁnanced by the European Fund for Regional
Development and from Greek National funds, and partly by the EU-funded H2020 datACRON project. We
wish to thank IMIS Hellas, our partner in AMINESS, for providing the AIS dataset used in the experiments.

34
Kostas Patroumpas et al.
