The Game Imitation: Deep Supervised Convolutional Networks for Quick Video
Game AI
Zhao Chen
Department of Physics
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
zchen89[at]stanford[dot]edu
Darvin Yi
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
darvinyi[at]stanford[dot]edu
Abstract
We present a vision-only model for gaming AI which uses
a late integration deep convolutional network architecture
trained in a purely supervised imitation learning context.
Although state-of-the-art deep learning models for video
game tasks generally rely on more complex methods such
as deep-Q learning, we show that a supervised model which
requires substantially fewer resources and training time can
already perform well at human reaction speeds on the N64
classic game Super Smash Bros. We frame our learning task
as a 30-class classiﬁcation problem, and our CNN model
achieves 80% top-1 and 96% top-3 validation accuracy.
With slight test-time ﬁne-tuning, our model is also compet-
itive during live simulation with the highest-level AI built
into the game. We will further show evidence through net-
work visualizations that the network is successfully lever-
aging temporal information during inference to aid in deci-
sion making. Our work demonstrates that supervised CNN
models can provide good performance in challenging policy
prediction tasks while being signiﬁcantly simpler and more
lightweight than alternatives.
1. Introduction
In 2014, Google DeepMind successfully used convo-
lutional neural networks with deep reinforcement learn-
ing to teach a computer to play classic score-based Atari
games[10]. We propose to study a complementary prob-
lem - that of teaching a computer to play modern video
games purely through imitation learning; i.e. pure behav-
ioral mimicry of human actions viewed through gameplay
screenshots.
The imitation learning framework provides
several advantages over its deep-Q sibling, not the least of
which is the fact that we no longer depend on a carefully
crafted loss function or an a priori notion of “game score.”
The gameplay data now also consists of a reliable ground
truth that we assume represents close-to-optimal behavior,
which should add further robustness at training time.
The goal of these studies is not to push performance past
that of a deep-Q network; while deep-Q methods have al-
ready surpassed human performance for some gaming tasks
[10, 15], our model performance at test-time is intrinsically
limited by the human-generated dataset that our networks
train on, as we provide our model with no additional rein-
forcement signal. However, we will show that our methods
provide reasonable performance at a signiﬁcantly lower cost
in terms of hardware and time, and can be implemented with
minimal ﬁne-tuning at inference. The same model can also
in principle be applied to various games without much ad-
ditional tuning, and this portability is attractive from an im-
plementation perspective. We thus present our results with-
out any intent of dethroning deep-Q learning in terms of
performance, but rather to demonstrate that a signiﬁcantly
more lightweight approach using CNNs can yield reason-
able results, which can be of great interest when using these
methods in practice.
More speciﬁcally, we propose training a deep convolu-
tional network on the task of playing Super Smash Bros., a
classic game for the Nintendo 64 gaming system. We use as
input data gameplay frames (∼128x128px images) and as
ground truth keyboard input generated from a human player
(who will be one of the researchers). Super Smash Bros was
chosen not only for its name recognition within the gam-
ing community, but also because it is more complex (with
3D camera angles, random zooms, etc.) when compared
to the 2D state-spaces already thoroughly explored by the
Atari experiments in [10]. We show that given a moderately
sized labeled data set, a supervised approach will be able
to produce a model that can play this complex game stably
within human reaction time at the level of a competent hu-
man player. However, we also recognize that such a method
might not be appropriate for all cases; for comparison pur-
poses, we will also train the same model on a Mario Tennis
dataset to investigate what parts of the model are portable
cross-game and what limitations such models might face in
the wild.
1
arXiv:1702.05663v1  [cs.CV]  18 Feb 2017

Crucial to the success of our model is its ability to rea-
son temporally about the dataset and leverage the many rich
correlations along the time axis within video game datasets.
Our work is thus also relevant to CNN applications in the
realm of video and temporal analysis.
2. Background
A close sibling to our method is deep-Q reinforcement
learning, a method which has been highly successful for a
variety of difﬁcult tasks [10, 15]. However, reinforcement
learning methods are usually slower to converge and also
require careful ﬁne-tuning (the creation of an effective re-
ward function, for example), and so these models can be
difﬁcult to work with. The problem is compounded when
the learning task is framed as a purely vision problem; only
having raw pixels as data puts even more stress on the deep-
Q networks, and this is even worse for modern games which
incorporate complicated 3D graphics and dynamic camera
angles.
Imitation learning, like reinforcement learning, seeks to
determine the best policy for an agent to take given a state
space and a set of possible actions. Unlike reinforcement
learning, imitation learning gives the agent access to the
state and action pairs generated by an expert agent, which
is assumed to act according to a close-to-optimal policy.
Such methods are attractive for complex problems, since
the agent now has reliable information on optimal behavior
rather than having to search for this behavior independently.
Thus, the main task at hand is to consider how to best lever-
age this expert information in training our agent.
Our method of purely supervised imitation learning,
where we ask the agent to directly clone the actions of the
expert, does not currently enjoy much status within the ma-
chine learning community. Such methods are known to be
prone to issues with robustness [13], primarily because the
data and labels are no longer distributed I.I.D. due to tem-
poral correlations within the data. Small deviations in agent
behavior might lead it into wildly divergent areas of the
state space that are not explored by the expert, causing com-
pounding errors in the agent policy. To circumvent this is-
sue, modern imitation learning methods might look towards
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) for inspiration [6, 11],
which allows an agent to directly learn a policy based on an
inferred reward function associated with the expert agent.
Or they might go to methods that supplement the training
dataset incrementally and allow the agent to more freely ex-
plore the full extent of the state space [14, 17]. Other work,
including the well-known AlphaGo model by Google Deep-
Mind [15], uses imitation learning but only as a priming step
to help further learning later in a deep-Q network.
In our case, we operate under the assumption that our
dataset lies in a sufﬁciently well-controlled space and that a
convolutional network is expressive enough for vision tasks,
so that a purely supervised model will still yield reasonable
results. In a way, our work is a statement on how CNNs
produce expressive features that are exceedingly robust on
image datasets. We also circumvent issues that might arise
with correlation within our training dataset by explicitly en-
forcing any such correlations at training time through an ap-
propriate architecture. The hope here is that by allowing the
supervised model direct access to temporal information, the
network will be not be strictly limited to examples it sees
in the training dataset, but will also be able to generalize to
unfamiliar situations. Our desire is to create a model that is
attractively simple in its implementation and yet still can be
useful in practice.
As a ﬁnal note, intimately related to our topic is work on
video classiﬁcation[8, 12, 7], as our input data is essentially
a frame within a larger video context. With reference to pre-
vious experiments done on large-scale video classiﬁcation,
we will experiment with various CNN video models to eval-
uate which is optimal for our learning problem. We discuss
these methods and their implementations on our data set in
section 5.
3. Problem Description
As mentioned in Section 1, we propose a purely super-
vised learning classiﬁcation for fully vision-based gaming
AI. More precisely, our classiﬁcation pipeline takes as in-
put a concatenation of four temporally sequential game-
play images, each of dimension (128, 128, 3), making the
input a dimension of (4, 128, 128, 3). We then use a convo-
lutional neural network to output 30 class softmax scores,
each corresponding to a different possible input command
on the Nintendo 64 console. The classes themselves are se-
lected based on the author’s expectations of important but-
ton combinations within the game; in Super Smash Bros.,
for example, the combination down+B is an important but-
ton combination and hence is encoded as its own separate
class. At inference, we not only want to see that our model
can correctly predict button presses on a held-out valida-
tion dataset, but also want to evaluate the performance of
our neural network in a real game setting, and so will use
these class scores in a gameplay simulation to send input
commands to a game character playing live against a CPU
opponent.
4. Data Collection and Preprocessing
The data was collected by the authors via a combination
of Nintendo 64 emulation and screen capture tools. The
Nintendo 64 and games (Super Mario Bros and Mario Ten-
nis) were emulated using Project 64 v2.1[2]1. Keyboard
1For the sake of fair use, we should mention that a purchased copy of
Super Smash Bros. and Mario Tennis along with a Nintendo 64 machine
are owned by the authors. The emulator software is used purely for aca-
2

Figure 1: Data Collection Pipeline.
Test Utility, which visually registers key pushes on a win-
dows machine, was used in parallel to keep track of the
button presses made during the gameplay. By visualizing
keyboard pushes and the gameplay data on the same screen,
we can ensure synchronization between the input and la-
bel data. Gameplay footage was captured with the screen
capture program Fraps v3.5.99[1] at 30 frames per second.
Figure 2 shows a frame of the screen capture data, with the
gameplay footage at the bottom left and keyboard visualiza-
tion at the bottom right.
For the full dataset, 60 5-minute games were played of
Super Smash Bros, giving approximately 600,000 frames
of gameplay with corresponding key presses. For our later
comparison with Mario tennis, 25 single games were played
of Mario Tennis, giving approximately 125,000 frames of
data. To minimize stress on our eventual models, game pa-
rameters were kept constant across all play-throughs. The
player always played as Pikachu against Mario in Super
Smash Bros., (see ﬁgure 3), and the game stage was also
always Hyrule Castle. These characters were chosen in part
because they are a classic matchup in the game, but more
importantly their color palettes are very distinct and should
allow color information to enter easily into our network. In
Mario Tennis, the player always played Yoshi against Birdo
on a clay court. A schematic of the data collection pipeline
is shown in Figure 1.
Image preprocessing was kept minimal to keep the train-
ing pipeline as end-to-end as possible. Each frame of the
video was downsampled from an original size of (334, 246)
(in pixels) to (128, 128). We downsample our images not
done by bicubic interpolation, which is a relatively stan-
dard image resizing metric, but rather by a nearest neighbor
interpolation. Thus, every pixel in our ﬁnal downsampled
frame will be a pixel from the original image that was close
in position to its ﬁnal downsampled location. We made this
choice because we realized that as these game sprites are
somewhat small (they occupy about 1-3% of the screen as
can be seen in ﬁgure 2), bicubic downsampling muted a lot
of the colors of these sprites and reduced sharpness of many
demic reasons: i.e. to allow easy interfacing with computer software for
data collection.
Figure 2: Data collection environment. Our screen capture
setup. We capture the visual game data together with a vi-
sualization of the keys pressed for each frame of gameplay.
This simultaneous data collection scheme ensures synchro-
nization between inputs and labels. The keyboard in the
bottom right shows currently pushed keys (orange), previ-
ously pushed keys (yellow), and inactive keys (white).
(a) Pikachu
(b) Mario
Figure 3: Character Sprites
texture features. Thus, even though nearest neighbor sam-
pling is known to be a much noisier downsampling metric,
we chose to try to preserve the stronger colors of our im-
ages. A mean image (deﬁned as the mean over the training
set) was also subtracted from each image beforehand.
5. Model and Methods
Three main convolutional neural network architectures
were considered as possible model to our frame classiﬁca-
tion problem: the single frame CNN, a CNN with early
integration of video frames, and a CNN with late integra-
tion of video frames (schematically shown in ﬁgure 4). The
foundational CNN architecture for all three of our models
is AlexNet [9]. We will take the standard softmax loss as
classiﬁcation loss in our system, and train with Adam and
standard learning hyperparameters. The softmax layer will
also be useful at inference by allowing us to treat the ﬁnal
class scores as probabilities from a sampling distribution
(see section 5.5).
Below, we describe our three main approaches in detail.
We will then describe how we trained these models and did
3

ﬁne-tuning at test time to optimize performance during live
gameplay.
5.1. Single Frame CNN
For our single frame CNN, we use a vanilla AlexNet
structure. Following the original AlexNet paper [9], we de-
sign our AlexNet to have the following layers:
1. INPUT: 128 × 128 × 3
2. CONV7: 7 × 7 size, 96 ﬁlters, 2 stride
3. ReLU: max(xi, 0)
4. NORM: xi =
xi
(k+(α P
j x2
j))
β
5. POOL: 3 × 3 size, 3 stride
6. CONV5: 5 × 5 size, 256 ﬁlters, 1 stride
7. ReLU: max(xi, 0)
8. POOL: 2 × 2 size, 2 stride
9. CONV3: 3 × 3 size, 512 ﬁlters, 1 stride
10. ReLU: max(xi, 0)
11. CONV3: 3 × 3 size, 512 ﬁlters, 1 stride
12. ReLU: max(xi, 0)
13. CONV3: 3 × 3 size, 512 ﬁlters, 1 stride
14. ReLU: max(xi, 0)
15. POOL: 3 × 3 size, 3 stride
16. FC: 4096 Hidden Neurons
17. DROPOUT: p = 0.5
18. FC: 4096 Hidden Neurons
19. DROPOUT: p = 0.5
20. FC: 30 Output Classes
We can see that our single frame CNN turns our supervised
learning problem into a simple single image classiﬁcation
problem. Given any frame, we will learn what would be the
most probable button class for that frame. The validation
accuracy as a function of training epoch is shown in ﬁgure
7.
However, such a model ignores temporal information of
our data set in our model, which can lead to many of the is-
sues with supervised imitation learning as described in [13].
From an instinctive level, character movement and trajecto-
ries should also tie in deeply with a decision-making pro-
cess for video games; it is clear, for example, that whether
players are moving towards each other or away from each
other should heavily inﬂuence the action taken. Any reason-
able model for this problem, therefore, must use previous
frames and character trajectories rather than pure current
states to better understand higher-order derivative features
such as velocity and acceleration.
5.2. Early Integration CNN
The most na¨ıve incorporation of temporal information
would be to concatenate all frames at the onset of the net-
work, forming an input of 128 × 128 × 3F where F is the
number of frames. In our case, we pick F = 4 for the
remainder of this paper, and so the last dimension of our
input here would be 12. This is exactly the idea behind an
Figure 4: Model Selection. This ﬁgure shows high-level
overviews of the three convolutional neural network archi-
tectures that we considered.
On top is the single frame
CNN, which is just a vanilla image classiﬁcation CNN. The
middle model is our early integration model as described in
section 5.2. The bottom model is the late integration model,
described in section 5.3, and the model we ultimately use.
early integration CNN. We will use the same layers 2-20
proposed in section 5.1, but our ﬁrst layer will be
1. INPUT: 128 × 128 × 12
We choose our frames to be t = 1
6s apart, which gives one
input to our model a temporal resolution of 0.5s. Human re-
action time is on the order of 0.25s, which means this tem-
4

poral resolution provides our network with approximately
twice as much information as the human reaction limit. We
do not further tune this hyperparameter during training.
The main problem with the early integration architecture
lies within the fact that in an early integration CNN, only
the ﬁrst convolutional layer has access to the temporal in-
formation in a separable form. Once the input has passed
through the ﬁrst layer, all temporal information is now en-
tangled within the ﬁrst layer activations. The subsequent
layers then do not have direct access to the temporal in-
formation, diminishing their ability to learn temporal fea-
tures. To circumvent this issue, we turn to the late integra-
tion CNN architecture.
5.3. Late Integration CNN
Similar to section 5.2, we will still consider four time
points of image data, each frames in a temporal sequence
separated by
1
6s.
However, rather than concatenating
the input data before the ﬁrst layer, we will send each
frame through its own independent CNN layers with untied
weights before merging the activations at the end through a
series of dense layers. Each frame will be separately pro-
cessed by the AlexNet architecture deﬁned in layers 2-15
from section 5.1. The dense layers which consolidate the
activations from the independent CNN branches will have
the same architecture as layers 16-20 in the architecture
presented in section 5.2. The ﬁnal model architecture is
schematically reproduced in ﬁgure 5.
5.
Figure 5: Late Integration. This ﬁgure shows our imple-
mentation of a late integration convolutional neural network
as described in section 5.3.
5.4. Model Training
We perform training on a NVIDIA GTX 870M GPU (a
rather old GPU chip with only 4gb memory) and primarily
use Lasagne/Theano to build our network.[4, 5, 3] We run
hyperparameter search on learning rate and L2 regulariza-
tion penalty with a small number (< 10) of trials. We ﬁnd
that the model training efﬁcacy is generally insensitive to
regularization but is very dependent on learning rate, and
we settle on the following training parameters:
• Learning Rate: 1e-4
• Learning Rate Annealing: 0.95 every 5000 iterations
• L2 Regularization Penalty: 1e-7
• Update Rule: Adam
• Batch Size:
25 (maximal size on late-integration
model given our GPU memory)
• Training Time: 2 epochs over 2 days.
Note that this is signiﬁcantly less training on much less data
when compared to deepQ learning methods like in [10],
which used 50 million frames of gameplay.
Batches were randomized across the entire training data
set (a single batch may consist of sequences of frames from
different gameplay videos). We also do not employ any data
augmentation; since all our data was generated in the lim-
ited conﬁnes of a game emulator, we expect the data set to
be relatively robust and for augmentation to have limited
effect.
5.5. Test-Time Tuning for Live Simulations
At test time, taking the pure maximum softmax class
score as the next input for a live simulator does not imme-
diately produce reasonable test-time behavior; the reason
for this becomes evident if we look at the histogram in
ﬁgure 6, which shows the frequency of occurrences of each
class in the training data. The dataset is very unbalanced,
and classes 0 (None), 26 (Left), and 27 (Right) are by
a large margin the most represented in the training set,
and as such tend to have overinﬂated softmax scores at
inference. One way to compensate for class unbalance is
to train with batch selection or a weighted loss function,
but we ﬁnd that a simple post-processing step that adds
scalar weights to class scores already produces impressive
test-time performance, which is attractive in that it saves us
from retraining the network with additional hyperparameter
search.
Our solution is to bias each softmax class score by a
simple multiplier bclass, which is chosen in order to ensure
that each class is expressed sufﬁciently during inference.
This can be done automatically by selecting bclass to bal-
ance the confusion matrix (see ﬁgure 8) and ensure that the
false positive rate is approximately equal across classes. In
our case, for example, balancing classes in post-processing
suppresses scores for classes 26 and 27 (which induce
many misclassiﬁcations) to approximately 10% of their
original value. Given that the number of classes is low,
some further ﬁne-tuning based on prior knowledge of the
game reward structure can yield additional performance
gains (for example, preferencing crucial classes that are
5

Figure 6: Training Data Histogram. Histogram of the fre-
quency of all 30 classes in our full training data set.
useful for recovering from dire situations).
In addition, because our top-3 validation score (see
Section 6) exceeds 96%, at test-time instead of taking the
maximum softmax score as our output class, we take the
top 3 class scores for each forward pass and sample from
them as a distribution. This allows us to inject a richer set of
behaviors into our model and reﬂects our belief that human
behavior in video games is not completely deterministic,
and that multiple actions may be appropriate in some
circumstances.
We also ﬁnd that this added complexity
prevents our model from “getting stuck” when presented
with some states for which more than one action may have
substantial softmax score, but for which only one action
may allow the game to continue.
6. Results and Discussion
Our major results are for Super Smash Bros., and we de-
fer discussion of Mario Tennis until section 6.4. We use top
N validation accuracy as a metric for preliminary model
evaluation; we also exhibit a confusion matrix heat map on
a test set to visualize speciﬁc problem areas with our ﬁnal
classiﬁer. Last, we quantify performance in live games of
our neural network player as a crucial evaluation metric. We
also provide videos of full simulations and visualizations
run on Super Smash Bros. and Mario Tennis, which can be
found in section 6.6. Although these videos are purely qual-
itative, they are convincing demonstrations of our network
performance.
6.1. Validation Accuracy
For comparison of the three main models we described in
section 5, we recorded top-1 validation accuracies over one
epoch of training, and the results are shown in ﬁgure 7. Val-
idation scores are based on a held-out set of full gameplay
videos to ensure the validation data is uncorrelated with the
training data. We can see that the late integration model per-
formance does begin to exceed that of the other proposed
models after a few thousand batches; the difference may
seem moderate at best (∼1%) in terms of validation accu-
racy, but it can be quite signiﬁcant in live simulation per-
formance (see section 6.6), and the late-integration model
also produces convincing network visualizations (see sec-
tion 6.3) that explicitly demonstrate the network is learning
to properly parse temporal information.
A confusion matrix for our classiﬁcation problem is
Figure 7: Validation Accuracy of our Three Models.
This ﬁgure shows the validation accuracy of all three time-
integration models investigated in section 5. For the pur-
poses of this comparison, we trained all three models for 1
epoch (15000 batches of 25 frames each).
shown below in ﬁgure 8. The confusion matrix heatmap
shown on the right is normalized to class frequency; we see
clearly that classes 0, 26, and 27 induce by far the most
misclassiﬁcations. This is very consistent with the the issue
with lopsided training data described earlier in section 5.5,
demonstrating that some test-time tweaking (which in our
case comes in the form of class-score multipliers) is well-
justiﬁed. After 2 epochs of training each, we arrive at the
validation scores reported in table 1. Top 3 accuracy for Su-
per Smash Bros. exceeds 96%, which shows that our model
is learning correct behavior but that this behavior might not
produce the maximal softmax score. Note that we only per-
formed minimal hyperparameter search, and so we expect
these validation scores to be essentially unbiased.
Game
Top 1 Acc
Top 3 Acc
Top 5 Acc
Super Smash Bros.
79.9%
96.2%
98.7%
Mario Tennis
75.2%
96.0 %
99.5%
Table 1: Validation Accuracy After 2 Epochs Training
6

(a) Raw Confusion Matrix
(b) Normalized by Label Fre-
quency
Figure 8: Confusion Matrix Heatmap
6.2. Performance on Live Gameplay
We ﬁnd that our model runs at test-time with a latency of
300ms (on our mediocre GPU). This is only slightly below
the average human reaction time (∼250ms) and so we can
expect realistic reaction speeds when running this network
in simulation.
To evaluate our model’s practical performance, we pit
our fully CNN-controlled Pikachu against the pre-packaged
Mario game AI. We run 10 games against a level 9 (high-
est level) Mario AI and 10 games against each a level 3 and
level 6 Mario AI and record damage dealt in each game.
The results are summarized in Table 2. Margins of error
are 95% conﬁdence intervals assuming Gaussian data dis-
tributions. We note that the CNN Pikachu handily defeats
a level 3 CPU, is just barely outside the margin of error for
being better than a level 6 CPU, and is quite competitive
with the level 9 CPU (they are statistically tied). One im-
Average Damage Dealt
Average Damage Dealt
Mario CPU Level
by Pikachu per Game
by Mario per Game
3
116.6% ± 29.3%
66.4% ± 12.6%
6
96.4% ± 13.8%
80.5% ± 18.7%
9
77.2% ± 18.3%
71.6% ± 24.7%
Table 2: CNN Pikachu Performance Against Mario AI
portant point to note is that our training data is generated
through matches against a level 9 CPU opponent. The fact
that our CNN Pikachu can also perform well against other
level CPU opponents with their own set of behaviors is en-
couraging, as it supports our statement that our CNN model
generalizes well.
We further ﬁnd in live simulations that our CNN Pikachu
successfully learned how to track Mario. That is, the our
CNN output is sensitive to what direction the Mario charac-
ter model is relative to Pikachu, and Pikachu is inclined to
move towards Mario. This is illustrated in Figure 9, which
shows the class softmax score distribution.
We see that
Mario’s relative position to Pikachu causes strong class pre-
dictions when Mario is (a) to Pikachu’s left, (b) to Pikachu’s
right, and (c) above Pikachu, respectively. In case (a), we
see a strong class score for left movement and left jump. In
case (b), we see a strong class score for right movement.
In case (c), we see a strong class score for the down+B at-
tack move, which is a move that most couples to the space
above Pikachu. All three of these trends are consistent with
conventional gameplay wisdom, and suggests that our CNN
Pikachu can successfully track his opponent’s position on
the game screen.
This analysis is of course a bit disingenuous, as our algo-
rithm takes as input four frames in temporal sequence, not
just one. We will take a closer look at how our network is
coupling to all the four frames of input in section 6.3.
Figure 9: Class Score Visualization Game footage (left) is
juxtaposed with class scores (right) at that moment in time.
Blue bars in the histogram code for passive actions (move-
ment), while red for aggressive actions (attacks).
These
frames exhibit strong class scores in one category, namely
(a) move left, (b) move right, (c) down+B attack. These
class scores suggest that the network has properly learned
character tracking information and is sensitive to the rela-
tive positioning of the two character sprites.
6.3. Gameplay Saliency Analysis
We choose saliency maps (as introduced in [16]) to visu-
alize our network and qualitatively evaluate how it parses
temporal information within our dataset.
In essence, a
saliency map calculates which pixels produce positive gra-
dient in a particular class softmax score; in our case, we
7

produce saliency maps at each frame during live gameplay
simulation for the class that the network predicts (since this
is a simulation, we have no access to ground truth labels).
Our saliency maps are evaluated in color, unlike traditional
saliency maps which are black and white. Gradient values
are clipped at ±exp[-9] and the resultant interval is rescaled
to lie in [0, 256].
These saliency maps expose some interesting behavior
within our networks.
In ﬁgure 10, we can see full sets
of saliency maps for selected frames. Crucially, we see a
clear specialization of the network in processing the differ-
ent frames: some situations (e.g. ﬁgure 10a) couple more
strongly to the earlier temporal information, while some sit-
uations (e.g. ﬁgure 10b) couple more strongly to more re-
cent temporal information. In general, these couplings are
consistent with conventional wisdom in the context of the
game: scenarios in which the player is ﬂying away and for
which player trajectory is important in inﬂuencing agent be-
havior seem to couple strongly to earlier frames, while sce-
narios in which the player encounters a nearby danger and
must react quickly couple strongly to more recent ones. In a
sense, earlier temporal information acts partially as a proxy
for information on temporal derivatives, allowing the net-
work to be cognizant of the velocity and acceleration of the
player.
Figure 10c perhaps shows the most interesting behav-
ior, in that all four frames show relatively localized saliency
signals, but the pixels which light up are markedly different.
The more recent frames couple strongly to Pikachu, while
the more temporally distant frames couple more strongly to
Mario, with the t = −10 frame coupling to both. We in-
terpret this as an indication that the network is successfully
processing not only the spatial positioning of the characters,
but deriving useful features from character trajectories.
The network also does not seem limited to processing
character information, but also couples to features in the
background behind the characters. In ﬁgure 11, we can see
some clear edge features present in the background show
up in the t = 0 saliency map, which inﬂuences Pikachu to
execute an Up+B move in an attempt to jump back onto the
map.
6.4. Performance on Mario Tennis
We also train the same late-integration model on a Mario
Tennis dataset generated in the same fashion. The model
yielded (as shown in table 1) top-1, top-3, and top-5 valida-
tion accuracies of 75.2%, 96.0%, and 99.5%, respectively.
These numbers may seem comparable to our accuracies for
the Super Smash Bros. model, but the Mario Tennis labels
only consisted of ten classes, so these numbers are slightly
weaker. Still, in live gameplay simulation with the same
tweaks as described in section 5.5, we ﬁnd that a CNN con-
trolled Yoshi (see ﬁgure 12) can track the ball successfully
and exhibits behavior that is reasonable and learned from
our gameplay dataset.
However, the live gameplay (see
videos linked in 6.6) is signiﬁcantly less convincing when
compared to that of our Super Smash Bros. CNN, and we
discuss why this might be the case in section 6.5.
6.5. Model Limitations
We have already shown that our model can play at close
to human reaction times and effectively against difﬁcult
CPU AI. It does so without any knowledge of game ob-
jectives, and can work across titles with different game ob-
jectives and styles of play. And it does so in a supervised
learning setting, which allows our models to train faster on
fewer data compared to deep-Q learning. However, the de-
graded performance on the Mario Tennis dataset suggests
that there may be some limitations to our model, and we try
to list those limitations here:
• Long-term memory Because we have hard-coded the
temporal separation between subsequent frames input
into our model (i.e. 1
6s), the temporal information our
model has is limited to 1
2s into the past. Temporal in-
formation beyond that might be important, especially
in games like Mario Tennis where consistent tracking
of the ball over longer periods is necessary.
• Allowable error Intrinsic to our model is the idea
that the output is modeled by a probability distribu-
tion given by our softmax scores. This assumes that
there may be multiple allowable button choices given
a game state, and in games where button uncertainty
might lead to fatal mistakes such an assumption might
not be optimal. This can certainly be the case in games
where long-term tracking of game entities is crucial to
performance, as such tracking would rely on consis-
tency in button predictions.
• Color speciﬁcity Because it is clear that our model is
coupling strongly to colors (see section 6.3), the cur-
rent model does not generalize easily to different maps
and characters due to the differing color palettes. It
may be possible to correct this generalizability issue
by incorporating color offsets during data preprocess-
ing and making good use of color augmentations dur-
ing training, but such methods were not employed yet
for these studies.
However, our model has still shown to be interestingly ro-
bust for games like Super Smash Bros., where actions are
relatively localized in time (i.e. do not need information
from the far past) and some prediction uncertainty is allow-
able if not encouraged. The CNN also lends a substantial
amount of generalizability to the model; even though plenty
of states during live simulation are not exactly present
within the training set, the CNN learns relevant features
(relative character positions, detection of map edges) that
allows the model to reason about unfamiliar states.
8

Figure 10: Saliency map analysis of live gameplay. Saliency map for all four frame inputs during live gameplay simulation.
Our CNN model clearly reacts differently to frames at different points in the temporal sequence.
9

Figure 11: Edge sensitivity. The network is sometimes able to detect edges in the image background when these features
become relevant (see the t = 0 saliency map).
Figure 12: Automatic Play of Mario Tennis. Yoshi tracks
and runs towards the ball in Mario Tennis live gameplay.
6.6. Video Demonstrations
There is perhaps no clearer qualitative demonstration
of our model’s performance than a full live gameplay
simulation. You can view a full Youtube playlist of some
videos relating to this project at:
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=c-6XcmM-MSk&list=
PLegUCwsQzmnUpPwVv8ygMa19zNnDgJ6OC
In total, there are 6 videos in the play list:
1. Super Smash Bros. AI Demo 1
2. Super Smash Bros. AI Demo 2
3. Super Smash Bros. AI Demo 3
4. Mario Tennis AI Demo
5. Super Smash Bros. Data Acquisition Time Lapse
6. Super Smash Bros. Single Frame AI Demo (Vanilla
Alex-Net)
We can see from the vanilla AlexNet implementation of our
model that the behavior of the agent is less rich compared
to the late integration models (AI Demos 1-3). The Mario
Tennis demo also shows reasonable test-time behavior and
signs that the network is beginning to learn tracking, but the
CNN-controlled agent is not as competitive with its CPU-
controlled opponent.
In addition to the above, also of interest may be some
speciﬁc videos which feature additional visualizations that
provide added insight into network behavior:
1. Live demo with full view of simulation environment,
including keys pushed by the network: https://
youtu.be/2A34d2O_Zb0
2. Saliency map visualization for full demo: https://
youtu.be/f02OvO46fBo
3. Saliency map visualization in slow-motion: https:
//youtu.be/rExHINi5-IY
7. Conclusions
We have shown that when re-framing a complicated
video game learning problem in terms of a simpler super-
10

vised learning framework, we can achieve good results on
complex games with much less training time and training
data. For Super Smash Bros in particular, we achieve AI
behavior that can compete with the most advanced CPU AI
in the game with only access to game visuals, and with very
little training (only 2 epochs of training over 2 days).
Also, despite our complicated state space, our model ap-
pears to generalize well despite having a rather ﬁnite train-
ing set.
We attribute this to both the expressiveness of
CNN features in image analysis, as well as the power of
the late-integration model in parsing temporal data. Both of
these effects help us mitigate issues with covariate shift and
model robustness that are well-documented for supervised
imitation learning models.
We have thus presented a model that performs well on
complex video game tasks while being lightweight and
straightforward to train. We believe that the simplicity of
our model makes its implementation especially appealing,
and hope that our analysis of our model’s capacity to rea-
son spatially and temporally about our data lends insight
into the generalizing power of deep CNNs on difﬁcult vi-
sion problems.
8. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the course staff of Stanford’s
CS231n: Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recog-
nition, for all their valuable advice and for giving us the
impetus to start this project.
