Transparent Machine Education of Neural Networks
for Swarm Shepherding Using Curriculum Design
Alexander Gee
School of Engineering & IT
University of New South Wales
Canberra, Australia

Hussein Abbass
School of Engineering & IT
University of New South Wales
Canberra, Australia

Abstract—Swarm control is a difﬁcult problem due to the need
to guide a large number of agents simultaneously. We cast the
problem as a shepherding problem, similar to biological dogs
guiding a group of sheep towards a goal. The shepherd needs to
deal with complex and dynamic environments and make decisions
in order to direct the swarm from one location to another. In
this paper, we design a novel curriculum to teach an artiﬁcial
intelligence empowered agent to shepherd in the presence of the
large state space associated with the shepherding problem and in
a transparent manner. The results show that a properly designed
curriculum could indeed enhance the speed of learning and the
complexity of learnt behaviours.
Index Terms—Curriculum Design, Machine Education, Neural
Networks, Swarm Control, Shepherding, Transparent Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
I. INTRODUCTION
The shepherding problem involves externally inﬂuencing
a swarm or a group of agents to guide them towards the
Shepherd’s goal. The problem is algorithmically difﬁcult due
to the complexity of its search space [8]. Biological Shepherds
such as Dogs are naturally smart. When a shepherd is an
uninhabited ground or aerial vehicle, the complexity of the
shepherd’s problem increases orders of magnitude such that
a machine learning approach becomes necessary. An artiﬁ-
cial intelligence empowered shepherd AI-empowered Shepherd
(AIES) is a smart agent for controlling a swarm.
The two challenges associated with the development of a
neural network for shepherding are: (1) the search space is
large and thus, obtaining a functioning network in complex
scenarios is non-trivial, and (2) neural networks are black-box
models that makes it difﬁcult to understand the skills being
learnt. These challenges call for functional decomposition of
the overall task to dissect the learning problem into chunks.
Such an approach could be traced back to Elman’s seminal
paper, The Importance of Starting Small [4], where he explored
the relationship between cognitive and memory capacity limi-
tations of early developmental stages (of children), the rate at
which learning is able to take place, and whether this concept
has an application in machine learning.
Elman suggested that it was these initial limitations, which
forced the learner to ‘start small’ (i.e. learning simple concepts
ﬁrst before moving onto more complex/abstract concepts),
that was responsible for the accelerated learning rate. His
ideas were experimentally demonstrated by ﬁrst limiting the
inputs the learner received to simple ones, and increasing
their complexity; and secondly by incrementally increasing
the limited memory capacity of the learner while keeping the
input constant, resulting in a learner that was able to learn
a ‘semi-realistic artiﬁcial language’ while reaching a level
of competency that was not previously reachable without the
constraints imposed by the incremental approach.
Elman’s gave birth to a school of thoughts where theories
for curriculum design in human learning became applicable
to machine learning. Work in curriculum learning [3], [4] has
demonstrated the learning efﬁciency beneﬁts when applied to
machine learning; and improved scalability of specialised data
creation through expert demonstration [1] and game play [2]
has also been demonstrated. Bengio et al. [3] were then able
to show signiﬁcant improvements in speed of convergence
to local minima, as well as the quality of the local minima
obtained, by implementing ‘Curriculum Learning’ which is the
concept describing the training strategy of organising concepts
from simple to more complex ones before presenting them to
a machine learner.
The concept of a curriculum has been demonstrated further
in [5] where the task of a robot aligning a gear onto an axle is
taught, by training a reinforcement learner in “reverse.” This
is achieved by initially causing start states to be close to the
goal (i.e. gear oriented correctly above axle) and as it learns to
achieve these small tasks, the start states are set increasingly
far from the goal.
Curriculum-based learning requires labelled data, a cum-
bersome task. Barrington et al. [2] proposed a model for
game-powered machine learning which they claim combines
the effectiveness of human computation with the scalability
of machine learning through the use of games. They suggest
that when there is a need for large data sets, manual tag-
ging/labelling done by human experts or through crowdsourc-
ing is both too costly and too time-consuming. Instead, they
suggest online crowdsourcing in the form of a game, be used
to provide the training set for a machine learning algorithm.
The area of swarm control is properly one of the most
difﬁcult learning problems, which calls for a curriculum-based
approach. Nevertheless, the literature lacks research in this
area, which motivated the work in this paper.
arXiv:1903.09297v1  [cs.CY]  4 Jan 2019

In this paper, we propose a curriculum learning approach
to design an AIES. A curriculum is designed hierarchically
by structurally decomposing the task of shepherding into sub-
behaviours and their required skills. The curriculum design is
coupled with apprenticeship learning [1], [10], with each skill
associated with a lesson learnt from human data.
By following a learner-centric approach, curriculum design
could account for the intended machine learning algorithm
and tailor elements of the design to the particularities of
the algorithm. Consequently, we adopt George’s Classical
Curriculum Design [6].
We use an interactive simulation to generate labelled data
for different skills required for shepherding. Different skills
were associated with different scenarios, which allowed for
the creation of the labelled dataset necessary for the AI
learner to develop the required skills. We then aggregate these
skills into an overall AIES for shepherding. We use a basic
form of shepherding to demonstrate the proposed general
methodology.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The
basic shepherding model used to create human demonstra-
tion data is covered in Section II followed by the proposed
methodology, experiments, results, and conclusion in Sec-
tions III, IV, V,and VI, respectively.
II. SHEPHERDING
Ψ
The shepherd’s output direction vector
ΨD
Shepherd’s output driving direction vector
ΨC
Shepherd’s output collecting direction vector
PF
Position of furthest agent from GCM
PG
Position of GCM (global centre of mass)
PC
Position of calculated collection point
PD
Position of calculated driving point
PT
Position of target
PS
Position of shepherd
R
Magnitude of GCM to furthest agent distance
N
Number of agents in cluster
f(N)
Switching distance
n
Current time step
ra
Agent-to-agent interaction distance
According to the model suggested by Strömbom et al. [12],
shepherding brings together two speciﬁc behaviours. Firstly
the shepherd responds to a dispersed herd by rounding up stray
agents, or collecting; and secondly it responds to an aggregated
herd by pushing them towards the goal, or driving.
Given a shepherd position PS, if the furthest agent has a
distance R from the global centre of mass (GCM) greater than
a distance f(N), the shepherd moves in the direction of the
collection point PC; point directly behind the sheep (relative to
the GCM) with greatest distance from GCM. Otherwise if all
agents are within distance f(N) from the GCM, the shepherd
moves towards the driving point PD; point directly behind the
GCM relative to the goal location and at the outer boundary
of the herd. The switching behaviour between collection and
driving is represented as shown in Equation 1, where Ψ(n) is
the ﬁnal shepherd direction vector in timestep n:
||PF (n) −PG(n)|| < f(N) →Ψ(n) =ΨD(n);
else Ψ(n) =ΨC(n)
(1)
Where the instantaneous shepherd driving direction vector
ΨD(n) can be modelled as shown in equation 2.
ΨD(n) =
PD(n) −PS(n)
||PD(n) −PS(n)||
(2)
PD(n) =
PG(n) −PT (n)
||PG(n) −PT (n)||ra
√
N + PG(n)
(3)
And similarly the instantaneous shepherd collection direction
vector ΨC(n) can be found as shown in Equation 4
ΨC(n) =
PC(n) −PS(n)
||PC(n) −PS(n)||
(4)
PC(n) =
PF (n) −PG(n)
||PF (n) −PG(n)||(R + ra) + PG(n)
(5)
The sheep follows swarming rules. This is justiﬁed by the
selﬁsh herd theory [7], which shows that individual agents will
form herds to reduce their own individual risk of predatory
attack. The seminal swarming model introduced by Reynolds
[11] offers the three basic rules to implement the selﬁsh herd
theory; these rules are separation, alignment, and cohesion.
The separation rule is a collision avoidance rule to maintain
the sheep dispersion and acts as a repulsive force between
one sheep and another. The alignment force ensures that an
agent aligns its velocity with its neighbours. However, in the
Strömbom model, this rule is replaced with an inertia so that
a sheep aligns with its previous velocity vector. The cohesion
rule groups sheep together by applying an attraction force from
a sheep to the local centre of mass of its neighbourhood. In
addition, Strömbom adopts two extra rules to each sheep. One
is a repulsion force from the shepherd and the second is an
angular noise as a disturbance term to a sheep position.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present our proposed curriculum de-
sign methodology to teach an AIES to shepherd a swarm
of agents, while using an interactive simulation to generate
demonstrations for the machine learner to learn from. The six-
stage curriculum methodology is based on George’s Classical
Curriculum Design [6] with modiﬁcations to make it suitable
for a machine learner. In particular, we added ﬁve stages (1-
3, 5 and 6). In George’s methodology, the assumption is that
there is a human who is an experienced curriculum designer
and is experienced in the subject matter of the curriculum.
We do not make this assumption here. Instead, we design the
methodology for data engineers to be able to adopt it without
the need to be immersed in curriculum design. The fourth and
ﬁfth stages are designed to create the lessons for the machine
learner. The six stages are depicted in Figure 1.

Fig. 1: Six Stages of AI education
A. Task deﬁnition
The designer needs to be clear on what the task is and the
desired solution. The AI focuses on solving the “how”, while
the designer is focused on solving the “what”; that is, what
behaviours are expected from the AI and what are the tasks
entrusted to the AI? The task deﬁnition statement deﬁnes the
requirements for the AI. In this paper, the task of the AI is
described as follows:
With a single shepherd, from any starting location,
inﬂuence a swarm of 50-200 agents towards a sin-
gle stationary goal predeﬁned at a location in an
obstacle free environment.
B. Task Decomposition
Two types of interdependent forms of task decompositions
need to be resolved. The ﬁrst is behavioural decomposition.
A behaviour deﬁnes the displayed pattern when an agent acts.
The second is skill decomposition. A skill deﬁnes the know-
how required to produce the right actions. Each high level
behaviour requires one or more skills strung together in various
patterns to express the target behaviour.
1) Behavioural decomposition: Inspired by Strömbom et
al’s model [12], shepherding requires two basic behavioural
building blocks and the switching between them, namely,
collecting and driving.
In the scripted model of Strömbom, switching occurs based
on the distance of the furthest agent from the GCM. The
shepherd has to decide whether it is ﬁrstly too close to the
sheep, in which case it will stop moving; and secondly decide
whether the herd is collected to adopt the driving behaviour,
otherwise it adopts a collecting behaviour.
Based on our mathematical representation of Strömbom’s
[12] model described earlier, an agent learning all behaviours
at once to generate the output vector Ψ could be described
mathematically as:
Ψ = F(PF , PG, PS, PT , ra, N)
(6)
A curriculum-based agent will have the two collecting and
driving behaviours denoted by ΨC and ΨD, respectively and
represented as
ΨC = F(PS, PF , PG, ra).
(7)
ΨD = F(PS, PG, PT , ra, N).
(8)
The curriculum-based agent will generate the output vector
Ψ by switching between the two behaviours above as follows:
Ψ = F(S, ΨC, ΨD)
(9)
where, S is the switching meta-behaviour deﬁned as
S = F(PF , PG, ra, N)
(10)
In our case, this switching behaviour is pre-scripted in our
curriculum based agent using the same condition by Strömbom
of whether the furthest agent distance to the GCM was less
than or greater than f(N), whereas the non-curriculum agent
needed to learn this behaviour within its single neural network.
The simplicity of the switch in this case did not require an
independent neural network. A more complex switch, however,
would be learned in the same way we learn the individual
behaviours.
2) Skill decomposition: Skills are generally broken up into
discrete, serial and continuous skills [9]. Shepherding is a
serial skill comprising a number of discrete skills put together
in a variety of patterns. To learn to shepherd, ﬁrstly a solid
grasp of the fundamental discrete skills is required. Secondly
once these have been learned, the patterns with which to string
these together must be learned and understood. Quantifying
the complexity of the discrete and serial skills should occur at
this stage as this will act as a guide for lower level curriculum
design decisions. Each distinct act is dependent on various

low level skills already being applied to attempt the learning
of the acts, which in turn are required to learn the higher level
collecting and driving behaviours.
Shepherd-agent interactions: The ﬁrst of these lowest level
skills is an understanding of the shepherd-agent interactions
that take place, i.e. an answer to the fundamental question,
what happens when the shepherd moves closer to an agent?
To go about deﬁning PC and PD, understanding that the sheep
will be repelled from the shepherd is crucial.
Movement: A necessary lower level skill is the ability of
the shepherd-agent to move within the environment. This may
sound trivial, but in practice this translates into a very complex
skill where the agent needs to actuate on the environment and
decides when and when not to actuate.
Estimating the collection and driving points: The shepherd
needs to know where it needs to go. Movement assists it to
reach the destination, but estimating the destination is a skill
in its own right.
C. Learning Impactors
1) Complexity Factors: Another important factor in the cur-
riculum concerns the quantiﬁcation of the level of difﬁculties
associated with a task. Task complexity raises two questions.
Firstly what makes it difﬁcult to learn that skill to begin
with? Secondly what factors affect the difﬁculty of completing
the task; that is, the identiﬁcation of the set of factors that
control task complexity? The ﬁrst question calls for metrics
to assess task complexity while the second calls for tracing
the causes for complexity. To address both questions, a series
of experiments were conducted to determine the effects of
changing various variables on difﬁculty with the results shown
in Figure 2. Two metrics to indicate complex tasks are used:
Success Rate and Completion Time. The former is calculated
as the ratio of successful trials to the total number of trials.
The latter is calculated as the total simulation time of each
simulation.
These are complementary metrics and neither of them could
independently capture task-difﬁculty. For example, a 100%
success rate hides the variance associated with the time taken
to achieve this success. The time to complete a task, if used
alone, could be misleading as it is natural that a simple
increase in distance between the initial position of the shepherd
and the sheep will cause an increase in task completion
time, assuming everything else is constant. Nevertheless, this
increase in time is deceptive as it is merely a scaling effect.
We have identiﬁed ﬁve factors based on Strömbom’s model
that impact the model, and therefore are expected to impact the
two metrics above. These are the number of sheep, the radius
where the sheep gets initialised, the number of locations a
sheep spawn relative to the global centre of mass, the shepherd
radius and relative speed of shepherd to sheep. The results of
complexity are shown in Figure 3.
2) Variable Impact Determination: For sake of competence
of the methodology, we need to ask if there is a particular
weighting scheme that should be used to combine the different
factors impacting task complexity to form an overall com-
plexity index. In the case of humans, this is normally done
through human experiments with questionnaires associated
with workload. In the case of a computer system, we will
assume in this paper that these factors are weighted equally.
D. Curriculum Design
The previous steps conclude with an understanding of what
makes a task complex, which represents the starting point for
designing a curriculum to educate the AI. The curriculum
design step consists of the a number of sub-steps presented
and discussed below.
1) Aims: From the task deﬁnition deﬁned in step 1, the
main aim of the learner is to learn how “to shepherd 50-200
agents from any starting location, to any goal location.” This
aim offers the point of reference to measure the complexity of
the task that has been discussed in the previous sub-section.
2) Assessments: The chosen assessment is designed around
the above desired learning aims. The purpose of the assess-
ment is to conﬁrm that the necessary skills have been learned
before moving on to the next lesson/level. The context of the
assessment is that the learning and assessment environment
are aligned, with assessment applying the trained skill with
untrained variables. The assessments should directly assess the
main learner aims pulled from the task statement.
Two types of assessments need to be considered: summa-
tive and formative. For summative assessments, we run 100
simulations of the open environment with each AEIS, and
compare their ability to drive, collect and shepherd overall.
For formative assessments, we run 50 simulations of the open
environment with the AEIS at increasing sample size to gain
understanding of the learning rate of each AEIS; that is,
generalisation ability of the learner as a demonstration that
the learner truly learnt, not just memorised, the skills. The
lower number of simulation runs in formative assessments is
due to their narrower search space compared to summative
assessments.
Summative assessment and formative assessments are
counted as successful if the minimum GCM to goal distance,
and average furthest agent to GCM distance achieved by the
curriculum based AIES is less, and the success rate is higher
than those achieved by the non-curriculum based AIES.
3) Learning needs: Selecting the correct data that fully
represents the skills and behaviours to be learned is crucial.
Data must be presented in a way that encourages the learner to
determine patterns from speciﬁc scenarios, that can be applied
to the general case or risk the neural network developing
weightings biased to the training scenarios. For this reason
as much of the data as possible is presented relative to the
shepherd. Noting Equation 6, we know that the desired output
direction is some function Ψ = F(PF , PG, PS, PT , ra, N);
hence these independent variables are provided as training
samples. The learner has one output representing the velocity
of the agent. The inputs are deﬁned below:
1) Shepherd to goal vector
2) Shepherd to cluster GCM vector

(a) Sheep Number
(b) Sheep Radius
(c) Shepherd Spawn X Location (relative
to GCM)
(d) Shepherd Radius
(e) Shepherd Speed
Fig. 2: Variable Impacts on Difﬁculty Simulation Results
Fig. 3: Difﬁculty Factor Summary
3) Shepherd to furthest agent from cluster vector
4) Cluster GCM to goal vector
5) Furthest agent from cluster to goal vector
6) Furthest agent from cluster to cluster GCM vector
7) Cluster GCM velocity vector
8) Furthest agent from cluster velocity vector
9) Number of agents in simulation
The above inputs are computed from a series of raw
observations: Timestep number; Goal X and Y coordinates;
Shepherd X and Y coordinates; Cluster GCM X and Y
coordinates; Furthest agent from cluster X and Y coordinates.
4) Teaching Plan and Lessons: The shepherding behaviour
is deconstructed into switching, driving and collecting with
each of the two latter behaviours individually trained on
separate neural networks, and hence lessons targeted at these
speciﬁc behaviours are required.
The research from previous stages is consolidated and
applied to give the following suggested scenarios within the
training curriculum. It is worth noting here that the ﬁrst
sub-sub-level in the drive and collect sub-levels spawn the
shepherd at the drive and collection points, respectively. This
is based on the curriculum learning concepts explored in [5]
where the learner starts in a state close to the desired goal
where it has a higher chance of achieving it, and then is moved
further from that state as it progresses. This approach ensures
that there is a higher percentage of ideal behaviour present in
the training data where the shepherd is at the desired driving
and collecting points respectively, than without it.
In the current obstacle-free task, the shepherd and sheep
spawn within an unbounded environment (i.e. they will be
free to move inﬁnitely in all directions) simulating an inﬁnite
paddock. This is done to ensure the collection points and drive
points can be navigated to freely, allowing the purist form of
Strömbom’s model without interference from obstacles such
as fence lines.
1. Drive Behaviour: The shepherd drives a tightly collected
cluster to the goal location, with the simulation ending
when this is achieved. The population of the cluster will
systematically increase from 50 to 100 then 190 ±10 in
each sub-sub-level based on the results of tests in the
variable impact determination step.
1.1. Straight drive lesson: The shepherd spawns at the drive
point i.e. directly behind the cluster relative to the goal,
meaning it only needs to drive the cluster straight to
the goal.
1.2. Random drive lesson: The spawn locations of the
shepherd, goal and GCM are randomised within the
environment.
2. Collect Behaviour: The shepherd collects at least one
agent which spawns at a distance greater than f(N) from
the cluster. The simulation will end when the cluster is
fully collected (i.e. all agents at a distance < f(N) from
GCM). The population of the cluster will systematically
increase from 50 to 100 then 190 ±10 in each sub-sub-
level based on the results of tests in the variable impact
determination step.
2.1. Straight collect lesson: The shepherd spawns at the
collection point; i.e. directly behind the furthest sheep
relative to the cluster, meaning it only needs to herd
the agent straight to the cluster.
2.2. Single agent random collect lesson: The spawn loca-
tions of shepherd, goal, GCM and furthest sheep are
randomised within the environment, with the furthest

sheep radius from the GCM being randomised between
1.25f(N) →2f(N).
2.3. Spread cluster collect lesson: All spawn locations
are randomised with the cluster being spread over a
distance greater than f(N), leading to the shepherd
needing to collect the entire population of agents.
3. Open Environment Behaviour: We also design three
lessons to train the non-curriculum AIES, and for the
testing and comparison of all AIES variances. For this
reason these simulations end only when the overall task
is complete (i.e. a collected herd is at the target). The
three cases are made up of:
3.1. Collected herd lesson: A fully collected herd, target
and shepherd spawn with random positions.
3.2. Single separated agent lesson: A single agent spawns
away from the herd, with all spawn positions ran-
domised.
3.3. Spread herd lesson: Cluster spread over a distance
greater than f(N), with all spawn positions ran-
domised.
Simulations are broken up into groups of 30, to allow for
10 individual simulations at each cluster size. The samples
are collected in small groups like this rather than all at
once to allow for more modular data sets that can be mixed
and matched during training as needed. Initially the break
down of samples for the curriculum is to have four sets of
thirty simulations in both the driving and collecting lessons,
therefore in total 240 individual simulations are required.
Within driving, one set will comprise of sub-level 1.1, and
the remaining three will comprise of sub-level 1.2. This was
chosen to allow for more samples for the more complex
scenario which will be harder to learn, but a single set is
expected to be sufﬁcient to inform the ideal behaviour from
1.1. Similarly, collecting will be broken up into one set of 2.1,
two sets of 2.2 and one set of 2.3. We have two sets in level
2.2 because of the importance of this behaviour. If the AI can
learn to gather an individual agent, technically gathering an
entire cluster will comprise of gathering each furthest agent
individually.
5) Evaluation: Analysis of the learning gradients found
in the formative assessments on the quality and number of
samples collected in each behaviour can be fed back into the
curriculum design to make future improvements.
E. Game Creation
Based on the ﬁndings of Curriculum design stage, a game
with user input and data collection functionalities could be
designed. The curriculum should be implemented into the
game, with different levels being equivalent to the designed
lessons.
The shepherd’s directions is controlled by a human who
is providing the target data. This was implemented using the
mouse to provide a unit vector between the shepherds position
and the shown mouse position, effectively having the shepherd
follow the plotted mouse position each timestep. The mouse
was chosen due to its ability to provide continuous directional
data, as opposed to the arrow keys for example which would
only provide limited discrete input.
F. Data Collection and Analysis
A human (the ﬁrst author) played 480 game simulations.
The data was recorded to create approximately 200,000 train-
ing samples. To provide continuity in the behaviour of the
AIES, stopping was replaced with a strategy whereby a
circular motion away from the direction of travel was used.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Two sets of experiments were run. Firstly, the summa-
tive assessment of the ﬁve fully trained AIES comprised of
one curriculum based learner and four non-curriculum based
learners. This was comprised of 100 simulations of our open
environment, with pseudo random spawn positions so as to
expose all ﬁve of the AIES to an identical test set. The
data collected was for the purpose of comparing each of
the AIES ability to exhibit the shepherding behaviour, within
the minimum time-frame suggested in [12]. With the deﬁned
purpose of shepherding as driving a collected cluster of agents
to a goal location, the minimum GCM distance to the goal
achieved in each simulation was recorded as a metric of
driving ability. Similarly the average distance of the furthest
sheep to the GCM for each simulation was recorded as a metric
of collecting ability. Finally a percentage of the binary success
rate of each simulation was recorded as an overall shepherding
competence metric.
The Formative assessment experiments were run, comparing
the same metrics as above but only on the single non-
curriculum based AIES assessed as being the most comparable
to the curriculum based learner. The purpose of this was
to observe and compare the learning efﬁciency of each of
the AIES with increasing training sample sizes. This was
measured by ﬁnding the learning gradient of the AIES in each
of the above metrics.
A. Summative Assessment Experiments
To determine the effectiveness of the curriculum based
AIES, it was compared against a number of non-curriculum
based AIES. This was used to conﬁrm that the non-curriculum
based learners are not at a disadvantage to the curriculum
based learner, ensuring the only variable was learning via the
curriculum. The curriculum based AIES was comprised of two
neural networks (one for driving and one for collecting), each
containing 10 hidden nodes in a single hidden layer and 53,890
training samples. Two of the non-curriculum neural nets con-
tained 20 hidden nodes, matching the total number of hidden
nodes in the curriculum neural nets, and two contained 10
hidden nodes, matching the number of hidden nodes in each of
the curriculum AIES individual neural nets. Another parameter
that needed to be tested for was the training sample size. The
curriculum AIES’s training scenarios were on average smaller
than the open environment that the non-curriculum AIES was
trained on. For this reason, two of the AIES were trained on

a sample size 54,629 matching that of the curriculum AIES
(consequently, containing less full training simulations), and
two were trained with a larger sample size of 107,986 to match
the total number of full training simulations the curriculum
AIES had access to.
B. Formative assessment experiments
In this experiment, the curriculum-based shepherd and the
best non-curriculum variant had their learning gradients com-
pared by assessing our metrics while varying training sample
size. The purpose of this experiment was to show the efﬁciency
of learning with the hypothesis that the curriculum based
learner would learn at a greater rate than the non-curriculum
based learner.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Table I shows the results from the summative assessment
experiment described above. Figure 4 shows the learning
gradient of success rate, average furthest agent from GCM
distance and the minimum GCM distance to goal distance.
A high positive gradient for success rate and a high negative
gradient for furthest agent and goal to GCM distances indicate
that curriculum learning is more effective.
The results shown in Table I ﬁrstly conﬁrm that the curricu-
lum learner did not have any advantages in terms of sample
size or node number over the baseline AIES. This is shown
by the fact that even the best performing non-curriculum
AIES, NC2, did not perform better than C1 (the statistical
signiﬁcance of difference was insigniﬁcant) even with double
the number of training samples. Assessment on NC3 and NC4
were conducted in order to conﬁrm that the curriculum learner
did not have the beneﬁt of a smaller number of hidden nodes
but these still perform poorly when compared to NC1 and
NC2, conﬁrming that this is not the case.
There is an improvement seen in the curriculum learner’s
ability to drive the herd towards the target, observable through
the mean min GCM to goal distances. As is shown in Table I,
C1 has an average minimum simulation distance of 36.16
units, whereas NC1 has a distance of 52.33 units. Smaller
values are better. This is an improvement of approximately
44%. Similarly, C1’s ability to collect the herd is improved,
observable in the mean furthest sheep to GCM distance. C1’s
average distance is 64.39, whereas NC1’s distance is 90.81,
and again a small value here is better, as it means that
the shepherd has been able to keep the cluster more tightly
collected. This is an improvement of approximately 41%.
However, due to the relatively large standard deviation of these
values, at a conﬁdence level of α = 0.01 the improvements
are not statistically signiﬁcant. For collecting and driving the
improvement p-value is found to be pc = 0.23 and pd = 0.34
respectively, thus we must in this isolated case accept the
null hypothesis that the curriculum has had no impact on the
shepherd’s ability to collect and drive individually, based on
these metrics.
Interesting to note however, is the relatively signiﬁcant
improvement in success rate. Table I shows that C1 had
a success rate of 32%, compared to NC1’s 7%. This is
an approximate 457% improvement, and at a negligible p-
value we can reject the null hypothesis and assume that the
curriculum has had some impact on the shepherd’s ability to
complete the overall task of shepherding.
Figure 4 shows the pattern of improvement for the cur-
riculum and non-curriculum learners, when provided with
an increasing number of training samples. As discussed the
success rate improvement was statistically signiﬁcant, and as
we can see in Figure 4c there is an observable pattern of faster
improvement in the curriculum AIES over the non-curriculum
agent. While the individual results at each sample size have
been statistically insigniﬁcant in the collecting and driving
metrics, the same pattern can still be observed and is worth
discussing.
Figure 4a shows our collecting metric learning plots. From
the best ﬁt equations we can see a curriculum to non-
curriculum learning rate ratio for collecting of:
MC = mC1
mNC1
= −7.13e −04
−6.47e −05 ≈11.02
(11)
The curriculum learning rate is larger than that of the non-
curriculum. It is worth noting that the larger constant in the
best ﬁt equation for the curriculum learner (102 > 95.8)
suggests that the non-curriculum learner is initially more
competent at collecting based on this metric. However this
quickly changes with the fewer samples of 10,000, evident
by the point of intersection at this value. This means that as
hypothesised, the curriculum is allowing C1 to learn more
efﬁciently than NC1 in terms of collecting, based on this
metric.
Secondly, Figure 4b shows our driving metric learning plots.
From the best ﬁt equations, we can see a curriculum to non-
curriculum learning rate ratio for driving of:
MD = mC1
mNC1
= −4.67e −04
−2.47e −04 ≈1.70
(12)
This again conﬁrms that the curriculum is allowing C1 to learn
to drive at a faster rate than NC1, based on this metric. The
smaller constant in the line of best ﬁt (60.9 < 66.1) also
suggests that C1 is more competent initially, and continues
this by learning at a faster rate.
Finally, Figure 4c shows our overall task competence learn-
ing rate. From the best ﬁt equations we can see a curriculum
to non-curriculum learning rate ratio for overall competence
of:
MS = mC1
mNC1
= 6.62e −04
1.54e −04 ≈4.30
(13)
This signiﬁes that C1 is able to learn overall task competence
at a higher rate than NC1 as hypothesised. The larger constant
in the line of best ﬁt (−1.07 > −2.18) also tells us that C1
is more competent initially than NC1, and continues this by
learning at a faster rate.

Shepherd
ID No.
Mean
min
GCM to
goal
distance
Standard
deviation
min GCM
to goal
distance
Driving
improvement
statistical
signiﬁcance
Mean
furthest
sheep to
GCM
distance
Standard
deviation
mean furthest
sheep to GCM
distance
Collecting
improvement
statistical
signiﬁcance
Task
success
rate
Success rate
improvement
standard
deviation
Success rate
statistical
signiﬁcance
C1
36.16
37.91
N/A
64.39
33.15
N/A
32%
4.66
N/A
NC1
52.33
38.98
0.3372
90.81
35.89
0.2296
7%
2.55
0.000
NC2
38.75
38.27
0.4721
83.60
36.43
0.2981
22%
4.14
0.1131
NC3
63.22
39.75
0.2483
90.75
28.36
0.1762
2%
1.40
0.000
NC4
54.21
39.78
0.3264
87.49
25.53
0.1841
7%
2.55
0.000
TABLE I: Summative assessment results
(a) Average GCM to furthest agent dis-
tance at increasing sample numbers
(b) Average minimum GCM to goal dis-
tance at increasing sample numbers
(c) Success rate at increasing sample num-
bers
Fig. 4: Formative assessment results.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Solving complex problems through supervised learning re-
quires large amounts of accurately labelled data. The shep-
herding problem is one such example due to its large state
space. Collecting this data through means of experiments with
sheepdogs for example is a large scale commitment and would
need to be reimplemented every time further development of
the model is desired. We suggest that a solution to this is the
development of a curriculum to efﬁciently create higher quality
training samples and data collection through interactive simu-
lations. This allows for natural deconstruction of behaviours,
providing beneﬁts such as higher explainability, modularity
and maintainability in the lower level learned behaviours.
Our results demonstrate the beneﬁt in efﬁciency and effec-
tiveness of the suggested AI Education Framework with hu-
man interaction to generate training data. To demonstrate this,
a curriculum for a simple case of the shepherding problem was
developed and implemented in the form of a shepherding game
which collected the required data from human demonstration,
to be presented as training samples to the supervised learning
AIES neural nets. We demonstrated that the curriculum based
AIES was able to learn more efﬁciently and effectively than
the baseline non-curriculum learner, and claim that this is due
to a combination between the deconstructed behaviour imple-
mentation, and the higher quality training samples provided
through the developed curriculum.
For future work, as detailed, in our implementation the
curriculum learner’s switching behaviour was hard-coded in an
if statement. As the number of behaviours increase, it makes
sense to train a neural network to switch between different
behaviours. Moreover, our curriculum caters to a simple
shepherding case, where the paddock is inﬁnite, contains no
obstacles or gates and the sheep and shepherd characteristics
do not change. Implementing further levels to handle more
complex cases is necessary for the behaviour to be applied to
the more general case.
