DVD: A Diagnostic Dataset for Multi-step Reasoning
in Video Grounded Dialogue
Hung Le‡§∗, Chinnadhurai Sankar†, Seungwhan Moon†, Ahmad Beirami†,
Alborz Geramifard†, Satwik Kottur†
†Facebook

‡Singapore Management University
§Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

Abstract
A video-grounded dialogue system is required
to understand both dialogue, which contains
semantic dependencies from turn to turn, and
video, which contains visual cues of spatial
and temporal scene variations. Building such
dialogue systems is a challenging problem, in-
volving various reasoning types on both vi-
sual and language inputs.
Existing bench-
marks do not have enough annotations to thor-
oughly analyze dialogue systems and under-
stand their capabilities and limitations in iso-
lation.
These benchmarks are also not ex-
plicitly designed to minimise biases that mod-
els can exploit without actual reasoning. To
address these limitations, in this paper, we
present DVD, a Diagnostic Dataset for Video-
grounded Dialogues. The dataset is designed
to contain minimal biases and has detailed an-
notations for the different types of reasoning
over the spatio-temporal space of video. Dia-
logues are synthesized over multiple question
turns, each of which is injected with a set
of cross-turn semantic relationships. We use
DVD to analyze existing approaches, provid-
ing interesting insights into their abilities and
limitations. In total, DVD is built from 11k
CATER synthetic videos and contains 10 in-
stances of 10-round dialogues for each video,
resulting in more than 100k dialogues and 1M
question-answer pairs. Our code and dataset
are publicly available1.
1
Introduction
Research in visual question answering (VQA) aims
to develop intelligent systems that can reason and
answer questions about visual information. Ear-
lier datasets have been introduced to study this
problem, focusing on images as the visual input
(Antol et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2015; Malinowski
∗Work done when HL was a research intern at Facebook.
1github.com/facebookresearch/
DVDialogues
Q1: until the end of the cube 's rotation , what types of actions 
does the big thing undertake the most ? A1: flying
Q2: during the same time period , how many sliding objects are 
there ? A2: 2
Q3: among them , there is a ball . during the whole video , what 
type of action does it undertake second ? A3: no action
Q4: how about up until now ? A4: sliding
Q5: during the red thing 's last slide , how many things are 
behind the earlier mentioned large object ? A5: 2
Q6: how about left of it ? A6: 0 ...
Figure 1: Example DVD dialogue: We demonstrate an
example dialogue in DVD that tests various aspects, in-
cluding action recognition, temporal reasoning, spatial
reasoning, video interval tracking, and dialogue object
tracking. Qi/Ai: question/answer of turn i.
and Fritz, 2014; Zhu et al., 2016) Recently, many
QA benchmarks have been proposed to extend the
visual information from the image to video domain
(Jang et al., 2017; Lei et al., 2018; Zadeh et al.,
2019). While image QA problems require a sys-
tem to learn cross-modality interaction, video QA
problems go beyond and capture visual information
with temporal variance.
As an orthogonal extension from VQA problems,
another line of research investigates image/video
QA in a dialogue setting (Das et al., 2017; Seo
et al., 2017; De Vries et al., 2017; Chattopadhyay
et al., 2017; Alamri et al., 2019). In this problem,
questions about a given video or image are posi-
tioned in a multi-turn dialogue. In each dialogue
turn, a question usually exhibits different types of
cross-turn relations to other questions in prior dia-
logue turns, such as object co-reference and topic
alignment. In this work, we investigate the problem
of multi-turn video question answering (QA), also
known as video-grounded dialogue.
Numerous approaches to video-grounded dia-
logue have shown remarkable performance in build-
arXiv:2101.00151v2  [cs.AI]  14 Jun 2021

ing intelligent multimodal systems (Hori et al.,
2019; Schwartz et al., 2019; Le et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2020; Le et al., 2020). However, most of
these methods exhibit marginal performance gain,
and our ability to understand their limitations is
impeded by the complexity of the task. Existing
benchmarks are not designed with enough informa-
tion to determine whether current approaches are
capable of sophisticated reasoning and not just ex-
ploiting biases, which has been a common concern
in vision-language systems (Agrawal et al., 2016;
Goyal et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2020).
To address the limitations of existing bench-
marks and analyze dialogue systems more efﬁ-
ciently, we propose DVD, a Diagnostic Dataset
for Video-grounded Dialogues. We demonstrate an
example dialogue in DVD in Figure 1. From scene
graphs and object action annotation of a CATER
video (Girdhar and Ramanan, 2020), we simu-
late questions based on reasoning structures, also
known as functional programs in CLEVR (Johnson
et al., 2017). Compared to CLEVR, we introduced
17 novel functional modules, designed for video
and dialogue input components. As illustrated in
Figure 1, at each dialogue turn, a DVD question
tests dialogue systems to perform different types of
reasoning on videos, such as action recognition and
spatio-temporal reasoning. Across turns, we gener-
ate questions to be related to each other by incor-
porating different types of semantic relationships,
including: (1) temporal relation, which requires a
system to learn to localize different temporal seg-
ments of the video from turn to turn; (2) object
reference, which requires a system to resolve visual
objects mentioned throughout the dialogue history
in either short-term references (pronouns) or long-
term references (e.g. “the earlier mentioned large
object”); and (3) topic transfer, which requires a
system to maintain a memory of the last question
turn to solve the question in the current turn.
On DVD, we trained a set of baseline methods
and analyzed the results by several aspects of visual
and linguistic complexity (Section 4). We found
that these methods struggle on questions requiring
both video temporal and spatial localization. They
are also vulnerable to long-term reasoning in both
videos and dialogues as they are not designed to
track active visual objects or relevant video seg-
ments throughout dialogue context. We hope the
DVD dataset will lead to new research avenues
to develop intelligent systems capable of complex
reasoning on video and dialogue medium (further
discussion in the Supplementary Material). The
DVD dataset and code will be made public.
2
Related Work
We compared DVD to existing datasets from the
following four angles:
1) Vision-linguistic. Vision-linguistic understand-
ing benchmarks have been proposed, including
captioning (Farhadi et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2014;
Rohrbach et al., 2015), phrase grounding or object
reference (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Plummer et al.,
2015), scene graph learning (Krishna et al., 2017),
and text-to-clip (Anne Hendricks et al., 2017). Our
benchmark, DVD, is more related to VQA in which
a visual input is given and a system is required to
answer a question about this input (Antol et al.,
2015; Zhu et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2017; Lei et al.,
2018). Another related line of research is the re-
search of navigation systems in a physical environ-
ment (Gordon et al., 2018; Wijmans et al., 2019).
Compared to the prior benchmarks, one major dif-
ference of DVD is the extension of single-turn in-
teraction to a multi-turn human-machine dialogue.
2) Visually-grounded Dialogue. Extended from
the vision-linguistic understanding research, this
line of research focuses on answering questions se-
quentially positioned over multiple turns (De Vries
et al., 2017; Das et al., 2017; Chattopadhyay et al.,
2017; Hori et al., 2019; Thomason et al., 2019). A
system has to understand the dialogue context and
resolve cross-turn semantic dependencies. How-
ever, due to the complexity of the tasks, involving
cross-modality and cross-turn information, prior
benchmarks are often subject to bias that models
often exploit without actual reasoning (Qi et al.,
2020). In this work, we design a diagnostic bench-
mark with minimal bias and incorporate a set of
speciﬁc reasoning requirements.
3) Diagnostic. Our work is related to MNIST Dia-
logue (Seo et al., 2017) and CLEVR Dialog (Kottur
et al., 2019). They involve synthetic images to de-
velop image-grounded dialogues. Compared to
them, DVD questions are extended from the image
to the video domain and injected with more diverse
cross-turn semantics. As shown in Table 1 DVD
contains a higher proportion of unique questions
than related benchmarks. DVD is also inspired
by the dialogue state tracking task (DST) (Mrkˇsi´c
et al., 2017; Bordes et al., 2017; Kottur et al., 2021;
Moon et al., 2020). DST requires a system to detect

Split
#Videos/
Images
#Dialogs
#Questions
# Unique
Questions
DVD-Train
6,157
61,551
615,510
360,334
DVD-Val
1,540
15,396
153,960
99,211
DVD-Test
3,299
32,978
329,780
200,346
DVD-Total
10,996
109,925
1,099,250
620,739
CLEVR
100K
N/A
1M
854K
CLEVRER
20K
N/A
305K
26.4K
VisDial
123K
123K
1.2M
380K
AVSD
11.1K
11.1K
101.2K
59K
MNIST Dialog
50K
150K
1.5M
355
CLEVR Dialog
85K
425K
4.25M
73K
Table 1: Statistics for DVD: Compared to synthetic
dialogue benchmarks, MNIST Dialog and CLEVR Di-
alog, majority of questions in DVD are unique. Ques-
tions are generated from question templates and incor-
porated with various cross-turn semantics.
all information slots mentioned in dialogue, such
as restaurant name and booking date. Instead, in
DVD, for each turn, we introduce an object tracking
state, deﬁned as visual objects and their attributes
mentioned in dialogue context.
4) Multi-step reasoning. A multi-step reasoning
question is typically represented by a reasoning
structure, also known as functional programs. Ear-
lier efforts (Andreas et al., 2016; Johnson et al.,
2017) designed questions that are expressed as ele-
mentary operation programs. More related to our
work, Song et al. (2018); Yi* et al. (2020) extended
the prior work to the video domain with questions
focusing on the temporal variance of video frames.
A major difference between our work and these
approaches is the extension of functional programs
to a dialogue task with context-based operations,
such as object tracking and interval tracking. This
extension brings a step toward more transparent
dialogue systems capable of performing reasoning
operations across question turns.
3
The DVD Dataset
Our benchmark provides a dataset that can be used
to conduct rich diagnostics to better understand the
reasoning capabilities of dialogue systems. Table 1
and Figure 3 to 6 give an overview of DVD.
3.1
Objects, Spatial Relations, and Intervals
Objects. Objects are identiﬁed by their attributes,
including object shapes, sizes, materials, and col-
ors. One unique characteristic of CATER objects
is that each object can move multiple times in a
single video. From the CATER universe, we de-
ﬁne 4 types of object actions: “ﬂying”, “rotating”,
“sliding”, and “no action” (object being stationary).
Another characteristic of CATER objects is that one
A2
A2
A1
B2
B1
B4
B5
B3
START
END
Stationary object A1
Moving object A2
Figure 2: Example spatial relationship: We demon-
strate the projection of objects and their movements on
the ground plane. Considering the “left” relationship,
“A1 is left of B2” and “A2 is left of B5”.
object can be contained by another object, resulting
in a visual problem called object containment. In
our experiments, current dialogue systems are still
vulnerable to this problem, making it hard to apply
to the open world (See Section 4.3).
Video intervals. We deﬁne video intervals as con-
tinuous video frames, limited by a start and end
point, each of which can be the start or end of an
object’s action or the start or end of the whole video.
We formulate two types of video intervals:
1) Atomic intervals. In these intervals, all objects
have at most one action and they can be in only one
of the two states: in motion or stationary. To ﬁnd
atomic intervals, we simply collate the start and end
timestamps of all object actions in a CATER video
and sort them chronologically. By deﬁnition, any
non-overlapping interval between two timestamps
is considered atomic. This constraint allows us to
identify the relative spatial relationships (“left”,
“right”, “behind”, and “front”) between any two ob-
jects by using their coordinates at the start and end
of the interval. Note that in the CATER universe,
all actions can be projected either as a straight line
(“ﬂying” and “sliding”) or a single point (“rotat-
ing” and “no action”). Practically, we focus on
spatial reasoning only when one of the two objects
is stationary. Figure 2 demonstrates the “left” spa-
tial relation, and Figure 3 (Top) shows an example
question of atomic interval with spatial relation.
2) Compositional intervals. Compositional inter-
vals are all other intervals that are not atomic. In
these intervals, an object can have more than one
actions, i.e. be in more than one states such as
“ﬂying” then “no action”. Therefore, its movement
projections are not linear and we do not identify
spatial relations in these cases. Instead, we focus on
information such as action set and action sequence
to generate questions. Figure 3 (Bottom) presents
an example question of compositional interval.
To create DVD questions, we ﬁrst identify all in-

during the small cone 's 
flight , how many objects are 
in front of the brown shiny 
thing ?
Filter 
material
Unique
Relate 
Spatial
Count
metal
front
Filter 
color
brown
Relate
Temporal
during
Find
Interval
flight
Filter 
shape
Unique
cone
Filter 
size
small
after the gray rubber thing 's 
first flight and before its 
second slide , is there any 
other object with the same 
set of activities performed by 
the block ?
Filter 
shape
Unique
Same 
Action 
Set
Exist
block
Relate
Interval
after
Find
Interval
first flight
Filter 
material
Unique
rubber
Filter 
color
gray
Relate
Interval
Find
Interval
Union
Interval
Example atomic-interval question 
Example compositional-interval question 
before
second slide
Figure 3: Example questions and their functional programs: Top: A question of atomic interval with relative
spatial relationship. Bottom: A question of compositional interval with action set comparison semantic.
Before this time period, how many other things with the same set of 
activities performed by the aforementioned yellow thing ? 
Filter 
color
Unique
Same 
Action 
Set
Count
yellow
Track 
Objects
Relate
Interval
before
Track
Interval
Example question with ‘before’ TR and long-term OR semantics
among them , there is a red thing . After this time window, what type of 
action does it undertake last ?
Example question with ‘after’ TR and short-term OR semantics
Unique
Action 
by 
Order
Filter
color
red
Refer 
Object
last
Relate
Interval
after
Track
Interval
them
Figure 4: Examples questions positioned in dialogue and their functional programs: Each question contained
references to past dialogue turns, through video temporal relation (TR) or dialogue object reference (OR).
tervals in a video (with a minimum duration of
about 0.5s), then randomly sample one interval,
and proceed to create questions based on object
movements and locations in this interval. Figure
5-(a) shows the percentages of DVD questions by
video interval types. Overall, more than 60% of
questions are of compositional intervals and among
the atomic-interval questions, the majority of them
contain a spatial relation. We still maintain a small
percentage of temporal-agnostic instances (“none”
type) to keep the dialogue ﬂow natural.
3.2
Question and Dialogue Generation
Question representation. We use question tem-
plates to materialize questions in natural language.
Each template associates with an applicable type of
video interval and a functional program. Compared
to CLEVR functional programs (Johnson et al.,
2017), we introduce 17 new functional modules, of
which 13 are extended for video-based inputs and
4 are extended for dialogue-based inputs. Over-
all, we utilize 26 question templates for 8 question
types. Figure 3 illustrates two sample questions
with corresponding reasoning structures and Figure
5-(b) shows the statistics of question type distribu-
tion. Please refer to the supplementary material for
the full details of functional modules and question
types and examples.
Dialogue Generation. We generated dialogues
with a ﬁxed length of 10 turns. In each turn, we
adopted a Depth First Search (DFS) approach, as
similarly used in CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017),
to instantiate questions by sequentially traversing
and executing functional programs. To generate
linguistic dependencies between dialogue turns, at
each turn, we randomly sample and incorporate
one or more of the 3 semantic relations below. Fig-
ure 4 and 6 present examples of 2 questions and a
dialogue with these semantic relations.
Type I: Video Temporal Relation (TR): This type
of semantic relation tests a system to localize video
intervals in relation to past dialogue turns. We
randomly select one of three types of relation: (1)
“during” relation reuses the same time interval as the
last dialogue turn, e.g. the Q4 in Figure 6; (2) “be-
fore” and (3) “after” relations simulate a dialogue
ﬂow with references to the earlier and subsequent
video segments. TR synthesizes scenarios when
humans either maintain or shift their attention tem-
porally from one video segment to a related part.
Type II: Dialogue Object Reference (OR): We
incorporate object references into a question by re-
placing original object phrase, such as “the large
rubber cone”, with pronouns, such as “it”, to re-
fer to object(s) mentioned in the earlier part of the
dialogue. The distance of reference is one turn
and we call this a short-term memory OR. Addi-
tionally, we simulate long-term memory OR by
injecting unique objects mentioned further in the
past dialogue turns. We simulate this behavior by
maintaining a dialogue object state at each turn.
To choose an object for references, we randomly

(b) Question distribution by 
question type 
(e) Dialogue distribution by the number of turns 
with semantic relations
(d) Question distribution by turn 
distance of object references
(a) Question distribution by 
video interval 
(TR)
(OR)
(TT)
(c) Number of active objects 
per dialogue turn
Figure 5: Data analysis of DVD: (a) and (b): Questions are distributed by 8 question types and 3 video interval
types. (c): The boxplot displays the distribution of active objects mentioned in each dialogue turn position. (d): At
turn position i, an old object originally mentioned in a prior turn position j might be reused, resulting in reference
of turn distance i −j. (e): Each dialogue turn is incorporated with semantic relations, including TR (temporal
relation), OR (object references), and TT (topic transfer). The dotted line indicates the overall average.
sample a past dialogue turn position and sample
an object introduced in this turn. This object then
replaces the original object phrases in the question
of the current turn. For example, in question Q3
in Figure 6, “the earlier mentioned small thing” is
identiﬁed from the object originally introduced in
Q1. Following this method, our dialogue simulates
scenarios in which humans only focus on a sub-
set of objects rather than all objects in the video
scene and they can refer to those objects again over
multiple dialogue turns. Figure 5-(c) displays the
boxplot of the number of active objects involved
in each turn position. Out of 10 objects (the max-
imum number of objects in a CATER video), 2
to 5 objects are involved on average per dialogue.
Figure 5-(d) shows the question distribution by the
turn distance of long-term memory OR, with the
majority of questions containing 2-turn distance
references.
Type III: Topic Transfer (TT): This relation tests
the model ability to memorize and reuse the context
of the last dialogue turn to the current turn through
3 types of topic transfers: (1) Attribute transfer and
(2) spatial transfer reuse the same question from the
prior dialogue turn with a modiﬁcation of object at-
tribute or spatial relation (e.g. Q2 and Q5 in Figure
6). Compared to TR, these two types of topic trans-
fers focus on human attention shifts in spatial space
rather than temporal space; (3) Temporal transfer
introduces a unique setting of situated dialogue
in DVD. Instead of using a ﬁxed video input for
each dialogue instance, at the ﬁrst dialogue turn,
we shorten a CATER video by a cutoff point, e.g.
T0. At each later turn, for 30% of time, we up-
date the current video input to a new cutoff point
later than the previous one e.g. Ti+1 > Ti. We
do not update when the cutoff reaches the end of
the original CATER video T i.e. Ti+1 = T . For
instance, in Figure 6, at Q7, we reuse the same con-
text from Q6 but with new extended visual content.
We introduce temporal transfer as a preliminary
step to challenge dialogue systems in a dynamic
environment with a continuous visual stream.
After sampling question templates and semantic de-
pendencies, the ground-truth answers are obtained
by executing corresponding functional programs.
For each question template, we discard dominating
instances to maintain an approximate uniform dis-
tribution of answer values, minimizing bias result-
ing from question-conditioned data distributions.
Additionally, at each turn, we remove any question
that is ill-posed or becomes redundant when posi-
tioned in dialogue. For instance, the question “how
many red rubber objects are there?” is removed if
in a prior dialogue turn, the question is “how many
red objects are there?” and the answer is already
“1”. To do this, we perform a check at every dia-
logue turn to determine whether involving objects
and their attributes are already mentioned in the
dialogue object state. Finally, we only keep dia-

Dialogue
Dialogue Object State
TR
OR
TT
A
S
T
Q1: before the large thing 's first flight , what color is the average thing that is in front of the small thing? A1: yellow
Q2: what about its material ? A2: rubber
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow}, {obj3: 
size=small}
✓
✓
Q3: during the earlier mentioned small thing 's first slide , 
what shape is the stationary thing to the right of the 
aforementioned average object? A3: cube
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow, 
material=rubber}, {obj3: size=small}
✓
Q4: during the same time period , how many average cyan 
shiny things are behind the gray object? A4: 1
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow, 
material=rubber}, {obj3: size=small}, {obj4: shape=cube}
✓
Q5: how about to the left of it ? A5: 0
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow, 
material=rubber}, {obj3: size=small}, {obj4: shape=cube}, {obj5: 
color=gray}, {obj6: color=cyan, size=average, material=metal}
✓
✓
✓
Q6: throughout the whole video , does the earlier cube 
object fly more frequently than the earlier mentioned 
average object slides ? A6: True
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow, 
material=rubber}, {obj3: size=small}, {obj4: shape=cube}, {obj5: 
color=gray}, {obj6: color=cyan, size=average, material=metal}
✓
Q7: what about up until now ? A7: False
{obj1: size=large}, {obj2: size=average, color=yellow, 
material=rubber}, {obj3: size=small}, {obj4: shape=cube}, {obj5: 
color=gray}, {obj6: color=cyan, size=average, material=metal}
✓
Figure 6: Dialogue generation: In each dialogue turn, we generate questions with randomly sampled cross-turn
dependencies: temporal relation (TR), object reference (OR), and topic transfers (TT), including attribute (A),
spatial (S), and temporal (T) transfer. We maintain a dialogue object state of active objects which are color-coded.
logues that have cross-turn dependencies in 9 out
of 10 turns, considering the ﬁrst turn semantically
independent. Figure 5-(e) provides the distribution
of dialogues by the number of TR, OR, and TT
relations. For more analysis of DVD, please refer
to the supplementary material.
4
Dialogue Systems on DVD
The video-grounded dialogue task in DVD is de-
ﬁned as a turn-based retrieval task from multiple-
choice candidate answers. At each dialogue turn
i (i = 1, 2, ..., 10), video input Vi, the ground-
truth dialogue context, including question and an-
swer pairs up to the last dialogue turn, Ci =
(Qk, Ak)|k=i−1
k=1
, the question of the current turn
Qi, are provided. The system is given a set of
candidate answers A, predeﬁned as all possible an-
swer values for all question types, with |A| = 40
in DVD, and is required to select one answer from
A. We evaluate models by the accuracy of pre-
dicted answers against the ground-truth answers.
For a system denoted as θ, the objective function
is: ˆ
Ai = arg maxA P(Ai|Vi, Qi, Ci; θ).
4.1
Experimental Setup
Baselines. We experimented with a representa-
tive set of baseline approaches on DVD, includ-
ing: (1) Answer Prior, which selects the most pop-
ular answer option as predicted answers; (2) Q-
type (Random/Frequency), which assume known
question types and select a random or most popu-
lar answer from the corresponding answer space;
(3) Q-retrieval (TF-IDF), which retrieves the most
similar question from the training set and use its
answer as the predicted answer; (4) RNN(Q) and
HRNN(C+Q), which encode dialogue-only compo-
nents without seeing visual information to predict
answers; (5) HRNN(C+Q)+CNN(V)/TA(V), same
as (4) but with access to visual information which
is encoded by pretrained CNN models and tem-
poral attention (TA) (Jang et al., 2017; Lei et al.,
2018; Hori et al., 2019); (6) TF(C+Q+V), which
uses a Transformer-based architecture to encode
visual and language information (Schwartz et al.,
2019; Le et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). Finally, we
conducted internal human evaluation on a subset
of the DVD test split. For each test sample, a hu-
man received an input video, dialogue history, and
the question for the current turn. The human was
required to select an answer from the list of 40
candidates A to answer the question.
Experiments. Video-grounded dialogues entail
a lot of visio-linguistic and reasoning challenges
that are not easy to be studied in isolation using ex-
isting datasets. To address this issue with DVD, we
exploit the rich annotations of DVD in our experi-
ments during evaluation. We designed our experi-
ments to systematically analyze model capabilities
and shortcomings through unique challenges in
video-grounded dialogue systems. Speciﬁcally, in
Section 4.2, we analyzed the results of all models
overall as well as by each question type. In Section
4.3, we leverage the spatio-temporal annotation
of visual objects to analyze model performance
by related video interval types, spatial reasoning
(results by object containment), and temporal rea-
soning (results by relative interval length). In terms
of dialogue contextual complexity, in Section 4.4,

Accuracy
Answer
Prior
Q-type
(Random)
Q-type
(Freq)
Q-retrieval
(TF-IDF)
RNN
(Q)
HRNN
(C+Q)
HRNN
(C+Q)+
CNN(V)
HRNN
(C+Q)+
TA(V)
TF
(C+Q
+V)
Human
All
21.3
27.8
35.3
32.1
39.7
45.8
49.3
50.2
51.1
89.3
Action count
0.0
9.3
23.4
19.8
16.3
28.2
37.8
36.0
38.8
87.5
Action query
0.0
12.7
23.7
20.6
25.8
33.1
36.7
38.6
39.4
88.1
Attribute query
0.0
32.9
38.7
39.4
38.1
39.2
43.3
45.1
43.1
98.0
Compare action seq
33.4
34.1
37.3
35.1
45.5
52.5
58.2
57.5
61.6
91.5
Compare action set
25.1
28.2
36.3
28.2
32.8
40.0
43.0
44.3
45.4
82.9
Compare action freq
48.5
50.0
50.5
44.4
58.4
56.9
62.3
65.2
67.1
88.5
Object count
0.0
9.1
23.3
18.8
26.2
38.6
40.0
40.2
39.9
90.6
Object exist
48.9
49.8
51.1
54.4
66.4
67.0
69.2
69.4
69.0
92.3
None
0.0
32.1
38.3
39.0
38.3
39.5
43.1
45.1
43.4
99.1
Atomic (non-spatial)
18.8
26.3
31.9
42.4
47.2
47.8
49.9
50.7
48.9
83.3
Atomic (spatial)
21.2
27.3
35.5
27.6
36.8
46.0
47.5
47.6
47.1
93.9
Compositional
22.8
28.0
35.4
32.1
40.0
45.8
50.2
51.4
53.2
87.1
Transfer (attribute)
0.0
30.7
45.5
37.1
40.8
45.7
54.5
57.3
57.7
100.0
Transfer (spatial)
49.8
42.4
44.9
26.4
29.6
48.1
47.7
47.4
48.0
90.5
Transfer (temporal)
28.9
38.4
22.6
3.0
30.2
53.5
62.2
64.6
69.0
79.8
Table 2: Experiment results on the DVD test split: Models are evaluated by overall accuracy and by question
types (Top), accuracy by video intervals in question (Center), and transferability accuracy (Bottom).
we use cross-turn relation annotations to analyze
model performance by temporal-based attention
shift (TR), dialogue turn distance (OR), and short-
term transferability (TT).
4.2
Results
From Table 2 (Top), we observe that “blind” sys-
tems that use answers only or questions only,
achieve quite poor results up to 39% accuracy. By
selecting the most popular answer option, Answer
Prior only achieves 21% accuracy. When a “blind”
model has access to dialogue history, the perfor-
mance increases up to 45%. This increment shows
that dialogue context contains useful information
for a dialogue system to infer answers. We note
that on average there are nearly 3 out of 10 question
turns with a topic transfer per dialogue (see Figure
5-(e)). In such cases, a model can randomly make
a good guess by just reusing the answer of the last
question turn. When a system is presented with
the visual input, we observe model performance
increases up to 51%. However, in the best system,
the performance is still far below the human level
with a performance gap of 38 absolute points.
In Table 2 (Top), from the results of Q-
type(Random) per question type, we observed that
answers are balanced in each question type. The ta-
ble also shows performance drops between pairs of
object-oriented vs. action-oriented question types.
For instance, TF(C+Q+V) achieves 38% accuracy
in Action count vs. 39% in Object count, and 39%
accuracy in Action query vs. 43% in Attribute
query. In comparison-based questions, comparing
action sets tend to be more challenging than com-
paring action sequences. To compare action sets of
two objects in a video interval, a system needs to
process the interval completely. However, to com-
pare action sequences, in most cases, the system
can determine the answer after the ﬁrst few action
steps the objects perform. For more analysis of
question types and sub-types, please refer to the
supplementary material.
4.3
Analysis by Visual Complexity
To understand the drive of the performance by vi-
sual inputs, we investigated the results by the visual
complexity in questions. In Table 2 (Center), com-
pared to HRNN(C+Q)+CNN(V), models using at-
tention, either through TA(V) or Transformer, show
more improvement in compositional interval ques-
tions with increments up to 3 absolute points. In
other types of intervals, the performance gains are
not very signiﬁcant. Particularly, in atomic-interval
questions that require spatial localization, the per-
formance does not change when applying attention.
This observation necessitates systems that focus on
both spatial and temporal space of visual inputs.
In Figure 7 (Left), we analyzed model perfor-
mance by the number of objects mentioned in ques-
tions that are contained in video scenes. We noted
that current models are vulnerable to visual ob-
ject containment, as the accuracy decreases by the
number of contained objects. This observation is
consistent with the results of CATER action recog-
nition tasks (Girdhar and Ramanan, 2020). In Fig-
ure 7 (Right), we investigated model performance

Figure 7: Experiment results by visual properties:
Left: results by the number of objects mentioned in
question that are contained in video scenes. Right: re-
sults by the relative length of video interval in question.
by the relative length of ground-truth video inter-
val in question, measured as the percentage of the
whole video length. To make a fair analysis, we
removed cases in which a question can be solved
correctly without localizing the speciﬁc video inter-
val but simply using the whole video. We observed
that model performance decreases as the interval
length increases, demonstrating the challenge of
long-term video understanding in video scenes. We
noted that there is a drop in performance in the low-
est range of interval lengths, 0−10%. As this range
often represents atomic intervals, the majority of
which include questions with spatial relations, sys-
tems are negatively affected and the curve drops
initially in this low range.
4.4
Analysis by Cross-turn Relations
We examined model performance in a multi-turn
setting by cross-turn semantic relations. First, we
investigated the effect of TR. In a TR-injected ques-
tion, a system is required to learn to retrieve a video
segment related to the last used segment. However,
some questions may be correctly answered without
localizing the correct segments. For instance, at
the current dialogue turn, a question is of interval
(tm, tn) and at the next turn, a question with an
“after” TR is of interval (tn, tq) (s.t. tm < tn < tq)
might be solved if the visual context is the same
in both intervals. We separate such question turns
and measured the results of the remaining ques-
tions with TR relations “after” and “before”. From
Figure 8, we observed that current systems are
not optimal to learn to shift attention to related
intervals, depending on the type of questions. In
action-based questions (AC, AQ, CASeq, CASet,
and CAF), the results of “before” and “after” TR
are lower than those without a TR relation, but in
object-based questions (OC, OE), we observed dif-
ferently. This difference can be explained by the
dynamics of actions vs. objects. Between video
intervals, information about object actions (e.g. fre-
(a) TF(C+Q+V)
(b) HRNN(C+Q) + TA(V)
Figure 8: Experiment results by temporal relations:
Action count (AC), Action query (AQ), Attribute query
(AttQ), Compare action sequence (CASeq), Compare
action set (CASet), Compare action frequence (CAF),
Object count (OC), and Object exist (OE).
Figure 9: Experiment results for cross-turn reason-
ing: Results of Action count questions by turn position
(Left) and by turn distance of object references (Right).
quency, types) tends to change more easily than
objects themselves. Action-based questions chal-
lenge systems through cross-turn temporal reason-
ing more than object-based questions.
Secondly, we analyzed the impacts of long-term
memory OR. From Figure 9 (Left), we noticed that
model performance becomes more stable in sys-
tems where dialogue history is introduced as an
input. For instance, compared to RNN(Q), the per-
formance curve of TF(C+Q+V) follows a more
gentle downward trend from low to high dialogue
turn positions. To fairly analyze performance by
OR turn distance, we discard any instances that
do not require systems to use dialogue context to
resolve the references, but simply rely on the input
video. For example, a question with a reference
“the earlier mentioned red object” is removed if
there is indeed only one “red object” in the video
scene. From results by OR turn distance in Figure
9 (Right), we observed all systems are relatively
unstable, even as dialogue history is introduced
as an input. This difference against the results by
turn position exhibits a limitation of current sys-
tems as they struggle to resolve object references
by existing dialogue encoding techniques.
Finally, to analyze the effect of TT relations, we
investigate a new metric, called transferability, in
Table 2 (Bottom). When a system is presented with
a question turn with a topic transfer, it should learn

to derive the answer in relation to the context of
the last dialogue turn. If the last answer is right,
an intelligent system should be able to consistently
answer in the current turn correctly. For instance,
given a question-answer pair “what is the color
of the sliding cube? red”, a human can often in-
fer the answer to a TT(A)-injected question “what
about its material?” based on the same visual ob-
ject. We gather questions that precede questions
containing topic transfers and call this set Qtt
prior.
For each question qtt
prior that the model answered
correctly, we measure the accuracy over the corre-
sponding transferred question qtt and average the
scores. We observed a clear performance gain from
RNN(Q) to HRNN(C+Q) in terms of transferabil-
ity metric, demonstrating the impacts of dialogue
context on TT questions. A chance-based system
can achieve approximately 50% transferability by
just recycling answers from prior turns. The best
system results, however, are still far from human-
level performance. This observation necessitates
systems designed with a better contextual memory
to adapt past context in new dialogue turns.
5
Discussion and Conclusion
We have introduced DVD, a diagnostic dataset de-
signed to analyze video-grounded dialogue sys-
tems. DVD dataset is generated with tight control
of data bias through balancing the question and an-
swer distribution and questions are built based on
a principled approach to reﬂect the complexity in
videos and dialogues. Our results have shown that
DVD can provide interesting insights into system
abilities and limitations. Speciﬁcally, our analy-
sis has revealed some key shortcomings of current
models, including: (1) limited ability to efﬁciently
integrate visual information from both spatial and
temporal space; (2) limited ability to recognize
and compile multiple actions in long-ranged video
intervals; (3) inconsistent performance across dia-
logue turns, especially in cases when systems are
required to switch attention temporally; and (4) un-
stable performance to resolve object co-reference
in the dialogue context, especially when the turn
distance of the object references increases.
These insights provide potential avenues where
we hope DVD will be a useful benchmark to ex-
plore new ideas. Speciﬁcally, we discuss two re-
search directions:
Dialogue object tracking. To further diagnose
a dialogue system, we aim to study their long-term
memory reasoning ability to track objects and their
attributes mentioned in the dialogue context. We
are inspired by research work of dialogue state
tracking in task-oriented dialogues (Bordes et al.,
2017) and propose to use tracking accuracy met-
ric in video-grounded dialogue systems. At each
turn t, a video-grounded dialogue system should
be able to track and update a dialogue state St,
deﬁned as a set of all mentioned objects ot
i and
their attributes, including sizes zt
i, colors ct
i, ma-
terials mt
i, and shapes st
i: St = (ot
1, ot
2, ...) =
((zt
1, ct
1, mt
1, st
1), (zt
2, ct
2, mt
2, st
2), ...).
We deﬁne
two tracking metrics, including joint accuracy,
measuring the accuracy of prediction of all objects
and attributes as a set, and slot accuracy, measur-
ing the accuracy of predicted attributes individually.
The introduction of these evaluation metrics neces-
sitates a new learning task, dialogue object track-
ing (DOT) in video-grounded dialogue systems, to
better understand current systems’ long-term rea-
soning ability.
Video interval tracking. Another aspect of di-
alogue systems that we want to diagnose is their
ability to localize video segments in a multi-turn
setting. Each question turn often focuses on dif-
ferent parts of the video as the dialogue extends
over time. It is important to learn how a system can
localize the right segments of the video from turn
to turn. Similar to DOT, we deﬁne a new learning
task for video interval tracking (VIT) in a similar
nature as text-to-clip tasks (Anne Hendricks et al.,
2017). The task can be deﬁned as a ranking task
of segment candidates to choose the relevant seg-
ments in each question turn. This task is evaluated

and mean intersection over union (mIoU). Alter-
natively, we can adapt grounding, a simple metric
used by Hudson et al. (2019) to assess spatial atten-
tion of image regions. in DVD, grounding can be
used in temporal attention-based approaches to de-
termine model ability to localize the right position
of video intervals in question.
Finally, we want to emphasize that DVD is de-
signed as a synthetic dataset for diagnosis purposes
to systematically evaluate model capabilities. The
benchmark should not be used to replace data of
human dialogues but be used to supplement real-
world dialogue datasets.
