Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
Charles P. Martin∗
Kai Olav Ellefsen†
Jim Torresen‡
Abstract
Musical performance requires prediction to operate instruments, to
perform in groups and to improvise. In this paper, we investigate how
a number of digital musical instruments (DMIs), including two of our
own, have applied predictive machine learning models that assist users
by predicting unknown states of musical processes. We characterise
these predictions as focussed within a musical instrument, at the level
of individual performers, and between members of an ensemble. These
models can connect to existing frameworks for DMI design and have
parallels in the cognitive predictions of human musicians.
We discuss how recent advances in deep learning highlight the role
of prediction in DMIs, by allowing data-driven predictive models with
a long memory of past states. The systems we review are used to
motivate musical use-cases where prediction is a necessary component,
and to highlight a number of challenges for DMI designers seeking to
apply deep predictive models in interactive music systems of the future.
1
Introduction
Prediction is a well-known aspect of cognition. Humans use predictions
constantly in our everyday actions [17], from the very short-term, such as
predicting how far to raise our feet to climb steps, to complex situations
such as predicting how to avoid collisions in a busy street and, ﬁnally, to
long-term planning. Prediction can be deﬁned as guessing unknown or future
states of the world informed by our current and past experiences. When
our predictions are not accurate, such as lifting our feet for one too many
steps, the error is used as a warning to correct our actions; in that case, the
warning is the sensation of surprise. Neuroscientists are now able to observe
prediction in action in the human brain. In particular, prediction has been
observed for visual perception [63], as well as musical perception [66]. Other

0001-5683-7529

0003-2466-2319

0003-0556-0288
1
arXiv:1801.10492v3  [cs.SD]  19 Dec 2018

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
Figure 1: Many types of cognitive prediction are required in musical per-
formance from low-level instrumental control to high-level planning using
multiple senses. Musical machine learning models can be used in digital
instruments to support performers’ predictions. (Photo: © Peter Hislop)
researchers have theorised that prediction and expectations are key to our
aesthetic appreciations [11], and, indeed, that prediction is the fundamental
basis for intelligence [36].
Musical performance involves many layers of prediction (see Figure 1).
Skilled performers predict the sounds produced by diﬀerent instrumental
gestures; they predict the musical eﬀect of rehearsed expressions and impro-
vised sounds; and they predict the musical actions of an ensemble. It may
seem natural that interactive music systems and digital musical instruments
(DMIs) should incorporate prediction to better account for the complexity
of musical performance. Brown and Giﬀord have noted that prediction
has been only modestly implemented in such systems [11], particularly for
incorporating proactivity into musical agents.
In contrast, we feel that many DMIs already use predictive models of
various kinds. These models are often used to generate new musical data,
manage ensemble experiences, or handle complex sensor input. Unfortunately,
the design frameworks that are often called upon to understand these DMIs
do not generally consider the role of prediction; they tend to focus on reactive
rather than predictive operation.
In this paper we investigate how DMI designs using predictive models can
2

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
lead to new creative aﬀordances for performers and DMI designers. We draw
parallels between predictive models in DMI designs and cognitive predictions
that musicians use to perform. We show how a number of existing DMIs
have applied predictive models to supplement these cognitive predictions,
extending and supporting the performer’s creativity. These systems apply
various machine learning (ML) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) approaches;
however, we review where recent work in deep learning has had particularly
meaningful applications in DMIs and where it could be used in future systems.
A practical contribution is that we frame two important, but usually
separate, problems in computer music—mapping and modelling—as diﬀerent
sorts of predictions. Mapping refers to connecting the control and sensing
components of a musical instrument to parameters in the sound synthesis
component [39]. While acoustic instruments often have no separation between
the control mechanism and sound source (e.g., a guitar string), the separation
in electronic instruments allows the potential for many exciting and creative
mappings, but also design diﬃculties.
Modelling refers to capturing a
representation of a musical process [23]. The model can be used to generate
further music [2], or help understand music that has been created. Both of
these problems have heuristic, as well as ML approaches. While mapping is
one of the main problems in interactive music system design, modelling is
often applied in non-real-time composition systems.
Mapping and modelling have parallels in the musical performance predic-
tions shown in Figure 1. Performers learn to predict the sonic result of their
control gestures; this involves building a cognitive mapping between control
and sonic output. Performers also do higher level prediction of the notes
or gestures they play either by looking ahead in a score, or planning and
selecting from diﬀerent musical possibilities in an improvisation. This clearly
involves modelling musical processes at various levels. Finally, in a group
situation, performers predict the action to sound relations and high-level
musical direction of other musicians or a conductor. This involves both
mappings and high-level models learned through experience.
By rethinking mapping and modelling as diﬀerent kinds of predictions,
we can bring multiple musical applications of ML together. This exposes
some future opportunities for endowing DMIs with predictive intelligence.
It also helps to understand some of the challenges of predictive DMIs, such
as interacting in ensemble situations, and handling temporal eﬀects such as
rhythmic, harmonic and melodic structures.
In the next section we discuss what prediction can mean in a musical
context, review the development of musical deep learning models, and discuss
how predictive models can be incorporated into DMIs and live musical
performance environment. In Section 3, we review applications of predictive
ML in two of our interactive music systems and systems from the literature.
Finally, in Section 4, we examine the beneﬁts and challenges that predictive
models can bring to DMI designers and performers.
3

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
Figure 2: Predictive models in an interactive context can predict future
states of a known sequence or the present state of an unknown process.
2
Prediction and Music
Cognition involves many levels of prediction that we rely on for our everyday
actions [17]; however, it is not always clear how prediction could be integrated
into creative tools in a beneﬁcial way. In this section, we will discuss what
prediction can mean in an interactive system, what musical predictive models
show most promise for interactive use, and how they might ﬁt into DMI
designs and musical performance.
2.1
What is a Prediction?
A simple deﬁnition for prediction could be as follows: the estimation of
unknown data based on current knowledge and perceptions. This deﬁnition
encompasses the everyday understanding that prediction relates to data in
the future (e.g., weather predictions), as well as the ML understanding of
prediction as simply any unknown variable (e.g., image classiﬁcation). In
an interactive music application, perceptions will generally consist of sensed
information about the performer and musical environment. Knowledge will
consist of previous experiences summarised in a learned model and latent
variables. Unknown data can come in two main varieties, as shown in Figure
2: future values of the sensed information, or some diﬀerent process running
in parallel.
For future predictions, the sensed information may include the performer’s
movements or gestures, symbolic musical data, or high-level information
about the musical context. In ML, this kind of temporal prediction is often
referred to as sequence learning [77] or time series forecasting [16]. Predictions
do not have to relate to the future. In ML, the two typical types of prediction
tasks are classiﬁcation and regression, where models are trained to predict
4

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
categorical and quantitative data respectively [35]. Both of these terms are
often applied when predicting a diﬀerent type of data than that given as
input, without supposing any temporal relationship. Such present predictions
can have a role in musical interaction as well; for instance, a model might
predict classiﬁcations of musical technique from gestural sensors.
2.2
Models of Musical Sequences
Using automatic systems to generate music is a compelling and enigmatic
idea. From the rules of counterpoint and music theory, to explorations of
indeterminacy in musical composition and performance by composers such as
John Cage or Iannis Xenakis, algorithmic composition has been practiced for
centuries. More recently, artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) have been used
to generate musical compositions and, now, digital audio signals directly.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are often used to generate sequences
of musical notes in a one-by-one manner, where the input is the previous
note and output is the next predicted note to occur. Mozer’s CONCERT
system [56] is an early example of this idea. The later introduction of gated
units such as the long short-term memory (LSTM) cell [38] improved the
ability of such networks to learn distant dependencies. RNNs with LSTM
cells were later used by Eck and Schmidhuber to generate blues music [24].
These models have a ﬂexible ability to learn about the temporal context in a
sequence and thus mimic human cognitive abilities for sequence learning and
prediction [18].
Other popular systems for generating music use Markov models to gener-
ate the emission probabilities of future notes based on those preceding [3, 23].
The advantage of RNN models over Markov systems is the latter requires
unreasonably large transition tables to learn distant dependencies in the data
[56]. RNNs can make more “fuzzy” predictions, interpolating between the
training examples, rather than attempting to match them exactly [31].
The proliferation of GPU computation and large datasets has contributed
to the popularity of creative RNN models. Character-level text generation
[42], is now well known in computational arts. Music, too, can be represented
as text and generated by an RNN such as the “ABC” formatted folk songs of
the FolkRNN project [76]. More complex musical forms such as polyphonic
chorales of J. S. Bach have also been modelled by RNNs; Hadjeres et al’s work
on DeepBach allows such a model to be steered towards generating voices
to accompany certain melodies [33]. RNN models can even be combined
with the rules of music theory via a reinforcement learning tuning step
described by Jaques et al. [40]. Google’s Magenta project1 has developed
a collection of RNN models for music generation and has notably released
1Magenta - Make Music and Art Using Machine Learning: https://magenta.tensorﬂow.
org.
5

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
trained versions of several musical RNN models and used them in creative
tools and experimental interfaces.
These models learn much about the temporal structure of music, and how
melodies and harmonies can be constructed; however, there is more to music
than these aspects. Sturm et al. [75] acknowledge as much, calling the output
of FolkRNN “transcriptions” of (potential) folk tunes, not tunes themselves.
These transcriptions have a melody, but musicians need to contribute their
own arrangement and expression to perform them as complete musical works.
Some recent models have begun to integrate more aspects of music into
their output, and thus produce more complete performances. Malik and
Ek’s StyleNet [47] annotates existing musical scores with dynamic (volume)
markings. Simon and Oore’s PerformanceRNN [71] goes further by generating
dynamics and rhythmic expression, or rubato, simultaneously with polyphonic
music. In terms of representations of music, PerformanceRNN’s output could
be said to be thicker [21] than FolkRNN’s thin output, because it contains
much more of the kind of information required to actually perform a musical
work.
Of course, an even thicker representation of music would be the actual
sounds of the performance. WaveNet models [80] can render raw audio
samples using dilated causal convolutional layers, rather than a recurrent
network, to handle temporal dependencies. These models are capable of
producing samples, the short musical sounds that can be used in music
production [25], as well as translating between diﬀerent “styles” of music [55].
These models show great promise; however, computational requirements
have not been suﬃciently overcome for them to be widely explored in an
interactive context.
2.3
Prediction in Musical Interaction
In this section we explore where predictive models can be situated within DMI
designs and musical performance environments, and the cognitive predictions
that they could support. Interactive music systems are often divided into
three stages: sensing, processing, and response, as shown in Figure 3 [67].
While this framework is simple, it provides a helpful division of concerns and
has previously been used to frame DMI designs [22] including those using
ML [27]. This framework highlights that electronic music systems, unlike
most acoustic instruments, are modular. The sensing and response stages in
particular are often interchangeable, for instance, diﬀerent interface designs
(e.g., keyboard, wind, or percussion controllers) could be used with the same
synthesiser. Complex systems may have multiple interconnected sensors,
processing stages, and responses, and might span across an ensemble.
A predictive model can be considered as an extra component of this
framework, providing extra, or unknown, information in some part of the
DMI. Predictive models have some ﬂexibility about the type of information
6

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
Figure 3: The three-stage model for interactive music systems. A predictive
model could be considered as an extra component of this framework.
Figure 4: Predictive models can be situated at various levels in musical
performance scenarios: within the instrument, at the level of the individual
performer, and between performers in a group.
they have as input and output and can connect to this framework at various
points. Input could come from either the sensing or response stage, and
output could be directed to any stage: sensing, as some additional generative
sensed data; processing, as parameters or adjustments to the mapping; or
response, as commands for a synthesis system.
Of course, music-making involves interactions not just inside an instru-
ment, but between it and a performer, between the members of an ensemble,
and others such as conductors, composers and audiences. Within this system,
there are many ways to situate a predictive model that might imitate human
cognitive prediction, as discussed in Section 1, or make new kinds of con-
nections. For the purposes of our review, we will consider three levels that
predictive models could focus on within the interactive process of musical
performance. These are illustrated in Figure 4 and described as follows:
1. instrument-level prediction: The model is focussed on the internal
components of the interactive music system and generally predicts
7

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
synthesis parameters, or aspects of the synthesis response, from sensor
data. Thus, it replaces or supplements an instrument’s processing stage.
The model generally operates on a time-scale within individual notes.
2. performer-level prediction: The model predicts an individual per-
former’s musical actions with their instrument over time and in their
musical context. The actions could be represented at a low-level (sensor
or audio data) or high-level (symbolic music or lead sheet). The model
could predict actions that are missing or in the future, and is focussed
on the interactions between performer, instrument, and the unfolding
musical process. The time-scale is between notes and up to large-scale
musical structures.
3. ensemble-level prediction: The model predicts actions of other mem-
bers of an ensemble. This could consist of multiple performer-based
models, or a more high-level model of interactions between ensemble
members. The model is focussed on interactions between performers
in the ensemble, but could operate at time-scales within or between
notes.
These levels for prediction correspond to typical divisions of concerns in
music performance, but could be ﬂexible in practice given that DMIs can be
constructed with multiple connections as mentioned above. For instance, an
instrument-level model might beneﬁt from information about the ensemble
context. Other kinds of prediction could also be considered that include
information about audiences, composers, conductors, or other factors.
Predictive models at each level can be related to existing cognitive
predictions that a human performer uses unconsciously in order to support
or extend these functions. Instrument-level prediction relates the movements
or gestures for controlling an instrument with the pitch, duration, volume,
and timbral quality of the resulting sound, mimicking the action-sound
relationships developed when learning to play an instrument. Performer-level
prediction could allow a DMI to guess musical actions of the performer that
are missing or occur in the future. Musicians have a similar model of musical
possibilities, either by reading ahead in a score, following a memorised piece,
or improvising new music. Many diﬀerent predictions are possible at the
ensemble level; for instance, anticipating the rhythmic pulse of an ensemble,
that one musician will play a solo, or the best dynamic to enhance the
collective sound. Ensemble-level models could generate “virtual” ensemble
members to accompany a solo performer, or predict future notes between
networked musicians to account for latency.
3
Predictive Interactive Music Designs
In this section, we review DMI designs that include predictive models,
including some examples of our own work (see Table 1 for a complete listing).
8

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
These examples are divided among the three levels for prediction outlined
above, and we discuss the purpose and conﬁguration of the predictive model
in each case. While many of these systems do not use deep learning models,
they show how predictive interaction can be incorporated into creative tools
and artistic practices.
3.1
Instrument-level Prediction
The potential of ML models to predict the parameters of sound synthesis
systems from gestural or control input has been acknowledged since at least
the early 1990s [44]. One early application was Fels and Hinton’s GloveTalk
II system [26], where a number of ANNs connected hand and ﬁnger sensors
to a voice synthesiser. This system was trained to produce vocal sounds
from examples given by the user. Fels and Hinton reported that GloveTalk
II users needed to learn the mappings from gesture to sound, but the ML
model could also be re-trained to better connect to gestures the user had
learned so far, thus supplementing their cognitive model for operating the
system. Predictive models at the instrument level can similarly adapt to a
user’s existing model of gesture-to-sound, perhaps one learned on an acoustic
instrument, by mapping desirable sounds closer to practised gestures. As
a result, performers can learn to play new DMIs more quickly and explore
wider creative possibilities.
3.1.1
ML as mapping
Many artists and researchers wish to connect complex or multiple sensors
to the parameter controls of audio or computer graphics systems. As with
GloveTalk II, this can often be accomplished eﬀectively with classical ML
models such as shallow ANNs or k-nearest neighbour classiﬁcation [1]. Artists
have been aided in this regard by software such as Wekinator [29], that
connects such algorithms into interactive music environments, allowing them
to be trained interactively by recording examples of control data matched to
the expected output classes or parameters. In practice, training such models
on-the-ﬂy and iteratively allows for valuable creative exploration of their
aﬀordances and predictive power [28, 27].
Snyder’s Birl [74] is a series of self-contained electronic wind instruments
where continuous-valued buttons (e.g., capacitive sensors) are used as the
control input. One iteration of the Birl used an ANN to map between these
buttons and the pitch of the synthesised sound. This ANN was trained
interactively using Wekinator, but later implemented on a microcontroller.
The advantage of the ANN over a hand-built mapping in this case was that
designed ﬁngering-to-note mappings could easily be learned, but the ANN
also interpolates between these ﬁngerings (i.e., when a button is not fully
touched) and creates some, perhaps unpredictable, output for untrained
9

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
combinations. This ML approach, however, is potentially more diﬃcult to
understand than rule-based or physical model approaches to mapping that
were also used with the Birl [73].
The use of predictive models in the processing stage is becoming more
common in interactive music designs; however, these models do not always
consider the temporal component of the data. As a result, they may not be
able to model all aspects of the musical interaction. For instance, if a sensor
can measure hand position, a non-temporal model might be able to map
the position of the hand to a response, but not the direction of the hand’s
motion. Using RNNs, rather than non-recurrent ANNs for instrument-level
prediction could better account for temporal eﬀects in performance.
The above listed systems have all used supervised learning to generate
algorithms for instrument-level prediction, with sets of training data provided
either by a DMI designer or performer. An interesting alternative is applied
in the Self-Supervising Machine [72]. In this system, real-valued input data
is segmented during performance by an adaptive resonance theory algorithm
[15], and these examples are stored to progressively train and re-train a
shallow ANN mapping to synthesis parameters. Among several use-cases,
the model is used with input data sourced from a touchscreen, and from the
sonic features of a violin. This system allows all learning to take place with
an interactive musical performance session; however, as the predictive model
is unknown until it is created, the performer needs to learn their own model
of the DMI’s behaviour without practice, as the authors note, this “lack of
constraints can be challenging” [72].
3.1.2
Predicting extra responses
Many DMI designs seek to augment existing musical instruments with audio
eﬀects, extra sounds, or visual elements. When performers literally have their
hands full, a predictive model may be able to interpret gestural information
from cameras and other sensors to control these extra responses.
In 000000Swan’s Monster [69], Wekinator’s predictive models are used to
track the output from a Kinect camera and a K-Bow, a sensor-laden bow for
string instruments [54]. Output from these models are used to control trigger-
ing of audio samples, parameters on audio eﬀects, and computer generated
visuals. The performers provided training examples by matching demon-
strations of sensor input with desired synthesis and visual conﬁgurations in
Wekinator.
The PiaF or Piano Follower [79] is an augmented piano system designed
to track auxiliary gestures in the pianist’s hands during performances and
use these to control synthesised sounds including processing of the piano
audio. The core of the system consists of a piano keyboard connected to an
audio processing system with sound output. A Kinect depth-sensitive camera
captures the position of the performer’s hands, arms, and body during the
10

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
performance which is sent to a gesture variation follower (GVF) algorithm
[14]. This temporal ML model tracks multiple dimensions of input data
to classify from a number of trained gestures. GVF additionally provides
continuous data about the speed, scale and rotation of the gesture. This is
particularly useful in a creative interface where important expressive control,
for example over timbre in a musical instrument, could be encoded in control
variations.
When operating PiaF, the performer’s movements throughout a composed
performance are broken down into a sequence of gestures during a training
phase. During performances, data from the Kinect is sent to the GVF system
to determine which gesture is being performed (and thus, which part of the
performance is being played). This, and variation data about that gesture
are used to control parameters in the audio processing part of the system.
The result is a system that can enhance the pianist’s expressive options
during performance.
In Monster and PiAF, the output of the predictive models were directly
tied to parameters in synthesiser and visualisation systems; however, ML
models can also be directed to more abstract, high-level, classiﬁcations. The
BRAAHMS system uses a functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
headset to measure the “cognitive workload” of a piano performer [81] and
a support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁer. This system adds generative
harmonic lines to melodies playing on the piano under either low- or high-
workload conditions. Ben-Asher and Leider used a naive Bayes approach
on pianists’ hand movements to classify the emotional content of their
performance into six high-level categories [6]. These classiﬁcations were
used to drive a visualisation during performances. Deep ANN models might
be able to predict high-level information, such as ratings of expression or
rhythmic accuracy, directly from audio signals [62].
3.2
Performer-level Prediction
ML models for performer-level prediction build a representation of the
notes, sounds, or actions that represent a performer’s planned or recorded
interactions with an instrument. Such models are often directed towards
capturing a certain musical style [23] and generally are conﬁgured to predict
future notes on the basis of those previously played. Performer-level models
can be used in two main ways: predicting future notes, which can be played
back or compared to those actually played, or used to analyse the music
that has already been played [19]. In the following examples, performer-level
prediction is generally used to ﬁll-in musical parts that the performer doesn’t
play, or to continue when they stop.
11

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
3.2.1
“Continuing” Musical Interactions
The Continuator is a DMI that models and imitates the style of individual
performers to “continue” their performances where they leave oﬀ[60]. The
performer plays on a control interface where high-level MIDI note data is sent
to a synthesis module; this MIDI data is also tracked by the Continuator. As
soon as the performer stops playing, the Continuator activates, generating
new MIDI notes in the same style as the performer’s recent input and
sending them directly to the synthesiser.
When the performer resumes
playing, the Continuator ceases the imitation and goes back to tracking their
performance. The temporal predictions here are generated by a variable order
Markov model that chooses from the space of various notes and rhythms
entered by the performer. This relatively simple model allows the system to
learn on-the-ﬂy but limits the range of temporal dependencies that can be
represented.
Beatback is a model focussed on drum machine performance [37]. Sim-
ilarly to the Continuator, Beatback uses a variable order Markov model
which is trained during performance from musical material supplied by the
performer. In drum machine patterns, performers play notes on the diﬀerent
sounds of the acoustic drumset: bass drum, snare, hi-hats, etc. Beatback’s
call-and-response mode predicts likely continuations of the user’s complete
drum pattern when they stop playing. A second “accompaniment” mode
functions diﬀerently, by only predicting notes for instruments that the user
leaves out. For drum machine performance, and unlike many other instru-
ments, predicting simultaneous musical phrases can serve as a practical
augmentation for solo performance, rather than a duet.
Deep RNN models can be applied to musical continuation in a similar way
to the Markov models. The Magenta project’s AI Duet [48] integrates their
Melody RNN model into an interactive music system that can run as part of
a computer music environment or in a self-contained web application. The
Melody RNN attempts to predict new notes from those in the recent past—it
automatically activates during performance, playing back its predictions
in a diﬀerent voice allowing the user to engage in call-and-response style
improvisation. Where the Continuator’s Markov model was trained on the
performer’s own playing, the Melody RNN needs to be pre-trained on a
large corpus of MIDI data. In practice, the ability to learn from a very large
corpus of data can be a signiﬁcant advantage; a novice user might provide
very simple musical input and the RNN could encourage or inspire them
with more elaborate musical ideas.
The systems above operate on symbolic music as both input and output
but it is also possible to produce continuations of audio signals. OMax is
a system of agent-based predictive models designed for use in interactive
improvisation [4]. This system can handle polyphonic MIDI data as well
as audio, so can be used by musicians playing acoustic instruments. OMax
12

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
allows one, or multiple, factor oracle models [5] to be trained in real-time
during a musical performance from streams of symbolic music data. The
system can capture audio signals, use pitch-tracking or some other feature
analysis to classify the signal into sequences of classes that are used to
train the predictive models, and then respond in the performer’s own sound
using concatenative synthesis of the recorded signals [4]. In the future, audio
feature analysis in a similar system could be handled by a deep belief network
(DBN) [34] or convolutional neural network (CNN) (e.g., [8]), which could
be trained oﬄine on larger amounts of audio data.
3.2.2
MySong
MySong is a system to automatically generate harmony accompaniments
for vocal melodies [70]. The predictive model takes as input a vocal melody
sung by the user and outputs a sequence of chords that match the melody.
The melody and chords can then be played back together allowing the user
to hear a piano arrangement of their performance. The predictive model in
MySong blends predictions made by a hidden Markov model (HMM) and
a simple, non-temporal model of chord probability based on the notes that
appear in each musical measure. The user is able to tune the predictions to
emphasise the HMM or melodic chord assignment, as well as a parameter
between models learned from songs divided between major and minor modes.
The beneﬁt of MySong’s predictive model is that a user is able to hear
their vocal improvisations in the context of a full musical arrangement, a
much more complete musical work. MySong supports the user’s creativity
and allows them to reﬂect more productively on their performances by
predicting an appropriate harmonic context. Although MySong plays back
a piano accompaniment to the melody, we categorise this model as making
performer-level predictions as the chords relate mostly to the melody rather
than the response of another performer. MySong’s HMM model seems to
have been eﬀective, but recent research suggests that bidirectional RNNs can
achieve better predictions with more diverse, and perhaps more interesting,
chord sequences [46].
3.2.3
RoboJam
RoboJam [53] (shown in Figure 5) is a call-and-response agent developed
by the authors that uses an RNN to continue musical performances created
in a smartphone app [52]. RoboJam is unique in using this RNN to model
musical control data rather than musical notes. In this way, the predictive
model connects to the sensing stage of the interactive music framework.
In this application, performers using a smartphone app collaborate asyn-
chronously by contributing 5-second performances to a cloud-based music
system. The short performances are created by simple mappings of touch-
13

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
Figure 5: RoboJam is a call-and-response agent for continuing touchscreen
musical performances. It uses an RNN to generate a sequence of real-valued
touch interactions after being conditioned on a user’s performance.
screen taps and swiping to notes played by various synthesiser instruments.
RoboJam conditions an RNN on these short performances and predicts an
additional 5 seconds of control data. This predicted data is used to play
a diﬀerent synthesiser and layered with the original performance. These
are musical (rather than ensemble) predictions as they continue the per-
former’s own control data. This system allows users to hear more complex
performances quickly, and to hear their performance in context with diﬀerent
layered sounds.
RoboJam’s predictive model is trained on a corpus of musical touchscreen
interactions which consist of touch locations and the time since the previous
interaction. The model uses a mixture density RNN inspired by models of
line drawings [32] to predict sequences of this real-valued data. Importantly,
this model is able to predict the rhythm of interactions absolutely, rather
than quantised to a set number of steps per measure.
Since the model predicts low-level musical control data, rather than notes,
it could be said to learn how to perform music, than how to compose. This
arrangement means that RoboJam has access to the whole expressive space
of the touchscreen mapping and can potentially perform very convincing
responses.
Since RoboJam learns to play through the touchscreen, its
performances can also be played through any of the synthesis mappings
available in the app; so, if the user performs using a string sound, the
RoboJam response might be played back with a drum sound. While low-level
learning has beneﬁts, it comes at a cost of diﬃculties in training—RoboJam’s
continuations are yet to be as musically convincing as AI Duet’s.
14

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
3.3
Ensemble-Level Prediction
In ensemble-level prediction, a model predicts the actions of other members of
a musical group. In this section we review a number of systems in two broad
categories: those that use such models to support networked performance
scenarios; and those that simulate an ensemble from the performance of a
single musician. We also discuss an example of our own work where an RNN
is used to simulate a free-improvisation touchscreen ensemble.
3.3.1
Network Ensemble Prediction
In network musical performance, groups of musicians perform together over
network connections from diﬀerent physical locations [43]. Time delays over
networks are unavoidable and can prevent convincing performance depending
on the physical distance, system latency, and the temporal sensitivity of the
music. Predictive models between the musicians can allow information to be
transmitted ahead of actual musical events, allowing the music at each end
to be correctly synchronised.
The MalLo system accomplishes this task for percussion performances
by incorporating a predictive model into a percussion instrument [41]. This
model, described by Oda et al. [58], uses computer vision techniques to track
the position of the percussionist’s mallets and quadratic regression to predict
when the mallet will strike the instrument before this actually occurs. By
predicting mallet strikes, MalLo can preemptively send note data to remote
participants which is scheduled to occur in time with the local sound. Similar
systems have been implemented to predict Indian percussion patterns [68],
and to support massed ensemble performances using a common metronome
[13].
In a related form of ensemble-level prediction, the collective behaviour
of a group is collected over a network and analysed to identify important
events in a performance. In Metatone Classiﬁer [50], control data from a
touchscreen ensemble is sent to a central server that, ﬁrst, uses a Random
Forest classiﬁer to identify high-level gestures and, secondly, generates a
Markov model to predict whether the ensemble has collectively changed its
style of improvisation. This information is sent back to the touchscreen
DMIs to trigger changes in the individual interfaces.
3.3.2
Simulated Ensemble Prediction
Individual musicians often engage in simulated ensemble experiences of
diﬀerent kinds, from practice and performance with a ﬁxed backing track to
the popular use of looping eﬀects. With predictive models, these experiences
can be made reactive and ﬂexible to the changing behaviour of the performer.
These applications usually include some kind of performer-level prediction, to
15

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
model the behaviour of other individuals in an ensemble and to understand
the performance of a live soloist to provide appropriate accompaniment.
A relatively well-explored form of simulated ensemble prediction is score
following, where an algorithm tracks a performer’s progression through a
known musical score to provide a synthesised accompaniment synchronised
to the soloist [20]. The task of tracking the performer’s location is often
accomplished with a hidden Markov model where the performer’s notes are the
observed states and score locations are the hidden states [59]. The Orchestra
in a Box system uses an HMM in this way and provides accompaniment by
playing back a time-stretched backing track [64].
For styles of music such as jazz, rock, and pop, a “thick” musical score is
usually not available, and so more advanced predictive models are needed
to create the accompaniment. In many cases, these can be constructed
using a combination of rule-based and ML systems. Biles’ GenJam system
[7], for instance, uses genetic algorithms to generate appropriate jazz-style
accompaniments with ﬁtness determined from the rules of music theory. This
system is also able to engage in interactive improvisation with the human
performer by mutating their improvisations to create responses.
In some cases, accompaniments can be generated from a musician’s own
musical material. The Reﬂexive Looper [61] records, manipulates and plays
back audio from the musician to create an accompaniment. Unlike a simple
live looping eﬀect that allows a musician to record a loop and subsequent
layers (typically using a pedal interface), the Reﬂexive Looper uses predictive
models to automatically choose audio material to play and manipulates it to
a known harmonic progression. A support vector machine is used to classify
the performer’s recent notes as either melodic, chordal or bass playing, a
generative music system then chooses appropriate backing recordings from
the two classes that are not being played. While the sound material was
generated and manipulated in real-time, the structure of the performance in
the Reﬂexive Looper was limited to pre-determined chord progressions and
song structures [49].
The above systems generally represent a “virtual” ensemble only through
sound or simple visualisation, although these musicians can also be embodied
as robots playing physical acoustic and electronic instruments [10]. For
example, the marimba-playing robot Shimon has been used in various inter-
active music scenarios [9], and employs predictive models for tracking human
musicians, prediction of musical notes to play, and communication through
physical gestures. Robotic music systems require other types of prediction
to control physical movements, a focus of the SHEILA system for imitating
drum patterns [78], but these are beyond the scope of this paper.
16

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
Figure 6: The Neural Touchscreen Ensemble uses an RNN to predict ensemble
responses to a human performer’s gestures. The system supports quartet
performances with three RNN-controlled iPads responding to one human
performer.
3.3.3
The Neural Touchscreen Ensemble
The Neural Touchscreen Ensemble [51], a system developed by the authors,
is an RNN-driven simulation of a touchscreen ensemble experience.
A
human performer plays freely improvised music on a touchscreen and an
ensemble performance is continually played back on three RNN-controlled
touchscreen devices in response. Both the human and computer-controlled
devices use a simple app that allows struck or sustained sounds from a
limited selection of notes. The performer’s touch control data is sent to the
server which, using a Random Forest classiﬁer, predicts a high-level gestural
class for the latest data once every second. The classes come from a simple
vocabulary of 9 touchscreen gestures described in previous research on iPad
ensemble performance [50]. The RNN uses three layers of LSTM units and
is conﬁgured to predict gestural classes in three parallel sequences, that
of the three ensemble performers. Four gestures are taken as input—the
human performer’s present gesture, and the ensemble’s gesture at the last
time step—and the RNN outputs the three gestures for the ensemble at the
present step. Control signals matching the gestures can then be played back
by the ensemble devices from a corpus of performance recordings.
This system uses both an instrument-level prediction model (touchscreen
control data to gestural class) and ensemble-level prediction to predict
potential responses. The RNN ensemble model is temporal as it uses previous
experience stored in the LSTM units’ state to make predictions. Although
the whole system takes touchscreen control data from the sensing stage as
both input and output, the RNN model predicts only high-level gestures.
Control data is generated from these gestures by a touch synthesis module. In
17

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
Figure 7: Gesture-RNN predicts appropriate gestural motions for three
ensemble members based on present information about the human performer,
and past information about the ensemble.
a more advanced system, touchscreen interactions could be directly predicted
as in RoboJam. The Neural Touchscreen Ensemble’s musical content—freely
improvised touch interaction—would not be easily described by music theory
used in GenJam or the Reﬂexive Looper above. A data-driven approach to
modelling this kind of interaction was required.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we have drawn parallels between predictive models in in-
teractive music systems with cognitive predictions involved in performing
music. We have reviewed how existing systems, including two from our own
group (RoboJam and the Neural Touchscreen Ensemble), have implemented
predictive models at the instrument-, performer-, and ensemble-level. A
variety of ML techniques have been employed, including models that forecast
future values of a known time-series, or that predict the present value of an
unknown quantity. In each case, predicting this unknown data has allowed
the systems to do more than we would normally expect of a musical instru-
ment. They are able to act preemptively, to make more expressive use of the
user’s musical control data, and to predict ensemble responses from artiﬁcial
agents or remote participants.
Our review demonstrates that deep learning models, in particular, have
much to oﬀer predictive musical interaction. RNN models can learn from
large corpora of training data allowing wide musical experience to be included
in a DMI. This contrasts with Markov-based predictive models that tend to
learn only from the performer’s contribution. Deep models are ﬂexible and
can be designed to predict multiple dimensions of related data simultaneously
with the same temporal model. We took advantage of this ability in both of
our systems. In RoboJam, we were able to predict touchscreen interactions in
both 2D space and absolute time, a novel improvement on typical step-based
musical models. The Neural Touchscreen Ensemble uses a typical RNN design,
18

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
but the input and output one-hot vectors actually encode multiple performer
gestures. Despite the interest in deep ANNs for generating symbolic music,
few interactive music systems apply these as predictive models. We suggest
that other musical deep models could be incorporated into interactive music
designs to take advantage of their ﬂexible capacity for data-driven prediction,
and potential to generate low-level output such as control or audio data.
Although we have discussed many interactive music systems that use ML
models, these are not often characterised in relation to cognitive prediction.
We think that this undersells the importance of prediction in these systems
and in musical performance in general. Embedding predictive intelligence
into DMIs appears to be a crucial step towards creating interfaces that allow
more expression, follow performers more naturally, and engage more closely
with ensembles. Further exploration of their relationship with cognitive
prediction could help expose ways to use these models in music performance.
In the ﬁnal part of this paper we will discuss what we see as the beneﬁts
that predictive models can oﬀer to DMI designers and performers, as well as
some challenges that they may face.
4.1
Beneﬁts of Prediction
Music and sound are temporal phenomena and yet, the widespread framework
for interactive music systems shown in Figure 3 does not necessarily consider
the axis of time. Indeed, the fundamental archetype for DMIs is reactive;
response necessarily follows gesture. We think that predictive models are
vitally important to embedding a temporal axis into interactive music design.
In reality, predictive models are used in DMI design. Considering prediction
as an essential part of interactive music design frameworks allows these
temporal models to be properly understood, examined, and developed. This
issue has gained increasing relevance in recent years due to deep learning
models enabling new insights into the diﬃcult problem of predicting long-term
structure in music [65].
While traditional acoustic musical instruments are (necessarily) reactive,
their players are not. Musicians are constantly proactive whether anticipating
a conductor’s beat or introducing a musical idea in a free jam. By embedding
predictive models into DMIs, instruments can be proactive as well, to the
beneﬁt of their users and listeners. Indeed, in situations where reactive
design is insuﬃcient for successful performance, such as networked ensemble
performance, predictive systems such as MalLo have been successful. We
envisage that proactive elements could be deployed much more widely in
DMIs; interfaces could change to aﬀord upcoming musical needs as well as
respond to the users’ commands.
Typical interactive music designs often include many conﬁguration pa-
rameters in the processing stage of their architecture. Predictive models
can be used to adapt these parameters to meet musical requirements of the
19

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
performer, audience, or composer. In the PiaF system, we have observed
that the GVF model adapts audio processing parameters according to the
speed and size of predicted gestures. Indeed, predictive adaptations in an
interactive music system could go much further than processing parameters.
Virtual reality, touchscreen, or haptic interfaces could be designed to adapt
their complexity or functionality according to a predicted requirement.
One of the clearest use-cases for predictive models in interactive music
design is to generate musical data that reﬂects the recent style of the user.
Automatic music generation, however, can sometimes seem like a solution
in search of a problem (Who wants to listen to AI generated music when
you can play it yourself?). Both our RoboJam and Neural Touchscreen
Ensemble systems use predictive generation to enhance solo performances.
In RoboJam, response performances are generated so that the user can hear
their own work in context, while in the Neural Touchscreen Ensemble, the
actions of three RNN-controlled musicians are generated and synthesised in
real-time during the performance.
A strong motivation to continue the introduction of deep generative
models into DMIs is that the musical data of new interfaces is often unknown
and not well-modelled by music theory. Predictive RNN models, such as that
used in RoboJam, could be able to learn a wide variety of low-level control
data. Future DMIs could even use deep models with digital audio data as
input or output. These could replace multiple parts of the three-stage DMI
framework and provide multiple types of prediction simultaneously.
4.2
Limitations and Challenges
Adding predictive models to DMIs can present many challenges to designers
and performers. From a design perspective, it can be challenging to develop
and train ML models that are artistically stimulating. Environments that
allow classical ML models to be trained in near real-time (e.g., [29, 12, 30, 45])
assist DMI creators to experiment and evaluate the creative potential of
these models [28]. Similarly responsive environments for deep models are yet
to appear, although the Magenta project has made moves in this direction.
As a result, the integration of RNNs and other deep models into DMIs has
been limited.
Where deep models are applied, they can present further diﬃculties.
Models that represent lower level data, such as the control signals in RoboJam,
tend to be more diﬃcult to train than symbolic music predictors. This is
partly due to larger amounts of training time and data required in comparison
to Markov systems or shallow ANNs, and is an ongoing challenge in our
research. While larger datasets can ameliorate this issue, this may not allow
a short, interactive and iterative training process in the style of Wekinator.
One workaround could be to apply transfer learning [57], where a small part
of a large pre-trained ANN is tuned using a small number of examples.
20

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
In all predictive models, the predictions are limited to the knowledge
available in the training data. The neural touchscreen band’s RNN is trained
on performance segments and not whole performances. As a result, it can
be diﬃcult to get the simulated ensemble to start playing, and to stop at
the end of performance. This shortcoming suggests that a few rule-based
elements could be helpful, even in data-driven models.
Understanding predictions in a DMI can be challenging for performers.
For instrument-level prediction, this is sometimes overcome by including
the performer in the training process [69, 26]. For models that are trained
during performance, the performer needs to continually update their own
understanding of the model in parallel, which can become overwhelming.
DMIs that change their mappings under a musician’s ﬁngers run the risk
of frustrating rather than engaging the performer. Predictive models that
simply continue when the performer is not playing allow the performer time
to listen and understand. For systems where extra sounds are generated by a
predictive model in synchrony with the musician, the source of these sounds
must be clear. One strategy is to follow structured performance paradigms
such as jazz interaction, or live-looping; another is to physically embody
these responses in robots or visually represented instruments.
4.3
Final Remarks
Prediction has clear roles in musical performance. In this work we have
shown how predictive models can ﬁt into DMI design by complementing and
extending the cognitive prediction already used by performers. Our review
has explored the musical and creative consequences of prediction at the
instrument-, performer-, and ensemble-level. In a world where AI and deep
learning interactions are increasingly built into everyday devices, the place of
predictive models in musical interaction certainly bears scrutiny. While DMI
designs show strong use of multi-modal sensing, highly creative processing,
and artistically savvy responses, predictive models have sometimes been
under-explored. We argue that considering machine learning models in DMIs
as extensions of human cognitive predictions helps to explain their beneﬁts
to users and performers. Deep models, such as RNNs, are being widely
explored for music modelling, but, despite their ﬂexibility in learning large
and low-level musical sequences, are not yet widely used in DMIs. Future
deep predictive models may be able to handle multiple types of prediction
in a DMI, with end-to-end mappings from sensors directly to sound. To
achieve these deep predictive DMIs, we challenge musical interface designers
to consider prediction as a new framework for ML in interactive music.
21

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
4.4
Funding
This work was supported by The Research Council of Norway as a part of
the Engineering Predictability with Embodied Cognition (EPEC) project,
under grant agreement 240862.
4.5
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
22

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
Table 1: Predictive interactive music systems reviewed in this
paper ordered by level: instrument-level (inst.), performer-
level (perf.), and ensemble-level (ens.). The machine-learning
model used, and its input and output conﬁguration are also
listed.
Title
Description
Model
Input
Output
Level
GloveTalk II [26]
speech synthesis control
MLP
hand sensors
synthesis parameters
inst.
PiaF [79]
control eﬀects with hand gestures
GVF
Kinect
audio eﬀect parameters
inst.
BRAAHMS [81]
adaptive harmonisation using BCI
SVM
fNIRS
harmonisation parame-
ters
inst.
Emotionally intel-
ligent piano [6]
control visualised colours
naive Bayes
IMU
emotion classes
inst.
The Birl [74]
control synth through button inter-
face
MLP
capacitive button
sensors
continuous pitch
inst.
Self-Supervising
Machine [72]
control synth through unsupervised
control interface
ART, MLP
touchscreen
con-
trol data
synthesis parameters
inst.
000000Swan’s
Monster [69]
control extra synth and video layers
MLP, classiﬁer
Kinect, k-bow
synthesis and video pa-
rameters
inst.
AI Duet [48]
continue performance
RNN
symbolic music
symbolic music
perf.
RoboJam [53]
continue performance
RNN
touchscreen
con-
trol data
touchscreen control data
perf.
23

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
Table 1: Predictive interactive music systems reviewed in this
paper ordered by level: instrument-level (inst.), performer-
level (perf.), and ensemble-level (ens.). The machine-learning
model used, and its input and output conﬁguration are also
listed.
Title
Description
Model
Input
Output
Level
Continuator [60]
continue performing in user style
Markov
symbolic music
symbolic music
perf.
MySong [70]
automatic accompaniment genera-
tion for vocal melodies
HMM
audio
chord sequence
perf.
OMax [4]
improvisation agent
Markov, FO
symbolic music
symbolic music
perf.
Beatback [37]
continue or ﬁll-in drum performances
Markov
symbolic music
symbolic music
perf.
GenJam [7]
band accompaniment in real-time
GA
symbolic music
symbolic music
ens.
MalLo [41]
predict percussion strokes
quad. regr.
camera / Leap mo-
tion
percussion stroke time
ens.
Metatone Classi-
ﬁer [50]
update interface during free impro-
visation
RF, Markov
control data
improvisation events
ens.
Neural
Touch-
screen
Ensemble
[51]
accompany improvisation in real-
time
RNN, RF
control data
ensemble gesture classes
ens.
Orchestra in a box
[64]
score-following system
HMM, Bayes’n
net
audio
score locations
ens.
24

Deep Predictive Models in Interactive Music
Table 1: Predictive interactive music systems reviewed in this
paper ordered by level: instrument-level (inst.), performer-
level (perf.), and ensemble-level (ens.). The machine-learning
model used, and its input and output conﬁguration are also
listed.
Title
Description
Model
Input
Output
Level
TablaNet [68]
tabla stroke recognition and phrase
prediction
kNN, Bayes’n
net
audio
symbolic music
ens.
Shimon [9]
robotic marimba player
Markov, curve
matching,
kinect,
symbolic
music
physical movements
ens.
SHEILA [78]
robotic drum player
ESN
drum
pattern
class
symbolic music, motor
control
ens.
25

C. P. Martin, K. O. Ellefsen, J. Torresen
