1
On the Minimal Adversarial Perturbation for Deep
Neural Networks with Provable Estimation Error
Fabio Brau, Giulio Rossolini
Alessandro Biondi, Member, IEEE and Giorgio Buttazzo, Fellow, IEEE
Department of Excellence in Robotics and AI, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy
Abstract—Although Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown incredible performance in perceptive and control tasks, several
trustworthy issues are still open. One of the most discussed topics is the existence of adversarial perturbations, which has opened an
interesting research line on provable techniques capable of quantifying the robustness of a given input. In this regard, the Euclidean
distance of the input from the classiﬁcation boundary denotes a well-proved robustness assessment as the minimal affordable adversarial
perturbation. Unfortunately, computing such a distance is highly complex due the non-convex nature of DNNs. Despite several methods
have been proposed to address this issue, to the best of our knowledge, no provable results have been presented to estimate and bound
the error committed.
This paper addresses this issue by proposing two lightweight strategies to ﬁnd the minimal adversarial perturbation. Differently from the
state-of-the-art, the proposed approach allows formulating an error estimation theory of the approximate distance with respect to the
theoretical one. Finally, a substantial set of experiments is reported to evaluate the performance of the algorithms and support the
theoretical ﬁndings. The obtained results show that the proposed strategies approximate the theoretical distance for samples close to the
classiﬁcation boundary, leading to provable robustness guarantees against any adversarial attacks.
Index Terms—Adversarial Robustness, Deep Neural Networks, Trustworthy AI, Veriﬁcation Methods
!
1
INTRODUCTION
I
N the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) achieved
impressive performance on computer vision applications,
such as image classiﬁcation [1] and object detection [2].
Despite their excellent results, all those models are
liable to adversarial attacks, deﬁned as input perturbations
intentionally designed to be undetectable to humans but
causing the model to make a wrong output [3], [4]. Extensive
studies have been conducted for improving these attacks
through effective techniques that minimize the distance from
the original input to make the resulting adversarial input
imperceptible to humans.
Finding the closest adversarial example, or in other terms,
the minimal perturbation capable of fooling the model, is
a notorious hard problem, because it involves the solution
of a non-convex optimization problem with highly-irregular
constraints, due to the intrinsic nature of DNNs [4]–[7].
Almost all the powerful attacks presented in the literature
(e.g., [4]–[10]) rely on the loss function gradient to build
up optimization methods for crafting those perturbations.
In a nutshell, their basic idea is to move the adversarial
perturbation towards the direction that mostly increases the
loss function, thus increasing the probability of a misclassiﬁ-
cation.
•
F.Brau, G.Rossolini, A. Biondi and G. Buttazzo are with the Depart-
ment of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna

•
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version
may no longer be accessible.
Although the above methods provide an affordable
empirical solution to the minimal perturbation problem, to
the best of our records there is no theoretical analysis that
estimates and bounds the error committed.
This paper. Inspired by the known strategies that aim at
solving the minimal adversarial perturbation problem, this
work aims at providing an approximate solution supported
by an analytical estimation of the error committed. The
motivation behind this work is to leverage the approximate
solution and the analytical ﬁndings to provide provable
statements regarding the trustworthiness of the classiﬁcation
model with respect to a given input.
In the following, we ﬁrst discuss the minimal adversarial
perturbation problem for a binary classiﬁer and then we
extend the analysis to a multi-class classiﬁer. To solve
the above problem, we propose two new strategies that
leverage a root-ﬁnding paradigm for computing the distance
from the boundary. Differently from the previous work,
aimed at solving the minimum perturbation problem, the
proposed strategies allow formulating an error estimation
theory that quantiﬁes the quality of the computed distance with
respect to the theoretical optimum. More speciﬁcally, Section 4
provides provable properties about the existence of a tubular
neighborhood with radius σ, where the error between the
approximate distance and the minimum distance from the
classiﬁcation boundary can be bounded. Figure 1 better
clariﬁes the latter point by illustrating an example of binary
classiﬁcation. If x is the input vector and f(x) is the classi-
ﬁcation function learned by the network, our formulation
provides an estimation of the radius σ from the classiﬁcation
boundary B = {f(x) = 0} having some regularity property.
The regularity is expressed in terms of the ﬁrst and the
arXiv:2201.01235v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2022

2
Fig. 1: Illustration of the addressed problem. The blue points
are DNN inputs, while the black line f(x) = 0 is the
classiﬁcation boundary that distinguishes points belonging
to the class −1 (f(x) < 0) and class 1 (f(x) > 0). The
dotted line starting from each point is the unknown opti-
mal perturbation, which is orthogonal to the classiﬁcation
boundary. The black arrows represent the gradient directions.
Observe that the gradients computed on the points whose
distance from the boundary is closer than σ provide a good
approximation to the minimal adversarial distance.
second derivatives of the classiﬁer and measures the linearity
of the classiﬁcation boundary.
Section 5 reports an extensive set of experiments carried
out to validate the theoretical ﬁndings with a list of tests
aimed at estimating the distance of an input from the
classiﬁcation boundary. The objective of such such tests is to
compare the distance computed by the proposed strategies
with the approximate minimum distance obtained with a
global-search method. Therefore, we validate the theoretical
ﬁndings and we propose an empirical estimation of σ.
Another set of experiments exploits the theoretical ﬁnd-
ings presented in Section 4 to derive a lower bound on
the magnitude of any adversarial perturbation for a given
input. Such a lower bound is assessed by generating a set
of powerful adversarial attacks and showing that they are
not capable of ﬁnding adversarial examples of magnitude
lower than the estimated distance derived by the proposed
line-search methods.
In summary, this paper makes the following contribu-
tions:
• It proposes two strategies based on a root-ﬁnding
algorithm to solve the minimal adversarial perturbation
problem close to the classiﬁcation boundary.
• It presents an analytical estimation of the error com-
mitted by solving the minimal adversarial perturbation
problem with the above strategies.
• It provides an analytical estimation of the neighborhood
in which the previous analysis holds by leveraging a
novel coefﬁcient that measures the regularity of the
classiﬁer.
• It presents a rich set of experiments to validate the
theoretical ﬁndings and a practical estimation of the
radius σ that is used to deduce a provable robustness
against any adversarial attack bounded in magnitude.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 brieﬂy reviews previous related work and the
most effective adversarial perturbation techniques. Section 3
introduces the two strategies to derive an approximate
solution of the minimum adversarial perturbation problem.
Section 4 provides the theoretical formulation of the error
estimation. Section 5 shows the experimental results. Finally,
Section 6 states the conclusion and proposes ideas for future
works.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
This section aims at presenting the problem of ﬁnding
the closest adversarial example for a given input while
discussing the most related papers on this topic.
2.1
Challenges in adversarial robustness
The literature related to adversarial robustness is quite vast.
The problem of adversarial perturbations for DNNs was
ﬁrst introduced by Biggio et al. [3] and independently by
Szegedy et al. [4]. Since then, a large number of works
followed for proposing more powerful attacks [5], [6], [8], [9],
detection mechanisms [11]–[13], and defense strategies [14]–
[16]. Most adversarial attacks use a gradient based approach
to craft adversarial perturbations. Although they generate
impressive human undetectable adversarial examples, the
reliability of the gradient direction is often taken for granted
and no bound was ever provided on the error committed,
with respect to the minimal theoretical perturbation.
2.2
Minimum adversarial perturbation problem
We consider a neural classiﬁer with n inputs and C outputs,
where C is the number of classes that can be recognized.
Let f : Rn →RC be a continuous function such that
an input x ∈Rn produces an output f(x) ∈RC. For a
given input x, the predicted class ˆk(x) is deﬁned as the index
corresponding to the strictly highest component of f(x);
in formulas ˆk(x) is such that fˆk(x)(x) > fk(x) for each
k ̸= ˆk(x). If the maximum component is not unique, that
is, fˆk(x)(x) = maxk̸=ˆk(x) fk(x), then we deﬁne ˆk(x) = 0
meaning that the classiﬁcation cannot be trusted.
It is also useful to deﬁne Rj := {x ∈Rn : ˆk(x) = j}
as the region of the input space corresponding to the class
j, and Bj as the classiﬁcation boundary for class j (or the
frontier of Rj).
Let x be a correctly classiﬁed sample with label l. The
problem of ﬁnding the minimal adversarial perturbation δ∗,
such that x + δ∗is the closest adversarial example to x, can
be obtained by solving the following minimization problem
d(x, l) = min
δ∈Rn
∥δ∥
s.t
ˆk(x + δ) ̸= l,
(MP)
where ∥·∥represents the Euclidean norm and the scalar value
d(x, l) represents the distance between x and the closest
adversarial example x + δ∗, or, equivalently, the distance of
x from the classiﬁcation boundary.
Note that, to practically apply the above formulation to
computer vision, two additional constraints are required: box-
constraint and integer-constraint. The box-constraint ensures
that the adversarial example x + δ is such that 0 ≤x + δ ≤1
(assuming images with pixel values normalized in [0, 1]). The
integer-constraint ensures that each pixel xi perturbed by δi
is encoded into an integer with Q gray levels (e.g., Q = 256),
that is, Q · (xi + δi) ∈[0, Q −1] ∩N.

3
Nevertheless, this work focuses on the unconstrained
formulation, as done by Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [5], since
it is more compliant for the proposed analytical study.
Note that this does not reduce generality, since the solution
of MP provides a lower bound of the constrained problem.
Therefore, to reduce clutter, unless differently speciﬁed, the
domain of the perturbation δ is equal to Rn.
The following paragraphs review relevant state-of-the-art
techniques for ﬁnding a practical solution of the previous
minimum problem. For the sake of clarity, we group them
into different categories depending on the approaches fol-
lowed for solving MP.
2.3
Penalty Methods
A well known technique to solve a minimum constrained
problem is given by the Penalty Method [17]. For instance,
Szegedy et al. [4] and Carlini and Wagner [6] introduced
a penalty term c and solved the following minimization
problem:
min
δ
c · ∥δ∥+ L(x + δ, l)
(1)
where the hyper-parameter c is selected through a line search.
The rationale of c is to balance the importance of the two
terms in the cost function. The second term L represents a
speciﬁc loss function that is positive in region Rl and zero in
∪j̸=lRj. Carlini and Wagner analyzed different loss functions
ﬁnding that L(x, l) = (fl(x) −maxj̸=l fj(x))+ produces the
most effective results, where f + = max{0, f}.
It is worth observing that in both works [4] and [6], a box
constraint is added to achieve an adversarial perturbation
that is feasible in the image domain. In particular, Szegedy et
al. [4] exploited the L-BFGS-B optimizer [17] to directly solve
the minimum problem with the box-constraint 0 ≤x+δ ≤1,
while Carlini and Wagner [6] introduced a change of variable
to reduce to the solution of an unconstrained problem.
Although both the previous techniques allow crafting
accurate perturbations, they turn out to be expensive in terms
of memory usage and computational cost. Moreover, they
require to repeat the optimization procedure over multiple
choices of the penalty c, causing a large number of forward
and backward network passes, thus resulting in a slow
convergence.
2.4
Toward Faster Methods
A key contribution towards less expensive solutions of MP
was given by the Decoupling Direction and Norm method
(DDN) presented by Rony et al. [9] (recently extended by
Pintor et al. [18] for different lp norms), where the authors
avoid searching for the best value of the penalty term
c. Instead, they search for an adversarial example in the
Euclidean ball centered in x with radius ε by performing
some gradient descent steps with the loss function used
to train the model and projecting the result on the sphere.
Then, depending on whether the solution is an adversarial
example, they adjust the radius of the sphere and iterate the
procedure.
Another approach, named Augmented Lagrangian Method
for Adversarial Attack (ALMA) [19], uses the same paradigm
but avoids searching for the best penalty c through a line-
search, by exploiting the Lagrangian duality theory [20].
Although both DNN and ALMA outperform the method
by Carlini and Wagner in terms of execution time (by making
less forwards and backwards passes), they do not provide a
theoretical estimation of the goodness of the solution.
2.5
Distance Dependent Attacks
Much closer to this paper, DeepFool (DF) [5] is a famous fast
method for ﬁnding a minimal adversarial perturbation. It
leverages the geometrical properties of a speciﬁc distance
(e.g., l2) to quickly generate accurate solutions for MP.
In short, the method provides an approximate solution
of MP by performing an iterative gradient based algorithm
with variable step size at each iteration. To be compliant with
the terminology used in Section 3, the problem solved by DF
can be rewritten by considering the minimal solution of a list
of less expensive minimum problems d(x, l) = minj̸=l dj(x),
where dj(x, l):
dj(x, l) = min
δ
∥δ∥
s.t
fl(x + δ) ≤fj(x + δ).
(2)
The
main
idea
consists
of
building
a
sequence
x(1), x(2), . . . , x(k), . . . that converges to an approximate
solution of MP, which lies in the adversarial region ∪j̸=lRj.
Given x(k), let ˜fj(x) be the ﬁrst order approximation
of (fl(x) −fj(x)) in x(k). Then, the next element of the
sequence x(k+1) is obtained by considering the minimal
solution dj(x(k), l) of Problem 2 applied to ˜fj(x) rather than
(fl −fj)(x). Since ˜fj is an afﬁne function, the problem has
an exact solution of the form
x(k+1) = x(k) −
˜fj(x(k))
∥∇˜fj(x(k))∥
∇˜fj(x(k))
∥∇˜fj(x(k))∥
.
(3)
The procedure turns out to reach convergence in K ≈3
steps, resulting in 2CK forward and backward passes, if
applied to a classiﬁer with C classes. The comparative study
reported in [9] empirically shows that the solution is close to
the one found by more expensive methods, as Carlini and
Wagner. However, it is crucial to point out that, since the
iteration is stopped when the adversarial region is reached,
there is no guarantee that the procedure provides a solution
of MP. Indeed, the procedure just ensures that a feasible
perturbation satisfying the constraint ˆk(x + δ) ̸= l, is found.
In other words, to the best of our knowledge, there are
no theoretical point-wise estimations of the approximation
error, but only estimations of the average distance from the
classiﬁcation boundary [21].
2.6
This work
Although the reviewed methods can craft accurate adversar-
ial perturbations, they do not provide an estimation of the
error committed with respect to the optimal distance.
Differently from the methods described above, this work
presents two methods for ﬁnding an approximate solution
of MP that simpliﬁes a complex global computation by treat-
ing it as a root-ﬁnding procedure. This allows formulating an
error estimation theory that is formally illustrated in Section 4
and validated in Section 5. Moreover, a ﬁnal test leverages the
estimated error for deriving provable robustness guarantees
of a given input x against any adversarial attack.

4
3
BOUNDARY DISTANCE VIA ROOT ALGORITHM
This section illustrates two main strategies that provide an
approximate solution to problem MP by reducing it to a
minimal root problem. A theoretical analysis for evaluating
the approximation error is provided in Section 4.
Both strategies leverage two main observations: (i) the
gradient of f suggests the fastest direction to reach the
adversarial region; and (ii) due to the objective function,
the minimal perturbation lays on the classiﬁcation boundary.
The two considerations above naturally bring to searching
the minimal perturbation as the intersection between the
classiﬁcation boundary and the direction of the gradient ∇f.
3.1
The Case of Binary Classiﬁers
Differently from a multi-class classiﬁer, a binary classiﬁer can
be modeled as a scalar function f : Rn →R that provides a
classiﬁcation based on its sign, i.e., for each x ∈Rn, ˆk(x) =
sgn(f(x)). Let x be a correctly predicted sample of class
l ∈{1, −1}. Due to the objective, the minimal perturbation
δ∗that solves MP is such that the perturbed sample x + δ∗
belongs to the classiﬁcation boundary, i.e. x + δ∗∈B = {p ∈
Rn : f(p) = 0}. This can easily be proved by contradiction
by observing that, if δ∗is a solution of MP, but sgn(f(x)) ̸=
sgn(f(x + δ∗)) ̸= 0, then, due to the continuity of f, there
exists 0 < t < 1 such that f(x + tδ∗) = 0, which is a
contradiction because ∥tδ∗∥< ∥δ∗∥.
Based on this observation, we can replace the original
problem with the following minimization problem with an
equality constraint
d(x, l) = min
δ
∥δ∥
s.t
f(x + δ) = 0,
(MP-Eq)
equivalent to a minimum distance problem from set B.
It is worth observing that the gradient ∇f(p) is orthogo-
nal to the boundary B for each p ∈B, and that, if x is close
to the boundary, then ∇f(x) ≈∇f(p∗) (where p∗= x + δ∗)
provides the fastest direction to reach the boundary. Hence,
it is reasonable to approximate MP-Eq with the following
minimal root problem (a formal proof of this is reported in
Section 4):
t(x, l) = min
t∈R+
t
s.t
f(x + tν(x)) = 0
(RP)
where ν = −sgn(f(x)) ∇f(x)
∥∇f(x)∥represents the direction that
best approximates ∇f(p∗) at the ﬁrst order.
3.2
Extension to Multi-class Classiﬁers
The extension of the binary case to a multi-class classiﬁer is
not unique. This section presents two different strategies to
tackle the problem.
3.2.1
The closest boundary
The Closest Boundary strategy (CB) leverages the idea that
the minimum problem related to a classiﬁer with C classes
can be reduced to a list of minimum problems for binary
classiﬁers.
In detail, let x be a sample, correctly classiﬁed by f with
label l ∈{1, . . . , C}, and let
dj(x, l) = min
δ
∥δ∥
s.t
fl(x + δ) ≤fj(x + δ).
(4)
Then, we observe that d(x, l) = minj̸=l dj(x, l), where
d(x, l) solves MP. This can be proved by reformulating the
statement with the following inequalities
min
j̸=l dj(x, l) ≤d(x, l) ≤min
j̸=l dj(x, l).
Let δ(j) be the solution of dj(x, l). The second inequality is
a consequence from the fact that δ(j) satisﬁes the constraint
of MP and that, by construction, d(x, l) is lower than ∥δ∥for
each feasible δ. The ﬁrst inequality, instead, can be proved
by observing that Problem MP is equivalent to
d(x, l) = min
δ
∥δ∥
s.t
fl(x + δ) ≤max
j̸=l fj(x + δ).
(5)
Hence, if δ∗is the solution of Problem MP and if
j∗∈argmaxj̸=l fj(x + δ∗), then, by construction, δ∗satisﬁes
the constraint of Problem 4 for j∗, and so minj̸=l dj(x, l) ≤
dj∗(x, l) ≤d(x, l). In conclusion, if tj(x, l) is the solution
of RP with f(x) = fl(x) −fj(x), then d(x, l) can be
approximated by t(x, l) = minj̸=l tj(x, l).
More informally, if Bjl := {p ∈Rn : fl(x) = fj(x)} is
the classiﬁcation boundary of the binary classiﬁer fl −fj,
we can reduce MP to the problem of ﬁnding the closest
intersection between the boundary Bjl and the straight
line passing through x with the direction provided by the
gradient of f.
A good aspect of this strategy is that it reduces to the
solution of a sequence of minimum problems by preserving
the regularity of f. In fact, it is important to anticipate that
the regularity and the differentiability of f has a big impact
on the accuracy of the approximation (see Section 4).
For the sake of clarity, the procedure described above is
summarized in Algorithm 1, where function Zero, called at
Line 7, is any root ﬁnding algorithm for univariate functions
that solves RP.
3.2.2
Fast outer boundary
The CB algorithm presented in the previous section can
bring to a large computational cost for a classiﬁer f that
distinguishes a large number of classes. In fact, if Oj is
the amount of forward and backward passes required to
compute each tj(x, l), then the total cost O can be estimated
as P
j̸=l Oj. The Fast outer Boundary strategy (FOB) is hence
proposed here to contain the computational cost.
The minimum problem MP can be reduced to the
minimal root problem RP by considering L(x, l) = fl(x) −
maxj̸=l fj(x) and observing that L acts like a binary classiﬁer
that takes positive values in the region Rl and negative
values in the outer region ∪j̸=lRj. Hence, the approximation
of d(x, l) can be deduced by solving the minimal root
problem obtained by substituting f with L in Problem RP.
Observe that, differently from the previous strategy, this one
requires the solution of a single minimal root problem. The
pseudocode formulation of the FOB strategy can easily be
obtained as a variant of Algorithm 1 by replacing F with L
and removing the for loop.

5
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode implementing the Closest
Boundary strategy depending on a root-ﬁnding
algorithm.
Data: Zero
!The root-ﬁnding algorithm.
Input: x, l, f
!The safe sample and the DNN.
Output: t, ν
!The distance and the direction
1 t = ∞;
2 for j = 1, . . . , c and j ̸= l do
3
F(x) := fl(x) −fj(x);
4
grad = ∇F(x);
5
νj = -grad/∥grad∥;
6
g(t) := F(x + t · νj);
7
tj= Zero(g);
8
if tj < t then
9
t = tj ;
10
ν = νj;
11 return t, ν;
3.3
Root-Finding algorithms
In this work, the above strategies are tested by solving the
root problem RP with a customized version of the Bisection
Algorithm and the vanilla Newton Algorithm, which return
the approximate distance t(x, l) for each sample (x, l). The
bisection method has been adapted to better ﬁt the task. A
more detailed illustration is provided below.
In general, the bisection method allows ﬁnding a zero
of a scalar univariate continuous function g : [a, b] →R
under the assumption that g(a) > 0 and g(b) < 0, without
requiring the computation of the derivative of g. Note that
in our case a = 0 because in Problem RP the variable t is
positive.
Solving RP requires ﬁnding the minimal positive root
of the g function, which, in general, is not a solution of the
vanilla bisection algorithm. In fact, in the searching interval
[0, b], function g is not guaranteed to be monotone and it can
change sign, from positive to negative and vice-versa.
To tackle this issue, we apply a pre-processing to the
initial searching interval [0, b] that is inspired by Armijo rule
for line search methods [17].
In details, given a maximum number of attempts R, we
consider ˜b = b · 2−˜k, where
˜k = max
i ∈N : g(b · 2−i) < 0, i = 0, 1, · · · , R
	
(6)
and we start the bisection in [0,˜b].
The pseudocode that implements the Closest Boundary
strategy is shown in Algorithm 2. Line 20 reduces the amount
of forward passes of the model by stopping the inner iteration
if the lower bound t_curr_low of the current label is higher
than the actual overall minimal estimation t.
4
BOUNDING THE DISTANCE FROM THE CLASSIFI-
CATION BOUNDARY
This section formally addresses the problem of estimating
the Euclidean distance from the classiﬁcation boundary. The
case of a binary classiﬁer is ﬁrst considered, while multi-class
classiﬁers are addressed later in Section 4.4.
Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for bisection algorithm,
with armijo-like upper bound estimation, applied to
the Closest Boundary strategy.
Data: t_up, MaxIter, MaxAttempt
Input: x, l, f
!The sample and the DNN
Output: t,ν
!The distance and the direction
1 Tol = 5e-5;
2 t = ∞;
3 for j = 1, . . . , c and j ̸= l do
4
F(x) := fl(x) −fj(x);
5
grad = ∇F(x);
6
νj = −grad/∥grad∥;
7
!Starting of the bisection algorithm;
8
t_curr_low = 0;
9
t_curr_up = Armijo(g, b=t_up);
10
for step = 1,. . . , MaxIter do
11
t_curr = (t_curr_low + t_curr_up )/2;
12
x_curr = x + t_curr * νj;
13
out = F(x_curr);
14
if out > 0 then
15
t_low = t_curr;
16
out_low = o;
17
else
18
t_up = t_curr;
19
out_up = o;
20
if t_curr_low > t then
21
Break !Reduce the amount of iterations;
22
if 0 > o_up > -Tol then
23
Convergence;
24
if t_up < t then
25
t = t_up ;
26
ν = νj;
27 return t, ν;
The objective is to leverage the error estimation to prove
whether an input is far enough from the classiﬁcation boundary,
hence guaranteeing that is provably safe with respect to
adversarial perturbations bounded in Euclidean norm. To
this end, this section provides an estimation of the error
obtained by approximating the distance from the boundary
d(x, l), i.e., the solution of MP, with t(x, l), i.e., the solution
of the minimal root problem RP.
Formally, by adopting the notation from Section 3.1, given
a radius σ > 0, let Ωσ := {x ∈Rn : d(x) < σ} be the
tubular neighborhood of B of radius σ, where
d(x) := min
p∈B ∥x −p∥,
(7)
i.e., Ωσ is the set of all samples whose distance from the
classiﬁcation border B is less than σ.
The proposed method provides an upper bound and a
lower bound of d(x, l) depending on t(x, l) and a coefﬁcient
ρ ≥1, which quantiﬁes the quality of the estimation (the
lower the better). In particular, we formally prove the
existence of a radius σ(ρ) such that the approximation error
is bounded as follows, for each ρ ∈(
√
2, 2]:
1
ρt(x, l) < d(x, l) ≤t(x, l),
(8)

6
where the ﬁrst inequality holds for each x in Ωσ(ρ). Such an
estimation is only valid in a neighborhood of B depending
on the magnitude of ρ. However, the lower ρ the smaller the
tubular neighborhood in which the inequality holds. In other
words, the conditions under which the estimation error can
be bounded become more and more difﬁcult to be satisﬁed as
the quality of the bound provided by Inequality (8) increases.
Given a distance ε < σ(ρ), we say that f is an ε-robust
classiﬁer with respect to (x, l) if the sample x does not admit
an adversarial perturbation of magnitude lower than ε, i.e.,
if for each perturbation δ with ∥δ∥< ε then ˆk(x) = ˆk(x + δ).
Thus, by only computing t(x, l), it is possible to deduce
the robustness of a classiﬁer with respect to a sample x
according to the following rules:
• If t(x, l) < ε, then the classiﬁer is not ε-robust with
respect to (x, l).
• If t(x, l) > ρε, then the classiﬁer is ε-robust with respect
to (x, l).
4.1
Preliminaries
Before going deeper in the mathematical aspects, it is
necessary to introduce three assumptions on the function f
of the classiﬁer.
Assumption A. The function f is of class C∞(Rn).
Assumption B. The function f is strictly positive outside
some B(0, M) (the open ball centered in 0 with radius M).
Assumption C. The gradient ∇f is not zero in B (i.e., 0 is a
regular value of f).
Although the three assumptions above are not valid in
general, they are not restrictive for a neural classiﬁer. In
particular, for a feed forward deep neural network with a
one-dimensional output, Assumption B is not veriﬁed by f.
However, being the samples of our interest always in some
closed limited set K, we can theoretically substitute f in
the following proofs with another function ˜f that coincides
with f in the compact set K and that satisﬁes Assumption B.
More details can be found in Appendix C.
Similarly, Assumptions A and C are not valid in general,
but we can assume that, in a practical domain, f is the
quantized representation of another function ˜f that satisﬁes
the conditions.
Observe that Assumptions A and C ensure that B is a
smooth manifold of dimension n −1 (this can be proved by
applying the implicit function theorem [22]). Assumption B,
instead, ensures that B is a compact set.
Since B is a compact set, then the minimum distance
problem formulated in Equation (7) admits a solution for
each x ∈Rn. Nevertheless, there is no guarantee that for
each x ∈Rn there exists a unique closest point in B. The
following result ensures the existence of a unique solution in
a tubular neighborhood of B (refer to [23] for more details).
Theorem 1 (Unique Projection [23]). If B ⊆Rn is a compact
manifold, then there exists a maximum distance σ0 such that for
each x in the open tubular neighborhood Ωσ0 there exists a unique
π(x) ∈B that solves Equation (7). Moreover, d is differentiable in
the neighborhood, and ∇d(x) =
x−π(x)
∥x−π(x)∥for each x ∈Ωσ \ B.
Following this result, the lemmas below explain in a
formal fashion that, close to the classiﬁcation boundary, the
gradient of f in x provides a fast direction to reach B.
Observe that this is the main idea behind all the gradient-
based attacks and, in particular, DeepFool [5], which exploits
the gradient of f to rapidly reach the adversarial region.
4.2
Bounding the estimation error
Let B(x, r) be the open ball in the Euclidean norm centered
in x with radius r. Furthermore, for each set A ⊆Rn, let A
be the closure of A, i.e. the smallest closed set containing A.
Lemma 1. Let σ0 be the distance for which Theorem 1 holds. For
each x ∈Ωσ0 \ B, the direction x −π(x) is parallel to ∇f(π(x)),
where π(x) is the unique closest point in B to x. In particular,
∇d(x) =
x −π(x)
∥x −π(x)∥= sgn(f(x)) ∇f(π(x))
∥∇f(π(x))∥.
(9)
Proof. By construction, π(x) is the solution of the mini-
mum problem on Eq. (7). Then, by the Necessary Condi-
tion Theorem in [17, p. 278], because of Assumption C,
there exists λ∗∈R such that ∇L (π(x), λ∗) = 0, where
L(p, λ) = ∥x −p∥+ λf(p). Observe that ∇L (π(x), λ∗) = 0
implies that
∇d(x) =
x −π(x)
∥x −π(x)∥= λ∗∇f(π(x)).
(10)
From the above equation, because ∥∇d(x)∥= 1, we deduce
that |λ∗| =
1
∥∇f(π(x))∥. It remains to prove that sgn(λ∗) =
sgn(f(x)). To prove this statement, we proceed in three
steps: (i) we prove that the segment pt that connects x to
π(x) is such that sgn(f(pt)) = sgn(f(x)) for t > 0; (ii) we
show that for t ≈0, the sign of sgn(f(pt)) is equal to the
sign of ∇f(π(x))T (x −π(x)); (iii) by leveraging identity
Equation (10), we show that the sign of λ∗is equal to the
sign of ∇f(π(x))T (x −π(x)).
Let pt := π(x) + t(x −π(x)) where t ∈[0, 1]. Observe
that sgn(f(x)) = sgn(f(pt)) for each t ∈(0, 1]. In fact, by
contradiction, if there exists τ with sgn(f(x)) ̸= sgn(f(pτ)),
then, by the Bolzano Theorem applied to function f, it would
exists a τ∗∈(0, 1) such that f(pτ∗) = 0. This would imply
that
∥x −pτ∗∥= ∥(1 −τ∗)(x −π(x))∥< ∥x −π(x)∥,
which is a contradiction because ∥x −pτ∗∥< d(x) but π(x)
solves Problem 7.
Based on this fact, observe that, since f is differentiable
in p0, then
f(pt) = f(p0) + ∇f(p0)T (pt −p0) + o(pt)
= t∇f(π(x))T (x −π(x)) + o(pt),
where o(pt)/t →0 when t →0, from which we deduce that
for small t, sgn(f(pt)) = sgn
 ∇f(π(x))T (x −π(x))

.
In conclusion, multiplying each term of Equation (10) by
∇f(π(x))T , we deduce that the sign of the ﬁrst term of the
equivalence is equal to sgn(λ∗), which proves the lemma.
The above result can be seen as a particular case of
the following lemma. Intuitively, the next lemma shows
that the closer the boundary, the sharper the angle between

7
sgn(f(x))∇f(x) and ∇d(x). Before expressing this result in
formal terms, remember that for any two vectors v, w ∈Rn,
the angle between v and w is given by arccos( vT
∥v∥
w
∥w∥). The
following lemma states that the angle between ∇f(x) and the
optimal direction ∇d(x) can be bounded in a neighborhood
of the boundary B.
Lemma 2 (Angular Constraint). For each angle bound α ∈
 −π
2 , π
2

, there exists a distance σ1(α), such that, for all x ∈
Ωσ1(α), the following inequality holds
∇f(x)T ∇f(π(x))
∥∇f(x)∥∥∇f(π(x))∥> cos(α),
(11)
where π(x) is the unique projection of Theorem 1.
Proof. From Assumption A, we deduce the continuity of ∇f.
From Assumption C and the compactness of B, we deduce
that there exists a distance δ such that ∥∇f(x)∦= 0 in Ωδ
(the closure of Ωδ), and so we deduce that
∇f
∥∇f∥is uniformly
continuous in Ωδ. Hence, for each ε, there exists a distance
σε ≤δ such that, for each x, y ∈Ωδ and ∥x −y∥< σε, the
following inequality holds

∇f(x)
∥∇f(x)∥−
∇f(y)
∥∇f(y)∥

 < ε.
(12)
By remembering that ∥v −w∥2 = ∥v∥2 + ∥w∥2 −2vT w for
each v, w ∈Rn, we can deduce the following inequality
1 −1
2ε2 <
∇f(x)T ∇f(y)
∥∇f(x)∥∥∇f(y)∥.
(13)
In conclusion, by taking y = π(x) and by selecting ε =
p
2 −2 cos(α), we deduce Equation (11) where σ1(α) =
min(σ0, σε).
Intuitively, by the geometrical properties of a manifold, a
small portion of the boundary can be enclosed between two
afﬁne parallel hyperplanes. This is the aim of the following
lemma.
Lemma 3 (Thickness Constraint). For each thickness factor
β ∈(0, 1), there exists a maximum distance σ2(β) such that, for
all p ∈B, the open set
Γr(p) :=
n
p + v : |vT ∇f(p)| < βr∥∇f(p)∥, v ∈Rno
contains B ∩B(p, r) for all r < σ2(β).
Proof. Let p ∈B. Because f is differentiable in p, there exists
a radius δp such that for all points q ∈B(p, δp) ∩B the
following identity holds
o(∥p −q∥) = f(q) −f(p) + (p −q)T ∇f(p) = (p −q)T ∇f(p)
and o (∥p −q∥) /∥p −q∥→0 for ∥p −q∥→0. Observe
that the same limit holds by dividing each term by ∥∇f(p)∥,
which is not zero due to Assumption C. By deﬁnition of limit,
there exists σp < δp such that for each q ∈B(p, σp)
(p −q)T ∇f(p)
 < β∥p −q∥∥∇f(p)∥,
(14)
with β ∈(0, 1). This proves that for each r ≤σp, if q ∈
B(p, r) ∩B, then q ∈Γr(p) by considering v = q −p and
observing that ∥p −q∥< r as p, q ∈B(p, r).
So far we proved that for each p there exits σp such that
B(p, r)∩B ⊆Γr(p) for each r ≤σp. The existence of a global
σ2(β), such that the condition above holds for all p and for all
r ≤σ2(β), is due to the compactness of B. In fact, the family
{B(p, σp)}p∈B is an inﬁnite cover of B that, by deﬁnition of a
compact set, admits a ﬁnite sub-cover indexed by p1, · · · , pk
such that B ⊆∪k
i=1B(pi, σpi). By taking σ2(β) = mini σpi
we deduce the thesis.
The Lemma above shows that the boundary B can
be locally bounded by the open set Γr(p) for each point
p and for each radius r not larger than σ2(β). Further-
more, the border B splits the set B(p, r) ∩Γr(p) in a
way that f keeps a constant sign in the two hyperplanes
R± :=
p + v : vT ∇f(p) = ±βr∥∇f(p)∥, v ∈Rn	
which
coincide with the frontier of Γr(p).
The geometrical intuition behind this statement is con-
densed in the following corollary of Lemma 3.
Corollary 1. Let β ∈(0, 1) and σ2(β) of Lemma 3. Let x ∈
Ωσ2(β), p such that d(x) = ∥x −p∥and r = d(x), then the
hyperplane
R :=
n
p + v : vT ∇f(p) = −sgn(f(x))βr∥∇f(p)∥, v ∈Rno
is such that
∀y ∈R ∩B(p, r),
sgn(f(y)) = −sgn(f(x)).
(15)
Proof. Let us prove the statement for f(x) < 0 ﬁrst. The
proof can be decomposed in two steps: (i) Prove that
p+ := p + rβ
∇f(p)
∥∇f(p)∥∈R and f(p+) > 0; (ii) Prove that
if y ∈R ∩B(p, r), then sgnf(p+) = sgnf(y).
The ﬁrst statement can be proved by using a procedure
similar to the one adopted in Lemma 1. In particular, let
pt := p+tβr ∇f(p)
∥∇f(p)∥for t ∈[0, 1] be the segment going from
p to p+; ﬁrst, we prove that f takes positive values for small
values of t; and then we prove that f does not change sign
in p+.
Since f is differentiable in p, then
f(pt) = tr∇f(p)T
 ∇f(p)
∥∇f(p)∥

+ o(pt),
and because o(pt)/t →0, we can deduce that sgn(f(pt)) =
sgn(r∥∇f(p)∥) = 1 for small t. Let us now prove by
contradiction that if f changes sign in p+, then Lemma 3
would be not valid in p. If f(p+) ≤0, then there exist
τ ∗≤1 such that f(pτ ∗) = 0. Hence, ∥p −pτ ∗∥= |τ ∗rβ|,
from which pτ ∗∈B(p, τ ∗r). Let us consider the smaller
radius r∗= τ ∗r and observe that pτ ∗̸∈Γr∗(p). In fact,
τ ∗βr ∇f(p)T
∥∇f(p)∥∇f(p) = βr∗∥∇f(p)∥shows that pτ ∗lays on
the topological border of the set Γr∗(p). This brings to a
contradiction for Lemma 3 being pτ ∗∈B \ Γr∗(p).
Finally, if y ∈B(p, r) ∩R, the second statement can
be proved by contradiction observing that, if f(y) ≤0,
then there exists p0 ∈R ∩B(p, r) for which f(p0) = 0.
Furthermore, this would implies that p0 ∈B and p0 ̸∈Γr(p),
which brings to a contradiction by Lemma 3.
In conclusion, the case f(x) > 0 can be deduced by
following the steps above, but considering p−:= p −
tβr ∇f(p)
∥∇f(p)∥, to prove that f(p−) < 0.

8
Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 are linked by the following
intuitive connection. In a geometrical sense, d(x) represents
the length of the shortest path needed to reach the boundary,
which is obtained by moving from x along −∇d(x).
Similarly, let t(x) be the length of the path (if there
exists one) required to reach the boundary by follow-
ing the direction ν(x) = −sgn(f(x)) ∇f(x)
∥∇f(x)∥, in formulas
x + t(x)ν(x) ∈B. To ensure the existence of such a t(x),
we can leverage two conditions. If we admit that ν(x) is
not similar to the optimal one (i.e., we assume a α ̸≈0
in Lemma 2), then the existence of t(x) would only be
guaranteed by an almost straight boundary B, which requires
a thickness factor close to zero, β ≈0.
Vice versa, if we admit a highly irregular boundary (i.e.,
β ̸≈0), then the existence of t(x) would only be guaranteed
by a direction ν(x) close to the optimal one. This would
require α ≈0.
This is the main idea of the following theorem, which,
by balancing the two parameters α and β, ensures: (i) The
existence of t(x); and (ii) The estimation of d(x) through
t(x) deﬁned in Equation (8). A graphical idea of the proof is
depicted in Figure 2.
Fig. 2: A graphical proof of Theorem 2. Lemma 3 ensures
that in B(p, r) the boundary belongs in the green area.
Lemma 2 ensures that ν(x) (in red) lays in the brown area. In
conclusion, there exists a solution T of RP, i.e. an intersection
between the boundary and the direction provided by the
gradient.
Theorem 2 (Distance Estimation). For each angle α ∈
 −π
4 , π
4

there exists a maximum distance σ = min {σ1(α), σ2(cos(2α))}
such that the error in approximating d(x) with t(x) can be
bounded as
∀x ∈Ωσ,
d(x) ≤t(x) ≤2 cos(α)d(x),
(16)
where t(x) ∈R+ is the smallest value such that
x −t(x) sgn(f(x)) ∇f(x)
∥∇f(x)∥∈B.
Proof. Let β = cos(2α). Let σ1(α) and σ2(β) be the max-
imum distances of Lemmas 2 and 3, respectively, and let
σ = min(σ1(α), σ2(β)). Note that in this way Lemmas 2
and 3 hold for x ∈Ωσ.
Let p = π(x) ∈B the closest projection, r = ∥p −x∥=
d(x) the minimum distance from the boundary, and let
ϕ(t) = x + t ∇f(x)
∥∇f(x)∥be the straight line passing through
x with direction ∇f(x). Observe that, by deﬁnition of Ωσ, it
holds r < σ. Without loss of generality, we can assume that
f(x) < 0.
The
proof
strategy
consists
in
proving
that
the
straight
line ϕ(t)
intersects
the
hyperplane R+
:=
p + v : vT ∇f(p) = βr∥∇f(p)∥, v ∈Rn	
(which is one of
the borders of the set Γr(p) of Lemma 3) in a point ϕ(t∗),
in which f assumes a positive value. This would imply the
existence of some point ϕ(t(x)) such that f(ϕ(t(x)) = 0.
Observe that the intersection between the support of ϕ
and R+ is realized for
t∗=
∥∇f(x)∥
∇f(x)T ∇f(p)

rβ∥∇f(p)∥−(x −p)T ∇f(p)

.
(17)
Moreover, observe that, multiplying each term of Equa-
tion (10) in Lemma 1 by ∇f(p)T , we deduce that (x −
p)T ∇f(p) = −r∥∇f(p)∥, from which, by substituting in
the second term of Equation (17), we deduce that
t∗= ∥∇f(x)∥∥∇f(p)∥
∇f(x)T ∇f(p)
(1 + β) r.
(18)
Note that with β = cos(2α), the intersection ϕ(t∗) is
realized inside the closed ball B(p, r) (details can be found
in Appendix D.1).
From Lemma 2, ∥∇f(x)∥∥∇f(p)∥
∇f(x)T ∇f(p)
<
1
cos(α), thus by Equa-
tion (18) we deduce the right-hand side of the following
inequality
d(x) ≤t∗< 1 + β
cos(α)r = 2 cos(α)d(x),
(19)
while the left-hand side is trivial by construction of d(x).
In conclusion, by observing that x = ϕ(0), if we prove
that f(ϕ(0)) < 0 < f(ϕ(t∗)), we can deduce the existence
of t(x) < t∗such that f(ϕ(t(x))) = 0, which ﬁnally implies
Equation (16).
The condition f(ϕ(0)) < 0 holds by assumption. More-
over, by construction, ϕ(t∗) ∈R+ and so by Corollary 1
f(ϕ(t∗)) is strictly positive. Hence the theorem follows.
4.3
A signiﬁcant lower bound of σ
This section presents an analysis of the magnitude of the ra-
dius of the tubular neighborhood Ωσ in which Equation (16)
holds and provides a lower bound of the largest σ.
In particular, the following lemmas provide an analytical
estimation of two lower bounds ˜σ1 and ˜σ2 for σ1 and σ2,
respectively, depending on the gradient of f and on the
Hessian ∇2f. Henceforth, we make use of the following
notation
∥∇2f∥K := max
x∈K ∥∇2f(x)∥,
where K is a compact set and ∥∇2f(x)∥is the operator norm
of the matrix ∇2f(x) inducted by the euclidean norm.
Lemma 4 (Lower bound of σ1). Let Ω= Ωδ of Lemma 2. For
each α ∈
 −π
4 , π
4

,
˜σ1(α) := 1
2
infx∈Ω∥∇f(x)∥
∥∇2f∥Ω
(1 −cos(α)) ≤σ1(α)
(20)
where σ1(α) is the same of Lemma 2.
Proof. See Appendix B.1

9
Lemma 5 (Lower bound of σ2). For each β ∈(0, 1)
˜σ2(β) := 2β · infp∈B ∥∇f(p)∥
∥∇2f∥B
≤σ2(β)
(21)
where σ2(β) is the same of Lemma 3.
Proof. See Appendix B.2
The lemmas above provide a lower bound ˜σ of σ by
considering ˜σ(ρ) = min{˜σ1(α), ˜σ2(β)}, where α and β are
such that ρ = 2 cos(α) and β = cos(2α).
Therefore, observe that the lower bounds ˜σ1 and ˜σ2
depend on two main parameters that measure the linearity of
the function f. In fact, for an afﬁne function f(x) = wT x + b,
these bounds diverge to +∞due to the Hessian of f that is
zero. This is in line with the properties of an afﬁne classiﬁer
f, for which the direction provided by the gradient in each
point is parallel to the optimal direction needed to reach the
boundary.
Moreover, for a highly irregular function, with many
stationary points close to the boundary, the bound ˜σ could
be close to zero, resulting in an extremely small tubular
neighborhood for which the distance estimation holds.
In this section, we are interested in ﬁnding a value of
ρ that provides the theoretically larger Ωσ(ρ) for which
Inequality (8) holds. In practice, this problem is hard to
solve — it would require the complete knowledge of all the
stationary points of f. However, the following observation
brings to an interesting value ρ∗that provides a lower bound
of the form
0 < ˜σ1(ρ∗) ≤
max
√
2<ρ<2
˜σ(ρ) ≤
max
√
2<ρ<2
σ(ρ),
(22)
where ˜σ1(ρ∗) represents a lower bound of the largest σ for
which Inequality (16) holds.
Observation 1 (Lower bound of largest σ). Let Ω= Ωδ of
Lemma 2, and let α∗solving 1
2(1 −cos(α∗)) = 2 cos(2α∗).
Then ρ∗= 2 cos(α∗) satisﬁes Equation (22).
Proof. Let Ω= Ωδ of Lemma 2, let σ1, σ2 those in Lemmas 4 5,
and let ˜σ(ρ) = min{˜σ1(α), ˜σ2(β)}, where α and β are such
that ρ = 2 cos(α) and β = cos(2α). Observe that, since B ⊆
Ωδ, then infx∈Ω∥∇f(x)∥≤infx∈B ∥∇f(x)∥, and ∥∇2f∥Ω≥
∥∇2f∥B. Hence, we can consider the following lower bound
of ˜σ(ρ)
infx∈Ω∥∇f(x)∥
∥∇2f∥Ω
min
1
2(1 −cos(α)), 2 cos(2α)

,
(23)
where ρ = 2 cos(α). And since function u(α) := min( 1
2(1 −
cos(α)), 2 cos(2α)) has maximum in α∗, the statement fol-
lows.
In summary, the above results show that, given a neigh-
borhood Ω= Ωδ in which Equation (7) has unique solution
(see Theorem 1) and there are no stationary points of classiﬁer
f (see Lemma 2), Inequality (8) holds for ρ∗≈1.461, and
σ∗:= σ1(ρ∗) is given by the observation above.
4.4
Error estimation for multi-class classiﬁers
The analysis above can be extended to a multi-class classiﬁer
by leveraging the two strategies presented in Section 3. In
fact, if f : Rn →RC is a classiﬁer with C classes, both
strategies reduce to a search for a solution of the minimal
root problem RP for one or more binary classiﬁers in which
the analysis above can be applied.
The Fast-Outer-Boundary strategy presented in Sec-
tion 3.2.2 consists in solving Problem RP for a binary
classiﬁer of the form L(l) : Rn →R where L(l)(x) :=
L(x, l) = fl(x)−maxj̸=l fj(x). Thus, by applying Theorem 2
to L(l), we deduce the existence of a σ(l)(ρ) such that the
estimation holds for each sample x with ˆk(x) = l. Therefore,
by considering σ(ρ) = minl σ(l)(ρ), we obtain the same
extension of Equation (8).
The Closest-Boundary strategy presented in Section 3.2.1
consists instead in solving Problem RP for a list of minimal
root problems relative to binary classiﬁers of the form fjl =
fl −fj. In particular, for each ρ, Theorem 2 ensures the
existence of a neighborhood with radius σjl(ρ) such that the
following inequalities holds
1
ρtj(x, l) ≤dj(x, l) ≤tj(x, l), ∀j,
where we keep the notation of Section 3.2.1. By taking
the minimum over j ̸= l we deduce the estimation in
Equation (8) for every x with ˆk(x) = l and x ∈Ωσl(ρ),
where σl(x) = minj̸=l σjl(ρ). In conclusion, by considering
σ(ρ) = minl,j̸=l σjl(ρ), we deduce an extension of the
desired inequality for the multi-class case.
5
EXPERIMENTS
This section presents a set of experiments aimed at validating
the strategies proposed in Section 3. They are executed on
four neural classiﬁers, each trained on a different dataset.
The approximate distances provided by the tested strate-
gies are compared in Section 5.3 with the Iterative Penalty
method (Section 5.1), which provides the ground-truth
distance. Section 5.4 reports an empirical estimation of σ
for three noticeable values of ρ. Finally, Section 5.5 discusses
the case in which all the classiﬁers are attacked with different
known methods. The magnitude of each attack is bounded
to be lower than t(x)/ρ∗in order to show that the attack
success rate drops to zero for samples in Ωˆσ∗, where ˆσ∗is an
estimation of σ∗.
5.1
Ground Truth Distance Estimation
In order to compare the approximate distances that solve
Equation (RP), we need an accurate measure of the theoretical
distance d(x). To tackle this problem, based on the ideas
presented in [24] and [6], we solve Equation (MP) by reducing
to the following minimum problem with penalty analogous
to Equation (1)
d(x, l; c) = min
δ∈Rn
∥δ∥+ c · L(x + δ, l)+
(24)
where L(x, l) = fl(x) −maxj̸=l fj(x) and L+ = max{0, L}.
For each sample (x, l) and for each penalty value c, we
perform a gradient descent with the Adam optimizer [25],
with default parameters, up to 104 iterations, stopping the

10
procedure when −Tol < L(x(k), l) ≤0, where the tolerance
Tol is set to 5e−5. Note that this convergence criterion
ensures that the solution lays close to the boundary and
it is contained in the adversarial region ∪j̸=lRj.
Similarly to [6], the best penalty c is selected through a
bisection-like search. In details, let clow = 0 and cup such
that d(x, l; clow) = 0 and d(x, l; cup) does not converge for
all the samples x in the dataset. In our experiments, we
discovered that cup = 100 is large enough to satisfy this
deﬁnition. Then, through successive bisections, we can deﬁne
ccurr =
1
2
 clow + cup

and either (i) set cup = ccurr (i.e.,
decreasing cup) if the optimization for d(x, l; ccurr) does not
converge, or (ii) set clow = ccurr (i.e., increasing clow) if it
converges. We stop the search for c after 12 bisections. The
whole procedure is implemented in batch mode to exploit
GPU acceleration.
5.2
Experimental Settings
As done by Carlini and Wagner [26], the proposed techniques
were evaluated on different datasets, each associated with a
different neural network.
MNIST
The MNIST handwritten digits dataset [27] was used to train
a vanilla LeNet [28] within a 2 × 2-MaxPool, 2 convolutional,
and 3 fully connected layers, achieving a 1% error rate
on the test set. The training was performed without data
augmentation, using the Adam optimizer [25] (default hyper-
parameters) to minimize the Cross Entropy Loss with a 128
batch size for 5 epochs.
Fashion MNIST
This dataset includes 50,000 training images and 10,000 test
images (28 × 28 greyscale pixels) grouped in 10 classes [29].
Compared to MNIST, this dataset is less trivial and requires
a ﬁner tuning to craft a model with a good accuracy. It was
used to train a vanilla LeNet with the same structure of
the previous one. The training was performed without data
augmentation, by minimizing the Cross Entropy loss with
the Adam optimizer for 30 epochs (with a batch size of 128)
to achieve a 91% accuracy on the test set.
CIFAR10
This dataset contains 60,000 RGB images of size 32×32 pixels
divided in 10 classes [30]. Inspired by [11], it was used to
train a Resnet32 model [31] over the ﬁrst 50,000 images of the
dataset with data augmentation, as described in the original
paper. In details, the images were randomly cropped and
horizontally ﬂipped.
The training was performed by minimizing the Cross
Entropy loss for 182 epochs by the stochastic gradient descent
with Nesterov momentum (SGD) [32] with a starting learning
rate of 0.1, momentum of 0.9, and a weight decay of 1e −4.
The learning rate was decreased using a multiplicative factor
of 0.1 after the 90th and the 135th epoch, achieving a 8.8%
error rate over the test set. This is in-line with the original
results of [11].
MNIST
FMNIST
CIFAR10
GTSRB
Strategy
Algorithm
FOB
Bisection
1.803954
0.830559
1.087711
4.885275
CB
Bisection
1.645090
0.739743
1.093022
3.665061
FOB
Newton
1.800629
0.813728
1.064261
3.979418
CB
Newton
1.645083
0.739525
1.080411
3.664718
DF
1.706957
0.548780
0.722579
3.136562
IP
1.325458
0.415969
0.492981
2.619886
TABLE 1: Average distance from the boundary for the four
datasets obtained with different methods.
GTSRB
The German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark [33] contains
about 51,000 trafﬁc signs RGB images of various shapes
(from 15 × 15 to 250 × 250), grouped in 43 classes. It was
used to train a MicronNet [34], a compact network similar
to LeNet that classiﬁes pixel-wise standardized 48 × 48
images. The training was performed over the ﬁrst chunk
of the dataset, containing ≈39,000 images with a data
augmentation technique. During training, each image was
randomly rotated by an angle in ±5◦, translated towards
a random direction with magnitude lower than 10%, and
ﬁnally scaled with a factor between 0.9 and 1.1. Each
transformed image was then scaled to have a dimension
of 48 pixels per side. The model was trained to minimize
the Cross Entropy loss by the SGD optimizer with a learning
rate of 7e −3, a momentum of 0.8, and a weight decay of
1e−5, for 100 epochs. The learning rate was decreased every
10 epochs with a multiplicative factor of 0.9. We achieved a
1.2% error rate over the test set, which is comparable with the
state-of-the-art classiﬁcation performance with this dataset.
5.3
Comparing distances
This section focuses on comparing the estimated distances
to the ground-truth distance for the four network models
and corresponding data sets. For each sample (x, l), the
approximate distances t(x, l) are obtained by applying the
zero ﬁnding algorithms (Bisection and Newton) to the
strategies CB and FOB presented in Section 3. The ground-
truth distance d(x, l) is computed through the Iterative
Penalty technique presented in Section 5.1.
Figure 3 shows a comparison between the approximate
distance t(x), computed by the Bisection CB strategy, and the
ground-truth distance d(x) for the four models considered in
Section 5.2. For each sample x of label l, each dot in a graph
represents the pair (d(x, l), t(x, l)). The dashed green line
with slope 1 represents the points in which d(x, l) = t(x, l).
The other three lines have slopes
√
2, ρ∗and 2, respec-
tively (where ρ∗is deﬁned in Section 4) and represent the
estimation of Equation (8) for different values of ρ.
Observe that all the points close to the boundary (i.e.,
those with a small ground-truth distance to the boundary) are
located above the green line and below the others, conﬁrming
that the estimation t(x) ≤ρd(x) holds.
Table 1 reports the average distances from the boundary
for each dataset and for each tested strategy. As one may
expect, DeepFool (DF) [5] and Iterative Penalty (IP) provide
lower distances with respect to our strategies CB and FOB.
However, the distances computed by CB and FOB are

11
Fig. 3: Comparison of the approximate distance t(x, l), computed by the Bisection CB strategy, and the ground-truth distance
d(x, l), for the four models considered in Section 5.2. Each dot represents the pair (d(x, l), t(x, l)) where x is a sample with
label l. The region between the green line (slope 1) and the other lines (slope
√
2, ρ∗, 2), highlights the samples for which
the Inequality 8 holds. Observe that, according to the theoretical results, the closer the boundary (small d(x, l)) the higher
the number of dots in the region of interest.
associated with a bound on the approximation error relative
to the theoretical distance d(x).
The boxplot in Figure 4 provides a comparison of
the approximate distances computed by the Bisection and
Newton methods applied to the CB strategy and DeepFool.
The Iterative Penalty, i.e. the ground truth distance, is also
represented for a fair comparison.
The ground truth distance reported on the x-axis is
partitioned, differently for each dataset, into four intervals.
Again, note that for points near the boundary, our method
provides an accurate estimation of d, whereas, far from the
boundary, a global technique as DeepFool results to be more
accurate, returning a better approximation of the ground-
truth distance.
5.4
Estimation of σ(ρ)
Theoretically, Theorem 2 ensures that for each ρ ∈(
√
2, 2)
there exists a σ(ρ) for which Inequality (8) holds. In practice,
however, for an arbitrary classiﬁer f, such a σ(ρ) cannot be
deduced explicitly. Nevertheless, we can empirically estimate
its value.
In particular, given a data set X , we can deﬁne ˆσ(ρ), an
estimation of σ(ρ), as follows:
ˆσ(ρ) = min

d(x, l) : t(x, l)
d(x, l) > ρ,
(x, l) ∈X

,
(25)
which corresponds to the maximum distance for which
Inequality (8) holds for the samples in X .
Table 2 reports different estimations of σ for different
values of ρ, in accordance with Section 5.3. For each ρ, the
estimation ˆσ(ρ) is deduced on a subset of the testset built by
randomly sampling 60% of the images.
Observe that the values of σ provided by CB are larger
than or equal to those provided by FOB. In terms of
algorithms, the customized bisection algorithm (augmented
with the armijo-like rule) provides more reliable results with
respect to the Newton method. We believe this is due to the
fact that there is no guarantee that the Newton algorithm provides
the smallest positive zero of the function.
These values can be seen as a measure of the regularity
of the models: the higher ˆσ, the higher the regularity of the
MNIST
FMNIST
CIFAR10
GTSRB
ρ
Algo.
Strategy
√
2
B
FOB
0.37
0.06
0.13
0.37
CB
0.37
0.06
0.13
0.58
N
FOB
0.37
0.06
0.13
0.37
CB
0.37
0.02
0.01
0.58
ρ∗
B
FOB
0.37
0.06
0.13
0.37
CB
0.59
0.08
0.13
0.58
N
FOB
0.37
0.06
0.13
0.37
CB
0.59
0.02
0.01
0.58
2
B
FOB
0.37
0.12
0.17
0.49
CB
0.72
0.12
0.17
0.87
N
FOB
0.37
0.12
0.17
0.49
CB
0.72
0.02
0.01
0.87
TABLE 2: Comparison of all the ˆσ estimated by the different
techniques.
model (or the boundary). Also observe that these results are
in line with Table 1, in which the model for FMNIST has
an average distance that is lower than the one of the LeNet
for MNIST (on which the images have the same dimension
and have been normalized with same mean and standard
deviation).
5.5
Adversarial robustness below ˆσ
This section evaluates the goodness of the empirical estima-
tion ˆσ∗of the theoretical σ∗(deﬁned in Observation 1) to
assess the model robustness against adversarial examples
bounded in magnitude by t(x)/ρ∗.
In formulas, let ˜x = Advε(x, l) an adversarial example
crafted with an unknown attack technique Advε that for each
sample (x, l) provides a new sample ˜x (if exists) such that
ˆk(x) ̸= l and ∥˜x −x∥≤ε. We want to empirically show that

x ∈Ωσ∗: ∃Advε(x, ˆk(x); ε), ε < t(x)
ρ∗

= ∅.
(26)
In other words, we empirically assess that for each
sample distant from the boundary less than ˆσ∗, there are
no adversarial perturbations with a magnitude smaller than
t(x, l)/ρ∗. For this purpose, we only test the approximation
t(x) provided by the CB strategy with the bisection method.

12
Fig. 4: Approximate distances computed by the CB strategies and DeepFool against the ground truth computed by the IP
technique. For a clearer representation, the ground-truth distance is partitioned into four intervals containing the same
amount of samples. For each method, the lower and the upper side of each box represent the ﬁrst and the fourth quartile Q1
and Q2, respectively; the lower and the upper whisker represent the quantiles Q1 −1.5 · Iq and Q3 + 1.5 · Iq, respectively,
where Iq is the interquartile range.
In fact, higher values of ˆσ represent a worst case to be tested,
since there are more samples with a distance lower than ˆσ.
By using FoolBox [35], we generated adversarial examples
for the four datasets with the following techniques: Decou-
pling Norm Direction (DDN) [9], Deep Fool (DF) [5], Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [8], Fast Gradient Method (FGM) [35].
For each dataset X , and for each sample (x, l) ∈X ,
we considered the clipped output of FoolBox that is
guaranteed to have magnitude lower than ε, i.e. ∥˜x −x∥< ε.
Observe that in this test the magnitude of the attack ε is
never computed by using the ground-truth distance d(x, l),
but by setting ε = t(x, l)/ρ∗.
The results of this experiment for the four datasets are
shown in Figure 5, in which each graph reports the number
of adversarial examples found with magnitude t(x)/ρ∗as
a function of the ground-truth distance d(x, l). In detail,
each stepped line reports, as a function of d, the cardinality
of the set
n
(x, l) ∈X : ∃Advε(x, l), ε = t(x)
ρ∗, d(x, l) ≤d
o
rescaled to be one for the maximum value of d, i.e, the
fraction of points that are out of the bound for the tested
attack. All graphs show that the higher d, the higher the
number of samples that escapes the bounds (a sample escapes
the bounds if t(x, l)/ρ∗is higher than real distance from the
boundary). In each plot, the values of ˆσ∗computed in Table 2
are represented by the dashed red lines. It is important to
observe that the estimation of ˆσ∗was deduced as explained
in the previous section, i.e., by applying Equation (25)
without knowing the results of the attacks in advance.
The result of this test shows that the two datasets FMNIST
and CIFAR10 have a different behavior with respect to
MNIST and GTSRB. In particular, for MNIST and GTSRB,
the estimation of σ∗is more selective, meaning that the
estimation done by Inequality (8) holds for distances slightly
larger than ˆσ∗. Moreover, for FMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets,
the estimation of σ∗results to be less accurate, and for few
samples (1 sample for each dataset) the attacks succeed
even if the ground truth distance is lower than ˆσ, proving
that the the estimation in Inequality 8 does not hold in a
neighborhood of radius ˆσ∗at least for one example.
6
CONCLUSIONS
This paper addressed the problem of computing the minimal
adversarial perturbation by presenting a novel strategy based
on root-ﬁnding algorithms. Differently from the state-of-the-
art methods, which focus on ﬁnding the minimal adversarial
perturbation, we presented an estimation error theory able to
provide a method for verifying the robustness of a classiﬁer
for a given input close enough to the classiﬁcation boundary.
The approximate distance t(x, l) of the input to the boundary
results to be less computationally expensive than the true
distance d(x, l), enabling an efﬁcient veriﬁcation of the ϵ-
robustness of a classiﬁer in a sample x ∈Ωσ(ρ).
Such theoretical ﬁndings have been evaluated through an
exhaustive set of experiments. First, we compared the esti-
mated distances to ground-truth distances on four different
models and the corresponding data sets. Then, we derived an
empirical estimation ˆσ of the distance under which the error
can be bounded, and ﬁnally we leveraged such an estimation
to verify the robustness of the classiﬁer for samples having
a distance lower than ˆσ. This was accomplished by testing
several adversarial attacks.
The presented results open two research directions to be
addressed in a future work.
First, as shown in Section 4.3, the theoretical bound
σ(ρ) depends on the ﬁrst and the second derivatives of
the model, which cannot be easily deduced for general DNN
classiﬁers. Moreover, the estimated value ˆσ only provides an
empirical upper bound of the theoretical σ on a validation
set. However, there are no ﬁndings on the accuracy of this
empirical estimation with respect to the theoretical one.
Second, Table 2 shows that some of the tested mod-
els/dataset (e.g., FMNIST and CIFAR10) have a small ˆσ.
Thus, the conditions under which the estimated distances
can be bounded are more difﬁcult to be satisﬁed. Future work
should hence focus at leveraging the proposed coefﬁcient
infx∈Ω∥∇f(x)∥
∥∇2∥Ω
in order to design more regular models for
which the above estimations hold for a larger amount
of samples (i.e., for a larger Ωσ(ρ) while preserving the
classiﬁcation accuracy of the original models.

13
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Ground Truth Distance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Adv below t(x)/ρ∗
MNIST
attack
DDN
PGD
FGM
DF
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ground Truth Distance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FMNIST
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ground Truth Distance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CIFAR10
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Ground Truth Distance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
GTSRB
Attack success with magnitude below t(x)/ρ∗
Fig. 5: Attack success rate cumulative curve for attacks bounded in magnitude less than t(x)/ρ∗obtained with Bisection
method and Closest Boundary strategy. The dashed red line represent ˆσ∗, which approximates σ∗of Theorem 2. For MNIST
and GTSRB, none of the samples with distance from the boundary less than ˆσ∗can be perturbed by the tested bounded
attacks, in accordance with the theoretical results. For the FMNIST and the CIFAR10 dataset, instead, the estimation ˆσ∗
results to be less accurate, failing in a tiny portions of the tested samples (1 sample overall).
