arXiv:1602.04283v1  [cs.DC]  13 Feb 2016
Deep Learning on FPGAs: Past, Present, and Future
Grifﬁn Lacey
University of Guelph
50 Stone Rd E
Guelph, Ontario

Graham Taylor
University of Guelph
50 Stone Rd E
Guelph, Ontario

Shawki Areibi
University of Guelph
50 Stone Rd E
Guelph, Ontario

ABSTRACT
The rapid growth of data size and accessibility in recent
years has instigated a shift of philosophy in algorithm de-
sign for artiﬁcial intelligence. Instead of engineering algo-
rithms by hand, the ability to learn composable systems au-
tomatically from massive amounts of data has led to ground-
breaking performance in important domains such as com-
puter vision, speech recognition, and natural language pro-
cessing. The most popular class of techniques used in these
domains is called deep learning, and is seeing signiﬁcant
attention from industry. However, these models require in-
credible amounts of data and compute power to train, and
are limited by the need for better hardware acceleration
to accommodate scaling beyond current data and model
sizes. While the current solution has been to use clusters
of graphics processing units (GPU) as general purpose pro-
cessors (GPGPU), the use of ﬁeld programmable gate arrays
(FPGA) provide an interesting alternative. Current trends
in design tools for FPGAs have made them more compatible
with the high-level software practices typically practiced in
the deep learning community, making FPGAs more accessi-
ble to those who build and deploy models. Since FPGA ar-
chitectures are ﬂexible, this could also allow researchers the
ability to explore model-level optimizations beyond what is
possible on ﬁxed architectures such as GPUs. As well, FP-
GAs tend to provide high performance per watt of power
consumption, which is of particular importance for appli-
cation scientists interested in large scale server-based de-
ployment or resource-limited embedded applications. This
review takes a look at deep learning and FPGAs from a
hardware acceleration perspective, identifying trends and
innovations that make these technologies a natural ﬁt, and
motivates a discussion on how FPGAs may best serve the
needs of the deep learning community moving forward.
1.
INTRODUCTION
The eﬀects of machine learning on our everyday life are
far-reaching.
Whether you are clicking through personal-
ized recommendations on websites, using speech to commu-
nicate with your smart-phone, or using face-detection to get
the perfect picture on your digital camera, some form of
artiﬁcial intelligence is involved. This new wave of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence is accompanied by a shift in philosophy for
algorithm design.
Where past attempts at learning from
data involved much “feature engineering” by hand using ex-
pert domain-speciﬁc knowledge, the ability to learn compos-
able feature extraction systems automatically from massive
amounts of example data has led to ground-breaking per-
formance in important domains such as computer vision,
speech recognition, and natural language processing. The
study of these data-driven techniques is called deep learn-
ing, and is seeing signiﬁcant attention from two important
groups of the technology community: researchers, who are
interested in exploring and training these models to achieve
top performance across tasks, and application scientists, who
are interested in deploying these models for novel, real world
applications. However, both of these groups are limited by
the need for better hardware acceleration to accommodate
scaling beyond current data and algorithm sizes.
The current state of hardware acceleration for deep learn-
ing is largely dominated by using clusters of graphics pro-
cessing units (GPU) as general purpose processors (GPGPU)
[18]. GPUs have orders of magnitude more computational
cores compared to traditional general purpose processors
(GPP), and allow a greater ability to perform parallel com-
putations. In particular, the NVIDIA CUDA platform for
GPGPU programming is most dominant, with major deep
learning tools utilizing this platform to access GPU accel-
eration [16, 26, 13, 19].
More recently, the open parallel
programming standard OpenCL has gained traction as an
alternative tool for heterogeneous hardware programming,
with interest from these popular tools gaining momentum.
OpenCL, while trailing CUDA in terms of support in the
deep learning community, has two unique features which dis-
tinguish itself from CUDA. First is the open source, royalty-
free standard for development, as opposed to the single ven-
dor support of CUDA. The second is the support for a wide
variety of alternative hardware including GPUs, GPPs, ﬁeld
programmable gate-arrays (FPGA), and digital signal pro-
cessors (DSP).
1.1
The Case for FPGAs
The imminent support for alternative hardware is espe-
cially important for FPGAs, a strong competitor to GPUs
for algorithm acceleration. Unlike GPUs, these devices have
a ﬂexible hardware conﬁguration, and often provide better
performance per watt than GPUs for subroutines important
to deep learning, such as sliding-windows computation [24].
However, programming of these devices requires hardware
speciﬁc knowledge that many researchers and application
scientists may not possess, and as such, FPGAs have been
often considered a specialist architecture. Recently, FPGA
tools have adopted software-level programming models, in-
cluding OpenCL, which has made them a more attractive
option for users trained in mainstream software development
practices.

For researchers considering a variety of design tools, the
selection criteria is typically related to having user-friendly
software development tools, ﬂexible and upgradeable ways
to design models, and fast computation to reduce the train-
ing time of large models.
Deep learning researchers will
beneﬁt from the use of FPGAs given the trend of higher
abstraction design tools which are making FPGAs easier to
program, the reconﬁgurability which allows customized ar-
chitectures, and the large degree of parallelism which will
accelerate execution speeds.
For application scientists, while similar tool level prefer-
ences exist, the emphasis for hardware selection is to maxi-
mize performance per watt of power consumption, reducing
costs for large scale operations. Deep learning application
scientists will beneﬁt from the use of FPGAs given the strong
performance per watt that typically accompanies the ability
to customize the architecture for a particular application.
FPGAs serve as a logical design choice which appeal to
the needs of these two important audiences.
This review
takes a look at the current state of deep learning on FP-
GAs, as well as current developments which serve to bridge
these two technologies.
As such, this review serves three
important purposes. First, it identiﬁes the opportunity that
exists within the deep learning community for exploring new
hardware acceleration platforms, and shows FPGAs as an
ideal choice. Next, it outlines the current state of FPGA
support for deep learning, identifying potential limitations.
Finally, it makes key recommendations of future directions
for FPGA hardware acceleration that would help in solving
the deep learning problems of tomorrow.
2.
DEEP LEARNING
Conventional approaches to artiﬁcial intelligence focused
on using computation to solve problems analytically, requir-
ing explicit knowledge about a given domain [10]. For sim-
ple problems this approach was adequate, as the programs
engineered by hand were small, and domain experts could
carefully transform the modest amount of raw data into use-
ful representations for learning. However, advances in arti-
ﬁcial intelligence created interest in solving more complex
problems, where knowledge is not easily expressed explicitly.
Expert knowledge about problems such as face recognition,
speech transcription, and medical diagnosis is diﬃcult to
express formally, and conventional approaches to artiﬁcial
intelligence failed to account for the implicit information
stored in the raw data.
Moreover, tremendous growth in
data acquisition and storage means that using this implicit
information is more important than ever. Recently, these
types of applications are seeing state-of-the-art performance
from a class of techniques called deep learning, where this
implicit information is discovered automatically by learn-
ing task-relevant features from raw data.
Interest in this
research area has led to several recent reviews [29, 34, 9].
The ﬁeld of deep learning emerged around 2006 after a
long period of relative disinterest around neural networks
research. Interestingly, the early successes in the ﬁeld were
due to unsupervised learning– techniques that can learn
from unlabeled data. Speciﬁcally, unsupervised learning was
used to “pre-train” (initialize) the layers of deep neural net-
works, which were thought at the time to be too diﬃcult
to train with the usual methods, i.e. gradient backpropaga-
tion. However, with the introduction of GPGPU computing
and the availability of larger datasets towards the end of
the 2000’s and into the current decade, focus has shifted al-
most exclusively to supervised learning. In particular, there
are two types of neural network architectures that have re-
ceived most of the attention both in research and industry.
These are multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) and convolutional
neural networks (CNN). Essentially all of the research on
FPGA-based deep learning has focused on one of these ar-
chitectures, and therefore we brieﬂy describe them below.
Before describing any speciﬁc architecture, however, it is
worth noting several characteristics of most deep learning
models and applications that, in general, make them well-
suited for parallellization using hardware accelerators.
Data parallelism – The parallelism inherent in pixel-based
sensory input (e.g. images and video) manifests itself in op-
erations that apply concurrently to all pixels or local regions.
As well, the most popular way of training models is not by
presenting it with a single example at a time, but by pro-
cessing “minibatches” of typically hundreds or thousands of
examples. Each example in a minibatch can be processed
independently.
Model parallelism – These biologically-inspired models
are composed of redundant processing units which can be
distributed in hardware and updated in parallel.
Recent
work on accelerating CNNs using multiple GPUs has used
very sophisticated strategies to balance data and model-
based parallism such that diﬀerent parts of the architecture
are parallelized in diﬀerent, but optimal ways [27].
Pipeline Parallelism – The feed-forward nature of com-
putation in architectures like MLPs and CNNs means that
hardware which is well suited to exploit pipeline parallelism
(e.g. FPGAs) can oﬀer a particular advantage. While GPPs
and GPUs rely on executing parallel threads on multiple
cores, FPGAs can create customized hardware circuits which
are deeply pipelined and inherently multithreaded.
2.1
Multi-layer Perceptrons
Simple feed-forward deep networks are known as multi-
layer perceptrons (MLP), and are the backbone of deep
learning [11]. To describe these models using neural network
terminology, we refer to the examples fed to these models
as inputs, the predictions produced from these models as
outputs, each modular sub-function as a layer with hidden
layers referring to those layers between the ﬁrst (input) layer
and last (output) layer, each scalar output of one of these
layers as a unit (analogous to a neuron in the biological
inspiration of these models), and each connection between
units as a weight (analogous to a synapse), which deﬁne the
function of the model as they are the parameters that are
adjusted during training [9]. Collections of units are some-
times referred to as features, as to draw similarities to the
traditional idea of features in conventional machine learn-
ing, which were designed by domain experts.
To prevent
the entire network from collapsing to a linear transforma-
tion, each unit applies an element-wise nonlinear operation
to its input, with the most popular choice being the rectiﬁed
linear unit (ReLU). A basic MLP is illustrated in Figure 1.
2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) are currently
the most popular deep learning architectures, especially for
pixel-based visual recognition tasks. More formally, these
networks are designed for data that has a measure of spatial
or temporal continuity. This inspiration is drawn largely on

Figure 1: Diﬀerences and similarities between MLPs and CNNs.
work from Hubel and Wiesel, who described the function of
a cat’s visual cortex as being sensitive to small sub-regions of
the visual ﬁeld [25]. Commonly, spatial continuity in data
is found in images where a pixel at location (i, j) shares
similar intensity or color properties to its neighbours in a
local region of the image.
CNNs are composed of various combinations of a few im-
portant layer types. These layers, in comparison to MLPs,
are constructed as a 2D arrangement of units called feature
maps. Convolution layers, analogous to the linear feature ex-
traction operation of MLPs, are parameterized by learnable
ﬁlters (kernels), which have local connections to a small re-
ceptive ﬁeld of the input feature map and shared at all loca-
tions of the input. Feature extraction in a CNN amounts to
convolution with these ﬁlters. Pooling layers apply a simple
reduction operation (e.g. a max or average) to local regions
of the feature maps.
This reduces the size of the feature
maps, which is favorable to computation and reducing pa-
rameters, but also yields a small amount of shift-invariance.
Finally, in recognition applications CNNs typically apply
one or more fully connected layers (the same layers used in
MLPs) towards the output layer in order to reduce the spa-
tially and/or temporally organized information in feature
maps to a decision, such as a classiﬁcation or regression.
3.
FPGAs
Traditionally, when evaluating hardware platforms for ac-
celeration, one must inevitably consider the trade-oﬀbe-
tween ﬂexibility and performance. On one end of the spec-
trum, general purpose processors (GPP) provide a high de-
gree of ﬂexibility and ease of use, but perform relatively inef-
ﬁciently. These platforms tend to be more readily accessible,
can be produced cheaply, and are appropriate for a wide va-
riety of uses and reuses. On the other end of the spectrum,
application speciﬁc integrated circuits (ASIC) provide high
performance at the cost of being inﬂexible and more diﬃcult
to produce. These circuits are dedicated to a speciﬁc appli-
cation, and are expensive and time consuming to produce.

FPGAs serve as a compromise between these two extremes.
They belong to a more general class of programmable logic
devices (PLD) and are, in the most simple sense, a reconﬁg-
urable integrated circuit. As such, they provide the perfor-
mance beneﬁts of integrated circuits, with the reconﬁgurable
ﬂexibility of GPPs. At a low-level, FPGAs can implement
sequential logic through the use of ﬂip-ﬂops (FF) and com-
binational logic through the use of look-up tables (LUT).
Modern FPGAs also contain hardened components for com-
monly used functions such as full processor cores, communi-
cation cores, arithmetic cores, and block RAM (BRAM). In
addition, current FPGA trends are tending toward a system-
on-chip (SoC) design approach, where ARM coprocessors
and FPGAs are commonly found on the same fabric. The
current FPGA market is dominated by Xilinx and Altera,
accounting for a combined 85 percent market share [8]. In
addition, FPGAs are rapidly replacing ASICs and applica-
tion speciﬁc standard products (ASSP) for ﬁxed function
logic. The FPGA market is expected to reach the $10 bil-
lion mark by 2016 [8].
For deep learning, FPGAs provide an obvious potential
for acceleration above and beyond what is possible on tra-
ditional GPPs. Software-level execution on GPPs rely on
the traditional Von Neumann architecture, which stores in-
structions and data in external memory to be fetched when
needed. This is the motivation for caches, which alleviate
much of the expensive external memory operations [8]. The
bottleneck in this architecture is the processor and memory
communication, which severely cripples GPP performance,
especially for the memory-bound techniques frequently re-
quired in deep learning. In comparison, the programmable
logic cells on FPGAs can be used to implement the data
and control path found in common logic functions, which
do not rely on the Von Neumann architecture.
They are
also capable of exploiting distributed on-chip memory, as
well as large degrees of pipeline parallelism, which ﬁt nat-
urally with the feed-forward nature deep learning methods.
Modern FPGAs also support partial dynamic reconﬁgura-
tion, where part of the FPGA can be reprogrammed while
another part of the FPGA is being used. This can have im-
plications for large deep learning models, where individual
layers could be reconﬁgured on the FPGA while not dis-
rupting ongoing computation in other layers.
This would
accommodate models which may be too large to ﬁt on a sin-
gle FPGA, and also alleviate expensive global memory reads
by keeping intermediate results in local memory.
Most importantly, when compared to GPUs, FPGAs oﬀer
a diﬀerent perspective on what it means to accelerate designs
on hardware. With GPUs and other ﬁxed architectures, a
software execution model is followed, and structured around
executing tasks in parallel on independent compute units.
As such, the goal in developing deep learning techniques for
GPUs is to adapt algorithms to follow this model, where
computation is done in parallel, and data interdependence
is ensured. In contrast, FPGA architecture is tailored for
the application. When developing deep learning techniques
for FPGAs, there is less emphasis on adapting algorithms
for a ﬁxed computational structure, allowing more freedom
to explore algorithm level optimizations. Techniques which
require many complex low-level hardware control operations
which cannot be easily implemented in high-level software
languages are especially attractive for FPGA implementa-
tions.
However, this ﬂexibility comes at the cost of large
compile (place and route) times, which is often problematic
for researchers who need to quickly iterate through design
cycles.
In addition to compile time, the problem of attracting
researchers and application scientists, who tend to favour
high-level programming languages, to develop for FPGAs
has been especially diﬃcult. While it is often the case that
being ﬂuent in one software language means one can eas-
ily learn another, the same cannot be said for translating
skills to hardware languages. The most popular languages
for FPGAs have been Verilog and VHDL, both examples of
hardware description languages (HDL). The main diﬀerence
between these languages and traditional software languages,
is that HDL is simply describing hardware, whereas software
languages such as C are describing sequential instructions
with no need to understand hardware level implementation
details. Describing hardware eﬃciently requires a working
knowledge of digital design and circuits, and while some of
the low level implementation decisions can be left to auto-
matic synthesizer tools, this does not always result in eﬃ-
cient designs. As a result, researchers and application sci-
entists tend to opt for a software design experience, which
has matured to support a large assortment of abstractions
and conveniences that increase the productivity of program-
mers. These trends have pushed the FPGA community to
now favour design tools with a high-level of abstraction.
3.1
High-Level Abstraction Tools
Both Xilinx and Altera have favoured the use of high-
level design tools which abstract away many of the chal-
lenges of low level hardware programming. These tools are
commonly termed high-level synthesis (HLS) tools, which
translate high-level designs into low-level register-transfer
level (RTL) or HDL code. A good overview of HLS tools is
presented in [8], where they are grouped into ﬁve main cat-
egories: model-based frameworks, high-level language based
frameworks, HDL-like languages, C-based frameworks, and
parallel computing frameworks (i.e. CUDA/OpenCL). While
it is important to understand these diﬀerent types of ab-
straction tools, this review focuses on parallel computing
frameworks, as they provide the most sensible path to join
deep learning and FPGAs.
3.2
OpenCL
OpenCL is an open source, standardized framework for
algorithm acceleration on heterogeneous architectures. As a
C-based language (C99), programs written in OpenCL can
be executed transparently on GPPs, GPUs, DSPs, and FP-
GAs. Similar to CUDA, OpenCL provides a standard frame-
work for parallel programming, as well as low-level access to
hardware. While both CUDA and OpenCL provide similar
functionality to programmers, key diﬀerences between them
have left most people divided. Since CUDA is the current
choice for most popular deep learning tools, it is impor-
tant to discuss these diﬀerences in detail, in the interest of
demonstrating how OpenCL could be used for deep learning
moving forward.
The major diﬀerence between OpenCL and CUDA is in
terms of ownership. CUDA is a proprietary framework cre-
ated by the hardware manufacturer NVIDIA, known for
manufacturing high performance GPUs. OpenCL is open-
source, royality-free, and is maintained by the Khronos group.
This gives OpenCL a unique capability compared to CUDA:

Figure 2: Proposed deployment ﬂow for image classiﬁcation using FPGA for acceleration.
OpenCL can support programming a wide variety of hard-
ware platforms, including FPGAs.
However, this ﬂexibil-
ity comes at a cost, where all supported platforms are not
guaranteed to support all OpenCL functions. In the case
of FPGAs, only a subset of OpenCL functions are currently
supported.
While a detailed comparison of OpenCL and
CUDA is outside the scope of this paper, performance of
both frameworks has been shown to be very similar for given
applications [22].
Beginning in late 2013, both Altera and Xilinx started to
adopt OpenCL SDKs for their FPGAs [21, 7]. This move
allowed a much wider audience of software developers to
take advantage of the high-performance and low power ben-
eﬁts that come with designing for FPGAs.
Conveniently,
both companies have taken similar approaches to adopting
OpenCL for their devices.
3.3
Proposed Design Flow for Deep Learning
Development
To successfully integrate FPGAs into deep learning de-
sign ﬂows, the needs of researchers and application scien-
tists, who are familiar with GPU design ﬂows, need to be
considered.
While this is a challenge given the architec-
tural diﬀerences of FPGAs and GPUs, we believe this goal
is achievable.
The main challenge is related to design compile time.
Both Altera and Xilinx support primarily oﬄine compil-
ing for OpenCL kernels. The main reason for this is that
OpenCL kernel compilation time for both vendors is on the
order of tens of minutes to hours, whereas compiling generic
OpenCL kernels for GPPs/GPUs is on the order of millisec-
onds to seconds. Obviously, this makes iterating through the
design phase challenging if the compilation time is hours
for each design iteration. However, this is not necessarily
futile for deep learning, as deep learning tools often reuse
the same pre-compiled kernels during the design phase. As
well, deep learning tools supported by CUDA use a similar
methodology, as CUDA employs a just-in-time compiling
approach.
As such, doing one-time oﬄine compilation of
commonly used deep learning kernels is a reasonable com-
promise that does not limit application scientists who are
usually not designing these kernels, but just interested in
using them. Figure 2 shows an example ﬂow for deployment
of an image classiﬁcation model.
For researchers who do have an interest in kernel design,
both Altera and Xilinx support integrated kernel proﬁling,
debugging, and optimization in their OpenCL tools. These
features give researchers the ability to speed up and opti-
mize the development of kernels. As well, both companies
have support for kernel simulation in software, which can cir-
cumvent the hassle of dealing with long compile times when
debugging non-hardware issues such as semantic or syntax
errors.
4.
A REVIEW OF CNNS ON FPGAS
One of the most limiting hardware realizations for deep
learning techniques on FPGAs is design size.
The trade-
oﬀbetween design reconﬁgurability and density means that
FPGA circuits are often considerably less dense than hard-
ware alternatives, and so implementing large neural net-
works has not always been possible. However, as modern
FPGAs continue to exploit smaller feature sizes to increase
density, and incorporate hardened computational units along-
side generic FPGA fabric, deep networks have started being

Figure 3: Timeline of important events in FPGA deep learning research.
implemented on single FPGA systems. A brief timeline of
important events in FPGA deep learning research is seen in
Figure 3.
The ﬁrst FPGA implementations of neural networks be-
gan appearing in the early 1990’s, with the ﬁrst implemen-
tation credited to Cox et al.
in 1992 [20].
However, the
ﬁrst FPGA implementations of CNNs began appearing a
few years later. Cloutier et al. were among the ﬁrst to ex-
plore these eﬀorts, but were strongly limited by FPGA size
constraints at the time, leading to the use of low-precision
arithmetic [17]. In addition, because FPGAs at this time did
not contain the dense hardened multiply-accumulate (MAC)
units that are present in today’s FPGAs, arithmetic was also
very slow in addition to being resource expensive. Since this
time, FPGA technology has changed signiﬁcantly. Most no-
tably, there has been a large increase in the density of FPGA
fabric, motivated by the decreasing feature (transistor) size,
as well as an increase in the number of hardened compu-
tational units present in FPGAs.
State-of-the-art FPGA
implementations of CNNs take advantage of both of these
design improvements.
To the best of our knowledge, state-of-the-art performance
for forward propagation of CNNs on FPGAs was achieved
by a team at Microsoft.
Ovtcharov et al. have reported
a throughput of 134 images/second on the ImageNet 1K
dataset [28], which amounts to roughly 3x the throughput
of the next closest competitor, while operating at 25 W on a
Stratix V D5 [30]. This performance is projected to increase
by using top-of-the-line FPGAs, with an estimated through-
put of roughly 233 images/second while consuming roughly
the same power on an Arria 10 GX1150.
This is com-
pared to high-performing GPU implementations (Caﬀe +
cuDNN), which achieve 500-824 images/second, while con-
suming 235 W. Interestingly, this was achieved using Microsoft-
designed FPGA boards and servers, an experimental project
which integrates FPGAs into datacenter applications. This
project has claimed to improve large-scale search engine per-
formance by a factor of two, showing promise for this type
of FPGA application [4].
Other strong eﬀorts include the design proposed by Zhang
et al., referenced above as the closest competitor achieving a
throughput of 46 images/second on a Virtex 7 485T, with an
unreported power consumption [36]. In this paper, Zhang et
al. show their work to outperform most of the main strong
competitors in this ﬁeld, including [14, 15, 23, 32, 33]. Most
of these implementations contain architecturally similar de-
signs, commonly using oﬀ-chip memory access, conﬁgurable
software layers, buﬀered input and output, and many paral-
lel processing elements implemented on FPGA fabric (com-
monly used to perform convolution). However, important
FPGA speciﬁc diﬀerences exist, such as using diﬀerent mem-
ory sub-systems, data transfer mechanisms, soft-cores, LUT
types, operation frequencies, and entirely diﬀerent FPGAs,
to name a few. As a result, it is hard to determine speciﬁc
optimal architecture decisions, as more research is needed.
Since pre-trained CNNs are algorithmically simple and
computationally eﬃcient, most FPGA eﬀorts have involved
accelerating the forward propagation of these models, and
reporting on the achieved throughput. This is often of most
importance to application engineers who wish to use pre-
trained networks to process large amounts of data as quickly
and eﬃciently as possible. However, this only represents one
aspect of CNN design considerations for FPGAs, as accel-
erating backward propagation on FPGAs is also an area of
interest. Paul et al. were the ﬁrst to completely parallelize
the learning phase on a Virtex E FPGA in 2006 [31].
5.
LOOKING FORWARD
The future of deep learning on FPGAs, and in general,
is largely dependant on scalability. For these techniques to
succeed on the problems of tomorrow, they must scale to
accommodate data sizes and architectures that continue to
grow at an incredible rate. FPGA technology is adapting to
support this trend, as the hardware is headed toward larger
memory, smaller feature sizes, and interconnect improve-
ments to accommodate multi-FPGA conﬁgurations.
The
Intel acquisition of Altera, along with the partnership of
IBM and Xilinx, indicate a change in the FPGA landscape
which may also see the integration of FPGAs in consumer
and data center applications in the very near future.
In
addition, design tools will likely tend toward higher levels
of abstraction and software-like experiences, in an eﬀort to
attract a wider technical range of users.
5.1
Popular Deep Learning Software Tools
Of the most popular software packages for deep learning,
several have began to take notice of the need for OpenCL
support in addition to CUDA support. This support will
make FPGAs more accessible for the purposes of deep learn-
ing. While, to our knowledge, no deep learning tools exist
yet which explicitly support FPGAs, the following list (sum-
marized in Table 1) details some of the notable OpenCL
eﬀorts which move these tools in that direction:
• Caﬀe, developed by the Berkeley Vision and Learning

Table 1: Overview of Deep Learning Frameworks with OpenCL Support
Tool
Core Language
Bindings
OpenCL
User Base
Caﬀe
C++
Python
MATLAB
Partial Support
Large
Torch
Lua
-
Partial Support
Large
Theano
Python
-
Minimal Support
Large
DeepCL
C++
Python
Lua
Full Support
Moderate
Center, has unoﬃcial support for OpenCL under the
name project GreenTea [2].
There is also an AMD
version of Caﬀe that supports OpenCL [1].
• Torch, a scientiﬁc computing framework written in
Lua, is widely used and has unoﬃcial support for OpenCL
under the project CLTorch [6].
• Theano, developed by the University of Montreal, has
unoﬃcial support for OpenCL under the work-in-progress
gpuarray backend [5].
• DeepCL is an OpenCL library to train deep convo-
lutional neural networks, developed by Hugh Perkins
[3].
For those new to this ﬁeld who are looking to choose be-
tween these tools, our recommendation is to start with Caﬀe
due to its popularity, support, and easy to use interface. As
well, using Caﬀe’s “model zoo” repository, it is easy to ex-
periment with popular pre-trained models.
5.2
Increasing Degrees of Freedom for Train-
ing
While one may expect the process of training machine
learning algorithms to be fully autonomous, in practice there
are tunable hyper-parameters that need to be adjusted. This
is especially true for deep learning, where complexity of the
model in terms of number of parameters is often accompa-
nied by many possible combinations of hyper-parameters.
The number of training iterations, the learning rate, mini-
batch size, number of hidden units, and number of layers are
all examples of hyper-parameters that can be adjusted. The
act of tuning these values is equivalent to selecting which
model, among the set of all possible models, is best for a par-
ticular problem. Traditionally, hyper-parameters have been
set by experience or systematically by grid search or more
eﬀectively, random search [12].
Very recently, researchers
have turned to adaptive methods, which exploit the results
of hyper-parameter attempts. Among these, Bayesian Opti-
mization [35] is the most popular.
Regardless of the method selected to tune hyper-parameters,
current training procedures using ﬁxed architectures are some-
what limited in their ability to grow these sets of possi-
ble models, meaning that we may be viewing the solution
space through a very narrow lens. Fixed architectures make
it much easier to explore hyper-parameter settings within
models (e.g. number of hidden units, number of layers) but
diﬃcult to explore settings between models (i.e. diﬀerent
types of models) as the training of models which do not
conveniently conform to a particular ﬁxed architecture may
be very slow. The ﬂexible architecture of FPGAs, however,
may be better suited for these types of optimizations, as a
completely diﬀerent hardware structure can be programmed
and accelerated at runtime.
5.3
Low Power Compute Clusters
One of the most intriguing aspects of deep learning models
is the ability to scale. Whether the purpose is to discover
complex high level features in data, or to increase perfor-
mance for data center applications, deep learning techniques
are often scaled up across multi-node computing infrastruc-
tures. Current solutions to this problem involve using clus-
ters of GPUs with Inﬁniband interconnects and MPI to allow
high levels of parallel computing power and fast data trans-
fer between nodes [18]. However, as the workloads of these
large scale applications become increasingly heterogeneous,
the use of FPGAs may prove to be a superior alternative.
The programmability of FPGAs would allow reconﬁgurabil-
ity based on the application and workload, and FPGAs pro-
vide an attractive performance/watt that would lower costs
for the next generation of data centers.
6.
CONCLUSION
When addressing the hardware needs of deep learning,
FPGAs provide an attractive alternative to GPUs and GPPs.
In particular, the ability to exploit pipeline parallelism and
achieve an eﬃcient rate of power consumption give FPGAs
a unique advantage over GPUs and GPPs for common deep
learning practices. As well, design tools have matured to
a point where integrating FPGAs into popular deep learn-
ing frameworks is now possible. Looking forward, FPGAs
can eﬀectively accommodate the trends of deep learning and
provide architectural freedom for exploration and research.
7.
