IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2022
1
RFormer: Transformer-based Generative
Adversarial Network for Real Fundus Image
Restoration on A New Clinical Benchmark
Zhuo Deng, Yuanhao Cai, Lu Chen, Zheng Gong, Qiqi Bao, Xue Yao, Dong Fang,
Wenming Yang, Senior Member, IEEE, Shaochong Zhang, Lan Ma
Abstract— Ophthalmologists have used fundus images
to screen and diagnose eye diseases. However, different
equipments and ophthalmologists pose large variations to
the quality of fundus images. Low-quality (LQ) degraded
fundus images easily lead to uncertainty in clinical screen-
ing and generally increase the risk of misdiagnosis. Thus,
real fundus image restoration is worth studying. Unfortu-
nately, real clinical benchmark has not been explored for
this task so far. In this paper, we investigate the real clinical
fundus image restoration problem. Firstly, We establish
a clinical dataset, Real Fundus (RF), including 120 low-
and high-quality (HQ) image pairs. Then we propose a
novel Transformer-based Generative Adversarial Network
(RFormer) to restore the real degradation of clinical fundus
images. The key component in our network is the Window-
based Self-Attention Block (WSAB) which captures non-
local self-similarity and long-range dependencies. To pro-
duce more visually pleasant results, a Transformer-based
discriminator is introduced. Extensive experiments on our
clinical benchmark show that the proposed RFormer signif-
icantly outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. In
addition, experiments of downstream tasks such as vessel
segmentation and optic disc/cup detection demonstrate
that our proposed RFormer beneﬁts clinical fundus image
analysis and applications. The dataset, code, and models
will be made publicly available at https://github.com/
dengzhuo-AI/Real-Fundus.
Index Terms— Real Fundus Image Restoration, Trans-
former, Generative Adversarial Network, Self-Attention
I. INTRODUCTION
D
UE to the safety and cost-effectiveness in acquiring, fun-
dus images are widely used by ophthalmologists for early
eye disease detection and diagnosis, including glaucoma [3]–
[5], diabetic retinopathy [6]–[8], cataract [9], [10], and age-
This work was supported in part by the Shenzhen Bay Laboratory and
the Shenzhen International Science and Technology Information Center.
Zhuo Deng, Yuanhao Cai, Zheng Gong, Qiqi Bao, Wenming Yang
and Lan Ma are with Shenzhen International Graduate School,

cyh20,
gz20,

{yang.wenming,

Lu Chen, Shaochong Zhang, Dong Fang, Xue Yao are with Shen-
zhen Eye Hospital afﬁliated to Jinan University, Shenzhen 518040,

Co-ﬁrst authors: Zhuo Deng and Yuanhao Cai.
Corresponding authors: Lan Ma, Shaochong Zhang, and Wen-
ming Yang.
Collecting Clinical Fundus Images
Selecting Fundus Image Pairs
Blurry Images
Clear Images
Calibrating Fundus Image Pairs
120 
2560×2560×3 
Selected 
Aligned
Clipped
High-Quality (HQ)
Gaussian Filter
Low-Quality (LQ)
…
…
…
…
Low-Quality (LQ)
24.42 / 0.8157
Ground Truth (HQ)
PSNR / SSIM
Cofe-Net
19.65 / 0.8179
I-SECRET 
20.53 / 0.8207
(a) Our Clinical Benchmark — Real Fundus
(b) Synthetic Fundus Image Dataset
(d) Restoration Results of Models Trained with Synthetic Data on Real Fundus
Synthetic
Real
(c) Synthetic LQ Image vs. Real LQ Image
Degradation Models
Fig. 1.
Our Real Fundus vs. Synthetic Dataset. (a) The pipeline of
establishing our clinical fundus image benchmark, Real Fundus (RF).
(b) Artiﬁcial degradation models are used to synthesize low-quality (LQ)
fundus images from their high-quality (HQ) counterpart. (c) Compar-
isons of synthetic LQ fundus image and our real clinical LQ image. (d)
Restoration results of models trained with synthetic data on RF. The two
CNN-based methods, I-SECRET [1] and Cofe-Net [2], fail to reconstruct
the real clinical degraded fundus images.
related macular degeneration [11], [12]. However, different
equipments and ophthalmologists pose large variations to the
quality of fundus images. A screening study of 5,575 patients
found that about 12% of fundus images are of inadequate qual-
ity to be readable by ophthalmologists [13]. We analyze the
factors causing the degradation in real fundus image capturing.
Firstly, patients, especially infant patients, do not cooperate
with the capturing process of fundus images. Speciﬁcally,
arXiv:2201.00466v2  [eess.IV]  3 Aug 2022

2
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2022
most patients are reluctant to undergo pupil dilation, which
causes poorly lit and blurred fundus images. Besides, infant
patients usually can not resist the eye-closing reﬂex caused by
a bright light during ﬂash photography. Secondly, in practice,
spatial pixel misalignment, color, and brightness mismatch are
inevitable due to the changes in light conditions and misop-
erations of inexpert ophthalmologists. Thirdly, high-quality
(HQ) fundus images can be collected in hospitals of developed
areas using high-precision fundus cameras. However, these
equipments are expensive and unaffordable for hospitals in
some remote areas of under-developed or developing countries.
As a result, low-precision and portable fundus cameras are
used to capture low-quality (LQ) fundus images. These LQ
fundus images easily mislead the clinical diagnosis and lead
to unsatisfactory results of downstream tasks like blood vessels
segmentation. Various biomarkers of the retina (e.g., hemor-
rhage, microaneurysm, exudate, optic nerve and optic cup)
are essential in different diseases. Therefore, it is necessary to
ensure the prominence and visibility of each marker for precise
clinical diagnosis. Thus, when LQ fundus images are captured
in clinical diagnosis, ophthalmologists often repeat dozens of
shots until HQ fundus images are obtained. Nonetheless, this
repeated capturing process harms patients, degrades hospital
efﬁciency, prevents reliable diagnosis of ophthalmologists, and
impacts automated image analysis systems.
We observe the clinical fundus images and ﬁnd that the
main degradation types of LQ images include out-of-focus
blur, motion blur, artifact, over-exposure, and over-darkness.
Compared with other types of degradation, blur, especially out-
of-focus blur, poses the most severe threat to image analysis
and clinical diagnosis. An example is shown in Fig. 2, where
the uneven illumination, haze, and out-of-focus blur degrada-
tion are presented in (a), (b), and (c), respectively. It can be
observed that the performance of blood vessel segmentation
only collapses on out-of-focus blurred fundus images.
Traditional fundus image restoration methods [14], [15] are
mainly based on handcrafted priors. However, these model-
based methods achieve unsatisfactory performance and gen-
erality due to the poor representing capacity. Recently, deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely
used in natural image restoration and enhancement [16]–
[18], e.g., super resolution [19]–[25], deraining [26], deblur-
ring [27]–[31], enlighten [32], [33], etc. Inspired by the suc-
cess of natural image restoration, CNNs have also been applied
to fundus image restoration [1], [2], [22], [23], [34]–[39].
Although impressive results have been achieved, CNN-based
methods show limitations in capturing long-range dependen-
cies. In recent years, the natural language processing (NLP)
model, Transformer [40] has been introduced into computer
vision and outperformed CNN-based methods in many tasks.
The Multi-head Self-Attention (MSA) in Transformer excels
at modeling non-local similarity and long-range dependencies.
This advantage of Transformer may provide a possibility to
address the limitations of CNN-based methods.
Existing deep learning methods rely on a large amount of
LQ and HQ fundus image pairs. Unfortunately, real clinical
benchmark has not been explored for fundus image reconstruc-
tion. There remains a data-hungry problem. As shown in Fig. 1
(b), to get more image pairs, artiﬁcially designed degradation
models such as Gaussian ﬁlter are used to synthesize degraded
fundus images from their high-quality counterparts. However,
as depicted in Fig. 1 (c), artiﬁcial degradation is fundamentally
different from clinical degradation. As shown in Fig. 1 (d), the
two CNN-based methods [1], [2] trained with synthesized data
fail in real fundus image restoration.
In this paper, we investigate the real fundus image restora-
tion problem, which has not been studied in the literature.
Our work is the ﬁrst attempt. To begin with, we establish
a clinical benchmark, Real Fundus (RF), including 120 LQ
and HQ real clinical fundus image pairs to alleviate the data-
hungry issue. Based on this dataset, we propose a novel
method, namely Transformer-based Generative Adversarial
Network (RFormer), for real fundus image restoration. Specif-
ically, the generator and discriminator are built up by the
basic unit, Window-based Self-Attention Blocks (WSABs).
The self-attention mechanism equipped with each basic block
excels at capturing the non-local self-similarity and long-range
dependencies, which are the main limitations of existing CNN-
based methods. In particular, the generator adopts a U-shape
structure to aggregate multi-resolution contextual information.
Unlike previous CNN-based Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), we adopt a Transformer-based discriminator to ex-
tract non-local image prior information and thus improve the
ability of discriminator to distinguish restored fundus images
from the ground-truth HQ fundus images. Our Transformer-
based adversarial training scheme encourages the generator
to create more plausible-looking natural and visually-pleasant
images with more detailed contents and structural textures.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We establish a new clinical benchmark, RF, to evaluate
algorithms in real fundus image restoration. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst real fundus image dataset.
• We propose a novel Transformer-based method, RFormer,
for real fundus image restoration. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the ﬁrst attempt to explore the potential
of Transformer for this task in the literature.
• Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative experiments
demonstrate that our RFormer signiﬁcantly outperforms
SOTA algorithms. Extensive experiments of downstream
tasks further validate the effectiveness of our method.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Fundus Image Restoration
Traditional fundus image restoration and enhancement
methods [14], [15] are mainly based on hand-crafted priors.
For example, Setiawan et al. [41] apply contrast limited adap-
tive histogram equalization (CLAHE) to fundus image en-
hancement. Some methods [42]–[44] decompose the reﬂection
and illumination, achieving image enhancement and correction
by estimating the solution in an alternate minimization scheme.
However, these model-based methods achieve unsatisfactory
performance and generality due to the poor representing ca-
pacity. With the development of deep learning, fundus image
restoration has witnessed a signiﬁcant progress. CNNs [1],
[2], [22], [23], [34]–[39] apply a powerful learning model

ZHUO DENG, YUANHAO CAI et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (JANUARY 2022)
3
(a) Uneven illumination 
(b) Haze
(c) Out-of-focus blur
Low-Quality (LQ)
Vessel Seg of LQ
High-Quality (HQ)
Vessel Seg of HQ
Fig. 2.
Fundus images of different degeneration types and
their blood vessel segmentation results. (a) Uneven illumination. (b)
Haze. (c) Out-of-focus blur. From top to bottom are the low-quality (LQ)
fundus images, blood vessel segmentation of the LQ fundus images,
the ground-truth high-quality (HQ) fundus images, and blood vessel
segmentation of the ground-truth HQ fundus images.
to restore LQ fundus images. For instance, Zhao et al. [23]
propose an end-to-end deep CNN to remove the lesions on
the fundus images of cataract patients. However, the cataract
lesions are not caused by clinical fundus imaging. Sourya
et al. [22] , Shen et al. [2], and Raj et al. [39] customize
different synthetic degradation models to better simulate the
degradation types in actual clinical practice. However, real
fundus image degradation is more sophisticated than synthe-
sized degradation. It is hard to simulate real degradation by
artiﬁcial degradation models completely. Thus, models trained
on synthesized data easily fail in real fundus image restoration.
In addition, the CNN-based methods show limitations in cap-
turing non-local self-similarity and long-rang dependencies,
which are critical for fundus image reconstruction.
B. Generative Adversarial Network
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is ﬁrstly intro-
duced in
[45] and has been proven successful in image
synthesis [16]–[18], and translation [17], [18]. Subsequently,
GAN is applied to image restoration and enhancement, e.g.,
super resolution [19]–[25], deraining [26], deblurring [27], en-
lighten [32], [33], dehazing [46], [47], image inpainting [48],
[49], style transfer [18], [50], image editing [51], [52], medical
image enhancement [22], [23], [53], [54], and mobile photo
enhancement [55], [56]. Although GAN is widely applied in
low-level vision tasks, few works are dedicated to improving
the underlying framework of GAN, such as replacing the
traditional CNN framework with Transformer. Jiang et al. [57]
propose the ﬁrst Transformer-based GAN, TransGAN, for
image generation. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge,
the Transformer-based GAN has not been involved in fundus
image restoration.
C. Vision Transformer
Transformer is proposed by [40] for machine translation.
Recently, Transformer has achieved great success in high-
level vision, such as image classiﬁcation [58]–[62], semantic
segmentation [61]–[64], human pose estimation [65]–[70],
object detection [61], [71]–[74], etc. Due to the advantage of
capturing long-range dependencies and excellent performance
in many high-level vision tasks, Transformer has also been
introduced into low-level vision [75]–[81]. SwinIR [78] uses
Swin Transformer [61] blocks to build up a residual network
and achieve SOTA results in natural image restoration. Chen
et al. [77] propose a large model IPT pre-trained on large-scale
datasets with a multitask learning scheme. MST [82] presents
a spectral-wise Transformer for HSI reconstruction. Although
Transformer has achieved impressive results in many tasks, its
potential in fundus image restoration remains under-explored.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. RFormer Architecture
The architecture of RFormer is shown in Fig. 3, where
(a) and (b) depict the generator and discriminator. Fig. 3 (c)
illustrates the proposed Window-based Self-Attention Blocks
(WSABs), which consists of a Feed-Forward Network (FFN)
(detailed in Fig. 3 (d)), a Window-based Multi-head Self-
Attention (W-MSA), and two layer normalization.
The generator adopts a U-shaped [83] architecture including
an encoder, a bottleneck, and a decoder. The input LQ image
is denoted as ILQ ∈RH×W ×3. Firstly, the generator exploits
a projection layer consisting of a 3 × 3 convolution (conv)
and LeakyReLU to extract shallow feature I0 ∈RH×W ×C.
Secondly, 4 encoder stages are used for deep feature extraction
on I0. Each stage is composed of two consecutive WSABs and
one downsampling layer. We adopt a 4×4 conv with stride 2 as
the downsampling layer to downscale the spatial size of feature
maps and double the channel dimension. Thus, the feature of
the i-th stage in the encoder is denoted as Xi ∈R
H
2i × H
2i ×2iC.
Here, i = 0, 1, 2, 3 indicates the four stages. Thirdly, X3
undergoes the bottleneck that consists of two WSABs. Sub-
sequently, following the spirits of U-Net, we customize a
symmetrical decoder, which also contains 4 stages. Each
stage of the decoder is also composed of two WSABs and
one upsampling layer. Similarly, the feature maps of the i-
th stage in the decoder is denoted as X′
i ∈R
H
2i × H
2i ×2i+1C.
The upsampling layer is a bilinear interpolation followed by
a 3×3 conv layer. To alleviate the information loss caused by

4
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2022
WSAB
+
(a) Generator
Input Projection
Low-Quality
Restored
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
WSAB
Output Projection
DownSample
DownSample
DownSample
DownSample
𝐻× 𝑊× 𝐶
𝐻× 𝑊× 𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 2𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 2𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 4𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 4𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 8𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 8𝐶
𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16 × 16𝐶
𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16 × 16𝐶
𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16 × 16𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 8𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 16𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 16𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 4𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 8𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 8𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 2𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 4𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 4𝐶
c
c
c
c
UpSample
UpSample
UpSample
UpSample
𝐻× 𝑊× 𝐶
𝐻× 𝑊× 2𝐶
𝐻× 𝑊× 2𝐶
Input Projection
Conv 3×3
DownSample
DownSample
DownSample
𝐻× 𝑊× 3
𝐻× 𝑊× 3
High-Quality
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
× 2
3×3 Conv Layer
Channel Concatenation
c
Conv 3×3
Window-based Self-Attention Block
Encoder
Decoder
Bottleneck
(b) Discriminator
𝐻× 𝑊× 3
𝐻× 𝑊× 𝐶
𝐻
2 × 𝑊
2 × 2𝐶
𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 × 4𝐶
𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 × 8𝐶
N× 𝑁× 1
WSAB
(c) WSAB
+
+
Layer Norm
Layer Norm
W-MSA
FFN
(d) FFN
conv1×1
GELU
DW conv3×3
GELU
conv1×1
Fake Label
Real Label
Prediction
𝐗0
𝐗1
𝐗2
𝐗3
𝐗0
′
𝐗1
′
𝐗2
′
𝐗3
′
DW conv3×3
Depth-wise 3×3 Conv Layer
𝐈𝐿𝑄
𝐈𝐻𝑄
𝐈𝑅
Fig. 3.
Architecture of our RFormer. (a) The generator adopts a U-shaped structure, including an encoder, a bottleneck, and a decoder. (b)
Different from CNN-based GANs, our discriminator is Transformer-based. (c) The basic unit of our RFormer is Window-based Multi-head Self-
Attention Block. (d) Feed-Forward Network consits of two 1×1 conv layers, two GLEU activations, and a depth-wise 3×3 conv layer.
L2
Partition
H
C
W
L
H×W ×C
𝐗𝑖𝑛
C
L
𝐗𝑖𝑛
𝑖
L×L×C
Flatten
Transpose
𝐗𝑖L2×C
C
Fig. 4.
Illustration of the feature map partition. The feature maps
are partitioned into non-overlapping windows, where the window-based
multi-head self-attention (W-MSA) is conducted.
downsampling in the encoder, skip connections are used for
feature fusion between the encoder and decoder. Finally, after
undergoing the decoder, the feature maps pass through a 3×3
conv layer to generate a residual image I
′ ∈RH×W ×3. The
restored fundus image can be obtained by IR = ILQ + I
′.
As shown in Fig. 3 (b), the discriminator aims to distinguish
the restored fundus images from ground-truth high-quality fun-
dus images. As analyzed in [17], patch-level GAN is more ef-
fective than image-level GAN in capturing high-resolution and
ﬁne-grained image information, which is critical for restoring
clinical fundus image restoration. Hence, we follow the adver-
sarial training scheme based on image patches as PatchGAN
and further propose a Transformer-based discriminator. More
speciﬁcally, the discriminator employs the same architecture as
the encoder in the generator followed by a 3×3 conv layer. The
restored fundus image IR ∈RH×W ×3 concatenated with the
ground-truth HQ fundus image IHQ ∈RH×W ×3 undergoes
our proposed Transformer-based discriminator to generate the
predicted map F ∈RN×N×1.
B. Window-based Self-Attention Block
The emergence of Transformer provides an alternative to ad-
dress the limitations of CNN-based methods in modeling non-
local self-similarity and long-range dependencies. However,
as analyzed in Swin Transformer [61], the computational cost
of the standard global Transformer is quadratic to the spatial
size of the input feature (HW). This burden is nontrivial and
sometimes unaffordable. To tackle this problem, we adopt the
Window-based Multi-head Self-Attention (W-MSA)
[61] as
the self-attention mechanism and integrate it with the basic
Transformer unit. The computational complexity of W-MSA
is linear to the spatial size, which is much cheaper than that of
standard global MSA. Inspired by Swin Transformer [61], we
add window shift operations(WSO) in our proposed Window-
based Multi-head Self-Attention Block (WSAB) to introduce
cross-window connections. The components of our proposed
WSAB are shown in Fig. 3 (c). WSAB consists of a W-MSA,
an FFN, and two layer normalization. The details of FFN are
shown in Fig. 3 (d). Then WSAB can be formulated as
F′ = W-MSA(LN(Fin)) + Fin,
Fout = FFN(LN(F′)) + F′,
(1)
where Fin represents the input feature maps of a WSAB.
LN(·) represents the layer normalization. F′ and Fout denote
the output feature of W-MSA and FFN respectively.
1) Window-based Multi-head Self-Attention: Instead of using
global correspondence, we partition the feature map into non-
overlapping windows. Subsequently, the token interactions are
calculated inside each window. As shown in Fig. 4, given
the input feature map Xin ∈RH×W ×C with H and W
being the height and the width. We partition Xin into L × L
non-overlapping windows. The feature of the i-th window
is denoted as Xi
in ∈RL×L×C, where i ∈{1, 2, · · · , N}
and N = HW/L2. Xi
in is ﬂattened and transposed into
Xi ∈RL2×C. We conduct MSA on Xi. Firstly, Xi is linearly
projected into query Qi, key Ki, and value Vi ∈RL2×C:
Qi = XiWQ, Ki = XiWK, Vi = XiW V ,
(2)
where WQ, WK, WV ∈RC×C are learnable parameters,
denoting the projection matrices of the query, key and value.
We respectively split Qi, Ki and Vi into k heads along the
channel dimension: Qi = [Qi
1, . . . , Qi
k], Ki = [Ki
1, . . . , Ki
k]

ZHUO DENG, YUANHAO CAI et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (JANUARY 2022)
5
and Vi = [Vi
1, . . . , Vi
k]. The dimension of each head is dk =
C/k. The Self-Attention (SA) for head j is formulated as
SA(Qi
j, Ki
j, Vi
j) = softmax(
Qi
jKi
j
T
√dk
)Vi
j,
(3)
where Qi
j, Ki
j and Vi
j respectively represent the query, key
and value of head j respectively. The output tokens Xi
o ∈
RL2×C of the i-th window can be obtained by
Xi
o =
k
Concat
j=1
 SA(Qi
j, Ki
j, Vi
j)

WO + B,
(4)
where Concat(·) denotes the concatenating operation, B ∈
RL2×C represents the position embedding, and WO ∈RC×C
are learnable parameters. We reshape Xi
o to obtain the output
window feature map Xi
out ∈RL×L×C. Finally, we merge
all the patch representations {X1
out, X2
out, X3
out, · · · , XN
out} to
obtain the output feature maps Xout ∈RH×W ×C.
2) Feed-Forward Network: As depicted in Fig. 3 (d), the
Feed-Forward Network (FFN) consists of a 1 × 1 conv layer
with a GELU activation, a depth-wise 3 × 3 conv layer with
a GELU activation, and another 1 × 1 conv layer.
C. Loss Functions
During the training procedure, we exploit the weighted sum
of four loss functions as the overall training objective. They
are described and analyzed in the following part.
1) Charbonnier Loss: The ﬁrst loss function is the Charbon-
nier loss between the restored and ground-truth HQ images:
L1(IR, IHQ) =
q

IR −IHQ

2 + ε2
(5)
where IR denotes the restored fundus image, IHQ represents
the ground-truth HQ fundus image, and ε denotes a constant
which is empirically set to 10−3 for all the experiments.
2) Fundus Quality Perception Loss: Unlike natural images,
fundus images have speciﬁc acquisition process and anatomi-
cal structures. This indicates fundus images have highly simi-
lar styles. Therefore, we exploit high-level feature constraints
to improve the perceptual quality and encourage the network
to capture the fundus anatomical structures and styles. To this
end, we propose Fundus Quality Perception Loss (FQPLoss).
More speciﬁcally, we adopt VGG-19 [84] as the perception
network and pre-train it on the fundus image quality evaluation
dataset, Eye-Q [85] with the fundus image quality classiﬁca-
tion task. The Eye-Q dataset has 28,792 fundus images with
three-level quality grading. The perception network trained
on the Eye-Q dataset is capable of extracting the difference
of high-level features between different qualities of fundus
images. Subsequently, our FQPLoss can be formulated as
Lfqp =
1
HW
H
X
i=1
W
X
j=1
(φ(IR)(i, j) −φ(IHQ)(i, j))2
(6)
where H and W denote the height and width of the fundus
image. φ(·) denotes the feature extraction function of the
pre-trained perception network. Our FQPLoss is customized
to assess a solution with respect to perceptually relevant
characteristics. By minimizing the FQPLoss Lfqp, the model is
encouraged to capture more high-level discriminative features
and generate more visually-pleasant results.
3) Adversarial Loss: Our proposed Transformer-based dis-
criminator aims to distinguish the restored fundus images
from ground-truth HQ fundus images. More speciﬁcally, the
discriminator outputs a patch score map F ∈RNH×NW ×1,
where NH and NW denote the height and width. The score of
each position indicates how realistic the corresponding fundus
image patch is. Then the adversarial loss is formulated as
LD
adv =
1
NH × NW
NH×NW
X
i=1
(D(IR)[i])2 + (D(IHQ)[i] −1)2,
LG
adv =
1
NH × NW
NH×NW
X
i=1
(D(IR)[i] −1)2,
(7)
where D(·) denotes the mapping function of our proposed
Transformer-based discriminator. LG
adv trains the generator to
fool the discriminator by generating more realistic restored
fundus images. In contrast, LD
adv encourages the discriminator
to distinguish the restored images from real images.
4) Edge Loss: To enhance the high-frequency edge details,
we exploit the edge loss function that focuses on the gradient
information of images and enhances edge textures. To be
speciﬁc, the edge loss function is formulated as
Ledge(IR, IHQ) =
q

∆(IR) −∆(IHQ)

2 + ε2,
(8)
where ∆(·) represents the Laplacian operator.
5) The Overall Loss Function: Finally, the overall training
objective is the weighted sum of the above four loss functions:
L = L1 + λ1Lfqp + λ2Ledge + λ3(LG
adv + LD
adv),
(9)
where λ1, λ2, λ3 are three hyper-parameters controlling the
importance balance of different loss functions. Our proposed
RFormer is end-to-end trained by minimizing L. The weights
of the perception network are ﬁxed. Each mini-batch training
procedure can be divided into two steps: (i) Fix the discrim-
inator and train the generator. (ii) Fix the generator and train
the discriminator. This adversarial training scheme encourages
the reconstructed fundus images to be more photo-realistic and
closer to the real clinical HQ fundus image manifold.
IV. REAL FUNDUS
This section introduces our clinical benchmark, Real Fundus
(RF). It consists of 120 LQ and HQ clinical fundus image
pairs with the spatial size of 2560 × 2560. The training and
testing subsets are split in proportional to 3:1. Since blur
signiﬁcantly impacts clinical diagnosis and automated image
analyzing systems, it is set to the primary degradation type of
LQ fundus images. Besides, there are other degradation types
such as artifacts and uneven illumination which are inevitably
introduced in the fundus image capturing process.
A. Data Collecting Process
The collection process of our RF obtains the exemption
determination from Shenzhen Eye Hospital and contains three
steps: capturing, selecting, and calibrating fundus images.

6
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2022
(d) Cofe-Net
(e) ESRGAN
(f) RealSR
(h) RFormer (Ours)
(i) High-Quality
(c) GLCAE
(b) Bicubic+RL
(g) I-SECRET
(a) Low-Quality 
Fig. 5.
Restored fundus image comparisons on our RF. Six SOTA methods and our proposed RFormer are included. (a) LQ fundus image. (b)
Bicubic+RL [86]. (c) GLCAE [87]. (d) Cofe-Net [2]. (e) ESRGAN [20]. (f) RealSR [88]. (g) I-SECRET [1]. (h) Our proposed RFormer. (i) Ground-truth
HQ fundus image. Our RFormer reconstructs more detailed contents and structural testures.
1) Capturing: Instead of exploiting artiﬁcial degradation
models (e.g., Gaussian Filter.) to synthesize LQ fundus images
as shown in Fig. 1 (b), we directly use the degraded fundus
images from the fail cases in practical capturing. As depicted
in Fig. 1 (a), the fundus images are captured by ophthalmol-
ogists using a ZEISS VISUCAM200 fundus camera, which is
a mainstream product of fundus camera. The price of ZEISS
VISUCAM200 fundus camera is about 350,000 RMB. We
select clinical fundus images from patients of different ages
and different fundus states (e.g., leopard fundus, hemorrhage,
microaneurysms, and drusen ) to expand the scope of our RF.
2) Selecting: When LQ fundus images are captured in
practice, the operator will repeat capturing until HQ fundus
images are obtained. Subsequently, we manually select LQ
and HQ fundus image pairs of the same eye. To ensure the
diversity of RF and avoid similar data, only one image pair is
selected with one eye. Note that only HQ clear fundus images
captured by experienced ophthalmologists can be used as the
ground truths of degraded LQ images. Based on these strict
criteria, we ﬁnally select 120 LQ and HQ fundus image pairs
from the eye hospital database containing more than 30,00 eye
instances. Each instance contains multiple fundus images.
3) Calibrating: After selecting fundus image pairs, we ob-
serve two issues in raw unprocessed fundus data. Firstly,
the LQ and HQ fundus images are spatially misaligned (as
illustrated in Fig. 1(a)). Secondly, there is a large black area
around the eyeball. This black area is uninformative and may
easily degrade the performance of the restoration model during
the training procedure. Thus, to improve the quality of our
RF, we calibrate the collected dataset using the software,
Photoshop. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst spatially align the image pairs
and then cut off the black area around the eyeball.
B. Comparisons with Synthetic Dataset
1) LQ Fundus Images: We compare the LQ images from our
RF and synthetic dataset in Fig. 1 (c). As can be seen from the
zoom-in patches that the artiﬁcially synthesized degradation is
fundamentally different from the real clinical degradation.
(a) Low-Quality
(b) PixelGAN
(c) PatchGAN
(d) Pixel and Patch
(e) Ours
(f) High-Quality
Fig. 6.
CNN-based vs. Transformer-based discriminators. (a) LQ
fundus image. (b) Using CNN-based PixelGAN [17]. (c) Using CNN-
based PatchGAN [17]. (d) Using both CNN-based PixelGAN and Patch-
GAN. (e) Equipped with our proposed Transformer-based discriminator.
(f) Ground truth HQ fundus image. Our Transformer-based discriminator
signiﬁcantly surpasses traditional CNN-based discriminators in terms of
recovering detailed contents and preserving the anatomical structure.
(a) Low-Quality
(b) w/o FQPLoss
(c) with FQPLoss
(d) High-Quality
Fig. 7.
Ablation study of our FQPLoss. (a) shows the LQ fundus
image. (b) and (c) depict the images restored by RFormers without
and with using FQPLoss, respectively. (d) illustrates the ground-truth
HQ fundus image. With our FQPLoss, the model restores more detailed
anatomical structure contents and high-frequency textures.
2) Domain Discrepancy: To validate the huge domain dis-
crepancy between the synthetic and real clinical datasets, we

ZHUO DENG, YUANHAO CAI et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (JANUARY 2022)
7
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS WITH SOTA ALGORITHMS ON OUR RF
AND CROSS-VALIDATION RESULTS OF RFORMER.
Method
PSNR
SSIM
Params(M)
FLOPS(G)
Cofe-Net [2]
17.26
0.789
39.31
22.48
GLCAE [87]
21.37
0.570
–
–
I-SECRET [1]
24.57
0.854
10.85
14.21
Bicubic+RL [86]
25.34
0.824
–
–
ESRGAN [20]
26.73
0.823
15.95
18.41
RealSR [88]
27.99
0.850
15.92
29.42
MST [82]
28.13
0.854
3.48
3.59
RFormer (Ours)
28.32
0.873
21.11
11.36
5-Fold Cross-valid
28.15
0.848
21.11
11.36
10-Fold Cross-valid
28.38
0.863
21.11
11.36
adopt two CNN-based fundus image restoration methods, I-
SECRET [1] and Cofe-Net [2], to conduct ablation study.
We train them with the synthetic data and then test them
on our RF. As shown in Fig. 1 (d), the two models fail to
reconstruct the real clinical LQ fundus images. They either
yield over-smooth results sacriﬁcing detailed contents, or
introduce visually unpleasant artifacts. Since the synthetic data
can not be applied to real fundus image restoration, it still
remains a severe data-hungry issue. To meet with this research
requirement, we establish a large scale clinical dataset, RF. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work contributing
a real clinical fundus image restoration benchmark.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
During the training procedure, fundus images are ﬁrst
cropped into the patches with the size of 128×128. Then the
patches are fed into our proposed RFormer. The Adam [89]
optimizer (β1=0.9, β2=0.999) is adopted. The initial learning
rate is set to 1 × 10−4. The cosine annealing strategy [90]
is employed to steadily decrease the learning rate from the
initial value to 1 × 10−6 during the training procedure. Our
RFormer is implemented by PyTorch. It takes about 12h using
an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU to train for 100 epochs. The mini-
batch size is set to 4. Random ﬂipping and rotation are used for
data augmentation. In the testing phase, the input is the whole
image with the size of 2560×2560 for fair comparison with
other methods. We adopt peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR)
and structural similarity (SSIM) [91] as the metrics to evaluate
the fundus image reconstruction performance.
B. Comparisons with State-of-the-Art Methods
We provide quantitative comparisons between our RFormer
with seven SOTA methods including two model-based meth-
ods (GLCAE [87] and Bicubic+RL [86]), four CNN-based
methods (RealSR [88], ESRGAN [20], I-SECRET [1], and
Cofe-Net [2]), and one Transformer-based method (MST [82]).
The quantitative comparisons on our RF are shown in Table I,
the proposed RFormer outperforms other competitors in terms
of PSNR and SSIM. Speciﬁcally, RFormer achieves 0.33 and
1.59 dB improvement in PSNR when compared to RealSR [88]
and ESRGAN [20].
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY OF THE LOSS FUNCTIONS AND WINDOW SHIFT
OPERATIONS(WSO).
WSO
L1
Lfqp
Ledge
PSNR
SSIM
✓
✓
27.42
0.840
✓
✓
✓
27.90
0.860
✓
✓
✓
28.20
0.866
✓
✓
✓
28.04
0.858
✓
✓
✓
27.25
0.744
✓
✓
✓
✓
28.32
0.873
TABLE III
CNN-BASED vs. OUR TRANSFORMER-BASED DISCRIMINATORS.
Discriminator
PatchGAN
PixelGAN
Pixel and Patch
Ours
PSNR
27.52
28.00
27.70
28.32
SSIM
0.822
0.790
0.839
0.873
To verify the robustness of our RFormer, we conduct 5-
fold and 10-fold cross-validation. The results are shown in
Table I. As can be seen that our Rformer still achieves robust
results, e.g., 28.15 dB in 5-fold cross-validation and 28.38
dB in 10-fold cross-validation. The small gap in performance
suggests that the overﬁtting is moderate while the effectiveness
of RFormer is reliable and promising.
Fig. 5 depicts the qualitative comparisons on RF. It can be
observed that Bicubic+RL [86], GLCAE [87], I-SECRET [1],
and Cofe-Net [2] yield over-smooth results and fail to restore
the LQ blurry fundus images. Although ESRGAN [20] and
RealSR [88] can reconstruct more high-frequency edge details,
they do not maintain the authenticity and anatomical structure
of the original fundus. Some undesired artifacts are introduced
to the restored images, which may severely mislead the clinical
diagnosis. In contrast, our RFormer is capable of restoring
more ﬁne-grained contents and structural details without in-
troducing artifacts. Thus, the fundus anatomical structure can
be well preserved.
C. Ablation Study
1) FQPLoss: We adopt RFormer as the restoration model
to conduct an ablation study to validate the effect of our
FQPLoss. As listed in Table II, when the FQPLoss is applied,
the PSNR and SSIM are increased by 1.07 dB and 0.129,
respectively. In addition, we provide visual comparisons in
Fig. 7. As depicted in Fig. 7 (b), the model yields an over-
smooth fundus image and fails in reconstructing the ﬁne-
grained vessel details without FQPLoss. As shown in Fig. 7
(c), when using our FQPLoss, the model restores more detailed
anatomical structure contents and high-frequency textures.
TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY OF THE PATCH SIZE OF OUR DISCRIMINATOR.
Patch Size
22 × 22
40 × 40
46 × 46
62 × 62
128 × 128
PSNR
28.23
28.32
28.12
28.02
28.03
SSIM
0.866
0.873
0.827
0.862
0.796

8
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2022
(a) Low-Quality
(d) Cofe-Net
(e) ESRGAN
(f) RealSR
(h) RFormer (Ours)
(c) GLCAE
(b) Bicubic+RL
(g) I-SECRET
(i) High-Quality
Fig. 8.
Vessel segmentation and optic disc/cup detection on our RF. From top to bottom are fundus images, optic disc/cup patches,
vessel segmentation maps, optic disc/cup detection maps, and the zoom-in patches of the optic disc/cup detection maps. (a) LQ fundus image.(b)
Bicubic+RL [86]. (c) GLCAE [87]. (d) Cofe-Net [2]. (e) ESRGAN [20]. (f) RealSR [88]. (g) I-SECRET [1]. (h) Our RFormer. (i) HQ fundus image. Our
restoration method can improve the performance of vessel segmentation and optic disc/cup detection.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 9.
Fail cases of Rformer on our RF. In the (a) and (e) column, from top to bottom are low-quality fundus image, restored fundus image, and
high-quality fundus image. (b), (c), and (d) are all the zoom-in patches of (a). (f), (g), and (h) are all the zoom-in patches of (e).
TABLE V
THE RESULTS OF IMAGE QUALITY EVALUATION IN USER STUDY.
Method
GLCAE [87]
Bicubic+RL [86]
Cofe-Net [2]
I-SECRET [1]
ESRGAN [20]
RealSR [88]
RFormer (Ours)
Score
37.49
31.00
35.67
24.81
59.33
77.20
83.21
2) Discriminator: We conduct ablation study to compare our
proposed Transformer-based discriminator with Traditional
CNN-based discriminators. Please note that the Transformer-
based generator remains unchanged. The results are reported

ZHUO DENG, YUANHAO CAI et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (JANUARY 2022)
9
TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY OF THE WINDOW SIZE OF OUR PROPOSED WSAB.
Window Size
PSNR
SSIM
Params(M)
FLOPS(G)
w/o WSAB
14.27
0.601
34.53
16.38
4 × 4
28.23
0.873
20.67
10.83
8 × 8
28.32
0.873
21.11
11.36
16 × 16
27.82
0.819
27.54
13.46
32 × 32
27.63
0.812
47.21
18.59
in Table III. Compared with the discriminators in CNN-
based PatchGAN [17], PixelGAN [17], etc, our Transformer-
based discriminator yields the best performance. We provide
qualitative comparisons in Fig. 6. It can be observed that
our Transformer-based discriminator signiﬁcantly outperforms
CNN-based discriminators in terms of recovering detailed
contents and preserving the anatomical structure consistency.
3) Patch Size: We experimentally analyze the effect of the
patch size set in the Transformer-based discriminator. The
results are shown in Table IV. Our RFormer achieves the best
restoration result with the patch size of 40×40.
4) Window Size: We change the window size of W-MSA
and conduct experiments to study its effect. The results are
reported in Table VI. It can be observed that our RFormer
yields the best result when the window size is set to 8×8.
5) Window Shift Operations: We conduct ablation study
to analyze the effect of the window shift operations. The
results are reported in Table II. The results indicate that the
window shift operations can build cross-window connections
and improve the performance of RFormer.
D. Clinical Image Analysis and Applications
The ultimate goal of restoring and enhancing fundus images
is to serve the real clinical tasks better and improve the
accuracy of clinical diagnosis. To validate the effectiveness of
our proposed RFormer, we use it as a pre-processing technique
for downstream clinical image analysis tasks, including vessel
segmentation and optic disc/cup detection. LadderNet [92] and
M-Net [93] are employed as the segmentation baselines.
1) User Study: Since the restored fundus images should
meet the requirements of ophthalmologists, we adopt 30 LQ
fundus images for user study. We use different image restora-
tion methods to enhance these LQ images. Subsequently, we
display these results in random order and ask the experienced
ophthalmologists to score the quality of the restored images
based on their extensive clinical experience. The score ranges
from 0 to 100, larger values are better. The suppression of
artifacts and preservation of lesions are taken into account.
Finally, we collect responses from ﬁve ophthalmologists. The
score results for each method are shown in Table.V. Our
RFormer receives the highest score for best restored results.
2) Vessel Segmentation: We test LadderNet [92] pre-trained
on DRIVE [94] dataset for vessel segmentation on our col-
lected RF. Please note that the vessel segmentation maps of
real HQ fundus images serve as the references for comparison
due to the lack of segmentation labels on our RF. The vessel
segmentation results are shown in the third row of Fig.8. As
can be seen that LadderNet fails in segmenting the blood
vessels of clinical LQ fundus images. In contrast, LadderNet
extracts obvious vessel structure of the fundus images restored
by our RFormer, which is closest to the segmentation results
of real HQ fundus images. These results clearly suggest the
effectiveness of our proposed method.
3) Optic Disc/Cup Detection: We also evaluate the effect
of our RFormer for the downstream disc/cup detection task.
We test M-Net [93] pre-trained on ORIGA [95] dataset for
optic disc/cup detection on our collected RF. Similar to the
vessel segmentation task, the optic disc/cup detection results
of real HQ fundus images function as the references due to
the lack of segmentation labels. The qualitative comparisons
of different fundus image restoration methods are depicted in
Fig. 8. The fourth line is the optic disc/cup detection map and
the ﬁfth line depicts the zoom-in patches of the fourth line.
It can be observed that M-Net fails to detect the disc/cup on
clinical LQ fundus images. On the contrary, M-Net detects
the optic cup and disc more accurately on the fundus images
reconstructed by our RFormer. This evidence veriﬁes that our
method beneﬁts the optic disc/cup detection task.
E. Fail Cases
Although RFormer achieves good performance, it may not
work in some scenes. Fig. 9 shows some fail cases of RFormer
on our RF dataset. In the (a) and (e) column, from top to
bottom are LQ fundus image, restored fundus image, and HQ
fundus image. (b), (c), and (d) are three zoom-in patches of
(a). (f), (g), and (h) are three zoom-in patches of (e). It can
be clearly observed from 9 (c), (f), and (g) that our RFormer
fails to remove the bright spots. As can be seen from 9 (b),
(d), and (h) that our RFormer fails in enhancing the low-lights
regions. It is difﬁcult for RFormer to learn the feature in areas
with insufﬁcient contrast and brightness. We will continue to
improve our work according to these fail cases.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we establish the ﬁrst real clinical fundus
image restoration benchmark, Real Fundus, which contains
LQ and HQ fundus image pairs to alleviate the data-hungry
issue. Our dataset can help better evaluate restoration algo-
rithms in clinical scenes. Based on this dataset, we propose
a novel Transformer-based method, RFormer, for clinical
fundus image restoration. To the best of our knowledge, it
is the ﬁrst attempt to explore the potential of Transformer in
this task. Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate that our RFormer signiﬁcantly outperforms a
series of SOTA methods. Extensive experiments verify that the
proposed RFormer serving as a data pre-processing technique
can boost the performance of different downstream tasks, such
as vessel segmentation and optic disc/cup detection. We hope
this work can serve as a baseline for real clinical fundus image
restoration and beneﬁt the community of medical imaging.
