Reasoning about Causality in Games∗
Lewis Hammond1, James Fox1, Tom Everitt2, Ryan Carey1,
Alessandro Abate1, and Michael Wooldridge1
1University of Oxford
2DeepMind
Abstract
Causal reasoning and game-theoretic reasoning are fundamental topics in arti-
ﬁcial intelligence, among many other disciplines: this paper is concerned with
their intersection. Despite their importance, a formal framework that supports
both these forms of reasoning has, until now, been lacking. We oﬀer a solu-
tion in the form of (structural) causal games, which can be seen as extending
Pearl’s causal hierarchy to the game-theoretic domain, or as extending Koller and
Milch’s multi-agent inﬂuence diagrams to the causal domain. We then consider
three key questions:
i) How can the (causal) dependencies in games – either between variables, or
between strategies – be modelled in a uniform, principled manner?
ii) How may causal queries be computed in causal games, and what assump-
tions does this require?
iii) How do causal games compare to existing formalisms?
To address question i), we introduce mechanised games, which encode depen-
dencies between agents’ decision rules and the distributions governing the game.
In response to question ii), we present deﬁnitions of predictions, interventions,
and counterfactuals, and discuss the assumptions required for each. Regarding
question iii), we describe correspondences between causal games and other for-
malisms, and explain how causal games can be used to answer queries that other
causal or game-theoretic models do not support. Finally, we highlight possible
applications of causal games, aided by an extensive open-source Python library.
∗Published
in
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
DOI:
10.1016/j.artint.2023.103919.
Correspondence
to

1
arXiv:2301.02324v2  [cs.AI]  17 Apr 2023

Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Causal Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Game-Theoretic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Mechanised MAIDs and Relevance
13
3.1
Mechanised MAIDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Causality in Games
18
4.1
Predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Interventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Counterfactuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Solution Concepts and Subgames
28
5.1
Nash Equilibria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Subgames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Equilibrium Reﬁnements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Connections to EFGs
33
6.1
Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Equivalences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Causality in EFGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Applications
37
7.1
Case Study: Insurance Pricing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
Blame, Intent, Incentives, and Fairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Discussion
42
8.1
Advantages and Disadvantages of Causal Games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A Proofs
50
A.1 Transformations between Game Representations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.2 Theoretical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B Further Examples
62
B.1
Counterfactuals Using the Closest Possible World Principle
. . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.2
Non-Existence Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.3
Reasoning about Existing Concepts using Causal Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C Codebase
70
C.1
Creating MAIDs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.2
Computing Equilibria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
2

Notation
Symbol
Object
Page
AncV
Ancestors of V
7
cRG
Condensed R-Relevance Graph
63
ChV
Children of V
7
DescV
Descendants of V
7
do
Do Operator
8
dom(V )
Domain of V
7
EV
Exogenous Variable for V
9
E
Edges
7
E
Extensive-Form Game
11
FaV
Family of V
7
G
Graph
7
I
Intervention
9
J
Intervention Set
34
M
Model
7
M(ζk)
Perturbed Model
33
MV
Mechanism Variable for V
14
mG
Mechanised Graph
15
mM
Mechanised Model
15
N
Agents
11
PaV
Parents of V
7
Pr or P
Probability Distribution
7, 11
Prπ or P σ
Probability Distribution Combining Pr with π or P with σ
11, 12
Q
Queries
18
R
Rationality Relations
15
R(mM)
R-Rational Outcomes of M
16
rD
Rationality Relation for D
15
rRG
R-Relevance Graph
17
V
Variable
7
v
Value of V
7
V
Variables
7
v
Values of V
7
δ
Kronecker Delta Function
9
∆
Probability Simplex
7
ΘV
Parameter Variable for V
14
θ
Parameters
7
µi
Mixed Policy for Agent i
29
πi
(Behavioural) Policy for Agent i
12
˙πi
Pure (Behavioural) Policy for Agent i
29
π
(Behavioural) Policy Proﬁle
12
ΠD
Decision Rule Variable for D
14
σ
(Behavioural) Strategy Proﬁle
11
⊥G
d-Separated in G
7
⊥⊥
Independent
7
≺
Topological Ordering
63
3

1
Introduction
Causal reasoning and game-theoretic reasoning are core capabilities for intelligent systems, and
as such, they are fundamental research topics in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Causal reasoning
is concerned with identifying causal relationships and estimating the eﬀects of interventions.
Game-theoretic reasoning is concerned with strategic behaviour: how rational decision-makers
interact, taking into account others’ incentives. Whilst formal treatments of causality [73, 75,
82, 91] and the game-theoretic foundations of multi-agent systems [71, 88, 99] have individually
led to many recent applications in AI, our present concern is with techniques that combine
causal and strategic reasoning.
Models that support both these kinds of reasoning oﬀer a wide range of possible applications
including analysing incentives [22, 57], fairness [49, 55, 67, 102], and blame and intention [28,
39]. As systems of multi-agent systems become increasingly ubiquitous and sophisticated, the
problem of how to formally reason about these notions becomes increasingly acute. A frame-
work that supports causal analysis of systems containing multiple self-interested agents would
therefore appear to be of great importance [22, 28, 76].
Causal questions are often more challenging to answer in multi-agent settings; one must consider
not only the causal dependencies present in the environment, but also the dependencies between
agents’ strategies. Similarly, reasoning strategically about what the eﬀects of an action would
be, or what other agents would have done under diﬀerent circumstances, naturally leads one
to consider both interventions and counterfactual possibilities when analysing games. These
causal concepts, however, are typically left implicit in game-theoretic models.
The central purpose of this paper is to introduce a unifying framework for modelling games
that supports both causal and game-theoretic reasoning. This framework – (structural) causal
games – can be interpreted in two diﬀerent ways.
In one sense, it lifts Koller and Milch’s
(henceforth, K&M) multi-agent inﬂuence diagrams (MAIDs) [51] from the probabilistic models
at level one of Pearl’s ‘causal hierarchy’ [73] to causal models that support both interventions and
counterfactuals, corresponding to levels two and three of the hierarchy, respectively. Building
on K&M’s graphical representation also means we may employ existing game-theoretic concepts
such as strategic relevance [51] and suﬃcient recall [64], which can be elicited purely from the
structure of the game. Alternatively, causal games can be interpreted as generalising the models
of the causal hierarchy to the game-theoretic domain by introducing decision variables that lack
a distribution until chosen by the corresponding agent, and a set of real-valued utility variables
representing the payoﬀof each agent. Causal games thus support both game-theoretic and
causal queries, as well as combinations of the two. It is our hope that this framework serves as
a foundation for further work at the intersection of causality and game theory.
1.1
Contributions
In answering the three key questions introduced above, we make the following contributions.
i) How can the (causal) dependencies in games – either between variables, or between strategies
– be modelled in a uniform, principled manner?
• We introduce mechanised MAIDs in Section 3, which allow us to cleanly model the de-
pendencies of decision rules on each other and on the parameters of the game.
• We also generalise K&M’s notion of strategic relevance to R-relevance to enable modelling
many diﬀerent decision-making principles.
• Furthermore, we derive sound and complete graphical criteria for detecting relevant vari-
ables when agents are playing best responses to one another.
4

ii) How may causal queries be computed in such models, and what assumptions does this
require?
• We generalise Pearl’s causal hierarchy of models to the game-theoretic domain by intro-
ducing (structural) causal games in Section 4.
• We then describe how these models can be used to answer conditional, interventional, and
counterfactual queries. By quantifying over the equilibria in the game (leading to ﬁrst
order queries such as “is it the case that in every Nash equilibrium, setting variable X
to value x would increase agent i’s expected payoﬀ?”) and taking into account causal
eﬀects due to rational agents who adapt their strategies to changes in the environment,
such queries strictly generalise those in other causal models.
• In essence, the assumptions required to model a given problem as a causal game are the
same as for their non-game-theoretic counterparts.
To mechanise the causal game we
further require assumptions about the decision-making principles that agents use play the
game.
iii) How do the models we propose compare to existing formalisms?
• We introduce subgames and two classic equilibrium reﬁnements – subgame perfectness and
trembling hand perfectness – to MAIDs in Section 5, and provide a detailed comparison
between MAIDs and EFGs (including several equivalence results) in Section 6.
• We also show that often more subgames can be found in a MAID than in the corresponding
EFG, ruling out more non-credible threats, and making the computation of equilibria more
eﬃcient.
• Finally, we discuss a range of applications in which causal games subsume prior work in
Section 7, and (dis)advantages with respect to other work in Section 8.
A previous conference paper contained preliminary results on subgames and equilibrium reﬁne-
ments in MAIDs, as well as their connections to EFGs [42], but did not contain any discussion
of causality, which is the main focus of this paper. Similarly, a previous tool paper introduced
an earlier version of our codebase [27], which implements many of the concepts in this paper
though does not contain any theoretical work, which is the emphasis of the present paper.
We conclude this section with a review of other related work. Before the primary exposition
of our results, we also provide the relevant background material on causal models, EFGs, and
MAIDs, in Section 2. Proofs, further examples, and details of our codebase are relegated to
Appendices A, B, and C, respectively.
1.2
Related Work
Causal games build on Pearl’s hierarchy of causal models [73], and work on inﬂuence diagrams
(IDs) – a kind of graphical model used to capture single-agent decision-making scenarios [45].
Later works have explicitly considered causal IDs, or CIDs [18, 22]. Indeed, Heckerman and
Shachter’s proposal to unify causal modelling and decision analysis via CIDs [43] can be viewed
as a precursor to our proposal to unify causal modelling and game theory via causal games.
None of these theories, however, place emphasis on games or strategic interactions between
multiple agents, which is our setting of interest.
In contrast, multi-agent IDs (MAIDs) generalise IDs [51, 64], and were originally developed by
K&M as a way to eﬃciently represent and solve games. One useful feature of MAIDs (which
causal games inherit) is that their graphical structure encodes what information is, or is not,
relevant for making an optimal decision. Thus in order to ﬁnd an equilibrium, it is often possible
to remove some of the edges (i.e. the ignorable information) prior to solving the game [64].
5

Many other graphical models of games, often inspired by MAIDs, have been introduced [48],
including networks of inﬂuence diagrams (NIDs) [30], interactive dynamic inﬂuence diagrams
(I-DIDs) [20, 77], and temporal action graph games [47]. Like MAIDs however, most of these
works are motivated by computational concerns, and none incorporate rigorous causal reasoning.
Modelling causal relationships in game-theoretic scenarios often leads to cyclic dependencies,
such as when one agent’s best response depends on the other’s, and vice versa. This can result
in multiple solutions, a feature that is also captured by generalised or cyclic causal models
[8, 38], chain graphs [59], probabilistic relational models [33, 62], and credal networks [14],
among others. In mechanised (structural) causal games, these solutions correspond to diﬀerent
equilibria induced by (serial) relations representing the potentially non-deterministic decision-
making processes of agents in the game (such as when an agent selects a decision rule using
an arg max operation, for example). This is essential for modelling equilibria in games, where
agents may be indiﬀerent between decision rules. The result is a relational causal model with
cycles – a formalism ﬁrst explored concurrently with this work [1], but without any reference
to the game-theoretic scenarios that are our focus.
Perhaps the most similar work to this paper is on settable systems,1 which are partly inspired
by generalised structural causal models and can be used to capture optimisation, equilibria,
and learning [95, 96].
In order to deal with cycles, settable systems duplicate intervenable
variables into a ‘response’ and ‘setting’ variable, so as to indicate which side of the structural
function each occurs on. In these models, the emphasis is on the causal analysis of optimisation
procedures at a relatively low level of abstraction, meaning that the algorithms used by agents
to select actions, or the procedures used to select one equilibrium from many, are explicitly
instantiated. In contrast, causal games represent the causal dependencies arising from the fact
that agents select their decision rules rationally and non-deterministically, leading us to ask
ﬁrst-order causal queries. Settable systems concentrate on problems such as how to capture
the data and attributes of a machine learning process, whereas we focus on problems such as
identifying subgames and equilibrium reﬁnements. Despite these diﬀerences, settable systems
are nonetheless a useful comparator for causal games.
The concurrency and semantics community is another that has produced work at the intersec-
tion of games and causality. Much of the most inﬂuential recent work on the foundations of
denotational semantics uses distributed games that are based on event structures – a partially
ordered model of discrete events [69] – for deterministic [81] and probabilistic [98] concurrent
games. Other related approaches to concurrent games use simpler mathematical formalisms
[11, 101]. Though containing the same primitive concepts, these works are motivated primarily
by the problem of deriving formal, low-level semantics for programs or probabilistic systems,
whereas we are interested in more high-level models of strategic interactions that can be applied
to a wide range of scenarios and disciplines.
Indeed, closely related causal models have been used (often in the context of analysing AI
systems) to deﬁne notions of blame and intent (both in the single-agent and multi-agent settings)
[28, 39], harm [80], incentives to control or respond to certain variables [22, 57], [49, 55, 67, 102],
social inﬂuence [46], and reasoning patterns such as manipulation and signalling [76]. We show
in Sections 4 and 7 that causal games subsume the models in these works and allow for even
richer concepts. Aside from analysing AI systems, one other relevant domain of application is
in economic analysis and mechanism design. For example, Toulis and Parkes use a behavioural
causal model to determine long-term eﬀects of policy interventions on multi-agent economies
[92] – though their emphasis is on dynamical systems and behavioural analysis – and some
1We note that Gonzalez-Soto et al.
also deﬁne a kind of causal game [35], though theirs is essentially a
Bayesian game where the outcomes are computed using an unknown causal model. This is a simpler and more
restricted setup than both settable systems and our causal games.
6

regulators such as the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority include an informal ‘causal chain’ in
their cost-beneﬁt analyses when proposing policy analyses [25]. We provide a more formal case
study of this second example in Section 7.
2
Background
We assume a basic familiarity with both probabilistic graphical models and game theory, though
for completeness, we brieﬂy review Pearl’s causal hierarchy [73] and two game-theoretic models:
extensive form games (EFGs) [54, 94] and multi-agent inﬂuence diagrams (MAIDs) [51]. Readers
familiar with these models may safely skip these sections.
Throughout this paper, we use capital letters V for random variables, lowercase letters v for their
instantiations, and bold letters V and v respectively for sets of variables and their instantiations.
We let dom(V ) denote the domain of V (where by default we assume that dom(V ) is ﬁnite)
and abuse notation somewhat by writing dom(V ) :=×V ∈V dom(V ). PaV denotes the parents
of a variable V in a graphical representation and paV the instantiation of PaV . We also deﬁne
ChV , AncV , DescV , and FaV := PaV ∪{V } as the children, ancestors, descendants, and family
of V , respectively (where note that neither AncV nor DescV contain V , by convention). As
with paV , their instantiations are written in lowercase. We use ∆(dom(V )) to denote the set of
all probability distributions over the values of V , and therefore write ∆(dom(A) | dom(B)) :=
×b∈dom(B) ∆(dom(A)) to express the set of all conditional probability distributions (CPDs) over
A given the values of B. Unless otherwise indicated, we use superscripts to indicate an agent
i ∈N = {1, . . . , n} and subscripts to index the elements of a set; for example, the decision
variables belonging to agent i are denoted Di = {Di
1, . . . , Di
m}.
2.1
Causal Models
Pearl’s causal hierarchy consists of three kinds of model: associational, interventional, and
counterfactual [73]. Each step up the hierarchy demands stricter assumptions. The lowest level,
association, pertains to correlations between variables that allow for predictions about a system.
For this, it is suﬃcient to use observational data to construct a joint probability distribution
over all of the variables in that system, which can then be represented graphically as a Bayesian
network (BN). On the second level, we wish to reason about the eﬀects of interventions – de-
liberate alterations made to the variables from outside the system. This requires the edges of
the BN to reﬂect causal, not just associational, relationships, giving rise to a causal Bayesian
network (CBN). The ﬁnal level of the hierarchy is concerned with counterfactual questions –
asking what would have happened had something been diﬀerent, given that we made a certain
observation – which corresponds to conditioning (as in associational queries), then interven-
ing. Answering such questions requires knowledge of the underlying deterministic relationships
between the variables, typically characterised using a structural causal model (SCM).
Association
Deﬁnition 1 (73). A Bayesian network (BN) over a set of random variables V with joint
distribution Pr(V ) is a structure M = (G, θ) where G = (V , E ) is a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) with vertices V and edges E that is Markov compatible with Pr, meaning that
Pr(v; θ) = Q
V ∈V Pr(v | paV ; θV ). We drop the parameters θ = {θV }V ∈V of the CPDs from
our notation where unambiguous.
We can use the d-separation graphical criterion to identify the set of conditional independencies
that any Markov compatible joint distribution over a DAG G must satisfy [74].
Deﬁnition 2 (73). A path p in a DAG G = (V , E ) is a sequence of unrepeated adjacent
variables in V . A path p is said to be blocked by a set of variables Y ⊂V if and only if p
7

contains either:
• A chain X →W →Z or X ←W ←Z, or a fork X ←W →Z, and W ∈Y ; or
• A collider X →W ←Z and W /∈AncY ∪{Y }.
For disjoint sets X, Y , Z, the set Y d-separates X from Z, denoted X ⊥G Z | Y , if every
path in G from a variable in X to a variable in Z is blocked by a variable in Y . Otherwise, X
is said to be d-connected to Z given Y , denoted X ̸⊥G Z | Y .
For example, in the graph G shown in in Figure 1a, we have that A ̸⊥G B | C due to the active
path A ←D →B, but that A ⊥G B | D, as conditioning on D blocks the connection along the
aforementioned path as well as along the path A ←C →D →B.
If X ⊥G Z | Y in G, then X and Z are probabilistically independent conditional on Y in
the sense that Pr(x | y, z) = Pr(x | y), written X ⊥⊥Z | Y , in every distribution Pr that is
Markov compatible with G and for which Pr(y, z) > 0. Conversely, if X ̸⊥G Z | Y , then X
and Z are dependent conditional on Y in at least one distribution Markov compatible with G
[93].
A
B
C
D
(a)
A
B
C
D
EA
EB
EC
ED
(b)
Figure 1: (a) A (C)BN with a Markov compatible joint distribution Pr(a, b, c, d) = Pr(a |
c, d) Pr(b | d) Pr(d | c) Pr(c). (b) An SCM representing the same system. Each variable V is
now associated with an exogenous parent EV ∈E.
A second well-established graphical criterion will also be a useful auxiliary result in Section 3.
Deﬁnition 3 (86). Given a DAG G, a variable V is a requisite probability node for Pr(x | y)
if there exist two parameterisations θ ̸= θ′ of G for BNs M and M′ diﬀering only on θV such
that Pr(x | y; θ) ̸= Pr(x | y; θ′).
Lemma 1 (31). Given a BN M, a variable V is a requisite probability node for the query
Pr(X | Y ) if and only if MV ̸⊥m⊥G X | Y .
Intervention
Associational models such as BNs are, in general, insuﬃcient to answer questions about inter-
ventions as they do not describe how the joint distribution changes in response; a causal model,
or level two model, such as a causal Bayesian network (CBN), is required. The graph underly-
ing a CBN diﬀers from that of a BN only in its causal interpretation: the directed edges now
represent the fact that intervening on a variable cannot aﬀect those causally ‘upstream’ of it.
The simplest form of intervention, a hard intervention do(Y = y), sets the values of variables
Y to some y. We denote the resulting joint distribution by Pry(V ) or, equivalently, Pr(Vy)
[73].2
Deﬁnition 4 (73). A causal Bayesian network (CBN) is a BN M = (G, θ) such that G is
2This is also known as an atomic [13], structural [21], surgical [73], or independent [52] intervention.
8

Markov compatible with Pry for every Y ⊆V and y ∈dom(Y ), and that:
Pry(v | paV ) =
(
1
when V ∈Y and v is consistent with y,
Pr(v | paV )
when V /∈Y and paV is consistent with y.
By the Law of Total Probability, Pry(v | paV ) = 0 when v is inconsistent with y. When paV
is inconsistent with y, then conditioning on a zero-probability event means that Pry(v | paV )
is undeﬁned. More generally, a soft intervention, speciﬁed using a partial distribution I over
variables Y replaces each CPD Pr(Y | PaY ) with a new CPD I(Y | Pa∗
Y ; θ∗
Y ) for each Y ∈Y ,
where Pa∗
Y may diﬀer from PaY .3 Any intervention I on the set of variables Y leads to a new
joint distribution:
PrI(v) :=
Y
Y ∈Y
I(y | pa∗
Y ) ·
Y
V ∈V \Y
Pr(v | paV ).
We represent an intervention I on Y graphically by outlining each variable Y ∈Y , replacing
each variable name Y with YI, and removing or adding edges from parent variables as necessary,
if Pa∗
Y ̸= PaY . More generally, we use Pr(VI) and PrI(V ) interchangeably, and denote the
new graph and model as GI and MI respectively. When I is a hard intervention, we simply
sever all incoming edges to Y , setting their values to y, and write Vy, Gy, and My respectively.
Examples of hard and soft interventions are shown in Figures 2a and 2b respectively.
A
B
C
d
(a)
A
BI′
C
D
(b)
Figure 2: (a) The graph Gd representing the CBN in Figure 1a after a hard intervention do(D =
d). (b) A similar graph GI where I(B | Pa∗
B) is a soft intervention with Pa∗
B = PaB ∪{C}.
Counterfactuals
In counterfactual queries, evidence about the actual state of the world informs us about a
hypothetical scenario in which some variables have been modiﬁed. For instance, we might be
interested in the probability of x in the scenario in which y, given that (in fact) we observed
z, written Pr(xy | z). To answer such questions in general, one must appeal to level three of
the causal hierarchy, such as by using a structural causal model (SCM). In SCMs, variables are
partitioned into exogenous and endogenous sets E and V respectively, where each endogenous
variable V ∈V is deterministically related to its parents via a structural function fV : dom(V \
{V }) × dom(E) →dom(V ) that speciﬁes the mechanism governing the values of the variable,
and where all stochasticity is relegated to the distribution Pr(E; θ) over the exogenous variables.
In this paper, we make the simplifying assumption that all SCMs are Markovian, meaning
that each variable V has exactly one exogenous parent EV and the exogenous variables are
independent. We also depart from convention by describing SCMs as a particular form of CBN
(which, in turn, are a particular form of BN), using deterministic distributions Pr(V | PaV ) =
δ
 V,fV (PaV )

for each endogenous variable V . This equivalent formulation will prove useful
for avoiding unnecessary repetition and notation when introducing causal models of games in
Section 4.
3A soft intervention is also known as a parametric [21] or dependent [52] intervention, and is referred to as
conditional or stochastic when deterministic or stochastic, respectively [13]. Hard interventions are a special case
in which each I(Y | Pa∗
Y ) = δ(Y ,y) for some y ∈dom(Y ), where δ is the Kronecker delta function.
9

Deﬁnition 5 (73). A (Markovian) structural causal model (SCM) is a CBN M = (G, θ)
where G = (E∪V , E ) is a DAG over exogenous variables E = {EV }V ∈V and endogenous variables
V , where PaV ∩E = {EV }. The parameters θ assign deterministic distributions Pr(v | paV ; θV )
to each endogenous variable and a stochastic distribution Pr(E; θ) = Q
E∈E Pr(E; θE) to the
exogenous variables.
Using such a model, we can evaluate a general counterfactual query Pr(xI | z) by following
three steps [73]:
1. Update Pr(e) to Pr(e | z) by conditioning on observation z (‘abduction’);
2. Apply the intervention I(Y | Pa∗
Y ) to the variables Y (‘action’);
3. Return the marginal distribution Pr(x) in this modiﬁed model (‘prediction’).
By convention, exogenous variables are viewed as beyond the realm of observation and inter-
vention. Further, we assume that each I(Y | Pa∗
Y ) is a deterministic function of its parents.
Soft, stochastic interventions may be modelled by adding a new exogenous variable E∗
Y ∈Pa∗
Y .
Note that by marginalising out the exogenous variables in an SCM, we can form a standard
(C)BN with a joint distribution Pr(v) = P
e Pr(v, e). This CBN is Markov compatible with
the SCM’s graph G when restricted to variables in V . Moreover, any CBN is also a BN. Thus,
each model in the causal hierarchy can be seen to generate those on lower levels; every query
that can be answered in a lower level model can also be answered in a higher level model.
2.2
Game-Theoretic Models
We now review two important formalisms for representing sequential strategic decision-making
scenarios, extensive form games (EFGs) and multi-agent inﬂuence diagram (MAIDs). Both of
these models are illustrated using the following example of a signalling game [90].
Example 1 (Job Market). A worker, who is either hard-working or lazy, is hoping to be hired
by a ﬁrm. They have the option of pursuing a university education, but know that they will
suﬀer from three years of studying, especially if they are lazy. The ﬁrm prefers hard-workers,
but is using an automated hiring system that can only observe the worker’s education, not their
temperament.
I2
1
I2
2
V 0
h
¬h
p
1 −p
V 1
1
g
¬g
V 1
2
g
¬g
V 2
1
(4, 3)
j
(−1, −1)
¬j
V 2
2
(5, 3)
j
(0, −1)
¬j
V 2
3
(5, −2)
j
(0, 0)
¬j
V 2
4
(3, −2)
j
(−2, 0)
¬j
(a)
T
U1
U2
D1
D2
(b)
Figure 3: (a) An EFG representing Example 1. (b) A MAID representing the same game.
10

Extensive Form Games
The material on EFGs is required only for Section 6, and so may be safely skipped or referred
back to later, depending on the reader’s preferences.
Deﬁnition 6 (54). An extensive form game (EFG) is a structure E = (N, T, P, A, λ, I, U),
where:
• N = {1, . . . , n} is a set of agents.
• T = (V , E ) is a game tree with nodes V that are partitioned into sets V 0, V 1, . . . , V n, L
where R ∈V is the root of T, L are the leaves of T, V 0 are chance nodes, and V i are
the decision nodes controlled by agent i ∈N. The nodes are connected by edges E .
• P = {P1, . . . , P|V 0|} is a set of probability distributions Pj(ChV 0
j ) over the children of
each chance node V 0
j .
• A is a set of actions, where Ai
j ⊆A denotes the set of actions available at V i
j ∈V i.
• λ : E →A is a labelling function mapping each edge (V i
j , V k
l ) to an action a ∈Ai
j.
• I = {I1, . . . , In} contains a collection of information sets Ii ⊂2V i, which partition the
decision nodes controlled by agent i. Each information set Ii
j ∈Ii is deﬁned such that for
all V i
k, V i
l ∈Ii
j, the available actions Ai
j := AV i
k = AV i
l are the same at both nodes.
• U : L →Rn is a utility function mapping each leaf node to a vector that determines the
ﬁnal payoﬀfor each agent.
Figure 3a shows Example 1’s signalling game in extensive form. Nature, as a chance node V 0,
ﬂips a biased coin at the root of the tree to decide whether the worker is hard-working h (with
probability p) or lazy ¬h (with probability 1−p). The worker’s decision whether to go g or avoid
¬g university is represented at nodes V 1
1 , V 1
2 ∈V 1 and the automated hiring system’s decisions
are given by V 2
1 , V 2
2 , V 2
3 , V 2
4 ∈V 2, each with the option to oﬀer a job or reject the worker (j or
¬j). The two non-singleton information sets (marked by dotted black lines) represent the fact
that the hiring system does not receive the worker’s temperament as an input.
The payoﬀs for the worker and the ﬁrm are given by the ﬁrst and second elements at the leaves
of the tree respectively. The worker receives a payoﬀof 5 if they are given a job oﬀer, but they
incur a cost of 1 for going to university if they are hard-working and a cost of 2 for going to
university if they are lazy. The ﬁrm receives a payoﬀof 3 if they hire a hard worker. If they
oﬀer a job to a lazy worker, they incur a cost of 2, and if they reject a hard worker, they incur
an opportunity cost of 1.
Deﬁnition 7. Given an EFG E = (N, T, P, A, λ, I, U), a (behavioural) strategy σi for agent
i is a set of probability distributions σi
j(Ai
j) over the actions available to the agent at each of
their information sets Ii
j. A strategy is pure when each σi
j(a) ∈{0, 1} and fully stochastic
when σi
j(a) > 0, for all a ∈Ai
j. A strategy proﬁle σ = (σ1, . . . , σn) is a tuple of strategies,
and σ−i = (σ1, . . . , σi−1, σi+1, . . . , σn) denotes the partial strategy proﬁle of all agents other
than i, hence σ = (σi, σ−i).
Combining a strategy proﬁle σ with the distributions in P deﬁnes a probability distribution P σ
over paths ρ in E. For each path ρ beginning from R and terminating in a leaf node ρ[L] ∈L,
agent i receives utility U(ρ[L])[i] – the ith entry in the corresponding payoﬀvector. Agent i’s
expected utility under a strategy proﬁle σ is therefore given by Eσ

U(ρ[L])[i]

.
Deﬁnition 8. A subgame of an EFG, E = (N, T, P, A, λ, I, U), is the game E restricted to a
subtree T ′ = (V ′, E ′) of T such that: for any information set Ii
j in E, if there exists Vk ∈Ii
j ∩V ′,
11

then Ii
j ⊆V ′; and for any Vk ∈V ′, if (Vk, Vl) ∈E , then Vl ∈V ′ and (Vk, Vl) ∈E ′.
In other words, a subtree of the original game tree forms a subgame if it is closed under
information sets and descendants. Any EFG is trivially a subgame of itself, so a subgame on a
strictly smaller subtree is called proper. In this paper, we denote subgames in EFGs by enclosing
them within dashed boxes. For instance, the EFG in Figure 3a has no proper subgames, but
the EFG given later in Figure 8c has two.
Multi-Agent Inﬂuence Diagrams
Inﬂuence diagrams (IDs) generalise BNs to the decision-theoretic setting by adding decision
and utility variables [45, 66], and multi-agent inﬂuence diagrams (MAIDs) generalise IDs by
introducing multiple agents [51, 64]. MAIDs can therefore be viewed as a BN over a graph
without parameters for the decision variables, although technically lie between levels one and
two of Pearl’s causal hierarchy as the decisions are eﬀectively modelled as causal interventions
[43], but paths between non-decision variables need not encode causal relationships [22].
Deﬁnition 9 (51). A multi-agent inﬂuence diagram (MAID) is a structure M = (G, θ)
where G = (N, V , E ) speciﬁes a set of agents N = {1, . . . , n} and a DAG (V , E ) where V
is partitioned into chance variables X, decision variables D = S
i∈N Di, and utility variables
U = S
i∈N U i. The parameters θ = {θV }V ∈V \D deﬁne the CPDs Pr(V | PaV ; θV ) for each
non-decision variable such that for any parameterisation of the decision variable CPDs, the
resulting joint distribution over V induces a BN.
Figure 3b shows a MAID representing Example 1.
Chance variables, such as whether the
worker’s temperament is hard-working or lazy (T), are denoted by white circles. Decision and
utility variables are represented using squares and diamonds respectively. The worker’s decision
(D1) and utility (U1) variables are displayed in red, and the ﬁrm’s (D2 and U2) in blue. Instead
of information sets, the fact that an agent is unaware of the value of a certain variable when
making a decision is represented by a missing edge between the two (e.g., the absence of an
edge T →D2). The parameters θ deﬁne conditional distributions for variables T, U1, and U2,
in accordance with the values shown in Figure 3a.
Deﬁnition 10. Given a MAID M = (G, θ), a decision rule πD for D ∈D is a CPD πD(D |
PaD) and a partial policy proﬁle πD′ is a set of decision rules πD for each D ∈D′ ⊆D,
where we write π−D′ for the set of decision rules for each D ∈D\D′. A (behavioural) policy πi
refers to πDi, and a (full, behavioural) policy proﬁle π = (π1, . . . , πn) is a tuple of policies,
where π−i := (π1, . . . , πi−1, πi+1, . . . , πn). A decision rule is pure if πD(d | paD) ∈{0, 1}
and fully stochastic if πD(d | paD) > 0 for all d ∈dom(D) and each decision context
paD ∈dom(PaD); this holds for a policy (proﬁle) if it holds for all decision rules in the policy
(proﬁle).
By combining π with the partial distribution Pr over the chance and utility variables, we obtain
a joint distribution:
Prπ(x, d, u) :=
Y
V ∈V \D
Pr(v | paV ) ·
Y
D∈D
πD(d | paD),
over all the variables in M; inducing a BN. The expected utility for an agent i given a policy
proﬁle π is deﬁned as the expected sum of their utility variables in this BN, P
U∈Ui Eπ[U] .
This allows a Nash equilibrium (NE) [68] to be deﬁned, which identiﬁes outcomes of a game
where every agent is simultaneously playing a best-response.4
4In Section 5.1, we build upon what’s already known about NE in MAIDs, by explaining the diﬀerence between
mixed policies and behavioural policies in MAIDs and clarifying when an NE is guaranteed to exist.
12

Deﬁnition 11 (51). A policy proﬁle π is a Nash equilibrium (NE) in a MAID if, for every
agent i ∈N, πi ∈arg maxˆπi∈dom(Πi)
P
U∈Ui E(ˆπi,π−i)[U].
K&M also deﬁne strategic relevance (s-relevance) [51] as a concept to infer whether the choice
of a decision rule can aﬀect the optimality of another decision rule. They further show how
s-relevance can be determined using a graphical criterion (s-reachability). In what follows, we
use capital letters for variables ΠD and Θ which may take diﬀerent values πD and θ. A more
detailed introduction to this notation is provided in Section 3.1.
Deﬁnition 12 (51). Let Dk, Dl ∈D be decision nodes in a MAID M. ΠDl is strategically
relevant (or s-relevant) to ΠDk if there exist two joint distributions over V parameterised by
Θ and policy proﬁles π and π′ respectively, and a decision rule πDk, such that:
• πDk ∈arg maxˆπD∈dom(ΠD)
P
U∈Ui E(ˆπD,π−D)[U];
• π diﬀers from π′ only at ΠDl;
• πDk /∈arg maxˆπD∈dom(ΠD)
P
U∈Ui E(ˆπD,π′
−D)[U], and neither does any decision rule ˜πD
that agrees with πDk on all paDk such that Prπ′(paDk) > 0.5
Proposition 1 (51). ΠD′ is s-relevant to ΠD if and only if ΠD′ ̸⊥G′ U i ∩DescD | D, PaD
(ΠD is s-reachable from ΠD′), where G′ is the same as G with an additional variable ΠD′ and
edge ΠD′ →D′.
Both s-relevance and s-reachability only consider which other decision rules matter under a
particular assumption about the rationality of agents (corresponding to a notion of subgame
perfectness).
In Section 3, we generalise this idea to also consider the parameterisation of
non-decision variables, which is key to reasoning about causality in games. We also generalise
the concepts to other assumptions about agents’ rationality. By considering the directed (but
not necessarily acyclic) graph over all variables ΠD := {ΠD}D∈D such that there is an edge
ΠD′ →ΠD if and only if ΠD′ is s-relevant to ΠD – called the (s-)relevance graph – K&M also
introduce a weakening of the perfect recall assumption that is suﬃcient for the existence of an
NE.
Deﬁnition 13 (51). Agent i in a MAID M has perfect recall if there exists a topological
ordering D1 ≺· · · ≺Dm over Di such that FaDj ⊂PaDk for any 1 ≤j < k ≤m. M is said to
have perfect recall if all agents in M have perfect recall.
Deﬁnition 14 (64). Agent i in a MAID M has suﬃcient recall if the s-relevance graph
restricted to just agent i’s decision rules is acyclic. The MAID M is said to have suﬃcient
recall if all agents have suﬃcient recall.6
Proposition 2 (51). Any MAID with suﬃcient recall has at least one NE in behavioural policies.
3
Mechanised MAIDs and Relevance
Although MAIDs allow us to elegantly and concisely represent the dependencies between vari-
ables in a game, the edges in the graph only tell part of the story. Indeed, game-theoretic models
are traditionally presented as objects to be solved, with the procedure used to produce solutions
(i.e., policy proﬁles) left extrinsic to the game representation. However, the fact that agents act
strategically means that agents’ policies may be dependent on some of the parameters of the
5This ﬁnal condition is included in order to ensure that πDk doesn’t lead to poor decisions in decision contexts
that occur with probability zero.
6Note that although suﬃcient recall is deﬁned using the s-relevance graph, a similar criterion could be created
for any set of rationality relations R and the resulting R-relevance graph.
13

game (as well as other agents’ policies) in ways that are crucial for causal reasoning, yet not
explicitly represented by MAIDs.
In this section, we introduce mechanised MAIDs, which allow us to model these dependencies
alongside the existing dependencies of the MAID. This representation will be fundamental for
causal reasoning in games (in Section 4), as well as for the introduction of subgames in MAIDs
(in Section 5.2). In the following subsections, we ﬁrst deﬁne mechanised MAIDs before formally
introducing the concept of relevance and corresponding graphical criteria.
3.1
Mechanised MAIDs
In order to explicitly capture the implicit dependencies between the decision rules and CPDs of
a MAID M = (G, θ), a mechanised MAID mM adds two elements: a (graphical) representation
of the decision rules and parameters, and a description of how these depend on one another.
Mechanised Graphs
For the ﬁrst addition, we extend G to form a mechanised graph mG. For each decision variable
D, a new parent ΠD representing its decision rule is added, and for each non-decision variable
V , a new parent ΘV representing the parameters of its CPD. We call these additional parents
mechanism variables M, as they determine the mechanisms by which values of the variables in
the game are set,7 and the variables V in the original MAID object-level variables. To distinguish
between diﬀerent types of mechanism variable, we often refer to those for decisions Π = MD
as decision rule variables and those for non-decisions Θ = MV \D as parameter variables.
In the mechanised graph mG, we also add new edges E ′ ⊆S
D∈D
 (M \ ΠD) × ΠD

from other
mechanism variables into decision rule variables. This represents the fact that agents typically
select a decision rule πD (i.e., the value of ΠD) based on both the parameterisation of the
game (i.e., the values of Θ) and the selection of the other decision rules in the game π−D.
For example, the worker and the ﬁrm’s hiring system in Example 1 might want to select their
decision rules πD1 and πD2 as a function of the probability p that a worker has a hard-working
temperament T = h. This would imply edges ΘT →ΠD1 and ΘT →ΠD2.
In general, an agent might select each of their decision rules based on the value of any other
mechanism variable – and so E ′ would be maximal (i.e., PaΠD = MV \{D}) – though typically
some of these variables will not be relevant and thus E ′ will not be maximal, a notion we make
precise in Section 3.2. A mechanised graph mG for Example 1 is shown in Figure 4a, where
decision rule and parameter variables are represented using black and white rounded squares
respectively.
Mechanised Games
For the second addition to M – a description of how the decision rules and parameters depend
on one another – we must specify how the values of the new mechanism variables are determined
and how each of the CPDs of the original object-level variables are deﬁned as a function of their
new mechanism variable parent. Beginning with the latter, note that for any parameterisation
mV \D = θ ∈dom(Θ) of the game and any policy proﬁle mD = π ∈dom(Π), the resulting
joint distribution over V can be written as:
Prπ(v; θ) = Pr(v | m) :=
Y
V ∈V
Pr(v | paV , mV ),
7This name is partially inspired by the ﬁeld of mechanism design, in which agents act by reporting their types
t ∈T and the mechanism f : T →O determines how this type proﬁle (which we might view as d) is mapped to
an outcome o ∈O of the game (which we might view as v).
14

where Pr(v | paV , mV ) is simply the CPD Pr(v | paV ; θV ) deﬁned by parameters θV = mV if
V is a non-decision variable, or the decision rule πD(d | paD) deﬁned by πD = mV if V is a
decision variable D. As such, given the parameters θ of the MAID M and a policy proﬁle π,
the distribution over V in mM is identical to that in the original MAID.
Finally, we must specify how the values of the mechanism variables are determined. For the
parameter variables, we simply set the distribution over each ΘV to δ(ΘV ,θV ), and let its
domain be given by ∆(dom(V ) | dom(PaV )). Intuitively, this may be viewed as the fact that
any particular game induced over the graph corresponds to an instantiation of the parameter
variables in the mechanised game, the values of which are known by all agents.8
In order to provide values for the decision rule variables, we introduce a set of rationality
relations R = {rD}D∈D that describe assumptions about how the agents choose decision rules.
Concretely, each decision rule ΠD is governed by a serial relation rD ⊆dom(PaΠD)×dom(ΠD).9
This accounts for the fact an agent may not deterministically choose a single decision rule πD in
response to some paΠD. In the remainder of the paper we abuse notation by also using rD(paΠD)
as a set-valued function to denote the set of all decision rules πD such that rD(paΠD) = πD.10
Deﬁnition 15. Given a MAID M = (G, θ) and a set of rationality relations R, a mecha-
nised MAID is a structure mM = (mG, θ, R), such that: the mechanised graph mG =
(N, V ∪M, mE ) is a directed (possibly cyclic) graph over V and M with edges mE := E ∪
{(MV , V )}V ∈V ∪E ′, where E ′ ⊆S
D∈D
 (M \ ΠD) × ΠD

; and R = {rD}D∈D is a set of
rationality relations, where each rD ⊆dom(PaΠD) × dom(ΠD) is a serial relation.
As an example, let us suppose that each agent in Example 1 plays a best response with respect to
the other. In this case, the values of ΠD1 and ΠD2 are determined by relations RBR = {rBR
D1 , rBR
D2 }
such that:
πD ∈rBR
D (paΠD)
⇔
πD ∈
arg max
ˆπD∈dom(ΠD)
X
U∈Ui
E(ˆπD,π−D)[U],
(1)
for each D ∈Di, where note that the expectation – despite the fact that the notation above
includes object-level variables – is deﬁned in terms of the mechanism variables paΠD = mV \{D}
and πD. Note that for games in which each agent has only one decision rule, this gives rise
to an NE, as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 11. In other words, the values of the mechanism variables
determine the CPDs of the object-level variables, which in turn deﬁne the joint distribution over
the object-level variables, and hence any expected quantities in the game. Many other kinds
of game-theoretic equilibria can be naturally deﬁned in terms of rationality relations, including
subgame perfect equilibria and trembling hand perfect equilibria (introduced in Section 5.3).11
It will often be visually useful to restrict a mechanised MAID to just the mechanism variables,
as can be seen in Figure 4b. We can then view a mechanised graph as simply the composition
of the original MAID and this graph of mechanism variables, via the addition of edges MV →V
for each V ∈V .
Rational Outcomes
If all of the rationality relations R in a MAID are satisﬁed by π, then we say that π is an
R-rational outcome of the game. For example, the RBR-rational outcomes of the MAID M
8This simply amounts to a common prior assumption. Though such an assumption can be relaxed, doing so
introduces additional complexities that we do not address in this work.
9A serial relation r ⊆A × B is one such that for any a ∈A there exists at least one b ∈B such that (a, b) ∈r.
10Whether we refer to some rD(paΠD) ∈dom(ΠD) or rD(paΠD) ⊆dom(ΠD) will typically be unambiguous.
11It would also be possible to deﬁne R such that, for example, every agent randomises their actions at every
decision, or chooses the action that minimises their expected utility.
Whilst it would be hard to view such
behaviour as ‘rational’ in the game-theoretic sense, one may think of R as deﬁning the degree(s) of rationality in
a game.
15

T
U1
U2
D1
D2
ΘT
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΘU1
ΠD2
(a)
ΘT
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΠD2
(b)
Figure 4: (a) A mechanised graph mG representing Example 1. Dotted edges represent those
that are present in neither the RBR-minimal nor the s-minimal mechanised graph. Dashed
edges represent just those that are not present in the s-minimal mechanised graph. (b) The
RBR-relevance graph is formed by removing the dotted edges, and the s-relevance graph by
further removing the dashed edge.
representing Example 1 are simply the NEs of M. Note that R-rationality is not merely a
convenience when reasoning about games, rather, it performs a necessary role by fully charac-
terising the process by which decision rules are generated. As we will see later, the nature of
the chosen rationality relations also allows us to deduce various facts about the game, purely
from its graphical structure. In essence, such results hinge on the links between how agents
choose their decision rules, and how the object-level variables depend on one another.
Deﬁnition 16. Given a mechanised MAID mM, we say that any πD ∈rD(paΠD) is an R-
rational response to paΠD, and that a (partial) policy proﬁle πD′ is R-rational if πD ∈
rD(paΠD) for every D ∈D′.
The set of (full) R-rational policy proﬁles in mM are the
R-rational outcomes of the game (where we tend to drop R from the terms above when
unambiguous) and is denoted by R(mM).
In general, the R-rational outcomes in mM therefore deﬁne a set of distributions {Prπ}π∈R(mM)
over the variables V where Prπ(v; θ) = Pr(v | m) for mD = π and mV \D = θ, which can be
extended over the mechanised MAID as Pr(v, m) = Pr(v | m)δ(M,m). We can thus view a
mechanised MAID as a set of BNs induced by the R-rational outcomes.12 The key point here
is that rationality relations form a principled, formal, and highly general way to model the
inherent non-determinism in a game, in order to render the model suitable for causal reasoning.
Note that Deﬁnition 16 is related to the notion of a solution in cyclic causal models [1, 8]. In
both formalisms, a solution corresponds to a joint probability distribution consistent with all
cyclic relationships, and in general a model may have many or no solutions. This, in turn, will
impact the answers to the causal queries that we might wish to ask (as we explain further in
Section 4). Similarly, we can view the rational responses at a decision variable as a credal set
[60], and therefore the resultant model as a form of credal network [14], where the imprecise
probabilities arise from the fact that there may be more than one rational outcome in a game.
Remark 1. Often, agents might only be boundedly rational [89]. For example, due to compu-
tational costs, agents might seek only to satisﬁce (rather than optimise) their expected utility,
leading to ϵ-approximate variations of equilibria concepts in which each agent cannot improve
their expected utility by more than ϵ > 0 by deviating [16]. These bounded rationality conditions
12We continue, however, to highlight diﬀerent variable types in our diagrams (rather than drawing each variable
as a chance variable) for clarity of exposition.
16

can also be captured using rationality relations.
3.2
Relevance
A natural question to ask is which edges in the mechanised graph mG are necessary. In other
words, which elements of PaΠD are necessary for computing the rational response rD(paΠD)?
In the mechanised game shown in Figure 4a, for example, we don’t need to know θU2 in order
to compute the set of best responses πD1 if we are given πD2. Whenever a mechanism variable
MV is found to be irrelevant to ΠD in this sense, we may remove the edge MV →ΠD to make
this independence explicit. Removing all irrelevant edges results in a subgraph mRG of mG that
is minimal with respect to R.
In the extreme case where all decision rules are chosen independently from all other mechanism
variables, then all edges E ′ between mechanism variables can be pruned. We call this subgraph
of mG the independent mechanised graph13 m⊥G. Game-theoretic models thereby break the
independent causal mechanism assumption, which states that mechanisms should be causally
and probabilistically independent of each other [75].
Formally, we have the following deﬁnitions, which are similar in spirit to those proposed in
earlier work [51, 64, 70], but diﬀer in that they consider the case of non-deterministic rationality
relations that encode the solutions of a game.
Deﬁnition 17. Given a mechanised MAID mM with rationality relations R, MV ∈PaΠD is
R-relevant to ΠD if there exists paΠD ̸= pa′
ΠD such that rD(paΠD) ̸= rD(pa′
ΠD), where paΠD
and pa′
ΠD diﬀer only on MV .
Deﬁnition 18. Given a mechanised MAID mM with rationality relations R, we say that its
mechanised graph mG is R-minimal, denoted by mRG, when it contains an edge MV →ΠD if
and only if MV is R-relevant to ΠD. When mRG is restricted to the mechanism variables M,
we refer to it as the R-relevance graph, denoted rRG.
Deﬁnition 17 is a property of a game after mechanising it via rationality relations. Therefore,
an immediate follow-up question is whether given some choice of R, we can identify R-relevance
(and hence prune edges in order to ﬁnd the R-minimal graph) for any MAID M = (G, θ) simply
by appealing to its underlying graph G, and the form of R. For many natural choices of R this
is indeed the case, and we can derive sound and complete graphical criteria for identifying
R-relevance.
For a given R, we refer to these criteria as R-reachability.
For example, the
graphical criteria deﬁning RBR-reachability in Proposition 3 enable us to remove the dotted
edges ΘU1 →ΠD2 and ΘU2 →ΠD1 in Figure 4a.
Proposition 3. MV is RBR-relevant to ΠD if and only if MV ̸⊥m⊥G U i ∩DescD | D, PaD or
MV ̸⊥m⊥G PaD, where if D ∈Di, then U i ∩DescD ̸= ∅.
By applying R-reachability to mG, we can ﬁnd the R-minimal mechanised graph mRG and
thus the R-relevance graph rRG. This latter object will be one that we make repeated use of,
and can be viewed as a generalisation of K&M’s concept of a relevance graph simpliciter, to
include all mechanism variables (as opposed to just those for decision variables) and for use
with any R.14 To avoid confusion, we refer to K&M’s relevance graph as an s-relevance graph.
By generalising s-relevance (Deﬁnition 12) and s-reachability (Proposition 1) to all mechanism
13Dawid [18] call this diagram the extended inﬂuence diagram, but they do not investigate the dependencies
and relationships between mechanisms.
14Note that the direction of the edges of the relevance graphs in this paper are the same as in [51], but are
reversed compared with [50] and [42]. K&M also refer to V being relevant to/reachable from D, whereas we
phrase this in terms of MV being relevant to/reachable from ΠD.
17

variables, we can see in Figure 4a, for example, that ΘT is not s-relevant to ΠD1, though it is
RBR-relevant.
Our generalisation of the idea of s-relevance to diﬀerent rationality relations parallels our de-
velopment of various equilibrium reﬁnements within MAIDs (introduced in Section 5.3), as
opposed to the singular concept introduced by K&M. For instance, we shall see in Section 5.3
that s-relevance corresponds to the concept of subgame perfectness. Moreover, use of the full
mechanised graph as opposed to simply its restriction to the decision rule variables is not only
important for reasoning about game-theoretic notions such as equilibria and subgames, but will
also be critical for reasoning about causality in games where agents may adapt their policies
in response to interventions on any mechanism variable (not just those representing decision
rules).
Generalising the Soundness and Completeness Results
We conclude this section by noting that it is possible to generalise the proof procedures for
Propositions 3 and 1 to other choices of R. The key step in doing so is to identify, for any
decision variable D, a ‘suﬃcient’ (sound) but ‘minimal’ (complete) set of queries QD ⊆Q
whose values, given some m = (π, θ), completely determine each rD. Formally, let Q(m) be
the set of probabilistic queries Prπ(x | y; θ) over X, Y ⊆V that can be formed in a MAID
given m = (π, θ). Note that we can use such queries to express expected utilities, among many
other things. For any decision variable D, we are looking for a suﬃcient but minimal subset of
queries QD ⊆Q and a truth-valued function gD such that:
πD ∈rD(mV \{D})
⇔
gD
 QD(m), dom(V )

.
(2)
In this setting, asking whether MV is R-relevant to ΠD reduces to asking whether the choice of
mV may aﬀect some Prπ(x | y) ∈QD, which is, in turn, equivalent to asking whether V is a
requisite probability node for Prπ(x | y) [86], introduced in Deﬁnition 3. Whether a variable is
a requisite probability node can be determined using a well-established graphical criterion [31],
given as Lemma 1.
We can use this criterion to establish graphical criteria for R-reachability, which, given a judi-
cious choice of QD, will be sound and complete. For example, the graphical criteria in Propo-
sitions 1 (s-reachability) and 3 (RBR-reachability) correspond to choices:
Qs
D = {Prπ(ui ∩descD | d, paD)},
QBR
D
= {Prπ(ui ∩descD | d, paD), Prπ(paD)},
respectively. With such a soundness and completeness result in hand, we can identify an R-
relevance graph as follows:
rRG contains an edge MV →ΠD
⇔
MV is R-relevant to ΠD
by Deﬁnition 18
⇔
rD(paΠD) may vary with the value of MV
by Deﬁnition 17
⇔
QD(paΠD, πD) may vary with the value of MV
by (2)
⇔
V is a requisite probability node for some Prπ(x | y) ∈QD
by Deﬁnition 3
⇔
MV ̸⊥m⊥G X | Y for some Prπ(x | y) ∈QD
by Lemma 1
4
Causality in Games
Many types of queries may be of interest in game-theoretic scenarios. For instance, recalling
Example 1, we could ask questions corresponding to:
18

1) Predictions, such as a) ‘Given that the worker went to university, what is their wellbeing?’
or b) ‘Given that the worker always decides to go to university, what is their wellbeing?’
2) Interventions, such as a) ‘Given that the worker is forced to go to university, what is their
wellbeing?’ or b) ‘Given that the worker goes to university if and only if they are selected
via a lottery system, what is their wellbeing?’
3) Counterfactuals, such as a) ‘Given that the worker didn’t go to university, what would be
their wellbeing if they had?’ or b) ‘Given that the worker never decides to go to university,
what would be their wellbeing if they always decided to go to university?’
Although these queries are ostensibly similar, they belong to diﬀerent levels of the causal hier-
archy. Predictions can be answered using (mechanised) MAIDs, which, as associational models,
reside on level one. However, in order to reason about interventions and counterfactuals in
games, we require models on levels two and three respectively. To this end, we introduce causal
games (CGs) and structural causal games (SCGs). These can be viewed as generalising MAIDs
to the causal setting, or CBNs and SCMs to the game-theoretic setting.
SCM
SCIM
SCG
CBN
CID
CG
BN
ID
MAID
level
agents
B
Bayesian
C
Causal
G
Game
I
Inﬂuence
M
Model
MA
Multi-Agent
N
Network
S
Structural
Figure 5: In this paper, we introduce CGs and SCGs. The causal hierarchy (associational,
interventional, and counterfactual) forms the vertical axis and the number of agents (0, 1, and
n) forms the horizontal axis. Note that all models in this diagram can also be mechanised.
The connections between all of these models and their various acronyms are displayed in Figure
5. Importantly, the models in each row are a special case of those in the row below (and the
models in each column generalise those in the column to its left). As such, everything deﬁned
with respect to MAIDs (such as the mechanised games of Deﬁnition 15 and the equilibrium
reﬁnements we introduce in Section 5) are also well-deﬁned in both CGs and SCGs.
Note that as well as asking queries regarding the object-level variables – such as queries 1a, 2a,
and 3a – after some policy proﬁle π has been chosen, mechanised games allow us to also ask
queries regarding the mechanism variables – such as queries 1b, 2b, and 3b – before ﬁxing a
policy. While this distinction between ‘post-policy’ and ‘pre-policy’ queries is less signiﬁcant in
the case of predictions, we shall see in Section 4.2 that this diﬀerence corresponds to whether
agents can adjust their policies in response to an intervention or not.
This distinction, which is critical in game-theoretic settings, does not apply to standard causal
models, as they do not contain strategic, decision-making agents. Similarly, standard game-
theoretic models do not explicitly represent this distinction either, as the dependencies between
agents’ decisions and other aspects of the game are not explicitly captured. Computationally,
pre-policy interventions correspond to altering the original game then calculating the outcomes,
and post-policy interventions correspond to calculating the outcomes of the original game, and
then altering them. In a sense, these latter queries are a more natural analogue of existing
work; in this work we unify both types of query using the same formalism.
In the remainder of this section, we show how the six types of causal queries represented by
the examples above (each of which is written formally in Table 1) can be answered using causal
19

games. Doing so requires us to identify which level of the causal hierarchy a query belongs to,
and to assess whether the query is pre-policy or post-policy. It is also simple to combine pre-
and post-policy queries using mechanised games, though for clarity and brevity we do not do
so here.
1) Prediction
2) Intervention
3) Counterfactual
a) Post-policy
Prπ(u1 | g)
Prπ(u1
g)
Prπ(u1
g | ¬g)
b) Pre-policy
Pr(u1 | ¯πD1)
Pr(u1
ˆπD1)
Pr(u1
¯πD1 | ˜πD1)
Table 1: Examples of the queries we may ask in causal models of games, corresponding to those
listed at the top of this section. Recall that dom(D1) = {g, ¬g}, indicating whether or not the
worker goes to university, and that ¯πD1, ˆπD1, ˜πD1 denote possible values of the decision rule
variable ΠD1. For example, ¯πD1 in query 1b is the decision rule in which the worker always
decides to go to university, i.e., ¯πD1(D1 | T) = δ(D1, g). As introduced in Section 2, Pr(xy)
denotes the probability of x given a hard intervention (Y = y) and Pr(xy | z) represents the
counterfactual probability of x had y been true, given that (in fact) z was true.
4.1
Predictions
Each policy proﬁle π in a MAID M induces a BN with joint distribution Prπ(V ; θ).
We
can therefore easily compute the probability of x given some observation z, written Prπ(x |
z), under a given policy proﬁle π. Note that the distribution Prπ(V ; θ) in the MAID can
equivalently be written in the mechanised MAID as Pr(V | m) with m = (π, θ).
However, in game-theoretic settings, we typically assume only that a rational outcome of the
game will be chosen, not some unique π. Moreover, we may not have any reason to favour one
rational outcome over another, implying that we ought to evaluate queries with respect to a
set of policy proﬁles. In the deﬁnition below, we therefore consider the distribution Prπ(x | z)
induced by each rational outcome that is consistent with the observation z.
Note that, as
remarked in Section 3.1, there may be many or no such rational outcomes.
Deﬁnition 19. Given a mechanised MAID mM with rationality relations R, the answer to
a conditional query of the probability of x given observation z is given by the set PrR(x |
z) :=

Prπ(x | z)
	
π∈R(mM|z) where R(mM | z) := {π ∈R(mM) : Prπ(z) > 0} is the set of
conditional rational outcomes. In general, Z ⊆V ∪M can include mechanism variables,
and so we compute Prπ(x | z) in M as Pr(x | z, m′) in mM, where M′ = M \ Z and mD = π.
More generally, we can view queries in games as ﬁrst-order queries deﬁned over formulae in
which π is a free variable, such as ϕ(π) ≡Prπ(x | z).
The answers to these queries are
therefore only well-deﬁned when this free variable becomes bound, or when considering a set
of answers, as in Deﬁnition 19.
For example, we can bind π by quantifying over it as in
∃π ∈R(mM | z).
 ϕ(π) ∼q

where ∼∈{<, ≤, =, ≥, >} and q ∈[0, 1] (as is often done in
ﬁrst-order logics for reasoning about and verifying multi-agent systems [12, 56, 100]), or by
returning bounds such as maxπ∈R(mM|z) ϕ(π) (as is often done in credal networks [14]). Above,
we quantify over R(mM | z), but it is also possible to quantify over any desired set of policies,
or even to posit a prior distribution Pr(Π) over policies. These queries strictly generalise those
in BNs and models such as settable systems [95, 96], which eﬀectively consider only a single
instantiation of Π.
By way of illustration, let us return to Example 1 and query 1a from earlier in this section.
We can interpret this question as asking about the expected utility of the worker given the
observation that they went to university, written Eπ[U1 | g] for some policy π. For the worked
examples in this section, we assume that p = Pr(T = h) = 1
2 and that the automated hiring
20

system and the worker are playing best responses to one another, i.e., R = RBR. The various
rational outcomes induced by this choice (i.e., the NEs of the game) are:
1. The worker always chooses ¬g.
The hiring system chooses j if the worker chose ¬g,
otherwise they choose j with any probability q ∈[0, 1].
2. The worker chooses ¬g if T = ¬h, and otherwise chooses g with probability 1
2. The hiring
system chooses j if the worker chose g, otherwise they choose j with probability 4
5.
3. The worker always chooses g. The hiring system chooses j if the worker chose g, otherwise
they choose j with any probability q ∈[0, 3
5].
The expected utilities for the worker under these rational outcomes are 5, 4, and 7
2, respectively.
In query 1a, the conditional rational outcomes R(mM | g) are the NEs consistent with observing
D1 = g. To answer the query, we must therefore compute PrR(u1 | g), which yields {Eπ[U1 |
g]}π∈R(mM|g) = {7
2, 4}.
As noted above, Deﬁnition 19 can also be employed when the observations made are of the
mechanism variables.
For example, in query 1b we condition on the observation that the
worker’s strategy is given by δ(D1,g), which we refer to as ¯πD1, i..e, the worker always decides
to go to university. Based on this, we can use the mechanised MAID to compute PrR(u1 | ¯πD1)
and thus that {E[U1 | ¯πD1]}π∈R(mM|¯πD1) = {7
2}. Note that this set is distinct from the answer
to query 1a as observations of mechanism and object-level variables provide us with diﬀerent
information, i.e., R(mM | ¯πD1) ̸= R(mM | g).
In particular, observations of mechanism
variables serve primarily to rule out certain rational outcomes by conditioning on decision rules
(conditioning on parameter variables tells us nothing as they have deterministic distributions
and no parents).
One advantage of computing predictions in MAIDs (as opposed to in EFGs, for instance) is that
we may exploit the conditional independencies in the graph. For example, if we were interested
in how likely a worker is to be hard-working given that they went to university and were hired,
then T ⊥G D2 | D1 implies that Prπ(h | g, j) = Prπ(h | g) for any policy proﬁle π. When
answering queries over object-level variables using mechanised MAIDs, we implicitly condition
on the values of the mechanism variables to represent the fact the game and policy under
consideration are ﬁxed. For example, the query Prπ(h | g, j) in M is given by Pr(h | g, j, m)
in mM, where mD = π. Hence, although T ̸⊥mG D2 | D1, we do have T ⊥mG D2 | D1, M, as
expected.
4.2
Interventions
Interventional queries concern the eﬀect of causal inﬂuences from outside a system. This be-
comes especially interesting in the case of games, when interventions aﬀect not only the envi-
ronment but also how the self-interested agents adapt their policies in response. In order to
answer such queries, the edges in a MAID must reﬂect the causal structure of the world. This
gives rise to the following deﬁnition, which can be viewed simply as a CBN without parameters
for the decision variables. Note that as causal games are a form of MAID, they also support
the associational queries introduced in the preceding section (just as CBNs may also be used to
compute both interventional and associational queries).
Deﬁnition 20. A causal game (CG) M = (G, θ) is a MAID such that for any parameteri-
sation of the decision variable CPDs π, the induced model with joint distribution Prπ(V ) is a
CBN.
Unlike CBNs, CGs let us ask about the eﬀect of an intervention before or after a policy proﬁle
has been selected, which we refer to as pre- and post-policy queries respectively. Asking about
the eﬀect of an intervention after a particular policy proﬁle π has been selected (as in query 2a)
21

is simply the same as performing an interventional query on the CBN with joint distribution
Prπ. Asking about the eﬀect of an intervention before a policy proﬁle has been selected (as in
query 2b) means that agents are made aware of the intervention before selecting their decision
rules, and thus they may react to its eﬀects. In other words, the intervention can be viewed as
producing a slightly diﬀerent game that the agents then (knowingly) play.
Our key observation is that pre-policy interventions can be modelled as interventions on the
mechanism variables in the mechanised CG, which ensures that the eﬀects are propagated
through the processes via which agents select their decision rules.
This is because the ad-
ditional mechanism variables and their outgoing edges in a mechanised CG represent causal
(though potentially non-deterministic) processes via which parameterisations for the object-
level variables are selected. Post-policy interventions, in turn, can be modelled as standard
interventions on object-level variables. We write mMI for an intervention I which may contain
both pre-policy and post-policy interventions.
This uniﬁcation of pre- and post-policy interventions is one of the key beneﬁts of mechanised
models. Indeed, post-policy interventions, and pre-policy interventions on parameter variables,
are deﬁned exactly as in CBNs, while a pre-policy intervention on a decision rule variable
ΠD corresponds to replacing rD : dom(PaΠD) →dom(ΠD) by some new r∗
D : dom(Pa∗
ΠD) →
dom(ΠD), where we may have Pa∗
ΠD ̸= PaΠD. As for conditional queries, in our deﬁnition
(which mirrors that introduced for cyclic causal models [8], but where the cyclic dependencies
are governed by relations instead of functions [1]) we quantify over the set of rational outcomes
that are consistent with the given intervention.
Deﬁnition 21. Given a mechanised CG mM with rationality relations R, the answer to
an interventional query of the probability of x given intervention I on variables Y is
given by the set PrR(xI) :=

Prπ(xI)
	
π∈R(mMI) where R(mMI) is the set of interven-
tional rational outcomes in the mechanised MAID mMI with rationality relations R∗:=
{r∗
D}ΠD∈Y ∪{rD}ΠD /∈Y and parameters determined by Pr(ΘI). Note that if I is fully post-
policy, then the rational outcomes remain the same, i.e., R(mMI) = R(mM) when Y ⊆V .
To illustrate these ideas, let us return to Example 1 and queries 2a and 2b. Query 2a concerns a
post-policy intervention since the worker is forced to go to university unbeknownst to the ﬁrm’s
hiring system; in other words, the hiring system does not observe this fact before computing a
decision rule. To compute the worker’s expected utility, we must calculate PrR(u1
g) and thus
perform a hard intervention do(D1 = g) in the mechanised game (shown in Figure 6a). As
the set of rational outcomes does not change under a post-policy intervention, we have that
PrR(u1
g) =

Prπ(u1
g)
	
π∈R(mM), which results in

Eπ[U1
g ]
	
π∈R(mM) = {−3
2, 7
2}.
Note that
unlike query 1a, the fact that D1 = g tells us nothing about the value of T, as it is causally
upstream of the intervention on D1.
Therefore, the wellbeing of the worker may decrease
because they may be sent to university even when they are lazy.
To answer query 2b, concerning a pre-policy intervention, we must compute Pr(u1
ˆπD1) where
ˆπD1(g | h) = ˆπD1(g | ¬h) =
1
2 represents the aforementioned lottery system, which selects
students to attend university randomly with probability 1
2. This time, the ﬁrm modiﬁes their
hiring system after observing the intervention – denoted by I and shown in Figure 6b – but
before the hiring system computes a decision rule, and so the new set of rational outcomes is
given by R(mMI) = {(ˆπD1, πD2) : πD2 ∈rD2(paΠD2)}. In other words, we set ΠD1 = ˆπD1
using a hard intervention and then allow the hiring system to best respond to this decision
rule using rD2. Note that R(mMI) ̸= R(mM | ˆπD1) = ∅, as there is no NE in the game
that contains decision rule ˆπD1. The lottery system removes any signalling eﬀect of going to
university, resulting in an optimal policy for the hiring system of always oﬀering a job to the
worker and expected utility

Eπ[U1
ˆπD1]
	
π∈R(mMI) = {17
4 }.
22

T
U1
U2
g
D2
ΘT
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΘU1
ΠD2
(a)
T
U1
U2
D1
D2
ΘT
ΘU2
ˆπ1
ΘU1
ΠD2
(b)
Figure 6: (a) A mechanised game showing the hard post-policy intervention do(D1 = g),
where incoming edges to D1 are severed. (b) A mechanised game showing the hard pre-policy
intervention do(ΠD1 = ˆπ1), where incoming edges to ΠD1 are severed.
Remark 2. In previous work, soft interventions on object-level variables V have been modelled
as hard interventions on its mechanism variable MV [18]. While these can be viewed as essen-
tially equivalent in the single-agent case,15 possible dependencies between mechanism variables
in mechanised games means that these two types of intervention may have markedly diﬀerent ef-
fects in the multi-agent setting. The diﬀerence between pre- and post-policy interventions results
from a diﬀerence in the information that is available to agents when they make their decisions,
rather than to the chronology of play in a game (as is also the case for the structure of EFGs).
4.3
Counterfactuals
The ﬁnal type of question we investigate arises when we combine predictions and interventions,
as in query 3a: ‘Given that the worker didn’t go to university, what would be their wellbeing if
they had?’. Such questions are counterfactual, as they combine observations made in the actual
world (in which the worker didn’t go to university), with questions pertaining to a counterfactual
world (where they did go to university). Answering these queries in games is signiﬁcantly more
nuanced and complex than those of the preceding subsections. To do so, we must ﬁrst consign
all stochasticity to a set of exogenous variables, one for each variable in the causal game. Just as
in an SCM, each variable V is thus associated with an exogenous variable EV , and is governed
by a deterministic CPD Prπ(V | PaV ), where EV ∈PaV .
Deﬁnition 22. A (Markovian) structural causal game (SCG) M = (G, θ) is a causal game
over exogenous and endogenous variables E ∪V such that for any (deterministic) parameteri-
sation of the decision variable CPDs ˙π, the induced model with joint distribution Pr ˙π(V , E) is
an SCM.
An SCG can be seen as an SCM without parameters for the decision variables. Given a policy
π, we recover an SCM, as we explain in more detail below. Meanwhile, mechanised SCGs can
be viewed as (a special case of) a relational causal model with cycles [1].
When we mechanise SCGs, although we introduce mechanism variables for the exogenous vari-
ables (as can be seen in Figure 7b), we view them and their object-level exogenous children
as beyond the realm of observation and intervention, just as in SCMs. As such, mechanism
variables of exogenous variables can largely be ignored. As in SCMs, interventional distribu-
tions I(V | Pa∗
V ) must be deterministic, and soft interventions may be deﬁned by introducing
a new exogenous variable E∗
V to Pa∗
V [13]. With these caveats in place, both pre-policy and
15To be precise, this is true when the agent has suﬃcient recall; see Deﬁnition 14.
23

post-policy predictions and interventions may be deﬁned in this model as described in 4.1 and
4.2 respectively.
T
U1
U2
D1
D2
ET
EU2
ED1
EU1
ED2
(a)
ΘT
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΘET
ΘEU1
ΘEU2
ΠD1
ΠD2
ΘED1
ΘED2
(b)
Figure 7: (a) A (Markovian) SCG representing Example 1. Note that we have included exoge-
nous variables for U1 and U2, although as neither is stochastic, this is not strictly necessary.
(b) The RBR-relevance graph of this game.
While computing predictions and interventions in SCGs is therefore relatively straightforward,
there are two main diﬃculties that arise when computing counterfactuals. The ﬁrst is the choice
of how to represent stochastic decision rules using structural functions and exogenous variables,
and the second is the problem of updating our beliefs about the policy proﬁle played in the
counterfactual world given our evidence about the policy proﬁle played in the actual world. We
resolve each of these diﬃculties in turn.
Decision Rules as Structural Functions
We assume that agents play the same kind of game regardless of the level in the causal hierar-
chy at which we model them. In these games, (behavioural) play equates to selecting decision
rules which stochastically sample a decision conditional on the value of some (non-exogenous)
parents. In structural causal games, we represent these decision rules using structural functions
and exogenous variables. One proposal would therefore be to view each agent as choosing both
a ‘structural decision rule’ ˙πD(D | PaD) and a distribution Pr(ED), with a shared mechanism
parent ΠD for both D and ED. This, however, leads to a diﬀerent type signature for decision
rules, and moreover leads to a formalism in which (pre-policy) interventions can be made up-
stream of stochastic variables, which are ruled out in SCMs. We therefore propose an equivalent
formulation in which each agent controls only their decision variables and not their exogenous
parents.
Unfortunately, while our assumptions about the rationality of the agents tell us what CPDs are
assigned to their decision variables, they are insuﬃcient for telling us what precise deterministic
mechanisms the agents use to implement these CPDs (as a function of some stochastic exogenous
variable). In fact, unless we chose to explicitly restrict the form of the mechanism, such as
by stipulating that it belongs to some parametric class, there will typically be inﬁnitely many
deterministic functions that induce a particular distribution over a decision variable [6]. Without
specifying such functions, it will not (in general) be possible to answer counterfactual queries
in games, and yet the precise form of these functions may impact the answers to these queries
[18].
In essence, the choice of how to represent a decision rule πD ∈∆(dom(D) | dom(PaD \ {ED}))
using a stochastic exogenous variable ED and a deterministic mechanism ˙πD ∈∆(dom(D) |
24

dom(PaD)) is the choice of what part of the decision rule we assume remains ﬁxed across
counterfactual worlds (ED) and what part may vary ( ˙πD). Assuming that we have no pre-
existing knowledge about this representation, we propose to stay true to the spirit of behavioural
policies by viewing each agent’s randomisation as independent between both:
• Decision rules, in the sense that learning about an agent’s random choice under one
decision rule πD is uninformative in settings where the agent is using a diﬀerent decision
rule π′
D;
• Decision contexts, in the sense that an agent’s decision rule πD can naturally be inter-
preted as independently sampling an action d after seeing an assignment paD of the
non-exogenous parents PaD := PaD \ {ED}.
We formalise this assumption by representing each exogenous variable ED as a set containing
a variable EπD,paD
D
for each πD ∈∆(dom(D) | dom(PaD)) and paD ∈dom(PaD), where
dom(EπD,paD
D
) = dom(D) (i.e., ED is a random ﬁeld with independently distributed elements).
Given a stochastic decision rule πD(D | PaD), we may then deﬁne a canonical structural
representation by setting:
Pr(EπD,paD
D
= d) := πD(d | paD),
˙πD(D = d | paD, eD) := δ(D,eπD,paD
D
),
(3)
where note that ˙πD is eﬀectively parameterised by πD, i.e., we have ˙πD(D | PaD, ED; πD). The
joint distribution over ED is simply the product of probability distributions over EπD,paD
D
[7].
Proposition 4 below then follows immediately,16 and means that we may continue to interpret
decision rules, policy proﬁles, and rationality relations as we do in MAIDs and CGs, where each
agent plays some πD ∈rD(paΠD) ⊆∆(dom(D) | dom(PaD)) and each πD parameterises ˙πD.
Moreover, this additional structure allows us to generalise the deﬁnition of counterfactuals in
SCMs to counterfactuals in games.
Proposition 4. For distributions over ED and D as governed by equations (3), there is a one-
to-one correspondence between the set of stochastic decision rules ∆(dom(D) | dom(PaD)) and
the set of deterministic decision rules dom( ˙ΠD) ⊂∆(dom(D) | dom(PaD)). Moreover, given
two such corresponding decision rules πD and ˙πD, then
R
dom(ED) ˙πD(d | paD, eD) Pr(eD) deD =
πD(d | paD).
Counterfactual Rational Outcomes
The second diﬃculty of answering counterfactual queries in games arises due to the possible
existence of multiple rational outcomes. If we have evidence that the equilibrium π was played
in the actual world, how and to what extent should that inform us of the equilibrium π′ played
in the counterfactual world where the values of some mechanism variables may have changed?
To answer this question, we begin by introducing our approach to answering counterfactual
queries in SCGs, which mirrors Pearl’s approach for SCMs (described in Section 2.1). That is,
we condition, intervene, and then compute the resulting distribution, though we generalise this
to observations and interventions on both object-level and mechanism variables. In particular,
we compute the set PrR(xI | z) as follows:
1. For every actual rational outcome π ∈R(mM | z), update Pr(e) to Prπ(e | z) (‘abduc-
tion’);
16Though note that there are many constructions that would result in these properties; we merely present one
particularly simple example.
25

2. Apply the intervention I, on variables Y , recomputing any rational responses to form π′
and adding new exogenous variables E∗to form E′ = E ∪E∗where required (‘action’);
3. Return each marginal distribution
R
dom(E′) Prπ′(x | e′) Pr(e′) de′ in this modiﬁed model
for each new counterfactual rational outcome π′ (‘prediction’).
In the ﬁrst step, we update our beliefs about the exogenous and decision rule variables in the
actual world under π; in the second, we apply an intervention I to form the counterfactual
world (and recompute the rational outcomes based on this change); and in the third, we return
the new set of distributions that are consistent with our beliefs from the ﬁrst step and the
results of the intervention made in the second step.
By reading these steps carefully, one notices a diﬃculty in SCGs that does not arise in an SCM:
when we condition on z in the ﬁrst step we obtain a set of policies R(mM | z) that are rational
in the actual world. Then in step two, we compute new rational responses π′, and it is π′ rather
than R(mM | z) that features in the counterfactual world of the ﬁnal step. This raises the
question of the extent to which knowledge of the rational policies R(mM | z) should be used
to compute π′.
Let us ﬁrst note that if I is a post-policy intervention, then this has no impact on the rational
outcomes of the counterfactual world – they are simply the same as the actual world, given by
R(mM | z) – and hence there is no diﬃculty. The issue only arises in pre-policy counterfactuals,
such as query 3b (‘Given that the worker never decides to go to university, what would be their
wellbeing if they always decided to go to university?’), where the intervention (in query 3b, on
the worker’s decision rule) means that the set of rational outcomes in the counterfactual world
will be diﬀerent from those in the actual world.
Because each policy proﬁle π is made up of decision rules πD, we can formalise this question
by asking which decision rule variables Π(I) ⊆Π are invariant to the intervention I. Written
in terms of the three-step process above, we must have π(I) = π′(I), i.e., for any invariant
decision rule variable Π ∈Π(I) then the counterfactual decision rule π′
D is equal to the actual
decision rule πD. Those that are not invariant must have their values recomputed in the new
counterfactual model. For instance, as argued above, when I is post-policy, Π(I) = Π. That
is, none of the values of the decision rule variables need to be recomputed. How should we
choose Π(I) when I is not (fully) post-policy?
There are multiple principles that could be invoked in order to make this choice. The simplest –
let us call it the simplicity principle – is to recompute the values of all decision rule variables, i.e.,
Π(I) = ∅. In other words, the intervention means that ‘all bets are oﬀ’ after the intervention
is made, and the actual rational outcomes R(mM | z) have no bearing on the counterfactual
rational outcomes. Under this principle, computing pre-policy counterfactuals is reminiscent of
the approach taken in existing work on cyclic causal models [8], where two sets of solutions are
induced by two halves of a twin graph. The problem with this principle is that it may require
us to ignore information gathered from our observation z. For example, if Z = z implies that
ΠD = πD in the actual world and I is causally downstream of ΠD (and hence can have no eﬀect
on the value of ΠD), then this means we also know that ΠD = πD in the counterfactual world,
i.e., ΠD ∈Π(I).
To solve this problem, we can instead invoke the closest possible world principle, where we
retain as much information as possible from our knowledge of the rational policies R(mM | z).
While the values of some decision rules may still need to be recomputed, by keeping Π(I) as
large as possible, we avoid the need for re-solving the entire game, and can provide a more
accurate answer to counterfactual queries. The process of computing Π(I) under this principle
is slightly more complicated, however, as it involves propagating the eﬀects of an intervention
through models that contain both cycles and non-determinism. In the remainder of the paper
26

we therefore employ the simplicity principle above, which is also more in keeping with prior
work.17 An algorithm for computing Π(I) according to the closest possible world principle is,
however, provided in Appendix B.1 for reference.
Deﬁning Counterfactuals in Games
Given a set of invariant decision rule variables Π(I), the answer produced by the three-step
process given above can be written as follows.
Deﬁnition 23. Given a mechanised SCG mM with rationality relations R, the answer to
a counterfactual query of the probability of x given observation z and intervention I on
variables Y is given by the set:
PrR(xI | z) :=
R
dom(E′) Prπ′(xI | e, e∗) Pr(e∗) Prπ(e | z) de′	
(π,π′)∈R(mMI|z),
where E∗= E′ \ E are any newly added exogenous variables as a result of a soft intervention,
R(mMI | z) :=

(π, π′) ∈R(mM | z) × R(mMI) : π(I) = π′(I)
	
,
is the set of actual-counterfactual rational outcomes, and Π(I) is the set of invariant
decision rule variables. Note that if I is fully post-policy, then the rational outcomes remain
the same, i.e., Π(I) = Π and R(mMI | z) =

(π, π) : π ∈R(mM | z)
	
when Y ⊆V .
In the deﬁnition of PrR(xI | z), for every actual policy π and counterfactual policy π′, we
compute the product of three quantities.
Prπ(e | z) is the updated distribution over the
exogenous variables under π, and corresponds to the ﬁrst step. If I is a soft intervention, then
we add further variables E∗= E′ \ E to capture the stochasticity of I, which leads to the term
Pr(e∗).18 We then condition on both e and e∗and compute the value of xI under π′, hence
the term Prπ′(xI | e, e∗). Finally, in the third step, we marginalise over all exogenous variables
E′. The set R(mMI | z) deﬁnes the pairs of policies that we must consider. Namely, actual
rational outcomes π ∈R(mM | z) and counterfactual rational outcomes π′ ∈R(mMI) such
that the decision rules invariant to I, denoted Π(I), remain the same: π(I) = π′(I).
We brieﬂy demonstrate the three step process above by returning to queries 3a and 3b. To
answer 3a we must compute Prπ(u1
g | ¬g). First, we note that as this involves a post-policy
intervention then we only need to consider the actual rational outcomes, as Π(I) = Π. Thus,
for each π ∈R(mM | ¬g) we begin by updating Pr(e) to Prπ(e | ¬g). In this case, such an
update amounts to changing Prπ(eT , eD1, eD2) to Prπ(eT , eD1, eD2 | ¬g), where note that we
independently update each EπD,paD
D
for every such π and endogenous decision context paD.
Following this, we apply the intervention do(D1 = g). The ﬁnal answer to the query is therefore
rather simple in this case, and is given by PrR(u1
g | ¬g) =

Prπ(u1
g | ¬g)
	
π∈R(mM|¬g). We thus
have

Eπ[U1
g | ¬g]
	
π∈R(mM|¬g) = {7
2}.
Query 3b involves a hard pre-policy intervention I that sets ΠD1 to πD1.
As Π(I) = ∅,
the answers to the query are given under the interventional outcomes, i.e., R(mMI | ˜πD1) =

(π′, π′) : π ∈R(mMI)
	
. In this particular game, R(mMI) = R(mM | πD1) and so the
answer is the same as the answer to query 1b.
Remark 3. The reasons for choosing between a CG or an SCG to model a given problem
are analogous to the respective reasons for choosing a CBN or an SCM. Using the latter, one
can reason about counterfactuals, path-speciﬁc eﬀects, and questions of identiﬁability [5]. The
17In practice, for queries 3a and 3b, it happens to be the case that both principles lead to the same answer.
18Note that the distribution over these ‘fresh’ exogenous variables does not depend on the policy, actual or
counterfactual.
27

former, however, is a simpler formalism, and requires less knowledge about the precise functions
holding between the variables, making CGs a more attractive choice when one does not require
any of the features listed above.
5
Solution Concepts and Subgames
In Section 3, we explained how a set of rationality relations can be used to capture the process
by which agents choose their decision rules, and thus which mechanisms agents need to consider
when doing so. In this section, we build on these ideas in three subsections. Firstly, we detail
the distinction between mixed and behavioural policies and their relation to NEs in MAIDs.
Secondly, we introduce the concept of subgames within MAIDs, which, analogously to their
EFG counterparts, allow us to analyse and solve parts of the game independently. Finally, we
introduce several equilibrium reﬁnements for MAIDs, which are discussed in relation to their
EFG counterparts in Section 6.2. With these contributions, we aim to place causal games on a
more equal footing with EFGs as a tool for game-theoretic analysis. Note that as (S)CGs are
reﬁnements of MAIDs, the results in this section also apply to these models. Concepts in this
section will be explained with the help of the following example, shown in Figure 8a.
Example 2 (Warehouse Robots). Two robots are working together in a warehouse. Robot one is
responsible for fulﬁlling orders; it can decide to move quickly or slowly. It will not break anything
if it moves slowly, but might break something if it moves quickly. Robot two is responsible for
keeping the warehouse tidy and so must decide whether to patrol or not, but it can only observe
what robot one does. If it patrols, robot two can repair broken items, but by doing so it might
obstruct robot one and prevent it from completing its order. Robot one is rewarded for fulﬁlling
orders, the quicker the better, and penalised for breaking things.
Robot two is rewarded for
everything in the warehouse ending up in a state of repair, but incurs a small energy cost for
patrolling.
To parameterise this game, let us suppose that robot one breaks something if it moves quickly
(D1 = q) with probability 1
3 but will not break anything otherwise, and that robot two obstructs
robot one with probability 1
2 if it patrols (D2 = p) and probability zero otherwise. Finally, we
deﬁne the utility functions such that robot one receives a reward of 5 or 2 for completing an
order quickly or slowly respectively, but it also incurs a penalty of −3 for breakages. Robot
two receives a reward of 6 for everything being in a state of repair, but incurs a penalty of
−1 for patrolling. Given this parameterisation, we can easily calculate the expected payoﬀof
each agent for the four possible action combinations. For reference, we show these in Figure 8c
using an EFG that only bifurcates on the two robots’ decisions; the chance variable B has been
marginalised out to create a reduced EFG (as detailed in Appendix 6.1).
5.1
Nash Equilibria
A solution concept aims to identify a subset of the possible outcomes of a game that may occur
if agents act rationally. In non-cooperative games, the most fundamental solution concept is
a Nash equilibrium (NE) [68], a policy proﬁle such that no agent may beneﬁt by unilaterally
deviating. In Example 2, for instance, the policy proﬁle πNE in which robot one chooses D1 = q
and robot two chooses D2 = p whatever the value of D1 is an NE. Previous work introduced
this concept to MAIDs, as recalled in Deﬁnition 11 [51], but did not fully characterise when an
NE is guaranteed to exist in a MAID. This existence depends on which class of policies agents
are permitted to choose from.
So far in this paper, we have viewed agents as employing behavioural policies, where each agent
selects decision rules for each of their decisions independently. In contrast, a mixed policy allows
an agent to coordinate their choice of decision rules at diﬀerent decisions; it is a distribution
28

B
U1
U2
D1
D2
ΘB
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΠD2
(a)
B
U2
D2
ΘB
ΘU2
ΠD2
(b)
V 1
1
q
¬q
V 2
1
(2, 5)
p1
(4, 4)
¬p1
V 2
2
(1, 5)
p2
(2, 6)
¬p2
(c)
Figure 8: (a) A MAID M = (G, θ) representing Example 2 and its s-relevance graph. (b) The
smallest proper s-subdiagram G′ of G and its s-relevance graph. (c) A reduced EFG where each
of the proper subgames corresponds to the two possible s-subgames for G′, where D1 = q or
D1 = ¬q respectively.
over pure policies. In what follows, we use a dot ˙ to denote the determinism of pure policies
and µ to denote mixed policies.
Deﬁnition 24. Let dom( ˙ΠD) be the set of all possible pure decision rules for D, and recall that
we write dom(V ) =×V ∈V dom(V ). A mixed policy for agent i is some µi ∈∆(dom( ˙ΠDi)),
a behavioural policy is some πi ∈dom(ΠDi), and a pure policy is some ˙πi ∈dom( ˙ΠDi).
Proposition 5. A (behavioural policy) NE is not guaranteed to exist in a MAID.
Nash’s theorem establishes that any ﬁnite game is guaranteed to have an NE, as long as all
agents are allowed to choose mixed policies [68]. However, in general, there is no such guarantee
when agents are only permitted to use behavioural policies (for an example, see Appendix B.2).
Despite this negative result, behavioural policies are often regarded as more ‘natural’ due to
their representation of agents randomising at each decision point instead of once at the beginning
of the game [72]. Moreover, behavioural policies respect the conditional independencies of the
MAID’s graph.
As such, an interesting question is when an NE in behavioural policies is
guaranteed to exist. As a ﬁrst step, it is relatively straightforward to prove an analogue of
Kuhn’s theorem: if all agents in the game have perfect recall (i.e., agents never forget their past
moves nor any of the information they knew previously, as introduced in Deﬁnition 13), then
an NE in behavioural policies is guaranteed to exist [54].
Lemma 2. Let π−i ∈∆(dom(D−i) | dom(PaD−i)) be a partial (behavioural or mixed) policy
proﬁle for agents N \ {i} in a MAID M. If agent i has perfect recall in M, then for every
mixed policy µi there exists a behavioural policy πi such that Pr(µi,π−i)(v) = Pr(πi,π−i)(v).
Proposition 6. In any MAID M with perfect recall, there exists a (behavioural) policy proﬁle
π that is an NE.
Going further, because MAIDs reveal conditional independencies between variables, only a
weaker criterion of suﬃcient recall is suﬃcient for the existence of an NE in behavioural poli-
cies. K&M implicitly prove this result – included as Proposition 2 – when proving that their
Algorithm for ﬁnding an NE always converges under certain conditions (as these correspond
with suﬃcient recall) [51]. Appendix B.2 provides an example of a MAID in which all agents
have suﬃcient but imperfect recall. In this example, there exists a mixed policy proﬁle with no
behavioural policy resulting in the same distribution over outcomes. There is still, however, an
29

NE in behavioural policies. On the other hand, a MAID without suﬃcient recall may not have
an NE in behavioural policies (an example is again given in Appendix B.2).
Proposition 7. If an agent i in a MAID M has perfect recall, then they also have suﬃcient
recall. However, if an agent has suﬃcient recall, then they do not always have perfect recall.
5.2
Subgames
Subgames in EFGs represent parts of the game that can be solved independently from the rest;
we now introduce the analogous notion of R-subgames in MAIDs. These subgames have three
uses: they allow us to introduce further equilibrium reﬁnements (in Section 5.3); they can reduce
the cost of computing equilibria [42]; and they allow us to analyse agents’ decision-making in
isolation from other parts of the game, which may be useful for other forms of analysis (such
as those discussed in Section 7). In Appendix C.2, we demonstrate the second of these facts by
empirically showing how subgames in MAIDs can be used to compute NEs much more eﬃciently
than in EFGs.
However, there are two key diﬀerences between subgames in EFGs and those in MAIDs. Firstly,
because MAIDs explicitly represent conditional independencies between variables, we can often
ﬁnd more subgames in a MAID than in its corresponding EFG. Secondly, because the ability
to solve part of a game independently varies with the solution concept, the R-subgames vary
with R. Given a set of graphical criteria, R-reachability, such as those in Section 3.2, one can
identify the structure of any R-subgames – which we refer to as an R-subdiagram – using only
the underlying graph.
Deﬁnition 25. Given a mechanised MAID mM = (mG, θ, R) and a set of sound and complete
graphical criteria for R-relevance – ie., R-reachability – we refer to the subgraph (V ′, E ′) of
G, along with the set of agents N′ ⊆N possessing decision variables in that subgraph, as an
R-subdiagram G′ = (N′, V ′, E ′) if:
• V ′ contains every variable Z such that MZ is R-reachable from some ΠD with D ∈V ′;
• V ′ contains, for all X, Y ∈V ′, every variable that lies on a directed path X 99K Y in G.
As before, we drop R from our notation where unimportant or unambiguous.
The ﬁrst condition on V ′ ensures that for any decision variable D in the subdiagram, any
variable whose mechanism may impact the rational response for D is also included in the
graph. This means that the rational responses for the decision rules in this part of the game are
independent of what happens elsewhere. The second condition says that additional variables
may also be included in the subdiagram as long as mediators are included too. This ensures
that the CPDs for all the variables in the subgame remain consistent, and allows us to deﬁne
a correspondence between subgames in MAIDs and subgames in EFGs (in Section 6.2). To
ﬁnd the subgames for each subdiagram, we must update the parameterisation of the remaining
variables to be consistent with the original game and the structure of the graph.
Deﬁnition 26. Given a mechanised MAID mM = (mG, θ, R), an R-subgame of M is a new
MAID M′ = (G′, θ′) where G′ is an R-subdiagram of G and θ′ is deﬁned by Pr′(v′; θ′) := Pr(v′ |
z; θ), where z is some instantiation of the variables Z = V \ V ′.19 An R-subgame is feasible
if there exists a policy proﬁle π where Prπ(z) > 0.
R-subgames can be found for any R using only R-reachability. In particular, s-reachability
produces s-subgames, which in many ways are the most natural form of subgame in MAIDs
(because of their connection to subgames in EFGs, as shown formally in Section 6.2). In the
19In fact, it can easily be appreciated that only the setting z of the variables that have a child in V ′ will
matter.
30

T
U1
U2
D1
D2
ΘT
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΠD2
(a)
U1
U2
D1
D2
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΠD1
ΠD2
(b)
U1
U2
D2
ΘU1
ΘU2
ΠD2
(c)
U2
D2
ΘU2
ΠD2
(d)
Figure 9: (a) A MAID M = (G, θ) for the modiﬁed version of Example 1 – in which the
ﬁrm’s proﬁts are also function of the worker’s decision but not of their temperament – and
resulting s-relevance graph.
The graph G is also an (improper) s-subdiagram and the full
game an (improper) s-subgame.
Figures (b), (c), and (d) illustrate the remaining (proper)
s-subdiagrams of G and their s-relevance graphs.
remainder of the paper, unless otherwise speciﬁed, we therefore focus our attention on this case.
Note also that any MAID is an R-subgame of itself, and so an R-subgame on a strictly smaller
set of variables is called a proper R-subgame. For example, the MAID for Example 1 (shown in
Figure 3b) has no proper RBR-subgames because ΠD1 and ΠD2 are both RBR-reachable from
one another.
Identifying More Subgames in MAIDs
Before continuing, we note that the conditional dependencies captured in MAIDs allow for
a richer and stronger notion of subgames than in EFGs. Not only can diﬀerent notions of R-
subgame be introduced for diﬀerent rationality relations, but it is often possible to identify more
subgames (and hence rule out more non-credible threats) in a MAID than in the corresponding
EFG. This can be seen by considering a minor variation on Example 1. Suppose that the ﬁrm
has a new vacancy in which what is important is not whether the worker is hard-working or
lazy, but whether they have studied at university. In other words, U2 is a function of D1 and
D2 but not T.
The game graph and s-relevance graph for this example are shown in Figure 9a. Note that the
structure of the EFG (shown in Figure 3a) does not change, only the payoﬀs for the ﬁrm. As
such, there are no proper subgames in the EFG because when the hiring system is making its
decision (D2), it cannot observe the value of T and so no proper subtree is closed under both
descendants and information sets. In contrast, we can recognise three proper s-subdiagrams
(shown in Figures 9b, 9c, and 9d) of the equivalent MAID. Each of these s-subdiagrams has two
s-subgames associated with it owing to the two values that T can take (for the s-subdiagram in
Figure 9b) and the two values that D1 can take (for the s-subdiagrams in Figures 9c and 9d).
5.3
Equilibrium Reﬁnements
When more than one NE exists, it is useful to specify additional criteria to rule out less plausible
outcomes. This corresponds to making additional assumptions about the rationality of agents,
which can be encoded as stricter rationality relations. Below, we provide deﬁnitions of two of
the most important equilibrium reﬁnements – subgame perfect equilibria [85] and trembling
hand perfect equilibria [84] – within MAIDs. Later, in Section 6.2, we provide proofs regarding
31

various equivalences between these deﬁnitions and those in EFGs.
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
The concept of a subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) was introduced into EFGs in order to
eliminate NEs containing non-credible threats – choices made by an agent in a sequential game
that would not be in their best interest to carry out if given the opportunity [84, 85]. In MAIDs,
we can rule out non-credible threats by ensuring that each agent plays a best response in every
feasible s-subgame. In games with suﬃcient recall, an SPE (in behavioural policies) can always
be constructed by performing backwards induction over the s-subgames and ﬁnding an NE
in each; it is this technique in Appendix C.2 that allows an NE to be computed much more
eﬃciently than in a corresponding EFG. However, if even one agent in the game has insuﬃcient
recall, an SPE may not exist even when allowing for mixed policies (see Appendix B.2 for an
example).
Deﬁnition 27. A policy proﬁle π in a MAID M is a subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE)
if π is an NE in every feasible s-subgame of M, when restricted to that subgame.20
Proposition 8. Any MAID M with suﬃcient recall has at least one SPE in behavioural policies.
Recall πNE in Example 2, introduced in Section 5.1, in which robot one chooses D1 = q and
robot two chooses D2 = p whatever the value of D1.
We can immediately see that in the
feasible s-subgame where D1 = ¬q – the s-subdiagram for the smallest such s-subgame is
shown in Figure 8b – then choosing D2 = p is a non-credible threat, resulting in expected
utility 5 instead of 6 for robot two. Instead, an example of an SPE is the policy proﬁle πSPE
in which robot one chooses D1 = ¬q, and robot two chooses D2 = p if and only if D1 = q.
Under such a policy proﬁle, robot two achieves its optimal expected utility in any of the feasible
s-subgames, and given that robot two is following this policy, robot two receives expected utility
2 regardless of whether they move quickly or not.
Before continuing, we note that rationality relations allow us to capture arbitrary sets of policy
proﬁles as rational outcomes, including the equilibrium reﬁnements in this section. For example,
(when each agent has at most one decision) the rational outcomes RBR(mM) are simply the
NEs of M, as can easily be seen via inspection of Equation (1) and Deﬁnition 11. Similarly, for
a MAID M let us denote by M(D) the set of all feasible s-subgames containing D, and deﬁne:
πD ∈rSP
D (paΠD)
⇔
πD ∈
arg max
ˆπD∈dom(ΠD)
X
U∈Ui∩V ′
E(ˆπD,π′
−D)[U] ∀M′ ∈M(D),
expressing that each agent plays a best response for their decision rule in every s-subgame con-
taining that decision. In other words, π ∈RSP(mM) if π′ ∈RBR(mM′) for each s-subgame
M′ of M, where π′ is π restricted to the decision variables in M′. If M has suﬃcient recall,
RSP(mM) are the SPEs of the game, as stated formally below. While such representations
may sometimes be slightly more cumbersome, encoding equilibria via rationality relations facil-
itates the use of R-relevance and hence R-reachability. This oﬀers a principled way to identify
independencies that can be useful both for causal and game-theoretic reasoning.
Proposition 9. Suppose that a MAID M has suﬃcient recall. Then, the set of SPEs of M is
equal to the set of rational outcomes RSP(mM).
Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
In an SPE, agents make decisions on the assumption that an SPE will be played in all proper
subgames. As a result, however, the optimality of their strategies may not be robust to events
20Note that this notion of subgame perfectness can be generalised to other choices of rationality relations.
32

in which other agents make mistakes, or ‘tremble’, with some small probability. To solve this
problem, we can stipulate that each agent must play a best response (leading to an NE) in each
perturbed game [84]. Let ζk be a perturbation vector containing, for every D ∈D, d ∈dom(D),
and decision context paD, a value ϵpaD
d
∈(0, 1) such that P
d∈dom(D) ϵpaD
d
≤1. Then, given
a game M, the perturbed game M(ζk) is deﬁned such that each decision rule πD is forced to
have πD(d | paD) ≥ϵpaD
d
.
Deﬁnition 28. A policy proﬁle π is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium (THPE) in a
MAID M if there is a sequence of perturbation vectors {ζk}k∈N such that limk→∞∥ζk∥∞= 0
and for each perturbed MAID M(ζk) there is an NE πk such that limk→∞πk = π.
For example, the policy proﬁle πSPE is not a THPE. To see this, suppose that robot two trembles
with probability ϵ > 0 when D1 = q and ϵ′ > 0 when D1 = ¬q. Then, robot one’s expected
utility when playing q is 2 + 2ϵ and when playing ¬q is 2 −ϵ′. Therefore in any NE of the
perturbed game robot one will play q with probability one. One THPE is given by the policy
proﬁle πTHPE in which robot one chooses D1 = q and robot two chooses D2 = p if and only if
D1 = q. Note that in any two-agent game, THPEs rule out all weakly dominated policies. In
this example, robot one’s policy of always choosing D1 = ¬q is weakly dominated by the policy
of always choosing D1 = q (which itself is not weakly dominated by any other policy).
6
Connections to EFGs
EFGs are perhaps the most widely studied model of dynamic strategic decision-making. Despite
their intuitive appeal, these tree-based models can be less concise and reveal less of the under-
lying structure of a game than the DAG-based models we use in this paper. With that said, a
natural question is whether the game-theoretic deﬁnitions for MAIDs in Section 5 successfully
capture the familiar concepts of their EFG counterparts, or whether we might lose something
by working with MAIDs – and hence (S)CGs – instead.
In this section, we show that such concerns are unwarranted: these game-theoretic concepts
are preserved when we convert between representations. We begin by brieﬂy describing two
algorithms, maid2efg and efg2maid, that implement these conversions. Using these procedures,
we then provide equivalence results for the deﬁnitions from Section 5. Following this, we brieﬂy
discuss how tree-based models can also be used for causal reasoning in certain cases.
6.1
Transformations
We brieﬂy summarise two procedures for converting between MAIDs and EFGs. A more formal
treatment of both can be found in Appendix A.1.
From MAID to EFG
There are many ways to convert a MAID M = (G, θ) into an EFG E, but these diﬀer in
their computational costs [51, 74]. The basic idea, as employed by K&M, is to use a topological
ordering ≺over the variables of G to construct E’s game tree by splitting on each of the variables
in order. This splitting is required due to the fact that a variable in G deﬁnes what happens given
any context (a setting of the parent variables), whereas a node in E deﬁnes what happens only
in one context (the path taken to reach that node). As such, we may end up with exponentially
more nodes in E than variables in G.
By querying the CPDs of each variable, branches from chance nodes are labelled with proba-
bilities based on the path taken from the root of the tree to that node, and similarly for the
utilities assigned to each leaf; branches from decision nodes are labelled with the possible actions
available. Given two nodes corresponding to the same decision variable D in G, we assign them
33

to the same information set if and only if the values taken by their ancestors along the paths
from the root of the tree to each node agree on all those variables in PaD. Note that because
there can be more than one topological ordering ≺, we regard the output of maid2efg as a set
of EFGs – one for each possible ordering.
Remark 4. This procedure can be made more eﬃcient by marginalising out all variables not
in U ∪FaD, such as in the reduced EFG for Example 2 (shown in Figure 8c), which only has
22 leaves, as opposed to the 23 leaves that would have resulted had we retained all the variables
in the original MAID (in Figure 8a).
Importantly, the information in this reduced EFG is
suﬃcient for computing its equilibria, and can thus oﬀer signiﬁcant eﬃciency gains (since the
cost of solving an EFG depends on its size, which is exponential in the length of ≺). In our
codebase [27], we therefore implement this more eﬃcient transformation (originally described
by K&M), which can be used in conjunction with Gambit, a popular tool for solving EFGs [63].
From EFG to MAID
By encoding the CPDs for each variable in the MAID using trees as opposed to tables, MAIDs
can represent any game using at most the same (but often exponentially less) space than an
EFG [51]. In general, there are many MAIDs that can represent a given EFG. For instance,
upon converting the EFG representation (in Figure 3a) of Example 1 to a MAID, we could
na¨ıvely create a decision variable for each information set. Alternatively, we could recognise,
for example, that V 1
1 and V 1
2 correspond to the same real-world variable – the worker’s choice
to go to university or not – and thus combine them (as shown in Figure 3b, in which the two
information sets for the second agent have also been combined).
Whether two nodes represent the same variable in an EFG is a matter of domain knowledge
external to the EFG, but this knowledge typically exists when creating a model of a game and
is then lost by viewing the interaction as an EFG. By formalising this notion as a question of
whether nodes belong to the same intervention set, we provide a procedure efg2maid (described
fully in Appendix A.1), which maps an EFG to a unique, canonical MAID.
Deﬁnition 29. An intervention set J in an EFG E is either a set of chance nodes, information
sets belonging to the same agent, or leaves, such that:
• Every node V ∈J or V ∈Ii
J ∈J has the same number of children;
• No path from the root of E to one of its leaves passes through J more than once.
Moreover, for a valid partition of information sets and chance variables into intervention sets,
we require that any path to a node V ∈J or V ∈Ii
J ∈J passes through the same intervention
sets before reaching J.
In efg2maid, we assume that intervention sets are given; in the absence of such knowledge,
one can simply choose each intervention set to be a singleton. The resulting MAID will remain
equivalent to the EFG (in the sense described in the following subsection), but may not be as
compact as it otherwise could be. The basic idea behind the conversion is to ﬁrst view the game
tree as a MAID, then to add missing edges to each node from its ancestors whilst merging nodes
that are in the same intervention set into single variables. Incoming edges from any variable
V whose value is not observed by a decision D are then removed from PaD, along with any
duplicate edges produced by merging nodes. Each leaf intervention set is split into one utility
variable for each agent. The distributions over each variable V are then formed for each context
paV by summing the relevant probabilities of sets of merged edges.
34

6.2
Equivalences
Using these transformations, we derive equivalence results between EFGs and MAIDs to demon-
strate that the fundamental game-theoretic notions of subgames and various equilibrium reﬁne-
ments in Section 5 are preserved when converting between representations. We begin by deﬁning
what we mean for two game representations to be ‘equivalent’; the underlying idea is that the
(behavioural) policy and strategy spaces in each game should be the same and each correspond-
ing (behavioural) policy and strategy proﬁle should lead to the same expected utility for each
agent in both games. An immediate consequence of this is that NEs are also preserved.
Deﬁnition 30. We say that a MAID M is equivalent to an EFG E (and vice versa) if there
is a bijection for each agent fi : Σi →dom(Πi)/ ∼between their strategies in E and a partition
of their policies in M (the quotient set of dom(Πi) by an equivalence relation ∼where πi ∼ˆπi
if and only if πi and ˆπi diﬀer only on infeasible decision contexts) such that for every π ∈f(σ)
and every agent i, we have Eσ

U(ρ[L])[i]

= P
U∈Ui Eπ[U], where f(σ) :=×i∈N fi(σi). We
refer to any such f as a natural mapping between E and M.
Lemma 3. Let f be a natural mapping between E and M. Then σ is an NE in E if and only
if every π ∈f(σ) is an NE in M.
The reason we use an equivalence relation on the space of policies is that efg2maid can in-
troduce additional infeasible decision contexts: those paD such that Prπ(paD) = 0 for all π,
corresponding to paths in the EFG that do not exist. An agent’s choice in such decision con-
texts has no bearing on the outcome of the game, meaning we may safely abstract away from
them. Any natural mapping is therefore suﬃcient for preserving the essential game-theoretic
features of each representation, as we show below, though it may not be unique. We begin with
a supporting lemma that justiﬁes the correctness of the procedures maid2efg and efg2maid,
and forms the basis of our other results.
Lemma 4. If E ∈maid2efg(M) or M = efg2maid(E), then E and M are equivalent.
This lemma follows directly from the construction of a natural mapping f using the two pro-
cedures, maid2efg and efg2maid respectively. The intuition is that the information sets in an
EFG correspond to the feasible decision contexts in a MAID, and thus a behavioural strategy
proﬁle σ in the EFG corresponds to a behavioural policy proﬁle π in the MAID, and vice versa.
The following result is a direct corollary of Lemma 3 and Lemma 4.
Corollary 1. If E ∈maid2efg(M) or M = efg2maid(E), then there is a natural mapping f
between E and M such that σ is an NE in E if and only if every π ∈f(σ) is an NE in M.
For a subgame E′ in an EFG, it can be shown that the variables outside E′ are not s-relevant to
those in the corresponding s-subgame M′. This means that subgames in EFGs have equivalent
counterparts in their equivalent MAID, as established by the following proposition. A minor
caveat here is that some utility variables may not occur in M′, and so we must add their value
(under the setting of the variables outside G′ that deﬁnes M′) to the payoﬀfor the agents in
order to equate their expected utilities with that of E′. For any subgame M′, however, this
change in value is constant for each agent under any policy proﬁle, and so has no eﬀect on their
decisions.
Proposition 10. If E ∈maid2efg(M) or M = efg2maid(E), then there is a natural mapping
f between E and M such that, for every subgame E′ in E there is an s-subgame M′ in M that
is equivalent (modulo a constant diﬀerence between the utilities for each agent under any policy
in M′) to E′ under the natural mapping f restricted to the strategies of E′.
This restriction of f to the strategies in E′ can be made precise by considering only those
feasible decision contexts that correspond to the information sets contained in E′.
By ﬁrst
35

applying Proposition 10 and then Lemma 3 to each of the resulting subgames, we see that any
SPE in M is carried over to E. We note, however, that as there may be more s-subgames in a
MAID than in its equivalent EFG, the criterion of subgame perfectness may be slightly stronger
in the MAID. In other words, not all SPEs in an EFG may be SPEs in the equivalent MAID.
This additional strength can be useful in ruling out non-credible threats even when they do not
fall under a particular subgame in the EFG.
Corollary 2. If E ∈maid2efg(M) or M = efg2maid(E), then there is a natural mapping f
between E and M such that if every π ∈f(σ) is an SPE in M, then σ is an SPE in E.
Finally, we derive an equivalence between the THPEs in EFGs and those in MAIDs. In order to
do so, it suﬃces to prove an equivalence between perturbed versions of the corresponding games
E(ζk) and M(ζk), which can easily be done by construction using maid2efg and efg2maid, and
then by applying Lemma 4 and Lemma 3 to each of these perturbed games.
Proposition 11. If E ∈maid2efg(M) or M = efg2maid(E), then there is a natural mapping
f between E and M such that σ is a THPE in E if and only if every π ∈f(σ) is a THPE in
M.
This series of equivalence results serves to justify MAIDs as an appropriate choice of game
representation. Not only do they provide computational advantages over EFGs, they preserve
some of the most fundamental game-theoretic concepts commonly employed in EFGs.
6.3
Causality in EFGs
One alternative to causal games would be to deﬁne causal concepts directly via EFGs. In this
section, we explain how this can be done for a limited set of causal queries by extending methods
designed for probability trees [32], and explain some shortcomings of this approach relative to
the models we focus on in this paper.
Interventions
Intuitively, interventions in EFGs correspond to replacing the probability distribution(s) gov-
erning some node(s) in the game tree. More formally, consider an EFG E with intervention sets
(if each intervention set is a singleton, we recover the case where each EFG variable is treated
separately). As in CGs, we can apply both pre- and post-strategy interventions, and both oper-
ations have the same form. We make an intervention I on an intervention set J by replacing Pj
or σi
j with an arbitrary probability distribution P ∗
j (Vj | ∩Vj∈JAncVj) or σi
j
∗(Vj | ∩Vj∈JAncVj),
for each Vj ∈J. Hard interventions represent the special case when this distribution is given
by δ(Vj,vj), where vj corresponds to an outgoing edge from each node Vj ∈J. Pre-strategy
interventions result from performing an intervention on the game tree before agents choose their
strategies – in essence, forming a new game EI – whereas post-strategy interventions result from
intervening on the probability tree that results after agents have chosen their strategies – in
other words, forming a new distribution P σ
I
over paths in the tree.
While the graph of an EFG is typically viewed as encoding informational constraints upon the
decisions of agents, as opposed to temporal or causal structure, it can also be given a causal
interpretation in much the same way that a MAID or BN can, by restricting the EFG to be
consistent with the set of all possible (hard) interventional distributions. This restriction pro-
duces a level two model in which the interventional queries described in the paragraph above
are semantically meaningful. Due to the total ordering imposed by EFGs over the variables in
a game, however, only a restricted subset of interventions are available (those whose distribu-
tions I condition only on ancestors of the node in question). Similarly, some queries (be they
probabilistic or causal) over EFGs are not well-deﬁned, due to the fact that, in general, not all
variables are assigned a value on a path ρ from the root to a leaf.
36

Counterfactuals
Answering counterfactual queries is slightly more complicated. We brieﬂy describe an existing
procedure for probability trees, and refer the interested reader to this work for further details
[32]. Suppose that we wish to calculate P σ(xI | z) – the value that X = V \ {Y, Z} would
have taken if Y were distributed according to I, given that in fact z is true. The ﬁrst step is
to condition on z by setting PZ(z) = 1 or σi
Z(z) = 1, which is equivalent to ﬁrst performing
a hard intervention do(Z = z) and then renormalising the probability distributions over the
branches upstream of this intervention. The second step is to perform the soft intervention I on
Y , without any renormalising. Thirdly and ﬁnally, we restore the probability distributions over
the branches downstream of this second intervention to the original settings given by P σ. The
resulting probability tree describes the post-strategy counterfactual distribution P σ(xI | z). By
modifying this procedure such that the normalisation upstream of Z and the restoring of distri-
butions downstream of Y takes place according to the actual strategy proﬁle σ, then allowing
agents to play a new counterfactual strategy proﬁle σ′, we produce a pre-strategy counterfactual
distribution (though if conditioning is performed downstream of diﬀerences between σ and σ′,
the resulting distribution will not, in general, be correct).
Counterfactual queries in EFGs are not invariant to the choice of tree representation, even if the
distributions P σ are the same for any strategy proﬁle σ. This diﬃculty arises because standard
EFGs do not reside at level three of the causal hierarchy, but may be overcome (as in CBNs and
CGs) by relegating all stochasticity to a set of exogenous chance nodes that appear at the top
of the game tree, and allowing agents only to select deterministic strategies (over endogenous
decision nodes) as a function of some exogenous noise. This also resolves the diﬃculties of
pre-policy counterfactuals in EFGs, as updates made due to conditioning on z will now be
upstream of diﬀerences between σ and σ′. Existing work on probability trees [32], on the other
hand, treats stochasticity as endogenous, and only possible to learn about (in the counterfactual
world) for those variables that are upstream of the intervention I. The ordering of variables
in the tree therefore implicitly represents a substantive modelling assumption that resolves the
subtle complexities surrounding counterfactuals in models with intrinsic stochasticity [17, 73].
7
Applications
Having described and analysed the theoretical features of causal games, we now consider poten-
tial domains of application. In the ﬁrst subsection, we provide a case study based on the UK
home insurance market. In the second, we discuss how several existing concepts for the analysis
of (artiﬁcial) agents can be embedded and further developed within our framework. We provide
worked examples of these embeddings in Appendix B.3. More substantive results, however, are
beyond the scope of this paper, whose fundamental aim is to lay the theoretical foundations for
causal games, rather than to explore speciﬁc applications.
7.1
Case Study: Insurance Pricing
While our primary motivation is to use causal games to analyse AI systems, another natural
domain of application is in economics, where both causal and game-theoretic modelling are
common. For example, when a regulator in the UK proposes a policy intervention, they are
required to conduct a cost-beneﬁt analysis to justify it.
This entails making a comparison
between the consequences of the intervention and the consequences of no intervention and/or
alternative interventions. Some regulators, such as the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA),
include a ‘causal chain’ in their analyses, though these are only heuristic diagrams rather than
formal causal models. In this case study, we demonstrate the usefulness of causal games for
economic analysis with an example based on the UK home insurance market, worth £6.31 billion
37

in 2021 [34], which was the focus of a recent FCA report [25].
The Model
In this setting: some customers are inert and do not change their insurance provider from year
to year; ﬁrms charge a low price to attract customers in the ﬁrst year, then increase their
prices upon renewal; inert customers, therefore, end up paying more, while savvy customers
spend time negotiating or switching provider each year. This allows ﬁrms to increase proﬁts at
customers’ expense, either from increased prices (if inert), or switching costs (if savvy). These
practices are especially troubling because it is often more vulnerable customers (such as older
or less educated individuals) who are likely to be exploited [61]. While this is not the focus of
the aforementioned FCA report, it is conceivable that the use of sophisticated AI algorithms to
set insurance prices based on customer details might potentially lead to an even greater degree
of exploitation. A simpliﬁed model of this setting is as follows.
Example 3 (Insurance Market). A customer in a duopolistic insurance market must choose an
insurance provider, and aims to minimise their costs. They already have a contract with one of
the two providers, and so must decide whether to renew or switch. The customer is either savvy
(in which case they are modelled as having a low switching cost) or inert (in which case they
are modelled as having a high switching cost). The two ﬁrms use internal pricing algorithms to
oﬀer their quotes simultaneously, with the knowledge of which ﬁrm the customer has an existing
contract with, but without the knowledge of the customer’s type (savvy or inert), in order to
maximise their proﬁts.
We represent this setting as a causal game M with three agents (in Figure 10a) and parameterise
the model using real-world data on pricing strategies and consumer tendencies in the UK home
insurance market within the period 2013-18 [25, 26, 61]. The two ﬁrms (agents one and two) use
their pricing algorithms to decide prices d1, d2 ∈N for their insurance premiums based on which
ﬁrm the customer (agent three) currently has a contract with, c ∈{1, 2}.21 The customer uses
this information, along with their type T – savvy (s) or inert (¬s) – to choose a ﬁrm d3 ∈{1, 2}
to purchase insurance from, or to exit the market (⊥).
Firm i’s utility (their proﬁt) is assumed to be given by their policy price di minus the marginal
cost of providing the policy, if selected by the customer, and zero otherwise. The customer’s
utility is deﬁned as their valuation of the policy, minus the price they pay and switching costs,
with an extra −∞term if the customer is inert (i.e., to model the searching and switching
cost being prohibitively high).
The customer’s utility is zero if they exit the market.
The
chance variables C (the customer’s current ﬁrm) and T (the customer’s type) are parameterised
following the values in Table 10b.
The Proposed Intervention
In the aforementioned report, the FCA proposes to ban insurance companies from setting diﬀer-
ent prices for new and existing customers [25]. Because ﬁrms are made aware of the intervention
before deploying their pricing algorithms, we represent this as a pre-policy intervention on ΠD1
and ΠD2. More concretely, this corresponds to changing the rationality relations rD1 and rD2 by
restricting their codomains – dom(Π1) and dom(Π2) – to be such that πD1(D1 | C) = πD1(D1)
and πD2(D2 | C) = πD2(D2), eﬀectively removing the edges C →D1 and C →D2 (shown as
21In practice, the ﬁrms’ prices will be bounded between the marginal cost of supplying the policy, and the
point at which the customer exits the market due to prices being too high.
21This quantity is estimated as the average amount received per policy by ﬁrms (£231) minus the average
proﬁt per policy (£25) [25]. In practice, there are other small fees that aﬀect a ﬁrm’s revenue.
22Taken as those who self-report as ‘actively’ searching for new policies [25].
38

C
T
D1
D3
D2
U1
U3
U2
(a)
Average Quantity
Amount
Marginal cost of supplying policy22
£206
Customer valuation of policy
£296
Switching cost for customer
£38
Savvy customers23
72%
Customers currently with ﬁrst ﬁrm
p%
(b)
Figure 10: (a) A causal game representing Example 3. (b) Data from the UK home insurance
market within the period 2013-18 [25, 26, 61], used to parameterise the game.
dashed in Figure 10a). In what follows we denote this intervention by I. The FCA oﬀers a
number of hypotheses about the likely eﬀects of this intervention, namely that:
i) The percentage of customers switching will reduce;
ii) Switching customers will end up paying higher prices, and renewing customers will end
up paying lower prices;
iii) Overall, customers will end up better oﬀon average.
Representing the intervention within a causal game M allows us to express these hypotheses
formally by measuring and quantifying the causal eﬀects of I, which cannot, in general, be done
without a formal causal model. For the purpose of this analysis, we set p = 0.6 and assume that
agents play a pure THPE, which, while not truly realistic, illustrates the real-world applications
of causal games (which can also be used to capture boundedly rational agents). In what follows,
we denote the rationality relations describing this assumption as R.
Before addressing the three hypotheses, it is a simple exercise to see that for each π ∈R(M),
ﬁrms do indeed end up setting minimal prices (i.e., equal to their marginal cost) for new cus-
tomers and higher prices for renewing customers, up to the point of driving away sales due to
switching costs from customers. In other words, we have that πDi(Di | C = 3 −i) = δ(Di, 206)
and πDi(Di | C = i) = δ(Di, 244) for each i ∈{1, 2}. For their part, customers always seek
the lowest price, taking into account switching costs, and are indiﬀerent when the price at an
alternative ﬁrm is the same as the price at their current ﬁrm plus the switching cost. After the
intervention I, the customer’s policy stays the same, but we have πD1(D1 | C) = δ(D1, 288)
and πD2(D2 | C) = δ(D2, 250) for the two pricing algorithms, respectively, for any π ∈R(MI).
The rational outcomes of the original game correspond to whether savvy customers (at each of
the two ﬁrms) switch to the other ﬁrm or not. Depending on whether customers with neither
ﬁrm, the ﬁrst ﬁrm, the second ﬁrm, or both ﬁrms switch, then we have 0%, 43.2%, 28.8%,
or 72% of customers switching, respectively. After intervention I, customers already with the
second ﬁrm have no incentive to switch, and so the percentage of customers switching is either
0% or 43.2%. If we were to assume a uniform prior over rational outcomes, for instance, then
we would see that the causal eﬀect of I on the percentage of customers switching insurance
provider is given by:
1
|R(MI)|
X
π∈R(MI)
switch(π) −
1
|R(M)|
X
π∈R(M)
switch(π) = 21.6% −36% = −14.4%,
where switch(π) := P
i Prπ(D3 = i | C = 3 −i) is the probability that a customer switches
provider. Thus, hypothesis i) is conﬁrmed.
39

For the ﬁrst part of hypothesis ii), we wish to measure the causal eﬀect of I on the quantity
Eπ[Di | C = i, D3 = 3 −i] for each i ∈{1, 2}, in settings such that Prπ(C = i, D3 = 3 −i) > 0.
For π ∈R(M), this quantity is equal to 206, which may occur when either i = 1 or i = 2.
For π ∈R(MI) this quantity is equal to 250, which occurs when i = 2; the customer never
switches to ﬁrm one. This conﬁrms the ﬁrst half of the hypothesis. For the second part, a
similar analysis shows that renewing customers pay £244 before the intervention either £250
or £288 after the intervention, which is contrary to the hypothesis. We discuss the reasons for
this in the following paragraph, as well as how another proposal can be employed to achieve
the desired result.
Hypothesis iii) concerns simply the causal eﬀect of I on Eπ[U3].
The customer’s expected
utility is the same under any of the rational outcomes and interventional rational outcomes
respectively, so we can write simply:
Eπ[U3
I] −Eπ[U3] = 23.12 −52 = −28.88.
As in the case for the second half of hypothesis ii), this disconﬁrms the hypothesis (in our
model).
The reason for both of these results is that the relatively high switching costs for
customers (£38) and the relatively high percentage of inert customers (28%) mean that the
ﬁrms’ pricing algorithms are better oﬀsticking to higher prices to exploit customers who will
not switch, rather than lower prices in order to attract customers away from other ﬁrms.
To achieve the desired eﬀects, we can instead consider another intervention proposed by the
FCA, which is to reduce switching costs for customers (for example, by allowing them to stop
their insurance policy from auto-renewing more easily) [25]. If we therefore consider a second
intervention I′ that makes the same change as I but also modiﬁes ΘU3 to set the switching
costs of customers to £0, for example, then we have that:
Eπ[U3
I′] −Eπ[U3] = 72 −52 = 20,
as πDi(Di | C) = δ(Di, 224) for i ∈{1, 2} in any π ∈R(MI′). Returning to hypothesis ii), this
implies that all customers now pay £224 when renewing as opposed to £244, thus completing
the set of all desired outcomes.
Extensions
As shown above, not only can our analysis be used to investigate the qualitative hypotheses
put forwards by the FCA, it provides quantitative results too. Nevertheless, we emphasise that
the model we present is highly simpliﬁed, and considers only a very simple intervention. More
complex models and queries are beyond the scope of the present paper, but represent a natural
avenue for further applied work. Before continuing, we brieﬂy remark on possible extensions.
First, we could extend the model to make it more realistic. This might include: increasing the
number of ﬁrms; diﬀerent marginal costs for diﬀerent ﬁrms; diﬀerent customer valuations of
insurance policies from diﬀerent ﬁrms; small costs to ﬁrms from customers switching; includ-
ing intermediary ﬁrms; more explicit modelling of the ﬁrms’ pricing algorithms; not making
savviness a binary variable; and modelling the market over time instead of as a one-shot game.
With these added complexities to the model come greater opportunities to exploit the richness
of causal games.
In particular, in the simple model above, the lack of more intricate causal dependencies between
the agents’ actions means that applying a pre-policy intervention essentially reduces to re-solving
a slightly diﬀerent game (where the dashed edges in Figure 10a are removed). In larger games,
it is both easier and more important to avoid this cost, which cannot (in general) be avoided in
models such as EFGs that do not explicitly represent the causal structure of a game. We could
40

also use the model for more advanced analyses, such as answering counterfactuals, identifying
subgames, and computing mixtures of pre- and post-policy queries.
7.2
Blame, Intent, Incentives, and Fairness
Many of the most important concepts for reasoning about the safe and ethical use of AI systems
are implicitly causal in nature. Moreover, in recent years, substantial progress has been made
on formalising these concepts using causal models [22, 39, 55, 65, 80]. Because causal games
are the ﬁrst causal framework to explicitly capture multi-agent and game-theoretic reasoning,
they open up the possibility of further work in these directions. In what follows, we explain
how causal games might be applied to existing concepts in order to arrive at richer and more
general results. Concrete examples of how these concepts can be modelled using causal games
are provided in Appendix B.3.
Blame and Intent
SCMs have been fruitfully employed in order to formally deﬁne the notion of actual causation
(i.e., what it means for some event c to, in fact, cause some event e) [37, 40]. Such ideas are not
only of philosophical interest, but have been argued as being crucial for building AI systems
that can automatically generate explanations, either of their own workings or that of other
agents [41, 65]. In recent years, this underlying theory has been used to formalise the concepts
of blameworthiness and intention [28, 39]. As these works have highlighted, issues of blame and
intent become particularly acute in multi-agent settings.
While these concepts can be accommodated within (structural) causal games (see Appendix
B.3), they also allow for an even richer formalism of blame and intent in multi-agent settings.
More speciﬁcally, there are at least four generalisations we might make. Firstly, the use of
sets of utility variables that deﬁne multiple utility functions, one for each agent, would mean
that costs (and hence both blame and intent) can be viewed from the perspective of multiple
agents. Secondly, we could consider blame and intent with respect to strategies rather than
single actions, which corresponds to considering soft (post-policy) interventions as opposed to
hard (post-policy) interventions. Thirdly, we might wish to consider pre-policy interventions
by using mechanised games. For example, if a pre-policy change to one agent’s decision means
that the only rational response for the second agent is something that causes a bad outcome, we
might think that the ﬁrst agent is at least somewhat to blame for this turn of events (although
these concepts become more nuanced when there are cyclic dependencies between decision rule
variables). Finally, all of these extensions can also be viewed in terms of coalitions of agents
and their strategies, which has already begun to be explored in prior work [28].
Incentives
In order to build intelligent agents that do not behave in undesirable ways, it is useful to be able
to reason about their incentives [19, 22, 57] and reasoning patterns [3, 76]. For example, given
a (possibly multi-agent) decision-making scenario, we might be interested in asking whether an
agent has an incentive to base its policy on a protected attribute, or to inﬂuence a variable that
we would prefer to be left alone. Similarly, notions of fairness are often naturally expressed in
terms of whether a diﬀerent outcome would result in some counterfactual situation.
Recent work has sought to formalise incentives by modelling such scenarios as single-agent
causal games (i.e., causal inﬂuence diagrams). This work has developed a number of sound
and complete graphical criteria for identifying Value of Information (VoI) [44] and Value of
Control (VoC) [87]. Sound and complete graphical criteria have also been introduced for two
novel concepts: response incentives, which indicate when a decision-maker can beneﬁt from
41

responding to a variable, and instrumental control incentives, which establish whether an agent
can beneﬁt from manipulating a variable [22].
Existing work, however, has been limited to the single-agent, single-decision setting; it is our
hope that causal games will provide the basis for generalising this work to the multi-agent,
multi-decision setting and that the use of mechanised games may lead to additional insights.
For instance, for some incentive concept C we may wish to ask questions such as ‘is there any
R-rational outcome in which agent i ∈N has a C incentive with respect to a particular variable
X in the game?’.
Given the fact that many proposals for safe AI systems are multi-agent
[23], this generalisation to the multi-agent setting marks an important next step in analysing
agent incentives. We provide an example of such a proposal – cooperative inverse reinforcement
learning [36] – modelled as a causal game, in Appendix B.3.
Fairness
Another important and useful application of incentives is for reasoning about fairness, a number
of popular and inﬂuential deﬁnitions of which are based explicitly on causal frameworks [4, 49,
55, 67, 102]. Indeed, it can be shown that all optimal policies π∗in a single-decision SCIM are
counterfactually unfair [55] with respect to a protected attribute A (meaning that a change to
the protected attribute would change the decision made) if and only if there is an RI on A [22].
The question of fairness arguably becomes even more important and interesting in the multi-
agent setting, in which one not only has to ask whether or not a process is fair, but fair to
whom, and whether we might be forced to trade oﬀfairness with respect to diﬀerent agents.
Interestingly, despite the large number of existing works investigating fairness in games (see, e.g.,
the seminal papers of Rabin [79] or Fehr and Schmidt [24]) and the recent insights gained from
using causal deﬁnitions of fairness, to the best of our knowledge there has been no application
of these deﬁnitions to the multi-agent setting. One possible (partial) explanation for this is that
researchers have, until now, been lacking precisely the kind of models that we introduce.
8
Discussion
In this paper, we have introduced a framework that we argue provides a unifying formalism
for reasoning about causality in games. As mentioned in Section 1, combinations of causal and
game-theoretic reasoning have long been considered by various research communities, and so
we conclude with a brief summary of the relative advantages and disadvantages of causal games
compared to other models, before oﬀering some ﬁnal thoughts about future directions.
8.1
Advantages and Disadvantages of Causal Games
The primary beneﬁt of causal games compared to prior work is that no previous framework
captured both game-theoretic and causal features in a general, principled way. Alongside our
discussion of related work in Section 1.1, we expand brieﬂy upon this claim by considering other
causal and game-theoretic models in turn.
Causal Models
Standard causal models do not take into account the presence of rational, self-interested agents.
Doing so requires more than a simple re-labelling of some of the variables as decisions and
utilities, as the presence of strategic, decision-making agents violates the standard assumption
of independent causal mechanisms [75], represented by the edges between mechanism variables
in mechanised games. Alternative causal models that do include agents, such as CIDs [18, 22,
45], typically only consider a single agent.
42

To the best of our knowledge, the only exception to this rule is settable systems [95, 96], though
these models do not capture the multiplicity of equilibria that arise in game-theoretic analyses,
and thus do not naturally support the analysis we seek to do in this paper.
The focus in
these works is instead on capturing lower-level algorithmic details, which may make them more
appropriate when reasoning about the data and attributes of, say, an optimisation or machine
learning process.
Our use of non-deterministic mechanisms (arising whenever agents are indiﬀerent between al-
ternatives) also serves to generalise existing work on cyclic causal models [8, 38] to the relational
setting [1, 33, 62]. However, the cyclic dependencies in causal games are of a speciﬁc form due
to the fact that they represent game-theoretic equilibria, which means that causal games are
not necessarily an appropriate model for analysing the more arbitrary dynamical systems and
sets of simultaneous equations studied in these works.
The fact that we build on top of MAIDs means that causal games inherit some of the existing
game-theoretic concepts introduced in these models, such as NEs, while being consistent with
the more standard probabilistic graphical models upon which MAIDs are based. This further
allows us to derive notions of subgames and other equilibrium reﬁnements, which are critical
for game-theoretic reasoning and yet are not supported by other causal models. Such concepts
have been historically underexplored in the context of graphical games when compared to, say,
EFGs or strategic-form games.
Game-Theoretic Models
The most natural game-theoretic model with which to compare causal games is EFGs, which
are tree-based models as opposed to DAG-based. For our purposes, the most important beneﬁt
of DAG-based models is that they can be more readily used to natively support a wide range
of causal queries. This is bolstered by the use of R-relevance graphs, which form an explicit
representation of the causal dependencies between agents’ decision rules; there is no such rep-
resentation for these dependencies in EFGs.24 Mechanised games can be used to deﬁne a wide
range of both pre- and post-policy queries in games. In contrast, as explained in Section 6.3,
there are many causal queries that cannot be natively answered in EFGs.
DAG-based models also more compactly and explicitly represent dependencies between vari-
ables, which can often only be understood in an EFG through inspecting the parameterisation
of the game. Moreover, a DAG-based representation of a game need never be bigger than the
corresponding EFG and can be exponentially smaller. On the other hand, if a game is highly
asymmetric in its play paths (such as when if play proceeds down one path the game stops
immediately, and on the other path it continues for several more moves), then this structure is
not immediately observable from a causal game, and may eﬀectively make many valuations of
the variables irrelevant due to their inconsistency with the shorter game path.
In addition to their transparency, MAIDs allow us to further exploit the conditional inde-
pendencies between variables using d-separation. Using R-reachability, we may construct the
R-relevance graph for any game and ﬁnd more subgames in a MAID than in its equivalent EFG.
This can signiﬁcantly reduce the computational complexity of solving a game (as shown by the
example in Appendix C.2), oﬀers analytical beneﬁts, and provides a way to deﬁne a stronger
subgame perfectness condition. On the other hand, in the case of context-speciﬁc independencies
– such as when A sometimes depends on B, and B sometimes depends on A – it is well-known
that DAG-based models are a less natural choice than tree-based models [10].25
24This further implies that we cannot take advantage of the structure of these dependencies in order to answer
pre-strategy queries more eﬃciently.
25Though it is possible to support said independencies in DAGs via tree-based representations of the CPDs,
which can graphically capture diﬀerent independencies on diﬀerent branches.
43

Finally, though we have signiﬁcantly extended the number of standard game-theoretic concepts
for MAIDs (and hence causal games) and proved their equivalence to their EFG counterparts,
EFGs remain a more well-investigated representation. Thus, if one is interested in more exotic
equilibrium reﬁnements, for example, EFGs are likely to be a more suitable model. It is our
hope that further research on MAIDs and causal games will reduce this last diﬀerence.
8.2
Future Work
Our priority is to use causal games to further analyse incentives in multi-agent systems, which
has important applications in ensuring that we build AI systems that are safe and fair. As
mentioned in Appendix 7.2, existing work has already characterised some of these incentives
using CIDs. Therefore, a natural next step is to extend these deﬁnitions to multi-agent (and
multi-decision) scenarios, though this is by no means trivial.
For example, in single agent-
settings VoI is always non-negative, whereas in multi-agent settings this need not be the case
(if other agents are aware of the information gain) [78]. Further, we might wish to rule certain
incentives in or out based on whether or not they occur under all or some policy proﬁles satisfying
a particular equilibrium reﬁnement, or more generally, falling within the set of rational outcomes.
Other speciﬁc applications for which causal games may prove fruitful are, for example: design-
ing mechanisms for auctions and other multi-agent systems, or analysing possible interventions
on those mechanisms; generalising counterfactual fairness to multi-agent settings; providing ar-
tiﬁcial agents with the means to more easily provide explanations and reason about qualitative
concepts (such as blame and intent or reasoning patterns) that can be deﬁned using causal
models of games; and deriving new deﬁnitions for similar concepts. We might also hope to ex-
tend the framework presented here with: model variations that can more easily capture dynamic
settings, ﬁne-grained subjective beliefs, or optimisation; deﬁnitions capturing other classic equi-
librium reﬁnements such as perfect Bayesian equilibrium [29] or sequential equilibrium [53]; and
methods of causal discovery for games.
Given that we propose this paper and our accompanying codebase as a robust foundation for
reasoning about causality in games, we believe our work presents many other interesting avenues
for further research. We hope that the advantages causal games confer based on their generality,
explainability, and succinctness (not to mention their compatibility with existing mainstream
models) make them an attractive choice for researchers and practitioners alike who are interested
in the intersection of causality and game theory.
