Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
Jordan T. Ash 1 Robert E. Schapire 2 Barbara E. Engelhardt 1
Abstract
Domain adaptation addresses the problem cre-
ated when training data is generated by a so-
called source distribution, but test data is gen-
erated by a signiﬁcantly different target distri-
bution.
In this work, we present approximate
label matching (ALM), a new unsupervised do-
main adaptation technique that creates and lever-
ages a rough labeling on the test samples, then
uses these noisy labels to learn a transformation
that aligns the source and target samples.
We
show that the transformation estimated by ALM
has favorable properties compared to transforma-
tions estimated by other methods, which do not
use any kind of target labeling. Our model is reg-
ularized by requiring that a classiﬁer trained to
discriminate source from transformed target sam-
ples cannot distinguish between the two. We ex-
periment with ALM on simulated and real data,
and show that it outperforms techniques com-
monly used in the ﬁeld.
1. Introduction
Intuitively, intelligent agents should be able to improve on
one task after having learned a similar kind of task. A hu-
man, for example, might be more capable of understanding
Italian after having learned Spanish, or of playing tennis af-
ter having learned to play badminton. The goal of domain
adaptation is to endow machine intelligence with this same
sort of capability.
In the usual classiﬁcation or regression framework, we
assume that training and test data are generated by the
same underlying distribution. When this assumption does
not hold, test performance can be signiﬁcantly worse than
training performance. This problem comes up in many ar-
eas of machine learning, particularly in natural language
understanding (Glorot et al., 2011) and computer vision
(Gong et al., 2012). As an example, we may want to build
1Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2Microsoft Re-
search, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Jordan T. Ash

a general-purpose sentiment classiﬁer, but only have access
to highly-biased training data, such as book reviews from
an online store. Similarly, a model trained on photos taken
by a webcam will likely generalize poorly to photos taken
by a higher-resolution DSLR camera.
The ability to improve the generalizability of ﬁtted mod-
els is crucial to the real-world effectiveness of data-hungry
methods like deep learning. Domain adaptation holds the
promise of allowing these models to be ﬁtted on datasets
where labeled examples are abundant, then used to make
predictions on a separate dataset where labeled samples are
much more scarce, and that may be generated by a dis-
tribution different than that of the samples on which the
network was originally trained.
Domain adaptation has
also been connected to a wide array of important machine
learning tasks, including counterfactual inference (Johans-
son et al., 2015) and off-policy reinforcement learning (Sut-
ton & Barto, 1998).
Domain adaptation comes in three speciﬁc forms. In super-
vised domain adaptation, we are given several fully-labeled
sources, and the goal is to learn a model that is stronger than
one trained on any of the sources alone. In semi-supervised
domain adaptation, we again have fully-labeled sources,
but also a partially-labeled target domain. In this setting
we are interested in classifying the unlabeled target data
well by making use of all available information. In this ar-
ticle, we consider unsupervised domain adaptation, where
we are given labeled source examples but do not have ac-
cess to labels on target examples.
To coerce a model trained on one domain into performing
well on another, domain adaptation methods often learn a
transformation that makes the source samples statistically
similar to the target samples. Correspondingly, the difﬁ-
culty of domain adaptation lies in learning a high-quality
transformation. Previous methods typically learn this trans-
formation by considering only source and target samples,
and sometimes source labels, but do not make any use of
the target labels since they are not provided in this version
of the problem.
In this work, we propose a new approach to unsuper-
vised domain adaptation called approximate label match-
ing (ALM). Our method constructs a rough labeling of the
target data that we then exploit to dramatically improve the
arXiv:1602.04889v3  [cs.LG]  1 Mar 2017

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
quality of the learned transformation between source and
target data.
As a concrete illustration, we show a synthetic unsuper-
vised domain adaptation problem, discussed further in Sec-
tion 3, that highlights the potential importance of target la-
bel information in domain adaptation tasks (Figure 1). We
place three circular domains on each of the three vertices of
an equilateral triangle. Points that are inside the triangle’s
perimeter are assigned negative labels and those outside are
assigned positive labels. Despite the obvious similarities of
each domain, without somehow incorporating target labels,
it would clearly be impossible to uncover the rotation and
translation that aligns the target data to either of the
available sources. We ﬁnd that ALM performs well in this
adversarial situation, while other methods struggle. This
example might seem contrived, but we show in experiments
(Section 4.5) that real data can have similar properties.
Source 2
Source 1
Target
Figure 1. The synthetic dataset, which includes two sources
and one target. Blue points are positive source samples, orange
points are negative source samples, and purple and green points
are positive and negative target samples respectively. Target do-
main labels are shown here for clarity, but the classiﬁer does not
have access to labels from the target dataset.
In Sections 2 and 2.1 we introduce and provide an intuitive
justiﬁcation for our method. In Section 2.2 we discuss what
it means for our model to overﬁt, and provide a simple reg-
ularization scheme that prevents this behavior. Finally, in
Sections 3 and 4 we present comparative results of ALM
applied to both simulated and real data, and we show that
ALM outperforms related methods for domain adaptation.
1.1. Related Work
Domain adaptation has been approached in two distinct
ways. In the ﬁrst, training samples are re-weighted to make
the resulting hypothesis better suited for classiﬁcation on
the test set. Kernel Mean Matching (KMM) is an exam-
ple of a domain adaptation technique that falls into this
category (Gretton et al., 2009). KMM re-weights source
points in an effort to make the means of the source and
target datasets as close as possible in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space, which circumvents the need to approximate
source or target distributions. Like other kernel methods, a
vanilla implementation of KMM requires the construction
of a matrix that is square with the number of samples in
the target dataset, causing potential difﬁculty when work-
ing with large amounts of data.
In the alternative approach, one or both of the domains
are transformed into a space where they better match each
other. Once in this new representation, a classiﬁer trained
on a source is expected to perform well on the unlabeled
target samples. A simple and effective algorithm that takes
this approach is Subspace Alignment (SA), which ﬁnds a
matrix that minimizes the Bregman divergence between the
transformed source and target (Fernando et al., 2013). The
PCA-based solution for SA is extremely efﬁcient.
Unlike ALM, SA and KMM do not make use of label
information from either the source or target datasets.
Like SA, ALM learns a transformation to match the
source and target domain, but SA is restricted to learning
linear transformations, whereas ALM is able to estimate
nonlinear transformations.
More recently, several deep learning-based solutions to
domain adaptation have been proposed (Ghifary et al.,
2015; Ganin et al., 2016). One popular example of this
is domain adversarial neural networks (DANNs), which
consist of three parts:
a transformation module, label
classiﬁcation module, and domain classiﬁcation module
(Ganin et al., 2016). Their goal, like with SA, is to uncover
a transformation that projects both the source and target
data into a canonical space where a model trained on the
source data will generalize well to the unlabeled target.
The transformation module embeds both the source and
target datasets, and the label classiﬁcation module uses that
representation to distinguish between labeled source sam-
ples. The domain classiﬁcation module is attached to the
transformation module via a gradient-reversal layer, and is
trained to distinguish between source and target examples.
Gradient reversal causes the transformation module to
learn to confuse the domain classiﬁcation module, ideally
forcing the transformed source and transformed target data
to have similar distributions. All of the DANN modules
are trained simultaneously.
The ALM architecture consists of three neural network
modules that are similar to those used in DANNs, but the
two methods differ in a number of important ways. A sig-
niﬁcant difference between the two procedures is our use of
a rough, better-than-guessing hypothesis on the target sam-
ples, which allows ALM to uncover transformations that
other techniques cannot. A subtle difference between the
two methods is that the transformation learned by ALM is
applied only to the target, not the source, which we ﬁnd

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
is important for preventing overﬁtting in ALM. Also, un-
like DANNs, our classiﬁcation module is trained ofﬂine on
the source dataset, and we make use of a true discrimina-
tor (discussed in Section 2.2) rather than a gradient reversal
layer, because gradient reversal can cause instability while
training (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017).
Approximate label matching (ALM) is somewhat reminis-
cent of co-training, which was developed as a method for
classifying data when there are few training examples avail-
able (Blum & Mitchell, 1998). The idea is to create two dif-
ferent hypotheses by training two classiﬁers on two differ-
ent representations of the same data. Test samples on which
the two hypotheses strongly agree are added to the training
set, and the process is repeated. Like co-training, ALM
takes advantage of two candidate hypotheses: a rough la-
beling that is obtained ofﬂine, and an alternate labeling cre-
ated by passing transformed target samples through a clas-
siﬁer trained on the source dataset.
2. Approximate Label Matching (ALM)
In unsupervised domain adaptation, the predictor has been
given one or more source datasets (Xs, Y s), s = 1, . . . , k
and one target sequence X⋆= ⟨x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
n⟩. Each source
dataset s includes an input sequence Xs = ⟨xs
1, . . . , xs
ms⟩
and a label sequence Y s = ⟨ys
1, . . . , ys
ms⟩, each with
ms elements.
In a binary classiﬁcation problem, every
ys
i ∈{0, 1} corresponds to a label for a d-dimensional in-
put xs
i ∈Rd. For each x⋆
i ∈Rd in the target sequence,
the goal of the classiﬁer is to predict the (unknown) label
y⋆
i ∈{0, 1}. Throughout this article, we use notation like
fs(Xs) to denote the sequence of predictions produced by
fs on all xs
i ∈Xs for simplicity.
We assume that, within each source s, all labeled examples
are generated according to the same distribution, and like-
wise for the target. We further assume that each domain is
generated by a different distribution, but that they are sim-
ilar enough that a model trained on one can be transferred,
to some degree, to another. Namely, as discussed in Sec-
tion 1, we suppose that the target domain can be made to
resemble any ﬁxed source domain (Xs, Y s) via a transfor-
mation φs. Once transformed, samples from the target do-
main could be classiﬁed using a model trained on the s-th
source domain. The key question then is how to ﬁnd such
a transformation.
As a natural starting point, we ﬁrst train a classiﬁer fs to la-
bel samples from source dataset (Xs, Y s). Because the dis-
tributions generating the source and target are different, the
accuracy of fs on the target X⋆will tend to be much worse
than that of fs(Xs). The hope is that predictions obtained
by transforming the target samples before classiﬁcation—
that is, fs(φs(X⋆))—will yield more favorable results.
In addition to the classiﬁer fs, we suppose the availability
of an approximate labeling ˆY ⋆= ⟨ˆy⋆
1, . . . , ˆy⋆
n⟩, ˆy⋆
i ∈[0, 1]
on the target samples X⋆. Such a rough labeling could
come from a variety of simple learning procedures, and we
outline some options in Section 2.1. To estimate the trans-
formation φs, we leverage both fs and the approximate la-
beling ˆY ⋆.
Speciﬁcally, if fs is the ideal decision boundary for an
optimally-transformed target, and ˆY ⋆is a labeling on the
target that is usually correct, then we may be able to un-
cover the optimal transformation as the function φs that
causes ˆY ⋆to best agree with fs’s predictions on the trans-
formed target samples fs(φs(x⋆
i )). That is, we ﬁnd φs to
minimize the squared error:
φs = arg min
φ
n
X
i=1
 ˆy⋆
i −fs(φ(x⋆
i ))
2.
(1)
The nested nature of φ makes gradient-based methods like
neural networks an ideal model choice for this optimiza-
tion.
We refer to this procedure, which treats each source sepa-
rately, as approximate label matching. When there are mul-
tiple sources available (k > 1), we can run ALM on each
to create multiple predictors, then take a simple average:
H(x⋆
i ) = round
1
k
k
X
s=1
fs(φs(x⋆
i ))

.
(2)
This average hypothesis can be similarly obtained for any
domain adaptation algorithm.
Our method can be generalized to multiclass problems by
using a vector encoding for labels and predictions instead
of scalar values.
2.1. Obtaining a Rough Labeling
As discussed above, approximate label matching requires
a better-than-guessing estimate ˆY ⋆of the target domain la-
bels in order to be effective. In this section, we overview
two ways in which these approximate labels can be ac-
quired.
In the ﬁrst approach, we obtain a rough labeling by treating
all sources in aggregate as one larger training set, and ﬁtting
a classiﬁer as one would in an ordinary supervised (non-
domain-adaptation) setting. We could then use the predic-
tions of this classiﬁer on the target samples as ˆY ⋆. We
call this a pseudo-supervised rough labeling. This works
particularly well when there are multiple sources available,
because the resulting model will be able to leverage fea-
tures that generalize well across the different sources, and
that may also generalize reasonably well to an unobserved
target domain.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
Another approach for estimating target domain labels,
which may be preferred when only one source dataset is
available, is to simply obtain a hypothesis from an alterna-
tive unsupervised domain adaptation algorithm, and use it
to produce a rough labeling on target samples. When us-
ing ALM in conjunction with this kind of rough labeling,
we call the overall technique reﬁnement, since ALM is in
a sense reﬁning the labeling produced by the given domain
adaptation algorithm.
2.2. Adversarial Regularization
Approximate label matching attempts to align the target X⋆
with the source Xs. However, when the transformation φs
is highly expressive, we may ﬁnd that it contorts the tar-
get samples so as to match the rough labeling ˆY ⋆without
aligning X⋆to Xs. We have observed this phenomenon
anecdotally and frequently in experiments; a detailed ex-
ample is given in Section 3. This is a form of overﬁtting, in
the sense that ALM is ﬁnding a hypothesis that agrees with
ˆY ⋆too precisely due to underconstrained optimization.
In order to prevent this type of overﬁtting, we propose an
adversarial form of regularization, which attempts to force
the transformed target samples φs(X⋆) to look enough like
the source samples Xs that they could confuse a classi-
ﬁer trained to distinguish between the two. We do this by
adding a discriminating function Ds that is trained jointly
with the other ALM machinery. At each step of learning,
Ds is updated to better distinguish between source sam-
ples and transformed target samples, and φs is updated
to both deteriorate the performance of Ds and to solve
Eqn. (1). Our regularization technique is very similar to tra-
ditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Good-
fellow et al., 2014), but instead of generating samples from
random noise, we generate source-looking samples from
target samples. The discriminating function takes as input
either source samples or transformed target samples, and
is trained to predict either 0 for a source sample or 1 for
a target sample. The loss minimized by Ds is simply the
binary cross-entropy of the misclassiﬁed source and target
samples,
−
n
X
i=1
λ log
 Ds(φs(x⋆
i ))

−
ms
X
i=1
λ log
 1 −Ds(xs
i)

,
where λ ∈[0, 1] is the magnitude of the regularization.
This approach changes the loss function for φs to
n
X
i=1

(1 −λ)
 ˆy⋆
i −fs(φs(x⋆
i ))
2 + λL(Ds(φs(x⋆
i )), 1))

,
where L(a, b) is the binary cross-entropy loss result-
ing from output a with label b.
The second term,
L(Ds(φs(x⋆
i )), 1)), denotes the discriminating function’s
conﬁdence that the transformed target sample is a target
sample. Minimizing this conﬁdence corresponds to “con-
fusing” the discriminator, effectively making the trans-
formed target samples resemble source samples. The ﬁt-
ted ALM now needs to match the labeling ˆY ⋆as well as
possible, while also aligning X⋆to source Xs.
Adversarial regularization makes the source and trans-
formed target samples appear relatively similar without the
need to approximate generative distributions or deﬁne an
explicit distance metric between them.
2.3. Implementation of ALM
We implement the ALM functions using neural networks.
Speciﬁcally, we let fs be a neural network of arbitrary ar-
chitecture, and we then use this network to estimate φs.
When solving for φs, fs and ˆY ⋆have already been approx-
imated and are ﬁxed. The transformation φs is represented
by adding additional network layers before the existing in-
put layer of the already-trained fs network. We further add
a discriminator Ds to the output of φs, which, as described
earlier, is iteratively trained to distinguish between source
samples and transformed target samples.
Figure 2. A diagram of ALM for a ﬁxed source s. Orange mod-
ules are being trained together while blue modules were trained
ofﬂine and are ﬁxed. Solid arrows correspond to standard con-
nections and dashed arrows are adversarial connections.
When training this aggregate network, we use ˆY ⋆as la-
bels on X⋆for backpropagation with a mean squared error
criterion, and we do not update any of the weights in the
layers corresponding to fs. The compositionality of back-
propagation allows us to easily solve Eqn. (2) even though
φs is nested within fs.
3. A Synthetic Example
To illustrate how our algorithm works, we demonstrate
its performance on the artiﬁcial dataset described in Sec-
tion 1, which is difﬁcult to classify but conceptually simple.
The data consists of three isotropic Gaussian domains dis-
tributed on each of the three vertices of an equilateral trian-
gle (Figure 3). Points that are inside the triangle’s perimeter
are assigned negative labels, and those outside are assigned

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
positive labels. For this example, we will try to adapt the
target domain X⋆to the ﬁrst source domain X1, but per-
formance is similar for any source-target pair chosen.
Figure 3. A visualization of the synthetic dataset and a few do-
main adaptation techniques. Top Left: The original dataset as
shown in Figure 1. Top Right: The source X1 and target X⋆
after being transformed by SA. Bottom Left: The transformation
learned by ALM without adversarial regularization applied to the
target data. Bottom Right: The transformation learned by ALM
with adversarial regularization applied to the target data.
Because our example includes two sources, ˆY ⋆is obtained
by training a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) on both sources
simultaneously. Such a classiﬁer is able to correctly predict
79.9% of the samples in the held-out target domain.
ALM trained without adversarial regularization overﬁts in
exactly the way described in Section 2.2: It learns to make
predictions that almost exactly matches the rough labeling
ˆY ⋆, but contorts X⋆such that it does not resemble X1 at
all (Figure 3). Once adversarial regularization is included,
the learned transformation φ1 aligns X⋆to X1 fairly well,
yielding 90.0% accuracy.
This unsupervised domain adaptation simulation demon-
strates ALM’s ability to ﬁnd transformations that other al-
gorithms cannot. In this speciﬁc example, recovering the
correct translation of target to source inputs is straightfor-
ward even without using a target labeling, but recovering
the correct domain rotation is challenging because of the
circular shape of the datasets. An algorithm that does not
make use of a target prediction cannot be expected to per-
form well on this task.
As an example, the SA algorithm, which does not use a
target labeling, lumps the source and target together so that
they appear to be from the same distribution, but cannot
uncover the necessary target domain rotation (Figure 3).
Accordingly, SA does not perform better than guessing on
this adversarial simulation.
4. Experiments and Results
We turn next to an empirical evaluation of ALM compared
to some leading domain adaptation algorithms. We evalu-
ate these methods on several domain adaptation problems,
which are described in detail below.
We begin by dis-
cussing our experimental setup.
4.1. Experimental Setting
Each domain-adaptation problem consists of several do-
mains. In our experiments we use one domain as a target
and another as a source. We repeat this for all possible
source-target pairs and report accuracies for each.
In each experiment, we chose φs to be an MLP that in-
cludes three layers, allowing for nonlinear transformations,
with 50 hidden nodes and input and output sizes equal to
the dimensionality of the data. Similarly, we chose fs and
the predictor used to produce pseudo-supervised rough la-
belings to both be MLPs with three layers, a hidden layer
size of 50 nodes, and as many output dimensions as there
are classes in the problem. We ﬁx Ds to also be an MLP
with three layers, and again with 50 nodes in the hidden
layer. In all experiments, dropout 50% is applied to help in
training all networks except for φs.
We compare ALM to both DANNs and SA on all datasets.
The SA algorithm takes a source and target as inputs and
returns a canonical feature representation. To make a rea-
sonable comparison, once in this space, we use a neural
network with the same architecture as used for fs in ALM
for classiﬁcation. Similarly, for DANNs, we ﬁx the trans-
formation, label classiﬁcation, and domain classiﬁcation
modules to have the same architecture as φs, fs, and Ds,
respectively. While these architectures are certainly not de-
signed to be optimal for each application, we kept them
ﬁxed as a control to highlight the relative performance of
the various domain adaptation approaches and the general-
ity of our solution.
We also include accuracies of the approximate labeling ˆY ⋆
as well as fs(X⋆), that is, fs applied to the target directly,
without transformation by φs. Finally, we report the results
of a “target only” experiment (denoted TO in the tables),
in which the target domain is used for both training and
testing (still using the same architecture as fs). These ac-
curacies are computed using twenty-fold cross validation.
The purpose of this design is to show for comparison how
well a model can perform when training and test examples

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
come from the same distribution.
The domain adaptation techniques used here, especially
DANNs and ALM, can be hyperparameter sensitive. The
unsupervised approximation of these kinds of values is an
active area of research outside the scope of this work. To
obtain accuracy values, we ran each algorithm 100 times
with randomly-chosen hyperparameters for each source-
target pair, and reported the best results. As an aside, we
did notice that the value of Ds(φs(X⋆)), the discrimina-
tor’s conﬁdence that the transformed target samples are in-
deed target samples, tends to correlate strongly with accu-
racy in both ALM and DANN: exploiting this observation
for hyperparameter tuning would be an interesting direction
for future research. All neural networks were implemented
in Torch (Collobert et al., 2011) and optimized using the
Adam variant of SGD (Kingma & Ba, 2015).
4.2. Sentiment Classiﬁcation
In the sentiment dataset, we are provided with product re-
views from amazon.com (Blitzer et al., 2007). All re-
views come from items in either Amazon’s book, DVD,
electronics, or kitchen departments, and data from each de-
partment contains 2,000 samples; each department is a sep-
arate domain. Each review is represented as term frequen-
cies for a speciﬁed vocabulary. The goal is to distinguish
between positive and negative reviews.
Because there are multiple sources available in this prob-
lem, we used a pseudo-supervised rough labeling (see Sec-
tion 2.1) for ALM. However, because of this choice, for
a ﬁxed source-target pair, ˆY ⋆implicitly uses more infor-
mation than DANNs and SA, which only use information
from that single source. Thus, we also present results with
reﬁnement of SA and DANN labelings.
We ﬁnd that, for this task, DANN generally outperforms
SA, sometimes by a large margin (Table 1). ALM consis-
tently achieves a higher accuracy than the rough labeling
used during its optimization, regardless of the procedure
used to generate that labeling.
4.3. Digit Classiﬁcation
In this experiment, we are supplied with standard MNIST
digits, as well as handwritten binary digits extracted from
USPS parcels. These two datasets look very similar (Fig-
ure 4), but a classiﬁer trained on one still performs signif-
icantly worse on the other. Digits from the USPS domain
are 16 pixels smaller in both dimensions than MNIST im-
ages, so we zero-pad them by 8 pixels on each side for
preprocessing.
Because only one source is available, we use reﬁnement
of SA to acquire rough labels ˆY ⋆.
To obtain image
features, we convolutionally embed both datasets into
Table 1. Percent accuracies for the sentiment classiﬁcation
task. Here, D, B, E, and K represent the DVD, Book, Electron-
ics, and Kitchen Appliances domains respectively. Pairs of letters
(e.g., DB) correspond to using the DVD domain as a source for
labeling the Books domain, which is used as a target. ALMp,
ALMs, and ALMd show the result of performing ALM using a
pseudo-supervised rough labeling ˆY ⋆, reﬁnement of SA, and re-
ﬁnement of DANN, respectively. Average accuracies are shown
in the last row.
TO
fs(X⋆)
ˆY ⋆
ALMp
DANN
ALMd
SA
ALMs
DB
85.5
54.6
80.3
82.9
76.8
78.4
74.8
77.0
EB
85.5
52.0
80.3
82.8
63.1
67.1
65.2
66.0
KB
85.5
55.6
80.3
82.7
65.1
65.7
67.6
70.5
BD
82.3
55.0
80.2
82.7
80.0
81.2
74.5
76.4
ED
82.3
53.9
80.2
83.2
66.1
68.0
63.9
64.3
KD
82.3
55.6
80.2
82.6
67.2
68.4
60.1
61.4
BE
81.8
50.7
82.8
85.2
68.9
69.1
62.0
66.6
DE
81.8
54.4
82.8
84.9
70.2
70.3
64.8
65.0
KE
81.8
65.8
82.8
85.1
76.2
79.1
54.3
56.2
BK
80.0
53.6
87.0
89.0
75.1
75.4
64.4
68.6
DK
80.0
54.4
87.0
89.2
71.5
72.2
56.6
60.0
EK
80.0
60.9
87.0
89.2
76.2
78.7
55.6
56.7
82.4
55.4
82.6
85.0
76.2
72.8
63.7
65.7
Figure 4. Example MNIST and USPS digit images. The top row
shows MNIST images and the bottom row shows USPS images.
The USPS images are actually 16x16 pixels, so they were scaled
to the same size as MNIST for this ﬁgure.
84 dimensions. This is done by training a convolutional
network of the LeNet-5 (LeCun et al., 1998) architecture
on the source data, then taking the activations in the layer
before the output layer as a new representation of both the
source and the target (Table 2).
Our results show that even in a situation where the source
and target appear very similar, domain adaptation could
be used to improve test accuracy.
We ﬁnd that ALM
achieves a more favorable result than that produced by
other techniques on these digit datasets.
4.4. Ofﬁce Object Classiﬁcation
The Stanford Ofﬁce dataset consists of images of 31 differ-
ent objects typically found around an ofﬁce (Saenko et al.,
2010). It is composed of three domains, pictures taken by
a low-quality webcam, a high-quality DSLR camera, and
product images from amazon.com (Figure 5).
The webcam, DSLR, and Amazon domains consist of 795,

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
Table 2. Percent accuracies for the digit classiﬁcation task.
The ﬁrst row of results correspond to treating USPS images as
a target and the second row corresponds to using MNIST images
as a target. Average accuracies are shown in the last row.
TO
fs(X⋆)
ALM
DANN
SA
U
90.8
90.0
94.5
92.4
93.1
M
88.0
86.9
89.7
87.8
88.3
89.2
88.5
92.2
90.1
90.7
498, and 2,817 images, respectively.
Because state-of-
the-art image classiﬁers typically require much more data
to train than is available here, we use a network of the
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) architecture that has
been trained on the ImageNet dataset as a feature extractor.
As in the previous experiment, we pass each image through
the network and use the activations at the last hidden layer
as a lower-dimensional representation of the data. In this
section, we use reﬁnement of SA for the rough labeling ˆY ⋆.
Figure 5. Example images for 20 (randomly chosen) of the 31
classes in the Ofﬁce Dataset. Classes from top left to bottom
right are ring binder, pen, printer, laptop computer, helmet, paper
notebook, trash can, speaker, desk chair, projector, desktop com-
puter, bookshelf, mobile phone, monitor, stapler, phone, mouse,
keyboard, ﬁle cabinet, and letter tray. The top two rows of images
are from the webcam domain, and tend to look overexposed and
washed-out, while more balanced images on the third and fourth
rows are generated from the DSLR domain. The last two rows of
images correspond to Amazon product images, which generally
feature a white background.
In these results, the most challenging source-target pairs are
those that involve the Amazon domain (Table 3). Unlike
the webcam and DSLR domains, Amazon images could
contain more than a single object, and that object may not
resemble typical items found around an ofﬁce. Even in
these difﬁcult situations, we ﬁnd that ALM performs as
well or better than other methods.
Table 3. Percent accuracies for the object classiﬁcation task.
Here, A, D, and W represent the Amazon, DSLR, and webcam
domains respectively. Paired notation (e.g., DA) corresponds to
using the DSLR domain as a source for labeling target Amazon
domain. Average accuracies are shown in the last row.
TO
fs(X⋆)
ALM
DANN
SA
DA
69.5
30.1
35.9
35.3
35.2
WA
69.5
32.2
37.5
37.5
36.9
AD
77.4
42.0
53.6
47.0
49.4
WD
77.4
94.1
98.0
94.4
96.4
AW
80.0
38.3
48.1
43.8
45.9
DW
80.0
80.4
90.8
86.0
88.3
75.6
52.9
60.7
57.3
58.7
We note that these results are somewhat worse than those
reported in the original DANN article. In that work, a pre-
trained AlexNet is reﬁned during training as the transfor-
mation module, rather than used to produce an image em-
bedding and training a transformation module from scratch
as we do here (Ganin et al., 2016). Although not explored
in this work, we would expect a similar boost in perfor-
mance from using the alterantive approach with ALM.
4.5. MEG Signal Classiﬁcation
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) machines use magnetic
ﬁelds to measure the brain’s electrical activity and are fre-
quently used for experiments in neuroscience and psychol-
ogy. In the speciﬁc problem we consider, originally part of
an online competition, the data come from sixteen different
people who were shown either pictures of human faces or
non-faces (images with no discernible face-like structures)
while having their brain activities recorded using MEG.
Each subject’s data comprises a single domain, and the ob-
jective is to classify instances where a held-out subject was
looking at a face from those in which the subject was look-
ing at a non-face (Henson et al., 2011).
Domain adaptation is a problem that comes up frequently
in brain-computer interface problems in general, not just
those dealing with MEG data.
Advancing classiﬁca-
tion methods in this space could improve existing tech-
niques in areas like fMRI analysis, neuropsychiatric dis-
ease diagnosis, prosthetics, and human-computer interac-
tion (Sugiyama et al., 2007), where the locations of neurons
and voxels are often person-speciﬁc (Xu et al., 2012).
We represent this data according to the method discussed
by Barachant et al. (2013), which maps the raw time-series
data into 2,014 dimensions.
Source labels are used
to obtain this representation, so each held-out subject
operates in a different space. Figure 6 shows an example
representation embedded into two dimensions.
Each

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
domain contains between 500 and 600 samples.
These data, at least in an embedded space, seems to have
visual properties similar to the synthetic example discussed
earlier. Most domains appear to be rotated and translated
with respect to each other, and there is no geometric overlap
between them. This suggests that ALM might be particu-
larly well-suited for this problem.
Unlike in previous experiments, instead of reporting the ac-
curacy of a technique that performs domain adaptation on
a ﬁxed source and target, we average the hypotheses result-
ing from running that technique on each available source
and a ﬁxed target. For ALM, this average hypothesis is de-
scribed by Eqn. (2). In this problem we again use a pseudo-
supervised rough labeling as ˆY ⋆.
Figure 6. A visualization of the MEG data embedded into two
dimensions using t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008). Blue points
are positive source samples, orange points are negative source
samples, and purple and green points are positive and negative
target samples respectively. The data shows distinct clusters cor-
responding to each subject, making this a clear domain adaptation
problem. Target domain labels are shown here for clarity, but the
classiﬁer does not have access to labels from the target dataset.
We also compare to stacked generalization, which in
the MEG literature is often used to solve such problems
(Olivetti et al., 2014).
In this hierarchical approach,
a separate base classiﬁer is trained on each of the k
available sources.
The predictions of these k classiﬁers
on all available source samples are then aggregated and
used as a k-dimensional feature space for a higher-level
classiﬁer. Again, all models are MLPs with one hidden
layer composed of 50 nodes.
ALM outperforms other techniques on this data by a mar-
gin larger than in any of the preceding experiments (Ta-
ble 4).
Table 4. Percent accuracies for the MEG classiﬁcation task.
Each row presents results corresponding to holding out the de-
noted subject as a target and averaging the hypotheses resulting
from performing domain adaptation with each available source.
For this experiment we also include the results of stacked gener-
alization, shown below as SG. Average accuracies are shown in
the last row.
TO
fs(X⋆)
ˆY ⋆
ALM
DANN
SA
SG
S01
85.6
75.1
77.2
85.2
77.1
76.3
72.7
S02
80.7
66.4
64.8
74.7
69.9
66.8
62.1
S03
82.9
59.8
61.1
73.0
65.2
64.0
57.1
S04
90.5
72.2
72.2
90.6
79.9
75.9
80.4
S05
86.2
66.5
66.0
82.5
76.1
70.8
62.9
S06
86.1
69.0
66.1
75.7
70.4
73.1
63.4
S07
86.1
53.9
69.9
83.0
68.7
70.0
53.7
S08
87.3
70.8
66.8
82.4
76.8
71.9
64.9
S09
88.2
73.7
71.7
84.1
79.4
73.7
76.1
S10
87.7
64.0
68.6
81.4
75.0
71.3
60.5
S11
78.7
62.5
67.4
72.5
64.4
72.5
59.3
S12
84.0
78.4
76.9
86.2
76.4
74.7
75.1
S13
83.3
69.9
67.8
79.3
75.0
72.9
70.2
S14
91.4
73.6
74.5
88.6
79.6
74.4
72.9
S15
90.7
65.0
68.2
83.6
72.7
70.7
67.4
S16
88.2
56.1
63.0
78.0
66.1
67.4
58.6
86.1
67.3
68.9
81.3
73.3
71.6
66.1
5. Discussion and Future Work
In this article, we presented approximate label matching,
a novel and powerful technique for unsupervised domain
adaptation.
In our results, we found that the performance of ALM is
never worse than that of the rough labeling used in its opti-
mization. In several cases, ALM was only able to improve
ˆY ⋆slightly, highlighting the difﬁculty of the unsupervised
domain adaptation task. Still, our approach can be used in
conjunction with any domain adaptation technique. In our
results, ALM outperformed other state-of-the-art domain
adaptation methods, sometimes by a substantial margin.
Separately, it might be useful to apply this algorithm
iteratively to see if performance continues to improve. In
that setting, the output of the current iteration of ALM
would be the approximate labeling used for the next
iteration of ALM.
Although we only address unsupervised domain adaptation
in this article, our approach could be straightforwardly
modiﬁed to accommodate supervised or semi-supervised
situations as well. For supervised domain adaptation, we
could learn a transformation by simply setting ˆY ⋆to the
true labels of the target.
Similarly, in semi-supervised
situations, the available target labels could be used to
supplement the source data when learning ˆY ⋆.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using Approximate Label Matching
