Transfer Learning for Prosthetics Using Imitation Learning
Waleed D. Khamies1, Monatser Mohammedalamen1, Benjamin Rosman2
1University of Khartoum, 2University of Witwatersrand, CSIR

Abstract— In this paper, We Apply Reinforcement learning
(RL) techniques to train a realistic biomechanical model to
work with different people and on different walking environ-
ments. We benchmarking 3 RL algorithms: Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG), Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) in OpenSim
environment, Also we apply imitation learning to a prosthetics
domain to reduce the training time needed to design customized
prosthetics. We use DDPG algorithm to train an original
expert agent. We then propose a modiﬁcation to the Dataset
Aggregation (DAgger) algorithm to reuse the expert knowledge
and train a new target agent to replicate that behaviour in
fewer than 5 iterations, compared to the 100 iterations taken
by the expert agent which means reducing training time by
95%. Our modiﬁcations to the DAgger algorithm improve the
balance between exploiting the expert policy and exploring
the environment. We show empirically that these improve
convergence time of the target agent, particularly when there
is some degree of variation between expert and naive agent.
I. INTRODUCTION
A.
Problem Deﬁnition
Limbs are hugely valuable to many people, in that they
improve mobility and the ability to manage daily activities, as
well as provide the means to stay independent. It is costly
(50K USD) and time-consuming for the manufacturers to
design artiﬁcial limbs customized for one person, Designing
intelligence prosthetics which deal with the large differences
between humans (like human body dimensions, weights,
height and walking styles) is so complicated by the large
variability in response among many individuals. One key
reason for this is that our understanding of the interactions
between humans and prostheses is not well-understood,
which limits our ability to predict how a human will adapt his
or her movement. Physics-based, biomechanical simulations
are well-positioned to advance this ﬁeld as it allows for many
experiments to be run at low cost.
B. Environment
We use OpenSim ProstheticsEnv environment, which
models one human leg and prosthetic in another leg see
in ﬁg(1), OpenSim is a 3D human model simulator, which
consists of observations of joints, muscles and tendons, 19
actions, and the reward Rt is the negative distance from the
desired velocity in eq( 1).
Rt = 9 −(3 −Vt)2
(1)
where Vt is the horizontal velocity vector of the pelvis.
OpenSim environment has a limitation it is very slow to run
due to the high number of observations and state variables.
Fig. 1.
OpenSim ProstheticEnv Environment.
C. Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms
Reinforcement Learning (RL) will help prosthetics to
calibrate with differences between humans and differences
between walking environments [1], RL is a machine learning
paradigm, where an agent learns the optimal policy for
performing a sequential decision making without complete
knowledge of the environment [2]. The agent must explore
the environment by taking action At and edit the policy
according to the reward function to maximize the reward
Rt. We use the DDPG algorithm [3], TRPO and PPO to
train the agent. DDPG is a model-free, off-policy actor-critic
algorithm using deep function approximators that can learn
policies in high-dimensional, continuous action spaces.
D. Imitation Learning
The main problem with RL algorithms is the time needed
to solve the problem -training time- because the algorithm
must explore the environment and adapt its policy according
to the reward at every timestep. Imitation learning is a
speciﬁc subset of RL where the learner tries to mimic an
experts action in order to achieve the best performance. The
main advantage of DAgger is that the expert teaches the
learner how to recover from past mistakes [4], and we aim
to leverage this to illustrate behaviour learning. There are
many ways to accelerate the learning process in RL, such as
Cross-Domain Transfer [2], Inter-task Mapping via Artiﬁcial
Neural Network (ANN) [5]. We use Imitation learning to
achieve that by implementing DAgger algorithm. The DAg-
ger algorithm has shown to be able to achieve expert-level
performance after a few data aggregation iterations [6]. To
use imitation learning there are two assumptions:
1) Similarity between the expert and the target agent in
actions, observations space and the reward function.
arXiv:1901.04772v1  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2019

2) Environment must be described by a Markov Decision
Process (MDP).
In the standard DAgger algorithm, the target agent exploits
the expert policy and stops exploring the environment. This
may be a problem, as the target agent should balance between
exploitation and exploration. We propose some improve-
ments to the DAgger algorithm to encourage the exploration.
II. EXPERIMENTS
We run the following experiments:1
1) Run RL algorithms (DDPG, TRPO and PPO) in
OpenSim ProstheticsEnv, 2,000 episodes and 1,000
timesteps in the episode to give an agent more time
to walk or stand up.
2) we trained a DDPG agent to achieve positive reward
(around +100) in the standing up task.
3) we use that agent as an expert to evaluate the DAgger
algorithm.
4) we modify DAgger so that the expert agent labels the
target agents actions based on the timestep reward, by
comparing between the timestep reward of the expert
agent and the target agent on a given timestep: if the
expert agent has less reward than the target agent, the
expert keeps the target agents action and the opposite
is true.
5) we use the target action value instead of timestep
reward to do the comparison, and we sum the timestep
rewards from a given state and action pair until the end
of the episode
6) we used the epsilon-greedy method [2], where the
algorithm has the choice to select between taking the
target action with a probability 1−ϵ or the expert action
with a probability ϵ.
III. RESULTS
The maximum reward mean achieved by TRPO (see table I
and ﬁg 2), but it takes more time comparing with PPO and
DDPG because it need to ﬁnd the inverse of matrix which
takes time. Although of this reward the agent can not walk
for more than one step and sometimes it falls before the
ﬁrst step. Dagger algorithm achieved the best average reward
comparing with other algorithms which balance between
exploiting and exploring (see ﬁg 3), we think the reasons
behind that:
1) The expert policy has a high reward.
2) The high similarity between expert and naive agent.
3) The naive agent needs more time to run by increasing
the number of iterations.
The main problem with timestep reward modiﬁcation, it
compares timestep reward (short-term) adding to this the
large variation between timesteps. When the variation be-
tween episodes is small in Action-value. The naive agent
has gotten a reward greater than the expert agent, so roles
can be exchanged, the expert can be naive and the naive can
1codes
available
at
github.com/montaserFath/
Reinforcement-Learning-for-Prosthetics
be an expert which will decrease training time signiﬁcantly.
Fig. 2.
Number of Iterations VS Reward Mean in OpenSim ProstheticsEnv
Environment.
Algorithm
Maximum reward
Mean reward
DDPG
113
-42
TRPO
194
43
PPO
70
-58
TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN ALGORITHMS IN PROSTHETICSENV.
Fig. 3.
Comparison between DAagger algorithm, Timestep Reward, action
value and Epsilon-greedy
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have applied imitation learning in a humanoid en-
vironment to accelerate the learning process. The naive
agent reaches convergence within 5 iterations while the
expert reaches it after 100 iterations which means reducing
training time by 95%. The DAgger algorithm achieved the
best average reward comparing with other algorithms which
balance between exploiting and exploring, these algorithms
will work better when there is some degree of variation
between expert and naive agent and this is what we are
planning to do in the future by apply imitation learning from
normal human legs to prosthetic, the main challenge will be
how to ﬁgure out the differences and similarities between it.

V. RESEARCH LIMITATIONS
1) The prosthetic model can not walk for large distances
even can falls before completing the ﬁrst step.
2) Each experiment runs for one time, So we are planing
to repeat each experiment number of times with differ-
ent random seeds and take the average and variance.
3) We used same hyperparameters for all algorithm to
benchmark algorithms, we need to select the best
hyperparameters for each algorithm and environment.
4) We benchmarcked three RL algorithms only and from
one library(ChainerRL). So we are planing to use
different implementations.
