1
Notice: This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible
publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
arXiv:2001.03366v1  [eess.SP]  10 Jan 2020

2
Sparse Vector Transmission: An Idea Whose
Time Has Come
Wonjun Kim†, Hyoungju Ji∗, Hyojin Lee∗, Younsun Kim∗, Juho Lee∗, and
Byonghyo Shim†
†Institute of New Media and Communications and Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
∗Samsung Research Seoul R&D Center, Seoul, Korea
Abstract
In recent years, we are witnessing bewildering variety of automated services and applications of
vehicles, robots, sensors, and machines powered by the artiﬁcial intelligence technologies. Communica-
tion mechanism associated with these services is dearly distinct from human-centric communications.
One important feature for the machine-centric communications is that the amount of information to be
transmitted is tiny. In view of the short packet transmission, relying on today’s transmission mechanism
would not be efﬁcient due to the waste of resources, large decoding latency, and expensive operational
cost. In this article, we present an overview of the sparse vector transmission (SVT), a scheme to transmit
a short-sized information after the sparse transformation. We discuss basics of SVT, two distinct SVT
strategies, viz., frequency-domain sparse transmission and sparse vector coding with detailed operations,
and also demonstrate the effectiveness in realistic wireless environments.
This work was supported by ’The Cross-Ministry Giga KOREA Project’ grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.
GK18P0500, Development of Ultra Low-Latency Radio Access Technologies for 5G URLLC Service).

3
I. INTRODUCTION
These days, automated things such as vehicles, drones, sensors, machines, and robots, com-
bined with artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies, have found their way into almost every
industry. Remarkable growth of business models using autonomous machines is accelerating the
need for communication between machines as well as machine to human communications [1].
One important feature of machine-centric communications over the long-standing human-oriented
communications is that the amount of information to be transmitted is tiny. For example,
information to be exchanged in the autonomous driving, robot, smart factory, and home appliance
is in a form of control and command-type information such as start/stop, turn on/off, move
left/right, speed up/slow down, shift, and rotate. Typically, required information bit in these
applications is in the range of 10 ∼100 bits. Information acquired from the sensors (e.g.,
temperature, pressure, speed, gas density) is in the order of 10 bits. Also, similar sized packets
are used in many feedback or control channels (e.g., ACK/NACK feedback in 4G LTE/5G NR
PUCCH [2], [3]).
Crucial observation in these applications is that conventional transmission mechanism is unduly
complicated and inefﬁcient, resulting in a waste of resources, transmit power, and processing
latency. Shannon’s channel coding theorem, governing principle of todays packet transmission,
is based on the law of large numbers so that it works properly only when the packet size is
sufﬁciently large. In fact, when the packet length is short, noise introduced by the channel
cannot be averaged out properly, degrading the packet reception quality substantially (see, e.g.,
information theoretic analysis in [4]). Further, in the ultra short-packet transmission regime, size
of the non-payload (pilot signals and control data) easily exceeds the payload size so that the
cost caused by the non-payload outweighs the cost of payload. In particular, in some applica-
tions requiring high reliability (e.g., ultra-reliable and low latency communications (URLLC)
in 5G [5]), cost caused by the pilot signaling increases sharply, further degrading the resource
utilization efﬁciency. Without doubt, relying on today’s transmission mechanism would not be
efﬁcient due to the waste of resources, large decoding latency, and also expensive operational
cost.
Our intent in this article is to introduce new type of short packet transmission scheme referred
to as sparse vector transmission (SVT). Key idea of SVT is to transmit the short-sized information
after the sparse vector transformation. Using the principle of compressed sensing (CS), we

4
decode the packet using a small number of resources. SVT has a number of advantages over the
conventional transmission strategies; it is simple to implement, reduces the transmission latency
as well as the encoding/decoding complexity. When the position of a sparse vector is used to
encode the information exclusively, decoding can be done without the channel knowledge, saving
the pilot transmission overhead and the channel estimation effort. Further, SVT can inherently
improve the user identiﬁcation quality and security. In a nutshell, SVT is a viable solution for
massive machine-type communication (mMTC) and URLLC scenarios having many advantages
over the conventional packet transmission mechanism.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we explain the principle of sparse
vector transmission. In Section III and IV, we discuss two distinct SVT strategies: the frequency
domain sparse transmission and sparse vector coding. We present the future research direction
and conclusion in Section V.
II. PRINCIPLE OF SPARSE VECTOR TRANSMISSION
In this section, we discuss the basic principle of SVT. After the brief review of the CS principle,
we explain two types of SVT schemes: frequency-domain sparse transmission and sparse vector
coding.
A. Basics of Compressed Sensing
A system with m-dimensional measurement vector y and n-dimensional input vector s given
by
y = As
where A is the system (sensing) matrix relating the input vector s and the measurement vector
y. If A is a tall or square matrix, meaning that the dimension of y is larger than or equal to the
dimension of s (m ≥n), one can recover s using the conventional techniques (e.g., Gaussian
elimination) as long as the sensing matrix is a full rank. However, if the matrix A is fat (m < n),
meaning that the number of unknowns is larger than the dimension of observation vector, it is
in general not possible to ﬁnd out the unique solution since there exist inﬁnitely many possible
solutions. In this pathological scenario where the inverse problem is ill-posed, sparsity of an
input vector comes to the rescue. A vector s is called sparse if the number of nonzero entries is
sufﬁciently smaller than the dimension of the vector. If a vector s is k-sparse, meaning that there

5
Fig. 1. System models for SVT schemes (FDST and SVC).
are k nonzero elements in s, the measurement vector y is expressed as a linear combination of k
columns of A associated with the nonzero entries of s. If the support Ωs (set of nonzero indices in
s) is known a priori by any chance, then by removing columns corresponding to the zero entries
in s, we can convert the underdetermined system into over-determined one and thus can ﬁnd out
the solution using the standard technique. CS theory asserts that as long as the sensing matrix
is generated at random, k-sparse vector can be recovered with m ≈ck log(n/k) measurements
(c is a constant). In performing the recovery task, ℓ1-norm minimization technique and greedy
sparse recovery algorithm (e.g., orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP)) have been popularly used
(see, e.g., [6]).
It is worth mentioning that underlying assumption in many CS-based studies is that the signal
is sparse in nature or can be sparsely represented in a properly chosen basis. Indeed, applications
of CS in wireless communications have been mainly on the recovery of naturally sparse signals
such as sparse millimetre wave channel estimation in angle and delay domains, angle (DoA/AoD)
estimation, and spectrum sensing [6]–[8]. Intriguing feature of SVT over these is to purposely
transmit the sparse vector to achieve the gain in performance, latency, and energy efﬁciency.

6
B. Two Types of SVT
Basically, there are two options in SVT. To ease our exposition, we discuss the orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) system, standard systems for 4G, 5G cellular and
WiFi systems, as a baseline. Nevertheless, main principle can be readily extended to different
transmission schemes. In the ﬁrst option, referred to as the frequency-domain sparse transmission
(FDST), information is embedded into a small number of subcarriers and then transmitted (see
Figure 1). In this case, composite of the channel matrix H and the IDFT matrix FH becomes
the sensing matrix so that the time-domain sample vector y = As+v = HFHs+v becomes the
measurement vector. While the symbol decoding in the conventional OFDM systems is initiated
after receiving all time-domain samples, sparse vector s in FDST can be recovered with a small
number of time-domain samples using the CS technique. Let P be the matrix taking early m
samples of y, then the vector of the ﬁrst m measurements is expressed as ˜y = Py (see Figure
1). For instance, if k = 16, n = 1024, and c = 4, then only 11% of samples (m ≈115) is
needed to decode s. In the second option, called the sparse vector coding (SVC), spreading
matrix C = [c1 · · · cn] is applied to the sparse vector s before the transmission (see Figure 1).
Each position in a vector s has its own spreading sequence ci so that the transmit vector can be
expressed as a linear combination of spreading sequences corresponding to nonzero symbols.
Distinctive feature of SVT over the conventional transmission scheme is that positions as well
as symbols can be employed to convey the information. By way of analogy, one can imagine
a process to generate the sparse vector as placing a few balls into the empty boxes. When we
try to put k balls in n boxes (k ≤n), we have
 n
k

choices, so that we can encode ⌊log2
 n
k

⌋
bits of information into the position of the sparse vector s. Suppose the modulation order is the
same for all nonzero positions (say bs bit per symbol), then kbs bits can be encoded to the active
symbols (symbols in the nonzero positions) so that one SVT block conveys kbs +⌊log2
 n
k

⌋bits
in total.
There are various options to encode the information in SVT. One simple option is to use both
positions and active symbols in the information transmission. Alternatively, one can map the
user ID (UID) to the positions and the rest information to the active symbols to elegantly divide
the user identiﬁcation process and information decoding. Yet another option is to embed the
message to the positions and the parity bits for the error detection and correction to the active
symbols.

7
III. FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPARSE TRANSMISSION
In this section, we discuss the FDST scheme in detail. In contrast to the conventional OFDM
systems, FDST transmits the information in a form of a sparse vector and then uses the CS
technique to decode the input sparse vector. We ﬁrst discuss the system model and then explain
the FDST decoding and environment-aware user identiﬁcation, an approach to simplify the user
identiﬁcation process using environmental information.
A. System Model
As discussed, the system model for FDST is y = HFHs + v. Due to the addition of the
cyclic preﬁx, H is a circulant matrix and thus can be eigen-decomposed by DFT basis. That
is, H = FHΛF where F is the DFT matrix and Λ is the diagonal matrix (λii represents the
channel of i-th subcarrier). The corresponding system model is expressed as y = FHΛs + v.
Since the supports of s and Λs are the same, by letting x = Λs, the system model is converted
to y = FHx + v. Recalling that CS operates with far fewer measurements than the conventional
techniques require, a small part of y is enough to recover x. From the principle of CS, the
recovery performance depends heavily on the quality of sensing matrix. As a metric to evaluate
the sensing matrix, mutual coherence deﬁned as the largest magnitude of normalized inner
product between two distinct columns of sensing matrix is widely used [6]. As long as we
choose consecutive samples, the mutual coherence of IDFT submatrix (PFH) remains constant
so that the recovery performance would not be affected by the choice of samples in y. Hence,
one can use early arrived samples to achieve a reduction in transmission and decoding latencies
(see Figure 2). Since this is a standard setting for CS, any sparse recovery algorithm can be
employed to decode x from ˜y.
B. FDST Decoding
Basically, decoding of FDST consists of two steps; in the ﬁrst step, support of x is identiﬁed
by the sparse recovery algorithm. For example, greedy sparse recovery algorithm identiﬁes one
column (position of a vector) of the sensing matrix in each iteration. In our case, a column of
PFH that is maximally correlated with the measurement vector is chosen. Once the support Ωx
of x (equivalently the support Ωs of s) is identiﬁed, by removing components associated with
the zero entries in s, an over-determined system model to decode the symbol s can be obtained.

8
Fig. 2. Illustration of the FDST-based short packet transmission in the TDD systems (k = 3).
In the decoding of s, conventional technique such as the linear minimum mean square error
(LMMSE) estimator followed by the symbol slicer can be used for the symbol detection.
In the mapping of the UID to the support, one can consider the environment-aware user
identiﬁcation (EA-UI). Key idea of EA-UI is to use a support Ωs derived from the environ-
mental information as a UID. By the environmental information, we mean the information
obtained from wireless environments such as channel impulse response (CIR), angle (AoD,
DoA), location, delay spread, to name just a few. EA-UI is conceptually similar to the biometric
user identiﬁcation. Biometric identiﬁer, such as iris or ﬁngerprint, intrinsically representing the
unique identity of individuals body, can greatly simplify the user identiﬁcation process. Principle
of EA-UI is essentially the same since the environmental information is reﬂected in the support
of the transmit vector. One simple example, illustrated in Figure 2, is to choose positions of k
subcarriers having the largest channel gain as a support and use this as a UID. For example,
in TDD systems, base station (BS) can acquire the channel information (and thus UID) of

9
all mobile devices from the uplink pilot signals due to the channel reciprocity. In the uplink
scenario, therefore, BS can identify which mobile device has sent the packet by checking the
support (UID) of the received packet. Similarly, in the downlink scenario, mobile device can
easily check whether the packet is for itself by comparing the decoded support ˆΩx and its own
support Ωx.
EA-UI has several advantages; ﬁrst, it improves the security since the UID is derived from
naturally acquired environmental (channel) information. Second, in most physical channels (e.g.,
UE-speciﬁc channels like PDCCH, PDSCH in 4G LTE/5G NR [3]), BS sends the data together
with UID to notify which device the packet is delivered to. Since the EA-UI mechanism separates
the user identiﬁcation and data decoding elegantly, time and effort to decode whole packet just
for the user identiﬁcation purpose can be saved. Indeed, since EA-UI is done by the identiﬁcation
of the support in x, not by the accurate recovery of sparse vector s, support of x can be recovered
using ˜y and D = PFH (the submatrix of IDFT). Recalling that D is independent of the channel
and x = Λs, the channel estimation is unnecessary in the support detection. Third, since k
is in general very small, sparse recovery algorithm can quickly identify the support. Further,
transmission and decoding latency can be greatly reduced since only a small fraction of early
arrived (time-domain) samples is used for the packet decoding (see Figure 2).
As a ﬁnal note, one can easily add the error correction capability to EA-UI since the sparsity
of subcarriers lends itself to the addition of error correction mechanism. For example, when the
correlation between adjacent columns in D is large, which is true for the submatrix of IDFT, an
index of a column adjacent to the correct one can be chosen as a support element incorrectly.
Incorrect support element can also be chosen when the supports of BS and UE are slightly
different due to the channel estimation error or imperfect channel reciprocity. Since k is small
(k ≪n) in s, by relaxing the success condition in the support identiﬁcation, an error can be
corrected. Basic idea of this strategy is to replace the selected index ˆω with the nearest support
element ω ∈Ωx. In other words, as long as the mismatch level ˆω−ω is smaller than the properly
designed threshold, the error caused by the different supports can be corrected [9].
C. Numerical Performance Evaluation
In this subsection, we present the numerical results to evaluate the performance of FDST.
In our simulations, the OFDM systems (with 512 subcarriers) under the i.i.d. Rayleigh fading
channels are used. As performance measures, the block error rate (BLER) and the processing

10
TABLE I
SYSTEM SETUP FOR FDST SIMULATIONS
FDST
PDCCH with convolution and turbo code (1/3 rate)
System model
5 MHz bandwidth, 15 kHz spacing, and 1 subframe = 1 ms
FFT size
512 (k = 36 in FDST)
Channel model
i.i.d Rayleigh fading channel
Number of bit
144
160 (144 for control information and 16 for UID)
Modulation scheme
16-QAM
QPSK
Fig. 3. BLER of URLLC packet transmission (m = 256).
latency (see Table I for detailed setup) are considered. In Figure 3, the BLER of FDST and
PDCCH in 4G LTE are compared. In our simulations, sizes of payload and non-payload are set
to 144 and 16 bits, respectively. Due to the selective use of good subchannels and also properly
designed error correction mechanism, FDST outperforms PDCCH by a large margin, achieving
more than 5 dB gain when BLER is 10−2. We next evaluate the average processing latency
deﬁned as the sum of the buffering latency and decoding latency for one OFDM symbol. The
processing latencies of FDST for m = 256 (73.4µs) and m = 128 (36.7µs) are reduced by the
factor of 56% and 78% over the LTE PDCCH (166.8µs), respectively. In practice, to decode
a packet in 4G LTE/5G NR systems, we need to receive 7 (4G LTE) or 2 (5G NR) OFDM

11
Fig. 4. The block diagram for the SVC transceiver using the deep neural network.
symbols while only one symbol is enough for the proposed FDST so that the latency gain of
FDST is pronounced. We note that, since the required number of samples in the receiver is
small, the base station does not need to transmit whole samples, resulting in the saving of the
transmit power.
IV. SPARSE VECTOR CODING
In this section, we discuss the SVC transmission scheme. Distinctive feature of SVC over
FDST is to transmit the sparse vector after the random spreading. We ﬁrst discuss the basic
SVC operation and then explain the deep neural network based SVC decoding.
A. Basics of SVC
Key idea behind SVC is to transmit the short-sized packet after the sparse vector transformation
and compression. To be speciﬁc, an information vector is mapped to the sparse vector and then

12
transmitted after the pseudo random spreading (see Figure 4). In view of this, one can consider
SVC as a reminiscent of CDMA. However, major difference is that the length of the spreading
sequence ci is far shorter than the size of an input vector s and only a few entries in s are nonzero.
Note, in contrast to FDST using the sub-matrix of IDFT as a sensing matrix, the sensing matrix
C = [c1 c2 · · · cn] of SVC is generated at random so that the vector Cs after the spreading
contains enough information to recover the sparse vector s. The input-output relationship of SVC
is y = HCs + v where H is the diagonal matrix where hii is the channel for i-th subcarrier
(e.g., resource element in LTE) and v is the additive Gaussian noise.
Major beneﬁt of SVC is that the decoding process can be greatly simpliﬁed when the channel
is approximately constant, which is true for most short packet transmission scenarios. Note that
when the channel is approximately constant (i.e., H ≈hI), the system model can be simpliﬁed
to y ≈hCs + v = Cx + v where x = hs.
Validity of this system model can be fortiﬁed when the packet is transmitted in a narrowband
channel or approximately static environments. In fact, when the packet transmission time Tp is
smaller than the channel coherence time Tc (Tc ≫Tp), channel can be readily assumed to be
a constant. For example, when the carrier frequency fc = 1.8 GHz and the mobile speed is
ν = 10 km/h, then Tc ≈11 ms is much larger than the duration of one LTE OFDM symbol
(≈0.07 ms) [10], which justiﬁes the validity of this approximation.
Suppose an information is embedded only in the positions of s. Then the decoding task is
to ﬁnd out the support Ωs of s (equivalently Ωx). Fortunately, since the system matrix C does
not contain the channel components, the support identiﬁcation can be done without the channel
knowledge, resulting in savings of the resources and power for the pilot transmission, not to
mention the saving the trouble for the channel estimation. Also, SVC is also good ﬁt for the
small cell deployed scenarios or cell-edge environments since the randomly spread sparse vector
is robust to the co-channel interference.
B. SVC Decoding with Deep Neural Network
In the SVC packet decoding, we can basically use any sparse signal recovery algorithm. In
most sparse recovery algorithms, such as OMP, an index of a column in C that is maximally
correlated to the measurement y is chosen as an estimate of the support element [11], [12].
Thus, if two columns of C are strongly correlated and only one of these is associated with the
nonzero values in s, then it might not be easy to distinguish the right column from wrong one.

13
Clearly, support identiﬁcation performance depends heavily on the correlation between columns
of C. In fact, when a packet is transmitted using a small amount of resources, underdetermined
ratio m/n of the system will increase sharply, causing a severe degradation in the decoding
performance.
To address this problem, we employ a deep neural network (DNN), an outstanding tool
to approximate the complicated and nonlinear function. Particularly, in this work, we use a
convolutional neural network (CNN) due to its computation efﬁciency [13]. In the training phase,
CNN learns the nonlinear mapping function g between the received signal y and support Ω(see
Figure 4). The support identiﬁcation problem can be expressed as ˆΩ= g(y; Θ) where Θ is the
set of weights and biases. In order to ﬁnd out the network parameters Θ that approximate
the mapping function correctly, a received signal y passes through multiple hidden layers.
In each hidden layer, the relationship between input zi and output zo can be expressed as
zo = f(W ∗zi + b) where W and b are the weight and bias, respectively, f is the nonlinear
activation function (e.g., ReLu function), and ∗is the convolution operator. In order to achieve a
reduction in the computational complexity, the max pooling operation taking the maximal value
in the ﬁltered window is employed. It is now well-known from the universal approximation
theorem that DNN processed by the deeply stacked hidden layers well approximates the desired
function. In our context, this means that the trained neural network with multiple hidden layers
can handle the whole SVC decoding process, resulting in an accurate support identiﬁcation.
When one tries to use the deep learning techniques to the wireless communication systems
(e.g., packet decoding and channel estimation), there are two major problems in the training
phase. First, it is very difﬁcult to handle the randomness of the received vector y. Indeed, since
the channel depends heavily on the environmental factors such as frequency band and geometric
objects, DNN needs to learn a huge amount of channel training data. Fortunately, the SVC
decoding is essentially the same as the support identiﬁcation and all channel components are
contained in an input sparse vector x = hs. Thus, the DNN-based SVC decoding only needs
to learn the codebook matrix C (known in advance), not the channel statistics, which greatly
simpliﬁes the learning process and also improves accuracy.
Next, in the training phase, abundant amount of dataset is required to train the DNN. Using
the real received signals as training data would be a natural option but it requires huge training
overhead. For example, when gathering ten million received signals in LTE systems, it will take
more than 4 hours (1 ms subframe consisting of 14 symbols). Luckily, since the DNN-based

14
Fig. 5. The block diagram for the SVC transceiver using the deep neural network.
TABLE II
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS FOR DEEP-SVC
The number of ﬂops
Complexity for various input size
m = 42
m = 54
Deep-SVC
2mT

2q + p−1
p
−1 + (4q+1)L
p
−T −p
T 2

+ (4m + k + 3)n −k(k+1)
2
−1
1.36 × 105
1.75 × 105
OMP
2mnk + k(k + 1)(4m2 + 3m −1)/2 + km3 −2k
1.86 × 105
3.71 × 105
SVC decoding is not so sensitive to the channel variations, the training vectors can be generated
synthetically and then used in the ofﬂine training phase. In doing so, time and effort to collect
huge training data can be prevented.
C. Numerical Performance Evaluation
In this subsection, we examine the BLER performance of SVC-encoded short packet in the
downlink of OFDM systems. For comparison, we also test the PDCCH of 4G LTE systems
and 5G NR system (using polar code) under AWGN channel condition. In the 4G PDCCH, the
convolution code with rate 1/3 with the 16-bit CRC is used. In the SVC scheme, the binary
codebook generated from the Bernoulli distribution is employed. Also, we set m = 42, n = 96,
and k = 2 for 12 bits transmission. In the decoding of the SVC-encoded packet, one-dimensional

15
CNN consisting of 6 hidden layers whose size is 84 (twice as m) and convolution ﬁlter whose
size is 3 are employed. In Figure 5, we observe that the DNN-based SVC outperforms the
conventional schemes, achieving 0.5 dB gain over the conventional SVC scheme, 3.3 dB gain
over the PDCCH with convolutional code, and 1.2 dB gain over the PDCCH with polar code at
BLER=10−5.
In Table 2, we compare the computational complexities of the proposed Deep-SVC and
conventional OMP algorithm under the simulation setup. Here, the number of ﬁlters T and
pooling size p are set to 32 and 2, respectively. In order to examine the overall behaviour, we
compute the required ﬂoating point operations (ﬂops) for various input sizes (m = 42, 54). We
observe that the complexity of Deep-SVC is much smaller than that of OMP. For example, when
m = 54, the complexity of the proposed scheme is 53% lower than that of the OMP algorithm.
It is worth mentioning that the complexity of the proposed scheme depends heavily on the DNN
network parameter (e.g., L and T), not the system parameter (m and k). For instance, when m
increases from 42 to 54, the computational complexity of the Deep-SVC changes slightly but
that of OMP algorithm increases signiﬁcantly.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION
In this article, we presented an overview of the sparse vector transmission suitable for the
short packet transmission in machine-centric communication scenarios (mMTC and URLLC).
We discussed basics of SVT, two distinct SVT approaches (FDST and SVC) with detailed
operations, and also demonstrated the effectiveness of SVT in realistic wireless environments.
We observed that SVT is an effective means to transmit the short packet having many advantages
over the conventional transmission scheme yet much work remains to be done. For example,
we did not elaborate the coding schemes in this work. Perhaps simplest option is to combine
the channel coding scheme and SVT mechanically. Better option would be to consider the
correlation of the sensing matrix and the quality of channel in the sparse vector generation and
decoding. In designing the coding scheme, we can recycle the wasted information (i.e., bit loss
log2
 n
k

−⌊log2
 n
k

⌋). Note that b bits are mapped into k positions of n-dimensional vector so
that
 n
k

−2b choices are wasted. By the deliberate mapping of these choices to the information
bits, decoding error probability can be reduced. Also, SVT can simplify complicated transmission
procedure. For instance, SVT can be used as a grant signal in the user scheduling process. It
can also be used as a grant-free uplink transmission of the short packet.

16
As communication between machines proliferates, short packet transmission will be more
popular and will eventually be a dominating transmission mode in machine-centric wireless
systems. We believe that the proposed SVT would serve as a useful tool in the machine
communication era.
