Janus: Automatic Ontology Builder from XSD files 
Ivan Bedini 
Orange Labs, 
 France 
(+33) 2 31 75 95 41 

Benjamin Nguyen 
PRiSM Laboratory, 
University of Versailles, France 
(+33) 1 39 25 40 49 

Georges Gardarin 
PRiSM Laboratory, 
University of Versailles, France 
(+33) 1 39 25 40 54 

 
ABSTRACT 
The construction of a reference ontology for a large domain still 
remains an hard human task. The process is sometimes assisted by 
software tools that facilitate the information extraction from a 
textual corpus. Despite of the great use of XML Schema files on 
the internet and especially in the B2B domain, tools that offer a 
complete semantic analysis of XML schemas are really rare. In 
this paper we introduce Janus, a tool for automatically building a 
reference knowledge base starting from XML Schema files. Janus 
also provides different useful views to simplify B2B application 
integration. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.3.3 [Programming Languages]: Language Constructs and 
Features 
– 
Data 
models, 
Semantics, 
Dynamic 
storage 
management.  
General Terms 
Algorithms, Management, Experimentation. 
Keywords 
Ontology, XML Mining, Application Integration. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Over the past ten years, the Semantic Web wave has shown 
a new vision of ontology use for application integration 
systems. Researchers have produced several software tools 
for building ontologies (like Protégé [1]) and merging them 
two by two (like Mafra [2]) or producing alignments (like 
S-Match [3]). These solutions, as well as adopted ontology 
building methodologies, are mainly human or, as shown in 
[4], sometimes assisted by semi-automatic software tools.  
Limitations to their adoption for integration of internet and 
enterprise applications, among others reasons, are: (i) the 
lack of tools capable of extracting and acquiring 
information from a collection of XML files (the “de-facto” 
format for applications information exchange definition); 
(ii) the complexity of aligning and merging two or more 
knowledge sources, a task excessively consuming of 
computational time; (iii) the difficulty of validation based 
on background knowledge hard to produce and maintain.  
Janus, the tool that we have developed, implements a new 
approach to ontology generation capable of providing a 
solution to the limitations described above. It is able to 
automatically generate and maintain, (in a meta-model 
OWL compatible), a collective memory resource that 
facilitates the discovery of alignments for matching 
concepts in a given domain. The knowledge source is 
automatically acquired from an extensible set of XSD files. 
The aim of this short paper is to introduce Janus, how it 
works and to show some different views (produced by the 
tool) of knowledge automatically acquired.  
2. JANUS ARCHITECTURE 
Our tool implements an adaptation of several techniques 
originating 
from 
text 
mining 
and 
information 
retrieval/extraction fields, applied to XML files (that we 
call XML Mining). XML Mining is used to pre-process 
simple and compound statements defining XML tags, such 
as XSD elements and XSD complex types. It includes 
clustering methods based on a Galois Lattice to quickly 
discovery similarities between names and structures 
extracted from XML schemas.  
Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of Janus.  
 
f1
f2
f3
f4
Extract
Corpus
XSD Files
Families
Clusters of 
documents
Aquisition
Normalization
Filtering
Build Taxonomy
Build views
Merging
Transform
OWL
f1
f2
f3
f4
f1
f2
f3
f4
Extract
Corpus
XSD Files
Families
Clusters of 
documents
Aquisition
Normalization
Filtering
Build Taxonomy
Build views
Merging
Transform
OWL
 
Figure 1 - Janus overall architecture 
The algorithm generating a high level representation of 
XML Schema information sources is composed of three 
main steps. The first step is the Extraction task represented 
by the Extract arrow and Acquisition rectangle in Figure 1. 
It provides the knowledge needed to generate the ontology 
(concepts, properties and relationships). Implemented 
techniques for knowledge acquisition are a combination of 
different types, such as: NLP (Natural Language Process) 
for morphological and lexical analysis, association mining 
for calculating term frequencies and association rules, 
semantics for finding synonymy, and clustering for 
grouping semantic and structural similar concepts. 
The second step is Analysis represented by the 
Normalisation, Build Taxonomy and Filtering blocks in 
Figure 1. This step focuses on the matching of retrieved 
information and/or alignment of two or more existing 
families of concepts issued from different sources. This step 
requires techniques already used in the first stage, as syntax 
and semantic measures, to establish the best similarities; it 

also requires an analysis of concept structures to determine 
hierarchical relationships and identify common properties. 
The last step is Generation, represented by the Merging, 
Transform and Build View blocks in Figure 1. This step 
looks for concepts with evident affinities (e.g., concept fully 
included into another) to merge them. It transforms the 
meta-model used by the tool into a semantic network that 
can be described in RDFS or OWL. The tool can derive 
from the network useful views provided to users.  
Users can also step into the process to parameterize 
thresholds for refining results.  
3. FUNCTIONALITIES and VIEWS 
The tool currently offers three visualization methods to 
view the acquired knowledge. The word view shows the 
list of terms composing the "ontology", and tag clouds 
(both in Figure 2). The table view gives detailed 
information about each concept (like frequencies, family 
attendance, source instances and direct relationships) . The 
graph view diplays the semantic network (Figure 3). Other 
views, “Concepts Social Network”, are under development.  
 
 
Figure 2 - Janus GUI – List and Tag Cloud Overview 
The graph view can show the whole graph or only the part 
related to selected concepts with different layouts 
(hierarchical, tree, …).  
 
 
Figure 3 - Janus GUI Overview 
Acquired relationships, and thus visualised, are of different 
types: propertyOf, synonym, shared terms (compound tags 
with common terms like address for tender_address and 
post_box_address) and relatedTo (mainly merged concepts 
or other of type “owl:sameAs”).  
The graph view also provides the possibility to choose the 
relationships to highlight, as well as concepts classes and/or 
properties (Figure 4). This feature permits to analyse in 
details some parts of the ontology; it is useful when the 
ontology is too large to be browsed with the global view. 
 
 
Figure 4 - Janus GUI Overview 
The tool also offers the possibility to parameterize 
thresholds for alignment and merging operations. 
4. CONCLUSION 
The automatic acquisition of knowledge from XML 
Schema files shows encouraging results, as well as the 
implemented meta-model (a semantic model detailed in [5]) 
that looks robust enough to continue research works in this 
direction. Before developing a complete and automatic tool, 
several problems remain to be resolved. But nevertheless, 
the ability to acquire semantic concepts directly from the 
“interchange language” (XML) without the a priori 
definition of application ontologies, is a new approach to 
B2B integration. Janus provides a first implementation of 
this approach.  
We propose to demonstrate the first results of this tool 
applied to the analysis of 23 existing B2B standards. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] N. F. Noy, R. W. Fergerson, & M. A. Musen. The knowledge model 
of Protege-2000: Combining interoperability and flexibility. EKAW 
2000, France. 
[2] Maedche, A., Motik, B., Silva, N., and Volz, R.. MAFRA - Mapping 
Distributed Ontologies in the Semantic Web. In Proc. EKAW 2002. 
[3] Fausto Giunchiglia, Mikalai Yatskevich, and Pavel Shvaiko. 
Semantic matching: Algorithms and implementation. Journal on 
Data Semantics, IX, 2007. 
[4] Ivan Bedini and Benjamin Nguyen. Automatic Ontology Generation: 
State of the Art. PRiSM Laboratory Technical Report, University of 
Versailles, 2007. 
[5] Ivan Bedini, Benjamin Nguyen and Georges Gardarin. Building 
Reference Ontologies from B2B XML Schema Files. PRiSM 
Laboratory Technical Report, University of Versailles, 2007.
