Stacked Thompson Bandits
Lenz Belzner
Institute for Informatics
LMU Munich

Thomas Gabor
Institute for Informatics
LMU Munich

Abstract—We introduce Stacked Thompson Bandits (STB) for
efﬁciently generating plans that are likely to satisfy a given
bounded temporal logic requirement. STB uses a simulation for
evaluation of plans, and takes a Bayesian approach to using the
resulting information to guide its search. In particular, we show
that stacking multiarmed bandits and using Thompson sampling
to guide the action selection process for each bandit enables
STB to generate plans that satisfy requirements with a high
probability while only searching a fraction of the search space.
I. INTRODUCTION
In many cases, system requirements can be formalized in
a bounded temporal logic [1], [2]. For example, consider
a mobile robot with planning capabilities in a area with
obstacles. Here, a requirement could be that when executing
a given sequential plan of ten actions, there should occur
less than e.g. three collisions with obstacles. One could write
this requirement as a temporal logic formula similar to the
following:
φ = □h≤10(collisions ≤2)
In this paper, we propose Stacked Thompson Bandits (STB)
as an algorithm for constructing plans that are likely to satisfy
a given requirement. STB works by simulation: It repeatedly
samples a plan from its current policy, simulates the result of
this plan w.r.t. a given requirement, and updates its policy
according to the result in order to increase the quality of
further sampled plans. As we will see, STB leverages Bayesian
statistics to guide the exploration-exploitation tradeoff when
searching the space of possible plans for feasible solutions.
STB is an open loop planner [3], [4]: It does only search
the space of plans. That is, action selection is not conditioned
w.r.t. intermediate states, but only w.r.t. previously selected
actions. STB does only account for intermediate states when
evaluating requirement satisfaction of a given plan.
The key idea of STB is to model the plan selection policy
by an open loop sequence of multiarmed bandits. Each of
the bandits represents an action choice for plan construction
at a certain point in time. Exploration of the search space
and exploitation of already gathered results are balanced
with Thompson sampling [5], [6]. Information gathered from
simulating sampled plans is used to increase the likelihood
that plans constructed by STB satisfy a given requirement.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion II recaps open loop planning, multiarmed bandits and
Thompson sampling. Section III introduces Stacked Thompson
Bandits. In Section IV we discuss our empirical ﬁndings.
Section V discusses related work. We conclude in Section VI
and give pointers to potential future work.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this Section, we recap open loop planning, multiarmed
bandits and Thompson sampling.
A. Open Loop Planning
In our setting, open loop planning ([3], [4]) is an approach
to ﬁnd plans that result in satisfaction of a given goal without
storing information about the intermediate states that are
encountered while executing the plan. I.e. given a set of actions
A, we are only interested in ﬁnding a plan p ∈A∗, and we are
only keeping information about the action sequences in order
to guide the planning process.
This is in contrast to closed loop planning, such as e.g.
Monte Carlo Tree Search [7], where action selection is typ-
ically conditioned by the history of previously encountered
states and executed actions.
B. Multiarmed Bandits
Multiarmed bandits (MAB) are a core framework for de-
cision making. A bandit consists of a number of arms, each
representing an agent’s choice. In our setting, each arm repre-
sents an action a ∈A. Each arms provides a particular payoff,
and the agent’s goal is to identify the most preferable arm.
It can explore the bandit by pulling one arm at a time, and
observe the corresponding payoff.
An MAB can be interpreted as a simple Markov deci-
sion process with a single state. In their basic formulation,
MABs already provide a clear framework for studying the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff inherent to decision making
under uncertainty: Should the agent select the arm that pre-
viously showed to be most promising? Or should it go on
exploring other options? For a recent survey of MAB and its
variants, see [8].
C. Thompson Sampling
Thompson sampling (TS) is a Bayesian algorithm for solv-
ing an MAB. It was proposed decades ago [5], but only
recently its astonishing effectiveness and generality have been
identiﬁed [9], [10], [11].
In the case of Bernoulli rewards (as in the case of STB),
the parameter of each arm to be estimated is a probability
arXiv:1702.08726v1  [cs.SE]  28 Feb 2017

p ∈[0; 1]. TS infers a posterior distribution over p based on
the observed arm payoffs and a prior assumption about the
distribution of p. In general, the posterior is proportional to the
likelihood of observed data D (i.e. an arm’s observed payoffs),
multiplied by the prior distribution P(θ) over the parameters
of interest, θ = p in our case (Equation 1).
P(θ|D) ∝P(D|θ)P(θ)
(1)
We can model the uncertainty about p by a Beta distribution,
the conjugate prior of the Bernoulli distribution. This approach
ensures that the posterior is of the same form as the prior
distribution, and thus enables efﬁcient sequential updating of
the distribution. The Beta distribution is parametrized by two
parameters a, b ∈R+. In our case, a and b are given by the
successes and failures of the arm pulls. Given s successes,
f failures, and assuming an uninformative prior over p, the
posterior (for θ = p) is determined by Equation 2.
P(p|D) = Beta(s + 1, f + 1)
(2)
TS maintains such a distribution P(θ) for each arm. The al-
gorithm then samples a potential value for each arm from these
distributions. It then plays the arm from whose distribution the
maximum value has been sampled, observes the payoff, and
uses this observation to update the corresponding distribution.
Repeating this process results in almost sure identiﬁcation of
the arm with the highest payoff. TS is schematically shown in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Thompson Sampling
1: procedure THOMPSON SAMPLING
2:
∀a ∈A : ˆpa ∼Pa(p)
3:
play arg maxa ˆpa and observe result
4:
update Pa(p) w.r.t. result
III. STACKED THOMPSON BANDITS
We now present Stacked Thompson Bandits (STB). STB
works by stacking a number of MAB, treating them as a
sequential decision problem. In order to construct a plan, STB
sequentially selects an action from each MAB using Thomp-
son sampling. The resulting plan checked for requirement
satisfaction using a simulation M. Given a set of states S,
a set of actions A and the set of bounded temporal formulae
Φ, M is a conditional probability distribution as follows.
M : P(Bool|S, A∗, Φ)
I.e. running a simulation for a given initial state s ∈S,
a given plan p ∈A∗and a given requirement φ ∈Φ can
be interpreted as a Bernoulli experiment. That is, M(s, p, φ)
deﬁnes a Bernoulli distribution, where the result indicates
whether p satisﬁes φ when executed in s. STB uses the
Bernoulli result of such a simulation to update each of the
MABs w.r.t. Equation 2.
STB is shown in Algorithm 2. It takes the following input:
• The current system state s ∈S.
• A bounded temporal formula φ ∈Φ.
• A simulation model M.
First, STB initializes the parameters of each stacked ban-
dit. In particular, for each step i up to the horizon of the
requirement φ and each action a ∈A, it maintains a count
of successes sa,i (i.e. satisfactions) and failures fa,i (i.e.
violations) (lines 2 – 4).
Then, STB repeats the following steps until interruption
(e.g. due to some budget, or because an event occurred).
• An estimated satisfaction probability is sampled from the
stacked bandit, i.e. from each beta distribution for each
step i and for each action a (line 8).
• The actions yielding the maximum estimate for each step
are combined to a plan (lines 9 and 10).
• The sampled plan is simulated in M w.r.t. system state
and given requirement. The result (satisfaction or viola-
tion) is observed (line 11).
• The bandit parameters of all actions in the simulated plan
are updated w.r.t. the simulation result (lines 12 – 16).
Algorithm 2 Stacked Thompson Bandits
1: procedure STB(s, φ, M)
2:
for a ∈A, i ∈0...h(φ) do
3:
sa,i ←0
4:
fa,i ←0
5:
while not interrupted do
6:
p ←nil
7:
for i ∈0...h(φ) do
8:
∀a ∈A : ˆpa ∼Beta(sa,i + 1, fa,i + 1)
9:
ai ←arg maxa∈A ˆpa
10:
p ←p :: ai
11:
sat ∼M(s, p, φ)
12:
for ai ∈p do
13:
if sat then
14:
sa,i ←sa,i + 1
15:
else
16:
fa,i ←fa,i + 1
The algorithm terminates on some external interruption
signal that is to be speciﬁed by the user. A possible decision
rule on which plan to execute would be to select the action
with maximum distribution mode (the value with most prob-
ability mass) for each MAB in the stack. The mode of a beta
distribution with parameters a, b is given by:
a + 1
a + b + 2
Mode plan selection for STB is therefore performed as
shown in Algorithm 3.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We implemented STB and observed whether it is able
to generate plans with increasing probability of satisfaction
requirement when performing more search iterations.

Algorithm 3 STB mode plan selection
1: for i ∈0...h do
2:
ai ←arg maxa∈A
sa,i+1
sa,i+fa,i+2
3:
p ←p :: ai
A. Setup
The state s is constituted by a 10 x 10 grid world, with the
agent at position (0, 0). Obstacles are randomly positioned, at
an obstacle to free position ratio of 0.2. Actions are movements
in four directions up, down, left, right with obvious semantics.
The agent has a Bernoulli action failure probability pfail
uniformly sampled from [0; 1]. Action failure results in the in-
verse movement (e.g. failing up yields down). This constitutes
domain noise in the simulation M available to the agent.
The task of STB is to generate a plan of length 10 that
yields less than three collisions with obstacles when executed:
φ = □h≤10(collisions ≤2)
This setup yields a search space cardinality 410 = 1048576.
However, note that due to probabilistic domain dynamics (i.e.
the branching due to potential action failures) a plan has to
be evaluated many times to obtain an adequate estimate of its
satisfaction probability, yielding a very hard search problem.
We approximated the ground truth satisfaction probability of a
plan by taking the maximum likelihood estimate of satisfaction
probability based on 1000 simulation runs.
Our implementation of the setup and STB is available at
https://github.com/jazzbob/stb.
B. Results
In our experimental runs, we observed that STB is able
to generate plans with increasing probability of satisfying
the given requirement. In particular, STB was able to ﬁnd
potentially close to optimal solutions searching only a fraction
of the search space. Figure 1 shows an exemplary run of STB.
As a sanity check, we also observed the average mode value
as well as the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) of sampled plan
arm distributions and mode (i.e. best) plan arm distributions
respectively. While the mode value gives a rough estimate
about value of an arm (i.e. an action), the CV is deﬁned as
the ratio of standard deviation to mean σ
µ of a distribution. CV
is suitable to measure the accuracy of a distribution when its
mean value changes [12], as is the case in STB. We expect
the average mode value to increase in the long run for both
sampled and best plans. We also expect the CV of sampled and
best plans to decrease in the long run. We could empirically
establish both expected results (cf. Figure 2).
However, we also observed STB to get stuck in local optima
(cf. Figure 3). This is a property of many stochastic search
algorithms. One could potentially reduce the risk of getting
stuck by using an ensemble of STB planners in order to reduce
the probability of such premature convergence.
Fig. 1. Exemplary STB result. The horizontal axis shows the number of search
iterations. The vertical axis shows the satisfaction probability of sampled
plans (orange) and of mode plans (blue) in the current iteration. Note that
information about plan satisfaction probability is never explicitly available to
STB. STB only uses the boolean simulation results to guide its search. The
dashed line shows the optimal plan found by random search (1000 runs, 1000
evaluations each).
Fig. 2.
Exemplary STB average mode and CV for sampled and best plan
respectively. The horizontal axis shows the number of search iterations.
The vertical axis shows the average value of sampled (orange) and current
best (blue) arm distributions’ modes and CVs. As expected, average modes
increase in the long run, while average CVs decrease. The strong disturbances
in the beginning, in particular w.r.t. to the average modes, is due to the lack of
valid information for STB to build its action value (i.e. satisfaction probability)
estimates.

Fig. 3. Exemplary run where STB is stuck in a local optimum. The horizontal
axis shows the number of search iterations. The vertical axis shows the
satisfaction probability of sampled plans (orange) and of mode plans (blue)
in the current iteration. The dashed line shows the optimal plan found by
random search (1000 runs, 1000 evaluations each).
V. RELATED WORK
Our work on STB is strongly inﬂuenced by existing open
loop planners. In particular, Cross Entropy Open Loop Plan-
ning is an approach for planning in large-scale continuous
MDPs [4]. It is however not applicable to discrete domains
as STB. Recently, cross entropy planning has been used for
searching sequences that satisfy a given temporal logic formula
[13] in a continuous motion planning setting.
STB is subtly related to statistical model checking (SMC)
[14], [15], and Bayesian statistical model checking in par-
ticular [16], [17], [18]. Here, the setting is to guarantee a
minimal required satisfaction probability for a given, ﬁxed
sequence of actions. SMC approaches are able to provide such
a result, potentially with a quantiﬁable conﬁdence. STB is
not able to provide a quantiﬁcation of satisfaction probability,
as is samples every plan only once. Also, the distributions
maintained in the stacked bandits to not provide an accurate
absolute quantiﬁcation due to the sampling nature of search
and the corresponding concept drift. On the other hand, STB
is able to generate plans with high satisfaction probability,
whereas SMC only can determine this probability. In practice,
a combination of both approaches is possible and seems useful.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented Stacked Thompson Bandits (STB), an
open loop planning algorithm for generating action sequences
that satisfy a given bounded temporal logic requirement with
high probability. STB works by maintaining a stack of multi-
armed bandits via Thompson sampling. We have preliminarily
and empirically evaluated the effectiveness of STB on a toy
example.
There are various directions for future work. As mentioned,
it would be interesting to see if an ensemble approach with
STB could reduce the probability of getting stuck in local
minima. Another interesting venue would be to combine
temporal action abstraction with STB. See [19], [12] for
previous work of one of the authors on temporal abstraction in
open loop planning. Also, guiding the sampling process in a
QoS-aware manner based on required conﬁdences could prove
worthwhile. See e.g. [20] for previous work of the authors on
QoS-aware sampling in multiarmed bandits. It would also be
interesting to explore STB under model uncertainty, e.g. when
the simulation model is learned from incomplete information.
