ETH Learning and Teaching Journal, Vol 2, No 2, 2020
153
https://learningteaching.ethz.ch | ISSN 2624-7992 (Online)
ICED 2020 proceedings: 
Artificial Intelligence enabled Smart Learning 
 
Debdeep Bose1, Pathan Faisal Khan2 
Department of Computing, Letterkenny Institute of Technology 
Port Road, Gortlee, Letterkenny 
Co. Donegal, Ireland 
 
Abstract 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a discipline of computer science that deals with machine 
intelligence. It is essential to bring AI into the context of learning because it helps in analysing 
the enormous amounts of data that is collected from individual students, teachers and 
academic staff. The major priorities of implementing AI in education are making innovative use 
of existing digital technologies for learning, and teaching practices that significantly improve 
traditional educational methods. 
 
The main problem with traditional learning is that it cannot be suited to every student in class. 
Some students may grasp the concepts well, while some may have difficulties in understanding 
them and some may be more auditory or visual learners. The World Bank report on education 
has indicated that the learning gap created by this problem causes many students to drop out 
(World Development Report, 2018). Personalised learning has been able to solve this grave 
problem. Brainly is one example: an AI-based knowledge-sharing social network where 
students post and respond to questions asked by other students. This collaboration, along with 
personalisation-based machine learning algorithms for networking features, has made Brainly 
a successful platform with 8,000 items responded to every hour. AI is also used in the 
classroom: China's largest AI education platform “Squirrel AI”3 has successfully implemented 
its system in many cities to provide personalised learning. They claim that their system was 
better at improving math test scores than experienced teachers teaching in a four-day 
experiment program conducted in October 2017 (Dickson, 2017). These are just a couple of 
examples of the use of AI inside the classroom to enhance learning activity. A few more, such 
as “Osmo”4 and “Classcraft”5, are integrated into K-12 programmes. It has also been predicted 
that personalised teaching methodologies using AI will reduce the cost of education, which is 
quite high even in developed countries. Master Learner is an AI-powered education platform 
from Shanghai, and they have claimed that "we can make our training fee as cheap as drinking 
a Coke every day for a year" (China Turns to Artificial Intelligence to Boost Its Education 
System, 2017). 
1 
Introduction 
Smart Learning includes new educational contexts in which the focus is students’ use of the 
technology at their fingertips. This depends not only on the software and hardware available 
but on how they are used in the classes. The main problem with traditional learning is that it 
cannot be suited to every child. The World Bank report on education has indicated that the 
learning gap created by disparities in this regard causes many students to drop out of school. 
Personalised learning has been able to solve this grave problem. The theory and development 
                                               

3 http://squirrelai.com 
4 https://www.playosmo.com 
5 https://www.classcraft.com 

ETH Learning and Teaching Journal, Vol 2, No 2, 2020
154
https://learningteaching.ethz.ch | ISSN 2624-7992 (Online)
of computer systems able to perform tasks which typically require human intelligence is known 
as Artificial Intelligence (AI), and AI comes into play here; see the examples below. 
2 
Classcraft 
2.1 
The system 
Launched in 2015, Classcraft is an award-winning, teacher-friendly gamification tool that is 
now used in more than 50,000 classrooms in 75 countries in 11 languages. The Quebec- and 
New York City-based education technology company uses gaming principles to address 
student motivation. It utilises gaming principles to foster social-emotional development and 
personalised learning, enabling educators to adapt curricula and teaching style to an individual 
student's needs. Highly customisable, this revolutionary educational approach can be adapted 
to any subject and has been proven to be very effective at improving student motivation, 
increasing student engagement and creating a positive classroom community by fostering 
secure team building. 
2.2 
Facts 
1. Nearly 54% of the EU population plays video games, which means that there are some 
250 million players in the EU. Roughly half of players are female (46%), and 54% are 
male (Games in Society, 2019). 
2. 58% of parents play video games with their kids to socialise with them (Hallifax et al., 
2019). 
3. A study funded by the British Academy and published in the journal Computers in 
Human Behaviour, found that 13-to-14-year-old girls classed as “massive gamers” – 
those playing over nine hours a week – were three times more likely to pursue a 
PSTEM (physical science, technology, engineering, and math) degree compared to 
girls who were non-gamers ("Geek Girl" Gamers Are More Likely to Study Science and 
Technology Degrees | University of Surrey, 2019). 
4. A study by Centre de Liaison sure Intervention et la Prévention Psychosociales, or 
(CLIPP) showed that gamification could help prevent bullying (Classcraft - Gamification 
in Education, 2019). 
3 
Alta 
3.1 
The system 
Alta is a software product built on a personalised learning engine for students pursuing higher 
education by Knewton, a New-York-based adaptive learning company. Knewton released Alta 
in January 2018 after ten years of experience with publishers. It is powered by their in-house 
high-quality content curated with long experience in the industry. The software is available to 
students as a standalone package and to universities and institutes as a comprehensive tool 
for all students. The product covers courses in mathematics, chemistry, economics and 
statistics. Courses contain textual, graphical and video-based content. The software is 
available for students as a standalone version for just $39.95. Alta's mobile app has made it a 
mobile software for every student to use on the go. The best thing about Alta is that students 
are not just left alone with the software; there is 24/7 online chat support for student doubts 
and queries. 
3.2 
Facts 
1. 87% of the time, students using Alta completed their assignments with proficiency. 
2. Of students who struggled in their assignments, 82% of them completed them. 

ETH Learning and Teaching Journal, Vol 2, No 2, 2020
155
https://learningteaching.ethz.ch | ISSN 2624-7992 (Online)
3. Students who used Alta and did not complete an assignment scored 55%, while those 
who completed their task scored an average of 81%. 
4. Students who were struggling have shown improvement in their scores, from being at 
40% to achieving 78%. 
5. 85% of students feel that Alta is improving their skills. 
6. Arizona State University has claimed that after implementing Knewton's adaptive 
learning technology, on which Alta is based, there has been a decrease in dropout 
rates from 13% to 6% and a rise in pass rates from 66% to 75%. 
4 
Squirrel AI learning 
4.1 
The system 
Squirrel AI is a Shanghai-based after-school tutoring company with nearly 2000 physical 
classrooms in China. Squirrel AI was founded in 2014 by Derek Li Haoyang after he stepped 
down as CEO from his previous education company, which featured an IPO. Using a laptop 
computer with the company's software installed on it, students study their lessons in a 
classroom supervised by a teacher of the respective subject. 
 
Squirrel AI's main motive was to address the problems faced in the education system: lack of 
personalised attention in classrooms and unequal distribution of educational opportunities. The 
inefficient, rigid education system has decreased students’ enthusiasm for learning; this 
motivated Derek Li to build what is China's most extensive AI-powered education product. 
Squirrel AI's scope and reach are impressive. However, the concept behind adaptive learning 
systems like Squirrel AI and others will not make teaching professionals obsolete any time 
soon. Instead, Squirrel AI is designed to support and augment the work of teachers by taking 
away the need to teach the “nuts and bolts” of each course (Building Personalized Education 
With AI Adaptive Learning - AI Business, 2019). 
4.2 
Facts 
1. It has been shown that the Squirrel AI system can teach 48 knowledge points in eight 
hours on average, whereas a human teacher can explain 28 knowledge points in the 
same period. 
5 
Conclusions 
In summary, Artificial Intelligence enabled Smart Learning is the next logical phase in the 
introduction of technology to classrooms and educational centres. The global educational 
landscape has been changing with the introduction to new state-of-the-art intelligent 
environments; a few have termed this "climate change" in education. Our paper (originally a 
poster) presents some of the latest successful software and its implementation, all based on 
AI enabled Smart Learning. However, this is not just about selecting a tool or technology – 
even though technology (like it or not) is essential to learning and is a primary part of every 
industry and because it changes so quickly students are better off learning about it sooner. 
More than this, it is essential to deploy a proven methodology that works with students and 
develops their skills in a progressive, natural and effective way.  
We thus bear in mind that the technological and pedagogical advancements described above 
are not meant to supersede current teaching and learning education systems, but rather to 
provide a holistic spectrum of complementary supporting tools which harness and exploit this 
emerging paradigm to its full potential for smarter education (Smart Learning for the Next 
Generation Education Environment, 2014). 

ETH Learning and Teaching Journal, Vol 2, No 2, 2020
156
https://learningteaching.ethz.ch | ISSN 2624-7992 (Online)
