JANUARY 2021
1
An Artiﬁcial Intelligence System for Combined Fruit
Detection and Georeferencing, Using RTK-Based
Perspective Projection in Drone Imagery
Angus Baird and Stefano Giani
Abstract—This work presents an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
system, based on the Faster Region-Based Convolution Neural
Network (Faster R-CNN) framework, which detects and counts
apples from oblique, aerial drone imagery of giant commercial
orchards. To reduce computational cost, a novel precursory stage
to the network is designed to preprocess raw imagery into
cropped images of individual trees. Unique geospatial identiﬁers
are allocated to these using the perspective projection model.
This employs Real-Time Kinematic (RTK) data, Digital Terrain
and Surface Models (DTM and DSM), as well as internal and
external camera parameters. The bulk of experiments however
focus on tuning hyperparameters in the detection network itself.
Apples which are on trees and apples which are on the ground
are treated as separate classes. A mean Average Precision (mAP)
metric, calibrated by the size of the two classes, is devised to
mitigate spurious results. Anchor box design is of key interest
due to the scale of the apples. As such, a k-means clustering
approach, never before seen in literature for Faster R-CNN,
resulted in the most signiﬁcant improvements to calibrated mAP.
Other experiments showed that the maximum number of box
proposals should be 225; the initial learning rate of 0.001 is best
applied to the adaptive RMS Prop optimiser; and ResNet 101 is
the ideal base feature extractor when considering mAP and, to
a lesser extent, inference time. The amalgamation of the optimal
hyperparameters leads to a model with a calibrated mAP of
0.7627.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
GRICULTURE, which is the main supplier to the food and
drinks industry, contributing £28.2bn to the UK’s economy
annually, is currently being revolutionised by Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) [1]. AI has the potential to increase farming output and
efﬁciency, thereby helping to meet the future demand for resources
largely due in part to a rapidly rising population. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that
the world population will increase by another 2 billion people
by 2050, and consequently, food production will be required to
increase by between 59% and 98% [2]. AI presents solutions to
current bottlenecks, providing farmers with a quick go-to-market
strategy. Modern examples of agricultural technology (agritech)
are detailed in [3] as autopilot tractors, smart irrigation and crop
sensors for efﬁcient fertiliser use, amongst others. One of the most
recent developments, however, is the use of drones for surveying
orchards. Aerial imagery, spectral reﬂectances and spatial data can
all be collected in one overhead pass of a giant commercial orchard.
This enables evidence-based planning to inﬂuence policies and
decisions taken by farmers [4]. Cambridge-based agritech start-
up, Outﬁeld Technologies, is one of the leading providers of this
service in the UK. As such, they have provided oblique, aerial
drone imagery for this research.
The aim of this work is to develop an AI system to detect
fruits, in this case apples, from this drone imagery. The desired
outputs are the total number of apples in the entire orchard and
the number of apples on each individual tree. Apples which are
growing on trees and apples which have fallen on the ground
will be considered as two separate classes to be counted. This
distinction contributes to a more accurate and informative yield
estimation for the entire orchard. Advanced knowledge of this
is beneﬁcial for farmers when making bulk order arrangements
with supermarkets. Furthermore, the number of crates and the
size of the workforce that will be needed to harvest, box and
deliver the fruit can be determined. To achieve this, the proposed
AI system will be based on fundamental principles of multiple-
instance object detection. This computer vision technique is the
combination of image classiﬁcation and object localisation, where
object coordinates in an image are extracted using bounding boxes
with accompanying class labels and conﬁdences. Traditionally, the
pipeline of object detection models can be characterised by three
stages: informative region selection, feature extraction and clas-
siﬁcation [5]. Conventional methods involved exhaustive sliding
window approaches, which were computationally excessive. These
were coupled with bespoke feature extractor and classiﬁer pairs,
which had to be manually designed for speciﬁc types of object [6],
[7].
Generalisation began following the advent of the Deep Con-
volutional Neural Network (Deep CNN) which was ﬁrst used
in the 2012 ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC). It achieved state-of-the-art accuracy with a top-5 test
error rate of 15.3%, compared to 26.2% achieved by the second-
best entry [8]. This was the pinnacle of a series of iterations
on the idea of multi-layer CNNs beginning in 1989 [9]. Modern
convolutional object detectors can be separated into two types of
framework. The ﬁrst generates region proposals, then classiﬁes
each proposal into different object categories. The second treats
object detection as a regression or classiﬁcation problem [5]. Both
perform better than the aforementioned traditional approaches due
to increased depth, allowing for a greater capacity to learn more
complex features and an ability to learn object representations
without the need to design features manually [10]. Regions with
CNN features (R-CNN) was one of the ﬁrst examples of CNN-
based detection in literature [11]. Adopting the ﬁrst of the two
frameworks, R-CNN applies a selective search to generate 2000
externally computed region proposal crops from an input image
[12]. Each region is warped and inputted to CNNs [12]. Pre-
trained, category speciﬁc, linear Support Vector Machines (SVM)
for multiple classes assign a score to a set of positive and negative
regions. These are then adjusted using bounding box regression
and ﬁltered with Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS), resulting
in ﬁnal bounding boxes for preserved object locations [5]. The
excessive computational cost associated with extracting and sub-
sequently passing each region through a CNN was solved in
Fast R-CNN. This passes the input image through a single CNN,
arXiv:2101.00339v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2021

JANUARY 2021
2
Fig. 1: The Faster R-CNN Architecture. Tree-Level Images Are Inputted on the Left-Hand Side, and the Three Main Modules Are Labelled
With Letters Corresponding to the Subsections in Section II.
creating a convolutional feature map. From this, region propos-
als are obtained and reshaped using a Region of Interest (ROI)
pooling layer before being fed into a fully connected network
[13]. A bottleneck in this method becomes the computation of
region proposals. Faster R-CNN evolved from this, showing that
box proposals can be generated using a Neural Network (NN).
This additional Region Proposal Network (RPN) was introduced
using a fully convolutional NN that shares full-image convolutional
features with the detection network, thus enabling nearly cost-free
region proposals [14]. The network slides over the convolutional
feature map and, at each window, generates an array of anchor
boxes of different shapes and sizes. Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation is applied to the output of the convolutional layer to
increase non-linearity. The regression towards true bounding boxes
is achieved by comparing proposals relative to anchors. Aside
from the R-CNN family, other architectures using the ﬁrst kind
of framework include Region-Based Fully Convolutional Network
(R-FCN) which is fully convolutional with almost all computation
shared on the entire image as opposed to applying a per-region
sub-network hundreds of times. To achieve this, position-sensitive
score maps address a dilemma between translation-invariance in
image classiﬁcation and translation-variance in object detection
[15]. The most ubiquitous networks using the second kind of
detection framework are You Only Look Once (YOLO) [16], its
successors, YOLOv2 and YOLOv3 [17], [18] and Single Shot
Multibox Detection (SSD) [19]. All of which are optimised for
real-time applications, due to the lack of region proposal gener-
ation.
An accurate detector is prioritised for this application due to the
inherent difﬁculties of the detection task. These include: the small
size of the apples, some being in the range a few pixels in area,
but with varying scales and aspect ratios; the fact that many of the
apples are largely concealed by other overlapping apples, or are
partially covered by foliage; the poor capturing of some apples due
to motion blur in the done camera; and that the number of instances
of apple in each photo is very high.
This paper ﬁrst justiﬁes the choice of object detection frame-
work. Then, a range of different feature extractor networks are
proposed and subsequently investigated. These form the basis
upon which relevant hyperparameters are tuned for their effect
on the accuracy and, to a lesser extent, inference time. This
culminates in the proposed optimal model conﬁguration, which
features a combination of all the most successful hyperparameter
modiﬁcations. Lastly, a novel precursory system is presented as
part of the practical deployment of the network. This serves as an
image preprocessor, which crops raw drone imagery into uniquely
labelled crops of each tree. This enables yield information to
be localised to the tree-level. In doing so, this prevents double
counting of apples and results in yield representation at the tree-
level, as opposed to merely a total for the number of apples in
the whole orchard. The ﬁnal output consists of this prepossessing
stage and the trained optimal model conﬁguration. Supplementary
material, including code for dataset augmentation, amongst others,
are referred to in the report.
II. PROPOSED SOLUTIONS
To justify the type of object detection framework used, the re-
gression and classiﬁcation approaches, such as YOLOv2, YOLOv3
and SSD are ﬁrst considered [17], [18], [19]. These have been
shown to achieve similar mean Average Precision (mAP) as the
region proposal-based networks on the benchmark PASCAL VOC
2012 dataset [20]. This can be misleading of overall performance,
especially relating to this application, due to the lack of small
objects in the dataset. A more thorough test is the Microsoft
Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset. Average Precision
(AP) performance of SSD on small (< 322 pixels) and medium
(322 < 962 pixels) objects (using COCO deﬁnitions) is on average
66.7% and 33.9% less than the corresponding Faster R-CNN, re-
spectively [21]. This was caused by large localisation errors due to
an inability to fully represent the characteristics of smaller objects
in particular [22]. Similar is found with YOLO architectures.
Considering the region proposal approaches, R-FCN, despite its
region-based detector being fully convolutional, has been shown
to be able to match Faster R-CNN on all three object size cate-
gories. When using feature extractors with more layers however,
comparative accuracy was found to tail off in all size categories by
approximately equal proportions [21]. Therefore, due to accuracy
taking priority over inference time, and the amount of small and
medium apple objects in this dataset, there is sufﬁcient justiﬁcation
for Faster R-CNN to be selected as the object detection framework.
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed Faster R-CNN architecture.
This is partitioned into three main modules for the purposes of this

JANUARY 2021
3
work: the initial CNN layers for feature extraction; the RPN, which
outputs a set of object proposals with a corresponding objectness
score; and the ﬁnal ROI pooling and fully connected layers, which
are comparable to Fast R-CNN [13].
A. Feature Extractor Network
The CNN architecture for feature extraction can be effectively
decoupled from the rest of the network, which will be referred
to hereafter as the Faster R-CNN meta-architecture. While most
application-speciﬁc literature simply uses the base networks pre-
sented in the original paper, a more modular approach to tuning
hyperparameters is taken here to achieve the optimal solution. This
is due to the intertwined nature of Faster R-CNN, and the meta-
architecture depending upon a rich feature map. Moreover, this
approach has been shown to yield positive results in the pertinent
work [23] which looks at multi-scale object detection in remote
sensing imagery.
The feature extractors that will form the basis of the investiga-
tion are Inception v2 and ResNet (including the 50-layer and 101-
layer variants). These have been shown to achieve top accuracy
(with a mAP of 0.28, 0.30 and 0.32, respectively) when trained
and tested on the COCO dataset, within reasonable time, using a
Nvidia GeForce GTX TITAN X card [24]. The mAP data however
are only reported as an average over Intersection over Union (IoU)
thresholds in the range 0.50 to 0.95 at increments of 0.05. Such a
metric is excessively strict for the application of this paper, but
serves as a good guide nonetheless. Moreover, performance of
these feature extractors on the small object category also remains
unknown. Later in the work, the combined Inception ResNet v2
Atrous network is examined due to a reported mAP of 0.37, at the
expense of being between 6 and 11 times slower than the separated
feature extractor networks at inference time.
1) Inception: Due to variation in location and scale of apples in
the images, optimising ﬁlter size is difﬁcult. Moreover, excessively
deep networks are more susceptible to overﬁtting and vanishing
gradient. A solution is to increase the width of the network, instead
of the depth, and have multiple-sized ﬁlters operating on the same
level. The Inception block incorporates multi-scale convolutional
transformations on the premise of split, transformation and con-
catenation [25]. This permits branching within a layer, allowing for
abstraction of features at different spatial scales [26]. Inception v2
was later proposed to reduce representational bottleneck caused by
the reduction in dimensions due to convolutions [27]. An Inception
block, which is found in the Inception v2 network used in this
work, is shown in Figure 2.
Fig. 2: The Inception Block: Split, Transform and Merge Concept.
2) ResNet: The aforementioned problem of vanishing gradient
is also addressed by skip connections. These jump over layers,
reusing activations from the previous layer until the adjacent layer
learns its weights [28]. The mathematical formulation for this is
given by:
F k′
m+1 = gc(F k
l→m,kl→m) + F k
l ,
m ≥l
(1)
F k
m+1 = ga(F k′
m+1),
(2)
gc(F k
l→m,kl→m) = F k′
m+1 −F k
l ,
(3)
where gc(F k
l→m,kl→m) is a transformed signal, and F k
l is
an input of the lth layer. In Equation 1, kl→m shows the kth
processing unit, whereas l →m suggests that the Residual block
can be consistent of one or more hidden layers. Original input F k
l
is added to the transformed signal through the bypass pathway
and thus results in an aggregated output, F k′
m+1, which is assigned
to the next layer after applying activation function, ga. Whereas,
F k′
m+1 −F k
l returns residual information which is used to perform
reference-based optimisation of weights. A further discussion of
this architecture is summarised in [25], which maintains the same
notation as used in this paper.
This type of residual learning is shown by the Residual block
in Figure 3. This is a structural unit of the ResNet family of
architectures. This work looks at two of the most common variants:
ResNet 50 and ResNet 101, which are the 50-layer and 101-layer
architectures. The effect of network depth on eventual detection
performance can therefore be ascertained.
Fig. 3: The Residual Block: ResNet Structural Unit [25].
3) Inception ResNet: This architecture combines the power of
residual learning and the Inception block. In doing so, the ﬁlter
concatenation stage is replaced by the Residual block [25] [29].
The speciﬁc incarnation looked at in this paper, Inception ResNet
v2 Atrous, uses atrous convolutions to maintain ﬁeld of view at
each network layer. This was reported to outperform other varieties
of the network [24].

JANUARY 2021
4
B. Region Proposal Network
The salient feature of Faster R-CNN is the RPN. This is a deep,
fully convolutional network that proposes the regions in a nearly
cost-free way, by sharing full image convolutional features, as well
as weights, with the rest of the network [5].
1) Anchor Boxes: The RPN slides over the feature map, out-
putted at the last shared convolutional layer of the feature extractor
network. For each pixel, a set of k anchors, spanning the input
image, are overlaid, each with a set of aspect ratios and scales. The
network checks if an object is contained within these, or it reﬁnes
the coordinates of the anchors to give bounding boxes as object
proposals [30].
2) Loss Function: Training therefore consists of making two
predictions for each anchor: a discrete class prediction and a
continuous prediction of an offset by which the anchor needs to
be translated in order to encompass the groundtruth bounding box
[21]. There is therefore a multi-task loss consisting of classiﬁcation
loss and bounding box regression loss. When training the RPN, a
binary class label is assigned to each anchor. As in most literature,
this work maintains the convention that positive labels are given to
anchors with an IoU overlap greater than 0.7 with the groundtruth
box. Conversely, negative labels are assigned to non-positive an-
chors if the IoU overlap is lower than 0.3 for all groundtruth boxes,
as in [14]. The loss function to be minimised is given by,
L({pi}, {ti}) =
1
Ncls
X
i
Lcls(pi, p⋆
i )
+λ
1
Nreg
X
i
p⋆
i Lreg(ti, t⋆
i ).
(4)
In this, pi is the predicted probability of the i-th anchor being
an object. The groundtruth label, p⋆
i , is 1 for positive anchors and
0 otherwise. The vector, ti, represents 4 parameterised coordinates
of the predicted bounding box; t⋆
i is related to the groundtruth box
associated with a positive anchor. Lcls is a binary log loss and
Lreg is a smoothed L1 loss as deﬁned in [13]. These two terms
are normalised by the mini-batch size, Ncls, and the number of
anchor locations, Nreg, respectively. λ is a balancing parameter
which is set to 10 in this work, as was found to maximise mAP in
the original paper [14].
C. Detection Network
The ﬁnal part of the meta-architecture is a network, equivalent
to Fast R-CNN, which uses the previously generated proposed
regions [13]. This network consists of an ROI pooling layer which
takes these region proposals from the feature map, divides them
into subwindows, then performs max pooling over these subwin-
dows. The output is passed through fully connected layers and
the features are fed into the sibling classiﬁcation and bounding
box regression branches. The classiﬁcation branch uses softmax to
convert class scores. The regression branch, which is size agnostic
but speciﬁc to each class, unlike in the RPN, has coefﬁcients which
are used to improve the predicted bounding boxes [30].
III. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
A. Dataset
The raw dataset consists of oblique drone imagery. Each image
is 5472 by 3648 pixels in area, and contains roughly 100 trees.
In some images, up to 70% of the image is background and
does not contain trees however. Therefore, to avoid unnecessary
computation, it is decided that the input to the feature extractor
NN will be crops of individual trees from the raw drone images.
Obtaining these crops is an automated process which is further
motivated by the desire to pair trees with a unique identiﬁer. This
enables a geospatial representation of the yield of fruit at the tree-
level. The deployment of this system, as a precursor to the object
detection NN, is discussed further in Section V.
To create training and validation datasets, the tree-level crops
are marked-up manually using labelimg.py [31]. Bounding boxes
are drawn for two classes: tree_apple (for apples which are on
the trees) and ground_apple (for apples which have fallen to the
ground). Distinctions between these two classes include slight dis-
colourations on the surface of ground apples, as well as detectable
differences between a tree backdrop and a ground backdrop around
the edge of the apples. It must be noted that there exists a degree of
subjectivity in the manual mark-up process. In some cases, apples,
particularly tree apples, are mostly concealed, blurred, or are
clustered in such a way that it is impossible to determine precisely
how many bounding boxes should be drawn. Consequently, it is
expected, given this and the similarity between the objects in the
two classes, that the mAPs found in this paper will be lower than
those seen in the literature for more objective object detection
applications.
To expand the dataset efﬁciently, data augmentation techniques
are applied using image_augmentation.py, which was written
largely using the imgaug library. Relevant transformations that pre-
serve the semantic content of the images are explored, including:
rotation (up to ±60◦) and horizontal mirroring, as well as subtle
Gaussian blur and additive noise which imitate the occasional
motion blur during drone image capture. Examples of these are
shown in Figure 4; the transformed groundtruth bounding boxes
are shown in blue.
Fig. 4: Examples of Data Augmentation: (i) Original, (ii) Mirrored
Horizontally, (iii) 60◦Clockwise Rotation, (iv) 30◦Anticlockwise
Rotation, (v) Gaussian Blur σ=0.1, (vi) Additive Gaussian Noise
From Distribution: N(0, 0.05*255).
The traditional 80:20 partition is applied to form the training and
testing datasets, respectively. A further 80:20 split on the training
dataset separates the images to be used in training, from those
used in the validation of the models [32]. In total, 13,439 apples
are marked-up in 435 tree-level images. For the initial purposes

JANUARY 2021
5
of training a large variety of different models however, a subset
of approximately a quarter of the data (107 images and 2,709
marked-up apples) is used, due to time constraints. Training with
this smaller set is used for preliminary cross-evaluation of different
feature extractors and hyperparameter combinations. Later, the
effect on accuracy of training with the full dataset is explored. This
is also used to train the optimal model conﬁguration.
B. Training, Validation and Testing
Training, validation and testing of all 76 models used in this
work is performed with a Nvidia TITAN Xp card running Tensor-
Flow GPU. The identical 107-image abbreviated dataset is used
on all models initially, with ﬁnal experiments using the full 435-
image dataset. All models are trained to 200,000 steps, which has
been shown experimentally to be more than sufﬁcient to train the
Oxford-IIIT Pets dataset [24]. After training, as with most object
detectors in literature, validation mAP is measured and compared.
This work uses the ubiquitous PASCAL VOC metric, which in-
cludes a class-speciﬁc AP at IoU = 0.50 as well as a corresponding
combined-class mAP. In this work however, a calibrated mAP at
IoU = 0.50 is devised as the primary metric. This is weighted
by the ratio 92:8 between the two classes, corresponding to the
number of instances of the tree_apple class to ground_apple class,
respectively. This aims to mitigate sporadic AP readings due to the
relatively small number of ground apples, which can over-inﬂuence
the overall mAP. Lastly, the speed of the models is measured
by recording the inference time on a sample of the testing set
consisting of 15 images.
The ﬁrst collection of experiments concerns the baseline models
[24]. These are three models which differ in backbone feature
extractor network: Inception v2, ResNet 101 and ResNet 50.
The meta-architecture of each baseline model begins the same in
terms of hyperparameters. The key values are shown in Table I.
Hyperparameters which are not listed can be assumed to be as they
are in [14].
TABLE I: Baseline Hyperparameters
Field
Parameter
Value(s)
Image Resizer
Min Dimension
600
(Fixed Aspect Ratio)
Max Dimension
1024
First Stage Features
Stride Length
16
Grid Anchors
Scales
[0.25 0.5 1.0 2.0]
Aspect Ratios
[0.5 1.0 2.0]
Height Stride, Width Stride
[16 16]
Object Proposals
NMS IoU Threshold
0.7
Max Box Proposals
150
Training Conﬁg
Optimiser Type (Value γ)
Momentum (0.9)
Initial Learning Rate η
0.0003
For each baseline model, the next set of experiments involve
conﬁguring the anchor boxes in the RPN stage, speciﬁcally, stride
lengths, scales and aspect ratios. Clustering approaches to anchor
box design, which have never been seen in literature for Faster R-
CNN, are compared to the baseline and original anchor boxes in
[14]. Also in the RPN, the number of box proposals will be varied,
noting the speed/accuracy compromise. Experiments then focus
on the training conﬁguration, in particular, the type of optimiser
and the learning rate. Three of the most efﬁcient types are looked
at, including the baseline case, Momentum, which is based on
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) but with a temporal element, t
[33]. This essentially provides momentum for updates on param-
eter, θ, allowing for faster convergence and reduced oscillations.
This is given by,
θt = θt −η∇L(θ) + γνt
(5)
where νt is the previous update to θ. Momentum is compared
to the Adam optimiser which computes adaptive learning rates for
each parameter [34]. Also considered is another adaptive learning
rate optimiser, RMS Prop. This unpublished method divides the
learning rate by an exponentially decaying average of squared
gradients [33]. After the training conﬁgurations are explored, ex-
periments look at combining Inception and ResNet architectures
in the backbone feature extractor CNN, followed by quantifying
the effect of training on more data. Once these experiments have
been run singly, the optimal solution is ﬁnally conﬁgured by
incorporating the best performing hyperparameter combinations
from all the previous models.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For experimental validity, the identical Inception v2 baseline
model conﬁguration was repeatedly trained to establish that the
resulting variation in model mAP was sufﬁciently small to justify
further model comparison. From 5 identical models, the mean
calibrated mAP was 0.5232 with a variance of 0.0052. Certain
hyperparameters from Table I which were investigated but did not
show any improvement on the baseline models include the input
image resizer dimensions and the NMS IoU threshold. Conse-
quently, such experiments are not reported in detail.
A. Baseline Models
The three baseline models, distinguishable only by their feature
extractor networks, were trained ﬁrst on the 107-image dataset. The
results, including class-speciﬁc and calibrated validation mAP (at
the IoU=0.50 threshold) as well as the test inference time, are given
in Table II.
TABLE II: Baseline Performance Statistics
Feature
ground_apple
tree_apple
Calibrated
Inference
Extractor
AP
AP
mAP
Time (s)
Inception v2
0.4091
0.5235
0.5144
16.43
ResNet 101
0.2213
0.6700
0.6341
56.38
ResNet 50
0.4124
0.6160
0.5997
35.27
The AP for the tree_apple class reﬂects what was reported in
[24] for these CNNs on COCO. The ground_apple class, on the
other hand, does not correlate. This is likely due to the presumed
lack of training data for this class in comparison to the tree_apple
class. The calibrated mAP is, as expected, found to be more
representative of actual accuracy on the test set. It can also be seen
that test inference time is proportional to mAP, with the ResNet
architectures having the highest calibrated mAP but the longest in-
ference time. Inception v2 was found to be up to 3.5 times faster but
with a considerably lower calibrated mAP. Furthermore, doubling
the number of ResNet layers yields an increase in calibrated mAP
by 5.58%.
The ﬁndings demonstrate that the deeper, residual learning-
based architecture of the ResNets is more effective at representing
and extracting the small, low-level features of the apples compared
to the width-based approach of Inception. Interestingly however,
Inception v2 was found to outperform both ResNet architectures,
achieving nearly double the mAP, for medium sized (322 < 962
pixels) apples. Though, due to the infrequency of these apples, this
evidently was not reﬂected in the overall mAP.

JANUARY 2021
6
B. Anchor Boxes
The family of tuneable hyperparameters found to be key in
improving detection performance was anchor box design. Previous
approaches gauge these values using ad-hoc heuristic methods for
the chosen application, for instance [35]. Two approaches, never
before seen in literature surrounding Faster R-CNN or any other
region-based detector networks, are trialed. Both are based on the
k-means clustering algorithm [36]: one using Euclidean distance
and the other using IoU [17] as the distance metric, d, as in
d(b box, centroid) = 1 −IoU(b box, centroid).
(6)
The two use Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) of the
groundtruth bounding boxes from the training dataset to determine
anchor scales and aspect ratios as the k-means centroid, µ, of boxes
in cluster ω. This is shown in Algorithm 1.
The Within-Cluster Sum of Squared Errors (WSS) was calcu-
lated for k between 1 and 10. Using the elbow method, k = 5
was found most suitable. The EDA of bounding boxes is shown in
Figure 5 as a Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) plot. The resulting
anchor box coordinates of the two k-means metrics are superim-
posed as centroids of the 5 clusters.
Fig. 5: KDE Plot of Groundtruth Bounding Boxes With Overlaid
Anchor Designs From the Two k-Means Clustering Approaches.
To assess the performance of the k-means approaches, a man-
ually selected batch of anchors was chosen with regular interval
scales and aspect ratios over the dataset, as was found to be most
successful in previous works [21]. Also tested were the 9 anchors
which were proposed in the original Faster R-CNN paper for the
PASCAL VOC set [14]. For completeness, the baseline anchors are
also featured. Table III shows all anchor designs.
Experiments on the height and width stride for the anchors, with
different combinations of ﬁrst stage features stride are not reported
in detail. When sweeping the ﬁrst stage features stride down to
8, an insigniﬁcant increase in tree_apple AP was recorded, when
considering the previously mentioned variance in successive train-
ing. The ground_apple AP, on the other hand, was detrimentally
reduced. Furthermore, it was found that sweeping anchor height
and width strides between 8 and 64 reduced or did not improve
the calibrated mAP. This might be explained by the small size
and sparsity of apples in most tree-level images, particularly those
captured towards the back of the ﬁeld of view of the drone’s
camera. Also unreported are the inference times, which were found
not to differ signiﬁcantly from the baselines cases. The mAPs for
all cases are shown in Figure 6.
Fig. 6: mAPs For Different Anchor Box Design Methodologies. Bars
Represent Calibrated mAP. Error Bars Denote the Class Discrepancy:
AP of the tree_apple Class (Upper Bound), AP of the ground_apple
Class (Lower Bound).
Immediately evident is the poor performance of the anchors
from the original paper. This shows the importance of optimising
anchor shapes for a particular dataset. It also shows that merely
having more anchors at each location on the convolutional feature

JANUARY 2021
7
map is insufﬁcient. This is exempliﬁed by the baseline set which,
despite using fewer anchors, includes the smaller, 0.25 scale anchor
which is more appropriately ﬁtted to the typical instance of apple
class. This also contributes to the reduction of false negatives,
which is often caused by a bunch or several overlapping apples
on a tree being miss-detected as a single instance. This results
in an increase in Average Recall (AR). This was also noted in
the three approaches which considered the groundtruth bounding
box dimensions. These were the best performers on each of the
three feature extractors. For Inception v2, the manually chosen
anchors yielded a higher calibrated mAP than both k-means, but
had a larger class discrepancy. This could potentially be explained
by a mismatch between the receptive ﬁeld of the network and
the relatively smaller anchor boxes generated by the two k-
means approaches [37]. For the two, deeper, ResNet architectures
however, the best performing anchor design (highest calibrated
mAP and smallest class discrepancy) was obtained using k-means
with the Euclidean distance metric. Finding that the Euclidean
metric outperformed the IoU metric was initially unexpected due
to the tendency of Euclidean distance to minimise error for larger
bounding boxes at the expense of smaller bounding boxes [17].
Observing the distribution of centroids in Figure 5 for both k-
means attempts however, reveals a compliance with a peripheral
test conducted in the original Faster R-CNN paper [14]. This high-
lighted the importance of variety in anchor box scales as opposed
to aspect ratios. Though there is greater aspect ratio variation when
using the IoU metric, Euclidean distance provides centroids with a
greater spread of scales over the groundtruth bounding boxes of
the dataset. Though ResNet 101 with manually selected anchors
marginally had the highest AP for the tree_apple class at 0.6967,
it did also have the widest discrepancy out of the three methods
which considered the groundtruth boxes. Its ground_apple AP was
only 0.3451, leading to a calibrated mAP of 0.6685. This was not
as high as for k-means (Euclidean metric) which achieved 0.6707.
C. Box Proposals
The maximum number of box proposals generated by the RPN
was varied from the baseline conﬁguration of 150 proposals.
Figure 7 shows the effect of varying the maximum number of box
proposals between 75 and 300 on calibrated mAP and inference
time for each of the three feature extractors [22].
Fig. 7: Calibrated mAP and Inference Time (s) As Maximum Number
of Box Proposals Varies Between 75 and 300.
It can be seen that inference time increases proportionally with
the number of box proposals. This increase is intuitive due to the
increase in computation, particularly in the costly box-classiﬁer
portion of the network. In general, doubling the maximum number
of box proposals was found to increase inference time by approxi-
mately 5%, 7% and 16% for Inception v2, ResNet 101 and ResNet
50, respectively. More pertinent is the positive correlation between
calibrated mAP and maximum number of box proposals for each
of the feature extractors. This is shown to increase over the range
of 75 to 300 proposals for Inception v2 and ResNet 50. This is
in accordance with [38] which also reported 300 proposals to be
optimal before accuracy gains plateau whilst computational cost
continues to increase. Notable in this experiment however, was that
calibrated mAP for ResNet 101 actually decreased between 225
and 300 box proposals, with drops in AP for both apple classes.
Repeated retraining conﬁrmed this ﬁnding not to be erroneous.
Though this has not been reported in literature surrounding Faster
R-CNN, it was notably documented in [13] which, as previously
stated, operates a selective search algorithm. Their results found
that AR, which usually correlates well with mAP, did not correlate
when number of box proposals increased. The same was found
in this experiment. As box proposals increased from 225 to 300
for ResNet 101, AR (with IoU threshold averaged over 0.50 to
0.95 in 0.05 increments) increased from 0.361 to 0.393, whilst
calibrated mAP fell from its highest value, 0.6802, to 0.6548. The
consequence of more box proposals for ResNet 101 is therefore
seen to be an increase in false positives. Such a pattern was
empirically attributed to the density of box proposals saturating
mAP in [13].
D. Optimiser
The training conﬁguration formed the next set of experiments.
Three of the most efﬁcient algorithms for gradient descent op-
timisation were investigated. These are Momentum, a variant of
SGD; Adam, an adaptive learning rate algorithm; and RMS Prop,
another adaptive method, which divides the learning rate by an
exponentially decaying average of squared gradients. The baseline
learning rate, η = 0.0003, was originally instated due to commonly
being used with the baseline Momentum optimiser in literature [8].
Similarly, a momentum value, γ = 0.9, was chosen as it features
in almost all literature involving Momentum [14], [39], [27]. The
omission of a ﬁxed learning rate schedule was also elected. This
is because it has been found previously that Momentum, when
training the Oxford-IIIT Pets set over 200,000 steps on Faster
R-CNN [24], converges sufﬁciently. Moreover, adaptive learning
rate schedules do not typically require manually decaying learning
rates.
The three feature extractor networks were initially trained using
each of the three optimisers, all with η = 0.0003. This was
also deemed the appropriate starting point for the two adaptive
learning rate methods due to their robustness in making implicit
corrections. A second round of training was conducted on these
two methods speciﬁcally. This time with an initial learning rate set
at, η = 0.001. This value was recommended in the initial paper for
Adam [34] and has been found empirically to be optimal for RMS
Prop too [33]. The experiments found that using η = 0.001 yielded
marginally better calibrated mAP compared to η = 0.0003 for the
two adaptive learning rate methods. As such, Figure 8 shows the
effect of optimiser choice where Momentum (η = 0.0003), Adam
(η = 0.001) and RMS Prop (η = 0.001) are used to train the three
feature extractors.

JANUARY 2021
8
Fig. 8: Calibrated mAPs For Different Optimisers: Momentum (η =
0.0003), Adam (η = 0.001) and RMS Prop (η = 0.001).
In spite of using the recommended learning rate for Adam, it
lead to a reduction in calibrated mAP for each of the three feature
extractors, compared with the Momentum baseline. When studying
the multitask loss in the RPN, it was found that, whilst bounding
box regressor (localisation) loss was similar compared to the
equivalent network trained with Momentum, the objectness loss
was consistently twice as large for all networks. This fed through
to the ﬁnal classiﬁer loss: localisation losses remained similar and
the classiﬁcation loss disparity between Adam and Momentum
remained, though was less extreme. Although Adam has often
been noted in literature as being an efﬁcient optimiser [33], it has
also been shown to have poor generalisation capabilities, compared
to SGD-based approaches, for certain applications. The results
in this work were in agreement with those found in [40], which
highlighted that for binary classiﬁcation problems, Adam ﬁnds
drastically different solutions to SGD-based approaches and has
a much higher test error.
The similarity in calibrated mAP performance between Momen-
tum and RMS Prop is mimetic of their multitask losses. These
were found to be almost identical for all three feature extractors.
It is observed that the RMS Prop optimiser slightly improved mAP
for ResNet architectures but lightly reduced it for the Inception
v2. Further experimentation on RMS Prop, used as an attempted
improvement to Inception v2, is presented in [27]. Looking at
individual class AP, it was also found empirically that using RMS
Prop lead to considerably higher AP for the ground_apple class
but a marginal reduction in AP for the tree_apple class. The highest
calibrated mAP found (0.6396) was obtained by ResNet 101 which
used the RMS Prop optimiser with η = 0.001.
E. Combining Inception and ResNet Architectures
Thus far, Inception and ResNet feature extractors have been
analysed separately. This experiment evaluates the effect of com-
bining the Inception network with residual connections found in
ResNet, as explained in Section II. Also justiﬁed in that section is
the use of Inception ResNet v2 Atrous, a base network which is
seldom studied in literature.
When trained with the same baseline hyperparameters as in
Table I, the calibrated mAP was found to be 0.6339 with
ground_apple and tree_apple APs of 0.3326 and 0.6603, respec-
tively. This is almost identical to the performance of ResNet 101,
in spite of what was reported in [24]. This saw an increase in mAP
(over IoU thresholds in the range 0.50 to 0.95) by 0.05 between
the two base networks trained on COCO. Less surprising was the
106.87s inference time, which is twice that of ResNet 101.
Potential explanations as to why Inception ResNet v2 Atrous
did not yield the desired mAP increase could be attributed to its
receptive ﬁeld size which is three times larger than that of ResNet
101 [29]. This has been shown to deliver state of the art accuracy
in datasets with large objects, though, for this application, which
consists of only small (< 322 pixels) and medium (322 < 962
pixels) objects, the receptive ﬁeld is too large, relatively. Such a
phenomenon has been noted in [37] which saw a reduction in AP
for small objects in networks with larger receptive ﬁelds.
F. Effect of More Training Data
A ﬁnal experiment was conducted to quantify the increase in
mAP due to increasing the size of the training dataset. This is of
particular interest to those, such as Outﬁeld, who have intentions
to extend the object detector to learn different types of fruit.
Therefore, knowledge of the quantity of training data required is
beneﬁcial. As stated in Section III, training up until this point has
been performed on the partial dataset consisting of 107 images
and 2,709 marked-up apples, due to time constraints. The effect of
increasing the dataset to 435 images and 13,439 marked-up apples
is now explored. The results for the feature extractors, including
Inception ResNet v2 Atrous, are shown in Figure 9.
As expected, calibrated mAP gains were seen for each case. On
average, mAPs experienced a percentage increase of 13% upon
approximately quadrupling the dataset. Also noticeable was the
shrinking of the class discrepancy caused by signiﬁcant gains in
AP for ground_apple class. This conﬁrms previous suggestions
that the ground_apple class AP was sporadic due to number of
marked-up examples in the training dataset.
Fig. 9: mAPs For Each Feature Extractor Trained on the Partial and
Full Datasets. Bars Represent Calibrated mAP. Error Bars Denote the
Class Discrepancy: AP of the tree_apple Class (Upper Bound), AP
of the ground_apple Class (Lower Bound).
G. Optimal Model Conﬁguration
Based on the results discussed in this section, the optimal model
conﬁguration is as follows. A ResNet 101 base feature extractor is
selected after being found consistently to attain higher calibrated
mAP than its 50-layer variant and the Inception v2 network while

JANUARY 2021
9
hyperparameters were tuned. It was shown to match the perfor-
mance of the Inception ResNet v2 Atrous network, though its in-
ference time was found to be half, making it preferable. The set of
k = 5 anchor boxes, determined from k-means clustering (with the
Euclidean distance metric) using bounding box EDA, is selected.
Also in the RPN, a maximum of 225 box proposals is permitted.
Finally, for training, an RMS Prop optimiser, with η = 0.001 is
employed. Remaining hyperparameters are unchanged as in Table
I. This optimal model was trained to 200,000 steps on the full 435-
image dataset. The performance is summarised in Table IV.
This model achieves the best calibrated mAP, individual class
APs, true mAP and AR compared to all other models tested. Whilst
having a similar inference time as the baseline ResNet 101, its
calibrated mAP is 0.1286 higher. Comparing this to [14], the best
Faster R-CNN incarnation from was found to have a mAP of
0.7040 on the PASCAL VOC 2012 set. This comparison should be
treated with caution due to the vastly different datasets however.
PASCAL VOC contains 20 classes and large unobstructed objects.
Whereas, this dataset contains 2, difﬁcult to distinguish classes,
consisting of small, often covered or clustered objects, which
have been marked-up to the best possible standard in spite of the
unavoidable subjectivity of the dataset, as predicted in Section III.
A sample of six separate test photos during inference are shown
in Figure 10. These highlight the success of this model in differen-
tiating between the two apple classes. This instils conﬁdence that
such a network could easily be extended to detect a wide range of
different fruits and potentially even different fruit varieties as soon
as training data become available.
Fig. 10: Inference Run on A Sample of Six Images From the Test Dataset. The Two Classes Are Shown In Green and Blue, With Respective
Conﬁdences Given For Each Apple.

JANUARY 2021
10
V. PERSPECTIVE PROJECTION IMAGE PREPROCESSOR
SYSTEM
Due to the desire to have tree-level crops as the input to the
network, as described in Section III, an image prepossessing step
must be devised. One method of extracting such crops from the
raw, drone images is to pass them through a preliminary NN for
detecting or segmenting trees. Such a network has been trained
by [41]. This would however need to be extended to crop out the
detected trees before passing them into the proposed networks in
this paper. Moreover, there is the issue of double-counting trees, as
successive drone images have a speciﬁed overlap to improve key-
point matching for creating orthomosaics and point clouds.
A more robust solution, given Outﬁeld’s orchard surveying pro-
cedure, would be to incorporate the Real-Time Kinematic (RTK)
positioning data. This can be collected easily for the bases of trees
at the end of each row of the orchard using an RTK receiver. In
QGIS, these coordinates can be extrapolated for all the trees using
a known tree spacing (provided by the grower), as well as the
obtained Digital Terrain Model (DTM). In addition, the Digital
Surface Model (DSM) is used to ﬁnd the height of each tree at these
base coordinates. The DTM and DSM are processed using Pix4D
following the drone survey. The result is a set of 3D coordinates
(latitude, longitude and altitude) for the top and bottom of every
tree in the orchard, given in the world reference frame, using the
Pseudo-Mercator Projection WGS-84.
To convert these into 2D pixel coordinates, the perspective
projection model must be applied. To do this, two types of pa-
rameters need to be obtained, namely, the extrinsic and intrinsic
camera parameters. The former deﬁne the transformation between
the camera reference frame and the world frame, whilst the latter
relates the pixel coordinates of an image point to the corresponding
coordinates in the camera reference frame. A depiction of the
perspective projection model using a standard drone image is
shown in Figure 11.
Fig. 11: Perspective Projection 3D Geometry For A Camera Without
Distortion.
Finding the extrinsic camera parameters involves ﬁrst determin-
ing the 3D rotation matrix that brings the axes of the camera frame
and the world frame into alignment. Using the angles ω, φ and κ,
this is shown in,
R = Rx(ω)Ry(φ)Rz(κ)
(7)
which is the multiplication of the 3D rotation matrices, using the
right hand rule, as in:
Rx(ω) =


1
0
0
0
cos(ω)
−sin(ω)
0
sin(ω)
cos(ω)

,
(8)
Ry(φ) =


cos(φ)
0
sin(φ)
0
1
0
−sin(φ)
0
cos(φ)

,
(9)
Rz(κ) =


cos(κ)
−sin(κ)
0
sin(κ)
cos(κ)
0
0
0
1

.
(10)
Secondly, the translation between the relative positions of the
origins of the world frame and the camera frame must be ascer-
tained. Combining both transformations results in,
P c = RT (P w −T )
(11)
where,
P c =


Xc
Yc
Zc

, P w =


Xw
Yw
Zw

, T =


Tx
Ty
Tz

.
(12)
P c and P w are the coordinates of a 3D point, P , in the camera
frame and the world frame, respectively. Whereas, T is the coordi-
nates of the centre of perspective projection in the world frame.
The intrinsic camera parameters are deﬁned by the optical,
geometric, and digital characteristics of a camera. These are then
found, by Thales’ theorem, using the focal length, f, the principal
point, (cx, cy), and perspective projection using the camera frame
in,

ui
vj

=
 fXc
Zc
−fYc
Zc
!
+

cx
cy

(13)
where ui and vj are the pixel coordinates of the 3D point
projection using a non-distorted camera model [42]. The code
3D_2D_bounding_crop.py was written to perform these transfor-
mations using the NumPy and OpenCV libraries. It ﬁrst decodes
the project ﬁles produced in Pix4D, such as pmatrix.txt and off-
set.xyz. Then, for every image in the undistorted_images directory,
the code iterates through all the tree coordinates, converting them
into the pixel frame, to determine which trees are visible. From
these, if a tree has not yet been recorded in a previous image, it
is cropped and saved with its uniquely assigned identiﬁer, before
being fed into the detection NN. The identiﬁer is a concatenated
row and column address based on the real-world position of the
tree in the orchard.
It is this algorithm that makes this system superior to simply
cropping all trees from a precursory NN. This is not only due
to the aforementioned double-counting issue, but also because of
the extra geospatial information provided. Speciﬁcally, being able
to determine how many apples are growing on each tree, and,
crucially, where those trees are located in the orchard. This type
of georeferencing is beneﬁcial because it provides data regarding
which trees or areas of the orchard are not meeting yield expecta-
tions. Physical investigations in the orchard can then be conducted
in problem areas, focusing on deﬁciencies in soil water content,
minerals or sunlight, for example. For illustration, a raw drone
image, where the identiﬁers have been automatically generated and
superimposed, is shown in Figure 12.

JANUARY 2021
11
Fig. 12: For Illustration: A Raw Drone Image, Where Each Tree Has Been Tagged and Identiﬁed Using the Perspective Projection Model.
This Is Prior to Being Cropped to the Tree-Level.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This work proposed a system, based on the principles of object
detection, to detect and count apples from oblique, overhead drone
imagery of giant commercial orchards. As a precursor, a novel
technique for extracting individual trees from the raw drone im-
agery was devised to avoid wasted computation in the NN caused
by feeding in such imagery. This incorporated RTK data and the
DTM to locate global coordinates of every tree base in the orchard
in WGS-84. Then, using forward projection, with the internal
and external camera parameters, the set 2D pixel coordinates
corresponding to each tree in the imagery could be found. Tree-
level crops were then taken, based on the DSM and a known tree
spacing, such that every tree was extracted once only. Unique,
geospatial identiﬁers localise yield information to the tree-level,
allowing farmers to take further action based on underperforming
trees or areas of the orchard.
The tree-level crops obtained from this initial stage formed the
set of input imagery to be fed into the detection NN. Optimisa-
tion of this network to detect individual apples, and differentiate
between apples on trees and on the ground, was then conducted.
From previous works, Faster R-CNN was established as the most
suitable object detection framework due to its region proposal ap-
proach which prioritises accuracy over training and inference time,
unlike regression-based approaches. Three base feature extractors
formed the basis on which network hyperparameters were tuned.
Parameters whose adjustment resulted in positive increases in
calibrated mAP were reported. Anchor box design was key due to
the atypical scale of apple objects. A k-means clustering approach
based on Euclidean distance and EDA of groundtruth bounding
boxes yielded the biggest increase in calibrated mAP compared
to the baseline anchors. Also explored were the number of box
proposals in the RPN, where mAP was found to peak or stagnate
at 225 proposals for the ResNet bases. Detrimental performance
above this was attributed to an increase in false positive detections,
which reduced mAP whilst AR continued to rise. Experiments on
the training conﬁguration explored the effect of optimiser types
and learning rate combinations. Adam optimiser was found to be
signiﬁcantly less successful than what was reported in literature
due to poor generalisation capabilities. RMS Prop, with η = 0.001,
was found to be a marginal improvement on Momentum. Final
experiments showed that combining Inception and ResNet blocks
did not give rise to the expected increase in calibrated mAP
compared to ResNet 101. This was potentially due the difference in
size between network receptive ﬁeld and apple objects. Inference
time also doubled, making it unfavourable compared to ResNet
101. Lastly, quadrupling the dataset size was quantiﬁed by an
approximate 13% increase in calibrated mAP.
The amalgamation of the optimal hyperparameters lead to a
model conﬁguration with a calibrated mAP of 0.7627 and a true
mAP of 0.6848, both of which sit among state of the art ﬁgures
quoted in literature, though for drastically different detection tasks.
The ability of the network to distinguish between ground apples
(AP = 0.5920) and tree apples (AP = 0.7776) was particularly
impressive. This leads to conﬁdence that this network can suc-
cessfully be extended to different types and varieties of fruit when
training data become available.

JANUARY 2021
12
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Outﬁeld Technologies (Oli
Hilbourne and Jim McDougall) for the data and motivation behind
the project.
