A Uniﬁed Conversational Assistant Framework
for Business Process Automation
Yara Rizk, Abhishek Bhandwalder, Scott Boag, Tathagata Chakraborti,
Vatche Isahagian, Yasaman Khazaeni, Falk Pollock, Merve Unuvar
IBM Research AI
75 Binney Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142

Abstract
Business process automation is a booming multi-billion-
dollar industry that promises to remove menial tasks from
workers’ plates – through the introduction of autonomous
agents – and free up their time and brain power for more
creative and engaging tasks. However, an essential compo-
nent to the successful deployment of such autonomous agents
is the ability of business users to monitor their performance
and customize their execution. A simple and user-friendly
interface with a low learning curve is necessary to increase
the adoption of such agents in banking, insurance, retail and
other domains. As a result, proactive chatbots will play a cru-
cial role in the business automation space. Not only can they
respond to users’ queries and perform actions on their be-
half but also initiate communication with the users to inform
them of the system’s behavior. This will provide business
users a natural language interface to interact with, monitor
and control autonomous agents. In this work, we present a
multi-agent orchestration framework to develop such proac-
tive chatbots by discussing the types of skills that can be com-
posed into agents and how to orchestrate these agents. Two
use cases on a travel preapproval business process and a loan
application business process are adopted to qualitatively an-
alyze the proposed framework based on four criteria: perfor-
mance, coding overhead, scalability, and agent overlap.
Introduction
Automation made its way into manufacturing plants in the
early 1900s, however comparatively, its integration into the
service industry has been slow. The service industry ﬁrst
took advantage of automation through customer care chat-
bots which routed incoming customer calls to the appro-
priate human operators. Gradually, these robotic answering
machines improved and began to replace services provided
by some human operators by walking customers through
simple steps to resolve problems and escalating to humans
only when necessary. As enabling technologies improved,
so have these customer care chatbots which can now carry
out more elaborate conversations with the customers.
Beyond chatbots, little automation was incorporated in
the services industry despite the plethora of automation op-
portunities. The emergence of Robotic Process Automation
(RPA) led to the next breakthrough. RPA developed robotic
software agents capable of automating simple tasks within a
business process such as form ﬁlling and data mining. RPAs
reduced the cost of deploying autonomous agents but cov-
ered a small portion of automatable tasks, namely simple
repetitive tasks. This led to the emergence of Business Pro-
cess Automation (BPA) which supersedes RPA’s scope. In
addition to task automation, BPA looked to automate de-
cision making, data management, content digitization, and
workﬂow improvement. BPA relies on various artiﬁcial in-
telligence technologies including optical character recogni-
tion (OCR) systems and decision making models to auto-
mate business process tasks. As state-of-the-art algorithms
become more accurate and reliable - deep learning OCR has
achieved super-human accuracy levels - automation in ser-
vice industry will become more cost-effective.
Nevertheless, wide-spread deployment of autonomous
systems has still lagged behind expectations. Trustworthi-
ness, coding overhead, scalability, algorithm life cycle, tech-
nical expertise and user experience have been a few chal-
lenges that have stood in the way of more successful in-
tegration into business process solutions. In this work, we
claim that a proactive multi-agent conversational framework
can be that one stop shop that resolves many of these chal-
lenges. However, multiple research questions at the intersec-
tion of automation and business processes must be address
ﬁrst. A conversational interface reduces the necessary tech-
nical expertise to interact, monitor and customize the frame-
work, but many algorithms do not have a conversational in-
terface. How can we effectively integrate such algorithms
into a conversational framework with minimal coding over-
head? How can such independently developed (and poten-
tially incompatible) functions coexist and cooperate within
the same ecosystem? How could the user access all of the
automation options in the framework with minimal interface
and protocol hoping? The goal is not to create a natural lan-
guage interaction for every part of the process but a single
interactive interface. If it is accessing different documents,
running OCR on a new application, checking our database
or setting up alerts on speciﬁc events in our system, one
would prefer to interact with a single interface which is con-
veniently conversational in this scenario.
We believe an orchestrator and agent composition ap-
arXiv:2001.03543v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2020

proach with a speciﬁc pipeline would provide solutions
to these questions. We present a multi-agent orchestration
framework that consists of heterogeneous agents such as
dialog, informational retrieval, task execution, and alerting
agents and an orchestration layer that consists of three com-
ponents (scorer, selector and sequencer) that would control
the execution of the agents in the framework. As a proof of
concept, we create two instances of this assistant for a travel
preapproval business process and a loan application business
process – deployed in a sandbox environment – and discuss
how this framework can address these challenges.
Related Work
Business Process Automation
Task automation has driven the digital transformation in en-
terprises with the emergence of RPA as a light-weight ap-
proach for automating repetitive tasks. RPA is a paradigm
that seeks to automate the “mouse-click" in user interfaces
to relieve human resources of repetitive tasks. RPA adopts
an outside-in approach that requires minimal changes to
legacy software (van der Aalst, Bichler, and Heinzl 2018);
they have been applied to various sectors including account-
ing (Mofﬁtt, Rozario, and Vasarhelyi 2018), auditing (Fer-
nandez and Aman 2018), human resources (Papageorgiou
2018), banking (Stople et al. 2017), public administration
(Houy, Hamberg, and Fettke 2019) and energy sectors (Lac-
ity, Willcocks, and Craig 2015).
Multiple approaches have been adopted in the develop-
ment of RPAs. (Gao et al. 2019) proposed an RPA solution
for document ﬂow automation in a debt collector business
process. They used deep learning OCR and classiﬁcation
to control the path of the document through the business
process. User behavior was captured to train a self-learning
agent capable of identifying relationships between tasks and
deploying RPAs based on the learned rules (Wróblewska et
al. 2018). This approach, known as form-to-rule, relied on
ﬁrst-order logic to deduce the rules. Another branch of lit-
erature focused on identifying RPA-eligible tasks automat-
ically. Leopold et al. relied on natural language processing
of business process descriptions (Leopold, van der Aa, and
Reijers 2018). They adopted supervised machine learning to
classify instances into one of three classes.
As the scope of RPA increases to include more complex
tasks, RPA agents incorporate other technological advance-
ments such as OCR for document digitization, and data min-
ing for content collection and management to successfully
automate complex tasks. These advancements have achieved
the best performance when adopting deep learning models
(Schmidhuber 2015). However, these models are computa-
tionally expensive to train and have seen slow adoption de-
spite their super-human accuracy due to their lack of trans-
parency and explainability.
Beyond RPA, BPA also seeks for automated decision
making within business processes. The ﬁeld of automated
planning has been considered a prime candidate to enable
more advanced levels of automation in business processes
(Marrella 2017). Planning algorithms can be used to auto-
matically generate business process models, adapt the busi-
ness process’ behavior based on unforeseen circumstances,
and autonomously perform conformance checking.
End-to-end BPA has yet to ﬁnd success in real-world de-
ployments despite the ubiquity of computing devices and
the advancements in software technology. Trust and reli-
ability have been two of the main challenges preventing
wide-spread adoption of automation approaches. With busi-
ness stakeholders lacking the technical skills to monitor au-
tonomous agents and intervene when they do not operate as
expected, they have been reluctant to adopt this technology.
Providing a natural language interface to allow such users to
interact with autonomous agents may be the key to increase
the adoption of automation in service enterprises.
Conversational Agents
Natural language is the main communication modality in
business enterprises. From conversations to written docu-

ural language can signiﬁcantly facilitate the integration of
various autonomous agents into domains where users do
not speak the language of computers. Conversational agents
have been developed for a wide range of applications using
a plethora of machine learning techniques that have resulted
in agents with increasing degrees of sophistication. In this
section, we will focus on chatbots developed for enterprise
applications and speciﬁcally those used in conjunction with
RPA. Two approaches to chatbot development have been
mainly adopted in the literature: 1) building domain speciﬁc
chatbots by relying on natural language understanding and
generative machine learning models, and 2) training deep
learning models on data samples (Galitsky 2019). While the
former requires more overhead to develop, it has been the
more widely adopted approach for enterprise chatbots due
to its predictable and controllable behavior.
In enterprises, chatbots were ﬁrst adopted for customer
support which involved answering customers’ questions
about the services, products, location etc. of businesses (Gal-
itsky 2019). Beyond question answering bots, a shopping bot
was developed to increase the sales of shops by answering
questions from customers and even providing custom prices
for products (Heo, Lee, and others 2018). A delivery bot was
also developed for food delivery services that reduced the ef-
fort required from customers to order pizza (Heo, Lee, and
others 2018). While only automating 30% of the processes
with these bots, the bot developers have recently begun in-
vestigating the incorporation of RPA to increase the per-
centage of automation. Matthies et al. developed a chatbot
for agile software development teams (Matthies, Dobrigkeit,
and Hesse 2019) which analyzed commits in version con-
trol systems to provide insights into the teams’ performance.
Kalia et al. proposed an approach to generate a conversa-
tional agent based on dialog trees given a business process
ﬂow (Kalia et al. 2017). Even though they provide a sys-
tematic way to develop chatbot that were sound, signiﬁcant
overhead and domain knowledge were necessary.
Furthermore, these approaches have focused on design-
ing a single conversational agent capable of answering fre-
quently asked questions and performing tasks in a process
such as determining the price of products in the shopping

Figure 1: Multi-agent Orchestration Overview
bot. Expanding the scope of their operation would require
signiﬁcant coding overhead by developers who understand
the existing system. Also, reusing existing agents may not
be possible due to compatibility reasons. In this work, we
propose a conversation agent framework based on the multi-
agent system paradigm as a potential solution to these issues.
Instead of designing a single powerful agent, multiple spe-
cialized agents with narrower scopes can be independently
designed and then integrated into a multi-agent system to act
as a single conversational agent from the user’s perspective.
Methodology
Overall Framework
The framework for the proactive conversational assistant for
BPA consists of three main components: skills, agents, and
an orchestrator, as shown in Fig. 1. Skills perform well de-
ﬁned tasks; they require a set of inputs to produce a set of
outputs. Agents are composed of skills that fall into three
main categories: understand skills, act skills, and respond
skills. An execution pattern for the skills must be provided;
it can be as simple as a static sequential script or as complex
as a full execution graph. The orchestrator coordinates be-
tween agents and it determines which agent or agents must
execute to successfully respond to a user. When a user en-
ters an utterance, this natural language sentence is forwarded
to all the agents in the assistant by the orchestrator after po-
tentially preprocessing the input. The orchestrator requests a
preview of each agent’s response and their conﬁdence score.
This score depicts how conﬁdent an agent is in its ability
to respond to the user. Depending on the adopted orchestra-
tion pattern, the orchestrator selects one or more agents to
execute and return their responses to the user.
Skills
Skills are atomic functions, the building blocks of agents.
They are categorized according to their role within an agent
and their effect on the state of the world. Skills can have
one of three roles: understand, act and respond. Furthermore,
skills can either be world changing or non-world changing.
Understand skills
Serving as the entry point to an agent,
understand skills identify the user’s intent. In the conversa-
tional setting, understand skills are generally intent and en-
tity recognition skills but can also be as simple as a key-
phrase detection. They may take a user’s natural language
utterance and classify it into one of many predeﬁned intents
that the agent can handle or check if a speciﬁc phrase des-
ignated to trigger the agent is there. They may also annotate
any entities they recognize within the input. In a non-dialog
setting, understand skills are event triggered skills that watch
for speciﬁc events and state changes in the system. These
events could be a user logging in or a change in database.
Act skills
Act skills process the user input to produce an
output that can be used to generate a response. We distin-
guish two main types of act skills: world changing and non-
world changing. World changing skills perform actions that
modify the state of the world or have side-effects outside the
conﬁnes of the orchestrator world. Examples of such skills

Non-world changing skills do not have any side effects. Ex-

etc. Act skills in the business process world can perform var-
ious tasks or activities. One task is gathering information
by querying databases or making API calls to information
sources. Decision points are a set of activities that move the
business process forward. Another task that moves the busi-
ness process forward is submitting applications or forward-
ing gathered information to the next activity.
Respond skills
Respond skills create the response that
will be returned to the user by the conversational assistant.
The skills take the output of act skills and process them to
form natural language responses to the user; these could be
full ﬂesh natural language generation to template responses
given different outputs of the other skills. Other modalities
of responses can also be considered such as visualization of
the output in the form of plots or images.
Agents
Individually, the skills may not be able to perform complex
tasks required by the activities within a business process.
Instead of increasing the scope of individual skills by imple-
menting more complex functionality within them, compos-
ing them into agents capable of completing these activities is
more effective. This modular approach simpliﬁes debugging
of skills and agents and increases the reusability of skills by
making them as domain agnostic as possible.
We deﬁne a contract for the agents in order to facilitate
their orchestration within a single assistant. The agents ex-
pect to receive an input message or utterance and the cur-
rent context which represents the state of the system. The
agent is capable of producing a preview response that does
not cause any world-changing actions to be invoked, an ex-
ecute response that results from fully executing its pipeline
and may cause the world to change, an updated context once
the agent has executed, and a conﬁdence in its response.
Multiple approaches can be adopted to compose skills
into agents. Creating the execution pipeline can be done stat-
ically where a software developer writes a script that explic-
itly deﬁnes the order in which skills must be executed and
directs the ﬂow of data by routing inputs and outputs. In
goal-oriented non-deterministic planning based composition
(Muise et al. 2019; Botea et al. 2019), software developers
declaratively deﬁne the inputs and outputs of skills and the

end goal of the agent. Then, a planning engine composes an
execution tree using the subset of available skills that will
lead to the goal. While this approach allows independent de-
velopers to include their skills in a catalog, composing skills
into agents in an effective way requires a minimum level of
compatibility between the skills, including the adoption of a
uniﬁed vocabulary for input/output variables.
Agents are composed of an understand skill, a set of act
skills, and a respond skill. Depending on the functionality of
the agent, none, one or multiple act skills may be included in
the composition. Next, we discuss four main types of agents
based on their functionality. While many more agents can
be created, we consider the ones that would be most relevant
and commonly used in BPA.
Dialog Agents
Users may just need to inquire about cer-
tain topics and do not require any action to be taken by the
assistant. In such scenarios, a dialog agent, composed of an
understand skill for intent and entity recognition and a re-
spond skill to answer the user’s query. Examples of such
agents include chit-chat agents, FAQ or “help" agents, etc.
They can be implemented in dialog tree type services. These
agents do not change the world; their preview mode and ex-
ecute mode are the same.
Information Retrieval Agents
Unlike dialog agents, in-
formation retrieval agents must connect to an external ser-
vice (such as making an API call or querying a database) in
order to produce their answer to a user’s query as opposed to
having the answering within the agent implementation. As
a result, such agent compositions consist of three types of
skills: understand skill that determine the intent of the user
and annotate any entities that may be useful, one or more
act skills that queries the appropriate service to produce its
answer, and a respond skill that appropriately constructs the
response returned to the user. In general, most agents within
this category do not contain skills that change the world.
However, their preview and execute modes may vary for
computational/latency reasons. In some situations, querying
does change the world; for example, retrieving the credit
score of a loan applicant is considered as world changing
as it will have a negative impact on the applicant if queried
a large number of times. In other cases, simply incurring a
cost, for example monetary or in the form or using up API
calls that are limited, to query a database can be modeled as
world changing to minimize the cost incurred by the system.
Task Execution Agents
Beyond querying for informa-
tion, the business user may want the assistant to perform
tasks within the business process. Task execution agents are
capable of moving the business process forward by submit-
ting application, making decisions at decision points and
such. These agents will change the world and therefore may
require a preview and execute mode based on the type of
orchestrator adopted. These agents are composed of an un-
derstand skill, a set of act skills and a respond skill.
Alerting Agents
Setting up alerts to receive notiﬁcations
triggered by the occurrence of speciﬁc events allows busi-
ness users to monitor the business process in an asyn-
chronous way. Like the other agents, these agents are also
composed of an understand skill, a set of act skills and a
respond skill. However, their understand skill does not nec-
essarily have to be a natural language understanding skill.
However, setting up custom alerts would require an intent
and entity recognition understand skill. These agents con-
sist of a watcher skill on the system that may trigger the
alert, a notiﬁcation generation skill and a communication
channel skill that sends the notiﬁcation over the appropriate

ral language understanding skill can be added to allow the
user to customize the trigger and settings through dialog. If
that is the case, a Natural Language to Query (NLQ) skill
would be necessary to convert natural language trigger def-
initions to structured, well-deﬁned queries on the database
that may trigger the alert and is watched by the daemon. If
an NLQ skill is not available, hard-coded conversions must
be present. However, this approach restricts the number of
alerts that can be created. NLQ provides a broader range of
triggers that can be set. It also allows the creation of domain
agnostic alert agents which would be more portable and re-
quire minimal coding overhead to deploy in new domains,
a desirable feature in the BPA ﬁeld. In this paper, we dis-
tinguish between alerts and notiﬁcations. The former is the
occurrence of an event that causes the conditions of the trig-
ger to be satisﬁed. The latter is the actual message sent to
the user when an alert happens.
Orchestration
Combining these diverse agents into a single assistant re-
quires a domain agnostic orchestration layer capable of de-
termining which subset of agents are best suited to respond
to the user’s utterance. Various orchestration frameworks
with diverse characteristics can be adopted to achieve this
goal. Stateless orchestrators do not keep track of the state in
a centralized location. Instead the context variables (state)
are passed between the orchestrator and agents. Stateful or-
chestrators on the other hand, maintain the state of the sys-
tem in a centralized location. The computational cost of data
transfer in the former approach increases with the number
of context variables maintained in the state. As a result, sys-
tem designers tend to minimize the number of variables in
their state resulting a decrease in the amount of information
agents have access to. Stateful orchestrators, however, re-
quire a central device to maintain the state which could be
costly from a deployment and scalability perspective.
Apriori orchestrators decide which agents should execute
by considering the user input and what they know about
agent capabilities. Posterior orchestrators pass the inputs
to the agents requesting their responses, then decide which
agents to select. In this case, preview and execute modes
of agents must be available for those agents that perform
world changing actions. Orchestrators also expect agents to
provide a conﬁdence in their responses which are used as a
feature in their decision making algorithm.
Unlike dialog managers, orchestrators do not require
knowledge of the dialog to select agents. Dialog managers
are assumed to be part of those agents that need it. For ex-
ample, dialog agents would have managers that keep track of
which node of a tree the conversation is in or perform dialog

Figure 2: 3S Orchestration Pipeline
disambiguation and co-reference resolution.
The 3S orchestrator is an example of a posterior orches-
trator that relies on the agent’s conﬁdence, among other met-
rics, to determine which agents should respond. Its pipeline
consists of three main steps: scoring, selecting, and sequenc-
ing agents (Yurochkin et al. 2019; Upadhyay et al. 2019).
Scorer
When the orchestrator receives the user’s utter-
ance, it forwards this input to all agents and requests a pre-
view of their response. Once the agents return their preview
responses and their conﬁdence score, the scorer performs ad-
ditional computations to obtain the ﬁnal scores per agent. An
identity function scorer simply forwards the scores as is to
the selector. A scorer may normalize scores, especially since
they could have been produced by very diverse agents that
compute their scores differently. A more sophisticated scorer
could enhance the agents’ conﬁdences with other measures
such as conversation stickiness, dialog depth (within a dialog
tree) and agent engagement. A Bayesian model that adapts
to user feedback could also be adopted.
Selector
Once the scorer computes the ﬁnal scores per
agent, it forwards them to the selector that must select one
or more agents that will respond to the user. It can be as
simple as a Top 1 (or Top K) score selector that picks the
agent (or K agents) with the highest score. More complex
selection criteria could be adopted such as heuristic rules,
learned selection models from labeled user data, online re-
inforcement learning models trained on user feedback, or a
combination of multiple approaches. Once the selector de-
termines the subset of agents that must execute, the orches-
trator requests their execution responses. Various machine
learning algorithms can be adopted to improve the robust-
ness of the selector as the noise in the score increases. In a
supervised learning domain, labels can represent agents that
are the output of classiﬁers and the input to the classiﬁer
would be a feature vector consisting of the agents’ scores
and/or user utterances. In a reinforcement learning domain,
actions can represent agents and the environment produces
a reward when the correct agent is selected. For both ap-
proaches, deep learning models can be trained if enough data
is provided to further improve the selection model.
Figure 3: Travel Preapproval Process
Conversation
Responding agent
Manager: Hello
Chit-Chat
Travelbot: Hi there
Manager: Retrieve the number of accepted
papers authored by John Smith
Publication Query
Travelbot: The number of accepted papers
by John Smith is 7
Manager: Approve John Smith’s request
Business Process
Travelbot: John Smith’s application has
been approved
Task Execution
Table 1: Conversation samples
Sequencer
After receiving the agents’ execution re-
sponses, a sequencer determines the order in which these
responses will be presented to the user. If a Top 1 score se-
lector was adopted in the previous stage, then no sequenc-
ing is necessary. The response is directly outputted to the
user through the conversational interface. However, when
a subset of agents has responded, a sequencer could adopt
different approaches to order these responses: e.g. descend-
ing score, heuristic rules (e.g. greeting agent must always
respond before other agents), supervised or reinforcement
learning models trained on labeled data and user feedback.
Use Case – 1: Travel Preapproval Application
We will now detail the implementation of a conversational
assistant (in Slack) for two personas (employees, and man-
agers/directors) in a simpliﬁed travel preapproval applica-
tion process using the framework described so far.
Travel Preapproval Business Process
We adopt a simpliﬁed business process revolving around
travel preapprovals generally used across many corpora-
tions. We consider the scenario of researchers/employees re-
questing travel funds to attend research conferences. The
travel preapproval process, shown in Fig. 3, was imple-
mented in a business process management software.
Employees submit a travel preapproval request to attend
a conference by ﬁlling in speciﬁc information into a form,
shown in Fig. 4(a). Once submitted, the application is for-
warded to the employee’s manager who can approve/reject

the application (Fig. 4(b)) or request additional informa-
tion/changes to the application (Fig. 4(c)). If approved by
the manager, the application is forwarded to the director who
makes the ﬁnal decision on the travel request.
Agents in Travelbot
Travelbot contains multiple agents that enable it to respond
to a broad range of user requests. The 3S orchestrator coordi-
nates between the composed agents to respond to the user or
execute any actions requested by the user. Table 1 includes
a sample interaction between Travelbot and a manager.
Chit-Chat Agent
A simple dialog agent, Chit-Chat is im-
plemented as a question answering dialog tree that is capa-
ble of answering utterances related to greetings (e.g. “hello”,
“how are you”, “goodbye”, etc.). It can also introduce the
assistant answering questions such as “who are you” and
“how can you help me”. Additional intents and dialog trees
are also included to make the assistant more human-like and
improve the user experience – e.g. “what are you doing”,
“tell me a joke”, etc. This agent does not have any act skills;
it does not cause any side effects when executed and hence
has identical preview and execute modes.
Publication Query Agent
This information retrieval
agent queries a database containing the publications of em-
ployees and conference information. In the adopted use case,
this agent can be used to auto-ﬁll the information in the
application form related to travel justiﬁcation and confer-
ence location and dates. It can also be used by managers
and directors to obtain information necessary for making
decisions. For example, travel requests would be approved
for employees presenting their work at the conference as
ﬁrst authors. This agent makes this information accessible to
managers through a conversational interface and eliminates
the need for them to switch to a different interface. The static
composition of this agent consists of a Natural Language
Understanding (NLU) understand skill, an act skill capable
of retrieving employee information from an employee direc-
tory that would be used by the publication query skill (sec-
ond act skill) to retrieve publication/conference information.
Finally, the respond skill generates the ﬁnal response that
will be returned to the user.
Business Process Data Query Agent
Another informa-
tional retrieval agent, the business process data query agent
allows managers and directors to query the existing travel
request applications. Managers and directors can ask ques-
tions like “How many pending travel requests are in my
queue?” or “How many applications have been submitted by
employee X?”. Such queries factor into the decision making
process and allow decision makers to make more informed
decisions. This agent is composed of three skills: an NLU
understand skill, a data query act skill, and a respond skill.
Business Process Task Execution Agent
This agent al-
lows users to move the business process forward by request-
ing the assistant to submit an application on their behalf
(e.g. “Submit an application to AAAI 2020 for me.”) or
approve/reject/send back an application (e.g. “Reject Jack’s
application to ICML 2019.”). The agent composition is more
Figure 4: Employee Travel Preapproval User Interfaces: (a)
Employee Application Form, (b) Manager/Director Review
Form, (c) Employee/Manager/Director Revision Form
complex in this case and consists of four act skills that may
or may not be invoked depending on the recognized intent.
Like the other agents, this agent also has an intent and entity
recognition understand skill and a respond skill. Its act skills
are employee directory query, paper directory skill, travel
pricing skill and business process task execute act skill. The
pricing skill is used auto-ﬁll the “requested amount” ﬁeld in
Fig. 4(a).
Travel Estimation Agent
This agent can respond to in-
quiries about travel such as – “What is the cheapest ﬂight
from BOS to SFO leaving on 2019/12/01 and returning on
2019/12/07?”. This information retrieval agent consists of an
intent and entity recognition understand skill, a travel pric-
ing skill which uses the Amadeus API to estimate the cost
of ﬂights and hotels, and a respond skill that formulates the
answer returned to the user. Managers or directors can use
this agent to verify the “requested amount” ﬁeld submitted
by the employee.
Visualization Agent
Beyond natural language responses,
the visualization agent provides the assistant with the ability
to return visual responses. This is useful in situations where
information retrieval agents return data that is easier to di-
gest in a plot form. Therefore, the user can ask the assistant
to plot the results. This agent is composed of an intent and
entity recognition understand skill to if and which plot the
user wants and what variables to use if multiple options ex-
ist. A plotter skill converts the plottable data to an image of
a bar graph or doughnut chart or other visualization format
that is then forwarded to the user using the respond skill. Due
to the stateless implementation of the orchestrator, the data
is persisted for a ﬁnite number of iterations in the context
that is passed between agents the orchestrator. If the visu-
alization agent is invoked by a user utterance, it will look
for plottable data in the context. If this data does not exist,
then a default response of “There is no data to be plotted.” is
returned to the user.

Alerting using Natural Language Query
TravelBot al-
lows the user to create and customize alerts based on user’s
data-store. The system accepts user input and if it is deter-
mined that intent is the creation of alert, the sentence is then
passed through an NLQ module (Sen et al. 2019), (Sen et
al. 2018), (Jammi et al. 2018). The NLQ module can ex-
press any natural language sentence into a data query which
can run on top of many different types of data-stores (Elas-
ticSearch, SQL, etc). The query from NLQ module is then
stored and a daemon runs in the background monitoring
these queries. If there is any change in the data store (Ad-
dition of new row, changes in values of an existing row) and
the query output changes, an alert is generated and sent to
the user on the communication channel. The system deter-
mines the communication channel for a speciﬁc user through
conversation. Alerts could be conﬁgured to send notiﬁca-

Use Case – 2: Loan Application
Using the same multi-agent framework, we also develop a
loan ofﬁcer chatbot for a loan application business process.
We include: 1) a data query agent capable of answering
questions related to existing applications, 2) a business rules
agent that can provide insights into whether an application
will be accepted or rejected, 3) a visualization agent capable
of representing data in different formats, 4) an alerts agent
that sends notiﬁcations when changes to loan applications
occur, and 5) a content analyzer that can process loan docu-
ments and extract information from them. Sample conversa-
tions with this chatbot are included in Table 2 and Fig. 5.
Figure 5: Multi-modal responses from the LoanBot.
Challenges
Multiple challenges have hindered the deployment of au-
tonomous conversational agents in BPA domains. We focus
Conversation
Responding
agent
Loan Ofﬁcer: What is the total loan amount for
borrowers with credit score more than 500?
Data query
Loanbot: The sum value is 137368000.0
Loan Ofﬁcer: Who are the top 3 borrowers with
average amount more than 10000
Data query
Loanbot: These are the value: 1). average of
J. Smith is 584917$, 2). average of V. Doe is
575692$, 3). average of Y. Doe is 557615$
Loan Ofﬁcer: List all borrowers with yearly in-
come more than 50000 but credit score less than
150
Data query
Loanbot: Total records found are 82. Here is the
link: <url>
Loan Ofﬁcer: Plot the bar chart per yearly in-
come
Visualization
Loanbot: <image> (Fig. 5)
Loan Ofﬁcer: Find the top 5 borrowers in terms
of total amount of loans
Data query
Loanbot: The result for your query is: <csv>
(Fig. 5)
Loan Ofﬁcer: Could you process an application
requesting a loan of 3000$?
Business rules
Loanbot: What is the credit score?
Loan Ofﬁcer: 400
Business rules
Loanbot: What is the annual salary (in USD)
Loan Ofﬁcer: 5000
Business rules
Loanbot: In how many months will the loan be
paid back?
Loan Ofﬁcer: 12
Business rules
Loanbot: High risk loan. This loan request
should not be approved
Table 2: Sample conversation with LoanBot
on a few of these challenges and discuss how the proposed
framework can overcome them.
Coding Overhead
The enterprises that need chatbots of-
ten do not have the technical expertise or resources to main-
tain and improve the framework. Thus, it is important that
the system requires minimal coding overhead to deploy
in new domains, expand the scope of the system and im-
prove its performance by adding new agents during its life-
time. Our framework assumes that independent developers,
whether domain experts or software developers, have cre-
ated the autonomous agents but require that they abide by
the adopted input-output contracts. This reduces the coding
overhead to integrate the agents. Furthermore, the 3S orches-
trator is robust enough to handle the noise in the agent conﬁ-
dence which is a byproduct of independent agent developers.
Scalability
Expanding the scope and capabilities of a con-
versational agent requires signiﬁcant developer effort and
may result in performance degradation. In the proposed
framework, integration is trivial but naively adding agents
may result in performance issues if the orchestrator incor-

rectly selects agents. Adopting an orchestration model that
learns from previous interactions and changes in the system
would improve the overall performance of the assistant.
Agent Overlap
As the number of agents in the frame-
work increases, some agent functionality and knowledge
may overlap. This may cause conﬂicts among agents when
attempting to respond to users and degrade overall perfor-
mance. As a result, it is important to model or quantify agent
overlap and incorporate it within the orchestrator model to
insure that the orchestrator will select the best agent to com-
plete the task of responding to the user. Adopting a learn-
ing selector in the orchestrator pipeline can lead to better
selection models that can handle agent overlap and prevent
performance degradation.
Multi-user Support
Giving users the ability to compose
their personalized assistants requires the framework to sup-
port multiple users. While this can be resolved by creating a
session per user, it provides an opportunity to increase the
available data from which the orchestrator can learn bet-
ter execution models. Therefore, the proposed framework
should consider approaches to learn from multiple users’
data while maintaining privacy and security of the data.
Access Control
With different personas in business pro-
cesses, some agents may not be accessible to speciﬁc users.
For example, with the Travelbot, employees should not have
access to the "approve/reject" functionality. Our framework
requires that these restrictions are implemented inside the
agent. When the user submits a request, the orchestrator for-
wards this request to all agents and expects them to decline
execution if the user does not have the required access.
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a multi-agent framework to de-
velop a conversational assistant supporting multiple capa-
bilities such as querying data through natural language, au-
tonomously executing tasks in a business process, alerting
users of changes in the business process and visualizing data
in various forms based on the user’s requests. An orches-
trator capable of combining independently developed skills
with minimal overhead is the key to effectively deploy more
powerful conversational assistants. While many challenges
remain such as scalability and agent overlap, preliminary re-
sults motivate follow on research.
