Transforming Graph Representations
for Statistical Relational Learning
RYAN A. ROSSI1, LUKE K. MCDOWELL2, DAVID W. AHA3 and
JENNIFER NEVILLE1
1Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
2Department of Computer Science, U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD 21402, USA
3Navy Center for Applied Research in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Naval Research Laboratory (Code 5514), Washington, DC 20375, USA

Abstract
Relational data representations have become an increasingly important topic due to the recent
proliferation of network datasets (e.g., social, biological, information networks) and a corre-
sponding increase in the application of statistical relational learning (SRL) algorithms to these
domains. In this article, we examine a range of representation issues for graph-based relational
data. Since the choice of relational data representation—for the nodes, links, and features—can
dramatically aﬀect the capabilities of SRL algorithms, we survey approaches and opportunities for
relational representation transformation designed to improve the performance of these algorithms.
This leads us to introduce an intuitive taxonomy for data representation transformations in
relational domains that incorporates link transformation and node transformation as symmetric
representation tasks. In particular, the transformation tasks for both nodes and links include
(i) predicting their existence, (ii) predicting their label or type, (iii) estimating their weight
or importance, and (iv) systematically constructing their relevant features. We motivate our
taxonomy through detailed examples and use it to survey and compare competing approaches for
each of these tasks. We also discuss general conditions for transforming links, nodes, and features.
Finally, we highlight challenges that remain to be addressed.
1
Introduction
The majority of research in machine learning assumes independently and identically distributed
data. This independence assumption is often violated in relational data, which encode depen-
dencies among data instances. For instance, people are often linked by business associations,
and information about one person can be highly informative for a prediction task involving
an associate of that person. More generally, relational data can be described as a set of
nodes, which can be connected by one or more types of relations (or “links”). Relational
information is seemingly ubiquitous; it is present in domains such as the Internet and the world-
wide web (Faloutsos et al., 1999; Broder et al., 2000; Albert et al., 1999), scientiﬁc citation
and collaboration (McGovern et al., 2003; Newman, 2001b), epidemiology (Pastor-Satorras &
Vespignani, 2001; Moore & Newman, 2000; May & Lloyd, 2001; Kleczkowski & Grenfell, 1999)
communication analysis (Rossi & Neville, 2010), metabolism (Jeong et al., 2000; Wagner & Fell,
2001), ecosystems (Dunne et al., 2002; Camacho et al., 2002), bioinformatics (Maslov & Sneppen,
2002; Jeong et al., 2001), fraud and terrorist analysis (Neville et al., 2005; Krebs, 2002), and
many others. The links in these data may represent citations, friendships, associations, metabolic
arXiv:1204.0033v1  [stat.ML]  30 Mar 2012

2
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
functions, communications, co-locations, shared mechanisms, or many other explicit or implicit
relationships.
Statistical relational learning (SRL) methods have been developed to address the problems
of reasoning and learning in domains with complex relations and probabilistic structure (Getoor
& Taskar, 2007). In particular, SRL algorithms leverage relational information in an attempt to
learn models with higher predictive accuracy. A key characteristic of many relational datasets
is a correlation or statistical dependence between the values of the same attribute across linked
instances (e.g., two friends are more likely to share political views than two randomly selected
people). This relational autocorrelation provides a unique opportunity to increase the accuracy
of statistical inferences (Jensen et al., 2004). Similarly, relational information can be exploited
for many other reasoning tasks such as identifying useful patterns or optimizing systems (Easley
& Kleinberg, 2010).
Representation issues—including knowledge, model, and data representation—have been at the
heart of the artiﬁcial intelligence community for decades (Amarel, 1968; Minsky, 1974; Russell &
Norvig, 2009). All of these are important, but here we focus on data representation issues, simple
examples of which include the choices of whether to discretize continuous features or to add
higher-order polynomial features. Such decisions can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the accuracy and
eﬃciency of AI algorithms. They are especially critical for the performance of SRL algorithms
because, in relational domains, there is an even larger space of potential data representations to
consider. The complex structure of relational data can often be represented in a variety of ways
and the choice of speciﬁc data representation can impact both the applicability of particular
models/algorithms and their performance. Speciﬁcally, there are two categories of decisions that
need to be considered in the context of relational data representation.
First, we have to consider the type of data representation to use (cf., the hierarchy of De Raedt,
2008, Chapter 4). For instance, relational data can be propositionalized for the application of
standard, non-relational learning algorithms. More often, in order to fully exploit the relational
information, SRL researchers have chosen to represent the data either using an attributed graph
in a relational database (see e.g., Friedman et al., 1999), or via logic programs (see e.g., Kersting
& Raedt, 2002).1 Each choice has diﬀerent strengths. In this article, we focus on the graph-based
representation, which has been a common choice for addressing the growing interest in network
data and applications analyzing electronic communication and online social networks such as
Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, and LinkedIn (Mislove et al., 2007; Ahmed et al., 2010). Speciﬁcally,
we assume a graph-based data representation G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩where the nodes V are entities
(e.g., people, places, events) and the links E represent relationships among those entities (e.g.,
friendships, citations). XV is a set of features about the entities in V . Likewise, the set of features
XE provides information about the relation links in E.
Next, given the type of representation, we must consider the speciﬁc content of the data
representation, for which there is a large space of choices. For instance, features for the nodes
and links of a graph can be constructed using a wide range of aggregation functions, based on
multiple kinds of links and paths. SRL researchers have already recognized the importance of
such data representation choices (e.g., Getoor & Diehl, 2005), and many separate studies have
examined techniques for feature construction (Neville et al., 2003a), node weighting (Tang et al.,
2009), link prediction (Taskar et al., 2003), etc. However, this article is the ﬁrst to comprehensively
survey and assess approaches to relational representation transformation for graph-based data.
Given a set of (graph-based) relational data, we deﬁne relational representation transformation
as any change to the space of links, nodes, and/or features used to represent the data.
Typically, the goal of this transformation is to improve the performance of some subsequent
SRL application. For instance, in Figure 1 the original graph representation G is transformed
into a new representation ˜G where links, nodes, and features (such as link weights) have been
1In the latter case, the applicable SRL algorithms are often referred to as probabilistic inductive logic
programming (ILP) (De Raedt & Kersting, 2008).

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
3
G	
  
˜	
  G	
  
Representa)on	
  
Transforma)on	
  
Result	
  
L	
  
L	
  
L	
  
C	
  
C	
  
SRL	
  Analysis	
  /	
  
Applica)on	
  
Figure 1
Example Transformation and Subsequent Analysis: The original relational represen-
tation G is transformed into ˜G where dotted lines represent predicted links, squares represent predicted
nodes, and bold links represent link weighting. Changes may be based on link structure, link features,
and node features (here, similar node shadings indicate similar feature values). Some SRL analysis is
then applied to the new representation. In this example, the SRL analysis produces a label (C or L) for
each node, as with the example task discussed in Section 2.1. This article focuses on the representation
transformation (left side of the ﬁgure), not the subsequent analysis.
added, and some links have been removed. Some SRL algorithm or analysis is then applied to
the new representation, for instance to classify the nodes or to identify anomalous links. The
particular transformations that are used to produce ˜G will vary depending upon the intended
application, but can sometimes substantially improve the accuracy, speed, or complexity of the
ﬁnal application. For instance, Gallagher et al. (2008) found that adding links between similar
nodes could increase node classiﬁcation accuracy by up to 15% on some tasks. Similarly, Neville
and Jensen (2005) demonstrated that adding nodes which represent underlying groups enabled
both simpler inference and increased accuracy.
1.1
Scope of this Article
This article focuses on examining and categorizing various techniques for changing the represen-
tation of graph-based relational data. As shown in Figure 1, we typically view these changes as a
pre-processing step that enables increased accuracy or speed for some other task, such as object
classiﬁcation. However, an output of these techniques can itself be valuable. For instance, the
administrators of a social network may be interested in link prediction so that predicted links
can be presented to their users as potential new “friendship” links. Alternatively, these techniques
may also be applied to improve the comprehensibility of a model. For example, the prediction
of protein-protein interactions provides insights into protein function (Ben-Hur & Noble, 2005).
Thus, the techniques we survey may be used for multiple purposes, and relevant publications
may have used them in diﬀerent contexts. Regardless of the original context, we will examine
the general applicability and beneﬁts of each technique. After such techniques have been applied,
the transformed data can be used as is (e.g., for friendship suggestions), examined for greater
understanding, used for some other task (e.g., for object classiﬁcation), or used recursively as
the input for another representation change (e.g., as in object/node prediction followed by link
prediction).
We do not attempt to survey the many methods that could be used for SRL analysis (e.g., the
right side of Figure 1), although the relevant set of methods for such analysis overlaps with the set
of methods that facilitate the transformations we consider. For instance, collective classiﬁcation
(Neville & Jensen, 2000; Taskar et al., 2002) is an important SRL application that we deﬁne in
Section 2 and use as a running example of an SRL analysis task. The output of such classiﬁcation
could also be used to create new attributes for the nodes (a data representation change). We

4
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
discuss this possibility in Section 6.2, but focus on a few cases where such node labeling is
particularly useful as a pre-processing step (e.g., before applying certain “stacked” algorithms),
rather than surveying the wide range of possible classiﬁcation algorithms, whether collective or
not. Likewise, we do not survey issues in model and knowledge representation, such as whether the
statistical dependencies between nodes, links, and features should be modeled with Structural
Logistic Regression (Popescul et al., 2003b) or with a Markov Logic Network (Domingos &
Richardson, 2004). We consider such issues only brieﬂy, in Section 8.4.
Furthermore, we focus on transformations to graph-based data that modify the set of links or
nodes, or modify their features. We do not consider changing the graph-based data to a diﬀerent
type of representation, e.g., by propositionalizing the data or by changing to a logic program.
However, some of the transformations we discuss, such as node or link feature aggregation,
are a form of propositionalization. In addition, Section 6.3.3 describes a number of techniques
for structure learning of logic programs, because these techniques are closely related to the
analogous problem of feature construction for graph-based representations. Finally, many of the
other techniques that we discuss are also applicable to logical representations. For instance, link
weighting could be applied to weight the known relations before using a logic program to detect
anomalous objects. We focus, however, on the methods most useful for transforming graph-based
representations.
1.2
Approach and Organization of this Article
There are many dimensions of relational data transformation, which complicate the task of
understanding and selecting the most appropriate techniques. To assist in this process, we
introduce a simple and intuitive taxonomy for representation transformation that identiﬁes link
transformation and node transformation as symmetric representation tasks. More speciﬁcally, the
transformation tasks for both nodes and links include (i) predicting their existence, (ii) predicting
their label or type, (iii) estimating their weight or importance, and (iv) constructing their relevant
features. In addition, we propose a taxonomy for constructing both link and node features that
consists of non-relational features, topology features, relational node-value features, and relational
link-value features. For each relational transformation task, we survey the applicable techniques,
examine necessary conditions, and provide detailed examples and comparisons.
This article is organized as follows. The next section presents our taxonomy for relational
representation transformation and discusses a motivating example. In Section 3, we review
the algorithms for link prediction, while Section 4 examines the task of link interpretation
(i.e., constructing link labels, link weights, and link features). Sections 5 and 6 consider the
corresponding prediction and interpretation tasks for nodes instead of links. In Section 7, we
summarize algorithms that jointly transform nodes and links. Section 8 discusses methods for
evaluating representation transformations and challenges for future work, and Section 9 concludes.
2
Overview and Motivating Example
In this section we ﬁrst introduce a running example based on the classiﬁcation of data from
Facebook, then describe how relational algorithms could be used to perform this task. Next, we
introduce a taxonomy for relational representation transformation and explain how each type of
transformation could aid the Facebook classiﬁcation task. Finally, we formally deﬁne each type
of relational representation transformation.
2.1
Motivating SRL Analysis Example: A Classiﬁcation Task
As an example, we consider hypothetical data inspired by Facebook (www.facebook.com),
one of the most popular online social networks. We assume that we are given a graph G =

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
5
⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩where the nodes V are users 2 and the links E represent friendships in Facebook.
XV is a set of features about the users in V such as their gender, relationship status, school,
favorite movies, or musical preference (though information may be missing for some users).
Likewise, the set of features XE provides information about the friendship links in E such as the
time of formation or possibly the contents of the message that was sent when the link formation
was requested by one of the users.
The example SRL analysis task (see Figure 1) is to predict the political aﬃliation (liberal,
moderate, or conservative) of every node (person) in G. We assume that this aﬃliation, which
we call the class label of a node, is known for some but not all of the people in G.3 Moreover,
we assume that a user’s political aﬃliation is likely to be correlated with the characteristics of
that user and (to a lesser degree) that user’s friends. The next section summarizes how these
correlations can be used for classiﬁcation.
For this example, we assume that links are simple, binary friendship connections. However,
other link types could be used to represent other kinds of relationships. For instance, a link might
indicate that two people have communicated via a “wall-post” message, or that two people have
chosen to join the same Facebook group. In addition, the notion of friendship in Facebook is very
weak and thus a signiﬁcant portion of a person’s “friends” are often only casual acquaintances.
Thus, representation changes such as link deletion or weighting may have a signiﬁcant impact
on classiﬁcation accuracy. For notational purposes, we add a tilde to the top of each graph
component’s symbol to indicate that it has undergone some transformation (e.g., the modiﬁed
link set E is denoted by ˜E).
2.2
Background: Features and Methods for Classiﬁcation
To predict the political aﬃliation of Facebook users, conventional classiﬁcation approaches would
ignore the links and classify each user using only information known about that user, such as
their gender or location. We assume that such information is represented in the form of non-
relational features, which are those features that can be computed directly from XV without
considering the links E. We refer to classiﬁcation based only on these features as non-relational
classiﬁcation. Alternatively, in relational classiﬁcation, the links are explicitly used to construct
additional relational features to capture information about each user’s friends. For instance, a
relational feature could compute, for each user, the proportion of friends that are male or that
live in a particular region. Using such relational information can potentially increase classiﬁcation
accuracy, though may sometimes decrease accuracy as well (Chakrabarti et al., 1998a). Finally,
even greater (and usually more reliable) increases can occur when the class labels (e.g., political
aﬃliations) of the linked users are used instead to derive relevant features (Jensen et al., 2004).
For instance, a “class-label” relational feature could compute, for each user, the proportion of
friends that have liberal views. However, using such features is challenging since some or all of the
labels are initially unknown, and thus typically must be estimated and then iteratively reﬁned in
some way. This process of jointly inferring the labels of interrelated nodes is known as collective
classiﬁcation (CC).
CC requires both models and inference procedures that use inferences about one user to aﬀect
inferences about related users. Many such algorithms have been considered for CC, including
Gibbs Sampling (Jensen et al., 2004), relaxation labeling (Chakrabarti et al., 1998a), belief
propagation (Taskar et al., 2002), ICA (Neville & Jensen, 2000; Lu & Getoor, 2003), and weighted
neighbor techniques (Macskassy & Provost, 2007). See Sen et al. (2008) for a survey.
2In general, there may be more than one type of node. For instance, nodes in a citation network may
represent papers or authors.
3Later, we discuss the representation change of node labeling, which also constructs an estimated label
for every node. As discussed in Section 1.1, representation changes can sometimes resemble the output
of SRL analysis, but we focus on changes that are particularly useful as pre-processing before some
subsequent SRL analysis.

6
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
As a concrete example of SRL analysis, we explain many of the techniques in this survey
in terms of the Facebook classiﬁcation task, with a special emphasis on CC. However, the
features and the transformation techniques apply to many other SRL tasks and data sets such as
relationship classiﬁcation, anomalous link detection, entity resolution, or group discovery (Getoor
& Diehl, 2005).
2.3
Representation transformation Tasks for Improving SRL
Figure 2 shows our proposed taxonomy for relational representation transformation. The two
main tasks in this taxonomy are link transformation and node transformation.We ﬁnd that
there is a powerful and elegant symmetry between these two tasks. In particular, the link and
node representation transformation tasks can be decomposed into prediction and interpretation
tasks. The former task involves predicting the existence of new nodes and links. The latter task
of interpretation involves three parts: constructing the weights, labels, or features of nodes or
links. Together, this yields eight distinct transformation tasks as shown in the leaves of the
taxonomy in Figure 2. Underneath these eight tasks in the ﬁgure, we list the primary graph
component that is modiﬁed by each task (i.e., ˜V , ˜E, ˜XV , or ˜XE), followed by an illustration of a
possible representation change for that task. In the text below, we summarize Figure 2, organized
around the four larger categories of link prediction, link interpretation, node prediction, and node
interpretation.
First, link prediction adds new links to the graph. The sample graph for this task (Figure 2A)
shows a link being predicted where the similarity between two nodes has been used to predict a
new link between them. Intuitively, Facebook users that share the values of many non-relational
features may also share the same political aﬃliation. Thus, adding links between such people
should increase autocorrelation and improve the accuracy of collective classiﬁcation. There are
many simple link prediction algorithms based on similarity, neighbor properties, shortest path
distances, inﬁnite sums over paths (i.e. random walks), and other strategies. Section 3 provides
more detail on these techniques.
Second, there are several types of link interpretation, which involves constructing weights,
labels, or features for the existing links. For instance, in many graphs (including our Facebook
data), not all links (or friendships) are of equal importance. Thus, Figure 2B shows the result of
performing link weighting. In this case, weights are based on the similarity between the feature
values of each pair of linked nodes, under the assumption that high similarity may indicate
stronger relationships. (Link prediction techniques may also use such similarity measures, but for
identifying probable new links, rather than weighting existing links.) Alternatively, link labeling
may be used to assign some kind of discrete label to each link. For instance, Figure 2C shows
how links might be labeled as either “personal” (p) or “work” (w) related, e.g., based on known
feature values or an analysis of communication events between the linked users. On the other
hand, links might instead be labeled as having positive or negative inﬂuence (i.e., labeled as +/−).
Finally, Figure 2D shows how link feature construction can be used to add more general kinds of
feature values to each link. For instance, a link feature might count the number of communication
events that occurred between two people or the number of friends in common. Link weighting and
labeling could perhaps be viewed as special cases of link feature construction, but we separate
them because later sections will show how the most useful techniques for each task diﬀer. All
three of these link interpretation tasks could help with our example classiﬁcation problem. In
particular, a model learned to predict political aﬃliation might choose to place special emphasis
on links that are highly weighted or that are labeled as personal. Other link features might be used
to represent more complex dependencies, for instance modeling inﬂuence from a user’s “work”
friendships, but only for friendship links between nodes where there are a large number of friends
in common. More details on these techniques are provided in Section 4.
Third, node prediction adds additional nodes (and associated links) to the graph. For
instance, Figure 2E shows the result after relational clustering has been applied to discover

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
7
Link	
  Prediction	
  
Link	
  Interpretation	
  
Node	
  Transformation	
  
Node	
  Prediction	
  
Link	
  Transformation	
  
Link	
  Weighting	
  
Link	
  Labeling	
  
Link	
  Feature	
  
Construction	
  
Node	
  Interpretation	
  
Node	
  Weighting	
  
Node	
  Labeling	
  
Node	
  Feature	
  
Construction	
  
p	
  
p	
  
w	
  
w	
  
p	
  
C	
  
C	
  
L	
  
L	
  
M	
  
input	
  
.3	
   …	
   A	
  
.5	
   …	
   A	
  
.3	
   …	
   B	
  
.1	
   …	
   B	
  
.2	
   …	
   A	
  
3	
   …	
   -­‐	
  
2	
   …	
   +	
  
3	
   …	
   -­‐	
  
predicted	
  link	
  
L	
  
p	
  
predicted	
  node	
  
weighted	
  node	
  
weighted	
  link	
  
labeled	
  node	
  
labeled	
  link	
  
A.	
  
B.	
  
C.	
  
E.	
  
D.	
  
F.	
  
G.	
  
H.	
  
E	
  
XE	
  
XE	
  
XE	
  
XV	
  
XV	
  
XV	
  
V	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
˜	
  
Relational  
Representation  
Transformation 
Figure 2
Relational Representation Transformation Taxonomy: Link and node transformation are formulated as symmetric tasks leading to four main
transformation tasks: link prediction, link interpretation, node prediction, and node interpretation. Each task yields a modiﬁed graph component: ˜E, ˜XE, ˜V , or ˜XV ,
respectively. Interpretation is further divided into weighting, labeling, or constructing features. Examples of each of the tasks in relational representation transformation
are shown under the leaves of the taxonomy. In these example graphs, nodes with similar shadings have similar feature values.

8
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
two latent groups in the graph, where each user is now connected to one latent group node. A
discovered node in Facebook might represent types of social processes, inﬂuences, or a tightly
knit group of friends. The clustering or other techniques used to identify the new nodes could be
designed to identify people that are particularly similar with respect to a relevant characteristic,
such as their political aﬃliation. The new nodes and associated links could then be used in several
ways. For instance, though not present in the small example of Figure 2E, some nodes that were
far away (in terms of shortest path length) in the original graph may be much closer in the new
graph. Thus, links to a latent node may allow inﬂuence to propagate more eﬀectively when an
algorithm such as CC is applied. Alternatively, identiﬁcation of distinct latent groups may even
enable more eﬃcient or accurate algorithms to be applied separately to each group (Neville &
Jensen, 2005). Node prediction is discussed further in Section 5.
Finally, there are several types of node interpretation, which involves constructing weights,
labels, or feature values for existing nodes. For instance, as with links, some nodes may be
more inﬂuential than others and thus should have more weight. Figure 2F demonstrates node
weighting, where the weights might be assigned based on the numbers of friends or via the
PageRank/eigenvector techniques. See Section 6.1 for more details. Alternatively, Figure 2G
shows an example of node labeling. Here the graph represents a training graph, and each node
has been given an estimated label of conservative (C), liberal (L), or moderate (M). Such labels
might be estimated using only the non-relational features or via textual analysis. While most
classiﬁcation algorithms learn a model based on true labels in the training graph, some approaches
instead ﬁrst compute such estimated labels, then learn a model from this new representation (Kou
& Cohen, 2007). Section 6.2 discusses how this can simplify inference. Finally, Figure 2H shows
the result of node feature construction, where arbitrary feature values are added to each node.
For instance, suppose we ﬁnd that users with relatively few Facebook friends are often moderate
while those with many friends are often liberal. In this case, a feature counting the number of
friends for each node would be useful. To more directly exploit autocorrelation, a diﬀerent feature
might count the proportion of a user’s friends that are conservative, or the most common political
aﬃliation of a user’s friends. Any feature that is correlated with political aﬃliation could be used
to improve the performance of a classiﬁcation algorithm for our example problem. Identifying
and/or computing such features is essential to the performance of most SRL algorithms but can
be very challenging; Section 6.3 considers this process.
In Table 1, we summarize some of the most prominent techniques for performing these tasks of
link prediction, link interpretation, node prediction, and node interpretation. Sections 3-6 provide
more detail about each category in turn.
2.4
Relational Representation Transformation: Deﬁnitions and Terminology
We assume that the initial relational data is represented as a graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩such
that each vi ∈V corresponds to node i and each edge eij ∈E corresponds to a (directed) link
between nodes i and j. XV is a set of features about the nodes in V , and XV
k ∈XV is the kth
such feature. Likewise, XE is a set of features about the links in E, and XE
k ∈VE is the kth such
feature. The features XE could refer to link weights, distances, or types, among other possibilities.
The preceding notation lets us identify, for instance, the values of a particular feature XV
k for
all nodes. Alternatively, xv
i refers to a vector containing all of the feature values for a particular
node vi, and xe
ij contains all of the feature values for a particular edge eij. Table 2 summarizes
this notation.
Relational representation transformation is the process of transforming the original graph
G into some new graph ˜G = ⟨˜V , ˜E, ˜XV , ˜XE⟩by an arbitrary set of transformation techniques.
During this process, nodes, links, weights, labels, and general features may be added, and nodes
and links may be removed. In theory, the transformation seeks to optimize some objective function
(for instance, to maximize the autocorrelation), although in practice the objective function may

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
9
Table 1 Summary of techniques: A summary of prominent graph transformation techniques for the
tasks of predicting the existence of nodes and links and interpreting them by weighting, labeling, and
constructing general features.
Relational Representation Transformation
Links
Nodes
Prediction
⋆
Adamic/Adar (Adamic & Adar,
2001), Katz (Katz, 1953), and
others (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg,
2007)
⋆
Spectral
Clustering
(Neville
&
Jensen,
2005),
Mixed-
Membership
Relational
Clustering (Long et al., 2007)
⋆
Text
or
Feature
Similarity
(Macskassy, 2007)
⋆
LDA (Blei et al., 2003), PLSA
(Hofmann, 1999),
⋆
Classiﬁcation via RMN (Taskar
et al., 2003) or SVM (Hasan et al.,
2006)
⋆
Hierarchical
Clustering
via
Edge-betweenness (Newman &
Girvan, 2004)
Weighting
⋆
Latent
Variable
Estima-
tion (Xiang et al., 2010)
⋆
Betweenness
(Freeman,
1977),
Closeness (Sabidussi, 1966)
⋆
Linear
Combination
of
Fea-
tures (Gilbert & Karahalios, 2009)
⋆
HITs
(Kleinberg,
1999),
Prob.
HITs (Cohn & Chang, 2000), Sim-
Rank (Jeh & Widom, 2002)
⋆
Aggregating Intrinsic Informa-
tion (Onnela et al., 2007)
⋆
PageRank (Page et al., 1999),
Topical PageRank (Haveliwala,
2003;
Richardson
&
Domingos,
2002)
Labeling
⋆
LDA (Blei et al., 2003), PLSA
(Hofmann, 1999),
⋆
LDA (Blei et al., 2003), PLSA
(Hofmann, 1999),
⋆
Link Classiﬁcation via Logis-
tic Regression (Leskovec et al.,
2010b), Bagged Decision Trees
(Kahanda & Neville, 2009),
⋆
Node
Classiﬁcation
via
Stacked Model (Kou & Cohen,
2007)
or
RN
(Macskassy
&
Provost, 2003)
Feature
⋆
Link Feature Similarity (Rossi
& Neville, 2010)
⋆
Database Query Search (Popes-
cul et al., 2003b), RPT (Neville
et al., 2003a)
Construction
⋆
Link Aggregations (Kahanda &
Neville, 2009)
⋆
MLN Structure Learning (Kok
& Domingos, 2009, 2010)
⋆
Graph
Features (Lichtenwalter
et al., 2010)
⋆
FOIL, nFOIL (Landwehr et al.,
2005), kFOIL (Landwehr et al.,
2010), Aleph (Srinivasan, 1999),
not be completely speciﬁed or guaranteed to be improved by the transformation. We now deﬁne
more speciﬁcally the four primary parts of relational representation transformation:
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Link Prediction) Given the nodes V , observed links E and/or the feature set
X = (XE, XV ), the link prediction task is deﬁned as the creation of a modiﬁed link set ˜E such
that E ̸= ˜E. Usually, this involves adding new links that were not present in E, but links may
also be deleted.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Link Interpretation) Given the nodes V , observed links E and/or the feature
set X = (XE, XV ), the link interpretation task is deﬁned as the creation of a new link feature
˜XE
k where ˜XE
k
/∈XE. This task may estimate a feature value for every link. Alternatively, the
values of ˜XE
k may be only partially estimated, for example, if the original features have missing
values or if additional links are also introduced during link prediction.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Node Prediction) Given the nodes V , links E and/or the feature set X =
(XE, XV ), node transformation is deﬁned as the creation of a modiﬁed node set ˜V such that
V ⊂˜V . In addition, many node prediction tasks simultaneously create new links, e.g., between

10
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
Table 2 Summary of notation used in this survey: The top half of the table shows symbols that
are sometimes written with a tilde on top of the symbol, indicating the result of some transformation.
For conciseness, the table demonstrates this notation only for G and ˜G.
Symbol
Description
G
Initial graph
˜G
Transformed graph
E
Initial link set
V
Initial node set
XE
Initial set of link features
XV
Initial set of node features
XE
k
Initial link feature k (XE
k ∈XE) (for one feature, values for all links)
XV
k
Initial node feature k (XV
k ∈XV ) (for one feature, values for all nodes)
xe
ij
Initial feature vector for eij (for one link, values for all link features)
xv
i
Initial feature vector for vi (for one node, values for all node features)
Other symbols
Description
A
Adjacency matrix of the graph
Γ(vi)
Neighbors of vi
δ
Cut-oﬀvalue
an initial node vi ∈V and a predicted node ˜vj ∈˜V . Thus, this task may also produce a modiﬁed
link set ˜E.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Node Interpretation) Given the nodes V , observed links E and/or the feature
set X = (XE, XV ), the node interpretation task is deﬁned as the creation of a new node feature
˜XV
k where ˜XV
k
/∈XV . As with link interpretation, the values of ˜XV
k may be estimated for only
some of the nodes. The node feature ˜XV
k could represent node weights, labels, or other general
features.
Section 2.2 introduced the notion of a non-relational feature, which is a node feature ˜XV
k that
can be constructed without making use of the links (i.e., without using E or XE). Such features
are sometimes referred to in other articles as attributes or intrinsic features. Other important
terms can also be referred to in multiple diﬀerent ways. To aid the reader, Table 3 summarizes
the key synonyms for the terms that are found most often in the literature.
3
Link Prediction
This section focuses on predicting the existence of links while Section 4 considers link interpre-
tation. Given the initial graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩, we are interested in creating a modiﬁed link
set ˜E, usually through the prediction of new links that were not present in E. This task can
be motivated in several ways. For instance, there may be a need to predict missing links that
are not present in E because of incomplete data collection or other problems. Similarly, we may
be interested in predicting hidden links, where we assume that there exists some unobservable
interactions and the goal is to discover and model these interactions. For example, in a network
representing criminals or terrorist activity, we may seek to predict a link between two people
(nodes) that are not directly connected but whose actions share some common motivation or
cause. For both missing and hidden links, predicting such links may improve the accuracy of
a subsequent learned model. Alternatively, we may seek to predict future links in an evolving
network, such as new friendships or connections that will be formed next year. We might also be
interested in predicting links between objects that are spatially related. Finally, we may wish to

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
11
Table 3 Possible synonyms for important terms related to relational data.
Term
Potential synonyms
Nodes
Vertices, points, objects, entities, individuals, users, constants, ...
Links
Edges, relationships, ties, arcs, events, interactions, predicates
Topology
Link/network/graph structure, relational information
Features
Attributes, variables, co-variates, queries, predicates, ...
Graph Measures
Topology-based metrics (such as proximity, centrality, betweenness, ...)
Similarity
Distance (the inverse of similarity), likeness
Clusters
Classes, communities, groups, roles, topics
Non-relational Features
Intrinsic attributes/features, local attributes/features, ...
Relational Features
Features, link-based features, graph features, aggregates, queries, ...
Structure Learning
Feature generation/construction, hypothesis learning
Parameter Learning
Model selection, function learning
predict beneﬁcial links, for instance, predicting pairs of individuals that are likely to be successful
working together.
Figure 3 summarizes one general approach that is often used for these link prediction tasks.
In summary, scores or weights are computed for every pair of nodes in the graph, as shown in
Figure 3(b). Predicted links with a weight greater than some threshold δ, along with the original
links, are used to create the new link set ˜E+ (shown in Figure 3(e)). (At this step, original links
with very low weight could also be deleted if appropriate.) As a ﬁnal step, the weights of the
predicted links are often discarded, yielding a new graph with uniform link weights as shown in
Figure 3(f).
The key challenge in this approach is how to compute a weight or score for each possible
link. The information used for this computation provides a natural way to categorize the link
prediction techniques. Below, Section 3.1 describes techniques that use only the non-relational
features of the nodes (ignoring the initial links), while Section 3.2 describes “topology-based”
techniques that use only the graph structure (i.e., the links or relations). Finally, Section 3.3
describes hybrid techniques that exploit both the node features and the graph structure.
3.1
Non-relational (Feature-based) Link Prediction
In this section, we consider link predictors that do not exploit the graph structure or relational
features derived using the graph structure. We are given an arbitrary pair of nodes vi and vj
from the graph such that each node is represented by a feature vector xv
i and xv
j , respectively.
Feature-based link prediction is deﬁned as using an arbitrary similarity measure S(xv
i , xv
j) as a
means to estimate the likelihood that a link should exist between vi and vj. Typically, a link
is created if the similarity exceeds some ﬁxed cut-oﬀvalue; another strategy is to predict links
among the n% of all such node pairs with highest similarity.
A traditional approach is to simply deﬁne a measure of similarity between two objects, possibly
based on knowledge of the application and/or problem-domain. There are many similarity metrics
that have been proposed such as mutual information, cosine similarity, and many others (Lin,
1998). For instance, Macskassy (2007) represents the textual content of each node as a feature
vector and uses cosine similarity to create new links between nodes in a graph. Macskassy showed
that the combination of the initial links with the predicted text-based links increased classiﬁcation
accuracy compared to using only the initial links or the text-based links. In addition to leveraging
textual information to predict links, we might use any arbitrary set of features combined with

12
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
(a) Initial Graph G = ⟨E, V ⟩
(b) Weighted Links wij ∈˜E
(c) Predicted Links ( ˜E −E)
(d)
Pruning
Predicted
Links
( ˜E>δ)
(e) ˜E+ := ˜E>δ + E
(f)
˜E+
with
Uniform
Link
Weights
Figure 3
Example demonstrating a general approach to link prediction: The initial graph
(a) is used as input to a link predictor, yielding a complete graph (b) where the weights wij are
estimated between all pairs of nodes. The next step shows the removal of the initial (observed) links from
consideration (c), followed by a pruning of all predicted links with a weight below some cut-oﬀvalue
δ (d). The remaining predicted links are then combined with the initial links (e). Often, the estimated
weights on the initial and predicted links are then discarded, leaving a uniform weight graph (f).
a proper measure of similarity for link prediction. For instance, many recommender systems
implicitly predict a link between two users based on the similarity between their ratings of items
such as movies or books (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005; Resnick & Varian, 1997). In this case,
cosine similarity or correlation are commonly used as similarity metrics.
Alternatively, a similarity measure can be learned for predicting link existence. The link
prediction problem can be transformed into a standard supervised classiﬁcation problem where a
binary classiﬁer is trained to determine the similarity between two nodes based on their feature
vectors. One such approach by Hasan et al. (2006) applied Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
and found that a non-relational feature (keyword match count) was most useful for predicting
links in a bibliographic network. There are many link prediction approaches (Taskar et al., 2003;
Getoor et al., 2003) that apply traditional machine learning algorithms. However, most of them
use features based on the graph structure as well as the non-relational features that are the focus
of this section. Thus, we discuss such techniques further in Section 3.3.
Finally, variants of topic models can be used for link prediction. These types of models
traditionally use only the text from documents (non-relational information) to infer a mixture of

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
13
latent topics for each document. Inter-document topic similarity can then be used as a similarity
metric for link prediction (Chang & Blei, 2009). However, because many topic models are
capable of performing joint transformation of the nodes and links, we defer full discussion of
such techniques to Section 7.
3.2
Topology-based Link Prediction
Topology-based link prediction uses the local relational neighborhood and/or the global graph
structure to predict the existence of unobserved links. Table 4 summarizes some of the most
common metrics that have been used for this task. Below, we discuss many of these approaches,
starting from the simplest local metrics and moving to the more complex techniques based on
global measures and/or supervised learning. For a systematic study of many of these approaches
applied to social network data, see Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (2007).
Metrics based on the Local Neighborhood of Nodes: The simplest approaches use only
the local neighborhood of nodes in a graph to devise a measure of topology similarity, then use
pairwise similarities between nodes to predict the most likely links. As shown in Table 4, there
are numerous such metrics, often based on the number of neighbors that two nodes share in
common, with varying strategies for normalization.
Zhou et al. (2009) compares nine such local similarity measures on six datasets and ﬁnds that
the simplest link predictor, common neighbors, performs the best overall. They also propose a
new metric, RA, that outperforms the initial nine metrics on two of the datasets. This new metric
is very similar to the Adamic/Adar metric, but uses a diﬀerent normalization factor that yields
better performance in networks with higher average degree. They also propose a method that
uses additional two-hop information to avoid degenerate cases where links are assigned the same
similarity score. Their results highlight the importance of selecting the appropriate metrics for
speciﬁc problems and datasets. In another related investigation, Clauset et al. (2008) evaluates
a hierarchical random graph predictor against local topology metrics such as common neighbors,
Jaccard’s coeﬃcient and the degree product on three types of networks: a metabolic, ecology and
a social network. They ﬁnd that a baseline measure based on shortest paths performs best for the
metabolic network, where the relationships are more homogeneous, but that their hierarchical
metric performs best when the links create more complex relationships, as in the predator-prey
relationships found in the ecology network.
Liu and L¨u (2010) proposed a local random-walk algorithm as an eﬃcient alternative to
the global random-walk predictors for large networks. This method is evaluated alongside other
metrics (i.e., common neighbors, local paths, RA, and a few random-walk variants) and shown to
perform better on most of the networks and more eﬃciently than the global random-walk models.
Metrics based on the Global Graph Structure: More sophisticated similarity metrics are
based on global graph properties, often involving some weighted computation based on the
number of paths between a pair of nodes. For instance, the Katz measure (Katz, 1953) counts the
number of paths between a pair of nodes, where shorter paths count more in the computation.
Rattigan and Jensen (2005) demonstrated that even this fairly simple metric could be eﬀective
for the task of “anomalous link prediction”, which is the identiﬁcation of statistically unlikely
links from among the links in the initial graph.
A related measure is the “hitting time” metric, which is the average number of steps required
for a random walk starting at node x to reach node y. Gallagher et al. (2008) use such random
walks with restart to estimate the similarity between every pair of nodes. They focus on sparsely
labeled networks where unlabeled nodes may have only a few labeled nodes to support learning
and/or inference in relational classiﬁcation. The prediction of new links improves the ﬂow of
information from labeled to unlabeled nodes, leading to an increase in classiﬁcation accuracy of
up to 15%. Note that adding teleportation probabilities to this random walk approach roughly

14
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
Table 4 Topology Metrics: Summary of the most common metrics for link prediction. Notation: Let
Γ(x) be the neighbors of x and A be the adjacency matrix of G.
Local Node Metrics
Description
Graph Distance
Length of the shortest path between x and y
Common Neighbors
Number of common neighbors between x and y, w(x, y) = |Γ(x) ∩Γ(y)| (Newman,
2001a)
Jaccard’s Coeﬃcient
Probability
that
x
and
y
share
common
neighbors
(normalized),
w(x, y) =
|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
|Γ(x)∪Γ(y)| (Jaccard, 1901; Salton & McGill, 1983)
Adamic/Adar
Similar to common neighbors, but assigns more weight to rare neighbors,
w(x, y) =
P
z∈Γ(x)∩Γ(y)
1
log |Γ(z)| (Adamic & Adar, 2001)
RA
Essentially equivalent to Adamic/Adar if |Γ(z)| is small,
w(x, y) = P
z∈Γ(x)∩Γ(y)
1
|Γ(z)|
(Zhou, L¨u, & Zhang, 2009)
Preferential Attachment
Probability of a link between x and y is the product of the degree of x and y,
w(x, y) = |Γ(x)| · |Γ(y)| (Barab´asi & Albert, 1999)
Cosine Similarity
w(x, y) =
|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
√
|Γ(x)|·|Γ(y)| (Salton & McGill, 1983)
Sorensen Index
w(x, y) = 2×|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
|Γ(x)|+|Γ(y)|
(Green, 1972; Zhou et al., 2009)
Hub Index
Nodes with large degree are likely to be assigned a higher score,
w(x, y) =
|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
min{|Γ(x)|,|Γ(y)|} (Ravasz, Somera, Mongru, Oltvai, & Barab´asi, 2002)
Hub Depressed Index
Analogous to Hub Index, w(x, y) =
|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
max{|Γ(x)|,|Γ(y)|} (Ravasz et al., 2002)
Leicht-Holme-Newman
Assigns large weight to pairs that have many common neighbors, normalized by
the expected number of common neighbors, w(x, y) =
|Γ(x)∩Γ(y)|
|Γ(x)|·|Γ(y)| (Leicht, Holme, &
Newman, 2006)
Global Graph Metrics
Description
Katz
Number of all paths between x and y, exponentially damped by length thereby
assigning more weight to shorter paths, w(x, y) = [(I −αA)−1]xy (Katz, 1953)
Hitting time
Number of steps required for a random walk starting at x to reach y (Brightwell &
Winkler, 1990)
Commute Time
Expected number of steps to reach node y when starting from x and then returning
back to x, deﬁned as w(x, y) = L+
xx + L+
yy −2L+
xy where L is the Laplacian matrix
(G¨obel & Jagers, 1974)
Rooted PageRank
Similar to Hitting time, but at each step there is some probability that the random
walk will reset to the starting node x, w(x, y) = [(I −αP)−1]xy where P = D−1A
(Page et al., 1999)
SimRank
x and y are similar to the extent that they are joined with similar neighbors,
w(x, y) =
P
u∈Γ(x)
P
v∈Γ(y) sim(u,v)
|Γ(x)|·|Γ(y)|
(Jeh & Widom, 2002)
K-walks
Number of walks of length k from x to y, deﬁned as w(x, y) = [Ak]xy
Meta-Approaches
Description
Low-rank Approximation
Compute the rank-k matrix Ak that best approximates A (hopefully reducing “noise”),
then compute similarity over Ak using some local or global metric (Eckart & Young,
1936; Golub & Reinsch, 1970)
Unseen Bigrams
Compute initial scores using some local or global metric, then augment the scores
w(x, y) using values from w(z, y) for nodes z that are similar to x (Essen & Steinbiss,
1992; Lee, 1999)
Clustering
Compute initial scores using some local or global metric, discard links with the lowest
scores, and then re-compute the scores on the modiﬁed graph (Johnson, 1967; Hartigan
& Wong, 1979)
yields the PageRank algorithm which is said to be at the heart of the Google search engine (Page
et al., 1999).
The SimRank metric (Jeh & Widom, 2002) proposes that two nodes x and y are similar if they
are linked to neighbors that are similar. Interestingly, they show that this approach is equivalent
to a metric based on the time required for two backwards, random walks starting from x and y to
arrive at the same node. As with the other approaches based on random walks, this metric could
be computed via repeated simulations, but is more eﬃciently computed via a recursive set-point
approach.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
15
Meta-approaches and supervised learning approaches: The metrics above can be modiﬁed
or combined in multiple ways. Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (2007) consider several such “meta-
approaches” that use some local or global similarity metric as a subroutine. For instance, the
metrics discussed above can each be deﬁned in terms of an arbitrary adjacency matrix A. Given
this formulation, we can imagine ﬁrst computing a low-rank approximation Ak of this matrix
using a technique such as singular value decomposition (SVD), and then computing a local or
global graph metric using the modiﬁed Ak. The idea is that Ak retains the key structure of the
original matrix, but noise has been reduced. Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (2007) also propose two
other meta-approaches based on removing spurious links suggested by a ﬁrst round of similarity
computation (the “clustering” approach) or based on augmenting similarity scores for a node x
based on the scores for other nodes that are similar to x (the “unseen bigrams” approach). They
compare the performance of these three meta-approaches vs. multiple local and global metrics on
the task of predicting future links in a social network. The Katz measure and meta-approaches
based on clustering and low-rank approximation perform the best on three of the ﬁve arXiv
datasets, but simple local measures such as common neighbors and Adamic/Adar also perform
surprisingly well.
Supervised learning methods can also be used to combine or augment the similarity metrics
that we have discussed. For instance, Lichtenwalter et al. (2010) investigate several supervised
methods for link prediction in sparsely labeled networks, using many of the metrics from Table 4.
These metrics are used as features in simple classiﬁers such as C4.5, J48, and naive Bayes. They
ﬁnd the supervised approach leads to a 30% improvement in AUC over the simple unsupervised
link prediction metrics. Similarly, Kashima and Abe (2006) propose a supervised probabilistic
model that assumes that a biological network has evolved over time, and uses only topological
features to estimate the model parameters. They evaluate the proposed method on protein-
protein and metabolic networks and report increased precision compared to simpler metrics such
as Adamic/Adar, Preferential Attachment, and Katz.
Discussion: In general, the local topology metrics sacriﬁce an amount of accuracy for compu-
tational gains while the global graph metrics may perform better but are costly to estimate and
infeasible on huge networks. Where appropriate, supervised methods that combine multiple local
metrics may oﬀer a promising alternative. The next subsection discusses additional work on link
prediction that has used supervised methods.
Link prediction using these metrics is especially sensitive to the characteristics of the domain
and application. For instance, many networks in biology, where the identiﬁcation of links is
costly, contain missing or incomplete links, while the removal of insigniﬁcant links is a more
signiﬁcant issue for social networks. For that reason, researchers have analyzed and proposed
many diﬀerent metrics when working in the domains of web analysis (Kleinberg, 1999; Broder
et al., 2000), social network analysis (Zheleva et al., 2010; Xiang et al., 2010; Koren et al., 2007),
citation analysis (Borgman & Furner, 2002), ecology communities (Zhou et al., 2009), biological
networks (Jeong et al., 2000), and many others (Barab´asi & Crandall, 2003; Newman, 2003).
3.3
Hybrid Link Prediction
In this subsection, we examine approaches that perform link prediction using both the attributes
and the graph topology. For such approaches, there are two key questions. First, what kinds of
features should be used? Second, how is the information from multiple features combined into a
single measure or probability to be used for prediction?
We ﬁrst consider the mix of non-relational and relational features that should be used. As
expected, the best features vary based on the domain and speciﬁc network. For instance, Taskar
et al. (2003) studied link prediction for a network of web pages and found that simple local
topology metrics (which they called transitivity and similarity) were more important than non-
relational features based on the words presents in the pages. Similarly, Hasan et al. (2006) found

16
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
that another topology metric (shortest distance) was the most useful for predicting co-authorship
links in a bibliographic network based on DBLP.
If only a single metric/feature, such as “hitting time,” will be used for link prediction, then we
must ensure that the metric works well for all nodes and yields a consistent ranking. However,
if multiple feature values will be combined in some way, then it may be more acceptable to
use a wider range of features, especially if a supervised learner will later select or weight the
most important features based on the training data. Thus, hybrid systems for link prediction
tend to have a more diverse feature set. For instance, Zheleva et al. (2010) propose new features
based on combining two diﬀerent kinds of networks (social and aﬃliation networks). Features
based on the groups and topology are constructed from the combined network and are used
along with descriptive non-relational features, yielding an improvement of 15-30% compared to a
system without the combined-network features. A second example of more complex features
is provided by Ben-Hur and Noble (2005), who design a new pairwise kernel for predicting
links between proteins (protein-protein interactions). The pairwise kernel is a tensor-product
of two linear kernels on the original feature space, and is especially useful in domains where
two nodes might have only a few common features. This approach has also been applied for user
preference prediction and recommender systems (Basilico & Hofmann, 2004). Vert and Yamanishi
(2005) propose a related approach, where supervised learning is used to create a mapping of the
original nodes into a new euclidean space where simple distance metrics can then be used for link
prediction.
Given the great diversity of possible features for link prediction, an interesting approach is
a system that automatically searches for relevant features to use. For example, Popescul et al.
(2003a) propose a unique link prediction approach that systematically generates and searches
over a space of relational features to learn potential link predictors. They use logistic regression
for link prediction and consider the search space covering equi-joins, equality selections, and
aggregation operations. In their approach, the model selection algorithm continues to add one
feature at a time to the model as long the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) score over the
training set can be improved. They ﬁnd that the search algorithm discovers a number of useful
topology-based features, such as co-citation and bibliographic coupling, as well as more complex
features. However, the complexity of searching a large feature space and avoiding overﬁtting
present challenges.
We next consider the second key question: how should the information from multiple features
be combined into a single measure to be used for link prediction? Most prior work has taken a
supervised learning approach, where both non-relational and topology-based metrics are used
as features that describe each possible link. As with the supervised techniques discussed in
Section 3.2, a model is learned from training data which can then be used to predict unseen
links.
Most of these supervised approaches apply the classiﬁer separately to each possible link, using
a classiﬁer such as a support vector machine, decision tree, or logistic regression (Popescul
et al., 2003a; Ben-Hur & Noble, 2005; Hasan et al., 2006). In these approaches, a “ﬂat”
feature representation for each link is created, and the prediction made for each possible link
is independent of the other predictions.
In contrast, early work on Relational Bayesian Networks (RBNs) (Getoor et al., 2003) and
Relational Markov Networks (RMNs) (Taskar et al., 2003) involved a joint inference computation
for link prediction, where each prediction could be inﬂuenced by nearby link predictions
(and sometimes also by newly predicted node labels). Using a webpage network and a social
network, Taskar et al. (2003) demonstrated that joint inference using belief propagation could
improve accuracy compared to the independent inference approach. However, this approach
is computationally intensive, and they noted that getting the belief propagation algorithm to
converge was a signiﬁcant problem. A possible solution to this computational challenge is the
simpler approach presented by Bilgic et al. (2007). Their method involved repeatedly predicting

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
17
labels for each node, predicting links between the nodes using all available features (including
predicted labels), then re-predicting the labels with the new links, and so forth. The link
prediction was based on an independent inference step using logistic regression, as with the simpler
approaches discussed above. However, the repeated application of this step allows the possibility
of link feature values changing in between iterations based on the intermediate predictions, thus
allowing link predictions to inﬂuence each other.
Recently, Backstrom and Leskovec (2011) proposed a novel approach that is supervised, but
where the ﬁnal predictions are based on a random walk rather than directly on the output of
some learned classiﬁer. Given a particular target node v in a social network, along with nodes
that are known to link to v, they study how to predict which other links from v are likely to
arise in the future (or should be recommended). They deﬁne a few simple link features based
on node proﬁle similarity and messaging behavior, then use these features to estimate initial
link weights. They show how to learn these weights (or transition probabilities) in a manner
that optimizes the likelihood that a subsequent random walk, starting at v, will arrive at nodes
already known to link to v. Because the random walk is thus guided by the links that are already
known to exist, they call this process a “supervised random walk.” They argue that this learning
process greatly reduces the need to manually specify complex graph-based features, and show
that it outperforms other supervised approaches as well as unsupervised approaches such as the
Adamic/Adar measure.
A ﬁnal approach for link prediction is to use some kind of unsupervised dimensionality
reduction that yields a new matrix that in some way reveals possible new links. For instance, Hoﬀ
et al. (2002) propose a latent space approach where the initial link information is projected into a
low-dimensional space. Link existence can then be predicted based on the spatial representation
of the nodes in the new latent space. These models perform a kind of factorization of the
link adjacency matrix and thus are often referred to as matrix factorization techniques. An
advantage of such models is that the spatial representation enables simpler visualization and
human interpretation. Related approaches have also been proposed for temporal networks (Sarkar
& Moore, 2005), for mixed-membership models (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001; Airoldi et al., 2008),
and for situations where the latent vector representing each node is usefully constrained to
be binary (Miller et al., 2009). Typically, these models have the capability of including the
attributes as covariates that aﬀect the link prediction but are not directly part of the latent
space representation. However, Zhu et al. (2007) demonstrated how such attributes can also be
represented in a related but distinct latent space. More recently, Menon and Elkan (2011) showed
how a matrix factorization technique for link prediction can scale to much larger graphs by
training with stochastic gradient descent instead of MCMC.
3.4
Discussion
Link prediction remains a challenge, in part because of the very large number of possible links (i.e.,
N 2 possible links given N observed nodes), and because of widely varying data characteristics.
Depending on the domain, the best approach may use only a single non-relational metric or
topology metric, or it may use a richer set of features that are evaluated by some learned model.
Future work may also wish to consider using an ensemble of link predictors to yield even better
accuracy.
Our discussion of link prediction has focused on predicting new links based on existing links
and properties of the nodes. In the context of the web, however, “link prediction” has sometimes
taken other forms. For instance, Sarukkai (2000) use web server traces to predict the next page
that a user will visit, given their recent browsing history. In particular, they use Markov chains,
which are related to the random walks discussed in Section 3.2, for this task that they also call
“link prediction.” More recently, DuBois and Smyth (2010) model relational events (i.e., links)
using latent classes where each event/link arises from a latent class and the properties of the event
(i.e. sender, receiver, and type) are chosen from distributions over the nodes conditioned on the

18
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
assigned class. In this work, the local community of a node inﬂuences the distribution computed
for each node, in a way related to the computations of stochastic block modeling (Airoldi et al.,
2008). DuBois & Smyth’s task is also a form of link prediction, but where the goal is not to
predict the presence or absence of a static link, but the frequency of occurrence for each possible
event/link.
One might also be interested in deleting or pruning away noisy, less informative links. For
instance, friendship links in Facebook are usually extremely noisy since the cost of adding
friendship links is insigniﬁcant. Most of the techniques used in this section could also be used to
remove existing links wherever the link prediction algorithm yields a very low score (or weight)
for an observed link in the original graph.
Indeed, since most link prediction algorithms eﬀectively assign a score to every possible link,
they could also be used to assign a weight to just the set of initial links in G. This “link weighting”
is one of the three subtasks of link interpretation shown in the taxonomy of Figure 2. However, in
practice if weights are needed only for the initial links, diﬀerent features and algorithms will often
be possible and/or more eﬀective. The next section discusses such link weighting algorithms, as
well as link interpretation in general. Also, in Section 7 we discuss some additional methods for
link prediction that seek to jointly transform both nodes and links.
4
Link Interpretation
Link interpretation is the process of constructing weights, labels, or general features for the
links. These three tasks of link interpretation are related and somewhat overlapping. First, link
weighting is the task of assigning some weight to each link. These weights may represent the
relevance or importance of each link, and are typically expressed as continuous values. Thus the
weights provide an explicit order over the links. Second, link labeling is similar, except that it
usually assigns discrete values to each link. This could represent a positive or negative relationship,

link feature construction is the process of generating a set of discrete or continuous features for the
links. For instance, these features might count the frequency of particular words that appeared
in messages between the two nodes connected by some link, or simply count the number of such
messages.
In a sense, link feature construction subsumes link weighting and labeling, since the weights
and labels can be viewed simply as possible link features to be discovered. However, for many
tasks it makes sense to compute one particular feature that summarizes the relevance of each
link (the weight) and/or one particular feature that summarizes the type of each link (the label).
Such weights and labels may be especially useful to later processing, for example with collective
classiﬁcation. Moreover, the techniques used for general feature construction tend toward simpler
approaches such as aggregation and discretization, whereas the best techniques for computing
weights and labels may involve much more complexity, including global path computations or
supervised learning. For this reason, we treat link weighting (Section 4.1) and link labeling
(Section 4.2) separately from general link feature construction (Section 4.3).
4.1
Link Weighting
Given the initial graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩, the task is to assign a continuous value (the weight)
to each existing link in G, representing the importance or inﬂuence of that link. As previously
discussed, link weighting could potentially be accomplished by applying some link prediction
technique and simply retaining the computed scores as link weights. For instance, Lassez et al.
(2008) perform link prediction and weighting by applying singular value decomposition to the
adjacency matrix, then retaining only the k most signiﬁcant singular-vectors (similar to the low-
rank approximation techniques discussed in Section 3.2). They show that querying (e.g., with
PageRank) on the resultant weighted graph can yield more relevant results compared to an
unweighted graph.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
19
Unlike with link prediction, however, most link weighting techniques are designed to work only
with links that already exist in the graph. These techniques don’t work for predicting unseen links
because they weight links based on known properties/features of the existing links, or because
they compute some additional link features that only yield sensible results for links that already
exist.
In the simplest case, link weighting can be just aggregating an intrinsic property of links. For
example, Onnela et al. (2007) deﬁnes link weights based on the aggregated duration of phone
calls between individuals in a mobile communication network. In other cases, simply counting
the number of interactions between two nodes may be appropriate.
Thus, when link features like duration, direction, or frequency are known, they can be
aggregated in some way to generate link weights. If actual link weights are already known
for some of the links, then supervised methods can be used for weight prediction, using the
known weights as training data. For instance, Kahanda and Neville (2009) predict link strength
within a Facebook dataset, where stronger relationships are identiﬁed based on a user’s explicit
identiﬁcation of their “top friends” via a popular Facebook application. Gilbert and Karahalios
(2009) also predict link strength for Facebook, but form their training data from survey data
collected from 35 participants (yielding strength ratings for about 2000 links). Both of these
algorithms generate a large number (50-70) of features about each link in the network, then
learn a predictive model via regression or some other technique such as bagged decision trees,
which Kahanda and Neville (2009) ﬁnds performs best among several alternatives. Gilbert and
Karahalios (2009) generate features based on proﬁle similarity (e.g., do two users have similar
education levels?) and based on user interactions (e.g., how frequently and about what topics
do two users communicate?). They ﬁnd the interaction features to be most helpful, especially a
feature based on the number of days since the last communication event. Kahanda and Neville
(2009) use similar kinds of features, which they term attribute-based and transactional features,
and also add topological features (such as the Adamic/Adar discussed in Section 3.2) and network-
transactional (NTR) features. NTR features are those that are based on communications between

network context. This moderation often takes the form of normalization, for instance to dampen
the inﬂuence of a node that has sent a large number of messages to many diﬀerent friends. They
ﬁnd that these NTR features are by far the most helpful for prediction, but that many other
features also contribute to the overall predictive accuracy.
When training data with sample link weights is not available, approaches based on a
parameterized probabilistic model are still possible. However, since candidate link features can
no longer be evaluated against the training data, these approaches must (manually) choose the
features that they use much more carefully. For instance, Xiang et al. (2010) examine link weight
prediction on two social network datasets (Facebook and LinkedIn), but use only 5-11 features
for each link. They hypothesize that relationship strength is a hidden cause of user interactions,
and propose a link-based latent variable model to capture this dependence. For inference, they
use a coordinate ascent optimization procedure to predict the strength of each link. Since the
actual strength of each link is not known, prediction tasks in this domain cannot directly evaluate
accuracy. However, Xiang et al. (2010) demonstrate that using the link strengths produced by
their method leads to higher autocorrelation and higher collective classiﬁcation accuracy when
predicting user attributes such as gender or relationship status.
A number of researchers have considered the importance of recency in evaluating link weight,
under the assumption that events or interactions that occurred more recently should have more
weight. For instance, Roth et al. (2010) propose the “Interactions Rank” metric for weighting
a link based on the messages between two nodes. The formula separately weights incoming and
outgoing messages for each link, and imposes an exponential decay on the importance of each
message based on how old it is. Roth et al. use this metric to weight the links in what they call the
“implicit social network,” where each node represents a group of users. They demonstrate that

20
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville

list. However, the basic metric is simple to compute and could be applied to many other tasks.
The Interactions Rank metric weights a link more heavily if it connects two nodes that
have frequently and/or recently communicated. Alternatively, Sharan and Neville (2008) have
considered how to weight links in a graph where the links (such as hyperlinks or friendships) may
themselves appear or disappear over time. In particular, they construct a summarized graph where
all nodes and links that have ever existed in the past are present. Each link in this new graph is
weighted based on a kernel function that can provide more weight to links that have been present
more often or more recently in the past. They explain how to modify standard relational classiﬁers
to use these weighted links, and demonstrate that a variety of kernels (including exponential and
linear decay kernels) produce weighted links that yield higher classiﬁcation accuracy compared
to a non-weighted graph. More recently, Rossi and Neville (2010, 2012) have extended this work
to handle time-varying attribute values, which may serve as a basis for incorporating temporal
dynamics into additional tasks.
4.2
Link Labeling
Given the initial graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩, the task is to construct some discrete label
for one or more links in G. These labels can be used to describe the type of relationship
that each link represents. For instance, in the Facebook example, a link labeling algorithm
may create labels representing “work” or “personal” relationships. Such labels would enable
subsequent classiﬁcation models to separately account for the inﬂuence of these diﬀerent kinds
of relationships.
Most prior work on link labeling has assumed that some text (such as a message) describes each
link, and has been based on unsupervised textual analysis techniques such as Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003), Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al., 1990), or
Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA) (Hofmann, 1999). Traditionally, these techniques
have been used to assign one or more “latent topics” to each document in a collection of
documents. The “topics” that are formed are deﬁned implicitly by a probability distribution
over how likely each word is to appear, given that the topic is associated with a document. These
topics will not always be semantically meaningful, but often manual inspection reveals that most
prominent topics do represent sensible concepts such as “advertising” or “government relations.”
However, even when such semantic associations are not obvious, inferring such topics for a set of
links can still aid further analysis, since the topics identify which links represent similar kinds of
relationships.
These textual analysis techniques were developed with independent documents in mind, not
inter-linked nodes, but they can be adapted to label links in several ways. For instance, Rossi and
Neville (2010) examined messages between developers contributing to an open-source software
project. They treat each message as a separate document, and use LDA to infer the single most
likely latent topic for each message (i.e., a link label). This technique could be used for any
graph with textual content associated with the links. Rossi and Neville (2010) also go further, to
consider the impact of time-varying topics and time-varying topic/word associations, by running
multiple iterations of LDA, one per time epoch. Using this model, they study the problem of
predicting the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent developers (nodes) in the network. They demonstrate
that the accuracy of predictions is signiﬁcantly improved by modeling the temporal evolution of
the communication topics.
McCallum et al. (2007a) describe an alternative way of extending LDA-like approaches for
link labeling. LDA is essentially a Bayesian network that models the probabilistic dependencies
between documents, associated topics, and words associated with those topics. They propose to
extend this model with the Author-Recipient-Topic (ART) model, where the choice of topic for
each document (message) depends on both the author and the recipient of the message. Once
parameters are learned for the model, inference (e.g., with Gibbs sampling) can be used to infer

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
21
the most likely latent topics for each message. They make use of these topics to assign roles to

Supervised techniques can also be used for link labeling. For instance, Taskar et al. (2003)
study an academic webpage network and consider how to predict node labels (such as “Student”
or “Professor”) while simultaneously predicting link labels (such as “adviser-of”). Given a labeled
training graph, they learn a complex Relational Markov Network (RMN) that can predict these
labels and the existence of new links. To make the link prediction tractable, only some candidate
new links are considered, such as those links suggested by a textual reference, inside a page,
to some other entity in the graph. The RMN utilizes text-based features, for instance based
on the anchor text for known links or the heading for the HTML section in which a possible
link reference is found. They demonstrate that the RMN’s joint inference over nodes and links
improves performance compared to separate inference. However, learning and inference with
RMNs can often be a signiﬁcant challenge, which in practice limits the number and types of
feature that can be considered.
The RMN approach learns from some training data and then uses joint inference over the
entire graph. A simpler supervised approach is to create a set of features for each link and
use these features for learning and inference with an arbitrary classiﬁer that treats each link
separately. Leskovec et al. (2010b) study a particular form of this approach where there are only
two link labels, representing a positive or negative relationship (such as friendship vs. animosity).
They create link features based on the (signed) degree of the nodes involved in each link and
also based on transitivity-like properties computed from the known labels of nearby links. They
demonstrate this approach using data from Epinions, Wikipedia, and Slashdot, where users have
manually indicated positive or negative relationships to other users. Given a network with almost
all edges labeled, the label classiﬁer is able to predict the label (positive or negative) of a single
unlabeled edge with high accuracy. Interestingly, they show that a classiﬁer’s predictive accuracy
for a particular dataset decreases only slightly when the classiﬁer is trained on a diﬀerent dataset
vs. being trained on the same dataset that is used for predictions. They argue that theories
of balance and status from social psychology partially explain this ability of their predictive
models to generalize across datasets. Unlike most of the other techniques discussed in this section,
this work does not make use of text-based features. However, the general problem of predicting
the “sign” of a link is related to sentiment analysis (or opinion mining) in natural language
processing (Godbole et al., 2007; Pang & Lee, 2008). These sentiment analysis algorithms could
be reformulated to predict the label (such as positive or negative) of a link given its associated
text.
Because a link between two nodes can be established based on many diﬀerent kinds of
relationships, there are many other types of algorithms that could potentially be used for labeling
links, even if the original algorithm was not designed for this purpose. For instance, Markov Logic
Networks (MLNs) have been used to extract semantic networks from text, yielding a graph where
the nodes represent objects or concepts (Kok & Domingos, 2008). This process produces relations
such as “teaches that” or “is written in” between the nodes, which could be used as link labels
in further analysis. Another example is the Group-Topic (GT) model proposed by McCallum
et al. (2007b), which, like the previously mentioned ART model, is a Bayesian network. The
model is intended for graphs where two nodes (such as people) become connected when they
both participate in the same “event,” such as both voting yes for the same political bill. Rather
than directly labeling links (like ART), the GT model clusters these nodes (such as people)
into latent groups based on textual descriptions of the events/votes. However, the GT model also
simultaneously infers a set of likely topics for each event, which could be used to label the implicit
links between the nodes. The results of the model could also be used to add new nodes to the
graph that represent the latent groups that were discovered.

22
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
(a) Before link-aggregation
(b) After link-aggregation
Figure 4
Link Feature Aggregation Example: The ﬁgure demonstrates how an unknown link
feature value can be computed by aggregating the link feature values of surrounding links. Here the
aggregation operator is Mode.
4.3
Link Feature Construction
Link feature construction is the systematic construction of features on the links, typically for
the purpose of improving the accuracy or understandability of SRL algorithms. Link feature
construction can be important for many prediction tasks, but has received considerably less
attention than node feature construction in the literature. Fortunately, many of the computations
that have been developed for node feature construction can also apply to link features. To avoid
redundancy, we defer most of our analysis of feature construction to the discussion of node feature
construction in Section 6.3. This section brieﬂy discusses how such techniques for node feature
construction can be applied to links, then summarizes the major types of link features that can
be computed.
Section 6.3 will later describe how feature values for relational data are often based on
aggregating values from multiple nodes. For instance, such a feature might compute the average or
the most common feature value among all of the neighbors of a particular node. Such aggregation-
based features help to account for the varying number of neighbors that a node may have. For
links, aggregation is less essential, since (usually) each link has precisely two endpoint nodes.
However, aggregation can still be useful for computing features that collect information from a
larger area of the graph. For instance, in Figure 4, a link feature value is being computed for
the link in the center of the subgraph (the “target link”). The computation considers the feature
values (positive or negative signs) for all of the links that are adjacent to the target link. In
this case, the aggregation operator is Mode, and the result is the new link feature value. This
example used link features as the input, but node feature values (e.g., of the lightly-shaded nodes
in Figure 4) could also be aggregated to form a new link feature. In this way, all of the aggregation
operators discussed for nodes in Section 6.3 can also be applied to links.
Figure 5 summarizes the kinds of features that can be constructed for a link. This ﬁgure is
organized around the sources of information that go into computing a single link feature (i.e.,
the inputs), rather than the details of the feature computation (such as the type of aggregation
or other function used). The bottom of the ﬁgure shows the four types of link features, each
represented by a subgraph. In each case, the emphasized link at the bottom of the subgraph is
the target link for which a new feature value is being computed. Each of the subgraphs shows
varying amounts of information because each displays only those features, nodes, and/or links
that can be used as inputs for that kind of link feature.
The simplest type is the non-relational link feature, which can be computed for each link solely
from information that is already known about that link. Thus, Figure 5A shows only the feature
values which are already known for the target link, which can be used to construct a new feature
value. For instance, if a message is associated with each link, then a link feature could count the
number of times that a certain word occurs, or the number of distinct words. Alternatively, if a
date is associated with the link, then a feature might compute the number of months since the
link was formed. Onnela et al. (2007) computed this kind of feature when they aggregated the

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
23
Non-­‐relational	
  
Link	
  Features	
  
Relational	
  Features	
  
Topology	
  
Features	
  
Link-­‐value	
  
Features	
  
Node-­‐value	
  
Features	
  
input	
  
A.	
  
B.	
  
C.	
  
D.	
  
C	
  
C	
  
L	
  
L	
  
p	
  
w	
  
w	
  
L	
  
target	
  link	
  
node-­‐value	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
link-­‐value	
  
L	
  
p	
  
‹V,E,XV,XE›	
  
XE	
  
‹V,E›	
  
‹V,E,XV›	
  
‹V,E,XE›	
  
‹V,E,XV,XE›	
  
XE	
  
˜	
  
Link	
  Feature	
  	
  
Construction	
  
	
  
Figure 5
Link Feature Taxonomy: The link feature classes are non-relational features, topology
features, relational link-value features, and relational node-value features. In the subgraphs at bottom,
only the information that is potentially used by that class of link feature (i.e., nodes V , links E, node
features XV , and/or link features XE) is shown. The emphasized link represents where the feature value
is computed (i.e., the “target link”).
duration of all phone calls between two people to form a new link feature (which they also used
as a link weight).
The remaining feature types are all relational, meaning that they depend in some way on
the graph (not just a single link). First, topology features (Figure 5B) are those that can be
computed using only the topology of the graph. Such a feature might, for instance, compute the
total number of links that are adjacent to the target link. Likewise, Kahanda and Neville (2009)
computed the clustering coeﬃcient of a pair of linked nodes, which measures the extent to which
the two nodes have neighbors in common (Newman, 2003), as well as other topological features
such as the Adamic/Adar measure discussed in Section 4.1. They used these link features to help
predict link strength, but they could also be used for other tasks.
Next, relational link-value features are those that are computed using the feature values of
nearby links. For instance, Figure 5C shows how link labels of personal (p) or work (w) might
be identiﬁed from links adjacent to the target link. A new link feature could be formed by
representing the distribution of these labels, by taking the most common label, or (when the
link features are numeric) by averaging. Leskovec et al. (2010b) used such link-value features
when working with graphs where each link had a “sign” feature of positive or negative (as with
Figure 4). They computed features based on the signed-degree of the two nodes connected by
the target link as well as more complex measures based on other paths between these two nodes
(e.g., to measure sign transitivity).
Finally, relational node-value features are those that are computed using the feature values of
the nodes that are close to or are attached to the target link. For instance, Figure 5D shows how

24
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
node labels of conservative (C) or liberal (L) might be identiﬁed for nodes close to the target
link. As with link-value features, these labels could be used to create a new feature value by
summarization or aggregation. Often, only the two nodes that are directly attached to the target
link are used. For instance, both Gilbert and Karahalios (2009) and Kahanda and Neville (2009)
construct link features based on the similarity of two nodes’ social network proﬁles. However,
the feature values of more distant nodes could also be used, for instance to compute a new link
feature based on how similar the friends of two people (nodes) are.
5
Node Prediction
Node transformation includes node prediction (e.g., predicting the existence of new nodes) and
node interpretation (e.g., constructing node weights, labels, or features). This section focuses on
node prediction, while Section 6 considers node interpretation.
Given a graph with existing nodes V , node prediction can be used in two distinct ways.
First, a node prediction algorithm could be used to discover additional nodes that are of the
same type as those that are already present in V . For instance, given a set of people that

recipients that are implied by the messages, but not explicitly represented in the original graph.
Alternatively, supervised or unsupervised machine learning techniques could be used to discover,
for instance, new research papers or people from information available on the web (Craven et al.,
2000; Cafarella et al., 2008). These techniques are valuable, and can certainly be used to add
new nodes to a graph. However, most such work has been examined in the context of general
knowledge base construction, rather than relational learning.4
We focus on the second type of node prediction, which involves predicting nodes of a diﬀerent
type than those that are already present in the graph. These new nodes might represent locations,
communities (Kleinberg, 1999), shared characteristics, social processes (Tang & Liu, 2009; Hoﬀ
et al., 2002), functions (Letovsky & Kasif, 2003), or some other kind of relationship. For instance,
in the running Facebook example, a newly discovered node may represent a common interest or
hobby that multiple people share. These nodes are usually referred to as “latent nodes” (and the
nodes connected to each such node form a “latent group”).5 The meaning of these nodes will
depend upon what features and/or links were included as input to the node prediction algorithm.
For instance, including work-based friendships will lead to very diﬀerent groups than if only
personal friendships are considered.
There are many advantages of this type of representation change with regards to accuracy
and understandability. For instance, nodes that are not directly connected in the original graph
but are similar in some way become, because of the links to the new nodes, closer in graph
space. Intuitively, nodes connected to a high level concept should share some latent properties
and representing that latent structure can directly impact classiﬁcation, network analysis, and
many other tasks. For instance, reducing the path length between similar nodes enables inﬂuence
from these nodes to propagate more eﬀectively if collective classiﬁcation (CC) is performed on
these nodes. A model can still learn about and exploit these new nodes and relationships, even
if the semantic meaning of the new nodes is not precisely understood.
The most popular methods for predicting new nodes are based on clustering, which in our
context means the grouping of nodes such that nodes within a group are more similar to each
other than they are to the nodes in other groups. Typically, one new node is created for each
group, and then links are added between each existing node and its corresponding group node
4 The recent work of Kim and Leskovec (2011) is an exception. Their technique uses EM to infer the
existence of missing nodes and links based on only the known topology of the graph.
5Prior work sometimes refers to such nodes as “hidden” nodes, especially when they are thought to
represent concrete characteristics, such as geographic location, that could be measured but were, for
some reason, not observed in the data.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
25
Figure 6 Alternative representations for newly predicted groups: The left ﬁgure shows how
a new feature (with value X or Y) could be added to each node, while the right ﬁgure demonstrates the
creation of two new nodes to represent the groups.
(see right side of Figure 6). Some techniques may also associate each node with multiple groups,
with link weights representing the aﬃnity to each group.
When new groups are discovered, whether via clustering or via some other technique, an
alternative to creating new nodes and links is to simply add new feature(s) to each node that
represent the group information. The left side of Figure 6 demonstrates this alternative. For
instance, a new node feature might represent having running as hobby, or it may simply represent
belonging to discovered group #17, which is of unknown meaning. Popescul and Ungar (2004)
use the CiteSeer dataset to demonstrate that this technique can derive features that can improve
predictive accuracy. An advantage of this approach, as opposed to adding new nodes, is that
it potentially enables simpler, non-relational algorithms to make use of the new information.
A potential disadvantage, though, is that it also does not allow for algorithms such as CC to
propagate inﬂuence between newly connected nodes, as discussed above. However, some such
methods use this general strategy to generate much larger numbers of latent features that can be
used for classiﬁcation (Tang & Liu, 2009; Menon & Elkan, 2010). Tang & Liu demonstrate that,
in some cases, the resultant large number of link-based features may make collective inference
unnecessary for obtaining good accuracy. Naturally, whether the information discovered from
these clusterings is best represented via new nodes or new features will depend upon the dataset
and the inference task. In this section, for simplicity we will discuss each algorithm assuming that
new nodes will be created (even if the algorithm was originally described in terms of creating
new features).
As with our discussion of link prediction, we organize our discussion around the kinds of
information that are used for prediction. Section 5.1 discusses non-relational (attribute-based)
node prediction, Section 5.2 discusses topology-based node prediction, and Section 5.3 discusses
hybrid approaches that use both the node feature values and the topology of the graph.
5.1
Non-relational (Attribute-based) Node Prediction
There are many clustering algorithms that can be used to cluster existing nodes using only their
non-relational features (attributes), which can then be used to add new nodes to a graph. The two
primary types are hierarchical clustering algorithms (e.g., agglomerative or divisive clustering)
and partitioning algorithms such as k-means, k-medoids (Berkhin, 2006; Zhu, 2006), EM-based
algorithms, and self-organizing maps (Kohonen, 1990). We do not discuss these algorithms further
since they have been well studied for non-relational data and can be easily applied to relational
data if clustering based only on attribute values is desired.

26
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
5.2
Topology-based Node Prediction
The techniques described in this section link existing nodes to one or more new nodes (i.e., latent
groups), based only on the original link structure of the graph. In most cases, ﬁnding this grouping
depends upon computing some kind of similarity metric between every pair of nodes. Two key
questions thus serve to identify these techniques. First, what kind of similarity metric should be
used? Second, how should the metric be used to predict groupings? We address each question in
turn.
Types of metrics for group prediction: Any type of topology-based link weighting metric
(see Table 4) could conceivably be used for latent node prediction. A metric will be suitable so
long as it produces high values for pairs of nodes that should belong to the same group and lower
values for other pairs. For instance, a high value of the Katz metric (see Section 3.2) indicates
that two nodes have many short paths between them, and thus may belong to the same group.
Metrics representing distance rather than similarity can also be used after negating the metric.
For instance, Girvan and Newman (2002) focus on detecting community structure by extending
the concept of node-betweenness to links. Intuitively, if a network contains latent groups that
are only loosely connected by a few intergroup links, then all shortest paths between diﬀerent
groups must go along these links. These links that connect the diﬀerent groups are assigned a
high link-betweenness value (which corresponds to a low similarity value). The underlying group
structure can then trivially be revealed by removing the links with highest betweenness.
This idea of using link-betweenness for relational clustering has been extended in a number
of directions. For instance, Newman and Girvan (2004) introduced random-walk betweenness,
which is the expected number of times that a random walk between a pair of nodes will
pass down a particular link. In addition, Radicchi et al. (2004) proposed using a link-based
clustering coeﬃcient metric. They showed that this metric performs comparably to the original
link-betweenness metric of Girvan & Newman, but is much faster because it is a local graph
measure instead of a global graph measure.
Zhou (2003) describes a new metric, the “dissimilarity index,” which can be computed as
follows. For each node i, compute a vector di where each value dij represents the distance from
node i to node j (Zhou measures distance based on the average number of steps needed for a
random walk starting at node i to reach node j, but any distance metric could be used). If nodes
i and k are very similar, they should have very similar distance vectors. Thus, the dissimilarity
index for nodes i and k is deﬁned based on a Euclidean-like distance computation between vectors
di and dk. Zhou demonstrates that this technique outperforms the link-betweenness approach of
Girvan & Newman for some random modular networks.
Relatively simple metrics can often lead to useful results. For instance, Ravasz et al. (2002)
used a simple clustering coeﬃcient metric to study metabolic networks. Their study reveals that
the metabolic networks of forty-three organisms are organized into many small, highly-connected
modules. Furthermore, they ﬁnd that for E. coli, the hidden hierarchical modularity closely
overlaps with known metabolic functions.
Using the metrics for group prediction: The simplest techniques for identifying new groups
is to perform some kind of hierarchical clustering. For instance, after similarities or weights
have been computed for every pair of nodes, all links can be removed from the graph. Next, the
weighted links are placed between the nodes one by one, ordered by their weights. The intuition is
that varying degrees of clusters are formed as more links are added. In particular, this approach
forms a hierarchical tree where the leaves represent the ﬁnest granularity of clustering where
every node is a separate cluster. As we move up the tree larger clusters are formed, until we reach
the top where all the nodes are joined in one large cluster. This type of hierarchical approach
was used by Zhou (2003). Girvan and Newman (2002) use a similar strategy, but start instead
with the original graph and iteratively remove the less similar links from the graph to reveal
the underlying community structure. A challenge with these approaches, as with clustering in

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
27
general, is to select the appropriate number of ﬁnal clusters, which corresponds to selecting a
level in the clustering tree.
Spectral clustering (Dhillon, 2001; Ng et al., 2001; Kamvar et al., 2003) can also be used for
group identiﬁcation. Spectral clustering relies upon computing a similarity matrix S that describes
all the data points, then transforming the matrix in a way that yields a new matrix U where
clustering the rows of U using a simple clustering algorithm (such as k-means) can trivially identify
the interesting groups in the data. The matrix transformation has several variants, but involves
computing some kind of Laplacian of S, then computing the eigenvectors of the resultant matrix
and using those eigenvectors to represent the original data. The motivation for this transformation
can be seen as identifying good graph cuts in the original graph (those that yield good separations
of highly-connected nodes into groups) or as identifying those nodes that are closely related in
terms of random walks; see von Luxburg (2007) for an overview. Spectral clustering was originally
applied to non-relational data, but, as with the hierarchical techniques described above, it can be
applied to relational data by using link-based metrics for computing the similarity matrix. For
instance, Neville and Jensen (2005) use the node adjacency matrix and the spectral clustering
technique described by Shi and Malik (2000) to identify latent groups in their graphs. They
show that this technique enables simpler inference (since each group can be handled separately),
and ultimately yields more accurate classiﬁcation compared to approaches that ignore the group
structure. Tang and Liu (2011) also use spectral clustering on the link graph, but do so in order to
create a much larger number of latent features that are then used to learn a supervised classiﬁer.
Unlike the latent groups of Neville and Jensen, this technique allows each node to be associated
with more than one cluster in the output of the spectral clustering, which Tang & Liu claim
leads to improved classiﬁcation accuracy. Spectral clustering can also be used with more complex
similarity metrics, as described in the next subsection.
Techniques borrowed from web search can also be useful for node prediction. For instance, given
the adjacency matrix A for a webpage graph, the Hits algorithm (Kleinberg, 1999) computes
the ﬁrst few eigenvectors of AAT and AT A, which represent the most authoritative nodes
(the “authorities”) as well as prominent nodes that point to them (the “hubs”). Normally, this
algorithm is used to ﬁnd only the single most prominent “community” of authorities and hubs (to
assist with a web search), but secondary communities can be discovered by also considering the
non-principal eigenvectors of AAT and AT A (Gibson et al., 1998). A node prediction algorithm
could then treat each such community as a latent group and add a new node and links to represent
this group. These techniques may be especially useful for detecting patterns of inﬂuence in a graph
and adding more explicit links to represent this inﬂuence.
5.3
Hybrid Node Prediction
The techniques in the previous section added new nodes to the graph, often based on clustering,
using only the topology of the graph. In principle, a technique that also used the nodes’ attributes
should produce more meaningful latent groups/nodes. This section considers how to add such
attribute information to techniques for node prediction.
A simple approach is to deﬁne some kind of similarity metric that combines non-relational
and topology-based similarity into a single value, then provide that similarity metric to one of
the previously mentioned clustering algorithms. For instance, Neville et al. (2004) use a weighted
combination of attribute and link information
S(i, j) = α · 1
k
X
k
sk(i, j) + (1 −α) · l
as a metric, where sk(i, j) = 1 iﬀnodes i and j have the same value for the kth attribute, and
l = 1 iﬀa link exists between i and j. Here the constant α controls the relative importance of the
attributes vs. the links. They use this metric with the NCut spectral clustering technique to add
new nodes to the graph, and demonstrate that these additional nodes increase the performance

28
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
of relational classiﬁcation. A similar weighted combination of attribute and link-based similarity
is used by Bhattacharya and Getoor (2005) for entity resolution.
Attribute-based information can also be incorporated on an ad-hoc basis. For instance, Adibi
et al. (2004) describe a group ﬁnding algorithm where an initial seed set of clusters is formed
based on a handcrafted set of logical rules, and then these clusters are reﬁned using a probabilistic
system based on mutual information. In their system, the logic-based component primarily uses
the attributes about each node (person), while the probabilistic system primarily uses the links
that describe connections between the people. However, both components make some use of both
attributes and links.
A more principled approach is to deﬁne some kind of generative model that represents the
dependence of the observed attributes and links on some latent group nodes, then use that model
to estimate group membership. For instance, Kubica et al. (2002) deﬁne a generative model
where each node belongs to one or more groups, and group members tend to link to each other.
In particular, they use a group membership chart to track whether each node belongs to each
group, and do a local search over possible states of the chart (using stochastic hill climbing) to
try to identify membership changes that would better explain the known data. At each step,
maximum likelihood is used to estimate the parameters of the model. They demonstrate the
usefulness of their technique on news articles, webpages, and some synthetic data.
Generative models can also be used with more sophisticated inference. For example, Taskar
et al. (2001) treats group membership as a latent variable and then uses loopy belief propagation
to implicitly perform a clustering of the nodes. Likewise, Mixed Membership Relational Clustering
(MMRC) (Long et al., 2007) uses EM variants to estimate group memberships. In particular, it
uses a ﬁrst round of hard clustering (where each object is assigned to exactly one cluster),
following by a round of soft clustering where continuous strength values are associated with each
membership assignment. Mixed membership stochastic blockmodels (Airoldi et al., 2008) also
assign continuous group membership values to each node, but use only topological information
(not attributes) for their group assignments and use variational inference techniques with the
generative model. Finally, Long et al. (2006) demonstrates how node clustering can be performed
instead using spectral clustering, and focuses particularly on how to simultaneously cluster
multiple types of nodes (e.g., to simultaneously cluster web pages and web users into two distinct
sets of groups).
Most group prediction algorithms assume that links are more likely to connect nodes that
belong to the same group. An exception is Anthony and desJardins (2007), which also uses a
generative model where the links and attributes depend on some latent group memberships, but
where some types of links are more likely to occur between nodes that do not belong to the same
group. For instance, they note that if groups in a social network are deﬁned by gender, then a
link representing “dating” is more likely to connect two nodes from diﬀerent groups.
5.4
Discussion
Most of the techniques described above produce a single clustering of the nodes, usually based
on assigning every node to a single group. In contrast, multi-clustering is an emerging research
area that aims to provide multiple orthogonal clusterings of complex data (Strehl & Ghosh, 2003;
Topchy et al., 2004). For instance, individuals in Facebook might be clustered in multiple ways
where latent node types might represent friend groups, work relations, socioeconomic status,
locations, or family circles. A type of multi-clustering is performed by McCallum et al. (2007a)
where latent nodes are created based on roles and topics. In addition, Kok and Domingos (2007)
propose Statistical Predicate Invention (SPI), a node transformation approach based on Markov
Logic Networks (Richardson & Domingos, 2006). SPI clusters nodes, features and links forming
the basis for the prediction of predicates (or potential nodes). SPI considers multiple relational
clusterings based on the observation that multiple distinct clusterings may be necessary to,
for instance, group individuals based on their friendships and their work relationships. They

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
29
Figure 7
Lifted graph representation: The initial graph G is clustered and transformed into a
lifted graph representation ˜G. The lifted graph representation is created by clustering nodes, links, or
both.
demonstrate that MLN inference can estimate these clusters and improves performance compared
to two simpler baselines. A similar node prediction approach applies MLNs for role labeling
(Riedel & Meza-Ruiz, 2008).
Node deletion may also be useful in some cases. For instance, node deletion might be beneﬁcial
for removing outdated or spurious nodes from the graph. Alternatively, there may be multiple
nodes that represent the same real-world object or concept, in which case deletion for the purposes
of entity resolution can be important (Pasula et al., 2003; Bhattacharya & Getoor, 2007; Singla
& Domingos, 2006).
Finally, node representation changes can be used to not only to improve accuracy, but also
to yield graphs that can be processed more eﬃciently or that have other desirable properties.
Section 5.2 already discussed how Neville and Jensen (2005) used the addition of latent nodes to
enable simpler inference. Another possibility is the creation of “super-nodes” that represent more
than one of the original nodes. For instance, Figure 7 demonstrates how ﬁve original nodes can,
after clustering, be collapsed into three super-nodes, yielding a “lifted graph” representation. This
kind of representation change can be used for more eﬃcient inference in Markov Logic Networks
(see Section 6.3) and for network anonymization (see Section 8.6).
6
Node Interpretation
Node interpretation is the process of constructing weights, labels, or general features for the nodes.
As with the symmetric tasks for link interpretation, node weighting seeks to assign a continuous
value to each node, representing the node’s importance, while node labeling seeks to assign a
discrete value to each link, representing the type, group, or class of a node. Likewise, node
feature construction is the process of systematically generating general-purpose node features
based on, for instance, aggregation, dimensionality reduction, or subgraph patterns.
As discussed in Section 4 for links, node feature construction could be viewed as subsuming
node weighting and node labeling, since general feature construction could always be used to
construct feature values that are treated as weights or labels for the nodes. In practice, however,
the techniques used tend to be rather diﬀerent. For instance, PageRank is often used for node
weighting and supervised classiﬁcation is often used for node labeling, but these techniques are
rarely used for general feature construction. Nonetheless, for node interpretation (more so than
with link interpretation) there is some substantial overlap between the techniques actually used
for weighting and labeling vs. those used for general feature construction. Below, we ﬁrst discuss
node weighting in Section 6.1 and labeling in Section 6.2. Section 6.3 then discusses node feature
construction, mentioning only brieﬂy the relevant techniques that were previously discussed for
weighting and labeling.

30
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
6.1
Node Weighting
Given the initial graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩, the task is to assign a continuous value (the weight)
to each existing node in G, representing the importance or inﬂuence of that node. Node weighting
techniques have been used for information retrieval, search engines, social network analysis, and
many other domains as a way to discover the most important nodes with respect to some deﬁned
measure. As with node prediction they can be classiﬁed based on whether they use only the node
attributes, only the graph topology, or both to construct a weighting.
Non-relational (attribute-based) node weighting: The simplest node weighting techniques
use only the node features XV (i.e., the attributes). For instance, nodes representing documents
might be weighted based on the number of query-relevant words they contain, while nodes repre-
senting companies might be ranked based on their gross annual sales. Many more sophisticated
strategies have also been considered. For instance, Latent Semantic Indexing (Deerwester et al.,
1990) can be used to identify the most important semantic concepts in a corpus of text, then nodes
can be ranked based on their connection to these concepts. These methods have been extensively
applied to quantify or rank the importance of scientiﬁc publications (Egghe & Rousseau, 1990).
However, because these techniques have been extensively studied elsewhere and also ignore graph
structure (such as citations), we do not discuss them further here.
Topology-based node weighting: Several node weighting algorithms that use only the
topology of the graph were developed to support early search engines. Examples of this kind
of algorithm include PageRank (Page et al., 1999), Hits (Kleinberg, 1999), and SALSA (Lempel
& Moran, 2000). Each of these algorithms rank the relative importance of web sites, conceptually
based on some kind of eigenvector analysis (Langville & Meyer, 2005), though in practice iterative
computation may be used. For instance, PageRank models the web as a Markov Chain and is
implemented by systematically computing the principal eigenvector of limk→∞Ake where A is
the adjacency matrix and e is the unit vector. Hits, as previously described, instead computes
the principal eigenvectors of AAT and AT A. These algorithms continue to be very important
for webpage ranking, but can also be applied to many other kinds of graphs (Kosala & Blockeel,
2000).
In social network analysis, the objective of topology-based node weighting is typically to
identify the most inﬂuential or signiﬁcant individuals in a social network. There have been
a variety of centrality measures devised that use the local and global network structure to
characterize the importance of individuals (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Examples of these metrics
include node degree, clustering coeﬃcient (Watts & Strogatz, 1998), betweenness (Freeman,
1977), closeness (i.e., distance/shortest paths), eigenvector centrality (Bonacich & Lloyd, 2001),
and many others (Jackson, 2008; Newman, 2010; Sabidussi, 1966). In addition, White and Smyth
(2003) considered how to compute relative node rankings, i.e., rankings relative to a set of
particularly interesting nodes. They show how to compute such relative rankings both for metrics
based on shortest paths as well as for Markov chain-based techniques (e.g., to produce “PageRank
with priors”). In addition, some of the similarity metrics described in Table 4 can alternatively
be formulated for computing weights on nodes.
More recently, node weighting techniques have been extended to measure the relative
importance of nodes in temporally-varying data. For instance, both Kossinets et al. (2008)
and Tang et al. (2009) deﬁne notions of temporal distance based on an analysis of how
frequently information is exchanged between nodes. This information can be used to deﬁne a
range of new graph metrics, such as global temporal eﬃciency, local temporal eﬃciency, and
the temporal clustering coeﬃcient (Tang et al., 2009). More recently, Tang et al. (2010) deﬁne
notions of temporal betweenness and temporal closeness. They argue that incorporating temporal
information with these metrics provides both a better understanding of dynamic processes in the
network and more accurately identiﬁes the most important nodes (people). All of these metrics
primarily concern networks that have time-varying interactions (e.g., communications between

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
31
people), but they could also be applied to other types of data with intermittent interactions
between nodes or where nodes/link join and leave the network over time. Some of these metrics
also apply to links, and could possibly be used to improve link prediction algorithms.
Hybrid node weighting: There are also hybrid node weighting approaches that use both the
attributes and the graph topology (Bharat & Henzinger, 1998; Cohn & Hofmann, 2001). For
instance, there are various approaches that modify Hits (Chakrabarti et al., 1998b; Bharat &
Henzinger, 1998) and PageRank (Haveliwala, 2003) to construct node weights based on both
content and links. Topic-Sensitive PageRank (Haveliwala, 2003) seeks to compute a biased set of
PageRank vectors using a set of representative topics. Alternatively, Kolda et al. (2005) propose
TOPHITS, a hybrid approach that adds anchor text (i.e., the clickable text on each hyperlink)
to the adjacency matrix representation used by Hits. They then use a higher-order analogue of
SVD known as Parallel Factors (PARAFAC) decomposition (Harshman, 1970) to identify both
the key topics in the graph as well as the most important nodes. Other hybrid approaches have
been proposed such as SimRank (Jeh & Widom, 2002), Topical methods (Haveliwala, 2003; Nie
et al., 2006; Kolda & Bader, 2006), Probabilistic HITs (Cohn & Chang, 2000), and many others
(Richardson & Domingos, 2002; Lassez et al., 2008). Section 7 discusses further relevant work in
the context of joint node and link transformation techniques.
Recently, node weighting approaches have been applied in Adversarial Information Retrieval
(AIR) to detect or moderate the inﬂuence of spam web sites. Typically, these techniques
produce weights using both the topology of the graph and some other information, but not
necessarily the kind of attribute information that is used by the techniques discussed above. For
instance, TrustRank (Gyongyi et al., 2004) is based on PageRank and uses a set of trusted sites
evaluated by humans to propagate the trust to other locally reachable sites. On the other hand,
SpamRank (Bencz´ur et al., 2005) measures the amount of undeserved PageRank by analyzing
the backlinks of a site. There are other algorithms that try to identify link farms and link spam
alliances (Wu & Davison, 2005), given a seed set of known link farm pages. Among these AIR
methods, TrustRank is the most widely known but suﬀers from biases where the human-selected
set of trustworthy sites may favor certain communities over others.
6.2
Node Labeling
Given the initial graph G = ⟨V, E, XV , XE⟩, the task is to assign some discrete label for some or
all of the nodes in G. We ﬁrst discuss labeling techniques based on classiﬁcation, then consider
unsupervised textual analysis techniques.
In many cases, node labeling may be considered an end in itself. For instance, in our running
Facebook example, the stated goal is to predict the political aﬃliation of each node where that
label is not already known. In other cases, however, node labeling is more properly understood
as a representation change that supports the desired task. For instance, for some deﬁnitions of
anomalous link detection (Rattigan & Jensen, 2005), having estimated node labels would allow
us to identify links between nodes whose labels indicate they should rarely, if ever, be connected.
Alternatively, for some datasets estimating node labels may enable us to subsequently partition
the data based on node type, enabling us to learn more accurate models for each type of node.
Even when node labeling is the ﬁnal goal, as with our Facebook example, intermediate label
estimation may still be useful as a representation change. In particular, Kou and Cohen (2007)
describe a “stacked model” for relational classiﬁcation that relabels the training set with estimated
node labels using a non-relational classiﬁer. They then use these estimated labels to learn a new
classiﬁer (one that uses both attributes and relational features), and use the new classiﬁer to
perform relational classiﬁcation on the test graph. This approach yields high accuracy, comparable
to that of much more complex algorithms for collective classiﬁcation (CC). Fast and Jensen (2008)
analyze this result and discuss how it can be explained by a natural bias in most CC algorithms:
training is performed with the given node labels but the inference depends in part on estimated

32
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
labels (McDowell et al., 2009). Stacked models compensate for this bias by instead training
with the relabeled (estimated) training set. In addition, inference with the new classiﬁer needs
only a single pass over the test graph, yielding much faster inference than CC techniques like
Gibbs sampling or belief propagation. More recently, Maes et al. (2009) extend these ideas of
node relabeling in order to generate a larger training set via multiple simulated iterations of
classiﬁcation. They show that in some cases this approach can outperform stacked models and
other CC algorithms like Gibbs sampling.
Thus, there are multiple reasons for creating new labels for the nodes in a graph. This labeling
can be accomplished by relational-aware algorithms like those described above as well as by earlier
algorithms used for relational or collective classiﬁcation (Chakrabarti et al., 1998a; Neville &
Jensen, 2000; Taskar et al., 2001; Lu & Getoor, 2003; Macskassy & Provost, 2003). Node labeling
can of course also be done by traditional, non-relational algorithms such as SVM, decision trees,
kNN, logistic regression, and Naive Bayes, among various others (Lim et al., 2000; Michie et al.,
1994; Burges, 1998; Cristianini & Shawe-Taylor, 2000; Joachims, 1998). These methods simply
use features ˜XV and do not exploit topology or link-structure.
The above techniques all assign new labels via supervised learning. Labels can also be assigned
via unsupervised techniques for textual analysis. There are many networks in the real-world

networks, and many others. Traditional textual analysis models such as LSA (Deerwester et al.,
1990), PLSA (Hofmann, 1999) and LDA (Blei et al., 2003) can be used to assign each node
a topic representing an abstraction of the textual information. More recent techniques such as
Link-LDA (Erosheva et al., 2004) and Link-PLSA (Cohn & Hofmann, 2001) aim to incorporate
the link structure into the traditional techniques in order to more accurately discover a node’s
type.6 In particular, Cohn and Hofmann (2001) demonstrate that their technique can produce
more accurate node labels than techniques that use only the node attributes or only the link
topology. There have also been more sophisticated topic models that have been developed for
speciﬁc tasks such as social tagging (Lu et al., 2010) or temporal data (Huh & Fienberg, 2010;
He & Parker, 2010).
6.3
Node Feature Construction
Node feature construction is the systematic construction of features for the nodes, typically
for the purpose of improving the accuracy or understandability of SRL algorithms. Feature
construction is the most common relational representation change, and is very frequently done
before performing a task such as classiﬁcation. For instance, before performing CC to classify
the nodes in our example Facebook political aﬃliation task, we are likely to compute some
new features representing the information about each node (e.g., age bracket?) and the known
information about each node’s neighbors (e.g., how many are liberal?).
Diﬀerent techniques for node feature construction have been described by many previous
investigations, though feature construction was not necessarily the focus of many of those
investigations. In this section, we summarize and explain the diﬀerent aspects of feature
construction. In particular, Section 6.3.1 presents and discusses a taxonomy of features based on
what kinds of inputs, such as topology information or link feature values, they use for computing
the new feature values. Next, Section 6.3.2 describes the possible operators, such as aggregation
or discretization, that can be applied to these inputs. Finally, Section 6.3.3 examines how to
perform automatic feature search and selection to support a desired computational task.
6.3.1
Relational Feature Inputs
A node feature can be categorized according to the types of information that it uses for computing
feature values. The possible information to use includes the set of nodes V or links E, the node
6The names for Link-LDA and Link-PLDA come from Nallapati et al. (2008), not from the original
papers describing the techniques.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
33
C	
  
L	
  
L	
  
A.	
  
B.	
  
C.	
  
D.	
  
p	
   w	
  
p	
  
XV	
  
˜	
  
.5	
   …	
   P	
  
Non-­‐relational	
  
Node	
  Features	
  
Relational	
  Features	
  
Topology	
  
Features	
  
Link-­‐value	
  
Features	
  
Node-­‐value	
  
Features	
  
input	
  
target	
  node	
  
link-­‐value	
  
node-­‐value	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
L	
  
p	
  
‹V,E,XV,XE›	
  
XV	
  
‹V,E›	
  
‹V,E,XV›	
  
‹V,E,XE›	
  
‹V,E,XV,XE›	
  
Node	
  Feature	
  	
  
Construction	
  
	
  
Figure 8 Node Features Taxonomy based on Inputs Used: The classes of node features are non-
relational features, topology features, relational link-value features, and relational node-value features.
These classes are deﬁned with respect to the relational information used in the construction of the features
(i.e., nodes V , links E, node features XV , link features XE). The double-lined “target” node represents
where the new feature value is being computed. Parts C and D show only a single feature value for each
link or node for simplicity, but in general more than one such feature may exist and be used.
features XV , and the link features XE. Figure 8 shows our taxonomy of node features based on
which of these sources of information (the “inputs”) they use. This taxonomy is consistent with
some distinctions that have been previously made in the literature (e.g., between non-relational
and relational features), but to the best of our knowledge this more complete taxonomy has never
been previously described. The taxonomy consists of four basic types: non-relational features and
three types of relational features (topology features, relational link-value features, and relational
node-value features). Below we describe and give examples of each.
⋄Non-relational Features: A node feature is considered a non-relational feature if the
value of the feature for a particular node is computed using only the non-relational features
(i.e., attributes) of that node, ignoring any link-based information. For instance, Figure 8A
shows a node and the corresponding node’s feature vector. A new feature value might
be constructed from this vector using some kind of dimensionality reduction, by adding
together several feature values, by thresholding a particular value, etc.
⋄Topology Features: A feature is considered a topology-based feature if values of the
feature are computed using only the nodes V and links E, ignoring any existing node and
link feature values. For instance, in Figure 8B, a new feature value is being computed for
the node in the bottom left of the ﬁgure (the “target node”), using only the topological
information shown. In particular, the new feature value might count the number of adjacent
nodes, or count how many shortest paths in the graph pass through the target node.

34
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
⋄Relational Link-value Features: A feature is considered a relational link-value feature
if the feature values of the links that are adjacent to the target node are used for computing
the new feature. Typically, some kind of aggregation operator is applied to these values,
such as count, mode, average, proportion, etc. For instance, in Figure 8C, the values on
the links shown represent communication topics (work or personal), and a new link-value
feature might compute the mode of these values (p). Usually this computation will include
only the links directly connected to the target node, but links a few hops away could also
be used.
⋄Relational Node-value Features: A feature is considered a relational node-value feature
if the feature values of nodes linked to the target node are used in the construction. Links
are used only for identifying these nodes, although nodes more than one hop away from
the target node may also be included. For instance, Figure 8D shows the feature values of
adjacent nodes (C or L) which could, for instance, be used to compute a new node-value
feature based on the mode (L) of those values. Alternatively, one feature might count the
number of adjacent “C” nodes and another might count the number of adjacent “L” nodes.
Feature computation may also be applied recursively. For instance, the ReFeX system (Hen-
derson et al., 2011) ﬁrst computes features for every node based on their degree (a topology-based
feature), then considers recursive combinations of these features (such as the mean out-degree
of a node’s neighbors). Henderson et al. show that such recursive features can often improve
classiﬁcation accuracy for datasets where the network structure is predictive. Alternatively, a
topology-based feature such as betweenness might be computed, then a relational node-value
feature might compute the average betweenness of the nodes that are neighbors of the target
and have a label of “C.” This is an example of a hybrid feature that uses both node-value and
topology-based information.
Another interesting aspect of relational features is the potential for feature value re-
computation. In particular, many techniques for collective classiﬁcation involve computing a
node feature (such as the number of neighbors currently labeled “C”) where that feature depends
on other feature values that are estimated (e.g., the predicted node labels) and thus may change
(Jensen et al., 2004; Sen et al., 2008). In addition, McDowell et al. (2010) describe features that
have a similar need for recomputation, because the “meta-features” they use depend upon the
estimated label probabilities for each node in the neighborhood of the target node. In contrast,
this kind of feature re-computation has much less applicability for non-relational data, where the
nodes are assumed to be independent of each other. However, it can occur with techniques such
as semi-supervised learning or co-learning.
6.3.2
Relational Feature Operators
The previous section described features according to the diﬀerent kinds of inputs that they use
during feature value computation, whereas this section describes the diﬀerent operators that can
be used for this computation. Table 5 summarizes these operators. In some cases, an operator
can be used for many diﬀerent types of relational input. For instance, aggregation operators
can be computed using the graph topology, relational node-value inputs, and/or relational link-
value inputs, as indicated by the appropriate checkmarks in Table 5. In contrast, path or
walk-based operators generally use only the graph topology; for these operators, the lighter
colored checkmarks in Table 5 indicate that path/walk-based operators could sensibly be used
in conjunction with relational link-value or node-values inputs, but this has been rarely if ever
done. Below we discuss each of the operators from Table 5 in more detail.
Relational Aggregates: Aggregation refers to a function that returns a single value from a
collection of input values such as a set, bag, or list. The most classical statistical aggregation
operators are Average, Mode, Exists, Count, Max, Min, and Sum (Neville & Jensen, 2000;
Lu & Getoor, 2003). For SRL, another frequent operator is Proportion, which computes,

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
35
Table 5 Relational Feature Operators: Summary of the most popular types of relational feature
operators. A check is used to indicate the classes of inputs (see Section 6.3.1) that each operator most
naturally uses for constructing feature values, while a lighter check indicates that the operator could
sensibly be used with that input but that this combination has rarely if ever been used.
Inputs
Relational Operators
Example Techniques
Non-relational
Topology
Relational Link-value
Relational Node-value
Relational aggregates
Mode, Average, Count, Proportion, Degree, ...
✓
✓
✓
Temporal aggregates
Exponential/linear decay, union, ...
✓
✓
✓
✓
Set operators
Union, intersection, multiset, ...
✓
✓
✓
Clique potentials
Direct link cliques, co-citation cliques, triads, ...
✓
✓
✓
Subgraph patterns
Two star, three-star, triangle (i.e., transitivity), ...
✓
✓
✓
Dimensionality reduction
PCA, SVD, Factor Analysis, Principal Factor Analysis,
Independent Component Analysis, ...
✓
✓
✓
Path/walk-based measures
Betweenness, common neighbors, Jaccard’s coeﬃcient,
Adamic/Adar, shortest paths, random-walks, ...
✓
✓
✓
Textual analysis
LSA, LDA, PLSA, Link-LDA, Link-PLSA, ...
✓
✓
✓
Relational clustering
Spectral partitioning, Hierarchical clustering, Partition-
ing relocation methods (k-means, k-medoids), ...
✓
✓
✓
✓
for instance, the fraction of a node’s neighbors that meet some criteria such as having the
label “C” (McDowell et al., 2007). These operators may also be combined with thresholds,
e.g., to evaluate whether the Count of a node’s neighbors labeled “C” is at least 3. The
thresholding turns the numerical aggregate into a Boolean feature, which is needed for tree-based
algorithms (Neville et al., 2003a). Perlich and Provost (2003) describe a set of more complex
relational aggregates that depend on the distribution of attribute values that are associated with
each node (e.g., via links or a relational join). For instance, these aggregates may use a function
such as the edit distance to compare each node’s distribution to a reference distribution computed
from the training data. Perlich and Provost demonstrate that these aggregations can in some cases
improve performance compared to simpler alternatives. There are also aggregate operators that
use only topology-based information. For instance, the operator Degree, which simply counts
the number of adjacent links, can be a predictive feature, but should be applied carefully to
relational data to avoid bias (Jensen et al., 2003).
Temporal Aggregates: Relational information might also contain temporal information in the
form of timestamps or durations for the links, node, or features. In general, such data can be
handled by deﬁning special temporal-aggregation features computed over the raw data (McGovern
et al., 2008) or by deﬁning a graph that summarizes all of the temporal information (usually by
decreasing the importance of less recent information) (Sharan & Neville, 2008; Rossi & Neville,
2010). Rossi and Neville (2010) discuss an example of the latter approach, where they explore the
impact of using various temporal-relational information and various kernels for summarization.

36
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
Figure 9
Subgraph Patterns with Link Labels. Each subgraph represents a possible pattern that a
particular feature could look for in relation to the target node (the bottom-left node in each case).
Alternatively, Section 6.1 discusses how notions of temporal distance can be used to modify
path/walk-based metrics such as node betweenness and closeness.
Set Operators: The traditional domain-independent set operators such as set union, intersec-
tion, and diﬀerence can be applied to construct features (Kohavi & John, 1997). For instance,
if there are two attributes that both represent the presence of some word in a page (node), a
new feature might represent the case where a page contains both of those words (i.e., feature
intersection). For relational data, more complex set-based features are possible. For instance, a
feature for collective classiﬁcation might represent the union of all the class labels of the nodes
adjacent to the target node. Neville et al. (2003b) propose a more complex approach where the
feature value is a multiset that represents the complete distribution of adjacent nodes’ labels (e.g.,
{3C, 2M, 5L} to indicate the labels of ten adjacent nodes). Using this feature representation,
they show that the “independent-value” approach that assumes that the labels are independently
drawn from the same distribution yields the most eﬀective relational classiﬁcation. Recently,
McDowell et al. (2009) showed that, for CC, this “multiset” approach usually outperformed
other types of features such as the proportion or count-based aggregates discussed above.
Clique
Potentials:
Some
probabilistic
models
such
as
Relational
Markov
Networks
(RMNs) (Taskar et al., 2002) perform inference over related nodes without computing aggregates.
Instead, they use clique-speciﬁc potential functions to represent the probabilistic dependencies,
and a product term in the probability computation naturally expands to accommodate a varying
number of neighbors for each node. In one sense, this is a “featureless” approach, since there is
no need to choose a relational aggregation function. However, diﬀerent kinds of dependencies can
still be represented by diﬀerent cliques. For instance, Taskar et al. (2002) consider diﬀerent sets of
cliques for webpage classiﬁcation: one based only on hyperlinks, the other including information
based on where links appear within a page. Likewise, later work added additional types of
cliques to enable link prediction (Taskar et al., 2003). Thus, even with these models there remain
important feature choices to be made.
Other probabilistic models also use link-based information without computing explicit features,
such as the random walk-based classiﬁer of Lin and Cohen (2010) or the weighted-neighbor
approach of Macskassy and Provost (2007). Even in these cases, however, choices remain about
what types of links to use. For instance, in webpage graphs, “co-citation” links may be more
predictive of class labels than direct links (Macskassy & Provost, 2007; McDowell et al., 2009).
Subgraph Patterns: A subgraph pattern feature is one that is based on the existence of a
particular pattern in the graph adjacent to the target node. Such a feature might count how
many times a particular pattern exists for the target node, or produce a value of true if at least
one such pattern exists. The simplest such pattern is called reciprocity; it is true when the target
node i links to node j and j links back to i. In most cases, however, the patterns are more complex
and involve more nodes. Robins et al. (2007) deﬁne many such patterns including two-star (a
node with at least two links), three-star (a node with at least three links), and triangle (also
known as transitivity, where i →j →k and i →k). Most such patterns can be deﬁned for both
directed and undirected links.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
37
Many other patterns are possible. For instance, Robins et al. (2006) use subgraph patterns
for probabilistically modeling graphs. They argue that using more complex patterns such as the
alternating k-triangle (based on ﬁnding k triangles that all share a common side) can help to
avoid degeneracy that might otherwise arise during graph generation. Furthermore, subgraph
patterns can also be extended to exploit labels on the links and/or nodes. For instance, assume
some links are labeled with τ1 or τ2 (representing diﬀerent topics) and some links are labeled
with a plus or minus sign (representing positive or negative relationships). Figure 9 demonstrates
three possible subgraph patterns, based on diﬀerent link labelings, relative to the target node
shown at the bottom left of each subgraph. A subgraph feature could compute, for each node,
the number of matches for one of these patterns, and this feature could be used for later analysis.
Dimensionality Reduction The goal of dimensionality reduction is to ﬁnd a lower k-
dimensional representation of the initial n features (Sarwar et al., 2000; Fodor, 2002). More
formally, given an initial n-dimensional feature vector x = {x1, x2, ..., xn}, ﬁnd a lower k-
dimensional representation ˜x such that ˜x = {˜x1, ˜x2, ..., ˜xk} with k ≤n where the most signiﬁcant
information of the original data is captured, according to some criterion. There are many
dimensionality reduction methods such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Principal Factor
Analysis (PFA), and Independent Component Analysis (ICA).
Dimensionality reduction techniques can be applied on the adjacency matrix A of the graph G
to create a low-dimensionality graph representation; Section 3.3 explained how this can be used for
link prediction. These techniques can also be useful for feature computation. For instance, Bilgic
et al. (2010) investigate active learning to improve the accuracy of collective classiﬁcation. Their
technique involves both non-relational and relational features, but they demonstrate that ﬁrst
applying dimensionality reduction (with PCA) to the non-relational features simpliﬁes learning,
leading to substantial gains in accuracy.
Other operators: We mention only brieﬂy those operators that have already been discussed
extensively elsewhere. Path-based measures (such as betweenness and distance) and walk-
based measures (such as PageRank) were discussed in Sections 6.1. These types of measures
have been used as features in a classiﬁer to predict links (Lichtenwalter et al., 2010) as well as
for validating relational sampling techniques (Leskovec et al., 2010a; Moreno & Neville, 2009;
Ahmed et al., 2010). These measures typically use only the topology (not the features), but one
could easily imagine computing metrics based, for instance, only on paths where each edge had
a particular label or type. Textual analysis techniques were discussed in Sections 4.2 and 6.2,
and relational clustering techniques were discussed in Section 5. These operators were used
speciﬁcally for node/link prediction, weighting, or labeling, but can also be used for more general
feature construction.
Finally, there are operators based on similarity measures. Similarity between two nodes
is often computed, for instance for link prediction (Section 3) or weighting (Section 4.1). Such
computations can easily lead to a feature value for a link, since the link obviously refers to two
endpoint nodes that can be compared. However, for computing a node feature value, there is
usually no obvious other node for comparison, so similarity measures are not typically used for
node feature values. Such measures can, however, be used for node prediction, and Section 5
discusses how in some cases newly discovered nodes/groups can be used to create new node
features. As a particular instance of relational similarity functions, graph kernels for structured
data (G¨artner, 2003) can also be used. Such kernels can be used either between the nodes of
a single graph (Kondor & Laﬀerty, 2002) or to compute the similarity between two graphs
(Vishwanathan et al., 2010). For instance, the former type of kernel is another technique that
could also be used for link or group prediction.
Discussion: Many of the feature operators discussed can naturally be used to compute feature
values for links in additions to nodes. For instance, textual analysis can be applied to links
if there is text associated with each link, and most node-centered path-based measures have

38
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
analogous formulations for links. One diﬀerence is that nodes naturally may link to many other
nodes, whereas we assume links with just two endpoints. Thus, relational aggregates such as
Count do not initially seem as useful for computing link features. However, Figure 4 previously
demonstrated how link-aggregation can be accomplished by broadening the computation to
include the multiple links or nodes that are logically connected to each endpoint node of the target
link. Naturally, some feature inputs and operators are better suited for computing node features
vs. for computing link features. The next section examines how to select the most appropriate
features for a given task.
6.3.3
Searching, Evaluating, and Selecting Relational Features
Given the large number of possible features that could be used for some task (such as the example
Facebook classiﬁcation task), which features should actually be used to learn a model? In some
cases, such selection is done manually based on prior experience or trial and error. In many
situations, though, more automatic feature selection is desirable. For non-relational data, this
has been a widely studied topic in machine learning (Guyon & Elisseeﬀ, 2003; Koller & Sahami,
1996; Yang & Pedersen, 1997; Dash & Liu, 1997; Jain & Zongker, 1997; Pudil et al., 1994), but
selecting relational features has received considerably less attention. Given the large number of
possible features, eﬃcient strategies for searching over and evaluating the possible features is
needed. In this section, we ﬁrst summarize these two key problems of feature search and feature
evaluation, then give examples of how these issues have been resolved in actual SRL systems.
Search: The ﬁrst step in searching over the relational features is to deﬁne the possible relational
feature space by specifying the possible raw feature inputs (e.g., node and link feature values) and
operators to consider. The possible operators can include domain-independent operators (e.g.,
mode, count) and/or problem-speciﬁc operators (e.g., count the number of friends divided by
the number of groups). Domain-independent operators are obviously more general and easier to
apply, while the problem-speciﬁc operators can reduce the number of possibilities that must
be considered but require more eﬀort and expert knowledge. However, both approaches are
vulnerable to selection biases (Jensen et al., 2003; Jensen & Neville, 2002). The second step is to
pick an appropriate search strategy, usually either exhaustive, random, or guided. An exhaustive
strategy will consider all features that are possible given the speciﬁed inputs and operators, while
a random strategy will consider only a fraction of this space. A guided strategy will use some
heuristic or sub-system to identify the features that should be considered. In all three cases, each
feature that is considered is subjected to some evaluation strategy that assesses it usefulness;
these strategies are described next.
Evaluation and Selection: Each feature that is considered must be evaluated in some way to
determine if it will be retained for use in the ﬁnal model. For instance, a candidate feature may
be evaluated by adding it to the current classiﬁcation model; if it improves accuracy on a holdout
set, then it is immediately (and greedily) added to the set of retained features (Davis et al.,
2005, 2007). In other cases, every candidate feature is assigned some score and then only the best
scoring feature is retained (Neville et al., 2003a), or features are added to the model based on
decreasing score, so long as the new features continue to improve the model (Mihalkova & Mooney,
2007). Simpler techniques that do not require evaluating the overall model can also be used. For
instances, metrics such as correlation or mutual information can be used to estimate how useful
the feature is for the desired task. Other metrics or strategies that could be used include Akaike’s
information criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1974), Mallows Cp (Mallows, 1973), Bayesian information
criterion (BIC) (Hannan & Quinn, 1979; Schwarz, 1978) and many others (Shao, 1996; George
& McCulloch, 1993). Frequently, a possible feature may have a particular parameter whose value
must be set (such as a threshold); selecting the best value for a given feature can use the same
evaluation metrics or may use a simpler estimation technique, e.g., based on maximum likelihood.

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
39
Table 6 Systems for Searching for and Selecting Node Features: A summary of some of the
systems that can be used to automatically search for and select the most appropriate features for a
given task. Note that, depending on the context, these papers may be describe their function in terms
of learning the best rules for a system or of learning the structure (e.g., of a MLN). Only some of the
MLN-based systems are described; for some of these, WPLL is the “weighted pseudo log-likelihood.”
Proposed System
Search method
Feature Evaluation
RPT (Neville et al., 2003a)
Exhaustive
Chi-square statistic/p-value
RDN-Boosting (Natarajan et al., 2012)
Exhaustive
Weighted variance
ReFeX (Henderson et al., 2011)
Exhaustive
Log-binning disagreement
Spatiotemporal
RPT
(McGovern
et
al.,
2008)
Random
Chi-square statistic/p-value
SAYU (Davis et al., 2005)
Aleph
AUC-PR
nFOIL (Landwehr et al., 2005)
FOIL
Conditional Log-Likelihood
SAYU-VISTA (Davis et al., 2007)
Aleph
AUC-PR
ProbFOIL (De Raedt & Thon, 2010)
FOIL
m-estimate
kFOIL (Landwehr et al., 2010)
FOIL
Kernel target alignment
PRM struct. learning (Getoor et al., 2001)
Greedy hill-climbing
Bayesian model selection
TSDL (Kok & Domingos, 2005)
Beam search
WPLL
BUSL (Mihalkova & Mooney, 2007)
Template-based
WPLL
PBN Learn-And-Join (Khosravi et al., 2010)
Level-wise search
Pseudo-likelihood
Discriminative
MLN
structure
learn-
ing (Huynh & Mooney, 2008; Biba et al., 2008)
Aleph++
m-estimate
Examples: Table 6 summarizes the strategies used by a number of SRL systems that automati-
cally search for features. The columns of the table describe how each system searches for features
and how the features are evaluated. For instance, Relational Probability Trees (RPTs) (Neville
et al., 2003a) are an extension of probability estimation trees for relational data that use an
exhaustive search strategy for feature selection. In particular, RPT learning involves automatically
searching over the space of possible features using aggregation functions such as Mode, Average,
Count, Proportion, Min, Max, Exists, and Degree. These aggregations can involve node
and link feature values (e.g., for Average) or just topology information (e.g., for Degree). These
features are used for classiﬁcation tasks, such as predicting the class label for a document. Each
feature is evaluated based on using the chi-square statistic to measure the correlation between the
feature and the class label; this yields a feature score and an associated p-value. Features with p-
values below the level of statistical signiﬁcance are discarded, then the remaining feature with the
highest score is chosen for inclusion in the model. This selection process has also been extended
to use randomization tests to adjust for biases that are common in relational data (Jensen et al.,
2003; Jensen & Neville, 2002). RPTs have also been extended for temporal domains (Sharan &
Neville, 2008; Rossi & Neville, 2012).
RPTs represent the conditional probability distributions using a single tree. In contrast,
Natarajan et al. (2012) propose using gradient boosting (Friedman, 2001) such that each
conditional probability distribution is represented as a weighted sum of regression trees grown in
a stage-wise optimization. The features for each tree are selected via a depth-limited, exhaustive
search, though they note that domain knowledge could also be used to guide this search. Natarajan
et al. argue that the resultant set of multiple, relatively shallow trees allows eﬃcient learning of

40
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
complex structures, and demonstrate that this technique can outperform alternatives based on
single trees or the Markov Logic Networks discussed below.
Another system that uses exhaustive search is ReFeX (Henderson et al., 2011), which uses
aggregates of Sum and Mean operators to recursively generate features based on the degree
of a node and its local neighborhood. To prune the resultant large set, ReFeX uses logarithmic
binning of the feature values, clusters features based on their similarity in the binned space, and
then retains only one feature from each cluster. The logarithmic binning is chosen because it
favors features that are more discriminative for high-degree nodes. This recursive approach has
also been modiﬁed for constructing features over dynamic networks (Rossi et al., 2012).
Alternatively, spatiotemporal RPTs (McGovern et al., 2008) use a random search strategy. In
particular, these RPTs add temporal and spatial-based features to the set of possible features.
The resultant feature space is too large for exhaustive search, so instead random sampling is used.
After a pre-deﬁned number of features have been considered, the best scored feature is added to
the model.
The remaining systems that we will discuss all use a guided search strategy, where some
heuristic or sub-system provides candidate features that are considered. For instance, several
such systems (Davis et al., 2005; Landwehr et al., 2005) use an ILP system to generate candidate
features, then evaluate those features and select some for ultimate use. In particular, SAYU (Davis
et al., 2005) uses the ILP system Aleph (Srinivasan, 1999) to generate a candidate feature (which
they consider to be a new “view” on the original data). Aleph creates candidates features based on
positive examples, from the training data, of the concept which is being predicted. Each proposed
feature is evaluated by learning a new model that includes the feature and then computing the
area under the precision-recall curve (AUC-PR). If a feature improves the AUC-PR score, it is
permanently added to the model and the feature search continues. SAYU-VISTA (Davis et al.,
2007) retains this same general approach but extends the types of features that can be considered,
in particular adding the ability to dynamically link together objects of diﬀerent types and to
recursively build new features from other constructed features. Davis et al. demonstrate that the
link connections are especially helpful in improving performance compared to the original SAYU
system. Landwehr et al. (2005) describe the nFOIL system which is very similar to SAYU but
was developed independently, while De Raedt and Thon (2010) describe how ProbFOIL upgrades
a deterministic rule learner like FOIL to be probabilistic. Landwehr et al. (2010) describes the
related kFOIL system which integrates FOIL with kernel methods. They also consider the impact
of several diﬀerent feature scoring functions.
A number of systems have considered how to perform structure learning for Probabilistic
Relational Models (PRMs) (Getoor et al., 2001) or for Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (Domingos
& Richardson, 2004), which is a more general case of the feature selection problems described
above. For instance, a MLN is a weighted set of ﬁrst-order formulas; structure learning corresponds
to learning these formulas while weight learning corresponds to learning the associated weights.
The ﬁrst MLN structure learning approaches systematically construct candidate clauses by
starting from an empty clause, greedily adding literals to it, and testing the resulting clauses
ﬁt to the training data using a statistical measure (Kok & Domingos, 2005; Biba et al., 2008).
However, these “top-down” approaches are ineﬃcient because the initial proposal of clauses
ignores the training data, resulting in a large number of possible features being considered and
possible problems with local minima. In response, a number of “bottom-up” approaches have
been proposed. In particular, Mihalkova and Mooney (2007) uses a propositional Markov network
structure learner to construct template networks to guide the construction of features based on
the training data. More recent work has examined how to enable bottom-up approaches to learn
longer clauses based on constraining the search to only consider features consistent with certain
patterns or motifs (Kok & Domingos, 2010), or by clustering the input nodes to create a “lifted
graph” representation, enabling feature search over a smaller graph (Kok & Domingos, 2009).

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
41
Khosravi et al. (2010) perform MLN structure learning by ﬁrst learning the structure of a
simpler Parametrized Bayes Net (PBN) (Poole, 2003), then converting the result into a MLN.
For data that contains a signiﬁcant number of descriptive attributes, they show that this approach
dramatically improves the runtime of structure learning and also improves predictive accuracy.
Schulte (2011) has given a theoretical justiﬁcation for this approach. Another alternative,
proposed by Khot et al. (2011), is to extend the previously mentioned work of Natarajan et al.
(2012) on gradient boosting to MLNs. Essentially, the problem of learning MLNs is transformed
into a series of relational regression problems where the functional gradients are represented as
clauses or trees. For several datasets they demonstrate faster MLN structure learning that is as
accurate or better than baselines including the algorithms of Mihalkova and Mooney (2007) and
Kok and Domingos (2010).
The above techniques for MLNs all seek to learn a network structure that best explains the
training data as a whole. In contrast, for situations where the prediction of a speciﬁc predicate
is desired (e.g., to predict the political aﬃliation in our Facebook example), Huynh and Mooney
(2008) and Biba et al. (2008) both propose discriminative approaches to MLN structure learning.
For instance, Huynh and Mooney use a modiﬁed version of Aleph (Srinivasan, 1999) to compute
a large number of candidate clauses, then use a form of L1-regularization to force the weights
that are subsequently learned for these clauses to be zero when the clause is not very helpful for
predicting the predicate. This regularization, in conjunction with an appropriate optimization
function, eﬀectively leads to selecting a smaller set of features that are useful for the desired task.
Discussion: We focus in this article on graph-based data representations (see Section 1.1).
However, many of the examples discussed above use a logical representation instead. We include
them in this section because the techniques used for constructing and searching for features or
rules are very similar in both settings. For instance, both RPTs (a graph-based approach) and
RDN-Boosting (a logical approach) use an exhaustive search over probabilistic decision trees,
with diﬀerent feature scoring strategies.
Popescul et al. (2003a) examine how to automatically learn new relational features for links
(to support link prediction), but their techniques could also be applied to constructing node
features. In particular, they treat each feature as a relational database query, and use the
concept of reﬁnement graphs (Shapiro, 1982) to consider reﬁning an initial query with equi-
joins, equality selections, and statistical aggregates. After each reﬁnement, further reﬁnements
can be considered; this search is guided by sampling over some possible further reﬁnements and
proceeding only if the results of a particular reﬁnement or type seems promising. The features
chosen are combined with a logistic regression classiﬁer. For evaluation of the speciﬁc features,
they use the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978), which includes a term than
penalizes feature complexity to reduce the danger of overﬁtting.
We discussed multiple systems that include notions of aggregation including RPTs, SAYU-
VISTA, and the work of Popescul et al. (2003a) discussed above. There are also other aggregate-
based learning approaches such as Crossmine (Yin et al., 2006), CLAMF (Frank et al.,
2007), Multi-relational Decision Trees (MRDTL) (Leiva et al., 2002), Conﬁdence-based Concept
Discovery (C2D) (Kavurucu et al., 2008), and many others (Perlich & Provost, 2006; Krogel &
Wrobel, 2001; Knobbe et al., 2002). There are also other possibilities for feature evaluation. For
instance, GleanerSRL (Goadrich & Shavlik, 2007) uses Aleph (Srinivasan, 1999) to search for
clauses and then uses a metric of precision × recall for evaluating the clauses.
7
Jointly Transforming Nodes and Links
In the previous sections, we primarily discussed relational representation transformation tech-
niques that are applied independently of one another. For instance, one technique might be used
to predict links, while another builds on the transformed representation by applying a node
labeling technique. This section instead examines “joint” transformation tasks that combine
node and link transformation in some way, for instance to label the nodes and weight the links

42
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
Table 7 Summary of the Joint Transformation Models: The middle section of the table indicates
what types of graph features are used as inputs to the model, while the right side of the table indicates
what types of link or node transformation can be performed by the model. Lighter checkmarks indicate
that the output of the model can be transformed to perform a particular transformation task (e.g., to
use the node labels to create new latent group nodes), but where that task was not the primary goal of
the speciﬁed model.
Links
Nodes
Input
Link Prediction
Link Weighting
Link Labeling
Node Prediction
Node Weighting
Node Labeling
Joint Transformation Model
E
XE
V
XV
˜E
˜XE
˜XE
˜V
˜XV
˜XV
LDA/PLSA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Nubbi
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Link-LDA, Link-PLSA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Pairwise-Link-LDA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Link-PLSA-LDA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Relational Topic Model (RTM)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Topic-Link LDA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Group-Topic (GT)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Author-Recipient-Topic (ART)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Block-LDA
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
simultaneously. Such techniques may enable each subtask to inﬂuence the other in helpful ways,
and avoids any bias that might be introduced by requiring the serialization of two tasks (such as
link weighting and node labeling) that might usefully be performed jointly.
One recent approach proposed by Namata et al. (2011) collectively performs link prediction,
node labeling, and entity resolution (which can be seen as a form of node deletion/merging).
They present an iterative algorithm that solves all three tasks simultaneously by propagating
information among solutions to the above three tasks. In particular, they introduce the notion of
inter-relational features, which are relational features for one task that depend upon the predicted
values for another. Their results show that using such features can improve accuracy, and that
inferring predicted values for all three tasks simultaneously can signiﬁcantly improve accuracy
compared to performing the three tasks in sequence, even if all possible orderings are considered.
Techniques that model the full distribution across links and attributes such as RMNs (Taskar
et al., 2002), PRMs (Friedman et al., 1999), and MLNs (Domingos & Richardson, 2004) can
also be used in this scenario, for instance to jointly predict node and link labels. In this section,
however, we focus particularly on recent techniques that all presume the existence of some textual
content that is associated with the nodes or links of the graph (although the basic algorithms
would also work with other kinds of features). We consider three types of techniques, based on
what kind of input text they use: stand-alone text documents (e.g., legal memos with no links),

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
43
text documents connected by links (e.g., webpages with hyperlinks), or entities connected by

the most prominent models, grouped according to these three types. The columns of this table
indicate what kinds of input the models use (middle section) and the types of transformation
they can perform (right-hand section). The text documents corresponds to node features in this
table, while text associated with links yields link features. Below we discuss each of the three
types of techniques in more detail.
Using text documents with no links: First, many techniques can be used to assign topics
or labels to the nodes when those nodes (such as documents) have associated text. For instance,
the ﬁrst row of Table 7 indicates that LDA and PLSA use only the nodes and node features
and can perform node prediction, weighting, and labeling. Section 6 already mentioned how
these techniques can be used to label each node with one or more discovered topics, which is
their more typical use. However, these techniques can also perform node weighting (using the
weights associated with the topics) and/or node prediction (by converting the discovered topics
to new latent nodes as discussed in the introduction to Section 5). In Table 7, we use lighter
checkmarks to represent these kind of situations where a transformation task could be performed
by a particular model but is not its primary use/output.
LDA and PLSA treat each document as a bag of words and seek to assign one or more topics
(labels) to each document based on the words. In contrast, Nubbi (Chang et al., 2009) designs an
approach based on LDA where a graph is deﬁned based on objects (nodes) that are referenced
in a set of documents, then links are predicted based on the relationships that are implied in
the text of the documents. In addition, the nodes and links are associated with their most likely
topic(s) based on these relationships. Thus, this model simultaneously performs link prediction,
link labeling, and node labeling. A similar result is produced by the semantic network extraction
of Kok and Domingos (2008) that was discussed in Section 4.2.
Using text documents with links: The second type of joint transformation also uses text
documents, but adds known links between the documents to the model. For instance, Section 6
discussed how Link-LDA and Link-PLSA add link modeling to LDA and PLSA in order to perform
node labeling; as discussed above for LDA and PLSA this can be modiﬁed to also achieve node
prediction and weighting. As shown in Table 7, Link-LDA and Link-PLSA can also be used for
link prediction and weighting by learning a model from a training graph and then using it to
predict unseen links on a new test graph (Nallapati et al., 2008).
Link-LDA and Link-PLSA model links in a way that is very similar to how they model the
presence of words in a document (node). For instance, in Link LDA’s generative model, to generate
one word, each document chooses a topic, then chooses a word from a topic-speciﬁc multinomial.
The identical process (using a topic-speciﬁc multinomial) is used to generate, for a particular
document, one target document to link to. Thus, Link-LDA and Link-PLSA directly extend the
original LDA and PLSA models to add links.
Nallapati et al. (2008) argue that Link-LDA’s and Link-PLSA’s extensions for links, while
pragmatic, do not adequately capture the topical relationship between two documents that are
linked together. Instead, they propose two alternatives. The ﬁrst, Pairwise Link-LDA, replaces the
link model of Link-LDA with a model based on mixed membership stochastic blockmodels (Airoldi
et al., 2008), where each possible link is modeled as a Bernoulli variable that is conditioned on a
topic chosen based on the topic distributions of each of the two endpoints of the link. The second
approach, Link-PLSA-LDA, retains the link generation model of Link-LDA, but changes the word
generation model for some of the documents (the ones with incoming links) so that the words in
such a document depend on the topics of other documents that link to it. The downside of this
latter approach is that it only works when the nodes can be divided into a set with only outgoing
links and a set with only incoming links. However, Nallapati et al. argue that this limitation
can be largely overcome by duplicating any nodes that have both incoming and outgoing links.
Moreover, this approach is much faster and more scalable than Pairwise Link-LDA. Nallapati

44
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
et al. demonstrate that both models outperform Link-LDA on a likelihood ranking task, and
that Link-PLSA-LDA also outperforms Link-LDA on a link prediction task. They also show that
Link-PLSA-LDA and Link-LDA were comparable in terms of execution time, but that Pairwise
Link-LDA was much slower.
Changes to the generative model used by each of these approaches encode diﬀerent assumptions
about the data and can lead to signiﬁcant performance diﬀerences. For instance, Chang and Blei
(2009) introduce the Relational Topic Model (RTM) and compare it to the Pairwise Link-LDA
model discussed above. Both models allow similar ﬂexibility in terms of how links are deﬁned,
but Chang and Blei argue that their model forces the same topic assignments that are used to
generate the words in the documents to also generate the links, which is not true of Pairwise Link-
LDA. They then demonstrate that RTM provides more accurate predictions and link suggestions
than Pairwise Link-LDA and several other baselines.
Another possible change to the model is to add other types of objects. For instance, Topic-Link
LDA (Liu et al., 2009) models not only documents, links, and the most likely topics associated
with each document, but also explicitly considers the author of each document and clusters these
authors into multiple “communities.” Creating this new clustering is not equivalent to ﬁnding
per-document topics because each author is associated with more than one document. They argue
that this approach is analogous to unifying the separate tasks of (1) assigning topics to documents
and (2) analyzing the social network of authors. They show that their approach can in some cases
outperform LDA and Link-LDA.
Using text associated with links: The ﬁnal type of joint transformation techniques form link

2007a) or scientiﬁc abstracts that relate to a particular protein-protein interaction (Balasubra-
manyan & Cohen, 2011). Several such techniques were discussed previously in the context of
link interpretation. For instance, Section 4.2 discussed how models such as the Author-Recipient-
Topic (ART) model (McCallum et al., 2007a) and the Group-Topic (GT) model (McCallum et al.,
2007b) extend LDA to perform link labeling; the strength of these predicted labels (topics) can
also be used to weight the links. In addition, the GT model directly assigns nodes to groups (i.e.,
node labeling), while the labels that ART associates with each link could also be used to label
the associated nodes. The RART model (McCallum et al., 2007a) extends ART by allowing a
node to have multiple roles. More recently, Block-LDA (Balasubramanyan & Cohen, 2011) merges
the ideas from these latent variables models with stochastic blockmodels. More speciﬁcally, the
Block-LDA shares information through three components: the link model shares information with
a block structure which is then shared by the topic model. Unlike GT and ART, however, Block-
LDA focuses on labeling the nodes rather than the links. Balasubramanyan and Cohen evaluate

Link-LDA and several other baselines on the task of protein functional category prediction.
Discussion: Most of the techniques discussed above are variants of latent group models that
focus on node and/or link label prediction, but they can also be used for node prediction where
the new nodes represent newly discovered topics or latent groups. These models have also been
extended to incorporate notions of time (Dietz et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2008; Wang & McCallum,
2006), topic hierarchies (Li & McCallum, 2006), and correlations between topics (Blei & Laﬀerty,
2007). In addition, links are usually assumed to be generated based on the overall topic(s) of
a node or link. In contrast, the Latent Topic Hypertext Model (LTHM) (Gruber et al., 2008)
models each link as originating from some speciﬁc word in a document. Somewhat surprisingly,
they show that this approach leads to a model with fewer parameters than models like Link-
LDA, and demonstrate that their approach outperforms both Link-LDA and Link-PLSA when
evaluated on a link prediction task.
If new nodes are added to the graph to represent discovered topics, then links are invariably
added to connect existing nodes to the new nodes. However, some models may also learn
information about how the discovered topics are related to each other. For instance, Figure 10

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
45
(a) Initial Graph
(b) Joint Transformation
Figure 10 Example of Joint Transformation: In this example, adapted from results in Nallapati
et al. (2008), new latent nodes are added to represent discovered topics, and weighted links are added
from each original node to a new latent node. In addition, weighted links are added between the latent
nodes, representing connection strength between these topics. Finally, new links between the original
nodes may be also be predicted.
shows how two new topics are discovered in a graph and how they are connected to the existing
nodes. In addition, the topics are connected to each other with new links where the weight of
each link represents how frequently a document from that topic cites a document representing a
diﬀerent topic. Adding these additional links to the graph lets the original nodes be connected
more closely not only to their primary topics but also to related topics.
8
Discussion and Challenges
In this section we discuss additional issues that are related to relational representation transfor-
mation and highlight important challenges for future work.
8.1
Guiding and Evaluating Representation Transformation
The goal of representation transformation is often to “improve” the data representation in some
way that leads to better results for a subsequent task or possibly to a more understandable repre-
sentation. How can we evaluate whether a particular transformation technique has accomplished
this goal? We ﬁrst address this question, then consider when the ﬁnal goal can be used to more
directly guide the initial transformation.
For some tasks, representation evaluation is straightforward provided that ground truth values
are known for a hold-out data set. For instance, to test if a technique for link prediction is
eﬀective, accuracy can be measured for links predicted for the hold-out set (Taskar et al., 2003;
Liu et al., 2009). The particular evaluation metric can be modiﬁed as appropriate for the domain.
For instance, Chang and Blei (2009) evaluate the precision of the twenty highest-ranked links
suggested for each document, while Nallapati et al. (2008) consider a custom metric called “RKL”
that measures the rank of the last true link suggested by the model. Likewise, if the desired task
involves classiﬁcation, then a classiﬁcation algorithm can be run on the hold-out data, with and
without the representation change, to see if the change increases classiﬁcation accuracy.
In other cases, it may be diﬃcult to directly measure how well a representation change has
performed, but classiﬁcation can be used as a surrogate measure: if accuracy increases, the
change is assumed to be beneﬁcial. For instance, classiﬁcation has been used to evaluate link
prediction (Gallagher et al., 2008), link weighting (Xiang et al., 2010), link labeling (Rossi &
Neville, 2010; Macskassy, 2007), and node prediction (Neville & Jensen, 2005). In addition, node

46
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
labeling is naturally a classiﬁcation problem, while node weighting is usually evaluated in other
ways, e.g., based on query relevance.
Other techniques can be used when direct evaluation is not feasible, but there exists some
other metric that is believed to be related. For instance, higher autocorrelation in a graph can be
associated with the presence of more sensible links, and algorithms such as collective classiﬁcation
typically perform better when the level of autocorrelation is higher. Thus, Xiang et al. (2010)
demonstrate the success of their technique for estimating relationship strengths (link weights)
based in part on showing an increase in autocorrelation when measured for several attributes in
a social network. Likewise, increased information gain for some of the attributes could be used
to demonstrate an improved representation (Lippi et al., 2009), or link perplexity could be used
to assess topic labelings (Balasubramanyan & Cohen, 2011). Naturally, the most appropriate
evaluation techniques vary based upon the task, and a comparison of transformation techniques
may yield diﬀerent results depending upon what metric is chosen.
Ideally, representation transformation would be guided more directly by the ﬁnal goal as it is
executed, rather than only being evaluated when the transformation is complete. This is often
the case for the feature selection and structure learning algorithms discussed in Section 6.3:
task accuracy (or a surrogate measure) is evaluated with a particular feature added, and it
is retained if accuracy has improved. In other cases, the transformation is even more directly
speciﬁed by the desired end goal. For instance, the “supervised random walk” approach discussed
in Section 3.3 uses a gradient descent method to obtain new link weights such that links predicted
by a subsequent random walk (their ﬁnal goal) will be more accurate. Likewise, Menon and Elkan
(2010) show how to add supervision to methods for generating latent features (see introduction
to Section 5) so that the features learned would be more relevant to their ﬁnal classiﬁcation task.
They show, however, that adding such supervision is not always helpful. As a ﬁnal example, Shi
et al. (2011) use a quadratic program to optimize a linear combination of link weights such that
the ﬁnal link weights will lead directly to more accurate classiﬁcation via a label propagation
algorithm.
In general, ensuring that a particular transformation will improve performance on the ﬁnal
SRL task remains challenging. Many transformations cannot be directly guided by the ﬁnal goal,
either because suitable supervised data is not available, or because it is not clear how to modify
the transformation algorithms to use such information (e.g., with the latent topic models of
Section 7 or the group detection algorithms of Section 5).
8.2
Causal Discovery
Causal discovery refers to identifying cause-and-eﬀect relationships (i.e., smoking causes cancer)
from either online experimentation (Aral & Walker, 2010) or from observational data. The
challenge is to distinguish true causal relationships from mere statistical correlations. One
approach is to use quasi-experimental designs (QEDs), which take advantage of circumstances in
non-experimental data to identify situations that provide the equivalent of experimental control
and randomization. Jensen et al. (2008) propose a system to discover knowledge by applying
QEDs that were discovered automatically. More recently, Oktay et al. (2010) applies three
diﬀerent QEDs to demonstrate how one can gain causal understanding of a social media system.
There is also another causal discovery technique for linear models proposed by Wang and Chan
(2010). The challenge remains of how to extend these techniques to apply to a broader range of
relational data.
8.3
Subgraph Transformation and Graph Generation
The majority of this article focused on transformation tasks centered around the nodes or links
of the graphs. However, there are also useful tasks for subgraph transformation which seek to
identify frequent/informative substructures in a set of graphs or to create features or classify

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
47
such subgraphs (Inokuchi et al., 2000; Deshpande et al., 2005). For instance, Kong and Yu
(2010) consider how to use semi-supervised techniques to perform feature selection for subgraph
classiﬁcation given only a few labeled subgraphs. As with nodes and links, for subgraphs the
tasks of prediction, labeling, weighting, and feature generation can all be described. Many of the
techniques that we described for node-centered features can also be used in this context, but a
full discussion of subgraph transformation is beyond the scope of this article.
Recently, graph generation algorithms have attracted signiﬁcant interest. These algorithms use
some model to represent a family of graphs, and present a way to generate multiple samples from
this family. Two prominent models are Kronecker Product Graph Models (KPGMs) (Leskovec
et al., 2010a) and those based on preferential attachment (Price, 1976; Barab´asi & Albert,
1999). These graph generation methods take advantage of global (with KPGMs) and local (with
preferential attachment models) graph properties to generate a distribution of graphs that can
potentially include attributes. Sampling from these models can be useful for creating more robust
algorithms, for instance by training a classiﬁer on a family of related graphs instead of on a single
graph. Newman (2003) surveys additional network models and properties that are relevant to
graph generation.
8.4
Model Representation
In SRL there is also the notion of model representation: what kind of statistical model is
learned to represent the relationship between the nodes, links, and their features? Some of
the most prominent models for SRL are Probabilistic Relational Models (PRMs) (Friedman
et al., 1999), Relational Markov Networks (RMNs) (Taskar et al., 2002), Relational Dependency
Networks (RDNs) (Neville & Jensen, 2007), Structural Logistic Regression (Popescul et al.,
2003b), Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) (Laﬀerty et al., 2001), and Markov Logic Networks
(MLNs) (Domingos & Richardson, 2004; Richardson & Domingos, 2006); full discussion of these
models is beyond the scope of this article. In many cases techniques for relational representation
transformation, such as link prediction, can be performed regardless of what kind of statistical
model will be subsequently used. However, the choice of statistical model does strongly interact
with what kinds of node and link features are useful (or even possible to use); Section 6.3
describes some of these connections. While a number of relevant comparisons have already been
published (Jensen et al., 2004; Neville & Jensen, 2007; Macskassy & Provost, 2007; Sen et al.,
2008; McDowell et al., 2009; Crane & McDowell, 2011), more work is needed to evaluate the
interaction between the choice of statistical model and feature selection, and to evaluate which
statistical models work best in domains with certain characteristics.
8.5
Temporal and Spatial Representation Transformation
Where appropriate, we have already discussed multiple techniques that can incorporate temporal
information from graph data (see especially Sections 4.2, 6.1, and 6.3). These techniques focused
on solving particular problems such as node classiﬁcation, but dealing with such data invariably
requires studying how to represent the time-varying elements. However, more work is needed to
examine the general tradeoﬀs involved with diﬀerent temporal representations. For instance, Hill
et al. (2006) provide a generic framework for modeling any temporal dynamic network where
the central goal is to build an approximate representation that satisﬁes pre-speciﬁed objectives.
They focus on summarization (representing historical behavior between two nodes in a concise
manner), simpliﬁcation (removing noise from both edges and nodes, spurious transactions, or
stale relationships), eﬃciency (supporting fast analysis and updating), and predictive performance
(optimizing the representation to maximize predictive performance). This work provides a number
of useful building blocks, but more comparisons are needed to, for instance, evaluate the merits of
using summarized networks with general-purpose algorithms vs. using more specialized algorithms
with data that maintains the temporal distinctions.

48
r. rossi, l. mcdowell, d. aha, & j. neville
Temporal data is one particular kind of data that can be represented as a relational sequence.
Kersting et al. (2008) surveys the area of relational sequence learning and explains multiple tasks
related to such data, such as sequence mining and alignment. These tasks often involve the need
to identify relevant features or structure, such as identifying frequent patterns or useful similarity
functions. Thus, the set of useful techniques for feature construction and search in this domain
overlap with those discussed in Section 6.3.
8.6
Privacy Preserving Representation
There is sometimes a desire to make private graph-based data publicly available (e.g., to support
research or public policy) in a way that preserves the privacy of the individuals described by
the data. The goal of privacy preserving representation is to transform the data in a way
that minimizes information loss while maximizing anonymization, e.g., to prevent individuals
in the anonymized network from being identiﬁed. Naive approaches to anonymization operate by
simply replacing an individual’s name (or other attributes) with arbitrary and meaningless unique
identiﬁers. However, in social networks there are many adversarial methods through which the
true identity of a user can often be discovered from such an anonymized network. In particular,
the adversarial methods can use the network structure and/or remaining attributes to discover
the identities of users within the network (Liu & Terzi, 2008; Zhou et al., 2008; Narayanan &
Shmatikov, 2009).
An early approach by Zheleva and Getoor (2007) examines how a graph may be modiﬁed
to prevent sensitive relationships (a particular kind of labeled link) from being disclosed.
They describe their approach in terms of node anonymization and edge anonymization. Node
anonymization clusters the nodes into m equivalence classes based on node attributes only,
while most of the edge anonymization approaches are based on cleverly removing sensitive edges.
Backstrom et al. (2007) address a related family of attacks where an adversary is able to learn
whether an edge exists between targeted pairs of nodes.
More recently, Hay et al. (2008) study privacy issues in graphs that contain no attributes.
Their goal is to prevent “structural re-identiﬁcation” (i.e., identity reconstruction using graph
topology information) by anonymizing a graph via creating an aggregate network model that
allows for samples to be drawn from the model. The approach generalizes a graph by partitioning
the nodes and then summarizing the graph at the partition level. This approach diﬀers from the
other approaches described above because it drastically changes the representation as opposed to
making more incremental changes. However, this method enforces privacy while still preserving
enough of the network properties to allow for a wide variety of network analyses to be performed.
In each of these investigations the key factors are the information available in the graph, the
resources of the attacker, and the type of attacks that must be defended against. In addition, if an
attacker can possibly obtain additional information related to the graph from other sources, then
the challenges are even more diﬃcult. More work is needed to provide strong privacy guarantees
while still enabling partial public release of graph-based information.
9
Conclusion
Given the increasing prevalence and importance of relational data, this article has surveyed
the most signiﬁcant issues in relational representation transformation. After presenting a new
taxonomy of the key representation transformation tasks in Section 2, we next discussed the four
primary tasks of link prediction, link interpretation, node prediction, and node interpretation.
Section 7 considered how some of these tasks can be accomplished simultaneously via techniques
for joint transformation. Finally, Section 8 considered how to perform representation evaluation
and key challenges for future work.
The taxonomy presented in Section 2 highlighted the symmetry between the possible
transformation tasks for links and those for nodes. This symmetry helped to organize this survey,

Transforming Graph Representations for Statistical Relational Learning
49
and also suggests areas where techniques developed for one of these entities can be used for an
analogous task with the other. For instance, Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (2007) reformulated
traditional node weighting algorithms to weight links. Likewise, topic discovery techniques based
on LDA can be used both for node labeling and for link labeling. Finally, many of the techniques
used to create node features can also be used to create link features, and vice versa, although
node features have been studied much more thoroughly.
As discussed in Section 8, there remains much work to do. For instance, link prediction
remains a very diﬃcult problem, especially for the general case where any two arbitrary nodes
might be connected together. Even more signiﬁcantly, while we have described a wide range
of techniques that can address each of the transformation tasks, at the end of the day the
practitioner is left with a wide range of choices without many guarantees about what might
work best. For instance, node weighting may improve classiﬁcation accuracy for one dataset
but decrease it on another. This challenge is made all the more diﬃcult because the techniques
that we have described come from a wide range of areas, including graph theory, social network
analysis, matrix factorization, metric learning, information theory, information retrieval, inductive
logic programming, statistical relational learning, and probabilistic graphical models. While the
breadth of techniques relevant to relational transformation is a wonderful resource, it also means
that evaluating the representation change techniques that are relevant to a particular task is a
time-consuming, technically challenging, and incomplete process. Therefore, much more work is
needed to establish a theoretical understanding of how diﬀerent representation changes aﬀect the
data, how diﬀerent data characteristics interact with this process, and how the combination of
these techniques and the data characteristics aﬀect the ﬁnal results of an analysis with relational
data.
